
Oracle Business
Intelligence
and Essbase
Solutions Guide


Oracle Business
Intelligence
and Essbase
Solutions Guide
Rosendo Abellera • Lakshman Bulusu

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2017 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
Version Date: 20161108
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4822-3407-7 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable 
efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot 
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and 
publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication 
and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any 
copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any 
future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, 
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information stor-
age or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copy-
right.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that pro-
vides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photo-
copy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are 
used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

v
Dedication
I dedicate this book to the loving memory of my mother, Smt. B. Sita, who has 
always been an inspiration to me in my writing and has always encouraged me 
to write more. Thank you, Mom. Your words will always be a guiding light to 
me as I move from one book to another.
– Lakshman Bulusu
I dedicate my first book to the memory of my father, Dr. Rosito Pimentel 
Abellera, who, as a man of a few words, whispered in my ear to “Go for it” 
when he bid me farewell as a young man stepping out onto the great big scary 
world on my own. 
Dad, you instilled in me the faith to make it through thick and thin and 
inspired me to always believe. How I wish I had told you in person while I had 
the chance that I greatly admired your character, strength, and courage. We all 
miss you so much. Your love for life lives in our hearts and minds as we step out 
to seek new adventures and endeavors. 
– Rosendo Abellera


vii
Dedication  
v
Contents 
 
vii
Foreword by William Heenan 
xiii
Preface 
 
xvii
Acknowledgments 
xxiii
About the Authors 
xxv
Chapter 1 Introduction 
1
In This Chapter 
1
1.1 
Introduction 
1
1.2 
A Basic Business Need 
2
1.3 
What Is Business Intelligence? 
3
1.4 
Why BI? 
4
1.5 
Enabling a Competitive Advantage 
4
1.6 
BI and Reporting Categories 
6
1.6.1 
Operational Reporting 
7
1.6.2 Analytical BI 
8
1.6.3 Operational BI 
10
1.7 
Summary 
13
Contents

viii Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
Chapter 2 Why Oracle Essbase Now 
15
In This Chapter 
15
2.1 
Introduction 
15
2.2 
OBIEE and Essbase: History and Importance  
16
2.3 
Why Essbase Now: From History to Historical, 
 
Analytical, and Beyond 
19
2.4 
Summary 
20
Chapter 3  Oracle Essbase and Oracle BI: Successful 
Players and Products 
21
In This Chapter 
21
3.1 
Introduction 
21
3.2 
The Primary Vendors: Inventors and Presenters 
22
3.3 
The Primary Products and Tools Set: Inclusions 
 
and Exclusions 
23
3.3.1 
Oracle Exalytics 
23
3.3.2 Oracle Essbase 
24
3.3.3 Oracle BI Publisher 
25
3.3.4 Oracle BI Foundation Suite 
25
3.3.5 Oracle BI Enterprise Edition (OBIEE) 
27
3.3.6 Oracle BI Mobile 
29
3.3.7 Oracle BI Applications 
30
3.3.8 Oracle BI for Big Data 
31
3.4 
The Primary Users: Evaluators, Investors, 
 
Implementers and Eventual Benefiters 
32
3.5 
Summary 
36
3.6 
References 
36
Chapter 4 Analysis, Evaluation, and Selection 
37
In This Chapter 
37
4.1 
Introduction 
37
4.2 
Essential Criteria for Requirements Analysis of
 
Oracle Essbase and OBIEE as a Comprehensive 
 
BI Solution 
38
4.2.1 
Business Processes—Discovery and Definition 38
4.2.2 Information Integration 
39

Contents ix
4.2.3 Information Dissemination, Transformation, 
 
and Visualization 
40
4.2.4 User Interaction 
41
4.2.5 Information Customization 
41
4.2.6 Information in Action: BI, Advanced 
 
Analytics, and Beyond BI (Competitive, 
 
Social, and Cloud-Based Intelligence) 
42
4.2.7 Information and Big Data 
42
4.3 
Key and Critical Deciding Factors in Selecting 
 
Such a Solution 
43
4.4 
The Final Pick is a Customer-Centric Solution: 
 
Key Indicator Checklist 
44
4.5 
Summary 
46
4.6 
References 
46
Chapter 5  Data Integration, Implementation, and 
Customization Using Essbase 
47
In This Chapter 
47
5.1 
Introduction 
47
5.2 
Building an Integrated Approach for Data 
48
5.2.1 
Recommendations 
49
5.3 
Implementation Specifics of Data, from Data 
 
Source to Data Analytics  
51
5.4 
Semantic Integration between OBIEE and 
 
Essbase, Using OBIEE as a Data Source for 
 
Oracle Essbase 
52
5.4.1 
Recommendations 
53
5.4.2 Implementation Specifics 
55
5.4.3 Using OBIEE 12c for Essbase 12c 
56
5.5 
Extending and Customizing Essbase  
57
5.5.1 
Extending Essbase Cubes 
57
5.5.2 Analytics That Can Be Applied to 
 
Custom Implementations 
59
5.5.3 Best Practices and Additional 
 
Customization Scenarios 
60
5.6 
Summary 
62
5.7 
References 
63

x Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
Chapter 6 Using Essbase for Analytical BI 
65
In This Chapter 
65
6.1 
Introduction 
65
6.2 
What Kind of Analytics Are Good for Essbase 
 
Cubes? 
66
6.2.1 Recommendations 
68
6.3 
Implementation Specifics of Using Analytical BI 
 
Using Essbase 
68
6.3.1 
Using Essbase for Analytical BI 
69
6.3.2 Using BSO Cubes for Analytical BI 
71
6.3.3 Using ASO Cubes for Analytical BI 
73
6.4 
Summary 
73
6.5 
References 
75
Chapter 7 Using OBIEE for Operational BI 
77
In This Chapter 
77
7.1 
Introduction 
77
7.2 
Don’t Let Your Tool Wag Your Data 
78
7.3 
Categories for Business Intelligence and Reporting 
80
7.4 
What Is Operational Business Intelligence? 
82
7.4.1 
The Ultimate Goal: Insight to Interaction 
83
7.5 
Delivering Operational BI 
84
7.5.1 
Operational BI and OBIEE  
85
7.5.2 
Updating the Enterprise Data Warehouse 
 
for Operational BI  
87
7.6 
The Operational Data Store Option 
91
7.7 
Summary 
94
Chapter 8 Using OBIEE for Self-Service BI 
97
In This Chapter 
97
8.1 
Introduction 
97
8.2 
In Search of Self-Service BI 
98
8.3 
Enter OBIEE as a Solution 
99
8.4 
OBIEE for Self-Service BI 
101
8.5 
Big Data and Self-Service BI 
103
8.5.1 
OBIEE12c and Big Data 
104
8.6 
Summary 
105

Contents xi
Chapter 9 Best Practices for Solution Implementation 
 
and Customization 
107
In This Chapter 
107
9.1 
Introduction 
107
9.2 
Establishing a Data Foundation Based on a
 
Logical Model 
108
9.3 
Extending the Logical Data Model for 
 
Implementation and Customization 
110
9.3.1 
Using the Logical Model To Extend 
 
Essbase Cubes 
111
9.3.2 Building Analytics That Can Be Applied 
 
to Custom Implementations 
112
9.3.3 Best Practices and Additional 
 
Customization Scenarios 
114
9.4 
The Logical Model as a Scalable Best Practice 
 
Solution 
116
9.5 
Summary 
117
Chapter 10 Use Case Scenarios 
119
In This Chapter 
119
10.1 Introduction 
119
10.2 The Challenge 
120
10.3 The Resolution 
123
10.4 Summary 
124
Chapter 11 The Prize for the Price: A Win–Win or Not 
125
In This Chapter 
125
11.1 Introduction 
125
11.2 The True Value of Expertise 
126
11.3 Data-Driven Development  
126
11.4 A 360-Degree View of a Holistic Solution 
127
11.5 Summary 
128
Appendix A: Oracle Big Data and the Cloud for Analytics 
131
A.1 
Using the Cloud To Unleash the Potential of 
 
Big Data 
131
A.2 Oracle’s Role in Cloud Services and Big Data 
132

xii Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
A.3 
Beyond BI 
133
References 
133
Appendix B: Slides from Data Warehouse Architectures 
135
B.1 
Overview of the Corporate Information Factory 
 
and Dimensional Modeling 
135
B.2 
Slides from OBIEE 12c Presentation 
144
Appendix C: Oracle® Data Sheets 
155
Index 
167

xiii
Foreword
William Heenan
Analytics has been around in some form for many years. Even before the advent 
of computers. The concepts are the same and smart people have known this 
their entire lifetime. Today, it’s a matter of looking at one’s business and figur-
ing out how to be more efficient. Thousands of years ago, cavemen looked for 
tracks, studied feeding patterns of animals, and were able to narrow down the 
best place to catch that tasty wild boar.
While I am not saying that the ancient caveman could develop an advanced 
system, he was able to put many pieces of information together to draw con-
clusions. While his end goal was to find an animal to eat, he had to look at 
lots of key facts. He looked at not only attributes about what he was tracking 
(e.g, tracks, depth of track, distance between, etc. . . .), but also weather facts, 
plants facts (e.g., types of plants, how much was eaten by animals, any broken 
branches, etc. . . .). He also worried about logistics, which all of the previous 
information played into. How big was the animal, which could be determined 
by track size, stride length, food consumption, and how many trees/branches 
were broken. He also worried about weather. If this animal is too big, how am 
I going to drag it home? Do I have access to friends to help me carry it? How 
much of the kill will I have to share?
Today we ask the same questions and see the relationships in this wealth of 
information. Today the questions might be more in line with moving a com-
pany’s headquarters from one state to another. The details lay in many areas to 
truly answer the question. Employee counts, floor space, logistics to move it all, 
tax breaks, general business taxes, employee-retention issues, and on and on. 
The CEO would have to look at all of these factors—costs, savings, logistics, 
uprooting families, and more—to make the best decisions. Just as the ancient 

xiv Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
caveman decided if the wild boar was worth the risk, the modern CEO has to 
consider very similar tidbits of information to make the right decision.
So how does the modern day caveman (CEO) use analytics to make the deci-
sion to catch the wild boar? He needs to not only look at each piece of informa-
tion but also find a way to bring all of this information together as one cohesive 
set of data. He must conceptually (and logically) understand all of the business’s 
data and the inherent relationships between them. Our modern day caveman 
can be greatly aided by a blueprint or model. Consider the following approach:  
The first step in building a model for a business is to actually identify the 
lines of business that make it up. For our modern-day business, these may 
include accounting, human resources, supply, logistics, sales, and so forth, or 
whatever else the organization’s needs entail. While all organizations have simi-
lar lines of business such as accounting, human resources, and recruiting, each 
organization will have others that make it unique. Identification and empower-
ment of personnel within each line of business fuels the strategy for determining 
a business’s information needs. 
Then for each business area, you must determine the main entities and attri-
butes that describe and make up that business area. This conceptual and logical 
exercise is where business and technology begin to converge as the entities and 
attributes identify the business data that is required which, in turn, can then 
“fuel” your analysis. It is critical to identify all of the attributes and relation-
ships, although this may evolve in an iterative manner according to the report-
ing and analytical needs. You can continue to grow each of the business areas 
with entities and attributes and also start building relationships between them 
as your business grows or changes. This approach will allow the data warehouse 
to be built out and grow as additional reporting needs are identified over time. 
Thus, with a data model the proper “translation” and evolution from busi-
ness concept to technology is set into motion and can be captured with an 
enterprise data model. With this model of the data foundation, a new data-
centric application or system using that data can be properly developed. This 
“blueprint” is the secret to a successful implementation for analytics.
While there are advanced systems and mathematical theories behind model-
ing, a good modeler is like an artist, having a vision of the business and creative 
yet practical ways to bring the information needs together. Having been in 
the business for several decades, I have come to realize that this type of person 
is hard to come by—a resource that has both business acumen and technical 
know-how. Unfortunately, books and material that address this topic—both 
from a high-level and a detailed view of proper implementation—are extremely 
scarce. A book such as this would help to guide and frame the proper thinking 
and approach. 

Foreword xv
In their book, Rosendo Abellera and Lakshman Bulusu have captured that. 
You begin with chapters that address and properly categorize reporting and 
analytics at the high, strategic level. Later chapters go into greater detail to 
help guide you through a certain frame of thought and focus that is data cen-
tric. Their book provides both a strategic and tactical framework. It provides a 
wealth of information about data warehousing (DW) and business intelligence 
(BI) even for an experienced resource—as if a personal mentor and expert on 
DW and BI is available at your fingertips for the subject area. All the while, the 
book keeps in focus and continually reiterates the secret guide—the blueprint, if 
you will—for successful implementation; that is, the proper data model. 
With over 25 years each of direct experience in the industry, the authors 
remind us of what works out in the field and how the basics can and will extend 
success into the next generation of BI and analytics. With the proper founda-
tion established by best practices, we can now evolve into related areas that we 
have longed dreamed of conquering such as predictive analytics, artificial intel-
ligence, and even machine learning. So even for our modern-day caveman, the 
CEO, analytics is continually evolving and perhaps finally providing the right 
or even better capabilities. We thank and applaud our authors for “sharpening 
our tools.” 
Happy hunting.
William Heenan is the Director of Analytics at Mythics, Inc., a large award-
winning and certified Oracle Platinum partner. Bill has been in the industry 
for over 30 years, with experiences around Analytics, Business Intelligence, 
Decision Support Systems, data architecture, and database design for 25 of 
those years. He has been a consultant to numerous customers, including com-
mercial, federal, state, and local governments. Bill has also had a chance to 
work with some of the industry’s pioneers. He is a veteran of the U.S. Marine 
Corps. When not working he spends time with family and friends, which is 
very important to him. He also has been known to run a marathon or hit the 
links on a lazy summer day. 


xvii
Preface
I feel honored to have served in Intelligence for the United States. After I spent 
nearly a decade in the U.S. Armed Forces, there was no shortage of accolades 
and gratuity expressed by family, friends, and strangers alike to make me indeed 
feel thanked and appreciated.
So when I heard the joke and felt the sarcasm for the first time, it left me in 
deep thought, wondering what it really meant. Whenever I was asked what I did 
in the service, I would answer, “Military intelligence.” Jokingly, the response 
was almost always, “Isn’t that an oxymoron?” It took a little getting used to, but 
after a while it always resulted in a chuckle. Quite clever, it was a running joke 
that stuck with me.
When I left the service, I started out in my new career in software develop-
ment and information technology in the civilian world. My software career 
grew in and around data-centric application development, and during this time, 
surprisingly, a whole new exciting industry and market had begun to emerge in 
intelligence and analytics which drew some parallels to what I had been doing 
in the military and—what do you know—they called it Business Intelligence. 
I had to chuckle. Nevertheless, I dove into this new discipline of knowledge 
management and intelligence head first. I was determined to master it. I was 
proud of my newfound endeavor and actually felt gallant about its lofty goals 
of pursuing knowledge and intelligence, as I had similarly done in the military. 
Surely there was no way that the oxymoron joke could apply. Could it?
But then I started to observe something quite dismaying. It seemed that in 
pursuit of business intelligence, organizations would do things that were actu-
ally counterproductive to business—things that would actually cost them valu-
able time and money. If business’s focus is to make a profit, these crazy situations 
or SNAFUs (to borrow a humorous acronym used in the military to describe 
chaotic situations that are problematic and full of issues but, nevertheless, seems 

xviii Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
to be the normal state of affairs) quickly run opposite of the goal and intention 
and could actually destroy an organization. 
SNAFU (Situation Normal, All Fouled Up): A confused, disorganized or 
muddled situation that is regarded as normal operating procedure.
I thought “Could these SNAFUs really be happening in the lofty world of 
business intelligence?”
For decades now, various technologies and approaches have been tried and 
proven to identify a clear path as the best practice for building a complete, 
holistic Business Intelligence (BI) and data warehousing (DW) solution. Yet for 
all the strides that we have made, organizations still attempt to deliver a solu-
tion based on limited to no knowledge. Undoubtedly, without any methodol-
ogy to guide the team through the complex process, it is difficult to weed out 
what is unnecessary from what is necessary—moreover, from what is crucial or 
vital—for a successful delivery of the solution. From my point of view as a prac-
titioner, I regularly witnessed the prevalence of chaotic situations and began to 
form some classifications around these SNAFUs. Let’s take a lighthearted look 
at some of these. Unfortunately, some reading this might just recognize these 
situations as their current procedure—and they may not be able to laugh about 
it wholeheartedly.
 
1. The “On-The-Job Training” SNAFU: In this elusive situation, inexperi-
enced resources use the project to learn what they should have already 
known or what you expected them to have already known. To avoid this 
situation, bring in experts early on, even during the process of interview-
ing, to ensure that resources hired have the necessary basic skillset and 
talent to be successful.
 
2. The “Buzzwords” SNAFU: This situation is when authoritative titles and 
buzzwords are hurled around, provide the appearance of actual knowledge 
and expertise—but appearing is as far as it gets. In this situation, the sem-
blance of expertise without real experience creates a dilemma. An expert 
practitioner not only “talks the talk” but also “walks the walk.” This is the 
value add that every potential customer should seek and demand.
 
3. The “Busy Work” SNAFU: This sets in when the team is assigned tasks 
that appear to be important and relevant to the project but actually are 
not. In this SNAFU, the perpetrators want to ensure that the “busy work” 
activity is always visible, because appearance and perception is valued 
above real tasks and crucial work. To the experienced, this activity can 
be clearly differentiated from productivity. In this situation, expertise is 
needed to identify and assign real deliverables.

Preface xix
 
4. The “Covering All Bases” SNAFU: This is very similar to the “Busy Work” 
SNAFU, in that a lot of work is done to make it seem that a solution is 
actually being created. The major difference is that there is a lot of work 
being assigned and done from all directions in an attempt to cover all 
bases that might be deemed important to the inexperienced. This leads to 
a trap that ends up with each and every issue becoming a “priority” or an 
“emergency.” This situation usually ends up with your resources focused 
on unnecessary objectives. Similarly, in this situation, an expert is needed 
to “cut out the noise.”
 
5. The “Jack of All Trades, Master of None” SNAFU: This situation occurs 
when the project leaders are knowledgeable in many areas but lack exper-
tise in the specialized field of DW and BI implementation. Without clear 
guidance on deep issues, the team and project are catapulted into SNAFU 
#1 as unexperienced team members are left to fend for themselves and the 
project essentially becomes on-the-job training. This situation can actu-
ally be quickly remedied if the perpetrator seeks subject matter expertise 
to cover knowledge gaps. 
 
6. The “Let’s Throw More Resources At It” SNAFU: Probably the most futile 
and misleading concept is when more resources are arbitrarily added and 
deemed as a solution. I experienced this situation first-hand where this 
notion was taken a step further. A newly hired executive came up with 
a “brilliant idea” for saving money and actually replace seasoned, experi-
enced professionals with lots of inexpensive (but inexperienced) resources. 
Unfortunately, the real underlying problem was that there weren’t enough 
experienced personnel—and that move virtually wiped out any expertise 
that the organization may have had. Years later, as expected, this move 
by the executive resulted in the dissolution of that organization. In this 
situation, having more resources was not the answer; providing the right 
resources was. Unfortunately, they learned the hard way that there is no 
substitute for experience and focusing on quality—not quantity—may 
have saved them.
Unfortunately, these are based on true stories, so identities have been hidden 
to protect these perpetrators and masters of SNAFU. Keep in mind that 
with the help of expert practitioners armed with solid best practices, Business 
Intelligence need not become an oxymoron.
So there you have it—a humorous take on some troubling situations and 
styles that may be encountered as a practitioner out in the field as organizations 
dismiss the difficulties involved in building complex BI and analytical systems 
and solution. It would seem obvious that expertise and experience is needed to 

xx Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
help chop through this jungle of technological mess and clear a path to success 
with a solid plan based on best practices. 
A BI and analytics solution, because of its complexity and many components 
is not the type of project to begin experimenting with—even if the resource is 
experienced in a related software or IT field. We have encountered it time and 
time again: Attempting to create a complex system with no experience or guid-
ance almost always leads to a path of rework down the road or, even worse, to 
a complete disaster in which nothing is delivered after a great deal of time and 
money is spent. Or even worse, as previously mentioned, it leads to the demise 
of your organization. In situations where your organization’s success—or even 
survival—is at stake, you would clearly demand experience and expertise.
So with a love and passion for my chosen discipline and career, I had a new 
mission. Basically, I wanted to share some of the successes that I had experi-
enced in my long career and provide a basic approach and methodology for 
others to follow. My first step in attempting this endeavor was to figure out 
exactly how to get it all down in print—enter Mr. Lakshman Bulusu. I had met 
Lakshman through a mutual friend who was also a long-time practitioner of 
DW and BI, and together we all shared a love for this field that married the best 
of business and technology together. But it was Mr. Bulusu, who had previously 
written seven technical books dealing with Oracle that served as the catalyst to 
this endeavor. It was a match made in business intelligence heaven where theory 
and academics partnered with extensive, practical hands-on experience. It all 
came together here in this book.
– Rosendo Abellera
We chose our subject with plans to offer a real solution to a prevalent problem-
atic issue that we have encountered in several occasions. I, in fact, was a player 
in one of the first major projects to try to put all the components of the tool 
suite all together. It is a subject that even the most advanced and experienced 
practitioner would find daunting, mainly because of the popularity of the tool 
as a standalone solution and the integration that is needed for a holistic system. 
In our industry, there are now simply so many tools to provide and deliver an 
analytical system and solution with the myriad of vendors and all their offerings 
of tools and technologies all professing to be the best generically—without ref-
erence to the best fit for the function sought. Claims of a one-size-fits-all solu-
tion should actually be a red flag to practitioners, who know well that there are 
no magic solutions that can provide a case of plug-and-play in which software is 
simply installed and you’re off to solution nirvana. 
This book was written from a practitioner’s point of view, based on experi-
ences collected through several decades of extensive hands-on experience. It is 

Preface xxi
our goal that, by heeding the advice provided, you can avoid some common 
pitfalls that form a barrier to success. Our attempt in this book is to try to 
help you by providing a framework that actually works. We highlight a central 
theme throughout the book as best practice and refer to it as the “secret sauce” 
to being able to successfully deliver a solution. It is our hope that we can provide 
the answers and resolve the issues that you may even be encountering right now. 
We reveal the key to successfully implementing a data-centric application 
and system such as BI. We show how by taking the time to first tackle the design 
and architecture of the data foundation, you can then plan and implement the 
rest of the system accordingly. It is similar to building a house: the foundation 
must be designed properly first and then built according to the design. Without 
this attention to detail and process, the house may easily collapse. So it is with 
building a complex technological system such as a BI solution. Doing it the 
wrong way almost always takes a lot longer (because of rework) than if done 
with proper planning and getting it right from the beginning. Your project or 
environment need not repeat the failures and issues that we have previously 
identified as avoidable situations.
We share our proven concept and method used for this endeavor, forged by 
decades of experience; providing you, the practitioner, a guideline and blueprint 
for success. Consider the recommendations forwarded in this book for estab-
lishing a firm data foundation for your downstream BI and analytical appli-
cations. We’ll show you how the logical model will provide the “blueprint” 
necessary to understand to identify and build the right data foundation for your 
downstream BI and analytical solution. We urge you to avoid the SNAFUs 
that can plague your project and by all means, we ask that you please do not let 
Business Intelligence be an oxymoron. 
But overall, we hope you enjoy and find this book useful.
– Rosendo Abellera
– Lakshman Bulusu


xxiii
Acknowledgments
First of all, I thank all the readers of my previous books, whose feedback in 
some form or other has helped me in improving the quality of content in my 
successive books.
I thank my lovely wife Anuradha and my twins Pranav and Pranati for their 
patience and cooperation during the period of writing of this book. 
I thank Mr. John Wyzalek of CRC Press, the CRC editorial and publishing 
team, and Mr. Theron Shreve of DerryField Publishing Services for their coor-
dinated help in making this book a reality.
I thank Mr. Rosendo Abellera, my co-author, for writing this book with me. 
Your expertise on on-the-job Oracle BI holistic solution implementation has 
enriched the content of this book.
– Lakshman Bulusu
First and foremost, I wanted to thank God for the blessings in my life—that is, 
my family. To my loving mother Violeta and my supportive siblings Roselito, 
Roselyn (my counselor and confidant), Roswel, and Ross, I thank you so much 
for all your patience.
To my wonderful wife, Annie (and family), I thank you for your patience 
and understanding. To my precious children, Alex, Tori, and Angelica, I thank 
you for your love. You have changed my life to always inspire to do good and to 
strive to be a better person.
I thank John Wyzalek and Theron Shreve and their staff for making my 
first book a reality. A special thank you goes to Lakshman Bulusu, my co-
author and friend, who was instrumental in opening up a whole new world of 
writing for me. May this be merely the beginning of many other collaborations.

Last but not least, a long overdue thanks to Mr. Steven D. Staller of Boca 
Raton, Florida, who, 25 years ago, gave a young vet a much-needed break into 
what would become a distinguished career in software technology. 
– Rosendo Abellera
xxiv Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide

xxv
Lakshman Bulusu is a Senior Oracle Consultant 
with 23 years of experience in the fields of Oracle 
RDBMS, SQL, PL/SQL, EDW/BI/EPM, and 
Oracle-related Java. As an Enterprise-level data 
warehouse, and business intelligence solution 
architect/technical manager in the ORACLE 
RDBMS space, he focused on a best-fit solution 
architecture and implementation of the Oracle 
Industry Data Model for telecom. He has worked 
for major clients in the pharma/healthcare, telecom, financial (banking), 
retail, and media industry verticals, with special emphasis on cross-platform 
heterogeneous information architecture and design. He has published eight 
books on Oracle and related technologies, all published in the United States, 
as well as four books on English poetry. He serves on the development team of 
qteria.com and Qteria Big Data Analytics.
Mr. Bulusu holds a bachelor of science degree in mathematics with honors 
and a bachelor of engineering (computer science and engineering). He is OCP-
certified and holds an Oracle Masters credential. He was selected as a FOCUS 
Expert for his research briefs titled “Raising your ‘SIQ’ (Social Intelligence 
Quotient): 5 Key Business Indicators,” “Raising your ‘BIQ’ (Business 
Intelligence Quotient): 5 Things Your Company Can Do NOW,” and “High-
Fives for an Innovative HR Strategy” on FOCUS.com. He has written a host of 
technical articles and spoken at major Oracle conferences in the United States 
and abroad. He can be reached at balakshman@gmail.com.
About the Authors

From military intelligence to business intelli-
gence, Rosendo Abellera has made a lifelong 
career out of utilizing data as a critical asset. His 
early career in software development began with 
several commercial software packages across 
various industries and business areas, includ-
ing work order management, telecom billing, 
prescription refill, and even voter registration. 
This extensive hands-on experience of develop-
ing data-driven applications has contributed 
 heavily to his expertise and proven, successful approach to Business Intelligence 
(BI) and Analytics solutions development. 
As an early adopter and pioneer of BI coupled with modern data warehousing 
(DW) approaches and technologies, he has successfully architected DW and BI 
solutions from the ground up for leading companies, including AAA, Comcast, 
John Hancock Financial, Koch Industries, LexisNexis, Mercury Systems, and 
State Street Bank. Additionally, Rosendo has consulted a multitude of leading 
organizations across various industries both in the government and commercial 
realm. As a DW and BI Subject Matter Expert (SME) and proven success-
ful practitioner, he has held key management positions to establish the DW 
and BI practices of several major, prolific consulting organizations. A consum-
mate entrepreneur, he has founded DW and BI firms including a former Oracle 
Partner as well as a Big Data Analytics company.
Rosendo is a graduate of the University of Nebraska at Omaha and the 
Defense Language Institute. Moreover, he is a veteran of the U.S. Air Force 
where he served worldwide as a cryptologist, intelligence analyst, and linguist 
for several languages. He received commendations for his service including 
for the direct support of Operation Desert Shield at the National Security 
Agency (NSA). 

xxvi Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide

1
Chapter 1
Introduction
In This Chapter
 
1.1 Introduction
 
1.2 A Basic Business Need 
 
1.3 What Is Business Intelligence 
 
1.4 Why BI?
 
1.5 Enabling a Competitive Advantage
 
1.6 BI and Reporting Categories
 
1.7 Summary
1.1 Introduction
A multitude of companies have now chosen to use business intelligence (BI) 
and analytics. The general goal is that somehow, BI will allow them to gain 
insight and knowledge into the data contained within their corporate systems. 
With this, companies armed with the necessary technologies and tools can 
address the executive, management, and user reporting and analysis needs of 
the organi zation in dealing with visibility and analysis to their corporate data. 
With the proliferation of vendors specializing in BI and analytics, it is com-
mon to find several tools being used by an organization. Sometimes, you can 
even find several BI tools being thrown together in an attempt to provide a 
complete, holistic BI solution for users at all levels and facets of their business. 
Indeed, one of the major goals when implementing a BI solution is to provide 

2 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
reporting and analytics for the entire enterprise. Most recently, some vendors 
have successfully made available packaged BI applications that try to provide a 
complete set of analytics and also provide full-featured platforms for reporting. 
This book will examine the functional features of a BI and analytics application 
and will also even discuss the architecture and design of the technical structures 
that enable the objects (i.e., reports and dashboards).
1.2 A Basic Business Need
In the corporate world, there is a need to have enterprise-class reporting and 
analytics through a single integrated and trusted source to access vital data and 
information. Moreover, there is a need for visibility into and access to the data 
from the main systems to address the organization’s prevalent topics, such as 
(among others):
 Revenue and cost opportunities
 Improved leverage in negotiations
 Accountability and compliance to corporate policies
 Business unit activity
 Strategic and planning initiatives
So then what exactly is this “magic” tool for the corporate decision maker? 
To some, the solution lies in BI. Organizations look to BI solutions and resources 
for building the proper solution and providing enterprise-class BI reporting and 
analytics. The goal for many is to gain, for example:
 Improved business decision making with greater visibility and trans-
parency into transactional data coming from a known, consistent single 
source for decision making based on facts
 Elimination or limitation of custom, on-the-fly manual development of 
repetitive reports: 
○ Automatically prepare and deliver data from a single source of the truth
○ Eliminate redundant sources of reporting
○ Eliminate silos of reporting from personalized sources or outdated 
applications
 Implementation of best practices for all business units and activity across 
the organization, with standard processes of reporting supported by analy-
tics to monitor and gauge report effectiveness
 Implementation of a flexible reporting and analytics management archi-
tecture that can grow with business requirements

Introduction 3
 Centralized pool of knowledge surrounding an organization’s reporting 
and analytics tools, reducing maintenance and support costs related to the 
upkeep of various other standalone tools
But behind this “magic” tool for decision making is a complex and often 
confused system. So let’s start with a definition of business intelligence.
1.3 What Is Business Intelligence?
Business intelligence in today’s BI and analytics landscape can mean many things 
to many people. Researching sources for any formal definition will yield any 
number of definitions or meanings. To some people, BI deals with reporting. 
To others, it is strictly analytics. Then again to others, it includes both types 
and categories of information. Perhaps they are all correct. But no matter the 
mechanism or tool used, BI funnels down to a common single notion: having 
these systems will enable a person or organization to make better, or more effec-
tive, business decisions. The two definitions shown below were taken from the 
corresponding links referred to alongside each. Indeed, both refer to BI being 
used to “help make business decisions” and “enable more effective strategic, tac-
tical, and operational insights and decision-making.” That is the ultimate goal. 
So what facilitates that capability?
Business intelligence (BI) is a technology-driven process for analyzing 
data and presenting actionable information to help corporate executives, 
business managers and other end users make more informed business 
decisions. BI encompasses a variety of tools, applications and method-
ologies that enable organizations to collect data from internal systems 
and external sources, prepare it for analysis, develop and run queries 
against the data, and create reports, dashboards and data visuali zations 
to make the analytical results available to corporate decision makers 
as well as operational workers. (Source:  http:// searchdatamanagement.
techtarget.com/definition/business-intelligence)
 
Business intelligence (BI) is an umbrella term that includes the 
applications, infrastructure and tools, and best practices that enable 
access to and analysis of information to improve and optimize deci-
sions and performance. (Source: http://www.gartner.com/it-glossary/
business-intelligence-bi/)
The definitions mention a set of applications, technologies, methodologies, 
processes, architectures, and the like to explain what BI is. Each definition can 
allude to a technical capability or even an actual special infrastructure and 

4 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
architecture. Indeed, as implementers and developers of BI solutions, we know 
that there are specialized skills and knowledge for delivering this special type 
of system. 
This book will explore those applications, technologies, and architectures. 
Moreover, we will use as an example the Oracle Business Intelligence Enterprise 
Edition (OBIEE) suite and discuss how, properly used, it can provide the right 
platform for reporting and analytics.
1.4 Why BI?
From a business context, it is tougher than ever to achieve a competitive advan-
tage with the prevalence of tools and technologies accessible to everyone. The 
key is to find the right tools and technology. There are few innovations available 
that can truly offer a breakthrough. Competing on analytical capabilities is one 
very important and powerful way to break through, sustain advantage over time/
economic cycles, and effectively outsmart and out-execute the competition.
Achieving competitive advantage in today’s world is vital to a business’s 
growth and well-being. Every decision can greatly affect an organization. For 
this reason, decision making based on facts at all levels of the enterprise has 
become increasingly important. With the proliferation of different types of 
data and information available in today’s world, no longer should decisions be 
made on “gut-feel” or a hunch. Breakthroughs in technology are enabling a 
more effective and efficient environment for business intelligence and analytics. 
Overall, there is a new generation of tools and capabilities to provide the right 
data to the right person at the right time!
1.5 Enabling a Competitive Advantage
As part of a large consulting firm, one of the authors helped to create a new 
Oracle BI practice. Centered around that practice was the concept of how cor-
porations and organization could use analytics to gain a competitive advantage 
over their competitors. Numerous books now have been written of how some 
organiza tions—even from seemingly surprising industries such as baseball, 
namely, the Boston Red Sox—were using new BI tools for analysis that could 
help to beat their rivals. Utilizing analytics, these companies could measure 
and focus in on certain key indicators that would allow them to do such things 
as optimizing supply chains to identify their most profitable customers. Later 
that year, he wrote and published an article that recognized the trend toward 
operational BI and how it was rewriting the rules of competition, augmenting 

Introduction 5
decisions and insights with facts, and slowly replacing the usual business prac-
tice of decision making with just instincts. With the maturity of BI systems and 
new technologies such as those involving Big Data to enable advanced analyt-
ics, a whole new level of business intelligence is possible.
BI and analytics are more than just a simple supply of data and information. 
BI solutions now encompass a holistic suite of capabilities that enables business 
strategy at all levels of decision making from tactical and operational to strate-
gic to gain the competitive advantage. Organizations are now more capable of 
achieving high performance. High performing organizations have chosen to 
employ the distinctive capabilities of analytics to win over time and over their 
competitor. More and more companies have gained these capabilities, and the 
trend is toward an accelerated acceptance of analytics. 
In their offerings, leading BI software vendor companies such as Oracle have 
pushed their message for organizations to gain a competitive advantage and 
become an “insight-driven enterprise.” The plan entails the following:
 
1. Every person is provided with relevant, complete, and consistent informa-
tion tailored to their function and role.
 
2. Intelligence provides insight that predicts the best next step, and delivers 
it in time to influence the business outcome.
 
3. Lead people take action based on facts to optimize decisions, actions, and 
interactions.
Sound simple enough, right? It’s the same objective that has always been tar-
geted. It seems that this may be easier said than done. From a practitioner’s and 
implementer’s point of view, we ask, “Why isn’t everyone doing it successfully? 
What are the challenges?” Perhaps we don’t have the right tools and technol-
ogy to make it truly happen just yet. After all, even after a few decades into it, 
the field is still in its infancy. New capabilities are being discovered with every 
change and advancement in technology. Take, for instance, the concept for 
mobile BI. The idea is not at all new; however, in today’s world of smartphones, 
mobile BI can now readily come to fruition. But not only that, other features 
and functions are just now being conceived and considered. With each new 
technological advance, BI will come closer to being able to offer organizations 
the means to transform into insight-driven enterprises.
But assuming that technology does get better and helps the BI industry 
overall, deep-rooted challenges still remain—especially when dealing with 
data. These issues are chronic, and we often hear stories of failed attempts at 
providing quality intelligence and analytics because of poor, inaccurate, or 
incomplete data. In fact even now, at the time of writing this book, there are 
other approaches and technologies (e.g., Big Data) being explored to effectively 

6 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
handle data. But our general perception is that it is not just about the technol-
ogy. We don’t dismiss the fact that fundamental shortcomings must first be 
fixed; however, other factors outside of technology come into play. These factors 
are related to understanding the various kinds of reporting and analytics being 
targeted and also knowing the data architecture and structures that support 
each kind of BI.
1.6 BI and Reporting Categories
Often, people will group tasks dealing with data or information as output under 
one heading as Reporting. In the simplest notion, reporting aims to provide 
access to data and information. Companies will often lump everything coming 
from the decision support system (DSS) and the output of transactional systems 
into one category, which they frequently call reporting or even sometimes ana-
lytics. But in this case, can “one size fit all” truly apply? 
As a practitioner who must create and support such a system, you will dis-
cover that several considerations will come up that may easily form divisions 
in thought regarding the best methods to develop and handle that report. You 
begin to understand that different structures are involved with different types of 
reports. Furthermore, you begin to discover that what you are trying to achieve 
is not Reporting at all; rather, it is more of an Analysis. The end result is that you 
now know that there are different types of reporting. For our discussion con-
cerning BI, reporting can be classified into three distinct categories:
 Operational Reporting
 Analytical BI
 Operational BI
Together, these three provide a holistic BI solution that covers all aspects 
of reporting and analysis. In the realm of BI, Analytical BI was the traditional 
form of BI, and it is often referred to as Traditional BI. With the industry now 
matured, what was once the traditional standard form of BI now has a place on 
its own and has made space for other forms of reporting and analytics. There 
are now other categories to complement Analytical BI: Operational Reporting 
and Operational BI, each having its own distinct purpose and goal, data source, 
and supporting data structure.
This book does not intend to go into detail as to how to implement each 
one but, for now, merely suggests that three different categories do exist. In 
recognizing this, you will achieve an understanding and gain knowledge of best 
practices for different types of online analytical processing (OLAP) solutions 

Introduction 7
and, moreover, gain a vital understanding of what your own system or solution 
can offer and what its true capabilities are. Without that accurate, firsthand 
understanding of your systems and needs, incorrect solutions are often chosen, 
and as a result, expectations are not met. It is nearly impossible, in that case, to 
achieve the desired outcome and get what you want. We will focus on under-
standing how and where each form of reporting or analytics fits into the whole 
equation of providing a complete, holistic BI solution.
1.6.1 Operational Reporting
Operational Reporting is the type of reporting that is commonly performed; 
it is the one that is usually referred to when talking about reporting. Basically, 
this type of reporting is simply concerned with the current data from the online 
transactional processing (OLTP) system. An OLTP is an operational system 
which is used to capture business transactions and input data into the system. 
This type of reporting usually comes in the form of a simple query of a cer-
tain entity within the system. For example, that query could ask “What is my 
customer list?” or “What is my product list?” The simple result and outcome 
would list these values. It does not concern itself with older or past data, mainly 
because the system may not contain that type of historical, trending data. This 
reporting can best be served and satisfied from the actual transactional system 
itself, as long as it contains reporting capabilities.
So take, for example, a customer with an enterprise resource planning (ERP) 
system installed and implemented. Most likely, that transactional system will 
inherently have a native mechanism for retrieving the data and producing a 
resulting output or report. In this case, no special architecture or redesign of the 
system is needed. In other words, a user should be able to request and produce 
a customer list simply by querying the customer entity in that application for a 
list of that data. In terms of quality, the operational system should ensure and 
handle the data input properly and subsequently store the data in the proper 
format so that it can be properly used later—including providing an accurate 
report of the data expected.
When retrieving a customer list, one would expect to find a field titled first 
name and another field titled last name. If so, then the system has properly 
formatted the data in the manner expected as an output. However, if this data 
is contained in a field that concatenates these two fields (first name and last 
name) along with some other information (such as Social Security number, for 
instance), then there would be a need to parse out that type of information to 
provide it in the expected format. The data would need to be restructured and 
reformatted beyond what is stored in the transactional system. With that said, 

8 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
though, it may not necessarily require an entirely new architecture and data 
structure to satisfy that request, as a complex analytical solution would entail.
1.6.2 Analytical BI
For an analytical solution or Analytical BI, an entirely different architecture 
and specialized data structure would be required to effectively handle that 
type of querying. That structure is referred to as a dimensional model or a star 
schema. Many books have been written on this subject matter, many of which 
are forwarded by Ralph Kimball, a pioneer in the data warehousing industry 
who championed that subject matter and provided practitioners with the crucial 
ingredient to building analytical solutions. As expert BI practitioners, we have 
come to understand and agree that the star schema and dimensional models 
are the appropriate architecture and structure for data warehouses and conse-
quently BI solutions. Figure 1.1 shows how dimensions used in Analytical BI 
Figure 1.1 Dimensionality Exists Similarly in the Star Schema and Cube Used in 
Analytical BI. (Reproduced with permission from BIS3 LLC © 2015.)

Introduction 9
exist similarly in various architectures, from a star schema in a relational data-
base to a cube in a multidimensional structure.
As an overview, dimensional modeling serves to satisfy two major prongs 
when dealing with the development of an analytical solution. Those two prongs 
are: (1) user understandability and (2) performance. User understandability is 
when data is structured in such a way that a business user would understand it. 
It assumes that business users will analyze data by a metric or measurement that 
will form facts about a transaction. These facts are linked to and enriched by 
data in dimensions that are arranged in common identifiable business groupings.
A common example would be to look at the sale and the revenue of a com-
pany. The fact that is to be analyzed is “how much was sold.” The dimensions 
most likely related to this metric of “how much was sold” are by product, by 
employee, and by date. In simple business terms, the organization might ask, 
“How much product was sold by a certain salesman in the second quarter of 
the year?” In technical terms, the query that would be formulated as: “Sum 
up the dollar amount that was sold by product, by employee, and by date.” As 
stated earlier, the data would be stored dimensionally in a model containing the 
related information just described.
The second prong would have to deal with performance when querying the 
data stored in the database. For that, the star schema serves to offer an efficient 
structure for querying. If an analytical solution is desired, the data coming from 
the operational system must be redesigned and re-architected. This book does 
not intend to discuss how and why we think this structure is proper for a BI 
solution, but merely to say that, from experience and expertise, that this indeed 
is the proper structure and architecture required for effective BI solutions. In 
addition, this exercise of creating a dimensional model to structure the data is 
precisely what is going to prepare and subsequently populate a multidimensional 
structure or cube such as Essbase. This book, in later chapters, will provide 
some detail for using Essbase and will offer the reasons why it should be used 
and how it fits in today’s landscape of BI tools, approaches to BI, and why it is 
to become Oracle’s go-forward product for BI. Moreover, the book will discuss 
in detail how to create an analytical BI solution using a multidimensional cube.
In summary, we have discussed Operational Reporting and Analytical BI. 
We discussed how each approach has its own purpose and goal, how each comes 
from a different data source, and how each requires a specific type of data archi-
tecture and structure to best satisfy the request. Essentially, they exist in the 
opposite end of the spectrum—one comes from an OLTP system, the other 
from an OLAP system, as shown in Figure 1.2.
So it is simple if you have determined that you need one or the other—but 
what about requests that require some current data along with some histori-
cal data, with properties of both Operational Reporting and Analytical BI? 

10 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
Furthermore, what if that type of reporting request cannot be effectively handled 
by either Operational Reporting structures or Analytical BI structures? Is there 
another type of reporting that exists that has properties of both Operational 
Reporting and Analytical BI, and is essentially a hybrid of both? Yes. That type 
of reporting is called Operational BI.
1.6.3 Operational BI
Operational BI entails transactional, up-to-date data displayed in the context 
of some sort of analysis. An example of this type of reporting could be “What 
products were sold to the top 10 customers of the month at the close of each 
business day?” This query cannot be answered solely by the operational system 
with its current list of customers, nor by the data warehouse storing the histori-
cal data from the prior day. Rather it depends on a certain combined analysis 
of the data coming from the integrated enterprise data warehouse supplying 
the list of the top 10 customers and the operational system providing the most 
current list of products sold during the day. Essentially, nowhere can this be 
provided except for a specially created structure called an operational data store 
that will contain current data along with some limited history provided.
Figure 1.2 Reporting vs. Analytics—Examples in the Context of BI. (Reproduced 
with permission from BIS3 LLC © 2015.)

Introduction 11
Figure 1.3 highlights examples of Operational BI involving both reporting 
and analytics.
It is important to discuss what type of structure would best satisfy that par-
ticular reporting request. In the history of BI, although analytics have served 
well when it comes to utilizing information of a historical nature, it still poses 
some problems and challenges when it comes to timing. In a traditional data 
warehouse, the timing to get data in to the warehouse is accomplished with an 
incremental nightly load. However, in the case of Operational BI, that may not 
be soon enough, and a mechanism may be required for loading data at or near 
real time.
So in technical terms, the basic conceptual difference and requirement 
needed for an Operational BI solution is that data has to be input into a struc-
ture that encompasses features from both an OLTP and OLAP structure com-
bined, in which data integration is a major consideration along with the ability 
to perform efficiently for decision support. This structure is called an opera-
tional data store. It is essentially similar to the architecture of an enterprise data 
warehouse, but provides provision to satisfy an extra requirement in terms of 
more frequent loading and access to that data. Figure 1.4 depicts the typical 
solution architecture and data flow needed to support Operational BI.
Figure 1.3 Examples of Operational BI—Reporting and Analytics. (Reproduced 
with permission from BIS3 LLC © 2015.)

Figure 1.4 Typical Operational BI Architecture. (Reproduced with permission from BIS3 LLC © 2015.)

Introduction 13
So in summary, there are various structures and architectures needed to 
satisfy certain data requests. If the request is for the most current data from 
a system, it can be accessed directly from the operational system itself; this is 
called Operational Reporting. On the other hand, if analysis of trending and 
historical data is the focus, then that request would be best satisfied by an enter-
prise data warehouse in the form of Analytical BI. This was the traditional form 
of BI, in which analysis of the most complete set of integrated data in a single 
repository is performed. As a hybrid of these two solutions, in the case where 
the requirement is to query current data along with some limited historical data 
provided at real or near-real time, this is most effectively achieved by leveraging 
a structure called an operational data store with Operational BI. These three 
categories for reporting and analytics—Operational Reporting, Analytical BI, 
and Operational BI—encompass all the reporting and analytical requirements 
and capabilities working together to utilize the data from the transactional sys-
tem and make it readily available with a tool such as OBIEE.
1.7 Summary
This chapter outlined an introduction to a holistic BI solution in reference to the 
business context and relevance thereof. Starting with an emphasis on reporting, 
analysis, and analytics as a basic business need to drive decision making, it high-
lighted the need for BI and the various BI and reporting categories. It also out-
lined the use of Oracle Essbase and BI as components of such a holistic solution. 
The next chapter examines the importance of Essbase and its relevance to 
modern-day multidimensional analysis and Analytical BI.


15
Chapter 2
Why Oracle Essbase Now
In This Chapter
 
2.1 Introduction
 
2.2 OBIEE and Essbase: History and Importance 
 
2.3 Why Essbase Now: From History to Historical, Analytical, and Beyond 
 
2.4 Summary
2.1 Introduction
Oracle Business Intelligence Enterprise Edition (OBIEE)’s roots stem from 
Siebel Analytics. From a historical standpoint in the business intelligence (BI) 
industry, Siebel Analytics’ prominence and rise came late in the game. At that 
time, other, more popular and visible BI tools were winning the market share 
in the nascent industry of BI in the late 1990s. Forward-thinking independent 
startup companies like Cognos and SAS were pushing the envelope for business 
intelligence. In those early days of the industry, there was a push to uncover 
all the possibilities of what BI and data warehousing (DW) could offer. As the 
industry took hold, many challenges were uncovered as the tools and the indus-
try matured. It was clear that certain challenges had to be overcome in order 
to present BI as a capable, viable solution for doing analytics and providing the 
tools necessary for enabling decision support.

16 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
Those industry challenges can be summed up as:
• Visualizing data—how the information was presented
• Handling large volumes of data
• Distributing results and enterprise-wide access 
• Effective data architecture and design
• Efficient movement of data from system to system
• Integrating data
Each one of these posed a major problem that needed to overcome in order to 
present a working holistic system and solution for BI and analytics. Some exist 
even today and have prompted the emergence of numerous technologies and 
approaches, such as Big Data and Big Data Analytics. Each of these new tech-
nologies and approaches boasts the same promise of overcoming the challenges 
that have historically plagued the industry.
2.2 OBIEE and Essbase: History and Importance 
So what is the importance of discussing the history? Well, looking at the history 
provides an explanation and understanding of how the product was formulated, 
which in turn provides a good glimpse as to where the product will be head-
ing. In other words, we will be able to gain knowledge and understand the true 
capabilities of an application and why it was developed as such. In the case of 
OBIEE, the application grew and was developed in an already mature market 
for what was then just a single specific extension of one specific application. It 
did not start out to become a premiere reporting and analytical solution. Almost 
by accident, it flourished into the powerful BI open platform that it is today.
It was indeed late in the game. However, because it developed in that man-
ner, by the time that Siebel was acquired by Oracle, Siebel had gained some 
traction as a capable BI solution. Furthermore, because it was late in the game, 
they were able to recognize and strategize that integrating with certain popular, 
common systems at the time, such as Oracle EBS or PeopleSoft, would provide 
an advantage in offering prepackaged and preconfigured standard reports and 
dashboards that could easily be implemented in a much shorter time frame. In 
the midst of custom BI projects going over budget and over schedule, that proved 
to be quite a proposition and effective sales strategy. Essentially, it reduced the 
amount of time to develop and deliver the numerous BI and DW components 
that a standard BI solution would entail, as depicted in Figure 2.1.
If Siebel Analytics started off as a proprietary solution, it has certainly then 
evolved to not only provide a reporting mechanism and tool for its own Siebel 
transactional system but, more importantly, provided a true BI solution with 

Figure 2.1 BI under the Covers. (Reproduced with permission from BIS3 LLC © 2015.)

18 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
an open architecture that enabled it to source data from any system. Moreover, 
because it gained prominence at a later stage in a relatively mature market, it 
was developed and encompassed what was, at the time, established tried and 
true best practices of BI. These best practices included:
• Utilizing the star schema architecture
• Using a best-of-breed extract, transform, and load (ETL) tool (embedded 
into the solution)
• Providing a browser-based front-end
These were included as a standard part of the solution offering and helped 
catapult the product forward, despite the fact that it was “late to the party.” 
However, being a latecomer may have actually greatly contributed to the prod-
uct’s success. For instance, while others were arguing about which architecture 
would best support the querying and decision support systems used for analyt-
ics, the Siebel Analytics product had already incorporated dimensional mod-
els and the star schema architecture from the beginning. Essentially, what this 
meant was that the solution offering already had a solid base for development, 
having incorporated proven best practices. So when Oracle acquired Siebel, 
Oracle also acquired a much-needed and more effective BI product to replace 
its existing BI product at that time. 
Since acquiring Siebel and the Siebel Analytics product, now repackaged as 
OBIEE, Oracle has been able to gather its BI strategy cohesively and create a 
new standard and offering for its own product. It can be said that the acquisi-
tion provided a movement toward fulfilling what Oracle’s customers were look-
ing for all along: a mechanism for being able to report from its operational 
system (i.e., Oracle EBS) seamlessly and effectively.
Oracle has retired—or is planning to retire—its old products and is now 
moving toward having an established reporting tool. The company is on the 
verge of adding to its established reporting and analytics platform by adding 
capabilities for other BI functions and mechanisms for data discovery, ETL, and 
cubes for Analytical BI. The last of these has been satisfied by the incorporation 
of a multidimensional analytical server called Essbase. This book explores why 
Essbase is now being added as the foundation and what is prompting this need.
Keep in mind that traditional BI offerings included a multidimensional 
structure or cube as a standard component. OBIEE, or the former Siebel 
Analytics, was a relational online analytical processing (ROLAP) solution, 
and not a MOLAP solution using a multidimensional structure. With the 
use of Essbase, a more traditional approach to BI, or what is now referred 
to as Analytical BI, is now possible.

Why Oracle Essbase Now 19
2.3 Why Essbase Now: From History to Historical, 
Analytical, and Beyond
From its humble beginnings as a product of Arbor Software in 1992 (when it 
introduced the first version of Essbase) to becoming part of Hyperion Solutions 
in 1998, Essbase has been growing in functionality as multidimensional 
OLAP (MOLAP) software. Oracle acquired Hyperion in 2007 and integrated 
Hyperion’s BI tools into OBIEE Plus. As of 2009, Essbase had been commercial-
ized as an Oracle product, as Oracle Essbase, and had been introduced as part of 
Oracle’s BI Suite. A history of Essbase can be obtained from the  in2Hyperion 
website (http://www.in2hyperion.com/page/Hyperion-Essbase.aspx), and an 
in-depth overview of Oracle Essbase can be found on Oracle’s website (http://
www.oracle.com/us/solutions/business-analytics/business-intelligence/essbase/
overview/index.html).
Here are a few reasons why Oracle Essbase matters now more than ever:
 As enterprises shifted toward integrated IT environments with hetero-
geneous systems, OLAP anaylsis involved more than querying the Oracle 
Database. Oracle Essbase, with its capability to address heterogeneous 
source systems, became a trend setter for multidimensional analysis. 
 From the late 1990s to today, the number of concurrent users rapidly grew 
from less than a hundred to thousands. The same explosive growth is true 
for data. This increase necessitated OLAP analysis to support this growth; 
Oracle Essbase, with its enriched functionality, is better suited for this.
 Oracle Essbase, as part of Hyperion acquisition, can power EPM solutions 
based on Hyperion. This is critical to today’s business needs, as it enables 
the measurement of the key performance indicators involved, which in 
turn drives business decisions.
 It also allows what-if analysis and scenario modeling—the basis for using 
Essbase to address predictive analytics.
• Essbase has a uniquely business-centric implementation, rather than being 
focused on database administration.
• Oracle Essbase is consumer-focused and independent of the Database. 
It has complete multidimensional functionality, capable of addressing 
 modern-day and next-gen OLAP analysis. 
• As a result of the gap of OBIEE‘s inability to fully address predictive 
analytics, Oracle Essbase enables cube-based predictive analytics using 
the analytical power of cubes and MDX structures. This is where Oracle 
 Essbase can be utilized for analytical BI and its future as a next-generation 
OLAP server.
• OLAP analysis became more in-depth, requiring complete highly com-
plex multidimensional analysis involving MDX, XML/A OLAP-aware 

20 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
querying and planning, forecasting, and allocations. Oracle’s OLAP-
based SQL OLAP was not quite suitable for addressing these needs.
• Essbase is now fully embedded and integrated into OBIEE.
Essbase has always been a dominant player and leader in multidimensional 
or cube technologies. Its developers’ use of cutting-edge technology and for-
ward thinking have paved the way for the development and evolution of busi-
ness intelligence and its capabilities. Coupled with definitive business metrics 
and goals, Essbase has become a formidable tool for decision making and ana-
lytics for business users. However, it is more than just a tool; its technology and 
capabilities for handling and summarizing large amount of data dynamically 
recommend it as a critical component of the total strategy for a good BI pack-
age and solution. In this case, Essbase provides aggregations and summaries as 
part of a holistic and comprehensive BI solution with cubes—something that 
was lacking in the earlier versions of OBIEE and the former Siebel Analytics.
Through its acquisition and evolution with Oracle, the plan for Essbase was 
always to become fully embedded as an integral part of the Oracle Business 
Intelligence Suite—and now that has come to pass. Although it still exists 
and can be used as a standalone product, it is now a component (i.e., Essbase 
Business Intelligence Accelerator Wizard) used in conjunction with the RPD 
of OBIEE for an aggregation strategy to essentially speed up reporting and 
analysis. Now more than ever, as it heavily relies on the logical data model (via 
the RPD) with a common and “single version of the truth,” it has become a vital 
part of the holistic, comprehensive solution for business intelligence and analy-
tics for the Oracle Business Intelligence Suite.
Throughout this book, the authors have emphasized the creation of a logical 
(dimensional) data model as a blueprint for multidimensional analysis and 
extension and customization of Essbase for analytical BI and beyond. This 
still holds true for current users with Essbase installations as a standalone 
tool and also now especially for new users with installations of the integrated 
Essbase and OBIEE package.
2.4 Summary
This chapter examined the important role of Essbase and how it evolved in 
modern multidimensional analysis and in the BI solution landscape. Starting 
with a history of BI and its role in business decision making, the chapter high-
lighted why it matters now more than ever to use Essbase as a component of a 
holistic BI solution. The next chapter will highlight the successful players and 
products of Oracle Essbase and BI.

21
Chapter 3 
Oracle Essbase and 
Oracle BI: Successful 
Players and Products
In This Chapter
 
3.1 Introduction
 
3.2 The Primary Vendors: Inventors and Presenters
 
3.3 The Primary Products and Tools Set: Inclusions and Exclusions
 
3.4 The Primary Users: Evaluators, Investors, Implementers and Eventual 
Benefiters
 
3.5 Summary
 
3.6 References
3.1 Introduction
The technology that supports using Oracle Essbase and Oracle BI for com-
prehensive business intelligence (BI) starts with implementing Oracle Essbase 
as an online analytical processing (OLAP) solution through data integration, 
then using it for Analytical BI. Oracle Essbase provides forward-facing analysis 

22 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
via its ability to model what-if scenarios and forecast future trends. It goes a 
step further by providing end user–enabled custom analytics, which can be 
augmented by Oracle BI and Oracle BI Enterprise Edition (OBIEE) for opera-
tional and interactive BI. While discussing the successful players and prod-
ucts, it is imperative to list the same categorized under multiple areas of OLAP 
and BI space. These include engineered solutions, enterprise reporting, OLAP 
Analytics, Enterprise BI, self-service, operational, interactive, mobile BI, and 
most recently Big Data. Oracle BI provides the ease of deployment on the plat-
form of choice that includes on-premise, on-cloud, or on-mobile.
Together, Oracle Essbase and Oracle BI provide a practical solution that 
stands out as an example of end-to-end BI that incorporates interactive visuali-
zations and dynamic dashboarding; in-memory, mobile, data discovery, Big 
Data, and predictive analytics; and across-the-business dimensions of analytical 
and operational analysis and decision making—while at the same time provid-
ing performance visibility and a user-friendly experience. It also provides insight 
into using self-service and advanced analytics to solve business problems. And it 
plugs seamlessly into existing infrastructure.
3.2 The Primary Vendors: Inventors and Presenters
The primary vendors include Siebel and Hyperion, which have now acquired 
by Oracle. These are the inventors. In addition to this, vendors of other rela-
tional databases and SAP Business Warehouse (BW) can be presenters of OLAP 
analysis by using Oracle Essbase as a stand-alone OLAP server for the purposes 
of analytical reporting and trend analysis. The presenters deserve special men-
tion, as stated in the following:
 Oracle Essbase and Oracle Essbase Studio, along with financial reporting 
tools primarily for what-if analysis
• Oracle BI Foundation Suite that can be used to integrate Oracle Essbase 
and OBIEE providing a complete BI solution
• Oracle Fusion Middleware, which is an enclosing product for Oracle 
Essbase
• Oracle Fusion Applications
• Siebel Analytics, on which OBIEE is based, acquired by Oracle in 2005
• Oracle Endeca Information Discovery software acquired by Oracle in 
late 2011 —tailored for unstructured analysis, self-service information 
discovery 
• Oracle Hyperion Smart View for Office for integrating OBIEE with 
Microsoft Office

Oracle Essbase and Oracle BI: Successful Players and Products 23
• Oracle BI seamlessly integrates with Oracle E-Business Suite, PeopleSoft 
Enterprise, JD Edwards Enterprise One, Hyperion Planning, Oracle 
Application Express (APEX), Oracle Endeca Information Discovery, and 
Oracle BI Discoverer 
The inventors and presenters, along with their products, expand Oracle BI 
and extend analytics beyond traditional reporting and key performance indica-
tors (KPIs) to support advanced analytics, including prescriptive and predictive 
analytics. This in turn provides access to the same, more pervasively (i.e., to a 
wider range of users), while at the same time making it more business user–
driven, resulting in scale-out BI.
3.3 The Primary Products and Tools Set: 
Inclusions and Exclusions
3.3.1 Oracle Exalytics
Oracle Exalytics is an in-memory system engineered to run Oracle BI and 
Enterprise Performance Management (EPM) products. It comes embedded 
with OBIEE 11g and Oracle Essbase (ASO and BSO), along with TimesTen in- 
memory cache. It leverages in-memory optimized hardware, in-memory Oracle 
BI, Essbase, TimesTen, and Endeca to provide relational, fully multidimensional, 
unstructured analytics, analytical reporting, and financial and operational 
planning. The inherent Oracle BI Foundation Suite provides extreme perfor-
mance for relational OLAP (ROLAP) and multidimensional OLAP (MOLAP) 
analysis involving Big Data scale and enterprise-wide performance management 
applications. It also delivers advanced data visualization capabilities that enable 
granular visual exploration. The following points deserve special mention with 
regard to Oracle Exalytics and improved Oracle BI and Essbase performance:
• Oracle Exalytics enables the caching of OBIEE metadata models and the 
data from Essbase cubes into memory. This ensures performance at the BI 
application level. 
• Oracle Essbase cubes can be easily deployed to run on Oracle Exalytics, 
resulting in a seamless integration that yields n times faster performance 
and scalability. OBIEE deployed in Oracle Exalytics is easier to maintain 
than that deployed on commodity hardware.
• Oracle Exalytics Summary Advisor, which is also in-memory and self-
optimizing, gathers usage statistics on queries to determine which data is 
to be loaded into memory versus left on disk.

24 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
• Oracle Exalytics’ in-memory performance architecture enables interactive 
dashboard analyses of multimillion-row sets—analyses that are forward-
looking; the datasets involved are larger in terms of velocity and variety.
• Oracle Exalytics can be integrated with Oracle Exadata via a fast Infini-
band connection, opening the door for direct access to enterprise data 
warehouses and seamless data flow from Oracle Exadata to Exalytics.
• Oracle Exalytics is more integrated into Oracle’s product stack with less 
support for multiple BI vendors.
Nucleus Research’s Research Note: “Examining The Value Of Oracle Exalytics” 
provides insight into the business value of Oracle Exalytics’ greater visibility, 
increased productivity and efficiency, scalability, and lower total cost of ownership 
(TCO). It is available at http://www.oracle.com/us/solutions/ent- performance-bi/
business-intelligence/examining-value-oracle-exalytics-1976483.pdf.
3.3.2 Oracle Essbase
Oracle Essbase is a standalone OLAP server owned and controlled by Oracle as 
part of its Hyperion acquisition. It is a fully functional OLAP server external to 
the Oracle database that is part of the Common Enterprise Information Model 
and under the umbrella of Oracle Fusion Middleware. It provides MDX and 
XML/A as opposed to SQL Access, thus enabling full multidimensional access 
to OLAP data. It is end user–centric and can be used across heterogeneous 
environments. Its potential lies in its ability to function as an OLAP engine 
for Hyperion performance management solutions and forecasting and planning 
tools. The uniqueness of Essbase lies in its business-centric implementation 
rather than database administration. It also supports write-back capabilities to 
its multidimensional cubes. The following features make Oracle Essbase a key 
choice for OLAP Analytics in conjunction with Oracle Database and OBIEE:
• Connectivity to multisource heterogeneous relational databases via open 
database connectivity (ODBC), including SAP BW
• MDX query language, the standard for OLAP querying—cubes accessed 
using MDX and XML/A (for Web Analysis)
• Analytic Integration Services, Administration Services, Provider Services, 
and Hyperion Shared Services
• Java, MDX and XML/A API and Smart View-based communication
• Hybrid Analysis 
• Integration with BI Publisher, financial and interactive reporting, and 
Web Analysis 

Oracle Essbase and Oracle BI: Successful Players and Products 25
• Search functionality
• Workspace and Excel Add-in
3.3.3 Oracle BI Publisher
Oracle BI Publisher is a common platform for creating and delivering for opera-
tional reporting over the Web or using familiar desktop tools such as Microsoft 
Word and Adobe Acrobat. Oracle BI Publisher allows separation of the data 
query from the report template, thus enabling a single query to be associated 
with multiple report templates at runtime. This allows for report bursting 
 tailored towards multiple users with customized content. Oracle BI Publisher 
can be deployed as a stand-alone or as part of OBIEE. The following points 
highlight some features and functionality about BI Publisher:
• It supports heterogeneous data sources, including Web Services, XML-
based sources, and external files. It also supports connections to Oracle 
Endeca data stores. Using Endeca Query Language (EQL) queries, data 
can be selected from Oracle Endeca Server and used in BI Publisher 
reports.
• It supports a variety of output formats, such as PDF for pixel-perfect 
reporting, HTML for reports over the Web, and CSV and XML for 
exporting to external systems. The interactive report mode and multiple 
report templates are optimized for high performance delivery of all output 
formats.
• It supports reports that can print in multiple languages.
• It is hot-pluggable and be seamlessly integrated with custom applications 
using Web services or Java API.
• It is end user–oriented, enabling the creation of report layouts by 
 dragging-and-dropping custom business indicators using BI Publisher’s 
layout editor. The integration of OBIEE dashboards with BI Publisher lay-
out editor enables PDF generation of the dashboard that can be imported 
into BI Publisher to autogenerate a printable format.
• It enables scheduling of custom report jobs based on a trigger. A retry 
limit can be set to auto-re-execute that trigger on its failure.
3.3.4 Oracle BI Foundation Suite
Oracle BI Foundation Suite, also termed Oracle BI Foundation, provides an 
integrated platform for operational reporting, dashboards, ad hoc query and 

26 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
analysis using ROLAP, MOLAP, planning and budgeting, unstructured ana-
lytics, and predictive analytics. Also, users can leverage all of this on the mobile 
platform of their choice ensuring data quality and security. It enables meta-
data to be shared consistently across OLTP sources, ODS, data warehouse, data 
marts, Essbase cubes, and Apache Hadoop data sources resulting in federated 
views of data. 
It includes features such as visualizations and interactions, office and smart 
view functionality, BI Mobile HD, BI Publisher, and BI Server for Big Data and 
Exalytics. Oracle BI Foundation Suite also includes OBIEE with dashboard 
analytics and common enterprise semantic model as its components. The latest 
release supports the following enhancements:
• Visualizations and user interactivity
○ Data-driven visualizations driven by recommendation views that 
enable selection based on content and context of the analysis. It also 
gives the flexibility of how data can be controlled using multiple views 
in the same analysis.
○ Performance tiles that display a set of metrics on a dashboard that are 
user-customizable.
○ New visualizations such as waterfall graphs, map views, 100% stacked 
charts, breadcrumbs, and trellis view actions in a dashboard all 
enhance user interaction experience. Freeze columns for tables, pivots, 
and advanced trellis views anchor the headers at the top of the view 
even as the user scrolls down the dataset. Freeze columns are also avail-
able in Oracle BI Mobile through the Oracle BI Mobile HD app via a 
two-finger swipe gesture.
○ Integrated search functionality via the Endeca Information Discovery 
server gives the end user/business analyst the power to do a full-text 
search based on attribute filters like type, name, created by, and so on.
• Oracle Mobile BI HD
 
Mobile-friendly gestures such as double-tapping and touch-screen inter-
actions enable better interaction in leveraging the improvements to visu-
alizations. Also users can take advantage of Oracle BI Publisher mobile 
improvements to open and view BI Publisher reports and locally save them 
for offline consumption. Additionally, the Oracle BI Mobile  Security 
Toolkit included in the latest version of Oracle BI Foundation Suite pro-
vides a repackaged, unsigned, and uncertified version of Oracle BI Mobile 
HD app that allows a customizable way to integrate third-party mobile 
device management (MDM) security solution, sign it with its corporate 
signature, and deploy it on the chosen delivery platform.

Oracle Essbase and Oracle BI: Successful Players and Products 27
• Integration with Hadoop
 
Oracle BI Foundation Suite 11g supports integration with Hadoop data 
sources via a Hive ODBC interface. Using direct commands from Oracle 
BI Server to Hive, querying and fetching data from Hadoop sources is 
possible.
• Oracle Essbase integration
 
The seamless integration of Oracle BI Foundation Suite with Oracle 
 Essbase provides write-back to Essbase cubes from OBIEE and  Essbase as 
an Aggregate Persistence target. 
• Other enhancements
○ It supports the export of dashboards to BI Publisher. BI Publisher reports 
are automatically rendered in the background. Additionally, dashboard 
content can also be exported to Microsoft Office formats—Excel and 
PowerPoint. Also, template-based printing of dashboards is supported.
○ It offers users the flexibility to create subject area reports that run 
directly against the Oracle BI Server. This eliminates the need to create 
an extra BI Publisher data model.
○ It supports Smart View integration with Office via the Oracle  Hyperion 
Smart View for Office. The BI Presentation Catalog in Smart View 
enables secure BI dashboard page and report prompts using single sign-
on, and BI View creation in Smart View allows creation of Answers 
views from Excel.
3.3.5 Oracle BI Enterprise Edition (OBIEE)
OBIEE is a powerful and comprehensive business intelligence and analytics 
platform. It includes interactive dashboards, ad-hoc, published and operational 
reporting including financial reporting, integrated analytics on any data-
set, any data source and in any format; unstructured, predictive and mobile 
analytics, proactive notifications and alerts, actionable intelligence, Microsoft 
Office integration, scorecards, and server based query, analysis and reporting. 
OBIEE is part of Oracle Fusion Middleware and is embedded in Oracle Fusion 
Applications. On the same lines Oracle BI Standard Edition One provides the 
same enterprise-class functionality to small and medium businesses that helps 
them in making better business decisions.
OBIEE incorporates a common enterprise semantic model through its 
repository—what is commonly referred to as the RPD. The RPD is an enter-
prise metadata layer that encompasses all data sources—from Big Data (Apache 
Hadoop) to in-memory sources like Oracle TimesTen to OLAP sources like 

28 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
Essbase, flat files, XML, Web Services, relational database management sys-
tem (RDBMSs) and third-party sources. OBIEE can seamlessly integrate with 
Essbase for reporting data. The OBIEE logical model can be used as a data 
source for Essbase. It is also possible to write-back to Essbase cubes from OBIEE.
Taking OBIEE as an example of a BI solution that addresses multiple facets 
of business needs, the following list gives a glimpse into the capabilities such a 
solution can provide:
• Near real-time and right-time reporting on operational data
• Business analysis across multiple dimensions using MOLAP
• Analysis and reporting on historical data using ROLAP 
• Comparative analysis with financial planning, budgeting, and forecasting 
data
• Predictive analytics to determine future outcomes using statistical models 
and other forms of predictive models
• Analysis of Big Data, including machine-generated data, to identify pat-
terns and correlations (Please refer to the article in Ref. 1 for a generic 
outline of using the cloud to unleash the potential of Big Data.)1
OBIEE 11g enables greater dashboard interactivity for the end user and 
improved data visualization over its previous versions. Of primary mention are 
the following:
• Oracle Summary Advisor, which can help improve performance
• Oracle BI Composer, a user-friendly wizard for creating analyses
• OBIEE‘s new visual discovery functionality when deployed with Oracle 
Exalytics
• Contextual suggestions, recommending the best-fit visualization type vis-
à-vis current data
• Performance tiles, which provide instant summary metrics 
• Compare and contrast data distributions using stacked bars
• Correlation between initial values and series of intermediate values using 
waterfall charts
• Comparative analysis by way of display of data-dense views in the form of 
trellis chart grids
• Contextual navigation actions and awareness 
• Full-text search using Endeca MDEX technology that is context based, 
augmented by visual analytics; Oracle Endeca supports self-service data 
discovery, considered as a component of mainstream BI
• Save As option for dashboard analysis 
• Export of dashboards and dashboard content to native Excel and 
PowerPoint formats

Oracle Essbase and Oracle BI: Successful Players and Products 29
• Smart Views that serves as the primary Office application that encloses BI 
presentation catalogs and allows BI view creation, a feature that enables BI 
answers view creation directly in Excel, and saving the same to Excel 
• Export of dashboard to BI Publisher, with autocreation of the data model 
and report based on it
• Pixel-perfect printing of dashboards; also, attachment of multiple tem-
plates to the dashboard and the preservation of dashboard state
OBIEE 11g excels in its support for Big Data analytics, which include native 
integration with Hive, Hadoop MapReduce, and HDFS. The Oracle BI Server 
uses auto-generated HiveQL/ODBC to query data directly from Hadoop. It 
can also be used to interface with Oracle Exalytics for integrated analysis of Big 
Data and real-time streaming/social media data.
Last but not the least, OBIEE supports self-service BI capabilities and 
actionable intelligence by way of its dynamic dashboarding, user-interactivity 
enhancements, and proactive detection and alerting. Oracle BI also supports 
process intelligence. The OBIEE Action Framework enables invocation of 
business processes from within dashboards and reports, querying of business 
activity monitoring data, and analysis of the same. This boils down to turning 
insight into actions. This ability can be further enhanced to accelerate self-
service BI by way of a feedback loop into the BI application in context that 
incorporates the same as BI rules to improvise and autogenerate better decisions 
using the BI dashboard.
3.3.6 Oracle BI Mobile
Oracle BI Mobile is a leading platform that provides greater BI outreach to 
growing number of users and enables the development of customized code-free 
applications tailored toward business needs. The Mobile BI platform supports 
apps for both smart phones and tablets that are interactive and business user–
focused. Oracle BI Mobile architecture enables development, deployment, and 
maintenance of mobile apps across a variety of devices while at the same time 
ensuring the security of critical data and master data management involved. 
It uses the same security model as Oracle BI, thereby eliminating the need to 
separately build security for the business users. This strategy provides for BI 
anywhere, anytime, and by anyone authorized. It also allows offline viewing 
and sharing of BI content and online synchronization of saved offline content. 
Also the mobile apps can be monitored for its usage and patterns using the 
integrated Oracle Fusion Middleware Audit Framework. Oracle Mobile BI 
Platform includes:

30 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
• Oracle Mobile BI HD
 
This Mobile BI app for smartphones and tablets enables seamless deploy-
ment of new or existing analytic content such as interactive dashboards, 
scorecards, and reports. It is integrated with Oracle BI Foundation Suite, 
supports location intelligence, and provides build-once, consume-any-
where access across the enterprise without any rework. 
• Oracle Mobile BI App Designer
 
This allows the business user to easily develop do-it-yourself analytic 
mobile applications that are purpose-built toward a line of business. It 
does this by way of a web browser–based drag-and-drop interface that is 
codeless and autorendering for variable screen sizes using its adaptive Web 
engine. Fully integrated with Oracle BI Foundation Suite, it allows data 
from existing BI environments to be consumed for actionable BI. 
 
 
The apps run using HTML5 on iOS, Android, Windows Mobile, and 
BlackBerry devices. The final output can be previewed using a browser 
based mobile simulator or by scanning QR code that is autogenerated by 
the BI App Designer. 
 
 
It is touch enabled for easy browsing through the data in context, and 
the interactive visualizations allow for drill-anywhere functionality on any 
dataset, to provide key insights for improved decision making. The tool-
bar menu and navigation pages ease the task of directly finding the data 
on which users need to base their analyses. Users can also create an App 
Library for sharing apps tailored towards a particular line of business.
3.3.7 Oracle BI Applications
Oracle BI Applications are a set of prebuilt BI solutions that enable businesses 
to buy and extend their BI implementations and at the same time deliver timely 
insight anywhere and anytime. It is built on a 100 percent open platform and 
incorporates industry-standard metrics, giving users the capability to define 
their own metrics on top of the packaged functional content. Its state-of-the-
art analytics coupled with next-generation BI foundation enable faster, better, 
and deep-dive fact-based analysis. Leveraging the power of Enterprise Oracle 
Data Integrator (ODI), it includes a comprehensive integration platform that 
gives direct access to federated data sources. It also enables extract, transform, 
and load (ETL) validation and allows the tracking of data lineage from source 
to target, thereby providing data transparency across the business. Also, Oracle 
BI Applications run on Exalytics. The following are the primary applications 
included in the latest release 11.1.1.7.1 of Oracle BI Applications solutions, 
encompassing horizontal and vertical domains:

Oracle Essbase and Oracle BI: Successful Players and Products 31
• Student Information Analytics 
• Indirect Spend Planning 
• ERP Analytics
○ Financial Analytics
○ HR Analytics
○ Project Analytics
○ Procurement and Spend Analytics
○ Supply Chain and Order Management Analytics
• Customer Relationship Management (CRM) Analytics
○ Sales
○ Marketing
○ Service
○ Contact Center
○ Price
○ Loyalty
• Enterprise Performance Management (EPM) Applications
○ Strategic Planning
○ Financial Close
○ Planning and Forecasting
○ Profitability Management
• Industry Analytics
○ Healthcare
○ Communications
○ Retail
○ Public Sector
○ Financial Services
• New tools to accelerate Oracle BI Applications that include Data Lineage 
Analysis, ETL Validation Utility, Configuration Manager, and Func-
tional Setup Manager
• Oracle Data Integrator Integration using in-database extract, load, trans-
form (E-LT) transformation and declarative design
• Oracle Golden Gate Integration 
3.3.8 Oracle BI for Big Data
The Big Data scenario demands optimizing BI environments for meeting the 
analysis of increased volumes, variety, and velocity data. Oracle BI for BI Data 
addresses these requirements by providing:
• In-memory analytics and BI 

32 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
• Integration of Big Data and decision making
• Advanced data visualization
• Enhanced interactivity
• Faster dashboards 
• Expanded and high-performance analytics
• Better performance 
• Better administration tools for lower TCO
Oracle BI Server provides Hadoop integration and complex event processing 
(CEP) integration. Oracle Exalytics can be leveraged against Big Data and con-
tinuous data sources. Additionally, Oracle Big Data Appliance is an engineered 
system that is specifically designed for delivering real-time insight to action by 
way of instant analyses of Big Data. It includes Hadoop, NoSQL, and very large 
dataset support. Oracle Endeca Information Discovery can be used for self-
service data discovery on structured and unstructured data, thereby enabling 
data-driven decisions on the variety of data.
3.4 The Primary Users: Evaluators, Investors, 
Implementers and Eventual Beneﬁ ters
With primary focus on the metrics by way of advanced analytics, a complete 
BI solution can go a long way in setting the standard for best practice metrics. 
This delivers faster time to value and a superior customer experience. It gives a 
big boost for businesses that are investing in and implementing such solutions 
and opens up a strategy of build versus buy and extend for customers hoping to 
leverage existing deployments.
An Oracle Essbase and OBIEE solution designed on the key factors of in-
memory analytics, data discovery, mobile, Big Data, cloud, and predictive 
analytics becomes the solution of choice for business analysts, IT executives, 
and customers alike.
Customers investing in and implementing Oracle BI Foundation Suite and 
the BI platform gain the benefits of:
• Faster and better analysis on large datasets that includes any data from any 
data source and in any format.
• Improved BI performance and scalability that ranges from department 
level to enterprise wide, in addition to rich functionality, information 
access, and seamless integration with the rest of BI stack.

Oracle Essbase and Oracle BI: Successful Players and Products 33
• Prebuilt and industry-tailored packaged analytic applications that are 
integrated contextually and can be deployed on premise, on cloud, or on 
mobile. BI in the cloud enables scale-out BI across increased user base and 
multitenant workloads.
• Oracle BI Solution-in-a-Box investors derive the benefit of enterprise class 
BI deployment at a lower TCO and higher return on investment (ROI). 
As described on the Oracle website (http://www.oracle.com/bi), Oracle BI 
Solution-in-a-Box includes the Oracle database with partitioning, diag-
nostics, and tuning, Oracle BI Foundation Suite, and ODI, all running in 
two Oracle virtual machines on the Oracle Database Appliance.
From a technical standpoint:
• OBIEE is an implementer of Oracle Essbase to report against its data (i.e., 
use Essbase as a data source for OBIEE and vice versa).
• OBIEE and BI stack benefit from Oracle Essbase, in that the latter can 
add performance and analytic functionality to both.
Business analysts and end users can significantly benefit from:
• Using OBIEE-enhanced and extensible visualizations and user- interaction 
functionality, Microsoft Office integration features, and Mobile BI 
improvements
• Using Oracle Endeca Information Discovery for self-service search-based BI
• Using Oracle BI Applications (OBIA) to leverage industry-specific and 
standards-based integrated analytics solutions deployable with existing 
Oracle BI infrastructure
System implementers can align business requirements with the appropriate 
Oracle BI tools set to create a perfect implementation scenario—especially in 
case of buy and extend.
Implementation specialists can benefit from:
• Using ODI and Oracle Golden Gate to eliminate data integration chal-
lenges, thereby easing the integration between OBIA and the BI platform
• Using OBIA’s new tools to accelerate the deployment of the same, such 
as Configuration Manager, Functional Setup Manager, Data Lineage 
Analy sis, and ETL Validation Utility 
BI developers can benefit from:
• All of the new and enhanced visualizations and dynamic dashboarding 

34 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
functionality in delivering BI content that provides extensibility and ease 
of self-service to the end user
• Oracle BI Mobile advancements in providing the BI Mobile consumer 
with anytime, anywhere, any-device access to information and delivery of 
the same 
• OBIEE functionality for pervasive integration between Oracle Essbase 
and OBIEE for broader access of Essbase data to end users
• Essbase and OBIEE security alignment
• Write-back feature to Essbase cube from OBIEE
• And last but not the least, getting to know how the user base is leveraging 
Oracle BI tools
Gartner’s 2014 Magic Quadrant for Business Intelligence and  Analytics 
Platforms describes Oracle’s BI platform positioned as follows with regard 
to its customer base: 
Customers choose Oracle for its integration within solutions based on 
Oracle applications and technology. In particular, Oracle offers over 
80 prebuilt analytic applications for Oracle E-Business Suite, People-
Soft, JD Edwards, Siebel and other enterprise applications, includ-
ing industry-specific packaged analytic applications. These analytic 
applications include prebuilt ETL, data warehouse models, KPIs, 
reports and dashboards. Oracle BI analytics optimizations with Oracle 
Essbase and the Oracle Hyperion Enterprise Performance Manage-
ment platform enable customers to implement an end-to-end ana-
lytic process for financial budgeting, planning, consolidation, and 
close processes. Oracle also has integration between Oracle BI, Oracle 
Complex Event Processing and Oracle Real-Time Decisions to sup-
port real-time event detection and analysis. However, the complexity 
of analysis conducted by Oracle customers who responded to our sur-
vey is less than that indicated by customers of most of the other ven-
dors in the survey. (Source: https://www.gartner.com/doc/2668318/
magic-quadrant-business-intelligence-analytics)
By way of extending analysis, Oracle Essbase and OBIEE thus make all rele-
vant data accessible to decision makers. Leveraging a combination of its  analytics 
and tools set, OBIA, Oracle BI and Oracle Mobile BI allows BI users and ana-
lysts to transform their organizations in an analysis-centric, user-friendly and 
IT-compliant manner. This can be applied at all levels of the organization start-
ing from the department level to the enterprise level in the following manner:

Figure 3.1 High-Level View of Oracle Essbase and BI Tools versus Analysis and Analytics Operations
(See description of Figure 3.1 on page 36.)

36 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
• Sourcing internal and external data in a federated manner, thereby provid-
ing direct access to source data
• Deriving analytics that power performance using Oracle BI Server
• Delivering analysis dashboards and scorecards that combine descriptive 
and predictive analytics using Oracle BI Presentation Services
• Going a step further in using optimization techniques to provide pro-
active BI solutions that deliver prescriptive analytics
Figure 3.1 gives a high-level view of Oracle Essbase and BI tools versus 
analy sis and analytics operations.
3.5 Summary
This chapter dealt with the successful players and products of Oracle Essbase 
and OBIEE in terms of the primary vendors, products and tools set, and pri-
mary users. It highlighted the features and functionality in Oracle’s product 
suite and how each one fits into the larger landscape of analytical, operational, 
and mobile BI. The next chapter focuses on the analysis, evaluation, and selec-
tion of Oracle Essbase and Oracle BI as a comprehensive BI solution with 
emphasis on essential criteria, critical deciding factors, and the final pick as a 
customer-centric solution.
3.6 References
 
1. Lakshman Bulusu, “Using the Cloud to Unleash the Potential of Big Data.” 
Presentation: Data Summit 2014, May 12–14, 2014, New York, NY; http://www.
dbta.com/DataSummit/2014/presentations.aspx.

37
Chapter 4 
Analysis, Evaluation, 
and Selection
In This Chapter
 
4.1 Introduction
 
4.2 Essential Criteria for Requirements Analysis of Oracle Essbase and 
OBIEE as a Comprehensive BI Solution
 
4.3 Key and Critical Deciding Factors in Selecting Such a Solution
 
4.4 The Final Pick is a Customer-Centric Solution: Key Indicator Checklist
 
4.5 Summary
 
4.6 References
4.1 Introduction
Building a real-world application using Oracle Essbase and Oracle Business 
Intelligence Enterprise Edition (OBIEE) requires strategic planning and analy-
sis of the business processes involved and how well they can be implemented in 
such a solution from design to dashboard and beyond. The essential criteria can 
be broadly classified into the following categories:
• Business process discovery 
• Information integration
• Information dissemination

38 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
• Information transformation
• Information visualization
• User interaction
• Information customization
• Information in action: BI, advanced analytics, and beyond BI (competi-
tive, social, and cloud-based intelligence)
• Information and Big Data
This chapter will examine each of the above categories based on how best 
Oracle Essbase and OBIEE can together be used to achieve implementation of 
the same to improve return on investment (ROI), reduce total cost of ownership 
(TCO), and provide the significant business-oriented goals of performance and 
scale-in, scale-up, and scale-out capacity. Starting with the above essential crite-
ria, it will highlight the key deciding factors in selecting such a solution and then 
present the key indicator checklist towards a final pick for such a solution imple-
mentation. Gartner’s Magic Quadrant for Business Intelligence and Analytic 
Platforms 2014 positions Oracle as a leader in the BI and analytic platforms industry 
(https://www.gartner.com/doc/2668318/magic-quadrant-business-intelligence-
analytics). And Oracle Essbase and OBIEE offer a plethora of  analytical, tacti-
cal, operational, pervasive, and self-service BI capabilities that fit into the usage 
landscape of customer, business-user, developer, and architect. For a general 
discussion of Oracle BI, please refer to the website provided in Reference 1.1 
For a BI solution that yields a better business value, please refer to the paper in 
Reference 2.2 This can be used as a guideline for the content in Sections 4.2, 
4.3, and 4.4.
4.2 Essential Criteria for Requirements Analysis of Oracle 
Essbase and OBIEE as a Comprehensive BI Solution
The essential criteria categorized in the introduction can be further dissected so 
as to enable requirements analysis for the design and development of an Oracle 
Essbase and OBIEE-based BI solution as well as helping to choose the right 
tools for the right job. Table 4.1 shows an example of how such a list might look.
4.2.1 Business Processes—Discovery and Deﬁ nition
This primarily involves:
• Determination of the key business rules and processes for the BI solution 
in the context of both the enterprise and its customers thereof.

Analysis, Evaluation, and Selection 39
• A clear and concise definition of what each process translates to when imple-
mented, taking into consideration the subprocesses, if any, and the primary 
users of the solution. This enables to prioritize them in order of relevance.
• Understanding existing business processes that pertain to online analyti-
cal processing (OLAP) and BI and creating and/or extracting definitive 
business rules from them.
Doing this eases the procedure of identifying changing business needs and 
translating them into business processes as well as choose the right BI tools that 
best-fit into each process, resulting in a solution that is business process driven, 
value based and yields right-time results. 
4.2.2 Information Integration
This involves the need to converge data from multiple sources into a common 
information platform that can be further leveraged to define unified informa-
tion architecture (UIA) for BI. Both extract, transform, and load (ETL) and 
Table 4.1 Essential Criteria for an Oracle Essbase and 
OBIEE-Based Complete BI Solution
Category
Criteria
Business Processes Discovery and 
Deﬁ nition
Business process analysis and deﬁ nition 
from an analytical and operational 
standpoint
Information Integration
Data sources involved 
Data integration 
Information Dissemination
Information Transformation
Information Visualization
Type of analysis, reporting, and 
distribution thereto 
Information Visualization
User Interaction
Information Customization
Information availability and accessibility 
options
Information in Action
User Interaction
Range of analytics: data-centric, 
customer-centric, cross-process, self-
service, and advanced analytics 
(subjective, prescriptive, and predictive)
Information Customization
Ability to leverage existing infrastructure
Information in Action
Going Beyond BI: Competitive, social, 
mobile, and cloud intelligence
Information and Big Data
Big Data

40 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
extract, load, and transform (E-LT) processes, complemented by data storage, 
metadata management, master data management (MDM), some data mining, 
and data virtualization techniques to seamlessly integrate structured data with 
unstructured data from external data sources, can be put to the test so as to 
result in a blueprint for information integration. Also, information integration 
comprises data quality measures in place that consist of data profiling, assess-
ment and enhancement, and culminates in measuring data quality. Regarding 
master data management, hierarchical and cross-dimensional, master data 
across the global enterprise must be taken into consideration during the design 
phase of UIA.
The best-fit way to do this is to identify how data from each data source will 
be used enterprise-wide as well as by customers and how well the UIA can 
be integrated with existing enterprise information systems. 
OBIEE enables such an implementation by way of its Common Enterprise 
Semantic Model, which enables data from any source and in any format to be 
transparently turned into a logical model. Such a data model can be integrated 
into the larger UIA, be used as a data source for Oracle Essbase or OBIEE 
itself, and even be exported to Oracle BI Publisher for operational reporting. 
Oracle Data Integrator can also be used to extract data from both Oracle and 
non-Oracle data sources into data formats that are compatible with OBIEE and 
Oracle Essbase. Both OBIEE and Oracle Essbase can be used as data stores for 
further analysis and reporting.
4.2.3 Information Dissemination, 
Transformation, and Visualization
This criteria involves the analysis, reporting, and distribution of collected infor-
mation thereto and the integration of visualizations based on the same. 
Oracle Essbase supports full-service analysis capabilities for OLAP-based 
business analysis for decision support systems, web-based reporting, and as an 
OLAP engine for Hyperion EPM. Its MultiDimensional eXpressions (MDX) 
and XML/A based access methodology, as opposed to being SQL-based, enables 
cross-dimensional data access. OBIEE supports right-time and near real-time 
analysis of operational data. Its BI Publisher component enables presentation 
of information across business marts along with interactive visualizations of the 
same. The separation of data queries from the reporting layer allows for custom-
ized data content to be disseminated to multiple users dynamically.

Analysis, Evaluation, and Selection 41
4.2.4 User Interaction
This criteria involves functionality that enables the creation of ad hoc queries, 
custom metrics, contextual integration of data at run-time, on-the-fly dynamic 
visualizations and dashboards, and search capabilities that extend beyond the 
prebuilt filters.  
Oracle BI Answers enables ad hoc querying using data-driven column-level 
information. Oracle BI Applications allow user interaction by providing users 
with the flexibility to create self-service business metrics on top of the prepack-
aged BI solutions. Oracle BI Publisher allows interactive querying of operational 
data and its seamless integration into OBIEE or export to external formats 
such as Microsoft Office and PDF files. Oracle Endeca Information Discovery 
allows self-service information discovery and new search metrics to be defined 
and integrated as search key performance indicators (KPIs) for the Oracle-based 
BI solution both at the metadata and analysis levels. Also, OBIEE 11g enables 
greater dashboard interactivity via drag-and-drop custom data integration and 
dynamic dashboarding for the end user and improved data visualization.
4.2.5 Information Customization
Regarding the capabilities needed to leverage existing infrastructure, the most 
significant of them is the ability to reuse existing business processes in place for 
building new or augmenting existing solutions. The business rules extracted 
from existing BI processes, as described in the section “Business Process 
Identification and Definition,” can be integrated into the proposed BI solution 
design to enable a seamless integration with existing IT solutions. 
OBIEE enables such an implementation by way of the OBIEE Action 
Framework, which enables invocation of these business processes from within 
dashboards and reports. This boils down to turning insight into actions. This 
ability can be further enhanced to augment information customization and 
improvisation. Users can then run these reports directly against Oracle BI 
Server, can use OBIEE as a data source for Essbase, or can export the dash-
boards in context to Excel for offline use. A data source for the former allows 
self-service BI by way of a feedback loop into the BI application in context that 
incorporates the same as BI rules to improvise and auto-generate better deci-
sions using the BI dashboard.
In the implementation stage, this boils down to the customer recognizing 
the potential of a better business value, not only in terms of TCO/ROI by 

42 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
making use of existing infrastructure, but also in terms of customer lifecycle 
value (CLV).
OBIEE also allows personalized BI environments by way of custom views 
of data based on logical queries built on using any data source, data and for-
mat, and dashboards. Such views are database and data-source agnostic and can 
be r-used across the presentation layer of the BI Solution. Personalized reports 
based on custom metrics can be built to slice and dice, drill-down, drill-across, 
and drill-through to a specified grain of data. Additionally, it secures all of this 
using multiple layers of security. 
4.2.6 Information in Action: BI, Advanced Analytics, 
and Beyond BI (Competitive, Social, and Cloud-Based 
Intelligence)
This criteria involves processes and corresponding technologies that can be 
incorporated into the BI solution so as to support insight-driven analysis and 
analytics. Starting with compare-and-contrast analysis, forecasting, and trend 
analysis; continuing to prebuilt analytics, advanced analytics comprising new 
KPIs, dashboards, proactive and predictive analytics; and extending to com-
petitive, social, and cloud-based BI, it is all information in action.
Cloud-based BI solution comes with on-demand capacity, elastic capability, 
extreme performance, mobility, and transparency. A hybrid cloud–based 
implementation of the same solution provides the additional benefits of 
security of proprietary data in the private cloud and the elastic benefits of 
public cloud. It can also enable custom solution for BI-on-the go. 
OBIEE and Oracle Essbase support all of this using Oracle Advanced 
Analytics, Oracle BI Applications, Oracle Exalytics, and Oracle RightNow 
Analytics Cloud Service. 
4.2.7 Information and Big Data
This involves processes and technologies to best-fit unstructured and semi-
structured data into the unified information architecture so as to enable  analysis 
and analytics on the same. Big Data generally includes machine-generated data 
to identify patterns and correlations, Web-based log data and clickstream data 

Analysis, Evaluation, and Selection 43
that is huge in volume and generated at high speed. Oracle Exalytics and its 
inherent Oracle BI Foundation Suite enable processing of Big Data by way of 
enabling corresponding metadata patterns to be cached in-memory and pro-
cessed efficiently to achieve high performance. Oracle Exalytics can be run 
on commodity hardware, easing its integration with the rest of the existing BI 
environment. Also Oracle Big Data Appliance can be used to analyze and derive 
insights from Big Data.
4.3 Key and Critical Deciding Factors 
in Selecting Such a Solution
After studying the essential criteria as presented in section 4.2, the primary 
factors in deciding an Oracle Essbase– and OBIEE-based BI solution are listed 
as follows:
• Building a business process view of various business processes, both exist-
ing and new, in defining the scope of the BI solution—and involving all 
concerned business users—from stakeholders to customers.
• Building a business view of data that aligns both business and IT pro-
cesses from an analysis and BI standpoint, using business terminology 
in context. This also involves deriving transformations on data that are 
process-driven.
• Building a logical view of data that encompasses the enterprise landscape. 
This could include master data and reference data in context, in addition 
to the transactional and historical data involved. Also, such a view must 
have the ability to meet the changing data landscape to accommodate 
multiformat and Big Data requirements. This also involves deriving trans-
formations on data that are data-driven.
• Building a metadata model that allows addition of new data sources on 
the fly and integration thereof. OBIEE can accommodate multiple hetero-
geneous data sources in one metadata model.
• Building analytics model tailored towards processing of data factored by 
volume, variety, velocity, validity, virtualization, and value. This must have 
the ability to discover patterns in large-volume and multiformat data and 
pre-emptive handling of data growth for increased performance.
• Building BI Views that align one-on-one with enterprise lines of business 
and reporting off each one of them. Ad hoc reports using OBIEE Analysis 
vis-à-vis subject areas can also be based on these BI Views.
• Building performance management views tailored towards specific busi-
ness functions comprising of scorecards, performance metrics, event-
driven metrics, and performance management dashboards that output 

44 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
recommendations and can be monitored in right time. The recommenda-
tions can then be integrated into the BI solution as business rules, trans-
formations, or analytics to improve information quality and value.
• Building a secure search view of all data in content and context that allows 
for custom filters and enables on-the-fly search criteria to be specified. 
• Building a secure view of the end-to-end solution for information acces-
sibility and availability. This must implement column-level security for 
user login–based data access to specific columns; row-level security for 
slicing of data based on appropriate privileges and metrics is based on 
these slices. 
• Building governance, risk, and compliance view of the unified informa-
tion architecture involved and its use thereof. At the forefront of this is 
having a robust data quality and master data management methodology. 
Additionally, this involves proper usage tracking to determine which user 
is accessing what data, why, and the audit (if the same).
• Building a BI-on-the-go solution and build-your-own-BI (BYOBI) solu-
tions to render the same BI experience on multiple (mobile) devices: 
○ By leveraging virtualization at the Information Integration, Access, 
Availability, and BI Presentation layers 
○ By using BI Solution in the Cloud
○ By using Oracle Mobile BI HD
4.4 The Final Pick is a Customer-Centric Solution: 
Key Indicator Checklist
The Key Indicator Checklist consists of a best practice BI solution design model 
based on OBIEE and Oracle Essbase that can be used as a reference model. 
Here’s a compilation of the same based on the essential requirements and criti-
cal deciding factors in sections 4.2 and 4.3, respectively:
 
1. Isolation of the data integration (including MDM and metadata manage-
ment) and data dissemination layers from the business analysis, BI, and 
business analytics layers, by way of data models that are relational OLAP 
(ROLAP)– and multidimensional OLAP (MOLAP)–based. ROLAP-
based (star schema) and MOLAP-based (MDX cube schema) models 
can be defined in Oracle Essbase, which in turn can be used as sources 
for OBIEE, at the same time maintaining the seamless interoperability 
between the two. Oracle Essbase even allows export of these data models 
to reuse them at a later time. 
 
2. Design of a data warehouse that has the star schemas and aggregate tables 
based on it and the MDX cube schemas to leverage multidimensional 

Analysis, Evaluation, and Selection 45
data aggregation. OBIEE uses intelligence to select the right aggregates 
to service the right query and present the information requested to the 
report/dashboard.
 
3. Design of the solution based on the UIA, comprising data virtualization, 
in-memory analytics, adaptive access control, dynamic streaming, and 
self-service–enabled interactivity and responsiveness. This helps imple-
ment a scale-out and scale-up analytical and operational BI solution that 
aligns with business, IT, and customer demands. Oracle BI Foundation 
Suite and Oracle BI Solution-in-a-Box allow such a design.
 
4. Design of a methodology to implement the UIA at each business unit 
level of the enterprise as well as at the customer-facing application level 
if required. This must consist of an analysis component that needs to 
identify the correct data integration strategy based on the actual data 
itself—across all data touch points.
 
5. Design of logical queries against the logical view of data using “logical 
SQL” that can be translated into physical queries. This can also involve 
applying appropriate data integration techniques, such as ETL, EL-T, 
data federation, or data virtualization.
 
6. Design of enhanced functionality for already existing queries by power 
users to enrich their BI experience.
 
7. Using the same design and building upon it for adaptability, extensibility, 
and fine-grained customer visibility, thus taking it beyond intelligence. 
This is possible by using Oracle Advanced Analytics and self-service–
based KPIs as well as dynamic dashboarding—all supported by OBIEE 
and Oracle Exalytics. 
 
8. Using an “open” design model by being flexible enough to use the same 
as a reference model that is business-driven and customer-centric, thereby 
minimizing IT intervention. The ROLAP and MOLAP data models 
outlined in point 1 can be exported as vendor-neutral design models that 
can be used as a source for offline and external BI and analysis.
 
9. Design of a high-performance data visualization platform that leverages 
the new features of OBIEE 11g and is sourced from a centralized reposi-
tory of data. Auto-aggregation of multidimensional data and auto-selec-
tion from the same for fine-grained BI queries and hierarchical queries. 
 10. Securing of the end-to-end BI solution using a security and compliance 
model that adheres GRC principles of business in context. This must 
allow for prebuilt and custom metrics for identity and access manage-
ment by way of multifactor authentication and authorization for informa-
tion availability and accessibility.
 11. Managing data as an asset, from data discovery to data as an analytics 
component encompassing all data from business process view to MDM to 
BI Views to user-input data. The OBIEE Server, repository, BI catalog, and 

46 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
Oracle Essbase ensure all BI objects and data are governed and compliant 
with regulatory standards throughout the lifecycle of the BI solution.
 12. Design of an Enterprise Performance Management (EPM) platform that 
does root cause analysis, which in turn can be used to derive KPIs result-
ing in performance metrics. Both the root cause and its solution metrics 
can either be prepackaged as performance analytics or used on a custom 
basis—and integrated into the complete BI solution.  
 13. Design of a Mobile BI Solution using Oracle BI Mobile HD, Oracle BI 
Foundation Suite, or Oracle RightNow Cloud Service.
4.5 Summary
This chapter outlined the essential criteria for requirements analysis of an Oracle 
Essbase and OBIEE-based complete BI solution, starting from business process 
analysis to information integration to information transformation and delivery 
to BI and analytics. It then examined the key critical and deciding factors in 
selecting such a solution, followed by the final checklist towards a customer-
centric solution. The primary focus was on how such a solution can deliver busi-
ness value and ease decision making in the process. The next chapter will cover 
Oracle Essbase Data Sources implementation and customization.
4.6 References
 
1. “Oracle BI: Business Intelligence.” Oracle website: http://www.oracle.com/bi.
 
2. Laura Burkamper, “A Value-Added Approach to Implementing Business Intelligence 
Solutions.” August 2013; http://mcgladrey.com/content/dam/mcgladrey/pdf/wp_
value_added_approach_implementing_business_intelligence_solutions.pdf.

47
Chapter 5 
Data Integration, 
Implementation, 
and Customization 
Using Essbase
In This Chapter
 
5.1 Introduction
 
5.2 Building an Integrated Approach for Data 
 
5.3 Implementation Specifics of Data from Data Source to Data Analytics 
 
5.4 Semantic Integration between OBIEE and Essbase, Using OBIEE as a
 
   Data Source for Oracle Essbase
 
5.5 Extending and Customizing Essbase 
 
5.6 Summary
 
5.7 References
5.1 Introduction
As a core component of Oracle’s BI technology stack and as a middle-tier online 
analytical processing (OLAP) server, Oracle Essbase plays a pivotal role for 
multi dimensional analysis across the enterprise spectrum, from data sourcing 
to data management. 

48 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
This chapter will examine the data integration component of Oracle 
Essbase’s capabilities, starting from data source definition to consolidation 
and further customization of the same; semantic integration between Oracle 
Business Intelligence Enterprise Edition (OBIEE) and Essbase; and extending 
and customization of Essbase. For a general discussion of Oracle BI, please refer 
to the websites stated in Reference 1 and 5, and for Essbase, please refer to the 
website stated in Reference 6.1,5,6
5.2 Building an Integrated Approach for Data
Oracle Essbase, as a middle-tier OLAP solution enables data source manage-
ment using a structured approach for data consolidation. Oracle Essbase Studio 
is a single tool that can handle heterogeneous data sources from definition to 
consolidation to administration and customization. 
Traditionally, these functions were carried out using Essbase Integration 
Services and Essbase Administration Services. With the previous tools, the 
processes involved were quite complex and difficult to handle. Essbase Studio 
provides a user-friendly toolset for doing all of the data integration needed 
for Essbase.
Using Essbase Studio is the way to go for performing all data integration in 
Essbase. It is not only easy but also flexible enough to extend Essbase, as will 
be pointed out in the section “Extending and Customization of Essbase.”
Here’s a list highlighting the functionality and tools that enable the same in 
Oracle Essbase:
• Business rules can be associated with data files while loading. Multiple 
rules file(s) can be applied to multiple data files identified for loading.
• Any relational database management system (RDBMS) can be used as a 
data source with its eXtending OLAP (XOLAP) on relational database 
feature. Using this, the ability to dynamically source from an RDBMS 
enables data sourcing using a SQL-friendly data retrieval processes. 
• Hierarchical data can be sourced using wizards that autocreate the appro-
priate hierarchies. As an example, using the Time Dimension Wizard 
enables autocreation of time hierarchies with Essbase Aggregate Storage 
Option (ASO) databases. 
• Data from flat files and Excel spreadsheets can be sourced into Essbase as 
input to cubes modeling.
• Teradata as a data source can be handled by way of setting the connection 
properties in the Oracle Essbase server.properties configuration file.

Data Integration, Implementation, and Customization Using Essbase 49
• Oracle OCI connect identifiers and Open Database Connectivity 
(ODBC) Data Source Names can be used as a data loading interface for 
handling Oracle and heterogeneous data sources in addition to the default 
ODBC Essbase connection string dynamically constructed. 
• Metadata objects such as dimensions, data sources, and lists (including 
text lists) can be reused using the common metadata repository via the 
Essbase Studio catalog and at the lowest detail of granularity. This catalog 
can be exported or imported into an XML file for offline usage. Further-
more, data source analysis can be done in an “online” fashion without 
locking the catalog.
• Mini-schemas can be defined paired directly with data source connections.
• Data Source connections to Oracle Real Application Cluster (RAC) 
sources can be defined and customized. The Connection Wizard allows 
for specification of multiple Oracle RAC sever nodes per connection based 
on an Oracle Service Name.
• Essbase Server Clusters can be used as a data source, with Essbase Studio 
allowing definition of the same.
• Essbase data source connections can be kept in “live” sync with the under-
lying physical connections by way of deletion or refresh operations on 
the physical data source changes or schema alterations. This can be done 
Delete and Refresh table commands in the Data Sources tab of the Source 
Navigator in Essbase Studio.
Figure 5.1 shows a high-level view of Oracle Essbase Data Source 
Implementation along with End User Interface.
5.2.1 Recommendations
To get a holistic view of using Oracle Essbase in the enterprise, the authors sug-
gest the following as best-fit scenarios for its implementation:
 
1. Use Essbase standalone, as a source for analytical BI. This is shown in 
Figure 5.1 as a directive from “Heterogeneous Data Sources” to “Oracle 
Essbase.” Analytical BI goes beyond traditional reporting to support 
 forward-looking analytics, “what-if” analysis and scenario modeling. 
The special Oracle Hyperion Smart View for Office integration allows 
this to be done at the enterprise level and in a scalable and intuitive way.
Based on the data sources, dimensions, facts, measures, and the like can be 
configured in Essbase.

Figure 5.1 High-Level View of Oracle Essbase Data Cubes Implementation. (Reproduced with permission from BIS3 LLC © 2015.)

Data Integration, Implementation, and Customization Using Essbase 51
 
2. Use Essbase against a data warehouse/star schema that forms a common 
enterprise information model. This introduces a data repository in the 
Essbase catalog structured as a star schema that inherently populates 
it in a definitive manner used for querying performance. This reposi-
tory serves as a single version of the truth—an advantage of a common 
model thereto. This is indicated by the lines from “Heterogeneous Data 
Sources” to “Oracle DB/DW” to “Oracle Essbase” in Figure 5.1.
 
3. Use Essbase as an in-memory accelerator for Oracle Exalytics that lever-
ages the next-generation data architecture of in-memory computing. This 
functionality is available as of 2014 and optimizes cube-based analyses 
in-memory. (For further information the reader is advised to refer to the 
Oracle White Paper: “Oracle Exalytics In-Memory Machine: A Brief 
Introduction.”4)
5.3 Implementation Speciﬁ cs of Data, from Data Source 
to Data Analytics 
Oracle Essbase implementation follows certain specifics in order to source data 
from multiple sources and output data as intelligence and analytics with value 
added to what was raw data. The following is a brief list of the same:
• Data source connections
• Metadata source connections
• Mini-schemas
• Metadata elements like dimensions, attribute-based members, etc.
• Hierarchies
• Cube schemas
• Cubes and Essbase models (that include Essbase Server connections)
The following paragraph describes in a nutshell how to implement these 
specifics in Essbase. For detailed information on how to go about creating and 
maintaining the same, the reader is recommended to check Oracle’s online 
documentation Oracle Essbase 11.1.2—Oracle by Example2 and Oracle Essbase 
Studio 11.1.2 Product Overview.3
The technology platform underlying an Oracle Essbase solution encom-
passes in-memory data store, in-database processing, mobile, and cloud (build 
your own data source). Oracle Essbase separates OLAP from OLTP, thereby 
ensuring faster analytical queries on large datasets while maintaining optional 
OLTP subsecond response time. The Oracle Essbase platform enables compres-
sion that’s configurable based on data store (aka data source) and workload.

52 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
A quick implementation overview using Essbase Studio is as follows:
 
1. Establish connections to the data sources using the Connection 
 Wizard. The Connection Wizard is intelligent enough to identify the 
data source type and display the appropriate specifications input fields 
for each such type.
 
2. Using multiple data sources and metadata sources: 
 
a. Build metadata elements such as dimensions, date elements, derived 
text measures, and alias tables using either the Create metadata ele-
ments tab in the Connection Wizard or the Metadata Navigator. 
 
b. Build hierarchies—standard, measure, parent-child, shared member 
or alternate roll-up, and calendar hierarchy types. Specialized hier-
archies such as those with added attribute dimensions and varying 
attributes based can also be created. The Hierarchy Editor can be used 
for this step. A folder must first be created or selected in the Metadata 
Navigator. 
 
c. Build (cube) schemas using Cube Schema Wizard, specifying dimen-
sions, measures, and hierarchies for the same. Mini-schemas can be 
defined too, based on enhanced functionality of data source connec-
tions. Mini-schemas can be defined in the Connection Wizard. Data 
load mappings can be specified in this step. 
 
3. Build Essbase models from cube schemas. Set appropriate properties for 
the model, including dimension and other member properties such as 
data load bindings. Essbase Models can be created from Cube Schema 
Wizard.
 
4. Consolidate the above built Essbase data structures by storing them in 
the Essbase catalog. These can be reused to generate Essbase cubes just-
in-time or at a later point in time. 
 
5. Set Essbase configuration and server properties using the essbase.cfg 
and server.properties files. A wide range of settings can be configured to 
improve and optimize the data source definition, consolidation, and data 
load processes. Properties can also be set for cubes deployment.
 
6. Generate Essbase outlines using the above settings and initiate the dimen-
sion and data load processes. 
 
7. Deploy Essbase Cubes using Cube Deployment Wizard.
5.4 Semantic Integration between OBIEE and Essbase, 
Using OBIEE as a Data Source for Oracle Essbase
OBIEE can be used as a data provider for Essbase in two ways:

Data Integration, Implementation, and Customization Using Essbase 53
 
1. Use the OBIEE presentation layer 
 
2. Use the OBIEE Business Model layer  
Additionally, the tight integration of Oracle BI Foundation Suite with Oracle 
Essbase provides write-back capability to the Essbase cubes from OBIEE and 
Essbase as Aggregate Persistence target. This feature is unique in that Essbase 
allows this not only to Essbase cubes but also to an application’s data repository 
and enabling the users to do this while maintaining security via application 
roles and policies. The aggregations done in OBIEE can be stored in Essbase 
ASO cubes that can be queried using SQL and/or MDX functions that are 
mapped to equivalent Essbase MDX functions.
Additionally, Essbase Model and cube schema creation can be done dur-
ing the data source connection definition process using Essbase Studio. The 
Essbase Model can be based on the OBIEE Business Model in context. Oracle 
Essbase Studio allows connections to OBIEE, directly thereby facilitating cube 
creation using OBIEE as a data source. On another note, OBIEE dimensions 
can be created from Essbase Studio.
Use OBIEE as a data source for Oracle Essbase when there is a need to 
tie MDX analytical capabilities to operational BI and thereby obtain an 
alignment of operational business processes with reporting and analytical 
BI. This also allows for scalability across a broader range of data sources 
and user base.
5.4.1 Recommendations
To get a holistic view of using OBIEE as a data source for Essbase, the authors 
suggest the following as best-fit scenarios for its implementation:
 
1. To leverage existing relational BI functionality within the enterprise and 
use it for Essbase-based OLAP, use the OBIEE Semantic Model to load 
data from it into Essbase cubes via data access using federated queries in 
OBIEE. The full integration of OBIEE and Oracle Essbase enables this. 
 
2. To improve the performance of analytical BI and hybrid OLAP 
(HOLAP), in terms of speed and multidimensional analysis, use OBIEE’s 
write-back capability to Essbase Cubes. This functionality allows cube spin-
off based on retrieval of subsets of data (e.g., by subject area in OBIEE) 
extracted from the BI dashboard or RPD; one can spin it off as an Essbase 
ASO or Block Storage Option (BSO) cube and perform auto-analysis 

54 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
against it. This also creates an Essbase analysis target. OBIEE’s logical 
SQL “ CREATE CUBE” declarative command is generated; it is com-
pletely based on OBIEE presentation layer objects. Per Oracle,5 once the 
CREATE CUBE command is executed within OBIEE, the cube can be 
edited within Essbase and resolved to aggregate across chosen or all levels 
of its dimensions. The cube also allows duplicate member names for its 
dimensions and levels. The Essbase analysis created can be mapped into 
the RPD physical layer and also can act as Business Model logical table 
source for the OBIEE logical data model.
 
3. To optimize OBIEE Business Model performance in terms of query 
response time and answers, source data from the Business Model in 
OBIEE and load it into Essbase, improvise the corresponding cube to fit 
in relational OLAP (ROLAP), multidimensional OLAP (MOLAP), and 
HOLAP, and remap the OBIEE Business Model to use the Essbase cube 
as the data source instead of the existing relational sources. 
The above three options are diagrammatically represented in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2 Options for Using OBIEE as Oracle Essbase Data Source

Data Integration, Implementation, and Customization Using Essbase 55
5.4.2 Implementation Speciﬁ cs
The implementation specifics for the above options involve using Essbase 
Studio, and Essbase Administration Services and OBIEE. 
For option (1) from the recommendations above, the steps involved using 
Essbase Studio are as follows:
 
1. Define a new data source connection and reference it in OBIEE. The 
data source type in the Connection Wizard in Essbase Studio must be 
specified as OBIEE.
 
2. If the appropriate relational data model is not inherited from OBIEE, this 
needs to be defined in Essbase Studio, using a Schema in the Metadata 
Navigator.
 
3. Define the necessary hierarchies for dimensions and measures along 
with the appropriate source elements, if any (as defined in OBIEE), in 
the Metadata Navigator. This can include ragged as well as value-based 
hierarchies.
 
4. Create a new Cube Schema based on the dimensions (regular hierarchies) 
and facts (measure hierarchies) in the Metadata Navigator and Cube 
Schema Wizard. Here you can also specify transformations for dimen-
sion member names, aliases, and aggregation rules. It may be necessary 
to specify the Cube Type as ASO. This enables auto-aggregation of data 
on demand.
 
5. Create a new Essbase Model based on the Cube Schema.
 
6. Validate the Essbase Cube Model and deploy it to create the cube, build 
the outline, and load the cube, using the Cube Deployment Wizard from 
the Metadata Navigator. The outline is visible from within Essbase and 
can be previewed to validate its data for aggregation.
For option (2) in this list, the implementation specifics have been described 
in the same.
For option (3) in this list, the Essbase cube built from the OBIEE Semantic 
Model can be reverse-engineered into OBIEE to serve as a MDX data source in 
the OBIEE logical model. It can either add to the OBIEE relational structures 
or replace an already existing traditional data source in OBIEE. It can also be 
customized to add aliases and dimension member names to map to the descrip-
tions in the logical model. Also, further analysis can be done based on this cube 
(across all levels and aggregations defined in the cube), using MDX for ASO 
cubes and Essbase code script for BSO cubes.

56 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
5.4.3 Using OBIEE 12c for Essbase 12c
Throughout this book, the authors have stressed using a logical (dimensional) 
model to define the dimensions and facts needed to build Essbase Cubes as well 
as using ROLAP/MOLAP schemas to extend Essbase for custom analytics and 
analytical BI.
Oracle recently released OBIEE 12c and with it, included Essbase 12c as an 
inherent component. There are three major components, as follows:
 
 BI Enterprise Edition—the main BI product
 
 BI Publisher—for pixel-perfect professional formatted reports
 
 Essbase—via the Essbase BI Accelerator Wizard for user-driven reporting
The Essbase12c option is a new component of OBIEE 12c and can be 
accessed via the new “Essbase Business Intelligence Acceleration Wizard.” This 
can be used to build Essbase cubes based on facts and dimensions directly 
from the RPD. It enables interactive querying of the RPD and determination 
of dimension hierarchies and data sources. Essbase ASO can be built from it, 
and the dimensions and data can be loaded and the RPD configured to use all 
of these.
The Essbase 12c option has a Java agent and an Essbase Server integrated 
into OBIEE 12c.
According to Oracle, “The Essbase RBDMS schema is the Oracle rela-
tional database that stores the Essbase application and database metadata (when 
Essbase is deployed on a WebLogic Server Cluster).” In addition, “The Essbase 
agent connects to Essbase RDBMS schema using Eclipse Link, an open source 
mapping and persistence framework. The Essbase server connects to the Essbase 
RDBMS schema using ODBC DataDirect drivers.”7
The Essbase Admin Console and Essbase Studio are no longer available 
in Essbase 12c. Custom cubes can be built from a standalone installation of 
Essbase and Essbase Studio and can be imported into OBIEE 12c, as is the 
case in OBIEE 11g, but this involves a completely separate installation and 
configuration.
This new architecture of OBIEE 12c along with Essbase 12c is along 
similar lines as the logical (dimensional) model in Essbase Studio (described 
throughout this book), and it can be utilized to use OBIEE as a source for 
Essbase. For further reading, the authors recommend the following web-
sites: https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E66975_01/doc.1221/essbase_db.pdf, http://
www.redstk.com/installing-obiee-12c-part-4-configuring-starting-obiee/, and 
http://john-goodwin.blogspot.com/2015/11/essbase-12c-for-bi-glimpse-into-
future.html?m=1.

Data Integration, Implementation, and Customization Using Essbase 57
5.5 Extending and Customizing Essbase 
The Oracle BI Suite, consisting of BI Publisher, OBIEE, and Essbase, con-
stitutes a toolset for holistic BI and analytics. This boils down to using BI 
Publisher for operational reporting, OBIEE for operational BI, and Essbase for 
multidimensional analysis and analytical BI. 
Initially, Siebel was missing MOLAP analysis, which is why Oracle bought 
Hyperion for MOLAP. The seamless integration between Essbase and OBIEE 
enables transparent integration between the two, thus enabling extension of 
Essbase cubes to be flexible, efficient, and scalable. This section will cover 
extension and customization of Essbase from the following two perspectives:
• Extension of Essbase cubes
• Analytics that can be applied to custom implementations
5.5.1 Extending Essbase Cubes
Extending Essbase cubes is useful in implementations that already use Essbase 
for analysis/analytics (and OBIEE in certain cases). This can be done by using 
a data mart in the cube itself or using a ROLAP data warehouse star schema in 
an RDBMS that feeds the cube.
We stress that the ROLAP star schema in the RDBMS is equivalent to the 
dimensional model in Essbase.
As mentioned above, extending Essbase cubes can be done using either of 
the following ways:
 
1. Using a data mart included in the cube itself (as a dimensional model 
specifying dimensions and their measures). 
 
2. Using a ROLAP star schema in an RDBMS, more specifically sourced 
from an enterprise data warehouse (EDW), thus conforming to the single 
version of truth. The EDW itself is a star.
In either case, we need to go through the process of putting a dimensional 
model that mirrors business requirements (at least on paper). This must 
involve business users and IT to sit across the board and chalk out specific 
business requirements that get mapped to equivalent technical steps for the 
dimensional model. This is needed for the translation of the star one-on-one 
with the mapped end user requirements..

58 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
5.5.1.1 When To Use What
First we state the preferred way to a holistic approach for extending Essbase 
and BI.
The preferred way to a holistic solution is to design an EDW based on 
OLTP requirements and have Essbase source data directly from the EDW 
via XOLAP or using ROLAP star. This allows for performing operational 
reporting/publishing, analytical BI and operational BI.
Option 1 in the previous section can be used if there is a unique need to 
cater to a department that needs to perform MOLAP/analytics and not just flat 
reporting. XOLAP can be used as the technology to directly and transparently 
source the data from OLTP/RDBMS and feed the cube via the dimensional 
model in Essbase Studio. 
Option 2 can be used if there is a need for reporting as opposed to analy-
tics. In this case, the ROLAP star can be used to feed the cube via the logical 
dimensional model in Essbase studio. 
Note that in either case the logical dimensional model does not necessarily 
mean a logical data model. This may mean that a data mart might not physi-
cally reside in the cube but exists as an equivalent MOLAP cube. 
The steps involving in building a cube in Essbase Studio based on a ROLAP 
star are as follows:
 
1. Design a ROLAP model (star schema)
 
2. Design a data connection based on this ROLAP model
 
3. Design an Essbase cube based on the ROLAP star created in step 1. This 
way, the ROLAP feeds the data to the cube.
 
4. Repeat step 3 for any similar cubes that need to be designed based on 
members of the Essbase outline or any additional dimensions/measures 
from the ROLAP model
 
5. Design an Essbase model based on this cube 
 
6. Deploy the cube
Recommendation: Use these two options explained in the prior section to 
extend the existing cubes, build additional cubes that can be built, and 
perform analytics. This is very flexible. 
Figure 5.3 depicts how Essbase can be extended and analytics can be applied 
to custom implementations.

Data Integration, Implementation, and Customization Using Essbase 59
5.5.2 Analytics That Can Be Applied to 
Custom Implementations
Extending Essbase cubes using a ROLAP dimensional model as outlined in the 
prior subsection provides the way to go for determining what kind of analytics 
that can be done to apply to custom implementations. A choice of techniques as 
described in subsection 5.5.1.1 can also be used to perform analytics as applicable.
5.5.2.1 Recommendations
The authors recommend the following process for applying analytics to custom 
Essbase implementations:
Figure 5.3 Extending Essbase and Applying Analytics to Custom Implementations. 
(Reproduced with permission from BIS3 LLC © 2015.)

60 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
 
1. Perform hybrid online transaction processing (OLTP)/OLAP analytics: Start 
with a ROLAP dimensional model to represent particular business pro-
cesses that need the final analytics as actionable insights. This leads to an 
integrated approach, by which we have analyzed what is ad hoc report-
ing (BI Publisher) and operational BI (OBIEE) using ROLAP through 
star schema, and multidimensional analysis (in Essbase) for MOLAP/ 
analytical BI. This is the right foundation that gives a holistic solution.
Do the dimensional logical ROLAP model outside of Essbase Studio. This is 
a better way. As a first exercise, this can be done as a prototype in Essbase 
Studio and then formally industrialized outside of Essbase Studio. This is a 
fantastic process that enables direct connectection to trans actional OLTP 
systems and also uses analytical data to do hybrid analytics. 
 
2. Perform descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analytics: As an extension of 
step 1, customization of Essbase via ROLAP models and integration into 
Essbase enables us to perform BI and Advanced Analytics at the same time. 
This means doing descriptive analytics on data from transactional (OLTP) 
systems and predictive analytics (what’s now, and what if) from both OLTP 
and OLAP systems with subsecond response times. The latter can be done 
using Essbase BSO cubes. The former can be done using ASO cubes, 
which are efficient and scalable across thousands of concurrent users. The 
outcomes from predictive analytics can be enhanced to derive prescriptive 
analytics (what’s next) that provide recommendations for actionable deci-
sion making. Predictive analytics can be done in the following manner:
 
a. Define dimension hierarchies corresponding to business structures 
such as business dimensions. This can be standardized as “scenario” 
dimensions.
 
b. Based on what’s current (e.g., trending and similar occurrences), derive 
what-if rules that can be ranked based on likelihood and closeness to 
the business process involved.
 
c. Create data that models the what-if scenarios and outcomes that align 
with what’s next. 
 
d. Try and incorporate the predictive model as a standard business pro-
cess using multi-user read/write capabilities and the write-back feature 
of Essbase.
5.5.3 Best Practices and Additional Customization Scenarios
This section outlines some best practices and additional customization scenar-
ios of using Essbase in the enterprise.

Data Integration, Implementation, and Customization Using Essbase 61
• Leverage Essbase Studio’s functionality to implement data integration 
that facilitates change. Essbase Studio supports sourcing from a data ware-
house (in ROLAP form) and populating the Essbase cube. Alternately, a 
part of the data warehouse can be used as data mart to source the Essbase 
cube. This takes care of manageability, scalability, flexibility, and extensi-
bility in regard to sourcing data and stuffing the Essbase cube because of 
the relational structure of the data warehouse. The warehouse also enables 
to have change data capture and incremental data loads. 
Do not use Essbase for ETL or E-LT type processes—for targeted output that 
requires minimal re-engineering and changes or provides the flexibility to 
accommodate current data as well future data. Facts and dimensions required 
can be modeled in the data warehouse for data aggregations, and any other 
analyses can be defined and redefined based on current and future 
requirements, thus making the data integration process change-proof and 
part of the holistic Essbase and OBIEE solution.
• The primary input for Oracle Essbase is data, and all data needs to be 
validated at the time of sourcing from the data veracity, integrity, and 
quality points of view. The following list comprises tasks recommended 
to be done at the data warehouse layer. There are three aspects in which 
data can be used for best results: 
o Use load first, and then check and transform.
o Use data validation as part of the workflow in the data warehouse, not 
only to ensure data is fully validated during sourcing data, but also to 
enable a consistent set of pertinent data for the cause of which it is used. 
This enables the filtration of data that won’t be loaded. Automating 
this process removes the complexities involved in the process.
o Eliminate bad data by checking that: 
 The data source and data process are consistent
 Exceptions have been taken care of
 Data is completed and validated to its source 
 Data is completed and validated for dimensions and facts 
 The automated workflow is functioning without any errors or data 
spills that are outliers
• Use Essbase custom-defined functions for calculations to extend Essbase’s 
calculation functions. 
• Use Essbase to leverage a single analytic platform that integrates disparate 
information for yielding better business decisions. Essbase Studio can be 
used to do this at the data source level, and Essbase cubes can be built on 
the same via a MOLAP data model to push analytics needed. This can be 

62 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
used to produce real-time (in fact right-time) reports either using Essbase 
standalone or by integrating it with Oracle BI.
• Use XOLAP cubes in Oracle Essbase Studio, starting with the 11.1.2.4 
release, to convert Essbase BSO cubes to Hybrid, and use them in Hyper-
ion applications for Hybrid and Advanced Relational Access. In a way, 
this optimizes Essbase for Hybrid Analyses. Also, BSO’s Hybrid ASO-like 
aggregation can be used. For example, the Hybrid Engine can be used for 
cross-dimensional hybrid formulas and Hyperion Planning Applications 
for gathering real-time insight from data. 
• Use SQL as part of the Essbase integration to source data from any data 
source and integrate data and metadata into Essbase more easily and effi-
ciently. Use SQL queries to load data into Essbase outlines. This process 
can be automated in Essbase Studio.
• Use BSO and ASO cubes based on data, query and calculation requirements:
o Use BSO cubes as opposed to ASO cubes for optimized calculations 
(e.g., to overcome the challenges in stored vs. dynamic hierarchies 
and dynamic time series–based calculations). Applications using ASO 
cubes converted to BSO result in better performance when integrated 
with financial modules for reporting purposes.
o Use ASO cubes for high-speed data loading, (real-time) aggregations, 
and faster query response time when the underlying data doesn’t involve 
complex hierarchies and temporal analysis. Also, use ASO cubes in appli-
cations that need to scale far beyond the limits of what BSO can offer.
• Use Oracle Data Relationship Governance (DRG) within Data  Relationship 
Management (DRM) to facilitate creation and maintenance of master 
data. Workflow models, requests, governance work lists, alerts and noti-
fications, and paths can be configured right out of the box within DRM. 
Using runtime substitution variables calculations for allocations across 
BSO and ASO cubes can be done so as to make them work together. The 
corresponding metadata can be synchronized using DRM. Using DRG 
in a way extends Essbase beyond its normal functionality for governance 
workflow and approval process by allowing copying of workflow models 
and tasks, automatic updates for request items, governance of Web Service 
API, database integration, EPM integration, and external workflow. 
• Use Essbase in the Cloud for creating ad hoc grids for enterprise financial 
users to save them as reports. The same can be done on-premise too.
5.6 Summary
This chapter outlined the data integration, implementation, and customiza-
tion methodologies in Oracle Essbase. It touched upon defining data sources, 

Data Integration, Implementation, and Customization Using Essbase 63
dimensions, metadata elements, hierarchies, mini-schemas, cubes and cube 
schemas, and Essbase models in such an implementation. Next, it described 
implementing specifics from data sources to data analytics process. The sub-
sequent section outlined using OBIEE as a data source for Essbase. The final 
section touched upon extending and customization of Essbase cubes. The next 
chapter will highlight the use of Essbase for analytical BI. 
5.7 References
 
1. “Oracle BI: Business Intelligence.” Oracle website: http://www.oracle.com/bi
 
2. “Oracle Essbase 11.1.2—Oracle by Example” (tutorials). Oracle website: http://
www.oracle.com/technetwork/middleware/essbase/tutorials/ess1112-396125.
html
 
3. “Essbase Studio 11.1.2 Product Overview.” Oracle website: http://www.oracle.
com/webfolder/technetwork/tutorials/tutorial/hyp/EssbaseStudio_11.1.2_
Overview/LessonIndex.htm
 
4. “Oracle Exalytics In-Memory Machine: A Brief Introduction.” January 2014. Oracle 
white paper: http://www.oracle.com/us/solutions/ent-performance-bi/business-
intelligence/exalytics-bi-machine/overview/exalytics-introduction-1372418.pdf
 
5. “Oracle Business Intelligence Enterprise Edition Samples.” Oracle website: 
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/middleware/bi-foundation/obiee-samples-
167534.html
 
6. “Oracle Essbase.” Oracle website: http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/middle
ware/essbase/overview/index.html
 
7. “Oracle Essbase Database Administrator’s Guide for Release 12.2.1.” Oracle web-
site: https://docs.oracle.com/cd/E66975_01/doc.1221/essbase_db.pdf (Chapter 63, 
pages 927 and 930)


65
Chapter 6
Using Essbase for 
Analytical BI
In This Chapter
 
6.1 Introduction
 
6.2 What Kind of Analytics Are Good for Essbase Cubes? 
 
6.3 Implementation Specifics of Analytical BI Using Essbase
 
6.4 Summary
 
6.5 References
6.1 Introduction
This chapter will examine the role of Essbase in Analytical BI as a specific com-
ponent of a comprehensive BI and analytics solution. It begins by identifying 
what kind of analytical measures are good for Essbase Cubes and continues by 
highlighting the implementation specifics of analytical BI using Essbase. As 
part of using Essbase for analytical BI, in additional to analytical reporting, 
Essbase fills the gap of cube predictive analytics and, when combined with 
Oracle Business Intelligence Enterprise Edition (OBIEE), provides a holistic 
solution of a combined OBIEE and Essbase–based implementation.
It is beyond the scope of this book to fully describe and discuss data mining, 
predictive analytics, and artificial intelligence beyond what are currently used 
in today’s business intelligence (BI) and analytics landscape. BI is setting up the 

66 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
next steps for what we imagine in the future. But in keeping with the theme of 
this book, we try to establish and define the best practices of BI that will create 
the foundation of what is to come.
Our book briefly covers the high-level and general principles that we want 
to adhere to and utilizes Essbase for Analytical BI. For detailed instructions 
and training, please refer to our instructional website at www.esssbasestudio.
com. For a general discussion of Oracle BI, please refer to the website pro-
vided in References 1 and 5; for Essbase, please refer to the website provided in 
References 2, 3, and 6.1–3, 5, 6
6.2 What Kind of Analytics Are Good for Essbase Cubes?
Oracle Essbase comes with the ability to handle descriptive analytics that can 
handle repeatable and expandable data and is scalable across implementations 
involving hundreds of concurrent users. But some measures enable it to be 
extended to make it usable for predictive and prescriptive analytics, as shown in 
Figure 6.1. This figure depicts how Essbase can be extended and analytics can 
be applied to custom implementations to a certain possible extent.
Here’s a bird’s eye view of certain practical analytics and queries that make 
up the before-mentioned categories:
• Descriptive analytics:
 o What were the daily sales of a particular product?
 o How were the sales for the previous day compared to those for the day 
before?
 o What were the reasons for any discrepancies?
 o What is the sales activity in the last quarter? 
 o If the sales were low, what factors led to the low sales activity?
• Predictive analytics: 
 o What happens if the product evolves over time?
 o How will the sales trend be in such a situation and why?
• Prescriptive analytics: 
 o What measures can be taken to improve poor sales?
 o How can we introduce these measures into existing business processes?
Analytics involving MDX queries, X by X, and online analytical processing 
(OLAP)-aware queries, planning and forecasting, and financial manage-
ment can be best handled by Essbase when extended using a DW-based 
holistic solution that leverages quality data constructs and architecture.
Figure 6.1 shows the realm of Analysis, BI, and Analytics.

Figure 6.1 Realm of Analysis, BI, and Analytics. (Reproduced with permission from BIS3 LLC © 2015.)

68 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
6.2.1 Recommendations
To get a holistic view of using Oracle Essbase for analytics, the authors suggest 
the following:
 
1. Because the gap of OBIEE renders it unable to fully address predic-
tive analytics, the authors suggest using the analytical power of cubes 
and multidimensional structures for cube predictive analytics and the 
functionality of predictive and prescriptive analytics—a holistic solu-
tion consisting of OBIEE and Essbase. This helps in accelerating deci-
sions involving what if and what’s next, as well as enhancing business 
performance.
 
2. Data from multiple sources can be fed into Essbase directly or via a 
relational OLAP (ROLAP) data warehouse and processed inside the 
cubes. Different kinds of analytic measures can be derived from them 
and used for reporting directly or sent to an OBIEE business analytics 
dashboard for self-service analytics. The key here is how Essbase, as a 
multidimensional engine, can process data from a variety of sources and 
turn it into measures that can be built into the solution as analytics for 
interday reporting. As an example, customer marketing data can be used 
to derive specific advertising channels’ information and analytics can be 
built upon that data to improvise on market segmentation for descriptive 
and prescriptive analytics. New data sets can also be created for predictive 
analytics. The Oracle Exalytics  machine for BI can incorporate Essbase 
as an in-memory accelerator for performing MDX analysis. For further 
discussion, please refer to the White Paper, “Oracle Exalytics In-Memory 
Machine: A Brief Introduction.”4
6.3 Implementation Speciﬁ cs of Using 
Analytical BI Using Essbase
Oracle Essbase supports multiple types of implementation methods for 
Analytical BI. Essbase allows the creation of facts, dimensions, measures, and 
joins at the time of sourcing data and feeding these into a ROLAP star schema 
without losing the dimensional granularity and hierarchy levels, so fact-
level measures functionality adheres to the dimensional model (e.g., the busi-
ness model or part thereof). The star schema can then be used as a data source 
for Essbase.
The following outline some of the recommended methods for the same:
 
1. Use logical cubes in addition to physical cubes and Cube Materialized 
Views for analysis. This approach works well when the number of 

Using Essbase for Analytical BI 69
 dimensions is not very high in number; additionally, it does not 
restrict dimensional access to the data. The underlying implementation 
technology can be a ROLAP schema architected as a data warehouse or 
data mart. The combination of ROLAP and in-memory cubes enables 
subsecond analysis and analytic measures for OLAP-based analysis. Use 
of aggregations, custom expressions, slicing and dicing, and filtering of 
data based on dimensions, levels, and measures can be incorporated to 
derive multidimensional metrics, aggregations and custom calculations 
that can be applied to data directly in the data warehouse or cube without 
having to move the data out.
 
2. Factor in predictive analytics, and the role of Essbase for analytical BI 
is enhanced with the ability to model complex data sets dynamically 
using analytical measures for predicting behavior and prescriptive deci-
sion support.
Essbase Studio can be used to construct the cubes and design the analytics 
for Essbase applications for Analytical BI and reporting involving drill-
through and drill across.
In a typical Oracle Essbase implementation there might be hundreds of 
cubes to be managed. As pointed out in Chapter 5, Sections 5.4 and 5.5, we 
suggested a data warehousing solution that is established for OBIEE: utilize 
the metadata of OBIEE from the RPD that gives an extra advantage of using 
enterprise metadata. This data warehouse should be the source for Essbase—
the very best tool for Analytical BI that can host data that is expandable and 
repeatable.
The data warehouse solution eliminates a lot of cubes—it does data 
cleansing and data quality that a cube cannot do. This way, we can let 
the data fuel the choice of implementation and not choose the tool merely 
for the sake of having a tool, based on an unwarranted perceived notion or 
biased preferences.
6.3.1 Using Essbase for Analytical BI
Oracle Essbase supports analytics in multiple domains by way of reuse of exist-
ing cubes. For example, sales analytics using numeric measures can be derived 
that can provide real-world business solutions. Essbase allows this by sharing 
existing metadata between cubes, such as dimensions and attributes. Time 
hierarchy and product hierarchy are two examples that can be reused across 

70 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
domains such as sales and marketing and spending. The existing cube struc-
ture can be leveraged to create new analytics for the target domain. Given 
below is a design strategy of how this can be achieved. All of the below steps 
can be performed in Essbase Studio. Additionally, the newly created dimen-
sions and measures can be added as extensions to the already existing logical 
dimensional model.
 
1. Take into account the existing Time dimensions available, such as Year, 
Quarter, Month, Week, and Day.
 
2. Take into account the existing Product dimension.
 
3. Consider the measures that can be reused, such as Profit pertaining to the 
product.
 
4. Take into account the Scenario dimension.
 
5. Note that all of these already exist in the precreated Essbase outline.
 
6. Create a new Sales and Marketing cube based on the relevant existing 
cube. Add child dimensions from the Time hierarchy. For example, Week 
and Day can be added if they are missing in the existing hierarchy, along 
with member values. Also add new dimensions to the cube along with 
corresponding member values.
Ensure that new member names are represented using aliases and reflect 
business terminology and are unique across the existing and new cubes in the 
Essbase outline. However, the shared dimensions themselves, such as Product 
and Time, can have the same name and member values.
 
7. Repeat step 6 for the measures as desired.
 
8. Prepare the data to be loaded so that it is cleansed and has the correct 
dimension, attribute, and member names and values. Once this is done, 
load the data into the cube.
 
9. Create new analytics based on this new cube that pertain to real-world 
business analysis. This can be done by utilizing Essbase’s ability to filter 
on existing data based on member selection. And all of this can be done 
in real time or on-demand. Such analytics can include:
 
a. Sales figures by product for current and last month
 
b. Profit generated in the current month versus last month by product. 
This helps in determining the top n products sold by month and in 
projecting future sales by product
 
c. Spend analysis by month by product by marketing campaign to deter-
mine how well a product is faring across each month for the marketing 
campaign used. This can also be used to project future spending for 
maximum sales as well as up-sell needs.

Using Essbase for Analytical BI 71
6.3.2 Using BSO Cubes for Analytical BI
Block Storage Option (BSO) cubes can be used for Analytical BI in the follow-
ing ways:
 
1. Adding new data sources by defining connections and adding tables.
 
2. Modeling text files. (In addition, SmartView for Office allows Essbase 
to directly interact with Excel for data retrieval and cube navigation 
purposes.)
 
3. Modeling data sources by creating mini-schemas. Mini-schemas are first-
class objects used to create logical groupings of tables in order to construct 
a subject area to work with. This is a preliminary step in data modeling 
using Essbase Studio to create analytic applications. This step is followed 
by associating tables with the mini-schema. To create the missing joins 
in the mini-schema panel, a ROLAP star can be a source for the mini-
schema, and by specifying/utilizing this, we can have Essbase set up for 
Analytical BI and reporting. 
This drill-through capability into a relational data warehouse is a vital 
feature and functionality of analytics and Analytical BI. Multiple fact tables 
can be used in the mini-schema and both fact tables and the mini-schema 
can provide data to the analytic model. In fact, the mini-schema can be 
modified later to add tables to bring in the data model that may have been 
modified after creation of mini-schema.
 
4. Extending Essbase by creating metadata elements in Essbase Studio. 
Existing relational columns from data warehousing or custom(er)-created 
ones, dimensions, fields from a text file, hierarchies, canned drill-through 
reports or cube schemas, or any other element that can be used in archi-
tecting an analytical model can be used to generate new elements or 
reorganized into hierarchies as well as cross-data sources and data source 
types. Hierarchies can be created from metadata elements. Dimension 
elements can be used to form levels within hierarchies or as distinct mem-
bers. Dimension elements can be organized as families with ascending 
or descending sort order. Even families can be made part of hierarchies. 
Custom elements can be created as dimensions by either deriving them 
from existing elements or by building them using functions such as Time 
dimension. Essbase cubes can be associated with these custom dimen-
sions while creating analytics or for analytical reporting. Measures and 
scenarios can also be created as hierarchies. These help in the building 
process of creating MDX metrics.

72 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
 
5. Using cube schemas. Cube schemas are a set of hierarchies that define the 
dimensions of a cube. Hierarchies are associated with cube schemas dur-
ing the cube schema creation process. The steps involved data modeling 
in Essbase Studio involve the following:
 
a. Define the properties in Essbase for dimension, dimension level, or 
specific member (in case of measures). Aliases can be assigned to hier-
archies by creating alias tables and assigning them to the Essbase data/
analytic model. Examples include formulae, data consolidation opera-
tors, and the like.
 
b. Validate the model prior to deployment.
 
c. Set deployment options such as Aggregate Storage Option (ASO), 
BSO, or eXtending OLAP (XOLAP) model. Also, specify the option 
to include metadata only, data only, or both. 
 
d. Execute the deployment in the specific Essbase server associated dur-
ing the data source creation process.
 
6. Using Essbase for drill-through and drill-back reporting. 
 
7. Using a ROLAP star schema as a data warehouse to feed the Essbase cube. 
Though Essbase Studio can connect any data source as stated earlier, our 
approach here pertains to the recommendation of using a ROLAP star 
schema as a data warehouse to feed the Essbase cube and we point out 
here the functionality involved for analytical reporting, AKA Analytical 
BI, based on the ROLAP star as the primary data source. Report con-
tent can be defined dynamically from new metrics based on calculations 
or otherwise from added dimensions and measures. There is no need 
to refresh drill-through data upon modification of report structure or 
data source. Dynamic association of reports to Essbase models enables 
autosynchronization across all appropriate models. Therefore, if the data 
in the data warehouse changes, or additional dimensions are added to 
ROLAP schema, these can be carried to the Essbase report, and the data 
associated with it as well as the modified report structure are available in 
the corresponding analytical model in Essbase. Both metadata and data 
can be brought over.
 
8. Drilling back to any data source associated to studio. This comes in handy 
when we intend to create data marts from a ROLAP data warehouse and 
add it as a source to Essbase Studio. This data mart can be associated with 
metrics for analytics or serve as source for reports by dept or subject area. 
This method of segmenting reporting can be done for Analytical BI that 
involves reporting on a nightly basis. Multiple data marts can be used for 
drill-through and drill back, depending on the business needs of the data 
analysis desired.

Using Essbase for Analytical BI 73
 
9. Creating once and using multiple times. Any Essbase cube that has a 
dimension that is part of the report can gain access to the report. This is 
because drill-through reports are independent of the deployed model. 
 10. Using OBIEE as a data source for Essbase to drill back to/from Essbase.
 11. Using multidimensional cubes as a data source for reporting and  analytics, 
including forward-looking analytics. 
 12. Reporting data lineage for a particular element or a model in itself as a 
chart.
 13. Employing smart view to derive Excel- and Office-based data and add 
extra dimensionality to reporting. The seamless interoperability of 
Essbase and Excel opens another door to defining and sharing data, ana-
lytics, and reports. Also, it is possible to drill-through from data directly 
from Excel. This extends BI analysis beyond disconnected spreadsheets.
6.3.3 Using ASO Cubes for Analytical BI
Essbase ASO cubes don’t require preaggregation in order to see data at the upper 
levels. Instead, ASO cubes dynamically calculate data to aggregate levels. To 
reduce query time, values can be preaggregated and stored as aggregate views. 
Retrievals then start from the closest aggregate view are calculated from there. 
Smart lists (Text and Date measures) can be used for Analytical BI.
The Essbase analytics link enables single reporting for custom financial 
analytics via modified dimensionality, as well as merging of additional data 
sources. It also allows for real-time or on-demand data synchronization, thereby 
enabling real-time reporting.
Figure 6.2 gives a high-level overview of using ASO  and BSO Cubes for 
Analytical BI.
Oracle Essbase for analytical revolves around the fact that it provides for 
modeling of a single platform of all related data via
• The logical (dimensional) model and source-to-target mapping
• Business-to-technology transformation
• Commonality and standardized metadata for Essbase and OBIEE
6.4 Summary
This chapter outlined the use of Essbase for Analytical BI. This is of primary 
importance in using Essbase for real-world decision making and plays a pivotal 
role in data integration and analytics for analysis. Starting with the kind of ana-
lytics that are suited for Essbase, the chapter highlighted the implementation 

Figure 6.2 High-Level Overview of Using Essbase ASO and BSO Cubes for Analytical BI. (Reproduced with permission from BIS3 
LLC © 2015.)

Using Essbase for Analytical BI 75
specifics of using Essbase for Analytical BI. The focus of the next chapters will 
be on OBIEE and using it effectively in the context of Operational BI.
6.5 References
 
1. “Oracle BI: Business Intelligence.” Oracle website: http://www.oracle.com/bi.
 
2. “Oracle Essbase 11.1.2—Oracle by Example” (tutorials). Oracle website: http://
www.oracle.com/technetwork/middleware/essbase/tutorials/ess1112-396125.
html.
 
3. “Essbase Studio 11.1.2 Product Overview.” Oracle website: http://www.oracle.
com/webfolder/technetwork/tutorials/tutorial/hyp/EssbaseStudio_11.1.2_
Overview/LessonIndex.htm.
 
4. “Oracle Exalytics In-Memory Machine: A Brief Introduction,” January 2014. Oracle 
white paper: http://www.oracle.com/us/solutions/ent-performance-bi/business-
intelligence/exalytics-bi-machine/overview/exalytics-introduction-1372418.pdf.
 
5. “Oracle Business Intelligence Enterprise Edition Samples.” Oracle website: 
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/middleware/bi-foundation/obiee-samples-
167534.html.
 
6. “Oracle Essbase,” Oracle website: http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/middleware/
essbase/overview/index.html.


77
Chapter 7 
Using OBIEE for 
Operational BI
In This Chapter
 
7.1 Introduction
 
7.2 Don’t Let Your Tool Wag Your Data
 
7.3 Categories for Business Intelligence and Reporting 
 
7.4 What Is Operational Business Intelligence?
 
7.5 Delivering Operational BI
 
7.6 The Operational Data Store Option
 
7.7 Summary
7.1 Introduction
In celebration of the decades of implementation and delivery experience, we 
are writing this book and sharing our secrets for success as practitioners in the 
field. We have been fortunate to have our careers grow alongside the growth of 
the industry, and we have helped to pioneer the thoughts, ideas, and approaches 
that have now become best practices. We stand in awe of the successful develop-
ment of the industry with its many technological advances into areas that were 
never before achievable, such as real-time or near real-time processing of large 
amounts of operational data. 

78 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
But despite the multitude of these innovations and advancements in busi-
ness intelligence (BI) and analytical solutions, we still continue to encounter 
basic errors and mistakes repeatedly performed in building or implementing 
solutions; thus, we still continue to see failures that plague our industry that 
should not have to be repeated with some knowledge and expertise. For this rea-
son, this book is somewhat being written to gather and reestablish best practices 
that are known but perhaps not heeded by some practitioners in the field. In 
addition, we try to provide valuable real-world experiences gained from actual 
implementation—as opposed to the ever so plentiful “pie-in-the-sky” advice 
and theories that may not be relevant in real-world environments and situa-
tions. It is therefore our goal to provide you with approaches and methods that 
actually work out in the field and have become best practices, proven and time-
tested by successful practitioners.
To begin with this theme of being a successful practitioner, let us observe 
the following principal covered in earlier chapters of the book; that is (in lay-
man’s terms), do not let the tools or technologies dictate how you handle the 
data or architect the solution. Rather, observe the best practices of data ware-
housing and business intelligence and then determine the right tools to use in 
accordance with the functional reporting or analysis categories you are trying to 
achieve and develop as a solution. We broadly and generally categorize those as 
Operational Reporting, Operational BI, or traditional Analytical BI. 
In this chapter, we will define those categories and then provide some guid-
ance into using Oracle Business Intelligence Enterprise Edition (OBIEE) for 
Operational BI. But first, let’s review the concept of using the right tool for each 
categorical BI function.
7.2 Don’t Let Your Tool Wag Your Data
We use this phrase in a humorous attempt to urge or even warn our  customers 
to use the right tool for the job. Even today out on the field, time and time 
again, we are seeing tools and technology being used for the wrong functional-
ity or solution, such as:
• Spreadsheets being used as a data store
• Multidimensional cubes being used as a data warehouse
There are various reasons why the wrong tool may be used for a solution. 
For the former example, with spreadsheets it could be the comfort level and 
familiarity with using a spreadsheet for data-driven or data-centric tasks. While 
a spreadsheet is great for presentation and providing limited data storage, it is 

Using OBIEE for Operational BI 79
not the proper tool to use as a data store where it is relied upon as a complete, 
accurate source of data. 
This improper cross-functional use is quite common, especially with tools 
that have previously provided a certain capability to users. Often, these tools 
are readily available and user-friendly enough to provide a self-serve or do-it-
yourself capability. Empowered by this, users will often gravitate around the 
tool to get something done and even press the limits and use the tool in areas 
that it was not intended. This notion is quite admirable, and in some environ-
ments and situations may even be “heroic,” in that the job gets done. “So then,” 
you ask, “what exactly is the problem with this?”
The problem often lies in the fact that the tool may have served a purpose 
and been capable for one person or maybe even a single department; however, 
it may not be strong or advanced enough to be used enterprise-wide by many 
people and several departments. In information technology (IT), we point the 
solution out as not being scalable, flexible, extensible, or even manageable. A 
prevalent example that we often find is when a spreadsheet application is being 
used as a data store and is then forwarded as a reliable data source, despite the fact 
that it may contain various questionable flaws in the data, such as having been 
manually manipulated or even lacking the mechanisms to be properly updated, 
among other things. When it is allowed to proliferate, the real problem begins 
as the flawed solution becomes the de facto standard and becomes the source of 
unreliable, inaccurate reporting and analysis for the organizations—or worse, 
because of the resources needed to maintain it, the flawed solution becomes the 
cause of having limited or no source of accurate, complete data.
The other example provided deals with the misuse of multidimensional 
cubes. In the early days of this industry, there was a great promise of replacing 
spreadsheets with new technology for reporting and analysis. That technology 
was the cube, a multidimensional structure that processed and stored data for 
fast retrieval of aggregated data for analysis. It was different from a relational 
database management system in the way that it stored its data. At that time, it 
was the hot new technology that promised an effective, efficient way for han-
dling large amounts of data. 
Without a doubt, cubes provided great functionality for such things as slic-
ing and dicing and aggregation of data; however, what cubes cannot do that 
data warehousing can do or at least can handle more appropriately are things 
such as data cleansing, incremental loads and updates, and change data capture 
(CDC) and, in general, anything having to do with preparing large amount of 
historical data.
Keep in mind the ever-changing world of IT. The very nature of techno-
logical advances and innovations in IT ensures an endless stream of new tools 
and technologies, appearing every so often and promising to provide a better 

80 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
way. The first reaction and expectation is that these new tools and technolo-
gies replace the “old,” which perhaps may be inefficient or said to be archaic. 
However, more often than not, these “new” tools and technologies really just 
build on existing best practices and do not necessarily replace them. The need 
to gravitate toward the new is something that must be approached with cau-
tion—especially in light of all the vendors who heavily market their product 
as the “Holy Grail” for developing the best solution. But remember not to “let 
your tool wag your data”—don’t follow best practices in an attempt to use a 
certain tool for all your BI and reporting needs and requirements.
So now that we have provided some discussion on using the wrong tool for 
reporting or analysis, the authors propose to define and establish specific guide-
lines for the proper use of various tools in the Oracle BI suite. As stated, these 
guidelines are for practitioners and implementers who want to achieve success 
in designing and implementing a complete, holistic BI solution that addresses 
and includes various types and categories of reporting and analytics. In this 
chapter, the focus is on a specialized type of reporting and business intelligence 
that actually carries the characteristics of real-time reporting and analysis at the 
same time. Let us examine the various categories of reporting and analytics and 
see how Operational Business Intelligence (or Operational BI, as we refer to it 
for short) fits in the big picture and what it has to offer.
7.3 Categories for Business Intelligence and Reporting
Through the recent decades, reporting and analytics have matured to offer vari-
ous kinds of capabilities and functionality in decision support. The industry 
has grown to include innovative and sophisticated methods and approaches 
for reporting and analysis under what is generally labeled as business intelli-
gence. Indeed, BI has evolved to offer different, various kinds of capabilities 
and functionalities so much so as to categorize these capabilities into distinct 
requirements and solutions—each with its own criteria of success, to include 
such things as proper architecture, infrastructure, or even performance levels.
Although the industry has evolved into distinct categories, today’s BI land-
scape contains complications brought on by the fact that BI has become a catch-
all term to describe and include everything that remotely deals with handling 
data and reporting. As a practitioner and implementer of BI, this is usually 
the first step to overcome with the intended audience. Education of the users 
is a key factor of success and acceptance of the solution, as users often do not 
understand or know the various distinguishing capabilities, characteristics, and 
components of BI that can make up a complete and holistic solution. 

Using OBIEE for Operational BI 81
So what are the characteristics of Operational BI? How does it differ from 
other components of the solution such as reporting? Moreover, in a holistic 
strategy for reporting and intelligence, how can you recognize and distinguish 
between what is Operational BI and another closely related system, such as what 
is commonly known and traditionally viewed as Analytical BI? More impor-
tantly, how does each one truly fit into your organization’s capability and sys-
tem for reporting and analytics as a whole?
To answer these inquiries, let’s start by recognizing that a general categoriza-
tion of BI and reporting could be organized and classified into three distinct 
categories:
• Operational Reporting
• Analytical BI
• Operational BI
To understand these, let us begin by examining the first two: Operational 
Reporting and Analytical BI. These two represent the extreme left and right 
of our categories. Taking these characteristics and comparing them side by 
side, we begin to understand how each category of reporting and analytics 
would be used to accomplish a particular set of requirements and capabilities. 
Table 7.1 examines the distinguishing characteristics and compares Operational 
Reporting to Analytical BI.
Table 7.1 Comparison between Operational Reporting and Analytical BI
Operational Reporting 
Analytical BI
Analytical Capability
n/a
Speciﬁ cally used for analytics
Latency
Immediate
Commonly a one-day lag, 
depending on scheduled refresh
Underlying Structure
3rd Normal Form as usually 
architected for systems for Online 
Transactional Processing (OLTP)
Multidimensional structure 
commonly referred to as a cube
After examining the characteristics of these two categories, a third category 
that involves real-time analytics between these two may be needed to complete 
your corporate strategy for reporting and analytics. Indeed this categorization 
“sits” in the middle of these two and “borrows” characteristics and requirements 
listed for Operational Reporting and Analytical BI to come up with a third 
categorization of reporting and analytics, which we refer to as Operational BI. 
Table 7.2 examines Operational BI in relation to Operational Reporting and 
Analytical BI.

82 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
Comparison of Operational BI
Table 7.2 Comparison of Operational BI in Relation to 
Operational Reporting and Analytical BI
Operational 
Reporting 
Operational BI
Analytical BI
Analytical Capability
n/a
Capable
Speciﬁ cally used for 
analytics
Latency
Immediate
Usually refreshed daily 
or can be processed 
intraday 
Commonly a one-day 
lag depending on 
scheduled refresh
Underlying Structure 3rd Normal Form as 
usually architected 
for systems for 
Online Transactional 
Processing (OLTP)
Star Schema or 
dimensional model as 
usually architected for 
decision support 
systems, such as for 
Online Analytical 
Processing (OLAP)
Multidimensional 
structure commonly 
referred to as a cube 
In adhering to this approach, these three general categorizations can now form 
the basic guidelines for what a holistic business intelligence solution can and 
should offer. This chapter specifically looks at Operational BI and the other 
categories will be discussed separately in respective chapters. 
7.4 What Is Operational Business Intelligence?
Tactical decision making (as opposed to strategic) with data coming from the 
operational or transactional systems of an enterprise form systems used to con-
duct business on a day-to-day basis. One such enterprise system would be a 
sales order entry system to input orders from customers for example. Naturally, 
some form of reporting and intelligence is needed to handle and understand the 
organization’s position and information is basically needed of the sales. So this 
financial reporting is a great sample of the kind of reporting and intelligence 
needed by organization and falls under this category of operational business 
intelligence. Let’s further examine the characteristics of Operational BI and 
how it differs from reporting and traditional Analytical BI. 
If we were to look at certain overriding characteristics of Operational BI, it 
would have to contain faster access to the data and its distribution. This faster 
access and distribution can be achieved in a much more timely manner than 
traditional Analytical BI because the mechanism (i.e., the cube) requires addi-
tional time to process. The cube requires this process in order to provide for per-
formance in the proper formatting. The various types of overlap may provide 

Using OBIEE for Operational BI 83
the answer to being able to handle your requirements between operational and 
analytical. We have set forward this theme that OBIEE best serves to satisfy the 
requirements of Operational BI. So then let us further examine Operational BI. 
Operational BI provides users in an organization time-sensitive information 
or intelligence regarding their operational systems. In regards to this require-
ment to deliver vital information within hours—or moreover, even  minutes—
perhaps the biggest challenge for Operational BI is the architecture of the 
system and addressing the challenges and limitations of near real-time or real-
time analysis and reporting often required of this type of solution. This com-
plex requirement alone calls for the right decision from organizations to decide 
the right architecture and technologies to enable and reap the benefits of what 
Operational BI can offer. 
7.4.1 The Ultimate Goal: Insight to Interaction
The goal that the authors proffer is to create a holistic and complete system 
for operational business intelligence and analytics to provide the information, 
knowledge, or intelligence to support decision making related to running the 
operations of an organization. Moreover, upon receiving this intelligence, the 
true ultimate goal is to gain insight and some ability to interact and follow 
through with the insight provided by your system to affect some change to 
your desired goal. In simpler terms, the goal is to be able to gain some kind of 
intelligence that can be used to your advantage. In this way, the insight turns 
into some valuable interaction. After all, what good is the knowledge and intel-
ligence if you can’t do anything with it? Let’s look at one example of where this 
intelligence can turn into insight and, moreover, interaction.
7.4.1.1 Sample Operational BI Insights and Interactions
The whole idea of Operational BI then is to be able to gain insight quickly 
concerning operations and be able to react with an action to take advantage of 
the insight. After all, what good is data if it doesn’t provide any real advantage 
or result—what you have, in essence, is exactly that; just a bunch of data. So, in 
other words, the real importance lies in not only being able to provide the right 
data to the right person at the right time but to also have the right insights and 
interaction with the data.
Take for instance the example where the transactional system would take 
an order and in doing so would be able to gauge a corresponding result as to 
the supply level of materials needed to create that product that was ordered. 

84 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
So in other words, with this capability, items in inventory can be ordered in 
advance to manufacture the product. The inventory level of raw materials used 
and consumed for manufacturing is properly gauged and measured. Through 
this process operational business intelligence is able to determine that raw mate-
rials used in the manufacturing of the product and determine whether materials 
are running low in supply. So as the order is taken, the system simultaneously 
reorders more raw material to satisfy any future orders. This is just but one 
example of how Operational BI could get the right data to the right person at 
the right time and consequently gain an advantage in keeping the business of 
manufacturing running smooth by decreasing the chance of running out of 
material and not lose an opportunity to sell more products due to a shortage 
of raw material for manufacturing. It may seem very simple but at this time of 
writing it has taken decades to effectively be able to source data from transac-
tional systems and move and transform it in a way that it is usable for analysis 
within the course of a day. This time-sensitive capability of business intelligence 
or analytics of an operational system that can offer a real competitive advantage 
to any organization is Operational BI.
With this goal in mind, we now turn our focus in this chapter to being able 
to deliver that system or solution that can provide the necessary operational 
business intelligence and analytics to achieve the goal previously described. We 
now reveal the practitioner’s secrets necessary to succeed in delivering a holistic 
and complete solution for Operational BI.
Operational BI for near real-time data analytics and analysis can be cen-
tralized around an Operational Data Store (ODS) complementing the EDW 
that does function as a persistent store of nightly or inter-day data. The ODS 
can deliver minute-by-minute data from operational systems by way of creation 
of semantic views based on a logical data model and the data for the views 
being materialized on the fly. These views eliminate the need to move data 
physically in addition to giving the flexibility to transform and reload data on 
the fly. Another approach can be in-memory caching of a table of metrics/
KPIs for dashboards in OBIEE. Operational BI can benefit from both of these 
approaches and deliver near-time data for analytics and analysis.
7.5 Delivering Operational BI
The underlying data structures and data architecture supporting the BI solution 
are the enablers most often overlooked when developing or implementing a solu-
tion entailing Operational BI. For structured data in a corporate environment, 
proper data modeling is vital in developing an Enterprise Data Warehouse. This 
is the “secret sauce” that at times, whether because of lack of expertise or even 

Using OBIEE for Operational BI 85
knowledge, is sometimes dismissed and is the cause of much of the failure that 
plagues the industry. In the past and even with some of today’s new tools and 
technologies, vendors have incorporated strategies and approaches attempt-
ing to avoid having to model the data. Although it is perhaps permissible for 
unstructured data to be in a setting for discovery, not modeling the data in a 
structured environment and solution such as for an enterprise data warehouse 
is not good practice. It would be analogous to building a house without a blue-
print. Today’s best practices for building BI solutions have reached the maturity 
to fully understand the limitations and capabilities of various different data 
structures and architectures as they relate to the various different categories and 
types of BI solution, ranging from Operational BI to Analytical BI and beyond. 
In this chapter, we have focused on structured data in a corporate environ-
ment to deliver business intelligence and analytics based on operational data and 
associated business processes. This book doesn’t necessarily go into the details of 
how to create the various structures, as there are many instructional books and 
writings concerning data architecture and the different types of foundational 
data structures for creating BI solutions. The basic choices are whether the data 
is normalized (e.g., to the 3rd Normal Form) or is de-normalized (as in a dimen-
sional model or star schema). Although best practices have now been established 
through decades of maturity in the industry, it is surprising that debates still 
linger as to which structure is best to support reporting and analytics. As prac-
titioners with extensive experience and expertise, we have determined through 
proven practical application which structure and foundation truly support a 
holistic and complete BI solution. We forward a basic fundamental strategy for 
BI as it pertains to reporting and analytics. That basic strategy and approach is 
the dimensional model or star schema, as found in an enterprise data warehouse 
and corresponding repository utilized in OBIEE.
7.5.1 Operational BI and OBIEE 
OBIEE specifically supports and provides for Operational BI through its reposi-
tory of data logically modeled through its Business Modeling and Mapping 
(BMM) utility in the BI Server layer. Through a BI Admin tool, the BMM is 
created in accordance with the physical layer exposed through the tool. The 
BMM is used to create the dimensional model or star schema and can even 
utilize data structures that have already been architected dimensionally at the 
database layer. As a relational online analytical processing (ROLAP) solu-
tion, it effectively makes use of the relational database management system (or 
RDBMS) that stores the data. In supporting the capability of querying and 
analysis, the data is ideally already architected and structured as dimensional 

86 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
model or star schema. In that case, the logical data model used to create the 
structures in the database can also be used as a guide for creating the data model 
and setting up the logical structures of the BMM.
The complications of Operational BI are the underlying added functionality 
and the requirement to provide trending and historical views of data along with 
real-time or near real-time data. In essence, this functionality combines the 
elements of reporting and analysis simultaneously. This unique combination 
of functionality can confuse practitioners and implementers as to exactly what 
type of system, and consequently architecture and infrastructure, is needed to 
deliver this solution and capability to the users. Therefore, to accompany the 
proper structure and architecture to support the Operational BI solution, the 
appropriate process also needs to be determined and explored. Essentially, for 
an Operational BI solution, an efficient, continual process is needed to update 
the underlying structures (e.g., an enterprise data warehouse, or EDW) with an 
incremental loading routine of adding new data in the source system to what is 
already existing and stored in the EDW. This will allow for a streamlined pro-
cess and approach for accessing the most current data added from the source. 
To create historical records and provide for trending analysis utilizing data 
from the EDW, the following general rules are needed:
• The EDW needs to be time-variant (the records should be dependent on 
a time factor). This can be achieved with a timestamp column, which 
basically creates a separate record of the same data elements, recorded and 
tracked through time.
• Changes to pertinent business data need to be examined, and the changes 
that need to be captured and stored in the EDW must be determined. 
Examples of changes include changes to an employee’s name, customer 
address, item description, or even a salesperson territory assignment. All 
these provide information about a certain sale, revenue, or any other fac-
tual transaction and can provide valuable insight to the nature of the 
transaction through time and history. The business user community will 
need to determine what changes to data should be recorded and stored in 
the EDW to track historical reporting and trending.      
Let’s explore how to update the EDW, and later in the chapter, we will 
explore accessing that new data not from the EDW but from another struc-
ture called an Operational Data Store (ODS), which serves as a great source 
of cleansed data for the EDW—especially new operational data that has been 
incrementally targeted and captured as real-time or near real-time changes to 
the source data. You will find that both relational database structures—the 
EDW and the ODS—can serve as the source of data to Operational BI.  

Using OBIEE for Operational BI 87
7.5.2 Updating the Enterprise Data Warehouse for 
Operational BI 
I n support of Operational BI, it is important to know the various methods for 
updating the enterprise data warehouse with new or modified records from 
the source. In general, there are two basic ways to accomplish this. These two 
methods can be labeled and described as a complete refresh and an incremental 
update (see Figure 7.1).
In a complete refresh, the tables in the target are either truncated or over-
written in their entirety with the complete set of data existing in the source 
at the moment. In contrast, an incremental update would look to the source 
system and perform a comparison to identify any changes in the data. It then 
appends the existing set of data already in the target tables. In this way, the 
table is said to be updated incrementally—as opposed to overwriting the data 
and completely refreshing the database. The following is a very simplistic 
depiction of the difference in data processing and data flow using a complete 
refresh versus incremental updates. In a complete refresh, the target tables are 
completely overwritten in a simple extract, transform, and load (ETL) that 
processes the data in bulk; for an incremental update, new records identified in 
the source system are processed specifically for each target with a special ETL 
to handle each source and target to create new records in the target tables of 
the data warehouse. 
Both methods and approaches are generally permissible, but one may be 
more appropriate than the other when considering such things as data volume, 
storage capabilities, or even timeliness of new data.
Figure 7.1 Complete Refresh and Incremental Update

88 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
7.5.2.1 Considering Requirements for Slowly Changing 
Dimensions (SCD) Types 
It is common for an EDW to be refreshed completely when new data is pro-
cessed. In other words, only the most current data found in the transactional 
system is kept and overwrites the data that was previously stored. As such, the 
EDW does not currently contain any historical records and does not keep any 
trending information. In developing a star schema for your data mart, this is 
called an SCD Type 1 as opposed to SCD Type 2 and SCD Type 3, which con-
tain complete history and limited history, respectively.
This book does not go into detail on how to process these slowly changing 
dimensions, as this subject is well documented. However, let us discuss how to 
identify the need for historical data and provide some examples. As previously 
stated the three choices, in respect to history, can be listed as:
• SCD Type 1—no history
• SCD Type 2—complete history
• SCD Type 3—limited history
Each type is pertinent to any organization and the determination must be 
made as to what kind of historical analysis, if any, is desired. To create the 
historical records in the EDW, pertinent business data must be identified and 
deemed as required. Declaring historical records to be included will undoubt-
edly affect reporting outcomes and results as well as system performance. 
In summary, the different methods for handling changes made to the 
dimensional data in your EDW can be summarized into three distinct catego-
ries; business users must determine which of the three is appropriate for captur-
ing history or any changes in the source data to meet their requirement to retain 
historical records or trending, if any, such as listed in the following section.
7.5.2.2 Considering Requirements for Capturing History or Any 
Changes in the Source Data To Meet the Requirements 
To Retain Historical Records or Trending
An incremental daily load can capture historical records and trending data in 
the EDW for Operational BI (see Table 7.3).
The main goal is to capture and identify records that are new to the source 
data system and not yet stored in the EDW. One such way is to run a Change 
Data Capture (CDC) process to compare and capture each new record in the 
source system and process that record in accordance to the SCD rules used in 
updating the target table, as described earlier in the chapter. In conjunction with 

Using OBIEE for Operational BI 89
identifying and capturing the changes, there may also be a need to group and 
aggregate these changes and store them as snapshots. In addition to providing 
a stored view of the data in a referenced point in time, these snapshots can also 
be utilized for Operational BI for viewing the most current and recent changes. 
Table 7.3 Sample Requirements Associated with Running an Incremental 
Daily Load To Capture Historical Records and Trending 
Data in the EDW for Operational BI
Process/Business 
Requirement
Description of Requirement
Possible Issues
Uniquely identify Fact record 
(and grain of Subject Area as 
a whole)
Create an identiﬁ er for each 
record in the Fact table, 
based on speciﬁ ed, precise 
data elements that make a 
record unique (e.g., natural 
key).
Records in the Fact table 
cannot be uniquely identiﬁ ed 
by their natural key for 
comparison. The natural key 
of record contains distinct 
values for each required data 
element which can identify 
its uniqueness. 
Historical Records
Provide means to report on 
past information and 
historical records from the 
EDW
The current structures for 
reporting and analytics only 
support the most current 
data—overwriting what is 
stored in the EDW.
Periodic Snapshots
Provide means to readily 
access and report on a 
predeﬁ ned calendar period
The current structures for 
reporting and analytics do 
not aggregate any data.
7.5.2.3 Utilizing Snapshot Copies for Operational BI
Periodic snapshots are copies of data in the EDW which represent a how the 
data and record existed at that point in time. These predefined and stored aggre-
gates can offer the needed comparison of old and new status to quickly enable 
Operational BI from an EDW. Two main points in utilizing periodic snapshot 
copies of the data for Operational BI are as follows:
• Records will be compared as prior and current snapshots in the staging 
table in the database layer. 
• Differences will be reported in the presentation layer via OBIEE.
Basic reporting for snapshots will be provided by comparing various snap-
shots of the same period. This will allow for quick analysis (see Figure 7.2).
Furthermore, when dealing with historical data for Operational BI, it is 
common to group it in aggregated groups of data based on the calendar, such 
as weekly, monthly, quarterly, and annual groups. To facilitate access to data 

90 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
during these predefined periods, individual aggregates of data called periodic 
snapshots can be stored. The strategy will comprise two components: incremen-
tal updates to the EDW and collective snapshots at each specified period.
Incremental updates at the daily atomic level will be processed. Differences 
in the record (or data that has changed) will be captured by the ETL logic and 
added to a single daily (and subsequent other periodical) snapshot at the data-
base layer.
The following is an overview of the steps needed to create snapshot copies of 
the report and analysis in various subsequent calendar periods.
 
1. Records are processed daily throughout the week and will be stored as the 
base table for the analysis and report. This table will contain historical 
records from the date determined by the business community.
 
2. At the start of every week, as determined by the business, the latest snap-
shot is stored to represent the week. This serves as the basic aggregated 
data which will feed the subsequent snapshots. 
 
3. As data is made available and stored accordingly in the appropriate 
weekly snapshot, subsequent periods will also be stored accordingly (e.g., 
month, quarter, and year) per the established schedule for processing. 
(See Figure 7.3.)
This process is one example of how the underlying structures and related 
strategies pertaining to the EDW provide quick access to data. In the case of 
Figure 7.2 Basic Reporting for Snapshots

Using OBIEE for Operational BI 91
a well-defined structured data for a given calendar period, such as a week, a 
month, a quarter, or a year, the EDW can readily store and access the struc-
tured data for purposes of using it for Operational BI. The structured data 
is essentially processed and then stored away for use on demand. In this way, 
an EDW is the needed enabler to provide Operational BI. However, there is 
additional option which might be added to the strategy to address the time 
factor involved when Operational BI needs to be more frequently updated and 
refreshed nightly or once a day. How can analysis of data intraday or in between 
the daily refreshes of an EDW be handled? The answer is another enabling 
structure called an operational data store (ODS).
7.6 The Operational Data Store Option
The EDW is a relational data structure that serves as the data source to 
Operational BI. The structures are predetermined and properly modeled 
Figure 7.3 Collective Snapshots by Week, Month, Quarter, Year

Figure 7.4 Operational Data Store. (Reproduced with permission from BIS3 LLC © 2015.)


Using OBIEE for Operational BI 93
dimensionally in a star schema to represent business transactions or facts and 
related business dimensions that describe the who, what, where, and so forth of 
that particular subject area. Once the star schema is processed, the data is avail-
able for analysis by its consumers for Operational BI. There is no longer a need 
to process the data again unless, of course, it prepares the data for Analytical 
BI best served in a cube such as Essbase. In that case, please refer to Chapter 6 
of this book.
Although the EDW is the main database structure to serve Operational BI, 
it may not necessarily meet the requirements for timeliness if the requirement 
is more frequent than the nightly or once-a-day refresh commonly needed for 
processing the EDW. In this case, another structure can fill the gap to serve as 
an intermediary between what can be gathered from the transactional system 
for reporting and what is currently stored in the EDW for historical analysis and 
trending. That structure is an ODS (see Figure 7.4). 
Essentially, the ODS is refreshed completely when new data is processed. 
In other words, only the most current data found in the transactional system is 
kept and the data stored previously in the ODS is overwritten. Processing the 
ODS changes the content and what is stored. If the ODS is queried, it would 
only contain the most current data that was processed from the transactional 
system. It will not contain any historical records or information stored based on 
the past contents of the EDW. 
As a basic strategy for the ODS, the data is refreshed and overwritten each 
time records from the transactional system are processed. However, in cases 
where some trending and historical analysis is needed, the ODS can be used 
to store limited history to meet the requirements of the specific analysis it is 
trying to obtain. For obvious reasons of maintenance, it should not be another 
duplicate copy of the EDW.   
Because of limitations in the capabilities of tools and technologies, 
Operational BI was not feasible in the early days of the industry. The processing 
requirement and preparation of the data for intelligence and analytics simply 
could not meet the requirements of real-time or near real-time BI. In essence, 
by the time the right data reached the right person, the intelligence would no 
longer be fresh or valuable to be fully utilized. In other words, an operational 
manager or director in charge of such operations would not even have access to 
the type of information and related insights that would enable them to affect 
the operational process that could drastically change and even improve busi-
ness—perhaps even to gain an edge over their competitors. Therefore, the gen-
eral idea of Operational BI did not even come into play until the tools and 
technologies enabled for moving data to and from the source to be able to utilize 
the data, information, and intelligence—and, moreover, the insights that could 
be potentially gained.

94 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
But even before getting to that vital point of gaining insight, the goal of 
gathering data within an organization or enterprise for use posed a big challenge 
within itself. For many decades, practitioners struggled as just the mere idea 
of being able to store all the information together in one place was a big issue. 
There was simply no easy way of moving large amounts of data to and from one 
system to another in a timely manner. So during the early days of the Internet, 
when data suddenly became readily accessible and ubiquitous across the globe, 
data professionals were searching for methods and approaches that could pro-
vide the most effective process for creating intelligence and analytics from raw 
data. What came of it was the emergence of ETL tools and technologies, and a 
whole new market was created that readily provided a means to access data that 
was much needed and desired which in turn fueled the creation of the business 
intelligence industry. 
However, along with the excitement of the new capabilities that it brought, 
BI hasn’t been without its share of complications and user understanding. There 
has been a lot of confusion about the difference between operational reporting 
and BI in general. The two subjects are often interchanged and referred to mis-
takenly. It used to be that reporting only referred to being able to access some 
data, but it never was meant to gain any kind of insight or analytics based on 
history. Transactional systems simply did not have the history to begin with. 
At that time, reporting was really just access to whatever data the transactional 
system may have had. Any kind of analytics was really formed afterwards with 
a different system, often through a very manual and labor-intensive process 
performed by the likes of statisticians and mathematicians. Today’s new tech-
nologies and tools offer a whole new world of analytics and predictive solutions 
that now have the capability to distinguish reporting from analytics. However, 
many users still do not fully understand the purposes and goals for each type of 
system. This book tries to address and answer that issue.
7.7 Summary
For decision support, the different types of systems that are available for report-
ing and analytics encompass and are grouped under what is now referred to in 
general as BI. With advancement of the tools and technologies needed to deliver 
BI, subcategories emerge or even evolve to form their own set of success criteria 
and requests. And so it was with Operational BI. In terms of reporting and ana-
lytics, a whole new set of criteria and goals have provided a combination of the 
characteristics of a reporting system and an analytical system. In conjunction 
with this new set of criteria and goals, it is important to understand that a whole 
new architecture and approach enables the capability to provide Operational 

Using OBIEE for Operational BI 95
BI. This chapter provides an overview to this capability and concept which has 
been successfully addressed with OBIEE. 
Different structures and architectures are needed to support various report-
ing and analytical systems. Not one type of structure can satisfy all require-
ments at this time. For that reason, it is still common to find some organizations 
querying a transactional system for analytics (as if it were a decision support 
system), often with futile results—especially in terms of performance, simply 
due to the many joins found in a transactional system. In these cases, the short-
term vision of being able to access any kind of data from the source system in 
hopes of gaining some useful information overrides the necessary vision and 
strategy needed to build a successful holistic, complete BI system and solution. 
For Operational BI, that holistic and complete solution is supported by the 
EDW and sometimes the ODS, if needed.
In the future, how great would it be to be able to query any kind of data 
system without any type of transformations or “heavy-lifting” in order to utilize 
it for analysis and beyond, such as data mining and predictive analytics? Indeed 
when technology catches up to where transactional systems and decision sup-
port systems use the same structure and architecture in the backend, business 
intelligence and analytics would take a great leap forward—at the very least, by 
eliminating additional processing efforts and time needed for transformations 
and preparations so that efforts could concentrate on what is needed for intel-
ligence and analytics. This approach would truly hit the main goal of getting 
the right information to the right person at the right time—perhaps within 
seconds. Imagine the future that that capability would enable.


97
Chapter 8 
Using OBIEE for 
Self-Service BI
In This Chapter
 
8.1 Introduction
 
8.2 In Search of Self-Service BI
 
8.3 Enter OBIEE as a Solution
 
8.4 OBIEE for Self-Service BI
 
8.5 Big Data and Self-Service BI
 
8.6 Summary
8.1 Introduction
From the early stages of business intelligence, there have been ample lists of 
promises and visions of grandeur for what this type of solution can provide 
for decision makers. In the beginning this reference to decision makers may 
have been reserved exclusively for executives. That definition and categoriza-
tion has now been forwarded for all levels of management and decision making 
and even further to include a broad capability to access and work with data 
to improve any decision-making process. This capability has been awaited by 
many practitioners in the hope that BI would be more widely accepted. Because 
of the new technologies that have come up through the years it has garnered a 

98 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
lot of attention of late for practitioners as one of the functionalities that a busi-
ness intelligence solution should offer and that vendors and practitioners should 
absolutely deliver. 
Vendors have done well in coming up with tools that could fulfill that 
promise of providing access to all levels of the corporate ladder. No longer was 
BI reserved for just executives and for only matters of a strategic nature. Now 
everyone in the company is in on the game and only one thing stood between 
accessing a wealth of enterprise data and knowledge and that was “how exactly 
does one query the data?” Naturally, it caused a lot of angst about being able to 
use the tool effectively or even easily.
So it began this need for self-service BI. It was exactly that function sought 
after in a BI system that would allow some degree of independence and capabil-
ity for a user to be able do their own analysis. I’m sure that almost all would agree 
that this idea of self-service BI is perhaps the true overall vision and essence of 
what a business intelligence solution should offer anyway. Indeed, the industry 
has come a long way to be able to offer all the technologies that enable a person 
to access and readily use large amounts of data. Even at the time of writing, the 
industry has introduced new tools and technologies (i.e., big data) to help with 
that task. These new tools and technologies undoubtedly help with the techni-
cal capabilities but is it truly enough to allow for Self-Service BI.
This chapter will examine the capabilities and functionalities of OBIEE for 
Self-Service BI. In addition, a basic guide has been included to quickly display 
the basic screens and show OBIEE’s user-friendly screens and ease of use for ad 
hoc querying.
8.2 In Search of Self-Service BI
When I first started in the industry, the mere fact that we connected  computers 
to each other to form a local area network and then go beyond to do a wide 
area network was perhaps the first step in allowing the sharing of data across 
the enterprise. Indeed, it was one of the very first things we had to address. But 
surprisingly, it no longer became an issue, and the ubiquitous Internet changed 
how applications were built. With that, readily sharing data across networks was 
no longer such a big problem. Anyone from anywhere can now access resources 
via the Internet, and the user community can now utilize servers and resources 
from far away. Once very elusive, these advances in technology and tools enable 
us to now utilize data systems to help ourselves.
Many businesses and business processes relied on experience and even on gut 
feeling to be able to make decisions. But now, with modern-day business 

Using OBIEE for Self-Service BI 99
intelligence solutions and systems, not only can decisions be made and 
supported by factual data but also decisions can be attempted that predict 
the future. 
So when we talk about self-service business intelligence, we have to look at 
the fact that although the resources and data are accessible, it doesn’t necessar-
ily mean that great insights and predictive analytics can be made despite the 
advancements in technology and tools. So what is truly meant by self-service? 
The elements of the solution would have to address the following:
○ Access to pertinent data
○ Performance and processing power
○ Friendly user interface
○ Ability to readily add and append pieces of new data
○ Visualization of the data to make insights
With these, an organization could really provide the necessary capabilities 
for data analysis in the hope that some kind of insight could be gained from 
data sources that would otherwise be useless and provide no advantage to that 
organization.
But even with these advancements in technology and tools, can a user truly 
utilize these systems and solutions? After all, it is not merely about the data. 
Along with it, there must be some kind of understanding of the business first 
in order to really form business insights from raw data. Otherwise, how would 
you know what kind of target or analysis is pertinent and being asked of the 
raw data? How would you also know how to put certain pieces of data together 
to form some kind of useful intelligence? The most sophisticated system and 
solution created would be rather useless in those cases where an understand-
ing of business is not applied. So even gauging the effectiveness of the business 
solution as being “self-service” would be rather misleading, or even elusive. In 
other words, the great promise of self-service business intelligence would not be 
satisfied, but it is only because of the limitations of the person’s understanding, 
not the limitations of the system solution that is provided. So with a plethora 
of tools and technologies in today’s BI landscape claiming ease of use, there are 
now numerous claims of platforms offering self-service BI.
8.3 Enter OBIEE as a Solution
Access to data in a database for the normal person is difficult, as the normal per-
son doesn’t necessarily understand why tables and columns exist. It is because of 

100 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
this that vendors have attempted to come up with an easy way to access data and 
to analyze data from a database. OBIEE has a tool called Analysis (previously 
named Answers) in which users with the drop of a column could come up with 
answers—no pun intended—to their inquiries. 
Easily sectioned as tabs, OBIEE Analysis allows a person to pick certain col-
umns from a table and drop them into a design board, so that the person may 
then easily view the results tab to display the results of their query. The sim-
plicity of design allows the average person to access the data without having to 
write an SQL file script. To the average user, this is light years ahead. If needed, 
advanced users can go beyond the simple dropping of columns and selection of 
columns, and go into writing complex formulas by using the formula button. 
The overall idea is to have a selection of attributes for your query and then 
to filter out certain pieces of data. This will be demonstrated in the next section 
as we guide you through creating your first Analysis.
Also offered, but in a limited functionality, is a way to format and create a 
report from your results. The limitations of the tool are only due to the fact that 
is it is browser-based. However, this is also one of its strengths, in that no special 
client is needed to be installed. So if you know how to move around a web page 
in a browser, you can move easily through the OBIEE screen page.
This setup of selecting and dropping columns and attributes into one page 
and then providing conditions and filters to the data for the side result is 
the strength of OBI. This tool is the closest to having a self-service solution 
and system for business intelligence; a normal worker can maneuver in and 
around the system to readily access and utilize data for information  knowledge 
and intelligence.
But this is only the user interface; what is more important is that the foun-
dation behind it is in order to provide for good clean data.  The structure of 
the data should be emphasized because normal users should be able to see their 
business, to view the mentions readily and visibly, and to see and understand the 
structure. For instance, if they want customer information, they should be able 
to view all the attributes of that particular entity such as “First Name,” “Last 
Name,” etc.
As Ralph Kimball, a pioneer in data warehousing and business intelligence, 
wrote in his industry ground-breaking book The Data Warehouse Toolkit for 
business intelligence practitioners, there were two reasons why a star schema 
might be needed for decision-support. One reason was particularly for the tech-
nical aspect for performance—data fashioned in the star will perform much 
better in a relational database management system (RDBMS) than in a 3rd 
normal form structure for a transactional system. This fact must be emphasized 
and yielded to because many people actually encounter problems when they try 
to create a query and transaction, and the closest support system is based off of 
transactional structure in the background. This book doesn’t go into the details 

Using OBIEE for Self-Service BI 101
of the Kimball approach and dimensions modeling except to say that when the 
data is structured in a star schema it consist of dimensions and facts. Structured 
correctly, the technical aspects for performance are then successfully addressed 
and thus set up the second prong and reason for designing and modeling the 
data dimensionally in a star schema. 
The second prong of the Kimball approach deals with what he referred to 
as “User Understandability.” In other words, the data should be presented in a 
way that can be easily translated and understood by business users. In very basic 
terms, business data can be categorized under two types of entities: a dimension 
or a fact. Data that is transactional in nature and can serve as measurements and 
metrics are called facts. To complement and describe those facts, the dimensions 
contain the fields that serve as descriptors. The descriptors are attributes that 
describe who, what, when, and where, among other things. By selecting descrip-
tors, a user can select a record that describes sales, for instance; then the user can 
select an attribute, such as who bought the product, what the product is, when 
the product was sold, or how much the product was sold for. As a result, the 
business user can easily see and analyze the sales to find the who, what, where, 
and when of that sale. 
With the data architecture established, we now turn to the front-end tool 
that  should allow a business user to readily query and analyze the data: Enter 
Oracle’s OBIEE.
8.4 OBIEE for Self-Service BI
As advocates for using OBIEE as a tool for Self-Service BI, we highlight its ease 
of use for creating a simple analysis of data without having to know a program-
ming or querying language typically used to extract data from a database. The 
tool has a number of options for creating an analysis, including an option for 
a direct database request for advanced users. This speaks to the strength of 
OBIEE; however, we will not focus on that particular piece here. 
Rather, the basic mechanism for creating an analysis is the design board, 
which begins with a blank view—analogous to a blank slate of paper. This is 
where it all begins. With an idea or query in mind, OBIEE is used for ad hoc 
or on-demand report reporting, readily satisfying the sought-after self-service 
capability. This basic and simple method for query and analysis is represented 
by two tabs, Criteria and Results, that are used to toggle between selecting data 
elements (drag and drop) as criteria and then easily viewing the results or values 
of the data elements that were selected. It is that simple.
As a precursor to this self-service capability, a subject area is prepared in 
which the data is grouped together in a logical model or categories represent-
ing the data readily understood by the user. We’ve previously discussed and 

102 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
described this logical model from a technical standpoint as a dimensional 
model or star schema consisting of metrics and measurements and descriptors 
as dimensions to answer what we refer to as the Who, What, and Where about 
the metric and measurement. 
With this proper data foundation and groupings into subject areas, the data 
elements are contained and can be found under the respective subject areas 
folders. For an analysis about  the subject area, simply locate the columns for 
your analysis, choosing as many attributes as needed or desired. Keep in mind 
that too many options might yield a large table of results, so it is good practice 
to start with only a few. Simply click and hold to drag and drop the field into 
the design pane. Organize and reorganize the selected data elements by click-
ing and dragging them where you would like them. The order of the attributes 
affects how the analysis will display and look. With all the columns from the 
tables ordered accordingly, the analysis can be previewed readily by clicking on 
the Results tab. The result is a table that contains the value of all the data ele-
ments that were previously added when selected in Criteria.
The basic operation of selecting data elements in the Criteria tab and then 
viewing the resulting data set in the Results tab is the simple—yet powerful—
method for querying the database. It is important to note that no code or script 
is needed to view the data. Moreover, this ad hoc function and capability is 
performed “on the fly” against the subject area in the data warehouse. As such, 
the resulting data set is not hard-coded, nor is it static. The data result will 
change dynamically in accordance to the criteria selections and will yield differ-
ent results as the data in the data warehouse is updated.
This ability to readily access your data with a user-friendly application is the 
power provided by OBIEE to its users. Armed with knowledge of the data and 
subject area, this mechanism provided by OBIEE for ad hoc querying of the 
enterprise data warehouse can confidently be provided and utilized by everyone 
in your organization, and therefore it can accurately be classified as self-service. 
Moreover, recent additions, prompted by changes and demands from the 
industry for self-service, have pushed OBIEE capabilities, enabling the linking 
of external data (such as data from a spreadsheet) to append and enhance the 
data already contained and prepared in the data warehouse. Recent advance-
ments have allowed this to be done dynamically, “on the fly.” No longer does 
the data warehouse sit in a vacuum, dependent on a rigorous and laborious 
mechanism for effective utilization as a valuable asset for data discovery and 
predictive analytics. Indeed, advances like these that allow for data mashups 
and data visualizations have spurred another growth in BI into the realm of 
advanced analytics and effective data mining under what is now generally being 
called data science.
For this new capability of BI and data science, effective tools are needed 
for the users and practitioners who warrant access to voluminous amounts of 

Using OBIEE for Self-Service BI 103
various types of data—and lots of it, coming in as fast as thought. The industry 
is in need of being able to gather, transform, and maintain this data while at the 
same time enabling users (or even data scientists) to easily and powerfully serve 
up and query the data themselves in a self-service capacity. We proffer that the 
Self-Service BI tool that the industry has been searching for, the one that can 
integrate an established enterprise data warehouse with pieces of external data 
for data discovery, is now here. That Self-Service BI tool is OBIEE.
8.5 Big Data and Self-Service BI
Self-Service BI revolves around the fact that decision making using data is aided 
in particular by interactive and (business-)user driven interfaces to the under-
lying data. Data today consists not only of structured but also of unstructured 
data (the so-called Big Data) characterized by volume, velocity, and variety. 
This data demands fast processing as well as an integrated approach to the 
analysis of online transaction processing (OLTP) and online analytical process-
ing (OLAP) data and the discovery of new information from that data.
As a result, Big Data for decision making must support new data, new ana-
lytics, and new metrics that involve past performance analytics (such as last 
week’s data) along with predictive analytics to ascertain what might happen and 
model development.
The common dynamic for all of this is self-service, with such analytics 
depending on what is being asked for and who is being asked for. The agile 
and changing needs of business users fit perfectly into this dynamic. When 
it comes to Oracle BI, Oracle Big Data and Oracle Data Discovery provide
• Real-time analytics of data, self-service analytics to all types of data, and 
scale-out adoption of the same with interactive data visualization as a 
major component of the same
• Access to relevant and right-time data and self-service access to that data. 
This means such data can be contextualized within the business process 
domain of the user asking for and accessing the data
• Data that is secure, complete, and granular
When self-service analytics become a reality made possible by such technol-
ogies, business analysis processes such as mobile device management (MDX), 
visual discovery, and spreadsheet analysis become (business-)user driven, with 
no disconnect across all needed data points.
Just as OBIEE combined with Oracle Essbase provides a holistic solution 
to enable predictive analytics and operational and self-service reporting on 
structured data, Oracle Big Data Discovery can enable extending BI beyond 

104 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
relational data and its multidimensional analysis, which in turn allows self-
service analytics on Big Data. This can answer the what, who, why, how of Big 
Data in near real-time and in a future-oriented fashion.
8.5.1 OBIEE12c and Big Data
As a new wave of analysis and intelligence, BI and Big Data analytics factors 
into mainstream adoption and self-service analytics on all data that enables near 
real- time decision making is what is trending now. OBIEE12c and Oracle Cloud 
solutions now enable “self-service” analytics and big data and go the extra mile 
in facilitating and effecting the change of the status quo. Be it data classified 
under the Vs sourced from clickstream data warehousing and web log analysis 
or the billions of transactional rows coming from OLTP, the quick and mean-
ingful handling of such data, turning it into insight in near real-time, always 
remains the business goal. Oracle has evolved into the Big Data realm with 
Oracle Exadata and Exalytics at the back end and OBIEE 12c on the front end 
to be the leader in the BI of the future realm.
Oracle 12c and OBIEE12c support the three major requirements of Big 
Data Analytics in general and Self-Service Analytics in particular, namely:
 1. Multi-tenancy—The new cloud style infrastructure, multi-service 
instance (MSI)–enabled
 2. In-memory optimizations—Oracle Exalytics and implicit columnar 
technology
 3. In-memory analytics and advanced analytics
 4. Data discovery
 5. Data mash-ups at run-time
 6. Multidimensional analysis using embedded Essbase engine based on 
(logical) dimensional model in OBIEE12c
 7. Pluggable BI—One OBIEE 12c engine servicing multiple BI 
applications
 8. Data visualizations at run-time—Self-service analytics and new 
data science techniques
 9. Data science
 10. Cloud
OBIEE12c offers self-service analytics by providing users the autonomy to 
analyze and provide analysis based on their own data at run-time. As a result, 
users have the ad hoc capability to bring in big data from various types of 

Using OBIEE for Self-Service BI 105
resources and “mash” it up with enterprise data. These are advantages to the 
user base in terms of user preference and intuitiveness, as well as analysis, intel-
ligence, and analytics. Though this requires the users to master some skills 
(and, therefore, for administrators to provide certain training and resources), 
the business benefits derived from such a holistic Big Data BI solution far out-
weigh these considerations. From technical standpoint, Oracle now supports 
the hardware and infrastructure to run a resource intensive data driven BI and 
Analytics application on the front end by way of its Exadata and Exalytics solu-
tion offerings, with OBIEE12c complementing the front end part of it.
8.6 Summary
This chapter should provide a clear example and view of the capabilities of 
Oracle BI and how it can easily serve the standard need for ad hoc reporting 
and research capabilities. The intention was to show how easily it can be used 
as a self-service BI tool. In the past, there was no easy way to access data with-
out a certain degree of knowledge and understanding of the technical aspects 
needed for querying the database. What Oracle has achieved is a simple drag-
and-drop interface that enables any user to query stored data. We feel that this 
process is efficient enough to be labeled as self-service although we do agree 
that there is some knowledge and understanding of the subject area being used 
is necessary. Without the business knowledge behind each data element, the 
user would not be able to perceive whether the tool is working well and whether 
or not it is advantageous. 
This is a common perception if the goal is not met. Often, what can be 
easily remedied is seen as extremely problematic, when it actually comes down 
to being able to pinpoint the issue. Not one tool will solve your problem if 
you don’t understand the business behind the metric measurement that you are 
going after. To offset this possibility, it is important from the very beginning to 
gain cooperation and collaboration with business users.
Lastly, this chapter touched upon the concepts of Big Data and Self-Service 
BI. Mainly, new requirements in advanced analytics as well as data discovery 
aspects come into play as we step into an era where legions of data scientists, 
armed with their self-service tool in OBIEE, seek to include external data (or 
even Big Data) to readily append and enhance the established data warehouse 
in search of answers to their queries and analysis.
The next chapter focuses on solution implementation and customization 
and our vital best practice component.


107
Chapter 9 
Best Practices for 
Solution Implementation 
and Customization
In This Chapter
 
9.1 Introduction
 
9.2 Establishing a Data Foundation Based on a Logical Model
 
9.3 Extending the Logical Data Model for Implementation and
 
   Customization 
 
9.4 The Logical Model as a Scalable Best Practice Solution
 
9.5 Summary
9.1 Introduction
Throughout this book, the focus has been on best practices for implementing a 
successful business intelligence and analytic solution marked by manageability, 
flexibility, extendibility, scalability, and the like, and accommodating any cus-
tomizations. Overall, this proven best practice we refer to is to establish a firm 
foundation for the data which correctly translates and encapsulates the data 
elements and requirements of the business to enable business intelligence and 
analytics. This data foundation is called a dimensional model or star schema, 

108 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
and the data architecture forms the basis for any downstream applications, such 
as decision support systems (e.g., OBIEE) and analytics (e.g., Essbase).
From a technical standpoint, the “translation” of the data occurs via a data 
model with two major data groupings. Essentially, the data model captures the 
metrics and measurements needed for analysis by declaring a fact table, and 
the various descriptors and criteria pertaining to the metrics and measurement 
by declaring the dimensions (as they are referred to in dimensional modeling). 
Practicing data modelers and architects recognize this as a star schema. Essentially, 
this star schema provides the necessary architecture for performance; moreover, 
it designs and fashions the data in a way that is understandable to business users 
by incorporating business groupings that are well defined and understood.
To capture and develop the correct dimensional model, the approach used 
is to create a logical data model. As its name suggests, this models the data in a 
logical fashion as it pertains to business requirements. This logical data model 
may stem first from a conceptual model with the main goal of capturing busi-
ness requirements before committing to any physical data model or even actual 
coding. In this way, the data architecture and foundation are modeled and the 
solution can be properly planned. 
This chapter explores this vital and crucial best practice for a successful solu-
tion implementation and customization.
9.2 Establishing a Data Foundation Based 
on a Logical Model
The best practice for implementing a holistic solution centers around an under-
lying data foundation based on a logical model of business objects. This model 
consists of:
• Related logical objects, both structured and unstructured, at the enclosing 
top level.
• Establishing modeled entities and their attributes.
• Business Intelligence (BI) data stores—both analytical and operational. 
The relational online analytical processing (ROLAP) solution can be 
viewed as virtually the same as multidimensional online analytical pro-
cessing (MOLAP). The physical implementation can be done using logical 
objects modeled per business requirements and additionally can include 
any related big data objects.
• Data discovery, consisting of big data elements; it may be mostly unstruc-
tured but can also involve structured objects.
• Data Integration layer that ties together all data sources, including Big 
Data if related and pertinent (see Figure 9.1).

Figure 9.1 One Data Foundation and associated Logical Model. (Reproduced with permission from BIS3 LLC © 2015.)

110 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
The logical model is the focus, and it is vitally important in planning out 
and strategizing the data foundation from a high level. In creating the logical 
model, the physical implementation is downplayed so as to not dismiss this cru-
cial stage of planning and representing the exact business data objects required 
to form the data foundation for the enterprise. How this overall data foundation 
is patterned on an established associated logical model is depicted in Figure 9.1. 
Essentially, the established data foundation defines one logical layer that will 
populate and “feed” both analytical BI and operational BI tools downstream. 
This logical data foundation can also be extended by a data lake tied to and 
filtered by data discovery, such as like Oracle Big Data Discovery, Microsoft 
PowerBI, Tableau, Qlikview, or any other visualization tool in the market. 
For implementing Oracle BI and factoring in OBIEE in as part of the solu-
tion, the logical (dimensional) model becomes the common information model, 
encompassing the metadata and semantic layer that is architected and housed 
in the Repository file or RPD through the Business Modeling and Mapping 
(BMM) section of the OBIEE Admin tool. 
With the common information model established as the data foundation, it 
can be leveraged and readily utilized to architect and build the Essbase cubes. 
The remainder of this chapter touches upon how the data is logically modeled 
and, with the enterprise data warehouse, builds and populates the cubes. It also 
highlights, as a best practice, how to extend Essbase based on the logical dimen-
sional model to address predictive and prescriptive analytics.
We reiterate the way that the data is logically modeled and an enterprise 
data warehouse is created to feed the cubes. The ROLAP star schema in 
a relational database management system (RDBMS) is equivalent to 
the dimensional model in Essbase. As part of best practices for analytics, 
Oracle Essbase for analytical BI provides for modeling of a single platform 
of all related data via the logical (dimensional) model and source-to-
target mapping, business-to-technology transformation, commonality, and 
standardized metadata for Essbase and OBIEE. 
9.3 Extending the Logical Data Model for 
Implementation and Customization
This section gives a detailed explanation of how to extend Essbase so that 
the ROLAP-based enterprise data warehouse (EDW) can be used to feed the 
Essbase cubes.
To recap, we begin with reiterating that the Oracle BI Suite, consisting 
of BI Publisher, OBIEE, and Essbase, constitutes a toolset for holistic BI and 

Best Practices for Solution Implementation and Customization 111
analytics. Using BI Publisher for ad hoc (operational) reporting, OBIEE for 
operational BI, and Essbase for multidimensional analysis and analytical BI 
provides for a custom implementation of the solution. The tight integration 
between Essbase and OBIEE enables transparent integration between the two, 
thus enabling extension of Essbase cubes to create a BI solution that is flexible, 
extendable, scalable, and manageable. 
9.3.1 Using the Logical Model To Extend Essbase Cubes
This is useful for customization of applications that use Essbase for analysis/
analytics. This can be done by using the cube itself or using a star schema in an 
RDBMS (which subsequently is leveraged to feed the cube). 
We stress that the star schema created in the RDBMS is essentially the logi-
cal equivalent to the dimensional model in Essbase in that both specify and 
define relevant dimensions associated to target metrics and measurements. 
The difference lies in the physical implementation of the analytical solution 
as a ROLAP or MOLAP.
We recommend the following two methods to extend Essbase based on a 
logical model:
 
1. Use the cube as a data mart and as a dimensional model specifying 
dimensions and their measures. 
 
2. Use a ROLAP star schema in an RDBMS, more specifically sourced from 
an EDW, as the dimensional model to use for BI and analytics.
The best practical methods to accomplish this are
• In either case, we need to go through the process of putting together a 
dimensional model that mirrors business requirements (at least on paper). 
This must involve business users and IT sitting across the board from each 
other to chalk out specific business requirements, which will be mapped 
to equivalent technical steps for the dimensional model. This is needed to 
translate the star to the end user requirements.
• The best practical way to a holistic solution is to architect an EDW based 
on online transaction processing (OLTP) requirements and have Essbase 
source data directly from the EDW via XOLAP or using ROLAP star. 
This allows for performing operational reporting/publishing, analytical 
BI and operational BI.

112 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
• Option 1 from the previous list can be used if there is a unique need 
to cater to a department that needs to perform MOLAP/analytics and 
not just flat reporting. XOLAP can be used to directly and transparently 
source the data from OLTP/RDBMS and feed the cube via the dimen-
sional model in Essbase Studio. 
• Option 2 can be used if there is a need for both reporting as well as ana-
lytics. In this case, the ROLAP star can subsequently be leveraged and 
used to feed the cube via the logical dimensional model in Essbase Studio. 
The steps involving in building a cube in Essbase Studio based on a ROLAP 
star that is based on the logical dimensional model are as follows:
 
1. Design a ROLAP model (star schema).
 
2. Design a data connection based on this ROLAP model.
 
3. Design an Essbase cube based on the ROLAP star created in step 1. This 
way, the ROLAP feeds the data to the cube.
 
4. Repeat step 3 for any similar cubes that need to be designed based on 
members of the Essbase outline or any additional dimensions/measures 
from the ROLAP model.
 
5. Design an Essbase model based on this cube. 
 
6. Deploy the cube.
Recommendation: These two options as explained above can be used to 
extend the existing cubes, build additional cubes, or perform analytics. 
Essbase can be extended and analytics can be applied to custom implemen-
tations (see Figure 9.2).
9.3.2 Building Analytics That Can Be Applied to 
Custom Implementations
A ROLAP dimensional model as outlined in the previous subsection for extend-
ing Essbase Cubes can also be used to perform analytics as needed.
The authors emphasize the following best practices for applying analytics to 
custom Essbase Implementations:
 
1. Perform hybrid OLTP/OLAP analytics—Start with a ROLAP dimen-
sional model to represent particular business processes that need the final 
analytics as actionable insights. This leads to an integrated approach 
by which we analyze ad hoc reporting (BI Publisher), operational BI 

Figure 9.2 Using a Logical Model to Extend Essbase for Analytical BI, Hybrid Analytics, and Data Discovery. (Reproduced with 
permission from BIS3 LLC © 2015.)

114 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
(OBIEE) using ROLAP through a star schema, and multidimensional 
analysis (in Essbase) for MOLAP/analytical BI. This is the right founda-
tion that gives a holistic solution.
Create the dimensional logical ROLAP model outside of Essbase Studio. This 
is a better way. As a first exercise, this can be done as a prototype in Essbase 
Studio and then formally industrialized outside Essbase Studio. This is a fan-
tastic process that enables a connection straight to transactional OLTP systems 
and also uses analytical data to conduct hybrid analytics. 
 
2. Perform descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analytics—As an extension 
of the first step in this list, customizing Essbase via ROLAP models and 
integrating these models into Essbase enables the simultaneous perfor-
mance of BI and Advanced analytics. This means performing descriptive 
analytics on data from transactional (OLTP) systems and predictive analyt-
ics (what now and what if) from both OLTP and OLAP systems with 
subsecond response times. The latter can be done using Essbase BSO 
cubes. The former can be done using ASO cubes that are efficient and 
scalable across thousands of concurrent users. The outcomes from predic-
tive analytics can be enhanced to derive prescriptive analytics (what next) 
that provide recommendations for actionable decision making. Predictive 
analytics can be done in the following manner:
• Define dimension hierarchies corresponding to business structures 
such as business dimensions. This can be standardized as “scenario” 
dimensions.
• Based on what now (e.g., trending and similar occurrences), derive what 
if rules that can be ranked based on likelihood and closeness to the 
business process involved.
• Create data that models the what if scenarios and outcomes that align 
with what next. 
• Try and incorporate the predictive model as a standard business pro-
cess using the multiuser read/write capabilities and write-back feature 
of Essbase.
9.3.3 Best Practices and Additional Customization Scenarios
This section outlines some best practices and additional customization scenar-
ios of using Essbase in the enterprise.
• The Data Integration layer defined in Figure 9.1 can be implemented by 
leveraging Essbase Studio’s functionality based on data source changes. 

Best Practices for Solution Implementation and Customization 115
Essbase Studio supports sourcing from a data warehouse (in ROLAP 
form) and populating the Essbase cube. Alternatively, a part of the data 
warehouse can be used as data mart to source the Essbase cube. This takes 
care of manageability, scalability, flexibility, and extensibility in regard to 
sourcing data and stuffing the Essbase cube, due to the relational struc-
ture of the data warehouse. The warehouse also enables change data cap-
ture and incremental data loads. 
Facts and dimensions required can be modeled in the data warehouse for data 
aggregations, and any other analyses can be defined and redefined based on 
current and future requirements, thus making the data integration process 
change-proof and part of the holistic Essbase and OBIEE solution.
• Taking into consideration that data is vital to a holistic solution, we assert 
that all data needs to be validated at the time of sourcing it from point of 
view of data veracity, integrity, and quality. The following steps need to be 
performed at the data warehouse layer based on the logical model. There 
are two aspects in which data can be used for best results: 
○ Use load first and then check and transform
○ Use data validation as part of the workflow in the data warehouse; this 
not only will ensure that data is fully validated during sourcing, but 
also will allow for a consistent set of pertinent data for the cause for 
which it is used. This enables to filter data that won’t be loaded. Auto-
mating this process removes the complexities involved in the process.
 
Bad data can be eliminated by checking to ensure that: 
○ The data source and data process are consistent.
○ Exceptions have been taken care of.
○ Data is completely validated to its source.
○ Data is completely validated for dimensions and facts. 
○ The automated workflow is functioning without any errors or data 
spills that are outliers.
• Essbase enables a single analytic platform that integrates heterogenous 
information for yielding insightful business decisions. Essbase Studio, 
when used at the data source level, enables construction of Essbase cubes 
based on this platform leveraging a MOLAP data model to push analytics 
needed. This provides for near real–time (in fact right time) decision mak-
ing either by using Essbase on its own or by integrating it with Oracle BI.
• XOLAP-based cubes can be implemented in Oracle Essbase Studio to 
convert Essbase BSO cubes to Hybrid and use them in Hyperion appli-
cations for Hybrid and Advanced Relational Access. This in a way opti-
mizes Essbase for Hybrid Analyses. Additionally, BSO’s Hybrid ASO-like 
aggregation can be used. For example, the Hybrid Engine can be used for 

116 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
cross dimensional hybrid formulas and Hyperion Planning Applications 
for gathering real-time insight from data. 
• SQL-based Essbase integration can help source data from any data source 
and integrate data and metadata into Essbase more easily and efficiently. 
SQL queries can be used to load data into Essbase outlines. This process 
can also be automated in Essbase Studio.
• Use Data Relationship Governance (DRG) within Data Relation Manage-
ment (DRM) to facilitate the creation and maintenance of master data. 
Workflow models, requests, governance work lists, alerts and notifica-
tions, and paths can be configured right out of the box within DRM. 
Using runtime substitution variable calculations for allocations across 
BSO and ASO cubes can be done to make them work together. The cor-
responding metadata can be synchronized using DRM. Using DRG in 
a way extends Essbase beyond its normal functionality for governance 
workflow and approval process by allowing copying of workflow models 
and tasks, automatic updates for request items, governance Web Service 
API, database integration, EPM integration, and external workflow. 
• Using Essbase in the Cloud enables the creation of ad hoc grids for enter-
prise financial users and the saving of these grids as reports. The same can 
be done on premise, too.
9.4 The Logical Model as a Scalable Best 
Practice Solution
We’ve described throughout the book the need to establish a firm data founda-
tion to support the downstream applications such as BI and Analytics. The sup-
porting structure is a structured data model instantiated and materialized as an 
enterprise data warehouse. The enterprise data warehouse is a ROLAP solution 
created in an RDBMS. If needed, a corresponding MOLAP solution housed in 
a multidimensional cube can also be used. The best practice for implementing 
the solution is to model the data logically first. This exercise ensures that the 
data foundation is well planned and utilized as the enabler and for the overall 
strategy for the solution. By logically modeling the solution first, no code or 
effort to build are committed before a design phase is completed. The basic 
concept is to create the blueprint and roadmap for a successful delivery. 
The logical data model also plays a role in Big Data Analytics and Data dis-
covery. The discussion of how this can be done will be presented in the authors’ 
blog at www.essbasestudio.com.   
We have established the best practice for dealing with structured data to 
be used in the enterprise. The architect and creators of the relational database 

Best Practices for Solution Implementation and Customization 117
based its concept of handling and relating data on set theory in which the deter-
mined sets were made up of members and elements. Determining proper sets 
and groupings can be a daunting task. As mentioned earlier, this exercise of logi-
cally modeling the data is the key to success—a well-proven, time-tested best 
practice. However, in terms of the unstructured data coming from big data, how 
does this best practice play out in this new situation and environment? Indeed, 
the issue becomes one of dealing with integration with the structured data. 
The answer still lies with a logical model. The data, whether structured 
or unstructured, can be examined and assessed as to how a specified object or 
entity relates to one another. Beginning with the predetermined collection of 
objects housed in the enterprise data warehouse, a link or relationship can be 
made to the unstructured data that is discovered. These matching objects are 
logically related. Once determined, the logically related objects can then be 
incorporated into the solution. As new tools and technologies emerge in this 
new arena of structured and unstructured data, we will begin to establish the 
proper method for modeling these logically related objects and evolve into the 
next generation of best practices for creating a complete, holistic solution.
9.5 Summary
This chapter described some of the best practices for a holistic BI solution. 
Starting with explanation of a One Data Foundation and the associated 
Logical Dimensional Model, it discussed how this logical model can be used 
to extend Essbase for custom implementations and analytics. Finally, it high-
lighted using a logical model a best-practice scalable solution. The next chapter 
deals with industry use cases involving a holistic BI solution based on Oracle 
Essbase and OBIEE.


119
Chapter 10 
Use Case Scenarios
In This Chapter
 10.1 Introduction 
 10.2 The Challenge
 10.3 The Resolution
 10.4 Summary
10.1 Introduction
The Business Intelligence (BI) industry has grown to now include many ven-
dors offering their products to accomplish their goals of business intelligence 
and analytics. In very basic terms, that goal can be defined as getting the 
right data to the right person at the right time. Undoubtedly, all vendors will 
make the generic claim that their product is the best. But after further  analysis 
and examinat ion of the exact reporting function or analytic capability that is 
required, it becomes apparent that certain tools and technologies are better 
suited than others. The true evaluation is not so much about which tools pro-
vide BI or analytics but rather which tool is the best fit to the requirement. To 
make that determination, it helps to understand how the BI space has evolved. 
Many early adopters of this concept tried to offer complete suites that 
went beyond the usual reporting tools and technologies. Early reporting tools 
struggled with providing analytical capabilities. For that reason, what we saw 
at that time was a race to develop new technologies, such as multidimensional 

120 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
cubes that promised to deliver solutions enabling the analysis of large amounts 
of data that were previously unmanageable. The complexity of handling what 
were then called very large databases (VLDBs) was posing a great challenge, 
given the sheer volume of data and the complexity of processing the queries that 
were needed for true analysis. The early adopters and vendors of BI rose to the 
occasion and through several decades have developed the tools and technologies 
that now enable business users and consumers to utilize and take advantage of 
their data beyond simple reporting; now data can supplement good decision 
making or even help a company gain a competitive edge over the competition. 
In time, these independent companies and their products became successful 
in their offerings. As leading-edge corporations adopted the concept of BI and 
analytics and successfully implemented it, the BI vendors with their product 
offerings soon caught the eye of major companies looking to get into the game. 
So it came to be that the success of the independent BI vendors and their 
offerings soon became the targets of acquisition for major players who wanted 
either to kickstart another line of business or to round out their own offer-
ings. Various tracks and paths were taken by big companies, whether through 
organic growth or acquisition, to offer a complete suite of BI tools and tech-
nologies to consumers. The suite of tools provided businesses with the means to 
establish a foundation for developing and building an enterprise BI solution. As 
they gained a foot in the door, these companies continued to build their suite of 
tools and offerings to go beyond the basics of BI to new areas, such as predictive 
analytics or even artificial intelligence and machine learning. This initial push 
by the big companies brought BI and analytical tools and technologies to the 
mainstream. Consequently, it opened up the business world to readily use and 
trust the concept and strategy for better analytics. As such, BI was here to stay.
But if the BI industry began as a complete holistic solution offered by small, 
focused vendors, it soon began to be disjointed from the many acquisitions and 
attempts of the big companies to create seamless and unified product offerings. 
Often, the proffered unified product was actually made up of several of the 
previously acquired companies’ disparate products with different histories of 
growth and adoption by the business world. Additionally, to complicate mat-
ters, these independent BI companies had different cultures and fostered differ-
ent kinds of loyalty with their users. Thus, companies inherently preferred to 
utilize the tool and technology of familiarity, as opposed to utilizing the best fit. 
10.2 The Challenge
In earlier chapters, it was suggested that specific tools and technologies match 
certain features and purposes for reporting and analytics. This seems like a very 

Use Case Scenarios 121
simple notion, but undoubtedly it is a common occurrence for certain products 
to be successfully marketed and identified as leading tools for something other 
than they were intended to be. As such, these products end up “stretched to the 
limit” to accomplish tasks that were actually better suited for other tools. The 
primary challenge that is encountered in the BI world is its plethora of vendors, 
all claiming to be the best tool. Further complicating this issue are the loyal 
users of the familiar tool, who do not know that other tools may actually better 
accomplish a certain functionality, or even worse, preferring to use the original 
tool, ignoring best fit. As the old quip says, “When you have a hammer, every-
thing is a nail.”
Such is the issue with Essbase or cubes being used in a data warehousing 
capacity or the main data repository of data used for decision making. With its 
popularity in particular to the financial world, it is quite common to see Essbase 
being used for BI. But BI covers a wide range and area that includes data ware-
housing, data integration, data visualization, analytics, and the like, all of which 
come together to form a complete solution. In that context, an Essbase cube 
would fit into the latter categories for data visualization and analytics but not to 
serve as a data warehouse and data integration tool. However, we have walked 
into situations with customers who have used Essbase and cubes in general as 
the data warehouse or central data repository in support of their holistic enter-
prise BI and analytics effort.
The issue was that the business users were using cubes to store the data as 
if they were a processed data mart and the trusted source of data, although 
the data had been manipulated “by hand” many times, without any neces-
sary controls to ensure its quality. The intention may have started off as a data 
warehousing effort, but due to misinformation or misguidance of the tools’ 
true capabilities, the solution that resulted was to import data using a cube that 
could serve as a base and that was, thereafter, daily refreshed and updated with 
new records to provide the reports or analyses that were requested. Of course 
this workaround allowed for an immediate temporary solution. However, the 
problem was that the solution is shortsighted and was not able to be extended 
or managed correctly. Every effort afterward still remained a manual process in 
terms of updates and thus perpetuated a laborious effort to provide reporting 
and analysis—often missing the mark and intended goals.
Although this “solution” may have been the answer that time, and often 
is said to be temporary, unfortunately what happens is that it becomes the de 
facto standard: embedded in the workflow, the makeshift solution becomes the 
accepted process and practice for the department. The issues and questions of 
scalability, flexibility, extensibility, and manageability of the system begin to 
swell. In time, given the number steps to be taken to bring in data into the cube, 
the process became unmanageable due to the sheer volume of cubes that had to 

122 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
be individually created for each customization. To further complicate the situ-
ation, the report and analysis report were nevertheless provided, even though 
it was recognized that the data was neither complete nor accurate. The process 
was simply imbedded and locked into the department and its tasks. In other 
words, the temporary solution actually became the permanent solution for the 
department, and personnel were even allocated and assigned to continue and 
maintain it. This bad process was perpetuated and was allowed to continue, as 
no alternatives were known.
The unfortunate fact is that expertly designed and planned solutions would 
probably have taken the same amount of time to create and architect as the solu-
tion created without references to best practices. The ability to build a system 
quickly without any planning and design frequently results in a hacked sys-
tem, built in a reactive mode, that seemingly providing an immediate solution. 
However, it cannot be a true solution if it results in the need to come up with 
yet another solution to solve its failures. Undoubtedly, the failure to plan and 
procure experts needed to build a complex system results in the creation of tem-
porary systems that become problematic. Unfortunately, only after the problem 
becomes critical are knowledgeable resources or experts then called to cure and 
fix the problems that should have never existed to begin with.
Moreover, the project wasn’t without faults beyond those that were 
IT-related. What sometimes plagues these projects is often either the involve-
ment of many departments or  the lack of unanimous support for the project 
(or both). In short: If you build it, they may not come. In the case of this study, 
there was no buy-in from the top business director. In fact, the project met with 
resistance all the way through, and the dissension trickled down to the point 
where the users began to resist the change. The most obvious lesson learned here 
is to ensure that support and buy-in are insured when undertaking a complex 
project. Support for the project ahead of time ensures some level of success 
when solutions are finally released. As BI professionals know, a great system can 
be developed and released, but without support for it, the system can easily be 
perceived as inadequate and useless. All methods must be used to circumvent 
results such as these; the issues can, in fact, be easily remedied by communica-
tion between stakeholders and expectations that are clearly defined at the begin-
ning of the project. 
Companies and departments that work with data have a need and desire to 
be able to handle access to data directly. But because access to the data is often 
not provided, the staff is left to come up with a way to provide the data for 
themselves. This need to work with data prompts workers to seek a tool such 
as a popular and readily available cube that will enable them to work with data 
directly, without the assistance and support of IT to properly model and build a 
supporting dimensional data model stored in a relational database management 

Use Case Scenarios 123
system (RDBMS). Without access to enterprise data and support from IT, 
departments often try to come up with some kind of system that allows them 
to do their work—or at least provide the perception that productive work is 
being accomplished.
10.3 The Resolution
With no idea of best practices to establish a proper foundation, the path to 
resolution begins with first recognizing and acknowledging a pain point. In 
situations such as these, where a tool and technology are improperly used and 
“stretched to the limit,” that pain point may be that the current solution is 
no longer sufficient. What may have started off all right as a short-term solu-
tion now has outgrown itself to a point at which it can no longer be scaled up, 
extended, or managed. In many cases, the process of utilizing experts to execute 
the plan, instill best practices, and develop the proper solution for the organiza-
tion may have been entirely dismissed.
With the pain point acknowledged, the process of developing the proper 
solution, complete with specific best practices in BI and analytics, can now 
begin. BI and analytical systems are data-centric and data-driven, and they take 
on an entirely different type of development that most application developers 
are used to. In data-centric development, the focus and central theme are being 
able to provide a data foundation which would provide complete, accurate, and 
up-to-date data for consumption and enabling downstream systems such as BI.
Data professionals with needed expertise and experience were brought in to 
create the data foundation with a design correctly architected and optimized 
for an enterprise data warehouse (EDW). The EDW provided a repository 
of cleansed and updated data that the department was able to access directly, 
replacing the process of updating customized cubes to do reporting. Although 
cubes were still preferred by the users, the warehouse is an entirely different 
proposition from using the cubes as a data store and the source of data for report-
ing. The new solution called for the most current data that had already been 
cleansed and updated through an extract-transfer-load (ETL) process to come 
from an EDW. With this process in place, the department staff could concen-
trate on reporting and analysis as opposed to acting as a pseudo-IT shop,trying 
to keep up with tasks and activities related to processing a data store.
Better reporting and analysis was provided via the EDW. Utilizing it accom-
plished a very important goal of having a single source of the truth. With this 
new data source for decision making, the company’s BI environment was 
updated with the most current and modern set of tools and technologies for 
performing complex tasks associated with BI and analytics. In essence, in this 

124 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
case study, they went from doing things on their own with a tool they perceived 
as capable to actually having the most appropriate, best-fitting, modern BI and 
analytics tool as part of a holistic, comprehensive solution. 
10.4 Summary
In today’s market for BI, many tools and technologies are offered but they are 
often improperly used and “stretched to the limit” beyond for the intended use. 
What may have started off all right as a short-term solution often outgrows 
itself to a point where it can no longer be scaled up, extended, or managed. In 
many cases, the process of utilizing experts to execute the plan to instill best 
practices and develop the proper solution for the organization may have been 
entirely dismissed. 
The BI space is currently experiencing this complicated—and unfortunately, 
common—challenge mired by choices and clouded by misinformation or lack 
of information. The use case scenario described in this chapter is a depiction 
of that challenge most relevant to this book; the authors suggest how to resolve 
the issue by focusing on the data foundation and proper utilization of the best 
fit tool and technology. 

125
Chapter 11 
The Prize for the Price: 
A Win–Win or Not
In This Chapter
 11.1 Introduction
 11.2 The True Value of Expertise
 11.3 Data-Driven Development 
 11.4 A 360-Degree View of a Holistic Solution 
 11.5 Summary
11.1 Introduction
For decades now, various technologies and approaches have been tried, proven, 
and identified as clear best practices for building a complete, holistic Business 
Intelligence (BI) and data warehousing (DW) solution. Yet organizations still 
attempt to deliver a solution without reference to these best practices. Moreover, 
limited or no knowledge of how to approach development for this type of solu-
tion can result in omitting the vital, critical asset used for planning and the 
blueprint—if you will—for building a comprehensive, holistic BI solution. 
Overall, we call for adhering to best practices, seeking expertise for guidance, 
and planning accordingly when attempting to build these complex systems, so 
as to realize the prize and win.

126 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
11.2 The True Value of Expertise
This book was written from a practitioner’s point of view, based on real, hands-
on experiences collected through several decades of data warehousing and busi-
ness intelligence projects. Organizations may dismiss the difficulties involved 
in building these complex BI and analytical systems and solutions. We’ve heard 
justifications such as:
• “It’s just data.”
• “We’ve done reporting before.”
• “It’s not rocket science.”
All of these dismiss the complexity involved and, as with any attempt to 
deliver a specialized, complex solution, it is highly recommended that the assis-
tance of a proven subject matter expert be sought—at the very least for guid-
ance on the specific subject matter. Consequently, an expert can help navigate 
the waters and clear a path to success with a solid plan based on adhering to 
best practices and cutting out the noise. Simply stated, a BI and DW solution, 
because of its complexity, numerous moving parts, and components that need 
to be developed and coordinated, is not the type of project that can be easily 
delivered by a novice—even if the resource is experienced in a related area, such 
as software development or information technology. 
To illustrate this point, consider an analogy: imagine that you need highly 
specialized heart or brain surgery, but the doctor who will perform your opera-
tion is a general practitioner. Or imagine being on a flight where the pilot is 
flying a different plane for the first time. No one would want to be caught in 
either of these scenarios; you would definitely attach a high value to expertise 
and clearly demand a certain level of experience and expertise, no matter the 
cost. So it goes when the success or survival of your organization is dependent 
on the successful delivery of the solution.
We have encountered, time and time again, attempts to create a complex BI 
and DW solution with no experience or guidance. As one might expect, this 
almost always sends organizations down a path that leads to rework later or, 
even worse, to a disaster in which nothing is delivered after a great deal of time 
and money is spent. So what approach can help avoid failure?
11.3 Data-Driven Development 
The central themes highlighted in this book can be summarized as data model-
ing, data architecture, and the use of data as a common unified foundation and 

The Prize for the Price: A Win–Win or Not 127
repository. It is obvious that best practice is to plan and lay out the data founda-
tion first. Planning is the key to successfully implementing a data-centric appli-
cation and data-driven system such as BI—because it is really all begins with the 
data. By taking the time to logically tackle the design and architecture of the data 
foundation, you can then plan and implement the system accordingly. It is simi-
lar to building a house: The foundation must be designed properly first and then 
built according to the design by the construction team. Without this attention 
to detail and process, the house may easily collapse. So it is with building a com-
plex system, such as one for BI and analytics. For BI solutions, the data model is 
the blueprint to the system and is the vital key to a successful implementation.   
To reiterate, our method and approach call for creating a data model and 
refining the data requirements from a conceptual data model to a logical data 
model, and finally to a physical data model. This is the dynamic process and 
mechanism that enable continual planning and design from the early phases 
and throughout. This extended review in itself can be considered a win simply 
because it doesn’t commit any development resources and code before a road-
map and plan are solidified. Although it may seem like just one more price to 
pay in lieu of jumping in and coding, the review process actually saves time 
and resources that would have to be spent on rework for something that was 
not developed correctly from the beginning. What may not be obvious to the 
inexperienced is that doing it the wrong way almost always takes a lot longer 
(because of rework) than taking the time to properly plan and do it correctly 
the first time. Moreover, the process of modeling and architecting the data and 
putting it into a data model that captures the business requirements is essential. 
This vital and crucial process of translating business requirements into the right 
technical transformation and implementation is the basically the secret to our 
success—proven time and time again. 
Overall, to ensure a win–win situation, we urge you to take the time to go 
through the exercise of logically modeling the data in your organization. The 
logical model will provide the “blueprint” and necessary understanding to build 
the right foundation for your downstream BI and DW solution or system. Atop 
that solid structure, you can then easily develop the application with confidence 
and clear thought. The resulting solution or system, specifically designed to 
meet your needs, is definitely a win–win!
11.4 A 360-Degree View of a Holistic Solution
Starting with a clear description of the business need for BI and the scope of 
a holistic BI solution, this book has covered the following topics as a best-fit 
pragmatics for the same:

128 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
 
1. The advantages and benefits of a logical data foundation based on the 
business processes involved, and how Oracle meets this goal through its 
products, solution suites, and tool sets. The key indicator is using data as 
a source to data as analytics.
 
  The analysis, evaluation, and selection of design criteria and key imple-
mentation specifics of the same, using Essbase for Analytical BI with 
OBIEE and the array of solutions based on it that help in complex multi-
dimensional analysis. The continual integration of OBIEE with Essbase 
as an inherent component of it and why Essbase matters now more than 
ever as part of the total solution and strategy.
 
2. The use of OBIEE for self-service BI, Operational BI and Analytics in the 
real-world business realm, and how self-service BI leads the way forward 
for customer-based analytics and ad hoc querying.
 
3. The role of descriptive (what’s-now), prescriptive (what’s-next) and pre-
dictive (what-if) analysis, and how Essbase and OBIEE can be used for 
the same.
 
4. How the logical data model helps in extending and customization of 
Essbase by way of extending cubes and analytics that can be customized; 
and how Essbase fills the gap of predictive analytics that OBIEE lacks to 
a certain extent.
 
5. The semantic integration of Essbase and OBIEE, and using OBIEE as a 
data source for Essbase and its write-back feature to Essbase Cubes.
 
6. And last but not the least, the best practices of a holistic BI solution that 
is Essbase- and OBIEE-based.
No matter the solution to be delivered, it is the pragmatics of architecting 
a logical (dimensional) model and the related EDW in a ROLAP-
based implementation augmented by Data Marts and MDX cubes that 
eventually is a win–win over all other solutions, and this book has repeatedly 
demonstrated this fact.
11.5 Summary
In this chapter we examined whether the recommendations forwarded in this 
book of using expert planning with data modeling and definitive utilization of 
tools could be declared and classified as a win–win. In addition, we try to illus-
trate the prize and advantage to the approach suggested in this book.  
In the end, for creating a DW and BI solution, we declared that taking the 
time to plan and create a blueprint (in the form of a data model) is a priceless 

The Prize for the Price: A Win–Win or Not 129
prize despite any perceived price attached to this approach. The data-centric 
expertise and planning are the keys to success and can help avoid undesirable 
results. Remember the old witty but very wise adage: “Fail to plan, plan to fail.” 
As we have detailed in this book, that planning equates to the development of 
the blueprint in the form of a data model. This is our suggested mantra for all 
practitioners to live by.
Undoubtedly, the data-centric and data-driven approach proffered here with 
expert guidance and planning may require a price to obtain the prize, but none-
theless this approach can present a clear view and direction toward the right 
path to success; as such, it is a win–win.


131
Appendix A
Oracle Big Data and the 
Cloud for Analytics
A.1 Using the Cloud To Unleash the 
Potential of Big Data
Oracle has made tactical and strategic progress in Big Data and in using the 
cloud to leverage its potential. Big Data analytics can now be used in appli-
cations such as Business Intelligence (BI), predictive analytics, data discovery, 
cloud services, enterprise metadata management, advanced analytics, enterprise 
health care analytics, and the like. This appendix focuses on using the cloud to 
unleash the potential of Big Data and describes Oracle’s role in cloud services 
and Big Data.1 
Big Data Characteristics
The chief characteristics of Big Data are:
• Big Data includes structured, semistructured, and unstructured data 
across multiple sources.
• Six factors that matter are volume, variety, velocity, validity, virtualiza-
tion, and value.
• From the typewriter to Twitter and everything in between, all consumer 
data is Big Data: random in nature and requiring presumptive analysis.

132 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
• Search and discovery are key requirements of enterprises as they navigate 
through huge volumes of Big Data.
Why Use Cloud?
A cloud-based solution:
• Delivers scale-out methodology for deployment of a unified platform 
from data to decisions, easily and efficiently
• Enables Big Data analysis, intelligence, and (new) analytics to fit into 
existing data environments with lower total cost of ownership (TCO) and 
faster time to value
The key is a unified platform for Big Data and all other data—a best-fit 
cloud-based solution—that provides high availability in the cloud and advanced 
analytics for all-data-as-a-service.
Essentially, cloud technologies can be used for Big Data in the following 
ways:
• Cloud-based self-service analytics—customized data-as-a-service solu-
tions based on lines of business—let business analysts define and derive 
their own individualized Big Data initiatives.
• Cloud platform-as-a-service processes Big Data and all other data in a 
hybrid cloud in the right time (from definition to storage to transforma-
tion to integration) and pipelines it to a business analytics platform for 
customer-facing analysis and visualization. 
• Enterprise search involving Big Data can scale to large proportions by 
using new or existing data discovery techniques, text analytics, and 
embedded search engines in the cloud on an as-is and as-needed basis. 
• A cloud-based BYOD (bring-your-own-device) and multidevice connec-
tivity solution can enable anytime-anywhere-anyone access to Big Data 
and its analysis by way of an authenticated mobile delivery platform.
• And last but not the least, cloud enables an easy and economic unified 
data access solution for both enterprises and small- to medium-sized busi-
nesses alike as social, mobile, and enterprise converge in the cloud.
A.2 Oracle’s Role in Cloud Services and Big Data
As outlined on Oracle’s web site for Big Data products and solutions,2 Oracle’s 
role in unleashing the power of Big Data using the cloud is as follows:

Appendix A: Oracle Big Data and the Cloud for Analytics 133
• Enterprise Big Data, which is the foundation for all data (structured, 
semi-structured, unstructured)
• Democratization or industrialization of Big Data
• Big Data management, using federated queries based on SQL that can 
query, Hadoop, RDBMS and NoSQL data sources (Oracle Big Data 
Cloud Service, Oracle Big Data SQL Cloud Service, and Oracle Big Data 
Appliance can be used to achieve this)
• Big Data analytics, Oracle Exalytics in-memory machine, Oracle BI 
Foundation, and Oracle Big Data SQL, which can foray into data discov-
ery and advanced analytics and can be used for BI by way of prescriptive 
and predictive analytics and self-service analytics that can go beyond tra-
ditional and operational BI and analyses (data science can also be lever-
aged as part of this).
• Big Data integration for securing the Big Data lifecycle, which includes 
protection, data identity, traceability, and audit using Big Data Integra-
tor, Oracle Golden Gate for Big Data, and Oracle Enterprise Metadata 
Management
• Using Big Data business aolutions that can drive insights into action based 
on the industry domain as a base
A.3 Beyond BI
Using cloud for Big Data can also make it possible for analytics beyond BI, 
such as:
 
• Going beyond BI: customer behavioral analytics, anytime and anywhere
• Zero-coding based Big Data analytics in the cloud
• Big Data discovery in the cloud for business analytics
References
 
1. Lakshman Bulusu, “Using the Cloud to Unleash the Potential of Big Data,” 
DataSummit presentation, New York, NY: May 12–14, 2014.
 
2. https://www.oracle.com/big-data/index.html


135
Appendix B
Slides from Data 
Warehouse Architectures
B.1 Overview of the Corporate Information Factory and 
Dimensional Modeling
The following slides are extracted from a presentation by Rosendo Abellera 
for The Data Warehouse Institute (TDWI) that discussed and presented at 
a high level what were then the two prevailing architectures and concepts 
for building an enterprise data warehouse. The presentation was titled “Data 
Warehouse Architectures: Overview of the Corporate Information Factory and 
Dimensional Modeling.”
Despite our current recognition of the apparent and proven advantages of 
one approach over the other, at that time, the industry was still trying to estab-
lish which one served as the proper way and best practice to develop and deliver 
data warehouse solutions. One approach was to go from the top down (popular-
ized by Bill Inmon) and the other one was from the bottom up—from the low-
est level of granularity(dimensional modeling by Ralph Kimball). Inmon and 
Kimball are considered the founders and pioneers of modern data warehous-
ing (DW), for which Rosendo had built his DW and business intelligence (BI) 
career (from 1997) with the development and creation of his first DW and BI 
solution. From that beginning, Rosendo has architected and built more than a 
dozen DW and BI solution from the ground up for some of the most prominent 
names in business and government. 

136 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
As it turned out, dimensional modeling prevailed by offering a method and 
approach that enabled the successful implementation of a DW and BI solution 
from the ground up in a timely manner. Incidentally, Oracle BI (or OBIEE) 
follows dimensional modeling. In terms of successful implementation, the bot-
tom-up approach (Kimball’s method with dimensional modeling) allows the 
most flexibility and the least amount of rework. The approach allowed for a 
series of incremental releases and “wins,” as opposed to trying to release the 
whole data warehouse in one big bang or releasing aggregated or summarized 
tables and then having to revisit and extend them at a later time.
The presentation slides show and list the characteristics of DW and the differ-
ences between each approach. At one point, he suggests incorporating the best of 
both worlds by recommending initiating the project with a high-level approach 
to fully understand the entire enterprise, then shifting into dimensional model-
ing for implementation. Humorously, Rosendo called this collaborative approach 
as the Kim-mon approach—joining the names Kimball and Inmon. 
The presentation culminates by properly categorizing the different charac-
teristics to clearly distinguish each approach.

Appendix B: Slides from Data Warehouse Architectures 137



138 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide



Appendix B: Slides from Data Warehouse Architectures 139



140 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide



Appendix B: Slides from Data Warehouse Architectures 141

142 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide


Appendix B: Slides from Data Warehouse Architectures 143



144 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
B.2 Slides from OBIEE 12c Presentation
The following slides were extracted from a presentation focusing on the differ-
ences between OBIEE 11g and OBIEE 12c. In response to the latest release of 
the Oracle BI software (i.e., OBIEE 12c), an analysis was done to determine some 
of the key points as to why one would choose to go straight to the latest version.
This situation was a “green field” and did not involve migrating any objects 
that might have previously existed. With that in mind, the presentation could 
focus on trying to determine whether there were any overwhelming differences 
and clear advantages provided by the latest version (OBIEE 12c).

Appendix B: Slides from Data Warehouse Architectures 145

146 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide

Appendix B: Slides from Data Warehouse Architectures 147

148 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide

Appendix B: Slides from Data Warehouse Architectures 149


Appendix B: Slides from Data Warehouse Architectures 151

152 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide

Appendix B: Slides from Data Warehouse Architectures 153


Appendix C
Oracle® Data Sheets












167
Index
3rd Normal Form, 81, 82, 85, 100
A
access, 2, 3, 6, 11, 16, 23, 24, 30, 32, 
34, 36, 40, 44, 45, 53, 62, 69, 
73, 82, 89–91, 93–95, 97–100, 
102, 103, 105, 115, 122, 123
Accountability, 2
acquisition, 18–20, 24, 120
action, 5, 26, 28, 29, 32, 38, 39, 41, 
42, 83
based on facts, 5
interactions, 5
optimize decisions, 5
actionable, 3, 27, 29, 30, 60, 112, 114
actionable information, 3
ad hoc function and capability, 102
ad hoc query, 41, 98, 102, 128
ad hoc reports using OBIEE Analysis, 
43
adaptability, 45
administration, 19, 24, 32, 48, 55
Administration Services, 24, 48, 55
advanced analytics, 5, 22, 23, 32, 38, 
39, 42, 45, 60, 102, 104, 105, 114
predictive, 23
prescriptive, 23
advanced users, 100, 101
aggregate, 27, 44, 45, 48, 53, 54, 72, 
73, 79, 89, 90
aggregated data, 79, 90
Aggregate Persistence target, 27, 53
agile, 103
alerts, 27, 62, 116
allocations, 20, 62, 116
analysis, 1, 3, 4, 6, 10, 13, 19–24, 
26–47, 49, 51, 53–55, 57, 
60–62, 66–70, 72, 73, 78–80, 
83–86, 88–91, 93, 95, 98–105, 
108, 111, 114, 115, 119–123, 128
analytic capability, 119
analytical and operational analysis, 22
Analytical BI, 6, 8–10, 13, 18–21, 49, 
53, 56–58, 60, 63, 65, 66, 68, 
69, 71–75, 78, 81, 82, 85, 93, 
110, 111, 113, 114, 128
Analytical BI Using Essbase, 65, 68
implementation specifics, 65, 68
analytical capability, 4, 53, 81, 82, 119
analytical measures, 65, 69
for interday reporting, 68
analytical reporting, 22, 23, 65, 71, 72
analytical solution, 8, 9, 16, 78, 111

168 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
analytical system, 94, 95, 123, 126
Analytic Integration Services, 24
analytics, 1–7, 10, 11, 13, 15, 16, 
18–20, 22–24, 26–36, 38, 
39, 42–47, 49, 51, 56–61, 63, 
65–73, 80–85, 89, 93–95, 99, 
102–105, 107, 108, 110–117, 
119–121, 123, 124, 127, 128
analytics management, 2
analytics model, 43
analyzing data, 3
answers, 27, 29, 41, 54, 81, 83, 91, 
94, 100, 102, 104, 105, 117, 121
APEX, 23
applications, 2–4, 7, 16, 22, 23, 25, 
27, 29–31, 33, 34, 37, 41, 42, 
45, 49, 53, 56, 62, 69, 71, 79, 
85, 98, 102, 104, 105, 108, 111, 
115, 116, 123, 127
Arbor Software, 19
architect, 38, 78, 108, 110, 111, 116, 
122
architecture, 2–4, 6–9, 11–13, 16, 
18, 24, 29, 39, 42, 44, 51, 56, 
66, 80, 83–86, 94, 95, 101, 108, 
126, 127
artificial intelligence, 65, 120
ASO cubes, 53, 55, 60, 62, 73, 114, 
116
aggregate views, 73
dynamically calculate data to 
aggregate levels, 73
asset, 45, 102, 125
atomic level, 90
attribute, 26, 52, 69, 70, 100–102, 
108
auto-aggregation, 45, 55
B
bad process, 122
base table, 90
best fit, 119–121, 124
best-fit pragmatics, 127
best-of-breed, 18
best practical methods, 111
a dimensional model that mirrors 
business requirements, 109
an EDW based on online 
transaction processing 
(OLTP) requirements, 109
best practice, 2, 3, 6, 18, 32, 44, 60, 
66, 77, 78, 80, 85, 105, 107, 
108, 110, 112, 114, 116, 117, 
122–128
best practice metrics, 32
best practices for analytics, 110
business-to-technology 
transformation, 108
commonality, 108
Modeling of a single platform of 
all related data, 108
Oracle Essbase for analytical BI, 108
source-to-target mapping, 108
standardized metadata for Essbase 
and OBIEE, 108
better business value, 38, 41
BI, 1–13, 15–49, 53, 56–58, 60, 62, 
63, 65–69, 71–75, 77, 78, 80–89, 
91, 93–95, 97–99, 101–105, 108, 
110–117, 119–128
BI Admin tool, 85
BI and DW solution, 126, 127
BI companies, 120
BI developers, 33
BI landscape, 80, 99
BI Mobile HD, 26, 46
BI-on-the-go solution, 44
BI open platform, 16
BI professional, 122
BI Publisher for ad hoc (operational) 
reporting, 111

Index 169
BI Server, 26, 27, 29, 32, 36, 41, 85
BI Server for Big Data, 26
BI software vendor, 5
BI solution, 1, 2, 4–9, 11, 13, 16, 20, 
22, 28, 30, 32, 36–39, 41–46, 
80, 84–86, 105, 111, 117, 120, 
125, 127, 128
BI Views, 43, 45
big data, 5, 16, 22, 23, 26–29, 31, 32, 
38, 39, 42, 43, 97, 98, 103–105, 
108, 110, 116, 117
Big Data Analytics, 16, 29, 104, 116
Big Data Discovery, 103, 110
Block Storage Option (BSO) cubes, 71
blueprint, 20, 40, 85, 116, 125, 
127–129
BMM. See Business Modeling and 
Mapping
browser-based, 18, 100
build-your-own-BI (BYOBI) 
solutions, 44
business-centric, 19, 24
business analysis, 28, 40, 44, 70, 103
business analysts, 26, 32, 33
business community, 90
business data, 86, 88, 101, 110
business decision making, 2, 20
business decisions, 2, 3, 19, 20, 27, 
61, 115
business dimension, 60, 93, 114
business insights, 99
business intelligence, 1, 3–5, 15, 
20, 21, 27, 34, 37, 38, 48, 56, 
65, 77, 78, 80, 82–85, 94, 95, 
97–100, 107, 108, 119, 125, 126
business intelligence and analytic 
solution, 107
business intelligence practitioners, 100
business intelligence solution, 82, 98
Business Modeling and Mapping 
(BMM), 85, 86, 110
business process, 29, 37–39, 41, 43, 
45, 46, 53, 60, 66, 85, 98, 103, 
112, 114, 128
business process view, 43, 45
Business Processes Discovery, 38, 39
business requirements, 2, 33, 57, 89, 
108, 111, 127
business rules, 38, 39, 41, 44, 48
business transaction, 7, 93
business unit activity, 2
business user, 9, 20, 23, 29, 30, 43, 
57, 86, 88, 101, 103, 105, 108, 
111, 120, 121
business user–driven, 23, 103
business view of data, 43
business world, 120
C
calendar period, 89–91
catch-all term, 80
CDC, 79, 88
central data repository, 121
centralized pool of knowledge, 3
challenges, 5, 11, 15, 16, 33, 62, 83, 
94, 119–121, 124
change data capture, 61, 79, 88, 115
CLV. See customer lifecycle value
collective snapshots, 90, 91
column-level security, 44
columns, 26, 44, 71, 86, 99, 100, 
102
Common Enterprise Information 
Model, 24, 51
Common Enterprise Semantic 
Model, 26, 27, 40
common information model, 110
metadata and semantic layer, 108
common metadata repository, 49
common unified foundation, 126
comparative analysis, 28

170 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
competing on analytical capabilities, 4
competitive advantage, 1, 4, 5, 84
competitive edge, 120
competitive, social, and cloud-based 
BI, 42
complete BI system and solution, 95
complete data, 79
complete history, 88
complete refresh, 87
complete refresh versus incremental 
updates, 87
compliance, 2, 44, 45
conceptual data model, 127
conceptual model, 108
concurrent users, 19, 60, 66, 114
consumer-focused, 19
contextual, 28, 41
corporate, 1–3, 26, 81, 84, 85, 98
corporate environment, 84, 85
cost, 2, 3, 24, 38, 126
CREATE CUBE, 54
criteria, 36–44, 46, 80, 94, 101, 102, 
108, 128
criteria of success, 80
Criteria tab, 102
CRM. See Customer Relationship 
Management
cross-functional use, 79
CSV, 25
cube, 8, 9, 18–20, 23, 24, 26–28, 34, 
44, 48, 50–63, 65, 66, 68–74, 
78, 79, 81, 82, 93, 110–112, 
114–116, 120–123, 128
cube as a data mart, 111
as a dimensional model specifying 
dimensions and their 
measures, 109
cube-based, 19, 51
Cube Materialized Views, 68
cube predictive analytics, 65, 68
using the analytical power of 
cubes and multidimensional 
structures, 68
cube schemas, 44, 51, 52, 63, 71, 72
cubes modeling, 48
cube spin-off, 53
culture, 120
current data, 7, 9, 10, 13, 28, 61, 86, 
88, 89, 93, 123
custom analytics, 22, 56
custom metrics, 41, 42, 45
customer lifecycle value (CLV), 42
Customer Relationship Management 
(CRM), 31
customers, 4, 7, 10, 18, 31, 32, 34, 
38, 40–43, 45, 68, 78, 82, 86, 
100, 121
customization, 20, 38, 39, 41, 46–48, 
57, 60, 62, 63, 105, 107, 108, 
110, 111, 114, 122, 128
D
dashboard, 2, 3, 16, 24–30, 32, 34, 
36, 37, 41–43, 45, 53, 68, 84
data, 1–11, 13, 15, 16, 18–34, 36, 
38–58, 60–63, 65, 66, 68–73, 
77–80, 82–95, 97–105, 107–117, 
119–129
data analysis, 72, 99
Data Analytics, 16, 29, 47, 51, 63, 73, 
84, 104, 116
data architecture, 6, 9, 16, 51, 84, 85, 
101, 108, 126
data as an asset, 45
data-centric application, 127
data-centric development, 123
data cleansing, 69, 79
data discovery, 18, 22, 28, 32, 45, 
102–105, 108, 110, 113, 116
data-driven approach, 129
data-driven development, 125, 126

Index 171
data-driven or data-centric tasks, 78
data-driven system, 127
data element, 86, 89, 101, 102, 105, 
107, 108
data federation, 45
data foundation, 102, 107–110, 116, 
117, 123, 124, 127, 128
data foundation based on a logical 
model of business objects, 108
Business Intelligence (BI) data 
stores, 106
Data discovery consisting of big 
data elements, 106
Data Integration layer, 106, 112
multidimensional online analytical 
processing (MOLAP), 106
Related logical objects, both 
structured and unstructured, 
106
relational online analytical 
processing (ROLAP), 106
data integration, 11, 21, 33, 39, 41, 
44, 45, 47, 48, 61, 62, 73, 108, 
114, 115, 121
data integration component, 48
Using Essbase Studio, 48
data lake tied to and filtered by data 
discovery, 110
data management, 29, 40, 44, 47
data mart, 26, 57, 58, 61, 69, 72, 88, 
111, 115, 121, 128
data mashups, 102
data mining, 40, 65, 95, 102
data model, 20, 27, 29, 40, 44, 45, 
54, 55, 58, 61, 71, 84, 86, 
107, 108, 110, 115, 116, 122, 
127–129
data modeling, 71, 72, 84, 126, 128
data points, 103
data processing, 87
data professional, 94, 123
data profiling, assessment and 
enhancement, 40
data quality, 26, 40, 44, 69
Data Relationship Management 
(DRM), 62, 116
Data Relationship Governance 
(DRG), 62, 116
data requirements, 43, 127
data science, 102, 104
data scientists, 103, 105
data source, 6, 9, 25–28, 30, 32, 33, 
39–43, 46–49, 51–56, 61–63, 
68, 71–73, 79, 91, 99, 108, 
114–116, 123, 128
data sourcing, 47, 48
data storage, 40, 78
data store, 10, 11, 13, 25, 40, 51, 
77–79, 84, 86, 91, 92, 108, 123
data structure, 6, 8, 52, 84, 85, 91
data system, 88, 95, 98
data visualization, 3, 23, 28, 32, 41, 
45, 99, 102–104, 121
data volume, 87
data warehouse, 8, 10, 11, 13, 24, 26, 
34, 44, 51, 57, 61, 68, 69, 71, 
72, 78, 84–87, 100, 102, 103, 
105, 110, 115–117, 121, 123
data warehousing, 8, 15, 69, 71, 78, 
79, 100, 104, 121, 125, 126
database, 9, 19, 24, 28, 33, 42, 48, 
49, 56, 62, 79, 85–87, 89, 90, 
93, 99–102, 105, 110, 116, 122
database layer, 85, 89, 90
de-normalized, 85
de facto standard, 79, 121
deciding factors, 36–38, 43, 44, 46
decision-support, 100
decision maker, 2, 3, 34, 97
decision making, 2–5, 13, 20, 22, 30, 
32, 46, 60, 73, 82, 83, 97, 103, 
104, 114, 115, 120, 121, 123

172 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
decision support system, 6, 18, 40, 
82, 95, 108
descriptive analytics, 60, 66, 114
descriptors, 101, 102, 108
design, 2, 16, 31, 37, 38, 40, 41, 
44–46, 58, 69, 70, 100–102, 
108, 112, 116, 122, 123, 127, 
128
design board, 100, 101
design criteria, 128
dimension, 8, 9, 22, 28, 48, 49, 
51–58, 60, 61, 63, 68–73, 88, 
93, 101, 102, 108, 111, 112, 114, 
115
dimensional, 8, 9, 18, 20, 56–60, 
68–70, 73, 82, 85, 88, 102, 104, 
107, 108, 110–112, 114, 116, 
117, 122, 128
dimensional data, 20, 88, 122
dimensional data model, 20, 122
dimensional model, 8, 9, 18, 56–60, 
68, 70, 73, 82, 85, 102, 104, 
107, 108, 110–112, 117, 128
dimensions and facts, 56, 61, 101, 
115
direct database request, 101
discovery, 18, 22, 23, 26, 28, 32, 33, 
37–39, 41, 45, 85, 102–105, 108, 
110, 113, 116
distinct values, 89
distributing, 16
do-it-yourself, 30, 79
drag and drop, 101, 102
drill-through and drill-back, 72
DRM. See Data Relationship 
Management
DW, 15, 16, 51, 125–128
DW-based holistic solution, 66
DW and BI solution, 128
dynamic dashboarding, 22, 29, 33, 
41, 45
E
early adopters, 119, 120
ease of use, 98, 99, 101
Eclipse Link, 56
EDW. See Enterprise Data 
Warehouse
efficiency, 24
E-LT, 31, 40, 61
end-to-end BI, 22, 45
end user–enabled, 22
end users, 3, 22, 24–26, 28, 33, 34, 
41, 49, 57, 111
Endeca Query Language (EQL), 25
engineered solutions, 22
Enterprise BI, 22, 120, 121
enterprise-class, 2, 27
Enterprise Data Warehouse (EDW), 
10, 11, 13, 57, 58, 84–91, 93, 
95, 102, 103, 110, 111, 116, 117, 
123, 128
Enterprise Performance Management 
(EPM), 19, 23, 31, 34, 40, 46, 
62, 116
Enterprise Performance Management 
(EPM) platform, 46
enterprise reporting, 22
enterprise resource planning, 7
enterprise system, 82
enterprise-wide, 16, 23, 40, 79
entity, 7, 100, 101, 108, 117
EPM. See Enterprise Performance 
Management
EPM solutions, 19
EQL. See Endeca Query Language
ERP, 7, 31
Essbase, 9, 13, 15, 16, 18–24, 26–28, 
32–44, 46–63, 65, 66, 68–75, 93, 
103, 104, 108, 110–117, 121, 128
Essbase 12c, 56
Essbase Admin Console, 56

Index 173
Essbase BI Accelerator Wizard, 56
Essbase cubes, 23, 26–28, 52, 53, 
56, 57, 59, 61, 63, 65, 66, 71, 
110–112, 115, 128
sharing existing metadata between 
cubes, 69
Essbase for multidimensional analysis 
and analytical BI, 57, 111
Essbase models, 51–53, 55, 58, 63, 
72, 112
Essbase Now, 15, 19
Essbase RBDMS schema, 56
Essbase standalone, 49, 62
as a source for analytical BI, 49
Essbase Studio, 22, 48, 49, 51–53, 
55, 56, 58, 60–62, 69–72, 112, 
114–116
Connection Wizard, 49, 52, 55
Cube Schema Wizard, 52, 55
Essbase catalog, 51, 52
Essbase outlines, 52, 62
Hierarchy Editor, 52
Metadata Navigator, 52, 55
used to construct the cubes and 
design the analytics, 69
essential criteria, 36–39, 43, 46
ETL, 18, 30, 31, 33, 34, 39, 45, 61, 
87, 90, 94, 123
ETL logic, 90
ETL tool, 18, 94
event-driven metrics, 43
Excel Add-in, 25
expand Oracle BI, 23
experience, 9, 22, 26, 32, 44, 45, 77, 
78, 85, 98, 123, 126
expert, 8, 122–124, 126, 128, 129
expertise, 9, 78, 84, 85, 123, 125, 
126, 129
expert planning, 128
extend analytics, 23
extendibility, 107
extending analysis, 34
Extending and Customizing Essbase, 
47, 57
actionable decision making, 60
a ROLAP data warehouse star 
schema in an RDBMS that 
feeds the cube, 57
BI Publisher, OBIEE, and Essbase, 
57
custom implementations, 57–59
data integration that facilitates 
change, 61
data mart in the cube itself, 57
Data Relationship Management 
(DRM), 62
data veracity, integrity, and quality, 
61
descriptive analytics on data 
from transactional (OLTP) 
systems, 60
EDW based on OLTP 
requirements, 58
extending Essbase cubes, 57
holistic BI and analytics, 57
hybrid online transaction 
processing (OLTP)/OLAP 
analytics, 60
Oracle BI Suite, 57
Oracle Data Relationship 
Governance (DRG), 62
predictive analytics (what’s now, 
and what if) from both 
OLTP and OLAP systems, 60
prescriptive analytics (what’s next), 
60
queries, 51, 53, 62
ROLAP star schema in the RDBMS 
is equivalent to the dimensional 
model in Essbase, 57
SQL, 48, 53, 54, 62
subsecond response times, 60

174 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
extensibility, 34, 45, 61, 115, 121
external data, 36, 40, 102, 103, 105
extract, 18, 30, 31, 39, 40, 87, 101
extract-transfer-load, 123
extract, transform, and load, 18, 30, 
39, 87
F
fact, 2, 4–6, 9, 18, 49, 55, 56, 61, 
62, 68, 71, 73, 79, 80, 89, 93, 
98–101, 103, 108, 115, 122, 128
fact table, 71, 89, 108
factual data, 99
factual transaction, 86
fast retrieval, 79
feedback loop, 29, 41
filter, 26, 41, 44, 70, 100, 115
financial reporting, 22, 27, 82
financial world, 121
fine-grained customer visibility, 45
flexibility, 26, 27, 41, 61, 84, 107, 
115, 121
flexible reporting, 2
forecasting, 20, 24, 28, 31, 42, 66
formulated, 9, 16
forward-facing analysis, 21
forward-looking, 24, 49, 73
foundation, 18, 22, 23, 25–27, 30, 
32, 33, 43, 45, 46, 53, 60, 66, 
85, 100, 102, 107–110, 114, 116, 
117, 120, 123, 124, 126–128
foundational data structures, 85
front-end, 18, 101
front-end tool, 101
full-text search, 26, 28
functional reporting, 78
G
governance, risk, and compliance 
view, 44
grain, 42, 89
guidance, 78, 125, 126, 129
H
Hadoop MapReduce, 29
HDFS, 29
heading, 6, 16
heterogeneous data sources, 25, 43, 
48, 49, 51
heterogenous, 115
hierarchical data, 48
high-performance data visualization 
platform, 45
historical analysis, 88, 93
historical analysis and trending, 93
historical data, 9, 10, 13, 28, 43, 79, 
88, 89
historical record, 86, 88–90, 93
historical reporting, 86
historical view, 86
history, 10, 11, 15, 16, 19, 20, 86, 88, 
93, 94, 120
History to Historical, Analytical, and 
Beyond, 15, 19
Hive, 27, 29
HiveQL/ODBC, 29
HTML, 19, 25, 56
hybrid OLAP (HOLAP), 53
hybrid OLTP/OLAP analytics, 112
Hyperion, 19, 22–24, 27, 34, 40, 49, 
57, 62, 115, 116
Hyperion Planning, 23, 62, 116
Hyperion Shared Services, 24
Hyperion Solutions, 19
I
identifier, 89
implementation, 2, 19, 24, 30, 33, 
38, 40–42, 46, 47, 49–53, 
55, 57–59, 62, 63, 65, 66, 68, 

Index 175
69, 73, 77, 78, 105, 107, 108, 
110–112, 117, 127, 128
implementer, 4, 5, 21, 32, 33, 80, 86
increased productivity, 24
incremental daily load, 88, 89
incremental load, 79
incremental loading routine, 86
incremental update, 87, 90
in-database processing, 51
industry, 4–6, 8, 15, 16, 31, 38, 
77–80, 85, 93, 94, 98, 100, 102, 
103, 117, 119, 120
information, 2–7, 9, 11, 16, 22–24, 
26, 31–34, 37–42, 44–46, 51, 
61, 68, 79, 82, 83, 86, 88, 89, 
93–95, 100, 103, 110, 115, 124, 
126
Big Data, 38, 39, 42, 43
customization, 38, 41
dissemination, 37, 39, 40, 44
in action 38, 39, 42
integration, 37, 39–41, 43–46
relevant, complete, and consistent, 
5
transformation, 38, 40, 43, 44, 46
visualization, 38–40, 41, 45
information technology (IT), 1, 
3–11, 13, 15, 16, 18–30, 32, 
36, 38, 41–46, 48, 51, 53–57, 
61–63, 65, 66, 68–70, 72, 73, 
75, 78–85, 87–89, 91, 93–95, 
97–105, 108, 110, 111, 115, 117, 
119–124, 126–129
infrastructure, 3, 22, 33, 39, 41, 42, 
80, 86, 104, 105
in-memory, 22–24, 27, 31, 32, 43, 45, 
51, 68, 69, 84, 104
in-memory caching, 84
in-memory data store, 51
insight, 1, 3, 5, 22, 24, 29, 30, 32, 41, 
43, 60, 62, 83, 86, 93, 94, 99, 
104, 112, 116
 delivers it in time, 5
 predicts the best next step, 5
integrate, 2, 10, 13, 16, 19, 20, 
22–30, 33, 40, 41, 44, 46–48, 
56, 60–62, 103, 112, 114–116
intelligence, 1, 3–5, 15, 20, 21, 27, 29, 
30, 34, 37–39, 42, 45, 48, 51, 
56, 65, 77, 78, 80–85, 93–95, 
97–100, 104, 105, 107, 108, 119, 
120, 125, 126
intended use, 124
interaction, 5, 26, 38, 39, 41, 83
interactive data visualization, 103
interactive visualizations, 22, 30, 40
Internet, 94, 98
inventors, 21–23
IT. See information technology
IT executives, 32
J
Java agent, 56
JD Edwards Enterprise One, 23
joins, 68, 71, 95
K
Key Indicator Checklist, 37, 38, 44
key performance indicators (KPIs), 
19, 23, 34, 41, 42, 45, 46, 84
Kimball approach, 101
Kimball, Ralph, 8, 100
KPIs. See key performance indicators
L
labor-intensive process, 94
laborious effort, 121
latency, 81, 82
limited history, 10, 88, 93
load, 11, 18, 30, 31, 39, 40, 52–55, 
61, 62, 70, 79, 87–89, 115, 116

176 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
local area network, 98
logical cubes, 68
logical data foundation, 110, 128
logical data model, 20, 54, 58, 84, 
86, 107, 108, 110, 116, 127, 
128
logical (dimensional) model, 56, 58, 
70, 73, 104, 108, 110, 112, 117, 
126, 128
logical (dimensional) model in 
Essbase Studio, 56, 58, 112
logical model, 28, 40, 55, 101, 102, 
107–111, 113, 115–117, 127
logical SQL, 45, 54
logical structure, 86
logical view of data, 43, 45
loyalty, 31, 120
M
machine-generated data, 28, 42
machine learning, 120
manageability, 61, 107, 115, 121
manual process, 121
master data management (MDM), 
26, 29, 40, 44, 45
mathematician, 94
MDM. See master data management
MDX, 19, 24, 40, 44, 53, 55, 66, 68, 
71, 103, 128
query language, 24
MDX cube, 44, 128
measurement, 9, 19, 101, 102, 105, 
108, 111
metadata and analysis levels, 41
metadata management, 40, 44
metadata model, 23, 43
metadata objects, 49
methodologies, 3, 40, 44, 45, 62
methods, 6, 68, 72, 78, 80, 87, 88, 
94, 101, 102, 111, 117, 122, 127
metric, 9, 20, 26, 28, 30, 32, 41–46, 
69, 71, 72, 84, 101–103, 105, 
108, 111
mini-schemas, 49, 51, 52, 63, 71
mobile, 5, 22, 26, 27, 29, 30, 32–34, 
36, 39, 44, 46, 51, 103
mobile analytics, 27
mobile, and cloud (build your own 
data source), 51
Mobile BI Solution, 46
mobile device management, 26, 
103
model, 8, 9, 18, 20, 22–24, 26–29, 
34, 40, 43–45, 51–63, 68–73, 
82, 84–86, 101–104, 107–117, 
122, 127–129
model complex data sets dynamically, 
69
modeling, 9, 19, 48, 49, 71–73, 84, 
85, 101, 108, 110, 116, 117, 
126–128
MOLAP, 18, 19, 23, 26, 28, 44, 45, 
54, 56–58, 60, 61, 108, 111, 
112, 114–116
MOLAP solution, 18, 116
month, 10, 70, 90, 91
movement, 16, 18
multidimensional analysis, 13, 19, 
20, 47, 53, 57, 60, 104, 111, 114, 
128
multidimensional analytical server, 
18
multidimensional cube, 9, 24, 73, 78, 
79, 116, 119
MultiDimensional eXpressions, 40
multidimensional OLAP, 19, 23, 44, 
54
multidimensional structure, 9, 18, 
68, 79, 81, 82
multimillion-row sets, 24
multiple dimensions, 28

Index 177
N
natural key, 89
near real-time, 28, 40, 77, 83, 84, 86, 
93, 104
near real-time analysis and reporting, 
83
near real-time BI, 93
near real-time data, 84, 86
near real-time data analytics and 
analysis, 84
near real-time processing, 77
next-generation OLAP server, 19
normalized, 85
notifications, 27, 62, 116
O
OBIA, 33, 34
OBIEE. See Oracle Business 
Intelligence Enterprise Edition
OBIEE 12c, 56, 104
OBIEE Action Framework, 29, 41
OBIEE Admin tool, 110
OBIEE Analysis, 43, 100
OBIEE as a Data Source for Oracle 
Essbase, 47, 52, 53
Use the OBIEE Business Model 
layer, 53
Use the OBIEE presentation layer, 
53
OBIEE business analytics dashboard, 
68
for self-service analytics, 68
OBIEE Business Model, 53, 54
OBIEE for operational BI, 57, 77, 78, 
111
OBIEE Semantic Model, 53, 55
ODBC, 24, 27, 29, 49, 56
ODBC DataDirect drivers, 56
ODI, 30, 33
ODS. See Operational Data Store
OLAP. See online analytical 
processing
OLAP analysis, 19, 22
OLAP Analytics, 22, 24, 60, 112
OLAP-aware, 19
OLAP-based, 20, 40, 69
OLAP-based analysis, 69
combination of ROLAP and 
in-memory cubes, 69
OLAP-based business analysis, 40
OLAP engine for Hyperion EPM, 40
OLTP. See Online Transactional 
Processing
OLTP Systems, 60, 114
online, 6, 7, 18, 21, 29, 39, 47, 49, 51, 
60, 66, 81, 82, 85, 103, 108, 111
online analytical processing (OLAP), 
6, 9, 11, 18–24, 27, 39, 40, 44, 
47, 48, 51, 53, 54, 60, 66, 68, 
72, 82, 85, 103, 108, 112, 114
Online Transactional Processing 
(OLTP), 7, 9, 11, 26, 51, 58, 60, 
81, 82, 103, 104, 111, 112, 114
on-premise, on-cloud, or on-mobile, 
22
open database connectivity, 24, 49
“open” design model, 45
operational, 3–7, 9–13, 18, 22, 23, 
25, 27, 28, 36, 38–41, 45, 53, 
57, 58, 60, 75, 77, 78, 80–89, 
91–95, 103, 108, 110–112, 128
operational and interactive BI, 22
Operational BI. See Operational 
Business Intelligence
Operational Business Intelligence 
(Operational BI), 4, 6, 10–13, 
45, 53, 57, 58, 60, 75, 77, 78, 
80–89, 91, 93–95, 110–112, 128
operational data, 10, 11, 13, 28, 40, 
41, 77, 84–86, 91, 92

178 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
Operational Data Store (ODS), 10, 
11, 13, 26, 77, 84, 86, 91–93, 95
operational process, 93
operational reporting, 6, 7, 9, 10, 13, 
25, 27, 40, 57, 58, 78, 81, 82, 
94, 111
operational system, 7, 9, 10, 13, 18, 
83, 84
Oracle, 4, 5, 9, 13, 15, 16, 18–54, 56, 
57, 61, 62, 65, 66, 68, 69, 73, 
78, 80, 101, 103–105, 110, 115, 
117, 128
Oracle Advanced Analytics, 42, 45
Oracle Application Express, 23
Oracle BI, 4, 21–23, 25–34, 36, 38, 
40–43, 45, 46, 48, 53, 57, 62, 
66, 80, 103, 105, 110, 115
Oracle BI Answers, 41
Oracle BI Applications, 30, 31, 33, 
41, 42
Oracle BI Composer, 28
Oracle BI Discoverer, 23
Oracle BI Enterprise Edition, 22, 27
Oracle BI Foundation Suite, 22, 23, 
25–27, 30, 32, 33, 43, 45, 46, 53
Oracle BI Mobile HD, 26, 46
Oracle BI Publisher, 25, 26, 40, 41
Oracle BI Solution-in-a-Box, 33, 45
Oracle Big Data, 32, 43, 103, 110
Oracle Big Data Appliance, 32, 43
Oracle Business Intelligence 
Enterprise Edition (OBIEE), 
4, 13, 15, 16, 18–20, 22–29, 
32–34, 36–38, 40–45, 47, 48, 
52–57, 60, 61, 63, 65, 68, 69, 
73, 75, 77, 78, 83–85, 89, 95, 
97–105, 108, 110, 111, 114, 115, 
117, 128
Oracle Data Discovery, 103
Oracle Data Integrator, 30, 31, 40
Oracle EBS, 16, 18
Oracle E-Business Suite, 23, 34
Oracle Endeca Information 
Discovery, 22, 23, 32, 33, 41
Oracle Essbase, 13, 15, 19–24, 27, 
32–40, 42–44, 46–54, 61, 62, 
66, 68, 69, 73, 103, 110, 115, 
117
data store (aka data source) and 
workload, 51
faster analytical queries on large 
datasets, 51
OLTP subsecond response time, 51
separates OLAP from OLTP, 51
Oracle Essbase Studio, 22, 48, 51, 53, 
62, 115
Oracle Exadata, 24, 104
Oracle Exalytics, 23, 24, 28, 29, 32, 
42, 43, 45, 51, 68, 104
Summary Advisor, 23, 28
Oracle Fusion Applications, 22, 27
Oracle Fusion Middleware, 22, 24, 
27, 29
Oracle Golden Gate, 31, 33
Oracle Hyperion Smart View, 22, 27, 
49
for Office integration, 49
Oracle Hyperion Smart View for 
Office, 22, 27, 49
Oracle Mobile BI App Designer, 30
Oracle RightNow Analytics Cloud 
Service, 42
Oracle Summary Advisor, 28
organic growth, 120
overwriting the data, 87
P
pain point, 123
PeopleSoft, 16, 23, 34
PeopleSoft Enterprise, 23
performance, 3, 5, 9, 19, 22–26, 28, 

Index 179
31–34, 36, 38, 41–43, 46, 51, 
53, 54, 62, 68, 80, 82, 88, 95, 
99–101, 103, 108, 114
performance analytics, 46, 103
performance management 
dashboards, 43
performance management views, 43
performance metrics, 43, 46
performance tiles, 26, 28
performance visibility, 22
Perform descriptive, predictive, and 
prescriptive analytics, 60, 114
periodic snapshot, 89, 90
persistent store, 84
pervasively, 23
physical cubes, 68
physical data model, 108, 127
physical layer, 54, 85
planning, 2, 7, 18, 20, 23, 24, 26, 
28, 31, 34, 37, 62, 66, 110, 116, 
122, 125, 127–129
point in time, 52, 89
point of view, 5, 61, 115, 126
policies, 2, 53
power users, 45
practitioner, 5, 6, 8, 77, 78, 80, 
84–86, 94, 97, 98, 100, 102, 
126, 129
preconfigured, 16
predefined calendar period, 89
predefined periods, 90
predictive analytics, 19, 22, 23, 26, 
28, 32, 36, 42, 60, 65, 66, 68, 
69, 95, 99, 102, 103, 114, 120, 
128
predictive and prescriptive analytics, 
60, 66, 68, 110, 114
predictive solutions, 94
prepackaged, 16, 41, 46
presentation layer, 42, 44, 53, 54, 89
presenters, 21–23
Primary Products, 21, 23
Primary Users, 21, 32, 36, 39
Primary Vendors, 21, 22, 36
proactive, 27, 29, 36, 42
process, 2, 3, 29, 34, 37–43, 45, 46, 
48, 52, 53, 57, 59–63, 66, 68, 
71, 72, 82, 84–90, 93, 94, 97, 
98, 103, 105, 111, 112, 114–116, 
121–124, 127, 128
processing power, 99
processing requirement, 93
product offerings, 120
project, 16, 31, 70, 122, 126
Provider Services, 24
Q
quality, 5, 7, 26, 40, 44, 61, 66, 69, 
115, 121
quality data constructs and 
architecture, 66
quarter, 9, 66, 70, 90, 91
query, 3, 7, 9, 10, 13, 23–25, 27, 29, 
40–42, 45, 51, 53, 54, 62, 66, 
73, 95, 98, 100, 101, 103, 105, 
116, 120
querying, 7–9, 18–20, 24, 27, 29, 
41, 51, 56, 85, 95, 98, 101, 102, 
105, 128
R
raw data, 51, 94, 99
RDBMS. See relational database 
management system
reactive mode, 122
real time, 11, 70, 104, 115
real-time analysis and reporting, 83
real-time analytics, 81, 103
real-time BI, 93
real-time data, 86

180 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
real-time data analytics, 84
real-time processing, 77
real-time reporting and analysis, 80
real-world environments, 78
real-world experiences, 78
records, 86–90, 93, 101, 121
redundant sources, 2
refresh, 49, 72, 81, 82, 87, 91, 93
relational database management 
system (RDBMS), 28, 48, 
56–58, 79, 85, 100, 110–112, 
116, 122, 123
relational data structure, 91
relational OLAP, 23, 44, 54, 68
relational OLAP (ROLAP) data 
warehouse, 68
relational online analytical 
processing, 18, 85, 108
reliable data source, 79
repeatable and expandable data, 66
report, 2, 3, 6, 7, 16, 18, 25–27, 29, 
30, 33, 34, 41–43, 45, 56, 62, 
71–73, 89, 90, 100, 101, 116, 
121, 122
report effectiveness, 2
reporting, 1–4, 6, 7, 9–11, 13, 16, 
18, 20, 22–25, 27, 28, 39, 40, 
43, 49, 53, 56–58, 60, 62, 65, 
68, 69, 71–73, 77–83, 85, 86, 
88–90, 93–95, 101, 103, 105, 
111, 112, 119–121, 123, 126
ad-hoc, 27
financial, 27
operational, 27
published, 27
reporting and analytical systems, 95
reporting function, 119
reporting tool, 18, 22, 119
reports, 2, 3, 6, 7, 16, 18, 25–27, 29, 
30, 33, 34, 41–43, 45, 56, 62, 
71–73, 89, 90, 100, 101, 116, 
121, 122
repository, 13, 27, 45, 49, 51, 53, 85, 
110, 121, 123, 127
requirements, 2, 13, 31, 33, 37, 38, 
43, 44, 46, 57, 58, 61, 62, 80, 
81, 83, 88, 89, 93, 95, 104, 105, 
107, 108, 111, 115, 127
requirements analysis, 37, 38, 46
resolution, 119, 123
results, 3, 6, 7, 16, 19, 39, 40, 61, 62, 
83, 88, 95, 100–104, 115, 122, 
125, 129
Results tab, 100, 102
revenue, 2, 9, 86
reverse-engineered, 55
right data, 4, 83, 84, 93, 119
right time, 4, 28, 39, 40, 44, 62, 83, 
84, 95, 103, 115, 119
right-time data, 103
right tools and technology, 4, 5
roadmap, 116, 127
ROI, 33, 38, 41
ROLAP, 18, 23, 26, 28, 44, 45, 54, 
56–61, 68, 69, 71, 72, 85, 108, 
110–112, 114–116
ROLAP star, 57, 58, 68, 71, 72, 
110–112
ROLAP star schema, 57, 68, 72, 110, 
111
dimensional granularity, 68
fact-level measures, 68
hierarchy levels, 68
used as a data source for Essbase, 
68
ROLAP star schema in an RDBMS, 
57, 111
sourced from an EDW as a 
dimensional model, 109
row-level security, 44
S
SAP Business Warehouse (BW), 22

Index 181
scalability, 23, 24, 32, 53, 61, 107, 
115, 121
scalable, 49, 57, 60, 66, 79, 107, 111, 
114, 116, 117
scale-out BI, 23, 33
SCD, 88
scenario modeling, 19, 49
scope, 43, 65, 127
scorecards, 27, 30, 36, 43
secure search view of all data, 44
secure view of the end-to-end 
solution, 44
segmenting reporting, 72
self-serve, 79
self-service analytics, 68, 103, 104
self-service–based KPIs, 45
self-service BI, 29, 38, 41, 97–99, 101, 
103, 105, 128
self-service business intelligence, 99
self-service capability, 101
self-service reporting, 103
self-service solution, 100
semantic views, 84
server based query, 27
set of criteria, 94
set of data, 87
short-term solution, 123, 124
Siebel, 15, 16, 18, 20, 22, 34, 57
Siebel Analytics, 15, 16, 18, 20, 22
silos of reporting, 2
single source of the truth, 2, 123
slicing and dicing, 69, 79
slowly changing dimensions, 88
snapshots, 89–91
software development, 126
solution, 1, 2, 4–9, 11, 13, 15, 16, 
18–22, 24, 26, 28, 30, 32–34, 
36–39, 41–46, 48, 51, 58, 60, 
61, 65, 66, 68, 69, 78–86, 94, 
95, 97–100, 103–105, 107, 108, 
110, 111, 114–117, 120–128
source data, 18, 36, 42, 51, 54, 58, 
62, 84, 86, 88, 111, 115, 116
source of data, 79, 86, 121, 123
source system, 19, 86–88, 95
specialized data structure, 8
spreadsheets, 48, 73, 78, 79, 102, 103
SQL, 20, 24, 45, 53, 54, 62, 100, 116
SQL-based Essbase integration, 116
SQL-friendly, 48
staging table, 89
stakeholders, 43, 122
standard, 2, 6, 16, 18, 24, 27, 32, 46, 
52, 60, 79, 105, 114, 121
star schema, 8, 9, 18, 44, 51, 57, 58, 
60, 68, 72, 82, 85, 86, 88, 93, 
100–102, 107, 108, 110–112, 114
statistician, 94
storage, 40, 48, 53, 71, 72, 78, 87
stored aggregate, 89
strategy, 5, 16, 18, 20, 29, 32, 45, 70, 
81, 85, 90, 91, 93, 95, 116, 120, 
128
streaming/social media, 29
structure, 2, 6, 8–11, 13, 18, 19, 52, 
55, 60, 61, 68, 70, 72, 79, 81, 
82, 84–86, 89–91, 93, 95, 100, 
114–116, 127
structured and unstructured, 32, 108, 
117
structured data, 40, 84, 85, 91, 103, 
116, 117
structured environment, 85
Student Information, 31
subject area, 27, 43, 53, 71, 72, 89, 
93, 101, 102, 105
subject matter expert, 126
successful delivery, 116, 126
suite of tools, 120
system, 1–7, 9, 10, 13, 16, 18, 19, 23, 
25, 28, 32, 33, 40, 48, 60, 79, 
81–88, 93–95, 98–100, 108, 
110, 114, 121–123, 125–127
system implementers, 33

182 Oracle Business Intelligence and Essbase Solutions Guide
system performance, 88
system to system, 16
T
table, 26, 38, 39, 44, 49, 52, 54, 71, 
72, 81, 82, 84, 87–90, 99, 100, 
102, 108
target table, 87, 88
TCO, 24, 32, 33, 38, 41
technologies, 1, 3–6, 16, 20, 21, 28, 
34, 42, 47, 51, 58, 69, 78–80, 
83, 85, 93–95, 97–99, 103, 104, 
117, 119, 120, 123–126
technology-driven, 3
temporary solution, 121, 122
temporary system, 122
The Data Warehouse Toolkit, 100
the right data to the right person at 
the right time, 4, 83, 84, 119
time-sensitive capability, 84
time to process, 82
timestamp column, 86
TimesTen, 23, 27
time-variant, 86
tool, 1–5, 9, 13, 15, 16, 18–25, 
31–36, 38, 39, 48, 69, 77–80, 
85, 93, 94, 98–103, 105, 110, 
117, 119–124, 128
tool set, 128
Tools Set, 21, 23, 33, 34, 36
transactional processing, 7, 81, 82
transactional structure, 100
transactional system, 6, 7, 13, 16, 
82–84, 88, 93–95, 100
transform, 5, 18, 30, 31, 34, 39, 40, 
61, 84, 87, 103, 115
transformations, 31, 38–40, 43, 44, 
46, 55, 73, 95, 110, 127
transparency, 2, 30, 42
trend analysis, 22, 42
trending, 7, 13, 60, 86, 88, 89, 93, 
104, 114
trending analysis, 86
trending data, 7, 88, 89
U
unified information architecture, 39, 
42, 44
unified product, 120
unstructured, 22, 23, 26, 27, 32, 40, 
42, 85, 103, 108, 117
unstructured analysis, 22
unstructured data, 32, 40, 85, 103, 
117
user-friendly, 22, 28, 34, 48, 79, 98, 
102
user-friendly experience, 22
user interaction, 26, 38, 39, 41
user interface, 49, 99, 100
user understandability, 9, 101
V
value, 7, 24, 28, 32, 38, 39, 41–44, 
46, 51, 70, 73, 89, 101, 102, 
125, 126
variety, 3, 24, 25, 29, 31, 32, 43, 68, 
103
velocity, 24, 31, 43, 103
very large databases (VLDBs), 120
visibility, 1, 2, 22, 24, 45
vision and strategy, 95
visual discovery, 28, 103
visualization, 3, 22, 23, 26, 28, 30, 
32, 33, 38–41, 45, 99, 102–104, 
110, 121
visualizing, 16
VLDBs. See very large databases
volume, variety, velocity, validity, 
virtualization, and value, 43

Index 183
volume, velocity, and variety, 103
volumes, 16, 31, 43, 87, 103, 120, 
121
W
Web Analysis, 24 
web-based reporting, 40
WebLogic Server Cluster, 56
Web Services, 25, 28
what-if, 19, 22, 49, 60, 128
what-if analysis, 19, 22, 49, 128
who, what, when, and where, 101
wide area network, 98
win–win, 125, 127–129
workaround, 121
workflow, 61, 62, 115, 116, 121
write-back capability, 53
write-back feature, 34, 60, 114, 128
write-back to Essbase cubes from 
OBIEE, 27, 28
X
XML, 19, 24, 25, 28, 40, 49
XML/A, 19, 24, 40
XOLAP, 48, 58, 62, 72, 111, 112
XOLAP-based cubes, 115
Y
year, 4, 9, 70, 90, 91, 97, 100

