

LAW, CRIME AND LAW ENFORCEMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORGANIZED RETAIL CRIME 
 
 
No part of this digital document may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or
by any means. The publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this digital document, but makes no
expressed or implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No
liability is assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information
contained herein. This digital document is sold with the clear understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
rendering legal, medical or any other professional services. 

LAW, CRIME AND LAW ENFORCEMENT 
 
 
Additional books in this series can be found on Nova‘s website  
under the Series tab. 
 
 
Additional E-books in this series can be found on Nova‘s website  
under the E-books tab. 
 

LAW, CRIME AND LAW ENFORCEMENT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ORGANIZED RETAIL CRIME 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BLAKE H. LIVENTIN 
EDITOR 
 
 
 
 
Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
New York 
 

Copyright © 2011 by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or 
transmitted in any form or by any means: electronic, electrostatic, magnetic, tape, 
mechanical photocopying, recording or otherwise without the written permission of the 
Publisher. 
 
For permission to use material from this book please contact us: 
Telephone 631-231-7269; Fax 631-231-8175 
Web Site: http://www.novapublishers.com 
 
NOTICE TO THE READER 
The Publisher has taken reasonable care in the preparation of this book, but makes no expressed or 
implied warranty of any kind and assumes no responsibility for any errors or omissions. No liability is 
assumed for incidental or consequential damages in connection with or arising out of information 
contained in this book. The Publisher shall not be liable for any special, consequential, or exemplary 
damages resulting, in whole or in part, from the readers‘ use of, or reliance upon, this material. Any 
parts of this book based on government reports are so indicated and copyright is claimed for those parts 
to the extent applicable to compilations of such works. 
 
Independent verification should be sought for any data, advice or recommendations contained in this 
book. In addition, no responsibility is assumed by the publisher for any injury and/or damage to 
persons or property arising from any methods, products, instructions, ideas or otherwise contained in 
this publication. 
 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information with regard to the subject 
matter covered herein. It is sold with the clear understanding that the Publisher is not engaged in 
rendering legal or any other professional services. If legal or any other expert assistance is required, the 
services of a competent person should be sought. FROM A DECLARATION OF PARTICIPANTS 
JOINTLY ADOPTED BY A COMMITTEE OF THE AMERICAN BAR ASSOCIATION AND A 
COMMITTEE OF PUBLISHERS. 
 
Additional color graphics may be available in the e-book version of this book. 
 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA 
Organized retail crime / Editors: Blake H. Liventin. 
p. cm. 
  Includes index. 
  ISBN 978-1-61209-462-5 (eBook)
 1.  Shoplifting--United States. 2.  Organized crime--United States. 3. 
Retail trade--Security measures--United States.  I. Liventin, Blake H. II. 
United States. Congress. House. Committee on the Judiciary. Subcommittee on 
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security.  
  KF9352.A25 2010 
  345.73'026232--dc22 
2010043943 
 
Published by Nova Science Publishers, Inc. † New York 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
 
 
 
Preface 
 
ix 
Chapter 1 
Organized Retail Crime 
1 
Kristin M. Finklea 
Chapter 2 
Statement of David Johnson, Section Chief, Criminal 
Investigative Division, Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, before the United States House 
Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and 
Homeland Security 
35 
Chapter 3 
Statement of Janice Ayala, Assistant Director for 
Investigative Programs, Office of Investigations, 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 
Department of Homeland Security, before the United 
States House of Representatives Subcommittee on 
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Hearing 
on ―Organized Retail Crime‖ 
41 
Chapter 4 
Statement of John R. Large, Special Agent in 
Charge, Criminal Investigative Division, Office of 
Investigations, U.S. Secret Service, before the House 
Committee on the Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, 
Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Hearing 
on―Combating Organized Retail Crime: The Role of 
Federal Law Enforcement‖ 
49 

Contents 
vi 
Chapter 5 
Statement of Zane M. Hill, Deputy Chief Postal 
Inspector, National Headquarters, U.S. Postal 
Inspection Service, before the House Committee on 
the Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism and 
Homeland Security, Hearing on ―Combating 
Organized Retail Crime: The Role of Federal Law 
Enforcement‖ 
59 
Chapter 6 
Testimony of Brade Brekke, Vice President, Assets 
Protection, Target Corporation, before the House 
Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism and 
Homeland Security, Hearing on ―Organized Retail 
Theft: Fostering a Comprehensive Public-Private 
Response‖ 
65 
Chapter 7 
Written Testimony of Mr. Robert Chesnut, Senior 
Vice President, Rules, Trust and Safety, eBay Inc., 
before the House Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism 
and Homeland Security, Hearing on ―Organized 
Retail Theft Prevention: Fostering a Comprehensive 
Public-Private Response‖ 
75 
Chapter 8 
Testimony of Karl Langhorst, Director, Loss 
Prevention, Randall‘s/Tom Thumb a Safeway 
Company, before the House Judiciary Subcommittee 
on Crime, Terrorism and Homeland Security, 
Hearing on ―Organized Retail Theft: Fostering a 
Comprehensive Public-Private Response‖ 
81 
Chapter 9 
Testimony of Detective David Hill, of the 
Montgomery County, Maryland Police Department 
on behalf of Law Enforcement, before the 
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism and Homeland 
Security, Hearing on ―Organized Retail Theft: 
Fostering a Comprehensive Public-Private 
Response‖ 
87 
 
Chapter Sources 
 
 
 
 
 
            91 
Index 
 
93 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PREFACE 
 
 
Organized retail crime (ORC), also known as organized retail theft, 
typically refers to large-scale retail theft and fraud by organized groups of 
professional shoplifters or "boosters." The organized crime rings resell this 
illegally acquired merchandise via a variety of "fencing" operations such as 
flea markets, swap meets, pawn shops, and online marketplaces. These goods 
are sold to both individual buyers as well as retailers. This book provides an 
overview of organized retail crime rings, their operations, and goods targeted, 
and examines the domestic impact of ORC in the arenas of the economy, 
public health and safety, and domestic security. This book also outlines current 
efforts by retailers, resale markets and the federal government to combat ORC. 
Chapter 1- Organized retail crime (ORC) involves the large-scale theft of 
everyday consumer items and potentially has much broader implications. 
Organized groups of professional shoplifters, or ―boosters,‖ steal or 
fraudulently obtain merchandise that is then sold, or ―fenced,‖ to individuals 
and retailers through a variety of venues. In an increasingly globalized society, 
more and more transactions take place online rather than face-to-face. As such, 
in addition to relying on physical resale markets, organized retail thieves have 
turned to online marketplaces as means to fence their ill-gotten goods.  
Chapter 2- What is called Organized Retail Theft or ORT by Retail Loss 
Prevention Professionals, can generally be described as professional burglars, 
boosters, cons, thieves, fences and resellers conspiring to steal and sell retail 
merchandise obtained from retail establishments by theft or deception. 
‗Boosters‘ – the front line thieves who intend to resell stolen goods – generally 
coordinate with ‗fences‘ who may sell the items outright at flea markets or 
convenience stores or online; or repackage them for sale to higher level fences. 
The problem is significant for its negative economic impact, the safety issues 

Blake H. Liventin 
viii 
it brings to unsuspecting consumers, and its potential link to other criminal 
enterprises.  
Chapter 3- , I would like to thank you for the opportunity to testify today 
on the efforts of U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) in the area 
of Organized Retail Crime (ORC). As you know, ICE is the largest 
investigative agency within the Department of Homeland Security. We protect 
national security and uphold public safety by targeting transnational criminal 
networks and terrorist organizations that seek to exploit vulnerabilities at our 
borders. 
Chapter 4- While the Secret Service is perhaps best known for protecting 
our nation‘s leaders, we were established in 1865 to investigate and prevent 
the counterfeiting of United States currency. As the original guardian of the 
nation‘s financial payment system, the Secret Service has a long history of 
protecting American consumers, industries, and financial institutions from 
fraud. Congress continues to recognize the Secret Service‘s 144 years of 
investigative expertise in financial crimes and over the last two decades has 
expanded our statutory authorities to include access device fraud (18 USC 
§1029), which includes credit and debit card fraud.  Congress has also given 
the Secret Service concurrent jurisdiction with other law enforcement agencies 
for identity theft (18 USC §1028), computer fraud (18 USC §1030), and bank 
fraud (18 USC §1344). We take our mission to combat these crimes seriously 
and as a result, the Secret Service is recognized worldwide for its investigative 
expertise and innovative approaches to detecting, investigating, and preventing 
financial crimes.    
Chapter 5- The Postal Inspection Service has a long, proud, and successful 
history of securing the nation‘s mail system and ensuring the public‘s trust in 
the mail. Postal Inspectors have been fighting consumer fraud since the mail 
fraud statute was enacted in 1872. The company name, address and ―product‖ 
may change, but con artists take advantage of economic trends and current 
events to plan their schemes and illegal activities. With modern technology, 
the potential for the American public to be defrauded through the mail is much 
greater and potentially impacts more people than ever before.  
Chapter 6- By way of background, the Coalition Against Organized Retail 
Crime, which has been together now for six years, is comprised of national 
manufacturing and retail organizations as well as individual companies from 
both sectors. In total, there are 32 members. A roster of all Coalition members 
can be found at the end of this written testimony. We are also pleased to 
recognize the formal support of the International Association of Chiefs of 

Preface 
ix 
Police (IACP) in our effort to control retail crime and the Internet fencing of 
stolen property. 
Chapter 7- Prior to joining eBay in 1999, I was an Assistant United States 
Attorney in the Eastern District of Virginia for 11 years. For 5 of those years I 
served as Chief of the Major Crimes Unit. My career at eBay has been focused 
on keeping our site safe for our community by working with the law 
enforcement community, the private sector, policymakers, consumer 
protection agencies and state and federal legislatures, so I very much 
appreciate the opportunity to speak with you today on behalf of eBay about 
this important topic.   
Chapter 8- I have been invited here to share with you our experience with 
the increasing problem of organized retail crime (ORC). Retailers have always 
had to deal with shoplifting as part of doing business, but let me be clear, ORC 
is not shoplifting. It is theft committed by professionals, in large volume, for 
resale. It is being committed against retailers of every type at an increasing 
rate. Safeway estimates a loss of $100 million dollars annually due to ORC. 
According to the FBI, the national estimate is between $15-30 billion 
annually.   
Chapter 9- By way of background, I am currently a detective with the 
Montgomery County Police Department‘s Retail Crimes Unit and have been in 
law enforcement for over 16 years. I am a sworn Deputy of the U.S. Marshall 
Service and assigned to the Metro Area Fraud Task Force of the United States 
Secret Service. I am the only detective in my department and one of the few in 
the region assigned exclusively to investigate retail theft and fraud.   
 
 
 
 


In: Organized Retail Crime 
ISBN: 978-1-61122-768-0 
Editors: Blake H. Liventin 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
Chapter 1 
 
 
 
ORGANIZED RETAIL CRIME 
Kristin M. Finklea 
SUMMARY  
Organized retail crime (ORC) involves the large-scale theft of everyday 
consumer items and potentially has much broader implications. Organized 
groups of professional shoplifters, or ―boosters,‖ steal or fraudulently obtain 
merchandise that is then sold, or ―fenced,‖ to individuals and retailers through 
a variety of venues. In an increasingly globalized society, more and more 
transactions take place online rather than face-to-face. As such, in addition to 
relying on physical resale markets, organized retail thieves have turned to 
online marketplaces as means to fence their ill-gotten goods.  
ORC exposes the United States to costs and harms in the economic, public 
health, and domestic security arenas. The exact loss from ORC to the retail 
industry is unknown, but an often-cited estimate of this loss is $15 billion to 
$30 billion annually. The economic impact, however, extends beyond the 
manufacturing and retail industry and includes costs incurred by consumers 
and taxes lost by the states. The theft and resale of stolen consumable or health 
and beauty products such as infant formula (that may have been repackaged, 
relabeled, and subjected to altered expiration dates) poses potential safety 
concerns for individuals purchasing such goods from ORC fences. In addition, 
some industry experts and policy makers have expressed concern about the 
possibility that proceeds from ORC may be used to fund terrorist activities.  

Kristin M. Finklea 
2 
Current efforts to combat ORC largely come from retailers, online 
marketplaces, and law enforcement alike. Retailers responding to the 2008 
National Retail Security Survey spent an average of 0.34% of their annual 
sales on loss prevention measures. These loss prevention costs are ultimately 
born by the consumers in the form of higher prices on goods. Also, online 
marketplaces report taking various measures to combat the sale of stolen and 
fraudulently obtained goods on their websites, including educating sellers and 
consumers, monitoring suspicious activity, and partnering with retailers and 
law enforcement. Combating retail theft has traditionally been handled by state 
law enforcement under state criminal laws. Some, however, have begun to 
question whether state laws—which vary in the quantity of monetary losses 
that constitute major theft—are adequate to combat ORC.   
While many agree that ORC is a national problem, there is debate over the 
federal government‘s role in deterring ORC and sanctioning various actors that 
may be involved in committing or aiding these crimes. One policy issue facing 
Congress is whether criminalizing organized retail crime in the U.S. Code 
would allow for more effective investigation and prosecution of these 
criminals. Congress may also wish to consider whether regulating resale 
marketplaces (online markets, in particular), to require such entities to increase 
information sharing with retailers and law enforcement, would strengthen 
investigations and prosecutions of ORC as well as decrease the prevalence of 
retail thieves relying on legitimate online marketplaces to fence stolen goods. 
Several pieces of legislation have been introduced in the 111th Congress that 
would address these issues.  
INTRODUCTION  
Organized retail crime (ORC), often referred to as organized retail theft, 
typically refers to large-scale retail theft and fraud by organized groups of 
professional shoplifters, or ―boosters.‖1 It is an umbrella term encompassing a 
variety of retail crimes, including theft, gift card fraud, receipt fraud, ticket 
switching,2 and cargo theft, just to name a few. Stolen and fraudulently 
obtained goods may be taken not only from retailers, but from manufacturers 
and distributors as well. The organized crime rings resell this illegally acquired 
merchandise via a variety of ―fencing‖ operations such as flea markets, swap 
meets, pawn shops, and online marketplaces; these goods are sold to both 
individual buyers as well as retailers—potentially the very retailers from 

Organized Retail Crime 
3 
where the merchandise was originally stolen. ORC differs fundamentally from 
shoplifting in that amateur shoplifters tend to steal merchandise for personal 
consumption. Boosters, on the other hand, are professional thieves who make 
money by stealing merchandise from retail and other venues and reselling it to 
fences who in turn sell the goods—through legal or illegal economic outlets—
for a fraction of the retail cost.   
Organized retail crime exposes the United States to economic, public 
health, and domestic security dangers. It is a national problem, not only for 
retailers, but for manufacturers, consumers, taxpayers, and the states as well. 
According to one industry survey, about 90% of retailers surveyed in 2010 
reported having been victimized by ORC in the previous 12 months. This is a 
decrease from the 92% that reported victimization in 2009 but still greater than 
the 85% that reported victimization in 2008.3 Estimates of retail losses to ORC 
range from as low as $15 billion to as high as $37 billion annually.4 And this is 
the loss to retailers alone. The monetary loss, however, extends beyond the 
retail industry to the taxpayers and states. Consumers pay for these losses in 
the form of higher prices on goods, and states lose the tax revenue that would 
otherwise be generated from the sale of these goods by legitimate retailers.  
In addition to the economic impact of ORC, the theft and resale of stolen 
consumable or health and beauty products, such as infant formula, may pose 
safety risks to individuals purchasing such goods from ORC fences. This is 
because such products may have been repackaged, relabeled, subjected to 
altered expiration dates, or stored improperly before being reentered into 
commerce. In addition, industry experts, law enforcement, and policy makers 
have expressed concern about the possibility that proceeds from ORC may be 
used to fund terrorist activities.5 In particular, federal law enforcement has 
reputedly traced the illicit proceeds from the theft and resale of infant formula 
to terrorist organizations and insurgent groups, including Hamas and 
Hezbollah.6  
Combating retail theft has traditionally been handled by state law 
enforcement under state criminal laws.7 Some, however, have begun to 
question whether state laws—which vary in the quantity of monetary losses 
that constitute major theft8—are adequate to combat ORC. While many agree 
that ORC is a national problem, there is debate over the federal government‘s 
role in deterring ORC and sanctioning various actors that may be involved in 
committing or aiding these crimes. One policy issue facing Congress is 
whether criminalizing organized retail crime in the U.S. Code would allow for 
more effective investigation and prosecution of these criminals. Another 
related issue that Congress may wish to consider is whether regulating resale 

Kristin M. Finklea 
4 
marketplaces (online markets, in particular), to require such entities to increase 
information sharing with retailers and law enforcement, would strengthen 
investigations and prosecutions of ORC as well as decrease the prevalence of 
retail thieves relying on legitimate online marketplaces to fence stolen goods.  
This chapter provides an overview of organized retail crime rings, their 
operations, and goods targeted. It then examines the domestic impact of ORC 
in the arenas of the economy, public health and safety, and domestic security. 
The report also outlines current efforts by retailers, resale markets, and the 
federal government to combat ORC. It then analyzes various policy issues that 
the 111th Congress may wish to consider, including whether current federal 
resources provided for the investigation of ORC are adequate, whether to 
amend the U.S. Code to criminalize ORC, and whether to regulate resale 
marketplaces that may be utilized as fences for criminals to sell stolen goods.   
CHALLENGES IN DEFINING OF ORGANIZED RETAIL 
CRIME  
The concept of organized retail crime tends to be discussed in terms of 
criminal networks engaged in large-scale theft. Descriptions of ORC also 
generally entail criminals fraudulently obtaining goods in quantities beyond 
what would normally be intended for personal consumption; reselling these ill-
gotten goods; receiving, concealing, transporting, or disposing of these goods; 
or coordinating individuals to commit these retail crimes.9 There is a lack of 
consensus, however, on the specific activities—particularly of boosters—that 
constitute ORC. On the one hand, most agree that ORC involves store theft or 
fraud schemes designed to obtain retail merchandise at a cost significantly 
below retail value or for free. However, some also include specific activities, 
such as cargo theft,10 in the definition of ORC,11 while others either omit 
certain activities or do not specify the range of ORC activities.12 For example, 
federal law enforcement agencies, such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
(FBI), tend to constrain discussions of ORC to situations in which boosters 
steal merchandise from retail establishments and resell it for profit. Similarly, 
retail organizations have generally focused on store theft when describing the 
problem of ORC. One possible explanation for this focus on store theft is that, 
although ORC may encompass multiple activities, including store theft and 
cargo theft, store theft has been cited as the most common.13 Because retail 
organizations, scholars, industry experts, and law enforcement have provided 

Organized Retail Crime 
5 
varying definitions of ORC, this complicates analysts‘ abilities to evaluate the 
exact impact of ORC.14  
Federal Definition  
Currently, ORC is not a federal crime. Issues surrounding the debate over 
whether it should be included in the federal criminal code are analyzed later in 
this chapter. For data collection purposes, however, Congress has defined 
ORC as  
 
 
violating a state ban against shoplifting or retail merchandise theft—if 
the quantities of items stolen are of the amount that would not 
normally be purchased for personal use or consumption—and stealing 
for the purposes of reselling the items or reentering them into 
commerce;  
 
receiving, possessing, concealing, bartering, selling, transporting, or 
disposing of any property that is known to have been taken in the 
violation outlined above; or  
 
coordinating, organizing, or recruiting persons to undertake either of 
the two violations outlined above.15  
OPERATION OF ORGANIZED RETAIL CRIME GROUPS  
As mentioned, organized retail crime rings generally include individuals 
serving in one of two main capacities: boosters or fences. Generally, boosters 
act as professional shoplifters who steal or illegally obtain merchandise. 
Fences pay boosters for stolen goods and then resell them to witting or 
unwitting consumers and businesses.  
Boosters work either alone or in groups to steal goods that they will later 
sell to fences for about 10% to 25% of the ticket value.16 They often carry 
―fence sheets,‖ or shopping lists provided to boosters by fences. These 
shopping lists itemize the goods fences desire, the amounts fences will pay for 
each item, and retail store locations where each item may be.17 In some cases, 
boosters may travel across state lines to target specific establishments in 
multiple states. Consequently, many boosters will at some point transport 
stolen merchandise across state lines, either when shipping stolen goods to a 

Kristin M. Finklea 
6 
fence or when physically delivering merchandise to a fence after stealing it in 
another state.   
Fencing operations can be very straightforward or can involve multiple 
stages and a degree of operational sophistication. Most stolen merchandise is 
sold to a low-level fence, commonly called a ―street fence.‖ Street fences will 
either sell these goods directly to the public—through flea markets, swap 
meets, or the Internet—or will sell the merchandise to mid-level fences who 
run ―cleaning operations.‖ Cleaning operations remove security tags and store 
labels as well as repackage stolen goods so they appear as though they came 
directly from the manufacturer. A notable concern for public health and safety, 
this cleaning process may even involve changing the expiration date on 
perishable goods.18 The ―clean‖ goods may then be sold to the public or to 
higher-level fences, who often operate illegitimate wholesale businesses. 
Through these businesses, the fences can supply merchandise to retailers, often 
mixing stolen merchandise with legitimate goods. The illegal activities of 
fences may be of concern for policy makers and federal law enforcement 
because—like boosters—fences‘ activities may cross state lines. They may, 
for instance, purchase stolen goods from boosters in one state and send them to 
another state to be cleaned; they may then sell this ―clean‖ merchandise to 
illegitimate wholesalers in another state. In addition, fences selling goods via 
online marketplaces may ship stolen goods across state or national lines.  
Targeted Products  
Investigations of organized retail crime rings have uncovered a wide 
variety of goods targeted to be stolen and resold on the black market. One 
researcher has noted that CRAVED items (meaning those goods that are 
Concealable, Removable, Available, Valuable, Enjoyable, and Disposable) are 
more often targeted because of the ease with which criminals can remove these 
items from stores and convert them into cash or other valuables.19 On the one 
hand, some desirable—or ―hot‖20—products, such as cigarettes and alcohol, 
may always be popular products for thieves. The desirability of other products 
may be based on their current popularity (such as new movies, video games, 
and music titles) or on their use in drug manufacturing activities (such as 
ephedrine-based cold medications and lithium batteries). In addition, the 
popularity of products may also be brand-specific. For example, while certain 
brands of razor blades, printer cartridges, and designer clothing may be 

Organized Retail Crime 
7 
frequently targeted for theft, competing brands may be ignored.21 Current 
desirable items, in no specific order, include  
 
 
tobacco products;  
 
premium razor blades;  
 
face creams;  
 
analgesics;  
 
smoking cessation products;  
 
designer, logo, and leather apparel and shoes (particularly athletic);  
 
name-brand power tools;  
 
vacuum cleaners;  
 
printer ink cartridges;  
 
steaks;  
 
film;  
 
coffee;  
 
consumer electronics (such as DVD players and GPS units);  
 
fragrances;  
 
infant formula;  
 
batteries;  
music and game DVDs; and  
 
over-the-counter (OTC) medications and test kits.22  
Methods Used by Boosters  
Boosters working in groups rather than alone often have at least one 
member of the group act as a lookout who scouts for employees, plain clothes 
security officers, or cameras. These lookouts may create diversions or distract 
employees to facilitate the work of the boosters actually stealing the 
merchandise.23  
To help prevent thieves from stealing these goods, many retailers place 
electronic detection tags on merchandise. Boosters often circumvent detection 
systems by cutting off or melting the tags, covering the tags in foil or 
concealing the merchandise in foil-lined bags (often referred to as ―magic‖ 
bags), or lifting goods over the antennas of the electronic detection systems.24 
In some instances, boosters take shopping bags directly from the store, fill 
them with merchandise, and walk out of the store, appearing as though they 
are carrying purchased goods. Store employees may be less likely to stop and 

Kristin M. Finklea 
8 
question boosters carrying shopping bags from the store because they 
incorrectly assume that the merchandise has indeed been paid for.25  
In addition, boosters do not always steal merchandise from retailers during 
business hours. Some may hide in stores and wait for all employees to leave 
before removing large amounts of goods through emergency exits. Others 
conduct ―smash-and-grab‖ burglaries, in which they steal trucks and vans to 
ram through store walls and windows, load the vehicles with merchandise, and 
drive away.26  
Employee Collusion  
At times, boosters also conspire with current or former store employees. 
Employees may take goods from storage rooms or receiving areas in stores 
and provide them directly to boosters. They may also help thieves by disabling 
store alarms, leaving doors unlocked, or providing information about computer 
passwords, alarm codes, keys, and management and security schedules.27 
Industry studies estimated the proportion of inventory loss due to employee 
theft.28 However, it is currently unknown how often employee theft or fraud is 
directly implicated in cases of organized retail crime. For example, the 2008 
National Retail Security Survey reports that retailers estimate about 42.7% of 
retail losses are due to employee theft. They further estimate that about 14.4% 
of these internal losses involve employees colluding with individuals outside 
of the given retail store. Of this 14.4% of internal loss cases, an unknown 
proportion may be attributed to employees working with organized retail 
criminals.29  
Fraud Schemes  
Not all organized retail crime involves traditional theft from retail stores. 
ORC groups have employed numerous tactics to defraud retailers and obtain 
merchandise. Take, for instance, receipt fraud. In these cases, thieves steal 
merchandise, create counterfeit receipts for the stolen goods, return these 
stolen goods to the retailers using the counterfeit receipts, and collect money 
off of the fraudulent returns.30 This cuts out the fence altogether, potentially 
netting a higher return.  
Another method by which ORC groups defraud retailers is through gift 
card fraud, of which there are several forms. For one, thieves may purchase 
legitimate gift cards using stolen credit cards and then sell the gift cards to the 
highest bidder using an online auction website. In other instances, thieves may 
purchase low-value gift cards, electronically reprogram the cards to contain a 
higher value, and resell these reprogrammed cards.31   

Organized Retail Crime 
9 
Similarly, ORC thieves may use ticket-switching scams to fraudulently 
obtain high-value items at a relatively low cost. Thieves use devices that create 
fake barcodes that they adhere to packages, covering the original barcodes; 
when scanned, these new barcodes ring up the items at lower costs. If, at 
check-out, a retail employee scanning the barcodes is not paying close 
attention or does not have a strong knowledge of items‘ values, the thief may 
get away with paying the price indicated by the counterfeit barcode. Criminals 
can then resell, or fence, the goods at prices higher than those which they paid, 
but still lower than their retail values.32  
Cargo Theft  
As mentioned, some scholars and experts include cargo theft as an 
element of organized retail crime while others do not. It is nonetheless of value 
to note how retail goods are vulnerable to criminals at various points 
throughout the supply chain. Further, goods that are stolen from either cargo 
trucks or from retail stores may be fenced by criminals for a profit, and both 
affect society‘s economy, public health, and domestic security.   
Because trains and trucks of cargo often travel with large quantities of 
desirable products, some have suggested that this presents a low-risk, high-
reward situation appealing to criminals.33 Thieves use a variety of methods to 
obtain merchandise from cargo, from hijacking entire trucks to colluding with 
current or former employees. These criminals may break or compromise 
security locks on trucks (possibly with the aid of security codes provided by 
dishonest employees) to remove entire boxes of desired goods. Other times, 
they may pilfer cargo boxes of their goods and then reseal them so the boxes 
appear as though they have not been tampered with.34  
Methods Used by Fences  
Fences use various methods to sell stolen goods that they purchase from 
boosters. As mentioned, some fences may sell stolen merchandise back to 
retailers through illegitimate wholesale operations. They may also operate 
legitimate business, such as pawn shops, convenience stores, repair shops, 
second-hand stores, and salvage yards, that serve as fronts for their illegal 
fencing operations.35 In addition, fences may sell their goods at a variety of 
resale marketplaces, including flea markets. At flea markets, illegitimate 
wholesalers are able to sell stolen goods that have been damaged and cannot 

Kristin M. Finklea 
10 
be resold to retailers. Also, flea markets have been known to serve as 
recruiting grounds for fences looking for boosters, and vice-versa.36  
Impact of Globalization and Technology  
In an increasingly globalized society, more and more transactions take 
place online rather than face-to-face. As such, in addition to relying on 
physical resale markets, organized retail thieves have turned to the Internet and 
online marketplaces as means to fence their ill-gotten goods.37 This practice of 
fencing via the Internet is commonly referred to as ―e-fencing.‖ According to 
the most recent National Retail Federation survey of retailers, about 66% of 
surveyed retailers indicated that they had identified or recovered stolen 
merchandise (including gift cards) that was being fenced online.38 Further, 
over one-quarter of the retailers indicated that more than half of the ―new in 
box‖ items sold on auction websites may be stolen or fraudulently obtained.39  
E-fencing has affected organized retail crime in several arenas, including 
criminal anonymity, global reach, and profitability. Whereas criminals fencing 
goods at physical locations (such as flea markets) must have face-to-face 
interactions, those who rely on e-fencing are better able to remain anonymous 
to customers, victimized retailers, and law enforcement alike. Further, the use 
of online markets has allowed criminals to more easily distribute stolen goods 
not only within the metropolitan areas where they were originally obtained, 
but throughout the United States and across the globe. E-fencing has also 
proven to be more profitable to criminals than has fencing at physical 
locations; while criminals may profit about 30 cents on the dollar (30% of the 
retail price) by selling goods at physical fencing locations, they can make 
about 70 cents on the dollar via e-fencing.40 It has been suggested that the 
face-to-face nature of physical marketplaces allows consumers to recognize 
the questionable legality of goods, and thus consumers are willing to pay less 
for goods in these physical markets than online.41  
DOMESTIC IMPACT OF ORGANIZED RETAIL CRIME  
At first glance, the impact of organized retail crime may appear to be 
limited to monetary losses to retailers. The economic impact, however, 
extends beyond the manufacturing and retail industry and affects costs 
incurred by consumers and taxes lost by the states. Beyond the economic 
impact, the theft of stolen consumable or health and beauty products may pose 

Organized Retail Crime 
11 
safety risks to individuals purchasing such goods from ORC fences. In 
addition, some industry experts and policy makers have expressed concern 
about the possibility that proceeds from ORC may be used to fund terrorist 
activities.  
Economic Impact: A Lack of Consensus  
The exact loss from organized retail crime to the retail industry is 
unknown.42 An often-cited estimate of this loss is $15 billion to $30 billion 
annually.43 The original source of this figure, however, has not been identified; 
while the FBI cites this figure as coming from retail industry estimates,44 
industry experts cite the FBI.45 As of 2007, the FBI revised the estimated 
annual loss from ORC and placed it between $30 billion and $37 billion.46 Of 
note, these ranges are broad estimates, and it is not precisely evident what the 
estimated loss includes. On one hand, it may include only the retail value of 
the merchandise stolen. Alternatively, it may include collateral costs, such as 
replacement costs or costs for implementing and maintaining various loss 
prevention measures.   
Another unanswered question is whether estimates of losses from ORC 
include or overlap with estimates of losses from cargo theft. The FBI estimates 
that cargo theft costs $15 billion to $30 billion annually in the United States.47 
It is not specified, however, what proportion—if any—of cargo theft losses 
may be attributed to ORC groups. Other estimates have placed the losses from 
cargo theft at $30 billion to $50 billion annually, with about half of these 
losses (roughly $15 billion to $25 billion annually) attributed to ORC. 48 If 
these data are correct, it suggests that the FBI‘s estimate of cargo theft losses 
may be largely attributed to either the proportion of cargo theft committed by 
ORC groups or the proportion of cargo theft not committed by ORC groups. 
Another explanation may be that industry estimates of losses may differ from 
law enforcement estimates based on differing criterion for counting an incident 
as a loss.  
The National Retail Security Survey (NRSS) collects data on the levels 
and causes of inventory ―shrinkage‖—the reduction in physical inventory 
caused by shoplifting, employee and vendor theft, and administrative error—
as well as data on loss prevention budgets, personnel, and strategies, and 
responses to shoplifting and employee theft.49 For the retail sectors surveyed 
by the NRSS, total sales for 2008 were estimated at $2.4 trillion50—about 52% 
of the total $4.6 trillion annual sales estimated for the entire retail industry.51 

Kristin M. Finklea 
12 
As outlined in the NRSS, not all retailers are equally susceptible to 
―shrinkage,‖ and therefore, the NRSS surveys only those sectors that are able 
to generate ―shrinkage‖ data. 52 Therefore, any conclusions drawn from the 
NRSS are only generalizable to those retail sectors included in the survey—
comprising about 52% of total retail sales.  
As illustrated in Figure 1, data from the 2008 NRSS indicate that total 
inventory shrinkage costs amounted to about $36.3 billion in 2008.53 Of this 
shrinkage, theft (both internal/employee theft and shoplifting) cost retailers 
$28.4 billion. In other words, theft accounted for about 78.3% of overall 2008 
shrinkage.54 Within the broad category of theft, internal/employee theft 
accounted for about $15.5 billion in losses to retailers, and shoplifting led to 
about $12.9 billion in losses. As mentioned, although retailers estimate that 
14.4% of internal theft cases involve collusion with outsiders, it is unknown 
what proportion (if any) of these involve collusion with organized retail crime 
groups. With respect to shoplifting cases, retailers have estimated that about 
27.5% of shoplifting cases are perpetrated by members of organized retail 
crime groups. Retailers also indicated that they experienced almost six ORC 
cases per every $100 million in sales and that the average loss per ORC theft 
incident averaged to slightly over $5,000.55  
 
Source: CRS presentation of data from the 2008 National Retail Security Survey Final 
Report.  
Note: This does not include losses to ORC as a result of cargo theft.  
Figure 1. 2008 Retail Shrinkage Costs 
Costs to retailers participating in the 2008 National Retail Security Survey  

Organized Retail Crime 
13 
As a direct result of retailers‘ losses to ORC, retailers may take various 
measures to strengthen retail security and mitigate any financial deficit from 
the lost revenue. In order to increase merchandise security, prevent future 
losses, and recoup the lost profits from the retail crime, retailers take measures 
such as hiring additional loss prevention personnel or increasing the price of 
goods. These costs are then born by consumers. The price increase may result 
in some consumers declining to purchase a given product, which may then 
have a circular effect and result in a loss in sales (and revenue) for the 
retailers. Retailers may also lock up ―hot‖ products, which, in addition to 
making the products harder to steal, makes it more difficult for consumers to 
find and purchase the merchandise. In other cases, the products are simply not 
available for the customer to purchase because the entire inventory of the 
product has been stolen.56  
In addition to the cost of organized retail crime to retailers and consumers, 
ORC can negatively affect state tax revenue. When goods are stolen rather 
than purchased, the state does not collect sales tax on the merchandise. The 
Food Marketing Institute (on behalf of the Coalition Against Organized Retail 
Crime) estimated that for 2007, the loss of sales tax revenue across the United 
States totaled about $1.6 billion.57  
Public Health and Safety Risks  
Several of the goods targeted by organized retail crime groups are 
consumable items or health and beauty products—infant formula, diabetic test 
strips, and over-the-counter and prescription medications, to name a few. 
There are public health and safety issues associated with the theft and resale of 
this merchandise by ORC rings. For instance, after boosters steal perishable 
goods, these goods may be sold to fencing operations that ―clean‖ the 
products; as mentioned, this cleaning process may involve repackaging goods 
(sometimes incorrectly relabeling them) and altering expiration dates before 
selling the merchandise back to retailers or to the general public. Further, these 
goods may be stored for indefinite periods of time in trucks or warehouses that 
are not climate-controlled. These factors may pose risks to the health of people 
who consume perishable goods that they believe to be safe, but have actually 
been tampered with or expired.  

Kristin M. Finklea 
14 
Potential Links to Terrorism  
In addition to the economic and potential public health risks associated 
with ORC, law enforcement and policy makers have expressed concern that 
proceeds from organized retail crime may be used to finance terrorist 
activities.58 In fact, federal concern over the link between ORC and terrorism 
was present even before the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.59 Federal 
law enforcement has traced the illicit proceeds from retail crime, specifically 
from the theft and resale of infant formula, to terrorist organizations and 
insurgent groups, including Hamas and Hezbollah.60 For instance, following 
the terrorist attacks of 2001, the former U.S. Customs Service established 
Operation Green Quest—a now-defunct, multi-agency terrorist financing task 
force—to combat the various sources of terrorist financing; one such source 
was identified as the ―theft, adulteration, and resale of infant formula.‖61   
While there may be suspicions that profits from ORC rings have been sent 
to certain countries to support terrorist activities, it is important to note that no 
members of ORC rings discussed in the organized retail crime literature have 
been convicted of providing material support to terrorist organizations. 
Nevertheless, there are instances in which profits—often from the sale of 
stolen infant formula—have been transferred to certain countries known to 
support terrorists, though it has not been determined whether these profits have 
ultimately been transferred to terrorist organizations.  
Three notable investigations of large organized retail crime rings 
uncovered evidence that the ORC ringleaders had transferred profits from their 
fencing operations to several countries known to support terrorists. In one 
case, an investigation into the Jamal Trading Company in Phoenix, AZ, 
uncovered a money-laundering operation that allegedly funneled the illicit 
proceeds to countries where several members of the crime ring had ties, such 
as Iraq, Jordan, and Lebanon. The ringleader, Samih Fadl Jamal, and 15 co-
conspirators had been profiting on the sale of stolen infant formula worth $22 
million.62 Another case involved the Ghali organized retail crime ring, led by 
Mohammed Khalil Ghali, which was involved in the sale of stolen infant 
formula and other ―hot‖ products, as well as the laundering of the proceeds. 
An investigation into the Ghali organization found that some of the profits 
were wired to financial institutions in Jordan, Egypt, and Palestine, and some 
were smuggled out of the United States on international flights. Further, the 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) has indicated that several 
members of the Ghali organization allegedly had direct ties to terrorist acts 
and/or organizations.63 In a third case, an investigation by the FBI‘s Joint 
Terrorism Task Force (JTTF) revealed that the Hamed Organization was a 

Organized Retail Crime 
15 
criminal enterprise involved in purchasing and selling stolen and contraband 
goods, including infant formula, computers, Global Positioning System 
devices, and cigarettes.64 Members of the Hamed Organization used 
convenience stores in which they worked or managed to fence stolen goods 
and then illegally transferred the proceeds to the Palestinian territories. None 
of these investigations, however, resulted in defendants being charged with 
providing material support to terrorists.   
There have also been reports of Hamas receiving material support from 
non-government organizations (NGOs) in the United States, some of which 
may have received funds from criminal activities such as the sale of stolen 
infant formula.65 For instance, it has been suggested that one Muslim charity 
organization previously operating in the United States, the Holy Land 
Foundation of Relief and Development (HLF), may have been supported in 
part by proceeds generated by ORC rings.66 In 2001, the federal government 
seized HLF‘s assets and ordered the organization closed. Five members of 
HLF were convicted of providing funding, over a period of six years, to 
Hamas—a specially designated terrorist organization.67  
As policy makers continue to consider the potential nexus between 
organized retail crime and terrorism, one important note is that, similar to 
other organized crime groups, ORC rings are motivated by money. Although 
this differs from the ideological motivation of terrorist organizations, both 
organized criminals and terrorists require money.68 As a means of bringing in 
this needed income, terrorist groups may model their money-generating 
criminal activities after those of organized crime groups—including ORC 
rings. Indeed, federal law enforcement continues to be concerned that 
organized crime groups may form short-term business partnerships with 
terrorist organizations if offered enough money.69  
CURRENT DOMESTIC EFFORTS TO COMBAT ORC  
Retailers  
There is a growing awareness among retailers about the consequences of 
organized retail crime. In its 2010 survey of organized retail crime, the 
National Retail Federation (NRF) reported that about 90% of the retailers 
surveyed indicated that their companies had been victimized by ORC, a 
decrease from the 92% that reported victimization in 2009 but still greater than 

Kristin M. Finklea 
16 
the 85% that reported victimization in 2008. While the percentage of retailers 
reporting victimization decreased in 2010, about 59% of all retailers surveyed 
still reported an increase in ORC activity over the previous year. 70 Further, of 
the retailers responding to the NRF‘s 2010 survey, nearly half indicated that 
they were allocating additional resources to combating ORC.71 It is unknown, 
however, whether these trends in reported victimization and in reported ORC 
activity levels are clear reflections of actual ORC activity or whether these 
reports are a reflection of the level of attention that retailers pay to ORC.   
With the increased knowledge about ORC, nearly 80% of retailers report 
tracking ORC statistics.72 Despite this knowledge, however, special ORC task 
forces have been established only in about 21% of loss prevention 
departments. Further, even though retailers report an increasing awareness of 
ORC, the proportion of retailers‘ funds allocated to loss prevention budgets 
actually appears to be decreasing; retailers responding to the 2008 NRSS spent 
an average of 0.34% of their annual sales on loss prevention—a proportion 
that, prior to 2004, had generally remained above 0.50%.73   
Retailers‘ loss prevention strategies can take various different forms, 
including pre-employment integrity screening measures, employee awareness 
programs, asset control policies, and loss prevention systems. Data from the 
2008 NRSS indicate that over half of retailers use the following loss 
prevention systems or personnel:  
 
 
burglar alarms;  
 
digital video recording systems;  
 
live, visible closed circuit TV (CCTV);  
 
point of sale (POS) data mining software;  
 
armored car deposit pickups;  
 
check approval database screening systems;  
 
live, hidden CCTV;  
 
secured display fixtures;  
 
uniformed guards;  
 
acousto-magnetic, electronic security tags; and  
 
drop safes.74  
 
However, data also indicate that less than half of retailers are using other 
available loss prevention measures, such as Web-based case management and 
reporting; cables, locks, and chains; remote CCTV video and audio; 
observation mirrors; plain-clothed store detectives; and silent alarms.  

Organized Retail Crime 
17 
In addition to their in-house loss prevention measures, some retailers and 
retail organizations also partner with law enforcement to share information 
about potential cases of organized retail crime (for more information on these 
partnerships, see the ―Federal Law Enforcement‖ section). Retailers 
responding to the 2008 NRSS indicated that almost 54% of ORC 
investigations were coordinated with local, state, or federal law enforcement. 
As a result, about 48% of ORC cases were prosecuted.75  
Online Marketplaces  
With an increase in the e-fencing of stolen merchandise, attention has 
recently turned to the role of Internet marketplaces such as eBay and 
Overstock in combating ORC. These marketplaces take various measures to 
combat the sale of stolen and fraudulently obtained goods—not solely by 
organized retail criminals—on their websites, including educating sellers and 
consumers, monitoring suspicious activity, and partnering with retailers and 
law enforcement. For instance, these marketplaces may provide guidelines for 
website use and require users to acknowledge policies regarding goods that 
may or may not be sold through the website. In addition, online markets may 
create filters to search for prohibited items up for auction. They may then take 
actions such as removing the prohibited items, sanctioning the policy violator, 
or referring the case to law enforcement. For example, eBay has created such 
filters based on input from regulatory agencies, law enforcement agencies, the 
retail industry, and member reports.76   
Another means by which Internet auction sites may combat the sale of 
stolen goods is to collaborate with retailers and law enforcement. This could 
occur through the establishment of investigative task forces or information 
sharing programs. Of the e-commerce websites most commonly used by 
criminals to fence stolen goods, eBay claims to be the leader in working with 
retailers and law enforcement to combat the online sale of stolen goods. For 
instance, in April 2008, eBay created PROACT (Partnering with Retailers 
Offensively to Attack Crime and Theft), a program designed to combat the 
sale of stolen goods on eBay. In this program, retailers voluntarily submit 
information about potentially stolen or fraudulently obtained goods being sold 
on eBay. In the first nine months of 2009, retailers brought 415 cases to eBay 
through the PROACT program.77 It is unknown, however, how many of these 
415 cases may be directly related to organized retail crime. In addition to 
creating its own programs to combat ORC, eBay partnered with the NRF in 

Kristin M. Finklea 
18 
March 2010 to fight this growing crime. The NRF/eBay partnership will 
utilize PROACT and LERPnet technologies to help track ORC rings, 
collaborate with the FBI to identify retail crime enterprises, and promote 
legislation to provide law enforcement with adequate tools to combat ORC 
thieves.78  
Federal Law Enforcement  
As mentioned, state and local law enforcement have held the primary 
responsibility for investigating and prosecuting organized retail crime. 
However, as the scope of the crime has increased, so too has the involvement 
of federal law enforcement. Retail criminals are no longer selling goods 
simply at local flea markets; rather, they are using interstate transportation 
routes to move stolen goods, as well as the Internet to ship this merchandise 
across the country and around the world.   
Much like other forms of organized crime,79 organized retail crime is 
becoming increasingly transnational. For law enforcement to effectively 
combat ORC, it must rely on multilateral coordination, via both domestic and 
international task forces and partnerships. In addition to expanding multilateral 
law enforcement partnerships, federal law enforcement has partnered with the 
retail industry and online markets to combat the theft and illicit resale of stolen 
goods. Law enforcement has also indicated that it has built cooperative 
relationships with retailers and online markets and have generally not had 
trouble obtaining the needed information to investigate potential cases of 
ORC.80  
The following section provides a discussion of various federal law 
enforcement agencies‘ current efforts to combat organized retail crime.  
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)  
In December 2003, the FBI established an Organized Retail Theft (ORT) 
Initiative aimed at identifying and dismantling multi-jurisdictional retail crime 
rings.81 The Initiative focuses on information sharing between law 
enforcement and the private sector in order to investigate ORC and develop a 
greater understanding of the nature and extent of ORC around the country. The 
Initiative relies on federal statutes such as the Money Laundering,82 Interstate 
Transportation of Stolen Property,83 and Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt 
Organizations (RICO)84 to investigate and prosecute ORC rings. In addition to 
the Initiative, the FBI leads seven Major Theft Task Forces around the country 

Organized Retail Crime 
19 
that are responsible for investigating a host of major theft areas, including 
ORC. These task forces are composed of local, state, and federal law 
enforcement agencies, as well as retail industry loss prevention experts. 85  
In the Violence Against Women and Department of Justice 
Reauthorization Act of 2005, Congress directed the Attorney General and FBI 
to establish a clearinghouse within the private sector for information sharing 
between retailers and law enforcement.86 The result was the Law Enforcement 
Retail Partnership Network (LERPnet).87 LERPnet began as a partnership 
between the FBI, ICE, various local police departments, individual retailers, 
and retail organizations including the Food Marketing Institute (FMI), 
National Retail Federation (NRF), and Retail Industry Leaders Association 
(RILA). As of January, 2010, LERPnet has been linked with the FBI‘s Law 
Enforcement Online (LEO) system, providing federal and local law 
enforcement a direct link to retail industry crime reports.  
Despite the establishment of the ORT Initiative, the use of the Major Theft 
Task Forces to investigate ORC rings, and the creation of LERPnet, the FBI 
continues to focus most of its resources on counterterrorism efforts. The FBI 
has indicated that the primary barrier to increasing its involvement in ORC 
investigations is the lack of resources dedicated directly to combating retail 
crime. Although the FBI has reportedly requested this directed funding, it has 
yet to be realized.88  
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE)  
Because ORC often involves interstate and international transportation of 
stolen goods and the movement of illicit proceeds associated with the sale of 
these goods, ICE has become increasingly involved in investigating ORC. 
Further, ICE may become ever more involved in ORC investigations if reports 
indicating that ORC rings rely on unauthorized (illegal) aliens89 (particularly 
from Mexico) to act as boosters are true.90 Employing these aliens as low-level 
boosters allows them to earn an income while protecting the higher-ups in the 
organization from being apprehended while stealing; if apprehended, 
unauthorized aliens may be jailed and then deported, saving higher-ups from 
the fines or jail time that they could otherwise face if arrested.   
In July 2009, ICE launched an ORC Pilot Program. This program, 
originally slated to last for six months in Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, and 
New York, focused on developing (1) an ORC threat assessment, (2) a 
tracking system for ORC cases, (3) a database of retail industry contacts to 
complement the LERPnet database, and (4) an investigation of how ORC 
groups exploit vulnerabilities in the nation‘s banking systems to launder illicit 

Kristin M. Finklea 
20 
proceeds.91 ICE has indicated that it intends to expand the pilot program into a 
nation-wide initiative if the results of the program suggest that such an 
initiative would significantly improve the investigation and prosecution of 
ORC rings. As of March 2010, the ORC Pilot Program had generated six ORC 
cases, six criminal arrests, and five convictions.92 ICE has since extended the 
program to last an additional 12 months and expanded the program to the 
National Cyber Crimes Center.93  
U.S. Secret Service (USSS)  
The USSS is most well known for protecting the President and Vice 
President of the United States, as well as visiting heads of state and 
government.94 However, it was originally established as a law enforcement 
agency charged with investigating and preventing the counterfeiting of U.S. 
currency. The USSS‘s authorities have expanded, and the agency now 
investigates crimes ranging from counterfeiting and financial institution fraud 
to identity crimes, computer crimes, and money laundering.95 Through 
investigations into crimes such as credit card fraud,96 access device fraud97 and 
computer fraud,98 the USSS has occasionally become involved in investigating 
organized retail crime groups who steal or fraudulently purchase merchandise 
from retailers (both traditional and online) and then resell these goods for a 
profit online.99 The USSS receives ORC case referrals from state and local law 
enforcement, retail industry investigators, and online marketplaces fighting the 
sale of stolen goods.  
The USSS has 28 Electronic Fraud Task Forces and 37 Financial Crimes 
Task Forces that investigate various financial crimes, including ORC.100 In 
addition to state and local law enforcement agencies, these task forces consist 
of investigators from retail stores, online auction houses, and the banking and 
finance industries. There are an estimated 100 or more retail investigators 
currently participating in the USSS task forces.   
U.S. Postal Inspection Service (USPIS)  
The USPIS works to prevent mail fraud as well as illegal substances, 
contraband, and dangerous products from entering the mail system. When 
investigating cases of ORC, the USPIS investigates individuals using the mail 
to ship stolen products or to transmit payment to a seller. These ORC schemes 
tend to fall into the categories of Internet auction fraud and re-shipper fraud.101 
In cases of Internet auction fraud, the criminals sell stolen goods and ship them 
domestically and internationally. In cases of re-shipper fraud, criminals may 
recruit individuals (often unwitting accomplices102) to receive the stolen goods 

Organized Retail Crime 
21 
and then ship them (often internationally) to other members of the criminal 
organization or to the buyer of the goods.103  
ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION  
When debating the federal government‘s role in combating organized 
retail crime, including sanctioning various actors that may be involved in 
committing or aiding these crimes, there are several issues that policy makers 
may consider. One is whether retailers are taking sufficient preventative 
measures to prevent retail theft. Another issue is whether criminalizing 
organized retail crime at the federal level would allow for more effective 
investigation and prosecution of these criminals. Yet another issue is whether 
regulating online marketplaces to require that such entities increase 
information sharing with retailers and law enforcement would improve 
investigations and prosecutions of ORC as well as decrease the prevalence of 
retail thieves fencing stolen goods via legitimate online marketplaces.  
Are Retailers Doing Enough?  
The first line of defense against organized retail crime is preventing the 
crimes from ever occurring. This involves security at the manufacturing sites, 
distribution centers, retail stores, and in the transportation throughout this 
supply chain.104 The NRSS present trends in retail industry loss prevention 
measures since 1991. The 2008 NRSS reports that retailers spent 0.34% of 
annual sales on loss prevention measures such as contract services, security 
equipment, and loss prevention personnel.105 This includes about 140 loss 
prevention employees for every $100 million in annual sales.106 As mentioned, 
prior to 2004, the percent of annual sales spent on loss prevention was 
consistently above 0.50%, but that amount has been decreasing over the past 
several years. Some experts explain this decrease in the loss prevention budget 
as a reaction to declines in overall inventory shrinkage over the past several 
years.107 Despite this general decline in shrinkage rates, 59% of retailers 
surveyed have seen an increase in ORC activity.108 Another explanation for the 
average decline in loss prevention budgets may stem from the recent economic 
downturn if retailers scaled back on loss prevention measures in order to save 
on costs. CRS was unable to locate data, however, on whether retailers are not 

Kristin M. Finklea 
22 
spending on loss prevention because they cannot afford to or because they 
choose not to spend in this area.  
For multiple reasons, it is difficult to empirically determine whether 
retailers are doing ―enough‖ to combat ORC. For one, retailers must strike a 
balance between protecting their merchandise from thieves and creating an 
environment where honest consumers can easily find and purchase the desired 
products. If retailers take every precaution to lock up ―hot‖ products and 
install security measures that make it difficult for consumers to get the desired 
product in a hassle-free and timely fashion, they may risk losing customers to 
competitors who provide a more relaxed shopping environment. If, on the 
other hand, retailers err on the side of being ―customer friendly‖ by keeping 
products out in the open, they may open themselves up to thieves.  
There are several policy options that may enhance retailers‘ abilities to 
combat ORC that policy makers may consider. In the literature, there appears 
to be a lack of research on the effectiveness of various loss prevention 
strategies on combating retail theft in general and ORC in particular. 
Understanding the strategies that have proven to reduce retail theft related to 
ORC may enhance retailers‘ abilities to secure their merchandise. 
Consequently, one option may be for Congress to commission a national study 
to examine promising loss prevention strategies. A second option may be for 
Congress to consider establishing a grant program that would provide funding 
to retailers to install or upgrade security systems and loss prevention measures 
in their stores. Congress could require that retailers comply with various 
benchmarks in order to receive grant funding; for instance, a grant program 
may require that retailers work with law enforcement to identify and 
apprehend members of ORC rings. Another potential requirement could be 
that retailers join LERPnet in order to be eligible for grant funding. Yet 
another eligibility requirement could be that retailers provide matching loss 
prevention funds.  
Federally Criminalizing ORC  
Combating retail theft has primarily been handled by state law 
enforcement under state criminal laws. In particular, major theft laws are the 
statutes that states have relied upon most to investigate and prosecute ORC. 
These major theft laws, however, vary from state to state with respect to the 
monetary threshold that constitutes major theft.109 While some states, such as 
New Jersey and Massachusetts, have relatively low thresholds, other states, 

Organized Retail Crime 
23 
such as Wisconsin and Pennsylvania, have relatively higher thresholds. Over 
one-third of states have felony theft thresholds that meet or exceed $1,000. 
With respect to organized retail crime, 16 states have passed legislation 
criminalizing ORC, and 8 others have pending legislation.110  
There is currently no federal law specifically prohibiting organized retail 
crime as such. There are, however, provisions in the U.S. Code that federal law 
enforcement uses to bring forth cases against ORC rings. Examples of such 
provisions include  
 
 
18 U.S.C. § 1956, ―Laundering of monetary instruments‖;  
 
18 U.S.C. § 1957, ―Engaging in monetary transactions in property 
derived from specified unlawful activity‖;  
 
18 U.S.C., Chapter 96, the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt 
Organizations (RICO) provisions;  
 
18 U.S.C. § 2314, ―Transportation of stolen goods, securities, 
moneys, fraudulent State tax stamps, or articles used in 
counterfeiting‖; and  
 
18 U.S.C. § 2315, ―Sale or receipt of stolen goods, securities, moneys, 
or fraudulent State tax stamps.‖  
 
Current federal law addressing theft does not criminalize the theft itself, 
but rather prohibits the transportation of stolen goods across state lines111 as 
well as the sale or receipt of these goods.112 For these activities to be 
considered federal crimes, the monetary value of the stolen goods must meet 
or exceed $5,000.   
When debating the federal government‘s role in combating organized 
retail crime, Congress may consider whether current law should be amended to 
create new provisions that would provide penalties for ORC. 113 Proponents of 
such legislation argue that criminalizing ORC may benefit law enforcement in 
several ways, including (1) illuminating the growing problem of ORC and (2) 
providing a statutory framework for tracking ORC case data rather than 
lumping these cases into other categories for statistical purposes. Opponents of 
legislation criminalizing ORC argue that already existing statutes allow for 
effective investigation and prosecution of ORC (as outlined above) and that 
creating a separate provision for ORC would be redundant. Representatives 
from federal law enforcement agencies have provided congressional testimony 
indicating that they indeed have sufficient laws and procedural tools to 
investigate ORC.114 As mentioned, impediments to investigating and 

Kristin M. Finklea 
24 
prosecuting these cases may come more from a lack of resources than from a 
need for better investigative and prosecutorial tools.  
Another policy option that Congress may consider could be enacting 
provisions that would lower the monetary threshold from $5,000 for the sale, 
receipt, or transportation of stolen goods across state lines (18 U.S.C. § 2314 
and 18 U.S.C. § 2315).115 Currently, the highest state felony theft level is 
$2,500, and the average is slightly over $700.116 Savvy criminals know each 
state‘s felony theft level and steal merchandise valuing just under this level so 
as to avoid state felony charges if caught. Federal investigators and 
prosecutors may rely upon the sum total of merchandise stolen in various 
states and moved across state lines in order to prosecute these thieves. The 
average value of goods transported, sold, or received by members of ORC 
rings is currently unknown. If this value were under the current federal 
threshold of $5,000, the data may support legislation decreasing the threshold. 
One issue that Congress may face if it amends the $5,000 limit for the sale, 
receipt, or transportation of stolen goods across state lines may be whether 
such a policy shift would also open the doors for the federal government to 
prosecute individuals not involved in ORC rings.  
If Congress determines that there are sufficient investigative and 
prosecutorial tools available for law enforcement to combat ORC, one issue 
that policy makers may face is whether to provide dedicated funding to law 
enforcement to enhance their ability to take on more ORC cases. Law 
enforcement has suggested that although the investigative tools are available, 
it may prioritize and utilize resources in higher-priority areas117—such as 
counterterrorism and fraud investigations.118 Therefore, another policy option 
may be to provide directed resources to federal law enforcement to investigate 
and prosecute ORC cases.  
Regulation of Online and Physical Marketplaces  
As mentioned, organized retail criminals use both physical and online 
marketplaces as fences to sell stolen goods. With an increasingly globalized 
society, these criminals take advantage of the Internet for their illegal 
activities. In an effort to curb sales of stolen goods online, one policy option 
that Congress may consider is increased regulation of certain actions on the 
Internet. In the past, Congress has regulated actions on the Internet that 
involve interstate commerce. For example, Congress enacted legislation that 
prohibited unlawful Internet gambling.119 Among other things, this legislation 

Organized Retail Crime 
25 
also included provisions holding certain computer services, Internet websites, 
telecommunications services, and financial transaction providers liable for 
illegal gambling if they aid or have knowledge of the Internet gambling.120 
Along the same lines, Congress may consider whether to regulate online 
auction websites to require them to document, retain, and disclose—to 
designated law enforcement—information about specified sellers, including 
those suspected of fencing stolen goods. Proponents of such regulation argue 
that this could better enable law enforcement to track suspected fences and that 
it may act as a deterrent, discouraging potential thieves from fencing stolen 
goods.121 Opponents of this type of regulation argue that online marketplaces 
already share such information because it is in their best interests to prevent 
the sale of stolen goods, promote the business of legitimate sellers, and ensure 
that customers receive genuine and safe products.  
Another policy option that policy makers may consider is the regulation of 
physical marketplaces, such as flea markets. One the one hand, some may 
argue that flea markets should be regulated by state laws because the face-to-
face transactions at these markets do not directly involve interstate commerce. 
Others, however, may contend that the federal government could regulate the 
goods sold at flea markets because they were likely involved in interstate 
commerce before being sold at the market. Further, it could be argued that the 
federal government could direct this regulation toward the sale of certain, 
already-regulated products such as goods regulated by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetics Act.122  
APPENDIX. STATE FELONY THEFT LEVELS  
Table A-1. State Felony Theft Levels  
State 
Felony Theft Level (in dollars) 
Alabama 
500 
Alaska 
500 
Arizona 
1,000 
Arkansas 
500 
California 
400 
Colorado 
500 
Connecticut 
1,000 
 

Kristin M. Finklea 
26 
Table A-1. (Continued) 
State 
Felony Theft Level (in dollars) 
Delaware 
1,000 
Florida 
300 
Georgia 
300 
Hawaii 
300 
Idaho 
1,000 
Illinois 
150 
Indiana 
Anya 
Iowa 
1,000 
Kansas 
1,000 
Kentucky 
500 
Louisiana 
500 
Maine 
1,000 
Maryland 
1,000 
Massachusetts 
250 
Michigan 
1,000 
Minnesota 
500 
Mississippi 
500 
Missouri 
500 
Montana 
1,000 
Nebraska 
500 
Nevada 
250 
New Hampshire 
500 
New Jersey 
250 
New Mexico 
500 
New York 
1,000 
North Carolina 
1,000 
North Dakota 
500 
Ohio 
500 
Oklahoma 
500 
Oregon 
750 
Pennsylvania 
2,000 
Rhode Island 
500 
South Carolina 
1,000 
South Dakota 
500 
Tennessee 
500 
 

Organized Retail Crime 
27 
Table A-1. (Continued) 
State 
Felony Theft Level (in dollars) 
Texas 
1,500 
Utah 
1,000 
Vermont 
900 
Virginia 
200 
Washington 
750 
Washington, DC 
250 
West Virginia 
1,000 
Wisconsin 
2,500 
Wyoming 
1,000 
Federalb 
5,000 
Source: CRS presentation of data provided by Frank Muscato, Walgreens ORC 
Investigations Supervisor, November 9, 2009.  
a. In Indiana, theft is always a Class D felony, regardless of amount.  
b. The federal law addressing theft does not criminalize theft itself, but rather prohibits 
the transportation of stolen goods across state lines (18 U.S.C. § 2314) as well as 
the sale or receipt of these goods (18 U.S.C. § 2315).  
End Notes 
1 A ―booster‖ is someone who steals merchandise and then sells it to a fence for a profit. A 
―fence‖ is someone who knowingly buys illegally obtained goods from a ―booster‖ and then 
sells the goods for a profit.  
2 Ticket switching involves thieves utilizing devices that create fake barcodes that they adhere to 
packages, covering the original barcodes. When scanned, these new barcodes ring up items 
at lower prices than their retail values.  
3 See the National Retail Federation, 2010 Organized Retail Crime Survey, 2010, p. 5. The 
percentage of surveyed retailers who reported victimization generally increased between 
2005 and 2009 and then decreased slightly in 2010.  
4 Issues involved in determining the exact losses are discussed later in the report. The National 
Retail Federation (NRF) has estimated that losses amass to between $15 billion and $30 
billion annually. The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) has provided varying estimates. 
In 2005, the FBI cited losses as between $15 billion and $30 billion annually. See testimony 
of Chris Swecker, Assistant Director, Criminal Investigative Division, Federal Bureau of 
Investigation before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee 
on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Responding to Organized Crimes Against 
Manufacturers and Retailers, 109th Cong., 1st sess., March 17, 2005. As of 2007, the FBI 
estimated losses as between $30 billion and $37 billion annually. See the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, Organized Retail Theft: New Initiative to Tackle the Problem, April 6, 2007, 
http://www.fbi.gov/page2/ april07/retail040607.htm.  
5 See testimony of Chris Swecker, Assistant Director, Criminal Investigative Division, Federal 
Bureau of Investigation before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, 

Kristin M. Finklea 
28 
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Responding to Organized 
Crimes Against Manufacturers and Retailers, 109th Cong., 1st sess., March 17, 2005.  
6 Charles I. Miller, Organized Retail Theft: Raising Awareness, Offering Solutions, National 
Retail Federation Foundation, 2005, p. 4. See also Food Marketing Institute, Media 
Reports—Middle 
East 
Connection: 
Organized 
Retail 
Crime, 
http://www.fm 
i.org/docs/loss/ORCMiddleEast.pdf. See also testimony by David Johnson, Section Chief, 
Criminal Investigative Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation, before the U.S. Congress, 
House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland 
Security, Combating Organized Retail Crime: The Role of Federal Law Enforcement, 111th 
Cong., 1st sess., November 5, 2009.  
7 From a statement by Representative Robert C. ―Bobby‖ Scott before the U.S. Congress, House 
Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, 
E-Fencing Enforcement Act of 2008, The Organized Retail Crime Act of 2008, and The 
Combating Organized Retail Crime Act of 2008, 110th Cong., 2nd sess., September 22, 2008.  
8 See Appendix for a table displaying felony theft levels by state.  
9 Walter E. Palmer and Chris Richardson, Organized Retail Crime: Assessing the Risk and 
Developing Effective Strategies, ASIS Foundation Research Council, 2009, p. 4.  
10 For statistical purposes, the FBI defines cargo theft as ―the criminal taking of any cargo 
including, but not limited to, goods, chattels, money, or baggage that constitutes, in whole 
or in part, a commercial shipment of freight moving in commerce, from any pipeline 
system, railroad car, motortruck, or other vehicle, or from any tank or storage facility, 
station house, platform, or depot, or from any vessel or wharf, or from any aircraft, air 
terminal, airport, aircraft terminal or air navigation facility, or from any intermodal 
container, intermodal chassis, trailer, container freight station, warehouse, freight 
distribution facility, or freight consolidation facility. For purposes of this definition, cargo 
shall be deemed as moving in commerce at all points between the point of origin and the 
final destination, regardless of any temporary stop while awaiting transshipment or 
otherwise.‖ U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Criminal Justice 
Information Services Division, Uniform Crime Reporting Program, National Incident-
Based Reporting System Addendum for Submitting Cargo Theft Data, January 2010, p. iii, 
http://www.fbi.gov/ucr/ nibrs/downloadables/nibrs_cargo_theft_downloadable.pdf.  
11 See, for example, Read Hayes, Organized Retail Crime Annual Report 2008: Describing a 
Major Problem, Loss Prevention Research Council, 2008, hereafter Organized Retail Crime 
Annual Report 2008: Describing a Major Problem. The issue of cargo theft will be 
discussed in more detail in the section, ―Methods Used by Boosters.‖  
12 See, for example, Walter E. Palmer and Chris Richardson, Organized Retail Crime: Assessing 
the Risk and Developing Effective Strategies, ASIS Foundation Research Council, 2009.  
13 Organized Retail Crime Annual Report 2008: Describing a Major Problem.  
14 This issue is discussed further in the section ―Domestic Impact of Organized Retail Crime.‖  
15 P.L. 109-162, § 1105, codified at 28 U.S.C. § 509 note. In the Violence Against Women and 
Department of Justice Reauthorization Act of 2005, Congress defined organized retail theft 
and directed the Attorney General and FBI to establish a task force to combat organized 
retail theft as well as a clearinghouse within the private sector for information sharing 
between retailers and law enforcement.  
16 Charles I. Miller, Organized Retail Theft: Raising Awareness, Offering Solutions, National 
Retail Federation Foundation, 2005, p. 17.  
17 Ibid.  
18 Ibid., pp. 17-20. The public health and safety risks and possible repercussions of these cleaning 
operations are discussed elsewhere in this chapter.  
19 Ronald V. Clarke, ―Hot Products: Understanding, Anticipating, and Reducing Demand for 
Stolen Goods,‖ Police Research Series, Paper 112 (1999), p. 23.  
20 Ibid., p. 1.  

Organized Retail Crime 
29 
21 Organized Retail Crime Annual Report 2008: Describing a Major Problem, p. 20. Benadryl, 
for instance, has been identified as one of the over-the-counter medications targeted by 
ORC groups, where competing brands of antihistamines have not.  
22 Ibid.  
23 Read Hayes and King Rogers, ―Catch Them if You Can: This Study of Organized Retail Crime 
Looks at How These Criminal Groups Operate and What Measures Might Help Stores Fight 
Back,‖ Security Management, vol. 47, no. 10 (2003), hereafter ―Catch Them if You Can.‖  
24 Ibid.  
25  From information provided to CRS during an organized retail crime briefing by members of 
the Retail Leaders Industry Association and the Coalition Against Organized Retail Crime, 
June 4, 2009.  
26 ―Catch Them if You Can.‖  
27 Ibid.  
28 Richard C. Hollinger and Amanda Adams, 2008 National Retail Security Survey Final Report, 
Security Research Project, Department of Sociology and Criminology & Law, University of 
Florida, 2009, p. 7, hereafter 2008 National Retail Security Survey Final Report.  
29 Ibid., pp. 7-8. In addition to employees colluding with ORC thieves, they may also conspire 
with individuals to steal merchandise for personal use—either for the employees‘ own use 
or for the co-conspirators‘ use.  
30 From information provided to CRS during an organized retail crime briefing by members of 
the Retail Leaders Industry Association and the Coalition Against Organized Retail Crime, 
June 4, 2009.  
31 Ibid.  
32 Ibid.  
33 Organized Retail Crime Annual Report 2008: Describing a Major Problem, pp. 17-18.  
34 Ibid., Walter E. Palmer and Chris Richardson, Organized Retail Crime: Assessing the Risk and 
Developing Effective Strategies, ASIS Foundation Research Council, 2009, p. 14.  
35 Tracy Johnson and Read Hayes, ―Behind the Fence: Buying and Selling Stolen Merchandise,‖ 
Security Journal, vol. 16, no. 4 (2003).  
36 Organized Retail Crime Annual Report 2008: Describing a Major Problem.  
37 King Rogers, ―Organized Retail Theft,‖ in Retail Crime, Security, and Loss Prevention: An 
Encyclopedic Reference, ed. Charles A. Sennewald and John H. Christman (Elseiver Inc., 
2008).  
38 National Retail Federation, 2010 Organized Retail Crime Survey, 2010, p. 7.  
39 Ibid., p. 9.  
40 National Retail Federation, 2009 Organized Retail Crime Survey, 2009, p. 8.  
41 See, for example, testimony of Brad Brekke, Vice President of Assets Protection, Target 
Corporation, before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee 
on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Organized Retail Theft Prevention: Fostering 
a Comprehensive Public-Private Response, 110th Cong., 1st sess., October 25, 2007, H.Hrg. 
110-122.  
42 Walter E. Palmer and Chris Richardson, Organized Retail Crime: Assessing the Risk and 
Developing Effective Strategies, ASIS Foundation Research Council, 2009, p. 5.  
43 See, for example, testimony of Chris Swecker, Assistant Director, Criminal Investigative 
Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on 
the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Responding to 
Organized Crimes Against Manufacturers and Retailers, 109th Cong., 1st sess., March 17, 
2005.  
44 Ibid.  
45 Testimony of Karl Langhorst, Director of Loss Prevention, Randall‘s/Tom Thumb, a Safeway 
Company before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on 
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Organized Retail Theft: Fostering a 
Comprehensive Public-Private Response, 111th Cong., 2nd sess., October 25, 2007.  

Kristin M. Finklea 
30 
46 Federal Bureau of Investigation, Organized Retail Theft: New Initiative to Tackle the Problem, 
April 6, 2007, http://www.fbi.gov/page2/april07/retail040607.htm.  
47  Federal Bureau of Investigation, Cargo Theft’s High Cost: Thieves Stealing Billions Annually, 
July 21, 2006, http://www.fbi.gov/page2/july06/cargo_theft072106.htm.  
48 As cited by Claire Mayhew, ―The Detection and Prevention of Cargo Theft,‖ Trends & Issues 
in Crime and Criminal Justice, no. 214 (September 2001), p. 1.  
49 2008 National Retail Security Survey Final Report.  
50 2008 National Retail Security Survey Final Report, p. 6.  
51 National Retail Federation, 2009 Organized Retail Crime Survey, 2009, p. 2.  
52 The NRSS surveyed retailers from the following sectors: optical; children‘s apparel; strip 
center; women‘s apparel; discount store; crafts and hobbies; men‘s and women‘s apparel; 
entertainment, media, games, video, and music; sporting goods and recreational products; 
shoes; department store; accessories; supermarket and grocery; household furnishings and 
housewares; cards, gifts, floral, and novelties; office supplies; stationery; books, magazines, 
and music; drug store; homecenter, hardware, lumber, and garden; electronics, computers, 
and appliances; and furniture. Of note, the NRSS does not include data from retailers such 
as restaurants, bars, motor vehicle dealers, auto service stations, direct catalog sale outlets, 
and Internet ―e-tailers‖ because these sectors do not produce comparable ―shrinkage‖ data 
to the other retailers that are included in the survey.  
53 2008 National Retail Security Survey Final Report, p. 6.  
54 The other known sources of shrinkage were administrative errors and vendor fraud.  
55 2008 National Retail Security Survey Final Report, p. 30.  
56 From information provided to CRS during an organized retail crime briefing by members of 
the Retail Leaders Industry Association and the Coalition Against Organized Retail Crime, 
June 4, 2009.  
57 Food Marketing Institute, on behalf of the Coalition Against Organized Retail Crime, 
Organized Retail Crime: Estimated Lost Sales Tax Revenue by State (2007), September 
2009. The most recent data available comes from 2007.  
58 See testimony of Chris Swecker, Assistant Director, Criminal Investigative Division, Federal 
Bureau of Investigation before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, 
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Responding to Organized 
Crimes Against Manufacturers and Retailers, 109th Cong., 1st sess., March 17, 2005.  
59 Karen E. Thuermer, ―Retailers Organize Against Crime,‖ Security Management, July 2007.  
60 Charles I. Miller, Organized Retail Theft: Raising Awareness, Offering Solutions, National 
Retail Federation Foundation, 2005, p. 4. See also Food Marketing Institute, Media 
Reports—Middle East Connection: Organized Retail Crime, http://www.fmi.org/do 
cs/loss/ORCMiddleEast.pdf. See also testimony by David Johnson, Section Chief, Criminal 
Investigative Division, Federal Bureau of Investigation, before the U.S. Congress, House 
Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, 
Combating Organized Retail Crime: The Role of Federal Law Enforcement, 111th Cong., 1st 
sess., November 5, 2009.  
61 U.S. Department of the Treasury, U.S. Customs Service, Office of Investigations, Green Quest, 
Customs 
Publication 
No. 
0000-0171, 
October 
2002, 
p. 
2, 
http://www.porta 
l.state.pa.us/portal/server.pt/document/437021/green_quest_brochure_pdf.  
62 Charles I. Miller, Organized Retail Theft: Raising Awareness, Offering Solutions, National 
Retail Federation Foundation, 2005, pp. 25 - 27.  
63 Testimony by Janice Ayala, Assistant Director for Investigative Programs, Office of 
Investigations, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Department of Homeland 
Security, before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on 
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Combating Organized Retail Crime: The Role of 
Federal Law Enforcement, 111th Cong., 1st sess., November 5, 2009.  
64  United States Attorney‘s Office Eastern District of Missouri, ―Eight Area Men Plead Guilty to 
Federal Racketeering Charges Involving Conspiracy to Transfer Cash and Checks to the 

Organized Retail Crime 
31 
Palestinian 
Territories,‖ 
press 
release, 
November 
24, 
2009, 
http://stlouis.fbi. 
gov/dojpressrel/pressrel09/sl112409a.htm.  
65 From testimony by John S. Pistole, Assistant Director, Counterterrorism Division, Federal 
Bureau of Investigation, before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on Financial Services, 
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Hamas Asset Freeze and Other Government 
Efforts To Stop Terrorist Funding, 108th Cong., 1st sess., September 24, 2003.  
66 Charles I. Miller, Organized Retail Theft: Raising Awareness, Offering Solutions, National 
Retail Federation Foundation, 2005, pp. 12 – 13.  
67 In November, 2008, a federal jury returned convictions for five members of the HLF accused 
of providing about $12.4 million in material support to Hamas. For more information, see 
http://www.fbi.gov/page2/nov08/ hlf_112508.html and http://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/20 
08/November/08-nsd-1046.html.  
68 For more information on the potential links between organized crime in the United States and 
terrorist organizations, see CRS Report R40525, Organized Crime in the United States: 
Trends and Issues for Congress, by Kristin M. Finklea.  
69 Pat Milton, ―FBI Worries About an Osama-Sopranos Link,‖ Associated Press, October 1, 
2006, 
http://www.redorbit.com/news/general/676652/ 
fbi_worries_about_an_ 
osamas 
opranos_ link/index.html. See also Mapping the Global Structure, National Intelligence 
Council, Report of the National Intelligence Council‘s 2020 Project, Based on consultations 
with nongovernmental experts around the world, Washington, D.C., December 2004, p. 96.  
70 National Retail Federation, 2010 Organized Retail Crime Survey, 2010, p. 5.  
71 Ibid., p. 6. Of the retailers responding to the NRF‘s 2009 survey, the average annual labor costs 
spent to combat ORC was $215,000, and 6% of these retailers spent over $1 million 
annually.  
72 2008 National Retail Security Survey Final Report, p. 30.  
73 Ibid., p. 12. There are various explanations for the decrease in the proportion of sales spent on 
loss prevention. For instance, one possibility is that an increase in total sales was not met 
with a relative increase in loss prevention measures. While overall sales may have climbed 
(as is suggested by 2008 U.S. Department of Commerce Retail Industry Census data), it is 
unknown whether loss prevention budgets increased, decreased, or remained the same.  
74 Ibid., pp. 23-25.  
75 2008 National Retail Security Survey Final Report, p. 30.  
76 From information provided to CRS during ORC briefing by representatives from eBay on July 
27, 2009.  
77 Information from correspondence between eBay and CRS, October 2, 2009.  
78 National Retail Federation, ―National Retail Federation, eBay Announce Partnership to Fight 
Organized Retail Crime,‖ press release, March 22, 2010, http://www.nrf.com/modu 
les.php?name=News&op=viewlive&sp_id=906.  
79 For further information on organized crime, see CRS Report R40525, Organized Crime in the 
United States: Trends and Issues for Congress, by Kristin M. Finklea.  
80 Testimony by law enforcement representatives from the FBI, ICE, USSS, and USPIS before 
the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, 
and Homeland Security, Combating Organized Retail Crime: The Role of Federal Law 
Enforcement, 111th Cong., 1st sess., November 5, 2009. Also from an ICE briefing for CRS, 
October 14, 2009 and a USSS briefing for CRS, November 13, 2009.  
81 The FBI utilizes the term ORT rather than ORC so as not to create a confusion between 
organized retail crime and traditional organized crime.  
82 18 U.S.C. § 1956.  
83 18 U.S.C. § 2314.  
84 18 U.S.C., Chapter 96.  
85 Testimony by David Johnson, Section Chief, Criminal Investigative Division, Federal Bureau 
of Investigation, before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, 

Kristin M. Finklea 
32 
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Combating Organized Retail 
Crime: The Role of Federal Law Enforcement, 111th Cong., 1st sess., November 5, 2009.  
86 P.L. 109-162, § 1105, codified at 28 U.S.C. § 509 note.  
87 For more information on LERPnet, see http://www.lerpnet.com/.  
88 Testimony by David Johnson, Section Chief, Criminal Investigative Division, Federal Bureau 
of Investigation, before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, 
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Combating Organized Retail 
Crime: The Role of Federal Law Enforcement, 111th Cong., 1st sess., November 5, 2009.  
89 An alien is anyone who is not a citizen or national of the United States and is synonymous with 
non-citizen.  
90 See, for example, Charles I. Miller, Organized Retail Theft: Raising Awareness, Offering 
Solutions, National Retail Federation Foundation, 2005, p. 1. Some have suggested that 
unauthorized aliens may be particularly vulnerable to being recruited by ORC groups 
because they are looking to earn money while in the United States and may be seen as 
expendable by higher-ups in the organization.  
91 Testimony by Janice Ayala, Assistant Director for Investigative Programs, Office of 
Investigations, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Department of Homeland 
Security, before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on 
Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Combating Organized Retail Crime: The Role of 
Federal Law Enforcement, 111th Cong., 1st sess., November 5, 2009.  
92 Information provided to CRS by ICE, March 19, 2010.  
93 See the National Retail Federation, 2010 Organized Retail Crime Survey, 2010, p. 11. For 
more information on the National Cyber Crimes Center, see http://www.ice.gov/p 
artners/investigations/services/cyberbranch.htm.  
94 See http://www.secretservice.gov/investigations.shtml.  
95 According to the USSS, ―investigations include counterfeiting of U.S. currency (to include 
coins); counterfeiting of foreign currency (occurring domestically); identity crimes such as 
access device fraud, identity theft, false identification fraud, bank fraud and check fraud; 
telemarketing fraud; telecommunications fraud (cellular and hard wire); computer fraud; 
fraud targeting automated payment systems and teller machines; direct deposit fraud; 
investigations of forgery, uttering, alterations, false impersonations or false claims 
involving U.S. Treasury Checks, U.S. Saving Bonds, U.S. Treasury Notes, Bonds and Bills; 
electronic funds transfer (EFT) including Treasury disbursements and fraud within the 
Treasury payment systems; Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation investigations; Farm 
Credit Administration violations; and fictitious or fraudulent commercial instruments and 
foreign securities.‖ For more information, see http://www.secretservice.gov/criminal.shtml.  
96 18 U.S.C. § 1029(a)(10).  
97 18 U.S.C. § 1029.  
98 18 U.S.C. § 1030.  
99 USSS briefing for CRS, November 13, 2009.  
100 Ibid., See also testimony by John R. Large, Special Agent in Charge, Criminal Investigative 
Division, Office of Investigations, U.S. Secret Service before the U.S. Congress, House 
Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, 
Combating Organized Retail Crime: The Role of Federal Law Enforcement, 111th Cong., 1st 
sess., November 5, 2009.  
101 Testimony of Zane M. Hill, Deputy Chief Postal Inspector, U.S. Postal Inspection Service 
before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Crime, 
Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Combating Organized Retail Crime: The Role of 
Federal Law Enforcement, 111th Cong., 1st sess., November 5, 2009.  
102 One common method of recruiting these unwitting accomplices is through employment 
websites where the criminals advertise work-from-home jobs as shippers.  
103 For more information on re-shipping scams, see https://postalinspectors.uspis.gov/ 
radDocs/consumer/ ReshippingScam.html.  

Organized Retail Crime 
33 
104 Detailed information on retailers‘ efforts to combat ORC is provided in the ―Retailers‖ section 
of this chapter.  
105 2008 National Retail Security Survey Final Report, p. 12.  
106 Ibid., p. 15.  
107 Ibid., p. 12.  
108 As mentioned, the NRF‘s 2010 survey of retailers reports that about 90% of the retailers 
surveyed indicated that their companies had been victimized by ORC, a decrease over the 
92% that reported victimization in 2009, but an increase over the 85% that reported 
victimization in 2008. While the overall percentage of retailers reporting ORC victimization 
decreased in 2010, a majority (59%) of surveyed retailers still reported an increase in ORC 
activity. See National Retail Federation, 2010 Organized Retail Crime Survey, 2010.  
109 See the Appendix for a table displaying felony theft levels by state.  
110 From an organized retail crime and felony theft level database maintained and provided to 
CRS by Frank Muscato, ORC Investigations Supervisor, Organized Retail Crime Division, 
Walgreens, November 9, 2009.  
111 18 U.S.C. § 2314.  
112 18 U.S.C. § 2315.  
113 The Organized Retail Crime Act of 2009 (H.R. 1173) would, among other things, define and 
criminalize ORC. It would also modify the transportation of stolen goods as well as the sale 
and receipt of stolen goods statutes to include ORC. Similarly, the Organized Retail Crime 
Prevention and Enforcement Act of 2009 (H.R. 4011) would expand these statutes to 
criminalize the transportation to and sale of goods (that were stolen or fraudulently 
obtained) on an online marketplace.  
114 Testimony by law enforcement representatives from the FBI, ICE, USSS, and USPIS before 
the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, 
and Homeland Security, Combating Organized Retail Crime: The Role of Federal Law 
Enforcement, 111th Cong., 1st sess., November 5, 2009.  
115 The Organized Retail Crime Prevention and Enforcement Act of 2009 (H.R. 4011) would, 
among other things, lower the monetary threshold to $1,000 for the sale, receipt, and 
transportation of stolen goods across state lines. The Combating Organized Retail Crime 
Act of 2009 (S. 470) would amend the statutes to criminalize the sale, receipt, or 
transportation of stolen goods having an aggregate value of $5,000 or more during any 12-
month period.  
116 See the Appendix for a table displaying felony theft levels by state.  
117 Testimony by David Johnson, Section Chief, Criminal Investigative Division, Federal Bureau 
of Investigation, before the U.S. Congress, House Committee on the Judiciary, 
Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and Homeland Security, Combating Organized Retail 
Crime: The Role of Federal Law Enforcement, 111th Cong., 1st sess., November 5, 2009.  
118 Testimony by Robert S. Mueller, III, Director, Federal Bureau of Investigation, before the 
U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on the Judiciary, Oversight of the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, 111th Cong., 1st sess., September 16, 2009.  
119 See 18 U.S.C. § 1084 and Title VIII of P.L. 109-347, Unlawful Internet Gambling 
Enforcement, codified at 31 U.S.C. § 5361 et seq.  
120 See 31 U.S.C. § 5365 - 5366.  
121 The E-fencing Enforcement Act of 2009 (H.R. 1166) would, among other things, require 
online marketplaces to disclose to law enforcement the contact information of high volume 
sellers who are selling goods matching law enforcement‘s description of stolen goods. Also, 
the Organized Retail Crime Act of 2009 (H.R. 1173) would, among other things, require 
online marketplaces to investigate credible claims of stolen goods (obtained and sold via 
ORC) being sold on their websites. It would also necessitate such marketplaces to require 
that high-volume sellers make available contact information and information about the 
source of the products sold.  
122 21 U.S.C. § 301.  


In: Organized Retail Crime 
ISBN: 978-1-61122-768-0 
Editors: Blake H. Liventin 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
Chapter 2 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF DAVID JOHNSON, SECTION 
CHIEF, CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIVE DIVISION, 
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, 
BEFORE THE UNITED STATES HOUSE 
JUDICIARY SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, 
TERRORISM, AND HOMELAND SECURITY 
 
 
Good morning, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Gohmert and Members 
of the Subcommittee. I appreciate the opportunity to testify before you today 
on the FBI‘s efforts to combat organized retail theft (ORT) in the United 
States. We prefer to use the term ―organized retail theft‖ because the term 
―organized crime‖ has a specific meaning within the context of law 
enforcement. Therefore referring to the criminal activity as ―organized retail 
crime‖ creates confusion.  
ORT THREAT  
What is called Organized Retail Theft or ORT by Retail Loss Prevention 
Professionals, can generally be described as professional burglars, boosters, 
cons, thieves, fences and resellers conspiring to steal and sell retail 
merchandise obtained from retail establishments by theft or deception. 
‗Boosters‘ – the front line thieves who intend to resell stolen goods – generally 
coordinate with ‗fences‘ who may sell the items outright at flea markets or 

David Johnson 
36 
convenience stores or online; or repackage them for sale to higher level fences. 
The problem is significant for its negative economic impact, the safety issues 
it brings to unsuspecting consumers, and its potential link to other criminal 
enterprises.  
Each year, organized retail theft is responsible for significant economic 
losses to retailers, which are then passed along to the American consumer. 
While it is difficult to pinpoint the exact annual dollar loss caused by this 
crime problem, retailers estimate all crimes where they are victims results in 
billions of dollars in losses.   
The tax revenue losses attributable to ORT also negatively impact states. 
In the face of the current economic downturn, the hundreds of millions of 
dollars in revenue losses to our states can be considered catastrophic.  
This crime problem also has the potential to negatively impact consumer 
health and safety. Specifically, the unsuspecting consumer faces potential 
health and safety risks from legitimate products which may have been 
mishandled by the criminal enterprises who stole them for resale to consumers. 
In many cases, stolen infant formula, pharmaceuticals, and other consumables 
are not stored under proper conditions. When these items are reintroduced into 
the retail market, they may pose a significant health risk to the consumer. The 
potential threat is perhaps most evident in cases in which infant formula is 
stolen, repackaged and then resold to both knowing and unknowing 
wholesalers, who then sell the infant formula to government food programs 
and discount stores. In addition to these concerns, the potential for intentional 
product tampering prior to the reintroduction of the stolen merchandise into 
the retail market is significant.  
Also of concern for the FBI, in particular, is the potential nexus between 
organized retail theft syndicates and other criminal enterprises.  In 2006, for 
example, nine members of an alleged Michigan smuggling operation were 
arrested, accused of taking part in a global scheme involving bootlegged 
cigarettes, phony Viagra and counterfeit tax stamps, and sending a cut of their 
illicit profits to Hezbollah.  
The FBI has also investigated criminal ties between members of the 
international street gang MS-13 and fencing rings suspected of trafficking in 
millions of dollars in stolen medicine and other retail goods.   

Statement of David Johnson, Section Chief, Criminal Investigative... 
37 
CHALLENGES  
There are many challenges on the road to combating organized retail theft. 
Lack of available resources to state and local police departments, who have the 
primary responsibility for investigating most retail crimes, is a huge hurdle. 
Sharing information between public and private enterprise is another.  
As with other forms of criminal enterprise, there is a loose hierarchy 
within organized retail theft groups. Specifically, these groups utilize low-
level ‗boosters‘ – those who actually steal the merchandise and higher level 
‗fencers,‘ who frequently coordinate booster thefts. Often, these boosters are 
illegal immigrants working off a debt or individuals suffering from some form 
of addiction. If these low-level boosters are removed from the criminal 
enterprise, others will simply step in to take their place.  
These criminal groups are also particularly nimble – able to easily change 
their appearance, alter their method of operation, and particularly adept at 
circumventing security devices and procedures. Groups typically utilize 
methods ranging in sophistication from the development and use of counterfeit 
receipts and UPC codes to refund and check/credit card fraud to something as 
basic as the ‗grab and run.‘ They frequently identify store locations with 
Global Positioning Systems (GPS), identify escape routes, use false 
identification, utilize rented or borrowed vehicles, and employ diversionary 
tactics in stores. They are known to travel from state to state or city to city 
following interstate corridors around large cities.  
Further, the wide reach of the Internet and online auction sites has 
provided global market places for entrepreneurs and, not surprisingly, criminal 
enterprises.  
Law Enforcement/Private Industry Response  
Sophisticated ORT groups can best be dismantled through a coordinated 
and cooperative effort between law enforcement and the retail industry. In 
December 2003, the FBI established an ORT Initiative to identify and disrupt 
multi-jurisdictional ORT groups, using federal statutes such as Conspiracy, 
Interstate Transportation of Stolen Property, and Money Laundering.  
Increased information sharing and cooperation between law enforcement and 
the private sector will enable both to gain a better understanding of the full 
nature and extent of the threat ORT poses, as well as to identify the best 
methods for law enforcement and the retail industry to attack this crime 
problem.  
Additionally, Congress passed legislation signed by the President in 
January 2006 that required the Attorney General and the FBI, in consultation 

David Johnson 
38 
with the retail community – specifically, the National Retail Federation (NRF) 
and the Retail Industry Leader‘s Association (RILA) -- to build a system for 
information-sharing, to include intelligence as well as lessons learned and best 
practices regarding ORT. As you may already be aware, the result of that 
measure - the Law Enforcement Retail Partnership Network (LERPnet) - was 
subsequently launched in 2007.  
The database, which is housed and run by the private sector, allows retail 
members to track and identify organized retail theft via a secure web portal. To 
date, nearly 100,000 retail locations are included in the data, which represents 
$1.17 trillion in retail sales or nearly 25% of all retail sales in one year.  
With a recently signed Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), law 
enforcement will also be able to access LERPnet via the FBI‘s Law 
Enforcement Online to search reported incidents and track organized retail 
theft throughout the country. This partnership between law enforcement and 
private industry provides for greater efficiency in intelligence gathering and 
dissemination, enabling increased arrests, prosecutions, and recoveries of 
stolen merchandise.  
Intelligence goes hand-in-hand with partnerships. One good piece of 
intelligence can be the breakthrough needed to make a vital connection or 
solve a case. By arming the retail industry with the infrastructure necessary to 
share such intelligence, it is our hope that they – along with their partners in 
law enforcement – are better able to thwart criminal efforts and reduce 
subsequent losses. Previously, individual retailers reported thefts to local law 
enforcement, but no uniform method of tracking these crimes across 
jurisdictions existed.  
In addition to LERPnet and coordination with the retail industry, the FBI 
is identifying and targeting multi-jurisdictional ORT groups utilizing existing 
task force resources. Currently, there are seven FBI-led Major Theft Task 
Forces which are located in the Chicago, El Paso (2), Memphis, Miami (2) and 
New York Field Offices. Staffed by FBI Agents and other federal, state and 
local law enforcement officers, the task forces are responsible for conducting 
investigations in the major theft areas of ORT, cargo, vehicle, and jewelry 
theft crimes. Further, in cases where an organized retail theft enterprise can be 
tied to other criminal entities, additional FBI or law enforcement resources 
may be able to assist.   
These task forces, which combine the resources of local, state and federal 
law enforcement, as well as retail loss prevention professionals, are applying 
investigative techniques and strategies which the FBI has successfully utilized 
to target traditional organized crime, including the development of a solid 

Statement of David Johnson, Section Chief, Criminal Investigative... 
39 
intelligence base and the use of undercover operations. Clearly, this approach 
increases the effectiveness and productivity of limited personnel and logistical 
resources, avoids the duplication of investigation resources, and expands the 
cooperation and communication among federal, state, and local law 
enforcement agencies as well as the retail industry.  
SUCCESSES  
The use of the task force approach to combating crime, coupled with 
successful partnerships within industry, is seen by the FBI as one of the most 
effective and efficient tools by which to identify, disrupt and dismantle any 
criminal enterprise. That strategy is working.   
In February 2008, for example, seven individuals were indicted for 
participating in a scheme to shoplift merchandise and then sell it on the 
Internet auction site eBay. All seven defendants were charged with 
participating in a conspiracy to commit wire fraud and to engage in the 
interstate transportation of stolen property. That case was investigated by the 
FBI, Kansas City Police Department, and the Postal Inspection Service. It has 
since been prosecuted by the U.S. Attorney‘s Office, Western District of 
Missouri.  
In May of that same year, 23 Organized Crime associates of the Gambino 
Crime Families – including a Gambino Crew Supervisor - were arrested based 
on a racketeering indictment charging them with operating an illegal enterprise 
involved in illegal gambling, extortion, fraud and labor racketeering. The fraud 
schemes pertained to eight or more associates involved in wire fraud because 
they created and used counterfeit UPC labels to obtain merchandise from 
numerous retail outlets. This six year investigation was conducted by the FBI 
as well as our partners at the U.S. Department of Labor, Office of Inspector 
General; the Internal Revenue Service; the New Jersey State Police; and, the 
Union County Prosecutors Office.  
In August 2008, following months of investigation, the FBI and its law 
enforcement partners at the Internal Revenue Service, U.S. Immigration and 
Customs Enforcement, and the Broward County Sheriff‘s Department, 
participated in a raid of PharmaCare Health Services in Sunrise, Florida. The 
resulting indictments charged transportation of stolen goods, money 
laundering, conspiracy, and fraud. According to court documents, PharmaCare 
was actually a wholesaler that often purchased bulk quantities of mixed and 

David Johnson 
40 
damaged stolen products. Its employees were subsequently convicted of 
selling millions of dollars worth of over-the-counter medications, health and 
beauty aids that had been stolen from Walgreens, Target, CVS and Rite-Aid.  
Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Gohmert and Members of the 
Subcommittee, I appreciate the opportunity to come before you today and 
share the work that the FBI is doing to address the problem posed by 
organized retail theft syndicates in this country. I am happy to answer any 
questions.  
 
 
 
 
 

In: Organized Retail Crime 
ISBN: 978-1-61122-768-0 
Editors: Blake H. Liventin 
© 2011Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
Chapter 3 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF JANICE AYALA, ASSISTANT 
DIRECTOR FOR INVESTIGATIVE PROGRAMS, 
OFFICE OF INVESTIGATIONS, U.S. 
IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS 
ENFORCEMENT, DEPARTMENT OF 
HOMELAND SECURITY, BEFORE THE 
UNITED STATES HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES SUBCOMMITTEE ON 
CRIME, TERRORISM, AND HOMELAND 
SECURITY, HEARING ON “ORGANIZED 
RETAIL CRIME” 
INTRODUCTION  
Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Gohmert, and distinguished Members 
of the Subcommittee: 
On behalf of Secretary Napolitano and Assistant Secretary Morton, I 
would like to thank you for the opportunity to testify today on the efforts of 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) in the area of Organized 
Retail Crime (ORC). As you know, ICE is the largest investigative agency 
within the Department of Homeland Security. We protect national security and 

Janice Ayala 
42 
uphold public safety by targeting transnational criminal networks and terrorist 
organizations that seek to exploit vulnerabilities at our borders. 
ICE investigates individuals and organizations that exploit vulnerabilities 
in financial systems for the purpose of laundering illicit proceeds. ICE also 
addresses the financial component of every cross-border criminal 
investigation. Naturally, this includes investigations into organized retail 
crimes. ICE's financial investigative authorities and unique capabilities 
specifically enable it to identify, dismantle, and disrupt the financial criminal 
enterprises that threaten our nation's economy and security. One of the most 
effective methods utilized to identify, dismantle, and disrupt organizations 
engaged in retail crime is to target the unlawful proceeds gained through their 
efforts. 
ICE's Role in Battling Organized Retail Crime 
ICE's Office of Investigations is well aware of the impact of organized 
retail crime on more than just our retail industry and economy. ICE 
investigations have demonstrated that profits generated from organized retail 
crime represent a clear threat to the U.S. financial sector because these profits 
may be laundered through U.S. and international financial systems. Similar to 
other criminal organizations, organized retail crime rings look for and exploit 
the vulnerabilities within these financial infrastructures to move and store their 
illicit proceeds. 
ICE is involved in myriad investigations that target criminal activity 
including money laundering, narcotics trafficking, illegal importation and 
export, violation of intellectual property laws, human smuggling and 
trafficking, gang activity and human rights violations. ICE agents have broad 
investigative authorities under Titles 8, 18, and 31 of the United States Code, 
permitting them to pursue many different types of criminal violations, 
including complex banking and financial misconduct cases and seize assets of 
criminal enterprises engaged in immigration and customs violations. The 
melding of these authorities and unique capabilities given to, and used by, ICE 
enables it to identify, dismantle and disrupt the financial criminal enterprises 
that threaten our nation's economy and security. 
From experience, ICE recognizes that organized retail crime groups 
engage in activities that cross over into one or more of ICE's ongoing 
initiatives or violate laws in which ICE has jurisdiction. ICE has been involved 

Statement of Janice Ayala, Assistant Director for Investigative... 
43 
in a number of successful organized retail crime investigations over the past 
few years, but I would like to briefly discuss two of them. 
Rosemont Wholesale, Inc.  
ICE has been involved in the Rosemont Wholesale, Inc. investigation 
since 2005. At that time, ICE learned that individuals connected to Rosemont 
Wholesale, Inc. were possibly moving illicit proceeds abroad from the large-
scale interstate sale of stolen retail products. 
In 2005, retailers operating in the San Francisco Bay Area provided 
information to the Oakland Police Department regarding an ORC ring. 
Oakland Police Department subsequently forwarded that information to the 
ICE Special Agent in Charge (SAC) office in San Francisco. 
ICE agents in San Francisco, with assistance from the Internal Revenue 
Service – Criminal Investigation (IRS-CI), the Oakland Police Department, the 
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI), uncovered a ring involving thieves who stole over-the-
counter products from large retailers throughout the San Francisco Bay Area. 
The stolen products were then resold through Rosemont Wholesale, Inc., a 
company involved in selling over-the-counter retail products such as 
medicines, razor blades, and baby formula, both over the Internet and 
throughout the San Francisco Bay Area to small, local grocery stores. Two 
fencing operations bought the stolen merchandise on behalf of Rosemont and 
generated illicit profits by selling it to Rosemont at a premium. 
Rosemont then "laundered" the products, selling them through their online 
auction site and shipping them throughout the United States and Canada. Some 
of the proceeds from the criminal enterprise turned up in Yemen. In addition, 
Rosemont structured numerous banking transactions to avoid currency 
reporting requirements. 
Following an extensive investigation, agents from ICE, IRS-CI, FBI, 
USDA, and officers from the Oakland Police Department executed search 
warrants at six locations in the San Francisco Bay Area. ICE seized more than 
12 tractor-trailer loads of stolen merchandise valued at approximately $4.4 
million. Charges were brought against eight defendants, including interstate 
transportation of stolen goods, securities, moneys, fraudulent state tax stamps 
or articles used in counterfeiting (18 U.S.C. § 2314), fraud and swindles (18 
U.S.C. § 1341), laundering of monetary instruments (18 U.S.C. § 1956), 
structuring transactions to evade reporting requirements prohibited (31 U.S.C. 

Janice Ayala 
44 
§ 5324), attempt to evade or defeat tax (26 U.S.C. § 7201), fraud and false 
statements (26 U.S.C. § 7206) and conspiracy to commit offense or to defraud 
the United States (18 U.S.C. § 371). 
On October 16, 2009, Hassan Swaid, the President, Chief Executive 
Officer and owner of Rosemont Wholesale, Inc., was sentenced to 78 months 
in prison for his role in the conspiracy. Swaid was convicted on June 24, 2009, 
following a six-week jury trial. Five other members of this organization have 
pled guilty to various crimes, including structuring transactions to evade 
reporting requirements, conspiracy related to the interstate transportation of 
stolen goods, securities, moneys, fraudulent state tax stamps or articles used in 
counterfeiting, attempting to evade or defeat tax, and fraud and false 
statements. All remaining conspirators are currently awaiting sentencing. 
Mohammed Ghali  
ICE was involved in the Mohammed Ghali investigation after receiving 
information that a criminal organization he headed was involved in the 
interstate transportation of stolen merchandise and laundering the proceeds 
from the sale of this stolen merchandise internationally. According to sources 
ICE had developed, several members of the organization were also alleged to 
have direct ties to terrorist acts and/or organizations. 
Mohammed Ghali was the leader of a criminal organization involved in 
large scale organized retail theft and international money laundering. Proceeds 
from Ghali's criminal activity were deposited in foreign financial institutions 
with weak anti-money laundering programs. 
Members of the Ghali organization recruited hundreds of shoplifters and 
drug addicts to steal over-the-counter medicinal products, prescription drugs, 
and other specific items such as infant formula, glucose test strips, razors, and 
pregnancy test kits. These items were then repackaged and sold to wholesalers 
and retailers. 
The organization used numerous convenience stores owned and operated 
by members of the organization in the Fort Worth, Texas area as fencing 
locations. Shoplifters and thieves utilized elaborate schemes to obtain the 
products such as counterfeit coupons, price matching schemes, and 
manufacturing counterfeit uniform price code labels. They also committed 
fraud through the use of food stamps and Women, Infant and Children 
Programs. In some instances, large quantities of products were obtained 
through armed robbery and warehouse thefts. For example, a shipment of 

Statement of Janice Ayala, Assistant Director for Investigative... 
45 
Viagra valued at over $1 million was stolen from a legitimate drug wholesaler, 
purchased by members of the Ghali organization, and then resold on the street. 
To further expose the criminal organization, ICE initiated a joint 
undercover operation between its Dallas SAC office, the Fort Worth Police 
Department, and the Food and Drug Administration. The investigation utilized 
a number of investigative techniques, including the use of confidential 
informants, wiretaps, video and audio surveillance, undercover meetings and 
pen registers. Members of the loss prevention community also participated 
throughout the course of the investigation. Agents conducted approximately 93 
undercover transactions in which property was specially marked, represented 
as stolen and sold to members of the organization. As a result of the 
investigation, approximately 35 members of the organization were charged 
with state and federal violations, including conspiracy, possession of stolen 
goods, interstate transportation of stolen property, receipt of stolen goods, and 
money laundering. Ghali, the leader of the organization, was convicted and 
sentenced to serve 14 years in federal prison. He also was ordered to forfeit 
two residences and $527,627 in cash that was seized during the investigation. 
While I cannot discuss the specifics of ongoing organized retail crime 
investigations, ICE is currently working on active cases related to organized 
retail crime in Texas, Illinois, California and Florida. 
Organized Retail Crime Pilot Program  
ICE has become increasingly involved in investigations that target 
organized retail crime due to the interstate and international shipments of 
stolen goods and the corresponding movement of illicit proceeds from the sale 
of these stolen goods. 
ICE has developed a pilot program to enhance the agency's ability to 
address the organized retail crime threat. The ORC Pilot Program was 
launched on July 6, 2009, in Houston, Los Angeles, Miami and New York, 
and is scheduled to last for an initial period of six months. The ORC Pilot 
Program focuses on four primary areas: 1) the development of a threat 
assessment to determine how these groups are engaged in crimes over which 
ICE has jurisdiction; 2) the development of a tracking system aimed at 
assessing ICE's involvement in ORC cases; 3) the development of a database 
that will be made available to the field with retail industry contacts for the 
affected ICE offices, which compliments the existing information contained in 
the National Retail Federation's LERPnet database by placing ICE agents in 

Janice Ayala 
46 
contact with members of the retail community throughout the country; and 4) 
an enhanced effort to explore fully how these groups are exploiting systemic 
vulnerabilities in the banking system to launder their profits. 
The ORC Pilot Program, which is being funded with base investigative 
resources, encompasses all types of ORC-related criminal activities under the 
jurisdiction of ICE, including those committed over the Internet. Since the 
pilot program was launched just over four months ago, it is still too early to 
conduct an accurate analysis of its overall effectiveness. However, based on 
previous successful ICE investigations into organized retail crime, we have 
been able to develop some indicators of suspicious banking activity related to 
ORC. These indicators include: 
 
 
Business checks written to individuals, as opposed to legitimate 
suppliers. 
 
Business checks cashed at the banks from which the checks 
originated, instead of being deposited into another business' bank 
account. 
 
Business checks written to cash on a regular basis in amounts that 
exceed a business's petty cash requirement. 
 
Multiple checks written on the same day to cash to ensure the amount 
of each check does not exceed $10,000. 
 
Multiple money orders in increments of $500 or less deposited into 
bank accounts in which the remitter of the money order is the same as 
the authorized signers on the bank accounts for which the checks are 
being deposited. 
 
Subjects of questionable financial transactions maintaining the same 
address. 
 
Occupations listed for the subjects of questionable financial activities 
that are not commensurate to the volume and type of the financial 
activities. 
 
Checks drawn from the questionable financial activities that are 
negotiated in foreign countries. 
 
Cash deposits related to the questionable financial activities involving 
currency in $100 denominations. 

Statement of Janice Ayala, Assistant Director for Investigative... 
47 
CONCLUSION  
While the organized retail crime initiative is only a pilot program at this 
time, based on our preliminary results of the threat assessment, ICE hopes to 
develop it into an ongoing initiative. 
I would like to thank the Subcommittee for this opportunity to testify and 
for your continued support of ICE, DHS and our law enforcement mission. I 
will be happy to answer any questions that you may have at this time. 
 


In: Organized Retail Crime 
ISBN: 978-1-61122-768-0 
Editors: Blake H. Liventin 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
Chapter 4 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF JOHN R. LARGE, SPECIAL 
AGENT IN CHARGE, CRIMINAL 
INVESTIGATIVE DIVISION, OFFICE OF 
INVESTIGATIONS, U.S. SECRET SERVICE, 
BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEE ON THE 
JUDICIARY SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, 
TERRORISM, AND HOMELAND SECURITY, 
HEARING ON “COMBATING ORGANIZED 
RETAIL CRIME: THE ROLE OF FEDERAL 
LAW ENFORCEMENT” 
 
 
Good morning, Chairman Scott, Ranking Member Gohmert and 
distinguished members of the Subcommittee. Thank you for the opportunity to 
testify today on the investigative responsibilities of the United States Secret 
Service (Secret Service).    
While the Secret Service is perhaps best known for protecting our nation‘s 
leaders, we were established in 1865 to investigate and prevent the 
counterfeiting of United States currency. As the original guardian of the 
nation‘s financial payment system, the Secret Service has a long history of 
protecting American consumers, industries, and financial institutions from 
fraud. Congress continues to recognize the Secret Service‘s 144 years of 
investigative expertise in financial crimes and over the last two decades has 

John R. Large 
50 
expanded our statutory authorities to include access device fraud (18 USC 
§1029), which includes credit and debit card fraud.  Congress has also given 
the Secret Service concurrent jurisdiction with other law enforcement agencies 
for identity theft (18 USC §1028), computer fraud (18 USC §1030), and bank 
fraud (18 USC §1344). We take our mission to combat these crimes seriously 
and as a result, the Secret Service is recognized worldwide for its investigative 
expertise and innovative approaches to detecting, investigating, and preventing 
financial crimes.    
To accomplish its investigative mission, the Secret Service operates 142 
domestic offices (including domicile offices) and 22 foreign offices in 18 
countries. The agency works closely with other federal, state, and local law 
enforcement, as well as other U.S. government agencies and foreign 
counterparts to maximize its efforts.    
FINANCIAL FRAUD AND ELECTRONIC CRIMES  
In recent years, the combination of the information revolution and the 
effects of globalization have caused the investigative mission of the Secret 
Service to evolve. Through our work in the areas of financial and electronic 
crime, the Secret Service has developed particular expertise in the 
investigation of identity theft, false identification fraud, credit card fraud, debit 
card fraud, check fraud, bank fraud, and cyber crime, including computer 
intrusions. In Fiscal Year 2008, agents assigned to Secret Service offices 
across the United States arrested over 5,600 suspects for financial crimes 
violations. These suspects were responsible for approximately $442 million in 
actual fraud loss to individuals and financial institutions.    
The Secret Service continues to observe a marked increase in the quality, 
quantity, and complexity of financial crimes, particularly offenses related to 
identity theft and access device fraud. Criminals often seek the personal 
identifiers generally required to obtain goods and services on credit, such as 
Social Security numbers, names, and dates of birth. Identity crimes also 
involve the theft or misuse of an individual's financial identifiers such as credit 
card numbers, bank account numbers, and personal identification numbers 
(PINs).    
In the 1980s and 1990s, criminals obtained stolen personal and financial 
information through traditional means, such as theft of mail, theft of trash from 
businesses or victims, home and vehicle burglaries, and theft of a victim‘s 

Statement of John R. Large, Special Agent in Charge, Criminal... 
51 
wallet or purse. While these low-tech methods of theft remain popular, 
criminal activity has also evolved so that criminals now employ newer, more 
high-tech methods for obtaining large quantities of stolen information.    
Recent trends observed by law enforcement show that today‘s criminals 
continue to seek to compromise victims‘ personal and financial information 
through the use of computers and the Internet to launch cyber attacks targeting 
citizens and financial institutions. Cyber criminals have become adept at 
stealing victims‘ personal information through phishing emails, account 
takeovers, malicious software, hacking attacks, and network intrusions 
resulting in data breaches.  
The Secret Service is particularly concerned about cases involving 
network intrusions of businesses that result in the compromise of credit and 
debit card numbers and all related personal information, and the subsequent 
exploitation of this data. A considerable portion of this type of electronic theft 
appears to be attributable to organized cyber groups, many of them based 
abroad, which pursue both the intrusions and the subsequent exploitation of 
the stolen data.  Stolen credit card information is often trafficked in units that 
include more than just the card number and expiration date. These ―full-info 
cards‖ include additional information, such as the card holder‘s full name and 
address, mother‘s maiden name, date of birth, Social Security number, a PIN, 
and other personal information that allows additional criminal exploitation of 
the affected individual.    
Another rising trend is the increase in volume of trafficking ―card track 
data‖ together with PINs. This data allows a criminal to manufacture a fully 
functional counterfeit credit or debit card and execute ATM withdrawals or 
other PIN-enabled transactions against an account.  
The increasing level of collaboration among cyber-criminals raises both 
the complexity of investigating these cases and the level of potential harm to 
companies and individuals alike. Illicit Internet carding portals allow criminals 
to traffic stolen information in bulk quantities globally. These portals, or 
―carding websites,‖ operate like online bazaars where criminals converge to 
trade in personal financial data and cyber-tools of the trade. The websites vary 
in size, from a few dozen members to some of the more popular sites boasting 
memberships of approximately 8,000 users. Within these portals, there are 
separate forums moderated by notorious members of the carding community.  
Members meet online and discuss specific topics of interest. Criminal 
purveyors buy, sell, and trade malicious software, spamming services, credit, 
debit, and ATM card data, personal identification data, bank account 
information, hacking services and other contraband.  

John R. Large 
52 
In addition to the exploitation of credit and debit card accounts, many of 
the more sophisticated online criminal networks are now actively exploiting 
compromised online financial accounts. Criminals who gain access to victim 
accounts using online systems then execute fraudulent electronic banking 
transfers or sell the information to other criminals. The desire to exploit online 
bank accounts has led to the explosive growth of phishing scams, as well as 
the recent wave of malicious software, also known as ―malware‖ or 
―crimeware,‖ which is specifically designed to harvest account login 
information from the computers of infected victims. The technical 
sophistication of the illicit services readily available continues to grow. For 
example, the online fraud networks are increasingly leveraging the technical 
capabilities of ―botnets‖ (i.e. networks of thousands of infected computers 
which can be controlled by a criminal from a central location) for financial 
attacks ranging in nature from the hosting of phishing and other malicious 
websites to the launching of widespread attacks against the online 
authentication systems of U.S. financial institutions.   
The information revolution of the 1990s has turned our personal and 
financial information into a valuable commodity, whether it is being collected 
and brokered by a legitimate company or stolen by an identity thief. This 
information is no longer only an instrument used to facilitate a financial crime; 
it is now the primary target of criminals. Today, many companies have access 
to or store customer‘s personal financial information. This wealth of available 
personal information creates a target-rich environment for today‘s 
sophisticated criminals.   
Globalization has made commerce easy and convenient for corporations 
and consumers – financial institutions and systems are readily accessible 
worldwide. Today‘s cyber-criminals have adapted to this new means of global 
trade and subsequently seek to exploit our dependence on information 
technology. With the explosion of Internet accessibility world-wide, criminals 
have modified their fraudulent schemes to a new, more anonymous and 
constantly evolving cyber arena. As a result, the Secret Service has modified 
its investigative techniques to keep pace with emerging technologies.    
With this expansion of cyber crime, online auction houses have found 
themselves the victims or even the unwitting participants in organized criminal 
conspiracies. The Secret Service, while continuing to investigate financial 
crimes, has also opened criminal investigations into these organized cyber 
groups. The Secret Service has found these cases primarily evolve from access 
device fraud investigations, wherein, criminals who fraudulently purchase 
merchandise from traditional and online retailers and then resell the 

Statement of John R. Large, Special Agent in Charge, Criminal... 
53 
merchandise through online auction houses. In the recent past, the Secret 
Service, working closely with online auction houses, has successfully 
investigated and prosecuted several of these groups.   
In May 2006, an internationally recognized telecommunications company 
contacted the Secret Service regarding the theft of approximately 20,000 cell 
phones from their plant in a major U.S. metropolitan area. The phones had left 
a warehouse in a shipment of five large pallets, and only two reached their 
final destination. The investigation led to employees of a nationally identified 
shipping company. The employees were interviewed regarding the missing 
shipments and eventually a manager of the shipping company confessed to 
running a stolen cell phone operation. The scheme involved cell phones that 
were sold to a re-seller at $75-$100 per phone, usually valued at $120-$150.  
Some of the phones were resold from a network of small collusive shops and 
some were sold at other venues, such as online auction houses. As a result of 
the investigation, the Secret Service recovered $1,549,000 of merchandise 
from a suspect‘s residence and all suspects in this case were arrested on 
federal charges for Aiding and Abetting, Conspiracy, and Access Device 
Fraud.   
In October 2007, members of a Secret Service Electronic Crimes Task 
Force (ECTF), in cooperation with a District Attorney‘s Office, began an 
investigation into the criminal activities of an identified international currency 
transmittal service. The investigation revealed that suspects associated with 
this currency transmittal service recruited numerous individuals to sell 
fraudulently obtained merchandise over online auction houses. These proxy 
sellers advertised and took orders and/or bids for electronic merchandise at a 
significantly reduced price. Using stolen credit card information, the suspects 
purchased the ordered merchandise and then shipped it directly to the 
purchaser, or through another remailer. To date, the known fraud loss 
attributed to the group exceeds $4 million. Since the launch of the 
investigation, fourteen defendants have been arrested and are now in the 
United States and one defendant is currently in custody overseas awaiting 
extradition to the United States.  
In March 2008, the Secret Service was contacted by a credit card issuing 
bank regarding credit cards that were compromised at a local restaurant.  
Subsequent investigation revealed four suspects were using ―skimmed‖ credit 
card numbers to purchase gift cards from nationally identified retail stores.  
Upon obtaining the gift cards, the subjects would purchase electronic 
merchandise and sell those items and other gift cards through various online 
auction houses. All suspects associated with this case were subsequently 

John R. Large 
54 
arrested on federal charges for Access Device Fraud, Aggravated Identity 
Theft, and Conspiracy.     
FOSTERING PARTNERSHIPS AND COMBINING RESOURCES  
Criminal groups involved in financial crimes routinely operate in a multi-
jurisdictional environment. By working closely with other federal, state, and 
local law enforcement representatives, as well as foreign law enforcement, the 
Secret Service is able to provide a comprehensive network of information 
sharing, resource sharing, and technical expertise that bridges jurisdictional 
boundaries.    
The Secret Service has established unique and vital partnerships with 
state, local, and other federal law enforcement agencies through years of 
collaboration on our investigative and protective endeavors. These 
partnerships enabled the Secret Service to establish a national network of 
Financial Crimes Task Forces (FCTFs) to combine the resources of the private 
sector and other law enforcement agencies in an organized effort to combat 
threats to our financial payment systems and critical infrastructures. The 
Secret Service currently maintains 37 FCTFs located in metropolitan regions 
across the country.    
Further, in 1996, the Secret Service established the New York Electronic 
Crimes Task Force (ECTF) to combine the resources of academia, the private 
sector, and local, state and federal law enforcement agencies to combat 
computer-based threats to our financial payment systems and critical 
infrastructures. Congress has since directed the Secret Service in Public Law 
107-56 to establish a nationwide network of ECTFs to ―prevent, detect, and 
investigate various forms of electronic crimes, including potential terrorist 
attacks against critical infrastructure and financial payment systems.‖   
To date, the Secret Service has established 28 ECTFs, including the first 
international ECTF based in Rome, Italy. Membership in our ECTFs include: 
299 academic partners; over 2,100 international, federal, state and local law 
enforcement partners; and over 3,100 private sector partners. The Secret 
Service ECTF model is unique in that it is an international network with the 
capabilities to focus on regional issues. For example, the New York ECTF, 
based in the nation‘s largest banking center, focuses heavily on protecting our 
financial institutions and infrastructure, while the Houston ECTF works 
closely with partners such as ExxonMobil, Chevron, Shell, and Marathon Oil 

Statement of John R. Large, Special Agent in Charge, Criminal... 
55 
to protect the vital energy sector. By joining our ECTFs, all of our partners 
enjoy the resources, information, expertise, and advanced research provided by 
our international network of members while focusing on issues with 
significant regional impact.    
Partnerships between law enforcement and the private sector are critical to 
the success of the ECTF‘s preventive approach. Our ECTFs collaborate with 
private sector technical experts in an effort to protect their system networks 
and critical information by encouraging the development of business 
continuity plans and routine risk management assessments of their electronic 
infrastructure. Greater ECTF liaison with the business community provides 
rapid access to law enforcement and vital technical expertise during incidents 
of malicious cyber crime. The ECTFs also focus on partnerships with 
academia to ensure that law enforcement is on the cutting edge of technology 
by leveraging the research and development capabilities of teaching 
institutions and technical colleges.  
Another key element of success within the ECTF model is the Secret 
Service‘s Electronic Crimes Special Agent Program (ECSAP). This program is 
comprised of 1,148 Secret Service special agents who have received at least 
one of three levels of computer crimes-related training. These agents are 
deployed in more than 98 Secret Service offices throughout the world and 
have received extensive training in forensic identification, preservation and 
retrieval of electronically stored evidence. ECSAP agents are computer 
investigative specialists and among the most highly-trained experts in law 
enforcement, qualified to conduct examinations on all types of electronic 
evidence. This core cadre of special agents is equipped to investigate the 
continually evolving arena of electronic crime and have proven invaluable in 
the successful prosecution of criminal groups involved in computer fraud, 
bank fraud, identity theft, access device fraud, and various other electronic 
crimes targeting our financial institutions and private sector.      
These resources allow ECTFs the potential to identify and address 
possible cyber vulnerabilities before criminals find and exploit them. This 
proactive approach has successfully prevented cyber attacks that otherwise 
would have resulted in large-scale financial losses to U.S. based companies or 
disruptions of critical infrastructures. The Secret Service task force model 
opens the lines of communication and encourages the exchange of information 
between all academic, private sector, and law enforcement partners.   
Additionally, the National Computer Forensics Institute (NCFI) initiative 
is the result of a partnership between the Secret Service, the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS), and the State of Alabama. The goal of this facility 

John R. Large 
56 
is to provide a national standard of training for a variety of electronic crimes 
investigations. The program offers state and local law enforcement officers, 
prosecutors, and judges the training necessary to conduct computer forensics 
examinations. Investigators are trained to respond to network intrusion 
incidents and conduct basic electronic crimes investigations.    
Since opening on May 19, 2008, the Secret Service has provided critical 
training to 564 state and local law enforcement officials representing over 300 
agencies from 49 states and two U.S. territories.    
Community Outreach and Public Awareness   
The Secret Service raises awareness of issues related to counterfeit, 
financial fraud, and electronic crimes, both in the law enforcement community 
and among the general public. The Secret Service has worked to educate 
consumers and provide training to law enforcement personnel through a 
variety of programs and initiatives. Agents from local field offices routinely 
provide community outreach seminars and public awareness training on the 
subjects of counterfeit currency, financial fraud, identity theft, and cyber 
crime. Agents often address these topics when speaking to school groups, civic 
organizations, and staff meetings involving businesses or financial institutions.  
In addition, the Secret Service provides training in the form of continuing 
education to state and local law enforcement. This training includes formal and 
informal classes which occur at field office sponsored seminars, police 
academies, and other various settings.       
The Secret Service currently participates in a joint effort with the 
Department of Justice, the U.S. Postal Inspection Service, the Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC), the International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP), 
and the American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators to host 
identity crime training for law enforcement officers. In the last four years, 
Identity Crime Training Seminars have been held in over 18 cities nationwide, 
with two more expected by the end of the year. These training seminars are 
focused on providing local and state law enforcement officers with tools and 
resources that they can immediately put into use in their identity crime 
investigations.    
In addition, the Secret Service is committed to providing our law 
enforcement partners with publications and guides to assist them in combating 
counterfeit activity, financial fraud and cyber crime. The Secret Service 
continues to collaborate with the Department of Treasury and the Bureau of 

Statement of John R. Large, Special Agent in Charge, Criminal... 
57 
Engraving and Printing to produce and distribute various pamphlets, guides, 
posters, and visual aides pertaining to counterfeit currency detection.   
Specific instructions pertaining to the seizure and analysis of electronic 
evidence should be provided to officers to ensure proper investigation and 
successful prosecution of cyber crime offenses. To provide this essential 
knowledge, the Secret Service published the ―Best Practices Guide for Seizing 
Electronic Evidence.‖  This pocket guide was designed for police officers and 
detectives acting as first responders and helps guide law enforcement officers 
in recognizing, protecting, seizing, and searching electronic devices in 
accordance with applicable statutes and policies.  
The Secret Service also has collaborated with several of our law 
enforcement and corporate partners to produce the interactive, computer-based 
training programs known as ―Forward Edge‖ and ―Forward Edge II.‖ The 
Forward Edge series is a CD-ROM that provides law enforcement and 
corporate investigators with practical training in order to recognize and seize 
electronic storage items.    
Finally, the Secret Service produced an Identity Crime Video/CD-ROM, 
which contains over 50 investigative and victim assistance resources that local 
and state law enforcement officers can use when combating identity crime.  
This CD-ROM also contains a short identity crime video that can be shown to 
law enforcement which discusses why identity crime is important, what other 
departments are doing to combat identity crime, and what tools and resources 
are available. The Identity Crime CD-ROM is an interactive resource guide 
that was made in collaboration with the U.S. Postal Inspection Service, the 
FTC and the IACP.    
CONCLUSION  
As I have highlighted in my statement, the Secret Service is committed to 
our mission of protecting the integrity of U.S. currency and safeguarding the 
nation‘s critical financial infrastructure and financial payment systems.  
Although the Service‘s core responsibilities remain the same, our methods of 
investigation have changed to keep pace with emerging technologies.  
Through successful partnership with public and private task force members, 
the Secret Service continues to adapt to the ever evolving cyber criminal 
environment. The Secret Service dedicates significant resources to 

John R. Large 
58 
aggressively investigate all offenses within our purview to protect consumers 
and financial institutions.    
This concludes my prepared statement. Thank you again for this 
opportunity to testify on behalf of the Secret Service. I will be pleased to 
answer any questions at this time.       
 
 
 
 
 

In: Organized Retail Crime 
ISBN: 978-1-61122-768-0 
Editors: Blake H. Liventin 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
Chapter 5 
 
 
 
STATEMENT OF ZANE M. HILL, DEPUTY 
CHIEF POSTAL INSPECTOR, NATIONAL 
HEADQUARTERS, U.S. POSTAL INSPECTION 
SERVICE, BEFORE THE HOUSE COMMITTEE 
ON THE JUDICIARY SUBCOMMITTEE ON 
CRIME, TERRORISM AND HOMELAND 
SECURITY, HEARING ON “COMBATING 
ORGANIZED RETAIL CRIME: THE ROLE OF 
FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT” 
 
 
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee: thank you for holding this 
hearing on organized retail crime. The Postal Inspection Service appreciates 
the opportunity to be here with our colleagues from the U.S. Secret Service, 
Federal Bureau of Investigation and Immigration and Customs Enforcement to 
talk about our efforts to thwart organized retail crime. The Postal Inspection 
Service is committed to protect the American public from criminals who use 
the United States Postal Service in furtherance of fraudulent schemes, 
including organized retail crime.  
The Postal Inspection Service has a long, proud, and successful history of 
securing the nation‘s mail system and ensuring the public‘s trust in the mail. 
Postal Inspectors have been fighting consumer fraud since the mail fraud 
statute was enacted in 1872. The company name, address and ―product‖ may 

Zane M. Hill 
60 
change, but con artists take advantage of economic trends and current events 
to plan their schemes and illegal activities. With modern technology, the 
potential for the American public to be defrauded through the mail is much 
greater and potentially impacts more people than ever before.  
Because it is essential the public have full trust and confidence in the mail, 
Postal Inspectors are intent on preserving the integrity of the U.S. Mail 
through vigorous law enforcement, public education, and crime prevention 
efforts.  
Postal Inspectors are charged with ensuring the mails are safe and free 
from fraudulent schemes, illegal drugs, various forms of contraband, child 
pornography, as well as other dangerous products. Additionally, we work with 
other law enforcement and government agencies at the local, state, and federal 
level to ensure the Postal Service is not used to facilitate the commission of 
other crimes or as a conduit for the transportation of proceeds from illicit 
activities.  
It is this commitment that makes the Postal Service the most trusted 
government agency and one of the most trusted organizations in the United 
States. It is the ongoing vigilance of the Postal Service and Postal Inspectors in 
identifying criminals who attempt to use the mails in furtherance of their 
illegal activities. The use of the mails in organized retail theft has not 
historically been one of the major types of criminal activities we have 
encountered. That being said, we are now aware of its potential impact and a 
number of these types of cases have been referred to us from other law 
enforcement agencies as well as the retail industry.  
Our colleagues in federal, state, and local law enforcement, as well as 
corporate security professionals, are the principal investigators in the area of 
organized retail crime. When these crimes or aspects of these crimes cross or 
enter into the postal system, we have the jurisdiction and statutory authority to 
investigate and assist other law enforcement agencies and retailers in 
combating these illegal activities.  
We generally see two types of schemes which I will discuss briefly: 
Internet auction fraud and Reshipper fraud. Both of these crimes take 
advantage of the increasing use of the on-line marketplace in order to sell the 
stolen or fraudulently obtained goods.  
The Internet has become a critical component of the world‘s commerce. 
More and more businesses are increasing their use of this commerce channel. 
Likewise consumers have the convenience and ease of shopping in this 
expanded marketplace with a simple click of the mouse without having to 
leave home. This convenience though has a downside – criminals as well as 

Statement of Zane M. Hill, Deputy Chief Postal Inspector, National... 61 
others who seek to take advantage of consumers, now have a larger market in 
which to sell and distribute their stolen products while making substantial 
profits with fewer risks than the physical fencing operations that these 
criminals have historically used. By far, there is a greater reach for advertising 
of the ill-gotten products and the risk of detection is somewhat limited, making 
this online marketplace option so attractive to the organized retail crime 
groups.  
As noted our jurisdiction in organized retail crime lies in the use of the 
mail in order to ship the stolen products or as a means to remit payment to the 
online seller. In these investigations, we have seen criminal groups utilize the 
full spectrum of postal products, including Priority Mail, Express Mail, postal 
money orders as well as Post Office boxes from which they run their 
fraudulent schemes.  
One example of a recent Postal Inspection Service case began in early 
2008. Postal Inspectors received a tip that owners of two Toledo, OH 
convienence stores were buying stolen merchandise, selling it on eBay and 
then shipping the items, both domestically and internationally via the Postal 
Service. Postal Inspectors determined that proceeds from the fraudulent sales 
were being laundered by the operators‘ relatives in Jordan. We alerted special 
agents of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) in July when it was 
determined one of the operators was leaving for Jordan on a flight from the 
Detroit Metro Airport, and was believed to be smuggling an unknown amount 
of cash. ICE special agents stopped the owner, his wife, and their two children 
at the airport and seized $75,000 in undeclared funds which were hidden in the 
children‘s clothing. The husband and wife each pled guilty to illegally 
smuggling cash and were sentenced to time in prison.  
Postal Inspectors continued their investigation of the other suspect 
operator with excellent cooperation from eBay and PayPal and obtained 
records of the owner which identifed over 7,500 items valued at $650,000 that 
he had sold online. Postal Inspectors worked with loss-prevention specialists 
from the victim companies and identified most of the items as coming from 
their stores.  
Throughout 2008, Postal Inspectors and corporate security investigators 
worked undercover, purchasing stolen items from online sites operated by the 
suspect. In February 2009, Postal Inspectors, ICE special agents, and Toledo, 
OH police executed a search warrant at the suspect‘s home and recovered 
boxes of stolen merchandise as well as maps of pharmacies he apparently 
planned to target in Cleveland, Columbus, and Toledo. He was arrested and 

Zane M. Hill 
62 
charged with mail fraud. He pled guilty in August and is being detained until 
he is sentenced.  
The second area of retail based crime we have become involved in is re-
shipper fraud. In these types of cases, criminal organizations enlist individuals 
to receive and then reship products to other segments of the criminal enterprise 
generally to locations outside of the United States. In the majority of these 
cases, the products are obtained by retail crime groups through credit card 
theft as well as fraud. The re-shippers are oftentimes unwitting accomplices to 
the scheme, receiving and mailing the products based on instructions provided 
by the fraudsters. The re-shippers are then paid for their services. Many of 
these groups recruit the ―re-shippers‖ in an attempt to further insulate 
themselves from detection, using a variety of ploys to trick individuals looking 
for easy work-at-home jobs. Ultimately, these re-shippers become part of the 
fraudulent activity. Retailers, legitimate shippers and financial institutions 
have all seen in increase in this type of crime. Again, the ability to move the 
stolen product with the least amount of exposure to those perpetrating the 
crimes is the reason for the use of the re-shipper approach.  
As part of their operation recruiters for the groups post bogus job listings 
on the various Internet career sites purporting to employ ―merchandising 
managers‖ and ―package processing assistants.‖ The employment is described 
as, ―receiving packages in the mail and resending them to foreign addresses.‖ 
This certainly sounds attractive as well as easy to the prospective participants. 
The groups further the scheme often providing bogus and fraudulently 
obtained postage-paid mailing labels to their re-shipper recruits. The Postal 
Service can also suffer significant losses as well as damage to its brand 
integrity when postal products or services are targeted by criminal schemes.  
Re-shippers are also recruited by a variety of other fraudulent solicitations, 
such as on-line dating Web dating sites. In the typical ―sweetheart scammer‖, 
the fraudster sends e-mails to the potential recruit in order get to know them. 
Once they have aroused their attention, the fraudster asks them to help the 
business or family by shipping packages to Europe or Africa.  
Other scammers oftentimes claim to be working with a charity or mission 
which needs help getting ―donated‖ merchandise delivered to third-world 
countries as well as other parts of the world.  
In reality, both the ―sweetheart‖ and the ―charity worker‖ need assistance 
with smuggling goods out of the United States which were purchased with 
stolen and other fraudulently obtained credit cards. In the end there‘s no 
sweetheart or legitimate charity—even the mailing labels are either fraudulent 
or obtained using stolen credit cards.  

Statement of Zane M. Hill, Deputy Chief Postal Inspector, National... 63 
The U.S. Postal Inspection Service continues to educate consumers about 
these fraudulent schemes using, for example, prevention-oriented messages 
delivered through online videos, newspaper and ad awareness campaigns (such 
as fakechecks.org), as well as via online publications, and our Web site at: 
www.usps.com/postalinspectors.  
In closing, be assured the Postal Inspection Service remains committed to 
collaborating with our law enforcement and corporate partners to deal with the 
problem of distribution of illicit goods through on-line market places and 
ultimately the U.S. mail.  
 
 
 
 


In: Organized Retail Crime 
ISBN: 978-1-61122-768-0 
Editors: Blake H. Liventin 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
Chapter 6 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF BRADE BREKKE, VICE 
PRESIDENT, ASSETS PROTECTION, TARGET 
CORPORATION, BEFORE THE HOUSE 
JUDICIARY SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, 
TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY, 
HEARING ON “ORGANIZED RETAIL THEFT: 
FOSTERING A COMPREHENSIVE PUBLIC-
PRIVATE RESPONSE” 
INTRODUCTION 
I am pleased to provide written testimony on behalf of Target and to 
represent the Coalition Against Organized Retail Crime. 
By way of background, the Coalition Against Organized Retail Crime, 
which has been together now for six years, is comprised of national 
manufacturing and retail organizations as well as individual companies from 
both sectors. In total, there are 32 members. A roster of all Coalition members 
can be found at the end of this written testimony. We are also pleased to 
recognize the formal support of the International Association of Chiefs of 
Police (IACP) in our effort to control retail crime and the Internet fencing of 
stolen property. 
The Coalition wishes to commend Chairman Scott and Ranking Member 
Forbes for scheduling today's hearing. This new focus on this issue is a very 

Brade Brekke 
66 
timely and appropriate response to the problem of Organized Retail Crime that 
is victimizing practically every segment of the retail community from 
supermarkets and retail drug stores, to mass merchandisers, department stores, 
specialty shops, boutiques, and convenience stores among others. We 
commend the Chairman, Ranking Member, and this Committee for 
recognizing the runaway problem of organized retail crime (ORC) and its 
causes. 
I would like to discuss three important issues concerning this problem: 
 
 
First, I will briefly describe the nature of retail crime today and how it 
has evolved; 
 
Second, I would like to describe our substantial efforts to combat 
retail crime and explain how the Internet fuels its dramatic growth. 
 
Finally, I will explain how we can join together in encouraging on-
line auctions sites to help protect our communities by preventing their 
sites from becoming markets for stolen goods and without expending 
valuable criminal justice resources on more arrests and prosecutions. 
BACKGROUND ON ORC 
First of all, when I refer to Organized Retail Crime, I do not intend to 
discuss the different phenomenon of what is commonly referred to as 
"shoplifting." Obviously, this type of theft is well understood and within the 
experience of most retailers. Organized retail crime, however, refers to the 
growing problem of mostly gangs but sometimes individuals who are engaging 
in illegally obtaining retail merchandise through both theft and fraud in 
substantial quantities and as part of a commercial enterprise in which the 
merchandise is resold through large scale distribution networks. The tactics 
can vary from multi-person diversionary efforts, to abuse of emergency exit 
doors and employing counter measures such as foil lined bags to defeat 
electronic merchandise protection tags. These criminal commercial enterprises 
are of a different nature and a different scale from what we have come to 
understand as "shoplifting." As I will explain, the size of these enterprises is 
often a function of their ability to redistribute their stolen merchandise. And 
the Internet has transformed their ability to resell their stolen goods. 
Yesterday, a for-profit retail theft may have focused on high-value 
individual items such as a watch or electronics that might garner economic 

Testimony of Brade Brekke, Vice President, Assets Protection, Target... 67 
return to the thief even if they had to sell it at a heavy discount. Today, 
commercial ORC gangs exhibit modern practices of inventory management to 
help them meet the growing demand for the entire range of stolen merchandise 
such as consumer electronics, heartburn medication, Dyson vacuum cleaners, 
printer cartridges, razors, DVDs, dental white strips, anti-histamines, over-the-
counter painkillers, diabetes test kits, and increasingly, baby formula. The 
inclusion of baby formula is troubling since there is little likelihood that 
attention is paid to whether it is safely stored prior to resale. 
Another interesting development is that some organized property rings 
actually use advanced "just-in-time" inventory control systems in which they 
first accept orders for goods and only then do they make up "shopping lists" 
that they direct their boosters to go out and steal. 
These commercial rings are a growing problem throughout the United 
States affecting many sectors of the retail community from supermarkets and 
chain drug stores to mass merchandisers and specialty stores. Precise 
measurements of the true scope of this problem are impossible due to the 
inherently secretive nature of what is, after all, a criminal enterprise. Not 
surprisingly, criminal gangs do not publicly report either their sales or their 
thefts. Studies by different academics estimate the scope of the problem at 
different levels but consistently in the billions of dollars annually. The Federal 
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) interstate task force recently estimated that 
Organized Retail Crime accounted for up to $30 billion in losses annually at 
the store level. By any measure, it is a significant issue affecting our 
communities. 
RETAIL INDUSTRY EFFORTS 
For years, the retailing industry has vigorously worked to control 
organized retail crime and other forms of retail theft. According to industry 
studies, retailers collectively spend an estimated $12 billion annually to 
combat retail theft. These efforts include but are not limited to the following: 
 
 
new technologies in tamper resistant packaging, 
 
labeling technologies, 
 
merchandise protection fixtures, 
 
high tech surveillance camera with sophisticated computer analytics 
and remote monitoring,  

Brade Brekke 
68 
 
sophisticated background investigations for employees to identify 
ORC ring members, 
 
many thousands of dedicated loss prevention professionals and 
investigators, 
 
we at Target have even invested millions in establishing forensic 
laboratories with latent fingerprint and other capabilities that support 
not only our own ORC investigations but also other law enforcement 
prosecutions all at no charge to law enforcement. 
 
Any suggestions that retailers are reducing their efforts to fight retail theft 
are erroneously misconstruing data by narrowing focusing on loss prevention 
staffing only. These estimates fail to consider the expenditures against retail 
theft that are part of our construction, human resources and information 
technology budgets. This is an enormously important and expensive effort for 
the retail industry. There is no question that these efforts will continue and 
grow. However, the continuing growth of retail crime and the damage it causes 
to communities must cause us all to recognize that something needs to be done 
to control the resale market for stolen goods. 
E-FENCING 
As has been recently reported in network news stories reported by both 
CNN and CNBC, (see attached) the explosive growth in retail crime has been 
fueled by the advent of technology in general and the Internet specifically. 
Before the internet, the market for stolen goods was limited by several 
critical factors: 
 
 
First, buyers and sellers of stolen goods had to physically interact with 
one another face-to-face and this naturally limited the overall size of 
the market for stolen goods; 
 
Second, the face-to-face nature of stolen goods market meant buyers 
could usually recognize the questionable legality of the merchandise 
offered and were willing to pay much less for goods (generally in the 
range of $.30 on the dollar); this made profits lower; 
 
Finally, the personal nature of the stolen goods market, along with 
state and local pawnshop regulations, meant that sellers of stolen 

Testimony of Brade Brekke, Vice President, Assets Protection, Target... 69 
goods had to identify themselves and identify their goods with serial 
numbers. 
 
In the "bricks and mortar" world, it was difficult to operate with 
anonymity. 
Today, that has all changed. The Internet has created a world wide market 
for stolen goods in which the sellers are anonymous and there is an enormous 
universe of buyers who are generally unaware of the nature of the goods sold. 
These unwitting buyers are usually willing to pay twice (close to $0.70 on the 
dollar) that which was previously available to fences in the "bricks and 
mortar" world. 
Moreover, Internet fences are routinely evading the traditional laws used 
by state and local governments to protect our communities by controlling sales 
of stolen property. 
Virtually all state and local pawnshop regulations require sellers to 
identify themselves and identify the serial numbers of goods sold. But on the 
Internet, there are currently no controls. This means that there are no limits on 
fences operating in the Internet and no assurances that the property consumers 
are buying is not stolen. 
Not surprisingly, the enormous new profits available to organized retail 
crime rings are resulting in more and more boosters in the stores. 
PROPOSED REQUIREMENTS FOR ONLINE AUCTION 
COMPANIES 
Retailers, in partnership with law enforcement, will continue to fight this 
problem. But the growth in organized retail crime - fueled by technology and 
Internet fencing - has reached such a scale that retail and law enforcement 
cannot successfully fight this problem one booster and one fence at a time. 
Consideration of two statistics can put in perspective the scale of this 
problem relative to available criminal justice resources. 
 
 
In the most recent year, Target alone made approximately 75,000 theft 
apprehensions in its stores. 
 
By comparison, the total number of criminal cases in all federal 
district courts across the country is usually less than 60,000 cases in 
any one year. 

Brade Brekke 
70 
What this means is that even if all of the U.S. Attorneys across the country 
stopped prosecuting bank robberies, fraud, drug trafficking and even terrorism, 
there still would not be enough capacity to prosecute even the apprehensions 
made by Target. Obviously, the entire industry makes hundreds of thousands 
of apprehensions annually. But sending even more people into the criminal 
justice system is not the answer and not what we are proposing. This also 
explains why cooperation from the Internet auction industry in individual 
cases and only when requested by law enforcement is also insufficient. We 
need to change behavior and the internet auction sites need to join us in this 
effort. 
It was once said by some insightful observer that: "If the only tool you 
have is a hammer, then all of your problems begin to look like nails." Mr. 
Chairman, we can't keep addressing this issue by investigating and 
apprehending one fence at a time; we need to add a new approach to this 
problem. 
Mr. Chairman, we need to have responsible internet auction sites make 
modest changes to their sites to help reduce sales of stolen property in the first 
place. And we can do this by applying traditional models of stolen property 
regulation to the Internet and inject some needed transparency to these 
transactions. 
And, Mr. Chairman, transparency works. It is already being effectively 
used on other parts of the Internet. Today, every vehicle listed for sale on eBay 
Motors is accompanied by a Vehicle Identification Number (VIN) [the VIN 
itself can be verified for accuracy through Carfax] which permits ready and 
automated identification of any stolen car posted for sale. This requirement of 
posting identifying information has virtually eliminated the sale of stolen 
vehicles through this service. It could have the same effect in preventing sales 
of stolen iPods and vacuum cleaners. 
Opponents to this proposal frequently cite alleged privacy concerns to 
oppose these requirements but the United Kingdom has employed a similar 
requirement for high volume Internet sellers for years without adverse 
consequences. Moreover, our suggestion is to limit the required identification 
of sellers to only the high dollar volume sellers. This will protect the privacy 
of infrequent sellers while preventing high volume commercial sellers from 
hiding in unnecessary anonymity. 
These requirements are not unorthodox. As I mentioned earlier, these 
requirements, identification of sellers and providing serial numbers, are the 
very same features that are common in almost all state and local pawnshop 
laws. These simple requirements have been used by virtually all communities 

Testimony of Brade Brekke, Vice President, Assets Protection, Target... 71 
to protect themselves from property crime problems. These are the same 
requirements that sellers are evading by going on-line. This means that the 
advent of e-fencing has taken this traditional state and local issue and made it 
impossible for local law enforcement to control. Every local fencing operation 
with access to the Internet can now operate internationally and beyond the 
reach of local law enforcement. A federal solution is necessary to protect our 
communities. 
We believe that law enforcement needs new tools to prosecute 
irresponsible internet auction sites and marketplaces that refuse to exercise due 
diligence over persons using their facilities. In this regard, what we are 
suggesting is that Internet auction sites who fail to exercise due diligence to 
prevent the facilitation of stolen property sales should be treated not unlike 
financial institutions that fail to exercise due diligence to identify and prevent 
money laundering by their customers. 
RETAILERS WANT TO PARTNER WITH INTERNET AUCTION 
SITES 
I want to make clear that we are not seeking the criminal prosecution of 
responsible Internet auction sites. Rather, we want to encourage them to join 
us in protecting our communities. In fact, we would expect that responsible 
Internet auction sites and their customers would welcome this opportunity to 
reduce the sale of stolen property online. 
Retailers have already formed critical partnerships that will pay important 
dividends under the proposed legislation, if passed. For example, certain 
Coalition members, such the National Retail Federation (NRF), the Retail 
Industry Leaders Association (RILA) and the Food Marketing Institute (FMI) 
have recently partnered with the Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI) to 
create a national data base, the Law Enforcement Retail Partnership Network 
(LRPNet) that tracks where ORC crimes are being committed throughout the 
country. This same database could be used to house and match the serial 
numbers of stolen merchandise to the serial numbers posted by online auctions 
sites. The partnership with the FBI could also be relied upon to ensure that the 
serial numbers and this database are used only to control criminal conduct and 
not misused for other purposes. 

Brade Brekke 
72 
CONCLUSION 
While retailers will continue to invest billions in trying to prevent 
organized retail crime and apprehend and prosecute the perpetrators, it is clear 
that the problem can not be solved by fighting these cases one by one and only 
in the shopping aisles. At the rate the Internet is growing and the constantly 
and rapidly escalating scale at which any criminal is now able to operate, it is 
clear that there is an immediate need to update the law to cover these 21st 
century criminal operations. 
We can do this by applying proven methods such as transparency and the 
posting of serial numbers that permit the tracing of stolen property. These 
modest measures have already been proven to be effective, even in the Internet 
age. And these measures can reduce property crime without more arrests and 
incarceration. 
COALITION AGAINST ORGANIZED RETAIL CRIME 
 
Abbott Laboratories 
 
Ahold USA, Inc. 
 
Consumer Healthcare Products Association 
 
Cosmetic, Toiletry, and Fragrance Association 
 
CVS/pharmacy 
 
Duane Reade 
 
Eastman Kodak Company 
 
Eckerd Corporation 
 
Food Lion, LLC 
 
Food Marketing Institute 
 
Giant Food LLC 
 
Giant Food Stores LLC 
 
GlaxoSmithKline 
 
Grocery Manufacturers/Food Products Association 
 
International Formula Council 
 
National Association of Chain Drug Stores 
 
National Association of Convenience Stores 
 
National Community Pharmacists Association 
 
National Retail Federation 
 
Nestle 

Testimony of Brade Brekke, Vice President, Assets Protection, Target... 73 
 
Publix Super Markets, Inc. 
 
Retail Alliance 
 
Retail Industry Leaders Association 
 
Rite Aid Corporation 
 
Safeway Inc. 
 
Security Industry Association 
 
The Stop & Shop Supermarket Company 
 
Target Corporation 
 
Tops Markets, LLC 
 
Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. 
 
Walgreen Co. 
 


In: Organized Retail Crime 
ISBN: 978-1-61122-768-0 
Editors: Blake H. Liventin 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
Chapter 7 
 
 
 
WRITTEN TESTIMONY OF MR. ROBERT 
CHESNUT, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, RULES, 
TRUST AND SAFETY, EBAY INC., BEFORE 
THE HOUSE SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, 
TERRORISM AND HOMELAND SECURITY, 
HEARING ON “ORGANIZED RETAIL THEFT 
PREVENTION: FOSTERING A 
COMPREHENSIVE PUBLIC-PRIVATE 
RESPONSE” 
 
 
Mr. Chairman, Ranking Member Forbes and members of the Committee,   
My name is Robert Chesnut, and I am the Senior Vice President for Rules, 
Trust and Safety for eBay Inc. I would like to thank the committee for giving 
eBay this opportunity to discuss the importance of fostering real and effective 
solutions to the problem of Organized Retail Crime, and I ask that my full 
statement be entered into the committee record.   
Prior to joining eBay in 1999, I was an Assistant United States Attorney in 
the Eastern District of Virginia for 11 years. For 5 of those years I served as 
Chief of the Major Crimes Unit. My career at eBay has been focused on 
keeping our site safe for our community by working with the law enforcement 
community, the private sector, policymakers, consumer protection agencies 

Robert Chesnut 
76 
and state and federal legislatures, so I very much appreciate the opportunity to 
speak with you today on behalf of eBay about this important topic.   
eBay recognizes that organized retail theft is a serious problem facing 
many retailers in this country. This Committee should be applauded for the 
commitment it has shown to addressing this problem, compiling clear 
evidence that this is a problem that stretches back many years and occurs at a 
disturbingly large scale. We believe that it is a problem that deserves serious 
attention by lawmakers, law enforcement and all aspects of the retail 
businesses impacted. eBay stands ready to work with all stakeholders on 
balanced and thoughtful responses, including responses that account for the 
internet as one among many and varied ways that criminals attempt to sell 
stolen goods to unsuspecting consumers.   
Let me be clear, eBay takes the problem of stolen goods, and all forms of 
illegal activity that can impact our users, very seriously. We have the most 
pro-active policies and tools to combat fraud and illegal activity of all the 
major internet commerce companies. There are over 2000 eBay Inc. 
employees around the world working to combat all forms of on-line fraud, 
including the sale of stolen goods. As we have grown as a business over the 
last 12 years, we have dedicated more and more resources to the fight against 
criminal activity that harms our users.   
When eBay first emerged as a dynamic way for people to buy and sell 
items online back in 1995, there were really no rules in place for our users to 
follow. We established the feedback system which gave each member a rating 
for each transaction that any user could see, and for the most part all of the 
trust between buyers and sellers was based on that system in the early years of 
eBay. But the company realized in those early years that in order to become a 
truly safe and trusted e-commerce site we needed to put policies and tools in 
place to make sure that illegal items and harmful sellers were quickly 
identified and removed from our platform. We created clear policies about 
what is allowed and not allowed to be listed on the site and built state-of-the 
art tools to enforce those policies. We developed advanced anti-fraud tools to 
identify suspicious behavior, remove members who engaged in harmful 
practices and take steps to keep them from coming back on the site. And we 
established a global Fraud Investigations Team to partner with law 
enforcement to make sure that criminals who seek to abuse our community of 
users get prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. Largely as a result of these 
efforts, we now have trading platforms in 38 countries with over 240 million 
registered users. At any one time around 100 million items are listed for sale 
on eBay around the world. Millions of transactions take place everyday on 

Written Testimony of Mr. Robert Chesnut, Senior Vice President, Rules... 77 
eBay where both the buyer and seller walk away totally satisfied. Here in the 
United States, over 750,000 Americans make all or a large percentage of their 
income selling items on eBay.   
Our acquisition of the online payment provider PayPal in 2002 only 
enhanced our ability to keep our users safe. PayPal offers our members a safe 
way to pay online, and in the last 5 years we have merged PayPal‘s anti-fraud 
experts with the engineers, statisticians and fraud modelists at eBay to create 
an industry-leading team of experts dedicated to keeping our sites and our 
community of users secure and safe. We dedicate significant resources toward 
cooperating with law enforcement agencies around the world. I am one of 8 
former law enforcement officials that work at eBay and PayPal, and the fact 
that we have a fairly large internal contingent of folks from that community 
helps us understand the challenges faced by enforcement agencies and how we 
can help those folks do their jobs and keep our users safe.   
Our Fraud Investigations Team works closely with law enforcement 
officials at the federal, state and local levels, and we have teams in San Jose 
and Salt Lake City to serve enforcement agencies throughout North America. 
Because we operate a truly global marketplace, we also have Fraud 
Investigation Teams in Dublin, Ireland and Dreilinden, Germany to serve law 
enforcement in Europe and Asia. Earlier this week, two of our law 
enforcement liaisons were in Romania working with officials there to combat 
fraudulent activity based in that country. This is the 6th time that our US-based 
staff has traveled to Romania in the last three years, and we have an attorney 
based in Eastern Europe who is dedicated full-time to working with police and 
prosecutors in that region. We make it easy for law enforcement officials to 
find us--we have dedicated hotlines, fax numbers and email addresses for law 
enforcement to be able to reach us quickly and efficiently. When agencies 
request records from us to support their enforcement actions, they receive 
those records in days---not weeks or months, as can be the case with other 
companies.   
In addition to providing the records necessary to bring cases, our Fraud 
Investigations Team trains law enforcement officials around the United States 
and globally on the best way to combat crime online. My colleagues and I 
have spent a lot of time on the road in the last several years building 
relationships with enforcement agencies and teaching them how to investigate 
eBay and PayPal cases. In 2006 alone, we trained over 3000 law enforcement 
personnel in North America about online fraud in the eBay/PayPal context and 
how we can help them prosecute criminals who attempt to abuse our users. 
The assistance that our teams provide to law enforcement agencies around the 

Robert Chesnut 
78 
world lead to an average of two arrests every single day. Our Fraud 
Investigations has worked on numerous cases with both law enforcement and 
loss prevention staff from the large retailers to make sure that thieves get 
prosecuted.   
Our policies and commitment to combating the sale of stolen goods on 
eBay are straightforward. eBay is no place for the sale of stolen goods, and the 
transparency of our site combined with our commitment to working with law 
enforcement makes it an unwelcome venue for ―fencing.‖ The reality is that 
eBay is the riskiest way for a criminal to try to sell stolen products over the 
internet. We work both reactively and proactively with law enforcement, often 
referring cases out to the appropriate agency where we detect fraudulent 
behavior by one of our sellers, including the listing of stolen goods. When any 
retailer has concrete evidence to the effect that stolen property is on our site, 
we will work with them and law enforcement to address the problem, 
including sharing information about a targeted seller with the appropriate 
enforcement agency. This process already exists and we believe it works well.   
In addition to our work with the law enforcement community, we have 
been engaging the retail industry for many years now to strengthen our 
relationships with retailer trade associations as well as individual companies to 
find ways we can work together to combat the sale of stolen property on eBay. 
We have held meetings with retailers all over the U.S. to hear their concerns 
and to explain how we can work with them on these issues. We have provided 
training to loss prevention teams about how to use the eBay website to 
investigate suspicious listings and gather information that can be used to bring 
a case to law enforcement. The manager of our Fraud Investigation Team in 
San Jose is presenting today at a joint law enforcement/retailer conference on 
Organized Retail Theft in Seattle, where over 400 officials from the retailer 
loss prevention community will be in attendance along with folks from local, 
state and federal law enforcement communities.   
In addition to our outreach to the law enforcement and retailer 
communities, we have also taken additional steps internally over the last year 
to keep bad sellers off of eBay before they have a chance to harm our buyers. 
All new sellers on eBay.com must register a credit card with us and they must 
accept PayPal as a payment option. By requiring new sellers to take these steps 
we lower the chances of a criminal attempting to use our trading platform to 
commit fraud, as criminals don‘t generally like to provide financial 
information and use payment systems that make it easy to track them down 
once their illegal behavior becomes apparent. We have revamped our feedback 
system to allow buyers to provide much more detailed ratings of a seller‘s 

Written Testimony of Mr. Robert Chesnut, Senior Vice President, Rules... 79 
transactional performance. We have put higher standards in place for seller 
performance and suspend sellers who to a significant extent fail to satisfy their 
buyers. Sellers who fail to deliver the goods at all get referred out to law 
enforcement for prosecution. Let me reiterate that the delivery of stolen goods, 
counterfeit goods, or no goods at all is a horrible buyer experience for our 
customers. In the relatively rare circumstances where these activities take 
place, the buyer generally leaves our site and never comes back. And probably 
tells everyone he or she knows to never buy anything on eBay. Fighting fraud 
and keeping bad sellers off of our site are vital to our success as a business.   
Regarding the broader ORC problem, this Committee has done significant 
work developing a record of this troubling issue. In terms of the distribution of 
stolen goods, your March 2005 Committee Report lists the following major 
venues: small shops (including beauty shops, gas stations, music stores, bars 
and gyms), flea markets, pawn shops, local fences, truck stops, newspaper ads, 
overseas buyers, and yes, the Internet through all types of web sites and chat 
forums. The Committee report also described how unscrupulous middlemen 
sell significant volumes of stolen goods back to traditional retailers blended in 
with legitimate products.   
My point in mentioning the breadth of the process of turning stolen goods 
into money is that there are many avenues for this illicit process. Most of them 
are decidedly low tech in nature. While some tech savvy criminals are finding 
ways to use internet technologies, sensible solutions should address the entire 
range of distribution methods and not place disproportionate focus on less 
popular methods. Many large manufacturers and retailers have a negative view 
of the eBay marketplace because we provide an incredibly efficient secondary 
market for their goods. Our sellers are perceived by some as their competition, 
and one way to attack efficient secondary market competitors that sell goods at 
low prices is to suggest that there is something shady about those sales, when 
in reality those sales are completely legitimate.   
This past summer there was a story in USA Today about the disdain that 
many large retailers have for individual entrepreneurs who use the Internet, 
usually eBay, to resell their products. A spokesperson from Gymboree, the 
popular children‘s clothing chain, explained their 5-item-per-customer limit by 
stating that ―we need to protect our image…we don‘t want people to think 
we‘re selling things on eBay.‖ A colleague of mine at eBay sells her kids‘ 
Gymboree clothes on eBay once they grow out of them. Those clothes are then 
worn by the buyer‘s kids, and my colleague uses the money to buy new 
clothes for her growing children. This is a truly efficient use of consumer 

Robert Chesnut 
80 
goods, but Gymboree does not like it, as they seem to feel that the only place 
you should be able to buy Gymboree clothes is at the Gymboree store.   
One approach to a legislative solution to the problem of organized retail 
theft is simple: increase the criminal penalties for this conduct. If these crimes 
are currently classified as misdemeanors, upgrade them to felonies. If the jail 
sentences tied to these crimes are too short, lengthen them. We have supported 
legislation in a number of states calling for tougher penalties, mandatory 
sentences and higher priority prosecutions of these criminals. We would 
support the same at the federal level. These steps will make these cases more 
attractive to law enforcement and will make judges more likely to put these 
criminals in jail rather than giving them probation. If these thieves make the 
unwise choice to use eBay to try and sell their stolen goods, we don‘t just want 
them off of eBay, we want them to see the inside of jail cell.   
eBay has always been committed to providing a safe, well-lit marketplace. 
We believe that this commitment to our community has been key to growing 
eBay into the world‘s largest global online marketplace. Working in a 
cooperative relationship with business partners and law enforcement has been 
central to this effort, and we will continue in that manner going forward.   
We look forward to working with this Committee on ways to effectively 
empower law enforcement to fight the problem of Organized Retail Crime. We 
stand ready to do our part to combat the long-term problem of retail theft in a 
balanced and responsible way. We believe that law enforcement is crucial to 
solutions regarding illegal activity, and we believe it is crucial across the board 
to protect the privacy and rights of the law-abiding citizens and small business 
people.  
 
 
 
 
 

In: Organized Retail Crime 
ISBN: 978-1-61122-768-0 
Editors: Blake H. Liventin 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
Chapter 8 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF KARL LANGHORST, 
DIRECTOR, LOSS PREVENTION, 
RANDALL’S/TOM THUMB A SAFEWAY 
COMPANY, BEFORE THE HOUSE JUDICIARY 
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM 
AND HOMELAND SECURITY, HEARING ON 
“ORGANIZED RETAIL THEFT: FOSTERING A 
COMPREHENSIVE PUBLIC-PRIVATE 
RESPONSE” 
 
 
Chairman Conyers, Chairman Scott, Congressmen Smith and Forbes, and 
members of the committee, good morning. Thank you for the opportunity to 
testify before the Crime Subcommittee today on the growing problem of 
organized retail crime. My name is Karl Langhorst, Director of Loss 
Prevention for Randall‘s/Tom Thumb of Texas, a Safeway company. Safeway 
Inc. is a Fortune 100 company and one of the largest food and drug retailers in 
North America. The company operates 1,755 stores in the United States and 
western Canada and had annual sales of $40.2 billion in 2006.   
I have been invited here to share with you our experience with the 
increasing problem of organized retail crime (ORC). Retailers have always 
had to deal with shoplifting as part of doing business, but let me be clear, ORC 
is not shoplifting. It is theft committed by professionals, in large volume, for 

Karl Langhorst 
 
82 
resale. It is being committed against retailers of every type at an increasing 
rate. Safeway estimates a loss of $100 million dollars annually due to ORC. 
According to the FBI, the national estimate is between $15-30 billion 
annually.   
Let me describe for you how sophisticated and organized these enterprises 
are. In a typical scenario that repeats itself hundreds of times each day, teams 
of boosters, or hired thieves, come into the store with a shopping list of desired 
product provided by the fence – the person behind the organization. Typical 
items stolen from Safeway stores include over the counter medicines such as 
Prilosec, Tylenol, and Abreva, razor blades, Crest White Strips, Oil of Olay 
and other beauty products, diabetic test strips, and baby formula. Using well 
coordinated efforts and highly sophisticated methods to elude store security 
and law enforcement, they sweep the shelves clean of hundreds of dollars of 
product at a time. They are in and out within a matter of 3 to 4 minutes. They 
often leave undetected and move on to other stores. Typically, boosters will hit 
10 to 15 retailers a day, in many areas criss-crossing state lines and 
jurisdictions, before going back to the fence to get payment for the goods they 
have stolen and to receive their marching orders for the next day. Their 
payment usually amounts to about twenty cents on the dollar. The fence then 
sells the items at traditional brick and mortar stores, flea markets, or - 
increasingly – online. They have great incentives to sell online because they 
know that they can operate anonymously and are protected, they can move 
more merchandise more quickly and to a broader audience, and they can 
receive the highest return for items sold online.   
You may ask what Safeway is doing to prevent ORC at the store level – 
why don‘t we just hire a few more guards? The simple answer is that guards 
posted at store entrances provide only so much protection. In addition, 
Safeway has taken a step unprecedented in the grocery industry, of creating a 
whole division to combat ORC, employing special investigators across the US 
and Canada. This is in addition to the loss prevention teams based in each of 
our divisions. Because of the prevalence of ORC in our stores, special teams 
of ORC undercover agents have been trained and deployed into the stores. 
These agents understand the difference in detecting and apprehending the 
boosters versus simple shoplifters. Additionally, store personnel are trained 
and spend significant time in the store performing additional steps to prevent 
ORC at store level. There are special markings on high theft items to help 
deter theft. We limit quantities of this merchandise on the shelf to try and 
minimize losses, and we have invested in specialized shelving and display 
fixtures to thwart theft within the store. Unfortunately, these measures also 

Testimony of Karl Langhorst, Director, Loss Prevention, Randall‘s... 
 
83 
make it difficult for customers to shop as easily as we would like and severely 
restricts the sale of these items. Safeway has implemented additional layers of 
security throughout the supply chain – from warehouse, to the loading dock, to 
the shelves. We have spent a tremendous amount of money in training and 
awareness campaigns among other retailers and law enforcement. Further, 
state of the art digital camera systems are installed in all of our stores at a cost 
of millions of dollars in order to aid law enforcement and our own 
investigators and store management teams in identifying the boosters who 
repeatedly steal from our stores.   
In spite of our extraordinary efforts, our company continues to see a 
steady increase of our health, beauty and cosmetic goods sold on the internet 
in high volume and offered below cost of what retailers can obtain it directly 
from the manufacturer. Fences have quickly learned that the anonymity of the 
internet presents an extremely low risk way to sell stolen goods and are 
abandoning the previous model of brick and mortar locations and flea markets 
that were once used to dispose of this type product. Online marketplaces such 
as eBay are being used as internet pawn shops, and are largely unregulated.   
We have has some successes in fighting ORC. In 2001 the Portland 
division of Safeway opened an investigation of three major fences and 
presented the information to the FBI. Over the course of the next three years 
Safeway and the FBI continued the investigation and successfully broke up a 
multistate ORC network operating from Oregon to Texas to Florida that 
ultimately resulted in the seizure of over $3 million in product, $950,000 in 
cash and federal criminal prosecution of 49 suspects. The suspects told federal 
investigators that they resold much of the stolen product on eBay because of 
the anonymity assured by the site.   
Last year, in cooperation with Walgreens, Wal Mart and other retailers, 
our Northern California division worked a case with ICE agents that resulted 
in the seizure of product valued at $5 million dollars and the arrest and 
prosecution of Yemeni nationals. These individuals operated a warehouse 
containing 12 tractor trailers full of merchandise - 850,000 pieces of HBC 
product, as well as a website for internet sales.  
Just this week, state agents in Texas and Safeway ORC investigators 
completed an over year long investigation and shut down a long time fence 
that was taking in an estimated 4 million dollars in stolen HBC product and 
who employed over 100 boosters. The fence was selling to another individual 
who was marketing it over the internet on both his own web site and eBay. In 
this case, many of the boosters were known drug users and the stolen product 
was stored under conditions that were not approved for these items. Storing 

Karl Langhorst 
 
84 
these items in unregulated conditions can render the products ineffective, or in 
the worst case actually harm unsuspecting consumers, as in the case of baby 
formula.   
In each of these cases, we could have had quicker, more thorough 
investigations and clearer rules under which the suspects could be prosecuted 
if we had a federal law in place specifically to address ORC. Federal law 
enforcement and prosecutors are interested in prosecuting ORC cases, but they 
lack the tools and resources necessary to bring these cases to bear. 
Investigation of these types of cases is extremely difficult. A federal ORC bill 
would establish a definition of ORC in statute, help eliminate the state to state 
jurisdictional cherry picking by thieves, and would be especially helpful in 
making efencing a less attractive option for criminals to sell stolen property. 
Operators of sites such as eBay have historically failed to provide any 
meaningful information to retail investigators. Without this cooperation, we 
are severely hampered in securing the evidence needed by federal investigators 
to even open an investigation.   
The need for a federal solution to address the current ―free for all‖ of 
electronic fencing is obvious. The information we are seeking from online 
marketplaces is no more cumbersome than is currently in place for brick and 
mortar providers of the same type operations. In many states sellers of product 
such as HBC must have proof upon demand of where they acquired the 
product and if they are pawning it they must have valid identification and 
serial numbers of the product, if any, are noted. Legitimate retailers - both 
those operating online and as brick and mortar businesses - as well as 
consumers have a right to this type of protection.   
As I am sure you are aware, retail is an extremely competitive 
environment and the grocery industry is no exception. In spite of that 
competitiveness, retailers understand that without cooperating with each other 
and working together on the investigations of boosters and fences we will not 
be able to effectively combat this problem. Because of the complexity of ORC 
cases and the many obstacles that stand in the way of investigating fences, 
especially internet based fences, it is not unusual for ORC investigators from 
several different retailers to work together to help gather evidence for law 
enforcement so that a fence can be shut down.   
In spite of Safeway‘s best efforts and unprecedented alliances with other 
retailers to combat ORC, we continue to suffer significant losses. If we are to 
be successful in curtailing this enormous criminal enterprise that threatens the 
businesses of retailers across the country, costs millions of dollars in lost sales 
tax revenue and impacts consumers through adulterated product, higher prices 

Testimony of Karl Langhorst, Director, Loss Prevention, Randall‘s... 
 
85 
and lack of availability of merchandise, we must have strong federal 
legislation that more clearly defines ORC and requires the same level of 
accountability on internet sellers as that of traditional retail sites.   
I thank you very much for your attention and I look forward to answering 
any questions you may have.  
 
 
 
 
 


In: Organized Retail Crime 
ISBN: 978-1-61122-768-0 
Editors: Blake H. Liventin 
© 2011 Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
 
Chapter 9 
 
 
 
TESTIMONY OF DETECTIVE DAVID HILL, OF 
THE MONTGOMERY COUNTY, MARYLAND 
POLICE DEPARTMENT ON BEHALF OF LAW 
ENFORCEMENT, BEFORE THE 
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME, TERRORISM 
AND HOMELAND SECURITY, HEARING ON 
“ORGANIZED RETAIL THEFT: FOSTERING A 
COMPREHENSIVE PUBLIC-PRIVATE 
RESPONSE” 
 
 
Good Morning Chairman Scott and Ranking Member Forbes, my name is 
Detective David Hill and I am pleased to be testifying before the 
subcommittee today on the growing problem of organized retail crime.   
By way of background, I am currently a detective with the Montgomery 
County Police Department‘s Retail Crimes Unit and have been in law 
enforcement for over 16 years. I am a sworn Deputy of the U.S. Marshall 
Service and assigned to the Metro Area Fraud Task Force of the United States 
Secret Service. I am the only detective in my department and one of the few in 
the region assigned exclusively to investigate retail theft and fraud.   
To put my job in perspective, industry-wide retail fraud and theft losses 
amount to almost $40 billion a year according to one prominent study. That is 
more than double the losses of robbery, burglary, larceny, and auto theft 

David Hill 
 
88 
combined ($16.9 billion) nationwide. As you know, the Washington 
Metropolitan Area is the eighth largest in the nation, with thousands of retail 
outlets and several major malls just in Montgomery County alone. I am a busy 
man. I typically handle scores of cases each year.   
As we have heard, organized retail crime is a real and growing trend, and 
accounts for a large portion of overall retail losses. According to the National 
Retail Federation, 79 percent of retailers surveyed report being victims of 
ORC and 71 percent saw increases in ORC activity last year. The term 
―organized‖ can mean many things, from pairs of ―boosters‖ who target retail 
stores with the intention of distracting a sales associate while the other sweeps 
merchandise from the shelf, to teams of five or more who stake out targets 
carefully and steal discreetly in crowded stores. In many cases, ORC teams are 
efficiently segmented into collectors, packers, and movers that take the stolen 
merchandise to a waiting car, and still others who serve as lookouts to make 
sure that the team is not being followed by security.   
Some of the more sophisticated criminals engage in changing the UPC bar 
codes on merchandise so they ring up differently at check-out, this is 
commonly called ―ticket switching.‖ Others use stolen or cloned credit cards 
to obtain merchandise. Sophisticated or not, what all of these thieves have in 
common is that they are career criminals usually hired by bulk buyers or ring-
leaders with specific products in mind. They have ―shopping lists,‖ if you will. 
Some target luxury clothing, accessories, and perfume while others focus on 
baby formula and expensive over-the-counter medications or beauty aids. Gift 
cards and electronics are other popular targets. Believe it or not, these 
criminals are even stealing vacuum cleaners and power tools. Whatever is 
new; whatever is hot, that‘s what the criminals want.   
Some of these ORC groups travel important interstate corridors, like I-95, 
from Miami to Maine, hitting numerous retailers along the way and filling 
vans or trucks with stolen merchandise. In one case, we recovered $40,000 in 
merchandise that was stolen in one hour. The booty ends up at underground 
bodegas, pawn shops and flea markets, some is repackaged and warehoused 
for re-distribution, and, in a growing trend, more and more of it is showing up 
for sale on the Internet.   
The reason so-called ―eFencing‖ is becoming so popular is the simple 
economics of risk and reward. A typical fencing operation typically pays 
criminals $.30 cents on the dollar, whereas online marketplaces and auction 
sites can bring closer to $.70 cents on the dollar for ―new in box (NIB)‖ 
merchandise, and gift cards pay even more. Further, local pawnshops tend to 
be regulated – requiring the disclosure of information about both sellers and 

Testimony of Detective David Hill, of the Montgomery County... 
 
89 
the merchandise being sold – which creates additional risks for criminals. In 
contrast, Online marketplaces provide an unregulated environment in which 
thieves can re-sell stolen property to customers on an national or even 
international level with few or no questions asked.   
The Internet not only makes it easier for ORC rings to unload merchandise 
at near retail prices, it also enables sophisticated single-operators to realize a 
huge profit off of their crimes as well. On Christmas Eve 2005 the 
Montgomery County PD apprehended a college student who was the subject 
of a CNBC piece on eFencing earlier this year. By his own admission, the 
student made over $50,000 auctioning off stolen merchandise on e-Bay. These 
items were stolen from stores such as Best Buy, Target, and Wal-Mart and 
included high-end computer graphic cards, GPS navigation units, books, 
expensive iPod accessories, and many other items.   
Mr. Chairman, important investigations like this one rely upon the 
ongoing partnership between law enforcement and the retail sector. While I 
work a regular investigative beat, cases are most often initiated and reported 
by the loss prevention investigators employed by retail companies. It is true 
that many companies like e-Bay will provide information to law enforcement 
when asked to do so, however, requiring Online auction sites to collect and 
disclose serial numbers of products being offered for sale when appropriate, 
and to provide additional seller information to retailers‘ loss prevention 
investigators will help our retail partners better understand and build cases that 
can then be turned over to detectives like myself.   
Additionally, as noted above, increased seller disclosures should 
discourage criminals from even attempting eFencing. Such transparency will 
likely disproportionately affect and deter criminals who are interested in 
fencing stolen product Online, with little or no impact on legitimate sellers.   
Mr Chairman, I commend the important work that you are doing to shed 
light on the very real problem of organized retail crime. Too often professional 
thieves are getting off with little more than a slap on the wrist because many 
jurisdictions are still treating ORC crimes as shoplifting cases. Some would 
say that this is a ―victimless‖ crime, but ORC affects society because it 
increases prices and can compromise the quality and safety of consumer 
goods. As I have already described, these are often multi-jurisdictional crimes 
where professional thieves are regularly crossing state lines. With the added 
component of eFencing on the Internet, this is a natural area for Congress to 
get involved. Clearly, federal legislation would serve as a powerful tool for 
law enforcement and a deterrent to would-be criminals.   

David Hill 
 
90 
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the invitation to address you and the 
subcommittee members. I welcome any questions or comments you may have.   
Thank you.   
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER SOURCES 
 
 
The following chapters have been previously published: 
 
Chapter 1 – This is an edited, excerpted and augmented edition of a 
United States Congressional Research Service publication, Report Order Code 
R41118, dated June 16, 2010. 
Chapter 2 – These remarks were delivered as Statement of David Johnson, 
before the United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, 
and Homeland Security, dated November 5, 2009. 
Chapter 3 – These remarks were delivered as Statement of Janice Ayala, 
before the United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, 
and Homeland Security, dated November 5, 2009. 
Chapter 4 – These remarks were delivered as Statement of John R. Large, 
before the United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, 
and Homeland Security, dated November 5, 2009. 
Chapter 5 – These remarks were delivered as Statement of Zane M. Hill, 
before the United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, 
and Homeland Security, dated November 5, 2009. 
Chapter 6 – These remarks were delivered as Statement of Brad Brekke, 
before the United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, 
and Homeland Security, dated October 25, 2007. 
Chapter 7 – These remarks were delivered as Statement of Robert 
Chesnut, before the United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, 
Terrorism, and Homeland Security, dated October 25, 2007. 
Chapter 8 – These remarks were delivered as Statement of Karl Langhorst, 
before the United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, 
and Homeland Security, dated October 25, 2007. 

Chapter Sources 
 
92 
Chapter 9 – These remarks were delivered as Statement of Detective 
David Hill, before the United States House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, 
Terrorism, and Homeland Security, dated October 25, 2007. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INDEX 
 
 
2 
21st century, 72 
A 
abuse, 66, 76, 77 
access, viii, 20, 32, 38, 50, 52, 55, 71 
access device, viii, 20, 32, 50, 52, 55 
accessibility, 52 
accountability, 85 
accuracy, 70 
activity level, 16 
agencies, viii, ix, 4, 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 39, 
50, 54, 56, 60, 75, 77 
Alaska, 25 
aliens, 19, 32 
antihistamines, 29 
arrests, 20, 38, 66, 72, 78 
Asia, 77 
assessment, 19, 45, 47 
assets, 15, 42 
authentication, 52 
authorities, viii, 20, 42, 50 
awareness, 15, 16, 56, 63, 83 
B 
bank fraud, viii, 32, 50, 55 
banking, 19, 20, 42, 43, 46, 52, 54 
banks, 46 
base, 39, 46, 71 
batteries, 6, 7 
benchmarks, 22 
black market, 6 
blades, 6, 7, 43, 82 
boosters, vii, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 19, 35, 
37, 67, 69, 82, 83, 84, 88 
bridges, 54 
business partners, 15, 80 
businesses, 5, 6, 50, 51, 56, 60, 76, 84 
buyer, 21, 77, 79 
buyers, vii, 2, 68, 69, 76, 78, 79, 88 
C 
campaigns, 63, 83 
cargo trucks, 9 
cash, 6, 45, 46, 61, 83 
cell phones, 53 
Census, 31 
challenges, 37, 77 
Chicago, 38 
children, 30, 61, 79 
cities, 37, 56 
citizens, 51, 80 
City, 39, 77 
cleaning, 6, 13, 28 
climate, 13 
clothing, 6, 61, 79, 88 
CNN, 68 
coffee, 7 

Index 
 
94 
collaboration, 51, 54, 57 
commerce, 3, 5, 17, 24, 25, 28, 52, 60, 76 
commercial, 28, 32, 66, 67, 70 
commodity, 52 
communication, 39, 55 
communities, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 78 
community, ix, 38, 45, 46, 51, 55, 56, 66, 
67, 75, 76, 77, 78, 80 
competition, 79 
competitiveness, 84 
competitors, 22, 79 
complexity, 50, 51, 84 
computer, viii, 8, 20, 25, 32, 50, 54, 55, 56, 
57, 67, 89 
computer fraud, viii, 20, 32, 50, 55 
conference, 78 
Congress, iv, viii, 2, 3, 4, 5, 19, 22, 23, 24, 
27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 37, 49, 54, 89 
consensus, 4 
consolidation, 28 
conspiracy, 39, 44, 45 
construction, 68 
consumer electronics, 7, 67 
consumer goods, 80, 89 
consumer protection, ix, 75 
consumers, viii, 1, 2, 3, 5, 10, 13, 17, 22, 36, 
49, 52, 56, 58, 60, 63, 69, 76, 84 
consumption, 3, 4, 5 
cooperation, 37, 39, 53, 61, 70, 83, 84 
cost, 3, 4, 9, 12, 13, 83 
counter measures, 66 
counterfeiting, viii, 20, 23, 32, 43, 44, 49 
counterterrorism, 19, 24 
covering, 7, 9, 27 
credit and debit card, viii, 50, 51, 52 
credit card fraud, 20, 37, 50 
crimes, viii, 2, 3, 4, 20, 21, 23, 32, 36, 37, 
38, 42, 44, 45, 50, 54, 55, 56, 60, 62, 71, 
80, 89 
criminal activity, 35, 42, 44, 51, 76 
criminal conduct, 71 
criminal gangs, 67 
criminal groups, 37, 55, 61 
criminal investigations, 52 
criminal justice system, 70 
criminals, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9, 10, 15, 17, 18, 20, 
21, 24, 32, 50, 51, 52, 55, 59, 60, 76, 77, 
78, 79, 80, 84, 88, 89 
critical infrastructure, 54, 55 
currency, viii, 20, 32, 43, 46, 49, 53, 56, 57 
customers, 10, 22, 25, 71, 79, 83, 89 
Customs Service, 14, 30 
D 
damages, iv 
data collection, 5 
data mining, 16 
database, 16, 19, 33, 38, 45, 71 
defendants, 15, 39, 43, 53 
deficit, 13 
Department of Agriculture, 43 
Department of Commerce, 31 
Department of Homeland Security, v, viii, 
30, 32, 41, 55 
Department of Justice, 19, 28, 56 
deposits, 46 
destination, 28, 53 
detection, 7, 57, 61, 62 
detection system, 7 
DHS, 47, 55 
distribution, 21, 28, 63, 66, 79, 88 
district courts, 69 
drug addict, 44 
drug trafficking, 70 
drugs, 44, 60 
E 
Eastern Europe, 77 
eBay, vi, ix, 17, 31, 39, 61, 70, 75, 76, 77, 
78, 79, 80, 83, 84 
e-commerce, 17, 76 
economic downturn, 21, 36 
economic losses, 36 
economics, 88 
economy, vii, 4, 9, 42 
ECTF, 53, 54, 55 
education, 56, 60 
Egypt, 14 
electronic banking, 52 

Index 
 
95 
Electronic Crimes Task Force, 53, 54 
e-mail, 62 
emergency, 8, 66 
employees, 7, 8, 9, 21, 29, 40, 53, 68, 76 
employment, 16, 32, 62 
energy, 55 
enforcement, viii, ix, 2, 3, 4, 6, 10, 11, 14, 
15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 28, 
31, 33, 35, 37, 38, 39, 47, 50, 51, 54, 55, 
56, 57, 60, 63, 68, 69, 70, 71, 75, 76, 77, 
78, 79, 80, 82, 83, 84, 87, 89 
entrepreneurs, 37, 79 
environment, 22, 52, 54, 57, 84, 89 
equipment, 21 
Europe, 62, 77 
evidence, 14, 55, 57, 76, 78, 84 
examinations, 55, 56 
expenditures, 68 
expertise, viii, 49, 50, 54, 55 
exploitation, 51, 52 
exposure, 62 
extradition, 53 
F 
face-to-face interaction, 10 
FBI, ix, 4, 11, 14, 18, 19, 27, 28, 31, 33, 35, 
36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 43, 67, 71, 82, 83 
FDA, 25 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, v, 4, 18, 
27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35, 43, 59, 67, 
71 
federal government, vii, 2, 3, 4, 15, 21, 23, 
24, 25 
federal law, 3, 4, 6, 15, 17, 18, 19, 23, 24, 
27, 38, 54, 78, 84 
federal statute, 18, 37 
feedback, 76, 78 
fencing, vii, ix, 2, 9, 10, 13, 14, 17, 21, 25, 
33, 36, 43, 44, 61, 65, 69, 71, 78, 84, 88, 
89 
filters, 17 
financial, viii, 13, 14, 20, 25, 42, 44, 46, 49, 
50, 51, 52, 54, 55, 56, 57, 62, 71, 78 
financial crimes, viii, 20, 49, 50, 52, 54 
Financial Crimes Task Forces, 20, 54 
financial data, 51 
financial institutions, viii, 14, 44, 49, 50, 51, 
52, 54, 55, 56, 58, 62, 71 
financial payment system, viii, 49, 54, 57 
financial sector, 42 
financial system, 42 
first responders, 57 
food, 36, 44, 81 
force, 14, 28, 38, 39, 55, 57, 67 
formula, 1, 3, 7, 13, 14, 15, 36, 43, 44, 67, 
82, 84, 88 
fraud, vii, viii, ix, 2, 4, 8, 20, 24, 30, 32, 37, 
39, 43, 44, 49, 50, 52, 53, 55, 56, 59, 60, 
62, 66, 70, 76, 77, 78, 87 
funding, 15, 19, 22, 24 
funds, 15, 16, 22, 32, 61 
G 
gambling, 24, 39 
gangs, 66, 67 
Georgia, 26 
Germany, 77 
global trade, 52 
globalization, 50 
glucose, 44 
goods and services, 50 
governments, 69 
GPS, 7, 37, 89 
growth, 52, 66, 68, 69 
guardian, viii, 49 
guidelines, 17 
guilty, 44, 61, 62 
gyms, 79 
H 
hacking, 51 
Hamas, 3, 14, 15, 31 
health, vii, 1, 3, 4, 6, 9, 10, 13, 14, 28, 36, 
40, 83 
health risks, 14 
heartburn, 67 
Hezbollah, 3, 14, 36 
hiring, 13 
history, viii, 49, 59 

Index 
 
96 
host, 19, 56 
House, iv, v, vi, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 
35, 41, 49, 59, 65, 75, 81, 91, 92 
House of Representatives, v, 41 
human, 42, 68 
human resources, 68 
human right, 42 
human rights, 42 
husband, 61 
I 
ice, 32 
ICE, viii, 14, 19, 31, 32, 33, 41, 42, 43, 44, 
45, 46, 47, 61, 83 
identification, 32, 37, 50, 51, 55, 70, 84 
identity, viii, 20, 32, 50, 52, 55, 56, 57 
image, 79 
immigrants, 37 
immigration, 42 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement, v, 
viii, 14, 19, 30, 32, 39, 41, 59, 61 
impacts, viii, 60, 84 
incarceration, 72 
income, 15, 19, 77 
individuals, vii, 1, 3, 4, 5, 8, 11, 20, 24, 29, 
37, 39, 42, 43, 46, 50, 51, 53, 62, 66, 83 
industries, viii, 20, 49 
industry, 1, 3, 4, 10, 11, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 
37, 38, 39, 42, 45, 60, 67, 68, 70, 77, 78, 
82, 84, 87 
information sharing, 2, 4, 17, 18, 19, 21, 28, 
37, 54 
information technology, 52, 68 
infrastructure, 38, 54, 55, 57 
integrity, 16, 57, 60, 62 
intellectual property, 42 
intelligence, 38, 39 
intelligence gathering, 38 
Internal Revenue Service, 39, 43 
Internet, ix, 6, 10, 17, 18, 20, 24, 30, 33, 37, 
39, 43, 46, 51, 52, 60, 62, 65, 66, 68, 69, 
70, 71, 72, 79, 88, 89 
intrusions, 50, 51 
investigative tools, 24 
Iowa, 26 
iPod, 89 
Iraq, 14 
issues, vii, 2, 13, 21, 36, 54, 56, 66, 78 
Italy, 54 
J 
Jordan, 14, 61 
jurisdiction, viii, 42, 45, 46, 50, 60, 61 
jury trial, 44 
K 
Kentucky, 26 
L 
labeling, 67 
law enforcement, viii, ix, 2, 3, 4, 6, 10, 11, 
14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 
28, 31, 33, 35, 37, 38, 39, 47, 50, 51, 54, 
55, 56, 57, 60, 63, 68, 69, 70, 71, 75, 76, 
77, 78, 80, 82, 83, 84, 87, 89 
laws, 2, 3, 22, 23, 25, 42, 69, 70 
lead, 78 
Lebanon, 14 
legality, 10, 68 
legislation, 2, 18, 23, 24, 37, 71, 80, 85, 89 
light, 89 
Lion, 72 
lithium, 6 
local government, 69 
Louisiana, 26 
low risk, 83 
lower prices, 27 
M 
magazines, 30 
mail fraud, viii, 20, 59, 62 
Maine, 26, 88 
majority, 33, 62 
management, 8, 16, 55, 67, 83 
manufacture, 51 
manufacturing, viii, 1, 6, 10, 21, 44, 65 
marketing, 83 
marketplace, 33, 60, 77, 79, 80 

Index 
 
97 
Maryland, vi, 26, 87 
mass, 66, 67 
matter, iv, 82 
measurements, 67 
media, 30 
medication, 67 
medicine, 36 
medicines, 43, 82 
melting, 7 
merchandise, vii, 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 
13, 17, 18, 20, 22, 24, 27, 29, 35, 36, 37, 
38, 39, 43, 44, 52, 53, 61, 62, 66, 67, 68, 
71, 82, 83, 85, 88, 89 
messages, 63 
metropolitan areas, 10 
Mexico, 19, 26 
Miami, 19, 38, 45, 88 
Middle East, 28, 30 
mission, viii, 47, 50, 57, 62 
Missouri, 26, 30, 39 
misuse, 50 
mixing, 6 
models, 70 
modules, 31 
money laundering, 20, 39, 42, 44, 45, 71 
monitoring, 2, 17, 67 
music, 6, 7, 30, 79 
N 
narcotics, 42 
National Computer Forensics Institute, 55 
National Retail Federation, 10, 15, 19, 27, 
28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 38, 45, 71, 72, 88 
National Retail Security Survey, 2, 8, 11, 
12, 29, 30, 31, 33 
national security, viii, 41 
NCFI, 55 
NGOs, 15 
North America, 77, 81 
NRF, 15, 17, 19, 27, 31, 33, 38, 71 
NRSS, 11, 12, 16, 17, 21, 30 
O 
obstacles, 84 
officials, 56, 77, 78 
OH, 61 
Oklahoma, 26 
operations, vii, 2, 4, 6, 9, 13, 14, 28, 39, 43, 
61, 72, 84 
P 
packaging, 67 
participants, 52, 62 
penalties, 23, 80 
performance, 79 
perpetrators, 72 
pharmaceuticals, 36 
platform, 28, 76, 78 
point of origin, 28 
police, 19, 37, 56, 57, 61, 77 
policy, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 11, 14, 15, 17, 21, 22, 
24, 25 
policy issues, 4 
policy makers, 1, 3, 6, 11, 14, 15, 21, 22, 
24, 25 
policy options, 22 
policymakers, ix, 75 
Postal Inspection Service, viii, 39, 59, 61, 
63 
5 
President, 20, 37, 44 
prevention, 2, 11, 13, 16, 17, 19, 21, 22, 31, 
38, 45, 60, 61, 63, 68, 78, 82, 89 
preventive approach, 55 
productivity, 39 
professionals, ix, 38, 60, 68, 81 
profit, 4, 9, 10, 20, 27, 66, 89 
profitability, 10 
prosecutors, 24, 56, 77, 84 
protection, ix, 66, 67, 75, 82, 84 
public awareness, 56 
public education, 60 
public health, vii, 1, 3, 4, 6, 9, 13, 14, 28 
public safety, viii, 42 
R 
racketeering, 39 
reality, 62, 78, 79 

Index 
 
98 
recommendations, iv 
recreational, 30 
recruiting, 5, 10, 32 
regulations, 68, 69 
regulatory agencies, 17 
reintroduction, 36 
requirements, 43, 44, 70 
resale, vii, ix, 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 13, 14, 18, 
36, 67, 68, 82 
research and development, 55 
resources, 4, 16, 19, 24, 37, 38, 46, 54, 55, 
56, 57, 66, 68, 69, 76, 77, 84 
response, 66 
restaurants, 30 
retail, iv, vii, viii, ix, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 
23, 24, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 33, 35, 36, 37, 
38, 39, 40, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 53, 59, 
60, 61, 62, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 72, 76, 78, 
80, 81, 84, 85, 87, 88, 89 
revenue, 3, 13, 36, 84 
RICO, 18, 23 
rings, vii, 2, 4, 5, 6, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19, 20, 
22, 23, 24, 36, 42, 67, 69, 89 
risk, 9, 22, 36, 55, 61, 83, 88 
risk management, 55 
risks, 3, 11, 13, 14, 28, 36, 61, 89 
robberies, 70 
Romania, 77 
routes, 18, 37 
rules, 76, 84 
S 
safety, vii, viii, 1, 3, 4, 6, 11, 13, 28, 36, 42, 
89 
scheduling, 65 
school, 56 
scope, 18, 67 
screening, 16 
Secret Service, v, viii, ix, 20, 32, 49, 50, 51, 
52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 87 
securities, 23, 32, 43, 44 
security, vii, viii, 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 13, 16, 
21, 22, 37, 41, 42, 60, 61, 82, 83, 88 
seizure, 57, 83 
seller, 53, 77, 78, 79, 89 
sellers, 2, 17, 25, 33, 53, 68, 69, 70, 76, 78, 
79, 84, 85, 88, 89 
sentencing, 44 
services, iv, 21, 25, 32, 50, 51, 52, 62 
showing, 88 
shrinkage, 11, 12, 21, 30 
smoking, 7 
smoking cessation, 7 
smuggling, 36, 42, 61, 62 
Social Security, 50, 51 
society, vii, 1, 9, 10, 24, 89 
software, 16, 51, 52 
solution, 71, 80, 84 
South Dakota, 26 
special agents, 55, 61 
specialists, 55, 61 
spending, 22 
staffing, 68 
stakeholders, 76 
state, ix, 2, 3, 5, 6, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23, 
24, 25, 27, 28, 30, 33, 37, 38, 43, 44, 45, 
50, 54, 56, 57, 60, 68, 69, 70, 76, 77, 78, 
82, 83, 84, 89 
state laws, 2, 3, 25 
states, 1, 3, 5, 10, 22, 24, 36, 56, 80, 84 
statistics, 16, 69 
statutes, 18, 22, 23, 33, 37, 57 
statutory authority, 60 
storage, 8, 28, 57 
structuring, 43, 44 
supermarkets, 66, 67 
suppliers, 46 
supply chain, 9, 21, 83 
surveillance, 45, 67 
survey, 3, 10, 12, 15, 30, 31, 33 
T 
tactics, 8, 37, 66 
tags, 6, 7, 16, 66 
target, 5, 38, 42, 45, 52, 61, 88 
taxes, 1, 10 
taxpayers, 3 
teams, 77, 78, 82, 88 
techniques, 38, 45, 52 

Index 
 
99 
technologies, 18, 67 
technology, viii, 52, 55, 60, 68, 69 
telecommunications, 25, 32, 53 
telecommunications services, 25 
telemarketing, 32 
terrorism, 14, 15, 70 
terrorist activities, 1, 3, 11, 14 
terrorist acts, 14, 44 
terrorist attacks, 14, 54 
terrorist groups, 15 
terrorist organization, viii, 3, 14, 15, 31, 42 
terrorists, 14, 15 
theft, vii, viii, ix, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 
12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28, 
32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 40, 44, 50, 51, 53, 
55, 56, 60, 62, 66, 67, 68, 69, 76, 80, 81, 
82, 87 
threats, 54 
Title V, 33 
tobacco, 7 
tracks, 71 
trade, iv, 51, 52, 78 
trafficking, 36, 42, 51, 70 
training, 55, 56, 57, 78, 83 
training programs, 57 
transactions, vii, 1, 10, 23, 25, 43, 44, 45, 
46, 51, 70, 76 
transparency, 70, 72, 78, 89 
transport, 5 
transportation, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24, 27, 33, 39, 
43, 44, 45, 60 
transshipment, 28 
Treasury, 30, 32, 56 
trial, 44 
trucks, 8, 9, 13, 88 
U 
U.S. Department of Commerce, 31 
U.S. Department of Labor, 39 
U.S. Department of the Treasury, 30 
U.S. Postal Inspection Service, vi, 20, 32, 
56, 57, 59, 63 
U.S. Secret Service, v, 20, 32, 49, 59 
U.S. Treasury, 32 
uniform, 38, 44 
United, iv, v, viii, ix, 1, 3, 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, 
20, 30, 31, 32, 35, 41, 42, 43, 44, 49, 50, 
53, 59, 60, 62, 67, 70, 75, 77, 81, 87, 91, 
92 
United Kingdom, 70 
United States, iv, v, viii, ix, 1, 3, 10, 11, 13, 
14, 15, 20, 30, 31, 32, 35, 41, 42, 43, 44, 
49, 50, 53, 59, 60, 62, 67, 75, 77, 81, 87, 
91, 92 
universe, 69 
USA, 72, 79 
USDA, 43 
USPIS, 20, 31, 33 
USSS, 20, 31, 32, 33 
V 
vacuum, 7, 67, 70, 88 
vans, 8, 88 
vehicles, 8, 37, 70 
venue, 78 
Viagra, 36, 45 
Vice President, vi, 20, 29, 65, 75 
victimization, 3, 15, 27, 33 
victims, 36, 50, 51, 52, 88 
video, 6, 16, 30, 45, 57, 63 
W 
warehouses, 13 
Washington, 27, 31, 88 
wealth, 52 
web, 38, 79, 83 
web sites, 79 
websites, 2, 10, 17, 25, 32, 33, 51, 52 
West Virginia, 27 
wire fraud, 39 
wiretaps, 45 
Wisconsin, 23, 27 
worldwide, viii, 50, 52 
Y 
Yemen, 43 

