OUT OF EDEN

This page intentionally left blank 

O UT OF ED EN
Adam and Eve and the Problem of Evil
■
■
■
■
Paul W. Kahn
PRINCETON UNIVERSITY PRESS
Princeton and Oxford

Copyright © 2007 by Princeton University Press
Published by Princeton University Press,
41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
In the United Kingdom: Princeton University Press,
3 Market Place, Woodstock, Oxfordshire OX20 1SY
All Rights Reserved
Kahn, Paul W., 1952–
Out of Eden : Adam and Eve and the problem of evil / Paul W. Kahn.
p.
cm.
ISBN-13: 978-0-691-12693-7 (hardcover : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-691-12693-3 (hardcover : alk. paper)
1. Good and evil. I. Title.
BJ1401.K34
2007
170—dc22
2006015864
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
This book has been composed in Sabon and Copperplate display
Printed on acid-free paper. ∞
pup.princeton.edu
Printed in the United States of America
1
3
5
7
9
10
8
6
4
2

CONTENTS
Acknowledgments
vii
Introduction:
The Study of Evil
1
1. A Preliminary Meditation on Oedipus and Adam
16
2. Evil and the Image of the Sacred
53
3. Love and Evil
106
4. Political Evil: Slavery and the Shame of Nature
143
5. Political Evil: Killing, Sacriﬁce, and the Image of God
174
Conclusion:
Tragedy, Comedy, and the Banality of Evil
211
Index
223

This page intentionally left blank 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
It is difﬁcult to thank people for teaching me about evil. In this book,
however, I argue that evil and love are bound to each other, and that
we ﬁnd evil where we ﬁnd love. To learn about evil, I have studied the
pathology of love. I hope that this has not made me bad company to
family and friends. I am fortunate in knowing that no amount of inter-
est in evil could threaten the love that sustains my world. For that, I
am most grateful.
Of course, I have also had help with theory and text. My ﬁrst ideas
about evil were formed in a seminar I taught at the Yale Law School
in 2000. To the diverse group of students in that class, I owe a special
debt. In the summer of 2005, the entire manuscript was critiqued by
a powerful group of young scholars in an interdisciplinary seminar
on law, politics, and theology sponsored by the National Humanities
Center and the Berlin Wissenschaftskolleg. These two seminars repre-
sented the beginning and end of the process of writing this book, and
I owe much to all who were involved. Several friends and colleagues
reviewed the entire manuscript, providing many valuable suggestions.
In particular, I thank David Luban, Bruce Ackerman, Benjamin Berger,
Tico Taussig, Max Kohn, and Ulrich Haltern. Adam Romero helped
to get the manuscript in ﬁnal shape. As with each of my books, Bar-
bara Mianzo kept the whole process moving smoothly. Finally, I ac-
knowledge the institutional support of the Yale Law School, which
has made it possible for me to pursue my ideas wherever they may
lead me.

This page intentionally left blank 

OUT OF EDEN

This page intentionally left blank 

I N T R O D U C T I O N
■
■
■
■
THE STUDY OF EVIL
Evil makes us human. We learn this early in Genesis, when Adam and
Eve are cast out of Eden because they chose to do wrong. Genesis
tells us that not only ourselves but our world is a consequence of evil:
“Cursed be the ground because of you.” Finding ourselves fallen, we
cannot be at ease: “For dust you are, and to dust you shall return.”
Nor can we be satisﬁed with our achievements, for labor is our punish-
ment. If evil brought us to where we are, then the Western religious
tradition tells us that our essential task as individuals and communities
is to overcome the evil in our nature. We want to return to that “image
of God” that we were at creation. We must recover Eden.
Fall and redemption have offered more than a religious frame of
reference. These concepts shaped the Western imagination. They of-
fered the frame through which philosophers, theologians, and political
leaders, as well ordinary people, understood themselves, their commu-
nities, and their relationship to the larger world.1 Evil and redemption
gave meaning to life and death. Without the concept of evil, individu-
als would not have approached themselves with the same sense of
urgency, a sense that their lives are the scene of a great moral battle in
which literally everything is at stake.
Today, all this may be changing. Outside of fundamentalist religious
groups, there is a reluctance to appeal to the idea of evil. In place
of evil, contemporary human sciences examine the social causes of
pathology, while postmodernists speak of a need to respect cultural
differences. In place of redemption, we are counseled by experts on
the need for therapeutic interventions in the lives of individuals and
1 For example, Susan Nieman recently argued that the history of modern philosophy
can best be understood as an inquiry into theodicy—the problem of understanding why an
omnipotent God allows evil to inhabit our world. S. Nieman, Evil in Modern Thought: An
Alternative History of Philosophy (2002).

2
■INTRODUCTION
societies. If such remedies fail, there is a turn to law enforcement.2 But
even here there is a fear that the language of evil is more likely to lead
to abuse of authority than to efﬁcient and humane policing.
The turn away from the category of evil is a part of the “disen-
chanted” character of the contemporary world. This has nothing to
do with a change in behavior. Man’s capacity for atrocious behavior—
including hatred, murder, genocide, and torture—continues. Nor have
we become blind to the terrible things that individuals and societies
do to each other. We continue to distinguish good behavior from bad;
we theorize about the nature of justice and injustice. But the distinc-
tion between good and bad acts is not the same as that between good
and evil. We can identify plenty of injustices in our own political order,
but it does not follow that we consider our society evil. Similarly, for
the individual, bad choices and bad behavior are not necessarily evil.
An evil person is not simply one with a propensity for bad acts; nor is
everyone who has committed many bad acts evil. One can be self-
destructive without being evil; one can be deﬁcient in one’s moral obli-
gations toward others without being evil. Certainly, one can lack civil-
ity and yet not be evil.
Of course, evil individuals or societies usually exhibit bad and un-
just behavior, but their character as evil is not reducible to these acts
or to the propensity to perform them. Something broader and deeper
is at stake in the concept of evil—not just a category of behavior, a
personality defect, or a political practice but rather a way of being in
the world. My aim in this book is ﬁrst to inquire into what was at
stake in the religious conception of evil within the Western tradition,
and then to offer a secular interpretation of this conception. I hope
to make evil available as a compelling category for contemporary
thought. To do so requires an exploration of the genealogy of the con-
cept. While bad or even terrible actions are universal, not every culture
has available to it a conception of evil. More is at stake than the form
2 Karl Rove, President George W. Bush’s political adviser, deftly captured this set of atti-
tudes—and turned it to partisan political purposes—in his widely reported comment: “Con-
servatives saw the savagery of 9/11 . . . and prepared for war; liberals saw the savagery of
the 9/11 attack and wanted to prepare indictments and offer therapy and understanding for
our attackers.” See P. Healy, “Rove Criticizes Liberals on 9/11,” N.Y. Times, June 23, 2005,
at A13.

THE STUDY OF EVIL
■3
of explanation of bad actions. The absence of the category signiﬁes
not just a difference in the understanding of the relationship of man
to the world but also a difference in the relationship itself. Who we
are is inevitably a function of who we think we are.
The classical Greeks did not have the concept of evil; for Christians,
evil is the central category of human existence. In chapter 1, I explore
this difference. In chapter 2, I trace the evolving character of the con-
ception of evil in the Judeo-Christian tradition. In the remaining chap-
ters I argue that the conception of evil that emerges from this religious
tradition remains critically important to understanding the secular
world of family, group, and polity within which we live our lives.
My central argument is that evil does not appear in classical thought
because the Greeks lacked a conception of the will. The Judeo-
Christian tradition, on the other hand, puts the will at the center of
its idea of the human. Where the Greeks saw the problem of man’s
relationship to the world and to each other as one of meeting—or
failing to meet—the demands of reason, once a conception of the will
emerges, that relationship is reconceived as one of love. God and men
now exist in reciprocal relationships of love. Evil, I argue, is the pa-
thology of the will; it is love gone wrong. Contemporary theory fails
to grasp evil, because it measures behavior against the standards of
reason, not will. To understand ourselves and the problems we con-
front, we must stop thinking only of good and bad—or, even worse,
of same and different—and recover again an understanding of love
and evil. In Putting Liberalism in Its Place, I offered an account of
politics that put love and sacriﬁce at its center. Here I am completing
the inquiry into the contemporary character of a will that is bound
by love and evil. Together these two volumes offer a political theology
of modernity.3
Confronting the problem of evil, early modern thinkers such as
Pierre Bayle, questioned the idea of an omnipotent creator, God. If
this world is the product of divine creation, then either God is not
omnipotent or He is not good. There is too much evil in the world to
reach any other conclusion. Bayle’s answer was to turn to Manichae-
3 The need for a modern political theology was noted by Clifford Geertz some time ago.
C. Geertz, Local Knowledge: Further Essays in Interpretive Anthropology 121, 143 (1983).

4
■INTRODUCTION
ism—the doctrine that the principles of good and evil are coequal
sources of the world—as “the most reasonable response to experi-
ence.”4 Manichaeism captures the sense that evil is so basic to our
experience that it must itself be a ﬁrst principle. It is the practical out-
put of a failure of metaphysical dimensions.
Bayle’s quandary shows us that evil will not appear if the categories
we deploy are one-dimensional—whether that single dimension is the
goodness of God or the modern liberal’s appeal to reason. For exam-
ple, evil makes no appearance in science, because scientiﬁc explana-
tions aim to give causal accounts of phenomena. That the sun will die
and the earth is doomed is not evil if it is simply the consequence of a
causal chain that marks the birth and death of stars. Similarly, in the
biblical account, as long as creation is the product of God’s effort
alone, evil makes no appearance. God’s judgment that creation is
“good” is not a contingent judgment expressing the success of his
world-making technique. Rather, being and goodness are one and the
same in a world that expresses nothing other than the godhead itself.
Evil appears in the biblical account when humans act. To explain that
action, we need to appeal to something other than the goodness of
creation. We need the faculty of the will.
Will is distinct from reason or desire. In Jewish thought it is the
faculty that corresponds to the possibility of the covenant. In Christian
thought it is the faculty that corresponds to—and receives—divine
grace. In both cases, will’s domain is that of faith. For moderns, it is
the faculty of the soul that has the capacity for love. After all, we
cannot reason ourselves to love, and surely we distinguish love from
mere desire.5 Evil, western religious tradition tells us, is a problem of
the will. But we go wrong if we think that the problem is that of a will
not shaped by reason. Rather, the pathologies of the will begin with
the loss or misdirection of faith.
Faith connects will to a source of ultimate meaning outside the self:
covenant, grace, beloved. The problem of evil arises when the will
insists that it is the source of its own meaning. Adam and Eve would
4 Nieman, Evil in Modern Thought 21.
5 On the faculty of will and its relationship to love, see P. Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its
Place 222–27 (2005).

THE STUDY OF EVIL
■5
be “like divine beings”: that is, they would be dependent upon nothing
outside themselves. In the mythical frame, such a being is one that
never dies. The Serpent assures Eve, “You are not going to die.” With
recognition of dependence comes the imagining of one’s own death.
Having eaten, Adam and Eve learn that they will indeed die. The locus
of evil, I argue, is in the refusal to recognize the possibility of one’s
own death.
Evil shows itself in different acts—political and individual—but
their common source is the ﬂight from recognition of mortality. Refus-
ing to recognize one’s own ﬁnitude, death is projected on to an other.
Thus the paradigm of evil is the murderer who claims the power of
life and death: he will live, and the other will die. Denying his own
death, the evil actor denies that he is a part of nature or, at least, that
part of nature occupied by fallen man. In the language of the Genesis
myth, he is “ashamed” of his nature.6 The victim, the slave, the tor-
tured are all identiﬁed with what I call the “shame of nature.”
Evil is at the center of Judeo-Christian thought, because will, not
reason, is at the center of Judeo-Christian metaphysics. Focusing on
the will, however, is not a direction in which our modern liberal cul-
ture cares to go.7 When we do see recourse to an idea of the will, it is
in the form of “willfulness,” meaning a certain recalcitrance toward
the demands of reason. Willfulness is a problem to be met by educa-
tion: the willful child needs the reasonable guidance of a parent or
teacher. A politics of willfulness requires that institutional structures
cultivating social habits of moderation be built into the constitutional
order. Because modern thought is committed to the idea that reason
can structure political order and discern personal moral obligation, it
must conceive of the will in a way that makes it fully subordinate to
reason. A will cured of willfulness has nothing to say. Or, more accu-
rately, it says only what reason tells it to say. This is the language of the
will behind the Rawlsian veil of ignorance: it lacks any particularity,
speaking only in the universal idiom of reason.8
6 As I explain, the Adam and Eve myth is actually two distinct myths with two distinct
representations of man’s nature. One I refer to as the “image of God” and the other as the
“shame of nature.”
7 The failure of liberalism to develop an adequate conception of the will is at the center
of my critique in Putting Liberalism in Its Place.
8 See J. Rawls, A Theory of Justice 136–42 (1971).

6
■INTRODUCTION
In the Judeo-Christian tradition, knowledge is the problem from
which the human condition begins: it was eating of the tree of knowl-
edge that condemned man to a life of labor outside the Garden.
Knowledge is not the answer but rather the source of the problem of
human existence. The object of reason may be truth, but truth without
faith will not redeem man. For the Greeks, on the other hand, knowl-
edge is the goal to be obtained. Even for Plato, who developed a myth
of perfect knowledge prior to birth, the mythical idea of recovery
grounds a forward-looking process of rational inquiry. In Aristotle’s
thought, too, that state in which knowledge and being are one and the
same is the ﬁnal cause or end of all existence.
The secularization of modern experience reﬂects a similar turn to
knowledge and reason. The consequence is that our ways of thinking
are not adequate to our experience of evil. Economics is the paradigm
of contemporary forms of explanation, and there is no evil in econom-
ics; there are only differences in tastes. Classical thought and modern
liberalism share a common orientation to justice. For both, this is a
product of a deep commitment to reason. Both traditions believe that
philosophical inquiry is an extension of those everyday discursive
practices that should control and structure political and psychological
order. This was given visible form in the agora—Socrates’ domain.
It is expressed as a methodological principle in Rawls’s pursuit of a
“reﬂective equilibrium”—testing philosophical principle against prac-
tical intuition and vice versa.9 There is a seamless movement from
pedagogy to psychology to politics to philosophy. Evil does not appear
in that process. The problem of evil is displaced by the problem of
political and social formation, on the one hand, and individual forma-
tion, on the other.
For contemporary liberal thought, political and moral failure
should be addressed by reform, which is always a matter of identifying
and correcting points of irrationality.10 Those who do wrong are like
9 Id. 48–51.
10 On reason and reform, see P. Kahn, The Cultural Study of Law 8 (1999). Early in
American political life, George Washington writes of the fortuity that our history begins in
an age in which political science has been fully developed: “The foundation of our Empire
was not laid in the gloomy age of Ignorance and Superstition, but at an Epocha when the
rights of mankind were better understood and more clearly deﬁned . . . the researches of
the human mind, after social happiness, have been carried to a great extent, the Treasures of
knowledge . . . may be happily applied in the Establishment of our forms of Government.”
Circular Letter of Farewell to the Army, June 8, 1783. Similarly, the rise of the administra-

THE STUDY OF EVIL
■7
children who do not listen to their teachers or like those who fail to
apply moral lessons to themselves. They lack self-control; they allow
their desires to get the better of their long-term interests; they are mis-
taken in their beliefs about right and wrong. Nowhere do we encoun-
ter evil as an equal and opposite force in the world. Instead, in the
liberal polity we encounter an endless concern with the processes re-
quired for reason to rule and with pedagogy. These come together in
that modern genre of work that focuses on democratic education, on
the one hand, and understands democratic politics as educational, on
the other.11
Even the most well-known account of evil under the conditions of
modernity, Hannah Arendt’s report on the Eichmann trial, shares
this general outlook.12 Like her teacher, Heidegger, Arendt lacks the
general faith in reason characteristic of liberal political and moral the-
ory. Indeed, her account of the possibility of the evil of the German
state relies in part on the rise of a bureaucratic, administrative ratio-
nality. That rationality is not evil in itself, but it makes Eichmann pos-
sible. Arendt’s particular contribution was to identify the “banality of
evil” in the character of Eichmann. He could manage the Final Solu-
tion, she claimed, because he had stopped thinking. Administrative
rationality did not itself require thought. Thinking for Arendt has a
special quality of recognizing and engaging the other: less pure reason,
more dialogical engagement. Eichmann could not imagine the world
from the point of view of another subject. Instead of thinking, he relied
on cliche´s.
Thus Arendt shares the view that psychology, politics, and philoso-
phy all work in the same dimension. But, for her, politics must be
modeled on the person-to-person dialogical engagement of Socrates
in the agora. Much of my argument is directed against this view. If
Eichmann is banal, so, too, is every soldier who expresses himself
through the cliche´s of patriotism. It will hardly do to dismiss the politi-
cal psychology of the modern state as merely “banal.” To understand
tive agency, in the early twentieth century, reﬂects the response of political institutions to
the rise of scientiﬁc expertise in the form of the empirical social sciences. See P. Kahn, Legiti-
macy and History: Self-Government in American Constitutional Theory 126–27 (1992).
11 See, e.g., J. Dewey, Democracy and Education (1916); A. Gutman, Democratic Educa-
tion (1987); A. Gutman & D. Thompson, Democracy and Disagreement (1997).
12 H. Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalam: A Report on the Banality of Evil (1964).

8
■INTRODUCTION
evil, we must stop measuring action against the standards of reason—
as justice or as dialogue—and instead turn to the dynamics of will and
faith for a subject who is aware that he is ﬁnite and will die.
More common than Arendt’s view of the banality of evil as the
failure of thought is the view that evil is located in the wrong thoughts.
Evil, then, is a matter of choosing on the basis of the wrong princi-
ples—for example, principles of superiority or subordination. A per-
son who believes that she need not extend equal recognition and dig-
nity to others is not a liberal, but is she evil? We cannot cast the entire
prehistory of liberalism as evil. Or is it somehow the case that “now
we should know better” and so are no longer excused? Should all
hierarchies of caste, or of social and political class, be treated in the
same way as slavery—a paradigm of evil? Surely we remain attached
to some hierarchies: age, education, professional competence, and po-
litical or corporate role. Other societies are attached to hierarchies of
gender or religion. We have disagreements across all these lines of
division, but we do not think that those who believe in positions other
than our own are evil. We do not want to label every illiberal society—
past or present—as evil. We may want to reform them, to make them
more egalitarian, but we do not condemn them as evil.13
The modern clash of ideologies might suggest that there is some-
thing to this view that the source of evil is the adoption of the wrong
principles as the ground of one’s actions. Yet there was no necessary
reason that the clash of capitalism and socialism should have been
seen as a clash of good versus evil. Principles alone will not explain
why we would or should invest so much of ourselves in the question
of the ownership of the means of production. We carry on a national
debate over the extent of government regulation of markets without
suggesting that this is anything other than disagreement in good faith.
Even if the principle we erect is the interest of every individual in his
or her own happiness, we have not yet entered the domain of evil.
Those who pursue success in free markets are not evil; nor are those
who advance modern social choice theory.
13 John Rawls confronts this problem of recognizing societies that are neither liberal nor
evil, classifying them as “decent hierarchical peoples.” J. Rawls, The Law of Peoples 62–
67 (1999).

THE STUDY OF EVIL
■9
If evil were simply an epithet we use against those who appear dif-
ferent from ourselves, it would not be so problematic a concept. But
to explain the perception of evil as a reaction to difference is far too
easy. On this view, evil, once again, literally slips away. The Jew, for
example, was long a symbol of evil for Europeans, but today we are
more likely to locate evil in anti-Semitism than in Semitism. We often
look back at the history of our hatreds and think that the problem
was in ourselves, not in the objects of our hatred. If we think that
the perception of evil is only the consequence of our own emotional
pathology, then we will be tempted by explanations that point to
moral relativism. We will respond with an appeal to the liberal norm
of respecting difference. If only we would all appreciate difference, we
think there would be no evil. The conﬂict between religious principles,
for example, need not appear as a clash between good and evil. We
can celebrate the diversity of faiths and the multiple ways in which
individuals realize the sacred. Religious conﬂict, like political conﬂict,
is often the locus of the perception of evil, but that does not in itself
explain why we perceive evil there or anywhere else.
We cannot be satisﬁed with such suggestions that evil arises out of
misperceptions of difference, because we are inheritors of a culture in
which evil is understood to arise from within. That, after all, is the
point of the myth of the Fall. Evil is not just something that comes to
us from without but is something we ﬁnd at the core of our own expe-
rience of the self. We cannot dismiss this as simply a matter of one’s
point of view; we cannot accept appeals to difference as the explana-
tion. We feel that evil is deeply a part of our world and yet does not
belong there. To locate evil in the misperception of difference is simply
to ignore one of the key insights of the myth of the Fall—that the
problem of evil is intimately related to, and indeed begins with, the
acquisition of knowledge. In particular, it begins with knowledge of
the ﬁnite character of the self.
The problem of evil is much more than a sense that we might judge
ourselves or others to be failures when measured against the norms we
articulate. Evil is more than merely a point of view; it is not “cured” by
adopting new, more forgiving, norms. Evil is not just a contingent
aspect of our circumstances—our lingering youth as a community or
as individuals—as if we could eliminate evil were we to try harder.

10
■INTRODUCTION
Yet outside the religious tradition of the Fall, how can we understand
something to be both essential and wrong? To understand evil requires
that we take up this sense of “not belonging” to our own world.
The disappearance of evil from Enlightenment thought was just as
critical a development as the introduction of evil in the post-classical
world. For much of contemporary thought, the very term “evil” sug-
gests something archaic and suspiciously religious, something that be-
longs to the pre-Enlightenment character of man. A disenchanted
world, a world transparent to reason, is one in which evil has disap-
peared, along with Satan, witches, spells, and miracles. Nevertheless,
the sense of many people that modern philosophical discourses—par-
ticularly liberal theories—miss something essential is related to this
failure to engage the problem of evil. Evil is deeper than self-regard,
deeper than a weakness of the will, and deeper than error.
The absence of evil from the contemporary worldview rests on a
failure to grasp what, borrowing from Hannah Arendt, we can call
the human condition.14 Subjecting evil to the same unidimensional
scheme of explanation as everything else misses the phenomenon en-
tirely. It is as if we were to read an economist’s account of love. Worse,
it is as if the lovers themselves had only the language of economics to
describe their own experience. That account might afford reasonably
accurate predictions of future behavior, but it would not have touched
upon the meaning of the experience to the lovers.
Although we may have lost the capacity to speak of evil, the persis-
tence of evil may be the most pressing problem faced by contemporary
Western thought. For the moral and political history of the twentieth
century is a history of evil, from the slaughter in the European trenches
to the torture chambers of authoritarian regimes to the repeated epi-
sodes of genocide.15 Modern liberalism would meet contemporary ex-
pressions of evil with the institutions of legality: human rights law
and effective criminal prosecutions. Yet there always appears to be an
incongruity between the scope of the problem of evil and this remedial
response. One measure of that incongruity may be the one hundred
thousand Rwandans accused of genocidal behavior and kept in jail
14 See H. Arendt, The Human Condition (1958).
15 See J. Glover, Humanity: A Moral History of the Twentieth Century (1999).

THE STUDY OF EVIL
■11
for years awaiting a formal judicial process that has barely begun to
function.16 Another would be the International Criminal Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia, which has had some success applying interna-
tional criminal law to participants in the former Serbian regime but
has left untouched the vast majority of ordinary citizens who sup-
ported Slobodan Milosevic and participated in the ethnic cleansing for
the sake of a greater Serbia.
There is surely nothing objectionable about punishing the perpetra-
tors of the evils of genocide or ethnic cleansing by applying to them
the framework of criminal justice. Punishment and deterrence—the
goals of criminal justice—are worthwhile ambitions. Nevertheless
there remains an incommensurability, a misunderstanding of the di-
mensions of the phenomenon, if we are satisﬁed with the identiﬁcation
of evil as crime.17 Some evil is not criminal at all, for example, the
evil of hatred or jealousy. Some evil overwhelms criminal law, such as
genocide. The break between evil and criminality is sometimes noted
by speaking of “radical evil.”18 I have no objection to the term, except
that today it tends to focus our attention on political manifestations
of evil. Its use may keep us from exploring the continuity between the
personal and the political in the dimension of evil.
Evil is not an aberration—a failure—in a world otherwise ordered
by reason. Rather, it is an effort to make the world anew, to create
meaning on a new basis. That new world—the world of evil—is one
in which death is projected onto the other. Aristotle wrote that every
human action is motivated by a perception of the good. Perhaps we
can say, equally, that every human action contains the germ of evil. If
we expand our understanding of evil to include hatred, as I do in chap-
ter 3, then none of us is all that far from evil.
16 The ﬁgure of one hundred thousand was widely reported in the fall of 2002. Substan-
tial releases occurred in 2003 and 2005, leaving still about forty thousand genocide suspects
in prison. See “Rwanda Starts Prisoner Releases,” BBC News, July 29, 2005, available at
http://news.bbc.co.uk/Z/hi/africa/4726969.stm (last visited Sept. 30, 2005).
17 The turn toward truth commissions, and away from formal adjudication, represents
more than a search for institutional efﬁciency. It responds to a felt need to provide a new
foundation for the polity through a more general confrontation with the phenomenon of
evil. See M. Minnow, Between Vengeance and Forgiveness: Facing History after Genocide
and Mass Violence (1998); Truth v. Justice: The Morality of Truth Commissions (R. Rot-
berg & D. Thompson, eds. 2000).
18 See Arendt, Eichmann 241; C. Nino, Radical Evil on Trial (1996).

12
■INTRODUCTION
The dispute with evil is a kind of metaphysical war; it is a clash all
the way down to the very basis of our understanding of the meaning
of our lives and our world. For this reason, today’s terrorists, who
appear to us as the paradigm of political evil, are often spoken of as
“nihilists,” as if they wanted nothing positive but only to destroy all
that is of value. The terrorist, of course, is unlikely to regard himself
as a nihilist. He acts for reasons of his own. We speak of nihilism,
however, not merely to excuse our own failures of comprehension but
to express something essential to our perception of evil. The identiﬁ-
cation of evil always includes this effort at negation. Evil persons are
accused of worshiping false gods, which means that at the basis of
their belief is nothing at all. The oldest accusation of evil is that of
idolatry. The idol may promise redemption but leaves us with only
meaninglessness and death.
If evil is to be a useful concept, rather than a political epithet, we
need a new understanding of the phenomenon. For this purpose, I
propose a return to origins, to the myth of Adam and Eve. My purpose
in turning to Genesis is not to establish the true meaning of the myth
as either a matter of biblical exegesis or historical inquiry. Rather, I
propose a series of interpretive exercises that draw on historical ex-
pressions of the myth but press toward an understanding of contempo-
rary forms of evil. I want to use the myth—or actually myths, since
there are two versions offered in Genesis—to meditate upon the forms
of evil that continue to characterize Western experience. Idolatry, for
example, may no longer be the compelling form of evil for us that
it was in the Old Testament, but hatred, subordination, and torture
continue to shape our understanding and experience of evil. The myth
allows access to contemporary forms of evil, because it offers a point
for reﬂection upon the problem of the will for a subject who self-
consciously confronts the fact of his own death. More than that, the
myth puts evil within a matrix of freedom, knowledge, love, and
death. This is just where we must go if we are to see evil clearly. Each
chapter that follows takes up anew the Genesis myth, emphasizing
different points in order to press the inquiry in new directions as I
consider evil within family, society, and polity. The common point of
origin in Genesis for each chapter’s interpretive inquiry emphasizes
an underlying unity within the different forms of evil. That unity

THE STUDY OF EVIL
■13
should not, however, be pushed too far. Each chapter is meant to stand
on its own as well as to illuminate a common core.
One of the ﬁrst lessons of Genesis is that we can speak coherently
of evil only where we can speak of subjects who are free. If we reduce
action to events that are to be explained by tracing patterns of cause
and effect, then we lose sight of evil. Only the free actor brings evil
into the world. Just as evil is related to freedom, it is also related to
death. In Genesis, death is a consequence of the free act. We will have
reason to question the order: the free act that is evil may be a conse-
quence of our awareness of death. Were we immortal, we would have
nothing upon which to ﬁx the label of evil. Mortality raises the stakes.
Immortal, we might be mischievous, but not evil. Indeed, evil disap-
pears from view for those who believe themselves immortal. Curi-
ously, both classical thought and liberal thought understand the sub-
ject from a perspective that would push death out of sight. A subject
who identiﬁes the truth of the self with reason does not worry about
death, for reason is timeless.
Death, like freedom, sets the conditions within which evil is possi-
ble. It is not the thing itself. We need to understand what conﬁguration
of self, freedom, knowledge, and death is at work in the experience of
evil. The argument I pursue is that evil arises out of the way the free
subject responds to the awareness of his own death. Evil forms at the
intersection of freedom and death. Some of our oldest images of evil
represent it as a personiﬁcation of death. They suggest that evil is an
inversion: an acting on the principle of death rather than life. Today
the terrorist—particularly the suicide bomber—is assimilated to these
images. He is the literal personiﬁcation of death. He brings death as a
shock into our ordinary lives, appearing as if from nowhere. Thus
terrorism brings into the heart of our contemporary political debates
a deep and difﬁcult philosophical problem.
Separating, as an analytic matter, evil from death is at the heart of
the problem of developing an adequate conception of evil. After all,
nature may terrorize us with disease, disability, and death. Death ter-
rorizes a free being, because death is a scandal to the thinking subject.
Thinking has no natural end. The modern world is also quite familiar
with the experience of angst, that sickness unto death. But angst and
evil are not the same, although both are related to death. Angst is

14
■INTRODUCTION
passive; evil is active. When death becomes a subject of the free will,
we approach the domain of evil. In myth, evil is often represented as
the search for immortality gone wrong. We can bring some philosophi-
cal clarity to this idea. The problem of evil begins in the ﬂight from
death: not the putting off of death, which is characteristic of moderni-
ty’s culture of entertainment, but a kind of practical metaphysics of
overcoming death. The contemporary products of that metaphysics
are hatred, murder, slavery, torture, and genocide. These are the sub-
jects of the inquiries that follow.
The locus of evil is not a function of theory or of abstract rationality
but of what we actually ﬁnd in ourselves and in those with whom we
interact. For contemporary citizens of the modern Western nation-
state, evil is more likely to take familial and political forms than reli-
gious forms, because these are the communities that constitute our
sense of identity. In truth, we ﬁnd evil where we ﬁnd love: in families
and in those communities that matter most to us. Both love and evil
characterize a free subject who knows he will die. Love would tran-
scend death; evil would conquer death. The modern subject is asked to
assume the burden of his or her own contingency. This is an intolerable
burden to many—perhaps intolerable to everyone at some point or in
some forms. Not every response to this burden is evil, but it may well
be that every response has the potential for evil.
If our forms of explanation cannot acknowledge and understand
evil, then we will remain opaque to ourselves morally and politically.
Here, the philosophical inquiry intersects with practical issues of what
to do about the problems of evil that are so pressing in contemporary
politics. Philosophy cannot, however, give prescriptions for political
or individual action. Philosophers have no particular political exper-
tise, because politics remains an art, a matter of judging the possible
within multiple intersecting contexts. This is especially true today,
when governments must act simultaneously before domestic and inter-
national audiences. Nor can philosophers reach the level of particular-
ity that characterizes the life choices of an individual. Philosophy may
help us to understand love and evil, but it cannot tell us whom we
should love or whether we should hate.
Philosophers can, however, bring contemporary problems into con-
tact with the larger traditions within which our thinking operates.

THE STUDY OF EVIL
■15
They can help to explain why we see our problems and possibilities
as we do. Our perceptions of self and world, of meaning and value,
are deeply embedded in the history of Western understandings. We do
not make the world anew; we inherit it. This is no less true of our
conceptual world than our material world. We perceive meaning in
certain ways because we perceive the world to be of a certain charac-
ter. The philosopher’s role is to clarify this structure of thought.
The inquiry into evil, as with every philosophical inquiry, is not so
much an inquiry into the objects of our judgments as an inquiry into
ourselves. What use we make of self-knowledge is a problem beyond
philosophy. Philosophy begins and ends with the injunction: “Know
thyself.” When Socrates took up that task, he did not discover evil
embedded in the soul of man. We do. This fundamental change in the
character of the human soul is the place to begin.

C H A P T E R
O N E
■
■
■
■
A PRELIMINARY MEDITATION
ON OEDIPUS AND ADAM
Evil terrorizes, but not all that terrorizes is evil. We may be terrorized
by illness, but we do not describe it as evil. Evil characterizes an actor,
a group, or a regime; it is not simply a bad or frightful experience.
Without a perception of agency, there can be terror but not evil. When
the collapse of the sun replaced the Last Judgment in our imaginations,
cosmology replaced eschatology. Imagining the end of the universe,
we lose our moral bearings. We may feel terror, but there is no one to
blame—whether ourselves or others—and so there is no demand that
we do anything. With that, a subject of intense moral signiﬁcance was
replaced by one of scientiﬁc interest.
Evil is connected to death but not just as an expression of the scale
of injury. The morally bad actor does not become evil when he moves
from maiming to killing. Moreover, whatever the connection of evil
and death not all that is evil arises out of a literal killing. Conversely,
not every killing—not even large-scale death—has its origin in evil.
Both the Final Solution and the National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Ad-
ministration embody administrative rationality, but even if both envi-
sion large-scale death, only one is evil. A world without evil would be
one in which we would still have to worry about bad actors, just as
we would still have to worry about accidents. While all that is evil
may be unjust and harmful, not every injustice and harm is evil.
Part of the problem of evil lies in its attraction. We see something
of ourselves in evil; we are not always repulsed by what we see. We
imagine ourselves as both terrorized and terrorizing. To grasp this
double character of evil, we need to understand the nature of sin and
not just bad events, of which unjust human action might be one
source. After the Fall, the evil Adam confronts is not a threat from

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■17
outside himself but one that arises from within. Evil, I argue, is not
sin but a response to the condition of sin in which man ﬁnds himself.
Stripped of the language of myth, we can say that evil is a response to
the self-consciousness of death. The account of original sin is an effort
to make comprehensible the terror in the face of our universal fate.
Evil arises when and where man ﬁnds his own ﬁnitude an intolerable
burden. Enlightenment promised to relieve man of the burdens of the
sacred and the polluted, by putting reason in the place of faith. But
enlightenment had no answer to the crisis of consciousness that arises
with the awareness of death. Accordingly, enlightenment left open the
space for evil but left us without the conceptual tools to understand
the character of evil.
The terror of death is linked to the terrorizing of evil. Joseph Conrad
vividly portrays this link in The Heart of Darkness. The protagonist,
Kurtz simultaneously perceives the terror of existence—“the hor-
ror”—and expresses evil in his own life. Terror arises from an experi-
ence of powerlessness. The inevitability of death does not merely rep-
resent man’s powerlessness; it is, rather, the very substance of that
powerlessness. A world characterized by death—and Kurtz lives in a
world surfeit with death—is one in which we all are susceptible to the
perception of horror. Kurtz’s evil is an assertion of power in the face
of this horror. Formally, he occupies the ambiguous moral position of
colonial commerce, which had the double mission of advancing one
civilization and destroying another. Kurtz, however, turns on the in-
tended beneﬁciaries—the natives—of this cultural gift. He becomes a
kind of god to them because he has power—indeed, the power over
life itself. He is, we might say, demonic.
Kurtz has become ineffective—powerless—from the perspective of
his Western employers, but he is an image of power to those he lives
among. Evil is at home in this simultaneous experience of power-
lessness—the horror—and of power—the terrorizing. Because power
and powerlessness can coexist in the same person, one can be evil and
yet see oneself as a victim. Suffering from the terror of powerlessness,
the subject asserts a power to master death.
Just here the inquiry into evil is as much metaphysical as it is psycho-
logical. We are asking how a ﬁnite being overcomes the experience of
his or her own ﬁnitude. This question points to the intimate connec-

18
■CHAPTER ONE
tion between love and evil: Kurtz is simultaneously an object of love
and an expression of evil. The juxtaposition of love and evil was at
the center of Freud’s later work, in which he saw eros and thanatos
as equiprimordial forces shaping the individual and civilization.1 It is
hard not to see this antinomy when one looks at the dual, Western
inheritance of “carnage and culture.”2 Yet love and evil are not simply
forces set in opposition to each other. Rather, they express ways of
understanding the self in the world, ways that have an intimate and
complex relationship to each other.
Already the story of Cain and Abel, the children of Adam and Eve,
presents an image of this relationship. The children go before God
once they have mastered the culture of the earth in agriculture and
husbandry—the labor to which Adam’s sin condemned all his descen-
dants. Abel ﬁnds favor with God; Cain does not. We are not told what
God’s acceptance means, but there is a suggestion that Abel is recov-
ering some of what his parents lost, whereas Cain remains condemned
to a life of labor and death. When God rejects Cain’s offering but
takes Abel’s, He says to Cain, “If you do well, will you not be ac-
cepted?” Cain, however, turns on Abel. He could have embraced
Abel’s good fortune in an expression of fraternal love; instead, he
kills Abel. Cain’s power to kill is matched with God’s power to pro-
tect. Thus, after killing Abel and suffering exposure of his crime, Cain
cries to God, “Whoever ﬁnds me will slay me.” But God marks Cain
“lest any who came upon him should kill him.” Although the text
turns quickly to a generational account, marking births and deaths,
there is no mention of Cain’s death. This is not to suggest that the evil
do not die. We know that Cain dies, but his death is pushed off into
an indeﬁnite future that remains out of sight. This is an apt character-
ization of the power of evil over death: a pushing off, a delay of recog-
nition, a ﬂight.
The biblical story goes further. Cain does not exactly wander the
earth. Instead, he founds a city, Enoch. The biblical narrative turns
from Cain’s generational and political accomplishments to the geneal-
1 S. Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents 65–69 (J. Strachey, trans. & ed. 1961).
2 The expression comes from V. Hanson, Carnage and Culture: Landmark Battles in the
Rise of Western Power (2001).

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■19
ogy of Seth, the child Adam and Eve had in place of Abel. But in a
textual confusion, the genealogy of Seth merges with that of Cain,
leading to Enoch and ﬁnally to Noah. This confused history suggests
a deeper point. Love and evil are not just equiprimordial, and they
are not just in opposition. They are equally productive in the same
dimension of human activity. The men of Noah’s time are all judged
by God to be evil—they are the descendants of Cain. But they are also
the descendants of Seth, so there is among them love as well—Noah
and his family. To eliminate evil requires a second, divine intervention:
the ﬂood. Neither love nor evil can do away with the other.
Here, then, in archetypal form, is an account of evil. Cain experi-
ences again the terror of Adam’s condemnation. Without God’s accep-
tance, Cain remains destined to a life of labor and then death. He is
condemned to this life for no apparent reason: like his brother, he,
too, made an offering, but it was not accepted. Every person’s death
appears undeserved and irrational in just this way. Failing to receive
divine acceptance, Cain asserts his own power over life and death: he
kills his brother. The power of evil, moreover, is genuine: he does avoid
his own death at the hands of others. Death is put off. But the power
of evil is never separate from the experience of terror. His punishment
is worse than the one for Adam’s sin: “When you till the ground, it
shall no longer yield to you its strength.” Cain declares, “My punish-
ment is greater than I can bear.” But bear it he does, for man’s capacity
for suffering is virtually endless. His suffering is matched by his power
over other men: he builds a city and founds a line. Men would kill
him if they could, just as they would kill countless, later rulers. They
do not, and we cannot help but suspect that it is not the mark, but
love, that saves him. For founders are loved even as they are feared.3
Together Cain and Abel tell us that we cannot identify evil with
man’s fallen state, not if we want the concept to do any work for us.
After the Fall, all have the potential for evil; there is nothing special
about Cain. It could have been Abel who killed Cain. Evil is not the
condition in which we ﬁnd ourselves but a form of response to that
3 For a recent reﬂection on this double quality—hated and loved—of the founder, see I.
Buruma, “The Indiscreet Charm of Tyranny,” New York Review of Books, vol. 52, no. 8
(May 12, 2005).

20
■CHAPTER ONE
condition. For that reason, evil is deeply intertwined with that which
is creative or constructive in our nature. Satan is often represented as
possessing knowledge and culture.4 Again, consider Kurtz, the agent
of European civilization. Seeking to overcome death, we are never far
from evil even as we build those deathless products of human creativ-
ity: culture, polity, family. Evil is disturbingly close to love.
Evil seems to threaten from without—to terrorize—but to come
from within. Focusing on either the inward or the outward aspect
alone misses the phenomenon. Viewed from the outside, evil becomes
just another source of terror, that is, a part of the horror of it all.
Among the horrors of the world are evil men: Abel is killed by his
brother. Viewed from the inside, evil becomes just another form of
psychological pathology. Evil is to be explained by jealousy, ambition,
or rage: Cain is jealous of Abel. Both these accounts appeal to the
logic of causal representation. Evil is categorized alongside other phe-
nomena, whether internal or external. Implicit in these accounts is the
assumption that we can master evil once we understand it, which
means to assign it a cause. Either we can avoid it through oppression
and containment—the outside perspective—or we can treat it—the
inside perspective. Avoidance and treatment characterize our attitudes
toward disease. Not surprisingly, some theories of evil speak of it quite
openly as a kind of disease.5
But evil is not a disease; it is not even analogous to a disease. Every
effort to treat evil as if it were a disease fails, because it is not possible
to identify the cause or set of causes that leads to evil. Where and when
evil will appear is always unpredictable. There is no constellation of
factors, whether psychological or sociological, from which we can
conﬁdently predict the appearance of evil. We cannot say that the well-
off are less likely to be evil than the poor or that culture and education
protect us against evil. There is an implicit acknowledgment of this
when people warn, “If the Holocaust could happen in Germany, the
center of European culture, then it could happen anywhere.” We see
the phenomenon of Cain and Abel repeated endlessly within families:
4 For example, Goethe’s Faust or Stephen Bene´t’s The Devil and Daniel Webster.
5 See, e.g., A. Heller, “The Natural Limits of Natural Law and the Paradox of Evil,” in
On Human Rights 149, 156–57, 170–71 (S. Shute & S. Hurley, eds. 1993).

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■21
children raised by the same parents turn out to have completely differ-
ent moral characters. Again the analogy to love is exact: we cannot
identify the conditions in which individuals will realize a love of oth-
ers, whether individuals or communities. This is not to say that we
cannot offer an explanation, point to patterns of causation in particu-
lar individuals or groups. But we cannot generalize from any such
narrative of an individual or a community. Christianity, with its faith
in love, arose within conditions of misery and destitution. That hardly
means that we should pursue suffering to ﬁnd love, although certainly
some Christians have done just that.
THE TERROR OF OEDIPUS
We can get a better sense of evil by looking ﬁrst in a direction from
which evil does not appear. The Greeks had myths of terror and pow-
erlessness. They, too, thought about the possibility that man’s labor
could fail, that it could produce the opposite of its intended aim. Nev-
ertheless, theirs were not myths of evil. Oedipus’s experience terriﬁes;
he, too, can speak of the horror. Even blind and old, he terrorizes
others. He is polluted, but he is not evil. He only becomes evil on a
modern rereading. To make him evil, we have to replace the Greek
idea of pollution with a Judeo-Christian idea of sin. We have to assign
Oedipus an agency that he lacks in Sophocles’ account. Indeed, the
very point of Sophocles’ play is to say that Oedipus is incapable of
such agency. To make Oedipus evil, we ﬁrst have to kill the Olympian
gods and then invest Oedipus with a subconscious.
What terrorized the Greeks was the world, not the inner life. When
the Greeks thought about the terror of human existence, they pro-
duced tragedy. Tragedy gives the audience just what subjects lack in
their ordinary lives: knowledge of the reality that is creating the ap-
pearance on the stage. The audience sees what the actor cannot see.
Seeing both the actor and the context, the audience understands the
drama to represent a gap in knowledge. The play’s action is the over-
coming of that gap—a direction and goal that the audience perceives
as necessary from the moment the play begins.6 In this sense, the audi-
6 See Aristotle, Poetics 1449b(24–28) (I. Bywater, trans.) in Basic Works of Aristotle
(R. McKeon, ed. 1941) (referring to tragedy as an “imitation of an action that is . . . com-
plete in itself,” but also “with incidents arousing fear and pity”).

22
■CHAPTER ONE
ence knows the whole from the beginning, and experiences a reduction
in tension as the perceptions of actor and audience converge at the
end. To the extent that the audience identiﬁes with Oedipus onstage,
it shares in his experience of terror. But to the extent that the spectator
reminds himself that he is not onstage, that he has a comprehensive
view of both the stage appearance and its cause, he has some control
over that terror. Oedipus may blind himself, but the audience is never
blind.7 The audience can thereby experience a kind of catharsis that is
not available to the actor, whether on the stage or in real life. Greek
tragedy reveals the terror of life itself—a terror rooted in what we
cannot know—but does so in a context within which it is cabined,
allowing some temporary relief from the horror of it all.
To see the causes of appearances—to see what men literally cannot
see—is to be beyond terror. For this reason, there is nothing of terror
in Greek philosophy, which strives to penetrate appearances and to
see the real. Plato’s cave—the most famous metaphor in all classical
philosophy—is all about shifting positions such that one sees fully the
context within which the human drama is set. Still today, this is the
ambition of reason. If reason can grasp the real, it can provide a ﬁrm
ground for practical action, whether of social construction or individ-
ual therapy. The philosopher turned therapist takes up the position
of the classical playwright who brings together, if only temporarily,
appearance and reality at the play’s conclusion. Psychoanalysis is the
construction of just such a drama in which the patient becomes the
audience to his own performance. Plato, who would banish the poets
from his ideal city, is only the ﬁrst of a long line of philosophers, psy-
choanalysts, economists, and others who would drive illusion from
the society: they rally to the cry, “To the facts themselves.”
Plato’s Republic, for example, is a profound psychological work,
but the psychological problems with which it deals are political prob-
lems with political solutions: how to educate a military class, how to
produce leaders who will not abuse public power for private ends,
7 If we compare Oedipus to Lear, we see that Shakespeare inverts the position of audience
and actor. Lear’s madness creates an access to truth not available to the audience. Lear
knows more than the audience because he can see beyond the mere appearances to which
the audience is bound. See P. Kahn, Law and Love: The Trials of King Lear 134 (2000).

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■23
how to produce a stable relationship between feelings of familial love
and feelings of political identity. Even when the psychological con-
cerns advance beyond the possibilities of ordinary politics, the goal
remains pedagogic: how to train philosophers who can see the ulti-
mate unity of being and the good. This is a world in which mistakes
will be made, in which there are plenty of human deﬁciencies to be
overcome, but not a world in which terror makes any appearance.8
To the degree that concerns with death do appear in the Republic,
they are met by myths designed to meet the same pedagogic goals.
Within the city, death is, ﬁrst of all, a problem of courage: one must
hold to politically appropriate beliefs even under the stress of battle.
Elsewhere the message of Plato’s dialogues broadens to the relation-
ship of death to other virtues: given what we know about justice and
the good, it is irrational to fear death. Indeed, in the Phaedo, Socrates
goes so far as to say that philosophy itself is a practice of dying, by
which he means that the philosopher takes no notice of death.9 He
takes no notice, because he has already withdrawn from that special
concern for the self that others associate with dying. To the thinking
mind, death makes no appearance because death, in and of itself, has
no meaning. Meaning is located in the objects of reason, which are
quite independent of any individual’s existence or nonexistence.
Plato’s point is clearer to us if we consider a discipline like mathemat-
ics. Death makes no appearance in mathematics because the individual
makes no appearance. Only in such disciplines of pure reason does the
thinking soul truly ﬁnd itself, for it overcomes the separation between
thought and the object of thought.10 The terror of Oedipus, Plato sug-
gests, rests upon a gap between appearance and reality. The philoso-
pher forsakes appearances; his truth is not of this world.11 With that,
the gap is to disappear.
8 In the Republic, the ultimate recalcitrance of the world to philosophical reconstruction
is blamed on an inevitable failure of the cosmic cycles. Thus a cosmological rather than a
moral myth is deployed to explain the source of inevitable failure. See Book VII, 546a–d.
9 Plato, Phaedo 63e–65a.
10 For an alternative view of mathematics, see E. B. Davies, Science in the Looking Glass:
What Do Scientists Really Know? (2003).
11 Similarly, there is no terror before death in Aristotle. For him, the philosopher is a man
at home in the world because world and mind realize the same principles of reason. What-
ever mysteries exist, they do not terrify. The world provides all the resources the philosopher

24
■CHAPTER ONE
Yet Plato is hardly representative of a Greek absence of terror in the
face of death. Plato’s view that philosophy is a practice of dying was
not exactly designed to attract a large following. Such a claim was
more likely to be the object of derision in comedy than of popular
belief.12 In Plato’s Apology, Socrates speaks of the contrast between
his own calmness before the threat of death and the terriﬁed reactions
ordinarily characteristic of those accused of capital offenses. Plato is
himself responding to Homer’s description of Odysseus’s visit to
Hades, where Achilles proclaims: “Better, I say, to break sod as a
farmhand / for some poor country man, on iron rations, than lord it
over all the exhausted dead.”13 The Athenians were no more likely to
be Stoics than the rest of us. The Platonic denial of the reality of the
mortal body does have a profound impact on the development of
Christianity but not as a form of general prescription. A sanctiﬁed
elite—whether philosophical or religious—might pursue this denial,
but the Church had to support a larger community organized in the
traditional patterns of familial and political life.14 The same can be said
of the belief in a fully knowable universe. This ideal of the philosopher
founds the Western belief in the universal reach of science. The mod-
ern man of science is the direct descendent of the Greek philosopher.
Again, however, only a few can adopt a comprehensive scientiﬁc atti-
tude toward the terrors of lived experience.
The classical philosopher could not conceive of the limits of reason;
he could not believe that experience might be impenetrable to discur-
sive inquiry. In Plato’s Apology, Socrates imagines life after death as a
kind of uninterrupted pursuit of the kind of conversations he enjoyed
in life. But terror is beyond discourse, just as death is the point at
which speech runs out. If people do experience terror, if they seek a
practical orientation in the face of terror, the philosopher’s answers
are not responsive to the conditions within which individuals ﬁnd
needs to achieve the best of ends: happiness. The practical problem for philosophy is to
establish the conditions under which the good man can be the good citizen, that is, the point
at which there is a reciprocal relationship between the happiness of the individual and the
well-being of the community.
12 Aristophanes’ Clouds portrays just such a comic Socrates.
13 Homer, The Odyssey, XI, 579–81 (R. Fitzgerald, trans. 1998).
14 See P. Brown, The Body and Society: Men, Women, and Sexual Renunciation in Early
Christianity (1988); E. Pagels, Adam, Eve, and the Serpent (1988).

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■25
themselves. The terrifying world was not the world of the philoso-
phers. This impenetrable domain of terror was, however, the subject
of tragedy. Oedipus the King may be the most effective presentation
of the classical response to the impenetrable character of existence.
That response shows us terror but not evil.
The experience of the play is terrifying in a double sense. Oedipus
is terriﬁed by what he comes to learn of himself: he is terriﬁed to learn
of the gap between appearance and reality. The audience is equally
terriﬁed not just for him but along with him, as it is drawn into the
play and sees the world from his perspective. Strikingly, neither our
terror nor his rests on a misuse of freedom. The horror of the play is
metaphysical, not ethical: free, deliberate action, we learn, may be
nothing other than a play of appearance. The failures of action repre-
sented in the play do not have their source in any failure of Oedipus’s
soul—for example, lack of reason, weakness of the will, overbearing
desire, or absence of sympathy. We cannot speak of a failure of fore-
thought, a failure of courage, or a failure to control desire. Oedipus
seeks to act virtuously despite the ill prophesies. He exercises reason
in all the choices he makes. He does show himself to have a temper,
but the source of the tragedy is hardly that. The disaster comes not
from his emotional reactions but from his measured, deliberate ac-
tions. The problem is in the world, not in himself.
Oedipus tries to escape the fate that was prophesied for him as a
youth at Corinth: that he would kill his father and marry his mother.
He ﬂees home and city. It cannot be a fault to try to escape such a
horrible fate, especially when it means death and destruction for those
one loves. Whatever we think about the inevitability of fate, we can-
not think it appropriate to do nothing but watch the tale unfold.
When told of the immeasurable tragedy that will be the tale of his life,
Oedipus must do something. If we speculate about what he “should
have done,” we are engaging in the same battle with fate that Oedipus
chooses. The ethical choice in his situation is hardly not to deliberate
any more than it is not to act. To think otherwise is to confuse the
idea of fate with a prediction of a causal sequence. Our fate does not
appear to us as the end of a scientiﬁc experiment that happens to be
our lives.

26
■CHAPTER ONE
Measured against the ordinary norms that govern choice, Oedipus
is faultless. He saves Thebes from the Sphinx and then rules well. His
ambitions are not for personal power but for the realization of justice
in his community. Similarly, he loves well. His attachments to family
are genuine. His concern is not for himself but for the well-being of
his loved ones. He has virtues of character and of reason; he pursues
justice with genuine sympathy for others. He achieves all those virtues
that are within the power of the individual and the community. He
deploys those virtues for admirable ends—to save family and city.
When he has to choose between self-interest and the interest of others,
he chooses the latter. Although he has ﬂed his fate, there is not some
dark secret brooding about his heart. He is not using others for pri-
vate, undisclosed ends; he is not hiding his true interests from others.
His actions are not what they seem, but not because he is in some way
a hypocrite, a pretender, or a subject with a deep break between an
inner and outer self. The break is in the order of reality, not in his soul.
Nothing Oedipus believes to be true is true: his parents are not really
his parents, his wife is his mother, his children are his siblings. Reality
is not what it seems, despite his best efforts to understand.
Oedipus appears in the play’s opening as the good man and the
good citizen. He is shocked beyond horror—terrorized—to discover
that all these virtues are mere appearances, that at the center of his
existence is a violation of the order of the universe. He is not in control
of what he does, even as he thinks of himself as virtuous. He is not in
control because that which he thinks he knows, he does not know.
The problem is one of knowledge, but the problem is incurable. Thus
his wife, Jocasta, tells him: “Why should man fear since chance is all
in all / for him, and he can clearly foreknow nothing? / Best to live
lightly, as one can, unthinkingly.” He is not himself a riddle to be
solved like the problem of the sphinx. Again Jocasta: “God keep you
from the knowledge of who you are!”15
Reading more Plato or Aristotle would not help Oedipus. He lives
in a world impenetrable to human reason: a world in which signs
and omens are more truthful than one’s own eyes, more reliable than
15 Oedipus, in The Complete Greek Tragedies, vol. 2, 977–79, 1068 (D. Greene &
R. Lattimore, eds. 1960).

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■27
rationality and deliberation. He is not forced to kill his father when
he would rather not. He kills his father, thinking that in his ﬂight he
has protected his father. He marries his mother, thinking that he is
maintaining the royal order of Thebes. In a world in which things are
not what they seem, deliberation is not a trustworthy guide to action.
Yet reason is the only guide man possesses. Jocasta’s recommendation
of thoughtlessness is not really an option. Even omens and prophesies
must be interpreted, and a plan of action must be formulated. In that
task, there is only reason to rely on. Omens are just more appearances
in the world, requiring the application of man’s reason. Oedipus
proves this by solving the riddle of the Sphinx. But just because one
riddle can be solved hardly means that all the riddles of existence can
be solved. Oedipus has done all that he can to avoid the terrible deeds
that are his fate. The fault may be his but not because he is blamewor-
thy. That is precisely the point: it is fault without blame.
Oedipus does those things that are most horrifying to man, family,
and city. He destroys the very conditions of order of each. Human
values rest on a necessary order—the divine conditions of all that ex-
ists. There is not some city in which it is permissible to kill one’s father
or marry one’s mother.16 These relationships are the foundation of a
human world. Outside these basic norms, we are not living in a human
world at all. Oedipus breaks apart the ordered universe of man. He is
cast off into the wilds of nature, the space between organized human
communities. He is literally no longer of this world. Whether that
makes him sacred or savage is an open question.17
That the wisest of men, the best of political rulers, and the most
loving of fathers can rend the universe in two suggests the failure of
human knowledge. The true order of the world moves to a system of
causes that is beyond our grasp. Plato may have thought that being
and the good are one and the same, but Sophocles did not. Why do
the gods so hate Oedipus? We cannot answer that question without
16 Thus the early anthropological interest in incest, in the pursuit of a kind of human
science of myth. See, e.g., J. Frazer, Totemism and Exogamy (1910); S. Freud, Totem and
Taboo (1918); C. Levi-Strauss, Elementary Structures of Kinship 24 (J. Bell, trans. 1969).
17 See Sophocles, Oedipus at Colonus. For a modern investigation of the double character
of the excluded ﬁgure, see G. Agamben, Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life
(D. Heller-Roazen, trans. 1998).

28
■CHAPTER ONE
literally entering a Sophoclean world in which our ordinary under-
standings of the order of reality are profoundly disturbed. We cannot
know if Oedipus is the victim of earlier actions by the House of Laius,
as if the gods keep their own tally of action and revenge. Oedipus asks,
“Was I not born evil?” and “What have you designed, O Zeus, to do
with me?”18 Alternatively we might think that Oedipus’s fate is the
response of the gods to Oedipus’s own hubris in thinking he could
outsmart them. When time loses its order, as it does with the immortal
gods, we can no longer distinguish cause from effect; an effect can
constitute its own cause. But if Oedipus’s predicted fate is a conse-
quence of choices not yet made and character not yet formed, he can
do no more about it than if he were suffering for the deeds of his
ancestors. Or perhaps there is no reason at all for Oedipus’s suffering.
We moralize endlessly about our lives, but perhaps the gods do not
really care. Oedipus’s fate may be only ill luck without any explana-
tion at all. All these possibilities terrorize.
The issue raised by these competing interpretations of the reasons
for Oedipus’s fate is the question of the dimensions of human blind-
ness. All converge on the idea that man’s knowledge is not adequate
to the ﬁeld upon which he acts. That ﬁeld is one that is constituted by
the gods, and about this man can know nothing. Outside the theater,
we cannot see as the gods see, so we might as well not see at all:
Oedipus puts out his eyes. Reason marks the point of man’s hubris:
his belief that there is a symmetry between what he can know and
what he can do. Man’s reason, however, is nothing more than clever-
ness, and cleverness runs out. Whether we have eyes or not, blindness
is the human condition. In the end, riddles deﬁne the scope of human
action because of the incapacities of human knowledge.
The terror of the play, then, lies in the dimension of the sacred. Man
may be a plaything of the gods; he may be the object of the gods’
antagonism. In neither case is he a subject who can control his actions
through reason. The human order that we create in good faith through
politics and family may, at any moment, be shown to rest on a founda-
18 Sophocles, Oedipus 822, 738. The translator’s use of the word “evil” for the Greek
kakow should not be confused with the Judeo-Christian conception of evil. Its meaning is
closer to bad or ignoble.

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■29
tion as terrifying as that of Thebes. We cannot know, because the ulti-
mate reality against which our actions are measured is impenetrable
to reason. “What man, what man on earth wins more / of happiness
than a seeming / and after that turning away?”19 No man can be pro-
claimed happy until he is dead, for all that he thought to constitute
his happiness may be shown to be nothing but disaster. In an inversion
of the Platonic claim that the best life, philosophy, is a practice of
dying, the Chorus proclaims that those who live are “equal with those
who live not at all!”20 This is not a reassurance but a statement of
terror in a world in which the gods may not be benevolent forces.
We can, of course, read the play as not really about divine causation.
Prophesy can be seen as just another form of knowledge, not as a form
of divine intervention.21 In that case, Oedipus brings his own fate upon
himself, and the gods merely see into the future. While today we might
be attracted to a reading that strips the play of its sacred dimension,
such a reading is hardly adequate. There is no moral puzzle to solve
in Oedipus’s behavior, as if the lesson is to take a bit more care before
one acts. To make it that is to turn it into comedy: mistaken identity
is the very stuff of comedy.
There is, however, a closely related reading that is more compelling.
This reading aligns the play with Plato’s inquiry into political psychol-
ogy in the Republic. The narrative line of the play begins with the
prophesy to Laius, the ruler of Thebes and Oedipus’s father. He is
warned of the future behavior of his son. He tries to prevent this be-
havior, but he fails. He cannot prevent the appearance of a son who
will slay him, claim political authority, and take possession of his fam-
ily. That such a son will arise is not a product of chance—secular or
sacred—but a necessary consequence of the structural conditions of
power in the city. The possibility of parricide haunts every royal fam-
ily. It is unavoidable as long as authority exists in city and family. Now,
the play is not about Oedipus but about the structural conditions of
politics, and how the structure of political authority shapes the psy-
19 Id. 1190–92.
20 Id. 1188–89.
21 For another dramatic representation of this problem, consider Macbeth’s response to
the prophesy that he will be king. Shakespeare, however, poses the issue in terms of a psycho-
logical drama—exactly the terms that Oedipus lacks.

30
■CHAPTER ONE
chology of those who are ruled.22 Oedipus as a unique person, charac-
terized by his disfavor with the gods, disappears from view in the polit-
ical-psychological account. The subject of this account is not the
failure of reason but the workings of intergenerational ambition and
jealousy: the son will assert himself in order to seize authority.
By murdering his father, Oedipus claims a power equal to, if not
greater than, the source of his own being. By marrying his mother, he
claims a kind of agelessness. He spans generations, confusing the chain
of orderly succession. This is the ultimate rebellion of the powerless—
to attempt to control time itself in the ages of man.23 The child has
become father to the man. In an age of science ﬁction, he would be
represented as literally father to himself.24 He comes as close to being
the uncaused agent—the ﬁrst cause—of his own existence as is possi-
ble in Greek representation. The violation of the order of the universe
is the violation of the fundamental order of life and death. Oedipus
claims the power of the gods themselves.
Yet Oedipus cannot claim this power without suffering horror at
his own actions, for fundamentally he believes in the norms that he
has violated. He would be the good son, the good ruler, and the good
father. His character is to be hero, not antihero. The horror Oedipus
feels is the afﬁrmation of the city’s order in the face of rebellion. Thus
the play begins with Oedipus, as King, announcing the penalty for the
unknown murderer of Laius:
Upon the murderer I invoke this curse—
whether he is one man and all unknown,
or one of many—may he wear out his life
in misery to miserable doom!25
If we read the play as an assertion of Oedipal power rather than as
a meditation on the failure of reason, then we see that power to be
insubstantial. Lacking divine foundations, this new power cannot sur-
22 This is the common reading of Antigone after Hegel. See G. W. F. Hegel, Phenomenol-
ogy of Spirit 221 (A. V. Miller, trans. 1975).
23 Oedipus’s intergenerational character should be considered in relation to his insight
into the riddle of the Sphinx.
24 Consider the movie Terminator (1984), or Orson Scott Card’s Children of the Mind
(1997).
25 Sophocles, Oedipus 246–49.

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■31
vive in any dimension: the city expels him, his mother/wife kills her-
self, and Oedipus physically blinds himself. In this condition of af-
ﬁrming the city’s order through his own suffering, he becomes a point
of manifestation of the sacred.26 Through him, traditional order has
overthrown rebellion and thus shown its own foundational power. In
Freud’s account, this reassertion of civilization against the rebellious
child occurs through the vehicle of guilt, which serves as the founda-
tion of law.27 For him, the play gives outward expression to the inter-
nal suffering of a soul that wills its own existence by denying every
limit on its own power.28
Freud and Sophocles agree that Oedipus violates the conditions of
political/familial order. Freud would locate the principles of order and
disorder in man himself. He internalizes Nietzsche’s account of the
moral history of the Christian West as a battle between the powerful
and the powerless. For Freud, the outcome depends on the feeling of
guilt by which the superego controls the id. Civilization is only as
powerful as the resources of guilt. Evil, accordingly, is that force
within the self that would destroy the conditions of the subject’s own
repression. Knowing this about ourselves, we know that we have the
capacity for evil. Psychologically we are already guilty by virtue of
that very knowledge. Part of the subject wants to be Oedipus, while
another part is terriﬁed by the possibility. The triumph of civilization
is the self-binding of the id, such that the subject afﬁrms the orderly
life of family and polity.
If we read the play in this Freudian way, we do turn Oedipus into
an evil character. His suffering is now the appropriate response to his
moral failing, and that failure is located in the will to be the source of
his own being. This is a will that would make of the universe an image
of the self, such that one never sees anything other than a reﬂected
image of one’s own power. To accomplish that end, one must murder
and violate ordinary moral norms. The suppression of this evil is, for
Freud, the source of civilization. He, too, believes that the normative
order is a tenuous affair, built on a kind of self-induced blindness.
26 See Sophocles, Oedipus at Colonnus, which portrays a contest between Thebes and
Athens for possession of the body of Oedipus after his death.
27 See Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents 79–80.
28 Again, a comparison to Macbeth is appropriate.

32
■CHAPTER ONE
For Freud, man cannot bear too much knowledge of himself.29 For
Sophocles, he cannot take too much knowledge of the world.
That the play is accessible to such a reading may explain something
of its enduring quality. Nevertheless, it is wrong to project this reading
back into the classical context, for at the center of this reading is an
assertion of the will in the face of death. This is indeed the problem
of evil in our world, but to get here from the classical era our analysis
must take up the myth of Adam and Eve.
For Sophocles, Oedipus’s conﬂict is not located in the soul. It is,
rather, a battle between man and the divine but not the divine within
man himself; this man is not created in the image of God. For Sopho-
cles, the divine still inhabits the world. Oedipus lives in a sacred world
that is not of his own creation. Oedipus is not striving for autoch-
thony—killing his father and claiming his mother. He is striving to
lead a virtuous life within the ordinary intergenerational cycles of poli-
tics and family. He has not been found out; he has been turned out.
Oedipus is not responsible for this inversion of power. If anyone is
responsible, it is the gods. In fact, every effort to assign responsibility
is left indeterminate in the play, for evil is not at issue.
What is so terrifying here is the showing forth of a divine order that
sets aside as mere empty appearance the objects of human understand-
ing. The horror of Oedipus is mixed with the sacred from the very
beginning. Prophesies and omens are needed to clarify exactly who
Oedipus is. Oedipus shares that double quality of the divine as simul-
taneously sacred and polluted. In the presence of the polluted, we are
very close—perhaps too close—to the sacred. For this reason, Oedi-
pus’s broken, blind body becomes the object of a battle for possession
between Athens and Thebes in Oedipus at Colonus. What is truly
terrifying is the manifestation of the divine as a principle of sacred
destruction. Indeed, this is too much to see; the terror is too great.
Oedipus blinds himself and takes himself away from the sight of the
human community. We can take just so much exposure to the sacred.
Whether the divine shows itself as ordered creation or endless horror
is beyond our control. To the human actor, it is one and the same
29 Nietzsche would take hold of this knowledge in the pursuit of a transformation of
values. See F. Nietzsche, Genealogy of Morals (W. Kaufman, trans. 1989) [1887].

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■33
world. It is only the difference between looking at life and at death.
Both are equal parts of our world.
This showing forth is the point of the mysterium tremendum.30 Oe-
dipus truly is touched by the gods. That makes him simultaneously
sacred and terrifying. Man’s duty is to maintain the order of the world
by expelling the polluted. It is to repair the rent in the universe by
which the sacred shows itself in its full and terrifying force. But there
is no rational theory by which to understand how the universe comes
to be torn, just as there is no theory by which we can understand how
mind becomes embodied or why life ends in death. Because the world
is torn, the world is terrifying. That it is so is simply a fact that we
experience. This fact is denied by the philosophers.
The rent in the universe is a measure of the gap between man’s
knowledge and the order of existence. Ultimately, we are all as blind
as Oedipus. Ritual must replace reason; prophesy, deliberation. If the
ritual fails—as it always will—all that is left is the horror. The truth
Oedipus learns, and the truth that he represents, is the truth that he
becomes: man is blind. We know no more about life than about death.
About death, it is always as if we are blind. We cannot see beyond life
to death; we cannot make sense of the presence of death. The stories
we tell about life turn out to be no more substantial than the stories
we tell about death. Oedipus thinks he is father, king, husband. These
are only words in an impenetrable universe.
Man experiences pollution as terrifying, but it makes no sense to
describe the polluted as evil. It is not up to Oedipus to avoid the deeds
he committed; it is not up to him to overcome them. His problems are
metaphysical, not psychological and not moral. He does not prescribe
a course of treatment for himself. He takes on a ritual of banishment,
not a therapeutic intervention that will allow him to return to the
norm.31 His behavior is the source of the disturbance, but we cannot
say that he is evil.
Oedipus would move from a polluted ﬁgure to an evil actor were
he to take up what he has done as his own actions, were he to assert
30 See R. Otto, The Idea of the Holy: An Inquiry into the Non-Rational Factor in the
Idea of the Divine and Its Relation to the Rational 12–18 (J. Harvey, trans. 1958).
31 For a general theory of the scapegoat, see R. Girard, Violence and the Sacred (P. Greg-
ory, trans. 1990).

34
■CHAPTER ONE
a power to overcome death, were he to assert that he is the cause of
his own existence and deny the principles of order within which he
ﬁnds himself. In short, were Oedipus to afﬁrm the person that he is,
we would confront evil.32 To make any of these afﬁrmations, however,
Oedipus would have to understand himself as fundamentally free. He
would have to understand his identity as the product of his own free
will. He would have to deﬁne himself through his relationship to his
will rather than to the gods. That person he would become is at the
heart of the Judeo-Christian tradition. Indeed, we are that person.
TERROR AND THE INVENTION OF EVIL
Sophocles leaves us no dream of a perfect world, a world in which the
problem of Oedipus is solved. Pollution is a fact about the world,
not a problem of human agency to be solved through knowledge or
cleverness. Oedipus is doomed to wander from place to place, always
reminding men of the terrifying truth of their own condition before
the gods. The Oedipus myth has a shape much like that of Cain. We
cannot know why Cain is disfavored or why Abel is favored. Like
Cain, Oedipus is marked by his pollution, which arises from killing
a family member. Each wanders the earth. For both, the divine sanc-
tion also has a sacred power: the power to found and protect a city.
Oedipus and Cain always draw the attention of the gods—for good
and bad.
This structural homology of Oedipus and Cain suggests that evil
steps into the category of the polluted. Just as the polluted is simulta-
neously terrifying and sanctifying, so is evil. There is a danger of get-
ting too close but also a danger of losing contact entirely. The double
character of Oedipus—polluted and sacred—is replaced by a new dou-
ble in the Judeo-Christian word—evil and love.
Something new appears in the idea of a covenantal religion. There
could not be a concept of evil until there was a concept of the will.
This is exactly what the classical Greeks lacked, which is why the
Oedipus story is not about evil but about the confrontation of reason
32 Compare Edmund in King Lear, particularly the opening of act 1, scene 2, where Ed-
mund literally afﬁrms his bastardy and directs the gods to “stand up for bastards!”

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■35
and revelation, of order and pollution.33 In the Judeo-Christian tradi-
tion, a metaphysics of the will displaces a metaphysics of the hiero-
phantic. The sacred no longer shows itself in the things of this world—
for example, omens and rituals—unmediated by the human will.34 The
very concept of pollution is rendered difﬁcult, for the world is the
creation of God’s will and that which He creates is good. Nor is the
sacred a matter of knowledge, as if we can reason ourselves to God—
although a classical tradition of reason survives even within the
Church. The relationship to the sacred is now founded on faith, and
faith is a matter of the will.35
Faith is beyond reason, but, like reason, it opens us to a world of
meaning outside ourselves. The opposition of faith to reason appears
with clarity in the story of the sacriﬁce of Isaac: Abraham must have
faith in the unreasonable promise that he will found a nation even as
he sacriﬁces his only legitimate son. Other immediate examples of this
opposition include that most concrete expression of Christian faith,
the catechism, which proclaims belief in a proposition that deﬁes rea-
son: the “consubstantial Trinity.”36 Or in the even simpler incantation,
in the mass for the dead, of Jesus’s statement, “He who believes in me
shall never die.”37 If faith in God is a product of the will, then failure
of faith is no longer a matter of “weakness of the will”—what the
Greeks termed akrasia. Rather, the failure of faith is sin made possible
by a free will.
Sin is the failure to place the self in a world of sacred meaning. It is
not the violation of a norm but the turning away from God. Of course,
33 On the lack of a conception of the will in classical thought, see H. Arendt, The Life of
the Mind Vol. 2, Willing 18 (1978); P. Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its Place 147 (2005);
M. Forster, “The Christian Doctrine of Creation and the Rise of Modern Natural Science,”
43 Mind 446 (1934).
34 Of course, not completely. There remains, for example, the tradition of sacred relics,
and the sacraments remain central to Catholicism. Pollution, too, remains a part of the
Jewish tradition. Generally Christianity is competing with—and absorbing—elements of an
earlier occultism in much of Europe right up to the early 1700s. See J. Butler, Awash in a
Sea of Faith: Christianizing the American People 7–30 (1990).
35 A classic expression of the subordination of understanding to faith is Saint Anselm’s:
“I do not seek to understand that I may believe, but I believe in order to understand.”
36 “The mystery of the Most Holy Trinity is the central mystery of the Christian faith and
of Christian life. God alone can make it known to us by revealing himself as Father, Son
and Holy Spirit.” Catechism of the Catholic Church, 2d ed., 261 (2000).
37 John 11:25–26.

36
■CHAPTER ONE
one form of that “turning” can be violation, but there is a fear that
even those who follow the law may still be in a state of sin. Sin is not
the outward act but the inner failure of faith, that is, the inner turning
of the will.38 That failure can result from the pride of reason as easily
as from the desires of the body. In both cases there is effectively a
turning in upon the self, a claim that the goal of the will is to express
individual subjectivity; whether that subjectivity is thought of as the
consequence of deliberation or of interest is not as important as the
initial turning.
This idea of sin as a product of the subject’s will makes no appear-
ance in the Oedipus drama. Pride is a virtue in a classical world. It
could, of course, lead to a hubristic overreaching, but hubris is not sin.
Pride suggests autonomy, independence, and self-reliance. Sophocles’
Oedipus begins the play full of pride for his accomplishments. That
pride comes to appear as hubris, because he has a misplaced belief in
his own reason: he has lived in a world of false appearances. In its
place, Oedipus takes up an attitude of horror toward himself. Yet he
does not overcome himself; there is no impulse toward self-transcen-
dence. He does not move from a position lacking faith to one of faith;
his problem is with the gods, not with his will. We can use neither the
language of faith nor that of will to describe his condition.
Oedipus shows us one set of classical antinomies: sacred and pol-
luted; Plato another: mind and body. Philosophy was seen as an attack
upon the gods at least in part because it would substitute the latter
antimony for the former. Philosophy would pursue contemplation in
order to free the soul of particularity, whether that of the desiring body
or that of the sacred. Neither of the dualisms of antiquity—mind and
body, sacred and polluted—is adequate to a world in which the soul
is experienced through a faculty of will. If the quality of the subject—
his or her moral character—is a product of a free will, then the battle
is not between body and mind but between the divisions of the soul
itself. In this very sense, man has become a deeper problem to himself.
38 Immanuel Kant secularizes this idea when he insists that the measure of moral worth
is not the outward act, which may be in accordance with law (civil and moral), but in the
quality of the maxim the subject gives himself—for example, “maxims which neglect the
incentives springing from the moral law.” I. Kant, Religion with the Limits of Reason Alone
25 (T. Greene & H. Hudsen, trans. 1960) [1793].

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■37
It is no longer enough to control the body’s intemperate desires. Nor
is it enough to educate reason alone. A free will is subordinated only
by its own free act.
Knowledge and evil, we know all too well, are no less compatible
than desire and evil. In Genesis, knowledge follows the willful act.
Indeed, knowledge of good and evil is the product of the violation. If
so, knowledge cannot be the answer to the problem of will. Man gains
knowledge but loses the presence of the sacred. Knowledge no longer
leads to the universal, to transcendence of the body. Just the opposite:
knowledge now appears as bound to the body and to individual sub-
jectivity. Oedipus had reason but was defeated by an unreasonable
universe; in the Judeo-Christian tradition, man has reason but is de-
feated by his own free will.39
In place of the classical dualism of the sacred and the polluted, we
confront a new dualism of love and evil. Neither love nor evil can be
understood apart from the relationship of the subject’s will to his own
death—not the fact of his death but the subject’s awareness of his own
ﬁnitude. Thus the knowledge that Adam and Eve gain and that deﬁnes
their fallen condition is the knowledge that they will die. Evil arises
out of the ﬂight from death, whereas love expresses a faith in the possi-
bility of the transcendence of death. Both express a metaphysics en-
tirely different from that derived from conceptions of the sacred or of
reason available to the Greeks.
All this is already present in the biblical myth of creation. God cre-
ates a universe that is good. It is perfect in that it is complete in itself;
it needs nothing else. God creates Adam and Eve just as he creates the
other beasts, in pairs.40 These original pairs are not unique subjects
but rather contain the entire life of the species. This is the creation of
Forms in the Aristotelian sense.41 All that the horse is or will be is
39 See Romans 7, 15.
40 In this discussion, I run together two different accounts of creation in the text. Distin-
guishing between these two accounts is important to the argument I develop in later chap-
ters. At this point, however, I want to emphasize only certain elements present in the general
account of creation.
41 Modern fundamentalists who insist that all species were fully present at creation are
closer to Aristotle than they realize. On the importance of Aristotle’s metaphysics in under-
standing the nature of Christ and the Eucharist in medieval thought, see D. MacCulloch,
The Reformation: A History 24–25 (2003).

38
■CHAPTER ONE
present in the original creation. That particular horses appear in the
order of time is irrelevant to what it is to be a horse. The garden is a
world of essences, of paradigms, only instances of which could be
repeated through all future time. In the absence of free will, nothing
new is to happen. Indeed, nothing could happen, for there is no
ground or source of the new. Accordingly, naming the individual origi-
nals of creation is naming all instances of the species for all time. Adam
does not assign the beasts proper names.
Like the other species, Adam and Eve can themselves be thought of
as plural beings. In them, all men and all women are already present.
But unlike the other beings, their state of perfection requires an exer-
cise of the will; that is, they must will their own perfection. In mythical
terms, they must exercise will to remain in the presence of the sacred.
They fail, as does all mankind that follows them.42
Death is not present before the Fall, because death has no meaning
for the species. Death is not yet an event; neither is birth. An event has
a before and after, but at creation all time is present. Time itself would
be only iteration, not change. Of perfect iteration, however, there is
no measure. We literally could not tell one moment from another. Sin
breaks the temporal character of creation. Human time—a measure
of past, present, and future—begins with the Fall. This conception of
time as moving from present to future is implicit in the dual meanings
of labor, which is the source of the sequence of generations and of
the world of production. Before the Fall, Adam’s present is like the
immortality of medieval European kings: deathless in its form but sus-
tained through successive iterations. That a species can die, let alone
that a new species can appear, is knowledge that must await nine-
teenth-century science. The knowledge that man can be the agent of
such species disappearances, as well as of new appearances, creates
one of the great moral burdens of the twentieth century.
In the beginning, Adam has one great discursive task: the naming
of species. Even after Eve’s creation, there is nothing further to talk
42 Augustine insists on the “corporate” character of Adam, from which follows his doc-
trine of original sin. In Adam’s sin, we all sinned because the Adam who sinned contained
the entire human race. See E. Pagels, Adam, Eve, and the Serpent 108–9 (discussing Au-
gustine’s City of God).

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■39
about. If nothing happens, what is there to say? There is no history to
record and no future to plan. Life in the Garden is life without male
or female labor. From our perspective, there is a sense in which Adam
and Eve lack seriousness. For this reason, they are associated with the
innocence of childhood. What they say in the Garden—apart from
the naming and before the temptation—is not worth recording. It is
ephemeral; it is of no consequence. Their talk to each other could not
advance beyond idle chatter. The only object of their talk that could
be serious would be the praise of God. But here words fail. There
is nothing to reason about, no counterpoint against which to judge
creation, no need to pray for anything further. Prayer could be nothing
other than a naming of God. All that could be said is already said in
the name itself.43
Discourse begins with temptation.44 Only now does something hap-
pen. The serpent appears. This serpent is not the species’ representa-
tive: snake.45 The serpent is singular—an individual—in a garden of
plural beings. He does not appear in order to be named. Rather, when
he appears, he speaks. As an individual, the serpent has speech. That
speech is hardly idle chatter. The serpent is the symbol of man’s will,
for its appearance marks the possibility of action. With its appearance,
creation breaks apart into individual subjects, each of whom has a
unique place in the sequence of time. There is no will in the abstract,
no moment of pure will that corresponds to that denial of the individ-
ual self which reason seeks through unity with the abstract universal.
Will has already individuated in the myth, because will is always the
possession of a subject. With the appearance of the serpent, we move
immediately from a world in which speech is naming to one in which
speech is narrative. The possibility of the willed act marks a before
43 Something of this remains in the Jewish service. While it does present the fundamental
narrative of divine intervention in favor of the Jews, at its center is an act of naming the
unnamable, of speaking what cannot be said. There is an asymptotic approach to this myste-
rious center—the more Orthodox the congregation, the more the central act of naming
recedes into “what cannot be said.” In the Garden we imagine the constraint lifted, which
means that all speech would converge on the single name of God.
44 See M. Luther, “Lectures on Genesis” in Eve and Adam 273–74 (K. Kram, L. Schear-
ing & V. Ziegler, eds. 1999) (imagining Adam and Eve’s conversation after the Fall).
45 Interestingly, he becomes that only after the original sin. This is his punishment.

40
■CHAPTER ONE
and an after, and that is the domain of narrative. Thus the origin of
the subject brings together discourse, will, action, and time.46
The serpent’s speech is neither that of reason nor that of the desiring
body. It is the speech of action. There is not yet knowledge by which
to judge the serpent’s speech. There is only authority, on the one hand,
and temptation, on the other. These are the boundaries of the will. The
serpent, accordingly, deploys the vice of the will: jealousy. Jealousy is
temptation’s response to authority. It is a kind of self-construction that
simultaneously involves recognition and denial of the authority of an
other. Eve would be like God in the knowledge of good and evil. To
be such, she must deny God’s authority.
The result of this dialogue of temptation is an act: something new
happens in the Garden. Its newness is symbolized in God’s failure to
know of it. Here, the suggestion is that not even God can foresee a
free act. His omniscience does not include the product of a subject’s
free will.47 His knowledge corresponds to the perfect and timeless state
of creation before the act. Thus God learns of the act only after he
sees the evidence of its occurrence. He ﬁnds Adam and Eve hiding in
the Garden and ashamed of their nakedness.
Tempting Eve, the serpent speaks to her. We cannot separate the
temptation from the speech. Entering into a dialogue, she is consti-
tuted as an individual. She becomes an individual when speech opens
a range of choices. Confronting possibility, she thinks of herself as a
subject who can exercise her will. This is the sense in which dialogue
creates the subject.48 If we spoke only the language of mathematics—
that is, the language of abstract deduction—speech would not be
linked to action. We would, in that case, be in the classical world of
pure reason. In Genesis, speech, action, and subjectivity are all created
at once. This speech that is not naming shows forth a world of possibil-
ity: Eve has a choice whether to eat of the apple.
46 We could push the exegesis back further, noting that even before the serpent’s appear-
ance God commands Adam and Eve not to eat of the trees. The command assumes the
possibility of the willful act; it, too, is speech linked to action but in the authoritative-prohib-
itive mode. The possibility of the act is realized with the appearance of the serpent.
47 This is a highly contested reading, resolving the “paradox of omniscience” against
God. Augustine argued that divine omniscience included knowledge of the free act, as did
those Protestant sects that took a strong view of predestination. See Augustine, On Free
Choice of the Will 92 (A. Benjamin & L. Hackstaff, trans. 1964).
48 See, e.g., C. Taylor, The Ethics of Authenticity 33 (1992).

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■41
Just as this speech is a necessary condition of subjectivity, action is
a necessary condition of dialogue. Speech directed at reason, rather
than action, tends toward the null point of dialogue. Beyond a certain
point, dialogue gets in the way of truth, which is the goal of reason.
Truth makes a claim to settle speech; it closes down discourse.49 After
a successful mathematical proof, there is nothing more to be said. Sim-
ilarly, claims to truth tend to undermine political communities, which
are built on free speech. A world of action, however, is a world of
speech.50 Action has, for this reason, traditionally been associated with
rhetoric, which is the art of persuasion. The Serpent’s speech, we
might say, is the ﬁrst rhetorical performance. God’s speech was cre-
ative, not rhetorical; Adam and Eve’s speech prior to the Fall was
naming, prayer, or chatter. The Serpent shows us speech as action,
which is the domain of rhetoric.
Because we are called upon to act, we are called upon to speak and
to listen. Every act has its source in a subject. Every subject has his or
her reasons. We try to persuade others to exercise choice one way or
another by appealing to those reasons. What appears internally as
choice appears outwardly as the object of persuasion. Both Adam and
Eve succumb to persuasion. We need to refer to that speech—we listen
to the narrative—to understand their actions. Action and speech, ac-
cordingly, are reciprocal phenomena. They are the constitutive ele-
ments of a subject whose deﬁning feature is the will. Because action
requires speech, an individual who understands that the source of the
self lies in the will necessarily understands himself as a part of a com-
munity, for there is no speech apart from a community of speakers.51
The serpent, we might also say, is the original founder; politics begins
in an act of the will.
Adam and Eve speak because they face a choice. If they can choose,
they are subjects. The Oedipus story, too, begins with speech, but
that speech is prophesy. That divine prophesy stands in sharp contrast
to the Genesis account in which God lacks knowledge of Adam and
49 See Plato, Republic, VI 506d–e (truth itself is beyond the capacity of language).
50 On action and speech, as mutually constructive of the political realm, see H. Arendt,
The Human Condition 197–98 (1958).
51 See P. Flathman, Willful Liberalism: Voluntarism and Individuality in Political Theory
and Practice, chap. 3 (1992).

42
■CHAPTER ONE
Eve’s sin until after the fact. Prophesy does not open up a moral do-
main of action; it undermines the very idea of action. Oedipus is not
commanded to do—or not to do—anything. Just the opposite. A
prophesy is made that opens up the paradox of free choice in a deter-
ministic world. Oedipus’s vice, if he has one, is not of the will; he does
not disobey.
Oedipus and Adam provide us with two very different mythical rep-
resentations of man’s place in the world. Oedipus’s story always
points outward toward the divine conditions within which reason and
action go forward: speech becomes riddles, choices accomplish their
opposite. The problem for Oedipus is his inability to know what is
real and what is not. The play poses the question: “What can we
know?” The biblical story instead turns inward. It forces us to ask:
“What is the source of disobedience?” The answer to that question is
found not in a failure of reason but of will. Both stories tell us that we
live in a disordered, unsettled world. Both are stories of failure: one
of reason, the other of will. One denies us knowledge, warning that
reality may be only a seeming. The other recognizes knowledge—we
have eaten of the tree—but at the cost of a disobedient will. One is a
story of necessity, the other of freedom. One puts us at the mercy of
forces outside ourselves, over which we have no control; the other
puts us at the mercy of our own will over which we fail to exercise
control.52 We seem to have to choose between the failure of reason and
the failure of will. Modern science may well have solved the riddles of
knowledge that were impenetrable to Oedipus, but it has not taken us
one step closer to solving the problems of the will. Natural horrors
may have receded in a disenchanted universe, but the terrors of evil
have only grown in the modern period.
In the Judeo-Christian tradition, every action, even the mythical ﬁrst
act, is the act of a subject, because every action is the product of a
choice between possibilities. Only with the introduction of a free sub-
ject can we speak of “what might have been.”53 Of course, we speak
loosely in this way when we ask, for example: “What would the world
52 Interestingly, for Augustine the consequence of the original failure of the will is a loss
of control of the body, particularly in its sexual function.
53 A traditional problem of theology comes from anthropomorphizing God at this point:
Could God have created a different world?

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■43
have been like had it not collided with the meteorite that wiped out the
dinosaurs?” But this is only a confusion of categories made possible by
imagining ourselves as observers of—and thus free agents with respect
to—the event in question. The category of “what might have been” is
a human category that shapes the narrative of history, not the evolu-
tion of prehistory. But it is precisely this category that the prophesy of
Oedipus denies.
The category of “what might be” has no existence apart from its
imaginative construction in discourse. Without this category, however,
we cannot speak of choice. Action, in other words, requires the possi-
ble. To understand an event as an act, we have to understand it in
relation to possibilities that were not, in fact, realized. That which has
been chosen is always seen in the light of that which has not been
chosen. Both are equally real from the perspective of the subject. Dis-
course refers both to what is and what might have been. It refers
equally easily to both, because each is necessary to the other. Thus the
subjunctive is as necessary a condition for language as the present
tense. Contemporary theoreticians make the point that there are no
internal marks by which we can distinguish history from ﬁction: both
are narratives.54 Precisely because the account of human action—his-
tory—must refer to what might have been, there is a necessary element
of ﬁction in every narrative.55
In the narrative we construct of our own lives, we experience an
endless longing for what might have been. This does not mean that
we regret the choices we have made. Still, no one fails to feel the endur-
ing pull of at least some of the possibilities those choices excluded, for
example, a choice to have no more children or to have none at all. We
experience metaphysical, if not psychological, regret. This “might
have been” exists in quite a different way from the “might have been”
of another ice age,56 for these unrealized possibilities are as important
54 See, e.g., L. Mink, “History and Fiction as Modes of Comprehension,” 1 New Literacy
History 556–69 (1969); H. White, “The Value of Narrativity in the Representation of Real-
ity,” in On Narrative 1–23 (W. Mitchell, ed. 1981).
55 See C. Geertz, The Interpretation of Culture 15 (1977) (anthropological writings are
“ﬁctions”); M. Foucault, Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972–
1977 at 193 (C. Gordon, ed. 1980) (“I have never written anything but ﬁctions”).
56 Games of chance pair these two categories by making the consequence of choice—for
example, a bet—dependent on an event rather than an act.

44
■CHAPTER ONE
to who I am as are the actual choices made. They are inseparable,
because every choice gains its meaning in substantial part from that
which has not been chosen.
Having acted, Adam and Eve feel shame toward each other. Shame
necessarily accompanies action, because every action exposes the lim-
ited character of the subject to him- or herself. We not only choose,
but we judge the choices we make. We take ourselves as subjects of an
internal discourse. Indeed, we do so endlessly. We invest the limited
resource that is the self one way rather than another, and we hold
ourselves accountable. We make judgments about our judgment. We
know that every choice is partial, and thus we know ourselves as vul-
nerable—as failing to be complete—at the very moment that we know
ourselves as subjects of a particular character. Every choice for some-
thing is a choice against other possibilities. Because we must be less
than we would be, we are ashamed. This is not a matter of violating
a moral rule. We feel shame even when we have done nothing wrong.
At creation Adam and Eve do not know shame, because, without
discourse or choice, they are not yet individual subjects. Shame is a
reaction to the realized judgment, but there is not yet anyone or any-
thing to judge. Shame ﬁrst arises when the subject imagines himself to
be observed, for in the thought of observation is that of judgment.
We think of ourselves as “exposed.” An internalized sense of shame
requires that the subject imagine himself standing in the place of an-
other who is observing him. To feel shame, accordingly, is to feel simul-
taneously bound to and estranged from the self. I cannot take that
position in the imagination until I have engaged an other in discourse.
But we cannot enter into dialogue without being judged and without
judging the other.57 Speaking and being spoken to, we are ashamed.
As subjects engaged in the narration of our own lives as the product
of free choice, we feel shame.
We cannot experience choice as something that matters without ex-
periencing the subject as a ﬁnite, limited asset. Choosing x means giv-
57 Contemporary proponents of discursive communities, for this reason, ﬁnd themselves
interested in “shaming” theories of punishment. See, e.g., J. Braithwaite, “Reintegrative
Shaming, Republicanism, and Policy,” in Crime and Public Policy: Putting Theory to Work
191 (H. Barlow, ed. 1995); D. Kahan, “What Do Alternative Sanctions Mean?” 63 U. Chi.
L. Rev. 591 (1996); D. Kahan, “Social Inﬂuence, Social Meaning, and Deterrence,” 83 Va.
L. Rev. 349 (1997).

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■45
ing up y forever. To speak of what might have been is to speak of the
limited conditions of a human life; it is to invoke death. When we
do not think choice matters, our decisions fail to register as elements
constitutive of our own subjectivity. They do not enter into our own
narrative. Indeed, we rapidly forget the content of such decisions; we
do not long for them at all. Nor are we ashamed for having made
them. We make countless decisions throughout the day: moving one
way rather than another, eating one thing rather than another, ﬂipping
through the channels or scanning the newspaper. None of this is re-
membered; it all could have been otherwise. None of it matters, be-
cause nothing is at stake. It is not really chosen, although it may be
preferred. Tomorrow we could behave differently; the decisions of
today do not preclude their opposite tomorrow. But not everything is
like this.
The subject emerges only when the understanding arises that
choices matter because they do not come again. Possibility may be
inﬁnite, but choice is not. Action differs from behavior in just this
element of choice. Of course, there is no deﬁned domain of choice, as
if some options are in and of themselves appropriate for choice and
others only for behavioral preference. The diversity of human subjects
allows for anything at all to become a matter of choice constitutive of
the subject. Things or acts become valuable when they become consti-
tutive of a subject who, in the very act of choosing them, must sacriﬁce
other possibilities. We are “invested” in these choices. This investment
cannot be measured in economic terms, for it rests on a distinction
between value and preference.
The consequence of choice, then, is the knowledge of what might
have been and therefore of the reality of death. More precisely, know-
ing of our own death, we confront choice. Choice matters, because
we die. The objects of our choice are valuable, because they make us
something rather than nothing. We know that nothing as death. One
way to ﬂee from the knowledge of death is to ﬂee from choice.58 If we
lived forever like the Greek gods, we might have personal decisions to
make, but they would not matter. That we might be playthings in their
58 The ethos of entertainment and the pathology of depression are both forms of the ﬂight
from choice and recognition.

46
■CHAPTER ONE
deathless world is, in part, the horror of Oedipus. It is death that
makes us serious. The human subject, as well as the human world, is
constituted by choice in the face of the knowledge of a personal death.
In the biblical account, death is the consequence of choice. That
representation projects the necessary conditions of human action into
a mythical narrative in which conceptual conditions are reiﬁed. Death
becomes the punishment for choice. That is more or less how we expe-
rience our own subjectivity: constituting ourselves as unique by virtue
of our freedom to choose, we always appear to ourselves as having
failed in that choice. We must fail, because every choice is equally a
negation. For this failure, we believe we suffer the burden of death.
We are always already fallen. Our sin appears to be original. We are
ashamed.
Choice means that we have some control over our will: a capacity
to evaluate our plans and to decide what the principle of our action
should be. Looking forward, our actions always seem to us to be the
product of our plans, that is, we think about what we will do and thus
“plan ahead.” Accordingly, our actions always appear to us to be the
result of choices already made. Kant correctly insisted that free choice
represents a break in the chain of physical causality, because there is
no scientiﬁc or empirical explanation of an action based on a principle.
To account for it, we must provide a narrative of the subject, an ac-
count of the deliberative process by which the subject chose and thus
of the values and principles which he afﬁrmed in that process.
That events in the world can have their source in principle is a com-
plete mystery from the perspective of knowledge. Yet, to the acting
subject, it is no mystery at all. It is just the necessary condition of the
moral task he ﬁnds himself confronting at every wakeful moment.
More than that, because he experiences his action as the product of
his plans, the world of practice appears as one already imbued with
principles. To have beliefs about what we should do is, at least im-
plicitly, to have principles that are separate from the acts them-
selves. Those principles are available not only to inform our future
choices but to evaluate the choices we have already made. We under-
stand ourselves always already to have acted—or failed to act—on
principles. We question whether these were the “right” principles

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■47
and whether they have been applied correctly. Because man is a
problem to himself, inevitably he perceives errors. The principles as
well as their applications are contested by the subject himself.59 Again,
death makes us see that every life is bought at the cost of what might
have been.
We cannot experience choice without experiencing the dread of
choosing—or, indeed, of having chosen—wrongly. Again, with choice
comes shame. To choose wrongly is to be the wrong person; it is to
miss the one chance of being that which we “know” we should be.
There are any number of ways this thought is expressed in the Western
tradition: the Romantic idea of realizing a true inner self, the Jewish
idea of a self constituted by following the law, the Christian idea of
being born again, the existentialist idea of taking responsibility for the
self. Having the capacity to choose, and caring about choice, we reﬂect
upon the principles that should guide choice. But we have no uncon-
tested source by which to measure the correctness of our choice. The
only measure of that choice is the life we lead. By the same token, the
measure of the life we lead remains the life that might have been. We
can no more escape the one than the other.60
Possession of a capacity for choice does not, in the abstract, tell us
why we should care about the choices we make or fail to make. We
care because we appear as a project to ourselves, and we appear as
such a project because of the knowledge of our own ﬁnitude. Each of
us, as the saying goes, “has just one life to lead.” We care about choice,
because we care about the constitution of the self as a unique subject.61
Knowledge of death is the condition of our awareness of ourselves as
unique subjects. Only a subject aware of his own death has a moral
59 The paradigmatic example of this self-contest is Christ’s experience of doubt. For a
classical version of radical self-doubt, see Plato’s Phaedo, 60e–61b, where Plato describes
Socrates composing songs just before his death. When asked why, Socrates responds that it
is just possible that his philosophical mission in life had been based on a misunderstanding
of an oracle that told him to “make music.”
60 This is the message of the ﬁnal myth presented in Plato’s Republic, the Myth of Er.
61 See the discussion of “self-love” in H. Frankfurt, The Reasons of Love 97 (2004)
(“[Self-love] is a condition in which we willingly accept and endorse our own volitional
identity. We are content with the ﬁnal goals and with the loving by which our will is most
penetratingly deﬁned”)

48
■CHAPTER ONE
responsibility for creating his life. We would eat of the tree of knowl-
edge, but we cannot do so without taking up the burden of death. Had
Adam and Eve chosen instead to eat of the tree of life, there would be
nothing to say. Nothing would have changed. There would be only
the timeless replication of the species.
After the Fall, sin is constitutive of what it means to be a subject.
This is Adam’s real sin: he becomes a person. Before that, he was man,
not a man. The subject experiences himself as already fallen because
he always experiences himself as a project that is only partially accom-
plished and that has already partially failed. One never ﬁnds the self
in a state of perfection to be maintained but always in a state of
yearning, a state of dissatisfaction with the present. This is the existen-
tial condition of shame. The absence of such a yearning appears to the
moral agent not as a state of beatitude or peace but as a kind of moral
stupor. It is a forgetting of the urgency of life in the face of death.
If Adam’s sin is that he becomes a person, then there is an inﬁnite
longing for a return to that state in which there was no subjectivity,
no differentiation of the subject. One traditional expression of that
longing is to imagine the self beyond death. The Platonic myth dis-
solved the individual subject into a pure knowledge of Ideas. In the
Judeo-Christian world, in which the subject is the product of the will,
that answer is not possible. The will requires an afﬁrmation of the
subject at the same moment that there is a transcendence of ﬁnitude.
The longing of the subject must be responsive to the sense of self as
fallen, which means an understanding of self as an individual facing
the reality of his own death.
Self-transcendence—at least in the West—is not the dissolution of
the ﬁnite in the inﬁnite but the afﬁrmation of both, that is, of the
inﬁnite in and through the ﬁnite. For this reason, no explanation of
heaven has, or could, overcome the problem of the one and the many:
Would we be one or many in eternity? We must be both. That collapse
of the one and the many is at the center of Christianity: God is one
and three. The Son is both apart from and the same as the Father; he
both dies and lives. The sacraments replicate this ambiguity of the
one and the many in the daily life of the members of the Church. To
participate in the sacraments is—until the next moment of action—to

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■49
be without sin. To be without sin is to be without subjectivity; one
exists not as a subject but as a part of the body of Christ, which is the
Church.62 To be without sin is to approach the point at which the will
disappears. This, however, is not the human condition. So the mystery
of the sacrament can never be anything but episodic. We are thrown
back into our individual lives, facing the limits of our own choices and
the knowledge of our own death. This longing of the ﬁnite self for the
inﬁnite opens a space for good and evil. We know the “good” form
of this self-transcendence as love; its pathological partner is evil.
The metaphysics of will is impenetrable to the Enlightenment mind
and to the whole movement of modern rationalism. Enlightenment
means to take responsibility through the exercise of choice under the
guidance of reason’s identiﬁcation of right principles.63 If we believe
that a domain of action can be perfectly ordered by reason, not only
evil but love, too, slips from view. There is neither love nor evil in the
conceptual world of the laboratory or the market. If we believe that
politics could be perfectly ordered by reason, then politics, too, could
be a domain without love and evil. Liberals often entertain this dream,
banishing that which resists reason to the domain of the private. What
remains would be a politics of administrative rationality, on the one
hand, and judicial reasonableness, on the other.64 Reason may dream
of such a perfected politics, but reason has always been a weak force
in the face of the will—exactly the point of the myth of the Fall. Liber-
als are always shocked by the resistance of politics to reason. We forget
at our peril that politics remains a domain of love and evil.65 Reason
alone will not take the self from deliberation to action.
The world imagined from the perspective of the will does not end
with an account of reasonable deliberation and its failure, or of ratio-
nally justiﬁable principles and enlightened institutional design—or
their failure. Rather, the world of the will includes ideas of the macro-
62 The miraculous powers of the saint are related to this magical quality of a “subjectless”
soul. The saint becomes an intermediary between the praying subject and God.
63 See I. Kant, “An Answer to the Question ‘What Is Enlightenment,’” reprinted in Kant:
Political Writings 54 (H. Nisbet, trans., H. Reiss, ed. 1971).
64 This emphasis on the marketplace and the courtroom is just what Larry Siedentop
ﬁnds emerging in the European Union. See L. Siedentop, Democracy in Europe (2001).
65 See Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its Place.

50
■CHAPTER ONE
cosm in the microcosm, of self-transcendence, of temporal simultane-
ity, of mystery and magic. If we imagine self-transcendence not as uni-
ﬁcation with the other through love but as the destruction of the other,
then we approach the domain of evil.
CONCLUSION: LOVE AND EVIL
The inquiry into evil begins from an awareness of the experience of
sin as the condition of a ﬁnite being with an awareness of the inﬁnite.
In this chapter I have begun the elaboration of the elements of a theory
of evil. These include the self-creation of the subject in the face of a
knowledge of death, the place of the will in the constitution of that
subject, and the endless need to transcend the conditions of subjectiv-
ity. Evil is never far from death: not biological death but the existential
condition of knowing of our own death. Nor, however, is it far from
love. The metaphysics of our normative order—the structure the
world must have to support the values we ﬁnd there—seems always to
leave open two possibilities: love and evil. Both show us the continuing
presence of forms of experience that are not accountable to reason.
The outbreaks of evil in the last century remind us that reason had not
penetrated deeply into the sources of meaning that actually motivate
political orders and individuals.
Man is, by nature, an incomplete being within which the whole
of existence—what is and what might be—shows itself. He always
combines the ﬁnite and the inﬁnite. Knowing that we will die, our
condition is beyond the possibility of repair by reason. In the Judeo-
Christian tradition, man experiences the human condition as a meta-
physical scandal. He is, we might say, metaphysically jealous of God.
This scandal continues in a secularized form today. That a being who
contemplates the whole of creation from the Big Bang to the Cosmic
Crunch is limited to the merely material conditions of his experience
is no less shocking than Adam’s fall. Adam’s condition after the Fall
is a mythical representation of this shocking antinomy for he has eaten
of the tree of knowledge—and is thus like God—but he is condemned
to the conditions of his own singularity in time and space. In short, he
combines knowledge and death.

OEDIPUS AND ADAM
■51
Man would encompass the whole of the universe, but he is always
thrown back upon the very real limitations of his own subjectivity, his
own choices, and his own time. From the perspective of reason, there
is no way out of this antinomy, except by denying one side or the other.
One either afﬁrms the whole and thereby denies the conditions of sub-
jectivity, or one afﬁrms the limits on the subject and denies the possibil-
ity of the inﬁnite. This is a familiar antinomy in the West, one that
appears in various domains and guises: epistemic (transcendent vs.
empirical accounts), ethical (deontological vs. utilitarian accounts),
and ontological (idealist vs. realist accounts).
No particular choice we make can overcome the burden of our own
death and the awareness of ﬁnitude as an experience of shame. To
overcome this state of fallenness, we seek a state of being beyond
choice. Evil is the effort at self-help by the fallen will. It is an effort to
overcome the conditions of ﬁnitude and thus of death itself. It is, how-
ever, a strategy of denial, of projecting shame and death on to the
other. Evil claims for the self the power of life and death. The motion
of evil is the ﬂight from death through murder. The motion of love is
self-transcendence through sacriﬁce for the beloved. Love invokes a
power over death by turning death into sacriﬁce. Sacriﬁce and murder,
love and evil, mark the basic antinomy of the will in the Judeo-Chris-
tian tradition. The sides of this antinomy, I argue, are perilously close
to each other. A politics of sacriﬁce is also one of murder.66
The particular, ﬁnite being we know ourselves to be has an unlim-
ited capacity for love or for evil. This intimate connection of love and
evil is the reason that all our cultural creations are suspect. With only
the slightest change of perspective, our highest accomplishments can
be revealed as structures of evil. Thus Walter Benjamin famously pro-
claimed, “There is no document of civilization which is not at the
same time a document of barbarism.”67 Whatever we do, we are
“ashamed.” This double sense is carried forward in postmodern the-
ory in the ambiguous quality of the central concept of power. Is power
good or evil? Is it the source of cultural productivity or the source of
66 This is the central claim of chapter 5 below.
67 W. Benjamin, “Theses on the Philosophy of History” in Illuminations 253, 256
(H. Arendt & H. Zohn, trans. 1969).

52
■CHAPTER ONE
individual constraint? Is some power good, and some evil, or is it al-
ways a question of where one stands in relationship to the assertion
of power?68 The entire world can, in a moment, appear as a structure
of evil.
Evil is not simply a condition to be eliminated. It is the point of the
“all too human.” Man cannot conceive of his death without conceiv-
ing of a self that can overcome death. This is what it means to experi-
ence the self as fallen. We exist in that ambiguous moral state that is
the intersection of the human and the divine, the profane and the sa-
cred. This is the point at which the possibility of evil emerges simulta-
neously with the possibility of love. A study of evil, then, is a study of
the human condition from beneath. It is a study of love gone wrong.
68 I explore this double-character of power in Kahn, Law and Love.

C H A P T E R
T W O
■
■
■
■
EVIL AND THE IMAGE
OF THE SACRED
Liberalism fails to understand evil for just the same reason that it fails
to understand love. Its horizon of explanation is framed by reason, on
the one hand, and personal well-being, on the other. Between reason
and interest, it can ﬁnd no third term. It has no conception of the will
that is not absorbed either by the universalism of reason or by the
particularism of interest.1 These always appear to be in a state of ac-
tual or threatened tension: reason must rein in interest, which will
always seek more than reason allows. This tension remains as long as
individuals ﬁnd themselves living under conditions of moderate scar-
city, because even under the best of arrangements they cannot have all
that they want.2 Evil, accordingly, can appear to liberalism only as a
failure of reason or as unconstrained desire—two perspectives on the
same phenomenon.
Liberalism can see pathologies to be cured, but not evil beyond re-
pair. Its effort to explain evil focuses on the social or psychological
conditions that lead to the failure of the ordinary constraints of rea-
sonableness. The acts that result are addressed as pathologies subject
to the criminal law, on the one hand, or to therapeutic intervention,
on the other. When evil appears as a political rather than a personal
phenomenon, liberalism’s response remains the same: enforcement of
law may now require an army; therapeutic intervention may require
foreign assistance and institutional reorganization. In each instance,
evil is understood as the collapse of the mechanisms of reasonable
restraint, resulting in or caused by the outbreak of irrational desires.
1 See P. Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its Place 15–16 (2005).
2 See B. Ackerman, Social Justice in the Liberal State 31–33 (1980); J. Rawls, A Theory
of Justice 127 (1971) (on moderate scarcity).

54
■CHAPTER TWO
To many, the great surprise of the twentieth century was the simulta-
neous extension of the empire of reason and the reach of evil. To the
liberal sensibilities of the nineteenth-century Victorian, the political
disasters of the next hundred years were beyond imagining.3 Having
discovered the principles of political rationality, the next hundred
years should have been a period of moderation and reform as reason
spread throughout the world. Even colonialism was understood as an
aspect of this process of bringing civilization—that is, reason—to its
full practical extension. Nevertheless, the science of politics did not
save Europe from a self-destructive frenzy of violence, and the spread
of civilization proved quite compatible with evil both before and after
the process of decolonization.
When the political failure came, liberal thought was not prepared
for it. Predictably its explanations tended to move in two directions.
In part, it saw a problem in the identiﬁcation of the principles of rea-
son. The problem with fascism or communism was that they were
false sciences of the political. A false science could not do the work of
reason to restrain interest. Political disputes were thereby assimilated
to other forms of scientiﬁc disagreement. But scientiﬁc disagreements
do not ordinarily lead to violence and slaughter. Why would the
United States and the Soviet Union threaten to destroy each other—
and incidentally the rest of the world—over the question of who
should own the means of production in a technologically advanced
society? Such destruction surely would not be in the interest of either,
just as the earlier great wars of the century could not be explained in
terms of the advancement of the state’s ordinary interest in citizen
well-being. If the false-science explanation was not adequate, then the
problem had to be located in particular individuals who abused their
positions of power because of their own psychological pathologies.
Now the problem was not wrong reason but too little reason. The
problem, on this view, was not Germany but Hitler; not the U.S.S.R.
but Stalin. These were unreasonable men driven by personal patholo-
gies, even when they were responding to real political circumstances.
3 See I. Berlin, “The Bent Twig: On the Rise of Nationalism,” in The Crooked Timber of
Humanity: Chapters in the History of Ideas 247–48 (1990) (on failure to foresee twentieth-
century nationalism).

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■55
Their appeal to political ideology was only a rhetorical form; real ex-
planation could be found only in an analysis of individual psychology.4
Under some circumstances, political situations arise that empower
leaders who themselves lack the internal mechanisms of reasonable
restraint. A policy designed to prevent evil should therefore be one
that intervenes to prevent these situations from arising in the ﬁrst place
or, if such leaders nevertheless arise, devises institutional mechanisms
for their removal. This gave us the postwar, double agenda of develop-
ment aid, on the one hand, and international criminal law, on the
other: the Marshall Plan and the Nuremberg trials.
Of course, both these sorts of claims might be true, even if they do
not provide an adequate account of evil. There can be false sciences
of the political. Fascism and communism, from the perspective of the
twenty-ﬁrst century, certainly do look like false sciences. So, however,
does laissez-fair capitalism, as well as the varieties of social Darwinism
that accompanied our own liberal politics one hundred years ago. Be-
lief in eugenics was widespread at the start of the twentieth century,
but it did not lead to genocide everywhere. We have little reason to
think that a science of politics explains much in the operation of actual
polities. The gulf between science and practice, between theory and
action, remains too large; the relationship of each to the other is, at
best, reciprocal, with practice affecting theory as much as the reverse.
Consider, for example, the contemporary transformation of Chinese
communism into a form of capitalism.
Similarly, a political leadership can no doubt demonstrate psycho-
logical pathologies. Yet that is hardly an explanation of national politi-
cal action. All the questions remain as to why and how such individu-
als are seen as heroic rather than sick, as leaders rather than criminals.
After the fact, we might treat such political leaders as criminals. We
often do so in order to separate their moral responsibility from that
of the larger political community.5
Whether it is effective or not as a transitional strategy for overcom-
ing the burden of political evil, criminal accountability reﬂects the con-
4 A closely related view projected the pathology of interest not on a particular individual
but on an entire class, for example, European aristocrats, capitalists, or the working class.
5 See, e.g., J. Malamud, Game without End: State Terror and the Politics of Justice
(1996); J. Sklar, Legalism 155–56 (1964) (on Nuremberg).

56
■CHAPTER TWO
ceptual resources available to liberal thought. Liberalism can under-
stand individual criminality; it resists a discourse that speaks of the
body politic as an evil actor. It will assimilate such groups to criminal
conspiracies.6 It is committed to an individualism that is both meta-
physical and moral. It will always be inclined to reduce the political
to the psychological, to view evil as a problem of criminality, and crim-
inality as a problem of the failure of reason to restrain interest. Liberal-
ism will pursue the calculus of punishment—a just measure of retribu-
tion and an effective amount of deterrence. Outside this calculus,
liberalism fears that the dignity of the individual—even that of the
wrongdoer—will be lost.
In the liberal world, evil slips from view. Instead, we see mistake
and crime, or false science and psychological deviance. None of these
is adequate to account for the presence of evil in the world. For this
reason, liberalism is always surprised by the failure of reason. In the
public order, liberals will continue to pass laws and establish tribunals;
in the private, they will support more education and more therapeutic
interventions. But they never seem to be able to get ahead of the prob-
lem of evil. There is always the hope for one more institutional re-
form—a constitutional court, an international criminal court, univer-
sal jurisdiction, open markets, or increased foreign aid—or one more
form of therapy—psychological, sociological, pedagogical, or phar-
macological—that will ﬁnally usher in a well-ordered world in which
the individual can exercise his or her own reason in the establishment
of a moderate life plan that each perceives to be good. It never seems
to work. Our actual world is one in which nuclear-equipped armies
stand facing each other, in which genocide and torture regularly ap-
pear, in which ethnic nationalism leads to civil war, and in which indi-
viduals regularly abuse others.
A contemporary approach to evil, accordingly, must also be a cri-
tique of liberalism—not a critique of liberal political policies, as if the
correct alternatives were conservative policies, but a critique of the
6 Accordingly, at Nuremburg, group criminality was conceived under the model of a
criminal conspiracy. See, generally, G. Fletcher, Romantics at War: Glory and Guilt in the
Age of Terrorism (2002); A. Danner & J. Martinez, “Guilty Associations: Joint Criminal
Enterprise, Command Responsibility, and the Development of International Criminal Law,”
93 Cal. L. Rev. 75 (2005).

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■57
philosophical approach upon which those policies rest. The policy dis-
putes between political liberals and conservatives are little more than
disputes over the best application of broadly liberal principles. The
pattern of liberal thought on evil was already established in the philo-
sophical framework offered by Immanuel Kant. His fundamental in-
sight was to turn away from the metaphysical task of trying to under-
stand the possibility of moral freedom in a world governed by
universal causality: How can we be free in a law-governed universe?
Rejecting metaphysics, he asked what we can know about our world
and what we must believe about our own actions. We are not in a
position to say anything at all about an ultimate reality. We do not
have God’s view of creation; we have only the structure of our own
experience, which spans facts and values, causal accounts and free
choice. His turn away from metaphysics, however, was not a turn to
particular, individual experience. It was, instead, a turn to the univer-
sal capacity for reason. Kant argued that we experience both science
and morality as deployments of reason. Both appeal to law: the laws
of nature, on the one hand, and the moral law we give to ourselves as
free agents, on the other. Both kinds of law rest on reason. Liberalism,
too, is committed both to individual responsibility under a moral rule
of reason and to scientiﬁc, causal explanation. Thus the practical and
the natural sciences have existed side by side for two hundred years.
This double schema applies at the macro level of politics as well as
the micro level of our own behavior. When we address the issue of
future behavior, we cannot help but appeal to our deliberative re-
sources organized under principles of moral reasoning. We ask what
it is we should do. We have to convince ourselves and others that our
answer to that question is the correct answer. So we deploy arguments
that appeal to common ground of reason. We ﬁnd ourselves making
arguments about what all rational beings would agree to, whether the
maximization of utility or adherence to a set of common rules. All
such debates assume that in and through the deployment of reason,
the question for free action—What should I do?—can be answered.
The same is true when the task of free action is political. Here, too,
the modern, liberal approach is ﬁrst to write a constitution, which
means to deploy reason to specify a set of institutions, rights, and

58
■CHAPTER TWO
obligations. We enter into these debates believing that, in our common
appeal to reason, we will reach agreement on a political order.7
When we look back on this same behavior, however, we organize it
under causal patterns of explanation. We theorize about the inﬂuences
on individuals or even about the relationship of brain chemistry to
behavior. On the macrolevel of the political, we speak of economic,
geographic, sociological, biological, or countless other causes. Look-
ing back, we are never satisﬁed with an explanation that simply says
it was a free choice; looking forward, we are never satisﬁed with causal
predictions. These two perspectives are always set in tension with
each other.
In offering his solution, Kant himself falls victim to an earlier meta-
physical puzzle: Is it possible to theorize evil without making it simply
the appearance of an absence? As long as being and the good are one
and the same, a failure of the good must appear as a failure of being.
While Kant has nothing to say about being or nonbeing apart from
human experience, he nevertheless takes up a modern version of this
position when he identiﬁes moral failure with the absence of reason.
If action is not the product of reason’s self-direction, then it must be
the causal product of desire. In this claim, Kant replicates the classical
opposition of soul and body. Body without reason is, for Kant, not
really the subject at all, for the subject only shows itself—only exists—
to the degree that he or she gives the self a principle of action. This
produces a kind of baseline principle of modernity: the truth of the
Kantian subject resides in his or her universality, not individuality. My
character as a particular subject is a product of the body—its desires,
pleasures, and pains—which may be part of the world but fails to
represent the truth of the subject. Kant’s transcendental idealism is
not all that far from the metaphysics of the Fall.
For Kant, in the absence of the principled choice of reason, we are
thrown back into a causal world, and thus to explanations of behavior
that point to laws of nature rather than moral laws. We speak, accord-
ingly, of “inﬂuences,” not choices. Only when reason controls action
does the subject realize freedom. Without freedom, the subject is not
really present at all. What appear to be actions are to be explained as
7 For a paradigmatic theoretical expression of this approach, see Rawls, A Theory of
Justice.

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■59
merely phenomena in the world. Because action is always possible, for
Kant the failure of the subject to appear is not an excuse: one could
always have acted. Nevertheless, we approach moral failure as if it
were a negation or an absence of the subject.8
Even Kant understands that this explanation is not adequate to the
appearance of evil, which most certainly does appear as action by a
subject.9 But neither Kant nor his liberal successors have a conceptual
apparatus adequate to the problem of evil. Freedom, the subject, and
reason all coincide: if a subject is present, it must be because she is
giving herself a rule of action. To understand evil, Kant falls back on
the only alternative left to him: it must be action based on a wrong
maxim. He cannot easily explain, however, how mistakes or irratio-
nality can ground a free act. It is, he says, “inscrutable.”10 Is not the
application of a wrong principle an empty set? It can determine noth-
ing. A mistake in mathematics, for example, is a mere nullity. Is it not
the same with moral law? There seems to be no space left for the free
act that is constitutive of an evil subject. If so, the appropriate response
is again therapeutic, which means to replace nothing with something.
Kant understands the Enlightenment as the moment of recovery of
man’s wholeness. The subject is now to give to himself the principle
of his own being: reason. Man becomes a project to himself. He is to
act as reason demands in all his relationships. This is the principle
incorporated in the categorical imperative: “act only according to that
maxim by which you can at the same time will that it should become
a universal law.”11 Indeed, after the Enlightenment, anything of practi-
cal importance becomes a project for reform based on reason: self-
construction, on the one hand, and political, economic, or social con-
struction, on the other. All our practices, habits, and traditions should
be subject to the test of reason. Politics, no less than individual action,
8 On Kant’s problem of reconciling his conception of evil with his understanding of the
conditions of freedom, see generally R. Bernstein, “Radical Evil: Kant at War with Himself,”
in Rethinking Evil: Contemporary Perspectives 55–85 (M. Lara, ed. 2001). Bernstein quotes
John Silber precisely on the point “[Kant’s] evil is expressed in abandoning the conditions
of free personal fulﬁllment in favor of fulﬁllment as a creature of natural desire.” Id. at 80.
9 See I. Kant, Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone 25 (T. Greene & H. Hudson,
trans. 1960) [1772] (“The wickedness or . . . the corruption of the human heart is the pro-
pensity of the will . . . to [reverse] the ethical order [or priority] among the incentives of a
free will”).
10 Id. at 17.
11 I. Kant, Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals 39 (L. Beck, trans. 1959) [1785].

60
■CHAPTER TWO
should be a product of deliberation and choice under the guidance of
reason. Kant can dream of “perpetual peace” in such a world.
Not only does God have little to say in this world, man is constitu-
tionally incapable of hearing him—unless he speaks the language of
reason. There are no more miracles. If that is all God has to say, how-
ever, man no longer has need of him in order to discern what must be
done. Man already has all the reason he needs both to understand the
world and to shape his own free actions in that world. Modern liberals
still dream of this world, but this was not the world the Enlightenment
produced.
Before the First World War a powerful imaginative effort was
needed to overcome the liberal conﬁdence that evil was only a failure
of reason and that the West was moving in the direction of a common
culture of science, the rule of law, and administrative rationality in
place of an earlier history of political conﬂict, authoritarian rule, and
religious prejudice. After the war, evil haunted the ordinary imagina-
tion as well as the actual political landscape.12 Today, however, as the
great wars recede from memory, we hear again from the same sort
of apostles of Enlightenment who wholly failed to foresee the latent
potential for evil that erupted in the twentieth century. Not surpris-
ingly, Kant’s theory of perpetual peace among reasonable, well-or-
dered states is again invoked.13 Today the shock of terror is the equiva-
lent of the shock of the outbreak of war in 1914. This time, however,
we have no excuse for failing to explore the nature and source of evil.
CONTEMPLATION AND LABOR BEFORE THE FALL
From what point does the explanation of evil begin? It begins not with
the Fall but with creation. We cannot understand the Fall without
understanding what it is from which man fell, for in the identiﬁcation
12 See, e.g., E. Remarque, All Quiet on the Western Front (A. Wheen, trans. 1996) [1929];
W. Owen, “Dulce et Decorum Est,” in The Complete Poems and Fragments, vol. 1 (J. Stall-
worthy, ed. 1983).
13 See M. Doyle, “Kant, Liberal Legacies, and Foreign Affairs,” 12 Phil. & Pub. Affairs
203–34, 323–53 (1983); A. Slaughter, “International Law in a World of Liberal States,” 6
Eur. J. Int’l. L. 503, 504 (1995).

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■61
of sin, there is always an aspiration for recovery.14 In the Genesis ac-
count, however, it is as if there were such uncertainty about the truth
of man’s nature that the myth of origins had to be written twice.
On the ﬁrst account, God, man, and nature stand in a continuous
relationship with one another. God ﬁrst creates the natural world and
then creates man “in our own image, after our likeness.” This man
who is the image of God is created male and female. Neither in the
relationship to God nor in the relationship to the things of the earth
is there a distinction between man and woman. Man who is the image
of God has “dominion over . . . all the earth, and over every creeping
thing that creeps upon the earth.”15 Man is not just an image of God
as a sculpture might be an image of someone. It is not a question of
appearance but of power, that is, of “dominion.” To all the rest of
creation, man represents God’s power on earth. Man is the point at
which the authority of the creator shows itself within the created
world. Man’s rule, moreover, speaks directly to the goodness of God:
“God saw everything that he had made, and behold, it was very
good.” Prelapsarian man and woman live within a world perfectly
suited for them: “And God said, ‘Behold, I have given you every plant
. . . and every tree.’ ” Accordingly, they need only be themselves to
realize the principle of meaning in the world: it is all an expression of
God’s goodness. This man, who is an image of God, is content with
his own divine origins, for he lacks nothing. He may have dominion,
but he has no needs that require labor. What remains for him is what
remains for God after creation is complete: to contemplate the good-
ness of creation. Paradise, we might say, is the indeﬁnite continuation
of the seventh day, the day of rest and contemplation.
Yes, but not quite, for a second account follows rapidly on the ﬁrst.16
In this account, God most emphatically does not give man “every
14 See G. Anderson, The Genesis of Perfection: Adam and Eve in Jewish and Christian
Imagination 8 (2001) (“Genesis is not only about the origins of sin; it is also about the
foundations of human perfection”).
15 Luther expresses this idea as follows: “Here the rule is assigned to the most beautiful
creature, who knows God and is the image of God, in whom the similitude of the divine
nature shines forth through his enlightened reason, through his justice and wisdom.” Lec-
tures on Genesis, in Eve and Adam: Jewish, Christian, and Muslim Readings on Genesis
and Gender 267 (K. Kvam, L. Schearing & V. Ziegler, eds. 1999).
16 On the subsequent history of the two accounts, see E. Pagels, Adam, Eve, and the
Serpent (1989).

62
■CHAPTER TWO
tree.” In this account, God’s creative act does not end with man, who
then mediates between creation and divinity by virtue of being an
image of God. Instead, God’s creation of life begins with man. Man’s
end is no longer to reﬂect upon the goodness of creation. Instead, from
the beginning, man must work. Labor deﬁnes man’s existence even
before the Fall: “The Lord God took the man and put him in the
garden of Eden to till it and keep it.” Man does not look out over all
creation but over only a limited domain within which he has a particu-
lar task. That domain is circumscribed from without—Eden is a geo-
graphically deﬁned location, set among four rivers—but also circum-
scribed from within—man may not eat of the tree of good and evil.
Nor does God look upon his creation as complete and good from the
start; rather, creation appears as a project to be perfected as the need
arises. In this second account, both man and God are seen from the
perspective of action, not contemplation. Thus God reﬂects, “It is not
good that man should be alone; I will make him a helper ﬁt for him.”
Even this task of ﬁnding man a helper is presented as a project subject
to a process of trial and error. God ﬁrst creates animals in the search
for man’s helper but is unsuccessful. This causes him to adopt a new
strategy in the creation of woman from a part of man. Man as actor
stands in constant need of divine assistance. The presence of this divine
succor—not the absence of labor—marks this as paradise. Tending
creation is a joint project of man and God. It must be, as long as man
himself does not know good and evil.
We ﬁnd in these two myths the elements of a fundamental ambiguity
that has haunted the Western mind for millennia. In the ﬁrst (“Genesis
one”) there is a “natural” correspondence between subjects and their
world. A world made for man and woman is fundamentally a know-
able world. Man is not a stranger in this world. Knowing this world,
he knows it as good, just as God judged it to be good: being and
goodness are inseparable. This is already built into the ideas that the
world is a product of divine creation and that man is at one with the
creator. To create is to act with regard to a ﬁnal cause. For God, the
ﬁnal cause of creation can only be goodness itself. Since it is creation
ex nihilo, there is no impediment or resistance to the realization of the
good in the material cause of creation; there is no separate material

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■63
cause. Thus it is neither accident nor skill that leads God to conclude
that his creation is good. In Genesis one, the goodness of God’s act is
also its goodness for man. To be an image of God is to share in the
divine purposes. We ﬁnd here a series of fundamental equivalencies:
knowledge, creation, and goodness. Fully to know is simultaneously
to realize the truth of the subject’s own existence which is the goodness
of creation. On this view, man’s Fall results in the breaking apart of
these equivalences. His recovery would be to regain this knowledge.
This line of thought reaches its ultimate fruition in Hegel. If we knew
what God knows, we would again overcome the distance between the
creator and the created. We would again be an image of God.
In the second myth (“Genesis two”), we ﬁnd a set of reﬂections on
man who always experiences himself as out of place in the order of
nature. Even the things made for him must be subdued by him. He
must labor in the garden from the ﬁrst; there is not yet a helper “ﬁt
for him.” This man experiences himself as always threatened by need.
Similarly, he must name the creatures of the earth. Naming is another
way of appropriating and subordinating to his own will; it is a form
of labor, a kind of taxonomic task. Everything about Genesis two
points to the future as anticipated need; labor, not contemplation, de-
ﬁnes man’s character. Being and goodness never coincide once creation
includes the self-consciousness of a needful being. From the perspec-
tive of Genesis two, the Fall is not a failure in the dimension of knowl-
edge but in that of action. God is no longer there to help man with
this endless task. Man is on his own, and this is truly terrifying.
In Genesis one, man sees the present as complete and thus good.
There is no need for labor or speech; man does not see his own death.
Instead of death, he sees continuity—“be fruitful and multiply”—and
endless dominion. Man has no need beyond that of realizing the prin-
ciple of his own being, which is to be the image of God. He is that
simply by being the point at which creation gains awareness of itself.
Being, reason, and the good all intersect in the mind of man, which at
this moment of contemplation approaches the mind of God. This has
remained the aspiration of much of our philosophical and religious
tradition: to know that which God knows. Man is the ﬁnite creature
in which the inﬁnite shows itself. One strand of this aspiration is ex-

64
■CHAPTER TWO
pressed in the various mystical traditions within Judeo-Christian
thought; another strand is expressed in the turn to “natural philoso-
phy”—which develops into modern science—with its idea that the
world itself expresses the mind of God.17 There is always something
divine about knowledge.
It would make little sense to say of this man that he could not eat
of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. For God possesses knowl-
edge and power. Man certainly does not possess the latter. If men and
women are an image of God, it must be because of their capacity for
knowledge. As the myth says, this man is given the fruit of “every
tree.” Satisfying as this image of completeness may be from the per-
spective of contemplation, it fails to account for man’s experience of
himself as subject to an indeterminate future, as somehow radically
incomplete, that is, as in need of a helper. In Genesis two, even before
the Fall, man appears to himself as suffering need. Man of the second
myth is neither a natural philosopher nor a mystic; he is a laborer. One
does not experience need as universal but as most intensely personal.
Each myth provides a theological/metaphysical account of a famil-
iar experience: the awe that man stands in before his own conscious-
ness of creation and the unease he experiences before the endless task
of labor. This double perspective within the creation accounts of Gene-
sis is reﬂected in traditional approaches to evil. In the ﬁrst myth, man
is complete simply in and through his consciousness of being. If the
object of contemplation is creation itself, and creation is the product
of a divine act that is good, then there is simply no room for evil. This
follows from God’s pronouncement of the goodness of creation—not
good in part but fully and completely. The Fall signiﬁes a failure of
comprehension, a substitution of appearance for reality. Such a failure
of apprehension is a failure of man to be fully that which he is essen-
tially—an image of God. There is a long history of this form of theod-
icy in the West. If all creation is good, then the appearance of the
bad—misfortune, natural disaster, and even evil behavior—must be a
false appearance. Evil is a problem in the knower, not in the object of
17 On the connection of these two strands in the early modern period, see D. MacCulloch,
The Reformation 658–62 (2003); C. Webster, From Paracelsus to Newton: Magic and the
Making of Modern Science (1982).

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■65
knowledge. The created world is, and must be, the best of all possible
worlds. As Pope famously said, “Whatever is, is right.”18 That we fail
to see this is a consequence of our character, not a fault in the world.
For man as actor, the world appears quite differently. He moves not
toward withdrawal from, but rather investment in, the world. He does
not see the wholeness of the good at once but experiences an endless
demand placed upon him from without and an endless need arising
from within. Looking forward, not backward, he sees a constant
threat of failure. He sees a need that ultimately he cannot meet in the
threat of his own death. He appears to himself as a wasting asset,
pregnant with nonbeing.19 He cannot secure a world without need or
pain even for those he loves. On his own, the best he can do is to
improve conditions “for the time being.” He can reform but not cure
the disorder of the world. From the perspective of need, the apologetic
character of the ﬁrst view approaches moral irresponsibility and meta-
physical nonsense. It is an appropriate subject of ridicule as in Vol-
taire’s Candide and Hume’s Dialogue. Laboring man stands in need
of that which he had before the Fall: divine assistance.
From the perspective of labor, knowledge appears inadequate to the
task of meeting need. Indeed, it is knowledge that delineates need.
Knowledge of good and evil gives man the charge, the direction, in
which he must move, but it does not give him the resources fully to
meet that need. After all, God links knowledge to death, telling Adam
that, if he eats of that tree, “you shall die.” At best, man can produce
more—more of the fruits of the ground and more of the fruits of sexual
union—but neither form of production is able to meet the endless need
that the future presents. Looking inward, man ﬁnds a kind of empti-
18 See A. Pope, “Essay on Man” in Selected Poetry and Prose (W. Wimsatt, ed. 1951).
See generally S. Neiman, Evil in Modern Thought: An Alternative History of Philosophy
18–36 (2002).
19 Kant’s “Speculative Beginning of Human History,” which is his “fanciful” reading of
Genesis 2–6, emphasizes this line of interpretation. He sees the ﬁrst human couple dis-
covering an awareness of freedom through the deployment of reason. This leads quickly,
however, to “anxiety and unease” in the face of the “inﬁnitude” of choices that reason
reveals and then to a vision of endless need leading inevitably to death. Man ﬁnds himself
“[thrown] into the world, where he was awaited by so many crises, burdens, and unknown
evils.” Man’s hope is for a paradise in which “he could dream or triﬂe away his existence
in peaceful inactivity and permanent peace.” See I. Kant, Perpetual Peace and Other Essays
49, 51–53 (T. Humphrey, trans. 1983) [1786].

66
■CHAPTER TWO
ness: he sees ﬁnitude—death—not the inﬁnite. Not surprisingly the
symbol of this failure, which arises with the knowledge of good and
evil, is the awareness of man’s sexual nature. For even more than eco-
nomic labor, sex is the sign of man’s endless longing in the face of his
own death.20 Accordingly, the serpent becomes a sign of sexual threat
and danger. The serpent is the false promise of divine assistance, but
man needs the real thing.
On the ﬁrst account, then, evil is a mere appearance to be explained
by a failure of knowledge. If we knew what God knows, then we
would not see evil. God’s knowledge, exercised at creation, is easily
reconﬁgured as the objectivity of a scientiﬁc account. For this reason,
there was a direct move from the eighteenth-century deist, who be-
lieved that God’s creation was limited to the original act of getting the
universe going, to the twentieth-century scientist, who believed that if
that were so, then there is no reason to refer to God at all. If God is
done with us, then we can be done with him. There is no need to think
about the author as long as we have the text. The monk contemplating
the unity of being and the good is the premodern form of the physicist
contemplating a uniﬁed ﬁeld theory.
If the world works according to scientiﬁc laws—if all that happens
can be accounted for by causes that are independent of moral judg-
ment—then there is no room left for evil. From the perspective of evil,
there is not a large difference between saying that this is the best of all
possible worlds because it was created by God and saying that it is the
only possible world because it is causally determined under universal
laws. True, one account emphasizes ﬁnal causes; the other, efﬁcient
causes. But the ﬁnal causes are God’s: to man’s knowledge they add
nothing beyond the abstract character of the good; that is, no particu-
lar good is at stake. Tracing back in time the course of efﬁcient causes
will take us just as rapidly to the uncaused origin of the whole: cre-
ation ex nihilo or the big bang. Either way, the universe seems indiffer-
ent to any moral valuation of man’s labor. Whether we speak of divine
providence or scientiﬁc laws of causation, evil disappears from sight
because human freedom disappears.
20 Diotima’s speech in Plato’s Symposium (201d–207a4) provides a classical expression
of this view.

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■67
The scientiﬁc/contemplative account, however, is no more complete
in modernity than it was when offered in Genesis one. As Kant saw,
it misses the equally fundamental experience of man as actor.21 We
have no particular reason to begin the account of ourselves from the
experience of contemplation rather than from that of labor and need.
We can no more deny the experience of ourselves as free actors, who
must labor to produce the good, than deny that the universe is funda-
mentally accessible to reason and reason’s laws. From the latter per-
spective, we must deny the possibility of miracles; that is, everything
that happens is explainable within the terms of a scientiﬁc inquiry,
even if we are not yet fully capable of giving the explanation. But then
free action itself and the moral demand with which we experience
the possibility of freedom looks like a regular recourse to miraculous
intervention. Nevertheless, this is a miracle in which we are constitu-
tionally required to believe: we cannot help but believe that we can
and must labor to produce the good. This double character of our
necessary beliefs was not the discovery of Kant in the eighteenth cen-
tury. It was already present in the double character of the myths of
creation in Genesis.
It is often said that evil is a failure to recognize the common human-
ity in the other. Nazis, for example, failed to see Jews as human; Amer-
ican racists fail to see African Americans as human. But this just
pushes the inquiry back to what it means to be human. Doing so, it
avoids the hardest part of the inquiry into evil, for there is not just one
way to be human. The Genesis account of creation already suggests
two ways: thinking and acting. To the subject as actor, thinking is
never enough, for the aspiration for the inﬁnite presses upon him as a
fear of his own death. To be assured that he already possesses the
inﬁnite is not reassuring at all. To the contemplative subject, on the
other hand, labor is never enough, for in that direction there can be
no completeness.
This tension of the inﬁnite in the ﬁnite often appears in the Western
tradition as the tension of soul and body: the immortal soul and the
21 Kant begins the conclusion of the Second Critique with a reﬂection on the inescapable
connection of thought and action: “Two things ﬁll the mind with ever new and increasing
admiration and awe . . . the starry heavens above me and the moral law within me.” I. Kant
Critique of Practical Reason 166 (L. Beck, trans. 1956) [1788].

68
■CHAPTER TWO
mortal body. Kant’s theory of heteronomy and, more generally, liber-
alism’s understanding of the irrational character of interests represent
modern versions of the myth of the Fall as the subjugation of the soul
to the dying body. The double creation myths of Genesis, however,
suggests that the focus on the body is misplaced. That focus substitutes
a classical idea of the opposition of soul and body for the biblical idea
of an existential tension in the subject, who appears to himself as the
inﬁnite within the ﬁnite. This tension does not arise with the Fall but
is already represented in creation itself. Man has both an immediate
relationship and a mediated relationship to the inﬁnite. He possesses
the whole as resource, origin, and goal. Yet he labors to achieve its
realization, knowing that nothing he can do is adequate to the ultimate
meaning he intuits. No life ever realizes its full potential; no state poli-
cies or actions are a full realization of a state’s sovereignty; no work
of art is adequate to the artist’s full aesthetic vision; and no narrative is
adequate to the fullness of experience. In every direction, man knows
himself to be more than he can realize. If we begin with this tension,
the problem of evil has less to do with the body’s uncontrolled desires
than with the problem of a ﬁnite will that seeks to realize an inﬁnite
meaning. Evil is not the pathology of the body but of the sacred.
Man has a metaphysical aspiration to make the ﬁnite self an image
of the inﬁnite. This image of the sacred inspires fallen man, who can
suppress neither the knowledge of his own death nor the knowledge
that he is linked to the inﬁnite. It is this image of the sacred that powers
faith in Christ and in the mystery of love. This image of the sacred is
also at the heart of evil.
If the aspiration for the inﬁnite lies behind both love and evil, then,
we can learn a great deal about both by examining the forms of the
sacred. The sacred always shows itself as the inﬁnite in the ﬁnite. Cor-
responding to the changing conceptions of the sacred in the West have
been changing conceptions of evil. Evil for the Jews is different from
evil for early Christians; both are different from that of the Protes-
tants. In each instance, the positive conception of man’s relationship
to the sacred is reﬂected in the conception of evil. Because the myth
of Adam and Eve serves as a constant resource for Western reﬂections
on evil, tracing the shifting readings of that myth provides a point of
comparison of the different conceptions of evil. This is not merely an

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■69
exercise in theological history, as if one form dies and is replaced by
another. Remnants of each conception continue today even as we have
secularized good and evil. Thus genealogical inquiry is a path to under-
standing ourselves.
A RELIGIOUS GENEALOGY OF EVIL
The Old Testament God of the Jews is separated from man by an
unbridgeable gap. Man may have been made in the image of God, but
the created can never be equal to the creator. A made object can never
overcome the gap between maker and made.22 Making is speciﬁcally
not reproduction: a child grows into a man; a made object only deteri-
orates after the moment of its production. This sense of separation of
God and man is reﬂected in the myth of an original proximity lost.
In the Garden, Adam was able to speak directly to God. That very
proximity, however, was too close. Brought near to God, man wanted
to be like God. For that, he is banished. The gap that was always
there is now given temporal and geographical—as well as moral—
representation. Excluded from the Garden, man is now of the earth
from which he came and to which he will return. In classical terms,
matter, not form, deﬁnes the conditions of his relationship to the sa-
cred. Man may have walked with God in the Garden, but now man
confronts God as completely distant from, and other than, himself.
The gap between creator and created is nevertheless crossed by
transmissions in both directions: through the authority of God, on the
one hand, and the obedience of man, on the other. God does not fully
withdraw behind the gap. Rather, God appears to man in the form of
the authoritative declaration of law, that is, he commands. The creator
God leaves a constant mark of his own presence in the command,
“thou shalt not . . .” God as lawgiver appears ﬁrst in the words, “And
the Lord God commanded the man, saying, ‘You may freely eat of
every tree of the garden; but of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil you shall not eat.’ ”23 Conversely, man reaches across the gap by
22 Locke will derive ownership from the act of making. See J. Locke, Second Treatise of
Government 111–12 (I. Shapiro, ed. 2003) [1690]. The same impulse is there in Old Testa-
ment faith: man is God’s possession, never the other way around.
23 Indeed, Jewish law retains a focus on eating.

70
■CHAPTER TWO
obeying those commands. By complying with the divine command, he
shows himself to be again an image of the divine: he is that which God
would make of him. Conversely, to fail to obey is to entrench the gap,
just as a failure of God to command would entrench the gap. To com-
ply with law is to maintain the divine order of creation, without which
man has no more meaning than the earth of which he is made. That
which was required of him in Eden is still required: to obey the divine
command. A failure to follow law replicates Adam’s fall. Man cannot
give himself his own end; he cannot recover Eden on his own. His end
is always death. Thus he should seek to follow God’s law even in his
fallen state. That is not just the best he can do; it is all he can do.
Nothing else has any value.
Jewish history is the fate of a people who have been banished from
their home because of their violation of God’s command. There can
be no other explanation of suffering in a world in which facts follow
law, and a world that is the product of God’s act of making is exactly
one in which “is” follows “ought.” Suffering must therefore be a con-
sequence of disobedience. Conversely, what unites Jews of the dias-
pora is that all live under the same law, regardless of where they might
be.24 To follow the law is to reach across the gap, which is represented
geographically and temporally in the diaspora. Man cannot himself
close the gap, but he can show himself morally ready for the recipro-
cal, divine reaching across the gap.
Not surprisingly, Jewish readings of Adam and Eve emphasized the
perspective of divine law: How is it that God has ordered men and
women to live? If Adam and Eve were not yet fallen, then they must
have been living in perfect compliance with law. We can therefore read
that law out of their behavior. “For centuries Jewish teachers built
from the passage [Genesis 2:23–24] the basic laws of moral behavior.
Certain rabbis actually formed these lines into a code of sexual con-
duct.”25 Jewish thought turned to the myth to understand the laws
of marriage and procreation, the appropriate relationships within the
family, and, more generally the relationship between the sexes. The
24 The thought of obedience to law is, inevitably, linked to a territorial idea of return:
“next year in Jerusalem.”
25 Pagels, Adam, Eve, and the Serpent 13.

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■71
centrality of the obligation to procreate, for example, comes directly
from the text of Genesis. The text ﬁgured dramatically in the construc-
tion of rules regulating not just marriage and divorce but homosexual-
ity, adultery, public displays of nakedness, childbirth rituals, and gen-
der hierarchy.26
The point is not merely heuristic; it is deeper than using the myth,
as we might appeal to diverse sources, to develop the content of law.
There is a single form of understanding that connects man and law.
Both law and man are created images of God; both have their sole
source of meaning in their character as created. God spoke both into
being; both always point toward their creator. Thus each derives its
meaning from the same source outside itself. If we ask what is the
ground of the authority of law—what we would call the source of its
“legitimacy”—the answer is that it is God’s command. If we ask what
is it that gives ultimate meaning to a life lived with labor, suffering,
and pain, the answer is God’s care. Thus the Jews are “chosen.” Be-
cause God cares, he commands the law. To follow the law is to live
as an image of God, for it is to make of oneself an objectiﬁcation of
God’s will.27
For the Old Testament Jews, living in the law is the symbol of recip-
rocal action across the gap: man reaches toward God, who has given
the law. Man lives under the threat of destruction from without and
from within. His world can fall apart either because God withdraws—
that is, he abandons the Jews—or because man fails to place himself
in the proper relationship to the divine. The latter failure, the myth
tells us, is the violation of law. Law establishes an economy of the
sacred—a point of exchange between the inﬁnite and the ﬁnite.
The diaspora is the point at which there is a shift in Jewish practice
from ritual sacriﬁce in the Temple to law among decentralized congre-
26 See id. 12–13 (citing rabbinic tradition, and Mishna Gittin 9, 10); The Book of Jubilees
3, 8–31.
27 This idea is hardly anachronistic. There remains an intimate relationship between sov-
ereignty and law: the legitimacy of law, on this view, ﬂows from the will of the sovereign.
This is particularly true of a constitutional democracy that is committed to the idea that the
popular sovereign—the people—wills the constitution into being. They are the source of its
legitimacy. For the individual citizen, to follow the law is to give expression to popular
sovereignty; it is to make oneself an “image” of the popular sovereign. See P. Kahn, The
Reign of Law: Marbury v. Madison and the Construction of America 234–35 (1997).

72
■CHAPTER TWO
gations. But a religion of law and one of sacriﬁce are deeply inter-
twined, and not just because the ritual of sacriﬁce is a law-governed
activity that must be done exactly right if it is to propitiate God.28 The
connection runs deeper. Sacriﬁce is not simply a gift. The ritual of
sacriﬁce is the paradigmatic act of crossing the gap in both directions.
To sacriﬁce is to make sacred by making an object a point of revelation
of the divine. The sacriﬁced object is a divine image not as a reﬂection
but as a presence: it literally brings God’s presence into the commu-
nity. The sacriﬁced object suspends the gap, drawing man to God and
God to man. For this reason, the sanctiﬁed object is often consumed
by the faithful. Unless the offering makes present the divine, it has not
yet worked in the domain of the sacred. But this showing forth of the
sacred is not within the power of man alone.
We can still see something of the relationship of law to sacriﬁce in
the modern property regime. Property is misunderstood if seen only
as an object or discrete area in the world. Rather, for an object to
become property requires that one see through it to an entire domain
of law and legal regulation, including contemporary rituals, for exam-
ple, registration, good-faith purchase, and title. Knowledge of all these
background conditions may not be explicit—one sees the property as
an object—but it can be made explicit. It is maintained in the “social
imaginary,” and it will be called forth when and if a problem arises.29
Property presents, in a reiﬁed form, not just the legal order as a system
of rules but also an image of the sovereign authority to make law, for
the sovereign is the source and guarantor of that law. For this very
reason, early modern political theory locates the function of the sover-
eign in the establishment of a property regime.30 Property differs from
possession just in this relationship to the sovereign. Property carries
the “warrant” of the sovereign; it does so by being created and con-
veyed according to law. The sovereign not only creates the possibility
of property but has an underlying claim on all property, which can
28 See H. Hubert & M. Mauss, Sacriﬁce: Its Nature and Functions 28 (W. Halls, trans.
1964) [1898]; M. Eliade, The Myth of Eternal Return 34–37 (R. Trask, trans. 2005).
29 On the concept of the social imaginary, see C. Taylor, Modern Social Imaginaries 23–
30 (2004).
30 See, e.g., J. Locke, Second Treatise 101 (“Political power, then, I take to be a right of
making laws with penalties of death, and consequently all less penalties for the regulation
and preserving of property”).

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■73
always be exercised to save the nation. The value of property is present
both in its maintenance and its destruction.31 The sovereign can only
partially bind itself to act according to law in its seizure of property—a
“just compensation clause.”32 In times of emergency—the Schmittian
exception—property just is the expression of the power of the sover-
eign. The sovereign shows itself by its demand for sacriﬁce of property;
it creates an exception to the ordinary law. This is why property only
appears from within the legal order of the state. To the outsider—
particularly the enemy—what appears as real property from within,
appears only as the state’s territory. From this perspective, the geo-
graphical extension of the state is identiﬁed with the political sover-
eignty of the state.33 Similarly, for a religion of sacriﬁce, God consti-
tutes the value of and has a claim upon every ﬁnite object and place.
Obedience to a law understood as divine command always has the
potential of appearing as a form of sacriﬁce, for it is both a means of
propitiating God and of making the divine present. It is reordering the
world as an image of the divine. Thus the sacriﬁce of Isaac allows
fallen man a hint of the return to, or at least the possibility of a full
recovery of, that life that is an image of God. The only authority for
the act of sacriﬁce is the divine command, but that is the only authority
there ever is in the world of image, law, and sacriﬁce. This is a world
in which the only subject is God. All else gets its meaning by virtue of
its relationship to God’s will. This is what it means to be “chosen.”
31 L. Strahilevitz, “The Right to Destroy,” 114 Yale L.J. 781 (2005).
32 See, e.g., United States v. Caltex (Philippines), 344 U.S. 149 (1952) (destruction of
private property to prevent it from falling to the enemy does not constitute a compensable
taking); United States v. Paciﬁc R.R., 120 U.S. 227, 238 (1887) (quoting veto message of
the president: “ ‘It is a general principle of both international and municipal law that all
property is held subject, not only to be taken by the government for public uses, in which
case, under the constitution of the United States, the owner is entitled to just compensation,
but also subject to be temporarily occupied, or even actually destroyed, in times of great
public danger and when the public safety demands it; and in this latter case governments
do not admit a legal obligation . . . to compensate the owner. The temporary occupation of,
or injury to, and destruction of property, caused by actual and necessary military operations,
is generally considered to fall within the last-mentioned principle.’ Cong. Globe, Forty-
second Cong. (2d Sess.) pt. 5, p. 4155.”)
33 When property is owned by a foreign national, conﬂicts inevitably arise when the sov-
ereign exercises this residual claim to all property within its jurisdiction. International law
has long struggled with conﬂicting views over the appropriate regulation of foreign expro-
priation. See R. Dolzer, “New Foundations of the Law of Expropriation of Alien Property,”
75 Am J. Int’l L. 553, 557–72 (1981).

74
■CHAPTER TWO
This is also a world that is squarely within the myth of Genesis two,
that is, a world in which man’s relationship to the sacred is mediated
through the paradigm of labor. Man’s truest labor always appears to
be sacriﬁce: sacriﬁce for loved ones, for community, and for God. Law,
accordingly, represents the promise of the divine assistance that was
lost with the Fall.34
A world of sacriﬁce is equally a world in which the miraculous is
routine. God actively shows himself in the world. Coordination be-
tween action and its consequences remains a subject for the Creator’s
will. Obedience to law brings man security, if not happiness, only be-
cause God wills that consequence. There is no explanation for God’s
commands, only the threat of destruction for failure to comply and
the hope for his beneﬁcence with compliance. Paradigmatically, this is
the story of Abraham and Isaac. God appears to man in the form of
command; the act of obedience is sacriﬁce. Obedience fueled by faith
leads to the miraculous reordering of nature itself.
Old Testament faith is characterized by this gap between man and
God. Every bridging of that gap is miraculous. Thus law is miraculous,
in just the same way that sacriﬁce is. They are the same exchange
between man and God; the ﬁnite becomes an image of the inﬁnite.
Accordingly, the narrative of the Old Testament is, on the one hand,
an account of the miracles that have linked the Jews to God, and, on
the other, a narrative of a people’s effort to comply with law. Because
fulﬁllment of law is never more than partial, the miracle, which is
always the appearance of the divine within the ordinary conditions of
space and time, is both threat and promise: we cannot know in ad-
vance whether the God that appears will be vengeful or protective.
God may save Isaac, but he destroys Sodom; he saves Noah and his
family but destroys everyone else. Indeed, the biblical history of
mankind is overwhelmingly a history of punishment. There is not an
alternative metaphysics that explains suffering evil. There is only dis-
obedience followed by the vengeance of a just God. Suffering must
be deserved; it is the consequence of disobedience. The suffering of
the Jews, right up through the Holocaust, is frequently read in just
34 Judaism is sufﬁciently diverse also to include traditions squarely located within the
framework of Genesis one. There is, for example, a long tradition of Jewish mysticism.

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■75
this way. It is not the evil done by others to the community but rather
an afﬁrmation of community identity by virtue of God’s special con-
cern for the Jews. That concern is special even when God acts in the
form of punishment. If we suffer, we must ourselves be the source of
that suffering.
In such a world, moral failure appears as disobedience: the failure
to obey God’s commandments. The narrative of the Jews is a history
of a failure to follow law—at least, this is the repeated lesson of the
prophets. But evil has a still more palpable face in Old Testament faith:
idolatry, or the worship of false gods. Disobedience to law—an ordi-
nary failing—becomes evil when it is grounded in idolatry. Thus the
First Commandment has a normative priority. Indeed, that priority is
represented temporarily as well, since idolatry and divine law-giving
appear simultaneously. While Moses ascends to obtain the law, the
community, left on its own, turns to idolatry. Law will be the vehicle
of mediation between fallen man and God.
In a world enthralled to the divine, the failure to worship one god
always rests on a decision to worship another. The belief that other
gods have the power to coerce and reward is the necessary foundation
of disobedience in a world watched over by the divine. Evil, accord-
ingly, is belief in the wrong god. Man’s suffering is not evil, for suffer-
ing may be justiﬁed punishment or it may be merely natural. To believe
that some other god has the power to alleviate that suffering, however,
is evil. To turn for succor from Jehovah to Baal—or any other god—
is to locate the truth of one’s self outside God’s will. It is to make of
the self an image of some other god, to become a citizen of some other
sacred space. To believe in other laws and other rituals of sacriﬁce is
to place into competition a set of ultimate beliefs that determine the
life and death of the individual, as well as the community. “In general
the war against idolatry in the Bible is a war against forms of ritual
worship imported from foreign nations.”35 A religion of law and sacri-
ﬁce can always be challenged by an alternative conception of the ob-
ject of sacriﬁce and the requirements of divine law. Today we often
describe sovereignty as the authority to make laws for a particular
35 M. Halbertal & A. Margalit, Idolatry 108 (1992).

76
■CHAPTER TWO
jurisdiction. Sovereignty always appears to itself as exclusive.36 When
conﬂicting claims of sovereignty are set forth, war is often the result;
when a citizen changes sovereign allegiance, it can appear as the secu-
lar evil of treason. Idolatry is the religious form of treason, just as
treason continues to carry the religious aura of idolatry.
The Jews of the Old Testament must maintain the distinction be-
tween the moral failure of disobedience to law and the evil of idolatry.
Violation of the law can be mundane, an ordinary failure characteris-
tic of all members of the community. Idolatry, on the other hand,
threatens to redeﬁne the sacred character of the community and the
self. Not all crime is treason, although there is always a kind of pres-
sure to move in this direction, since all illegality disregards the sover-
eign command.37 The categories are necessarily confused: all crime is
a betrayal of an obligation of loyalty to the sovereign. Idolatry, like
treason, is prohibited as a matter of law, but idolatry is always more
than a particular crime. The turning away from law is a turning away
from God and thus a turning toward another god.
More broadly, what positive meaning can we give to worship of
another god in the face of the claim that there is only one God? Wor-
ship of other gods must be worship of nothing at all, not a competition
among alternative sources of the sacred but really just a negation of
the source of all meaning. Thus the Jews must deny the very existence
of that which they fear most.38 The charge of idolatry simultaneously
suggests the power of other gods and undermines any such claim by
asserting that they are not gods at all.39 A golden calf has no power to
construct or to destroy, no power to bridge the gap between the ﬁnite
and the inﬁnite. The meaning of worship of the false god is reduced
to a violation of the true law of the one God. The calf is an empty
36 This is why the American constitutional idea of federalism, in which the states were to
retain some aspects of sovereignty, appeared so conceptually difﬁcult. See F. MacDonald,
Novus Ordo Seclorum: The Intellectual Origins of the Constitution 277–78 (1989) (on the
problem of imperium in imperio).
37 Traditionally crime was a breach of the king’s peace. See M. Arnold, “Accident, Mis-
take, and the Rules of Liability in the Fourteenth Century Law of Torts,” 128 U. Pa. L. Rev.
361, 370–72 (1979).
38 Halbertal and Margalit ﬁnd the earliest biblical meaning of idolatry in the metaphor
of the sin of adultery. This is to locate the wrong in the turning away of the believer rather
than in the object toward which he turns. See Halbertal & Margalit, Idolatry 11–14.
39 See Jeremiah 2:11.

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■77
image, and its very emptiness becomes the ground for divine retribu-
tion. This is an important characteristic of our perception of evil. Evil
is a reaching toward the divine, but at the same time it is a negation.
It is both there and not there—the action of negation or a false tran-
scendence. Evil is an image of the divine, but it is also nothing at all.
The evil of idolatry is, accordingly, twofold. First, it is a violation
of God’s law set out for members of the Jewish community. Paganism
is not idolatry, for pagans are not bound by that law. The analogy to
treason is again exact: it is not treasonous for the noncitizen to support
a state opposed to my own. Second, idolatry differs from other viola-
tions of the law because of its assertion of a divine power in place of
God. That which we recognize as evil has this double character of
violation and power. To identify evil as idolatry is more than a descrip-
tive act; it is already the assertion of a strategy of repression and de-
nial. If the idol is not really a god, then it is only the creation of man.
The idol has no power at all. The evil of idolatry, accordingly, includes
the idea of man attempting to make his own gods, that is, he would
himself be the source of the sacred. This, not merely the violation of
law, is what makes idolatry evil.
Idolatry is the face of evil in a world in which polytheism is still
imaginable. To label a practice idolatrous is to defend one set of beliefs
about the sacred by condemning another. What we might call the “dia-
lectic of idolatry,” however, extends more broadly. That dialectic has
the following character: ﬁrst, the appearance of a new source of ulti-
mate meaning; second, the violation of the community’s existing
norms for the sake of that new source; and, third, the community’s
negation of the positive claim, leaving only the wrongful conduct. Evil
is recognized but then is reduced to mere sin. This dialect of idolatry
is seen today in the political evil of treason: ﬁrst, a claim is made for
a new source of political meaning; second, the community’s law is
violated; and, third, that claim is negated, leaving only the illegal act.
The failed revolutionary becomes the common criminal; his execution
is simultaneously a recognition and a suppression of the alternative
claim to power. Treason is recognized to be not just another illegal
act, even as it is forcefully assimilated to crime.40
40 See G. Fletcher, Loyalty: An Essay on the Morality of Relationships (1992).

78
■CHAPTER TWO
The proliferation of conﬂicting claims about the sacred is not just a
problem of lingering polytheism. A community based on the interpre-
tation of a sacred text always threatens to fragment into diverse
communities of interpretation. The text itself—the point of entry of
the sacred—has no capacity to stop this proliferation of interpreta-
tions. Authority works against interpretive diversity, but it has no
more claim on the text than any of the interpretations it denies. No
interpretation can itself ground an authoritative claim to the truth of
the text.41 It is always possible for a prophet in the wilderness to arise
and claim that the community labors under a misinterpretation of its
own sacred text. How and when such interpretive disagreement will
arise, and whether a new interpretation will attract its own commu-
nity of faith, remain mysteries. We cannot say whether any particular
crisis—assuming there is a relationship between the turn to faith and
crisis—will lead to an afﬁrmation of traditional beliefs or spawn a
new interpretation. It depends not just on the felt force of the new
interpretation but on the real force—coercive, punitive power—of the
existing authorities. Truth is as much a function of power as power is
of truth. Sometimes the revolutionaries win; sometimes they are
hanged as traitors.
Judaism spawned just such a diversity of interpretations and inter-
pretive communities.42 Yet the birth of Christianity is not just the ap-
pearance of another interpretation of a common, sacred text. Chris-
tianity claimed to offer something more than another interpretation.
Christ’s relationship to the sacred text is not interpretive at all. His
relationship to that text is as the superceding truth that the text pro-
phesizes. For the new community of faith, Christ is the miraculous
appearance of the Word within creation. He is described as himself a
text, the logos—not like the law, a lingering marker of God’s presence,
but the thing itself; not a made image of God, the product of a creator,
but the divine Son. To the traditional community of the Jews, who did
not accept Jesus as the Messiah, such a claim could not help but appear
41 See S. Fish, Is There a Text in This Class? Interpretive Communities and the Sources
of Authority (1982); R. Cover, “The Supreme Court, 1982 Term—Foreword: Nomos and
Narrative,” 97 Harv. L. Rev. 4, 16 (1983).
42 See, e.g., E. Pagels, The Gnostic Gospels (1979); see also Second Corinthians 11, 4–5
(Paul warns of those who preach “another Jesus”).

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■79
blasphemous, for it denied the fundamental gap between man and
God. That gap had been mediated by law. Now Christians proclaimed
the end of law.43 Those who afﬁrmed belief in this new God appeared
to the traditionalists as idolaters: worshiping nothing at all, they vio-
lated the sacred law. The dialectic of idolatry would have Christ exe-
cuted as a common criminal.
New Testament faith radically reconceptualizes the relationship
between creator and created, the inﬁnite and the ﬁnite. The Old
Testament concept of that relationship as one of a made image to its
maker is replaced by an image of the Son and the Father. The gap has
been overcome in the person of Christ, who is both man and God.
Thus the Nicene Creed speciﬁcally declares that Christ is “begotten,
not made.” Whereas a made object can never be the same as, and is
always subordinate to, its maker, an organic relationship is one of
identity across difference. Father and Son are of the same form, sub-
stance, or essence: “God from God, Light from Light, true God from
true God.”44
The model of craft or making is not only the earliest model of
order—order exists because it was established by an intelligent act of
making—it is also the most pervasive and easily accessible. It is at the
root of all anthropomorphic conceptions of the sacred. This model of
making continues, for example, in the powerful intuition behind the
argument from design: the ﬁnely articulated order of such things as
the hand or the eye “shows” us that there must have been an intelligent
act of creation. We cannot easily imagine an intelligent act apart from
an anthropomorphized intelligence. This was and continues to be the
argument—and image—that Darwin and all his successors have had
to defeat. Darwin did so by linking reproduction to change.45 Until
that point, reproduction had been conceived as the mechanism for
maintaining identity through difference.
Mythically, Christ’s displacement of Adam is the displacement of a
made image by a begotten son. God as father displaces God as maker.
43 Romans 10, 4.
44 Nicene Creed. One sees here the attraction of the later theological turn to Aristotle’s
understanding of form or substance.
45 This revolutionary thought is conveyed in the very title of Darwin’s work: Origin of
Species.

80
■CHAPTER TWO
Both are anthropomorphic images: man is by nature both a maker
and a begetter.46 Neither has priority over the other; neither can do
away with the other. Despite their common basis in ordinary experi-
ence, each invokes a different conceptual frame: a model of making
versus a model of organic unity. The appearance of the idea of Christ
marks a movement from the former to the latter in imagining the rela-
tion of man to God.
Prior to Darwin, the organic was a model of the relationship of the
part to the whole. Each part gains its meaning only from the relation-
ship to the whole, and the whole is nothing apart from its elements.
Organic models work both synchronically and diachronically. Syn-
chronically, the hand is only a hand by virtue of its being a part of the
entire body. Detached it is only the “remains” of a hand.47 Parent and
child are constituent parts of the organic unity of the family; citizens
are constituent parts of an organic nation. The principle of the whole
is more than, but not separate from, the constituent parts. An artisan
may have a blueprint or an abstract idea of the whole before he begins
his work, but there is no idea of the horse or of the family prior to the
existence of particular horses or families.48 Diachronically, the child
succeeds to the parent, carrying forward the same unmediated princi-
ple or form. Nations, as well as other corporate bodies—for example,
churches, ethnicities, and institutions—also reproduce themselves
across generations. Reproduction appears as the temporal mainte-
nance of the continuity of complex form. The relationship is not causal
but synecdochic. At each instance, the whole is present in the particu-
lar. Thus an organic entity maintains sameness in difference across
both space and time.
46 Arendt’s ordered typology of human behavior would have making—“work”—succeed
begetting—“the labor of the body.” H. Arendt, The Human Condition 79–93 (1958). The
genealogical order of Western religion suggests that she gets the order wrong. That geneal-
ogy is repeated endlessly in Western institutional self-understandings, including American
constitutionalism. Institutions begin with a moment of the sovereign act of law making;
they maintain themselves as organic—that is, corporate—entities. See P. Kahn, Legitimacy
and History 5–7 (1992).
47 See Aristotle, Parts of Animals 1.1640b34–641a10.
48 With biotechnology, the line separating the organic from the made is shifting, but
this was always a blurred line with respect to social formations: a constitution is both a
made object and an organic whole. The framework of understanding we use depends upon
context.

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■81
A craft understands the form of its product as something separable
from the material in which it is executed. The Old Testament God ﬁrst
had the idea of man before he made him: He made him in the image of
Himself. The elements of the organic are not similarly “put together”
according to a plan. We misconstrue this organizational form—that
is, its principle of intelligibility—if we continue to offer efﬁcient causes
to explain its temporal sequence and spatial organization. To under-
stand the organic, we have to explain not how it came to be but what
its nature is. There is no understanding the “how” of Christ, only the
“what” of the Church, which is his body. Of course, theologians will
continue to speculate about the how, producing two thousand years
of doctrinal controversy, which is all that can be expected when one
asks the wrong question. Christ is outside all temporal sequence and
geographic division: he ﬁlls all time and space. His particular appear-
ance is simply a mystery, for chronological sequence is itself the tempo-
ral form of making, and Christ is not made.
The religion of the New Testament begins with the disappearance
of the gap that informs the Old Testament ideas of image, law, and
sacriﬁce. After Christ, man no longer relates to the sacred as to a
maker/creator God.49 Christ announces the end of law; he takes on to
himself the entire demand for sacriﬁce under which the Jews had la-
bored. Just as he is the Word, he is the sacriﬁcial offering. This is
literally the end of time, because the sacred is present not as a ritual
object but as man himself. The presence of the divine among men
marks the end of man as a made image of God. That man dies and is
born again as something entirely new. This new man reconceives him-
self as a participant in the body of Christ. He is a part of a sacred
whole, the unity of which is not an aggregation of divisible parts but
completely organic. The end of time, accordingly, is the end of man’s
conception of himself as a laborer in need of law, on the one hand,
and of sacriﬁce, on the other. With that, there is a new focus on Genesis
one, in place of Genesis two. For Christ is the new Adam through
whom individuals now achieve that perfect realization of the inﬁnite
in the ﬁnite—the unity of being, knowledge, and the good—which was
Adam’s in the ﬁrst myth of creation.
49 See Romans 8, 1–8.

82
■CHAPTER TWO
The Church is the body of Christ in precisely the sense of an organic
community. The Church is not made; there is no blueprint, no plan,
no model against which it is measured. Participation is unmediated by
a craftsman, even by the divine creator who had always to mediate
between command (law) and consequence for the Jews.50 Thus the
Church is not a historical phenomenon in the same way that the narra-
tive of the Old Testament records the history of miraculous interven-
tions for the sake of the Jewish community. Rather, the Church exists
at once everywhere and in all time. One must be born again into the
Church, which means to be born again as a part of the body of Christ.
Man is no longer a ﬁnite body—an image separated from the divine,
living in a fallen world of geographical space and temporal succession.
In Christ, man is no longer of this world.
To be of the body of Christ is to experience personal salvation not
as a promise for the future but now as an eternal present. It is to escape
history in a way unavailable to Old Testament faith. This is spoken of
as the “end of time,” but the eschatological impulse can confuse a
phenomenology of religious experience with a metaphor. The relation-
ship to the sacred has already changed; the time of fallen man is al-
ready over. A religion of law waits for the end of time as a historical
event that corresponds to the giving of new law. New Testament faith
abandons linear history for the immediate presence of the sacred in
and through the body of the Church itself. This is the movement from
a religion of sacriﬁce to one of self-sacriﬁce. To be a part of the body
of Christ is to have suffered the cruciﬁxion and resurrection. It is al-
ready to have sacriﬁced that self which was the ﬁnite body: “We know
that our old self was cruciﬁed with him so that the sinful body might
be destroyed, and we might no longer be enslaved to sin.”51
Evil in the Old Testament, I argued earlier, appears in the form of
idolatry, which is best understood as a conﬂict between claims of sov-
ereign allegiance: whose law does one obey? What is evil after the
50 Historically and institutionally, of course, claims for mediation do arise and a priestly
class develops, which is, in turn, rejected in the Reformation. The Church, as a temporal
institution, has a political life—internally and externally—as a competitor for power. See,
e.g., G. Wills, Why I Am a Catholic (2002). My discussion is not a social or political history
of the Church but a genealogy of conceptual models.
51 Romans 6,6.

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■83
appearance of Christ? It is the failure to take up the offer of Christ to
be born again as a part of the organic unity of the sacred. It is to
remain within the Old Testament conception of the gap; it is to con-
tinue to labor under the law. This is the evil of the Jews, who reject
the divinity of Christ as if his worship were only another form of idola-
try. The killing of Christ, of which the Jews are long accused, is sym-
bolic of treating Christ as another false idol, that is, treating him as
nothing at all.
If Christ is no more than a false appearance of the sacred, then man
himself remains bound to death. That is an intolerable thought and
the implicit threat that motivates the millennia of anti-Semitism. Just
as the Jews saw the idolater as a combination of power and nothing-
ness, so does the Jew—the paradigmatic nonbeliever—appear as that
same combination to the Christian. By denying Christ, the Jew pro-
claims the continuing power of death over life; he stands, therefore,
within the emptiness of an unredeemed life. He can follow law, but to
what end when life brings only death? Luther writes “When the Law
stands alone without the Gospel and the knowledge of grace, it leads
to despair and ultimate impenitence.”52 Man can mark himself with
the sign of the Covenant, but he remains separated by an unbridgeable
gap from the divine being.53 We see in this opposition between Chris-
tian and Jew a basic structure of evil—not simply relativism but a
conﬂict over the source of meaning adequate to overcome death itself.
Each side claims for itself all the meaning that there is; each sees the
other as pursuing death in place of life.
Man longs not just to be good—to follow the law—but to be a part
of the sacred. He wants not just to sacriﬁce according to divine law
but to be the object of sacriﬁce himself. Only then can he become the
point of transparency to, and participation in, the sacred. Thus Christ
is exactly what Isaac is not: Christ is sacriﬁced; Isaac is saved for the
law. But in the economy of religious belief, Isaac is denied what Christ
achieves: Isaac is not saved but dies. To the Christian, everyone has a
choice whether to follow Isaac on the path of law or to be a part of
52 Luther, Lectures on Genesis 272.
53 The failure of law to provide meaning appears in the familiar opposition of law and
love, a timeless theme of Western literature. See P. Kahn, Law and Love: The Trials of King
Lear (2000).

84
■CHAPTER TWO
the sacriﬁce of Christ. Death has literally changed places. Paul writes,
“All of us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized
into his death. Therefore, we have been buried with him by baptism
into death.”54 The turn to Christianity is, accordingly, marked by the
move from sacriﬁce to self-sacriﬁce. Christ says, “He who wishes to
follow me, let him deny himself and take up his cross.” Only a religion
founded on an organic conception of unity can support a practice of
self-sacriﬁce: it is that form of self-destruction which is rebirth. Again,
Paul writes, “I have been cruciﬁed with Christ; it is no longer I who
live, but Christ who lives in me.”55
This is not a conﬂict over the intensity of religious belief. Both Chris-
tian and Jew can be fully enthralled by the sacred; both claim to locate
an ultimate meaning in the realization of the sacred in and through
their own lives. It is rather a question of the forms of religious belief:
Do we experience the sacred as a transcendent power miraculously
showing itself across the gap or as immanent and participatory? Is the
sacred found in law or in self-sacriﬁce? This same form of conﬂict
intrudes on the West in the confrontation with Islam. Like Judaism,
Islam is a religion of law: the Sharia marks the miraculous appearance
of the divine within the ﬁnite conditions of life. Mohammed is a
prophet, not a god. Islam and Judaism, for this reason, have far more
in common than Christianity and Islam.56 This has been reﬂected in
the history of conﬂict.57 For much of European history, the face of
evil—when it was not the Jew—has been the Muslim. Not surpris-
ingly, as anti-Semitism is suppressed, it is replaced by an anti-Islamic
sentiment. This remains a conﬂict between a covenantal community
and an organic community, a community of law and a community of
the Eucharist. There is no common ground in such conﬂicts: where
54 Romans 6, 3–4.
55 Galatians 2, 20.
56 This close relationship of Islam to Judaism is symbolically represented in their mutual
appeal to the story of Abraham’s sacriﬁce of his son. Jews believe that son to be Isaac;
Muslims believe him to be Ishmael.
57 The recent appearance of the suicide bomber as a tactical weapon used by certain
Islamic groups should not be read to suggest that self-sacriﬁce is central to Islam. The suicide
bomber appears ﬁrst as a tactic within a nationalist struggle of the Palestinians. Some of the
bombers, for example, are Christian Palestinians. Moreover, one would have to know about
the expectations of the bomber: Does he expect a future reward, and of what sort?

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■85
one sees ultimate meanings, the other sees only negation; where one
sees God’s presence, the other sees only the obstinate refusal of belief;
where one sees the sacred, the other sees idolatry; where one sees life,
the other sees death.
To the Christian, to remain bound to law is to choose evil; it is to
choose to remain fallen in the face of the presence of divine salvation.
The Christian sees here a kind of repetition or recurrence of the origi-
nal sin of turning away from God. From this perspective, the problem
is not disobedience to law but rather the idea of law itself. Law sug-
gests an enduring gap between God and man.58 Law provides order
in the place of the chaos of mere change; it provides meaning where
otherwise there would be nothing at all. Law is the measure of mean-
ing—and therefore of action—in a world still pregnant with death.
This is a world that is bound to history: to realize meaning within
history is to live in accordance with the divine law. The lesson of
Isaac’s sacriﬁce was that compliance with divine command is the foun-
dation of the nation of Israel. That nation is suspended between the
divine foundation and the not-yet of the divine return. Law is the
structure of order in this intermediate time and space. With Christ,
however, God is now present in the world. The gap expressed by law
has itself dissolved through the ﬁnal and complete miracle of Christ’s
appearance. This is the fundamental belief of Christianity. To live as
if the world continues as before is the fundamental evil. It literally kills
the soul. Like idolatry, it seeks power in what is only negation.
An entirely new calculus of good and bad is required in this trans-
formed world. This is the lesson of the early Christian martyrs, who
invert the moral valence of pleasure and pain, of life and death. Even
the phenomenon of torture is transformed. Living already as a part of
the body of Christ, they are no longer of this world. Their bodies
have already exhausted themselves on the cross of Calvary, for they
are His body. Their actual torture is nothing more than a replay, in
ﬁnite time, of a death already suffered. The transcendent self-sacriﬁce
that spans all time and includes all others is Christ’s suffering on the
58 This gap remains even when we think of law as the expression of the popular sovereign.
Law is never the actual presence of the sovereign but only a kind of marker that the sover-
eign had been present. Law always marks the absence of the sovereign, even as it claims to
be the product of the sovereign act. See Kahn, Reign of Law 69–74.

86
■CHAPTER TWO
cross. Thus the Christian martyrs have no concern for life itself, no
concern for the painful deaths they are forced to suffer. Or, not exactly
no concern; rather, suffering is martyrdom and is thus the celebration
of the soul over the body, of redemption over fall, of rebirth in the
body of Christ.59
Suffering is no longer a sign of God’s displeasure, His response to
a failure to comply with law. Suffering is now testimony to transcen-
dence: through suffering one testiﬁes to the reality of Christ’s presence.
Thus sacriﬁce moves from an external object given up to God to the
body itself. Sacriﬁce is no longer an act under law designed to bridge
the gap. Rather, self-sacriﬁce is the presence of the divine and thus the
disappearance of the gap. Abraham could not literally sacriﬁce Isaac,
his only legitimate son, and still found a great nation. There must be
a miraculous substitute. With Christ’s appearance, there is no longer
any distance between sacriﬁce and suffering; there is no substitute.
The very meaning of the nation of Israel has come to an end, for his-
tory itself has come to an end.
Earlier I argued that we see remnants of the Old Testament idea of
sovereignty in our understanding of the popular sovereign as the
source of law, in property as the reiﬁcation of a legal order, and in
treason as the paradigmatic political evil. We ﬁnd a parallel remnant
of the New Testament idea of the Church as the body of Christ in the
idea of the popular sovereign as a transtemporal, organic whole—that
is, a uniﬁed subject composed of all citizens at all times and in all
places. Participation in the popular sovereign is simultaneously an act
of self-sacriﬁce and the realization of the ultimate truth of the self.
Citizens are exhorted to be “selﬂess”—that is, wholly public regard-
ing—in their relationship to the state. They are asked literally to make
the “ultimate sacriﬁce,” when the nation needs them.
No words thrill the modern citizen more than “We the people,”
which is always a single subject, never a mere aggregate. The European
sovereign traditionally was the mystical corpus of the state; the popu-
lar sovereign retains this mystery of a transtemporal, single, collective
subject. Evil now appears as that which would deny the reality, or
59 See P. Brown, The Body and Society 72–76 (1988); Pagels, Adam, Eve, and the
Serpent 55.

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■87
threaten the life, of this organic whole. Archetypically, evil is seen in
the regime of law that preceded the emergence of the popular sover-
eign. In postcolonial states, including the United States, the prior re-
gime was the order of law that bridged the gap between sovereign and
colony.60 In the European ancien re´gime, that same gap was present in
the relationship of sovereign to subject. In the contemporary experi-
ence of the nation-state, evil is located in the enemy who, by threaten-
ing the existence of the sovereign, calls up a demand for self-sacriﬁce
on the part of the citizen. In this imaginative construction lies the rea-
son why so much of the modern experience of the nation-state has not
been that of a peaceful, well-ordered legal regime but rather one of
self-sacriﬁce in war.
Once life and death changed places, the moral foundation of the
prohibition on murder is no longer secure. Christ may have preached
peace and a universal love, but we know the organic community as a
potentially dangerous and destructive form of belief in ultimate mean-
ings. The deepest source of that danger is its own belief in self-sacriﬁce.
Killing those outside the body politic does not appear as murder at
all, for it occurs within a context in which members show their own
willingness to die. War appears as a competition in self-sacriﬁce rather
than a murderous impulse directed at the nonbeliever. In a community
of self-sacriﬁce, death expresses the character of the sacred.
The popular sovereign has a literal claim on the body of every citi-
zen. It has the power to conscript. This is true regardless of whether
any particular state currently has a law in place granting the govern-
ment this power. Such a law could be passed. Thinking of conscription
as a legal power fails fully to capture the place of self-sacriﬁce in the
citizens conception of the ultimate character of political meaning in
the modern nation-state. Conscription is not just an allocation of legal
authority; it is the power of life and death.61 The modern nation-state
actively cultivated an ethic of self-sacriﬁce; countless citizens realized
a kind of self-transcendence on the battleﬁeld.62 Under conditions of
60 Consider how much of the American Revolution was driven by reaction to British
laws, e.g., the Townshend Acts, The Quartering Act, the Stamp Act, and the Intolerable
Acts.
61 On self-sacriﬁce and sovereignty, see Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its Place 91–92.
62 See J. Glenn Gray, The Warriors: Reﬂections on Men in Battle (1970); C. Hedges, War
Is a Force That Gives Us Meaning (2002).

88
■CHAPTER TWO
modern warfare, the battleﬁeld expanded to the entire state. Despite
the efforts of international humanitarian law, modern warfare eroded
the distinction between soldier and citizen. This was true of both the
great wars of the twentieth century but also of the wars of decoloniza-
tion and the Cold War, with its policy of Mutual Assured Destruction,
which occupied the second half of the century. All citizens in every
part of the state were at risk; all could be called upon to sacriﬁce
themselves for the state.
This changed set of ultimate beliefs represented by the appearance
of Christ is reﬂected in the new meaning drawn from the story of
Adam and Eve. In place of the Jewish readings that found in the story
the moral law for the family dedicated to procreation, early Christian
readings, beginning with Paul, tend to understand the story as an ac-
count of sin that must be overcome. They read the story from the
perspective of the Fall rather than from that of creation. Adam and
Eve can have nothing to teach us about how to live in a world in-
formed by the presence of Christ, the new Adam. In Augustine’s view,
they can have nothing to teach us for we are not even similarly situated
with respect to freedom of the will, that is, in our capacity to obey
law. Through their sin we have all been condemned, and law cannot
redeem us.63 Living as Adam and Eve did, following the law that in-
formed their actions before sin, is not a possibility for men. Moreover,
to attempt to do so would be to ignore the presence of the new Christ.
For Augustine, the authority of the Church now stands in place of the
authority of the Genesis myth as a source of law.
Rather than replicating the sin of Adam and Eve through sexual
union, Paul—following Christ himself—preaches the normative prior-
ity of celibacy.64 In place of the reproductive family, Christians speak
of marriage to the Church and of becoming one ﬂesh in the body of
Christ. The sexual family of Genesis—“man and woman become one
ﬂesh”—is to be overcome through the family of Christ. Christ is the
bridegroom and the Church his bride.65 This new family rests on a
63 Augustine, City of God 13, 3. Augustine is continuing Paul’s claim that “no human
being will be justiﬁed in his sight by works of law, since through the law comes knowledge
of sin.” Romans 3, 20.
64 First Corinthians 7.
65 See Ephesians 5, 29–32 (“We are members of his body”).

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■89
denial of the ﬂesh rather than a lawful ordering of desire: “I appeal to
you . . . to present your bodies as a living sacriﬁce, holy and acceptable
to God.”66 To follow Christ is to act in the awareness that the Kingdom
of God is at hand, which means that the body is viewed through its
negation in the act of self-sacriﬁce. The injunction to be fruitful and
multiply no longer applies in a world where the meaning of the body
is now found in its sacriﬁce.
Paul’s vision of the immediacy of the end of time does not come to
pass. The Church necessarily becomes a historical institution con-
cerned as much with maintaining its own authority as saving souls.
Not everyone can give up family for Christ—at least not for long, if
history is to continue. The austerity of Paul’s vision and the self-sacri-
ﬁce of the martyrs must be moderated by the recovery of the value of
family as the source of reproduction and maintenance of the culture—
including the culture of Christianity. The asceticism of Jerome is neces-
sarily challenged by the moderation of Jovinian.67 Nevertheless, the
understanding of the body as the medium for self-sacriﬁce and for
participation in Christ remains a powerful theme of Christian belief.
Augustine puts the corruption of the ﬂesh at the very center of his
theology, which becomes central to the doctrine of the Church, with
its continued insistence on clerical celibacy. The appropriate attitude
toward the body, which carries the taint of sin, is that of self-sacriﬁce.
The West remains deeply attracted to this idea, as well as to the idea
of the moral virtue of suffering. True life remains not of this world.
The mark of an organic understanding of the sacred, I have argued,
is the shift in the character of sacriﬁce from an object offered across
the gap to self-sacriﬁce as the displacement of the ﬁnite body by the
presence of the inﬁnite. The subject no longer makes an offering to
an angry God but becomes literally a part of the godhood. Organic
communities—including the Church—are often characterized by vio-
lence directed both within and without.68 The enemy that threatens
the life of this community will be called evil. But precisely because the
community ﬁnds itself in the act of self-sacriﬁce, there is a certain
66 Romans 12, 1.
67 See Pagels, Adam, Eve, and the Serpent 90–96.
68 See chapter 5 below.

90
■CHAPTER TWO
ambiguity in regard to an enemy that calls forth the sacred. The enemy
at war is never quite so evil as that which denies the very foundation
of the sacred character of the community. For the early Christian com-
munity, the Jewish Pharisees represented the paradigmatic evil of in-
sisting on law as the only measure of the sacred.
We cannot rank the forms of evil as if there is a better and a worse.
The critical point is that every form of belief in the sacred sees evil as
the negation of itself—as a false inﬁnite. Jewish faith will see Christian-
ity as just another, and more vicious form, of idolatry. To worship
Christ, in place of the law of Moses, is to believe in false gods or mere
idols—all the more so to the degree that Christianity includes worship
of relics and the rituals of the sacrament. Christians can return the
favor, accusing the Jews not just of a failure to recognize Christ but of
following their own sacriﬁcial rites, for example, drinking the blood
of Christian children.69 Christian accusations of Jewish idolatry are
complemented by accusations of Pharisaism. The dynamic of evil re-
mains the same: to turn away from sacred truth and put in its place a
false claim of the divine.
We cannot get beyond our own beliefs in order to identify an “objec-
tive” form of evil. For religions of law and sacriﬁce, evil is recognizing
a new source of sovereign command. For religions of sacriﬁcial partici-
pation, evil is insisting that life can have meaning outside the organic
body of the Church. Wars are fought over the power of idols or the
meaning of the Eucharist. These are not “small things,” for at stake is
the ultimate meaning of man. Evil always moves from the normative
to the ontological; it begins with a perception of violation but proceeds
to a controversy about the nature of being—of life and death—itself.
We may have lost much of our religious sensibilities, but our political
conceptions bear remnants of their genealogy. Our world remains very
much one in which we trade charges of idolatry and engage in our
own attacks upon Pharisaism.
It is no harder to believe that man is the product of a divine act of
creation than to believe that the subject is born again as a part of the
body of Christ. Elements of both sets of belief—the models of making
69 This is generally referred to as the “blood libel” myth and dates back to 1144 in En-
gland. See The Blood Libel Legend (A. Dundes, ed. 1994).

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■91
and of the organic—are present from the beginning of Judeo-Christian
thought. Each is a subtheme to the other as they trade places as the
dominant form of explanation of man’s relationship to the sacred.
Arguably, both are needed to comprehend the experience of the sa-
cred. The inﬁnite is separated from the ﬁnite self as maker is to made,
and yet it is so close that the subject appears to himself as an aspect
of the inﬁnite. Religious doctrine is an effort to give conceptual form
to the experience of the sacred as that of the “inﬁnite in the ﬁnite.” It
cannot do other than use the conceptual tools at hand. These tools
always include the models of made order and of organic order, for
these are the double meanings of labor already set forth in Genesis.
They are, of course, fundamental to all human experience.
To modern, multicultural sensibilities, we cannot be sure if the evil
is located in the other—the idolater or the Pharisee—or in the negative
reaction to the competing claim to the sacred. We cannot be sure,
because both sides of this antithesis invoke conceptions of the inﬁnite
of which we are skeptical. The miracle of divine intervention presented
in the narrative of the Jews is not the same as the presence of the Holy
Ghost, but both beliefs require a leap of faith. If God saves Isaac,
surely He will follow that act with a set of commandments—laws—
setting forth how the nation that derives from Isaac is to conduct itself.
If we can believe that God created Adam, then it is no harder to believe
that Christ is the Second Adam come to redeem man from the sin of
the ﬁrst. Both forms of belief are equally hard to maintain once the
conﬁdence in the possibility of the miraculous disappears. That disap-
pearance is the phenomenon of the Enlightenment, which is both a
product of and then an inﬂuence on the developing culture of Protes-
tantism—the third moment in the Western genealogy of the sacred.
The Enlightenment has multiple strands, but its most important
characteristic is a turn toward critical self-reﬂection.70 Man ﬁnds him-
self with certain beliefs, that is, representations of himself and of a
world outside himself. But what exactly is the relationship between
representation and represented? What is it that man can know? Are
his representations to be trusted? This is the point of origin of
70 See I. Kant, “What Is Enlightenment?” in Kant’s Political Writings (H. Reiss ed.,
H. Nisbet, trans. 1971) [1784].

92
■CHAPTER TWO
Cartesian doubt: Can we ﬁnd a ﬁrm foundation for true belief? The
Enlightenment deepens as the critical instrument of doubt is applied
ever more widely until no belief whatsoever—scientiﬁc, political,
moral, or religious—is secure from the application of the corrosive
force of doubt. One direction of doubt is empirical; the other is con-
ceptual. The former leads to an effort to return to unmediated experi-
ence, that is, to the phenomena themselves. On this view, what we can
know about the world is only secured through the immediacy of direct
experience. The latter leads to the various forms of idealism. What we
can know, on this view, is only that which we can grasp through reason
itself. Logic, not sensation, is the only secure ground of knowledge.
Thus the philosophy of the Enlightenment is characterized by an an-
tithesis between the empiricists and the idealists.71 We cannot say
whether Hume or Hegel is more representative of Enlightenment
thought. We can say, however, that both are responding to the
Cartesian challenge: What can we know beyond doubt?
Protestantism began with an effort to apply the lessons of a recov-
ered classical humanism to the content of inherited religious belief.
Later, that recovery will lead to a more general Enlightenment skepti-
cism toward unsupported claims of knowledge and authority. Before
that, however, it powered the effort of the Reformation to purge Chris-
tian faith of false representations. Symbolically, this is evident in the
attack on pictorial images of the divine, which is characteristic of Re-
formed Protestant sects. More important, we ﬁnd the fundamentalist
impulse to return directly to the biblical text itself. Religious belief is
to be grounded in that text which carries still the aura of the miracu-
lous. To add to that text—for example, with the history of Church
teachings—is to replace a direct manifestation of the divine with man’s
interpretive acts, which can always be in error. To move beyond doubt,
we have to separate the sacred text from all other claims of religious
authority. That text is the only warrant for authority; all other claims
to authority fail to survive this process of doubt and critique.
In this sense, Luther shows the way toward an empiricism of faith.
He seeks to get to the phenomenon of faith itself, stripping away the
layers of interpretation added by the Church over the centuries. Lu-
71 Of course, there are positions in-between, the most important Kant’s.

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■93
ther, who remains committed to infant baptism and to some artistic
representations, goes only so far on this path.72 Nevertheless, he sets
a direction quickly pursued by Zwingli, Calvin, and other Protestant
reformers who would strip away all beliefs that lack biblical warrant.
There is no logical explanation of why the text, but not, for example,
the sacraments, is seen as the base point of miraculous revelation. And,
of course, a majority of the Christian community remains enthralled
to the Church as the body of Christ, as well as to Church doctrine.
There is nothing about religious experience in itself that points to a
text over any other possible point of miraculous appearance, wherever
and whenever it might have occurred; that is, there is no explaining
from within the hermeneutics of faith. There are ample explanations
from within the historical sociology of the Church: for example, the
presence of political corruption and the abuse of religious authority
for the ends of personal power. Luther did not set out to found a new
faith but to reform an existing one.
The scalpel of Enlightenment self-criticism cannot, however, be con-
tained within the parameters of traditional faith. Once belief becomes
the subject of doubt, there is an unbounded character to the question,
“What can we know?” The answer that we can know only that which
God has directly revealed is necessarily an unstable answer, dependent
on a faith that remains outside the engine of Enlightenment criticism.
Hume, for example, directly applies the corrosive character of doubt
to the reports of the experience of the miraculous upon which religion
had traditionally been based.73 Both Old and New Testament faiths
were rooted in the experience of the presence of the divine: one in the
form of law, the other in the form of the mystical corpus. But Hume
shows that neither reports of the miraculous nor even the experience
itself can authoritatively support the religious claims. Were we today
to experience the miraculous, we would register it as merely the “yet
to be explained.”74 The tools of explanation we would bring to the
72 See MacCulloch, The Reformation 138–39.
73 D. Hume, An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding 175–86 (T. Beauchamp, ed.
1999).
74 See id. at 184 (imagining a uniform report of an eight-day darkening of the earth,
Hume writes that “our present philosophers . . . ought to search for the causes whence it
might be derived”); see also R. Fogelin, A Defense of Hume on Miracles 25–28 (2003).

94
■CHAPTER TWO
phenomenon would be those of modern science. That we do not un-
derstand a phenomenon is hardly proof of the existence of God but
only of an unsolved problem for further scientiﬁc inquiry. If we can
no longer read our own experiences as proof of the existence of God,
then the content of our religious belief, if it is to be secure or warranted
belief, must be generated by the deployment of reason itself. This is
not Hume’s position—he is a thorough agnostic—but it is Kant’s re-
sponse. He announces this Enlightenment ambition in the title of a
critical work, Religion within the Limits of Reason Alone.
For Kant and many others, the God of Protestant faith must be a
God of reason. The authoritative quality of the moral law comes not
from its miraculous source in the sacred word but rather from its
quality as a norm that expresses the nature of reason itself. Reason
is objective and universal. Accordingly, the moral law is the content
generated by the form of reason alone. This is summarized in the
categorical imperative: “Act only according to that maxim by which
you can at the same time will that it should become a universal
law.”75 On this formula, moral belief becomes self-warranting: reason
must believe in the truth of its own command. Man’s capacity to give
a law to himself, to determine the maxim of his own action by refer-
ence to reason, is the practical reﬂection of the divine within ﬁnite
existence. An irrational god is unimaginable at a time when the reason
of the world is being revealed by science and when reason is working
a revolution in reordering the productions of social life. If reason links
man to the divine, then it is exactly as a rational agent that man is an
image of God.
Kant argued that we can know nothing about the existence or na-
ture of God in and of itself, since we can only know that which we
experience in space and time—so far Hume was right. Nevertheless,
we put ourselves in the position of the divine legislator when we deter-
mine our intentions by reason alone. Here Hume was wrong, for he
failed to see that reason can be an active force and thus a source of
our own freedom.76 God is not distracted by interests or desires, and
75 See above at note 11.
76 The practical side of this dispute between Hume and Kant is foundational for the mod-
ern period. Hume founds the belief in negative freedom, under which the task of reason is
to strip away false idols, whether internal or external. Kant founds the belief in positive
freedom, under which the task of reason is to ground an authentic intention stripped of the
inﬂuence of heteronomous forces whether from within or without the body.

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■95
neither should we be. However, where God’s reason would order cre-
ation, our own reason can order nothing beyond our own individual
wills—not even the small world within which the self acts. The hope
that a well-ordered will can be successful in action remains a matter
of religious faith—a necessary faith for man.
Thus the larger Enlightenment project for religion must be to locate
the grounds of faith in the conditions of true belief. In this domain,
the goal of Cartesian doubt is the reconstruction of a sure faith. Chris-
tian belief is to reemerge from a rigorous examination of man’s own
capacity for reason and representation. Religion will no longer be
based on faith in authority but on propositions whose truth cannot be
denied. Such was the hope of the Enlightenment faithful. After all, if
God made man in his image, critical self-reﬂection should lead man
back to God even more surely than relying on the inherited traditions
of the community. An enlightened, mature man must have an enlight-
ened faith.
Enlightenment man is thus an inquirer into the nature and scope of
justiﬁed religious belief. Religion must be put on the same foundation
as other beliefs, which means that religion and science must have a
common root in man’s reasoning and representational capacities.
Thus the founders of modern science—for example, Descartes, New-
ton, and Leibniz—do not see any break between their scientiﬁc and
their religious inquiries.77 There is just one world, which they are ex-
ploring by examining the truth conditions of man’s representations of
that world. They had every reason to believe that the end of that in-
quiry would reveal the divine truth. As long as they believed in cre-
ation, they could not imagine any other result.
Through the early nineteenth century this project was more or less
successful. Philosophy had not separated from theology, on the one
hand, or from natural science, on the other. Metaphysics remained
the “queen of the sciences.”78 What we call science was pursued as
“natural philosophy.” To understand the world was to understand
God’s creation. Institutionally we see that many of the great modern
universities have their origins as religious seminaries. Sociologically
we see not just the unity of philosophy, theology, and science but,
77 See Webster, From Paracelsus to Newton.
78 The expression is taken from the opening page of Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason.

96
■CHAPTER TWO
more generally, that the most learned man in a community was
usually the minister whose education likely spanned the entire reach
of philosophy.79
Protestant thought is caught between reason and experience. On
the one hand, there is the desire to put religion on the same ground of
rationality as all other justiﬁed belief. One form of this quest is Kant’s
moral law; another is Newton’s effort to understand the miraculous
through scientiﬁc inquiry. Contemporary versions of the latter range
from creationism to the archaeological search for Noah’s ark. On the
other hand, there is the effort to return to the biblical text itself, which
is to be approached without interpretation, that is, without the inter-
vention of the doubtful capacities of human explanation. Fundamen-
talism is never far from scientism in Protestantism. This is nothing
more than the theological version of the tension in modern thought
between the impulse to seek a foundation for belief in the immediacy
of experience and the contrary impulse to seek it in the systematic
quality of reason. When we turn to experience, we ﬁnd religion as
easily as we ﬁnd desire; the “oceanic feeling”—a sense of transcendent
unity—is as elementary as pleasure and pain.80 When we turn to rea-
son, we might ﬁnd systematic theology or critical social theory. The
forms of inquiry do not themselves account for the content of the
phenomena to be explained.
The fundamentalist strain of Protestant thought reads the myth of
Adam and Eve not as a source for law nor as a kind of negative counter
to the institutional community that is Christ’s body but as a literal
account of our current situation. The text is not only fundamental to
an understanding of our condition, it is the only source of understand-
ing: “The Fall took place at the beginning of human history, and all
79 The convergence of learning, faith, and public service is seen, for example, in that
provision of the 1780 Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts regarding Har-
vard College, referring to graduates who were “initiated into those arts and sciences which
qualiﬁed them for public employments, both in church and state; and whereas the encour-
agement of arts and sciences, and all good literature, tends to the honor of God, the advan-
tage of the Christian religion, and the great beneﬁt of this, and the other United States of
America.” Part II, Chap. V, sec. I.
80 See, e.g., R. Otto, The Idea of the Holy: An Inquiry into the Non-rational Factor in
the Idea of the Divine and Its Relation to the Rational (J. Harvey, trans. 1925); C. Taylor,
Varieties of Religion Today: William James Revisited (2002).

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■97
individuals born since then suffer these same consequences, are fallen,
sinful and lost and are in need of the saving grace of God.”81 There is
a recognition of the religious idea of the gap between the ﬁnite and
the inﬁnite but a rejection of the institutional forms—law and the
Church—of overcoming the gap. Instead, what is required is a per-
sonal avowal of faith in Jesus and, correspondingly, a direct response
from Christ: “There is no salvation apart from personal faith in
Jesus Christ as Lord.”82 In place of institutions, we have a religion of
immediacy: Christ either appears to the believer or he does not. The
relationship to Christ is personal and self-validating. Christ is the be-
liever’s “personal savior.” This is Protestantism as a phenomenology
of religious experience. The fundamentalism of the text is paralleled
by a fundamentalism of experience: both exist only as unmediated,
miraculous appearances of the divine.83 Belief is not mediated through
the report of old miracles or through the authoritative traditions of
the Church. Rather, the miraculous is located within the individual
believer. Each person must be seized by the Holy Spirit; each must
be personally born again. Thus a religion that takes a text as funda-
mental can curiously appear to be without language—the personal
experience of being saved can take the form of “speaking in tongues.”
Every deiﬁcation of a text—every fundamentalism—puts at risk lan-
guage as an expression of dialogic form and intersubjective engage-
ment. It must do so precisely because of the skepticism it directs to-
ward interpretation.
The rationalist strain of Protestant faith, on the other hand, reads
Adam and Eve as a myth urging self-reliance and the deployment of
reason. Adam and Eve may be on their own, but they are in possession
of knowledge of good and evil. The task of man is to apply reason
within the domain of his own experience. For Kant, that domain be-
gins with the lawful ordering of the individual will. For his followers
81 Grace Evangelical School of Theology: Detailed Statement of Belief; see also Southern
Baptists Convention, 2000 Baptist Faith and Message (Adam “fell from his original inno-
cence whereby his posterity inherits a nature and an environment inclined toward sin. There-
fore, as soon as they are capable of moral action, they become transgressors”). These themes
are already present in Augustine, but he remains committed to the authority of the Church
as a response to the Fall.
82 Grace Evangelical School of Theology: Detailed Statement of Belief.
83 On the fundamentalism of the text, see “The Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy.”

98
■CHAPTER TWO
along the path of positive freedom, that domain expands to include
the entire sociopolitical order. Recovery is no longer waiting on divine
intervention. The post-lapsarian utopia will be the kingdom of reason,
which will arrive as soon as man puts it into place.84 A God that de-
mands that we act under the guidance of reason is asking no more
than that we subject our practical selves to the same critique of reason
that we apply to every other form of belief. The fundamental meaning
of the myth now shifts to a message of equality: each person is equally
an image of God, because every individual possesses reason. The new
Protestant rationalist is paradigmatically Jefferson, whose most fa-
mous statement is that “all men are created equal.” Jefferson is fol-
lowed by all those who claim a Christian foundation for the modern
idea of individual dignity. This is the sense in which modernity itself
is a deeply Protestant project. This is true not just of modern forms
of economic organization but also of the commitment to democratic
government under the rule of law.85 The autonomous, rational agent
is the ideal upon which this conception of the citizen depends.
The end of this line of development is the morality of liberalism, for
liberalism is the commitment to ordering practical affairs through the
direction of reason. Only when we understand the religious genealogy
of the reason-governed will can we make sense of “liberal passion,”
that is, the fervor with which these beliefs are held and the proselytiz-
ing character of their adherents. Liberalism, like every other version
of Judeo-Christian belief, is a ﬁghting faith. At stake is not merely a
prudential reasonableness, but the realization of that unity of the ﬁnite
and the inﬁnite for which fallen men strive. No doubt part of the intu-
itive attraction of Rawls’s idea of reaching a knowledge of justice be-
hind the veil of ignorance is the symbolism of leaving this fallen world
of particular concerns and returning to a purer space of undifferenti-
ated, equal individuals. Rawls’s argument is a modern myth of over-
coming the Fall by returning to that moment just prior to expulsion
in order to determine the conditions that should govern the labor upon
84 Modern social contract theory is just the latest version of this appeal to reason. See
Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its Place.
85 See M. Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (T. Parsons, trans.
1958).

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■99
which man is about to engage.86 In the end, Rawls appears as a New
England Congregationalist replicating the covenantal communities of
his Puritan forbearers.
What do these new forms of religious experience suggest about evil?
For each, evil arises out of the failure to apply the Enlightenment de-
mand for doubt to the content of religious belief. Again, at stake is a
false faith—a mistaking of nothing at all for the inﬁnite. Of course,
each ﬁnds its self-evident foundation—its point beyond doubt—in op-
posite ways. Thus the Protestant rationalist sees evil in the failure of
the fundamentalist to entertain any doubt of his or her claim of
Christ’s presence in text and experience. The fundamentalist, on the
other hand, sees evil in the failure of the Protestant rationalist to doubt
the capacity of reason itself.
Evil is refracted through these two conceptions of Enlightenment
faith: experience and reason. Each now takes the other as the primary
object of fear and the threat of evil. For the fundamentalist, contempo-
rary evil is likely to take the form of “secular humanism.” This is
understood as the claim that reason can inform a moral practice quite
independently of religious belief. The fundamentalist understands this
claim as the modern form of Adam’s effort to be the source of his own
ultimate meaning. Luther already identiﬁed the source of sin in man’s
desire to be wise: “That is what the devil wants to bring about in all
his temptations, that the farther man draws away from the Word, the
more learned and the wiser he appears to himself.”87 Faith in reason
stands in contrast to faith in the Word. Secular humanism appears as
the end point of this development.
Religious belief for the secular humanist is reduced to private faith,
and private faith is seen as essentially irrational, a matter of taste. The
secular humanist does not need to deny the phenomenon of religious
experience but only to declare it irrelevant to the projects of creating
a public order or of articulating norms of justice, equality, and liberty.
This denial of a public space to religious faith is intolerable to the
86 Rawls does his best to disavow such a “metaphysical” reading of his work. See
J. Rawls, “Justice as Fairness: Political Not Metaphysical,” 14 Phil. & Pub. Aff. 223 (1985).
My point, however, is not about Rawls’s own views but about why those views seem so
compatible with the fundamental beliefs of many.
87 Luther, Lectures on Genesis 271.

100
■CHAPTER TWO
fundamentalist who ﬁnds Christ’s presence to be not a matter of per-
sonal feelings but a new foundation of the world. The fundamentalist
sees the same threat to the transformative character of faith from
the privatization of religion in liberal democracies as from the suppres-
sion of religion in the old communist states. The contemporary
Eastern European experience suggests that faith can thrive in adver-
sity, yet wither with tolerance. Contemporary fundamentalists do not
want to be “tolerated”; they want to construct a public order infused
with the sacred.
Accordingly, the fundamentalist ﬁnds himself locked in a battle with
those who would construct a public order based on the same kind of
critical thought that characterizes science. In contemporary America,
the secular humanist is identiﬁed with a broadly liberal political and
social culture. But that is not the source of the fundamentalist’s com-
plaint. He would have the same complaint against other secular, politi-
cal ideologies, whether socialism or libertarianism. The arguments be-
tween them are family disputes over the shape of a politics founded
on reason. None is open to the fundamentalist’s claim for the primacy
of the experience of the Word.
Conversely, the Protestant rationalist sees the source of evil in the
claim to a personal experience of God’s grace, that is, the claim that
some individuals are saved and others lost. A personal savior is an
affront to the universalism of reason, which ﬁnds its contemporary
moral and political expression in liberalism. Claims of religious privi-
lege always appear as a ground of distinction for favoring some over
others. This distinction between the saved and everyone else becomes
a ground for injury, abuse, and hatred. Because this religious claim is
inaccessible to reason, it appears as an irrational prejudice incompati-
ble with the public norm of justice. Accordingly, the particularism of
religious faith must be expelled from our public life. Moreover, the
state must be ready to intervene even in private life where fundamen-
talist faith violates norms of autonomy and equality.
Both sides in this conﬂict have much history to draw upon. They
are continuing the old battle of Genesis one and two. The fundamen-
talist seeks that unity of being and the good that had been Adam’s;
the Protestant rationalist takes up the task of ordering the world

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■101
through labor.88 Nor does recent history allow us easily to choose be-
tween them. We know that efforts to remake society on the basis of
science have produced some of the worst evils of the last century.
Liberalism is not the only science of the political that has character-
ized modernity. Its competitors included those varieties of totalitarian-
ism that produced the paradigmatic instances of modern political
evil. Claims for reason may have their origin in the faith of the Enlight-
enment that man can be released from the irrational bonds of tradition
and the customary practices of power. But, for most people, the result
has hardly been a new age of personal freedom. We also know,
however, that those who hold themselves to be privileged in their rela-
tionship to God are capable of terrible acts against those with whom
they disagree.
CONCLUSION
Religious faith is always one thing and not another. Too often we think
of faith as primarily a matter of tradition, as if there is a single narra-
tive of a community of faith that anchors it to the past. But, like any
other conceptual formation, the structure of a group’s faith emerges
in response to the circumstances of belief within which it ﬁnds itself.
Religious forms, no less than political formations, have a history of
belief, crisis, and recovery. I have argued in this chapter that Western
belief moves from a conceptual model of making to a model of the
organic to one of self-reﬂection. This dialectical shape characterizes
the search for order across many ﬁelds of experience. We start by
thinking that the order we ﬁnd is the product of an intentional act of
making. We move beyond that when we realize that we are not just
observers of the whole that we seek to explain but rather are a part of
it; we stand within, not outside, the whole. The principle of intelligibil-
ity does not come from without but sustains the whole from within.
Finally, we turn our capacity for critique upon the structure of our
88 Of course, neither side to this dispute will leave uncontested the alternative reading of
Genesis. Above I argued that the rationalist side of Protestantism claims the “image of God”
for its vision of rational equality; surely the fundamentalists want to take up the burden of
labor in order to refound the world.

102
■CHAPTER TWO
thought itself. We create some distance between faith and reﬂection,
and take responsibility for our commitments.
No religious conception ever gives way entirely to its successor. Ear-
lier forms of belief continue right alongside those forms that develop
in reaction and opposition. Jews do not disappear with the appearance
of a new form of religious belief in and through Christ; Protestants do
not defeat their predecessors in New Testament faith. Rarely, however,
do these diverse forms of belief view each other from the perspectives
of benign indifference, of multicultural celebration, or even of modus
vivendi accommodation. They see in each other threats to the founda-
tion of their own beliefs; they see each other as evil. Because each
stands as a challenge to the other’s beliefs about the meaning of life
itself, each grounds a distinctive conception of evil. In each instance
we see that evil is not the failure to meet the internal norms of a system
of belief. Rather, it is the external assault on the claim to have located
the point of the sacred in a fallen world.
These three moments in the history of Western monotheism, accord-
ingly, provide the groundwork for our understanding of evil. Experi-
ence of the sacred can take the form of following the law, participation
in the mystical corpus of Christ, personal salvation, or the pursuit of
what used to be called “natural philosophy.” Each form generates a
double perception of evil—synchronic and diachronic. The synchronic
supports what Freud called the “narcissism of minor differences.”89
Those with whom we share a worldview can become our deepest ene-
mies and the incarnation of evil. This is the history of civil wars and
religious factionalism but also the personal history of intra-familial
dispute. These disagreements offer familiar patterns of the perception
of good and evil, but not every difference is minor. Entire worldviews
shift. The diachronic clash of worldviews, of entire patterns of under-
standing the ultimate meaning of experience, can be the locus of good
and evil. The alien other can be no less evil than my alienated brother.
We can name the synchronous model of evil after its ﬁrst appear-
ance: the charge of idolatry in a polytheistic world. Idolatry is that
form of evil that appears within a single conceptual model or category
89 S. Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents 61 (J. Strachey, trans. 1961); see also
M. Ignatieff, The Warrior’s Honor: Ethnic War and the Modern Conscience 34–71 (1997).

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■103
of belief. As interpretive communities splinter, they inevitably charge
each other with false belief, with substituting a false god for the truth,
an empty idol for the sacred presence. Analogously, we can label the
diachronic form of evil after its ﬁrst appearance: the Christian attack
on Pharisaism, that is, the condemnation of the Jewish failure to recog-
nize the new Adam in place of law and ritual. It is that form of evil
that appears across forms of belief. So used, idolatry and Pharisaism
are categories, not particular practices. Thus the charge of Pharisaism
can take the form of antipapism for Reformation Protestants, and
charges of idolatry can occur across the schism between the Catholic
Church and the Eastern Orthodox.
Used most expansively, these terms can describe the deepest conﬂict
of the contemporary period. Idolatry expands to include the very core
of the religious experience: faith in the manifestation of the sacred.
Once every claim to the sacred is rejected, an appearance of the divine
has no more power than a golden calf. The history of religious experi-
ence is described as a history of “illusion.” Not the wrong god, but
all gods lead to behavior that disrespects and ultimately destroys the
only true source of value there is. That value is the application of
reason to the well-being of the subject—every subject. The history of
evil, on this view, is not just parallel to the history of religion; they are
one and the same. Evil threatens to reappear whenever and wherever
people give up the practice of a secular reason aimed directly at well-
being and, instead, place a religious-like faith in a leader, a group, or
an institution.
Just as charges of idolatry expand to cover every manifestation of
the divine, charges of Pharisaism expand to cover all who would rely
on law in place of an organic, participatory faith. The characteristic
of the Jew that anchored Pharisaism was his insistence that man was
separated from God by a gap that could only be partially bridged by
law. This meant that history could never be more than labor. Laboring
man still has to wait for the appearance of a savior. If history is only
the domain of labor, then we remain doomed to death. The Jew, then,
is easily assimilated to all who reject the claim that man has been
offered the opportunity to be reborn free of the ﬁnite conditions that
characterize the Fall. The Jew becomes the symbol of the pathologies
of modernity—whether economic, epistemic, political, or cultural.

104
■CHAPTER TWO
This is, for example, already the role of the Jew in the Merchant of
Venice. The deepest dispute of the contemporary period remains that
between the biopolitics of reason and the biopolitics that is the body
of Christ. What else should we expect for Western man who must
struggle to locate a transcendent meaning within a ﬁnite body.
What unites all these forms of evil is their proximity to a set of
ultimate beliefs. “Ultimate” refers to matters of life and death—
Adam’s sin brought death to the world—as well as to matters of inﬁ-
nite value. Every idea of evil in the religious tradition arises at the
point of intersection of these two senses of the ultimate: Is there a
meaning that can save us from a life of labor leading only to death?
Evil is not measured by disregard for the life or the well-being of oth-
ers. Such disregard may be criminal; it is certainly immoral. We enter
the domain of evil when such disregard is the product of a contest
between beliefs about ultimate values. These are the beliefs by which
we respond to the awareness of our own ﬁnitude by asserting a faith
in the sacred. If we are without any faith at all, we will not see evil
but only criminality and pathology. We will be where this chapter
began: with liberalism’s incapacity to understand evil.
Evil arises at the intersection of death and faith. So, of course, does
love. The myth of Adam and Eve locates all four—death and faith,
love and evil—at the point where man realizes he is condemned to
ﬁnitude. We are an inﬁnite consciousness caught in a ﬁnite body.
Today many would contest the idea that the forms of evil can be
read directly out of religious belief. That belief has become both too
various and, after Darwin, too tenuous. Darwin teaches the nineteenth
century that order can emerge from disorder without the intervention
of Providence. Accordingly, we do not need ﬁnal causes to explain
our own origins. Chance operating within a world of ﬁnite resources
is a more powerful source of explanation than any appeal to divine
plans. If we no longer need God to explain our origins, perhaps we
do not need God to explain our fate. It may very well be that we have
no fate at all. We may be alone in a universe driven by chance. There
may be nothing at all on the other side of the gap. Religion is to be
explained now not by God’s revelation across the gap but by man’s
very human activity of projecting an image of God across the gap.

EVIL AND THE IMAGE OF THE SACRED
■105
The end of this line of thought is found in Nietzsche and Freud—a
disenchanted world.
Yet the religious genealogy of evil offers fundamental insights that
remain relevant in our more secular age, for this genealogy points to
two fundamental ideas: ﬁrst, evil arises in the ﬂight from a meaningless
death; it is ﬁnitude we cannot bear. Second, we ﬁnd evil in close prox-
imity to love. These are the claims I pursue in the following chapters,
which trace the continuing presence of evil in our secular world.
To understand contemporary evil we must understand the contem-
porary forms of our own beliefs about ultimate meanings. If we would
use the language of Enlightenment to say that man’s maturity is
marked by his capacity to accept his own death, we can say that the
source of evil is the continuing presence of man’s immaturity. This
immaturity, however, like original sin, may be a condition beyond our
capacity to outgrow.

C H A P T E R
T H R E E
■
■
■
■
LOVE AND EVIL
The second Adam and Eve myth of Genesis (“Genesis two”) is usually
read as a story of disobedience and punishment. The magnitude of the
disobedience is heightened by the authority of the source of the rule.
We can also read the myth, however, as a story of love. Read as a tale
of punishment, it offers a one-dimensional account of man: he is to be
measured only in his relationship to God’s command. As a tale of love,
however, the myth broadens, rather than narrows, our understanding
of ourselves, for it asks us to reﬂect on the tension between authority
and love, or justice and meaning.
THE TWO-BECOME-ONE OF LOVE
In the ﬁrst Genesis myth (“Genesis one”), woman is created simultane-
ously with man. Both are created as images of God. Their joint cre-
ation is a necessary condition of God’s procreative ambition: “be fruit-
ful and multiply.” Genesis two approaches Eve from a completely
different perspective. The story of Eve’s creation now begins with
God’s observation that “It is not good that the man should be alone;
I will make him a helper ﬁt for him.” What is the deﬁciency for which
the man needs a helper? It is not the need to labor; labor is not yet a
burden.1 Nor is it the task of naming; naming does not require dia-
logue. It is not even the necessities of procreation. The injunction to
procreate ﬁgures in the ﬁrst Genesis story of man’s creation, not in the
second. A procreative god does not overlook the female of the species.
The source of need in the second story is not procreation but loneli-
ness: man “leaves his father and his mother and cleaves to his wife,
1 Of labor in the Garden, Luther remarks that God gave man this task “that he might
not be idle.” M. Luther, “The Freedom of a Christian,” in Selections from His Writings 9
(J. Dillenberger, ed. 1962).

LOVE AND EVIL
■107
and they become one ﬂesh.” Eve’s creation is a story of separation of
a part of the self—the metaphorical rib—and recovery—becoming one
ﬂesh. This is much the same story as the myth of the circle-men told
by Aristophanes in Plato’s Symposium. Aristophanes explains that
once we were whole, but we have been split apart. As we are meta-
physically constituted, we are lonely. It is as if we have lost a part of
ourselves. Happiness depends upon recovery of our other half. When
we ﬁnd that other half, we will cleave to it and become “one ﬂesh.”
Thus our loneliness arises from the limits of the body itself. We experi-
ence the body as a source of isolation, of separation from the world.
In Aristophanes’ myth, man experiences the body as literally a wound.
We can only overcome the injury of loneliness through love, which is
the recovery of our other half.
The account offered in a myth must resonate at two levels. First, it
has to have its roots in the range of ordinary experience. These are
stories of passion, anger, conﬂict, and revenge. Aristophanes’ myth,
for example, is so attractive because we know exactly what he means
in referring to the circle-man’s search for his other half; the same is
true of the Genesis idea of becoming “one ﬂesh.” Second, the object
of the myth is to provide a narrative—an account of reciprocal de-
mands and actions—to explain the subject’s experience of the self in
the world. The story tells us “how” we got to where we are. The
explanation of our current sense of ourselves as guilty, for example,
must be found in an earlier violation. Similarly, if we are looking for
love, we must have lost an earlier love. Thus man ﬁnds himself always
already to have eaten of the tree—he knows good and evil—and al-
ready longing for his other half—he needs the completeness of love.
He ﬁnds himself always and already at the end of the mythical narra-
tion. The point of the myth is not simply to offer an explanation of
our condition but to dispose the listener to take up a certain attitude
toward his or her present situation. The account is not neutral. It of-
fers meanings, not facts.
In both the biblical and the Platonic stories, the completeness of
love is experienced as both promise and threat. Both myths suggest
that love is not just the goal we seek but also the origin or foundation
of our present world. Man longs for that completion through union,
which he feels as the recovery of the truth of the self. Nevertheless, to

108
■CHAPTER THREE
believe in the achievement of that union is dangerously hubristic. For
Aristophanes, the prelapsarian love of the other leads to a direct chal-
lenge to the gods; in Genesis, it leads to disobedience to God’s com-
mand. The point is the same: a fully accomplished love is complete in
itself; it has no need of the gods. In both myths, a divine sanction
follows. The wholeness is lost; individuals are separated, doomed to
an endless longing for their lost, other half. We can never fully recap-
ture that complete love. Put more directly, love is never complete; there
is always some remainder of the self beyond or outside love.
The image of becoming “one ﬂesh” symbolizes a life in which need
no longer ﬁgures. Not because we are sated but because we are com-
plete. Thus Aristophanes appeals to the image of a circle, complete in
itself. Lovers know exactly who they are. They do not wonder if there
is more to life or if they are being true to themselves. For them, love
is experienced as the point at which being and meaning are one and
the same. What I am is exactly what I ought to be, for it is as that
subject that I both love and am loved. Such a convergence of the “is”
and the “ought” ordinarily appears as an attribute of the sacred; about
love there is always something sacred.
Both myths suggest that love provides the plot for the narrative of
our lives. Since we cannot search for what we do not know—or at
least know of—love has somehow preceded us. If sin is original, then
so, too, is love. We are thrown into our world as a consequence of
love. For Western man, love, like sin, is a necessary condition of the
life within which we ﬁnd ourselves.2 Without speaking of love, we
cannot explain who we are; neither can we explain our relationship to
each other or to the world. We cannot speak of love, however, without
speaking of guilt, sin, and fall. Love appears as the truth of the self,
but it is a truth we never quite realize. We cannot fully shake the sense
of guilt; we cleave to the other, but we cannot quite become “one
ﬂesh.” Love is the aspiration to overcome the loneliness of the ﬁnite
self. Through the beloved, love remakes our relationship to the world.
Yet somehow we are not quite adequate to love.
2 In the Kantian sense, love is a “transcendental condition” of our experience of
ourselves.

LOVE AND EVIL
■109
Man has need of a “helper.” Without that, even in the presence of
God, man is lonely. This creates one of the great paradoxes of the
Judeo-Christian tradition. God creates a being that alone is not perfect
and that cannot ﬁnd its perfection in the single relationship to God.
Perfection of man requires the creation of the beloved. But with love,
man no longer needs God.3 Hegel’s myth of the master who has con-
trol of the slave but can never obtain from such a subordinated crea-
ture the recognition he wants has its archaic origins in the biblical
creation myth. God faces the same choice as the master: He can have
a less than perfect man who worships only Him or He can have a
perfect man who no longer needs Him. In much of the Judeo-Christian
tradition, God is to be the object of man’s love. Jews speak of the
relationship of the nation of Israel to God as one of marriage; Chris-
tians speak of Christ as the bridegroom to the Church. But this is just
the state of prelapsarian man: the state in which God saw that man
needed a helper. Love is so powerful that once it appears we can read
man as hubristic—he no longer needs God—or we can read God as
jealous—He would take up the position of the beloved. This is a para-
dox not just for God but for man as well. How can man have the
completeness of love without offending the authority of God?
The lovers lack of need for divine assistance is symbolized by their
transgression: they would be like God in eating of the tree of knowl-
edge. The serpent promises Eve that “when you eat of it your eyes will
be opened, and you will be like God, knowing good and evil.” They
do indeed learn good and evil, but they do not become like God. After
the Fall, lovers no longer fully realize that escape from loneliness,
which Adam found in Eve. Their world is now one of labor, not in
place of, but despite, their love. Knowing good and evil—possessing
moral knowledge—is a problem for love.
Aristophanes claimed that love has a daimonic power to make us
whole. In Genesis, the ambition for wholeness remains love’s aspira-
3 This paradox generates two thousand years of theological dispute over the place of
celibacy in the relationship of man to God. Is not the celibate—whether monk, saint, or
priest—at best in the same relationship to God as was Adam? Did Adam not need a helper?
The three stages of Western monotheism resolve this puzzle in different but always unstable
ways. See G. Anderson, The Genesis of Perfection 43–62 (2001).

110
■CHAPTER THREE
tion, but now our loneliness is beyond love’s capacity to repair. For
love itself is implicated in the sin. Loving Eve, Adam cannot abandon
her once she has eaten of the apple.4 Adam knew a life without Eve:
it was one of irredeemable loneliness. No relationship to an asymmet-
rical authority, even that between God and man, can be complete.
Completion requires the two-in-one of love. Thus, for the sake of love,
man will do anything; he will even disobey God.5 For this they are
expelled from the Garden. Piercing the narrative form of the myth, we
can say that through love we learn of good and evil; we learn that our
actions have not met the standard of justice.
This conﬂict between love and authority—even divine authority—
is deep and true.6 It appears even when we believe that the demands
of authority are entirely just. For the sake of love, we place ourselves
against the demands of justice. We privilege our own children over the
just demands of equally deserving children; we protect our own fami-
lies at a cost to others, even when there is no just reason to make
others bear that cost. For love of nation, we protect our own commu-
nity while we ignore the equally just demands—indeed, even more just
demands—of outsiders. We will, if necessary, injure innocent others
for the sake of protecting those we love. Every loving relationship
privileges the beloved in a way that is incompatible with the obliga-
tions of justice.7 Morality always makes a claim to speak in the univer-
sal language of reason, but love is never reasonable.8 Sometimes we
speak of a love of all mankind. That can mean putting justice ahead
of love of anyone in particular; it can also mean acting toward a partic-
ular individual for no reason other than his or her humanity. A selﬂess
love might be universal, but it would not speak to the longing for
4 To put love at the center of Adam’s choice is to follow Augustine’s reading: “the man
could not bear to be severed from his only companion, even though this involved a partner-
ship in sin.” City of God 14.11 (M. Dods, trans. 1950). This reading was, in turn, at the
heart of Milton’s Paradise Lost, 9:955–59. See generally Anderson, The Genesis of Perfec-
tion 105–11.
5 The theme of betrayal of a sovereign authority for the sake of love is a constant of
Western literature. But the moral quality of the act is open. It can be represented as an
afﬁrmation of love or as treason against the state. See Anthony and Cleopatra.
6 See P. Kahn, Law and Love: The Trials of King Lear (2000).
7 See id. 169–70.
8 On the tradition of associating justice with Satan and mercy (love) with God, see Ander-
son, The Genesis of Perfection 167–68.

LOVE AND EVIL
■111
completeness experienced by the subject acutely aware of his or her
own limits. Such a love might be Christlike, but it is beyond us. As
long as there is a particular content to oneself, love must be bound to
particular others.
We do not ask of love that it meet a measure of justice either inter-
nally or externally. Rather, love operates under the standard of care.9
Internally, the demands lovers make upon each other are not just; the
demand for care is never a just burden. It is not just that my parents,
my spouse, or my children have extraordinary needs. It is not just that
some lovers are happy and others are in pain. We do not demand
compensation for the burdens of love—although, when love ends, we
look to justice for a standard for the distribution of assets. Externally,
too, the reciprocal care that lovers bestow upon each other looks like
an unjust allocation of resources. No doubt more good could be done
by a more equitable distribution. Nevertheless, every utopian scheme
that has tried to substitute justice for love—from Plato to Mao—has
failed. This is true not only of familial love. Rational schemes for a
just world government have never made much progress against the
love of nation. Justice alone cannot win the battle with love. One form
of love can only be challenged by another; for example, familial love
can be challenged by love of another individual or by love of the com-
munity—and, vice versa, when the familial challenges the political.10
Yet justice leaves its mark such that we feel the taint of injustice in love.
Experiencing love, we do indeed “know” good and evil: we know it
as a demand for justice that we fail to meet. Like Adam, we will take
the apple from the beloved even when we know it is unjust.
Love reminds us of our prelapsarian state of completeness, but love
in this world is never free of moral knowledge. For us, the physical
act of sexual union bears much of the weight of this ambiguity: simul-
taneously a symbol of love and of moral failing. It is both the point of
union in which two become one—“they become one ﬂesh”—and the
point at which we discover irremediable moral failure. It is the symbol
of completeness and of endless desire, of becoming one with another
9 See H. Frankfurt, The Reasons of Love 41–42 (2004).
10 See, e.g., recent accounts of parents’ opposition to military recruitment of their chil-
dren. D. Cave & L. Cummins, “Growing Problem for Military Recruiters: Parents,” N.Y.
Times, June 3, 2005, at A1.

112
■CHAPTER THREE
and of using the other, or transcending the ﬂesh and of being sunk in
the ﬂesh. When love expresses itself through sex, it simultaneously
recoils from the limits of the body. This is why Aristophanes describes
the body as suffering a wound. This is why the original sin of Genesis
has been linked to the experience of sex, not merely as procreation
but as the symbol of love between Adam and Eve. Thus Augustine
locates the transmission of original sin in the sexual act, regardless of
how loving the couple.
This incommensurability between the sexual act and the meaning it
must bear appears as comic in Aristophanes’ account of the sexual
union of the circle-people. That sex can bear the weight of love is
comic; that it cannot is tragic.11 The aspiration for dissolution of the
self symbolized in sexual union always verges on the comic, just as
that aspiration always moves toward tragedy as it elides into a symbol
of the disappearance of the self in death. In the presence of sex, we are
never far from death.12 Thrown upon the body, the subject inevitably
discovers his or her own limits—the fact of his or her own mortality.
This is precisely the point of the Genesis story, which links sex, labor,
and death as the consequences of the sin brought on by love. Unlike
Aristophanes’ lovers, the lovers of Genesis know too much. What they
know is that the completeness of love is never fully what it seems, that
in this world two cannot quite become one ﬂesh. There is always a
remainder of the self apart from love. That remainder is the subject
who knows good and evil, and knows it as an aspect of his or her own
mortality. Turning to love and only love, the lovers ﬁnd themselves
thrown into a world of labor, justice, and death.13
LOVE’S INCOMPLETENESS: SHAME
Two-become-one is a metaphor for the selﬂessness of love. In a pre-
lapsarian world there is nothing sinful in sexual union: “and the man
and his wife were both naked, and were not ashamed.” There is noth-
11 For an example of the comic, consider Midsummer Night’s Dream; for the tragic, con-
sider Othello.
12 The French expression for orgasm is “petit mort” or “the little death.”
13 I mean to invoke Heidegger’s concept of “thrownness” here. For Heidegger, man is
thrown into “projects,” just as fallen man “labors.” See M. Heidegger, Being and Time
219–24 (J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson, trans. 1962).

LOVE AND EVIL
■113
ing shameful in being naked, as long as one is not observed. Observa-
tion requires a separation between subject and object, between the
viewer and the viewed. Observation, in this sense, is the condition of
all knowledge, including self-knowledge. To be without shame is to
be without the separation that is the condition of knowledge; it is
to be in love without that excluded remainder. Accordingly, to have
knowledge, to have eaten of the tree of knowledge of good and evil,
is to experience this separation. We cannot know the world without
knowing ourselves as yet another object in the world. Naked, we are
just such an object. Knowing the self, we experience shame.14
Shame is the emotive state that accompanies self-knowledge. We
can understand that shame in two ways, and both ﬁgure in the story
of the Fall. First, ﬁnding oneself limited to a particular body and con-
demned to death is shameful for a subject who knows him- or herself
as an image of God. Before the Fall there is love without shame, be-
cause there is not yet knowledge of death. Second, we know the good
as a demand beyond our limited capacities. We know it as a demand
that we have already failed to meet once we have taken up the burden
of labor. I do not appear to myself as just one subject among others.
Rather, I appear to myself with a certain urgency: What should I do?
Asking that question, I know that I have not done all that I should,
nor will I in the future. For that reason, too, we experience shame.
In the Garden there is no shame between man and wife, because
there is only the experience of the two-in-one, which is the common
world of lovers. We cannot characterize this as self-knowledge but
rather as the contentment with being that precedes knowledge—the
unity of being and meaning. Their naked union is no more shameful
than nakedness between mother and infant. In each case, it is a love
beyond—or before—language. If the other does not appear as an ob-
ject, neither does the self appear as a subject. This love is a forgetting
of the self in that union of two. There is shame after the Fall, because
now we labor under the conditions of self-knowledge. Lovers may
aspire to a forgetting of the self in and through the other, but they ﬁnd
that they cannot achieve that complete love without a remainder. That
remainder beyond love is the subject as the object of self-knowledge.
14 See chapter 1 above.

114
■CHAPTER THREE
The aspiration for the completeness of love remains, but complete-
ness itself is beyond our grasp because we cannot forget that we will
die. Our fate is to be one body alone. The lover is reminded of that
not just when he engages in self-regard but equally when he thinks of
the death of the beloved. That death, too, leaves him or her alone
with the self. Just as the infant grows into self-knowledge, lovers fall
apart—not necessarily wholly and completely, but love can never com-
pletely overcome loneliness for a self-conscious subject. A subject who
can take the self as an object of thought has an unlimited capacity for
loneliness that love cannot fully heal.
Shame, then, marks the incompleteness of the union of love. When
Adam and Eve feel shame before God, they also feel shame before
each other. Covering themselves before God, they cover themselves
from each other. Covered they are two, not one. Their separation is
characterized simultaneously by moral knowledge and by death. God
told Adam that “of the tree of knowledge of good and evil you shall
not eat, for in that day that you eat of it you shall die.” For a self-
conscious being, death is not the singular event marking the end of
life. Death characterizes the whole of our lives as the knowledge of
our own ﬁnitude. Self-consciousness appears in this double form: “I
will die; what should I do?” Our mortality raises in compelling form
the question of our action. The question of action always raises the
question of justice.
We are never fully at one with the beloved because that relationship
is marked by the self-consciousness of a ﬁnite subject. We act, and we
observe ourselves acting. Our capacity for judgment is as broad and
deep as our capacity for self-knowledge, that is, we inevitably judge
ourselves just as we judge others. To cleave to the other as one ﬂesh is
now not just a recovery but also a forgetting. It is no longer only a
fulﬁllment but also a ﬂeeing. It is both comic and tragic. Lovers may
forget that they will die, but they can never forget for long. They may
forget the demands of justice, but that, too, they will remember.
Nothing in the story of prelapsarian union suggests anything other
than fulﬁllment, an overcoming of loneliness through the two-be-
come-one. Sin comes later. The experience of sin is the knowledge of
a radical incompleteness and an insatiable longing. For women, the
structure of that incompleteness is located in the linking of sexual de-

LOVE AND EVIL
■115
sire to the pain of childbirth: “your desire shall be for your husband.”
Sexual union is never complete in itself; it leads to the pain of procre-
ation and thus of separation. Two can no longer be one. Rather, two
produce a third. The possibility of union is displaced onto this third,
who inevitably both is and is not the parents. The child is the objectiﬁ-
cation of the promise of love to overcome our loneliness; the child is
equally the denial of that very possibility. Indeed, the inevitable inde-
pendence of the child is a reminder of the incurable loneliness that is
individual existence. Procreation is not just physically painful. It is
both a symbol of mortality and the thing itself. It points directly back
to the creation of Eve out of Adam’s rib. But God’s procreative act
was accomplished while Adam was asleep and led immediately to the
uniting of man and woman. Procreation after the Fall always reminds
us of the pain of separation. In our children, we see not only our own
fulﬁllment but also our own death. We see again the remainder—the
ﬁnite self—that is beyond love.
Just as women’s labor links sexual union to separation and death,
so does God’s condemnation of Adam to labor mark a similar fate.
Having eaten of the tree of knowledge, what exactly does Adam
know? Most simply, his knowledge is of the good. When God judges
creation to be good, he is also explaining the goal of his creative act:
to bring forth the good. The good remains man’s end. As Aristotle
says, “The good has rightly been declared to be that at which all things
aim.”15 But for a ﬁnite creature without the power of creation ex ni-
hilo, knowledge of the good presents itself as the endless demand for
labor: man must labor to bring forth the good. Apart from God,
knowledge of the good is only possible for a temporally conscious
being: one who can look to the future and ask, “What should I do?”
This effort at self-government, however, inevitably results in knowl-
edge of death. For when man looks to the future, he sees his own
death.16 Thus the one thing Adam most deﬁnitely knows is what God
now tells him: “You are dust, and to dust you shall return.” This
knowledge applies not only to man himself but to all the products of
15 See Aristotle, Ethics I, I.
16 See the discussion of I. Kant, “Speculative Beginning of Human History,” in chapter 2
above.

116
■CHAPTER THREE
his labor. Nothing he can produce endures in the end. No matter what
he achieves, it will not endure. For man, too, the pain of creation is
the realization of mortality.17
Man’s fall is represented as an effort to become like God by gaining
the knowledge God possesses. Instead of grasping a timeless identity
of being and the good, however, man’s knowledge includes an aware-
ness of the nothingness of his own existence. Death is his fate, which
no amount of labor can prevent. Man cannot save himself; he cannot
give up the knowledge he has, but that knowledge is never enough. It
is not sexual desire that ultimately defeats the will to the good—the
focus of much Christian moralizing at least since Augustine—it is
death, which is why the most urgent message of Christianity is that of
overcoming death.
We have no reason to think that the Adam and Eve of Genesis one
are immortal, but we have every reason to think that they lack knowl-
edge of their mortality. For them, procreation is not linked to sin. They
are not troubled by death. After the Fall, both man and woman take
up the task of labor in a condition of shame. No achievement of ei-
ther—not children, and not the products of man’s labor—can over-
come this basic fact: we labor in the shadow of death. Nothing man
can do, and nothing he can learn, allows him to transcend this existen-
tial fact. Knowledge of good and evil is knowledge of the self, and self-
knowledge is the knowledge of death. At the core of man’s existence is
a metaphysical puzzle: death. In myth, the existential condition that
expresses this puzzle is shame.
Socrates proclaimed, as the ﬁrst principle of a full life, “Know thy-
self.” In the Genesis account, that principle has just the opposite moral
valence. To know the self is to know that one is dust and will return
to dust. To know the self is not to transcend the conditions of mortal
existence but to be burdened by those very conditions. Here we ﬁnd
one of the deep tensions between the classical and the biblical
worldview: original sin is not a matter of ignorance but a matter of
gaining knowledge. For biblical man, knowledge, not ignorance, is the
temptation. At the opening of Metaphysics Aristotle states, “by nature
all men desire to know.” In Genesis, that desire leads to the Fall. In
17 See H. Arendt, The Human Condition 18–19 (1958).

LOVE AND EVIL
■117
the Judeo-Christian world, only love, not knowledge, holds the prom-
ise of locating a meaning adequate to the burden of death.
The Platonic vision of the idea of recovery of the “true self” also
appeals to an idea of a self prior to birth. That self, however, is without
the limits of the body, which means that it is not the self of an individ-
ual subject. The experience of longing to overcome the conditions of
life is, for Plato, a longing to be relieved of the burden of being a
subject. To know the Forms is to realize a unity of knowledge and the
object of knowledge.18 The Genesis myth, on the other hand, reveals
a subject who would overcome the divide not by abandoning but by
expanding the self. Adam and Eve become one ﬂesh; they do not be-
come disembodied selves. They do not overcome their existential lone-
liness by becoming “nobody at all.” They remain particular to each
other, even as each ﬁnds the truth of the self in the other. Together they
occupy the point at which subject and object merge, without giving
up either their individual subjectivity or the objectivity of the world.
They are two-in-one, not less than one.
The subject of Genesis longs for a condition in which he is a ﬁnite
self with an inﬁnite breadth. This would be the completeness of love,
or love without remainder. He or she longs to achieve the inﬁnite
within the ﬁnite, to be a subject who is also the whole of creation. The
symbolic realization of this inﬁnite in the ﬁnite is Christ, of whom
there is no parallel in classical thought. After the myth of the Fall,
knowledge cannot offer the path out of the burdens of labor. For
Christians, only in Christ are knowledge and love reconciled. Thus
Christ loves without remainder. The absence of a remainder is, in the
domain of the symbolic, the resurrection. The knowledge of death is
experienced as a kind of metaphysical rift, producing a feeling of
shame. Christ is to redeem man from the shame of Adam—the shame
of endless labor, moral failure, naked bodies, and death.
The narrative of Adam and Eve, accordingly, is a mythical account
of that ﬁrst Copernican revolution, which was the creation of human
self-consciousness. Before the Fall, there is only the unity of being and
meaning that is the creative power of God. God does not know the
18 Of course, the Platonic idea of self-transcendence remains a part of the Western philo-
sophical inheritance.

118
■CHAPTER THREE
world as the object of a proposition that could be otherwise. Rather,
for God, to know and to create are one and the same. Thus creation
is a function of speech itself. Divine omniscience is coterminous with
divine omnipresence; both are inseparable from divine omnipotence.
The same logic of the sacred is at work in Christology: Christ does
not know the Church; rather, the Church is his body. There is further
“mythic pressure” to see all of creation as the body of Christ.19 The
two-in-one of Adam and Eve has this same quality of a union of know-
ing and being. This very quality supports the lovers’ lack of need of
God, which leads to disobedience in the mythical narrative. For man,
accordingly, this unity cannot sustain itself. Wanting to be one with
the beloved, we discover instead the loneliness of our own death.
Only a being that knows itself as a particular subject can know the
world as an object. Subject and object are created in the same act of
knowledge. The self that knows the world is the dying self of Genesis.
To know the world as other than myself is to acknowledge the possibil-
ity of my own death, for I know the object of my knowledge to be
quite independent of my own existence. I imagine a world without
me; I see myself as the dust I will become. This is the knowledge that
love would overcome—if it could. This is the existential condition that
grounds the myth.
Copernicus would put natural science in the space that opens up
between man’s knowledge of himself and of the world. The Genesis
myth puts moral knowledge—knowledge of good and evil—into that
same space. We experience the alienation of self from world ﬁrst in a
practical form—the labor of production—and only much later in the
form of science. Both labor and science are efforts by ﬁnite men to
establish a new home in the universe. The lost home is represented in
three different ways: the unity of meaning and being, the two-in-one
of love, and life in the Garden. These are the approaches of philoso-
phy, the romantic imagination, and myth.20 No one ever makes it back
home, for ﬁnite man does not have the resources to recover the inﬁnite
foundation of his own existence.
19 See, e.g., Letter to the Colossians 1, 15–20 (“He is before all things and in him all
things hold together”).
20 We could also describe them as stages in the life of man: the old age of the philosopher,
the romance of the young adult, and the innocence of youth.

LOVE AND EVIL
■119
MEMORIES OF EDEN
Man remembers Eden, because he remembers that unity of being and
meaning which is the sacred. The break with the sacred is simultane-
ously the incompleteness of love. Through that gap we quite literally
discover a world of objects, one of which is the dying body of the
subject. This is also the world of other subjects, each one distinct from
ourselves. We orient ourselves in this world by measuring our actions
against the standard of justice.
Before the Fall, Adam and Eve’s knowledge of each other is insepa-
rable from their being one with each other. Symbolically they are made
of the same ﬂesh; they know each other as one hand knows the other.
They are bound together not as the result of a practical argument, nor
as the consequence of a duty, moral rule, or customary practice.
Rather, each knows a self that already includes the other. Propositions
are always inadequate to represent this ontologically prior experience
of unity. Once we enter into discourse, there is no end to talk. Before
that ﬁrst proposition, before subject is separated from object, man is
the point at which being shows itself to itself—yet another meaning
of the image of God. This experience of pre-propositional unity is at
the opposite pole to the existential loneliness that accompanies the
ﬁnite knowledge of the subject.
In the Bible sexual union is often called knowledge; we still speak
of “carnal knowledge.” This graphic expression is more right than
wrong: love is a way of knowing that is bound to the ﬂesh and thus
inseparable from being. To ﬁnd the self in the other, to overcome the
subject-object divide without doing violence to either the subject or
the object, is love. There is nothing abstract about this. This experi-
ence is at the heart of every experience of ultimate meaning—familial,
political, or religious. In each of these domains, who we are and what
we know are one and the same.
The two-in-one of love is always an attachment to the body of the
beloved. That beloved might be the lover/spouse, child, or sovereign.
If we think of this attachment as a claim on the body, then we will be
led to evaluate love under the standard of justice. We will object to
commodiﬁcation; we will demand autonomy and equality. We will

120
■CHAPTER THREE
measure what each person “gets out of the relationship.” But love’s
claim is not a matter of property at all. Rather, it borrows from the
sacred. Because the body bears the meaning of love, the “awesome”
character of the body in love overwhelms us. It is more accurate to
speak of subjects being possessed than possessing the body of the be-
loved. This relationship is quite literally incomprehensible, because it
is not a thing in the world but at the foundation of a world. Only
because we love do we care about the world. We cannot grasp this
relationship within the logic of the proposition; we cannot subject it
to judgment. Or, if we do try to judge it, we are likely to ﬁnd judgment
ineffectual.21
Today we can better understand the phenomenon of meaning at
stake in the Genesis myth if we think of the love between parent and
child. We tend to locate our deepest experience of love in the child;
here we ﬁnd a kind of lost innocence. The child acts without awareness
of death, and thus without that differentiation of self that accompa-
nies the awareness of death. He or she does not yet know good and
evil. We imagine childhood as a taste of prelapsarian existence.22 Lov-
ing the child, we experience again something of that lost innocence.
This is love without desire. Desire is a quality of a subject who exists
in a world that is other than the self. For this reason, desire for another
always brings with it the problem of commodiﬁcation. Like proposi-
tional knowledge, desire exists in this gap between subject and object.
Desire disappears when the gap is closed.
Familial love is an end in itself; it resists reasoned explanation. Yet
it offers a non-propositional answer to the question of the meaning of
life. Enthralled by the child, we do not ask what or where is the mean-
ing of our lives. Parent and child constitute a world to themselves, a
world that is beyond our ordinary categories of time and space.23 It is
of the body—I love a particular child or children—but it does not
require presence. This relationship of love always brings the whole
into the present moment: loving the child we experience the fullness
21 See Kahn, Law and Love 7–12 (arguing that King Lear opens with an attempt to put
love on trial).
22 This is a distinctly modern view of childhood. See C. Heywood, History of Childhood
in the West from Medieval to Modern Times (2001). It was, for example, not shared by
Augustine, who saw the child as already corrupted and thus never innocent.
23 This also explains why the representation of romance is often located in the journey.

LOVE AND EVIL
■121
of the past and the potential of the future. In this way, we are bound
to the world in and through the child. I cannot love my child but be
indifferent to the world.24 Of course, because we also have reason, we
never ﬁnd ourselves wholly absorbed by this experience of love. There
is a remainder to the self. Standing within that remainder, we can re-
ﬂect upon the experience. But that reﬂection is misunderstood if the
thought is that love itself requires a justiﬁcation in some “deeper”
source of meaning.
Not too long ago, childhood was seen in just the opposite way.25
The child, it was thought, lacked internal control and was therefore
always vulnerable to temptation. Incapable of exercising reason, the
child required outside direction. Parental authority was valued,
whereas childhood had no value in and of itself. Childhood was not
the moment before the Fall but the moment after. How and why child-
hood became the privileged site of love is a story of the shifting place
of religious authority and the rise of a familial ideal that claims its
own ultimate value quite apart from politics and markets. Sociologi-
cally, the shift reﬂects economic developments as well as improve-
ments in childhood survival rates.26 These changes do not explain the
character of love, but they do set the conditions under which subjects
are likely to ﬁnd love.27
In a disenchanted world, we remain enchanted by our children. The
archetype of “lost innocence” is more important than its location.
24 Environmental and peace movements often make use of this intergenerational connec-
tion to the child.
25 See Heywood, History of Childhood in the West; P. Arie`s, Centuries of Childhood: A
Social History of Family Life 365–404 (R. Baldick, trans. 1962). But see L. Pollock, Forgot-
ten Children: Parent-Child Recognition from 1500 to 1900, at 262–71 (1983).
26 The romantic image of the family, which puts at its center the innocence of the child,
is also related to the militarization of the twentieth century. Teenagers were drafted,
and millions were to die in the trenches. The innocence of childhood is, in part, a reaction
to the politicization of adolescence. Childhood is not just an innocence before the burden
of reason but also an innocence that is pre-political. The child exists in a privileged world
before the state claims him. The same point is made with the rise of a romanticized nature
that stands opposed to the destructive character of modern politics. No longer does the
wilderness appear as the domain of danger—the disordered and untamed. Rather, it appears
as life without the evil of man. The innocence of childhood is set within this depoliticized,
natural world. What could be more natural than the child and the relationship between
parent and child?
27 I suspect that it remains the case that the more religious the family, the less pervasive
is the romanticism of childhood.

122
■CHAPTER THREE
Innocence lost is the mythical/romantic cost of coming into the posses-
sion of knowledge, which always brings a guilty conscience. The inno-
cence of childhood, accordingly, is life before reason; even more so, it
is life before a knowledge of death and sex. The relationship to the
innocent child represents a kind of sexual unity without sex: to be of
one body. This is again symbolic of its prelapsarian character.28 The
infant’s longing for the breast is one thing, the sexual longing for the
breast is another. But after Freud, of course, we know that this distinc-
tion does not hold.
Instead of longing for a return to Eden, Freud tells us that we long
for a return to the mother’s breast. There is a longing to return to a
point prior to knowledge, that is, prior to the differentiation of the
subject into a unique, separate being. For Freud, this longing for a
return to an infantile condition of nondifferentiation is a source of
religion.29 What myth identiﬁes as Eden, and romance as love, the
modern science of the psyche identiﬁes as immaturity. For Freud, the
world of innocent union is broken when the child becomes aware of
the parents’ sexual activity and its own sexual desires. Innocence is
shattered not so much by the perception of the father’s violence
against the mother as by the awareness that the parents may form a
unity from which the child is excluded: In the family, which two be-
comes one? Oedipus, after all, does not just kill his father, he marries
his mother.
Genesis points to the shock that procreation is to the two-in-one of
the loving couple, but Freud reminds us that there is an equal and
opposite shock as the child comes to know his parents. In both direc-
tions, there is differentiation of self and other. The child’s longing to
replace the parent is a longing for recovery of unity. There are two
forms of response to this shock: to murder the father or to displace
the impulse to murder with the work of civilization. Having fallen out
of the innocence of love, we have two choices: evil or civilization.
28 The appropriate characterization of the sexual unity of Adam and Eve, before the Fall,
has long puzzled theologians. We must think of sex that is not tainted by desire, of naked-
ness without shame, and of reproduction without pain. Whether there was sex and whether
it was generative are all controversial issues. The problem of interpretation arises, in part,
from the very different attitudes toward procreation presented in the two different stories
of Adam and Eve.
29 See S. Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents 11–15 (J. Strachey, trans. 1961)

LOVE AND EVIL
■123
Freud invents a new myth of an original murder that leads to a guilty
conscience—shame—which in turn provides the foundation for a
moral code of good and evil that allows the work of civilization—
labor—to go forward.30 Like the founding myth of Genesis, the Freud-
ian myth is one of lost love, knowledge of good and evil, labor within
a world of existential loneliness, and endless longing to recapture the
unity of being and meaning.
Whether we think of Eden as garden or as breast, the same experi-
ence of longing for unity is at stake.31 It is a longing for a life without
the burden of knowledge, moral judgment, shame, and death. We long
for the experience of a free will that is also a complete will: the point
at which freedom and necessity coincide.32 We long for this, and yet
we recoil from our own longing. For Freud, we recoil because the cost
of fulﬁllment is murder. We cannot have that unity without giving up
civilization itself. In Genesis, we recoil because the longing for unity
is always matched by the awareness of death. Who succeeds in love
seems closely related to who lives and dies. Our own death is linked
not just to civilization—labor and justice—but to murder. Love ap-
pears to us as simultaneously innocent and irresponsible, as the most
important and the most dangerous of pursuits.33
Justice is labor’s end and the ground of civilization: we work to
produce the good. Yet justice cannot explain why we care about the
world. Care, I have argued, is a function of love. The action of love
always moves from justice to care to self-sacriﬁce. The sacriﬁce of
the self is a condition of the two-become-one. Self-sacriﬁce is enacted
symbolically in the giving up of the rib; it is reenacted in the procre-
ative economics of the family, and enshrined at the heart of love as
romance. Self-sacriﬁce is the response to the remainder, which always
subverts love.
Because self-sacriﬁce is the action of love, we feel that it is not com-
pletely of this world. It cannot be measured in pleasure and pain—the
30 See S. Freud, Totem and Taboo 141–44 (J. Strachey, trans. 1950).
31 Using Jung’s terminology, we can say that both are archetypes of innocence embedded
deep within the cultural consciousness. See C. G. Jung, “Approaching the Unconscious,” in
Man and His Symbols 1 (C. G. Jung, ed. 1968).
32 See I. Kant, The Critique of Judgment 184–200 (J. Bernard, trans. 1951).
33 See the discussion of Cain in chapter 1 above.

124
■CHAPTER THREE
calculus of desire. If we thought that all value was a consequence of
the subject’s desires or interests, then self-sacriﬁce would make no
sense.34 There cannot be a value higher than the source of value. Nor
can self-sacriﬁce be derived from any kind of calculus in the discourse
of justice and rights. Rights protect the subject. A willingness to sacri-
ﬁce the self for the rights of others cannot derive from the substance
of the rights alone.35 Rights are not free-ﬂoating; they only attach to
subjects. I might be willing to sacriﬁce myself for the rights of some
subjects but not because rights are at issue. I am not willing to sacriﬁce
myself for all similarly situated subjects. I care about my children as
an ultimate value but not because they fall within the general category
of children, all of whom have certain interests and rights. The same is
true of political communities. I may be willing to sacriﬁce myself to
achieve justice within my community but not for other communities
with equal claims to justice.36
Self-sacriﬁce never “makes sense.” Yet it often seems to be the most
sensible thing in the world, for it afﬁrms the world in and through the
self. It is a truism that love is beyond words. We cannot explain
the qualities of the other that evoke love. If we try to explain, we end
up sounding trite. This is because it is not the particular qualities of
the other that we love, as if a change in those qualities would under-
mine our love. Rather, through the particular, we grasp the whole.
Love is not really of anything or anybody; rather, it is a way of being
in the world. That love leads us to such a unity of the self with the
world is the lesson that Socrates tells us, in the Symposium, he learned
from Diotima.
Love is the sole necessity in a meaningful universe. In and through
the beloved, we are literally enthralled by this world. Without love,
we would still know good and evil, but we would not care. We cannot
help but respond to this world with an endless sympathy, because
through love we are always already fully and completely invested in it.
34 Of course, it might make sense as epiphenomenal, as an appearance resting on some
other structure of beneﬁt to the individual: the economist’s explanation of altruism. Or it
might make sense from the perspective of the interests of the group or species: the Darwin-
ist’s explanation of altruism.
35 This is why Hobbes has such trouble with the idea of sacriﬁce for the state. See
M. Walzer, Obligations: Essays on Disobedience, War and Citizenship 82–89 (1970).
36 See Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its Place 239–40.

LOVE AND EVIL
■125
We cannot hold ourselves apart, as if we are awaiting some alternative
universe. Without love, one is literally out of place in the world.
Like Aristophanes’ circle-men, who can say nothing once they are
united, love cannot speak its own being. Fully invested in the world
through love, that world only becomes articulate as the object of rea-
son, which is then subject to the measure of justice. To speak is already
to break apart being and knowing. We labor at speech. Seeking to give
expression to our “original” experience, we ﬁnd that our words are
never commensurate with that experience. We “remind” ourselves of
that experience through ritual; we invoke that experience through the
poetic and metaphoric use of language. We appeal to myth. When we
try to translate these symbolic forms into the discourse of reason, we
inevitably fail. The prelapsarian character of the divine word may be
realized only at that quintessential moment of love as speech: the nam-
ing of the newborn. Speaking the name—resisting the propositional
form—ever after can be a reminder of that moment of realized love.
Love remains a mystery impenetrable to knowledge. Thus we can-
not explain love. Like language, we are more a part of it than it is a
part of us. Love is timeless and complete, whereas reason operates in
time, breaking our experience into discrete propositions. Love is a
singular wholeness at the foundation of our relationship to being, but
knowledge ﬁnds only plurality among subjects and objects. Loving,
we feel that we have overcome our limits, but knowledge speaks of
the hard reality that is the dying body set among similarly limited
objects. Thus one of the most common representations of the relation-
ship between love and speech is the deathbed scene. There, words
reach their limits as the subject confronts the death of the beloved
whom he or she would embrace in the timelessness of love.37 The cycle
of our experience is from love to knowledge to death, and back to
love. Love, we hope, can transcend death; reason never gets beyond
the reality of labor and death. Our sin, as Genesis describes, is origi-
nal, which means that it is produced by the very resources that consti-
tute our way of being in the world: love and knowledge.
37 The ritualistic expression of the move from the speech of reason to the symbolism of
instantiation is “extreme unction.” In the modern world, extreme unction competes with
the love of the familial, because love of family is a ﬁrmer foundation for our faith in the
ultimate than is religion.

126
■CHAPTER THREE
The love of Adam and Eve becomes the labor of work and reproduc-
tion. That is the Fall. Even romantic lovers cannot remain locked in
each other’s embrace, as Aristophanes’ circlemen would. The world
that love founds becomes the ﬁnite world of separation of subject from
object, of the limited capacities of labor and production in a world
that is inevitably unjust and, equally inevitably, decays. Even the most
beloved child grows up. We might try to extend the innocence of child-
hood, but we cannot do so indeﬁnitely. The child rebels and, with that,
breaks apart the complete world of the romantic family. Becoming a
unique subject, the child is overwhelmed by a world that is not his
own. He now faces that same task of refounding that world on the
basis of love.
EVIL AS MURDER
Like love, evil occupies a space of inﬁnite longing and endless failure.
It is not a mundane carelessness about others or an excessive concern
with the self, both of which can lead to bad or unjust acts. To think
of evil as injustice is a metaphysical mistake. Evil’s opposite is love,
not justice. Evil, too, belongs at the foundation of the world, not
among the ﬁnite acts and objects of the world. It, too, is constitutive
of a way of being in the world. For this reason, the domains of the
appearance of evil track those of love. The close bond of love and evil
is like that of God and Satan or that of the sacred and the polluted.
The genealogical survey of forms of religious evil in chapter 2 demon-
strated this: we ﬁnd evil where we ﬁnd the sacred. Approaching the
mystery of one, we always ﬁnd ourselves confronting the other.
Love expresses itself in sacriﬁce of the self; evil expresses itself in
murder of the other. The paradigmatic murder—the ﬁrst murder in
the Bible—is that committed by Cain. Cain’s murder of his brother
shows us evil in the house of love. If we ask why Cain murdered Abel,
the myth tells us only that God recognized Abel over Cain. Abel’s
offering was more pleasing to God. We can never really know why
one person is loved and another is not. The two brothers are equally
deserving—both make offerings—but love extends to one and not the
other. The failure of recognition leads to murder. At ﬁrst reading, it
seems that Cain would recover God’s recognition by displacing his

LOVE AND EVIL
■127
brother from God’s love. He would substitute himself for the beloved.
This is the shape of jealousy, which always has a murderous character
even if only metaphoric.
If we leave the interpretation at this point, however, we have not
penetrated the narrative form of the myth but have only set forth a
conventional critique of jealousy. We have read the myth as simply a
variation on Freud’s Oedipus myth. Wanting his mother’s love, Oedi-
pus murders his father; wanting God’s love, Cain murders Abel. God
may be a father ﬁgure, but he should not be read literally as a father.
The appropriate question of interpretation is not “Why did Cain mur-
der Abel?” but what is it about the human condition that turns a per-
son from love to murder. The story of Cain is not simply a morality
play concerning brotherly love. The existential condition for which
the myth provides a narrative explanation is a pervasive feeling of
guilt and loneliness. We ﬁnd ourselves as if we have already murdered.
Murdering Abel, Cain is literally on his own. And so are we all.
The myth does connect murder and recognition, but, once we reject
the inclination to moralize the relationship, the connection appears
more complex than one of cause and effect.38 Why this urge to mur-
der? Why this sense that we have already done the deed? Pushing be-
yond the narrative structure of the myth, we can say that it puts at
issue not just Abel’s recognition by God but the relationship of recog-
nition between the brothers. Murdering Abel, Cain is not likely to gain
his place before God. What he does assure, however, is that there will
be no recognition—no love—between himself and his brother. We can
further suggest that Cain murders Abel not to gain God’s recognition
but to avoid recognition by Abel. God’s recognition of Abel suggests
Abel’s capacity for love, which Cain cannot tolerate. To avoid love,
he would murder. Nonrecognition is his end and murder the means.39
But why would Cain recoil from this recognition? Our sense of our-
selves as if we have already murdered is rooted not in a jealous desire
for recognition but in this partially suppressed fear and rejection of
38 See above, chapter 1 at 28 (on inversion of cause and effect in the Oedipus myth).
39 See S. Cavell, “The Avoidance of Love: A Reading of King Lear,” in Must We Mean
What We Say? A Book of Essays 267–353 (1976). But see Kahn, Law and Love 179 n.14
(distinguishing a political psychology from the psychological per se).

128
■CHAPTER THREE
recognition. To understand this is to understand the relationship of
love to evil.
In the myth of Adam and Eve, recognition of the other and knowl-
edge of death are closely linked. Loving, we discover our own ﬁnitude;
we ﬁnd that remainder—the dying body—that is beyond love’s capac-
ity for repair. That is the knowledge God gives to Adam—“you are
dust”—and under which we all labor. If love forces upon us acknowl-
edgment of our own death, then avoidance of love is avoidance of
death. This is the self-knowledge that Cain would put off by murder-
ing Abel. Recognition is precisely what he does not want. Thus murder
is not the response to nonrecognition but the ﬂight from recognition.
If Cain’s is the power of life and death, then he would be immortal.
That, at least, is how he would see himself. Cain’s punishment is sug-
gestive of this interpretation of the myth. He does achieve a kind of
deathlessness, if not exactly immortality: “And the Lord put a mark
on Cain, lest anyone who met him should kill him.” The mark itself,
as a divine sign, suggests that Cain is not to be looked upon by others
as yet another ﬁnite or dying person. It is a mark of his own power
over life and death.
To recognize the other as a subject means to imagine oneself as an
object of that person’s knowledge.40 This is an experience as shattering
as the loss of love. Truly to appreciate the other as a subject is simulta-
neously to recognize oneself as a potential object. To that subject I can
appear as just one more object in a ﬁeld of knowledge. This thought
is inseparable from the thought of death. Indeed, it is to imagine one-
self dead, to recognize that the world will continue without me. The
dead are always the object of someone else’s gaze. Precisely that transi-
tion from subject to object is murder. So Cain murders Abel. Cain
would not be an object but only a subject. Abel will not bury Cain;
Cain will bury Abel. Cain will be nothing but subject, never object to
any other subject. Thus the odd quality of the end of the myth: Cain
does not die but has a son and founds a city. Love and evil are recipro-
cal forms of power: the giving of oneself to the world in the act of
sacriﬁce, on the one hand, and the making of the world as an image
of the self in the act of murder, on the other.
40 See the discussion on self-consciousness as knowledge of oneself as an object in the
world in chapter 1 above.

LOVE AND EVIL
■129
We see this dynamic clearly in the family. Members of a family are
bound to one another in love. But, at the same time, family is the most
immediate context within which we imagine our own deaths. Each
family member, at some point, imagines the others standing over his
or her own dead body. This is most especially true of parents; it is part
of the meaning of parenting. We love our children, but we also think
that they will bury us. If we could love purely, then we would only
imagine the self-sacriﬁce of love. Loving our children, we think there
could be nothing worse than our seeing their death. But because there
is always a remainder to the self beyond love, we also imagine our
own death as end, not fulﬁllment. Loving my children, I am forced to
confront my own death. No one can take hold of that thought for too
long. Indeed, there is only a short step—perhaps no step at all—from
imagining oneself as dead to imagining oneself as murdered. The
Freudian father is in just this situation. Cain shows us the response to
this dread: it is murder.
To know the other as a subject is to know oneself as ﬁnite. To recog-
nize the other is to acknowledge one’s own death. This is the deepest
point to which interpretation of the myth can take us in the under-
standing of evil. It is the point at which the myth of Adam and Eve
merges with the myth of Cain and Abel. One is the story of self-sacri-
ﬁcing love, the other of murderous evil. Adam would take up the
burden of death out of love for Eve; Cain would ﬂee that burden by
murdering Abel. We can overcome shame—the condition of being ob-
served in our nakedness (itself a symbol of death)—either by love or
by murder. Love and murder are bound to each other in the symbolic
dimension. They are reciprocal ways of overcoming the divide be-
tween subject and object that ﬁrst shows itself in the shame of self-
knowledge.41
The evil person cannot live with the acknowledgment of his own
death that lies implicit in the recognition of the other as a subject. His
response to this is murderous. His actions are guided by a Ptolemic
psychology that places his own self at the center of the universe.
Rather than experience the shame of ﬁnitude, he would eliminate the
subject before whom he could feel that shame. He deals with his own
41 In chapter 4 below, I take up a sustained inquiry into the meaning of “shame.”

130
■CHAPTER THREE
death by eliminating the conditions under which that death is imag-
ined. He looks out upon a world and sees only himself; he never imag-
ines an other looking at him. Not imagining himself as an object, he
need not imagine his own death. Of course, the strategy of murder
offers only a temporary respite from acknowledgment of one’s own
death. Shame returns, for indeed we are mortal. Murder is not the
cure for mortality. We can put off self-knowledge only for so long.
Because this murder can be metaphorical, it is not always easy to
distinguish love from evil. At stake is not necessarily the physical de-
struction of the other but destruction of the other’s capacity to imagine
a world without me, the subject. The other’s world is to be my world.
The evil subject, then, will see only himself when he looks at the other.
This is the parent who would see only himself in his child. It is the
foundation of that political form in which the ruler would see only
himself.42 His subjects are reduced to images of the ruler; their very
being is an occasion for the display of his power. At no point can the
other stand apart from, and look back upon, the one in power. The
very possibility is the object of murderous intent. This subordination
and control is the “murder” of the other as a free subject. Tradition-
ally, political subjects were literally not permitted to look upon the
ruler. When observation was unavoidable, it was ritualized as a sacred
act.43 Is the child/citizen, who sees in the parent/ruler her all, experienc-
ing a profound love or victimization? She herself may not even know
whether her life is one of self-sacriﬁce or murder.
A classic, literary example of this close relationship between love
and evil—and of evil as a murderous intent aroused by the reminder
of one’s own death in the recognition of the beloved—is found in Leo
Tolstoy’s portrayal of the relationship between the old Prince Bolkon-
sky and Maria, his daughter, in War and Peace. Maria puts the love
of her father before every other relationship in her life. She turns down
suitors in order to take care of him, despite his authoritarian manners.
In return, he subjects her to an abusive domestic discipline that is the
familial counterpart of the military regime with which he had been
42 King Lear’s opening scene combines both forms of evil in the father/king who insists
that his adult daughters tell him that he alone—not their husbands—constitutes their world.
When Cordelia fails that test, he would destroy her.
43 See L. Marin, Portrait of the King (M. Houle, trans. 1988).

LOVE AND EVIL
■131
familiar. Still, she extends to him an inﬁnite Christian sympathy, excus-
ing all his abuse and willingly making herself the suffering subject.
Her love expresses itself as an ethic of care and self-sacriﬁce. The self-
sacriﬁce is all the more poignant because she appears to us as a victim.
There is no good reason for her to stay; her brother, Prince Andre,
leaves. There is only her love of her father, which is not reasonable at
all. Justice has nothing to do with this relationship. The old prince’s
abuse undermines any claim of right he may have had on his daughter.
Yet she loves him still.
The old prince turns from abusively authoritarian to genuinely evil,
when Maria turns down her suitor and announces she will live for
no man except her father. His behavior is no longer just a misplaced
militarism but is palpably evil. In her explicit avowal of self-sacriﬁce,
he receives what he most feared he would lose: the love of his daughter.
Yet he panics as he considers that she might actually have accepted
the proposal of marriage. Marriage, after all, remains a possibility;
self-sacriﬁce may have limits. His panic is not unconscious. He knows
that he has an inﬁnite need for his daughter, that he longs for her to
stay with him, to tell him exactly what she does: that no man matters
to her except him alone. He knows this but cannot acknowledge it.
His reaction to this knowledge about himself is to attack her dread-
fully. All her care he labels treachery. He knows precisely how to cause
her the most pain possible, by taking advantage of the vulnerabilities
created by her love for him. Most painful of all is to pretend a loving
attachment to her companion, Mme Bourienne. This not only turns
her sole friend against her but at the same time sends her the message
that her father can form loving attachments elsewhere. It is a murder-
ous act: to meet the proclamation that “you are my all” with the state-
ment, “you are nothing to me,” is a kind of spiritual murder.
We are horriﬁed by the penetration of evil deep into this familial
domain of love. Yet surely we recognize the phenomenon. The old
prince occupies that familiar place of longing for love and revulsion
at himself for that longing. His reaction is not to turn away from the
object of his love. In no way does he want to live without the loving
support of his daughter. His abuse always has the dual aim of main-
taining his daughter by his side and rejecting her from that position.
He does not turn her out but only acts as if he will. He wants to see

132
■CHAPTER THREE
the continual afﬁrmation of her love for him even as he abuses her.
That endurance is, for him, the true measure of her sacriﬁce and thus
of her love. He must be her all, even as he makes that position one of
utmost pain for her. He would be complete in himself, the only subject
in his world. The test of that completeness is his capacity to reject
love. Is he strong enough to murder the object of his love? Behind all
this is the simple fact that the old prince cannot recognize Maria as a
subject without acknowledging his own death. He would murder her
before he would acknowledge that.
The old prince’s evil is rooted, therefore, in a refusal to recognize
his own vulnerability and ﬁnitude, that is, his own mortality.44 He will
not allow his loving daughter to exist as a subject who can consider
him an object. His actions are to ﬁll her world: she will see only him,
and he will not see her at all. He makes an inﬁnite claim for recogni-
tion upon his daughter while at the same time completely rejecting
her. He cannot live without her recognition, but he cannot live with the
knowledge which that recognition implies. He would live completely
within the familial, but he would create the conditions under which
his entire family is nothing but an expression of his own power. He
can form no relationships that are not projections of his own self, and
thus he abuses all who come in contact with him.
Yet, of course, he dies. The prince’s strategy of avoiding the shame
of death is no more successful than that of Cain. Refusing to recognize
death, it nevertheless recognizes him. Rage as we might, death works
at is own pace. Only at the moment of his death is he able to recognize
the possibility of his death. With that recognition, the existential fear
that fuels the furor of evil disappears. All that is left is love. We see,
therefore, the paradigmatic deathbed confession of love. A confession
that must be speechless—he has already lost his voice—because it is
beyond propositions. But it is already known by Maria, and therefore
speech is not needed. Only when he has become the literal embodi-
ment of death can he allow her the possibility of viewing him as object.
Now her failure to attend the dying body, her failure to sit vigil as he
44 He acts out his immortality by taking up the activities of youth, claiming to ﬁnd a new
lover in Mme Bourienne. Because this relationship rests on nothing more than a denial of
death and a paralyzing fear of love, it strikes us as both comic and evil.

LOVE AND EVIL
■133
dies—a consequence of her fear of him—is a blow to his love. In death,
Tolstoy tells us, the remainder that is the subject alone disappears:
only the love that founds the world remains.
Just as love is something greater and deeper than bodily desire, so,
too, is evil. Both negotiate the relationship between the inﬁnite and
the ﬁnite. Because both love and evil are about the foundation of
meaning in the world, the two-in-one that is love can easily become
the one-in-two that is evil. Evil is, as Auden says, “to love the self
alone.” The cost of that love is murder. Love sees the inﬁnite in the
ﬁnite; evil sees the ﬁnite in the inﬁnite. Neither love nor evil can be
understood within a discourse limited to the body itself, but neither
can be understood apart from the body. Moral judgments, too, miss
the domain of meaning at issue here: love is often unjust, and evil can
be perfectly just. The claim of the king to be the body of the state is a
model of evil, even if he is a just king.45 Yet the belief that Christ is the
body of the Church is a model of love. Love and evil are not about
good and bad, but about being in the world.
Reason can never explain the world-destroying sense the lover feels
upon learning of the beloved’s betrayal. No matter what we say about
respecting the autonomy of the other, despite how we reason about
the distinction between the body’s pleasures and the emotional com-
mitments we make, the words ring entirely hollow. The betrayed lover
is in the same position as the religiously devout who comes to believe
that his religious rituals were mere illusions, not a showing forth of
the divine at all. One feels simultaneously the dissolution of the world
and the shame of one’s own being. In place of the sacred, there is
nothing at all; in place of the subject there is only the experience of
the self as negation. What had been love looks dangerously like evil,46
for in the turning away of the beloved, there is an imitation of murder:
where once one had been a subject, one now feels only the shame of
being an object in the gaze of an other. It is as if one were dead.
This shock is as deep and disturbing as the Freudian shock of dis-
covering the father with the mother. It is, indeed, the same shock. At
45 See chapter 5 below.
46 See chapter 2 above (discussing idolatry as the power of negation). Perhaps the idea
that marriage is a sacrament and cannot be dissolved has its origins in the sense of the world
creating/destroying power at issue.

134
■CHAPTER THREE
the moment it occurs, the world collapses into the self alone. It was
through the two-become-one of the lover and the beloved that a uni-
verse of meaning was revealed. The thought of the beloved with an-
other always invokes shame: the shame of self-knowledge, of knowing
that one is nothing but dust and will return to dust. This, indeed, is a
world without divine presence. The body of the beloved bears the
weight of the entire world, and when the beloved turns away, that
world is destroyed.
Because the turning away produces an experience of death, it is im-
perceptibly close to an act of evil. Still, we do not think that falling in
love with another is evil, although its consequences may be tragic. If
we are speaking of children turning away from familial love toward
new objects of erotic attachment, it is not evil at all—painful as it may
be to the parents. Lover and beloved share a world, but, in doing so,
each is necessarily vulnerable to the other. Thus the death of a child
or parent is often experienced as the end of the world. We are thrown
back on the self and experience quite literally that remainder, which
always escapes love and constitutes the dying body. The beloved has
died, but in that death we experience a kind of murder of the self.
In love, we place our lives in the hands of another. If we cannot bear
that knowledge, there will be an impulse to murder. Thus evil arises
when we refuse to make ourselves vulnerable to this world-destroying
power. The fear of destruction of the self and of one’s own world leads
to the destruction of all worlds but one’s own. Because love always
contains the risk of betrayal, the only way to accomplish this end is
murder. Evil is failed love.
Lover and beloved have a claim upon each other, for each is the
foundation of a common world. Each always has the power to destroy
the other’s world. It is as simple as turning to another. This is why the
ﬁrst concern of love is always care and why the action of love is self-
sacriﬁce. To afﬁrm one world, the subject must give up the possibility
of others. For lovers, care is more important than justice or truth. This
insight is as old as the biblical description of God as “choosing” the
nation of Israel, but it is lost to the rational moralists of the Enlighten-
ment and to their liberal successors. Truth and justice do support each
other, but, as I have explained, love and justice are always in tension.
Lovers do not want to hear the truth if it is that we are dust and will

LOVE AND EVIL
■135
return to dust; the lover’s claim to care is not the assertion of a right.
The lover has no right to demand of the beloved that she not turn
away, that she not fall in love with another. When love ends, the pain
the lover suffers is the shame of ﬁnitude. He dies, we might say, but
he is not murdered.
Our lives in their symbolic dimension are as vulnerable as our bio-
logical lives. Worlds fall apart, even when founded on love. Genesis
speaks of the original failure of love: every child falls out of the unity
of familial love. The child must leave the parents’ home and love an-
other. This is not evil, although the parents may experience it with a
world-destroying sense of shame. A parent’s response to this shame
can be the symbolic murder of the child. When Cordelia refuses to
proclaim her love for her father alone, Lear responds: “we / Have no
such daughter, nor shall ever see / That face of hers again; therefore
be gone / Without our grace, our love, our benison.”47 Lear would
have Cordelia be “nothing.” This is a symbolic act of murder that
follows from the child’s refusal to see the father as the only subject.
The opening scene of King Lear may look like a father arranging his
bequests, but it is really about a father refusing to die.
Conversely, the child may leave the parents’ home carrying the bur-
den of shame, when he or she feels their love to be a demand to recog-
nize them alone. Unable to satisfy that demand, the child may feel that
he or she has murdered the parents. The child, Freud tells us, bears
the guilt of what seems an unavoidable evil. Cordelia, it has long been
noticed, is not quite an innocent. Her father asks for little—a small
rhetorical display—but, in insisting upon truth, she sets in motion
Lear’s experience of a kind of royal death. For this, she feels shame.
Thus, when she returns to England to ﬁght on behalf of her father, she
asks his benediction.48
The contemporary phenomenon of the suicide bomber provides an
example of this tight connection of love and evil. As a self-sacriﬁcing
martyr, the terrorist appeals to love; as the murderer of innocent indi-
viduals, he or she engages in evil. The point is not that love and evil
are just a matter of one’s point of view, as if “one man’s terrorist is
47 King Lear I, I, 261–64.
48 King Lear IV, vii, 44–58.

136
■CHAPTER THREE
another’s freedom ﬁghter.” Both love and evil occupy the point at
which the ﬁnite intersects with the inﬁnite, the point at which the ﬁnite
subject realizes an ultimate value. For love, the ﬁnite subject becomes
the point at which the macrocosm shows itself of ultimate value. Love
afﬁrms a world in and through the sacriﬁce of the self. The suicide
bomber engages in just such a ritual of self-sacriﬁce, making a state-
ment that he acts out of love for family, religion, and community. To
sacriﬁce the self, however, simultaneously entails the murder of an
other.49 The subject destroys a world that leaves him with only a sense
of shame and death. He acts with murderous rage toward that world
that has produced the shame of his own being. When we view his act
from the perspective of love, we see it as an afﬁrmation of ultimate
value. When we look at it from the vantage point of evil, we see the
exclusionary and destructive character of this claim to realize the inﬁ-
nite. Evil would see the self in all that is, while love would bring forth
the whole of the world through the sacriﬁce of the self.50
The suicide bomber shows us that love and evil can exist simultane-
ously in the same subject and even in the same act. But why not? My
interpretation of Cain and Abel in chapter 1 already suggested this
possibility. Was this not also true of the absolute ruler of early modern
Europe? Does it not remain true of many charismatic leaders? That the
sacred and the polluted can occupy the same site is hardly surprising to
the mythical mind. Nor is this idea unusual to anyone who has
thought about the complicated world-creating and world-destroying
character of the family. Indeed, it is a contemporary commonplace for
the media to show us the afﬁrmation of familial love surrounding the
suicide bomber. Even a loving family can be a dangerous force in the
world—a lesson we continually relearn from Shakespeare. Is this not
the same lesson we have been retaught by contemporary forms of eth-
nic nationalism in the remnants of the Soviet Empire? In the ﬁnal chap-
ter I argue that it is no less true of our own liberal state.
49 The symbolic dynamic of killing and being killed is at the center of my analysis of
political evil in chapter 5 below.
50 That the suicide bomber is usually a young adult suggests a deeper psychological point:
the murderous rage directed outward, while afﬁrming familial and communal love, may
well be a displacement of the murder of the parent that is implicit in the young adult turning
toward a new object of his love.

LOVE AND EVIL
■137
This is not to suggest that evil is located in the failure to treat the
other as a subject. Indeed, evil must implicitly acknowledge the victim
as subject, for it is the rage at the possibility of appearing as an object
to the subject that leads to evil. Treating someone as a means, rather
than an end, is an ordinary failing. It may be injustice, but it is not
evil. We are all guilty of this failing most of the time. To treat the other
as a means is not to attempt his or her elimination. It does not make
us murderers, metaphoric or actual. Evil lies in the ambition to murder
these subjects, not in order to use them as means to some other end
but because of the shame we experience in our own character as ﬁnite
objects in the world.
Just as the murder at the heart of evil need not be a literal killing,
not every killing expresses evil. Of course, we can use the term in
that way, making it synonymous with serious crime, but then evil is a
sociological, not a metaphysical, issue.51 The murder that is evil is pres-
ent wherever a subject denies the other the capacity to take a perspec-
tive in which he (the subject) would appear as an object. Evil arises
when the subject says that “knowing me, you are to see only your own
death—never mine.” This murderous intent is the outward expression
of a claim to personal immortality.52 For a mortal creature, such a
claim can only lead to more desperate acts of murder. In the ﬁnal chap-
ter I argue that the immortality of the political sovereign is linked to
this power to take life. Politics makes visible the symbolic structure of
love and evil, but individual subjects, no less than polities, live within
this structure.53
Evil is a response to understanding that the other is a subject. A
world of plural subjects is only naı¨vely thought to be a dialogic
community—a mistake of much contemporary political theory. It is
also a world in which I imagine my own absence, that is, my own
death. To afﬁrm that possibility as the maintenance of the world is
the self-sacriﬁce of love. To refuse to imagine my own death is the
beginning of evil.
51 See, e.g., E. Becker, The Structure of Evil (1968).
52 We often hear reports that the contemporary Islamic terrorist believes that his suicidal
act will lead directly to an immortal heavenly life—one that is ﬁlled with the pleasures of
the body.
53 On the city as an enlarged image of the individual see Plato, The Republic II,
368D–369A.

138
■CHAPTER THREE
To respond to evil by insisting that the actor treat others as subjects
is exactly the wrong response, for if others are subjects, then he—the
evil actor—is potentially an object. Recognition of this is beyond his
imaginative possibilities. Justice cannot cure evil any more than justice
can bring love. We can tell pathological parents to treat their children
justly, but at stake is an entire world of meaning. People do not commit
evil acts because they fail to understand what justice requires. They
do so because it gives expression to the only world they are willing to
see, one where they will continue indeﬁnitely. Of course, evil actors
could do otherwise—they are free actors—and worlds do change. But
worlds do not change in response to a moral directive. We cannot
legislate evil out of existence.
The response to evil is not justice but love. Judeo-Christian culture
has always placed this conﬂict between love and evil—not that be-
tween justice and injustice—at the center of man’s normative experi-
ence. The conﬂict over justice is central to the political debate internal
to particular communities, but those communities are themselves
founded on love.54 The drama of the family, as of every other group
that claims an ultimate meaning, is that of love against evil. That does
not mean that families have an excuse to maintain injustice among
their members. The virtue of justice does not disappear. Rather, justice
is secondary to love—and to evil—in the family. We love in spite of
injustice; we fall into evil despite justice. We are bound together “for
better and for worse.”
Arguments about justice and injustice are played out in the court
of reason. They are arguments about what one subject owes another
subject. Subjects do not owe each other love. They cannot reason
themselves to love; rather, they ﬁnd themselves in love. Neither do
subjects reason themselves to evil. Accordingly, we never can make
sense—that is, offer an adequate explanation of the causes—of the
murderous rage of evil. We cannot say why Cain murdered Abel any
more than we can explain why the Nazis murdered the Jews or the
Hutus murdered the Tutsis. We can describe the conditions which
led to the event—God favored Abel—but we cannot say why evil
followed. Such actions always defy reason, including the reasons of-
54 See Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its Place 226–41.

LOVE AND EVIL
■139
fered by those carrying out the murders. Evil, like love, appears as if
from nowhere.
Markets and market behavior, justice and injustice, can generally
be understood on their own terms. This is why economics and political
theory are such powerful tools. We can explain why one market either
is or is not pareto-superior to another; we can write a legal code and
explain what one person owes another. We cannot, however, explain
love and evil in the analytic structures of reason or interest. When we
attempt to do so with respect to love, we get only parody, as if love
were mere desire or the aspiration for universal justice. When we do
so with respect to evil, we are likely to sound trite or prejudiced. Geno-
cide, for example, is not the result of an error of judgment. The Ger-
mans did not lack an adequate theory of justice; nor did they want
anything from the Jews. Our ordinary understanding will always leave
us unprepared for the outbreak of either love or evil. Both come as a
surprise to the reasonable mind. But while the surprise of love is some-
thing we can relish as a recovery of meaning, the shock of evil leaves
us devastated and uncertain about the very value of existence.
Accordingly, evil is not injustice, nor is it banal.55 Like love, evil is
metaphysical before it is psychological. It is a way of being in the
world, of locating an ultimate meaning, for a ﬁnite subject. Neither
the lover nor the evil person can live with the knowledge of his or her
own separation from others. Both love and evil are responses to
shame, which is the experience of ﬁnitude in a subject with aspirations
for the inﬁnite. The lover responds to shame by seeking a return to
that state of innocence that precedes knowledge: the mythical moment
of two-in-one. The evil person responds to shame by murder. There is
no shame if one is not observed. Both would overcome the separation
of the self from the other that characterizes ﬁnite knowledge and ﬁnite
desire. Both seek that unity of being and knowing that founds a world
of meaning.
Love and evil are speechless, not because they are somehow brute
facts but because their symbolic structure is not propositional. Thus
the reasons offered for evil actions are never commensurate with the
55 Compare H. Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil (1963),
discussed in the conclusion below.

140
■CHAPTER THREE
actions themselves. First comes the murderous act; only later do we
seek to articulate a difference to justify that act. But justiﬁcation is not
interpretation, and this language will fail. It is the same problem as
that of the lover seeking to justify the “choice” of the beloved: he
or she will speak of beauty or character or individuality, but these
justiﬁcations will also fail. Political evil generates ideologies as easily
as religious faith generates theology, but we do not have faith for theo-
logical reasons. Injustice does not provide an account of evil any more
than justice provides an account of love. The incommensurability in
both instances is between our reasons and our consciousness of our-
selves as meaningful subjects in the world.
The failures of justiﬁcation of love and evil are no different from
the traditional problems of understanding myths as causal explana-
tions. For centuries, reasonable people theorized over how Adam’s
sin could burden future generations or what exactly about Cain’s of-
fering accounts for God’s rejection. The sociologist’s or the political
theorist’s approach to evil today is different in technique but not in
ambition. Both are trying to locate the causal conditions of that which
is without causal explanation. We can better approach the truth of
love and evil through ﬁction and poetry. Shakespeare is a better guide
than sociology, and so is the Bible as myth, not history. We must
strip away the reasons which theory offers and confront, as well as
we can, the fundamental structure of our experience as subjects who
exist with the simultaneous awareness of a meaningful world and of
our own death, of our connection to the inﬁnite and of the fact of our
own ﬁnitude.
We ﬁnd evil then, as we ﬁnd love, where individuals act in a sym-
bolic dimension that has neither the abstractness of reason nor the
particularity of desire. Love and evil exist where the word has become
ﬂesh, where meaning shows itself in the body. Toward that symbolic
body, we have two fundamental attitudes: self-sacriﬁce and murder.
Each is a way of making the body bear the meaning of the world.
In the West, the domains of the symbolism of the body have most
prominently been those of family, state, and religion. Accordingly,
here is where we ﬁnd love and evil.
To understand love and evil we must remain within the domain of
the symbolic. We cannot go too far in either the dimension of the body

LOVE AND EVIL
■141
itself—its pleasures and pains—or in the dimension of reason itself. A
life of pleasure will fail to be meaningful, as will a life of reason. We
cannot say of a life of love, however, that it failed to be meaningful.
Neither can we say that of a life of evil, although we may put ourselves
at war with that set of meanings given life through evil.
CONCLUSION
There is an old idea in the West, dating at least to Saint Paul, that
associates sin with sex and love with asceticism. On this view, the
problem of sin is that of substituting the fulﬁllment of the body for
the fulﬁllment of grace; it is to mistake pleasure for meaning. My argu-
ment rejects this view, for man, even when he does evil, never lives
within the terms of the body alone; he never lives merely for pleasure.
It is a conceit of reason that its opposition comes only from the animal
nature of the body. Opposed to reason is the entire dimension of the
symbolic, of the word become ﬂesh. The deepest problems for jus-
tice—that is, for the norms of reason—arise not from desire but from
love and evil.
Reason will never show us this truth about ourselves. Reason will
move immediately from the discourse of justice to the discourse of
bodily need, from the categorical imperative (binding all rational sub-
jects, whether human or not) to utilitarianism (measuring all pleasure
and pain, whether human or not). But ours is a human world that lies
always between reason and the body’s pains or pleasures. It is a world
of meaning located in the body but not reduced to the body. Ours is
a world of birth and death, of families and nations. It is a world to
which we are tied by love and which we would destroy by evil.
Today we live in a largely disenchanted world. We seek to deploy
reason in the place of mythical narrative. Reason, however, reaches its
limit in the loving body. If the sexual body is taken as just another
object of reason, subject to the modern techniques of social construc-
tion, we react with a kind of horror. This was the project of eugenics
in the early twentieth century; it is the threat some see in contemporary
experiments with cloning.56 At stake in the sexual body is love. With-
56 Consider not just European eugenics—in particular, German—but American efforts as
well. See D. Kevles, In the Name of Eugenics: Genetics and the Use of Human Heredity
(1995).

142
■CHAPTER THREE
out love, we are back in that state of existential loneliness that charac-
terized the second Genesis story.
We may no longer live in a world of the sacred, but we continue to
live in one where we are very much aware of the threat of that existen-
tial loneliness that was Adam’s fate before Eve. We no longer know
how to speak of this world. Still, we have no better cure for this loneli-
ness than the two-become-one of love. And, as is already clear from
the myth, not even this is enough, for love cannot save us from knowl-
edge of our own death. When we demand this of love, we become evil.

C H A P T E R
F O U R
■
■
■
■
POLITICAL EVIL: SLAVERY AND
THE SHAME OF NATURE
In the last chapter I offered an interpretation of the Adam and Eve
myth which puts at its center the loneliness of a subject who knows
he will die. Refusing to acknowledge his ﬁnitude, the subject murders
those who are in a position to recognize his death. Evil is less about a
moral demand for recognition of the other as an autonomous sub-
ject—the concern of justice—than it is about the refusal to imagine
the self as an object, that is, the dead body that is no longer subject
but only object. Evil produces unjust acts, but to understand the
source and power of evil we must turn from the demand of the other
for equality to the subject’s ﬂight from death. The evil person may
know he is acting unjustly, but justice is not an answer to the problem
of death. The same is true of the lover: he, too, may act unjustly for
the sake of the objects of his love. Adam knows he should not eat of
the apple, but he chooses love even at the cost of death. If evil arises
out of the ﬂight from death, the possibility of accepting death remains
bound to love. That love makes death possible—that is, acceptable to
the imagination—is an old thought. This is implicit in the argument I
offered that self-sacriﬁce is the action of love.
Evil can appear within the same domain as love, because the subject
before whom we refuse to appear as a dying body is often someone to
whom we are already bound: friends, lovers, family. These are the
relationships within which one imagines one’s future, and that future
inevitably ends in death. These relationships constitute what we might
think of as the ordinary boundaries of the testamentary imagination—
the subjects who will appear in my will. These are the people to whom
I am closely bound through love. In the previous chapter my concern
was with love in its intimate, familial forms. Eros, however, is not

144
■CHAPTER FOUR
exhausted in these forms of intimacy. In this chapter and the next I
pursue the forms of evil as it appears in Western political experience.
Here, again, we ﬁnd a close relationship between evil, love, and the
knowledge of death. In politics, too, injustice is not a sufﬁciently ex-
pansive or rich concept to capture what is at stake in evil.
In the personal life of the family, evil takes the form of murder, but
this is largely metaphoric killing. In politics, murder is not metaphori-
cal at all. Can we understand the character of political evil as a kind
of enlargement or projection of the same familial dynamic of love and
hatred—this time, however, resulting in actual murder? Is the evil of
politics a murderous response to the recognition of ﬁnitude? There are
certainly some grounds for thinking that the analogy holds. After all,
the history of many Western states was once tied to the history of
particular families. We do not have to read King Lear to understand
that political and familial pathologies have often been linked. Still
today political communities rely upon bonds of affection among citi-
zens. Similarly, states continue to cultivate sentiments of patriotism
and nationalism, which are surely kinds of love. In politics, unlike
families, however, love and killing are more often aligned than op-
posed. Love of the state has often taken the form of a willingness to
battle its enemies.
Regardless of what Western political theory has written about safety
and justice as the ends of the political community, Western politics
has, in fact, been characterized by the reciprocal phenomena of citizen
sacriﬁce and killing of the enemy. The sovereign nation-state is distin-
guished from other forms of association by virtue of its capacity to
deploy force. It has, in the familiar Weberian phrase, “a monopoly of
the legitimate use of physical force within a given territory.”1 This
capacity is ordinarily a function of its ability to call upon its own
citizens to sacriﬁce themselves. That willingness is not a function of
justice alone: individuals are rarely willing to sacriﬁce for a state that
is not their own, regardless of how just its cause. Conversely, they can
remain willing to sacriﬁce for their own state even if they believe a
particular government policy is unjust—although there are likely to
1 M. Weber, “Politics as a Vocation,” in From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology 77–78
(H. H. Gerth & C. Wright Mills, eds. and trans. 1946).

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■145
be limits on how much injustice they will tolerate. What needs expla-
nation is the bond to the political community which precedes these
judgments of justice and injustice. True, that bond commits the indi-
vidual to an interest in making this particular community just. Never-
theless, the state’s unique ability to demand sacriﬁce and the citizen’s
willingness to sacriﬁce are the fundamental political phenomena that
theory must explain.2
We need not celebrate the violence of politics, but we must recognize
the possibility of violence that attaches essentially, not accidentally, to
the experience of the political. The state, and only the state, has the
power to conscript. To understand oneself as a citizen in the modern
nation-state has been to recognize the possibility that one can be legiti-
mately called upon to sacriﬁce in defense of the state. Even today,
when conscription is out of fashion, we recognize that political iden-
tity carries deadly risks as well as rewards. We can be the target of
violence for no other reason than we are citizens of a particular state.
Of course, we argue about the conditions under which sacriﬁce can
be legitimately demanded. We want the state to ﬁght only just wars.
But from the beginning of any such argument, we acknowledge the
possibility that those conditions can be met. The just wars of this state,
and of no other, are ours to ﬁght.
Still, the question is whether the killing we ﬁnd in politics is a form
of the evil of murder analyzed in the last chapter. Is the political phe-
nomenon of war, for example, a kind of mass expression of individual
citizens’ ﬂight from the recognition of the possibility of their own
death? On its face, this claim seems implausible, since there is no kill-
ing in politics that does not involve a reciprocal risk of death. Violent
political conﬂict is a kind of reciprocity of self-sacriﬁce: to threaten
the enemy is to be threatened in turn. Here, killing the other brings us
closer to the fact of our own death. It is a turning toward, not a turning
away, from death.
Because politics is a ﬁeld of potential killing and being killed, the
killing of another loses its character as a marker of evil. Consider the
paradigmatic political phenomenon of battle: Is the ﬁeld of battle the
scene of virtue or evil? To be in battle is to accept a reciprocity of risk,
2 This is the fundamental theme of P. Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its Place (2005).

146
■CHAPTER FOUR
which means that battle relies substantially on a willing self-sacriﬁce
on both sides. We know that the ﬁeld of battle, violent as it is, is also
a ﬁeld of love, as individual soldiers sacriﬁce themselves for friend,
comrades, units, and ultimately the nation. Under these circum-
stances, killing can be a mark of personal heroism or courage, as well
as of communal commitment. Killing cannot be condemned as univer-
sally evil without rewriting the moral and historical imagination of
the state and its citizens. They will not ordinarily judge their own
efforts of self-sacriﬁce as evil, even if others see those same acts as
murderous. Political evil, however, is not simply a matter of one’s
point of view, as if the other side is always evil. Evil is a pathology of
politics that is just as likely to appear in one’s own political culture as
in another.
To understand political evil, we must take up a speciﬁcally political
point of view, that is, the form of self-understanding that creates and
maintains political power. Politics, Aristotle noted, begins with
speech—not, however, just any speech. We have politics only when
individuals take up as a topic of ongoing discussion the meanings for
which they are willing to exercise their collective, coercive capacity. In
part, this is a matter of internal regulation, of the laws and practices
that govern the community; it is also partly a matter of external self-
expression, of how the community shows itself to the rest of the world.
In both these respects, the political community stands for something;
it is a product of ideas as much as of material resources. Members
may disagree over the character of these ideas, but such disagreements,
unless they break the community apart, are like arguments over the
meaning of a common text. They afﬁrm, rather than undermine, the
representational character of political life. Politics is sustained by this
debate over who we are. Were the members to ﬁnd that the community
stands for nothing or nothing important to them, politics might be
replaced by mere administration—bureaucratic efﬁciency would re-
place political debate.
Political power is the capacity to give substantial form and material
embodiment to one set of ideas over another. Ideas have politi-
cal power only insofar as members of the community are willing to

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■147
defend them.3 Too much emphasis on politics as discourse misses the
critical fact that at some point discussion ends and the act follows:
campaigns end with the vote, jury deliberations end with a verdict,
legislative debate ends with enactment, and foreign policy debate ends
with the threat or use of force. Talk can go on forever. Politics is not
academic debate, because its discourse is cabined by the act. Politics
is about the coercive power of ideas, but that power arises in the ﬁrst
insistence from citizens’ willingness to sacriﬁce for the sake of the po-
litical community. A regime that sustains itself only through the de-
ployment of force by “outsiders” may express the political life of that
other community, but it represents a failure of the political in the com-
munity over which it rules. Politics, in this case, is reborn in resistance.
A political idea for which no one is willing to sacriﬁce himself
lacks power; it is a mere abstraction. It might be a good idea, but it
does not belong to any particular community. For its sake, no one is
prepared to give up anything. To understand political evil, then, we
need to understand the pathologies that arise in the relationship of
an idea to its political embodiment. Here a religious conception, tran-
substantiation, can help us: this is the mystery by which an idea of the
sacred takes on a material form. Politics is just such a process
of transubstantiation: it links ideas to action, voice to force. Thus,
where we ﬁnd politics, we ﬁnd rhetoric—debate—and armies.4 Politi-
cal evil appears when something goes deeply wrong in the process of
transubstantiation.
Instead of looking at politics through the prism of murder—the pa-
thology of love—we need to take up the problems of slavery and kill-
ing. I treat slavery in this chapter, and killing in the next. In each in-
stance, I show how the particular practice—slavery or killing—offers
a paradigm through which to view a wider category of political evil.
Together, they cover the ground of much of what we ordinarily con-
sider the evils of politics, including subordination, physical abuse, un-
just war, and genocide.
3 See R. Cover, “The Supreme Court, 1982 Term—Foreword: Nomos and Narrative” 97
Harv. L. Rev. 4 (1983).
4 By “armies,” I mean all the instruments of coercive power, including police.

148
■CHAPTER FOUR
The paradigm of slavery is at stake whenever the merely natural
element of man’s character is projected on to an other. The slave is
what we are not: nature without culture. If the slave is pure nature,
the master is not a product of nature at all. He creates himself by
embodying an idea. To embody an idea in politics is to express a will-
ingness to sacriﬁce for it. Not accidentally, the same American culture
that practiced slavery was also one which thought of itself as particu-
larly committed to the military virtues of honor and sacriﬁce.
When the rituals of sacriﬁce fail and we are left with only the pain
of the suffering body, we are in the domain of torture. This will be my
most controversial claim: when politics loses its power of transubstan-
tiation, it becomes torture. On this view, the soldier at the front who
loses his faith and confronts only the possibility of his own destruction
for an idea in which he sees nothing at all is in the same position as
the torture victim, who suffers in the secret cell of the authoritarian
regime. Through self-sacriﬁce we seek to transcend death by becoming
the embodiment of the idea of the nation. If we no longer believe that
is possible, then the suffering of political life literally makes no sense
to us. Both soldier and victim, then, anticipate death and mutilation
for the sake of an idea that they view as making no claim upon them
at all. Both might overcome this perception of torture by thinking of
themselves as martyrs sacriﬁcing themselves for the truth of some
other idea. Both may reject entirely the claim of self-transcendence
through suffering. In that case, their suffering becomes mere torture.
Again, the place to begin is with a reading of Adam and Eve, for no
less than in our personal lives, this myth has informed our deepest
imaginings of the political.
MAN AS AN IMAGE OF GOD: NATURE AND LABOR
In the ﬁrst Genesis account, man is created in the image of God. He
does not represent the divine because of what he can achieve; labor
comes later, in the second narrative. Rather, as created, he already
manifests a sacred quality. Before the Fall, the natural self inspires
awe, not shame. We know this phenomenon today, for example, in
the experience of wilderness or in the presence of the newborn.
Both can leave us with a sense of awe at the majesty of life before it is

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■149
shaped by convention. That awe points in two directions at once—to
the majesty of the natural and the wonder of the human. We cannot
separate the two, for man is the point at which nature gains conscious-
ness of itself.
After the Fall, however, there is nothing awesome about nature. It
is that against which we labor. Nature, we say, must be “tamed.” We
clothe the self not just to hide our participation in the natural but
literally to do away with it. Our nature is no longer to be a part of
nature; rather, our nature is to be unnatural. The natural is now the
less than human. It is that which must be given a human form—made
to serve human goals—through labor. We cannot see through the
clothes to the natural man, and we do not want to. When we are
forced to view the naked body, we are reminded of the ultimate cor-
ruption of the ﬂesh. Man is fully himself only in a world of human
convention. That is the world that puts off the ultimate shame of na-
ture—that we die.
The shame of nature spoken of in the myth is not just the shame of
actual nakedness but the shame of being reminded that there is a
naked body beneath the clothes. We carry this shame forward even
when we are fully clothed. We feel shame at others’ nakedness, as
much as at our own, because we cannot see the former without being
reminded of the latter. We avert our eyes, wanting to see nothing but
the clothed subject. We want to live in a fully clothed society, that is,
a world given shape by human agency. We get confused on this point
if we imagine the other as the model of beauty. Even here, outside the
boundaries of art, we are likely to feel shame, as much as fascination,
with the naked body portrayed, for example, in pornography.5 But
ﬁrst of all and most of the time, the naked body is that of the aging
and the old, the injured and the out of shape—that is, life in all its
commonplace forms, which include ourselves. The nude that is the
object of beauty in art is not the shameful, naked body of Genesis two.
It may indeed be the divine image of Genesis one. Nevertheless, from
the perspective of the Fall, recovery of that image is the product of the
labor of culture.
5 On the double character of the pornographic, see Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its Place
183–227.

150
■CHAPTER FOUR
Genesis one and two capture a fundamental ambiguity in our atti-
tudes toward our “natural self” and our place in nature. Is the naked
self the source of shame because it is less than human—the fallen con-
dition that we begin to transcend only through the act of clothing the
body—or is it the point at which we afﬁrm our connection with a
sacred nature? Is man’s nature something to be achieved by his own
labor, guided by his own knowledge of good and evil, or is it some-
thing given, perhaps to be recovered as we might recover the wilder-
ness from the encroaching civilization? Do we claim to be an image
of God because we are the end point of divine creation or because we
have the capacity to create our own world? Are we an image of God
as created objects or as creative subjects? Becoming like God was ex-
actly what the serpent promised when he tempted Eve with the fruit
of the tree of knowledge, but, according to the ﬁrst myth, she already
was an image of God.
These are not antinomies that can be resolved, which is just why
the Adam and Eve myth appears both as a story of the sacred character
of the truth of our nature and as a story of the burden of self-creation.
At least, the antinomy cannot be resolved on its own terms. In Chris-
tianity, the resolution is the appearance of Christ, whose naked, suffer-
ing body—literally, a divine body—takes on the shame of nature for
all men. His pain becomes the point of universal redemption, allowing
believers to remain clothed even in death. Nakedness may characterize
Hell but not those resurrected to God’s presence. There is no going
back to the Garden.
Whatever one may believe about Christology, man ﬁnds himself lo-
cated in the antinomy of the unclothed and the clothed. Man is always
a part of nature and always apart from nature. He can always appeal
to nature to attack the artiﬁcial character of conventionality. Con-
versely, he can appeal to convention to condemn the merely natural
as base and shameful. Choosing to locate the truth of his character in
one direction always exposes him to criticism from the other. Failing
to exercise knowledge and will—labor—he will experience shame; ex-
ercising those faculties, he will experience sin. He is caught between
the shame of his nakedness and the sin of his knowledge.
Because this dualism is fundamental, it informs our everyday experi-
ence of ourselves and others. We use it to sort out preferences and

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■151
identify character types. The myths of Genesis, for example, describe
two different personalities: those who ﬁnd self-realization in a strip-
ping away of convention and those who ﬁnd it in the projects of cul-
ture. Some ﬂee the city to ﬁnd the truth of themselves in nature; others
ﬂee from nature to the city. Some believe that the truth of the self is to
be discovered; others believe that the self is a project for construction.
Each is likely to see the other as profoundly mistaken, as failing to see
the fundamental source of the possibility of a full and meaningful life.
Similarly, the myths describe two different philosophical approaches:
Do we look for the truth of the human condition in an unsullied con-
science or pure reason, on the one hand, or in the cultivation of civili-
zation or character, on the other?
As in all such antinomies, the terms themselves do not have a partic-
ular content. The categories shape a debate, the content of which de-
pends on the circumstances. Because of this, their applications are eas-
ily reversible.6 In the abstract, we can never say what is natural and
what is conventional. Any particular context can be described as natu-
ral or conventional; we cannot know which it is in advance of a partic-
ular argumentative situation. The most conventional of social arrange-
ments can be criticized as nothing but a manifestation of nature.
Justice in the city, Thrasymachus already argued in the Republic, is
only the interest of the stronger. The social order can always be criti-
cized as nothing but a manifestation of an unjust nature, for the
stronger interests always dominate the weaker. In this sense, politics
replicates the natural world of animals; it is, accordingly, shameful.
Such beliefs can lead to revolutionary efforts at reconstruction or to a
turning away from politics as inevitably an expression of man’s fallen
nature. That same social order, however, can be criticized as mere con-
vention that does not do justice to man’s nature. Rousseau’s project
was to align the political and the natural equality of man. Nietzsche
turned Thrasymachus around and argued that justice was only the
unnatural victory of the interests of the weaker. From one perspective,
nature is shameful and must be civilized; from the other, nature sets
forth the norm, whether of Rousseauian equality or Nietzschean in-
6 See, e.g., J. Culler, On Deconstruction: Theory and Criticism after Structuralism 139–
50 (1982); J. Derrida, Of Grammatology 62–63 (1976).

152
■CHAPTER FOUR
equality. Even the most apparently conventional context—for exam-
ple, a cityscape—can be portrayed by the artist as an exemplar of
nature. Conversely, wilderness can be deconstructed to show that it
is nothing but a particular cultural manifestation.7 This conceptual
indeterminacy is the contemporary version of Genesis, which tells us
that naked man is both an image of the divine and shameful.
Despite this indeterminacy, certain patterns of argument emerge in
the way the Western political imagination uses the double myths of
Genesis. We use the myth of man as an image of God to speak of
fundamental rights that attach to all men everywhere. This is the Lock-
ean state of nature. Jefferson appealed to this myth to give expression
to the moral foundation upon which American nationhood was to
stand: “All men are created equal, endowed by their creator with cer-
tain inalienable rights.” Even as he is created, man already has these
rights. All men have these rights, regardless of their conventional cir-
cumstances. We feel no shame in our common humanity but appeal
to it as the source of norms and principles that precede and measure
the work of political construction. Jefferson hardly invented this use
of Genesis one, and its use remains vitally present.
This is the mythic source of the strong egalitarian strand of Western
political culture. We are all equal, because we are all created beings
standing in just the same relationship to God.8 We ﬁnd the same divine
imprint in each and every person. No person falls below this level;
each is a subject with moral rights; each should have the same legal
rights. We are to see in the poor and the naked not the shame of nature
but the bearers of rights. Each can demand, and is entitled to, equal
recognition. Accordingly, rights are not an achievement of man’s labor
in the production of political culture; rather, they are a recovery of
that nature which is there from the beginning. To offend against this
equality is to offend God by disrespecting the product of his creative
act. Respecting that divine presence is the demand that “natural law”
7 What we mean by “wilderness” is hardly the way that other peoples have seen nature;
where we see promise, they may have seen only threat. See, e.g., W. Cronan, “The Trouble
with Wilderness, or Getting Back to the Wrong Nature,” in id., Uncommon Ground: To-
ward Reinventing Nature 69–90 (1995); R. Nash, Wilderness and the American Imagina-
tion 1, 273 (1973).
8 See G. Fletcher, “In God’s Image: The Religious Imperative of Equality under Law,” 99
Col. L. Rev. 1608 (1999).

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■153
makes upon any political order. Governments are put into place, Jef-
ferson and Locke tell us, to enforce the rights we have by nature. When
they fail to do so, they should be replaced.
This myth continually fuels a strand of antipolitical politics in the
West. The aim of the political, on this conception, is to realize the
natural. A perfect politics would be one that was invisible, allowing
man’s true nature to show itself fully. This is the attraction of the idea
of the withering away of the state, of visions of utopian simplicity—
for example, of yeoman farmers—and of a general skepticism about
government. On this view, the virtues of politics are not those of the
labor of self-creation but of recovery and preservation. Of course, the
divine character of natural man can be interpreted in many different
ways, and there are many different utopian visions in the history of
the West. The myth will not tell us whether we should locate the natu-
ral self that politics is to recover in the operation of free markets or in
the preservation of the environment. It may not even tell us about the
place of hierarchy, since nature in Genesis already includes a hierarchy
of man over beast and, arguably, of man over woman.
This belief in nature as the measure of political convention contin-
ues in contemporary human rights discourse. Imagining natural man
as an image of God, however, must be juxtaposed to one of the sharp-
est lessons of modernity: the possibility of a political rage directed at
the merely natural man. In the concentration camps of the twentieth
century man was indeed stripped naked, reduced to nothing but the
natural thing itself: “a bare forked animal.” Everywhere the response
was the same—not sympathy and not respect for the natural man but
revulsion before the shameful spectacle of natural man.9 Too often,
out of this revulsion emerged organized, systematic murder. If all that
man can rely on before political power is his claim to be naturally an
image of God, then he may indeed be doomed.10 In the camps of the
twentieth century we ﬁnd a reminder of the moral economy of that
form of slavery which was brought to an end less than one hundred
years earlier. We ﬁnd natural man as the shame of nature.
9 American experience in Iraq—particularly the scandal of Abu Ghraib prison—are a
recent reminder of this phenomenon.
10 See H. Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism 300 (1973) (“It seems that a man who
is nothing but a man has lost the very qualities which make it possible for other people to
treat him as a fellow man”).

154
■CHAPTER FOUR
The human rights community has too often assumed that it is
enough to defend the naked man as the bearer of natural rights. But
this lesson of equal rights has never been absent in the West. It was,
we might say, there at creation. The problem has been that it has not
been enough, for it is countered by the second moment of the mythical
narrative in which nature is the source of shame. In American history
we do not have to look far to ﬁnd this second element operating along-
side the ﬁrst. Jefferson, who wrote eloquently of the equality of all
men, lived in a slave society and himself maintained a large number
of slaves. Reconciling the ideals of the Declaration of Independence
with the reality of a slave society has been a perennial problem in
understanding the American, revolutionary mind.11 The double char-
acter of the myths of Genesis helps at just this point.
GENESIS TWO: THE SHAME OF NATURE
Slavery may have been inconsistent with the ﬁrst moment of the Gene-
sis myth, but it gave visual embodiment to the second.12 The slave was
the natural man, the man stripped of even his clothing. In this image
of man, the slave-holding society recognized the shame of nature. This
does not mean that it was ashamed of itself for treating men as less
than images of God, although some men, including Jefferson, certainly
did feel such shame.13 Just the opposite. To be a slave was shameful;
slavery was not. For many, slavery seemed the appropriate response
to the shameful condition of the slave. The slave is a reminder of the
Fall—of naked man before the beginning of that recovery that is the
11 See, e.g., J. Ellis, Founding Brothers 81–119 (2000); J. Ellis, His Excellency: George
Washington 258–65 (2004); R. Wilkins, Jefferson’s Pillow: The Founding Fathers and the
Dilemma of Black Patriotism (2001); G. Wills, “Negro President”: Jefferson and the Slave
Power (2003).
12 My argument here is not directed at slavery whenever and wherever it has appeared,
for example, in classical Greece or among Muslim nations. I am concerned in particular
with American slavery, but much of what I argue extends back more broadly to the Euro-
pean attitude toward indigenous populations and forward to continuing manifestations of
racism. For Europeans and Americans, the problem is that of reconciling Christian ideas of
equality and dignity with the practice of subordination.
13 Jefferson’s most eloquent expression of his own sense of shame before the unnatural-
ness of slavery is found in the famous passage from Notes on Virginia: “I tremble for my
country when I reﬂect that God is just: that his justice cannot sleep forever.” Query XVIII,
at 163 (W. Peden, ed. 1982).

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■155
product of labor. The blackness of the slave served as a kind of natural
marker of this state not just of difference but of shame. The slave’s
nature was to display shame. If his being is shameful, his value is as
pure labor. Apart from labor, the slave exists only as a negative. In the
slave, there is a perfect match of shame and labor.
Linking shame and labor, the slave is a reminder of the fragility of
labor’s achievements. That fragility is apparent in three dimensions:
existential, cultural, and political. Existentially, we know we are no
less connected to the dying body than is the slave; culturally, we know
that our ﬁnest achievements can never overcome the burden of histori-
cal decay; politically, we know that we are always vulnerable to the
contingencies of war. The slave reminds us of all three: death, forget-
ting, and defeat.
Man feels shame when that nature he shares with animals intrudes
into the human world—when he sees himself as if he has not yet
“made something of himself.” He feels shame, because he knows that
he is ontologically incapable of making something of himself. He is
no less doomed to the corruption of the ﬂesh, despite the achievements
of culture and polity, than those who preceded him. He is no less vul-
nerable to the vicissitudes of political power. If covering up nakedness
is movement from the merely natural world to the fully human, then,
conversely, stripping off clothing is movement in the opposite direc-
tion. The slave reminds each of us that the nakedness we cover up we
also reveal in our daily routines with our own bodies—from eating to
sleeping, and most especially, in this context, sex. Each of us is as
much a slave “by nature” as we are a master, for each of us stands
within an imagination framed by the double myths: man is both the
image of God and the shame of nature.
This imaginative state is critical to understanding the status of the
slave. It is not enough to say that the slave was considered property—
a mere object—rather than a legal subject. That legal categorization
was the end point of a certain way of seeing the slave; it was the prod-
uct of a “social imaginary.” Slavery was, moreover, always a contested
category. From very early on in the age of exploration and coloniza-
tion, there were some who would extend the ﬁrst Genesis myth of
moral equality to the indigenous populations discovered outside Eu-
rope. Those populations did not simply appear under the category of

156
■CHAPTER FOUR
slave. While it would be anachronistic to speak of a kind of multicul-
tural imagination that respected foreign civilizations for their own
achievements, Christianity was a religion of universal aspirations.
Christianity proved itself compatible with slavery, but the resources
were always there to contest the practice. It was not unimaginable to
see the indigenous as populations open to the Christian mission of
spreading the gospel and saving souls; it was not impossible to see
these populations as equal to others before God and entitled to the
respect that comes with equality.14 This proselytizing mission was
never abandoned. The indigenous, too, could share in the body of
Christ; they could be seen as the image of God.
While the indigenous populations could be seen through the frame-
work of the Genesis myth of equality, for the most part they were not.
Instead, they were seen through an appeal to the second element of
the Genesis myth, for the slave powerfully presented the shame of
man’s nature. Because his condition was shameful—merely natural,
not yet fully human—he could be treated as less than a subject. He
was seen through a prism of negation: the slave was not what the
master was. He lacked culture or civilization along the only dimension
the master was willing to see: that of the West. The explorers them-
selves were often struck by the cultural achievements of the peoples
they met; their cities, social organizations, and means of production
are noted with wonder.15 Simultaneously they were accused of “uncivi-
lized” behavior, meaning cannibalism, human sacriﬁce, nakedness,
and sexual licentiousness. The issue is not what the slave was but what
he represented. The space of negation—the shame of nature—repre-
sented by the slave is not an objective quality but a way of seeing that
the Europeans and Americans were prepared to adopt.
Undoubtedly, the fact of forceful subjugation of the slave was
known by the members of the slave-owning society. Some knew of
the indigenous cultures that had been destroyed. All knew that slaves
could be taught to read and to participate in civil society—even if
there were doubts about the capacity for full political participation.
14 See, e.g., B. Las Casas, A Short Account of the Destruction of the Indies (N. Grifﬁn,
trans. 1992) [1552].
15 See, e.g., B. Diaz, The Conquest of New Spain 216–19 (J. Cohen, trans. 1963);
S. Greenblatt, Marvelous Possessions: The Wonder of the New World 75–79 (1991).

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■157
Laws making it illegal to educate slaves are themselves testimony to
the slaves’ capacity to learn. All knew that slaves were taught religion;
they had families; and, of course, they occupied diverse roles within
the economy of production. Certainly, political and economic power
went a long way toward sustaining the institution of slavery, despite
Jefferson’s and the nation’s invocation of the ﬁrst myth of Genesis
in the Declaration of Independence. Still, the moral complexity here
goes beyond mere hypocrisy. Those who sustained slavery may have
feared a just God, but they also had to provide a moral narrative to
themselves.
In his role as political revolutionary, Jefferson projected the evil of
slavery onto King George. It was the king who had attacked African
societies, enslaved their members, and shipped them to America.
This is a speciﬁc charge in his original draft of the Declaration of
Independence:
He has waged cruel war against human nature itself, violating its most
sacred rights of life & liberty in the persons of a distant people, who never
offended him, captivating and carrying them into slavery in another hemi-
sphere, or to incur miserable death in their transportation tither. This pirati-
cal warfare, the opprobrium of inﬁdel powers, is the warfare of the Chris-
tian king of Great Britain.16
Whatever the injustice of bringing the slave trade to the colonies, by
the time of the Revolution, slavery within the colonies was a well-
established practice, creating a set of moral and political dilemmas
quite different from those of the slave trade itself. This moral differ-
ence is reﬂected in the constitutional response. The international slave
trade was to be gradually eliminated over twenty years; slavery as a
domestic institution was protected.17 At the edge of the moral and
political imagination of the postrevolutionary world was the possibil-
ity of repatriation of the slaves.18 As that disappeared as a practical
16 The passage was eliminated from the ﬁnal draft. The original text was recorded by
Jefferson in the autobiography he composed in 1821.
17 See U.S. Constitution amend. I, sec. 9, cl. 1; amend. IV, sec. 2, cl. 3.
18 Some slaves who fought with the British in the Revolution, for the promise of their
freedom, were relocated to the Canadian maritime provinces and from there to Liberia
shortly after its founding in 1821.

158
■CHAPTER FOUR
solution, the dilemma of what to do about the slaves overwhelmed
the practical imagination. Even Lincoln, before the Civil War, could
not imagine more than limiting the spread of slavery—and hoping that
it would die out of its own in the southern states. Of emancipated
slaves, he still entertained vague hopes for repatriation to Africa.19
Some, like Washington, released their slaves upon their own deaths.
But death is the moment at which the practical, political calculus is
replaced by the moral calculus of eternity—or, at least, the calculus of
lasting fame.20 Putting off release until death is itself an admission of
the failure of the political imagination. What changes at death is not
the practical possibility of imagining a multiracial society but the need
to take responsibility for living in and administering such a society. It
is a bit like living a luxurious life and then using one’s estate to buy
indulgences.
We only approach the moral complexity of the Jeffersonian position
when we examine not just the fear of divine justice but, more immedi-
ate, the fear of rebellion. Like all those around him, Jefferson feared
a slave rebellion: in Notes on Virginia, he worried that if emancipation
did not come “with the consent of the masters,” it could well come
“by their extirpation.” His draft of the Declaration accused the king
of “exciting [slaves] to rise in arms among us, and to purchase liberty
. . . by murdering the people on whom [the king] also obtruded them.”
To rebel is to take up the task of political construction. One does not
fear the rebellion of one’s property. Subjects rebel when they react to
their present state as shameful. Then, they take up the labor of creating
a proper human order for themselves.
To acknowledge the possibility of a slave rebellion is implicitly to
recognize the slave’s humanity. This knowledge, however, appears not
as a fact but as an element in a normative ﬁeld: it contributes to the
structure of the moral imagination. Recognizing the potential for re-
bellion did not push the slave owner to substitute the Genesis image
of man as an image of God for that of the shame of nature. It is not
plausible to believe that Jefferson, Madison, and the other founders
19 On Lincoln’s ideas of repatriation even during the war, see his speech to a group of
free Negroes on August 14, 1862. 5 Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln 370–75
(R. Basler, ed. 1953).
20 See Ellis, His Excellency: George Washington 263–64.

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■159
who failed to characterize slavery as a violation of their own princi-
ples were simply hypocrites. Rather, they lived within the moral uni-
verse of the Fall, which sees shame in nature. On this view, the slaves’
failure to take up that task of rebellion is morally shameful. In that
failure, the slave conﬁrms his own nature as less than human or as
merely natural. Thus there were two sides to the moral tension.
Jefferson clearly understood that slavery violated the Declaration’s
principles:
What a stupendous, what an incomprehensible, machine is man who can
endure toil, famine, stripes, imprisonment, and death itself in vindication
of his own liberty, and the next moment be deaf to all those motives whose
power supported him through his trial, and inﬂict on his fellow-man a
bondage, one hour of which is fraught with more misery than ages of that
which he rose in rebellion to oppose.21
Yet, strikingly, the slaves did not rise in rebellion against their condition.
The white population—whether slave owners or not—could say
that they themselves would not have tolerated the conditions of slav-
ery but would have rebelled. They could be conﬁdent in this judgment
because they understood themselves to have rebelled against that con-
dition of slavery to which the British Crown had tried to reduce the
colonies.22 Revolution as a rebellion against slavery is a constant rhe-
torical form for the founding generation, endlessly repeated in politi-
cal tracts, sermons, and public speeches.23 A popular ballad, sung by
the Sons of Liberty, repeated the line, “Parliament’s voice has con-
demned us by law to be slaves.” Jefferson’s description of King George
as “tyrannical” echoed Patrick Henry’s earlier speech of March 23,
1775, in which he asked, “Is life so dear and peace so sweet as to be
21 Quoted in D. Post “ ‘Words Fitly Spoken’: Thomas Jefferson, Slavery and Sally
Hemings,” available at http://www.temple.edu/lawschool/dpost/slavery.PDF (last visited
Oct. 17, 2005).
22 There is an interesting connection in this respect between Jefferson’s role in the revolu-
tion and his decision to wage war against the Barbary Pirates as president. It had been the
practice of the Barbary states to take prisoners who would be released for ransom or sold
into slavery. This “white slavery” was again intolerable to the American self-image. See
A. Shipple, To the Shores of Tripoli: The Birth of the U.S. Navy and Marines (1991).
23 See A. Burstein, Sentimental Democracy: The Evolution of America’s Romantic Self-
Image 52–82 (1999).

160
■CHAPTER FOUR
purchased at the price of chains and slavery?”24 Political independence
had its moral foundation not only in the positive idea of freedom as
self-government but equally in the negative idea that the colonists
would not be slaves.
Using the language of resistance to slavery to justify their own rebel-
lion suggests a moral distinction between their own intolerance of
shame and the slave’s tolerance. This is already implicit in Jefferson’s
observation of the American moral contradiction: the issue is not only
how the revolutionaries could tolerate slavery but how the slaves
could fail to rebel. Indeed, the worse the master class made the condi-
tions of slavery, the more reassurance they had of the slave’s moral
failings; that is, as the conditions of servitude became more intolera-
ble, the failure to rebel marked a greater moral failure. It was thus a
reassuring, vicious circle of belief.
The moral pattern here is a kind of reverse image of Hegel’s master-
slave relationship. Hegel’s master wins the battle for recognition with
the slave but then ﬁnds that the very conditions of victory deprive him
of that which he most wants: recognition from an equal subject. He-
gel’s myth is a story of the move from equality to inequality; it estab-
lishes, as a theoretical matter, the instability of inequality. The early
Americans found themselves with an existing social practice of in-
equality—slavery—that needed legitimation. They found themselves
already having slaves, just as individuals ﬁnd themselves already hav-
ing families or religious practices. Of course, these are social construc-
tions that can be changed. First of all, however, they are social prac-
tices that require a moral narrative of legitimacy, if they are to make
sense to their participants—especially to the most thoughtful among
them. The master class in a slave society needed to explain and conﬁrm
this asymmetry. The narrative of revolution—or, more speciﬁcally, of
a failure to revolt—operated to link political history to moral and
religious belief. Rebellion would be the condition in which the slave
demanded political and moral equality. The failure to rebel is read as
the justiﬁcation for maintaining those very conditions which, from the
perspective of an autonomous subject, would justify a rebellion.
24 P. Henry, Speech at the Virginia House of Delegates (March 23, 1775), reprinted in 2
Annals of America 1755–1783, at 321 (1968).

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■161
This is a recurring political pattern: one conﬁrms the moral failure
of one’s enemies—domestic or foreign—by treating them as less than
human. One knows that Jews, for example, are less than human, be-
cause one can see the inhumane conditions of the concentration camp.
The intolerable supports a practice of intolerance. Of course, there is
always the implicit knowledge that the circle can be broken. At some
point there may be a rebellion. A slave-owning society always exists
with this fear. The pattern here is no different from that within familial
life: women and children conﬁrm their subordinate condition by ac-
cepting the conditions which maintain that subordination. Here, too,
we know that rebellion is possible. Freud bases a theory of the emer-
gence of civilization on just such a myth of subordination and rebel-
lion of the children against the tyrannical patriarch. Until they rebel,
they are not equal.25
This does not mean that rebellion will be welcomed as a sign of a
new-found equality. After all, the narrative has already legitimated
inequality: rebellion against this natural inequality appears now as
“unnatural.” This self-conﬁrming myth of inequality is not a matter
of logic but of move and counter-move. Nevertheless, we do know that
sometimes the logic of rebellion does convince. The black regiments
of the Civil War did help to move the nation toward emancipation;
similarly, black soldiers of the Second World War helped to bring on
the second Civil Rights movement. This is the larger pattern of the
postwar decolonization movement: rebellion is the condition for rec-
ognition of political equality.
This fear of rebellion distinguishes American slavery from other
forms of hierarchy. Aristotle thought some people natural slaves. The
appropriate response to such a hierarchy was not fear but action for
the sake of the slave. Hierarchies often recognize pedagogical con-
cerns, for example teacher to student or parent to child. Frequently,
hierarchies are ﬂuid and circumstantial, depending on temporary rela-
tionships, for example, employer to employee; others are understood
to be directly beneﬁcial, such as priest to penitent; and still others rest
25 See S. Freud, Totem and Taboo 141–43 (J. Strachey, trans. 1950). The traditional ten-
dency to see the rape victim as the shame of nature was a product of the same mythic line
of thought.

162
■CHAPTER FOUR
on knowledge, for example, doctor to patient. American slavery was
marked not just by the permanence of its inequality but by the way it
created and maintained a structural condition of fear to support that
inequality.
The fear of slave rebellion took a double form: fear of murder of
the master and fear of rape of white women—precisely the story
Freud tells of the origins of civilization.26 In the American slave society,
the myth of murder and rape was used not to explain a feeling of guilt
that is the Freudian precondition of one’s own self-subordination
to law but rather to relieve the potential guilt of the master class. It
was used, that is, to overcome the Jeffersonian guilt present in the
implicit recognition of the injustice of slavery. These fears were an
exact objectiﬁcation of the moral imagination that supports slavery.
Murdering the master, what Jefferson called “extirpation,” is the act
of political rebellion: the assertion of equal humanity by effectively
going to war against the conditions of slave subordination. The master
demands this rebellion by the slave as a condition of recognition and
respect. Nevertheless, at the same time he fears it and acts to suppress
the threat by denying the slave’s humanity. But if the slave’s position
is a function of his nature rather than his misfortune, then he re-
emerges as a sexual threat. The naked body of the slave, which repre-
sents the shame of nature, was inevitably read as the sexual body.
The naked body of Genesis is, after all, the body that also labors in
reproduction. Fear of rape, accordingly, expresses the imagination of
the merely natural, that which the slave showed himself to be in his
failure to revolt.27
Just this fantasy of rape tells us that we are within the world of the
second Genesis myth. For the sexual act bears the aggregated weight
of millennia of emotional, symbolic, and mythic thought about man’s
fallen state. Regulating sexual access is the ﬁrst object of man’s labor,
the very condition for the emergence of a world of work after the
26 See S. Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents 78–80 (J. Strachey, trans. 1961).
27 Corresponding to the fear of rape was a fear that the white subject would “go natural,”
that he or she would ﬁnd the truth of his own existence in the nature revealed by the slave.
Access to female slaves was an element of the hidden self-knowledge of the master class.
Master and slave are always reciprocal images of the suppressed truth of the other. Jefferson
has much to teach us here as well.

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■163
Fall.28 Violation of that ground norm is symbolic of the destruction of
civilization itself. For some, sex is the point of transmission of original
sin; more broadly, sexual desire reminds us that we are never all that
far from the naked body. We remain tied to the body, and thus to the
threat that the labor of culture can disappear in that meeting of bodies
which is a necessary condition for the species to continue. When we
distance ourselves from the carnal knowledge of ourselves—when we
regulate sexual contact through law, morality, and social structure—
that knowledge comes back at us as a fear of rape.
The slave is an object of sexual temptation—real or imagined. He
or she reﬂects the shame of nature that extends to the slave-owner
society. We know that slave women were very much the object of sex-
ual temptation for white men. Is not the fear of rape of white women,
in part, a fear that, after the Fall, women no less than men are sexual
beings? If men are tempted by the slave body, why not women? Indeed,
women’s relationship to the sins of the body are believed to be more
immediate, complex, and deeper in much of the Christian tradition.
A patriarchal, slave society labors to maintain a social and political
hierarchy; it does so by “naturalizing” the position of subordination.
But if women are closer to nature, they are also closer to the slave.
The fear of a violation of the lines of sexual access easily becomes a
fear of sexual communion between the white woman and the black
slave. Thus the fear of rebellion and of rape is also a fear that rebellion
and rape could constitute joint action of the subordinated—women
and slaves—against a slave-owning, patriarchal class.
One had to fear either the humanity of the slave or his bestiality.
These correspond to the fear of murderous rebellion and rape. Either
way, the fear reﬂected less about the genuine danger of violent rebel-
lion and more about the self-understanding of the dominant class. At
stake is the shame of nature, not the slave’s but the master’s. The slave
who is imagined to threaten rape and murder exposes the vulnerability
of the body, and thus the vulnerability of the cultural construction that
would turn away from the body. Increasing the distance from the slave
28 Again, for Freud, it is the origin of the incest taboo. For an alternative view linking
taboo to transgression, see G. Bataille, Eroticism: Death and Sensuality 63–65 (M. Dal-
wood, trans. 1986).

164
■CHAPTER FOUR
by subjecting him to the intolerable is the analogue of the hatred di-
rected at the beloved described in the previous chapter.
Thus the shame of the slave has a twofold root. More precisely,
racism takes a double form, for the social imagination that sustained
slavery continues, even after slavery’s formal demise. This racism rests
on the one hand, on the belief that the black man is a part of nature,
not fully human, and on the other, on the belief that his shameful
character is a result of his own moral failure. He brings it on himself
by failing to take up the task of creating culture, the ﬁrst object of
which would be rebellion. Thus the status of the slave is both a fact of
nature and a moral condition.29 These two propositions are mutually
supportive: failing to rebel, the slave shows himself to be naturally
inferior. He is stripped naked, reduced to a sexual being, and then
negated quite literally in a ritual of desecration that establishes an
unbridgeable distance between the civilized and the shame of nature.
The danger of rape was only a fantasy projected on the victim, just
as the fear of rebellion was largely only a projection. The fantasy of
rape, nevertheless, often functioned as a justiﬁcation for the torturous
mutilation of black men, which is a pure expression of rage at the
shame of nature.30 It is the point where political and sexual power
merge. The mutilated, lynched black man is, most especially, not
that image of suffering martyrdom that deﬁnes the white man’s civili-
zation: Christ. For the master class, the black victim is at the opposite
extreme. While Christ transcends the body through his suffering,
the lynch victim is reduced to nothing but the naked, shameful body.
He is what we might even call an “anti-Christ”: nothing but the shame
of nature.31
Slaves who did rebel by ﬂeeing proved their own humanity in that
very act—at least some would read their act this way. In ﬂeeing, they
distinguished themselves from those who remained. This, for example,
was the moral narrative of escape, rebellion, and moral equality sym-
29 Much the same combination of fact and failing is used to characterize the black un-
derclass today. See, e.g., R. Hernstein & C. Murray, The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class
Structure in American Life (1995).
30 See chapter 5 below on torture.
31 This, of course, does not tell us how that victim was seen by the slave class. For them,
the analogy to Christ was indeed available. See, e.g., L. Hughes, “Christ in Alabama” (1931)
in The Collected Poems of Langston Hughes 143 (A. Rampersad, ed. 1994); C. Cullen,
“The Black Christ” (1929) in C. Cullen, The Black Christ and Other Poems (1929).

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■165
bolized by Frederick Douglass. They had freely acted, separating
themselves by that action from the shame of nature. If one accepted
this moral reading of ﬂight, then the most offensive political act would
be to return the escaped slave to a condition of slavery. This would
change the character of slavery from a moral hierarchy to a political
act of war, in which the general class of black people were declared
the enemy. This moral narrative of freedom won was just the target
of Dred Scott, which held that no black person could be a citizen of
the United States regardless of his or her personal achievements. For
the Dred Scott Court, blackness was itself a stigma beyond the capac-
ity for repair or recovery. It marked a natural man outside the political
community: “The unhappy black race were separated from the white
by indelible marks, and laws long before established, and were never
thought of or spoken of except as property, and when the claims of the
owner or the proﬁt of the trader were supposed to need protection.”32
The master class was in the ideologically difﬁcult position of having
to deploy that narrative of rebellion but at the same time undermine
its application in instances of actual rebellion, including ﬂight. To do
so it deployed another traditional tool of ideological construction: the
claim that slave rebellion was caused by “outside agitators.” The
threat of slave rebellion could not be seen as an expression of self-
liberation but only of third-party intervention.33 Because slaves were
merely natural, they were easily misled or tempted. What might ap-
pear as rebellion could really be only an aggressive political act by
those outside the immediate community. Thus the South engaged in a
massive effort to suppress and expel abolitionists and even abolitionist
literature.34 Secession, when it came, would be seen not as the initia-
tion of war but as a continuation of a war already engaged.35
32 Dred Scott v. Sanford, 60 U.S. 393, 410 (1856).
33 One example of this rejection of third-party intervention was the gag rule in the House
of Representatives that prohibited consideration of the thousands of antislavery petitions
sponsored by the American Anti-Slavery Society from 1836 to 1844.
34 See, e.g., C. Eaton, The Freedom-of-Thought Struggle in the Old South (1964);
W. Savage, The Controversy over the Distribution of Abolition Literature 1830–1860
(1938). Southern states also tried to prohibit the presence of free blacks. See P. Finkelman,
“Race and Domestic International Law in the United States,” 17 Nat’l. Black L. J. 25, 41
(2003) (“By 1860 every southern state prohibited the migration of free blacks”).
35 See, e.g., the Georgia Declaration of Secession which accuses the non–slave-holding
states of ten years of hostile action, which “has placed the two sections of the Union for
many years past in the condition of a virtual civil war.”

166
■CHAPTER FOUR
An individual can respond to the shame of the slave in two different
ways. He can cover up the nakedness of the other or he can hold
himself apart, projecting the shame of nature wholly onto the naked
slave. In other words, he can extend the human world built through
labor or he can narrow it. What he cannot easily do is rely on the idea
that man is an image of God to counter what is perceived to be the
shame of nature. Once we see that shame, there is no going back to
the innocence of Eden. For this reason, the discourse of human rights,
which relies on the ideal of equality, often seems curiously detached
from the real world of power, hierarchy, and subordination. This
moral ideal alone is not enough to deny the distinction between master
and slave, autonomous subject and shame of nature. To think that it
is sufﬁcient is to fail to recognize the Jeffersonian dilemma, which
begins precisely with the acknowledgment of both. Knowledge of a
fundamental human equality is never completely absent; rather, it is
just the starting point of the dilemma presented by the inequalities
within which we ﬁnd ourselves.
A three-termed state of the moral imagination characterizes a slave-
owning society: ﬁrst, the slave is stripped down to the merely natural;
second, he is recognized as a fully human threat; and, third, he is deni-
grated for his moral failure to take up his own humanity. The human
must be dehumanized. Suffering that dehumanization is then taken as
proof of a less-than-human—a shameful—quality. Together, these
three steps reconcile the two elements of Genesis: equality and in-
equality; man’s divinity and his shameful nature.
This is the moral imagination not just of slavery but more broadly
of racism and colonialism. We ﬁnd, for example, the same imaginative
construction of the other in the earliest reports of the Spanish interac-
tion with the indigenous populations in their American possessions.
These populations are ﬁrst described as a part of the discovery of a
new world. They are like the geography, the ﬂora, and the fauna. They
can be treated as mere objects, collected as curiosities.36 Quickly they
become not just curiosities but productive assets. Their existing worlds
can be ignored as they are turned into beasts of labor for the material
36 On Columbus’s return from his ﬁrst voyage, he already took back to Spain a number
of Tainos along with a cargo of a variety of plant and animal species.

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■167
interests of the colonists. Yet they are not merely beasts. They are seen
to have their own families, polities, and civilizations. They have their
own gods, their own rulers, their own social structures. Most im-
portant, they have their own capacity for resistance. They have armies
with their own loyalties and, in some instances, loyalties they are will-
ing to betray. This combination leads the Spaniards to commit mass
atrocities on this population. These atrocities are only inhumane if
these are human subjects. That they are not is conﬁrmed by their very
suffering. Not the defeat but the humiliation constitutes the natural
shame of the indigenous.
These actions are misunderstood if interpreted only as a practice
of treating the natives as if they were mere objects upon which the
Spanish could test the sharpness of their swords. Killing is not mere
sport; torture and murder are designed to send a message. One does
not send a message to merely natural objects. Like all atrocities
since, these actions were meant to be witnessed by potential victims
as well as by other victimizers. They are designed to tell the victims
that it is as if they are mere possessions of the Spaniards, to be disposed
of as they wish. At the same time the Spanish are telling one another
that the indigenous peoples are not subjects. They are not subjects
because “we, the Spanish, can do this to them.” Master and slave are
reciprocally constructed in the act of humiliation. As the conditions
of repression become worse, the failure to rebel becomes greater evi-
dence of moral failure and thus of the shame of nature. We never could
live like that.
The pattern has remained the same with the modern terror of au-
thoritarian regimes: terror does not just defeat, it humiliates. The sub-
ordinated are understood to afﬁrm their position by accepting the hu-
miliation. When they do rebel—with outside assistance or not—the
construction of political inequality often collapses very quickly.37 That
is because the construction of the inequality of slavery just barely sup-
presses a recognition of equality.
37 This pattern creates substantial dangers for the liberator, as the United States is learning
in Iraq, for with liberation comes a need to overcome years of humiliation, that is, to over-
come the shame of nature. A liberated population is more likely to be rebellious than a
politically repressed population. See F. Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth (C. Farrington,
trans. 1976); A. Memmi, The Colonizer and the Colonized (H. Greenﬁeld, trans. 1965).

168
■CHAPTER FOUR
The resource of Genesis one and the idea of moral equality can
always be used to question the inequalities that support the idea of
the shame of nature. Once that ambiguity is opened up, it is possible
to invert the practices of hierarchy and subordination. This move is
not an innovation of the abolitionists of the nineteenth century but
has always been a possibility in the West. If the native is denigrated
as merely natural because he lacks the signs of civilization, does the
colonizer’s action not demonstrate the same capacity for uncivilized,
merely natural behavior?38 Already in the early 1500s Las Casas fully
worked the transformation of values, labeling the conquistadors evil
and the indigenous the suffering innocent.39 This is the same message
that Conrad portrays in The Heart of Darkness, in which the colonizer
“goes native,” revealing the truth of the colonial enterprise to be the
shame of nature. From the beginning, labor is tainted with sin.
The politics of slavery or racism erects a symbolic order that would
suppress the appearance of the natural man. Metaphorically, man cov-
ers his natural self in clothes.40 In actual political life, man is clothed
with uniforms and insignia of rank, on the one hand, and with the
expressions of fashion, on the other. The substantially impenetrable
character of the symbolic world of the political is seen in its transfor-
mation of those sites that might otherwise most vividly express the
natural self. Birth becomes the origin of political identity, if not politi-
cal rank. Death becomes honorable sacriﬁce. Fighting becomes the
expression of political strength, the construction of history, and the
display of political virtue. There is no world of nature to be found
within this polity. In every direction we see only more of the symbolic
order, for it would be shameful were any of these activities to become
merely the expression of nature. We prevent this emergence of the
shame of nature in our own activities by projecting that shame com-
pletely upon an other. That other is the scapegoat, the slave, the native,
the black, the enemy who threatens to remind us that beneath the
38 See above at 151–52 on the instability of the terms “nature” and “culture.”
39 See Las Casas, A Short Account of the Deconstruction of the Indies.
40 In Genesis, the paradigmatic “covering up” is that performed by Noah’s sons, Shem
and Japheth, when they carefully avoid observing their father’s nakedness. Ham, who sees
too much and is too much of the body, suffers his father’s curse of his own son, Canaan,
who will be “the lowest of slaves.”

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■169
world of class, power, patriotism, and culture remains the shame of
our own nature: we are born like every other animal, and we die just
the same.
Corresponding to the construction of the slave as the shame of na-
ture is the construction of a master characterized by fear and guilt. He
cannot fear rebellion without implicitly acknowledging his own guilt.
Evil arises as fear dominates the guilt, producing an ever-increasing
repression and dehumanization. The greater the distance between
master and slave, the more the master’s world seems to depend on
exclusion of the slave. The fear of the slave rebellion is a fear that this
world will collapse. The slave states of the South claimed for them-
selves an especially “high” culture of honor, dignity, and tradition.
We always fear that the world in which we have invested our labor
and found our meaning will be exposed as nothing but a manifestation
of the Fall. We fear we will be exposed as worshiping idols, that is, as
nothing at all. This fear is deeply embedded in the Adam and Eve
myth. There the product of man’s labor is not spoken of with the
pride of achievement. This is not Hobbes describing the creation of
the Leviathan, or Burke describing the cumulative labor of generations
to create and maintain a civilization. Rather, it is the fear that all that
we build will fall apart. Civilization is no less mortal than the subject
who labors. The shame of our nature is not a condition that we leave
but only one that we cover up. It remains a constant accusation that
we are dust and to dust we will return.
CONCLUSION: REVOLUTION AND SLAVERY
Revolution, as Jefferson taught, is always the throwing off of those
who would treat us as slaves. Ideas prove their power in a community
by creating this distance from the merely natural. Jefferson and his
cosigners pledge to one another “our Lives, our Fortunes, and our
sacred Honor.” There is nothing natural—and so nothing shameful—
about this body that bears an idea. This is the sacriﬁcial act that founds
the political order; it remains a constant possibility carried forward
by the citizen’s self-identiﬁcation with that founding sacriﬁce.41 The
41 On the concept of the popular sovereign as the symbolic vehicle for this identiﬁcation
see chapter 5.

170
■CHAPTER FOUR
slave is imagined as failing to take this ﬁrst step of political founda-
tion. He is not an embodied idea at all; he remains, therefore, a part
of nature.
A world built on symbols is simultaneously the strongest and the
weakest of constructions, for it both founds a universe and can disap-
pear in an instant. When we maintain that world by projecting out-
ward the threat that nature poses to the symbolic, we create the condi-
tions for evil, for just then we defend our own humanity by making
the other less than human. We are not him. He lives a life of shame;
we live a life of culture. His life has no meaning; our life is one of
ultimate meaning. He is slave; we are masters. His life is bound always
to that wasting asset, which is the body. Our life may not be free of
death—that would claim too much—but does transform death itself
into an expression of an idea. Death becomes sacriﬁce for honor, love,
family, or nation. The master freely “pledges his life,” which is exactly
the moment at which he shows himself to have overcome the shame
of nature. This much Hegel got right.
This form of evil appears whenever the social order sustains its own
humanity by dehumanizing the other. The more precarious a society’s
own symbolic system, the more likely it is to seek support by pro-
jecting nature outside itself. Reciprocally, the more it does so, the more
it places itself at risk from rebellion. Thus colonial regimes were partic-
ularly brutal. Evil feeds upon itself but not without reason. There was
every reason to fear that a slave rebellion, were it to come, would
indeed be a very destructive affair. Revolutionary violence, when it
comes, may speak the language of universal equality, but frequently it
merely inverts the locus of the shame of nature. Now the old order is
recast as the shame of nature. The king must be killed to prove that
he is merely human: humiliation is his due.
Thus, Louis XVI is stripped of his place in the symbolic order of the
state and becomes merely citizen Louis Capet. Only in part is this an
expression of political equality in the new order, for Louis, along with
his spouse, Marie Antoinette, is viliﬁed in ways that directly suggest
the shame of nature. Both are the objects of pornographic representa-
tions; they are accused of crimes arising from uncontrolled desire; they

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■171
are charged with showing a kind of primitive fear in their ﬂight.42
Court society is no longer the expression of culture but is recast as the
natural life of predation, of the abuse of power for the ends of interest,
and of uncontrolled sexuality. To cut off the head of the king is to
conﬁrm the belief that he is not just another man sharing our world.
Rather, he is nothing but the shame of nature, to be expelled from the
new political order. The transformation of Louis from the symbolic
center of the state to the shame of nature shows the ﬂuidity of a sym-
bolic order structured around the antinomy of culture and nature.
Louis ends his life as slave, enemy, scapegoat. He moves from Christ
to Antichrist. So must every slave master have feared the rebellion of
the slave, just as every tyrant fears the rebellion of the repressed. They
fear, because they “know” they are guilty.
The problem, moreover, is not just one for tyrants. Louis XVI, after
all, was a reformist king, and many a colonialist had the best of inten-
tions. The shame of nature is an imaginative space, not a substantive
category against which we can measure behavior.43 The need to defend
the symbolic order against the shame of nature works in just the same
way for those who oppose revolutionary change. The conservative
defense of the state is cast as an opposition to the merely natural man
who would destroy civilization. Rebellion is rarely seen on its own
terms as a demand for equality. It is not seen as such, for civilization
itself seems to turn on maintenance of the inequality. Popular forces
are denigrated as the “mob,” which is driven by passion rather than
reason. Instead of proving a common humanity, rebellion is cast as
undeserving greed. The fear of rape is never far behind.
Such transformations of the locus of the shame of nature are charac-
teristic of the revolutions that follow the French revolutionary exam-
ple for the next two hundred years. Revolution is not understood as
political disagreement—a clash of political ideals—but rather as a con-
frontation between political truth and a state of nature characterized
42 See, e.g., R. Danton, The Forbidden Best-Sellers of Pre-Revolutionary France 225–26
(1996); M. Walzer, Regicide and Revolution: Speeches at the Trial of Louis XVI (1993).
43 President Clinton’s impeachment and viliﬁcation—also involving allegations of sex and
interest—was a modern version of Louis XVI’s humiliation. Surely there were those who
wanted his head. Fortunately it was a less revolutionary time.

172
■CHAPTER FOUR
by the predation of the ruling class. The source of that “political
truth” can be an appeal to an alternative conception of nature—Gene-
sis one remains a vibrant resource. But my point here is about the
political uses of Genesis two in order to legitimate inequality and sub-
ordination. Revolutionaries strip naked the old political leadership—
often the aristocracy—to reveal the hidden truth, which is that their
behavior has been only the shame of nature. There is an acting out of
just the vulnerability of the symbolic order that the revolutionary re-
lies upon, yet fears. He is right to fear it, for if the traditional order
can be shown to be nothing but the shame of nature, then the revolu-
tionary order can be subject to the same charge. It remains precarious,
and revolutionaries often end up victims of the violence they cultivate.
The Terror becomes the shame of the Revolution. The American Revo-
lution, for the most part, avoided the Terror. It may, however, have
purchased moderation by limiting its reach. Slavery remained, and
when ﬁnally it did go, the means for its removal were no less terrifying.
In American history, of course, the end of slavery hardly marks the
end of this conception of the shame of nature against which the politi-
cal and social order must protect itself. In the South, slavery is suc-
ceeded by Jim Crow. The Fuller Court at the turn of the century has
a deep fear of rebellion by the working class.44 This pattern of thought
is not limited to political conservatives. Those who would lead the
proletariat revolution of the twentieth century had no trouble identi-
fying the aristocracy or the capitalists or both with the shame of na-
ture. Surprisingly, we see the same conceptual form deployed by Han-
nah Arendt, when she writes that the people’s pursuit of the “social
question”—the demand for material necessities—destroys the possi-
bility of politics.45 This is only another version of the shame of nature.
The merely natural man is always just one step away from being
treated as the slave, for slavery is the institutional expression that con-
ﬁrms the difference between us and them, between satisfaction with a
world of symbolic meaning and the fear that that world is so intangi-
ble as to be nothing at all.46
44 See O. Fiss, Troubled Beginnings of the Modern State, 1888–1910 at 53–74 (1999).
45 See H. Arendt, On Revolution 22–24 (1965).
46 David Cannadine’s recent book, Ornamentalism: How the British Saw Their Empire
(2001), describes the peculiar character of the British imagination of their empire. In the
face of the social question at home—the “naturalization” of domestic politics by the rise of

SLAVERY AND THE SHAME OF NATURE
■173
The lines along which the distinction between the shame of nature
and the achievement of political culture will be drawn are not predict-
able in the abstract. Their substantive character is the product of their
deployment. We can say, however, that the deeper the faith in a sym-
bolic order—whether revolutionary or conservative—the more its sup-
porters will defend it against the shame of nature. This is partly a
matter of drawing on the willingness of members of a community to
sacriﬁce themselves—a pattern of belief explored in the next chapter.
It is also partially a matter of making a meaningful world unimagin-
able apart from the continuation of this belief system. The alternative
is seen as nothing but the shame of nature. This form of reasoning
reaches right back to that of the slave master who is conﬁdent that he
would choose death before he would be a slave.
There remains a kind of primal fear of returning to nature. Political
communities combat that fear by projecting nature onto the enemy,
the destruction of which will be the afﬁrmation of their own non-
natural life. Nature is not the friend of politics but its enemy. A liberal
political movement that understands the end of the state to be the
health and welfare of its citizens—their material well-being—is dan-
gerously close to slipping into the mythic formation of the shame of
nature.47 The place of evil in the contemporary politics of well-being
is the subject of the next chapter. The politics of well-being may have
overcome the shame of nature that was the slave’s, but it has left us
with just as challenging a form of evil: killing for the state. Slavery
and killing are two ways of driving out the shame of nature, two ways
of founding the ultimate meaning of politics by denying our own ﬁnite
character.
an industrial, urban, working class—an immense amount of political energy was invested
in the symbolic reconstruction of indigenous societies in the colonies. Those societies were
imagined as aristocratic, hierarchical, and rural, just as England had once been. There one
would ﬁnd the maintenance of the truth of politics, while England was succumbing to the
shame of nature. Rather than constructing the indigenous populations along the lines of
race—a category of natural inferiority—they were understood within the categories of class.
Class can be determined by birth, but just at that moment it can displace the merely natural
from the imagination. Not even at birth—or death—is the shame of nature allowed to pene-
trate the symbolic order.
47 This was Carl Schmitt’s complaint against liberalism. See C. Schmitt, The Concept of
the Political 60–61, 69–70 (G. Schwab, trans. 1996); see also G. Agamben, Homo Sacer:
Sovereign Power and Bare Life (D. Heller-Boazen, trans. 1998).

C H A P T E R
F I V E
■
■
■
■
POLITICAL EVIL: KILLING, SACRIFICE,
AND THE IMAGE OF GOD
Within modern, liberal states one generally ﬁnds belief in a narrative
of political progress. That narrative has three central elements. First,
there has been a transition from personal to democratic forms of
power—from kingdoms to republics. The people are the sole source
of legitimate power today. Expression of that power takes the form of
law. Second, there has been progress in the character and operation of
the law. This is a story of movement from a world of torture to one
of procedure, from the spectacle of the scaffold to the science of penol-
ogy. The ambition of modern law extends to the care of every citizen,
even to those who violate its proscriptions. The democratic, people’s
republic is, in this way, simultaneously the republic of law. Third, there
has been a humanization of war. This is, in part, a claim for battleﬁeld
discrimination such that the intent directly to injure is limited to com-
batants.1 Perhaps more important, war itself is increasingly displaced
by law—international law and transnational institutions of adjudica-
tion are to resolve disputes among nations. War, we tell ourselves, is
an anachronism in the modern age.
Each aspect of this narrative of political progress appeals, then, to
law. Indeed, the rule of law is the dominant theme of the entire narra-
tive. There is no space, within or without the modern state, that is
not to be regulated by law. This includes both democratic political
processes and the deployment of force, both internal self-regulation
and relationships to others. In the modern, liberal state, politics and
1 Even among combatants, the means of warfare are not unlimited. See Hague Conven-
tion IV, Annex, sec. II, art. 22 (“The right of belligerents to adopt means of injuring the
enemy is not unlimited”).

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■175
law are to be coterminous normatively and factually. Wherever there
is politics, there must be the rule of law.
The rule of law plays this central role in the narrative of progress,
because law is imagined as the realization of reason within the space
of political life. Thus the larger framework of the progressive narrative
is one that moves from a politics driven by the personal interests of a
privileged class to a politics of justice for all. Justice is the normative
claim of reason, and the aim of law is the realization of justice—on
this, both our jurisprudence and popular political ideals agree.2 This
political narrative is modeled on other forms of progressive narratives:
nature is tamed, sciences are purged of false belief, and economic pro-
duction is rationalized. In all these narratives, the issue is not historical
accuracy. Rather, they are ways of imagining the past (and the future)
from the perspective of contemporary values. In fact, politics never
lacked a conception of justice; science never lacked a conception of
truth. Nevertheless, the past is recast as a story leading to the present,
just as the future is cast as the space for the realization of contempo-
rary projects—a space for the realization of reason’s ends.
The political narrative of progress, then, is yet another version of
the story of the triumph of reason. The modern state appears as an
endless project of reform: every institution and arrangement is subject
to critique and improvement on the basis of reason. The rule of law
always includes deliberate mechanisms for the reform of law.3 An irra-
tional law, let alone an unjust law, is always an appropriate object of
critique. Critique is always the predicate for reform. Reform and rea-
son, however, to what end? Just like the myth of nature, the claim of
reason represents an imaginative possibility, not a substantive posi-
tion.4 Reason is not self-deﬁning. Not so long ago reason took the
form of theology: understanding the mind of God as it shows itself in
and through creation. Stripped of the sacred, a humbled reason today
is more likely to offer us a politics of well-being.
2 See, e.g., R. Dworkin, Law’s Empire (1986); J. Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1971);
O. Fiss, “The Supreme Court 1978 Term—Foreword: The Forms of Justice,” 93 Harv. L.
Rev. 1 (1979).
3 See H. L. A. Hart, The Concept of Law 92 (1961) (on secondary rules that allow for
revision of laws).
4 See above at 151.

176
■CHAPTER FIVE
The theological project had no particular connection to the body’s
well-being. Indeed, reason’s ambition, from within this earlier per-
spective, was better understood as seeking to understand pain as part
of the divine plan.5 In the contemporary liberal state, however, the
ediﬁce of reason is tightly bound to the health and well-being of the
body of the citizen—not the advancement of the interests of a particu-
lar group but the well-being of all. The liberal state does not generally
tell its citizens where or how they can realize their own ideas of a good
life. But it does assume that all such ideas include bodily well-being—
health, freedom from pain or want, and, of course, life itself. These
are necessary, although hardly sufﬁcient, conditions of every reason-
able idea of the good.
The well-being of the individual, understood quite literally as the
health of the body, is assumed to be the unproblematic foundation
for public policy. This is related to, but not the same as, the satisfac-
tion of interests that drives the economic order. Economic outcomes
are measured against citizen well-being in this more basic sense. De-
spite its economic success, the United States, for example, is not only
deeply criticized for its failure to assure universal access to high-qual-
ity health care but is itself in a kind of unending policy crisis over
how to advance toward this goal.6 Government cannot proclaim its
indifference to citizen well-being. It cannot deﬁne care of the body as
private—not a public concern—even if it is committed to the use of
private institutions to achieve that well-being. That does not mean
that governments are always successful, only that they will be mea-
sured by their success or failure to improve the health and well-being
of their citizens.
Health care is not different, in this respect, from general economic
performance. Both are fundamental public concerns quite apart from
the use of private institutions to advance these interests. Morbidity
rates stand right next to, if not above, the gross domestic product
as the ultimate measure of progress. A democratic politics is thought
“naturally” to pursue these ends: How could government by and for
5 See S. Neiman, Evil in Modern Thought (2002) (arguing that modern philosophy can
best be understood as driven by the problem of theodicy).
6 Health care reform has been at the center of the domestic policy agenda of the most
recent Democratic and Republican administrations.

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■177
the people fail to seek the health and well-being of its citizens? We
conclude the general narrative of progress, then, with a contrast be-
tween contemporary biopolitics, the end of which is the minimization
of the body’s pain and the maximization of its health, and the premod-
ern state in which the end of the state seemed often to be the produc-
tion of pain, whether as punishment or warfare.7
Reason turns to the body’s well-being in an effort to ground what
would otherwise be an abstract discourse of progress. Nevertheless,
this grounding can only be partially successful. Neither formal reason
nor material well-being tell us anything about our relationship to the
particular communities of which we are members. Both fail to set forth
a history that is ours or a destiny about which we should care. Progress
in the development of reason—including the medical and productive
sciences—is a common possession of mankind. In the concern for
well-being, all individuals are the same. No one has a stronger claim
than anyone else for health or well-being. We see the impulse toward
the universal, for example, in utilitarianism, which theorizes the appli-
cation of reason to well-being. Indeed, the logic of utilitarianism not
only transcends particular communities but moves beyond man him-
self to a concern for the well-being of other species.8
This progressive narrative has not gone unchallenged. The modern
era has generated a counternarrative as well. In this account, the state
remains deeply invested in the production of pain. This is the narrative
that begins not in the hospital but in the concentration camps; that
registers a gap between the reformist ambition of penal science and
the practice of incarceration; that notes the deployment of weapons
of mass destruction threatening entire populations; that perceives the
disappearance of the spectacle of the scaffold but sees in its place the
rise of mass armies. This narrative takes as its reference points the
trench warfare of the First World War, the mass bombings of the Sec-
ond World War, the terrorizing tactics of the wars of decolonization,
the recurrent outbreaks of civil war, and the proliferating threats from
weapons of mass destruction. The liberal state, no less than the non-
7 The word “biopolitics” is derived from Foucault’s concept of “biopower.” He uses it
to identify a politics directed at the maintenance of populations. See M. Foucault, History
of Sexuality vol. 1, at 143 (R. Hurley, trans. 1980).
8 See P. Singer, Animal Liberation (1975).

178
■CHAPTER FIVE
liberal state, has been intimately involved in these phenomena. The
United States, for example, imprisons well over two million men—
a portion of its population equivalent to that of South Africa under
apartheid.9 It maintains armed forces of roughly similar size.10 Until
recently, the history of modern Europe was one of concentration
camps and confrontations between mass armies, not to speak of the
European involvement in colonial and neocolonial efforts. Leading
liberal states have not seen a problem with their own possession of
weapons of mass destruction.11 In this counternarrative, the symbol
of political power remains the body in pain, and the measure of power
is the capacity to produce pain. Not surprisingly, the contemporary
threat of terrorism makes a claim to political power based on its ability
to inﬂict bodily pain.
The modern nation-state may understand itself as caring for the
body, but it is not clear that we have become generally safer as a result
of modern political developments. This was self-evident during the
Cold War, with its imminent threat of mutual assured destruction. It
took only twelve years after the end of the Cold War for the specter
of mass destruction to again haunt the political imagination. Political
identity in the contemporary world remains a source of deadly danger.
This is true not just in those states struggling with civil war but in
Western liberal states as well. We are potential targets because we are
Americans—or British or Spanish—and we respond to that perceived
threat through our own deployments of force. The United States never
disarmed after the Cold War. Today Europeans debate the need to
create a military capability coordinate with the changing character of
the European Union and the contemporary perceptions of threat.
This counternarrative of pain is a bounded narrative. Well-being
points to the universal, but pain particularizes.12 Pain always seems
9 See U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics Bulletin, July 2003.
10 As of September 30, 2004, there were 1.5 million active-duty military, with another
1.2 million national guard and reservists. See Department of Defense, Selected Manpower
Statistics, Fiscal Year 2004.
11 Despite the formal obligation set forth in the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty to move
toward a world free of nuclear weapons, no nuclear state has ever expressed a real interest
in giving up its weapons—apart from some remnants of the Soviet Union.
12 Tolstoy starts Anna Karenina with the line: “All happy families are alike but an un-
happy family is unhappy after its own fashion” (R. Edmunds, trans. 1978).

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■179
exceptional. It intrudes into our lives, stopping our ordinary progress
and concerns. In the ﬁrst instance, suffering pain makes us aware of
ourselves in a way that excludes others.13 We feel quite literally that
others cannot share our pain. Pain makes us lonely. While well-being
leads us out into the world, pain tends to focus attention inwardly. As
the intensity of pain increases, the boundaries of our world tend to
contract. Pain is not just a metaphor for death but a part of the very
substance of death. Just as my death is my own, so is my pain. Extreme
pain is often thought to be worse than death. Moderns argue about
whether suicide is a justiﬁed response to pain; premoderns represented
Hell as a place of perpetual pain.
An overwhelming pain may close off the world entirely, limiting the
self to the boundaries of the body. It is hard to pursue the well-being
of others when suffering one’s own pain. This is true not just of indi-
viduals but of societies as well. A society suffering economically or
physically—from whatever source—will focus on itself to the exclu-
sion of others. While pain may cause the world of the sufferer to shrink
into the self, pain does not remove the sufferer from our common,
human world. I may not see others through my physical pain, but
others surely see me. When a child, friend, or lover suffers pain, his
or her pain can constitute our world. If love is a disinterested caring
for the success and well-being of the beloved, then we cannot help but
suffer the pain of the object of our love. We do not simply “carry on”
or go about our usual business in the face of such pain.
Pain, accordingly, is a phenomenon of human meaning; it is an espe-
cially powerful source of political meanings. It marks the borders of
a community of care. At the foundation of the Christian myth is the
claim that Christ suffered for all of us; he has taken on our pain
through a universal love.14 To show equal care for all pain is to consti-
tute a universal community—the aspiration of the Church. Unlike
Christ, we do not take up the pain of all others. For us, a community
of pain is a bounded community, just as love is always for a particular
individual or community. The boundaries of pain are the boundaries
13 See E. Scarry, The Body in Pain: The Making and Unmaking of the World 4–5 (1985).
14 For this reason, however, Christian martyrs are often represented as not suffering pain
at all. Theirs is a beatiﬁc experience.

180
■CHAPTER FIVE
of love, for I suffer the pain of those I love. Indeed, it is not too much
to say that one cares about one’s own pain because of a love of the
self.15 Indifference to the pain of those one loves is unimaginable, ex-
cept as that form of evil which was the subject of my argument in
chapter 3: the ﬂight from that recognition of death—and pain—that
necessarily accompanies love.
A state, like an individual, organizes its history around pain. It is a
story of battles fought, of war and threats of war, of disasters—natural
and man-made—overcome. When we commemorate loss, we ac-
knowledge that the pain is ours. It tells us who we are: we are the
people who have suffered this pain—others have not.16 When we lose
the memory of that pain, we lose the connection to that earlier commu-
nity. Its experiences strike us in the same way as those of any other
foreign community: subjects about which we may learn and to which
we may extend sympathy, but about which we do not care.
This counternarrative of pain is surely not the only history that is
or can be written; it is not even the favored form of professional his-
tory today. Nevertheless, even in the modern state, the counternarra-
tive is encountered as a story of past sacriﬁce. It provides the founda-
tion for a patriotic identiﬁcation with the community—love of nation.
It provides the national myth. Thus the counternarrative of demo-
cratic pain succeeds the narrative of royal succession. That, too, was
a narrative of life and death, focused, however, on the body of the
king. The move from the monarch as sovereign to the people as sover-
eign relocates the suffering body that bears the state. It does not aban-
don what I have called the counternarrative of suffering for that of
well-being but locates that suffering in every citizen.
The popular sovereign truly emerges when all members of the polity
can experience the pain of politics. This is not a matter of extending
the franchise but of a revolution in the political imagination. All citi-
zens are equal, when all read the same history of suffering as their
pain, and all stand equally before the threat of future pain—sacriﬁce—
for the state. Institutionally, this demand for an equality of suffering
15 See H. Frankfurt, The Reasons of Love 79–80 (2004).
16 At the center of the Jewish Passover service is a line that always puzzles children but
which they repeat yearly in the formulation of the counternarrative: “It is because of this
that the Lord did for me when I left Egypt.”

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■181
expresses itself in the extension of military service to groups previously
excluded: participation in the military expresses equal dignity within
a democratic state. Groups excluded will not see in that exclusion
good fortune but a stigma of shame.
Implicit in the imagination of the democratic state is a deep rejection
of that ideal of modern humanitarian law, which insists upon a distinc-
tion between combatants and noncombatants. That is an aristocratic
ideal in tension with the democracy of pain that founds the modern
state in the revolutionary action of the popular sovereign. At the heart
of this state, accordingly, we ﬁnd a commitment not to the principle
of discrimination on the battleﬁeld but to the willing sacriﬁce of all
the national resources—human and material—for the purpose of pre-
serving the state. All can be called upon to sacriﬁce—to suffer—for
the maintenance of the state.17 Nuclear weapons are the perfect expres-
sion of democratic pain. A policy of mutual assured destruction is the
endpoint of the counternarrative.18 Just as the narrative ends in a vi-
sion of well-being under the regime of reason, the counternarrative
ends in a vision of universal self-sacriﬁce founded on a love of nation.
The attachment of politics to pain, accordingly, is not simply a pre-
modern phenomenon. At the core of modern political belief has been
the imagination of violence: the Western idea of democratic citizenship
entails the possibility of killing and being killed for the state.19 Nothing
is easier to describe than the horror of the battleﬁeld. Yet, despite our
knowledge of that horror, we celebrate a political history of achieve-
ment on the battleﬁeld.20 The West not only experienced the destruc-
tion of a generation of young men in the First World War, it pursued
the Second World War to the point of genocide and the destruction of
European material wealth and civil society. My point is not that all
the participants in these wars are to be judged equally accountable,
that all violated moral norms, or that we cannot make normative dis-
17 This is linked to the demand for unconditional surrender: all the resources of the enemy
state must be emptied of their political meaning.
18 See P. Kahn, “Nuclear Weapons and the Rule of Law,” 31 NYU J. Int’l. L & P. 349
(1999).
19 On the history of the citizen as soldier, see V. Hanson, Carnage and Culture: Landmark
Battles in the Rise of Western Power (2001).
20 For a recent reﬂection on this phenomenon, see C. Hedges, War Is a Force That Gives
Us Meaning (2002).

182
■CHAPTER FIVE
tinctions between the politics of the different nations. Rather, it is that
the imaginative connection of politics to violence remains vibrant. My
own generation has lived its entire life under the threat of mutual as-
sured destruction. The ordinary background condition of our lives has
been the constant possibility that we will die for the sake of our politi-
cal identity: where and how are accidents of circumstance. This will-
ingness to hold an entire population hostage to political meanings is
now celebrated as victory in the Cold War. More than anything else,
the Cold War should have taught us that modern political identity
extends to everybody the possibility of pain and the demand for sacri-
ﬁce. If we missed that lesson then, surely the contemporary war on
terror is teaching it again.
The narrative and counternarrative of the modern state, accord-
ingly, exist in deep tension. The former links reason to well-being; the
latter links love to pain. Pain is the enemy of reason but not of love.
The narrative leads toward the universal; the counternarrative cele-
brates the particular. The former generates law; the latter, sacriﬁce.
Advancing the interests of the individual in his or her own well-being,
the narrative imagines the state as nothing more than a transitional
point in the progressive development of a universal legal order in
which the well-being of every individual will be of equal concern. The
counternarrative focuses on the special character of the particular
state to is own citizens. It speaks of friends and enemies, not universal
care. This counternarrative commemorates past pain and speaks of
future sacriﬁce. Narrative and counternarrative are literally at war
with each other, and often at war in the single individual. One appeals
to well-being, the other to pain; one imagines a universal order, the
other a bounded community; one appeals to reason, the other to will.
From the perspective of the narrative, the counternarrative repre-
sents the pathology of politics. The counternarrative offers a politics
of killing and being killed as the history of the state. It takes only a
slight shift of perspective—the shift from sacriﬁce to well-being—to
see in this the great evil of the modern era. Thus contemporary liberal
theorists are likely to see the idea of sovereignty not as the foundation
of political meaning but as a threat to a rational politics. What can
be rational about the celebration and willing suffering of pain? The
narrative rejects a politics of pain as nothing more than a failure of
reason. It links the development of human rights law, which seeks to

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■183
prevent torture, to the development of humanitarian law, which seeks
to minimize the suffering attendant to warfare.21 In both cases, the
ambition is to secure a politics of reasonableness—that is, a politics
that no longer expresses itself through the inﬂiction and suffering of
pain. It ﬁnds here the face of evil in modern politics.22
This may be the greatest puzzle in the inquiry into evil: Has the
Western nation-state itself become so bound up with the production
of pain that we must condemn the entire history of that political form
as an expression of evil? While we need to distinguish between good
and bad among these political regimes—democracies are not the
moral equivalent of totalitarian regimes—these distinctions may
themselves occur within a domain of profound evil. A state that simul-
taneously devotes its resources to health care and weapons of mass
destruction can never decide whether it is founded on the narrative or
the counternarrative. Somehow the two narratives have become
tightly bound to each other. Had the politics of sovereignty produced
a nuclear exchange—a threat not yet gone—could we take any other
position than to condemn this politics as the greatest of evils, regard-
less of whether the bombs were launched in the “defense of freedom”?
To make sense of the evil of political violence, we need to return again
to Genesis, for the Genesis myth tell us that even the best we can do
in the world of labor will never be enough to escape our fallen condi-
tion. Is this not precisely the political condition within which we ﬁnd
ourselves?
POLITICAL LABOR
To be expelled from the Garden is to fall into the space for human
construction—the world of labor. That construction is possible be-
cause man now knows the good. He knows it, however, as idea, not
material fact. The material nature upon which he labors is, in itself,
21 See, e.g., T. Meron, “The Convergence between Human Rights and Humanitarian
Law,” in Human Rights and Humanitarian Laws: The Quest for Universality (D. Werner,
ed. 1997).
22 In a new book, Christopher Hedges describes this evil—that is, a willingness to sacriﬁce
for the state—as a form of “idolatry,” just the form of argument I describe in chapter 2
above—the worship of nothing at all. See C. Hedges, Losing Moses on the Freeway: Ameri-
ca’s Broken Covenant with the Ten Commandments (2005); see also M. Howard, Wars and
the Liberal Conscience (1978).

184
■CHAPTER FIVE
devoid of any meaning. Man goes from a paradise in which being and
the good are identical to a space in which being and the good are
linked only through the mediation of his own labor. Without labor,
the world will produce nothing. It remains “dust.” It confronts man
as the ontological emptiness that is death. Thus to dust man will re-
turn. After the Fall, all life occurs in the shadow of death. As soon as
his labor stops, man dies, and his world falls apart. Whatever meaning
the world has, it is the meaning that has been put there by man’s labor,
not by God’s creative act.
A world that we are to understand as meaningful must therefore be
a fully human world. The point, however, is not that man is free to
judge the good however he pleases, rather, every event, object, and
person we ﬁnd in our world appears to us as an idea given material
form through our own labor. When we understand the world, we un-
derstand the ideas that founded that world. Absent those ideas that
inform our labor, the world would be literally nothing at all. Labor
may appear as punishment for eating of the forbidden tree, but the
knowledge produced by that mythical act of consumption is a neces-
sary condition of labor. We see this clearly when we come across an
artifact of another culture, of which we cannot make sense. We do not
know it as a thing. Instead, we apprehend it only as a question. We
say, “What is it?” or, “What purpose did it serve?” We understand
objects in the world when we can read them as representations of
ideas.23 This is not merely a condition of the artifact. Dropped into an
unknown place, we ask, “Where are we?” We answer that question
by setting this space in relation to all the other spaces we know—those
are spaces that have been shaped by human labor. We place ourselves
within a geography of cultural and emotional space. Similarly, we ask
of a stranger, “Who is he?” And, with that, we invite entry into a
world of relations, friends, and known others. A person with no such
connections is not just a stranger but rather represents the pathology
of a person who has “forgotten” his identity; he is no one at all.
Ideas may seem the most ephemeral of things, but, given material
form, our ideas far outlast us. A person may long for immortality, but
23 Compare R. Barthes, “The Death of Author,” in Image, Music, Text (S. Heath,
trans. & ed. 1977).

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■185
his body is a rapidly wasting asset. When he gives material shape to
his ideas, however, he puts himself into the world in a way that en-
dures. We ﬁnd the pot shard in the streets of Athens. We know that it
was the product of a particular subject, who held it in his hands and
gave it shape. He is forgotten, but the artifact that is the product of
his ideas endures. What is true of a pot shard is all the more true of
our great works of art, from cathedrals to books to symphonies. We
impress our ideas upon the world, and they endure. Labor makes a
world that is our own. The ancients understood this well. When they
attacked an enemy, they aimed to destroy this material instantiation
of the will. They razed the city, killed the men, and sold the women
and children into slavery. This is what it means to destroy a world: to
leave no artifact or person that can be read as an expression of the
idea of that world.
This fully human world does not maintain itself; there is no day of
rest. Man spends his entire life laboring to shape and sustain a mean-
ingful world. Because the material of the world does not take form
easily, labor entails violence. This is equally true in politics: it requires
a good deal of labor to shape a resistant population into the represen-
tation of an idea. Political violence is never the molding of the merely
natural into the human world of order, for there is no “natural” in the
domain of politics. The violence of politics cannot be understood as
if it were a lack or an absence of something else, a mere negation
without a meaning of its own. Violence is not a forgetting of ourselves.
Rather, to create our polity, we may have to destroy someone else’s.
To sustain one set of political meanings, we have to defeat alternative
possibilities. The nation’s history is a story of suffering for the sake of
political ideas. Any particular narrative is only as secure as the victory
it records.
This is the lesson that Thucydides conveys in his description of the
Athenian expedition against the Melians. Not only is ours a fully
human world, but it is already a fully occupied world. From the Athen-
ian perspective, there were only two possibilities for the Melians: ei-
ther they were part of the world of Sparta or that of Athens. If they
chose Sparta, then the Athenians were prepared to make them into
nothing at all. Athenian power existed in its opposition to Spartan

186
■CHAPTER FIVE
power.24 Of course, had the Melians had sufﬁcient power, they could
have constructed their own world as neither that of Sparta nor that of
Athens. To do so, they would have had to ﬁght both Athens and
Sparta. What they could not do was to express that idea of themselves
without the power to make it real. Ideas become real through the ap-
plication of force—labor—to build and sustain a world. The destruc-
tion of the Melians was all about an idea: the Athenian idea that if
you are not part of our world, then you will not be at all. There is no
empty space, no unclaimed peoples, no terre nulla, as the expression
went in classic international law. This ancient conﬂict was, in this re-
spect, not very different from the modern conﬂict over spheres of in-
ﬂuence in the Cold War.25 Today we see the test of an American politi-
cal idea in Iraq. We cannot know in advance whether the United States
and its allies have the power to give sustained material reality to that
idea. It may very well be that Americans are not willing to suffer or
cause much pain for this idea in this place at this time.
The ideology of nineteenth-century colonization teaches us some-
thing here as well. The Europeans often understood their colonial pop-
ulations as not yet fully civilized. They were like children, requiring
further formation fully to realize the truth of their own being.26 If they
had been seen as a fully formed other, then the imperial attitude would
have been that of Athens toward Sparta: the destruction of the mean-
ing of that otherness. In this sense, recognition of the other may be
more dangerous than the paternalism of quasi-recognition. My point
is not to justify European colonialism but to see the connection be-
tween destruction and construction, between violence and pedagogy.
In politics, they are inseparable.27 At stake is the construction of a
human world—our world, not someone else’s. Colonization always
24 See Thucydides, History of the Peloponnesian War, Book V, ch. 17.
25 Or, for that matter, President Bush’s description of the obligations of other nations in
the war on terror: “You’re either with us or against us in the ﬁght against terror.” See S.
Tay, “Perspectives on Terrorism from Asia, the United States and the Middle East,” 28
Fletcher Forum of World Affairs 113, 117 (2004) (quoting Bush from Nov. 6, 2001).
26 See R. Jackson, Quasi States: Sovereignty, International Relations and the Third World
(1990).
27 Indeed, much of postmodern political theory has explored the violence implicit in the
constructive project of modern politics. See, e.g., M. Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The
Birth of the Prison (A. Sheridan, trans. 1977).

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■187
had this double track of military violence and civic construction.
When a state gave up the latter, it became merely another form of
imperial occupation.28
The extension of one’s own world inevitably appears as a good
thing. Symbolic orders are complete: they make sense of an entire
world. The market wants to go global, just as information “wants to
be free.” For most nineteenth-century Europeans, it was not conceiv-
able that the truth of Christianity should not be relevant everywhere:
at stake was “civilization.” Today we are more likely to speak of multi-
culturalism and respect for the other, but this is hardly a concession
to the boundaries of symbolic forms. Contemporary discourses of uni-
versality speak of markets, rights, and democracies. Our respect for
the other is an afﬁrmation of our own value of tolerance. A pressing
question for many today is whether we—the United States and other
modern, Western states—are willing to use force to extend this world.
In its ordinary appearance, then, political violence is a form of labor.
It is an expression of the will by which a political order extends itself
by forming the beliefs of those subject to the authority of the state.
When we approach political life in this way, we view violence as we
do other forms of labor: as a means to an end. We speak of casualities
as costs to be measured against gains. We hope to keep the casualty
count low as we set about extending our own political authority. We
hope to exercise coercion in more efﬁcient ways. We think that the
point of the violence is not to eliminate its immediate targets but to
“break the will”—change the beliefs—of those who survive. This is
true whether we apply violence internally as criminal punishment or
externally as war. The destruction of the Melians had as its point not
mere destruction but impressing Athenian power upon other allies
who might have contemplated breaking out of the alliance. The same
spectacle of violence can be witnessed today in the American interven-
tion in Iraq. As von Clausewitz pronounced, “War is the continuation
of politics by other means.”29
If political violence were only a means to an end, then there would
be reason to think that we could pursue a program of reform to mini-
28 The classic example is the Belgian rule in the Congo, but consider also the early Spanish
occupation of South and Central America, and the Japanese occupation of China.
29 C. von Clausewitz, On War 605 (M. Howard & P. Paret, eds. & trans. 1976).

188
■CHAPTER FIVE
mize its costs. This is always the ideal of labor: to reduce the burden
of work. We dream of accomplishing our end of fully investing the
world with meaning without exhausting our limited resources. In the
domain of political meanings, that dream often takes the form of law,
which is to be a “machine that will go of itself.” Just as we seek to
replace domestic violence with law enforcement and adjudication, we
hope we can replace war with international law and courts. The
spread of Western ideas in the era of colonization was as much a mat-
ter of proselytizing, pedagogy, and institutional construction as of
brute violence. Today we compare the effectiveness of “soft” power
with that of “hard.”30 These are all elements of the narrative of prog-
ress. Suffering from political violence, on this view, is not exactly the
pathology of politics, but still it is pure cost. Past political history is
tainted by this pain. A liberal politics is progressively moving toward
a politics of pedagogy in place of painful coercion. The critique of
liberal politics is often an effort to show just how coercive and painful
politics remains for its intended beneﬁciaries. In this respect, the cri-
tique, too, remains within the boundaries of the imagination of labor,
for, no less than the narrative, it believes that labor’s end is bodily
well-being.
If political violence is a form of labor, it is bad but not evil. We may,
of course, do terrible things in the course of political labor. This is just
what the Athenians told the Melians; the same thing has been repeated
ever since. Politics is a labor of violence and suffering. Individuals
will be injured and die, but they do so as well in every form of labor.
Nineteenth-century industrialization probably produced as much in-
jury as nineteenth-century politics.31 Stalin’s economic policies were
no less brutal than his politics. Application of criminal punishment is
not evil, even if we would prefer a world in which it was not necessary.
War is no different in this respect: we regret the losses, but we believe
the beneﬁts exceed the costs. Of course, from the perspective of the
individual victim, suffering is a terrible thing. But suffering in all
forms—disease, poverty, injury, back-breaking labor—is terrible. If
30 See J. Nye, Soft Power: The Means to Success in World Politics (2004).
31 See J. Witt, The Accidental Republic: Crippled Workmen, Destitute Widows, and the
Remaking of American Law (2004).

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■189
the labor of politics produces more suffering than necessary, it should
certainly be condemned as misguided and wrong. Under many condi-
tions, we may properly regard it as unjust.
Nevertheless, we cannot take the production of pain as the measure
of evil in politics without losing hold of the special threat of evil. The
evil of twentieth-century political violence—and now that of the
twenty-ﬁrst century—is misunderstood if approached merely as the
cost of labor. As labor it makes little sense: wars generally extract
costs far greater than their possible beneﬁts. Wars can be fought over
claims to quite unproductive territory; they are fought over conﬂicting
ideas, beliefs, or historical claims. Viewed from the perspective of the
well-being of each individual, all would be better off if disputes were
settled by arbitration or if those groups that hold different beliefs ac-
cepted a modus vivendi practice of political tolerance. If the body’s
well-being is the end of politics, then war makes no sense, and criminal
punishment should be replaced by rehabilitation and remediation.
Well-meaning individuals are always ready to suggest alternative
forms of labor that are not only more humane but more efﬁcient. But
politics is not merely a matter of social engineering, because pain is
not simply a cost.
POLITICAL SACRIFICE
Political violence is more than labor when it occupies a space of unme-
diated meaning. Violence can be the point at which politics sets itself
against the desacralization of the world. This is no longer violence as
a means of impressing the will upon the world. It is violence as self-
sacriﬁce, not as labor. There are not more or less efﬁcient ways to
engage in sacriﬁce. There are no ﬁnite measures available as we ap-
proach the sacred. Sacriﬁce and labor both work in a medium of pain,
but they are not the same. Labor’s end is to alleviate pain, to minimize
resistance to production. The end of sacriﬁce is not to alleviate the
pain of labor but to transcend the conditions of labor. This is the fun-
damental tension that produces the contemporary conﬂict in the lib-
eral state between the narrative and the counternarrative, for pain ap-
pears in the counternarrative as the testimony of self-sacriﬁce.

190
■CHAPTER FIVE
Hobbes claimed that in creating the Leviathan man was acting in
the image of God—he, too, becomes a maker of a world. This idea of
creation is the project of labor that characterizes man after the Fall.
Politics, however, is not just about labor. It is equally about recovery
of a prelapsarian experience of the unity of being and meaning. The
political name for that experience is sovereignty. Hobbes got the name
right, but he never offered an adequate explanation of that one power
that characterizes the sovereign: the power to claim the life of the
citizen. Hobbes could not do so because he thought the whole point
of the labor of politics was to put off the moment of death, that is, to
pursue the well-being of the body. If so, for politics to require the
citizen’s death is a logical contradiction. Yet this is exactly what we
ﬁnd. Hobbes’s Leviathan may shift the ﬁeld of killing from civil to
international war—although often not even that shift occurs—but
there is no reason to think that an international ﬁeld of battle offers
the Hobbesian individual a life any less nasty, brutish, or short than
that from which he ﬂed in the state of nature. If sovereignty is a power
over life and death, then, we cannot understand politics simply as the
labor of fallen man.
For the individual, the difference between the Hobbesian state of
nature and the organized state is not the difference between violence
and peace, or death and life, but between the ﬁght for survival and
sacriﬁce for the polity. The struggle for survival is always a form of
labor. Laboring, man hopes to come to feel at home in the world that
he creates. This is the end of a politics of well-being.32 No matter how
successful an individual is in this task of construction, man can never
fully overcome the separation between himself as subject and the
world as object. The permanence of that separation is realized in
the thought of his own death: when he dies, the world goes on with-
out him.
A politics of well-being can put off death, but it cannot overcome
the very thing it would avoid. Contrary to Hobbes’s claim, we do not
ﬁnd ourselves to be an image of God as laborers, for labor ties us to
32 This is why contemporary game theorists are so interested in Hobbes: politics for them
is an answer to a problem of labor. See, e.g., D. Gauthier, The Logic of Leviathan (1969);
G. Kavka, Hobbesian Moral and Political Theory (1986).

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■191
death. Adam cannot save himself no matter how well he performs the
task of labor. He can do no more than pass on this task to the next
generation. The sacred is literally not of this world. Yet the sacred is
where man knows he belongs, for he knows that he is an image of
God. Only through sacriﬁce does the separation of subject from object
collapse: only in this act are being and meaning one and the same. The
sacriﬁced object is not re-formed but sanctiﬁed. It becomes a point for
the showing forth of the sacred. Ultimately the object of sacriﬁce must
be man himself, for it is man who must realize an ultimate meaning.
Just as the Genesis myth grounds an idea of political labor, it pro-
vides a source for the Western idea of sovereignty that can support a
practice of political sacriﬁce. According to the myth, man’s role in the
Garden includes the naming of creation: “whatever the man called
every living creature, that was its name.” God speaks the world into
existence. Naming creation, man gives words to the text that is cre-
ation. Naming creation is a kind of reading of the text authored by
God. This process of naming/reading constitutes a kind of reverse
image of God speaking. To name is to possess in a representational
form. The prelapsarian world of Adam, accordingly, has an inner and
an outer form. Outwardly Adam occupies a place in a created world—
the Garden. Inwardly he doesn’t occupy a single place but possesses
the whole of that world. Naming creation, Adam is more than a part;
he is the point at which the whole is present to itself. The implicit
dangers of language, which is always an image of the divine power of
creation, are fully realized in the story of the Tower of Babel: a second
story of the Fall.
Man is an image of God, because he symbolically reproduces all of
creation. Before the Fall, the truth of a proposition is not separate
from the act of speech. God’s speech creates its own truth—and so
does man’s. We cannot ask whether a name is true or false. Naming,
like creation itself, is a performative utterance. If creation is good in
itself, then the symbolic doubling of creation has that same quality.
After the Fall, there is no longer a necessary correspondence between
being and representation. Just as man must struggle to produce the
object of his labor, he must struggle to understand the object of his
representations. Not only does labor take time but so, too, does

192
■CHAPTER FIVE
speech. Just as labor can go wrong, so, too, can the proposition. A
fallen world is one in which error is not only possible but is expected.
Accordingly, the gap between subject and object appears in both
labor and language. The existential loneliness of ﬁnite man is rooted
in this separation from his world. We experience that separation most
intensely in our foreknowledge of our own death. Ironically, death is
one of the few certainties among our beliefs. That very knowledge,
however, renders all else that we know uncertain. Because we will
die, we know that we will never complete the projects of labor or
knowledge. We know, moreover, that the objects of our labor are as
tenuous as the propositions we construct. Both may outlast us, but
neither escapes the decay that is the material world. Today we know
as scientiﬁc fact what had been metaphysical fear: history itself will
come to an end. Our end is followed by the end of all. It does not
matter how far away the end is, for the eschatological imagination
spans all time. The modern biopolitics of health represents one form
of response to the limitations of labor: we aim to conquer death by
endlessly putting it off. But death delayed can never answer the meta-
physical demand for death transcended.
Bound to labor and death, we nevertheless have an idea of ourselves
as subjects of inﬁnite value, not bound to labor at all. This is the pre-
lapsarian subject who is an image of God. This is the subject who
has named all of creation, and thus possesses the whole before any
task of labor even begins. This subject knows himself as an endless
resource that is always more than any ﬁnite project of labor. He has a
memory of the self as the point at which being and consciousness are
identical. This subject can never ﬁnd himself fully in the world that is
the product of labor, for labor cannot encompass the inﬁnite character
of the subject.
Death literally makes no sense to a subject who knows himself as
inﬁnitely more than the world he occupies. In myth, it is not immortal-
ity that needs to be explained, but death, for death is a contradiction
to the soul’s self-knowledge. The subject longs for immortality but not
as an endless task of labor and speech. He longs for immortality as
recovery of the subject he knows himself already to be, not the product
of labor but the foundation of a world of meaning that labor and
language seek to elaborate. The myth of recovery is always a myth of

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■193
overcoming this separation of subject and object. In politics we ex-
press that recovery as sovereignty, which is always imagined as com-
plete in and of itself.33
Prior to the age of revolution, it certainly was not true that all men
were created equal. Difference was not just material and political.
There was a metaphysical gap between sovereign and subject. Genesis
was a cultural resource of immense symbolic value in providing an
understanding of difference, just as it has more recently informed an
understanding of equality. In both instances, however, it provided a
resource for interpretation, not a particular plan for political or reli-
gious action.
For the sovereign to be close to God, he had to take up Adam’s
position. Accordingly, the central symbolism of the Western concep-
tion of the sovereign invokes the idea of a “new Adam, the successor to
Christ.”34 The sovereign recovers what fallen man has lost: an intimate
relationship between the ﬁnite and the inﬁnite. Thus the sovereign
exists in different dimensions of time and space from ordinary people:
the sovereign is the point of showing forth of the inﬁnite. His body is
not what it seems but is fully invested in the symbolic dimension. His
true being is as the “mystical corpus of the state.” His body is coexten-
sive with the state, not as a map but as a presence. Just as the sovereign
is omnipresent, he is timeless: the sovereign never dies, even as particu-
lar manifestations of the sovereign come and go. His knowledge is as
complete as his presence, not because he can put his knowledge in
propositional form but because, for him, being and knowing are one
and the same. He is omniscient but not encyclopedic. Just as the body
of Christ is the Church, the body of the sovereign is the state.
The sovereign does not labor because he is already metaphysically
complete. If he does not die, there can be no shame connected to his
body.35 Rather than turning from the body in shame, there is a ritualis-
33 See Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its Place 259–79 (on completeness of sovereignty).
Whether this conception of sovereignty is actually realized in the material reality of state-
to-state relations is quite a different question. To ask that question is like asking whether
the completeness of God is actually realized in the world. On the failure of sovereign realiza-
tion, see S. Krasner, Organized Hypocrisy (1999).
34 See C. Lefort, “The Permanence of the Theological Political?” in Democracy and Polit-
ical Theory 213, 250 (D. Macey, trans. 1988).
35 See chapter 4.

194
■CHAPTER FIVE
tic celebration of the king’s body.36 His private functions become mat-
ters of public concern. To be close to that body is to be in the presence
of the sacred. Furthermore, he can do no wrong, because there is no
gap between idea and act. In him, as in God, word and deed are one
and the same. Thus his word is law; the courts of law speak in his
name.37 He is not subject to the law because he is the law—a position
Christ claimed as well. His judgment decides the fate of the individual
and thus literally creates its own truth. Guilt or innocence, friend or
enemy, life or death are expressions of the sovereign voice. For the
sovereign, is and ought are one and the same. The sovereign thereby
claims recovery of that power originally granted to man: the power to
name being. This is the ultimate meaning of a politics of sovereignty:
citizens hold property and even life itself only as an expression of the
sovereign voice.
Wherever we achieve an immediate relationship between the idea
and its material presence—a relationship unmediated by labor—we
are in the presence of the sacred. This is the structure of the miraculous
and the magical; it is also the structure of sovereignty. Thus a king
who could create political reality by his word alone could also cure
the sick by his touch alone: a common practice right up to the age of
revolution.38 Once Louis XVI is seen as citizen Louis Capet, however,
he has neither the power to speak the law nor to heal the sick.
That kings have lost their power to instantiate the sacred does not
mean that we live our political lives in a wholly desacralized world.
The same immediacy in the relationship between idea and reality is
present in the popular sovereign. Thus the popular sovereign has the
capacity to speak a world into being: this, for example, is the ground
of the American Constitution. The Constitution speaks in the sover-
36 See, e.g., L. Marin, Portrait of the King (M. Houle, trans. 1988). Even modern states
retain elements of the “king’s body.” Citizens seek to be in the presence of the president,
who operates within a ritualized, protected space. Mussolini’s body was treated by many
as if it “enjoyed semi-divine status,” until it lost its sacredness in an execution reminiscent
of that of deposed kings. See N. Farrell, Mussolini: A New Life 225–30 (2003).
37 See W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Law of England, Bk. 3, chap. 17, at 255
(1768). Hitler builds on this ancient idea when the German state proclaims that “the Fu¨h-
rer’s word is law.”
38 See M. Walzer, introduction to Regicide and Revolution: Speeches at the Trial of Louis
XVI (1993).

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■195
eign voice—“We the People”—which is our voice. As citizens, we are
bound to the constitutional order because we are a part of the body
of the popular sovereign. To understand the transtemporal character
of that relationship—how it is that we as individuals can be bound by
past acts—we cannot dispense with the idea of the mystical corpus of
the sovereign, which spans history and space. Theories of individual
consent—a form of labor—are never adequate to this relationship,
just as theories of majoritarianism are never adequate to explain the
authority of the popular sovereign.39 The popular sovereign is never
just a contemporary majority. The act of the popular sovereign founds
the world of the nation-state as the making present of an inﬁnite
source of meaning that will be elaborated through that labor which
is the nation’s history. The nation’s sovereignty is never adequately
captured by its past or present, as if it were a ﬁnite set of actions or
the meeting of certain procedural conditions. Thus we are still work-
ing out the inexhaustible meaning of the American founding.
The word “sovereignty” is irreducibly religious in origin and mean-
ing.40 Over time, the locus of the sovereign subject changes but not its
transcendent character. The sovereignty of God becomes the sover-
eignty of kings, which becomes the sovereignty of nations and ends
with the sovereignty of man. The claim of sovereignty expresses a
sense of the deathless soul of man now made real in the fallen world.
It is the reiﬁcation of this experience of the inﬁnite quality of the self.
We may start with the idea of man as the image of God, but we end
with the knowledge that God is the image of man. Absent sovereignty,
man is doomed to labor and death. Labor, however, proves too much
for man. He must believe, and he ﬁnds in himself a capacity for faith.
In substantial part, it has been as a metaphysical promise that poli-
tics appeals to us. Every member of the body politic is an aspect of the
sovereign’s body. As part of that mystical corpus, the subject partici-
pates in the sacred doubling that is man. He ﬁnds himself bound to
labor, but he maintains a faith that he is a part of the deathless and
omnipresent sovereign. The royal “we” worked in both directions of
39 See Kahn, The Reign of Law 200–201.
40 See C. Schmitt, Political Theology: Four Chapters on the Concept of Sovereignty 36
(G. Schwab, trans. 1985).

196
■CHAPTER FIVE
the hierarchy of power. It expressed the extended corpus of the sover-
eign, as well as the political identity of the subject. Still today, the
citizen reads his own political order—historically and geographi-
cally—as the work of a plural subject. That subject is no longer the
king but the popular sovereign. The citizen remains embedded in this
“we,” when he reads the national history of sacriﬁce as his own. The
Revolution is “our” struggle for freedom; the Constitution is the prod-
uct of “We the People”; and the Civil War was the test of “our” com-
mitment to the popular sovereign. The citizen knows where he stands
in history, because he views that history through the narrative of the
popular sovereign. The state’s history is our history; its territory is our
space; and its future is ours as well.41 These are the elements of the
counternarrative. There is no movement toward the universal, no
sense of suffering as a cost, and no idea that the end of the nation is
nothing more than individual well-being.
Modern states killed the king, but they certainly did not kill the
sovereign. Instead, there has been a democratization of the king’s
body. The mystical corpus of the state is now the popular sovereign,
which maintains just that character of timelessness, omnipresence,
and omnipotence that characterized the king. While the popular sover-
eign has no existence apart from the bodies of its members, those
members do not constitute the sovereign in the aggregate. The sover-
eign is not the product of the social contract. Rather, the citizen is
the product of the popular sovereign. The sovereign always precedes
and overﬂows the aggregate of individuals. Hobbes had it back-
ward: actual nation-states—as well as their citizens—have found the
ground of their historical presence not in the narrative but in the
counternarrative.
The idea of sovereignty is that of an ultimate meaning that is never
exhausted in any ﬁnite form—that is, in the products of labor. The
ultimate value of sovereignty is incalculable. Only so can it make a
total claim on an individual’s life. There is no value of the profane
when measured against the sacred. Once put at issue, the sacred qual-
ity of sovereignty will demand war without compromise, even if that
41 The challenge of multiculturalism to this “we” is an important aspect of the rise of the
postmodern state.

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■197
means consumption of the entire polity. Thus the continued existence
of the United States is not one end among many for its citizens. For
them, that existence gives meaning to history; it is not a part of a larger
historical narrative but the very foundation of that history. We do
not measure the defense of sovereignty against citizen well-being. The
sovereign has a nonnegotiable claim on all the resources of the state,
including the lives of its citizens. We are not yet done with a politics
of manifest destiny, even if we mean to abandon efforts at neocolonial-
ism. The nuclear threat implicit in American politics perfectly ex-
presses the ultimate value of that politics: better the destruction of the
world than the failure of the United States. Nuclear policy also shows
us that killing and being killed are reciprocal political phenomena. We
cannot threaten the enemy without suffering the threat in return. We
are relearning this lesson from the contemporary war on terrorism.
An understanding of politics must draw on a conception of sover-
eignty that works outside the categories of labor and representation.
We need, instead, the categories of transubstantiation, of the mystical
corpus, and of the sacred. Central to the mystery of the politics of
sovereignty is the experience of sacriﬁce: that which is sacriﬁced be-
comes sacred. Sacriﬁce does not appease an angry god; it creates and
maintains that god. Sovereign and sacriﬁce are linked as subject and
verb. The sovereign exists as long as citizens are willing to sacriﬁce for
the maintenance of the sovereign. Both sacriﬁce and sovereignty point
us beyond labor and thus beyond death. The ﬁnite body must be de-
stroyed, if one is to recover that unity of being and meaning, of the
inﬁnite in the ﬁnite, that was Adam’s but was lost in the Fall. Lincoln
captures this when he speaks of the dead at Gettysburg “consecrating”
the land. In the presence of such citizen sacriﬁce, one is within the
domain of the sacred. Sovereignty, we can say, is God’s political form.
Sacriﬁce is an act of transubstantiation by which a “mere” thing
loses its ﬁnite character and becomes a site for the manifestation of
the sacred. Thus one participates in the sovereign not through consent
but through self-sacriﬁce. Without a willingness to suffer pain and
even to give up one’s life, there is no participation in the sovereign.
There can be a politics of rights, a politics of management of the eco-
nomic order and of the body’s well-being, but there is nothing in this
that rises beyond the horizon of the body’s own ﬁnite character.

198
■CHAPTER FIVE
The aspiration for the inﬁnite does not in itself entail a rejection of
labor. The politics of sovereignty is not suicidal. Citizens do not liter-
ally want to die for the state, although there have been moments of a
romantic longing for such sacriﬁce. But a politics of sovereignty only
exists as long as the imaginative possibility of self-sacriﬁce remains
real for citizens. Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote, “No society ever ad-
mitted that it could not sacriﬁce individual welfare to its own exis-
tence. If conscripts are necessary for its army, it seizes them, and
marches them, with bayonets in their rear to death.”42 A polity that
has no power to call on its citizens for sacriﬁce lacks sovereignty. In-
deed, it is hard even to call such an organization a state. Such a polity
may understand itself as advancing individual well-being; it may see
itself as an adjunct to markets. It is not its role, however, to take citi-
zens beyond their individual interests.
An account of political life that ignores the metaphysics of sover-
eignty will never confront the actual experience of life and death
within the state. It will reduce the political to law, law to reason, and
reason to well-being. If it conceives sovereignty at all, it will be as the
reiﬁed object of a constructive contract. Sovereignty in this sense adds
nothing to a politics of rights. The sovereign that moves citizens to
acts of sacriﬁce, however, is not of this world at all. Sovereignty signi-
ﬁes the sacred foundation of the community. The citizen understands
that for the sake of the sovereign he can be asked to suffer pain, and
that under some circumstances the state can make an unanswerable
demand upon his or her life—unanswerable because it is beyond the
capacity of any proposition to comprehend. Argument ends, but the
act remains. So it is with all faith in an ultimate meaning. Today, in
the West, only politics can make that claim upon a life. As long as it
can do so, we are in the presence of a sovereign power.
The willingness to sacriﬁce for the creation and maintenance of po-
litical meanings always appears inconceivable to those outside the
community. We ﬁnd it incomprehensible that Palestinians would be
willing to blow themselves up for the maintenance of a political iden-
tity. But the suicide bomber is not different in kind from the Israeli
soldier. Both know that political identity is a matter of life and death.
42 O. Holmes, The Common Law 43 (1923) [1881].

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■199
Both sides in this conﬂict wonder at the capacity of the other to kill
and be killed. Both sides try to apply a moral measure to the behavior
of the other. In this, they each suffer from the same misunderstanding.
Citizens sacriﬁce themselves and their children not because it is mor-
ally correct but because it is politically necessary. This a necessity,
however, that can be measured only from within the political world
of meaning.
We have the same reaction to the sacriﬁcial politics of others as we
do to those who believe in different gods, rituals, and sacred texts. It
literally makes no sense to us; it appears “crazy.” How, we wonder,
can anyone believe that the gods appeared in that object or that place?
Why would anyone think that wine can be the blood of Christ or that
God would perform miracles for an enslaved people? This shock of
difference, however, usually does not cause us to doubt our own be-
liefs. We think others strange, but that does not unmoor us from our
own sacred rituals. The same is true of our own political meanings.
We cannot understand how anyone could believe in the sacred charac-
ter of a king, but this does not lead us to question the way in which
the sacred operates in our relationship to an atemporal, ubiquitous
popular sovereign. It does not do so, because we have little choice in
the matter. There is not some other, nonsymbolic world in which we
can choose to live, once we learn that others live by meanings different
from our own. There is not a truth of the matter that we have some-
how missed.
None of this means that every time the state demands sacriﬁce from
its citizens it will be forthcoming. We live in multiple symbolic orders:
the demands of politics can be displaced by those of morality, and vice
versa. Moreover, political meanings are contested and can themselves
fail. The Russian effort in the First World War collapsed when the
Russian soldier no longer thought the state an appropriate object of
sacriﬁce. This happened again in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe
seventy-ﬁve years later. Wars end when armies go home. When the
symbolic order of sovereignty comes to seem as foreign to its own
citizens as that of a distant state, the capacity of the state to maintain
itself in and through the bodies of its citizens disappears. The experi-
ence of revolution in the West tells us that this collapse of a symbolic
order can happen incredibly quickly. The change, however, can be in

200
■CHAPTER FIVE
the opposite direction as well. The Argentine experience with the inva-
sion of the Malvinas teaches us this lesson, as does the recent mobiliza-
tion of American power in pursuit of the war on terrorism.
We cannot know in advance which meanings—political, moral, or
familial—will dominate in any particular situation. However, even if
political sacriﬁce has been resisted at particular moments or for
particular causes, the idea of self-sacriﬁce has not been resisted in the
modern nation-state. Citizens have lived with the knowledge that,
under some set of possible circumstances, the state could demand
sacriﬁce and there would be no grounds of objection. The unique qual-
ity of the political reveals itself in imagining this moment of “excep-
tionality,” which always appears to us as simultaneously familiar
and strange.43 This combination of the most natural and the most un-
natural points us in the right direction: sacriﬁce is ritual, not labor.
Americans, in particular, are not yet done with the magic of political
life. The Constitution, we say, is the product of an act of popular
sovereignty. For the Constitution, individuals will sacriﬁce them-
selves and they can be conscripted. For its sake, the entire population
is put at risk.
Man’s capacity for sacriﬁce expresses his aspiration to transcend
the conditions of labor. Labor is always a burden. It takes time and
effort; it is never guaranteed success. We labor only to fail in the end.
We are overwhelmed by the recalcitrance of the material which we
would shape to embody our ideas; we are defeated by circumstance;
we are let down by the weakness of the body and the failure of the
will. We labor until we die, and still we are not done, for the world
always threatens to return to disorder. The same limits attach to
knowledge. We seek to learn until we die, and still we are not done,
for our knowledge is never commensurate with the world. Sacriﬁce,
on the other hand, is perfect, complete, and done in a moment.
To sacriﬁce is to enact an ultimate meaning, not as yet another proj-
ect but as an irreducible fact. Sacriﬁce is a ritual of instantiation that
literally takes the subject outside the limits of time and space, and
43 Carl Schmitt was right to focus on the exception as a moment beyond law. He was
wrong, however, to look to the exercise of authority instead of looking to the sacriﬁcial act
of the citizen. See Schmitt, Political Theology 5.

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■201
beyond the structure of the proposition. Meaning is present not as a
goal or an ambition to be achieved but as an inﬁnite presence. The
body is fully absorbed in and by the symbolic. The Islamic martyr, we
are told, believes that on death he will ﬁnd himself immediately in the
presence of Allah, satisﬁed in every way. This is the mythic expression
of completeness outside the domain of labor. We can reject the liter-
alism of the myth, but we cannot deny the experience of an inﬁnite
meaning in the extraordinary act.
Sacriﬁce, accordingly, is that form of meaning which stands in oppo-
sition to labor. Labor always deploys the process of craft. Every craft
takes up discrete projects; each one follows a plan. Every plan has a
beginning, a middle, and an end. This is no less true of the labor of
politics. Labor is not, however, the only way we relate to a world of
symbolic meanings. Meaning enters the world through the magic of
transubstantiation. Participation in sacriﬁce is participation in the
very foundation of the world. This is the sacred quality of violence.
To fail to see this is to see only a suffering carpenter on the Cross.
This opposition of sacriﬁce and labor is not one between distinct
kinds of acts. The same act can be both. Sacriﬁce and labor refer to
forms of meaning, not instances of behavior. Indeed, an individual can
see a single act in both dimensions: self-sacriﬁce for the state is always
labor as well. This is just the way we view the virtues and costs of
battle: an expression of sacriﬁce but also a labor of death. It is, we
might say, “a sacred project.” Nor should we expect victims to cele-
brate acts of sacriﬁce. Knowing that my political identity makes me a
potential target of a terrorist attack does not lead me to celebrate the
possibility of that sacriﬁce for the state. The terrorist and his victims
are, in a sense, out of sync. The terrorist may celebrate the symbolic
act of self-sacriﬁce; the victim ﬁnds the threat of death intruding into
his or her ordinary world of labor—a world directed at putting off
death. Conventional wars between nation-states were efforts to syn-
chronize a politics of sacriﬁce.
Every symbolic order, I suspect, has a rhythm that moves between
transubstantiation and labor. Freud spoke of an “oceanic feeling”;
others speak of the ﬂash of creative genius or the presence of grace. I
would speak of the experience of love. Like politics, love is sustained
through labor: for example, the labor of creating and maintaining the

202
■CHAPTER FIVE
family. But also like politics, the labor of love is founded on an experi-
ence of transubstantiation. That is an experience of realizing wholly
and completely an ultimate meaning that does not exist in space and
time. This is love as inﬁnite—not fulﬁlled in time but timeless. At these
moments we know the whole immediately and completely. This is love
as a force that destroys the ﬁnite boundaries of the body, as the subject
expands through the beloved to a unity with all that is meaningful
in the world.44 We can no more wholly separate these moments of
transubstantiation and labor than we can separate the morally free act
from the causally determined one. Rather, these are different ways of
understanding experience. No meaningful act is wholly one or the
other, although the way that we understand ourselves may emphasize
one over the other. I can see my life as labor for my family’s well-
being, but I can see those same acts as infused with a self-sacriﬁcing
love that binds me to them—and to the world through them—as an
ultimate value. We move back and forth between the divine image of
Genesis one and the ﬁnite laborer of Genesis two.
We experience ourselves as more than laborers on a symbolic ﬁeld;
we know the world to be fully and completely ours. In biblical terms,
the world is ours to name. This is the sacred quality of man and the
foundation of human dignity. Politics shares this rhythm and projects
it upon the world. In politics, however, the metaphysics of sacriﬁce—
the complete transparency of the self to an inﬁnite meaning—takes
the form of literal violent destruction of the ﬁnite self. The violent,
sacriﬁcial character of politics is not simply a function of its impor-
tance—an entire world can be at stake. Every symbolic form puts an
entire world at stake. Few are willing to die for the sake of art or even
science; even fewer are willing to kill. Galileo recanted, and one would
hope that most great scientists and artists would have done the same.
Yet Western religion was, and Western politics remains, different in
this respect. Christianity is founded on a cult of martyrdom; citizens
who recant too early are considered political traitors—itself a capital
offense. Self-sacriﬁce is built into the structure of these beliefs. It is not
correct to say that religion and politics are “more important” than
science or art. Nor can we say that the former are capable of constitut-
44 See P. Kahn, Law and Love: The Trials of King Lear 141 (2000).

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■203
ing individual identity in a way that the latter are not. Every symbolic
form constitutes identity from a particular point of view. We cannot
say which among these multiple worlds will be particularly compelling
to an individual subject.
Every symbolic form is capable of a comprehensive reach: we can
see science aesthetically; we can understand all that we do from the
perspective of religious faith. The politics of sovereignty is no different
in this respect. It can attach at any point; it has the ﬂuidity of the
sacred. Any object can become an icon, any point a site of pilgrimage.
The sovereign shares the ubiquity of Mary, who has been sighted in
trees, pastures, and ofﬁce buildings. So, too, with the dizzying appear-
ance of a politics of ultimate meaning, can the death of one man be
made into a national cause that can bring about the sacriﬁce of mil-
lions or ﬁnd, in the “affront to national honor,” a cause for war.
Viewed from the perspective of labor, none of this makes any sense.
Except that, without the sacred, labor itself lacks a ground adequate
to overcome man’s sense of himself as fallen.
Carl Schmitt makes an important point here about politics.45 We
cannot say in the abstract what the content of political belief will be.
Politics can attach to any cultural production or set of distinctions,
including such “natural” categories as territory, race, or ethnicity. Po-
litical understandings, for example, can attach to science and art, even
if we say that, considered in themselves, they are not political. They
can also attach to moral ideals: justice or equality, for example. Surely,
an element of a European political consciousness—and still an aspect
of Western self-understanding—has been that ours is a “civilized”
world, by which we refer, in part, to science and art and, in part, to
moral and religious norms. The Western way of war goes so far as
to protect great works of art.46 According to Schmitt, politics adds a
dimension of intensity to other beliefs. It places those beliefs—from
whatever source—at the center of a world of ultimate meanings to be
defended through the medium of violence and sacriﬁce.
The willingness to kill and be killed distinguishes the political as a
distinct symbolic domain. The objects that call forth the reciprocal
45 C. Schmitt, The Concept of the Political 37–38 (G. Schwab, trans. 1996).
46 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conﬂict art. 1(a), 249 U.N.T.S. 240–88, entry into force August 7, 1956.

204
■CHAPTER FIVE
violence of sacriﬁce are as arbitrary as the objects in which the pre-
moderns located the sacred. This does not mean that we should be
indifferent to differences between these objects but only that there is
no neutral position from which we can assess their political meanings.
Neutrality is no more possible here than it is with respect to sacred
objects or practices. Political beliefs speak to a particular community;
they do not offer a universal, normative measure. Friends and enemies
speak the same language, but the referents of their words are entirely
different. In this sense, they speak right past one another.
We cannot predict in advance where the sacred will appear; we can-
not foresee what will come to represent the sacred quality of our poli-
tics. Even the most mundane act or object can come to be seen as an
element of the “American way of life.” To understand a person or
thing as sacred is not a matter of giving it “added value.” Value in this
quantitative sense is always an attribute of labor. The sacred does not
exist in the dimension of comparative value and capital preservation.
Just the opposite: the sacred is always at the edge of its own destruc-
tion. The mysterium tremendum terriﬁes as it sanctiﬁes. We know the
person as a saint when he sacriﬁces his own life. We know the sover-
eign as an ultimate value when sovereignty threatens to consume the
entire well-being of the state. In this dimension, destruction is not
labor lost but labor transcended. This is what the counternarrative
preserves as living memory.
In the West we are never far from the story of the Fall, but neither
are we far from the story of recovery. The model of recovery is the
sacriﬁce of Isaac, a story not simply of religious faith but of political
foundations. The test of Abraham’s faith was belief in the paradox
that, in order to found a nation, he had to sacriﬁce his only legiti-
mate son. There would be no nation until and unless the divine ap-
peared. That appearance of the divine, however, would consume
the very being of the profane, that is, the son. The nation becomes
possible not as a familial project of labor in either of its generative
senses. A nation begins only with a sacred foundation—just what
fallen man cannot give himself. That is the meaning of sacriﬁce—a
making sacred through destruction of ﬁnite form. This is the paradox
of the sacred: we must destroy to create, die to live. Our politics has

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■205
followed this paradox from the beginning: we maintain the nation by
sacriﬁcing the sons.47
The demand for sacriﬁce tests our faith in the ultimate meaning—
the sovereignty—of the polity, just as Abraham was tested. In fact, we
cannot learn that we have this faith until we are tested. That test is
not proof to a third party but constitutive for the subject. Fortunately
or not, Western citizens have had no trouble passing this test in their
relationship to the nation-state. Surely this should not surprise us: we
live in a culture that begins with the twin sacriﬁces of Isaac and Jesus
as moments in recovery from the Fall. In politics, as in religion,
through death is life.
Labor can preserve but it cannot found the world. Paradoxically, to
bring into being a meaning that is worth living for, one must ﬁrst be
willing to engage in an act of self-sacriﬁce. We know this intuitively
in our everyday life. A person unwilling to sacriﬁce is a person without
love. Such persons can see no further than their own interests. They
live in a world without objective value. There is nothing against which
they measure themselves or which they can claim should be of value
to others.
Political violence, then, is not simply a form of labor but is the an-
swer to man’s condition as symbolic laborer. Political violence is about
redemption from a life of labor. This is why the act of political violence
shows us a perfect match of destruction and construction. They are
one and the same. Terrible as war may be, we ﬁnd repeatedly that the
experience stands out in people’s lives as the point at which they knew
a kind of perfection of meaning.48 This can be equally true of victims
as well as victimizers. Once suffering becomes sacriﬁce, it transcends
its own ﬁnite conditions. It is constitutive of an identity that can
ground or re-ground a life. At the moment of sacriﬁce, the individual
47 Wilfred Owen makes the direct connection of the war to Abraham, who now rejects
the ram in place of his son: “But the old man would not so, but slew his son. / And half of
the seed of Europe, one by one.” W. Owen, “The Parable of the Old Man and the Young,”
in The Collected Poems of Wilfred Owen 42 (1965). Modernity has largely overcome the
gendered character of political experience, ﬁrst by extending the domain of destruction—
that is, sacriﬁce—to the entire population and, more recently, by allowing women to enter
the battleﬁeld itself.
48 See J. Gray, The Warriors: Reﬂections on Men in Battle (1973); Hedges, War Is the
Force That Gives Us Meaning (2002).

206
■CHAPTER FIVE
knows exactly who he or she is and knows the value of life. Labor, on
the other hand, never escapes doubt, for labor is never commensurate
with death. It is death put off, which is never enough for man.
Terrible as sacriﬁce may be, it is the point to which reference is made
in understanding all that happens thereafter. This is true not only for
individuals but for entire societies. The ages of American political life
are marked by the violence that founds the meaning of this world: the
Revolution, the Civil War, World War II, the Cold War, and perhaps
now the war on terror. It is also true of internal wars, even when they
take the form of terror and repression. The imaginary construction of
political sacriﬁce means that those who carry out these violent acts
have to believe that the nation is at risk and that they, too, are willing
to sacriﬁce themselves. Political killing is always the reciprocal side of
a willingness to be killed. Without that reciprocity, killing is just crime
and personal pathology—of which there is no doubt plenty—passing
for the political. Under conditions of belief in reciprocity, however,
even repressive violence can appear as a form of sacred violence. For
this reason, those involved will always try to resurrect the moment as
foundational in their own lives and in the history of the nation. Argen-
tine dirty warriors want recognition for their victory; Pinochet and his
supporters remain unrepentant; Milosevic still believes he embodied
the Serb nation.
These views can change, just as religious beliefs can fail. Neverthe-
less, we cannot manage the movement from one set of beliefs to an-
other. Even punishment can be seen within the prism of sacriﬁce: what
we call justice may be seen as only the politics of war continued by
other means.49 Nor are truth commissions or any other innovative
form of “transitional justice” likely to shake these beliefs, at least in
the short term.50 These beliefs are a matter of faith, not evidence. The
creationist is not moved by the evidence of evolution. Those who be-
lieve in their own sacriﬁcial identiﬁcation with the sovereign will not
be moved by the evidence of their victims’ suffering.
49 Those Japanese convicted of war crimes after the Second World War, for example,
quickly came to be seen as sacriﬁcial victims of a process that was only victors’ justice, that
is, the ﬁnal playing out of the war itself. See J. Dower, Embracing Defeat (1999).
50 See N. Meredith, Coming to Terms: South Africa’s Search for Truth 314–19 (1999).

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■207
CONCLUSION: POLITICAL EVIL
Because the character of political violence as both labor and sacriﬁce
is so obscured by our willful belief in the narrative of the modern
state, I have focused particular attention on the deeper rhythm of the
symbolic form. Only within this matrix of belief do we get to the heart
of evil in modernity. The evil of modern politics is an inverse of the
dynamic of the shame of nature represented by the slave, which I de-
scribed in the previous chapter. The evil of slavery arises out of the
desire to localize and expel the merely natural from the symbolic order
of the society. If the body is only the shame of nature, it is no longer
the site of the passion of Christ; it is not the object of sacriﬁce or the
material proof of faith. A slave-owning class is quick to show its own
willingness to sacriﬁce, to show that it is not bound to the body but
fully invested in an idea. This was the language of revolution and thus
of popular sovereignty to which Jefferson and the founders appealed.51
But if the paradigmatic political evil is not slavery but the tortured
and destroyed body, then the victim of evil can as easily be the master,
who appears now as the citizen-soldier. He becomes the victim of his
own imagination. If the master would not be a slave, he would will-
ingly assume the place of Christ. Suffering is proof of his faith in an
ultimate meaning. Suffering becomes torture at the moment faith fails.
To the outsider, the ritual inﬂiction of pain—even if willingly as-
sumed in an act of self-sacriﬁce—will always appear evil. It will appear
as a form of that oldest paradigm of evil, idolatry, for the outsider
does not see the transubstantiation of the ﬂesh but only the pain. He
sees a false promise of redemption, a worship of nothing but an empty
idol for whose sake suffering is inﬂicted and pain endured. This was
the reaction of the European colonizers to the sacriﬁcial rites of the
indigenous Americans. Outside the faith, other explanations are of-
fered for this suffering: coercion, false consciousness, fear, ideology,
or the Devil. To see another culture’s rituals of sacriﬁce as evil, one
need not believe all such rituals to be idolatrous. One need only believe
51 The lingering attachment of southern society to the duel suggests the same distancing
from the idea of the body as merely natural. J. Williams, Dueling in the Old South: Vignettes
of Social History 26–27 (1980).

208
■CHAPTER FIVE
that this particular practice fails. In place of recovery from ﬁnitude it
offers only a false path of ﬂight from death.
The experience of “seeing through” sacriﬁce to a world of pain and
death is not, however, only the experience of the outsider. The insider
can become the outsider when faith fails. One’s own practices of
sacriﬁce can come to be seen as empty. Every ritual of sacriﬁce stands
just at the edge of failure. Even Christ suffered doubt. The failure of
faith is as familiar an experience as the fullness of faith. When we lose
faith, we no longer see the transcendence of death but only a futile
ﬂight from death in which we have become victims. We see pain in
place of life.
For the sake of the deathless sovereign, politics creates a world of
killing and being killed, of reciprocal acts of sacriﬁce. This is a world
of ultimate meaning as compelling as those of any religious faith. But
precisely because it is a violent world, the line between sacriﬁce and
coercion can dissolve for the actor himself. Practically, we see this in
the institution of conscription: conscription is not exactly coercion—
it is not the same as impressment in a foreign service—but it becomes
increasingly coercive as faith in the transcendent meaning of the polity
fails. The ultimate failure is when the conscript sees himself as just
another victim of state violence. From the perspective of this victim,
the conditions of warfare collapse into those of torture. The victim
knows that he may be brought to suffer terrible pain or death, that
his body will be forced to bear a political meaning he neither agrees
with nor has faith in. In politics, killing is always linked to the percep-
tion of a threat of being killed. That means that every participant can
appear to himself as a victim. Without faith in the sovereign, sacriﬁce
becomes victimhood and injury becomes torture. The war-wounded
veteran is likely to resist this reading of his own body. He will insist
that the missing leg is a mark of his own participation in the sovereign.
But that faith is vulnerable, and when it collapses he becomes, in his
own eyes, another victim.52
52 The 2004 election showed that American conﬂict over Vietnam continues to play itself
out in this contrast between victimhood and sacriﬁce. Something similar has been happening
in Germany with respect to participation in the Second World War: a dispute over who the
victims are.

KILLING AND SACRIFICE
■209
The experience in the trenches of the First World War, for example,
comes to appear to many as nothing other than a torturous mauling
and destruction of bodies—a task well beyond the capacity of labor
to justify or repair. For the soldier who has lost faith in the sovereign
character of a politics of sacriﬁce, war becomes a scene of horrendous
torture: broken bodies, pain, and death.53 Once a family loses this faith
in the sovereign, it will see only the state conscripting and killing its
loved ones. This is an entirely familiar phenomenon. The sacred loses
its power, and we are left with the tortured body—a residue of politics
when faith in the sovereign has disappeared. Wilfred Owen captures
this residue of the dying body when he writes: “What passing-bells
for those who die as cattle?”54 Not sacriﬁce but slaughter; not the
transcendence of the merely human but the evil of human loss. To
those who do not hear God, Abraham’s action must have looked like
a bizarre torture of his son.
A secular age looks back at the wars of religion and sees in them a
great evil: bodies were destroyed for “no real reason.” All the suffering
and destruction to what end? Similarly, we look at the tortured de-
struction of witches and heretics as a kind of madness producing great
evil. Once faith is gone, we are left with only tortured and maimed
bodies. We are beginning to see our own political past in this way. We
see not political martyrs but senseless suffering. No longer understand-
ing the sacred character of the political, we see only the victims’ tor-
tured bodies. We can no longer distinguish clearly between friends and
enemies among those broken bodies. Do we not all die the same death?
We see a ﬁeld of arbitrary death and destruction that contributes noth-
ing to the well-being that we would place at the heart of the contempo-
rary political narrative. Our customs of war—humanitarian law—
may harden us to some forms of destruction over others. But once we
lose faith in the ultimate value of politics, there is no particular reason
to prefer the killing of young men over others. Nor is there any reason
to prefer death by the modern technology of war over the primitive
methods of the terrorist or the dirty warrior. To the politics of well-
53 The greatest ﬁctional representation of the tortured quality of the battleﬁeld may be
E. Remarque, All Quiet on the Western Front (A. Wheen, trans. 1956).
54 W. Owen, “Anthem for Doomed Youth,” in The Collected Poems, 44.

210
■CHAPTER FIVE
being, these are senseless distinctions. If there is no difference between
the tortured body and the sacriﬁced body—both are victims of an idol-
atrous belief—the debate about the technology of warfare is an argu-
ment with the Devil. In a world with no ambition beyond well-being,
a politics of sovereignty that leads us to the edge of total destruction
in a nuclear Armageddon must be condemned as the greatest evil.
Or, I should say, this is what we might begin to see—or even hope
to see—but still not quite yet. The politics of the sublime, of the sacred
character of the nation, recedes but is not yet gone. The counternarra-
tive persists. The popular sovereign remains a brooding presence capa-
ble of enthralling the nation. It remains a hungry god, and we remain
willing to feed it our children. We react in only half-forgotten ways to
the attack of September 11. We appeal again to the old language of
sacriﬁce. We fail to see the tortured bodies of the victims of our actions
as we pursue the Western politics of sacriﬁce, of killing and being
killed, ﬁrst in Afghanistan and then in Iraq. We see, instead, the self-
sacriﬁce of our own citizens as they afﬁrm in and through their own
lives the ultimate meaning of the popular sovereign. We continue to
distinguish friend from enemy.
Torture and sacriﬁce are reciprocal images. Moreover, they reside
in the very same act. This ambiguity of man’s body—tortured and
divine—is the imagery of the Cross. If we could always tell the differ-
ence between sacriﬁce and torture, then we would have no trouble
distinguishing love from evil. In politics, however, killing and being
killed are so inextricably linked that we cannot tell them apart. Our
own history of violence appears to us as a sacred history of sacriﬁce.
It does not appear that way to others, who see only the destruction
and pain, not the promise of the sacred.
Not surprisingly, political meanings remain entangled in the deepest
mythical foundations of the culture. If we would call torture evil, as
we must, then we have indeed reached the goal of our inquiry into
evil, for evil is located at the source of our own symbolic world. Man
is out of place in a world constituted by labor. To ﬁnd his way out, he
must overcome death itself. Just there, in the ﬂight from death, we ﬁnd
the foundation of evil.

C O N C L U S I O N
■
■
■
■
TRAGEDY, COMEDY, AND THE
BANALITY OF EVIL
Every Jewish scholar raised in the postwar period feels a need to write
his or her book on the Holocaust. This has been mine. I have done it
without raising the Jewish question explicitly, and with no inquiry into
the historical origins and context of the Holocaust. Still, much that I
have argued bears directly on our understanding of the Holocaust. On
my analysis, what was peculiar in Germany was the intersection of
two forms of evil. The evil of politics—killing and being killed for the
state—but also the evil of slavery—localizing in the other the shame
of nature. The Jew was simultaneously the enemy and the shame of
nature.1 He was represented as physically repulsive, as weak and per-
verse—that is, as shameful in his nature yet still a threat. Hitler spoke
of Jews as “apes” and “parasites”; Himmler, as having “slave-like
souls.”2 The Aryan race expressed again that prelapsarian man who
is an image of God, while the Jews were the “mightiest counterpart.”3
In the peculiar dynamics of Nazi ideology, the competing understand-
ings of nature were expressed in the double perceptions of the Jew as
the enemy but also as a threat to the biological stock of the German
race. The ideology of slavery under conditions of war easily moves
beyond expulsion of the shame of nature to physical destruction. The
Nazis began by dreaming of expulsion to Madagascar but ended up
at Auschwitz. Out of this combination of evils emerges that distinctly
modern phenomenon of genocide.
1 While the Nazis believed that the Jew was the product of a discredited high culture,
they also believed that the consequence was a perversion of nature. On the culture/nature
distinction, see chapter 4 above.
2 H. Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism 457 (1958) (quoting Himmler).
3 A. Hitler, Mein Kampf 300 (R. Manheim, trans. 1971); see also ibid. 302 (“Jewish
people . . . without any true culture”).

212
■CONCLUSION
My inquiry has not been one of applied political or moral theory. I
have pursued a more elusive issue: not what it was about Germans
that allowed the murder of six million Jews but what it is about man
that can account for such evil. I do not think we will ﬁnd the answer
to that question by looking outside ourselves, at the circumstances
under which groups and individuals act.4 Of course, circumstances
matter, but they matter in the sense that they make socially and politi-
cally possible that which is existentially possible. They do not make
us other than we are, and what we are includes a vast potential for
evil. Whether we act on that potential depends, in part, on our circum-
stances—personal and political. Until we understand that potential,
however, we will always be puzzled by the turn toward evil, no matter
how desperate the circumstances. After all, those same circumstances
can bring out the very best in man as well. We ﬁnd saints among the
poverty-stricken and paciﬁsts in belligerent times.
The sources of evil are as deep as the sources of love. Both arise out
of the intolerable character of our own ﬁnitude. We can never be con-
tent with the fact that we will die. The difference between evil and
love is the difference between ﬂight from, and transcendence of, death.
Because of their common origin, these are not always easy to distin-
guish even for those within the experience. Consider, for example, the
way that patriotism can become violently xenophobic, or love intoler-
ant and possessive. In chapter 2, I investigated the way that existing
forms of transcendence come to be seen as forms of ﬂight, producing
the perceptions of idolatry and Pharisaism. In chapter 3, I investigated
the way that love itself can produce the conditions of evil. The tran-
scendence of death through love is so close to death itself that we can
turn away in ﬂight, producing the evils of hatred and murder. In chap-
ter 4, I argued that slavery falls directly within this tension of ﬂight
and transcendence, for it is belief in the slave’s failure to transcend the
conditions of the shame of nature—the ﬁnite, suffering body—that
marks the difference with the master. This is a measure of the other
4 See, e.g., D. Goldhagen, Hitler’s Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and the
Holocaust (1996); D. Horowitz, The Deadly Ethnic Riot (2001); E. Staub, Roots of Evil:
The Origins of Genocide and Other Group Violence (1992).

CONCLUSION
■213
that easily turns in upon the self, appearing as the master’s ﬂight from
the conditions of his own ﬁnitude: there is no slavery in the West with-
out a guilty conscience. It can also ground a self-hatred among a re-
pressed population—whether slave or colonized. Finally, in chapter 5,
I argued that the difference between transcendence and ﬂight in poli-
tics can come down to the difference between winning and losing a
war. This is not because the difference is merely subjective, a matter
of where one stands. Rather, it is because transcendence is a function
of faith. When we lose faith, all that is left of the sacriﬁcial act is
the maimed and destroyed body. At that point, sacriﬁce takes on the
appearance of torture. Western politics replicates the deepest truths of
Western religion: whether Christ and, before him, Isaac are seen as
self-sacriﬁcing or as tortured is a matter of faith alone.
As long as Western man has engaged in self-reﬂection, he has found
in himself a potential for terrible actions. Oedipus kills his father and
marries his mother; Adam and Eve sin; Cain murders Abel. And so it
goes. To understand evil, we have to take seriously the conceptual
resources of our tradition. Most especially, we have to take account
of the religious origins of much that is still constitutive of the Western
way of thought. Evil is not a fact of our nature, as it was produced
by a creator, God. It is rather a possibility created by the conceptual
structure within which we understand ourselves and our relationship
to the world. As that conceptual structure changes, the character of
evil also changes. It changes as a matter of self-understanding, that is,
of what we are prepared to see in ourselves, but also as a matter of fact
in our relationship to the world. There is no subjective and objective in
this respect. The world that presents itself as meaningful to us is only
the world that our own imaginations make possible. To understand
the conceptual structure of the imagination is to understand the possi-
bilities for our being in the world. Those possibilities have been shaped
as much by the Judeo-Christian tradition of fall, grace, and redemp-
tion as by the Enlightenment tradition of reason and objectivity.
We cannot understand evil without taking into account the nature
of the sacred, not because evil is sin or a violation of divine commands
but because the sacred presents itself as a distinctive and ultimately
important truth apart from which a subject cannot make sense of him-

214
■CONCLUSION
self or of his experience of the world. Intuitively we know that evil
and the sacred are deeply connected. The Fall is part of the religious
myth of creation. For millennia, the symbol of evil was a fallen angel,
Satan. Approaching evil, we still feel that we are beyond the bound-
aries of our ordinary forms of experience and explanation. Evil is not
just some deﬁcient form of behavior or a forgetting of the rules. For
this reason, the inquiry into evil does not start within the profane and
everyday but starts instead with those experiences that touch upon the
sacred. Just as pollution is always tied to the sacred for archaic man,
evil remains intimately related to the sacred for us.
There are, however, as many ways to represent the sacred as there
are forms of experiencing an ultimate meaning. At various points in
this inquiry, I have pointed not only to traditional religious forms but
to love, to nationalism, and to the inﬁnite potential of language and
consciousness. All offer perspectives on the sacred. If we no longer
experience a world of the sacred, then we will have little use for a
concept of evil. Evil will be just another term for the bad or the disap-
proved. It may be a form of emphasis—the really bad—but it will no
longer point to the problematic character of being itself. It will be a
sociological or psychological phenomenon, not a metaphysical prob-
lem. My point has not been to deny that bad actions require psycho-
logical and sociological explanations—and responses—but rather to
open up an exploration of the sense we have that more is at issue in
the phenomenon of evil.
Evil, I have argued, arises out of the deepest tension in the soul of
man. Despite his participation in the inﬁnite or an ultimate meaning,
the subject is bound to a ﬁnite body and a particular set of circum-
stances. For a subject with aspirations for the inﬁnite, this is an intoler-
able contradiction. We want to identify wholly and completely with
the inﬁnite in our nature—with God’s love, the nation, or the awe
before the ultimate majesty of nature or the moral law. This produces
the demand for sacriﬁce, for sacriﬁce is an act of transubstantiation
by which the body becomes a point of the showing forth of the inﬁnite.
When we fail in this movement of transubstantiation—and we all do
fail at some point and in some ways—we ﬁnd only death. At that point
we discover the possibility of evil in each of us. Evil is the rage of an

CONCLUSION
■215
inﬁnite soul before the ﬁnite conditions of the subject. This contradic-
tion of the inﬁnite and the ﬁnite—the tension between transcendence
and ﬂight from death—is the phenomenon I have explored here.
I do not claim to have offered a complete account of evil, let alone
a complete account of all the bad things that happen to people or that
they do to one another. Circumstances and pathology—individual and
social—certainly contribute their share to misery. Not all suffering is
evil, but all of it is bad. The battleﬁeld may offer an opportunity for
self-transcendence, but so does familial love. Even though familial love
offers its own opportunities for evil, I would choose love over battle.
Still, the choice is not up to me. We inherit the forms of meaning as
much as we inherit the forms of technology. My effort has been to
illuminate from within one strand of our experience: the existential
conditions of evil.
Much contemporary inquiry turns to external circumstances to ex-
plain evil. It asks what are the conditions under which individuals
or societies commit atrocious actions. These are valuable inquiries.
Nevertheless, to make this turn to circumstance is to turn away
from the particular insights of Judeo-Christian thought; it is effectively
to return to the classical tradition. Oedipus committed evil acts be-
cause he was unfortunate in his birth. He was a victim of circum-
stances, doing that which he would have preferred not to do and that
which he would never have chosen to do. He lived in a terrifying world
precisely because he could never be sure of the meaning of his own
actions. Clever as he was, he could not reason himself to the truth of
his own actions. For the Greeks, the understanding of circumstance
began with an inquiry into the gods. For us, it begins with an inquiry
into history and sociology. These inquiries are not the same, yet they
do share a common impulse to explain evil by explaining the context
within which behavior makes sense or fails to make sense to the actor.
What we do is a product of where we are, rather than an expression
of who we are.
Adam and Eve are not the victims of circumstance. They know ex-
actly what they are doing. They have been warned, yet they sin. There
is no mistake when Cain murders Abel. To understand evil in the
Judeo-Christian tradition, we have to turn inward. For Oedipus, the

216
■CONCLUSION
world was impenetrable to good intentions. His was a world in which
reason was never commensurate with its object. But in Genesis, man
names creation. From the beginning, there is a symmetry between man
as subject and his world as object. This man lives in a fully human
world because his world is the object of his own creation: ﬁrst as repre-
sentation—that is, naming—and, second, as the product of his will.
The human world in this tradition is always a product of labor. After
the Fall, we know the good and we labor to achieve it. We also know,
however, that we are dust and shall return to dust. To live with the
knowledge of both is, we might say, superhuman.
To understand evil, we must understand the character of the will:
that faculty by which we realize the self in the world and the world in
the self. We ﬁnd a tension between two forms of realization: a moment
of identiﬁcation and a moment of separation, of transcendence and of
ﬁnitude. We are bound to the world wholly and completely as to an
object of inﬁnite concern. Traditionally, this was the appearance of
the sacred. In our contemporary world, it is the moment of love. Love
grounds our concern about the world. But just as love brought Adam
to labor, so are we still condemned to labor for our love. Evil emerges
out of the gap between transcendence and labor, that is, between the
aspiration for the inﬁnite and the ﬁnite character of man. One of
the memorable symbols of the Holocaust was the sign at Auschwitz
that read “Arbeit Macht Frei.” The symbolism here is richer than that
of a deliberate falsehood in a camp devoted to extermination. Rather,
it is a perversion of the deepest aspects of the Western tradition: no
matter how hard man works to achieve the good, he cannot save him-
self. That freedom which is redemption must come from outside, from
the sacred.
The promise of Western religion has been to overcome this gap. One
representation of that promise was the law God gave the Jews. That
representation is succeeded by the perfect synthesis that is Christ him-
self: the inﬁnite realized in the ﬁnite. Man himself cannot ﬁnd that
synthesis on his own; it is not a matter of realizing the truth of his
own being. Instead, what is required is an act of redemptive grace—a
showing forth of the sacred—in order to obtain again that Edenic bliss
man possessed before the Fall. Western religious forms have never se-
cured a single form of synthesis. Indeed, as I argued in chapter 2, the

CONCLUSION
■217
religious forms of evil are best understood as a family argument over
the nature of this synthesis. No synthesis is stable, because it is the
tension itself that constitutes our nature. Accordingly, in the religious
tradition, evil appears as the “false” synthesis. It is the claim to have
realized the inﬁnite in the ﬁnite in a manner that appears now to be a
rejection of the “truth.” Idolatry, for example, is not worship of the
wrong god; it is worship of nothing at all. This is not different from
the evil of political life: once faith in a political sovereign fails, what
had been seen as the realization of ultimate value appears only as the
evil of meaningless death and tortured destruction. When faith fails,
we not only look foolish to ourselves but we may discover that we
have killed and destroyed those we loved—as well as those we hated—
for no purpose whatsoever. To those who lacked the faith in the ﬁrst
place, including those with different faiths, all that was ever seen was
death and destruction.
My account of the sources and character of evil stands opposed to
the most famous of Holocaust books: Hannah Arendt’s Eichmann in
Jerusalem. Her conclusion was that to understand the Holocaust we
have to take up the category of “administrative murder.” When we do
so, we ﬁnd the “banality of evil.” Eichmann was not a disturbingly
bad man by our ordinary standards of character. The prosecution tried
to paint him as a kind of sadist, but that description just did not
hold. He was, instead, a kind of clown—a completely banal person.
On Arendt’s view, he lacked the capacity to think, meaning he lacked
the capacity to use language in a fully human way. He could not
pursue a genuine discourse, because he could not take up the other’s
point of view. He could not imagine the other as a subject; he could
not put himself in the place of another. Without this, language is not
possible. Instead of discourse, Eichmann’s verbal expressions never
advanced beyond the repetition of cliche´s. Unlike the manipulative
politician who produces a propaganda machine, Eichmann believed
the cliche´s he mouthed. He lived a life in which the cliche´s had become
regulative ideals.5
Eichmann spent his life worrying about complying with the spirit
of the law and measuring his own success within the bureaucratic hier-
5 H. Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil 48–49 (1964).

218
■CONCLUSION
archy. That he was killing people simply never—or at least rarely—
entered his moral conscience. For Arendt, Eichmann represents a pos-
sibility within modernity: evil, she said, has no “roots,” by which she
meant that it is a surface phenomenon. “The phenomenon of evil
deeds,” she wrote, “committed on a gigantic scale, could not be traced
to any particularity of wickedness, pathology, or ideological convic-
tion in the doer, whose only personal distinction was a perhaps ex-
traordinary shallowness.”6 Germany had become a nation that had
somehow lost the capacity to think or, minimally, lacked sufﬁcient
thought to resist the turn to genocide led by Hitler and the Nazi party
leadership.7 We cannot explain exactly how and why this happened
in Germany but not everywhere in Europe. Some nations resisted the
Nazis’ effort to pursue the “ﬁnal solution”; some did not. In some
places, resistance was directed by the political leadership; in others,
the sense of the moral retained its grip on the general population. In
Germany, however, the moral point of view collapsed completely.
Arendt suggests that Nazi Germany realized a state made possible
by the conditions of modernity: bureaucratic, technologically proﬁ-
cient, and possessing a surplus population. The possibility of geno-
cide, in her view, remains an aspect of the modern condition. That
these conditions made the Third Reich possible, however, does not
explain why that possibility was realized. Why these conditions pro-
duce genocide in some places and not others is a mystery as deep as
the origins of thought itself. Why do people stop thinking? Why is it
that killing no longer looks to them like murder? To answer these
questions, Arendt, too, would turn from the existential to the social
and the historical. It happened in Germany because of the disasters of
the First World War and the Weimar Republic, because of the appear-
ance of Hitler and the incompetence of other political elites, because
the rest of Europe let it happen—the list of conditions is as long as the
historical inquiry itself.
Arendt is right to emphasize the ordinary character of evil. She is
also right to emphasize its historical particularity and its unpredictable
6 H. Arendt “Thinking and Moral Considerations: A Lecture,” 38 Social Research 417
(1971).
7 On morality, mores, and thought, see H. Arendt. “Personal Responsibility under Dicta-
torship,” in The Listener 205 (Aug. 1964).

CONCLUSION
■219
character. We cannot say in advance whether extreme conditions will
produce heroism or evil. But she is wrong to link the ordinary to the
banal. She is wrong to think that Eichmann’s failure is one of thought,
as if evil resides in a forgetting of the human condition. Her error here
is of a piece with her error in thinking that concern with the “social
question”—the question of state responsibility for the material condi-
tions of life itself—precludes a genuine politics.8 Politics and genuine
discourse are, for her, one and the same. Anything less is less than
human; it is to fall back into the material conditions of our animal
nature. It is mere labor. Sacriﬁce, however, is never the end of a logical
argument, although it is the literal end of political discourse. Politics
is not “thoughtless” even when it is not discursive. Politics is its own
conceptual form, which does not measure itself against the standards
of logic or morality.9 The language of politics is rhetoric, and it is
rhetoric that Arendt confuses with banality.
Expanding the scope of the inquiry into the forms of evil reveals
there is little that is banal about evil. Banality suggests a ﬂattening of
experience, a kind of lack of personal investment. But the inquiry into
evil shows us a subject raging at his own mortality. It shows us a char-
acter who refuses the conditions of his own ﬁnitude, and would over-
come those conditions by expelling the shame of nature and turning
death into sacriﬁce. What Arendt sees as the banality of Eichmann’s
life appears actually to be the penetration of these existential impulses
deep into the life of the ordinary citizen. Eichmann’s banality is not
different in kind from that of the ordinary citizen-soldier. The soldier,
too, fails to think, if by that we mean trying to understand the world
from the enemy’s viewpoint. The soldierly virtues do not include self-
reﬂection and discourse with or about the enemy. He does not engage
in a discursive act; he kills, and he dies. He proves to himself and
others that he is ready to sacriﬁce himself for the sake of an idea.
Indeed, Arendt’s report on the trial of Eichmann reveals a person
whose banality is always reaching toward the dignity of the political.
Eichmann may mouth cliche´s, but they are about sacriﬁce, about the
8 See H. Arendt, On Revolution 22–24, 59–114 (1965).
9 See P. Kahn, Putting Liberalism in Its Place 236–40 (2005). Of course, any individual
can measure politics against logic and morality, just as he can measure logic and morality
against politics.

220
■CONCLUSION
need to dedicate himself wholly to an idea, about adherence to a rule,
and about the dignity that comes from disregard of his own personal
interests. He has no toleration for corruption and wants only to be a
purely political being. In his case, politics equates with following the
rule of law in the spirit that the lawmaker—Hitler—would demand.
This is his oddly modiﬁed Kantianism. It means being “hard” in the
sense of suppressing whatever ordinary moral impulses he may have
had. Eichmann, while not a statesman, shows us something of the
meaning behind Goebbel’s ﬁnal remark that they would “go down in
history as the greatest statesmen of all time or as the greatest crimi-
nals.” This is just that intersection of transcendence and evil that I
described in chapter 5.
Like Eichmann, soldiers do not just mouth the cliche´s of patriotism;
they believe them. The alternative to thinking in Arendt’s sense can be
faith, not thoughtlessness. Soldiers do terrible things for the sake of
their political faith. If they win, they may be heroes. If they lose, they
may be an embarrassment to the progressive development of the na-
tion—just as Eichmann was an embarrassment to postwar Germany.
Eichmann feels this when he speaks of sacriﬁcing himself to relieve the
guilt of the new generation of Germans. He would be the scapegoat—
again a cliche´ but one that motivates a conception of political sacriﬁce.
None of this excuses Eichmann’s behavior. We are never just politi-
cal beings; we are never without the capacity for moral judgment.
That does not mean that the political is a normative order subordinate
to the moral. At times, the political and the moral converge; at other
times, the two are in competition with no “correct” outcome.10 The
triumph of the political, however, is not somehow the decline into
banality. It is the power of the claim for sacriﬁce as the means for
realizing a kind of immortality. Just here, we ﬁnd the undeniable at-
traction in evil. It is the attraction of power: the power to put off
death. That attraction, as I have argued, is there from the beginning
in the myth of Cain.
In retrospect, the ﬂight from death can always appear banal. To see
it that way is already to acknowledge that the claim for transcendence
10 On the competition between the moral and the political, see Kahn, Putting Liberalism
in Its Place 244–56.

CONCLUSION
■221
has failed. Evil would put off death by locating it in the other. This
strategy is doomed to fail for death is our common fate. There is al-
ways something pathetic in evil, not, of course, at the moment that
evil rages but when the guilty are put on trial. Viewing Eichmann, we
ﬁnd the pathos that is the failure of the human. It is the pathos of
believing that an idol can be sacred or that political sacriﬁce can tran-
scend death.
I have argued that the faith in redemption is necessary, but also
necessarily bound up with its own failure. Man falls. No matter how
deep his faith, he cannot escape doubt. When doubt leaves him only
with the fact of his death, he turns away in rage. We cannot have the
sacred without evil, love without hatred, or politics without enemies.
If we must give up the sacred to avoid evil, we are being asked to
give up the human. That possibility leads us either to a classical—and
Kantian—world of pure reason, in which man is just one possible
locus of reason, or to the contemporary ethos of entertainment in
which we pursue the satisfaction of our particular interests and make
no claim to any truth beyond the experience itself. These are the
possibilities of reason and of interest. But between the reason of
the Greeks and the interests of the moderns was an experience of the
human in and through the faculty of the will. I do not believe we are
in a position to reframe the character of our experience, such that love
and evil disappear. In truth, we have no choice about the nature of the
human. We can turn away from our existential condition as the inﬁnite
in the ﬁnite only for so long—regardless of whether we turn to reason
or to interest.
And so Eichmann is hanged. He goes to his death with just that
combination of dignity and banality that so puzzled Arendt. He claims
to be a Christlike ﬁgure, even as he proclaims that he does not believe
in God. He understands himself to be engaging in a kind of redemptive
act of sacriﬁce for the nation, but he cannot express this in any way
other than mouthing yet more cliche´s. Arendt might be right that by
1960 Eichmann appears as little more than a clown to those who
would report on his behavior. But if he is a clown, this only repeats
one of the oldest lessons of all: tragedy and comedy are not so very
different from each other. The unresolvable antinomy in the human

222
■CONCLUSION
subject between the inﬁnite and the ﬁnite produces tragedy; every
claim to resolve that antinomy can, in the end, be seen as comic. Eich-
mann is a clown because he believes himself to be Christ, when, in
fact, what we see is only a silly man hanging from the gallows. Of this
kind of clowning, however, we are all in danger.

INDEX
Abel, 18, 126–27
Augustine, Saint, 38n, 40n47, 42n52,
88, 89, 110n4, 120n22
Abraham, 35, 84n56, 204, 209. See
also Isaac
Auschwitz, 216
action: choice and, 46; discourse and,
40–41; principles and, 46–47; rea-
bad, evil versus, 2
banality of evil, 7, 217–19
son and, 57; subjectivity and, 42.
See also agency
Bayle, Pierre, 3–4
begetting, creation as, 79–80
Adam and Eve: and death, 114–16;
and discourse, 38–39; fundamen-
beliefs. See faith; meaning
Benjamin, Walter, 51
talist interpretation of, 96–97;
and love, 106–12; Oedipus versus
body: Christianity and, 89; love and
evil acting on, 140. See also sacriﬁce
Adam, 42; as plural being, 38; ratio-
nalist interpretation of, 97–98; and
Britain, 172n46
sex, 122n28; and shame, 44, 112–
14; and sin, 88; and will, 38. See
Cain, 18–19, 34, 126–27
care: love and, 111, 124, 134–35;
also Eve; Genesis
agency: evil dependent on, 16; of
pain and, 179
catechism, 35
Oedipus, 25–26. See also action
angst, 13–14
celibacy, 109n
children: and authority, 121; existen-
antinomies: ﬁnite/inﬁnite, 48–49, 51,
68; of nature, 150–54; of will, 51.
tial meaning of, 115; innocence of,
120–22, 121n26; parent-child rela-
See also dualisms
Apology (Plato), 24
tionship, 120–21, 130–33, 135
choice: action and, 46; death and,
Arendt, Hannah, 7, 10, 172, 217–21
Argentina, 206
45–46; ﬁnitude and, 44–46; and
meaning, 43–45; shame and, 47;
Aristophanes, in Plato’s Symposium,
107–8, 112
subjectivity and, 42–47
Christ: and creator-created relation-
Aristotle, 6, 11, 23n11, 37n41, 115,
116, 146, 161
ship, 78–80; efﬁcient cause of, as
unknown, 81; inﬁnite/ﬁnite in,
Auden, W. H., 133

224
■INDEX
Christ (cont.)
4, 37–38, 61, 62–65; organic model
of, 79–81
117; man in relation to, 81–82,
creativity, evil and, 20
88–89; and pain of others, 179;
culture. See civilization
and sacriﬁce, 83–84; and shame
of nature, 150
Darwin, Charles, 79
Christianity: and body, 89; and evil,
death: Aristotle and, 23n11; certainty
82–85, 89–90; God-man relation in,
of, 192; choice and, 45–46; evil
79–82; law rejected by, 79, 81, 85;
and, 5, 13–14, 18–19, 51, 104,
sacriﬁce and, 82–84, 86; and univer-
127–30, 134, 137, 212, 220–21;
salism, 156. See also Christ; Judeo-
Fall and, 38; in Genesis creation
Christian tradition; New Testament;
narratives, 63; human condition
Protestantism
and, 116, 118; and limits of lan-
Church, Christ in relation to, 81,
guage, 125n; love and, 114; Plato
82, 88
and, 23–24; reason and, 13, 23;
civilization: barbarism and, 51; fear
self-transcendence and, 48; subjec-
of destruction of, 169; individual
tivity and, 47–48; terrorism and,
versus, 31
13; transcendence/ﬂight as response
classical tradition: and death, 13;
to, 212–13. See also ﬁnitude
evil not part of, 21; knowledge
deism, 66
in, 6, 116–17; reason in, 3, 6; self-
democracy, 7
transcendence in, 48. See also
denial, evil and, 5, 51, 127–30, 134,
Aristotle; Plato
137
clothing, 168
design, argument from, 79
Cold War, 178, 182
development aid, 55
colonialism: British, 172n46; destruc-
discourse: action and, 40–41; of
tion/construction effected by, 186–
Adam and Eve, 38–39; after Fall,
87; justiﬁcation of, 166–67
191–92; Eichmann’s failure with,
comedy, 221–22
217; fundamentalism versus, 97;
Conrad, Joseph, The Heart of Dark-
good sought through, 6, 7; in-
ness, 17, 168
adequacy of, 125, 139–40; individu-
conscription, 87, 145, 208
ality and, 39–40; political, 146–47;
Constitution, U.S., 194–95
and possibility, 43; prophesy versus,
contemplation, human condition in
41–42; serpent and, 39–41; truth
Genesis and, 61, 64
and, 41
counternarrative to political progress,
disease, evil as, 20
177–83, 196
disenchantment of modern world, 2,
craft model of creation, 69, 79–81
10, 104–5
creation: craft model of, 69, 79–
diversity, evil and, 9
81; dual character of, in Judeo-
doubt, 47n59, 92, 208
Christian tradition, 90–91; Genesis
Douglass, Frederick, 164
Dred Scott case, 165
narratives of, 61–69; goodness of,

INDEX
■225
dualisms: love-evil, 37, 126; mind-
90, 104, 139–41; metaphysics and,
body, 36, 141; sacred-polluted,
17, 25, 57–58, 214; misperceptions
36; soul-body, 58, 67–68. See also
of, 10–11, 20, 56; as modern prob-
antinomies
lem, 10–11; as murder, 126–30,
137; and nihilism, 12; Oedipus and,
Eichmann, Adolf, 7, 217–22
33–34; in Old Testament, 75–77; as
empiricism, 92, 96
original/foundational, 3–4, 126,
enemies, denigration of, 161
213; pathos of, 221; Pharisaism as,
Enlightenment: and evil, 10, 99; rea-
90, 103; political, 49, 54–55, 144–
son as focus of, 59–60; and reli-
46, 207; propositional logic inade-
gion, 95; and self-reﬂection, 91–92;
quate to, 138–40; radical, 11; rea-
and will guided by reason, 49
son and, 3–4, 99–101, 103, 138–
equality of persons, 152
40; reform and, 6–7; religion and,
ethics. See morality
102, 103; sacred and, 68, 90;
Eve: conﬂicting Genesis accounts of,
selﬁshness of, 130, 133; self-tran-
106; individuality of, 40. See also
scendence and, 49–50; sin and, 16–
Adam and Eve
17; sociopolitical circumstances
evil: agency required for, 16; attempts
and, 212, 215, 218; as surprise,
to control/remedy, 6–7, 20, 53, 56;
139; synchronic and diachronic as-
bad versus, 2; banality of, 7, 217–
pects of, 102–3; terror and, 16–17;
19; Christianity and, 82–85, 89–90;
unpredictability of, 20–21; in War
Christians versus Jews, 83; Chris-
and Peace, 130–33; will and, 3–5,
tians versus Muslims, 84; and com-
34–35, 216; wrong principles as
mon humanity, 67; concept of, 1–2,
cause of, 8, 59
16; creativity and, 20; death and, 5,
extreme unction, 125n
13–14, 18–19, 51, 104, 127–30,
134, 137, 212, 220–21; and differ-
faith: beyond reason, 35; and evil,
ence, 9; disease model of, 20; dual
104; failure of, 208–10, 217; will
character of, 77; Enlightenment
and, 4, 35
and, 99; faith and, 104; ﬁnitude
Fall: barbarism and, 52; death and,
and, 14, 17, 214–15; freedom and,
38; evil and knowledge in myth of,
13; fundamentalism and, 99; geneal-
9; evil as response to, 19–20; in
ogy of, 69–101; Genesis creation
Genesis creation narratives, 63;
narratives and, 64–66; of Holo-
liberalism and, 98; signiﬁcance of
caust, 211; and human condition,
concept of, 1
1, 10, 52, 214; idolatry as, 75–77,
familial love: evil coexisting with,
102–3; justice not opposite of, 126,
136; and meaning of life, 120–21;
134; liberalism and, 8–10, 53, 56–
sociocultural factors in, 121,
57; love and, 3, 18–20, 51–52, 126,
121n26
128, 130, 133, 135–36, 138, 140–
fear: of civilization’s destruction, 169;
41, 212; man’s divine ambitions as,
31, 77, 99; and meaning, 11–12,
of return to nature, 173

226
■INDEX
ﬁnitude: choice and, 44–46; Christ
tament, 69–71; omniscience of, 40;
scientiﬁc view of, 66
and, 117; evil and, 14, 17, 214–15;
gods: idolatry and, 75–77; Oedipus
Genesis creation narratives and, 68;
and, 32–33
as human condition, 50–51, 68; in-
Goebbels, Joseph, 220
ﬁnite and, 48, 117, 133, 136, 216–
good: as goal of action, 115–16; politi-
17; knowledge and, 115–16; love
cal, 183–84
and, 114–15; recognition and, 128–
Greece. See classical tradition
29; sacriﬁce as overcoming of, 200–
201; self-transcendence, 48; sexual
The Heart of Darkness (Conrad), 17
union and, 115. See also death; in-
Hegel, G.W.F, 63, 109, 160, 170
completeness; wholeness
Heidegger, Martin, 7
First World War, 209
Henry, Patrick, 159
freedom: evil and, 13; in law-governed
Hitler, Adolf, 211
universe, 46, 57–58; reason and, 59
Hobbes, Thomas, 190, 196
Freud, Sigmund: on civilization’s ori-
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 198
gin, 31–32, 123, 161, 162; and dis-
Holocaust, 7, 211, 216–18
enchantment of modern world, 105;
Homer, 24
on longing for return, 122; on love
human condition: Adam versus Oedi-
and death, 18; and narcissism of
pus, 42; ambiguity of, 52; death
minor differences, 102; on parent-
and, 116, 118; evil and, 1, 10, 52,
child relationship, 135
214; as ﬁnite, 50–51, 68; in Genesis
fundamentalism: versus discourse, 97;
creation narratives, 61–62; God-
and evil, 99; and individualism, 97;
man relation and, 69–71, 78–80,
Protestantism and, 92, 96–97; and
109; incompleteness as, 50, 106–7;
public character of faith, 99–100
in Judeo-Christian tradition, 50;
loneliness and, 142, 192; nature ver-
Galileo Galilei, 202
sus culture and, 151; world in rela-
Genesis: creation narratives in, 61–69,
tion to, 62–65
106–12, 148–54; evil in, 12–13;
human rights, 152–54, 166
love in, 106–12; nature in, 148–54;
Hume, David, 65, 93–94
and sovereignty, 191, 193. See also
humiliation, 167
Adam and Eve
genocide, 211, 218
ideas: endurance of, 185; political
George, King of England, 157, 159
labor and, 183–86; sacredness and,
Germany, Nazi, 218
194. See also symbolic domain
God: creation by, 4, 37–38, 61–69;
idolatry, 75–77, 102–3, 207, 217
and evil, 3–4; as father versus
image of God: ambiguity of, 150;
maker, 79–80; human relation to,
Aryan race as, 211; craft model
69–71, 78–80, 109; idolatry and,
and, 69; creation and, 191; and
75–77; in Judeo-Christian tradition,
equality, 152; in Genesis creation
35; in Kantian worldview, 60; in
narratives, 61, 69, 148; Hobbes on,
190; indigenous populations as,
New Testament, 79–81; in Old Tes-

INDEX
■227
156; natural man as, 153; in New
justice: evil not opposite of, 126, 138;
as liberal response to wrongdoing,
Testament, 79; organic model and,
79; and power, 61; sacredness and,
6, 10–11, 55–56; love and, 110–11,
138
148; and unity of being, 119
immortality, 192
incompleteness: as human condition,
Kant, Immanuel: on free choice, 46;
on Genesis creation narratives,
50, 106–9; shame and, 114. See
also ﬁnitude
65n19; and liberal conception of ac-
tion/evil, 57–60, 67; on moral
indigenous populations, perceptions
of, 156, 166–67
worth as inner determined, 36n; on
religion and reason, 94
individualism: fundamentalism and,
97; liberalism and, 56
King Lear (Shakespeare), 135
knowledge: biblical versus classical
inﬁnite: ﬁnite and, 48, 117, 133, 136,
216–17; sovereignty and, 195. See
perspectives on, 6, 116–17; and ﬁni-
tude, 115–16; in Genesis creation
also ﬁnitude; self-transcendence;
wholeness
narratives, 63–66; Oedipus and,
26–28, 33; propositional, 120,
innocence, 120–22
interest, liberalism and, 53
124–25, 138–40, 191–92; reason
and, 6; sexual union as, 119; shame
international criminal law, 55
interpretations, competing, 78
and, 113; tragedy and, 21. See also
reason
Iraq, 186
Isaac, 83, 204. See also Abraham
Islam, 84
labor: human condition in Genesis
and, 62, 63, 65; inadequacy of,
190–91, 200, 216; meaning and,
jealousy, 40, 127
Jefferson, Thomas, 98, 152–54, 157–
184–85; and nature, 149; political,
183–92, 201–2, 205; sacriﬁce ver-
60, 169
Jerome, 89
sus, 189, 200–201; slavery and,
155. See also civilization
Jews: and Christ, 83; and Holocaust,
7, 211, 216–18; Islam and, 84; and
language. See discourse
Las Casas, Bartolome´ de, 168
law, 69–72; modern pathologies
and, 103–4. See also Judeo-Chris-
law: Christian claims of end of, 79,
81, 85; disobedience to, 75–76;
tian tradition; Old Testament
Jovinian, 89
Islam and, 84; Jewish, 69–72; mean-
ing of, 85; political progress and,
Judaism. See Jews; Judeo-Christian tra-
dition; Old Testament
174–75; property and, 72–73; sover-
eign as, 194
Judeo-Christian tradition: creation in,
dual character of, 90–91; evil in, 5;
liberalism: critique of, need for, 56–
57; and death, 13; and evil, 8–10,
human condition in, 50; knowledge
in, 6, 116–17; self-transcendence in,
53, 56–57; and Fall, 98; and individ-
ualism, 56; and interest, 53; and jus-
48; will in, 3–5, 35. See also Chris-
tianity; Jews; New Testament; Old
tice, 6; and modern nation-state vio-
lence, 178; as outcome of Protestant
Testament

228
■INDEX
liberalism (cont.)
140–41, 202; pain and, 179; poli-
tics and, 203; sacred and, 213–14;
rationalism, 98–99; and political
failures, 54–56; and reason, 4–5,
sacriﬁce and, 200–201, 206; sover-
eignty and, 195, 196–97; terrorism
49, 53–54, 98. See also modernity
Lincoln, Abraham, 197
and, 12; war and, 205–6
Melians, 185–86
Locke, John, 152–53
loneliness: existential, 142, 192; love
metaphysics: and evil, 17, 25, 57–58,
214; of Genesis creation narratives,
and, 106–10; procreation and, 115
Louis XVI, 170–71
62, 64; Kantian rejection of, 57;
politics and, 195
love: betrayal of, 133–34; and care,
111, 124, 134–35; as completion,
military service: conscription into, 87,
145; equal participation in, 181
106–10, 117; death and, 114; evil
and, 3, 18–20, 51–52, 126, 128,
Milosevic, Slobodan, 11, 206
miracles: Hume’s critique of, 93–94;
130, 133, 135–36, 138, 140–41,
212; familial, 120–21; ﬁnitude
reason versus, 60; sacriﬁce and, 74
modernity: and evil, 2, 6–7, 10, 218;
and, 114–15; Genesis creation nar-
ratives and, 106–12; justice and,
Jews and pathologies of, 103–4;
reason versus will in, 3–6. See also
110–11, 138; and meaning, 124,
140–41, 202; as original/founda-
liberalism
Mohammed, 84
tional, 107–8; politics and, 49; prop-
ositional logic inadequate to, 120,
morality: Oedipus and, 25–26; poli-
tics and, 220
124–25, 138–40; and recognition,
127–28; and sacriﬁce, 51; and self-
murder: evil as, 126–30, 137; and rec-
ognition, 127–28; slavery and, 162
sacriﬁce, 123; self-transcendence
and, 49–50; sex and, 111–12;
mysterium tremendum, 33, 204
mysticism, 64
speech as, 125; subject-object
divide overcome through, 119;
myths, purpose of, 107
as substitute for relation to God,
109–10; as surprise, 139; transub-
naming: of creatures in Genesis, 63,
191; of newborn as act of love, 125
stantiation and labor as poles of,
201–2; will and, 4
nation-states: as evil, 183; and pain,
180–82; and sacriﬁce, 86–88, 144–
Luther, Martin, 83, 92–93, 99
46; sovereignty of, 196; violence of,
178. See also sovereignty
making, creation as, 69, 79–81
Manichaeism, 3–4
natural philosophy, 64, 95
nature: ambiguity toward, 150–54;
Marie Antoinette, 170–71
martyrs, Christian, 85–86
fear of return to, 173; in Genesis
creation narratives, 148–54; labor
master-slave relationship, 109, 160,
169
and, 149; prelapsarian sense of,
121n6, 148–49; shame and, 5, 149,
meaning: choice and, 43–45; evil and,
11–12, 90, 104, 139–41; faith and,
153–55, 163–64, 168–73; slavery
and, 148; symbolic domain versus,
4, 35; familial love and, 120–21;
labor and, 184–85; love and, 124,
170, 173

INDEX
■229
Nazi Germany, 218
Paul, Saint, 84, 88, 89, 141
perpetual peace, 60
New Testament, 79–90; evil in, 82–
85; God-man relation in, 79–82
Phaedo (Plato), 23
Pharisaism, 90, 103
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 31, 105, 151
nihilism, 12
philosophy: in classical tradition, 22–
24; as enemy of sacred, 36; role of,
Noah, 19
novelty, 38, 40
14–15; theology and science con-
nected with, 95–96
nuclear policy, 197
Pinochet, Augusto, 206
Plato, 6, 36, 117; Apology, 24;
object. See subject-object dichotomy
Oedipus: Adam versus, 42; circum-
Phaedo, 23; Republic, 22–23, 151;
Symposium, 107–8, 112, 124
stances of, 215; and the divine, 32–
33; ethical behavior of, 25–26; and
politics: antipolitical, 153; appear-
ances of sacred in, 203–4; discourse
evil, 33–34; and knowledge, 26–28,
33; and power, 29–31; and reason,
in, 146–47; evil in, 49, 54–55, 144–
46, 207; innocence of child/nature
27; and terror, 21–22, 25, 28–29,
32–33
versus, 121n26; labor of, 183–92,
201–2, 205; love and evil in, 49,
Old Testament, 69–78; evil in, 75–77;
God-man relation in, 69–71. See
144–46; and meaning, 203–4; meta-
physics and, 195; morality and,
also Genesis; Jews
organic relationships, 79–81, 86–87
220; versus nature, 121n26, 168;
power in, 146–47; progress narra-
original self/condition, recovery of:
Aristophanes on, in Symposium,
tives in, 174–77; reason and, 6n10,
49, 57–58; and sacriﬁce, 189–91,
107; through Christ, 117; Freud on,
122; Genesis on, 117; immortality
197–206; as transubstantiation,
147; violence of, 181–82, 185–
and, 192; impossibility of, 118;
longing for, 123; through love, 107–
89, 203–5; war as, 187; of well-
being, 176–77, 190, 210. See also
8; Plato on, 6, 117; political sacri-
ﬁce and, 190; political version of,
sovereignty
pollution: dualism of sacred and, 36;
153; sacriﬁce of Isaac and, 204; sex-
ual union and, 122
evil and, 34; Oedipus and, 32–33
Pope, Alexander, 64–65
original sin, 38n, 112, 125
Owen, Wilfred, 209
popular sovereignty, 86–87, 194–96
possibility, 43–44
power: ambiguity of, 51–52; and
pain: in democracy, 180–82; meaning
and, 179; nation-states and, 180–
human condition in Genesis cre-
ation narrative, 61; Oedipus and,
82; particularity of, 178–80; politi-
cal narratives of, 177–78, 180–82;
29–31; political, 146–47
pride, 36
rituals of, 207–8; sacriﬁce versus
labor as response to, 189
principles: action and, 46–47; evil as
following wrong, 8, 59
parent-child relationship, 120–21,
130–33, 135
private sphere. See public/private dis-
tinction, religion and
part-whole relationships, 80

230
■INDEX
progress: counternarrative to, 177–83,
Rove, Karl, 2n
196; political, 174–77, 182–83
Rwanda, 10–11
property, 72–73
prophesy, discourse versus, 41–42
sacraments, 48–49
propositional knowledge: love not
sacred: dualism of polluted and, 36;
amenable to, 120, 124–25, 138–40;
evil and, 68, 90; image of, and self-
pre- and post-Fall, 191–92
transcendence, 68; and meaning,
Protestantism, 92–101; and attack on
213–14. See also God; gods
false representations, 92–93; and
sacriﬁce: Christianity and, 82–84, 86;
reason, 94–98
Christ versus Isaac, 83; versus labor,
public/private distinction, religion
189, 200–201; love and, 51; and
and, 99–101
meaning, 200–201, 206; modern na-
tion-states and, 86–88, 144–46;
racism, dual root of, 164
pain and, 207–8; political, 189–91,
radical evil, 11
197–206; religion of law and, 72–
rape, slavery and, 162–64
74; sovereignty and, 197–98; sub-
rationalism. See reason
ject-object dichotomy overcome
Rawls, John, 5, 6, 98–99
through, 191; torture and, 210
reason: and action, 57; administrative
saints, 49n62
rationality, 7; and death, 13; and
Satan, 20
evil, 3–4, 99–101, 103, 138–40;
Schmitt, Carl, 200n, 203
faith beyond, 35; freedom and, 59;
science: and God, 66; human-world
knowledge and, 6; liberalism and,
relationship and, 64; religion and
4–5, 49, 53–54, 98; Oedipus and,
modern, 95. See also reason
27; politics and, 6n10, 49, 57–58;
secular humanism, 99
progress and, 175; and religion,
self-love, 47n61
94–98; sociopolitical projects based
self-reﬂection, 91–92
on, 101; subjectivity and, 58–59;
self-sacriﬁce: Christianity and, 82, 84,
symbolic dimension versus, 141;
87, 89; love and, 123; sovereignty
terror and, 22–23; universalism
and, 197–98; valuation of, 123–24;
of, 100; will and, 5. See also
war and, 87, 145
knowledge; science
self-transcendence: in classical
rebellion. See revolution
thought, 48; in Judeo-Christian
recognition, 127–28
tradition, 48; and love/evil, 49–50;
redemption, 1, 216
sacred and, 68. See also inﬁnite
reform, 6–7
Serbia, 11
Republic (Plato), 22–23, 151
serpent, 39–41
revolution: political, 170–72; slaves
Seth, 19
and, 157–65
sexuality: Christianity and, 88; Jewish
rhetoric, 41, 219
law and, 70–71; slaves and, 162–
rights, 124, 152–54, 166
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 151
63. See also sexual union

INDEX
■231
sexual union: Adam and Eve and,
states and, 196; organic model of,
86–87; popular, 86–87, 194–96;
122n28; ambiguity of, 111–12; and
ﬁnitude, 115; as knowledge, 119;
property and, 72–73; questioning
of, 199, 208–10; sacredness of,
and original sin, 112
Shakespeare, William (King Lear),
194; and sacriﬁce, 197–98. See also
nation-states
135
shame: Adam and Eve and, 44, 112–
species, 37–38
states. See nation-states
14; betrayal of love and, 133–34;
choice/action and, 44, 47; as existen-
subject-object dichotomy, 113–14,
118, 122, 128, 190–92
tial, 48; incompleteness of love and,
114; knowledge and, 113; love and
subject/subjectivity: choice and, 42–
47; death and, 47–48; evil as mur-
evil as responses to, 139; nature
and, 5, 149, 153–55, 163–64, 168–
der of, 126–41; inﬁnite value of,
192; in Judeo-Christian tradition,
73; slavery and, 154–56, 159–60,
164, 166
42; reason and, 58–59; saints and,
49n62; and self-transcendence, 48;
sin: Adam and Eve and, 88; evil and,
16–17; original, 38n, 112, 125; sub-
sin and, 48; sovereignty and, 195;
will and emergence of, 39–41
jectivity and, 48; as turning away
from God, 35–36; will and, 36
suffering: Christians and, 86; Jews
and, 74–75
slavery: and fear of rape/murder, 162–
64; human/natural duality of slaves,
suicide bombers, 13, 84n57, 135–36,
198
158–59, 163, 166; justiﬁcation of,
160, 166; labor and, 155; mutila-
symbolic domain: comprehensiveness
of, 203; extension of, 187; identity
tion and, 164; nature versus culture
as framework for, 148, 154–55,
construction in, 202–3; love and
evil operating in, 140–41; versus
162; political evil versus, 207; and
rebellion, 157–65; shame and, 154–
nature, 170, 173; strength/weakness
of, 170; transubstantiation and
56, 159–60, 164, 166; in United
States, 157–62, 172
labor as poles of, 201. See also
ideas
social contract, 196
social factors: evil and, 212, 215, 218;
Symposium (Plato), 107–8, 112, 124
familial love and, 121, 121n26
Socrates, 6, 24, 116
temptation, 39–40
terror: and evil, 16–17; Oedipus and,
soldiers, mindset of, 208–9, 219–20
sovereignty: claim of, on individuals’
21–22, 25, 28–29, 32–33
terrorism: death and, 13; meaning of,
lives, 190, 196, 198; completeness
of, 193–94; and corporate identity,
12. See also suicide bombers
theodicy, 1n
195–96; exclusivity of, 75–76; and
force deployment, 144; Genesis cre-
Thucydides, 185–86
time: Fall and, 38; New Testament
ation narratives and, 191, 193; Hob-
bes on, 190; law and, 194; meaning
and, 81–82
tolerance, 99–100
of, 195, 196–97; modern nation-

232
■INDEX
Tolstoy, Leo, War and Peace,
war: causes of, 189; and meaning,
205–6; murder compared to, 145;
130–33
torture, 148, 208–10
as politics, 187; and self-sacriﬁce,
87, 145–46; soldier-citizen bound-
tragedy, 21–22, 221–22
transubstantiation, 147, 197,
ary eroded in modern, 88, 181; as
torture, 208–10
201–2
treason, 76–77
War and Peace (Tolstoy), 130–33
Washington, George, 6n10
Trinity, 35
truth, 41
Weber, Max, 144
well-being, politics of, 176–77, 190,
truth commissions, 11n17
210
wholeness: love and, 106–10, 117;
United States: and Iraq, 186; popular
sovereignty in, 194–95, 200; Sep-
part-whole relationships, 80; pre-
lapsarian, 119
tember 11 response by, 210; slavery
in, 157–62, 172; violence and mean-
will: of Adam and Eve, 38; antinomies
of, 51; deﬁnition of, 4; evil and, 3–
ing in, 206
universalism: Christianity and, 156;
5, 34–35, 216; faith and, 4, 35; indi-
viduality and, 39–40; and love, 4;
politics of well-being and, 177; of
reason, 100
reason and, 5; and self-sufﬁciency,
4–5; serpent as symbol of, 39–40;
utilitarianism, 177
sin and, 36
willfulness, 5
von Clausewitz, Carl, 187
violence, political, 181–82, 185–89,
World War I, 209
203–5
Voltaire, 65
Yugoslavia, Former, 11

