OUTDOOR LIGHTING  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
Basic DIY skills are needed to install new lights and wiring. 
Connecting things up takes electrical skills and technical 
knowledge, so if in doubt, employ an electrician. 
  
 
 
Always ensure that the power supply is switched off before 
starting any work on your home's lighting circuits. It is not 
sufficient to turn off individual light switches. These 
instructions comply with the requirements of the current IEE 
wiring regulations. 
  
 
 
Adding outdoor lights will show you and your visitors the 
way to the front door on dark nights, highlight your garden 
and help to deter intruders. 
  
A light by your front door is useful, so that visitors can find it
after dark and you can identify them easily. Other lights can 
be used to illuminate side passages, and paths to the garage
and back of the house. All can be wired up as extensions of 
the house wiring. 
  
If you want to install lights some distance from the house, 
you must use a separate circuit. You can easily install low-
voltage garden lights yourself. 
 
2  - Planning the job  
Think about what lighting effect you want to achieve, as this 
will influence the types of fitting you buy and where you 
install them.  
 
 
 
At the front door, and on the patio, you will probably want a 
decorative fitting (or two) that looks attractive by day and 
by night. The style is a matter of personal taste, and there is
a wide range to choose from.  
 
 
 
Elsewhere, function will be more important than looks. For 
example, cheap bulkhead fittings are ideal for side paths, 
garage approaches and so on. The one type of fitting to 
avoid, unless very high levels of illumination are absolutely 
essential for security purposes, is the 500-watt floodlight 
mounted high on your house wall. It is far too powerful for 
most domestic settings, and its glare merely annoys 
neighbours and passers-by.  
 
 
 
Should you still wish to install floodlights, look for models 
that help combat light pollution.  
 
 
 

Then decide how to provide 
power for the new lights. The 
easiest option is to take f
spurs from power circuits
since you can connect th
spur into a socket outlet 
or near an outside wall and 
take it straight through t
wall to the light position (1). 
 
Yo
cable into any socket outle
that is on the main circuit and 
is not itself supplying a spu
in other words, one with two 
cables present. You cannot 
connect it to an outlet that is itself a spur, with just one 
cable supplying it. 
used 
, 
e 
on 
he 
 
u can connect the spur 
t 
r - 
 
 
 
If you decide to extend an existing lighting circuit, use the 
upstairs one which you can access in the loft. You can then 
drop cables down the outside walls to the light positions. You
would have to lift carpets and floorboards to get at the 
downstairs lighting circuit - a degree of disruption that may 
not be worth the effort.  
 
 
 
Check that extra lights will not overload a lighting circuit. 
Each can supply a maximum of 1200 watts. A high-wattage 
floodlight could easily cause an overload and blow fuses.  
 
 
 
3  - Choosing fittings 
Any light fitting for outdoor use - even in a porch - must be 
marked as suitable for the purpose. 
 
 
 
Inspect fittings before you 
buy, to see how they are 
intended to be connected to 
the circuit wiring. Some have 
an internal terminal block to 
which the circuit cable can be 
wired directly (2).  
 
 
 

Others have a flex tail 
emerging from the fitting; 
look for ones with a hollow 
baseplate which can be used 
to accommodate the wiring 
connections (3). Both of 
these fitting types can be 
mounted straight onto the 
house wall, with the cable 
entering via a hole in the wall 
behind.  
 
 
 
Other fittings require 
mounting over a round rear-
entry conduit box recessed 
into the masonry (4) - a job 
best avoided if possible.  
 
Decide how the lights are to 
be controlled. A porch light 
can be switched from the 
hallway, and patio lights f
close by the back door. Other 
lights, with more of a security
function, will benefit from 
passive infra-red (PIR) 
control, although isolation switches must still be fitted.  
rom 
 
 
 
 
A PIR detector senses the movement of any warm object - 
visitor, burglar, animal, car - moving in its field of view, and 
acts to switch on the lighting it controls. You can buy 
individual light fittings with an integral PIR detector, or have 
a separate stand-alone detector linked to a number of 
ordinary light fittings.  
 
 
 
Choose the bulb wattage to suit the situation, bearing in 
mind the maximum wattage for the fitting. A 40-watt or 60-
watt bulb will be more than adequate in most situations. 
Wherever possible, use compact fluorescent lamps rather 
than tungsten-filament bulbs for long life and economy.  
 
4  - Preparing the cable route  
Once you have decided where each light fitting is to be 
installed, the next step is to create a route for the spur 
cable. Ideally the cable should emerge immediately behind 
the fitting's baseplate, but if this isn't possible, the cable can 
run up or down the outside wall of the house.  
 
 
 
When using tools, ensure the relevant safety equipment is 
used.  
 
 
 

Check walls for buried cables and pipes before drilling. 
Special detectors are available to assist with this.  
 
 
 
Use a 16mm diameter masonry drill bit to make a hole for 
each cable. It must be long enough - 400mm (16in) at least 
- to penetrate the wall in one go. Work from the outside so 
you can drill through a soft mortar joint rather than through 
the face of the bricks, and angle the drill bit very slightly 
upwards so rainwater will not penetrate the hole. 
 
 
 
If you need a recessed conduit box to contain the 
connections to the light fitting, chop out its recess next. First
remove a knockout and hold the box over the drilled hole. 
Mark its outline on the wall and drill a series of closely-
spaced holes within it to a little more than the box depth. 
Then chop out the honeycombed brick with a cold chisel, 
clean up the hole and secure the box in the hole with screws 
and wallplugs.  
 
 
 
Slide a length of 16mm PVC conduit through the hole to line 
it so the cable cannot chafe on the masonry. Then feed in 
the 1mm2 cable, leaving about 150mm on the outside ready 
for connection to the light fitting. Indoors, route the cable to 
near the point you have chosen for the connection to the 
indoor power circuit. You can clip it to the top of skirting 
boards, or run it in mini-trunking if you prefer to conceal it. 
 
5  - Installing the light fitting 
At the light position, strip the cable sheath and the core 
insulation and connect the cable to the light fitting. If it has 
a terminal block (see illustration (2) in the section 'Choosing 
fittings'), you will probably need to feed the cable through a 
flexible waterproof seal at the cable entry point. Connect the 
cores to their terminals, which are generally marked L (live), 
N (neutral) and E (earth). 
 
 
 
If the fitting has a flex tail, link this to the circuit cable, 
using three strip connectors. Link the cable red core to the 
flex brown core, the cable black core to the flex blue core 
and the cable earth core (covered in green/ yellow PVC 
sleeving) to the flex earth core, if it has one (see illustration 
(3) in the section 'Choosing fittings'). If it doesn't, simply 
link the cable earth core to the third strip connector.  
 
 
 
If the fitting has a hollow baseplate, fold the cable neatly 
into it so it contains the strip connectors within it. Then fill 
the baseplate with clear silicone mastic to waterproof the 
connections. Use the same technique if the strip connectors 
are housed in a recessed conduit box.  
 
 
 
You can now fix the fitting to the house wall. In most cases, 

this involves marking the screw-fixing positions on the wall, 
drilling holes, inserting wallplugs and holding the fitting in 
place while you drive in the screws. 
 
 
 
Some outside light fittings have a separate baseplate which 
you screw to the wall. The body of the fitting is then 
attached to the baseplate with machine screws.  
 
 
 
With the fitting securely in place, run a bead of clear silicone 
mastic all round it to waterproof the junction between fitting 
and wall.  
 
6  -  Making the wiring connection  
A spur to a light on the house wall must be fused, so the 
spur cable is run via a switched fused connection unit (FCU). 
This also allows the light to be isolated from the mains for 
maintenance or repairs. A 3amp fuse must be fitted in the 
spur.  
 
 
 
Install the mounting box for the FCU near to the socket 
outlet you have selected for the connection to the power 
circuit. Connect in the 1mm2 spur cable from the outside 
light, and connect its live and neutral cores to the FCU 
terminals marked LOAD. 
 
 
 
Run a short length of 2
cable from the FCU back to 
the socket outlet. Connect 
the cores at the FCU end to 
the terminals marked FEED or
MAINS. Connect the earth 
cores to the FCU's earth 
terminal, and link this to the 
earth terminal in the 
mounting box with a 'flying 
earth' (5).  
.5mm2 
 
 
 
 
Turn the power off at the mains, remove the faceplate and 
feed the other end of the 2.5mm2 cable into the socket 
outlet's mounting box. Strip the sheath and core insulation 
and connect the cores to the outlet's live, neutral and earth 
terminals, linking like cores to like. Fit a 5amp fuse in the 
FCU's fuseholder. 
 
 
 
Restore the power and switch on the FCU, which will act as 
the light's on-off switch if it is an ordinary fitting. If it is PIR-
controlled, leave the FCU switched on permanently; the PIR 
detector will act as the on-off switch.  
 
 
 
 

7  - Providing separate switching  
If you want the light to be 
independently switched, 
include a four-terminal 
junction box in the wiring r
between the light fitting and 
the FCU. Wire in the switch
cable there (6) and run it to
your chosen switch position.  
un 
 
 
 
 
 
You can control the light from two positions if you create a 
two-way switching arrangement. For example, this could 
allow you to switch the light on and off from upstairs after 
bedtime - a useful security measure. 
 
8  - Installing low-voltage lighting 
The simplest way of lighting up your patio or garden safely is
to use low-voltage light fittings powered by a transformer. 
You can buy complete sets consisting of a number of light 
fittings, special low-voltage cable (typically about 8m (26ft) 
long) and the transformer, which must be sited in the house,
in an outbuilding or in a weatherproof enclosure. 
 
 
 
Decide where you want the lights, and lay out the cable from
the furthest light position back to where the transformer will 
be placed.  
 
 
 
Assemble the light fittings 
and place them next to the 
cable where you want to 
connect them. Remove the 
terminal cover plate from 
each fitting in turn and press 
in the cable (7). Pins inside 
the terminals pierce the two-
core cable and make the 
electrical connections.  
 
 
 
As all manufacturers' products are different, instructions 
supplied with light fittings must be followed.  
 
 
 
Replace the terminal covers and set the fittings in position 
by pushing their spikes into the ground. The lamps can now 
be pushed into lamp holders.  
 
 
 

Connect the cable to the 
output terminals of the 
transformer (8). Plug the 
transformer into a switched 
socket outlet, which will also 
act as the lights' on-off 
switch. If the transformer is 
in an outbuilding or a 
weatherproof enclosure, the 
socket outlet supplying it 
nsitivity (30 milliamp) 
residual current device - the type normally installed for 
supplying garden power tools.  
must be protected by a high-se
 

