TLFeBOOK

Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

For a complete listing of the Artech House Computer Security Series,
turn to the back of this book.
TLFeBOOK

Outsourcing Information Security
C. Warren Axelrod
Artech House
Boston • London
www.artechhouse.com
TLFeBOOK

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the British Library.
Cover design by Igor Valdman
© 2004 ARTECH HOUSE, INC.
685 Canton Street
Norwood, MA 02062
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of this book
may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission
in writing from the publisher.
All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have been
appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this information. Use of
a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark or service
mark.
International Standard Book Number: 1-58053-531-3
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
TLFeBOOK

To my own in-house support team: Judy, David, and Elizabeth
TLFeBOOK

.
TLFeBOOK

Contents
Foreword
xv
Preface
xix
Acknowledgments
xxv
1
Outsourcing and Information Security
1
First … Some Definitions
2
Second … A Clarification
2
Y2K as a Turning Point
3
The Post Y2K Outsourcing Speed Bump
5
Shaky Managed Security Services Providers
6
A Prognosis
7
The Information Security Market
8
References
9
2
Information Security Risks
11
Threats
11
From Internal Sources
11
From External Sources
13
vii
TLFeBOOK

Review of Threats
16
Vulnerabilities
17
Computer Systems and Networks
17
Software Development
17
Systemic Risks
18
Operational Risk
19
Operator and Administrator Risk
20
Complexity Risk
21
Life-Cycle Risk
21
Risks of Obsolescence
23
Vendor Viability Risk
24
Risk of Poor Quality Support
24
Conversion Risk
24
Risk of Dependency on Key Individuals
25
Summary
25
References
25
3
Justifying Outsourcing
27
Professed Reasons to Outsource
27
The Basis for Decision
28
Reasons for Considering Outsourcing
28
Cost Savings
29
Performance
35
Security
37
Expertise
40
Computer Applications
41
Support
43
Financial Arrangements
45
Summary
47
The Other Side of the Outsourcing Decision
48
References
48
4
Risks of Outsourcing
49
Loss of Control
49
viii
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Viability of Service Providers
50
Reasons for Abandoning Service
54
Relative Size of Customer
55
Quality of Service
56
Tangibles
56
Reliability
56
Responsiveness
57
Assurance
57
Empathy
57
Definitions
59
The Issue of Trust
59
Performance of Applications and Services
62
Lack of Expertise
63
Hidden and Uncertain Costs
63
Limited Customization and Enhancements
66
Knowledge Transfer
66
Shared Environments
67
Legal and Regulatory Matters
67
Summary and Conclusion
68
References
68
5
Categorizing Costs and Benefits
71
Structured, Unbiased Analysis—The Ideal
71
Costs and Benefits
72
Tangible Versus Intangible Costs and Benefits
72
Objective Versus Subjective Costs and Benefits
72
Direct Versus Indirect Costs and Benefits
73
Controllable Versus Noncontrollable Costs and Benefits
73
Certain Versus Probabilistic Costs and Benefits
73
Fixed Versus Variable Costs and Benefits
73
One-Time Versus Ongoing Costs and Benefits
74
Tangible-Objective-Direct Costs and Benefits
75
Contents
ix
TLFeBOOK

Tangible-Objective-Indirect Costs and Benefits
78
Tangible-Subjective-Direct Costs and Benefits
81
Tangible-Subjective-Indirect Costs and Benefits
81
Intangible-Objective-Direct Costs and Benefits
82
Intangible-Objective-Indirect Costs and Benefits
82
Intangible-Subjective-Direct Costs and Benefits
83
Intangible-Subjective-Indirect Costs and Benefits
83
Next Chapter
83
Reference
84
6
Costs and Benefits Throughout the Evaluation Process
85
Triggering the Process
85
Different Strokes
87
Analysis of Costs and Benefits
87
The Evaluation Process
91
Requests for Information and Proposals—Costs
94
Costs to the Customer
95
Costs to the Service Providers
96
Requests for Information/Proposal—Benefits
96
Benefits to the Customer
96
Benefits to the Service Providers
98
Refining the Statement of Work (SOW)
99
Service Level Agreement (SLA)
100
Implementation
101
Transition Phase
101
Transferring from In-House to Out-of-House
101
Monitoring, Reporting, and Review
104
Dispute Resolution
104
Incident Response, Recovery, and Testing
105
Extrication
105
Summary
105
References
106
x
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

7
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process—Customer
and Outsourcer Requirements
107
Investment Evaluation Methods
107
Including All Costs
109
Structure of the Chapter
111
The Gathering of Requirements
111
Business Requirements
112
Viability of Service Provider
116
Financial Analysis
116
Marketplace and Business Prospects
117
Health of the Economy
118
Marketplace Matters
118
Competitive Environment
119
Structure of the Business
120
Nature of the Business
121
Relative Sizes of Organizations
121
Service Requirements
123
Meeting Expectations
123
Concentration and Dispersion of Business Operations
and Functions
124
Customer View of Satisfactory Service
126
Technology Requirements
127
The “Bleeding” Edge
127
References
128
8
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security
Considerations When Outsourcing
131
Security Management Practices
134
Security Organization
134
Personnel Security
136
Other Human-Related Concerns of the Company
137
Ameliorating the Concerns of Workers
140
Asset Classification and Control
140
Information Security Policy
146
Contents
xi
TLFeBOOK

Adopt Customer Policy
147
Adopt Service Provider’s Policy
147
Evaluate Responses to Due-Diligence Questionnaire
147
Enforcement and Compliance
147
Access Control and Identity Protection
149
Application and System Development
151
Operations Security and Operational Risk
152
Security Models and Architecture
153
Security Services—Framework
153
Security Infrastructure
153
Security Management and Control
154
Framework
154
Application to Service Providers
154
Physical and Environmental Security
155
Telecommunications and Network Security
156
Cryptography
158
Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity
159
Business Impact Analysis
159
Planning
159
Implementation and Testing
159
Legal Action
160
Summary
160
References
161
9
Summary of the Outsourcing Process—Soup to Nuts
163
Appendix A:
Candidate Security Services for Outsourcing
171
Appendix B:
A Brief History of IT Outsourcing
181
The Early Days
181
Remote Job Entry
182
xii
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Time-Sharing
184
Distributed Systems
185
Personal Computers and Workstations
186
The Advent of Big-Time Outsourcing
187
The Move Offshore
188
And Now Security
189
Networked Systems and the Internet
190
The Brave New World of Service Providers
191
The Electronic Commerce Model
191
Portals, Aggregation, and Web Services
192
Straight-Through Processing (STP) and Grid Computing 194
Mobile Computing
194
References
195
Appendix C:
A Brief History of Information Security
197
The Mainframe Era
197
Isolated Data Centers
197
Remote Access
198
Distributed Systems
200
Minicomputers
200
Client-Server Architecture
201
The Wild World of the Web
202
The Wireless Revolution
205
Where IT Outsourcing and Security Meet
205
References
207
Selected Bibliography
209
Annotated References and Resources
209
Books
210
Newspapers, Journals, and Magazines
211
Contents
xiii
TLFeBOOK

Computer-Related Publications
211
Security Publications
219
Business and Business/Technology Publications
220
Web-Based Resources
222
Web-Based Resources Related to Specific Publications
225
Conferences and Seminars
226
Publications from Professional Associations and
Academic Institutions
228
Government Sources: Legal and Regulatory
229
Vendors and Service Providers
231
Education and Certification
232
About the Author
235
Index
237
xiv
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Foreword
In the current knowledge age, business thrives on the confidentiality, integrity,
and availability of information. Information provides the nervous system in
which business operates. The task to secure business information is simpler in a
closed environment. However, our knowledge age is also one of outsourcing
business processes and services to reduce cost and streamline the organization.
In addition to those who are already taking advantage of outsourcing,
many other organizations are just beginning to consider the idea. The question
frequently asked, after how much money will be saved, is: How safe of a propo-
sition is it to send mission-critical code and information (e.g., intellectual prop-
erty, regulated data, private data) to another business entity? Organizations are
keen to understand how they can ensure the security of their code, data, compli-
ance requirements, and intellectual property while still taking advantage of the
cost benefits.
The answer is that outsourcing is as secure as you make it. There are multi-
ple levels of security—both from a process perspective and a technology perspec-
tive—which companies can put in place to secure their business relationships,
their data, and their intellectual property.
As companies allow business partners to access and process an increasing
amount of proprietary data, applications, and intellectual capital, they are realiz-
ing that not only must they get their business partners to commit to formalized
security measures and policies, but companies must also take steps to protect
themselves in the event that their business partners have a security breach.
With the current political turmoil and focus, this is particularly imperative
today in offshore vendor relationships. Certainly business partner security
breaches anywhere can be devastating, but the publicity given to offshore
xv
TLFeBOOK

outsourcing makes a security breach offshore a potential customer, reputation,
and regulatory disaster.
While organizations need to address security in their business partner rela-
tionships, it is imperative to not go to the extreme and impose draconian con-
trols that inhibit these relationships when it is unwarranted. The risk to
information varies depending on the nature of the information. Not all business
partner relationships warrant the same level of risk controls because the informa-
tion and the nature of the relationships vary significantly.
The bottom line is that risk and business partner relationships vary and
that controls should be appropriate for the circumstances. Companies are only
as secure as their weakest link; in forming outsourcing relationships, keep the
following in mind:
• Don’t assume that “marquee clients” always equate to good security
partners.
• Don’t assume that IT service providers, even prestigious domestic ones,
will be good security partners.
• Ensure that business partners commit to formalized security measures
or policies, but companies also must take steps to protect themselves in
the event that their business partners have a security breach. Lax busi-
ness partner or vendor security can negate a company’s entire invest-
ment in information security.
• Companies embarking on offshore outsourcing relationships should
use new relationships as a catalyst to formalize all their business partner
security processes.
This book provides valuable insight for organizations seeking an approach
to securing business partner relationships and will be a valuable tool for anyone
involved in outsourcing relationships, including information security and IT
managers, IT executives, and senior management in the organization. The risk
that organizations face in outsourcing extends to many parts of the business and
could significantly impact operations and reputations. The approach and
knowledge contained herein is a commendable work to present this to all inter-
ested parties.
By writing this book, Warren Axelrod specifically shows his experience to
provide an approach that will secure outsourcing relationships but is not steeped
in technology. While technology is important, Dr. Axelrod provides a very bal-
anced risk-based approach to these relationships, an approach in which the
benefits of the relationship are balanced with risks and exposures that it
introduces.
xvi
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

The risk is clear. Business reputations can be affected by business part-
ners—companies are only as trustworthy as the least reputable firms with which
they deal. Therefore, one security breach with one business partner cannot only
negate a company’s entire investment in information security, but it can also
damage the reputation and viability of a company. If companies cannot trust
their business partners and vendors, they should not be doing business with
them. In the case of IT outsourcing, companies may be better off internally sup-
porting their IT systems than risking their support or development to third-
party providers, at home or abroad.
Michael Rasmussen, CISSP
Principal Analyst, Information Risk/Compliance Management
Forrester Research, Inc.
September 2004
Foreword
xvii
TLFeBOOK

.
TLFeBOOK

Preface
The idea for this book formed in 2001—a time when information technology
(IT) outsourcing was not at all the object of controversy, as it became in the
politically charged atmosphere of the United States in 2004. In fact outsourcing,
particularly offshore IT outsourcing, was seen as a boon and as having “saved
the day” with its contribution to preventing a computer meltdown during the
calendar change from 1999 to 2000—known variously as “Year 2000,” “Y2K,”
or the “Millennium date changeover.”
The book concept began when a colleague, Russell Dean Vines, a leading
author in the information security space, asked if I would write a book as one in
a series on security, which a publisher had asked him to put together. We agreed
that my book would address security aspects of IT outsourcing. This was appro-
priate for me since I have worked for IT outsourcing companies for more than
two thirds of my career and have specialized in information security since 1996,
earning a CISSP and CISM along the way.1
As luck would have it, Russ’s publisher decided to cancel the series. How-
ever, I was fortunate to have Artech House accept the proposal a short time later.
And the rest, as they say, is history.
xix
1. The Certificate for Information Systems Security Professionals (CISSP) is awarded by the In-
ternational Information Systems Security Certification Consortium (ISC)2 to those who can
demonstrate proficiency in the ten areas contained in the “body of knowledge.” The Certi-
fied Information Security Manager (CISM) is granted by the Information Systems Audit and
Control Association (ISACA) to those who have had substantial practical experience manag-
ing an information security function and who can demonstrate a required level of knowledge.
TLFeBOOK

The Time Was Right
Looking into security aspects of outsourcing seemed timely because increasing
concerns were being voiced during the Y2K remediation period that foreign
outsourcers might be stealing intellectual property embodied in computer pro-
grams or injecting damaging code into computer programs for financial or
political gain. But, as Dan Verton points out in his revealing book, there was no
known evidence then or in the years that have followed that any such malfea-
sance has occurred [1].
In addition, lawmakers and regulators—in Europe and other countries,
such as the United Kingdom, Canada, and New Zealand, and later in the
United States—were increasingly reflecting the public’s concerns about identity
theft.2 In the United States, federal and state legislators in general, and regula-
tors in the financial and health services industries in particular, voiced major
concerns that mirrored their constituents’ fears about the stealing of individuals’
personal information by those with evil intent. The regulators have already insti-
tuted extensive guidelines as to how to protect customers’ information as well as
that being handled by service providers, especially when such information may
be farmed out for processing abroad. The European Union is particularly
aggressive in this area.
The Intent of the Book
The goal of this book is to heighten your awareness of the many complex and
confusing issues that you need to identify, quantify (where possible), and ana-
lyze, if you are to make the right outsourcing decisions while ensuring that secu-
rity matters have been fully addressed and accounted for. The content is not
intended to be all-encompassing, nor is it by any means the last word on the
subject. The goal is to bring to your attention, as it did to mine during the
research and writing processes, many items not typically included in analyses
but that, in some cases, change the whole basis of an outsourcing decision.
The central theme of the book is that organizations must understand and
consider what costs and benefits are incurred and gained, respectively, at the
intersection of the two most dynamic, difficult, and controversial areas of infor-
mation technology today, namely, outsourcing and security. If we look at these
areas in a two-by-two table (see Table P.1), we see the full scope of the issues at
hand.
xx
Outsourcing Information Security
2. On November 15, 2001, I testified before Congress on cyber security. However, the con-
gressmen at the hearing expressed much greater concern over the growing identity theft issue
than they did about the prospect of terrorists attacking through cyberspace.
TLFeBOOK

Now we will consider each box within the table to understand how it plays
within the overall concept.
The Outsourcing of Outsourcing
This refers to when an outsourcer subcontracts one or more IT services to
another service provider. The ultimate customer of the outsourcer may not even
be aware that this is occurring. But increasingly that question is being asked,
since the only way, for example, to be able to vouch for the protection of cus-
tomer information is to know every pair of hands that has touched it or eyes that
have viewed it. While this issue is not a major focus of the book, an organization
must take it into account and include due diligence for providers to providers, to
whatever depth is necessary to ensure that every relevant point of contact has
been checked.
The Security of Security
Also, a lesser focus of the book, this subject relates to the security posture of
managed security services. In the physical world, it is a matter of ensuring that
security guards do not have criminal records. In the electronic world, it might
include a check as to how secure a particular manufacturer’s firewalls might be,
that is, whether it has any known vulnerability. In a real sense, the security of
security is the greatest risk of all, since so much reliance is placed on managed
security service providers (MSSPs). If they are corrupted—by design or by acci-
dent—the basic premise of security is thwarted.
The Outsourcing of Security
Here we are dealing with, for the most part, MSSPs. Appendix A includes an
extensive list of the types of security service available in the marketplace.
This is really a subset of general outsourcing, but it is a category that must
be looked at most carefully. It somehow combines both the above categories.
Preface
xxi
Table P.1
The Intersections of Outsourcing and Security
The Outsourcing
The Security
…of Outsourcing
Subcontracted IT services
Secure IT services
…of Security
Subcontracted security services
Secure security services
TLFeBOOK

The security services provider may well use a third party to check on the back-
grounds of its staff, or third parties may supply software and “signatures” to
facilitate the provider’s work. Consequently, there is reason for concern as to
how effective these once-removed services or subcontractors might be. This area
is addressed throughout the book. It is frequently offered as a more extreme
security situation relative to regular outsourcing, even critical services. Any risks
that relate to these services can put many of an organization’s activities at greater
risk.
The Security of Outsourcing
This subject represents the main focus of the book. It is the general case and, as
such, is subjected to all the concerns of the other entries in the table. It empha-
sizes the security issues that must be accounted for when making a decision to
outsource and when selecting a particular outsourcer. Many of these issues are
direct and specific to the provider of the services. But to the extent that the serv-
ice provider relies on other providers for ancillary services, including security
services, then due consideration must also be given to the security postures of
these indirect service providers.
These dependencies, which have evolved over time, are on the verge of
potentially spiraling out of control. New technologies, in the form of Web serv-
ices and grid computing, bring with them the specter of large numbers of
remote providers, many of whom may not be known to the user of the services.
In order to deal bravely with this “new world,” the analyst must be aware of the
issues and how to address them. Such is the foundation that this book attempts
to provide.
The Structure of the Book
Chapter 1 introduces our subject by defining the scope of the treatment of the
joint topics of outsourcing and security. It gives a definition of IT outsourcing
and traces the history of the recent rapid growth of such services. More detailed
and extensive histories of both outsourcing and information security are pro-
vided in Appendices B and C, respectively.
While it is true that there are many new outsourcing and security issues
and circumstances, many of these have been addressed in some form or another
in earlier times. We can take some of these lessons from the past and apply them
to the present and future. While appearances might be different, surprisingly
much is fundamentally the same. Deciphering the similarities and differences
makes for a much richer approach to current problems and many of the solu-
tions can be tailored from past successes.
xxii
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

In Chapter 2, we lay out the range of information security risks that are
confronted daily, whether an activity is outsourced or not. Threats can come
from internal and external sources.
Vulnerabilities arise in many areas with
many causes. It is hard enough to protect against threats and manage vulner-
abilities for one’s own organization. How much more difficult it is to deal with
threats and vulnerabilities as they impact third parties and in turn affect the
security health of the customer of the services.
In Chapter 3, we look at the risks of outsourcing. The purpose is not to
discourage organizations from engaging third parties; rather it is to ensure that
the responsible parties have considered the risks, accounted for them, and after
going through the process, are more comfortable in their decision. Awareness is
important here. However, even when one thinks one knows all the risks, many
of them remain obscure—they are difficult or impossible to measure, yet their
impact can be enormous. This makes for some interesting subjective tradeoffs.
Clearly some decisions will be reversed—in either direction—by allowing for
these risk factors, but that is not a bad thing. It is far better to know what one is
getting into than to proceed blindly and find out later when bad things actually
happen.3
In Chapter 4, we get into greater detail and describe the categories of costs
and benefits. We differentiate between tangible and intangible, direct and indi-
rect, and objective and subjective costs and benefits as they relate to outsourcing.
We provide examples of these costs and benefits, relating the categories specifi-
cally to risk and security areas.
Chapter 5 describes how the costs and benefits relate to the Request for
Information (RFI) and Request for Proposal (RFP) processes. The analysis is
done in the context of the status and viability of the outsourcing company,
which is a major consideration in the decision.
In Chapter 6, we look at the evaluation process that takes place once the
information has been collected and sorted. We consider issues that need to be
addressed, what should be included in the analysis, and the relative importance
of various items.
Preface
xxiii
3. I am reminded of an industry newspaper report some 20 years ago of a major early player in
the computer industry, which purportedly decided it would withdraw from the computer
business based on a spreadsheet analysis that was later shown to contain a major error. Had
the correct analysis been done, it would have projected that this particular company would
have become a very profitable player in the business, as contrasted with the losing scenario
portrayed by the incorrect analysis. Errors of commission and omission can equally lead to
the wrong decisions. The goal here is to broaden the base of factors to be included in an
analysis to improve its accuracy and lead to better decisions. The reader is encouraged to add
factors of his or her own that I may have omitted and to check from many different angles to
ensure accuracy in the analysis.
TLFeBOOK

Chapter 7 delves into the specific security considerations that affect the
outsourcing decision and how they should be handled. It is here that we take
each of the categories usually ascribed to the field of security, map them to
aspects of the outsourcing decision process, and describe what influence they
might have. This is the crux of the book.
Finally, in Chapter 8, I summarize the full flow of the outsourcing evalua-
tion and decision processes.
At the end of the book are three appendices. Appendix A is particularly
important as it evaluates the various candidate security services that might
be performed by a third party and shows their specific advantages and
disadvantages.
Appendices B and C contain histories of outsourcing and information
security, respectively. These provide the backdrop against which to view the cur-
rent state of the art.
Reference
[1]
Verton, D., Black Ice: The Invisible Threat of Cyber-Terrorism, New York: McGraw-
Hill/Osborne, 2003, p. 37.
xxiv
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Acknowledgments
There have been many contributors to this book, some of whom were not even
aware of their participation. They include work colleagues, the staff and mem-
bers of various industry and professional associations, with whom I worked on
joint projects, and professionals in the information security field, with whom I
discussed various topics.
Perhaps my most significant interactions were with the staff and members
of the Banking Industry Technology Secretariat, or BITS, as it is better known.
BITS is the information technology arm of the Financial Services Roundtable
(FSR) and is an industry association run by a dynamic group of high-energy
individuals led by CEO Cathy Allen. BITS staff, who made great strides in
pushing the envelope on reducing the risks related to IT outsourcing, include
Faith Boettger, John Carlson, and Margaret Prior, and former staffers Peggy
Lipps (now at the Bank of America) and Laura Lundine. BITS members, myself
included, created two of what I consider to be the definitive publications on the
topic of IT outsourcing. One is the report “BITS Framework: Managing Tech-
nology Risk for Information Technology (IT) Service Providers,” Banking
Industry Technology Secretariat, Financial Services Roundtable, Washington,
D.C., November 2003, http://www.bitsinfo.org, and the other is the “Expecta-
tions Matrix,” Banking Industry Technology Secretariat, Financial Services Round-
table, Washington, D.C., January 2004, http://www.bitsinfo.org, a rigorous
questionnaire that financial institutions are encouraged to use as a basis for their
due-diligence efforts.
I also worked on a number of committees and working groups of the Secu-
rities Industry Association (SIA) and received a different perspective from SIA
staffers Don Kittel, Art Trager, and John Panchery.
xxv
TLFeBOOK

It was through BITS that several of its members became involved in
reviewing work done at Carnegie Mellon University’s Software Engineering
Institute relating to selecting and engaging MSSPs. My collaboration with Julia
Allen and Carol Sledge was very rewarding and helpful in clarifying my
thoughts. The report that resulted from the research, Outsourcing Managed Secu-
rity Services, Network Systems Survivability Program, Carnegie Mellon Univer-
sity, Pittsburgh, PA, Software Engineering Institute, January 2003; http://www.
fedcirc.com, is well worth the reader’s attention.
I am grateful to Mike Rasmussen and Steve Hunt of the Giga Information
Group, which was acquired by the Forrester Research Group. Both of these gen-
tlemen are leaders in the areas of security and outsourcing, and it was most help-
ful to learn from them.
Priscilla Tate, executive director of Technology Managers Forum (TMF),
helped by facilitating discussions on the topic at TMF meetings.
And I must not forget the guidance and learning that I obtained from col-
leagues at work, including Charlie Carroll at the AXA Group; Jim Finnigan,
Ted Gerbracht, and John Kirkwood at Credit Suisse First Boston; Mike Gergel,
Jeff Kemp, Eliot Wagner, and Tom Whitman at Pershing; and Eric Guerrino
and Sharon Kaufman at The Bank of New York. Each provided their own
insights into security issues and outsourcing, which helped greatly in my formu-
lating ideas. However, I take full responsibility for any errors or omissions in the
content of the book.
The team at Artech House, namely, Tim Pitts and, particularly, Tiina
Ruonamaa, the project editor, deserve a tremendous amount of credit for their
patience and persistence mixed with encouragement. I have no doubt that this
project would not have come to a conclusion without their prodding me to keep
going at each step of the way.
And last, but certainly not least, I thank my family, particularly my wife
Judy, for their patience, support, and encouragement to get it finished. The bur-
den falls disproportionately heavily on those who are the closest. They suffer all
the anguish and pain without having the satisfaction of creation that occurs
when a book takes shape.
xxvi
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

1
Outsourcing and Information Security
Modern societies can be distinguished from earlier, more primitive peoples by
the degree of specialization, and the consequent interdependencies, that we find
today. Early human society largely consisted of generalists endowed with and
trained in the relatively few skills and capabilities necessary for survival. Today’s
developed societies are so complex that we see specialties beget subspecialties to
the nth degree. And while there is always a small minority of “outbackers,” who
could probably survive independently, the majority of us need a complex sup-
port system of specialists to provide the goods and services that we need to lead
our everyday lives.
Outsourcing is, in broad terms, the provision of certain goods or services
by third-party specialists in direct or indirect exchange for money. A more
detailed derivation of outsourcing and related concepts can be found in William
Safire’s humorous article [1].
Each of us typically outsources services hundreds if not thousands of times
each day. Someone delivers the morning newspaper to our home. We buy a cup
of coffee and a doughnut before taking a bus or train, or we have fuel put into
our cars and drive to our offices, where we enter a heated, cooled, cleaned, and
protected environment. In each case, someone else is providing a product or
service to us, either directly or through intermediaries.
It is the miracle of our developed economies that such systems of interde-
pendent service and product suppliers can be coordinated to function as well as
they do. Today, for the most part, others meet our very many personal and busi-
ness needs. Goods and services are available when and where we need them at a
cost that is usually less than that of our making them or performing them
1
TLFeBOOK

ourselves, even if we have the ability, time, or materials to do so, which we often
do not.
First … Some Definitions
The term “outsourcing” is used extensively to describe many types of services
provided by third parties. We shall focus on the outsourcing of IT services and
address physical or human services only to the extent that they affect IT. In par-
ticular, we examine the types of outsourcing that have been facilitated by
advances over the past half century in telecommunications and computer sys-
tems. IT outsourcing has become a business with revenues in the multibillions
of dollars per year and exhibiting double-digit growth.
Less commonly used is the term “insourcing,” by which we mean out-
sourcing that is done internally within the sphere of control of the organization,
most likely by a separate division or subsidiary. The insourced service is assumed
to be provided with a formal service level agreement (SLA) in place. The pricing
of the service may or may not be at the market, but it should be competitive so
that the “customer” can select the service that offers the most benefit at the low-
est cost.
A hybrid of outsourcing and insourcing, whereby the responsibility for
providing the services is shared in some manner between internal and external
groups, is termed “cosourcing” or, to use Safire’s term, “intersourcing” [1].
We will be concentrating primarily on risk factors relating to logical secu-
rity (i.e., relating to IT). We will also address risk factors of physical security, to
the extent that they affect the decision to outsource IT services, including man-
aged security services. We will analyze how to determine whether or not to use
outsourced services and how to evaluate particular services and to select provid-
ers. We will determine which services are suitable for outsourcing and the attrib-
utes of service providers, such as size, financial health, operational excellence,
staffing, longevity, and location, that are required to meet such responsibilities.
Outsourcing is a choice and should be based on informed analysis.
Second … A Clarification
Considerable confusion and contradiction exist in the literature regarding the
definitions of outsourcing and IT outsourcing. To some extent, outsourcing has
become the mot du jour and is applied to situations that are not strictly out-
sourcing arrangements.
In “Outsourcing: Evolving Toward Trust,” Sweet et al. define IT out-
sourcing as “…the transfer of IT services or business processes from one
2
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

company to another” [2]. The authors note that, while outsourcing is related to
service contracting, there are important differences between the two. In the case
of service contracting, the purchaser, or client, of the services retains ownership
of and responsibility for the services subject to the agreement, and the client
specifies what is to be done by the service provider and how it is to be achieved.
In contrast, with outsourcing the service provider generally takes on the addi-
tional responsibility for determining the manner in which requirements are met.
The authors describe business process outsourcing as the assumption of even
broader responsibilities by the service provider, allowing, for example, the serv-
ice provider to redesign processes and apply new and existing technologies in
different ways.
Differentiating outsourcing from other types of third-party services by the
degree of control and responsibility taken on by the provider is a convenient way
to limit the scope of our investigation. However, it should still be recognized
that the line between outsourcing and other types of third-party services is fuzzy,
especially as we see providers offering both types of service or combinations of
the two. For our purposes, we shall define IT outsourcing as third-party
computer-based services that involve some measure of third-party management
and control of the overall processes.
Y2K as a Turning Point
At the turn of the millennium, the markets for IT and business process out-
sourcing, internal information security activities, and outsourcing of informa-
tion security projects and managed security services were all sanguine.
Expectations were high. The demand for services relating to Y2K computer
application and system program remediation came at a particularly good time
for the U.S. economy, which was experiencing a prolonged expansion and could
readily absorb the hundreds of billions of dollars that were purportedly spent on
the Y2K effort.1
The Y2K remediation effort in the United States pushed well beyond the
resource limits of domestic consulting companies and their customers, both of
which turned to third-party programming and testing services, at home and
abroad, to fill the gap. The urgent and enormous Y2K requirements expanded
dramatically the use of outsourcing and consulting, especially offshore IT out-
sourcing in countries such as India and Ireland.
Outsourcing and Information Security
3
1. In fact, the side effects of Y2K, such as the replacement of older computer equipment and
software with new, had a very positive impact on the economy, particularly the technology
sector.
TLFeBOOK

Once the use of outsourcing had been established under the pres-
sure of the immutable Y2K deadline, it became much easier and comfortable
to continue using such services once the crisis had passed. The Y2K out-
sourcing push was less cost-driven than it was based on the need to engage
adequate resources to get the job done within a short lead time. Subsequently,
lower costs have become a driving force for outsourcing, particularly after the
substantially lower costs of the offshore resources had been experienced
firsthand.
A number of organizations outsourced their information technology and
business process operations because they did not wish to undergo the huge inter-
nal effort anticipated for Y2K systems remediation. In general, the primary busi-
ness of these companies was financial services, air transportation, or health
services, for instance, and not IT or business processing. These companies deter-
mined that they did not want the aggravation, burden, and risk, as well as the
cost, of making their own systems Y2K compliant. These organizations were
mostly smaller companies, although a number of medium and large organiza-
tions took the same path. These organizations moved their computer and net-
work operations, and sometimes their operational functions, to outsourcers with
the expectation of defraying risk and cost. Outsourcers were generally more eas-
ily able to attract the requisite resources and bear the necessary expenses as they
could spread the costs over a number of customers and realize substantial econo-
mies of scale.
During my personal involvement with both Y2K-related outsourcing
and the ramping up of offshore outsourcing prior to, during, and after the turn
of the millennium, I witnessed both the general use of outsourcing to meet the
surge in Y2K technology requirements and the reliance on offshore resources.
The latter was usually through intermediary contracting companies. I also saw a
number of new customers, including relatively large firms, deciding that they
did not want the problems of the Y2K remediation for their back-office systems,
seek third-party service providers to solve that problem.
We then entered a period of retrenchment in 2001 and 2002, which
followed the bursting of the dot-com bubble and the ensuing collapse of
the many companies dependent on the “new economy.” The emphasis on cost
cutting, combined with the need to remain competitive globally through lever-
aging advanced technology, led to the increased substitution of offshore IT serv-
ices for domestic resources. This trend will undoubtedly increase over the
coming years as the infrastructure to facilitate such services is improved continu-
ally and the comfort level in using offshore services increases through positive
experiences.
In the volatile political climate of 2004, concerns have been raised about
moving domestic jobs abroad, particularly skilled technology jobs, and about
the resulting unemployment among certain segments of the working population
4
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

in the United States and other developed countries.2 In this book, we will not
address these emotionally charged political issues—issues that can change, either
by becoming more or less significant, in the wink of an eye. I will merely observe
that similar services, which are now considered a threat to jobs, were considered
a lifesaver during the years of Y2K remediation, when the economies of the
United States and other countries were booming and the demand for program-
mers far exceeded the supply. The supply now exceeds demand in these same
areas of expertise—and this excess demand is being filled by an abundance of
newly minted offshore staff.
The Post Y2K Outsourcing Speed Bump
The euphoria and high expectations of the early twenty-first century were soon
dampened by the demise or desperate merger and acquisition of a number of
outsourcing firms.
In some cases, the problems encountered were due directly to the lack of
customers and shortfalls in revenues from the serious decline of dot-com and
telecommunications companies. In other cases, failure was the result of flawed
business models. In particular, expectations that information security would be
the next big thing following Y2K were not realized to the level anticipated, per-
haps because they were based more on hope than reality.
Consulting firms and IT service providers had amassed substantial teams
of skilled IT workers and were counting on employing them profitably and in
large numbers once the Y2K work had dissipated. These firms anticipated that
the development, support, and operation of systems for e-commerce would be a
profitable mainstay, but this did not happen. Therefore, high-powered technol-
ogy teams were dismantled, along with development, testing, and operational
facilities. The ratcheting down of these capabilities led to a particularly poor job
market for U.S.-based IT professionals in the post-2000 period.
Those who were directly involved in Y2K remediation and contingency
planning, as well as those of us who staffed the Cyber National Information
Center,3 understood that retaining the monitoring, reporting, and emergency
Outsourcing and Information Security
5
2. In the 2003–2004 period, articles in the computer press have been predominantly negative,
with reports of failures of outsourcing, both domestic and global, given much more play than
success stories.
3. The Cyber National Information Center was a group within the umbrella National Coordi-
nation Center (NCC). The President’s Council on Year 2000 Conversion created the NCC,
which was headed by John Koskinen. It was comprised of representatives of government
agencies and the private sector. Information on incidents was reported from around the globe
and entered into a system, which notified everyone in the NCC of problem areas. The infor-
mation system was the basis of the regular reports presented to the country and the world.
TLFeBOOK

response capabilities established for Y2K would make sense. Some $50 million
was reportedly spent on building a federal government data gathering and com-
munications center that monitored the status of millions of critical computer
systems and communications networks. Regrettably, that facility and the related
public-private cooperative infrastructures were dismantled. The individuals
assigned to the Information Center at the millennium returned to their day-to-
day roles and responsibilities. Yet that facility and its supporting systems and
staff would have been extremely valuable during many crises of the new millen-
nium, including the distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks in 2000, the
Code Red and Nimda computer worms of 2001, the SQL Slammer and Sobig
attacks in 2003, the MyDoom virus early in 2004, the terrorist attacks of Sep-
tember 11, 2001, and the anthrax and ricin incidents.
Some of us who had been involved in Y2K preparation and contin-
gency planning kept going with the national effort relating to critical infrastruc-
ture protection but, following the change of administration in Washington in
2001, most of these efforts were in a hiatus. No clear direction was seen until the
September 11 attacks of that year accelerated the formation of the Department
of Homeland Security. “The National Strategy for Critical Infrastructure Assur-
ance” was launched in September 2002. Plans were put in place to effectively
rebuild the Information Coordination Center along Y2K lines, and new life was
breathed into many of the initiatives that had been spelled out in the May 1998
Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 63 on Critical Infrastructure Protection
and reiterated in the National Strategy.
On January 28, 2004, the National Cyber Security Division of the
Department of Homeland Security announced the formation of the National
Cyber Alert System as the initial step in building the capabilities, established for
Y2K, that remain relevant for protecting against cyber attacks.
Shaky Managed Security Services Providers
The dramatic failures of some high-profile managed security services providers
left prospective customers gun-shy. In some cases, customers had to scramble to
maintain their network availability as some service providers closed down with-
out prior notice [3].
These business failures, combined with a regulatory environment requir-
ing more stringent due diligence, may well have put a considerable crimp into
this market for a year or two. However, the pendulum appears to be swinging
back—at least to the point where firms are reconsidering engaging security serv-
ice providers, albeit after much more comprehensive due diligence efforts.4
6
Outsourcing Information Security
4. There have been a number of industry efforts in the banking sector, in particular, with re-
spect to coming up with questionnaires and evaluation methods for third-party information
TLFeBOOK

Perhaps the need for such services is so great that the hurdles just have to
be overcome. Interestingly, even though there may be some cautious return to
outsourcing of security services, customers are approaching the process soberly,
with “due diligence” as their mantra.
A Prognosis
In the August 2000 issue of Information Security [4], an article on managed secu-
rity service providers appeared to be optimistic, arguing that, with appropriate
evaluations and precautionary measures, firms could once again rely on third
parties to operate various security services with measured confidence.
The future for outsourcing as a whole, and as a percentage of IT spending,
remains favorable. In a survey by CAP Gemini, published in the July 8, 2002,
issue of InfoWorld, 250 executives at 120 financial institutions expected out-
sourcing to rise from 29% of the IT budget in 2002 to 31% in 2004. In the
April 29, 2002, edition of InformationWeek, three major IT outsourcing compa-
nies (IBM, EDS, and Keane) were reported to have shown substantial growth in
outsourcing revenues, while revenues in other areas actually fell. For managed
security services, the growth rate is running at about 35 percent per year com-
pounded with an expectation of $16.5 billion by 2004, according to IDC.
The first recession of the new century began in 2001. During this time, we
saw a large outflow of programming and system development work from the
United States, in particular, to such countries as India, Ireland, Singapore, and,
increasingly, China. The main motivator has been not so much the limitations
in appropriately skilled domestic resources, as was the case for Y2K, because an
excess of qualified domestic technology applicants has resulted from the down-
turn in the economy. Rather, the outflow was motivated by potential cost sav-
ings, as the daily rates for skilled programmers and systems analysts in these
countries were a small fraction of rates in the United States and other developed
countries.
The quality of the work outsourced to these countries is often comparable
to, and sometimes better than, that obtainable from local practitioners. Further-
more, the experience level of the outsourcing labor pool has increased over the
years. The local time differences, often greater than eight hours, may be consid-
ered an inconvenience in terms of personal communications, but that same time
shift allows for virtually around-the-clock work and support.
Outsourcing and Information Security
7
technology (IT) service providers. For example, the Banking Industry Technology Secretariat
(BITS) has developed extensive guidelines for evaluating both domestic and foreign-based IT
service providers.
TLFeBOOK

Consequently, the major barriers to offshore outsourcing of skill, knowl-
edge, experience, ability, and communications have become much less signifi-
cant than in the past. Furthermore, offshore project managers are usually more
than willing to accommodate the time differences and be available for late even-
ing or early morning voice and video conference calls, which they consider a
small price to pay for the economic benefits of the relationship.
Not that everything is positive in such arrangements. Management con-
trol by the customer is more difficult and requires extra effort in the coordina-
tion of tasks, people, and other resources. There are structural and cultural
differences that might lead to misunderstandings. Also, risks may be associated
with the political volatility of some countries. All these issues must be accounted
for and mitigated against, usually through the provision by the customer of
domestic backup resources (including knowledge and skills), retention of up-
to-date copies of design documents and program source code, and other
methods.
Nevertheless, the critical mass of management and technical expertise is
increasingly being applied to both domestic and offshore IT outsourcing, both
of which are expected to grow in absolute terms and as a percentage of IT expen-
ditures. The outsourcing of IT seems to be here to stay.
The Information Security Market
With the rapid increase in the number of information security software–related
threats and vulnerabilities, as well as recent major incidents in the physical
arena, one would expect that the market for information security (especially
network-orientated cyber security) would flourish. In reality, we are seeing
almost the opposite. Many information security software, equipment, and serv-
ices vendors are struggling to survive. Stronger companies, which happen to be
in the right market segment (such as antivirus software) or in a different business
altogether (such as systems integration), are gobbling up their weaker
competitors.
The service provider model is not proving to be as lucrative as initially
expected due to notable failures and bankruptcies [3]. Furthermore, the already
low security budgets of client companies seem to be cut back even further
despite the pressing need to establish more secure environments. In difficult
economic times, we often consider security (like insurance) to be discretionary
in the short term and put it off or forego it completely. Management’s risk pref-
erences look to the costs of the additional protection versus the expense hit to
the bottom line, and executives frequently seem more willing to take a chance
that something bad will not happen. If they are lucky, nothing happens. But
a number of high-profile incidents, both in the form of external attacks and
8
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

internal misdeeds, have brought such judgment into question as reputation-
ruining headlines appear in the press.
Why is it that, at a time when the risks and dangers of purposeful attacks
and willful destruction are everywhere, the security response is so measured? In
order to try to understand the forces that have led to this quandary, we shall look
into several areas. In the next chapter, we shall examine the risks that currently
prevail and against which we want to protect.
References
[1]
Safire, W., “On Language: Outsource … And the Urge to Insource,” The New York Times
Magazine, March 26, 2004, p. 30.
[2]
Sweet, B., et al., “Outsourcing: Evolving Toward Trust,” CSC Consulting, May 21, 2001,
http://www.csc.com.
[3]
Berinato, S., “Security Outsourcing: Exposed!” CIO Magazine, August 1, 2001,
http://www.cio.com.
[4]
James, N., “(Still) At Your Service,” Information Security, Vol. 5, No. 8, August 2002, pp.
48–57.
Outsourcing and Information Security
9
TLFeBOOK

.
TLFeBOOK

2
Information Security Risks
There are two sides to security risks—threats and vulnerabilities. It is not until a
threat meets a vulnerability that a security incident occurs. Threats will always
be out there, somewhere. They can be discouraged through deterrence mecha-
nisms, such as the possibility of punishment or retaliation, or they can be
avoided by not engaging in activities that are threatened. Protective and defen-
sive measures can be installed that will attempt to prevent attacks or ward off an
attack when it occurs. Or vulnerabilities can be fixed so that an attacker pene-
trating defenses cannot perpetrate damage. In what follows, we shall list the
more common IT-related threats and vulnerabilities and indicate how out-
sourcing affects them and how they affect outsourcing.
Threats
That the greatest threats to an organization reside within the organization itself
is a commonly held belief by information security professionals and, by the
press, although reporters emphasize external threats.
From Internal Sources
A number of categories of insiders present threats to the integrity and availability
of an organization’s computer networks and systems and to the confidentiality
of the information that traverse over them and resides in them, respectively.
11
TLFeBOOK

The Disgruntled Employee
The typical disgruntled employee might have been fired or still be on staff and is
often from the IT department. He or she has all the qualities needed for wreak-
ing havoc—intimate knowledge of the firm’s computer applications, networks,
systems, and procedures; physical access to the premises; logical access to appli-
cations and systems; and the desire to do harm.1
The Insider
The insider is an employee, contractor, or consultant who is very familiar with
the organization’s applications, systems, and procedures and who is able to use
that knowledge for personal gain, through fraud, embezzlement, money laun-
dering, and other methods.
The Opportunist
The opportunist is either an insider or an outsider who comes across a flaw or
“hole” in a computer application or system, often by chance, and, rather than
reporting the flaw to the appropriate authorities, decides to exploit it for per-
sonal gain.
The opportunist is just as guilty of committing a crime as someone who
intentionally gains illegal entry into a system. Because of the risks relating to
opportunism, many computer systems display a message or banner screen, as a
deterrent, stating that information available through the system is proprietary or
confidential. This notice might also state that the organization will take
action—disciplinary and/or legal—should anyone steal or misuse the informa-
tion that they are able to access.
Inadvertent Destroyer
The inadvertent destroyer is probably responsible for much computer system
compromise and damage. Such a person can be an employee or contractor with
legitimate access to various systems, or a customer who is entitled to access
applications and information and to perform a variety of tasks. He or she might
also be a support person or an administrator who is unfamiliar with a system and
its nuances.
The inadvertent destroyer might be following normal procedures and
then, either accidentally or mistakenly, issue a command or series of commands
12
Outsourcing Information Security
1. There have been cases where an employee has been fired and the guards, particularly those on
nights and weekends, not have been informed. The ex-employee will come to the facility,
pretend to have lost his or her ID card and, because the guard knows him or her, be allowed
onto the premises. If the ex-employee’s system access has not been terminated, he or she has
free reign of the systems. The company may not wish to pursue the matter as it would pub-
licly disclose deficiencies in its controls.
TLFeBOOK

outside the range of standard operations. The new command(s) might trigger
inappropriate system responses or cause the system to fail. Since the culprit did
not intend to intrude or cause an error, he or she is likely to report the incident,
request official assistance, or simply not repeat the action, as opposed to exploit-
ing it, which the opportunist would do. Such situations might come to light
only if they create a severe error or breakdown.
The main concern for the organization is a reduction in confidence,
because the system has exhibited a vulnerability that might be exploited by less
well-intentioned individuals.
From External Sources
A number of types of individuals having very different motivations will attack or
try to infiltrate an organization’s networks and computer systems.
The Hacker (aka the Cracker)
2
In the public’s mind, the hacker—an evildoer who attacks systems—poses the
greatest threat. Such a person might deface Web sites, steal credit card numbers
(and sell them, hold them for ransom, or use them fraudulently), or put
smart-aleck remarks on workstation screens. The hacker generally does damage
to the system, commits fraud, and creates a publicity nightmare for affected
organizations. To some extent, this notoriety is a result of the hyped reporting of
an enthralled press.
The hacker has been generally depicted as a teenager playing with his com-
puter in his bedroom, as shown in the movie War Games. The problem with this
movie is that the hacker is made into a hero by saving the day and preventing the
destruction of the world—a possibility that he created himself.
Information Security Risks
13
2. Some people feel very strongly about what they consider the misuse of the term “hacker.”
Originally, this term applied to a very bright, competent computer programmer and/or sys-
tems expert who would try to break into systems to reveal their deficiencies and vulnerabili-
ties. The purpose of these ventures was to point out weaknesses in the systems so that the
systems’ builders could repair them and produce better quality work. The vindictive, destruc-
tive fellow, who is intent on breaking a system for the fun of it and to show his peers how
smart he is, was termed a “cracker.” Today, common usage is to apply the word “hacker” to
anyone attempting to break into a system. Just to make things more complicated, the term
“ethical hacker” arose to distinguish between the good guys or “white hats” and the bad ones,
the “black hats.” The distinction is fuzzy and difficult to deal with in real situations. The
question arises as to whether or not one should hire a “reformed hacker,” or a firm that em-
ploys such, to do one’s security work. In this case, the person may be a known renegade, and
may even have served jail time, but someone who has apparently seen the light and now only
works on the right side of the law.
TLFeBOOK

Too often this image of the playful prankster, who just happens to be
smart or lucky enough to intrude into a supposedly well-protected computer
system, prevails. Such a portrayal masks the criminal aspect of the deed. The
crime of hacking is just as insidious and despicable as physically breaking into a
building and smashing computer equipment or stealing secret files.
The Thief
While the hacker is interested in kicks and may be characterized by the teenager
in his room, a more serious group of individuals intends to steal money or other
valuable assets. This type of attacker is often well funded, highly committed to
success, and not easily deterred or discouraged. The thief’s unassisted exploits
are likely to be less frequent and less successful than those that feature collusion
with current or former internal staff, because inside knowledge of the systems,
their vulnerabilities, and their most lucrative assets is extremely helpful.
The thief differs from the opportunist only in that he is actively searching
for a “hole” in the system, versus just coming across one by chance. The persis-
tence of this type of perpetrator works against an organization’s defenses. Mostly
the thief wants to leave as little evidence of the intrusion and missing assets as
possible so as not to activate pursuit and capture. Such behavior contrasts with
that of the hacker who wants his exploits to be noticed and publicized widely
and who may, in some circumstances, notify authorities and the press of his be-
ing responsible for the attack.
The Virus Creator and Distributor
Computer viruses or worms that spawn across the Internet in a matter of hours
or, more recently, in minutes, are opportunistic, undirected forms of attack.
The person who generates the virus (or worm or Trojan horse) cannot be sure
whom it will infect and who will spread the virus to others.
Individuals develop and spread viruses for a variety of reasons, such as to
claim success to peers or to do damage for its own sake. The virus creator never
knows for sure what the impact might be and, when caught, he often appears
genuinely surprised that he was successful. The original Morris worm is a case in
point—it was much more successful than its creator Robert T. Morris had
anticipated [1]. There are perhaps hundreds, even thousands, of new viruses cre-
ated every day and very few ever make it into “the wild.” Of those that do, very
few spread globally and cause significant damage and cost.
Although the numbers are not known, one might expect that those hack-
ers who have specific intentions and targets are much more successful than virus
creators, since, even if specific targets are not sought out in advance, the general
category of victims, such as banks, can be selected and targeted.
Organizations have different policies regarding employee activities.
Some organizations restrict e-mail and Internet access, some screen incoming
14
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

and outgoing e-mails, some restrict access to certain Web sites, some allow
standalone modems, and so on. When an organization engages a third party to
provide IT services, their security standards and controls are almost certainly dif-
ferent (either better or worse) than those of the outsourcing company. These
differences generally increase the risk of hacking of the combined organizations.
The Spy
The industrial or national spy can be dangerous to the credibility and viability of
an organization. Such a person, or group of individuals, attempts to steal secrets
about networks, systems, operations, and data. Such information can lead to
subsequent acts of theft or terrorism or can be used for direct financial or mili-
tary gain, often through the selling of secrets to other interested parties.
The spy has been profiled as a male in his twenties or thirties, usually from
Eastern Europe or Russia, well funded by competing companies or opposing
governments, and highly sophisticated in the use of expensive technologies. This
image differs from that of the hacker as a teenager or student with too much
time on his hands.
While there are potential spies within one’s own organization and country,
the possibility of providing access to spies increases dramatically when functions
are outsourced to other companies. This is of special concern in countries where
segments of the population are either equivocal or opposed to the client organi-
zation’s own regime and sympathetic to other opposing philosophies.
The Cyber Terrorist
The cyber terrorist might be a combination spy and thief, but his motivation is
generally destruction of, or major damage to, the “enemy.” His methods are
very specific and are aimed against well-defined targets. He may be acting alone,
but is more likely to be part of a group. The nation state or terrorist group for
which he works pays for his activities and is likely to be well funded itself.
Instances of cyber terrorism include events such as when Chinese hackers
broke into and defaced U.S. government Web sites in protest of the deaths of a
group of students on a boat that was inadvertently capsized by an American sub-
marine. Another example is the bombing of the Chinese embassy in Kosovo,
which activated a spate of cyber attacks against U.S. sites. During the Bosnian
war, the United States itself blocked telecommunications using hacking tech-
niques—or “cyber warfare,” as such hacking is now known.
Because cyber terrorism involves specific targets, the organizations that are
potential targets should understand their exposure, which may be due to their
preeminence, popularity, or importance. Furthermore, they need take appropri-
ate countermeasures.
Following the attack on the World Trade Center in 2001, it has become
much more evident that the critical infrastructures that support a modern
Information Security Risks
15
TLFeBOOK

economy—such as energy, telecommunications, and transportation—are highly
interdependent and very vulnerable to attack, even an indirect attack.3
This fact is understood by nations with a desire to destroy U.S. political
and economic systems. Ongoing evidence exists of scans being done on crucial
systems in the infrastructure, which is clearly the type of research that can pre-
cede terrorist attacks.
The fact that cyber terrorism has not become more prevalent to date is just
a matter of preparedness and opportunity. Clearly, cyber terrorism is strongly
indicated to become a preferred method as time goes by because it can be acti-
vated remotely from outside the target country.
Outsourcing to third parties, both at home and abroad, might inadver-
tently provide potential terrorists access to vulnerable infrastructure systems and
networks.
Review of Threats
As can be seen from the above descriptions, threats of attack can come from
sources that are internal or external, amateur or professional, motivated by per-
sonal gain or political cause, supported on a shoestring or well funded, and so
on. From a protection point of view, the source of an attack may or may not
result in a different defense. Ideally, an organization will build defenses that can
meet all types of attack, but this is neither physically or economically feasible.
Some middle-of-the-road approach is often taken, with everyday attacks being
thwarted through regular methods, and with the more sophisticated and damag-
ing attacks being addressed according to their risk and the availability of cost-
effective countermeasures.4
16
Outsourcing Information Security
3. The recognition of critical infrastructure interdependencies and the importance of protecting
the critical infrastructure began in the United States in the early 1960s as a result of the Cu-
ban missile crisis. However, the recent national plans and strategies emanated from the Presi-
dential Decision Directive No. 63 (PDD-63) issued in May 1998 and escalated as Y2K
approached. For an overview of initiatives relating to critical infrastructure and a description
of the interdependencies, see [2].
4. Whereas it might seem reasonable to determine the level of security through economic risk
analysis, laws and regulations reflect the risk appetites of legislators and regulators, which re-
flect those of their constituents. Hence, certain threats, such as identity theft, are given
greater prominence in laws and regulations because of the relative influence of individual vot-
ers versus corporate lobbies. The cost of protecting against such threats may well be much
higher than the benefits perceived from the corporate standpoint, or even for society as a
whole. However, the potential for very expensive and damaging actions by regulators, for ex-
ample, will generally favor compliance at any cost. Of course, the cost is eventually borne by
customers and taxpayers.
TLFeBOOK

When an organization has reached what is considered an acceptable level
of defense, then it must ensure that its business partners, particularly third-party
service providers, match or exceed that standard. Otherwise, the quality of pro-
tection is diminished by having less well-protected business partners introduce
vulnerabilities into the overall infrastructure of the organization.
Vulnerabilities
A threat can do actual damage only if it comes up against vulnerable systems,
processes, and procedures. There are many forms of vulnerability, ranging from
technical to human, which need to be identified, evaluated, and mitigated.
Computer Systems and Networks
Modern computer systems and networks have all the characteristics that make
for vulnerability. They are, among other things, generally accessible, ubiquitous,
complex, written for features rather than security, and dependent on human
beings, particularly in the handling of nonstandard situations.
The esoteric knowledge of computers and access to them, which were for a
long time in the hands of a few specialists, are now broadly available. Millions of
individuals around the world have been trained in application development, sys-
tem programming, technical support, customer assistance, and system admini-
stration. Such skills are readily acquired by an educated population, easily
transferable, and largely independent of location. These computer-savvy indi-
viduals, along with the hundreds of millions who have become proficient with
PCs, have created a huge body of technical knowledge that can be used either
productively or destructively. Add to that the global access provided by the
Internet and you have a formula for malicious activities with far-reaching
consequences.
Adding another dimension to the already difficult problem, outsourcing
requires the management and control of computer experts across additional
organizations. By entering into an outsourcing partnership, one organization
automatically exposes its networks and systems to a new set of individuals, many
of whom will have high levels of expertise and some of whom might have evil
intentions. However vulnerable an organization might be from the misdeeds of
its own internal staff, it is much more so when it links up with other entities.
Software Development
Expectations about the capabilities of computer systems have always run
ahead of the technology needed to manage and control them. This has created a
culture in which, for the most part, application functionality precedes quality
Information Security Risks
17
TLFeBOOK

and security. The fact of the matter is that applications and systems software
have not in general been built to be secure, and as a result they usually contain
many bugs or holes—vulnerabilities that can be exploited by evildoers.
Pressure from critics and customers has resulted in an emphasis on secu-
rity, as in a recent pronouncement by Bill Gates that security is now the number
one priority at Microsoft. However, it still remains to be seen whether this new
concern with security is a knee-jerk reaction or a long-term commitment.5
Another area of concern regarding software, either commercial or
home-grown, is the chance that someone will purposely inject malicious or
exploitable code into a program. There have been several instances of computer
viruses being put into shrink-wrapped software, intentionally or unintention-
ally, without the knowledge of the manufacturer. Concern has been frequently
expressed in regard to software developed or modified in foreign countries,
where activist groups might be determined to undermine the recipient of the
software.
When organizations partner in an outsourcing arrangement, the likeli-
hood of significant differences in cultures, attitudes, and standards of excellence
is high, particularly when it comes to security requirements. Objective standards
are needed, against which the quality and security aspects of software can be
measured. As discussed later, some standards do exist, but they are not univer-
sally accepted.
Systemic Risks
Even if software or equipment is robust and carefully tested and scanned for vul-
nerabilities, the system chain is only as strong as its weakest link. Also, the
more components and pathways that are linked together, the greater the chance
that something will not quite match up or that components or links have weak-
nesses that can be exploited. There is greater potential for more and riskier vul-
nerabilities as more systems within a company are integrated, and as more
organizations link their systems with those of business partners and customers.
Adding to the exposure, new capabilities, such as Web services, are designed to
combine the processing capability of many independently built and supported
components.
Outsourcing invariably adds another dimension to what is already a com-
plex set of interactions. Take Web services, for example. Still in their formative
stage, Web services require the ability of programs within a unit or belonging to
different units of an organization or among organizations to interact with one
18
Outsourcing Information Security
5. Security continues to be a top priority with Bill Gates and with Microsoft’s customers, as de-
scribed in [3].
TLFeBOOK

another through a standard set of interfaces. In concept, this is not unlike
object-oriented programming, whereby a programmer will utilize a library of
objects, enabling him or her to pull standard routines or objects that perform
common functions into the program.
Web services, however, can be structured as an extreme form of out-
sourcing, since each unit of the service can be incorporated into a program
through the program’s accessing the unit to perform specific standard functions,
such as credit checking. The dependence upon the security of the third-party
provider of the particular service is extremely high, particularly as business-
critical functions might be performed by the remote service. How such services
are warranted and how both sides accommodate change will become major chal-
lenges. The need for security and reliability is great, as any unauthorized changes
or lack of availability would have instant impact on all the systems using a par-
ticular service.6
Another trend having serious security implications is grid computing,
wherein, for example, a computer program is broken down into components
that can be processed on many computers within an organization, across known
organizations, or across the Internet. In the last case, the program manager may
not even know where the processing machines are or to whom they belong. As
the form of grid computing migrates from processing to database handling, the
issues of privacy and confidentiality become even more significant.
The ultimate security nightmare arises with the intersection of Web
services and grid computing, where applications developed by a diverse group
across possibly many organizations are run on machines that might reside in
unknown places with data spread across a mysterious network of applications
and systems.
Operational Risk
Operational risk results from deficiencies in an organization’s management
information, support, and control systems. These deficiencies represent one of
the more significant areas of risk. Certainly up until the recent accounting and
control debacles at major corporations, such as Enron, Tyco, and WorldCom,
the focus for many high-flying companies was on functionality, usability, and
appearance (i.e., reputation). The underlying control capabilities needed to
ensure the lawful and correct running of systems and processes were given short
Information Security Risks
19
6. There is an equivalent in Business Process Outsourcing (BPO), as it relates to workflow com-
ponents. Here, each step of a process can be separated into individual components, any one
of which might be outsourced.
TLFeBOOK

shrift. If adequate systems did exist, those responsible for running those systems
and processes were delinquent.
With outsourcing, matters of management and control become even more
crucial because functions are often divided among organizations in seem-
ingly arbitrary ways. The combining of two or more operational systems intro-
duces its own set of problems, inconsistencies, and vulnerabilities. Ironically, it
was the ability to subjugate the control and auditing of a separate entity that
exacerbated the Enron debacle, since such insourced entities were created in
order to hide misdeeds.
From an outsourcing organization’s perspective, the fact that specific
operational processes may be given over to a third party raises many questions
about the operational integrity and security of the other party. Consequently,
customers exhibit an increasing interest in objective reviews and assessments,
such as that provided by a SAS 70 report, which goes beyond the provision of IT
services by adding operational functions.7 There are other certifications, such as
TruSecure Enterprise Certification, SysTrust, WebTrust, and Trust-e, that spe-
cifically address the IT and information security functions.
Operator and Administrator Risk
Many security-related problems can be attributed to the human factor. When
strong system and operational controls are not in place, an organization depends
heavily upon its system operators and administrative staff to ensure that com-
puter systems operate according to their design and purpose. Operators and
administrators tend to be fairly low in the organizational hierarchy both in terms
of pay and education, yet they have enormous responsibility and authority. An
operator error can cause a system to operate inappropriately or fail entirely. A
simple slip by an administrator can expose highly confidential information to
unauthorized persons. Consequently, significant effort should be expended on
automating administrative and control systems to reduce operator intervention
to a minimum and to remove the decision-making responsibility from low-level
administrators.
When outsourcing, many of these administrative and operational func-
tions are transferred to the service provider, resulting in another degree of sepa-
ration. This real concern must be addressed through stringent due diligence
and, where possible, retaining or overseeing control. Retention of control is
20
Outsourcing Information Security
7. The Statement on Auditing Standards No. 70 (SAS 70) is an auditing standard developed by
the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), which is used by a service
provider to provide independent assurance that control objectives are met and control pro-
cesses are adequate. Details of the SAS 70 are available at http://www.sas70.org.
TLFeBOOK

possible but difficult to implement.8 More usual is the situation in which the
service provider manages the operation and submits management reports to the
client, so that the latter can oversee the operation from afar.
Complexity Risk
As described earlier, any arrangement that adds a third party will increase com-
plexity, because the interactions between the organizations must be added to the
internal activities within each organization. The more complex an arrangement
of interacting systems, operations, and human beings, the greater is the chance
of error or damage, unintentional or otherwise. Therefore, one can assume that
managing an outsourcing arrangement will be more difficult and require more
effort than if the outsourced functions ran totally in-house.
That is not to say that an organization should not outsource. Clearly they
often should and they do. However, when all the benefits of outsourcing are
evaluated, they must be set against the additional risks and effort that increased
complexity produces.
Life-Cycle Risk
There are many life cycles in the IT world, the best known being the system
development life cycle (SDLC)—the process whereby a system is designed,
developed, tested, and implemented.
Security aspects of system development are frequently neglected. For the
highest-quality systems, security considerations need to be included and security
features need to be built in from the outset. Each stage of development provides
an opportunity to take a more secure approach, as well as to insert security
assessments [4]. The risks in the SDLC are of particular importance when appli-
cations and systems development are outsourced. Applications development is
among the more recent IT functions to be outsourced. However, with the recent
availability of large offshore pools of highly educated, well-trained programmers
at reasonable cost, and of low-cost, high-bandwidth communications, this form
of outsourcing is expanding rapidly.
Other life cycles relate to the newness of technology. The reliability and
efficacy of new hardware and software can be low since they frequently contain
bugs, errors, and manufacturing defects that must be resolved over time. For
Information Security Risks
21
8. Early in my career, I implemented a production control system (called UCC-7 when sup-
plied by University Computing Corporation (UCC), then becoming CA-7 after Computer
Associates bought UCC), which enabled the client organization, for which I worked, to man-
age the running of applications at the hosting service provider (or facilities manager). I can
attest to the fact that this type of arrangement is difficult to achieve and requires considerable
effort.
TLFeBOOK

equipment, most failures occur when units are new and later when they wear
out, with the in-between period showing good reliability, as in the well-known
“bathtub curve” (see Figure 2.1).
The pattern for software is somewhat different, as shown in Figure 2.2.
Here there is an initial relatively rapid improvement as early, more obvious
errors are detected and fixed. Over time, new errors are found and resolved,
making for a continuing drop in failure rate. There is no wear-out period as such
for software, although withdrawal by the vendor of maintenance support on
obsolete software will mean that any failures in such software will not be
resolved, or will be addressed at a lower priority compared to supported soft-
ware. However, when software is replaced with newer versions, the failure rate
will generally jump up again and the pattern in Figure 2.2 will repeat itself.
22
Outsourcing Information Security
Time
Failure
rate
Period of improving operation
Burn-in period
Figure 2.2 Software failure rate over time.
Time
Failure
rate
Period of stable operation
Burn-in
period
Wear-out
period
Figure 2.1 Hardware failure rate over time.
TLFeBOOK

The combination of failure rates of new hardware and software can be
complex. If the equipment and software are combined, as they are with so-called
“appliances,” then the failure rate pattern will likely be of the form shown in
Figure 2.3, which is a combination of the curves in Figures 2.1 and 2.2. This is
not often the case. Generally, equipment will break and have to be replaced,
with existing software reloaded onto the new hardware. On the other hand, new
software may well function on older, in-place equipment, which is passing
through its period of stability. Whatever the situation, it is the combined failure
rate that pertains.
Sometimes an organization will outsource to gain the benefits of new tech-
nologies through providers who have already moved beyond the initial failure
period. To the extent that technology is new and unknown to the client but well
known and familiar to the service provider, the use of the outsourcer yields con-
siderable benefits. One should be concerned, however, if a technology is first
being tested and used by the service provider for your environment, as it might
be unreliable.
Risks of Obsolescence
While there are risks tied to introducing new technologies, as described above,
there are also risks relating to obsolescence. Replacement parts and trained serv-
ice engineers may no longer be available for older equipment. Often with com-
puter equipment, in particular, we see the cost of maintaining older machines
often exceeding the total cost of ownership of new equipment. Not only does
the higher cost of maintenance reflect the reality that older technology is more
expensive to fix, the manufacturer is likely using maintenance charges as an
incentive for customers to buy new equipment, which is cheaper to maintain
and service. Falling costs exacerbate the planned obsolescence phenomenon.
Information Security Risks
23
Time
Failure
rate
Period of improving operation
Burn-in
period
Wear-out
period
Figure 2.3 Combined hardware and software failure rate over time.
TLFeBOOK

Software has not experienced the same downward plunge in cost per unit
of capacity or capability. However, older software does become more costly to
maintain than new software and lacks desirable features and capabilities.
While some service providers use leading-edge technologies, others may
choose to prolong the life of older technologies. In the latter case, they may be
locked into obsolete platforms by customers who are unwilling to change or
upgrade to newer technologies. Whatever the reason, both customers and serv-
ice providers need to evaluate periodically the efficacy of their current technolo-
gies to determine whether they should be upgraded.
In addition to the operational and support issues, security issues exist. Old
versions of software may no longer be supported by the vendor, and unsup-
ported software is a security risk. First, the software vendor will not fix newly
discovered vulnerabilities in older unsupported products and, second, there is a
greater chance that a hacker will have had more time to discover vulnerabilities
in longer-running products.
Vendor Viability Risk
Vendors produce hardware and software that may be used by both or either the
customer and the service provider. When a vendor goes out of business and can
no longer support a product, the company using that product must deal with
the possibility of the product breaking and being unrepairable. This issue applies
to hardware and software, as well as services.
Careful due diligence before committing to a vendor can reduce this risk.
Mitigation of vendor risk also includes reducing dependency on a single vendor
and designing systems to be flexible so that they can be ported to other plat-
forms with relative ease.
Risk of Poor Quality Support
Vendors and service providers not uncommonly assign their most able support
personnel to their largest, most lucrative accounts. Those customers who do not
fall within this privileged category often receive lesser support service. Any nego-
tiation of service level should ensure that the best possible support is provided.
Even entities that consider that they have little leverage can adopt techniques
that will encourage suppliers of goods and services to provide top-quality
support.
Conversion Risk
Conversion from an existing in-house operation to a service provider, as well as
setting up a new function at a third-party site, can be rife with problems. If the
members of a functional area see that it is to be disbanded once the conversion is
24
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

done, they will not be likely to cooperate unless specific incentives have been
agreed upon in advance. Even with an entirely new operation, insiders may be of
the opinion that they should be in charge of the function. Any sense of dissen-
tion or disgruntlement must be followed up and protected against, since an
employee or contractor who harbors resentment is more likely to try to damage
systems or facilities.
Risk of Dependency on Key Individuals
Very commonly one or two experts are knowledgeable in specific critical appli-
cations, networks, systems, or processes. The loss of such subject-matter
expertise can be extremely detrimental to the ongoing operation and support of
these systems. When an existing operation is outsourced, it is quite likely that
those expert individuals will decide not to remain with the operation, even if it is
clear that they are needed. It is crucial to the future stability of an ongoing
operation to identify rapidly those individuals who are critical for the smooth
running of systems and to encourage them to stay on.
Both the customer and the service provider may have a number of such
individuals. However, the customer may not be aware of who is important to
the third-party operation and who is not. It is incumbent upon those arranging
the service relationship to make sure that this concern is addressed by both cus-
tomer and service provider.
Summary
Outsourcing presents organizations with security-related risks—as does decid-
ing not to outsource. The underlying principle of this book is that knowing what
the risks are and taking them into account make for better outsourcing deci-
sions. In this chapter, we have laid out the risks. In what follows we shall discuss
how to deal with them.
References
[1]
Schneier, B., Secrets and Lies, New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000, pp. 154–155.
[2]
Axelrod, C. W., “Protecting the E-Commerce Infrastructure,” Electronic Commerce Advi-
sor, November/December 1999, Vol. 4, No. 3, pp. 13–20.
[3]
Taft, D. K., “Gates Has Mind on Future Tech: Security Tops Microsoft Chairman’s
‘Think Week,’” eWeek, March 29, 2004.
[4]
Graff, M. G., and K. R. van Wyk, Secure Coding, Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly & Associates,
2003.
Information Security Risks
25
TLFeBOOK

.
TLFeBOOK

3
Justifying Outsourcing
So you think that you should outsource your major IT functions, such as net-
work and computer management, applications development and testing, and
customer support and, perhaps, even some of your information security func-
tions? How about really diving in with both feet and seeking an offshore pro-
vider of services so as to reap the enormous cost and productivity benefits that
these faraway places promise?
Professed Reasons to Outsource
Is your primary motivation to hand over responsibility to a third party so that
you will not be on the hook when things go awry? Well, think again, because the
function may move out the door, but the responsibility might very well stay
behind, lurking in the shadows. On whose door will management knock if the
service expectations are not met, or if the charges are higher than expected, or if
the third party goes out of business—suddenly, and without warning? The
inevitable question from management in such soul-destroying situations is
“Whose idea was this in the first place?” as all eyes bear down on you, if you are
unfortunate or unwise enough to have stayed around.
Perhaps you think that you are going to save piles of money for your
organization. But are the savings real? How about sharpening your pencil and
going over those numbers again? Did you include all those intangible costs? You
have probably fully accounted for intangible benefits as if they were already in
hand. But what about hidden costs? Are you still trying to keep them out of
sight? And don’t forget the possible delayed costs of extricating yourself from a
relationship turned sour? Were they included in the initial analysis or not?
27
TLFeBOOK

Probably they were not. Perhaps you should have put more effort into calculat-
ing the numbers ahead of time and remembered to put in a contingency cush-
ion. Here management’s question will be: “Why didn’t you tell me we would be
hit with such-and-such costs?”
Do you believe that you chose to outsource a peripheral function so that
you could concentrate on your core businesses? Well, now you are more on
track. This line of reasoning could make sense and may even be true. Your plan
may not work out as expected, but at least outsourcing stands a chance of pro-
ducing the desired benefits, that is, if you are positioned to take advantage of the
situation. But don’t expect the kudos for the additional business opportunities
or revenues to come to you. The sales and marketing staff will be sure to take the
largest share of the credit. And worse, even in the face of success, an ungrateful
management might ask: “Well, why didn’t you suggest this years ago?”
So it is for those who propose risky ventures such as outsourcing. You can
be faulted whether or not the outsourcing venture is successful in terms of serv-
ice, cost, and capability. So why do it at all? Clearly there must be more to this
outsourcing business than meets the eye.
The Basis for Decision
The outsourcing decision is often highly subjective, even when the decision-
maker has gone through an extensive quantitative analysis. Determining the
costs of a particular outsourcing venture usually involves a fair amount of
estimation and judgment. Cost estimates can be inflated or understated, or a
cost category or two might be omitted entirely, either accidentally or intention-
ally. However inaccurate cost estimates might be, quantitative estimates of bene-
fits usually have very broad ranges, particularly for those that are intangible. It
can be extremely difficult, if not impossible, to place an accurate value on cer-
tain intangible benefits, and any valuation is likely to be highly subjective and
engender significant error. Clearly, in such situations, personal bias can be the
deciding factor, overriding any amount of precision in the cost analysis.
Reasons for Considering Outsourcing
Perhaps the best place to begin is to list and discuss the reasons one might give
for considering outsourcing as an alternative to in-house functions. Some rea-
sons are obvious and inarguable, while others are fuzzy and highly debatable.
Sometimes a reason may appear obvious, but it might become the basis of
heated arguments, politicization, and polarization.
I reviewed a variety of sources, some of which reported on surveys of those
in a position to use information technology outsourcers, and others which
28
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

presented reasons based on direct experience [1–4]. It was an interesting exer-
cise, especially as the same item can be a driver to one person and a risk to
another. For example, a reason to outsource is to benefit from a particular exper-
tise offered by the service provider. Yet, at the same time, there is a feeling that
the in-house staff is not being given access to the feeding trough of knowledge.
However, let us willingly suspend our disbelief and come up with a list of
good reasons to outsource. Here we shall discuss the arguments in favor of out-
sourcing associated with costs, performance, security, expertise, support, and
financial arrangements.
Cost Savings
Saving money is usually at or very near the top of the list of reasons to outsource.
It is very difficult to justify a third-party service that is more expensive than per-
forming the same service in-house, unless there is a significant material differ-
ence in the type or quality of service.
The challenge at hand is to calculate the full cost of performing the same
tasks internally or externally over a particular time period, which would gener-
ally be the number of years over which a third-party agreement is expected to
run. Different periods, such as three, four, or five years, might be considered, in
order to determine the minimum time for which the arrangement must be in
place to recoup initial costs through future savings and benefits.
Labor
Often the largest cost of service provision is for labor. For in-house full-time and
part-time staff, there are a number of categories of cost. They include salaries,
overtime, benefits, and payroll taxes for internal staff. For contractors and con-
sultants, there is an hourly or daily basic rate, with a premium for overtime. The
basic consultant rate covers salaries, benefits, and so on, as well as profit. For
internal staff paid vacations and holidays as well as sick days must be added,
whereas for consultants these are included in the basic rate applied to actual time
spent on the job.
Various overhead costs, such as those related to facilities occupied by the
staff (e.g., rent, utilities), administrative costs (e.g., secretarial staff, costs of
printing, copying) and management,
can be handled in a variety of ways.
Within a company such costs as facilities and administrative costs are generally
depicted as allocations from the corporate cost centers to the specific staff cost
centers. The cost of management and corporate staff may be included in admin-
istrative costs or may be specifically assigned to individuals. This is also true of
service providers and consulting firms, although here the senior managers are
often billed directly, whereas administrative support staff is included as a per-
centage, such as a surcharge of 20% of total other charges.
Justifying Outsourcing
29
TLFeBOOK

It should be noted that, in calculating internal costs, contractors and con-
sultants may be engaged in support of the in-house service in addition to in-
house staff. For third-party services, internal employee costs will likely be mini-
mal, and most staff costs will be for consultants, even in the case where internal
employees are transferred to the service provider. In Table 3.1, we show how
staffing varies for internal or external services and the general degree to which
the staff is provided internally or externally. This illustrates that some mix of
internal and external staff is necessary regardless of the nature of the service,
although the ratios can change dramatically. This is important to remember
when costing out a particular service since accounting for internal staff in a
third-party relationship and, to a lesser extent, the external staff assisting on an
in-house service can be easily forgotten.
Besides costs directly attributable to individuals, other costs can be
ascribed more generally to the role that a particular person has and what activi-
ties the person does in relation to that role. Perhaps the most obvious of these
are travel-related costs, which include transportation, accommodation, meals,
and costs related to entertaining clients. Often a consulting firm will charge
travel-related expenses attributable to a project or service at cost with an admin-
istrative fee, as mentioned earlier. However, it should be noted that travel costs
to a primary place of business are generally borne by an employee, whereas a
consultant might charge for travel to the same client premises regardless of dis-
tance. For offshore service providers, the travel component can be considerable,
not only in terms of airfares and accommodations, but also in the time required
for the travel, which will be charged to the client.1
Other employee-related costs include those for training and attendance at
seminars and conferences. Costs include those directly attributable to travel,
accommodations, and registration, but also the cost of lost opportunity by not
30
Outsourcing Information Security
Table 3.1
Staff (Internal and External) by Type of Service
In-House Service
Third-Party Service Provider
Internal Staff
Full- and part-time employees
Minimal (relationship managers)
External Staff
Some consultants, contractors
Almost all consultants
1. The factors that affect the decision to use offshore and near-shore outsourcers are examined
in a separate section. However, as we go through the general factors, I will point out aspects
of those factors that pertain specifically to the selection and use of out-of-country service
providers.
TLFeBOOK

working during the training period. However, the training activity will probably
more than pay for itself through higher productivity and effectiveness and new
opportunities to create revenues and reduce costs. Companies often have formal
standards for training, such as requiring so many days of training per year, or a
minimum number of continuing education units (CEUs), for certain business-
related or technology-related certifications. For consulting services, such costs are
built into the rate, which includes an allowance for a certain number of nonbilla-
ble days per employee per year, some of which may be earmarked for training.2
Then there are one-time, per-person costs, such as those for recruiting, hir-
ing, and firing. It can be more difficult for an organization to hire specialists
than for a service provider or consulting firm to do so, since the latter can gener-
ally offer more interesting work, greater responsibility, more variety of work and
environment, and a better career growth path. Thus, service providers may be
able to save on these one-time personnel costs if being able to offer more attrac-
tive work environments and opportunities results in lower staffing turnover.
Various labor-related costs, and how they are calculated and assigned or
allocated, are shown in Table 3.2 for both in-house and externally provided
services. The main observation is that for internal workers the individual cost
categories have to be defined and quantified, whereas for outside service provid-
ers most categories are included in a base rate. Of course, the service provider
must go through the same definition and quantification of its internal costs to
arrive at a suitable base rate.3
Justifying Outsourcing
31
2. In difficult times, companies often cut back on training and other discretionary expenditures.
Not investing in maintaining staff at the forefront of their respective fields can result in lower
future productivity and reduced savings. It becomes a real issue in the outsourcing environ-
ment, where the service provider is motivated to keep up-to-date, but skills of internal staff
can atrophy. This leads to greater dependency on the outsourcer by customers, with the po-
tential for substantial rate increases and inability of the customer organization to seek better
providers or move in-house.
3. It should be noted that only certain types of consulting and professional services proposals
lend themselves to base-rate charging. Often, a service provider will charge based on some
other measure, such as number of items processed per unit of time, or propose a fixed rate.
What is even more interesting is that the revenue per internal employee and employee pro-
ductivity is sensitive to whether or not the number of staff embodied in the outside services
charges is included in the head count for these calculations. It can make an enormous differ-
ence in productivity numbers (e.g., number of calls answered or lines of code programmed)
in particular. For example, the recent growing trend for outsourcing such activities as soft-
ware development to countries such as India and China means that a certain amount of work
can be done more cheaply. But it could be less productive in units of work per person, if the
additional relationship management and project management staff and the likely larger num-
bers of programmers required are included in the calculation. Perhaps some of the noted in-
crease in productivity seen recently in the United States is due in part in the conversion of
head count–related costs to lump-sum fixed-price contracts.
TLFeBOOK

Computer and Network Equipment and Software
The comparison between costs for equipment and software used in-house and
which are either provided directly, as in the case of an application service pro-
vider (ASP), or embodied within a service, as for a business service provider
32
Outsourcing Information Security
Table 3.2
Labor-Related Costs for In-House and External Workers
In-House
External
Ongoing Costs
Salary
Specific cost
Included in base rate
Overtime
Percentage, say, 150%, of salary
Charged as a percentage of base
hourly rate
Benefits
Percentage, say, 30%, of salary
Included in base rate
Payroll taxes
As required by taxing agency
Included in base rate
Travel and entertainment
Specific cost
Billed at cost or cost plus
Training
Specific cost
Included in base rate
Company car
May be taxable benefit
May be included in base rate or
charged to client per mile
One-time Costs
Hiring
Specific cost
Included in base rate
Firing
Specific cost
Included in base rate
Setup
Specific cost
Included in base rate
Overhead Costs
Facilities (rent, utilities)
Specific cost
Included in base rate
Administration
Specific cost
Charged as percentage, say, 15%, of
price
Corporate staff
Specific cost
Included in base rate or as part of
administrative cost
Management
Specific cost
Charged on hourly basis and/or
included in base rate of billable staff
TLFeBOOK

(BSP), can be difficult because such products are acquired in a number of differ-
ent ways.4
Whether equipment is leased or purchased accounts for the most obvious
cost differential. Leasing is reflected as a recurring periodic cost, usually monthly,
whereas for purchased equipment, the company will depreciate the asset over a
given number of years. Either way, costs include ongoing maintenance charges
and, possibly, charges per unit of output, as in the case of a printer. Installation
and de-installation charges are likely also, as are sales taxes and the like.
Software usually cannot be purchased; instead, the buyer is confronted
with a periodic license fee plus a maintenance charge. There may or may not be
installation and de-installation charges for software products, but there are often
significant charges for professional services. Software pricing varies considerably,
ranging from costs for unlimited licenses to very specific licenses according to
the size and number of central machines on which the software is running, the
number of end-users, the amount of use, and other factors.
Networks incur additional expenses for ordering, installing, maintaining,
and de-installing circuits. Such costs are generally charged as a set fee per month
for dedicated circuits, and for shared networks often on the basis of units of use.
The ready access to the Internet and proliferation of portable wireless
devices has changed forever the way in which communications technologies are
used and charged for.
All of the above examples indicate that there are certainly opportunities for
quantity discounts based on the volume of products acquired. The discount can
apply to either the service provider or the customer, but often a service provider
will get a better deal than the customer, especially for specialty products, and
may or may not pass such savings though, depending on the competitiveness of
the market for those particular services.
With third-party service providers, the costs of equipment, software, serv-
ices, and networks are usually rolled into a stated price regardless of whether the
cost will change over time or the equipment has been fully depreciated.
For offshore outsourcing, the telecommunications costs can be consider-
able due not only to the distances involved, but also because of the increased
need to communicate due to different time zones. In addition, different coun-
tries have different equipment requirements, telecommunications tariffs, and
rules and regulations.
Justifying Outsourcing
33
4. There are many types of service providers. Prevalent are ASPs and BSPs or Business Process
Outsourcers (BPOs). In general, ASPs offer customers use of proprietary applications or cus-
tomized off-the-shelf computer applications, where the customers interact directly with the
computer applications housed with the ASP from their organization’s location. For BPOs,
the customer usually deals with persons who offer an interactive services, such as help desk
services, and the outsourcer’s staff interacts with appropriate computer systems.
TLFeBOOK

For internal use, the cost can vary widely based on not only how the prod-
ucts have been acquired but on whether or not they are shared with other
applications.
Facilities
People and equipment require space, furniture, heating and cooling, electrical
power, light, and air. In particular, they not only require a regulated physical
environment, but also supplies, food, drink, bathroom facilities, and more.
Space, fixtures, equipment, and furniture can be rented or purchased, and,
if purchased, depreciated for tax purposes over a number of years. Buildings are
amortized over decades compared to depreciation over a few years for equip-
ment and furnishings. If a building is purchased, the owner must pay for prop-
erty taxes and utilities, such as electricity, gas, and water, and maintenance and
support of the facilities, including the costs of janitorial and security staff. Some-
times the costs for utilities and maintenance are passed through to the renter,
while in other situations they are included in the rent.
These various facilities costs can be determined explicitly for in-house
operations but are factored into the basic rate or the full price presented by serv-
ice providers, much as was described for the costs of internal versus external staff.
Other Infrastructure Costs
In order to be all-inclusive, costs must include such items as security, business
continuity, and disaster recovery. Some portion of these costs should be allo-
cated to the particular service under consideration for outsourcing. In some
cases, a third party will automatically provide the redundancy and capacity to
fulfill the security and recovery needs. Indeed, many third-party services are
offered specifically to fill such needs, namely, those from managed security serv-
ices and disaster recovery services providers.
One aspect that should be carefully considered is the degree to which a
customer organization might wind down backup sites after taking on a service
provider and vice versa. In some situations the service provider serves as a com-
plete backup, in which case the current cost of the in-house backup facility can
be removed. In other cases, the impact of outsourcing one part of the business
may have negligible impact on a backup facility that must remain in place, with
marginally small savings. Particular care must be taken to ensure the continua-
tion of backup services if they are moved back in-house or converted to another
provider, or if the environment changes substantially, as might occur in the case
of a takeover of either the customer or provider.
It should also be noted that if a function shares costs that are fixed and
cannot be reduced in the event of outsourcing, then those costs have to be redis-
tributed across remaining in-house functions. Consequently, the latter might
become uneconomical and candidates for outsourcing.
34
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

We now turn to a number of other reasons for outsourcing, many of
which also have cost components that must be included in the analysis.
Performance
An important reason for considering outsourcing is to achieve an improvement
in performance that the service provider might offer both due to economies of
scale and because of its absolute and relative size. Size, or scale, might give an
organization the opportunity to provide sufficient work to keep second-shift
and third-shift staff busy. Also, large scale can provide a variety of functions and
opportunities which will help to retain the best available talent, who might not
want to work in a less stimulating customer environment.5 Additionally, the
level of operational expertise is expected to be higher with service providers, due
to the staff’s greater concentration on, and lower repetitiveness of, tasks as com-
pared to internal operations.
The relationship between service provider and customer is of necessity for-
mal and specific, with particular service-level requirements often accompanied
by charges for nonperformance and, occasionally, bonuses for exceeding
requirements. Internal relationships are less likely to be as formal; furthermore,
it is usually more difficult to press for nonperformance within one’s own organi-
zation. Consequently, even with an internal service-level agreement in place (an
increasingly popular practice), it is unusual for the customer to enforce such
payment clauses of the agreement against other members of “the family.” An
advantage of third-party arms-length relationships is the greater likelihood that
service-level performance will be aggressively monitored and pursued in the
event of a provider missing a deadline or other performance measure. Therefore,
service providers are usually more motivated to meet or beat agreed-upon service
levels than in-house providers.
On the other hand, in a number of instances deterioration has occurred in
service levels (to the extreme of no service) from third parties when, for example,
a service provider runs into financial difficulty [5] or overly commits its limited
resources and capacity.6
Justifying Outsourcing
35
5. There is a paradox here. Service providers argue that they offer a more attractive work envi-
ronment for specialists who would otherwise be bored and leave. Yet I recently asked a repre-
sentative of a managed security services provider how they keep employees interested while
performing routine and boring tasks, such as monitoring firewall logs. The response was that
they rotate the staff after six months. This answer contradicts the frequent claim that service
providers’ staffs are very experienced in any particular area.
6. There has always been an issue with disaster recovery services as to their ability to handle a
regional problem, such as a power blackout or snow storm, which results in numerous re-
quests for service. This became an issue on September 11, 2001, when a large number of
companies in the New York area declared emergencies virtually simultaneously, and some
notable firms were not able to avail themselves of the services for which they had contracted.
TLFeBOOK

Reliability
Improved reliability is a high-priority characteristic reportedly sought by those
looking to contract with a service provider. Reliability is a component of per-
formance—that is, it is a factor that drives availability, and availability is a key
aspect of performance.
The study of reliability is an engineering field unto itself. Components indi-
vidually have reliability characteristics, expressed in such terms as mean-time-
between-failure (MTBF) and mean-time-to-repair (MTTR) that are estimated
from experience with the hardware and software. When components are com-
bined in series, their failure is additive and overall reliability decreases, whereas
when components are combined in parallel, the overall reliability is increased.
Therefore, by selecting more reliable hardware and software components, which
have been suitably “burned in,” and combining them so as to assure a measure of
redundancy, the overall system is made more reliable, and hence more available.
Other factors to consider regarding reliability are business continuity and
disaster recovery. Business continuity planning (BCP) and disaster recovery
services (DRS) represent major outsourcing opportunities, since sharing services
and facilities with other customers can reduce the cost to each participant con-
siderably. From an availability perspective, BCP and DRS provide a high level
of assurance that an organization can survive and recover from a major disaster
such as a fire, hurricane, earthquake, or bomb.
From a customer’s perspective, the time at which these seemingly random
failures take place can be very significant. In [6, 7], I distinguish reliability and
availability as seen from the users’ perspective from the view of reliability and
availability by the vendor or service provider. Availability is only significant from
a user’s perspective for periods during which the person normally has access to
systems and networks. Failures during off-hours essentially don’t count. That is
why companies often contract with vendor service departments for short
response times during critical periods and are willing to pay a substantial pre-
mium, perhaps 20% to 50% of the base maintenance fee, for such services.
It is really availability, rather than reliability, that is of interest to custom-
ers and the customers’ employees. But availability alone does not meet the serv-
ice requirements. A system or service can be up and running, but it meets the
performance standards for the customer only if all the contracted systems and
services are available. That is to say, if systems are available but are operating
erroneously (for example, they may be operating on a corrupted database, or a
function within a program may not be running properly), they are not meeting
the service requirements.
Integrity
The requirement that a system be running properly and accurately is one aspect
of integrity or usability. In order to maintain such integrity, a service provider
36
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

must develop, adopt, follow, and enforce policies and procedures to establish
and implement protective controls. The provider must be able to monitor and
review all activities by subjects (such as end users or programs) to determine and
verify who has gained access to specific applications, functions, and data and to
review the frequency and timing of successful and unsuccessful access attempts.
The service provider must also have plans in place to respond to the observation
of any unusual activities or intrusions in order to prevent further abuse, repair
any damage done, and pursue and prosecute perpetrators, as appropriate.
Quality of Service
While service levels, availability, and, to some extent, integrity are measurable
and can be managed against the numbers, quality of service is by definition less
tangible. It is a combination of these quantitative measures along with the intan-
gible aspects of performance. Particularly important here is the degree to which
the service provider is proactive in anticipating and resolving issues before they
become critical. Through such actions, a service provider can differentiate itself
from internal providers and competitors.
Because quality of service is subjective yet very important in the selection
of a service provider, a potential customer needs to do due diligence, primarily
through talking with references very familiar with the subject outsourcer. Other
more measurable factors can be included, such as the growth in the number of
customers, the length of time the customers have stayed with the provider, attri-
tion rates, and percentage of renewals. These factors are all-important and
should be included in the justification analysis, but are not as valuable as the
honest opinions of current and former customers.
Security
Another factor high on the list for those deciding on whether or not to out-
source and how to choose the service provider is security. Much like reliability,
security involves a broad range of characteristics. The mantra for security is
confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA). We have already discussed
integrity and availability under the rubric of performance and quality of service,
so what is left to discuss is confidentiality.
Confidentiality
In the discussion of security, we see a fair degree of confusion among the terms
confidentiality, privacy, intellectual property, and proprietary information. In
general, we use these terms to discuss the handling of information that should be
viewed and can be changed by a select population, not necessarily the same
group in each case. The issue of confidentiality receives a huge amount of
Justifying Outsourcing
37
TLFeBOOK

attention from legislators and regulators, particularly in the financial services
and health services industries.
The rapid advances in technology, particularly those that allow virtually
universal access from practically anywhere to information stored within the
databases of government agencies and private organizations, have by far out-
stripped the ability of organizations to control access to such information and
suitably secure it. However, the increasing number of widely publicized abuses,
with millions of cases of theft of identity and other personal information occur-
ring each year, has caught the eye of governments. The result is a large number
of laws and, for certain industries, regulations designed to protect individuals’
personal information. The significance of this trend to outsourcers is that regu-
lators in some industries, such as financial services, are demanding that custom-
ers perform exhaustive due diligence on prospective service providers in terms of
their security.7 That is to say, banks in particular are performing extensive
evaluations and security assessments in practically every area of security, includ-
ing system access, awareness, business continuity, disaster recovery, and physical
security. BITS has produced an IT Service Provider Expectations Matrix [8],
which provides a very extensive set of due diligence questions and requests.
Table 3.3 shows the covered categories and subcategories.
One highly motivating reason for this relatively sudden and very pressing
need to achieve the level of due diligence shown in Table 3.3 is the laws in the
United States. They have, in particular, made senior management and boards of
directors of major corporations personally responsible for any unauthorized dis-
closure of customers’ nonpublic personal information (NPPI). This information
might include full name, Social Security number, date of birth, and account
numbers.
Security and Trust
As indicated above, the examination of the status of service providers’ security
posture extends well beyond the usual technical and operational controls. The
examination investigates hiring practices (using background checks, testing for
evidence of drugs), security awareness programs, and access to buildings and
facilities (especially data centers).
It is rapidly becoming a baseline requirement that service providers dem-
onstrate that they can adequately protect and restrict access to the confidential
information of their customers and, in some cases, the private information of
their customers’ customers. Because third parties are, by definition, not legally
38
Outsourcing Information Security
7. See, for example, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) Bulletins 2001–47 and
2002–16. The former looks at third-party IT service providers in general and the latter re-
lates to offshore IT outsourcing in particular. Available at http://www.occ.treas.gov.
TLFeBOOK

Justifying Outsourcing
39
Table 3.3
Summary Categories and Subcategories as Outlined in BITS Expectations Matrix [8]
Categories
Subcategories
Security policy
Organizational security
Information security infrastructure
Security of access by third parties
Outsourcing
Asset classification and control
Accountability for assets
Information classification
Personnel security
Security specified in job definition
User training
Responding to security incidents and malfunctions
Physical and environmental security
Secure areas
Equipment security
General controls
Communications and operations
management
Operational procedures and responsibilities
System planning and acceptance
Protection against malicious software
Housekeeping
Network management
Media handling and security
Exchanges of information and software
Access control
Business requirements for access control
User access management
User responsibilities
Network access control
Operating system access control
Application access control
Monitoring system access and use
Mobile computing and teleworking
Systems development and
maintenance
Security requirements of systems
Security in application systems
Cryptographic controls
Security in system files
Security in development and support
Business continuity management
Aspects of business continuity planning
Compliance with legal requirements
Compliance with legal requirements
Review of security policy and technical compliance
System audit considerations
TLFeBOOK

or, usually, physically part of customers’ organizations, their ability to conform
to these stringent security requirements is more difficult to achieve and
represents a major risk of outsourcing, particularly offshore outsourcing.
An oft-quoted reason for using third parties is that they must have high
security standards because their business depends on their demonstration of
secure facilities and services. However, trusting to this belief is a mistake. It is
certainly not true in all, or perhaps even in many, cases. If a third party can dem-
onstrate such high security standards, it can be a very good reason to choose a
service provider, especially one that can help with security itself.
Expertise
Another major reason to outsource, alluded to in the section on performance, is
having access to highly qualified personnel, who may not be otherwise available
to the hiring organization. In a number of areas, particular in information secu-
rity, demand for highly qualified and experienced practitioners far outpaces the
supply, particularly in government agencies where compensation levels are rela-
tively low. Also, a particular organization may not have adequate work to keep
highly qualified personnel busy, whereas a specialty service provider will. For
example, security specialists working for service providers can also benefit by
being exposed often to many situations, such as hacker attacks, which an
employee of the customer’s company would not experience to such a degree.
The analogy is that one would prefer to go to a surgeon who does several of a
particular procedure each day compared to one who may do the procedure twice
a month on average. Though both are qualified, the former benefits from more
frequent exposure.
Customers should be forewarned that, while a service provider may have
presented staff with exemplary credentials, it may not be planning to assign
those particular individuals to your account. It is important that customers
understand exactly who is to be assigned to their project and in what roles.
Specific staff assignments should be included in the service agreement.
Also, as described earlier, highly competent specialists are not likely to be
satisfied doing the same routine—even though they are extremely good at
it—year in and year out. Service providers claim to offer their specialized staff
better career growth and opportunities than customers do. That may be true in
many cases. However, the flip side of this is that the best, most experienced prac-
titioners may well be swapped out of the position agreed upon. If the specialist
were forced to remain in the same position as a result of contractual stipulations,
then he or she might pick up and leave the outsource altogether, causing a major
loss for the customer.
There are several answers to this problem. One is to ensure that the service
provider has redundancy in the form of several individuals on staff with the high
40
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

level of expertise and extensive experience required for the particular role.
Another solution is to have the service provider automate the role, thereby
incorporating the knowledge into an expert system. Yet another is to fully docu-
ment the role so that someone with lesser expertise can perform the function.
In any event, access to expertise that is in short supply can be a significant
driver in the decision to outsource.8 It is one of the major factors driving the
movement of offshore outsourcing to countries such as India, Ireland, and
China, where there are increasingly large pools of low-cost, highly educated
engineers and other professionals.
Computer Applications
Whether the outsourcer is an applications service provider (ASP) or not, the
majority of, if not all, services that are provided by third parties embody com-
puter applications, either as explicit offerings or built into an overall service and
not necessarily visible to the customer. The customer, the service provider,
and/or a software vendor may have developed these applications, jointly or inde-
pendently. Because of the tight integration of computer applications into service
offerings, much of the outsourcing decision revolves around the design, devel-
opment, implementation, and operation of applications and interfacing such
applications with other systems and processes.
It requires time, money, and frequently the effort of many specialists,
expert in computer systems, technology, and specific business areas, to develop
and maintain these computer applications. Quite often, a company will
decide that having a third party take care of the headaches that come with appli-
cation development and operation is preferable for a number of reasons dis-
cussed next.
Insufficient In-House Expertise
As described earlier, an important reason for using third parties to develop and
run computer systems is that the customer organization may not have sufficient
work to justify or interest highly skilled in-house persons. Part and parcel of the
lack of expertise is the retention issue.
Justifying Outsourcing
41
8. The U.S. government established a program to train security professionals. The government
has instituted a program whereby it pays for the education and training of professionals in
exchange for a commitment that the graduates will spend a stated amount of time working
for their government sponsors. The first crop of graduates had surprising difficulty getting
positions with government agencies, which appeared reticent in accepting newly minted
graduates of the programwho might supplant more experienced personnel.
TLFeBOOK

Retention
The competitive market for particular specialty skills may make it difficult for a
customer organization to hold on to capable, trained individuals. Often, the
preferred solution is to avoid the issue by using an outsourcer.
Compensation Limitations
Customer organizations may have difficulty recruiting the desired caliber of per-
son or may have an issue with the compensation that such individuals demand
in the marketplace. Budget-constrained customers may not be able to offer com-
petitive incentives, such as stock or stock options, to their professional staffs.
Shared Costs
An individual customer organization may not be able to justify the cost of build-
ing a particular application. On the other hand, it might be able to afford the
cost of application development and modification if the costs are shared with
other organizations through the conduit of a service provider intermediary.
For systems that provide competitive advantage, not being able to build or
modify systems might lead to loss of market share, reduced profits, and a nega-
tive impact on the image of the organization. In cases where regulators require
certain capabilities by a given deadline, the ability to build new systems or
change existing systems means the difference between surviving or not. Such
considerations arose as a Y2K issue, when many companies decided to outsource
rather than analyze and change millions of lines of program code.
Prompt Software Version Updates
Although there is appeal in not having to upgrade versions of software and apply
patches when errors or vulnerabilities are found, in today’s world viruses and
worms can spread globally in seconds. Therefore, keeping software and systems
up to date is even more important. This not only maintains the service provid-
er’s image as progressive, but it also reduces vulnerability in the face of ever-
growing threats. Outsourcers are often more apt to perform upgrades because
they tend to be somewhat more sensitive to implications that their systems are
insecure.
The incentives for updating software are the same for in-house and exter-
nal situations, but often the in-house program is not given a sufficiently high
priority and inadequate resources are assigned to this effort. Updates are more
likely to be a priority for a healthy outsourcer.9
42
Outsourcing Information Security
9. The updating of software is one of the first activities to be jettisoned at an ailing outsourcer.
If this is observed, it is a red flag to the customer.
TLFeBOOK

Speed to Market
By having a large, flexible team of specialists to deploy to a priority system, a
service provider can help a customer organization bring a particular application
or service to market more rapidly than would be possible using in-house
resources.
New Revenue Opportunities
Customers can exploit the broader range of capabilities offered by service pro-
viders in order to generate higher revenues and profits. Sometimes a business
opportunity starts out small and grows over time. In such a case, an organization
may be unwilling to make the initial investment in developing systems and serv-
ices in support of the opportunity, but may find that, if priced appropriately, a
service provider might reasonably support the volume of business, particularly
in its early stages.
Fluctuations in Volume of Projects
A particular issue that organizations have regarding their application develop-
ment shops is the fluctuations in volumes of work due to available opportuni-
ties, business cycles, and other factors. Service providers offer two benefits here.
First, they may be more able to deploy staff to other projects. Second, by using
service providers, the customer organization avoids laying off and rehiring per-
sonnel in response to fluctuations in workload.
Lower Customization Costs
While not always the case, it is sometimes easier for a third party to customize its
systems and services for a particular requirement than for a customer organiza-
tion to do so. One reason for this is that service providers likely build their sys-
tems to be readily adapted to the individual requirements of their customers,
compared to more directed and less flexible in-house systems.
Lower Integration Costs
Service providers must be able to integrate their systems efficiently with those of
customers and business partners. The ability to rapidly convert a customer’s sys-
tems and processes is usually a determining factor in a service provider’s success
and can be a significant differentiator among services. The service provider’s sys-
tems and processes are designed to facilitate this requirement to adapt quickly to
multifarious environments.
Support
Service providers need strong support capabilities to survive in a competitive
marketplace. Support takes many forms, such as a help desk that assists those
Justifying Outsourcing
43
TLFeBOOK

using the services and embedded systems, or sophisticated technical support to
deal with problems arising from a failure of the systems or networks to operate
properly.
Help Desk
The help desk function for a service provider is much like an internal help desk
except that its support personnel are likely to be better qualified to respond to
problems. The service provider’s personnel see problems and issues across a
number of customers, resulting in a higher likelihood that they have confronted
a particular problem many times before. Their experience level will likely have
improved more rapidly in a multicustomer setting.
That is not to assume that internal or external help desk staff are particu-
larly well trained, or that a service provider’s staff is inherently better than inter-
nal staff. There is stronger motivation, however, for the service provider to
present the best support image that it can. This is because customers can easily
leave a provider, whereas in-house “customers” are captive.
It is quite common for companies to locate their help desk facilities in
remote areas, including offshore locations, where a large, cheap labor pool exists
which is reasonably well educated and hungry for employment. However, in
order to justify this approach, a certain critical mass is necessary to assure that
the required infrastructure and management is cost-effective despite cheaper
labor. Often, a service provider supporting many customers can justify the
establishment of a remote, cost-effective help desk capability better than those at
customer organizations. Despite providing much-needed employment and
money to less economically buoyant parts of the world, the image of the help
desk job is quite negative in the United States and other developed countries—it
is often viewed as a menial, boring job that attracts poor quality candidates. This
may be truer of the large urban marketplace where there are many vocational
choices. It is less true in areas, such as those with high unemployment or subur-
ban areas where employees do not wish to commute large distances or have
other personal reasons to be near to home, that any employment is desirable,
particularly part-time employment.
In an interesting anomaly that, in certain countries, such as India, a help
desk job is well respected and much sought after. According to Stephanie Moore
of Forrester Research, not only is a help desk position highly regarded in India,
with many candidates seeking relatively few jobs, but those companies out-
sourcing help desk services go to great lengths to make the location of the help
desk transparent to customers calling in. For example, for the U.S. market, the
candidates must be extremely proficient in English, but receive additional
training to speak with an American accent and to use vernacular and buzz words
relating to the specific service supported. Furthermore, the help desk staff mem-
bers are given American pseudonyms. Ideally, a customer calling in has no idea
44
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

of the location of the help desk facility—it could be in Florida or India for all
they know.
Technical Support
Advances in communications technology have facilitated the trend towards
remote technical support and service, particularly of the 24/7 variety. While it is
possible and not uncommon, to have three-shift technical support domestically,
outsourcing to foreign countries in different time zones makes for a much larger
pool of engineers available around-the-clock within their normal working hours.
With the cost of broadband long-distance communications lines coming down,
linkages within organizations and between customer organizations and outsour-
cers are more feasible both technically and economically.
Financial Arrangements
The use of a third-party service provider can significantly impact a company’s
profitability, depending upon the payment options available from the
outsourcer.
Price and Sharing
The cost of service can be charged to the customer by the outsourcer in a
number of ways. Perhaps the simplest, and often the most appealing, is a
monthly cost, which is based on level of resource use and agreed-upon service
levels. Because the service provider frequently allocates certain resources across a
number of customers, it is possible to come up with a menu of service costs
based upon the degree of sharing. A customer organization commonly buys
some combination of shared and dedicated resources in its service package.
Perhaps the most illustrative example of shared resources is in disaster
recovery services (DRS). The whole raison d’être for such services is the notion
that, at any given point in time, only a small subset of customers might need to
use particular services. Providers typically offer a number of levels of service
based largely on the degree of sharing and the low probability of customers
declaring near-simultaneous disasters.
For generic DRS, such as providing access to off-site central processing
and data storage, or desktop facilities, resources are made available to customers,
up to a predetermined quantity (e.g., number of workstations) on a first-come,
first-served basis. At this lowest level of service, providers typically overbook
facilities. Consequently, the agreed-upon resources may not be available in total
or even in part, if there are many customers competing for those same resources.
The DRS vendor will often take certain precautions, such as assigning specific
shared resources among companies that are geographically dispersed, in differ-
ent lines of business, or not dependent on one another. This type of distribution
Justifying Outsourcing
45
TLFeBOOK

reduces the probability of simultaneous requests for particular designated
resources.
Another option for overbooked resources is to apportion them in some
ratio among customers, with the ratio based in some manner on the original
request. For example, let us assume that Company A had contracted for 120
workstations and Company B for 60 workstations. The DRS vendor may build
a total of 120 workstations so as to meet Company A’s demand and to fully
accommodate Company B if it were to declare a disaster and if Company A did
not. If the two companies declared emergencies simultaneously, Company A
would be assigned 80 workstations and Company B would get 40 workstations,
based on an assignment proportional to the contracted numbers.
The next level of DRS service would be for a full dedication of resources to
a particular customer. That is, in the above example, Company B decides that it
needs to have 60 workstations under all circumstances. The DRS vendor builds
140 workstations, rather than 120, so that for a simultaneous emergency, Com-
pany B gets its 60 workstations, but Company A must make do with only 80
workstations, since Company A is on a lower-cost sharing plan. If only Com-
pany A declared a disaster, it receives its full allotment of 120 workstations.
Company A’s rate (cost per workstation) is lower than that of Company B since
it is taking a greater risk, which allows the DRS vendor to build fewer worksta-
tions overall.
The highest cost per unit occurs when there is no sharing. This might be
due to customers being unwilling to take the risk of not having their full com-
plement of resources and facilities available, or it may be that the company’s
requirements are so specialized that sharing is not possible. In either case, the
cost is high—possibly as high or higher than having an in-house facility. Why
would a company choose a DRS facility if it costs more? The answer often lies in
nonfinancial benefits of such a relationship, such as ability to hire capable, expe-
rienced staff, and not having to find a building and set up the facility. The abil-
ity to pay on a monthly basis, without having a large initial capital outlay, may
also be a factor, particularly for a start-up company.
Many of the above issues apply to a variety of outsourcing arrangements,
particularly those that involve setting up a specialized facility. Managed security
service providers (MSSPs) are in a similar situation, except that they generally
provide a primary service rather than a backup.
Impact on Costs
As alluded to earlier, depending on the size of the customer, the use of third
parties provides a much greater and more flexible range of payment options, not
all of which are available through an in-house facility.
The ability to pay per unit of use, often on a sliding scale with discounted
rates for increased transaction volumes, is a way for organizations to introduce
46
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

new services and products without high up-front costs. If the new business is
successful and becomes self-sustaining, it might be worthwhile for the customer
organization to convert from the outsourced service to an internal operation.
Tax-related financial benefits might apply to leasing through third parties
versus buying equipment and software, based on depreciation calculations and
estimates of the residual value of equipment were it to be sold. Also, a firm may
not want to commit capital to equipment and facilities, preferring to lease or
rent equipment and services and license software on a periodic basis.
Feasibility of Project or Activity
Sometimes it is necessary to finance the development and operation of a certain
function or service by having a third party do the work at a predetermined rate.
Many startups do not have the funding or the management resources to put eve-
rything together themselves, nor should they want to. More mature organiza-
tions can recognize significant cost reductions from outsourcing, which can turn
an infeasible activity into a possibility.
For example, few organizations are large and globally dispersed enough to
be able to justify 24/7 support for tasks such as monitoring firewalls, because
this requires a high level of knowledge, training, and expense. A third party can
spread such a function across a number of customers, which is cost-effective for
each customer and profitable for the service provider.
This model provides the support necessary, beyond venture capital and
other funding, to enable many companies to become profitable, which would
have been impossible to achieve without outsourcing. For many mature organi-
zations, the opportunity to outsource significant parts of their operations
enabled them to return to profitable status or stay in business.
Summary
The justification of outsourcing centers on cost, responsibility, capabilities, and
skills. Reduced cost or payments, shifting of responsibility, purchasing of scarce
or expensive resources and facilities, and acquisition of hard-to-find or
expensive-to-hire professionals—these are the major reasons to justify out-
sourcing. They may or may not be the real reasons in any particular case, but
they are generally acceptable and politically correct. After all, an insider justify-
ing using third parties does not want to present his or her own deficiencies or
incompetence as the real reasons, although an outsider, such as a consulting firm
brought in by senior management, might. We will address the potential discon-
nect between outsourcing proposals and reality later in what may be one of the
more controversial parts of this book.
Justifying Outsourcing
47
TLFeBOOK

The Other Side of the Outsourcing Decision
When all the reasons that favor outsourcing have been brought out and substan-
tiated to show significant benefits, we still don’t have the full picture. Practically
every one of the benefits carries with it one or more risks, which may, singly or
in combination, destroy any hope of justifying outsourcing or availing the com-
pany of the service at all, even internally. Many of these risks relate to security
and its related liabilities, as we will see in the following chapter.
However, one only needs to proceed with evaluating the offsetting risks if
the benefits have been shown to be extensive and of high value. Otherwise, the
decision-making process stops here. Let us assume that the anticipated benefits
of outsourcing in a particular situation are substantial and that, if the negatives
are not too great, the organization will be able to proceed. In that case we must
see what risks abound.
References
[1]
“Network Computing E-Mail Poll,” Network Computing, June 12, 2001.
[2]
Allen, J., et al., “Outsourcing Managed Security Services,” Network Systems Survivability
Program, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA: Software Engineering Institute,
January 2003, http://www.fedcirc.com.
[3]
Gareiss, R., “Analyzing the Outsourcers,” InformationWeek, November 18, 2002.
[4]
“BITS Framework: Managing Technology Risk for Information Technology (IT) Service
Providers,” Banking Industry Technology Secretariat, Financial Services Roundtable, Wash-
ington, D.C., November 2003, http://www.bitsinfo.org.
[5]
Berinato, S., “Security Outsourcing: Exposed!” CIO Magazine, August 1, 2001, http://
www.cio.com.
[6]
Axelrod, C. W.,“The User’s View of Computer System Reliability,” Journal of Capacity
Management, Vol. 2, No. 1, 1983.
[7]
Axelrod, C. W., “The User’s View of Computer System Availability,” Journal of Capacity
Management, Vol. 2, No. 4, 1985.
[8]
“BITS IT Service Provider Expectations Matrix: Review of Audit and Assessment
Methodologies for Financial Institutions,” Banking Industry Technology Secretariat,
Financial Services Roundtable, Washington, D.C., January 2004, http://www.bitsinfo.org.
48
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

4
Risks of Outsourcing
In the previous chapter, we examined reasons for outsourcing certain functions
to service providers. In this chapter, we discuss factors, such as hidden costs,
phantom benefits, and broken promises, that might be used to argue against
such a decision. We shall return to the references that were used for the justifica-
tion of outsourcing as they also suggest what risks or negative experiences cus-
tomers had with outsourcing.
Loss of Control
The other side of the coin to handing over responsibility and blame to service
providers is loss of control over outsourced operations. It is debatable whether a
customer does—or indeed can—avoid some or all responsibility through
engaging service providers.
The most common view of outsourcing appears to be that the concerns
generated by giving up control override any sense of relief at not having the day-
to-day operational responsibilities. This trend may result from perceptions
regarding the different goals and attitudes of internal and external staff towards
service, profits, and survival. Clearly much of the concern stems from customers’
suspicions, which may be justified, that the outsourcer does not have the same
level of commitment to meeting service requirements as an internal group. After
all, as the argument goes, internal staff is more closely aligned to other insiders
and subscribes to the goals, mission, and culture of the customer organization.
However, this may be somewhat offset by greater formality, as embodied in
explicit service level agreements (SLAs), which almost always exist in arms-length
49
TLFeBOOK

relationships between customers and providers, and are seldom seen between
internal departments or divisions.
There are fundamental differences in motivation, goals, and attitude
between internal staff and employees of outsourcers. However, these differences
are not the same for all organizations and all situations. They can vary with the
relative size of the customer and outsourcer, both to one another and, for the
customer, to other customers. They will depend on the nature of the relation-
ship—for example, whether internal staff members were transferred to the out-
sourcer’s payroll or not.
The differences might also relate to the type of service being provided and
the relative skills required of internal and external staff. The differences will
surely vary over time as the personnel in both customer and provider organiza-
tions change, as the nature of the services changes, as competitive pressures build
in the customer’s world and for the outsourcer, and as the economic environ-
ment changes, within the industry, regionally, nationally and, increasingly,
globally.
In the following sections, we will examine many of the factors that can
negatively affect the posture and effectiveness of customer/outsourcer relation-
ships. We will consider what can be done to mitigate the impact of these factors.
We will also attempt to anticipate how these factors are changing over time and
which of them will be exacerbated or moderated by general trends in the out-
sourcing business.
The principal risk drivers are the viability of the service provider, relative
size of the customer, conflicts in service level agreements, legal liabilities, knowl-
edge transfer, and hidden costs. We will look at these in detail in the following
sections.
We show in Table 4.1 the relative objectives of each of these factors for the
customer and the outsourcer respectively. The similarities or differences in
objectives between each party impact greatly how each approaches the service
relationship. Where they are similar, each party should be willing to compro-
mise in order to optimize the relationship. Where they differ, we have the
opportunity for contention, misperception, and damaging behavior.
Viability of Service Providers
Perhaps the worst nightmare of the customer of third-party services is the pros-
pect that the provider will fail and leave customers in the lurch without access to
critical services and systems. There have been a number of immediate and dra-
matic instances of failure of managed security service providers (MSSPs), which
threatened the ability of customers to stay in business [1]. A number of outsour-
cers have reconstituted themselves and are looking to grow in their new form [2].
50
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Risks of Outsourcing
51
Table 4.1
Opposing and Common Objectives of Outsourcers and Customers
Factor—Objective
Customer (In-House)
Outsourcer (External)
Cost per unit of
service—Opposing
Customer wants to obtain the most
service for the least cost by:
Carefully defining and controlling the
services and related costs;
Requesting proposals from a wide
range of providers;
Negotiating the most effective price
(not necessarily the lowest price).
Outsourcer’s goal is to maximize
long-term profitability through:
High price-to-cost ratio;
Proposing flexibility in pricing rules to
allow for additional revenue
generation;
Large volume of standard services;
High customer retention;
Economies of scale.
Quality of service—
Somewhat opposing
Customer wants guaranteed
aggressive service levels, adhering to
prespecified metrics, with high costs
(e.g., nonperformance payments) if
the outsourcer does not meet the
service levels.
Customer wants compensation for
business loss.
Outsourcer prefers looser or
nonexistent service-level
requirements with minimal give-back
in the event of not meeting any
specified service levels.
Provider wants to be responsible only
for subscription fee.
Control—Opposing
There are two customer views:
Customer retains control by having
staff and capabilities in-house that
can assert control.
Customer hands over control and
responsibility to the service provider
and does not maintain in-house
capability. Here, the reliance is on the
service contract to ensure that third
party performs and enforces
requirements.
Outsourcer prefers having greater
control since, among other benefits, it
makes it harder for customer to
terminate services and perform the
services in-house or at a competitor’s
facility.
Viability of service
provider—Similar
Customer wants to retain a service
provider that is likely to be around for
the duration of the contracted
services, and extensions if needed or
wanted. Customer does not want to
have to react to a sudden change in
ownership of the service provider
(including none) that might lead to the
discontinuation of critical services.
Outsourcer wants to be perceived as
a long-term player and not an
organization presenting the specter of
failure. An ability to demonstrate
long-term viability attracts more
customers and is self-fulfilling since
the additional business supports the
outsourcer’s remaining viable.
TLFeBOOK

52
Outsourcing Information Security
Table 4.1 (continued)
Factor—Objective
Customer (In-House)
Outsourcer (External)
Viability of service
provider—Similar
Customer needs to be careful not to
necessarily retain the lowest bidder
since that firm could be in trouble and
be desperately seeking additional
business just to stay afloat and may
not be successful.
Viability of
customer—Similar
A good cost-effective outsourcing
deal can, in many cases, increase a
customer’s profitability and make it
more competitive, therefore it is more
likely to survive and compete
effectively.
Outsourcer should concentrate on
customers with a good record and
realistic business plans and who
appear to be outsourcing for the right
reasons, rather than as a survival
tactic. The rise and fall of the
dot-coms represents an example of an
industry whose demise threatened,
and in some cases took out, otherwise
healthy service providers and vendors.
Bottom line: The customer needs to
be able to pay its bills.
Setup—Similar
From the customer perspective, it
should be relatively painless to
establish the service relationship and
its concomitant systems and services.
From the service provider perspective,
it should be relatively efficient and
fast in establishing the service
relationship and its concomitant
systems and services. This will
accelerate the start of the income
stream from the customer.
Discontinuance—
Opposing
From the customer perspective, it
should be relatively painless to sever
the service relationship and its
concomitant systems and services.
From the service provider perspective,
it should be a relatively difficult and
lengthy process, but inexpensive (to
the provider) for the customer to
extricate itself from the service
relationship and its concomitant
systems and services. This will extend
the income stream from the customer
as much as possible. The anticipation
of the process being difficult also
might discourage present customers
from closing down their relationship.
Another ploy is to engage the
customer in as many of the
outsourcer’s services as possible,
which will make extrication even
more difficult.
TLFeBOOK

Risks of Outsourcing
53
Table 4.1 (continued)
Factor—Objective
Customer (In-House)
Outsourcer (External)
Operation—
Somewhat similar
The services and systems provided by
the outsourcer should integrate well
and easily with other customer
operations. This might require, in
some cases, considerable
customization of the services and
systems.
The service provider also wants the
systems and services to integrate
well with existing customer systems
and services, which the service
provider is not able to replace oris
not interested in doing so. However,
the outsourcer’s preference is for its
customers to use the “plain vanilla”
systems and services, with a
minimum of customization. The more
the systems and services are tailored
to the meet the customer’s
requirements, the more difficult the
support and the more resources
required to maintain the specialized
system and services.
Scalability—Similar
From the customer’s perspective, the
outsourcer’s systems, networks, and
services should be able to be easily
scaled to meet increases in business
volumes and changes in business mix.
All this ties in with the cost model
that customers seek, namely,
elimination of fixed cost and pricing
based on variability of activity volume
(e.g., number of transactions).
For the outsourcer, it is
advantageous for the systems,
networks and services being offered
to be scalable so that additional
customers and business volumes
can be accommodated easily and
quickly.
It is preferable for the incremental
costs of the additional services and
systems to be very low, but the
market should be such that the
outsourcer can charge substantially
higher prices.
Complexity—
Opposing
The systems and services might be
complex “under the covers” but should
be simple to use.
The systems and operations should
be easy to maintain and change, but
there should be a high cost of entry
for customers and/or competitors
trying to in-source and/or compete,
respectively.
Ease of use—
Similar
The systems and services should be
intuitive and simple, requiring a
minimum of training and fewer calls to
the help desk.
The systems and services should be
intuitive and simple, requiring a
minimum of customer and technical
support.
TLFeBOOK

In order to reduce the risk of such failures, it is important that custom-
ers follow a clear, structured approach to minimize the chance of being sub-
jected to such a failure or to reduce the impact if such a failure does occur.
Before entering into a service-provider arrangement, the prospective pur-
chaser of the services should perform a complete and detailed due diligence
process [3, 4]. Additionally, the agreement between the customer and outsour-
cer should anticipate the potential failure of the service provider and include
provisions for such an event. These provisions should include a set of contin-
gency plans allowing the customer organization to avail itself of alternative
facilities and resources or to take over those resources of the outsourcer that have
been applied to the customer’s particular service. The operational contingency
plans need to be exercised and rehearsed on a regular basis to ensure that they
will work.
At the time of failure, a predetermined response plan should be put into
effect to protect the outsourcer’s customers from the negative aspects of such a
failure, which might include effecting negotiations with other vendors.
Reasons for Abandoning Service
There are many reasons why a company might go out of the service-provider
business. Some are due to internal factors, such as poor management, inade-
quate funding, and employee misdeeds. Others relate to external factors, such
as industry trends, downturns in the general economy, and mergers and
acquisitions.
One of the most insidious causes for failure is damage to reputation. This
can be real or perceived. But either way, the results can be the same—abandon-
ment by existing customers, reticence of new customers to sign up, loss of key
staff, and more.
A major factor can be broad awareness of customer dissatisfaction if it is
made known through disparaging articles in the press, badmouthing among
industry members, or other forms of communication. And it is not just the
larger customers who can be harmful. Dissatisfaction expressed by smaller cus-
tomers can be just as damaging to a service provider as complaints from larger
customers, particularly if the smaller customers band together and give voice to
their unhappiness through the press.
Mergers and Acquisitions
Mergers and acquisitions can affect customers in two ways. The most obvious is
the acquisition of the service provider. The question then arises as to whether
the acquiring company wishes to continue providing the specific service or pre-
fers to close down or sell that particular operation.
54
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

In another scenario, a company might acquire an existing customer and
then the latter or its owner may transfer to a competing service provider, per-
haps the one that is already being used by the acquiring company. Another rea-
son for leaving might be that the acquiring company already provides the service
in-house and wants to internalize the outsourced services.
Such changes can threaten the existence of a service provider and repre-
sents some risk to the customer.
Relative Size of Customer
Generally, a particular customer is one of many serviced by the outsourcer and
most likely accounts for only a small percentage of the total workload of the
service provider.1 Sometimes smaller customers feel that they are second-class
citizens in the mind of the outsourcer, relative to larger customers from which
most revenues are generated. Bigger customers may get special price breaks, cus-
tomized services, and dedicated support staff—features that may not be avail-
able to the medium-sized and smaller customers at all, or may be unbundled and
charged for at a high premium. In the event of general problems, larger custom-
ers may have their concerns addressed first, with small customers waiting until
support staff is freed up from dealing with the larger customers.
Sometimes a large customer will successfully assert its dominance in order
to obtain preferential treatment. However, if that customer is in contention for
service with another even larger customer, it may itself have problems getting
the desired attention. Also, in such a competitive battle for service, the customer
may gain priority by making the most noise and escalating the issue to upper
management at the provider. Smaller companies can avail themselves of this
technique also and move up the priority ladder based on aggressive requests or
special relationships with senior staff. Sometimes a customer might appeal to
former employees who have transferred to the provider, thereby getting privi-
leged access to decision-makers. Competition between customers for the provid-
er’s attention is a common situation. And it takes a top-flight service provider to
be evenhanded in its treatment of customers.
In some situations, larger clients provide the economies of scale that make
costs lower for everyone, including smaller customers. The latter should under-
stand that the large clients might in fact be subsidizing them. On the other
Risks of Outsourcing
55
1. If a service provider has many customers (for instance, more than 50), it is to be expected
that the 80-20 rule, or similar, will apply, whereby 80% of business belongs to 20% of the
customers. Sometimes the percentage is more skewed, with a handful of large customers and
hundreds of relatively small organizations.
TLFeBOOK

hand, the larger clients are often able to negotiate sweeter deals with the out-
sourcer just because of their size and volume of business. With their unequal risk
profiles and different motivations, outsourcers and their customers approach the
outsourcing relationship in different ways, as depicted in Table 4.1.
Quality of Service
One of the main reasons to outsource is the expectation of receiving better serv-
ice from the outsourcer than from internal staff. This expectation is often based
on the knowledge that there will be an explicit SLA in place, which can be
enforced by the customer and which might bear remedies against the outsourcer
for nonperformance. While companies are increasingly establishing SLAs for
internal providers, they are often harder to enforce since everyone is a member
of the family.
If an outsourcer loses a customer because of poor service, it is much less
excusable. Of course, the perception of poor service could be misguided, or serv-
ice expectations may not have been realistic in the first place. However, SLAs
between customer and provider generally specify what constitutes acceptable
service and what does not. Therefore, a base set of metrics exists against which to
measure performance. The SLA is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 6.
There is a strong argument that the measures in an SLA may not ade-
quately depict the perceived service. In an article by Jiang et al., quality measures
are categorized into tangibles, reliability, responsiveness, assurance, and empa-
thy items [5]. Some items are typical of those included in a SLA, whereas others
are not. The quality measures include the following categories.
Tangibles
In tangibles:
• The service provider has up-to-date hardware and software.
• Physical facilities are visually appealing.
• Employees are well dressed and neat in appearance.
• Appearance of the physical facilities of the information systems unit is
in keeping with the kind of services provided.
Reliability
In reliability:
56
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

• When outsourcer promises to do something by a certain time, it does
so.
• The outsourcer provides services at the times promised.
• The customer insists on error-free records, and the outsourcer agrees.
• When users have a problem, the outsourcer’s information systems units
show sincere interest in solving it.
• The outsourcer’s information systems units are dependable.
Responsiveness
In responsiveness:
• The outsourcer tells customers’ users exactly when services will be
performed.
• The outsourcer’s employees give prompt service to users.
• The outsourcer’s employees are always willing to help users.
• The outsourcer’s employees are never too busy to respond to users’
requests.
Assurance
In assurance:
• Behavior of the outsourcer’s employees instills confidence in users.
• Users feel safe in their transactions with the outsourcer’s information
systems units’ employees.
• The outsourcer’s employees are consistently courteous with users.
• The outsourcer’s employees have the knowledge to do their jobs well.
Empathy
In empathy:
• The outsourcer’s operational hours are convenient for all their users.
• The outsourcer gives users individual attention.
• The outsourcer’s technical units have employees who give users per-
sonal attention.
• The outsourcer has the users’ best interests at heart.
• The outsourcer understands the specific needs of users.
Risks of Outsourcing
57
TLFeBOOK

The only item that can be related specifically to security or, more precisely,
integrity of the service is the reference to error-free records in the reliability cate-
gory. Many of the measures do not typically appear in SLAs, but are often key in
evaluation and selection processes. Interestingly, security is only alluded to in
one item in the assurance category in regard to feeling safe.
However, it is noticeable that there are no specific security metrics. The
measurement of security characteristics is still in its infancy. There are no abso-
lute standards and probably never will be, since the environment is continually
changing and the needs of security are changing in response.
Since absolute security is not achievable, it follows that measures are likely
to be relative. Some current standards are set and the actual operation can be
measured against them. TruSecure Corporation, in defining their measures for
certifying security posture uses the term “essential practices.” This underscores
the fact that the term “best practices” is not an accurate depiction due to the fre-
quent occurrence of new threats and the discovery of previously unknown vul-
nerabilities. The latter could result from a detailed examination of the
application or system code, a random event, or a directed attack by a computer
worm or virus.
Nevertheless, the aspects of security that are characterized by system and
network availability and system and data integrity are more measurable. Avail-
ability, in particular, can be expressed in specific percentage terms. However,
even for availability, issues exist as to what are appropriate measures, since pro-
viders and users may have differing views, as described in my articles on the
user’s view of availability and reliability [6, 7].
Brandon and Siegelstein list occurrences, which make a system unavail-
able, in their book on contract negotiation [8].These occurrences are:
• The system fails to operate.
• The system fails to operate in accordance with formal specifications.
• The system operates inconsistently or erratically.
• The system is in the process of being maintained or repaired.
• A hardware or software component of the system is inoperative, which
renders the entire system useless for user purposes.
• The system is not operated because there is potential danger from
operation of the system to operators, employees, or customers.
• There is a defect in software supplied by the manufacturer.
These factors all affect the availability of a system to a customer’s users, even
though some factors may be controllable by the service provider and others are
not. An important goal of the service arrangement is to establish that the outages
58
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

due to controllable factors will be minimized. This is usually more difficult to do
when the resources reside at, and/or are managed by, a third party.
Definitions
In order to assist in your determining what availability and reliability mean in
this context, here are some definitions of applicable terms:
The reliability of a system is the probability that, when operating under
given stated environmental conditions, the system will perform its in-
tended functions adequately for a specified interval of time.
The availability of a system is the probability that the system is operating
satisfactorily at any point in time, excluding scheduled idle time.
Intrinsic availability is the probability that a system is operating in a satis-
factory manner, when used under given conditions, at any point in time,
excluding idle time and downtime other than active repair time.
Operational readiness is the probability that a system is either operating or
can operate satisfactorily when it is used under stated conditions.
The probability that a system is operating is a function of the mean time
between failures (MTBF) and the mean time to repair (MTTR).
More detail in this area is available in the cited references and in standard
engineering texts on system reliability. It is well worth learning some of these
details. The availability component of quality of service is often the most con-
tentious aspect since there is generally room for a range of interpretations and
misinterpretations as to whether a service level is being met.
The Issue of Trust
It has become very important to ensure that third parties who have access to per-
sonal and confidential information are protecting that information from inap-
propriate disclosure and from misuse. In particular, customer organizations are
increasingly being held responsible for securing and protecting customers’ infor-
mation. As mentioned earlier, a burgeoning body of laws and regulations holds
boards of directors and senior management directly responsible for any breaches
that disclose nonpublic personal information (NPPI), in particular to those who
might exploit it for fraudulent endeavors.
The issue of trust has recently taken center stage in the health and financial
services industries in the United States, the United Kingdom, Europe, and other
Risks of Outsourcing
59
TLFeBOOK

countries around the world. A slew of laws and regulations require the protec-
tion of end customers’ NPPI from unauthorized access and from misuse by
those with or without approved authorization. In these and other sectors, there
is also concern in regard to unauthorized and unintended disclosure of corporate
and government confidential or proprietary information, as well as intellectual
property.
Even prior to the extensive privacy and security legislation and regulation
of recent times, which have focused on the protection of customers’ identifying
information,2 there were very valid and forceful reasons to limit access to infor-
mation when transmitted and stored electronically.
Such protection is not only altruistic but is often related to preventing com-
petitors from gaining access to customer lists for fear that they would steal cus-
tomers. In financial services, requirements keep information known to
investment bankers away from traders, brokers, and other individuals who might
attempt to use such insider information improperly. Such requirements also
extend to third-party service providers who have access to the same information.
It is one level of effort to protect confidential, personal, and otherwise sen-
sitive information within the confines of a single institution. Imagine how much
more difficult it is to protect such information when it is obtained and processed
by service providers, which may not be bound by the same laws and regulations
as their clients. Of all the aspects of outsourcing, information protection is often
the most critical, especially, as we have noted, in financial and health services, as
well as government sectors, such as law enforcement and defense, where secrecy
is paramount.
As will be discussed later, it is difficult and often costly to satisfy executive
management, boards of directors, and regulators that sufficient care has been
taken to safeguard the privacy of individuals’ data. Safeguards include ensuring
protection of information against unauthorized access or false manipulation
during creation, transmission, storage, and retrieval operations involving third
parties.
Another complication arises when different laws and regulations govern
both the customer organization and the third party, particularly when located in
different jurisdictions such as different states in the United States or different
countries Accordingly, heavily regulated financial firms make extraordinary
efforts to ensure that their service providers comply on their behalf and on
60
Outsourcing Information Security
2. The U.S. Congress, along with other legislative bodies around the world, continues to express
serious concerns over the proliferation of identity theft and the use of personal information
against the interests of the owner of that information, namely, the private citizen. As men-
tioned previously, members of Congress, at a Subcommittee Hearing on cyber security at
which I testified, clearly indicated that they had concerns about identity theft. In fact, I got the
distinct impression that the issue of identity theft superceded cyber security in their minds.
TLFeBOOK

behalf of their retail customers with relevant laws and regulations as they apply to
the customer organization.
A U.S. financial firm, for example, is required by their regulatory bodies to
retain and have quick access to certain documents for periods of several years.
Therefore, in order to be acceptable to the financial institution and its regula-
tors, service providers must arrange to offer and maintain such storage and
access capabilities in their handling of those documents, in paper, electronic, or
other form, in a manner consistent with the financial institution’s regulatiory
requirements. In such cases, it is not enough to have a statement or response
from the service provider to the effect that the documents are stored and avail-
able appropriately. It is necessary for the financial firm to review the policies,
standards, procedures, and other documentation relating to such data creation,
transmission, storage, and disposal by the service provider and by any subcontrac-
tors of the service provider.
It is also good practice to test whether the outsourcer’s stated policy and
procedures are enforced and implemented. Either the customer organization
or the service provider may hire third-party auditors or security assessment
consultants to perform security and control assessments. Such specialty assess-
ment firms are likely to do a more orderly, structured, and complete evaluation
than an in-house staff might achieve, because they perform so many more assess-
ments over a period of time than would an in-house group.3
With respect to support functions, an internal support group, whether a
user help desk or technical support group, is usually dedicated to assisting inter-
nal personnel or direct customers of the firm. On the other hand, service provid-
ers’ support groups will likely have many more customers vying for their
attention. This raises concerns that an outsourcer’s support may not be of as
high a quality or as responsive as that of the firm itself, when the support func-
tion is internal. However, there is a strong trend towards outsourcing customer
and technical support to third parties domestically and offshore, with mixed
success.4 Since, in many cases, support does not need to be colocated with the
Risks of Outsourcing
61
3. Nevertheless, these third-party security assessments are not guarantees of absolute security,
and should not be taken as such. Security assessment is not an exact science and, to a consid-
erable degree, depends upon the expertise and experience of the testers. I recently had the ex-
perience where a second evaluation of the same application unearthed a vulnerability that
had been missed by a prior assessment by a highly reputable firm. Also, the assessment is
good only at particular point in time and should be redone whenever a major change in ar-
chitecture or functionality occurs. It is recommended that security tests for highly critical sys-
tems be done with regularity and by different consulting firms. It is also very useful to have
an internal group able to perform such assessments as an additional check, if such a group
can be cost-justified.
4. In one highly publicized example, Dell Computer actually pulled back a help desk operation
from India to a domestic U.S. facility because corporate customers were complaining that the
quality of service was inadequate.
TLFeBOOK

main service facilities, such support is frequently put in remote places where
there might be a shortage of jobs and wages are lower. This also applies in
regions where the cost of labor is less, as in near-shore and offshore locations.
Much of the evaluation of support is subjective and qualitative. The sup-
port area is rife with measurement problems. Service metrics include the
number of requests handled per unit of time and in total, time to respond, and
time to resolve the issue. Such measures usually are more relevant to the opera-
tion of the support group than to the customers. However, customers are cer-
tainly affected by the service levels, in terms of how long it takes to get through
on the telephone (numerous rings, busy signal, on hold, or diverted through a
complex automated response system), how knowledgeable the support person is,
and how quickly and accurately the problem is resolved.
Sometimes, what appears to be a high service level, in terms of increased
number of calls handled per hour, is not necessarily a good thing. A large on-line
brokerage firm found that following the introduction of a telephone response
system the number of calls increased dramatically, in part because the system
was easy to use and individuals took advantage of the faster system to ask more
questions. From the firm’s perspective, there was little added value to the incre-
mental calls since they did not generate additional revenues.
Customers often have concerns that the service provider will not meet
required service standards. These concerns can usually be mitigated through
contractual language. More likely, the service given is often in direct response to
the service demanded. Customer organizations need to be willing to assert their
contractual rights in getting better service, possibly through escalation or the
threat of escalation to outsourcers’ senior management. If that is not effective,
the terms in the agreement need to be enforced, which might involve payments
to the customer organization or reduced charges. If the matter is still not
resolved, it may become necessary to take legal action and prosecute the terms of
the contract, although this is clearly the least desirable action, since it will lead to
strained relationships between customer and service provider and additional
costs for both parties.
Performance of Applications and Services
Support is only one aspect of service. Another is the performance of the actual
services, be they IT applications, operational services, or something else.
Again, SLAs should be designed to account for levels of performance of the
contracted services. Here, too, metrics can assist. Measures of capacity, through-
put, response time, and availability—particularly availability—are frequently
used in SLAs to monitor performance.
However, since the outsourcer has profitability in mind, its goal is to pro-
vide service within the agreed-upon limits at minimum cost. Sometimes, if the
62
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

penalties for not meeting the performance criteria are not onerous, the outsour-
cer might find that it is cheaper to fail on the performance criteria than to add
capacity and redundancy to meet or beat the criteria. It is important, therefore,
to ensure that any payments back to the customer are sufficient to motivate the
service provider to meet the service requirements.
It is also important for the availability criteria to be applied to significant
times of day, days of the week, and so forth. A failure during a period of peak
volume will have much greater impact than one that occurs during off-hours.
To maintain a proper balance between capacity and cost, it is necessary to
establish the criteria up front and allow for changing requirements. Otherwise,
performance needs of customers may not be met over time as the customer’s vol-
ume and/or the volumes of other customers increase.
Lack of Expertise
It can often be difficult to find third parties with a proven team of experts
who are experienced and knowledgeable in a particular industry being serv-
iced or in specific computer applications, programming languages, or system
platforms. Customers should beware of bait-and-switch tactics. Vendors should
provide lists of their staff along with their résumés as part of the outsourcer’s
proposal, and customers must insist that specific individuals be assigned to the
project or service. Additionally, the customer should retain the right to approve
any substitutes. Another safety measure is to ensure that the applications or
activities outsourced can, if necessary, be insourced or contracted out to a differ-
ent provider.
Hidden and Uncertain Costs
There are two main reasons why certain costs may be overlooked or hidden from
the due diligence evaluation of service providers.
First, some costs are very difficult or practically impossible to quantify.
Intangible costs might relate to such aspects as perceived quality of service.
Other costs are easier to define, but the probability of their occurrence is
very uncertain. Such is the case with outsourcer viability. Reasonably good esti-
mates of the cost impact of failure of a service provider can be made, but the
probability that the outsourcer will fail is uncertain, particularly at the time of
the evaluation. In fact, if outsourcers were known to be having financial difficul-
ties at the time of the evaluation, they should not have been included in the
short list of finalists. However, even though an outsourcer is in financial distress,
it might continue to provide services. Additional funding (from a venture
Risks of Outsourcing
63
TLFeBOOK

capitalist, for instance) could save the outsourcer or the provider might be
acquired by another company, perhaps a competitor.
In the case of acquisition, services to specific customer companies may or
may not be continued, at the choice of either the provider or the customer. Out-
sourcers are sometimes acquired by a competitor of one or more of their cus-
tomers, in which case the latter might decide to terminate the service at the
earliest opportunity. Some astute customers include statements in their contract
with the outsourcer to the effect that either party can end the relationship, with-
out termination payments, upon acquisition by a third party of either customer
or provider.
The range of possible outcomes adds to the uncertainty. I have often
heard, in response to negative financial news about a service provider, that
“someone will buy the company and keep the service going.” History has shown
that such a resolution is by no means certain. Some form of risk analysis is called
for in these circumstances in order to estimate the probabilities of each outcome
and to project the corresponding costs.
In risk analysis, however, some costs might be hidden or excluded alto-
gether, either unintentionally or through the analyst’s ignorance or inexperi-
ence. More insidiously, an analyst may intentionally exclude costs to favor one
decision, such as selecting one provider versus another, choosing insourcing over
outsourcing, or staying in a particular business or not. Whatever the predisposi-
tion of the analyst might be, these intentional oversights or unintentional errors
have to be dealt with differently, but they all must be confronted. There are
well-publicized instances of major business decisions having been made due to
errors or omissions in the calculations, as mentioned earlier.
While many domestic and offshore outsourcing decisions are based on
known, tangible costs and benefits (such as cost savings), others rely on less tan-
gible costs and fuzzy benefits for their conclusions. Furthermore, actual events
have a major influence on the analyst’s expectations of the likelihood and mag-
nitude of future events. For example, the successful terrorist attacks of Septem-
ber 11, 2001, revised everyone’s expectations of the frequency, scope, and
impact of devastating terrorist attacks. Legislators and regulators have responded
with conservative backup and disaster recovery requirements, particularly in
critical sectors such as financial services.
The greatly increased expectations of the probability and magnitude of ter-
rorist attacks, the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the threats posed by North
Korea and other nations, and the potential for the global spread of diseases (such
as SARS) have raised management concerns about offshore outsourcing. As a
result, management has focused on contingency planning, business continuity,
and disaster recovery for offshore facilities.
In response to these concerns, management in many domestic organiza-
tions using offshore service providers launched investigations of outsourcers’
64
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

contingency plans in the event of a war or other disruptions. Management
wanted to know whether domestic facilities and capabilities could take over
in the event that offshore facilities were no longer available. Of course, similar
requirements apply to domestic outsourcing, where the chance of war may
be less but the expectation of terrorism is high. Suddenly, the security and
continuity risk equations for critical functions such as technical support and
applications development changed and are now considered subject to the
whims of terrorists. The huge increase in expected losses resulting from recent
terrorism, wars, and health epidemics, in addition to the vagaries of the econ-
omy, has created a much greater willingness to expend funds to mitigate such
risks with increased investments in security, business continuity, and disaster
recovery.
Such potential losses were not anticipated when originally evaluating
many outsourcing proposals—how could they have been? In hindsight, the
analysis was in error. Had such terrible events been factored in, the decision to
adopt a particular outsourcing arrangement might have actually been reversed in
some cases to avoid the newly recognized risks or the costs of mitigating them.
While some analysts favor a high reserve to allow for extremely uncertain events,
such as acts of war or terrorism (often termed “force majeur”), it was far more
common not to allow for such highly unlikely scenarios prior to September 11
than subsequently. Of course, one might argue that the telecommunications
industry did not, as a whole, consider the potential bursting of the dot-com
bubble, which in many ways was far more devastating financially to many
organizations and individuals than the various terrorist acts.
Table 4.2, illustrates the differences between situations in which there
is
an
understatement
of
costs
and/or
overstatement
of
benefits
and
situations in which the expectation of something happening was explicitly
included or not.
In Table 4.2, if the analyst misses something that should have been antici-
pated, that is a sign of incompetence. If the analyst misses something that some-
one expert in the area would likely miss also, he or she is not to blame, because
Risks of Outsourcing
65
Table 4.2
Predictable and Unpredictable Oversights
Likely to Be Anticipated
Unlikely to Be Predicted
Oversight
(Accidental)
Less usual—reason for
concernabout the ability and/or
intentions of the analyst
Usual situation
Hidden (Intentional)
Fraudulent
Unprofessional (given the benefit of
the doubt)
TLFeBOOK

events that could not have been guessed in advance occur frequently. If the
analysis intentionally omits something that should be generally known by some-
one familiar with the area, it is a fraudulent act and, if provable, needs to be
dealt with severely. If an analyst omits something that is difficult to know about
or it is hard to estimate its impact, the analyst is being professionally dishonest if
he or she chooses not to disclose that such an event could happen and would
affect the analysis if it did indeed happen.
Limited Customization and Enhancements
Going into an outsourcing arrangement, it might appear that the systems and/or
services meet most if not all of customer’s requirements without the need
for future enhancements. However, situations change over time, both for the
outsourcer and the customer organization, and need to be renegotiated if
they were not in the original contract. Most changes of this nature are readily
accommodated.
On the other hand, a customer’s business might change due to external
market forces or new laws and regulations, and the demands on their outsour-
cers change accordingly. To the extent that the demands of a customer and
the provisions in the outsourcing agreement diverge, there are implicit as well
as explicit costs to the customer related to satisfying the discrepancies, even to
the extent of having to transfer to a different service provider or to an in-house
operation.
Knowledge Transfer
The more functions and roles that are outsourced, the less likely is it that the
internal staff can support those functions should they be moved back in-house.
In order for an organization to maintain its best bargaining position and to
retain critical internal staff, the latter must be kept up-to-date by means of train-
ing programs and/or via the transfer of knowledge from the outsourcer to the
customer. Rotation of customer staff through the service provider on a prespeci-
fied schedule might be feasible. Of course, the outsourcer will probably not be
enthusiastic or supportive of such an exercise, since it is in their interest to keep
customers dependent on them.5
66
Outsourcing Information Security
5. I once was involved in an effort to move a computer system in-house from a “facilities man-
ager,” as host service providers were once called. We were able to achieve a great deal on the
operational side—taking over the entire computer job production-control system. In this
way, the internal expertise was built up.
TLFeBOOK

The cost of not maintaining a knowledgeable cadre of internal staff can be
considerable in the long run. The impact can include loss of negotiating power
in terms of costs and services, difficulty in moving to another service provider or
in-house, and the danger of being totally dependent on a third party whose stra-
tegic direction might not match that of the customer. For the most part, these
costs are difficult to measure and are usually excluded from the evaluation of the
outsourcing relationship, but they are real costs.
Shared Environments
A major concern, especially among firms in highly regulated industries such as
financial and health services, is one customer gaining access to information
about another customer. Beyond the risk of having a competitor get access to
proprietary information, there would be the strong possibility that a firm is not
in compliance with laws and regulations. Such a case is not purely a business or
reputation risk, but puts senior management and boards of directors in jeopardy
if found to be negligent about ensuring that customer information is protected.
With a function operating totally in-house, there is little likelihood that
other companies can access information—unless, of course, industrial espionage
or information warfare occurs. However, if these same systems and data are
moved into a shared environment, such as an outsourcing arrangement, this
new, very serious risk appears. How should this risk be mitigated? There are sev-
eral possible approaches, such as vulnerability analysis and tests and enterprise
security evaluations and certification. But, it is important to note that the out-
sourcer’s status might change.6 The customer needs to be notified in a timely
fashion.
Legal and Regulatory Matters
Increasingly, legislators and regulators are looking at the issue of the security of
customer data. The risks related to not protecting customer data adequately
apply not only to the individuals tasked with managing those information assets
but also to senior management and the board of directors. The real strength of
these regulations lies in their application whether or not the information is in
the hands of the organization to which it was originally entrusted. That is to say,
a firm’s management is just as culpable if the disclosure took place from inside a
Risks of Outsourcing
67
6. I know of a situation where an ASP was considering moving its own computer facilities from
in-house to a hosted service. It was only by chance that the customer got to know about it,
much to their chagrin.
TLFeBOOK

third party not under the former management’s direct control. This has led to a
frenzy of due diligence, particularly by the larger U.S. banks, which are subject
to the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act and the consequent regulations by the Federal
Reserve Board, Securities and Exchange Commission, and other agencies.
Certainly, from a basic perspective, the cost of the newly required and
intensive due diligence efforts and the risks associated with not meeting the
regulatory requirements need to be included in the evaluation of all outsourcing
arrangements, particularly where customer NPPI is transferred to and from the
outsourcer.
The long-term effect of these requirements is likely to be a reduction in the
number of service providers serving highly regulated markets and a consolida-
tion into a relatively few major players. These stringent requirements also sug-
gest that some form of globally recognized certification standards needs to be
developed and the means of attaining them established. While certifications
might increase initial costs, they tend to lower the longer-term aggregate costs
because certification standards must be met periodically, perhaps annually, ver-
sus being continually subject to verification.
Summary and Conclusion
When all the risks of outsourcing are considered, one wonders how anyone ever
makes the decision to use a third party. However, there is plenty of evidence that
these deals are done frequently and are often satisfactory from both buyer’s and
seller’s perspectives.
The purpose of this chapter is to make the reader aware of the risks and
pitfalls involved in the analysis and evaluation of third-party service providers,
particularly from the security aspect. Once aware, the evaluator should be able
to develop a satisfactory analysis and service arrangement and, consequently,
arrive at a decision that is justified through the consideration of all factors, and
not the neglect of an unpleasant few. For the latter will surely raise their ugly
heads and negatively affect the area of outsourcing. Better to be prepared in
advance for the appearance of hidden costs and the possible occurrence of
unlikely events than to be taken by surprise.
References
[1]
Berinato, S., “Security Outsourcing: Exposed!” CIO Magazine, August 1, 2001, http://
www.cio.com.
[2]
Wright, R., “The Hosts with the Most: Three Hosting Companies Revamp Their Chan-
nel Strategies. What’s in It for VARs?” VAR Business, June 2, 2003, http://www.varbusi-
ness.com.
68
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

[3]
Allen, J., et al., Outsourcing Managed Security Services, Carnegie Mellon University, Pitts-
burgh, PA: Software Engineering Institute, January 2003, available at http://www.fedcirc.
com.
[4]
“BITS Framework: Managing Technology Risk for Information Technology (IT) Service
Providers,” Banking Industry Technology Secretariat, Washington, D.C., November 2003,
http://www.bitsinfo.org.
[5]
Jiang, J. J., et al., “Closing the User and Provider Service Quality Gap,” Communications
of the ACM, February 2003, Vol. 46, No. 2, pp. 72–76.
[6]
Axelrod, C. W., “The User’s View of Computer System Availability,” Journal of Capacity
Management, Vol. 2, No. 4, 1985.
[7]
Axelrod, C. W., “The User’s View of Computer System Reliability,” Journal of Capacity
Management, Vol. 2, No. 1, 1983.
[8]
Brandon, D. H., and S. Siegelstein, Data Processing Contracts: Structure, Contents, and
Negotiation, New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company, 1976.
Risks of Outsourcing
69
TLFeBOOK

.
TLFeBOOK

5
Categorizing Costs and Benefits
In Chapters 3 and 4, we discussed the positive and negative aspects of out-
sourcing in general terms. At some point, however, management will want to
know what outsourcing will actually cost, what savings can be expected, and
what the return on investment (ROI) will be.
In this chapter, we will analyze how to categorize the specific items that
need to be included in the cost-benefit equation of an outsourcing proposition,
so that you can make a case for such a proposal before the appropriate approving
body within your organization.
Structured, Unbiased Analysis—The Ideal
Many organizations, particularly government agencies, already use detailed tem-
plates and work sheets for such evaluations—the techniques are by no means
new. However, in the approach described below, we will expand upon those
templates in order to take into account the peculiarities of outsourcing, since
few business decisions involve so much emotion and subjectivity.
As previously stated, analysts’ preferences and predispositions often bias
the evaluation of outsourcing. It is well known that analysts, from time to time,
make the numbers work in order to come up with the answer they want. This is
not necessarily fraudulent since the analysts’ bias might be subconscious and
impact only the subjective components of the analysis. For example, an Ameri-
can individual of Irish descent might feel more comfortable with offshore service
providers from Ireland because he or she is more familiar with the country and
subconsciously consider the risk less there than in other countries.
71
TLFeBOOK

However, an analyst who believes that he or she would be personally
affected negatively by the decision to outsource might intentionally bias the
results. Therefore, many organizations have objective third-party consulting
firms perform the analysis. Objective is the questionable word here, because
sometimes the third party has a business interest in the outcome. For example,
the consulting firm may believe that it has an opportunity for a sizeable transi-
tional engagement were the decision to be made in favor of outsourcing versus
retaining the functions in-house, which would not generate additional consult-
ing work. Any firm contracting for a third-party analysis should be aware of this
issue and should avoid such conflicts of interest.
Next we will describe both objective and subjective measures, as well as
those that demand a degree of reasonableness in order to minimize bias on the
part of analysts, decision-makers, and other stakeholders.
Costs and Benefits
Some costs and benefits associated with outsourcing are known with a high
degree of precision and certainty. These include labor costs for predefined tasks
and rent and equipment leases for which contracts already exist or for which
expenses can be predicted accurately. Comparable benefits might include labor,
rent, and equipment lease cost savings, if they are made on the same basis and
use the same assumptions.
The spectrum of the cost-benefit continuum runs from certain, known,
and tangible costs and benefits to those that are uncertain, unknown, and intan-
gible. First, we will identify a number of cost-benefit classifications [1].
Tangible Versus Intangible Costs and Benefits
Tangible costs can be observed and measured. They appear on the books of
organizations and can be audited. Tangible benefits are realized or potential cost
savings and revenue increases, which can also be measured and audited.
Intangible costs and benefits may be easy to identify, but they are always
much more difficult, if not impossible, to measure with any degree of accuracy.
Objective Versus Subjective Costs and Benefits
Tangible costs are objective in nature, but tangible benefits are subjective
because, while a cost saving or revenue increase may be real, attributing it appro-
priately to a specific effort can be difficult and very much a matter of opinion.
Intangible costs and benefits are subjective, sometimes highly so, even
though estimates can be obtained from objective third parties.
72
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

An example is the use of industry-wide statistics of losses, due to computer
worms, viruses, and hacker attacks, in order to justify spending on security tools.
While the statistics, which are themselves questionable as to accuracy, provide
general trending data, they are not valuable in estimating specific events. Fur-
thermore, the stronger the security protection in place, the less the potential
impact of a particular threat, so that the loss from any specific event is condi-
tional upon the measures already implemented.
Direct Versus Indirect Costs and Benefits
Costs and benefits are handled differently depending on whether they are
direct or indirect. Direct costs or benefits can be attributed to a specific activity
or group. Indirect costs and benefits, on the other hand, are incurred or
achieved in another area and are allocated or assigned back to other activities or
groups.
Controllable Versus Noncontrollable Costs and Benefits
This differentiation is between costs and benefits that the analyst or decision-
maker can change or influence versus those that he or she must accept as given.
In general, tangible, direct, and objective costs and benefits are considered con-
trollable, but those categorized as intangible, indirect, and subjective are not.
Certain Versus Probabilistic Costs and Benefits
Some costs and benefits can be expressed in precise absolute terms, that is, they
are known with a high degree of certainty. For instance, contractual payments
for equipment and software are certain. However, uncertainty needs to be fac-
tored into some costs and benefits, since either their magnitude or their very
occurrence is questionable. Usually, for probabilistic costs and benefits, some
expectation is established, and estimates of magnitude and probability are made.
In some cases, a decision tree is created whereby the probabilities of various out-
comes are stated and the magnitude of each outcome is estimated. By multiply-
ing probability by magnitude and aggregating across all probabilities, an
“expected value” is obtained for use in the analysis.
Fixed Versus Variable Costs and Benefits
To paraphrase a common saying, in the long run all costs and benefits are vari-
able. However, the term of a typical outsourcing contract, which is usually in
the two- to three-year range, but can extend to as long as 10 years, allows for
some costs and benefits to be considered fixed. Such long-term fixed costs
include building leases or mortgage payments.
Categorizing Costs and Benefits
73
TLFeBOOK

Variability is a function of time, resource level, and/or activity level. If the
latter is related in some form to the costs and benefits, then assumptions can
be made regarding the so-called independent variables (e.g., activity level),
and the dependent variables (i.e., costs or benefits) can be calculated. Sometimes
the relationship is not “well behaved” and is “disjoint,” meaning that it can
jump from one level to another level at a certain value. Such disjoint or binary
behavior can result from a number of situations. A frequent example in econom-
ics is power stations, which come in very large, expensive increments, namely,
another power station. Each power station is characterized by enormous one-
time fixed costs. Assuming that the power demand of homes and businesses
in a region, which is served by a single station, reaches and exceeds the capacity
of that station. The next incremental unit of demand will, at least theoreti-
cally, call for the building of a second power station. Is it fair to charge the incre-
mental user the whole expense of the power station? No. Should existing
users be asked to share the cost and see a doubling of costs? That would not
be popular. Instead, the power authorities build on the expectation of using
most of the capacity of the second power station so that costs will remain
about the same as before. For a period, they will not recover the cost of the new
power station—unless, perhaps, they can sell the power to some other
region—but, over time, the initial fixed costs and the ongoing running costs will
be recovered. Benefits, namely, the revenues from the power, are variable for the
most part.
Fixed and variable costs often, but not always, consist of one-time and
ongoing costs, respectively, as described next.
One-Time Versus Ongoing Costs and Benefits
It is important to distinguish between one-time costs, such as the purchase price
of equipment or a software license, and the ongoing costs of maintenance and
the like. Benefits, which may occur at a single point in time or can be spread
over the life of the project, do not necessarily track costs. Usually benefits are
realized only after much of the expenditure has been made. The cost and benefit
flows are illustrated in Figure 5.1 for a typical internal application development
project. This type of diagram also applies to customizing and/or installing
off-the-shelf products, including security-related products. Benefits are net of
ongoing costs
This phasing of costs and benefits means that they cannot be compared in
an absolute sense—the time value of money must be considered, as will be dis-
cussed later in this chapter.
Table 5.1 provides descriptions of costs and benefits falling into each of
the categories and subcategories defined above.
74
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Following are the major items of costs and benefits falling into the catego-
ries shown in Table 5.1.
Tangible-Objective-Direct Costs and Benefits
As mentioned above, this category includes most of the costs and benefits that
would be recorded in the books of the organization and are almost always con-
tained in an analysis, although some costs may be omitted or ignored, usually
accidentally.
Labor Costs
The direct costs of employees, contractors, and part-time staff include wages,
overtime, and the cost of benefits, such as a health plan (if applicable) and pay-
roll taxes. Job-related travel and accommodation are also directly assigned to
specific individuals and are therefore direct. Also, if a car is part of the employ-
ee’s package, the cost of the car is a direct cost attributable to an individual.
Equipment and Software Costs
Computer and communications equipment, as well as other equipment such as
manufacturing machines and computer software, are assets that are owned by an
Categorizing Costs and Benefits
75
Time
Positive
cash flows
Negative
cash flows
System use
benefits
System
development
costs
Figure 5.1 Costs and benefits related to the system development process.
TLFeBOOK

76
Outsourcing Information Security
Table 5.1
Costs and Benefits by Category and Subcategory
Categories
Costs
Benefits
Tangible
Costs that are measurable and can be
recorded and reported
Benefits that are measurable and able to be
recorded
Objective
Expenditures as reported in the books
and records of the organization.
Cost savings or revenue enhancements that
can be directly attributed to a specific
management decision or internal or external
event, and can be recorded and reported
Direct
Specific, measurable costs. Major
categories include labor (full-time,
part-time, contractors, consultants),
computer hardware, computer software,
communications lines, software, and
equipment
Cost reductions due to specific cuts in
headcount, equipment, software, and the
like
Indirect
Costs of other departments allocated to
specific resources, such as personnel,
equipment, space, utilities
Cost reductions due to savings in overhead
and allocated costs, such as reduction in
head count in administrative areas, leased
space (if it can be sublet or the lease
terminated)
Subjective
Costs that are not clearly defined and
are subject to the discretion of the
analyst
Benefits that are not clearly defined and are
subject to the discretion of the analyst
Direct
Opportunity cost increases attributable
to not having engaged in a specific
activity or resource
Opportunity cost savings such as the
reductions in cost by not having to hire and
retain staff for a particular purpose
Indirect
Opportunity costs not directly
attributable to any particular activity or
resource
Opportunity cost savings not directly
attributable to any particular activity or
resource
Intangible
Costs that cannot be measured with
precision or at all
Benefits that cannot be expressed in terms
of specific cost savings or revenue
increases
Objective
Costs incurred from, say, inadequate
experience based upon certain known
measures
Benefits not realized, such as those due to
wrong mix of staff
Direct
Increased cost of staff and other
resources due to, for example,
inadequate or lack of training program
Increased productivity due to, for example,
conducive work environment that has been
purposely introduced
Indirect
Increased costs due to external factors
outside the control of the organization
Increased productivity due to external
factors outside the control of the
organization
TLFeBOOK

organization or leased or rented from a third party. Either way, they are a direct
cost of the operation, although not necessarily attributable to employees. In fact,
much equipment and software is acquired to perform a particular function, and
therefore is related to specific activities.
Furniture and Fixtures
As with equipment, furniture that is either purchased or rented is a direct cost
and is assignable to a resource. However, fixtures are usually considered part of
the building and, as such, are more likely to be considered an indirect cost.
Third-Party Services
Pricing of services from third parties can be directly related to specific costs, par-
ticularly the hourly or daily rates of consultants and contractors. These rates are
based on the direct cost of the contractors’ salaries and benefits, as well as allo-
cated overhead costs and a margin for profit.
For the buyer of these services, such costs are tangible and direct, since
they are measurable and can be specifically assigned to particular activities. For
the service provider, on the other hand, these charges are a combination of
direct and indirect costs. They are considered to be fully variable by the cus-
tomer, in contrast to internal staff, whose costs contain both fixed and variable
components. Consequently, the cost impact of the addition or removal of con-
sultants is easy to determine.
In other situations, a proposal from third parties may be fixed-price, if it
involves a specific deliverable. Fixed-price contracts do not specify an hourly or
daily rate (at least for the basic work, although add-on work may be quoted that
way). Here the cost is binary—either the full amount is incurred or nothing is
Categorizing Costs and Benefits
77
Table 5.1 (continued)
Categories
Costs
Benefits
Subjective
Costs resulting from lack of motivation,
loyalty, camaraderie, and so forth, and
subject to the discretion of the analyst
Benefits not realized because of, perhaps,
lack of loyalty and motivation, and subject
to the discretion of the analyst
Direct
While these costs are fuzzy in nature,
they can be attributed to specific
activities or resources
While these benefits are fuzzy in nature,
they can be attributed to specific activities
or resources
Indirect
These costs are fuzzy in nature, and
also cannot be attributed to specific
activities or resources (e.g., country
risk)
These benefits are fuzzy in nature, and also
cannot be attributed to specific activities or
resources (e.g., reputation, goodwill)
TLFeBOOK

done or charged for. Again, from the buyer’s point of view, such costs are direct
in that they can be assigned to a specific activity and are highly measurable.
As was mentioned in an earlier chapter, it is advantageous to know with
precision the direct costs of services, whether they be fixed or variable, since such
external costs are generally more manageable and predictable than the internal
costs of equivalent in-house services.
Tangible-Objective-Indirect Costs and Benefits
Indirect Costs
Indirect costs fall into virtually any resource category; however, the most impor-
tant are labor, equipment, software, space, and utilities. Typically, these charges
are accumulated in specific cost centers and then allocated to specific direct-cost
resources based on some algorithm, such as in proportion to the number of per-
sonnel or square feet occupied.
Often costs, such as other cost center charges, that are considered indirect
when they are incurred internally become direct costs (to the customer) when
incurred by a service provider. For example, administrative costs are generally
considered indirect, yet they will often be included in the hourly rate of consult-
ants. Sometimes they will appear as a specific percentage of those other changes
added on to the cost of the project and charged directly to the customer.
Backup, Continuity, and Recovery
A category of indirect costs that is growing rapidly in size and importance, due
largely to concerns surrounding terrorism and increasing access to real-time sys-
tems through the Internet, is backup, business continuity, and disaster recovery.
There is frequently confusion with terms such as business continuity and disas-
ter recovery and with backup, recovery, and restart. Usage does vary, but for our
purposes we will use the following definitions:
• Business Continuity Planning (BCP) is the establishment of plans and
procedures for the recovery of business functions of an organization fol-
lowing some damaging event. BCP might include relocating staff to
another site that has basic infrastructure in place or able to be rapidly
deployed, so that critical business functions can continue to operate.
• Disaster Recovery Planning (DRP) involves backing up the primary
infrastructure by establishing separate data processing and communica-
tions facilities that will operate to support the business units should the
primary facility suffer a damaging or destructive event. This is often
termed “offsite backup.” The backup site might be “hot,” meaning that
it is kept in an active state of readiness should there be a need to
switch from the primary site; “warm,” meaning that certain initiating
78
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

procedures are needed to bring up the backup systems, which are
already fully loaded with the requisite software and for which the data
can be quickly recovered; or “cold,” meaning that software and data
need to be loaded and initiated from scratch.
• Onsite backup refers to the location of redundant hardware and soft-
ware within the same facility so that, should a system break (usually an
equipment failure), processing can be switched to the backup system.
For critical, high-availability systems, a separate unit will determine the
health of a system at any instant in time and switch automatically to a
hot backup.
• Recovery refers to the process whereby the compromised systems are
brought back to normal operating condition. This will most likely
involve restoration and restart processes.
The costs and resources described in this category are called into active
service when an event occurs that disables or destroys the primary facility,
although they should be exercised by periodic tests and rehearsals.
These capabilities include:
• Onsite backup and recovery of data, processors, and networks and the
restarting of application programs;
• Offsite recovery of business functions (business continuity) where the
primary infrastructure (i.e., computers, networks) remains intact;
• Offsite backup and recovery of the primary infrastructure functions
(disaster recovery) with business units intact.
Onsite backup, recovery, and restart capabilities might well be included as
part of the original system acquisition, although often they are not. If they are,
then the costs are taken as direct. If not, they could be included in some broader
based set of costs, which are then allocated across all systems within a particular
configuration.
Business recovery, which involves setting up alternative office space and all
necessary supporting facilities, and infrastructure recovery, which involves setting
up secondary data centers and related computer equipment, software, and staff-
ing, costs larger organizations in the tens of millions of dollars per year. This cost
is often charged to some central corporate account and then allocated to other
cost and profit centers rather than being directly assigned to specific systems.
Information and Physical Security
Some aspects of security are attributable to specific resources, programs, and
data and are allocated directly to those resources. However, much of the costs of
Categorizing Costs and Benefits
79
TLFeBOOK

security and security functions are general organizational expenses, which are
allocated to other costs centers, the costs of which may or may not be further
allocated to direct cost items.
Indirect Benefits
The formal allocation process for indirect costs seldom applies to indirect bene-
fits. Indirect benefits realized by one department, perhaps as a result of the
activities of another department, are not generally allocated over several areas,
but are frequently claimed by the areas that see the benefits directly. It is usually
difficult in a corporate environment for a particular area to claim cost reductions
in another area as its own benefit, even though the first area is responsible for the
second area’s savings. If both claim the benefit, we have double counting.
The major elements of indirect benefits follow.
Backup and Recovery
Not only are backup and recovery functions considered to be indirect costs, they
also yield indirect benefits. One such benefit is a reduction in business interrup-
tion insurance premiums for the organization implementing such recovery
capabilities.
Information and Physical Security
The benefits of security are very difficult to measure. Much has been written on
security metrics, but the development of meaningful measures is as distant as
ever, particularly as the threat and vulnerability environments are rapidly evolv-
ing and mutating. In many respects, the best event is a nonevent. The benefits of
security relate to the prevention of potential attacks or misdeeds and the mitiga-
tion of and recovery from any events that do occur.
If we accept that security benefits are the avoidance of costs that would be
incurred were security to be breached, it is certainly possible to measure the
direct and indirect costs that are incurred as a result of inadequate security. Such
costs—hopefully incurred by someone else—can be used to estimate what
would have been lost had security not been effective. By applying some prob-
ability of occurrence in an unprotected environment, a measure of indirect secu-
rity benefits can be estimated and used as a representation of the indirect
benefits of the security program.
Losses due to security breaches can be felt in a number of ways and in dif-
ferent areas. Important examples include:
• Credit risk—somewhat tangible, objective;
• Liquidity risk—somewhat tangible, objective;
• Reputation risk—intangible, subjective;
80
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

• Legal and compliance risk—intangible, somewhat objective;
• Operations risk—intangible, subjective (includes security risk).
Tangible-Subjective-Direct Costs and Benefits
Tangible, subjective direct costs and benefits are specific to resources that are
assigned to a task or activity. They can be measured, although choice of the par-
ticular measurement, or metric, is discretionary, or subjective, on the part of the
analyst.
For example, such a cost is the direct cost of an offshore employee who is
paid in local currency. Here there may be subjective discretion as to what
exchange rate to use in a cost-benefit analysis. Usually an organization will have
a specific policy as to what rate is appropriate—and it is almost certainly some
published number—but even among published numbers, there are ranges and
variations.
Another element of subjectivity in offshore outsourcing relates to person-
equivalents. Is one offshore employee exactly the same as one on-site employee?
Usually not, but it is difficult to measure the person-equivalent of an offshore
employee. Undoubtedly additional effort is required to manage offshore opera-
tions. Additional effort is also expended on splitting tasks so that any jobs
requiring specific local expertise are performed on-site, whereas generic tasks are
done offshore.
The earlier example also applies to direct benefits. To the extent that the
costs saved as a result of using offshore staff is calculated in a specific currency
different from the local currency, and uses a subjectively selected exchange rate,
the offshore cost of resources can be made to look more or less favorable. This
situation is more complicated if costs and benefits are calculated using different
exchange rates. While this might not happen internally, it might well occur for
external consulting staff, where the third-party provider might gain an addi-
tional advantage by using an exchange rate more favorable to it. The agreement
between the organization and the service provider, and even internal agree-
ments, need to ensure that the source of, and criteria for selecting, the rates be
standardized across entities, even though the choice may be arbitrary.
Tangible-Subjective-Indirect Costs and Benefits
This category includes those measurable costs and benefits, which are generally
allocated and assigned to specific direct resource costs and benefits, respectively,
subject to the discretion, or the subjective view, of the analyst. For example, the
costs of heating and cooling, or the cost savings of finding an efficient way to
heat and cool a location, are certainly tangible and measurable in themselves,
but the way in which the respective costs or savings are allocated to human and
Categorizing Costs and Benefits
81
TLFeBOOK

equipment resources can be based on any of a number of factors, such as square
feet, number of people, and amount of equipment installed and running. Of
course, if each section of a location is individually metered, the discretionary
component is eliminated and the cost is in the tangible-objective-indirect
category.
Benefits are usually claimed by the specific department that implemented
the cost-saving method, although the other departments will see a benefit in
reduced charges allocated to them.
Intangible-Objective-Direct Costs and Benefits
In this category, the cost or benefit is specific and attributable to a particular
direct resource, but not all aspects are fully measurable. An example of such a cost
is the loss of productivity that results from lack of training, poor computer
response time, or inadequate supervision of outsourcing. Even when productivity
is measurable in specific units, such as number of calls to the help desk or
number of calls lost, attributes such as customer service are measured subjec-
tively. The loss is calculated by comparing the productivity against some standard
or goal, which might be based on other similar operations. And the cost is clearly
directly attributable to the labor resources, which are usually direct.
However, some aspects of the cost of reduced productivity are not so easily
identified, even though their impact can be measured—it is just that the costs
cannot be specifically attributed to a particular aspect. This situation is very
common and is probably subject to the most misinterpretation. Whether a par-
ticular component is responsible for a shortfall of revenue or an increase in cost
cannot be readily determined, because those responsible for the specific compo-
nent will usually question the relationship. And since this component is intangi-
ble, it is difficult for management to point to the source, and, even if they can,
the resulting estimate might be highly subjective.
The quality component of service provided, which may not be measur-
able, is certainly affected by training and supervision.
Intangible-Objective-Indirect Costs and Benefits
These costs and benefits result from known factors, often external to the organi-
zation, that affect an organization’s indirect costs and savings in a specific way,
but are not easily defined or measured. This often occurs when internal and
external factors are known to impact less readily discernable internal costs and
benefits; that is, there is not any judgment involved in stating that such a rela-
tionship exists, only in measuring the effect.
An example is a change in the exchange rate, which certainly affects any
indirect costs and benefits associated with offshore resources. However, the new
82
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

exchange rate might support the analyst’s opinion that certain resources are
becoming less competitive globally than others on a relative basis or that
resources in other nations have become more competitive, even though quan-
tifying the impact is virtually impossible. The analysis is further complicated by
other factors affecting the decision, such as the leveling off of one country’s
appeal just as another is gaining market share.
Intangible-Subjective-Direct Costs and Benefits
Intangible, subjective costs and benefits are the fuzziest of all since they are nei-
ther readily discerned nor measured objectively. These types of costs and bene-
fits—particularly benefits—are the most difficult to analyze and raise the most
questions in an analysis, particularly given an attempt to quantify them. The
most important examples are goodwill and reputation. Goodwill has value if it is
preserved and loses value if an organization’s reputation is besmirched.
It is similarly difficult to assign such costs and benefits to a specific
resource so that it affects the cost of that resource. However, a situation is possi-
ble where the reputation of a company hangs on that of one individual or a
select group. When that person is in good graces, he or she highly augments the
value of specific products or services, but if that reputation is sullied, then the
impact on costs and benefits can be immediate and dramatic. The billing rate of
a service provider might be reduced if something bad happens, and the provider
might have to reduce staff because of a loss of business due to the damaged repu-
tation of the high-profile representative.
Intangible-Subjective-Indirect Costs and Benefits
This category is similarly difficult to analyze, although here the fuzzy aspect
applies to indirect costs and benefits. Thus, an offshore facility for which the
country risk is high, due to the high likelihood or war or terrorism, for example,
can lead to increased costs of security. Security is an indirect cost as it is allocated
across cost centers.
Next Chapter
In the next chapter, we will demonstrate how the cost-benefit classification
should be part of the information gathering process, leading to an analysis of
internal versus external providers of service. We will show where the weaknesses
and strengths of such an analysis lie and demonstrate how the analysis leads to
the selection decision.
Categorizing Costs and Benefits
83
TLFeBOOK

Reference
[1]
Axelrod, C. W., Computer Productivity: A Planning Guide for Cost-Effective Management,
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1982, Chapter 4.
84
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

6
Costs and Benefits Throughout the
Evaluation Process
In Chapter 5, we examined costs and benefits related to outsourcing as to whether
they are tangible or intangible, subjective or objective, and direct or indirect. This
breakdown gives the reader an idea as to which characteristics of costs and bene-
fits should be considered when evaluating an outsourcing opportunity.
In this chapter, we look at specific costs and benefits that accrue at each
phase of the evaluation process used in deciding whether or not outsource and
how to choose an outsourcer. It is certainly worth remembering the categories
delineated in the previous chapter when enumerating the costs and benefits at
various stages of the evaluation process.
Triggering the Process
For organizations that have not done any material outsourcing in the past, there
will likely be one or more events that will trigger looking into this option. For
organizations that have previously outsourced projects and functions, their deci-
sion to outsource further, from less-critical to core functions, will likely be based
on their prior experiences. That is to say, many companies will test the water by
first dipping in a small function or task that is not critical to the business. If that
experience turns out to be positive, then the company is likely to consider
extending the range of services performed externally. If not, there will likely be
retrenchment of existing contracts.
We will now look at some of the triggers that might cause someone, or
some group, within an organization to look at the prospect of outsourcing for
85
TLFeBOOK

the first time or to consider expanding into previously untried areas. One or
more of the following triggers is experienced by a decision-maker, usually ini-
tiating the evaluation process:
• An outsourcing vendor calls and offers to describe a brand-new, red-hot
service.
• A peer in another company describes a great new service they have been
using.
• An article in a magazine or newspaper describes an exciting new out-
sourcing trend.
• A television program or news item runs about outsourcing.
• A seminar or conference treats outsourcing as the main or subsidiary
topic.
• In-house units do not provide satisfactory service.
• Finding, hiring, and retaining high-quality staff to support a function
in-house is a hassle.
• The staffing problem is exacerbated by the need to use fast-moving,
leading-edge technologies (such as many of the information security
technologies), for which the supply of experts and practitioners is
severely lacking.
• The in-house function causes continual and debilitating problems that
create dissatisfaction throughout the company.
• The pressure to reduce costs and, at the same time, improve service is
extreme.
Once obscure, the term outsourcing is now in everyday use, and the con-
cept of using a third-party service provider for critical business and information
technology functions is now commonplace. Additionally, more people than ever
before are being asked to evaluate and decide upon the suitability of outsourced
services to a particular situation. But these individuals often have insufficient
knowledge, experience, and understanding to perform an exhaustive evaluation
of outsourcing options. Furthermore, the area of security is often given short
shrift or is analyzed inadequately, whether or not the primary function of the
outsourcing is security.
When a company, nonprofit organization, academic institution, or gov-
ernment agency is a start-up, it may not want to take on the burden of establish-
ing and operating a payroll department, for example. Other potential areas for
outsourcing include building a computer systems capability or engaging in a
wide variety of support activities. These are not generally considered to be core
business functions. Or a business may be too small to achieve the critical mass
86
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

needed in some of these areas even if they are considered to be core functions,
forcing the use of third parties as sole supplier or in conjunction with internal
staff as the only reasonable solution. In other cases, organizations may be already
running specific functions in-house and might, at some point, determine that
transferring those functions to a third-party service provider is more cost-
effective. The internal staff in many organizations is unlikely to have had much
direct experience of outsourcing and therefore falls into a similar category as for
start-ups, namely, that they may be uninformed and/or inexperienced.
Perhaps a company has already tried outsourcing and then, based upon
external changes, unmet expectations, increased internal capability, or other fac-
tors, decides to insource (i.e., move the function back in-house). Or conversely,
the organization has had a positive experience with an outsourcer and is pre-
pared to engage service providers for increasingly critical activities. In other
situations, with circumstances having changed, the cost-effectiveness of an in-
house operation may become superior to that of an outsourcer. One example of
unmet expectations is that the cost savings and/or operational benefits initially
expected were never fully realized or the quality of service never reached the
desired, and contracted, level.
Often a willingness to outsource is expressed at a high executive level, but
then it is more intuitive than analytical. The analyst’s responsibility is to quan-
tify this interest to the extent possible and to integrate the results into a cost-
benefit or return-on-investment (ROI) analysis.
Different Strokes
We will first look at the different approaches associated with various types of
organization and stages of development. This is illustrated in Table 6.1.
The nature of an organization on the broad spectrum of size, stage (e.g.,
start-up, mature), sophistication, and willingness to outsource, can go a long
way in determining the approach that it might take and how it responds to the
results of such an analysis.
Practically all companies, at any stage and of any size, outsource at least
one function, such as payroll processing or tax accounting, not considering this
instance to be true outsourcing since they have never performed the task as an
internal function.
Analysis of Costs and Benefits
In this section, we travel chronologically through the outsourcing decision-
making process and consider the costs and benefits at each stage.
Costs and Benefits Throughout the Evaluation Process
87
TLFeBOOK

88
Outsourcing Information Security
Table 6.1
Decision Factors based on Nature of Organization and Approach to and Reasons for Outsourcing
Nature of
Organization/
Outsourcing
Approach
Reasons for
Outsourcing or
Insourcing
Examples of
Outsourcing or
Insourcing
Options
Relevant
Decision
Factors
Start-up—open to
outsourcing
Concentrate available
resources on core
business functions
Too small for the
cost-effective running
of certain noncore
functions in-house,
therefore may be
better to take
advantage of
economies of scale of
outsourcer
Outsource noncore
functions to third parties
or cosource more critical
functions with service
providers, where cost is
secondary to getting the
required work done.
Hire part-time staff into
the function or cosource
with a third party until
the function is large
enough to move in-house
effectively
Outsource a function if it
does not grow to a
critical mass for
effective in-house
operation
Comparison of costs of
insourcing, outsourcing,
and cosourcing
Comparison of benefits of
various alternatives
Analysis of viability of
service providers,
particularly those
supporting critical functions
Ease of hiring internally
versus outsourcer’s
attractiveness to potential
employees
Threat to intellectual
property, and confidential
and private information
Established
self-contained
operation—little or
no outsourcing
Concentrate on and
excel at core business
functions
Reduce cost per unit
and total costs to
remain competitive
Make costs more
predictable with
respect to changes in
volume and over time
Outsource only noncore
functions to third parties
Retain in-house those
functions offering
competitive advantage
Comparison of costs
Comparison of benefits
Availability of in-house
versus external expertise
Ease of hiring internally
versus attractiveness of
outsourcer to potential
employees
Ability to retain key staff
Potential threat to
intellectual property, and
confidential and private
information, if certain
functions are outsourced
TLFeBOOK

Costs and Benefits Throughout the Evaluation Process
89
Table 6.1 (continued)
Nature of
Organization/
Outsourcing
Approach
Reasons for
Outsourcing or
Insourcing
Examples of
Outsourcing or
Insourcing
Options
Relevant
Decision
Factors
Established
organization
amenable to
outsourcing where
it makes sense
Concentrate on core
business functions
Reduce cost per unit
and in total
Make costs more
predictable with
volume changes and
over time
Outsource noncore
and/or possibly critical
functions to third parties
in order to get them
done, where cost is
secondary to getting the
required work
accomplished timely and
of good quality
Outsource functions that
do not achieve internal
critical mass
Comparison of costs
Comparison of benefits
Viability of service
providers
Availability of in-house
versus external expertise
Ease of hiring internally
Attractiveness of
outsourcer to potential
employees
Ability to retain key internal
staff
Potential threat to
intellectual property,
confidential and private
information
Currently
outsourcing one or
more functions—
satisfied with
results—looking to
outsource further
Further concentrate on
core businesses and
outsource noncritical
functions
Reduce cost per unit
and in total
Make costs more
predictable with
volume changes and
over time
Outsource noncore
and/or possibly critical
functions to third parties
in order to get them
done, where cost is
secondary to the work
needed
Hire part-time staff into
the function until it is
large enough to move
in-house or outsource
the function if it does not
grow internally to a
critical mass
Comparison of costs
Comparison of benefits
Analysis of viability of
service providers
Availability of in-house
versus external expertise
Ease of hiring internally
Attractiveness of
outsourcer to potential
employees
Ability to retain key staff
Potential threat to
intellectual property,
confidential and private
information
TLFeBOOK

90
Outsourcing Information Security
Table 6.1 (continued)
Nature of
Organization/
Outsourcing
Approach
Reasons for
Outsourcing or
Insourcing
Examples of
Outsourcing or
Insourcing
Options
Relevant
Decision
Factors
Currently
outsourcing one or
more functions—
looking to bring
some or all of the
functions back
in-house
Gain greater control
over function(s)
Improve morale and
motivation of internal
staff
Meet new business
and technical
requirements that
cannot be achieved by
third party
Reduce cost per unit
and in total
Insource the more
critical functions to
ensure that they get
done as desired
Comparison of costs
Comparison of benefits
Availability of in-house
versus external expertise
Ease of hiring internally
versus attractiveness of
outsourcer to potential
employees
Ability to retain key staff
Organization going
out of business—
has no outsourced
functions
May need to outsource
certain support
services, which were
previously performed
in-house, during the
winding-down process
Outsource specialty
services that are specific
to going out of business
(e.g., firms that
specialize in selling off
products and fixtures)
Hire specialists in the
financial aspects of
dismantling and selling
off parts of a business
Comparison of costs
Comparison of benefits
Analysis of viability of
service providers
Availability of in-house
versus external expertise
and willingness to stay
around—might need
incentives to retain experts
Threat to intellectual
property, confidential and
private information—these
assets may have
considerable liquidation
value
Organization going
out of business—
has outsourced
functions
Will need to decrease,
then terminate, the
outsourcing
relationship consistent
with the winding down
of the enterprise as a
whole—this will likely
be highly dependent
on the contractual
relationship between
customer and
outsourcer
To the extent possible,
arrange for smooth exit
from outsourcer,
considering applicable
penalties and
restrictions
If going bankrupt, then
bankruptcy process will
determine actions
Threat to intellectual
property, confidential and
private information—these
assets may have
considerable liquidation
value
Retention of records
consistent with legal and
regulatory requirements
Minimization of impact on
customers and debtors
TLFeBOOK

The Evaluation Process
As stated above, a particular event usually triggers the consideration of out-
sourcing specific corporate functions and capabilities. Sometimes, because of
critical business needs or political factors, some assessment steps are bypassed.
Costs and Benefits Throughout the Evaluation Process
91
Table 6.1 (continued)
Nature of
Organization/
Outsourcing
Approach
Reasons for
Outsourcing or
Insourcing
Examples of
Outsourcing or
Insourcing
Options
Relevant
Decision
Factors
Service provider
may be going out
of business—has
buyer to continue
services
Need to decrease,
then terminate, the
current outsourcing
relationship consistent
with transitioning to
the buyer—this may
involve minimal
disruption if the
current services are
maintained, or could
result in major
disruption if buyer
decide to move
customers to another
service
To the extent possible,
arrange for smooth
transition from one
outsourcer to another
Transfer and retention of
records consistent with
operational, legal, and
regulatory requirements
Minimization of impact on
customers
Service provider
may be going out
of business—has
no buyer on the
horizon to continue
its services
Need to find
alternative services,
either in-house or with
another provider, in
order to avoid
discontinuance of
services
If it is determined to
remain in outsourcing
mode, arrange for
smooth transition from
one outsourcer to
another
If it is determined to
bring services in-house,
which may be more
likely following the
negative experience of
the current outsourcer
failing, arrange for
smooth transition from
the existing outsourcer
to in-house facilities
Comparison of costs
Comparison of benefits
Analysis of viability of
service providers
Availability of in-house
versus external expertise
Ease of hiring internally
Attractiveness of
outsourcer to potential
employees
Ability to retain key staff
Threat to intellectual
property, confidential and
private information
TLFeBOOK

However, for a complete and accurate assessment, well-defined steps should be
addressed, the first of which is the evaluation process.
The cost of evaluation occurs only if a decision involving potential change
has to be made—otherwise the effort of evaluation and subsequent phases are
obviously not required. Consequently, the cost of evaluation is rightfully attrib-
utable to the outsourcing decision.
Internal staff, outside experts, or a combination of both perform the
evaluation. The inclusion of outside expertise is generally recommended if the
internal staff is not familiar with the third-party service providers for the par-
ticular service to be rendered or if adequate internal resources, even those knowl-
edgeable in the area, are not available for the project. However, in any
outsourcing decision, if the function currently exists internally, including those
internal staff familiar with the operation in the decision-making process is
highly recommended. Two reasons apply: first, the staff’s specific knowledge is
of value to the evaluation and implementation of any outsourcing option
selected, and second, they are more likely to accept and subscribe to the decision
if they are involved in the process.
Requirements Phase—Costs
While, in some cases, the choices may be obvious, for the most part it is neces-
sary to determine and document the requirements formally, particularly the
security requirements, for the function(s), whether performed internally or
externally. This requirements phase will be addressed specifically in a later chap-
ter. However, for our purposes here, we need to be aware that a requirements-
gathering phase is usually needed. The costs that generally result from the
requirements phase follow.
Internal staff costs:
• Direct:
• Salaries;
• Benefits;
• Travel and accommodation (flights, meals, hotels).
• Indirect:
• Allocated overhead (space, telephone, utilities, computer systems,
network supplies, mailing costs, administrative and managerial
staff).
Direct consultant costs:
• Hourly or per diem rate per consultant by category (e.g., manager,
technician);
• Travel and accommodation (flights, meals, hotels);
• Administrative support;
92
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

• Supplies, copy services, computer rental.
Other costs:
• Direct:
• Software licensing and maintenance;
• Computer and computer equipment rental and maintenance;
• Subscription to information and advisory services.
• Indirect, Intangible:
• Not meeting user expectations;
• Reduction in customer satisfaction;
• Loss of reputation and goodwill.
Requirements Phase—Benefits
While less tangible, there are also benefits in performing a complete and orderly
requirements phase. In fact, it is reasonable to state that the requirements phase
is highly critical to the success of the project and represents the highest bene-
fit/cost ratio of any of the phases in the decision process. Benefits of a careful
determination of requirements, which are realized at later stages of the process,
include the following.
• Greater precision in what is needed—This can lead to realistic estimates
of the effort, and hence the costs, of effectively designing and imple-
menting the project.
• Lower implementation and ongoing costs—Lower costs are a direct result
of detailed, agreed-upon requirements, as there is a greater probability
that the end result will meet requirements and expectations and that
rework is reduced or eliminated.
• Faster time to market—The avoidance of rework or “scope creep” will
result in a shorter project time to complete, other things being equal.
I hesitate to give estimates as to what the impact of these benefits might be
in real terms. However, it is likely, based on experience and reading the com-
puter press, that improvements of the order of 25% to 50% are attainable from
investing enough time and effort in this phase, versus short-shrift requirements
definitions. There is no question that inserting appropriate expertise at this
stage, particularly persons with extensive experience in the particular venture
being contemplated, can greatly improve the end product and avoid many of the
pitfalls encountered in outsourcing.
Costs and Benefits Throughout the Evaluation Process
93
TLFeBOOK

Requests for Information and Proposals—Costs
Costs incurred at this stage are those related to preparing the Requests for Infor-
mation (RFIs) and Requests for Proposals (RFPs). They include the cost of
researching the information, assembling the document, putting together a list of
recipients, reproducing and distributing the document, receiving the responses,
following up if necessary, and analyzing the results. Internal staff, consultants, or
a combination of the two do this. Many of these costs are hidden within the
organization’s general infrastructure, but uncovering them is illuminating and
should be required. Not doing so, which is more frequently the case, leads to an
underestimate of the costs of the entire outsourcing decision process.
Large RFIs and RFPs can require months of effort and incur substantial
consulting fees to prepare and manage. The magnitude and expense of the effort
is usually dictated by the anticipated size of the project itself rather than, say, the
risk of a failed project. However, a strong argument exits for the spending level
on RFIs and RFPs to be on a risk basis. For highly risky situations, such as out-
sourcing of core IT functions or business processes or considering offshore serv-
ice providers, emphasizing the information-gathering and evaluation stages
usually pays off.
The above considerations do not include the substantial costs that are
invested by the service providers that choose to respond. In fact, it is these costs
that might have the greatest impact on selection opportunities. Smaller, less
well-funded organizations may not to respond to an RFI or RFP because the
cost may be prohibitive and they expect that a larger, better-known provider will
win.
Consequently, smaller, obscure service providers may be self-eliminating,
even though they might be very well qualified candidates.
It can be argued that third-party firms that do not spend highly on this
process often offer better value for the money, since they do not incur the high
marketing overhead. The irony is that the larger customer may never know this.
Perhaps not until the smaller providers have established a foothold in companies
not willing or able to pay the premium prices of the larger, better-established
firms can they play in the larger arena.
It therefore behooves the decision-maker to simplify and streamline this
part of the process or, if the project is a large, risky one, then consideration
should be given to a paid information gathering and estimation process. In other
words, a precursory project should be initiated. This could level the playing field
and enable a larger group of contenders to participate, allowing the customer to
benefit from a wider choice.
I have seen a difference in quotes of a factor of four for a particular consult-
ing assignment between a single practitioner and a larger well-known firm. The
small firm’s principal was more qualified than the combined expertise of the
94
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

team from the larger firm. The large firm presented a thick, colorful proposal
detailing the extent of its expertise and assuring me of a quality product, even
though their particular capability of the area in question was clearly limited,
whereas the single practitioner offered a one-page proposal. We selected the
small firm and received a much better product at 75% lower cost.
While the above example does not apply across the board, if in-depth due
diligence is done, firms frequently benefit significantly from trawling for the
more efficient and hungrier smaller players. The small firm may go out of busi-
ness, but this risk exists for larger firms also, as experience with outsourcers has
demonstrated.
So, how does this affect costs and benefits? RFIs and RFPs cost both the
questioner and the responder money, but they provide significant benefits in
terms of being able to select among contenders based on substantial informa-
tion, thereby reducing the risk of a poor choice.
Costs to the Customer
The specific costs relating to preparing and processing of an RFI or RFP include
salary, benefits, and overhead for internal staff and/or fully loaded per diem
charges for consultants. The required tasks are:
• Determining that an RFI/RFP is warranted and should be prepared;
• Obtaining necessary approvals to proceed with developing an
RFI/RFP;
• Researching the area for which the RFI/RFP is to be prepared;
• Preparation of the RFI or RFP document itself;
• Assembling a list of service providers to whom to send the document;
• Distribution of the document in physical or electronic form;
• Responding to questions from recipients;
• Receipt of responses;
• Analysis of responses;
• Preparation and presentation of conclusions.
Other related costs include those for:
• Research and advisory services, published reports, books, subscriptions;
• Telephone, computer, and other office-related costs;
• Travel and accommodation;
• Expenses relating to the printing, binding, and mailing of documents.
Costs and Benefits Throughout the Evaluation Process
95
TLFeBOOK

Costs to the Service Providers
The specific costs relating to responding to an RFI or RFP, are similar to those
of the preparers and include salary, benefits, and overhead that apply to service
providers’ staffs working on:
• Determining that a response is worth the effort and should be prepared;
• Obtaining necessary approvals to proceed with developing a response to
an RFI or RFP;
• Analyzing the RFI/RFP and determining the form and content of a
response;
• Preparation of the response document itself;
• Preparation of a presentation, if required;
• Sending back the response document in physical or electronic form;
• Responding to questions from the potential customer over the tele-
phone, via e-mail, or in person;
• Revising the RFI or RFP to account for changes determined as a result
of a presentation or questions.
Other related costs include:
• Telephone, computer, and other office-related costs;
• Travel and accommodation, if in-person presentations are needed;
• Expenses relating to the printing, binding, and mailing of documents.
Requests for Information/Proposal—Benefits
Benefits to the Customer
A number of benefits to the requestor result from a well-constructed RFI or RFP
development and activation process.
RFI/RFP Exercise Reduces Risk
In the first place, thinking through the requirements and coming up with ques-
tions to determine how well service providers might meet those requirements
reduces the risk of missing critical decision criteria.
96
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Focus on Real Contenders
The responses to the questions can eliminate outlying bidders and quickly nar-
row the field to a short list of perhaps three or four serious candidates. This
reduces the effort for both customers and providers.
It is important here to differentiate form and content in the proposals.
Large, well-heeled vendors proffer impressively produced proposals, which are
lengthy, detailed, and expensively bound, often in color on heavy glossy paper.
The recipient must see through the veneer and superficial claims and determine
if real substance lies in these pages. Many such fancy proposals are pure boiler-
plate, with extensive chapters on the history and background of the firm, the
firm’s approach, and the broad range of skills and experience of the principals.
The actual section responding to questions in the RFI or RFP may be minimal,
demonstrating little understanding of the issues at hand and meager capabilities.
Of course, this is not always the case—such large firms often are well equipped
to handle the tasks at hand. However, the appearance of a proposal should not
be necessarily taken as an indicator of the ability to do the proposed work well.
Documentation of Process
Later in the negotiation or during the service time itself, disagreement often
arises as to what the RFP requested and what the proposal in response offered.
Having these items carefully and fully documented provides for quick and less
contentious resolution of disagreements.
Clearly the above benefits are intangible and cannot be readily measured
in specific money terms. They can, however, be included in a risk assessment
with broad estimates of how much the risk of problems can be reduced as a
result of a sound RFI/RFP process. Two other major areas of risk reduction are
described next.
Selection of a Cost-Effective Provider
While difficult to estimate, it is clear that a thorough RFI/RFP process can
reduce the price that might otherwise be paid for services. A proposal will give
pricing information, so that the customer can look at the range of prices and
choose a service that provides more for less.1
Ability to Negotiate Strongly
If the short list contains several viable contenders, where the main difference is
price, it should be easier to negotiate down the price or up the services than if
Costs and Benefits Throughout the Evaluation Process
97
1. The best choice is not necessarily the lowest bidder. I know of one institution that regularly
eliminates the five lowest bidders from consideration. While I question the appropriateness
of what appears to be such an arbitrary cutoff, the institution stated that the criterion does
reflect concern that very low bids are suspect.
TLFeBOOK

there were only a single candidate. What is the value of this? I would say that a
vibrant contest among providers can easily result in a 10% to 20% lower cost on
the resulting services.
Benefits to the Service Providers
While clearly a great amount of work is involved in reviewing and responding to
RFIs and RFPs, the process would not exist at all if there were not also signifi-
cant benefits to the service provider. Following are some examples of benefits to
be derived.
A Chance to Win the Business
The New York Lottery’s publicity uses the phrase “you have to be in it to win
it.” This also holds true of service providers. If a vendor is not on the list, it can-
not be considered for the work.
Consideration for Future Business
Even if the service provider does not win a particular contract, it is more likely to
be considered for future RFIs and RFPs if it makes an honest and thorough
effort to respond to each and every request, even if that response is “no bid.” It is
better, from a credibility and reputation viewpoint, to decline to bid on engage-
ments that it cannot handle or does not have appropriate expertise or capacity,
than to bid, win, and fail to perform satisfactorily. Conversely, if a provider does
not respond at all, even to acknowledge receipt of the request and unwillingness
to bid (for whatever reasons), it is likely to be struck from the list of contenders
for future opportunities.
Recommendations to Potential Customers
Even if a provider does not win a particular engagement, the goodwill created
from responsiveness and willingness to negotiate can yield the benefit that cus-
tomers will develop a positive view of the provider, which may well be relayed to
others. I have often heard statements such as: “We didn’t go with XYZ, but were
very impressed with their professionalism and would certainly consider them for
future work and would recommend that you consider them also.”
What is this all worth to the service provider? This is particularly hard to
guess, but a service provider might see a 10% increase in future business result-
ing from a favorable RFI/RFP process. Furthermore, the service provider has a
chance to capture the business being proposed—depending on the type of
assignment and the number of viable competitors. The a priori chance of success
generally varies between 10% and 50%. The service provider should estimate
the probabilities of positive results and the possible value of these results, using a
98
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

decision tree for the RFI/RFP submissions, responses, and outcomes such as the
one shown in Figure 6.1.
Refining the Statement of Work (SOW)
The main purpose of the RFI is to gather sufficient information to decide
whether or not to proceed with an RFP and, if so, the information obtained will
assist the customer in developing a meaningful RFP. The RFP should contain
the objective of the endeavor, a list and description of requirements, and a SOW
on which prospective service providers can base their proposals.
The more complete and accurate the RFP, which depends to a significant
extent on whether an RFI exercise was undertaken or whether access to a similar
RFP was available, the more complete the SOW will be. Nevertheless, responses
to an RFP by a number of vendors throws light on weaknesses or omissions in
the SOW and may prompt a revision to it.
Here again, there is a tradeoff between additional time and effort spent on
enhancing the SOW and savings that will result in the implementation of the
Costs and Benefits Throughout the Evaluation Process
99
Likely to
receive RFP
Receive and
respond to
RFP?
Make the
short list?
No
End
Yes
End
No
Receive
RFI
Respond to
RFI?
End
No
Yes
Probably will not
receive future
requests
Probably will
receive future
requests
Probably will not
receive future
requests
Yes
Win
project?
End
Will very
likely
receive
future
requests
No
Implement
project
Yes
Receive revenues
from provision of
services, plus likely
to make future short
lists and receive
follow-on business
Cost of RFI but
incur opportunity
costs of loss of
this project and
potential business
incurred
Cost of RFI and
RFP and benefit of
possibly achieving
short list next time
No direct costs, but
incur opportunity
costs of loss of this
project and
potential business
Cost of RFI and
RFP and benefit of
possibly achieving
short list next time
Figure 6.1 Outsourcers’ decision processes for responding to RFIs and RFPs.
TLFeBOOK

service itself. The costs here are simply the time and materials needed to make
the revisions and redistribute the revised SOW. At this point in the process, the
revised version of the SOW will likely be sent only to the short list of contend-
ers, under the presumption that the changes were not material enough to war-
rant going through the entire RFP process again. Of course, that is not always
the case, and it could be that the changes to the SOW are so significant that
cycling back through the RFP process is warranted. From the customers’ point
of view, it is still better to spend the money at this stage than to go forward with
a half-baked SOW. The costs down the line of a poorly structured SOW will
certainly exceed by many times the costs of getting it right before embarking on
the project.
While the benefits to the customer are clear, there are also benefits to the
more ethical service providers, since they will be able to perform the assigned
services to the customers’ greater satisfaction and possibly less cost. Less scrupu-
lous outsourcers may favor a less well-defined SOW as a means of upping their
revenues after the fact; that is, they can turn any fuzziness in the SOW to their
own fiscal advantage through costly revisions forced upon a then-dependent
customer. Because of this prospect, it serves customers well to put in the
additional effort to clarify the details of the SOW.
Service Level Agreement (SLA)
The SOW, which describes each phase of the implementation and how the
account will be handled during the rendering of the services, feeds right into the
SLA. Therefore, the more demanding and accurate the SOW, the likelier the
SLA is to be tight and well structured. The SLA, however, should go well
beyond the SOW in its specification of the measures that the service provider
must achieve in order to satisfy the customer, as well as the consequences of not
meeting those measures.
The SOW requires the attention and effort of those closest to the process
that is being outsourced, such as the IT department and the project manage-
ment office. Finalization of the SOW demands reviews and responses from the
operational, as well as the managerial, members of the service providers’ team.
On the other hand, the preparation and negotiation of the SLA will bring in
such additional areas as the legal and compliance departments (especially for
regulated industries, such as financial services). The SLA should describe the
expectations of the customer and the means of extrication if deviations from
those expectations are not remedied.
The preparation of a strong SLA can be a demanding, lengthy, and expen-
sive process, depending on the criticality and complexity of the services. It is,
however, of great importance to the success of the outsourcing relationship and
100
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

is, again, well worth the effort if done properly. The costs relating to the effort are
much the same by category as those in preparing the requirements or RFI/RFP,
except for the addition of legal and compliance talent, on both sides.
By this stage in the process, the expectation is that the service provider
involved in the SLA negotiation will be the one to perform the services, barring
some showstopper in the discussions. Consequently, with a high degree of cer-
tainty of the revenue, the outsourcer possesses a stronger willingness to invest in
the SLA negotiation and to resolve open issues. Also in favor of resolution is the
significant investment both parties will have already made in the process.
Implementation
The implementation process has several components, the costs of which must be
recognized and included in the analysis as to whether or not outsourcing still
makes sense. At the analysis stage, such costs are rough estimates. However,
every effort must be made to obtain as accurate estimates as possible.
The components to consider are:
• The transition from in-house to third-party services;
• The implementation of management controls, and measurement,
auditing, and reporting systems;
• The introduction of dispute resolution processes;
• The implementation and testing of emergency procedures;
• The development of a termination process due to expected or unex-
pected events.
Transition Phase
Perhaps the least understood and most underestimated phase of the outsourcing
process is the transition from in-house to out-of-house. It is often accompa-
nied by changes in information technology and business processes that alone are
difficult to handle. Just listing the costs is a challenge, never mind quantifying
them. And the benefits of a smooth transition are also difficult to quantify,
although they become very obvious if one gets embroiled in a contentious or
poorly planned transition.
Transferring from In-House to Out-of-House
While the outsourcer’s salesperson uses phrases such as “transparent to the user”
and “don’t worry, we’ve done this a hundred times before,” these assurances are
Costs and Benefits Throughout the Evaluation Process
101
TLFeBOOK

cold comfort when one is in the midst of a crisis or experiencing cost overruns in
the range of 200% or higher.
Most transfers involve a period of parallel operation, when the costs of two
facilities are being incurred. Any underestimate as to the duration of this over-
run period results in rapidly escalating costs, sometimes matching the cost of the
entire transition. In a chapter on the “Financial Evaluation of Transition Tech-
nologies” [1], I suggested that cost overruns on client-server transition projects
typically run 50% to 100%. Some outsourcing projects do involve the adapta-
tion of old technologies to newer platforms, with comparable risks.
The obstacles to timely and on-budget completion of such projects are, in
priority order:
• Underestimation of time and staff requirements;
• Change in corporate strategic direction;
• Shift in technology management;
• Unstable technology;
• Overrated project benefits;
• High cost of implementation [2].
These obstacles are not only relevant to the transition to client/server tech-
nology, but can be applied equally well to the transition to third-party services.
Table 6.2 summarizes the issues and mitigation strategies as they relate to the
above obstacles in the context of outsourcing services.
Specific costs and benefits related to transition are described next.
Costs of obsolescence (if in-house technology is obsolete and the outsour-
cer has more modern technology):
• Diminishing pool of required skills, leading to inflated costs;
• High and increasing maintenance costs for older equipment;
• High and increasing support costs for older software;
• Risk of discontinuation of vendor support;
• Lack of new features that may be taken for granted.
Transition costs include:
• Hiring of knowledgeable staff (high-salaried individuals);
• Training of existing and new staff;
• On-the-job learning (reduced productivity);
102
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

• Cost of redoing or reworking initial efforts;
• Loss of credibility from missed deadlines and inadequate systems;
• Lack of adequate project management.
Transition benefits, if outsourcing has installed more flexible and scalable
technologies, are:
• Installation of an infrastructure and architecture for future work;
• Establishment of a knowledgeable team;
• More flexible, adaptable technologies that are easier to support and fix;
• Greater availability of more flexible and adaptable technologies;
• Availability of advanced design, development, and testing tools;
Costs and Benefits Throughout the Evaluation Process
103
Table 6.2
Mitigation of Obstacles to Timely and On-Budget Completion
Obstacle
Related Issues
Mitigation Strategies
Underestimation of time and
staff requirements
Reaching point at which adding
staff causes drop-off in
efficiency
Hire experienced managers who
have led similar projects several
to many times before
Change in corporate strategic
direction
Changes in existing businesses
and taking on new businesses
call for flexibility
Ensure that there is sufficient
scalability in outsourced
arrangements to allow for
business change, without
penalties
Shift in technology management Lack of continuity and support
throughout the transition project
Break down project into
component deliverables with
fairly short-term deadlines
Unstable technology
Particularly true in outsourcing
application development as
complexity increases
Allow for possibility of technical
difficulties and use seasoned
internal and external staff
Overrated project benefits
Difficult to prove whether or not
benefits have been realized
Discount intangible benefits and
try to concentrate on direct
savings
High cost of implementation
It is usually cheaper and easier
in the short term to remain
in-house with existing systems
and services
Need to look at the longer
term—some outsourcing
arrangements run as long as 10
years
TLFeBOOK

• Building of career-enhancing credentials for all those involved.
Again, quantification is difficult for many of the above categories, but
some estimates are possible and should be made to get a good picture of the rele-
vant costs and benefits. The key is to understand that there is clearly a need to go
through such transition in order to reap the benefits of a new environment and,
frequently, newer technologies. However, the existence and uncertainty of tran-
sition costs must temper these benefits. If these costs get out of hand, they can
negate the advantages of the entire project.
Monitoring, Reporting, and Review
Enforcing SLA requirements requires measuring and reporting on specific met-
rics. These measures must have been part of the requirements, for both the RFI
and RFP phases. Like security, auditing cannot easily be bolted on as an after-
thought—it should be designed into the process from the start.
However, there are costs involved, both in the development and imple-
mentation of the measuring programs and the reviewing, reporting, and
responding to exceptions when the service is in place. Generally the costs are
minimal. However, there is a possibility of overdoing the collecting and report-
ing of metrics beyond what is truly informative and actionable. There are also
different views of the measures, depending upon whether you are the customer
or the service provider. I previously looked at application availability from the
user’s perspective [3]. The user is interested only in his application being avail-
able when and for how long he needs it, and is indifferent to its availability at
other times.
Certain metrics are more difficult than others to measure and apply. This
is particularly true of security-related metrics. Rather than using specific meas-
ures, generally the SLA requires that periodic security tests and assessments be
conducted and that the service provider meet or beat standard industry
practices.
Dispute Resolution
It is also important to have in place the means of resolving differences if, for
example, a particular service level is not met in the view of the customer, but the
service provider believes that it is met. The costs surrounding dispute resolution
are among the more obscure, with losses on both sides. It becomes a matter of
which side believes that it can benefit from pursuing a particular course of
action, which very much depends on what they expect the outcome will be. It
behooves both parties to agree up front how various contingencies will be
104
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

handled—a kind of “prenuptial” agreement. It is clearly better to agree on what
will be done if the terms of the agreement must be invoked.
Incident Response, Recovery, and Testing
There has been an increase in sensitivity to the possibility of major disas-
ters—due in part to various terrorist events and natural disasters in recent
years—and the ways in which they can be prevented or responded to. This has
placed a significant emphasis on business continuity and disaster recovery by
many critical business sectors and government. However, such backup capabili-
ties can be extremely expensive to implement and test—and that cost has to be
reflected in the cost of services.
The premium for a recoverable environment, versus one that is not, can
easily add 25% to 50% to the cost of services, depending on whether the service
provider is broadly dispersed or highly concentrated geographically. Whether or
not a customer is willing to pay such a premium depends upon the criticality of
the services being outsourced. Unless a company is in a regulated industry in
which the provision of recovery capabilities is dictated in certain situations, the
decision becomes one of risk analysis and the possible use of insurance to defray
the risk.
Extrication
There can be a significant cost to both the customer and service provider if the
arrangement is terminated either voluntarily or involuntarily. For one thing,
another transition must be accounted for, with similar costs and risks of the
transition, which must be incorporated into the original analysis. The transition
may be orderly, if the separation is according to the contract’s terms and condi-
tions. Or it may be chaotic, as when the termination results from one or other
party suddenly closing its doors or if it results from a dispute, rather than merely
the lapsing of the term of the agreement.
What might the cost of ending the arrangement be? Since going into an
arrangement, one may have certain expectations about how it may end, one
should engage in an analysis based on the probability of each possible outcome
and the costs or losses that might result.
Summary
The intent of this chapter is to show that the costs and benefits resulting from
each stage of the outsourcing process must be all considered in a complete analy-
sis. The costs and benifits of many of these phases, such as the requirements and
RFI/RFP processes, SLA development, transition, and termination, are often
Costs and Benefits Throughout the Evaluation Process
105
TLFeBOOK

omitted, primarily because accurate costs and benefits are very difficult to estab-
lish. However, such costs and benefits are important to consider. While their
magnitude is much less than that of implementation, these costs and benefits
could be determining factors in the outsourcing decision.
References
[1]
Axelrod, C. W., “Financial Evaluation of Transition Technologies,” Chap. 5 in Handbook
of Investment Technology, K. Merz and J. Rosen, (eds.), Chicago, IL: Irwin Professional
Publishing, 1996.
[2]
“Why ITs Client/Server So Difficult?” Client/Server Computing, Vol. 3, No. 1, January
1996, pp. 48–49.
[3]
Axelrod, C. W., “The User View of Computer System Availability,” Journal of Capacity
Management, Vol. 2, No. 4, 1985.
106
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

7
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process—
Customer and Outsourcer Requirements
It is clearly a chicken-and-egg situation—having completed a cost-benefit analy-
sis (CBA), the purpose of which is to demonstrate the feasibility of the project,
we now return to the actual outsourcing decision process. However, before
proceeding further, we will quickly review the financial evaluation methods in
more common use today.
Investment Evaluation Methods
There are a number of ways in which an investment can be evaluated, such as
cost-benefit analysis, net present value, return on investment, internal rate of
return, and payback period. Each method has its supporters and detractors.
Here are some brief definitions and descriptions of each method. More detail
can be obtained from texts on financial analysis and capital budgeting.
• Cost-benefit analysis (CBA): This is the simplest method, although the
determination of benefits is always difficult. CBA involves calculating
the costs and benefits related to a specific project and then determining
whether or not there is a positive net benefit. When there is, the project
should be approved if money is available. The method does not account
for absolute cost of a project, nor does it prioritize projects. It also does
107
TLFeBOOK

not account for the time it takes to complete the project and when
benefits will start to be accrued.
• Net present value (NPV): This is similar to cost-benefit analysis except
that the time value of money is incorporated into the analysis. It is
based on the premise that a dollar held today will be worth more in the
future because it accrues interest. For example, for a 10% interest rate,
the dollar is worth $1.10 at the end of 1 year. Conversely, a dollar
earned 1 year from now has a discounted value of about $0.91 today.
The 0.91 is the discount factor. If costs incurred and benefits obtained
are laid out across some future period of time (say, 5 years), then future
negative cash flows (costs) and positive cash flows (benefits or revenues)
can be discounted to the present to determine the NPV. In general, if
the NPV is positive, the project should be considered. However, other
factors, which might include intangible benefits, will determine
whether the project’s priority is high enough for it to be approved. In
addition, for the NPV calculation, a single interest rate is assumed
throughout the life of the project, which is generally not particularly
realistic.
• Return on investment (ROI): This is merely the ratio of net benefits (or
returns) to costs (investment), where net benefit (or profit) is total
benefits less total costs. If the ROI is greater than zero, then the project
should be considered. However, this method does not consider the time
value of money, nor does it account for the absolute magnitude of the
investment or relative magnitude as compared to other projects.
• Payback period (PP): The payback period is the length of time it takes
for the flow of benefits to cover the costs. Benefits accruing beyond the
payback period represent profits from the investment. Projects are com-
pared on the basis of how quickly costs are recovered. However, the
method does not account for the time value of money or the cash flows
subsequent to the payback period.
• Breakeven: The breakeven is the point at which costs and benefits are
equal. It corresponds to the payback period in that the latter designates
the time at which the breakeven occurs. In addition, the breakeven is
defined as an amount, namely, the project’s breakeven point is
$750,000 which occurs in the eighteenth month following initiation of
the project.
• Internal rate of return (IRR): The IRR is to NPV as ROI is to CBA. The
IRR is the interest rate, calculated from periodic cash flows, which
would make the NPV equal to zero. Because of the nature of the mathe-
matics, there will generally be two solutions to the IRR calculation,
where one is clearly not valid for the purposes. The appropriate IRR is
108
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

then compared to a minimum return or “hurdle rate” desired (usually
some level above the cost of money to the organization) and projects
with IRRs exceeding that rate are viable. Again, priorities are deter-
mined based not only on the IRR, but also on the size of the expendi-
tures relative to available funding. Also, there is an implicit assumption
that all cash flows are invested at the same IRR rate.
• Economic value added (EVA): This is a measure based on maximizing
shareholder or stakeholder value. The method is associated with New
York consulting firm Stern Stewart & Co. and is described on the Web
site http://www.eva.com. This is mentioned in [1] along with four
other methods, including ROI, NPV, IRR, and payback period.
Including All Costs
One should not go through the extensive and costly evaluation process, as
described in this chapter, unless a preliminary cost-benefit analysis actually hints
at the possibility of major benefits from outsourcing. Going into the process, the
evaluator likely has some preconceived notion as to which way the analysis will
go, although once the process is complete, the outcome can often be counterin-
tuitive—which is the whole point of going through the ordeal in the first place.
There is a very high possibility that the costs of the evaluation process itself
will not have been considered. If these costs were deducted from the cost sav-
ings, it might well transpire that the decision could hinge on the costs of the
process. That is to say, with the addition of all the costs related to the evaluation
process itself, the decision might be reversed. For example, if the net benefit of
outsourcing is less than the cost of the evaluation, it would not be worth
addressing in the first place. Of course, you will not know this until after the
fact. Therefore, it should be expected that the value of outsourcing will exceed
the cost, inclusive of evaluation costs, by a sufficient amount to make it worth-
while. That is, the analyst should have an a priori expectation that the savings
net of process costs, however measured, will meet or exceed what is required by
the organization. This is further complicated by the variations in evaluation
methods described earlier, which themselves can produce very different conclu-
sions, and each of which has its own anomalies.
To overcome these limitations, an organization might take a “portfolio”
approach by recognizing in advance that not all analyses of potential out-
sourcing opportunities will yield savings. Here, there is an up-front recognition
that any particular outcome may not yield a saving over the current
approach—for example, the decision may be to preserve the status quo. Conse-
quently, the cost is incurred without any measurable benefits, except that it
enabled the organization to avoid an unprofitable move. The portfolio approach
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process— Customer and Outsourcer Requirements
109
TLFeBOOK

takes the view that, even though individual cases may not produce savings,
across a multitude of analyses, there will be aggregate savings that exceed the
total cost of all the analyses by enough to realize the required return or savings.
Here is a simplified example, in which an organization looks at two out-
sourcing opportunities. One is shown to yield savings over the life of the
arrangement with a net present value of $500,000. In the other case, the out-
come is to retain the operation in-house, so that there is no resultant saving. If
the cost for each evaluation is $100,000 (although it is likely that this cost will
vary with the type and magnitude of the service and other factors), then the net
saving will be $300,000, even though there is a direct cost loss of $100,000 in
one case. Whether the $300,000 net saving is acceptable depends on whether it
yields a sufficient return on the investment needed to effect the outsourcing
arrangement. It should be noted that for the individual analysis yielding a
$500,000 gross saving, and a $400,000 saving net of the evaluation cost, the
return may be acceptable, whereas the overall return from the portfolio of two
investments might not meet return requirements. Clearly this becomes much
more complex as the number and variety of prospective projects increases.
Few organizations will go through so explicit an analysis as this—more
likely there will be informed guesses as to what is likely worth pursuing and
what is not. When someone, with sufficient authority within the organization,
decides that outsourcing a particular function might be a good idea, then the
evaluation of the particular outsourcing venture is initiated. Ironically, when the
origination of the desire to look at outsourcing comes from “on high” the
“lowly” analysts may believe that the decision has already been made and that it
is their task merely to provide documented justification that favor the boss’s pre-
disposition1 (see http://www.eva.com).
A highly subjective aspect of the outsourcing decision is that of the inher-
ent security of the service provider. Increasingly, companies are performing
more detailed due diligence on service providers (as well as having their own
security assessed by security consultants); but when it comes down to the final
analysis, someone (most likely the chief information security officer or some
other high-level executive) will usually make an intuitive determination as to
whether the security is adequate to protect the assets at risk.
For the purposes of this book, we will make the overriding assumption
that everyone involved in the analysis is seeking an objective, unbiased result,
110
Outsourcing Information Security
1. To the extent that this conception, or misconception, is the overriding factor in the approach
to the evaluation process, we might see the subjective weighting of the less-tangible costs and
benefits in favor of the intended outcome. While this view may appear cynical, experience
has shown this executive management influence to be prevalent. After all, the analyst is also
looking to advance within the organization and may feel that this agenda is assisted by com-
ing up with results that show the executives to be prescient and “on top of their game.”
TLFeBOOK

which is in the best interests of the organization and its stakeholders—otherwise
we can stop right here (or should have done so much earlier!). Nevertheless, I
will point out such areas in the evaluation process where someone’s bias (or
prejudice) could just possibly creep into the estimates of the less tangible costs
and benefits. This is so that, at the very least, those responsible for the decision
might know where to drill down for possible discrepancies.
Structure of the Chapter
In this chapter, we will address the following subjects:
• What issues need to be addressed along the way;
• Which items could and should be included at each step;
• The relative importance of the issues and items that we consider.
The goal of the exercise is to ensure to the greatest extent possible that every-
thing relevant has been included, and that less important factors are not given
excessive attention and weight, as an analyst might easily become enthralled
with a minor details. We will also demonstrate how sensitive the decision can be
to the less tangible, more intuitive estimates of costs and benefits. Distressingly,
many such decisions are made based on incomplete and imprecise information.
As we examine each step, emphasis will be placed on the information security
aspects of the endeavor. Subsequently, we will look at the unique aspects of out-
sourcing actual security functions.
The Gathering of Requirements
In the beginning is a period of unstructured contemplation of whether or not a
particular function or process should be outsourced. At this stage, the prelimi-
nary prediction as to the outcome of the analysis is made. Sometimes prediction
is easy because the arguments, one way or the other, are overwhelming. Perhaps
the function in question cannot be done in-house at the particular stage of an
organization’s development without incurring huge costs, perhaps many times
the cost of having a third party perform that same function. However, even in
such a situation, the best practice is to complete the entire evaluation process in
order to determine which service provider to select. If little choice among service
providers exists—that is, a dominant provider or couple of providers are being
considered—the analysis may be perfunctory, but should still be done. Situa-
tions do change, such as new players entering into the fray or software products
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process— Customer and Outsourcer Requirements
111
TLFeBOOK

appearing on the scene, which might increase the feasibility of bringing the
function in-house.
In addition, the decision to outsource varies greatly depending on how an
organization compares with respect to business and technology. It matters
greatly, for example, if an internal function already exists or whether it is neces-
sary to create an entirely new process. Also, the stage of a company’s business life
cycle—start-up, rapid growth, mature, declining, in bankruptcy—has signifi-
cant influence on the options that might be available and worth considering.
These issues have been discussed in detail earlier, but bear repetition here since
they refer to significant factors that are often omitted.
Business Requirements
In the BITS document [2], the decision as to whether or not to engage in IT
outsourcing is considered a business decision, as indeed it mostly is. However,
the technical component is also large, especially for the more esoteric areas of
information security, where a critical success factor is the ability to implement
and manage leading-edge technologies. One important reason for outsourcing,
as described earlier, is to tap into frontier-technology products, skills, and abili-
ties that are not readily available on the open market, but have been acquired
and developed by leading providers months, if not years, ahead of the
marketplace.
If the service being evaluated is already performed for the organization
either internally or externally, a document should have been produced describ-
ing the need for such a service, as well as its scope, magnitude, and expected
service levels. In the case of start-ups, such details may have been provided to
venture capitalists in a business plan.
The motivation to examine other options—such as outsourcing a service
that is being run in-house, changing an existing arrangement with a service pro-
vider, or transferring business from one service provider to another—will gener-
ally be the result of a number of triggers. These triggers, some of which were
introduced in Chapter 6, may be generated by internal or external events that
are related to time, performance, cost, or one or more particular incidents
within or outside the control of the customer organization or the outsourcer.
Some examples of triggers, which might initiate a review of a current out-
sourcing or insourcing relationship, are as follows:
• The end of the current term of the agreement between the two parties,
resulting in the need to decide whether or not to extend the term of the
service, and at what cost, by renegotiating and/or renewing the agree-
ment (time-related and event-related).
112
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

• Downturn in business volumes leading to reduced profits for the cus-
tomer and/or the outsourcer. This might well result in the renegotia-
tion by either party of the contract prior to the prearranged termination
date (event-related).
• Dissatisfaction with the service levels and quality of service as a result of a
drop-off in responsiveness by the outsourcer or its inability to scale up
to handle greater volume at the same service level as before
(performance-related).
• Unexpected increases in costs, possibly as a result of external factors such
as inflation, or internal factors such as the need to build a new facility
(cost-related).
• Acquisition of the service provider by another company that may or may
not be interested in continuing the existing service arrangement
(event-related).
• Acquisition of the customer by another company that may or may not use
the particular service provider and may have strong views for or against
using the service. Sometimes, if the acquiring firm has a different exter-
nal auditor from the acquired firm, there may be a conflict between
using a particular auditing firm’s services (event-related).
• Business dissolution of the service provider (whether voluntarily or not)
that forces a revision in the outsourcing relationship. Here the customer
may be able to transfer its business to another provider or bring the
service in-house (event-related).
• Business dissolution of the customer (whether voluntarily or not) that
forces a change in the outsourcing relationship. Here the question
relates to provisions in the contract for winding down the operation
(event-related).
• Exposure to information about successful outsourcing deals through news-
paper or magazine articles, newsletters, vendor or customer announce-
ments, conversations with peers, attendance at conferences and
seminars, and so on. The actions of peers, especially in the same indus-
try, can greatly influence senior managers to view outsourcing positively
and to consider outsourcing various functions themselves (event-
related).
• Exposure to information about failed outsourcing deals through newspaper
or magazine articles, newsletters, vendor or customer announcements,
conversations with peers, attendance at conferences and seminars, and
so on. The actions of peers, especially in the same industry, of simi-
lar size, can greatly influence senior managers to view outsourcing
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process— Customer and Outsourcer Requirements
113
TLFeBOOK

negatively and to consider bringing an outsourced function back in-
house (event-related).
The object of the exercise at this stage is to determine the business justifi-
cation for the service. Some services, whether performed internally or externally,
are mandatory for every organization (e.g., payroll, accounting, legal). Others,
such as training and strategic planning, are discretionary (at least in the short
term), in which case a decision is necessary as to whether a service should be
done at all at a particular point in time. The latter issue might hinge on whether
viable opportunities to outsource the service exist at an acceptable cost and serv-
ice level if, in fact, the service cannot be justified internally. Thus, one might not
want to hire a training staff, but may well use a provider. Sometimes we see
enormous growth in what appear to be marginal services if outsourcing is able to
meet demand for lower costs and higher service levels, thereby opening up a new
market. ADP’s growth and dominance in payroll processing is a good example.
Outsourcing decisions, by category of service, are illustrated in Figure 7.1.
In Figure 7.1, we differentiate between “discretionary” and “nice-to-have”
services. Discretionary services refer to those services that in the long run may be
114
Outsourcing Information Security
Need for specific service
Mandatory
(e.g., legal, regulatory)
Discretionary
(e.g., R&D)
Nice to have
(e.g., certain training)
Do or
not?
Do or
not?
Yes
Internal
or
external?
Yes
Yes
Figure 7.1 Outsourcing decisions by category of service.
TLFeBOOK

needed for the future health and viability of the organization, but can be put off
to a future date without significant negative impact. Arguably, such activities as
research and development, training, advertising, and documentation of com-
puter applications may be considered discretionary over some period of time.
However, the consequences of reductions in spending on these types of activity
may ultimately be far more costly in terms of lost future revenues from new
products, drops in efficiency, lower morale of workers who are no longer well-
trained, and increased maintenance costs associated with inadequately docu-
mented computer programs. A company may be wiser to borrow and spend
money on these activities so that its future is not mortgaged. One might also
argue that deterioration in these areas will likely lead to their being outsourced
in the relatively near future.
On the other hand, nice-to-have services may affect the quality of the
workplace but do not generally have a discernable impact on the com-
pany—although their advocates would argue otherwise. Nice-to-haves are often
morale boosters. They might include attendance at marginally job-related con-
ferences and lavish seasonal parties, which appear not to have a directly positive
impact on the short-run profitability of the organization, but may contribute to
higher staff retention and the concomitant benefits of a stable employee popula-
tion. Experience has shown, however, that the strongest organizations in the
long run are those that do not throw their money at frivolities in profitable
times, but rather invest in programs that will serve them well in the difficult
times that inevitably arise. Often, employees themselves would rather see profits
return to them in compensation or invested in their future prosperity, and other
stakeholders, such as shareholders, also want to see their companies build for the
future.
In any event, the activities in discretionary areas may become viable if the
services are outsourced rather than performed internally, or if they are in-sour-
ced rather than performed by a third party, because perhaps one or the other is
cheaper or more effective. Training is an area that should be considered for out-
sourcing. But, even a function that appears as innocuous as training involves
issues, such as the protection of proprietary information and intellectual prop-
erty, that must be taken into account during due diligence.2
For both discretionary and nice-to-have services, the decision whether or
not to move forward with any provider—internal or external or a combina-
tion—may well come after the entire evaluation has been completed. Certainly
one possible outcome is that the service cannot be justified in any form. Clearly,
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process— Customer and Outsourcer Requirements
115
2. I am aware of an embarrassing and potentially dangerous situation in which a firm hired an
outside service to document a critical part of its computer applications, only to discover,
quite by chance, that the owner of the provider had been convicted of computer fraud.
TLFeBOOK

proceeding with the evaluation process only makes sense if the expectation of
moving forward with change is 50% or more.
Assuming that proceeding is deemed reasonable, based upon prior analyses
or experience, the next step is to specify the requirements. An excellent list of
requirements is provided in the report issued by the Software Engineering
Institute [3].
First, we will look at the business-related requirements.
Viability of Service Provider
In many ways, this is the most important component of the analysis because, if a
provider does not pass muster here, it is hardly worth being included among the
prospects. An added danger is that such a marginal vendor, if included, might
come up with the most attractive proposal, driven by the vendor’s attempt to
survive at all costs, and the analyst may come under tremendous pressure to
accept the lowest bid.3
Experience, particularly with some prominent MSSPs, has shown that
even apparently well-funded outsourcers have gone out of business with little or
no advance warning. It should also be noted that the person or persons analyz-
ing the outsourcing opportunity might not have all necessary skills, such as
being able to review, understand, and opine upon a company’s financials. Cer-
tain issues should be left to the experts, particularly financial and legal matters.
Financial Analysis
Internal or external credit specialists should be asked to perform a credit check
on the service provider. This type of review should include requesting or access-
ing a report from one of the companies that specializes in this area, such as Dun
& Bradstreet. Additionally, if the service provider is a public company, the
review should include going over its financial statements, including annual
reports. If the service provider is privately owned, generally much less financial
information is available and what is available is probably less comprehensive and
useful compared to information about a public company.
The names of sources and managers of initial and subsequent funding
should be obtained, if possible. Those companies heavily dependent on venture
capital, for example, are likely to be much more volatile than companies able to
fund their operations out of revenues. Consideration should be given to the
116
Outsourcing Information Security
3. One analyst, who works for a major bank, said that he routinely eliminates the five lowest
bidders from consideration. However, for many types of service, particularly in the informa-
tion security area, there might not even be as many as five bona fide bidders.
TLFeBOOK

number, size, quality, and length of commitment of current and potential client
service contracts and product sales. Care should be taken when assessing the
pipeline and backlog of work, as demonstrated by the number of high-profile
cases of companies booking sales inappropriately.
Despite taking great care in reviewing financials, a customer organization
cannot be absolutely sure of what is happening behind the scenes at a service
provider or what matter might arise to overturn all the diligent analysis. As a
recent example, the management of a well-reputed security consulting company
was accused of using unlicensed software throughout their firm. Reports of
defections of key staff and loss of customer trust can in a matter of weeks destroy
a reputation that took years to build. Nevertheless, in the vast majority of cases,
a thorough financial review provides a reasonably good picture of the financial
health and prospective viability of potential business partners.
Marketplace and Business Prospects
Every organization operates in some form of marketplace. And no organization
is immune from its vagaries. Therefore, the analyst should learn as much rele-
vant information about the marketplace as possible to assess its impact on a par-
ticular outsourcing decision. However, evaluation of the marketplace is another
area where the analyst might not have the capability, knowledge, or understand-
ing to determine who the significant players are, how they stack up against one
another, and, finally, how they might fit in with the requirements of the buying
or selling entity.4
Subscribing to advisory services, such as those provided by the Gartner
Group or Forrester Research (formerly Giga), can pay off since it is their busi-
ness to be tuned into the vagaries of various IT-related markets, of which IT
outsourcing is but one. Such advice should be supplemented with research on
the Internet and in industry magazines and newspapers, as well as through dis-
cussions with peers in other, preferably similar, companies. The least reliable
sources are competing outsourcing firms, which clearly have a different agenda
to yours in that they will obviously downplay their own difficulties and perhaps
exaggerate the troubles of others. However, from time to time, a vendor will dis-
close gossip containing information about a competitor that is worth trying to
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process— Customer and Outsourcer Requirements
117
4. For the most part, the analysis of outsourcing is done from the buyer’s perspective. However,
the providers of these services also have requirements of buyers in terms of financial capabili-
ties (for example, the buyer’s ability to pay its bills) or cultural acceptance to permit a pro-
ductive working relationship. It is often indicative of solid service providers that they will
perform their own due diligence on customers. This provides the added assurance that they
have had other customers go through such an evaluation. This, in turn, means that the out-
sourcer has a better chance of getting paid and staying in business.
TLFeBOOK

verify independently. That is, such heavily biased gossip can lead you down a
path of investigation that will yield some beneficial information, which could
save you from a costly mistake.
Health of the Economy
How are the sectors of the economy encompassing the buyer and seller of serv-
ices doing? A poor economy may provide insufficient markets for outsourcers,
resulting in paring of prices, lower profits, and increased likelihood of bank-
ruptcy or takeover.
On the other hand, some outsourcers often do well in a down economy,
because companies are looking to reduce costs and make costs more predict-
able—both potential advantages of outsourcing as described previously. In the
early years of the twenty-first century, a poor economic climate in the United
States has resulted in pressure on costs of doing business, which in turn has led
to a surge in outsourcing, particularly in offshore locations such as India and
China.5 For the latter two countries, the cost per unit of service is a fraction of
the equivalent U.S. domestic service, even accounting for the increased overhead
due to managing the service remotely.
Probably the risk is higher from the outsourcers’ perspective if customers
are not able to sustain anticipated volumes or, worse, are not able to pay their
bills. Of course, even in a recession some businesses do relatively well, so the
outsourcers need to determine what portfolio of customers they should seek, by
industry, company, size, and region. The general determination here is that it is
difficult, if not impossible, to come to general conclusions, and each case needs
to be evaluated separately.
Marketplace Matters
Is the market for the particular outsourcing services that an organization seeks
growing and profitable? It is important here to segment the marketplace prop-
erly. For example, information security services can be divided into many
submarkets, such as consulting services, advisory services, assessment services,
and managed services. Some firms specialize in one or two of these, while others
participate in several or most. Some firms sell security software products. Others
remarket software products and/or bundle them into services. Some specialize in
118
Outsourcing Information Security
5. An article [4] describes how revenues from software and computer services will grow more
rapidly in China than in India, although the growth in India is expected to be substantial.
This is because of the substantially lower wages in China, even compared to India. A chart
from Gartner Dataquest shows 2002 revenues to be about $8 billion for India and $2 billion
for China rising to about $27 billion each for China and India in 2006. With the growth
rate so much greater for China, one might expect China to far surpass India following 2006.
TLFeBOOK

information security; others provide general security services; and yet others,
such as major accounting and consulting firms, provide security as one of many
practices. The information security marketplace, which is relatively new, has
seen many recent entrants, quite a few failures, and a significant number of
mergers and acquisitions.
In recent years, the growth in the information security marketplace has
been disappointing, despite major attacks on the Internet and organizations
attached to the Internet. Heightened awareness and concerns about security fol-
lowing the September 11, 2001, terrorist plane hijacking and consequent
destruction of the World Trade Center and part of the Pentagon did not result
in major expenditures by businesses. However, when more funds flow from the
Department of Homeland Security, the overall market probably will see growth,
although it may be concentrated with a few large government contractors.
Furthermore, general spending on information technology in the United
States has not shown growth comparable to that of the previous decade, with the
exception of IT outsourcing services, particularly offshore outsourcing of appli-
cation development and certain support services.
In 2004, we are seeing some measure of recovery both in IT and informa-
tion security spending. It is too early to tell whether this is a brief upturn or if it
is the start of a period of sustained growth.
Competitive Environment
Proceeding to the next level of analysis, we need to determine if a particular serv-
ice provider is stable and can be relied upon to stay around to conduct its busi-
ness. How is a service provider placed in its segment? Is it a leader or follower? Is
it the only game in town, or does it face aggressive competition from like com-
panies? Is the segment characterized by a few large publicly owned, or even
employee-owned, companies or does a large number of privately held outfits
exist? Have companies maintained their independence or is the segment rife
with mergers, acquisitions, takeovers, bankruptcies, and defections? When a
market is relatively new and still subject to all manner of upheavals, as is the case
with information security, selecting a service provider is difficult and risky. To
help make decisions in such an environment, one must gain as much market
intelligence as possible.
An outsourcer looking at potential customers should go through similar
assessments of customers’ environments. It particularly needs to know whether
the customer is a leader in its business segment, whether it is relatively large or
small, whether it is growing or shrinking, and if it is financially viable. These
considerations affect the reputation of the outsourcer as provider of advanced
services to leading customers, the potential level of business, and the customer’s
ability to pay its bills in full and on time. If customers run into financial trouble,
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process— Customer and Outsourcer Requirements
119
TLFeBOOK

a domino effect adversely affects first other organizations that are customers of
the outsourcer, and then the viability of the outsourcer. A failure by the outsour-
cer then impacts other financially healthy customers by endangering their serv-
ices, which could severely damage and possibly eliminate even the strongest of
customers if the service provided is critical.
Structure of the Business
As mentioned above, outsourcers and their customers may offer a single product
or service, may be fully diversified across a wide range of business types and
industries (i.e., be a conglomerate), or be somewhere in between. From a busi-
ness perspective, the single product, single industry provider, or single customer
is very risky—they can offer the highest returns, but they are also the most
exposed to fluctuations in the economy and changes in technology and demand.
The dot-coms of the latter half of the 1990s and the turn of the twenty-
first century were a prime example of a single dependency, namely, the on-line
marketplace. The failure of dot-coms took out of business many companies that
were not diversified into other markets, with relatively few exceptions. Those
established companies, which saw the Internet as just another distribution chan-
nel, were not as affected by the crash, and most survived if their other businesses
and channels were viable. A few dot-com companies, which dominate a particu-
lar segment, such as Amazon.com, eBay, and Google, have done very well in the
post-bubble Internet economy.
Sometimes, a customer may be looking for a specialist—a service provider
that concentrates on one thing and works to be the best there is in that particu-
lar area. In the information security arena, such a specialty could be “penetration
testing,” or the scanning of a customer’s Internet-facing perimeter and the
assessment of vulnerabilities discovered.
Frequently, a customer will seek a provider who offers a range of services,
some of which might support and enhance others, as synergies are recognized
and exploited. So, for example, an information security provider offering vul-
nerability assessments might also offer an alert and notification service of emerg-
ing threats, vulnerabilities, and patches relating to the customer’s particular
profile. First, the provider tracks threats, vulnerabilities, and software patch lev-
els as part of its assessment services and, second, it understands the customer’s
environment. Further, if that same provider has a laboratory to test and assess
security products, it may offer commercial off-the-shelf product security certifi-
cation as an added service. While this example focuses on information security
service providers, the same synergistic relationships apply to other outsourcers.
Major customers gravitate to well-established, stable, and diversified sup-
pliers in order to reduce risk. Smaller, newer, and more cost-conscious custom-
ers might take on additional risk to get a cheaper price from a less established,
120
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

more specialized outsourcer, particularly if the service is not core to the cus-
tomer’s business. Under this model, it is hard to see how start-ups grow to sub-
stantial size. Indeed, many small service providers fail, especially if a major
customer decides to terminate its relationship. Other small outsourcers get
bought by larger firms and then, in their new incarnation, take on the mantle of
the owner. Others grow through gradually upgrading the quality and size of
their customers and corresponding work engagements.
Nature of the Business
Customer organizations must not only consider what lines of business an out-
sourcer is in, they need to look at the specific characteristics of that business.
They should consider the types of customer that the outsourcer serves (e.g., gov-
ernment, commercial, nonprofit) and the locations of those customers (e.g.,
concentrated in one or two metropolises, spread across the country, interna-
tional). Of particular interest is whether the outsourcer has served one or more
customers in the industry being researched, whether they are located nearby,
and whether they are of similar size in both total business and size of service
engagement anticipated. Discussions with such references should be part of the
due diligence process.
Often a customer will look for a geographic match between itself and the
service provider, particularly if the customer has a number of affiliates and sub-
sidiaries distributed across many countries and it wishes to have some or all of
these locations served. Today, with vast improvements in communications,
including teleconferencing, electronic mail, instant messaging, videoconferenc-
ing, and voice over Internet protocol (VoIP), the location issue is less important
than previously. Still, there are certain occasions and situations where face-to-
face meetings are particularly valuable, and not readily being able to meet in per-
son can be a hindrance.
Relative Sizes of Organizations
Their relative sizes as well as the absolute sizes of organizations can significantly
affect the viability of the outsourcer and the customer and their relationship, as
described in the following variations.
Large Customer, Small Outsourcer
If the customer is much larger than the outsourcer and the customer is the out-
sourcer’s major source of revenue, there are a number of effects. The customer is
likely able to negotiate price and deliverables aggressively, with the outsourcer
acquiescing because of the importance of the account. On the other hand, the
high dependency on a single customer makes the service provider highly
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process— Customer and Outsourcer Requirements
121
TLFeBOOK

vulnerable to changes in the level of business of that particular customer and, at
the extreme, the termination of that business at the customer’s option. This sce-
nario is particularly dangerous for other smaller customers, which might have
small but important services tied up with the outsourcer. Potential customers
should be very wary of this situation if they will only account for a small part of
the overall business of the outsourcer.
When the customer is much larger than the outsourcer, the customer
has concerns that the smaller provider may not be able to stay in business.
This does not generally discourage the customer from aggressively negotiat-
ing low prices and high service levels, to which the outsourcer is usually only too
willing to agree in order to boast of the customer in its marketing and sales
efforts. The customer must balance its desire for lower-cost services against the
need to ensure that the outsourcer remains in business. Also, financial pressure
might mean that the outsourcer will try to make up its shortfall by charging for
additional services and not meeting the level of service expected by the cus-
tomer, just to stay in business. For the customer, the resulting costs if the out-
sourcer fails will likely far outweigh the benefits of the initial cost reduction, in
terms of risk to the business and need to transfer to another provider or to an
operation in-house.
Large Outsourcer, Small Customer
The small customer derives a number of benefits from contracting with a large
service provider—aside from the economies of scale that such a relationship
brings, the customer is likely to gain better security, higher availability, and
greater redundancy of systems and networks. The customer also gains access to
the outsourcer’s technologies, which might be more advanced than their own.
Large outsourcers can usually afford to put advanced capabilities in place,
whereas smaller-scale customers may not. Such outsourcers can also use these
capabilities to enhance their competitive advantage in selling to prospects and in
retaining existing customers.
From the customer viewpoint, choosing a large outsourcer is reassuring to
the smaller customer, because of the greater chance of the provider’s long-term
viability. On the other hand, the outsourcer may have concerns about the cus-
tomer’s viability, although losing such a small customer might not result in
much of a loss relative to the outsourcer’s overall business.
Large Outsourcer, Large Customer
When both the customer and outsourcer are large, stable, viable organizations,
the question of either one going out of business represents a lower risk than in
other cases, but the risk is not zero. Large companies do get bought, suffer major
declines, or are subject to losses of confidence that can cripple their effectiveness
and result in slowdowns and failures.
122
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

For the most part, however, both types of organization can negotiate from
a position of strength and come up with a win-win agreement whereby the cus-
tomer gets good value and the outsourcer earns a fair profit. Many large organi-
zations prefer to do business with other large organizations because so much of
the risk is ameliorated.
Small Outsourcer, Small Customer
In some ways, this scenario is equivalent to the large outsourcer/large customer
situation, in that both parties are evenly matched when it comes to negotiating
strength and viability. Either party is subject to getting bought, suffering signifi-
cant fluctuations in business level, and going out of business altogether. This is
the riskiest situation but often the most common among smaller organizations.
Small outsourcers have problems acquiring large customers, and small custom-
ers may not engage the interest of larger outsourcers, for whom the expensive
setup required for small customers may not pay.
Service Requirements
Meeting Expectations
It is one thing to ensure that the business relationships are well founded, it is
quite another to make sure that the level of service, as required by the customer,
will be met satisfactorily on a continuing basis. What represents satisfactory
service is expressed in a SLA, but it is clear from the many reports of failure of
customer-outsourcer relationships that merely “putting it in writing” does not
guarantee that the relationship will work. Fundamentally, quality of service is in
the eyes of the beholder and accordingly the customer’s perception of service
quality and satisfaction count, no matter what the numbers indicate.
Two service providers can have identical commitments in terms of tangi-
ble and measurable service levels, such as throughput rate, capacity, response
time, job completion times, availability, accuracy, data integrity, maintenance of
confidentiality, communications and reporting, and responsiveness of technical
support. Typical metrics include the percentage of messages handled per second
within a specific time interval (e.g., 95% of response times less than 2 seconds),
percentage of telephone calls to a support area that are answered within a spe-
cific period of time (or number of rings), and the percentage of the time an
application is available.
Yet, even if these criteria are met consistently, the customer may still be
unhappy. Customer satisfaction can vary enormously from one provider to
another. Clearly, some features of service are beyond metrics—such as the
knowledge and helpfulness of support staff and willingness to follow up and get
the answer. An article in the August 2003 issue of the Communications of the
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process— Customer and Outsourcer Requirements
123
TLFeBOOK

ACM discusses how CIOs should manage expectations, in this case the expecta-
tions of their superiors. It states that “…measures that address quantifiable effi-
ciency like speed of processing are typically well understood and commonly
used, but their usefulness is often limited. Other important measures…that
address organizational/strategic effectiveness, value and popularity may not be
well understood, widely used, or not used appropriately or consistently by
organizations” [5].
It is reasonable to ask what items comprise service quality and how they
can be evaluated if some aspects of service are intangible and not readily measur-
able. Jiang et al. assess both expectations and perceptions of service quality from
the customer and provider viewpoints [6]. Ironically, typical performance meas-
ures may not jibe with user perceptions of good service, particularly in the IT
arena. Jiang et al. look into the expectations, perceptions, and satisfaction gaps.
The management of customer satisfaction requires the convergence of
expectations and perceptions of both customer and service provider. The goal is
to reduce, or preferably eliminate, the gap in understanding between what the
customer expects in terms of service level and what the provider thinks the cus-
tomer needs. When that has been resolved and the service is implemented, a per-
formance gap will arise if the customer’s perception of what is being delivered
differs from what the provider thinks is being delivered. Such a difference results
in dissatisfaction. This gap needs to be put in specific terms and then fed back to
both customer and provider in order to change perceptions regarding what level
of performance is acceptable and to close the satisfaction gap. Without the feed-
back and the willingness to change, service levels will not generally improve.
The above-mentioned article shows that the crux of the service dilemma is
indeed the management of expectations and the relationship. The authors state
that the establishment of trust, based on prior track record, is indispensable and
that “a relationship of trust with sufficient communication is the first line of
defense against unrealistic and unmet expectations.” CIOs are quoted as saying
that “…perceptions are often not accurate. Evaluation at the executive level is
often vague and impressionistic ….” Another CIO stated that “Surprises lead to
failures—unanticipated outcomes, scope creep, cost overruns ….” [6].
Concentration and Dispersion of Business Operations and Functions
My article on the user, or customer, view of reliability considers how customers
perceive the performance of the systems [7]. Trends that affect reliability result
from the concentration of power, while other trends result from concentration of
functions. These concepts can easily be translated to the outsourcing arena.
Outsourcing effectively distributes computational power and operational
activities between customers and third parties, since even under the most
drastic outsourcing scenarios some functionality is retained within customer
124
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

organizations. For example, when the entire information technology function is
outsourced or spun off, certain related business processes frequently remain with
the customer. If some business processes are outsourced, others are retained.
Otherwise, there would be no customer organization! Consequently, if some-
thing adverse should happen to customers’ systems or facilities, customers might
be affected less severely than they would be had certain operations remained in-
house. The outsourcer will probably be operational and able to carry some addi-
tional load and perform additional services in support of damaged customers.6
Conversely, if the outsourcer fails to provide contracted-for services for some
reason—be it a failure in software or equipment or the business itself going
bankrupt—then, depending on the size of the outsourcer, large segments of an
industry or sector could be adversely affected. If the outsourcer provides core
services, the impact could be enormous. For this reason, backup and recovery
are a key issue in choosing an outsourcer. Also, outsourcers prefer customers
that have business continuity plans in place so that a disaster at one location
does not put them out of action.
Functionality may be less concentrated if business processes are included
in the outsourcing arrangement. Increasingly, functions such as applications
programming and customer support are being moved to external providers both
at home and abroad. Again, advantages exist in terms of redundancy and resil-
iency if functional capabilities are dispersed. As discussed in a recent article,
three U.S. financial regulatory agencies require key institutions to have redun-
dant computer systems and networks and also to have operational staff distrib-
uted so that critical functions can continue, even if staff are not able to get to the
designated backup site within an acceptable period of time [8]. Such require-
ments are being demanded more and more frequently as fears of terrorist acts
and dependency on a few concentrated critical operations have increased enor-
mously over the past few years.
The reliability of computer equipment has vastly improved over the last
three decades. At one time, having to fix equipment failures was an everyday
routine, with service engineers living on-site at major customer facilities. Back
in the 1970s, most systems ran batch programs rather than real-time applica-
tions. While a breakdown in equipment was inconvenient, the delays were often
tolerable because the expected turnaround times were relatively long with high
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process— Customer and Outsourcer Requirements
125
6. The tragic events that occurred in New York City on September 11, 2001, caused many or-
ganizations in and around the World Trade Center to seek alternative facilities and systems
in order to try to remain in business. Although there were no contractual terms to force it, a
large financial services outsourcer rapidly set up capabilities within its existing facilities to ac-
commodate a subset of the staff, systems, and networks of several customer firms that were
directly affected. While not a contractual obligation in this case, it was done to foster good
customer relations and to keep the affected customers in business.
TLFeBOOK

variances, and so the cost of outages of several hours or more were expected and
tolerated by users, although not welcomed. As terminals and workstations were
connected through networks to real-time or online applications, instant
response and continuous availability became the users’ goals. Discussions
focused on subsecond response times for simple interactions with computer appli-
cations, and how a longer response would lead to marked declines in user pro-
ductivity. Today, while tolerance exists for some delays for computationally
intense operations, the push for speed continues, with even home users turning
to high-speed telecommunications to accelerate the responsiveness of their
Internet access.
As a side point, slower response is more tolerable if a system indicates that
something is happening either by the appearance of comments regarding how
much time remains for the process (such as a file transfer) or graphical meters
showing percentage complete. Providing information on what to expect goes a
long way towards satisfying service needs.
The usual engineering attributes do not adequately express the sentiments
of most users, who view the computer applications as a means of getting work
done in a timely and accurate fashion. Users are not generally patient with the
lack of availability or responsiveness even when told how complex and difficult
to manage such systems are and how remarkable their accomplishments.
“Always on and available” is a minimum expectation, if not requirement, that
users of systems believe is their due.
Customer View of Satisfactory Service
My article on availability examines the components of availability and its con-
verse, downtime, from the user or customer viewpoint specifically [9]. The cus-
tomer is generally not interested in the cause of an outage—only that the
application is not available and how long it will be until it is back up again. Cus-
tomers also have questions as to what information was lost and whether and
when it can be recovered.
As the article describes, the system may be unavailable for a whole variety
of reasons—some intentional, others accidental. For example, a system may be
unavailable or available but not usable; in other words, the user can bring up an
application on his or her workstation but the application is not operating prop-
erly—it might not accept data, perform calculations accurately, or generate
results of requests. In negotiating an agreement with a service provider, these is-
sues need to be investigated and addressed.
The makeup of downtime includes the time to realize that the system is
down, subject to the definition in the SLA, the time the service engineers require
to arrive on-site (if necessary) or to log in remotely, the time to determine the
cause of the problem, repair it, and restore it to its condition before failure. The
126
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

mean time between failure (MTBF) is a measure of the average time between
failures. The mean time to repair (MTTR) is the average time a technician
requires to get access, either physically or electronically, and then to fix, test, and
bring back online the offending system. While these times give a decision-maker
means of measuring, in relative and absolute terms, the performance of the pro-
vider, they give little guidance as to the impact of any outages in regard to the
seriousness of an event, both in absolute and comparative terms. It is useful here
to compare MTBF and MTTR performance across providers to investigate
material differences. Such differences might arise as a result of the technological
prowess of one vendor over another.
Technology Requirements
As described earlier, one of the key reasons why organizations seek to outsource
certain functions is that they need a way to buy into new technology and capa-
bilities and either cannot or will not do it in-house. With technology advancing
so rapidly, firms commonly are overtaken and find themselves at a competitive
disadvantage by being shackled with obsolete and expensive technologies that do
not meet their needs. In some industries, the legal and regulatory demands may
be so great that it is no longer feasible for a smaller firm to keep their applica-
tions and systems up-to-date, so they naturally seek help elsewhere. We also see
that some service providers have an edge in respect to the technology they use.
The “Bleeding” Edge
A fine balance exists between engaging the latest technologies or waiting until
others have tested them out before adopting them. The temptation is to get a
lead over competitors by reaping the purported benefits of newer technology.
However, because many innovative systems are beset by problems in the initial
stages, one must question whether the risk is worth it. Even a proven track
record is no guarantee of success. For example, the team that brought the
world-beating SABRE system to American Airlines ran into major problems
when they attempted to carry over many of their ideas and develop a system,
named Confirm, for the hotel and car rental businesses. Confirm ran into major
technological difficulties trying to implement a newer technology that could not
be made to work. The effort disintegrated in a flurry of lawsuits.
When choosing a service provider, technology plays a major role, particu-
larly for IT outsourcing and even more so for information security outsourcing.
It is generally safer to select a provider with a proven track record and solid tech-
nology than to experiment with a glitzy new approach, particularly if you are a
“beta” site, where the systems are being developed.
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process— Customer and Outsourcer Requirements
127
TLFeBOOK

I have experienced situations where trying out the latest and greatest sys-
tems, using the most modern of architectures, has led to significant operational
and financial problems. In one case, a third party was developing the first real-
time on-line system and operations to handle a complex financial instrument.
When a multimillion dollar shortfall appeared, I suggested using a service that
had been in the business about a decade and had gained a reputation for solid,
reliable, accurate work. Once transferred to the “old-line” provider, the prob-
lems were quickly rectified, and the provider was able to deliver quality service,
albeit using an older technology.
I certainly do not eschew new technologies—I very much favor pushing
ahead with more efficient, less-costly, easier-to-use systems. I merely recom-
mend that innovative systems be approached with caution and that extra care be
taken to test them thoroughly from start to finish. However, for rapidly chang-
ing technologies, especially those that pertain to information security, often the
only choice is to push against the frontier. The risk of not having adequate pro-
tection and response capabilities is too high. In the next chapter, we will look at
the information security space in particular because it is needed for pure-play
information security outsourcing as well as a crucial part of every IT outsourcing
arrangement.
References
[1]
King, J., “Five Metrics for the Books,” Computerworld, Vol. 36, No. 20, May 13, 2000,
p. 40.
[2]
“BITS Framework: Managing Technology Risk for Information Technology (IT) Service
Providers,” Banking Industry Technology Secretariat, Financial Services Roundtable, Wash-
ington, D.C., November 2003, http://www.bitsinfo.org.
[3]
Allen, J., et al., “Outsourcing Managed Security Services,” Network Systems Survivability
Program, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA: Software Engineering Institute,
January 2003, http://www.fedcirc.com.
[4]
Einhorm, B., and M. Kripalani, “Move Over, India,” BusinessWeek, August 11, 2003,
pp..42–43.
[5]
Potter, R. E., “How CIO’s Manage Their Superiors’ Expectations,” Communications of the
ACM, Vol. 46, No. 8, 2003, pp. 75–79.
[6]
Jiang, J. J., et al., “Closing the User and Provider Service Quality Gap,” Communications
of the ACM, Vol. 46, No. 2, 2003.
[7]
Axelrod, C. W., “The User’s View of Computer System Reliability,” Journal of Capacity
Management, Vol. 2, No. 1, 1983, pp. 24–41.
[8]
“Interagency Paper on Sound Practices to Strengthen the Resilience of the U.S. Financial
System,” Federal Reserve System, Department of the Treasury: Office of the Comptroller
128
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

of
the
Currency,
and
Securities
and
Exchange
Commission,
April
7,
2003,
http://www.sec.gov/news/studies/34-47638.htm.
[9]
Axelrod, C. W., “The User’s View of Computer System Availability,” Journal of Capacity
Management, Vol. 2, No. 4, 1985, pp. 340–362.
The Outsourcing Evaluation Process— Customer and Outsourcer Requirements
129
TLFeBOOK

.
TLFeBOOK

8
Outsourcing Security Functions and
Security Considerations When
Outsourcing
In this chapter, we examine the outsourcing of security functions and security
issues that arise from the outsourcing process itself. Not only is security an
important subject on its own, but it is also a crucial component whenever an
outsourcing arrangement is made. In many ways, the outsourcing of security as
related to information assets, physical assets, and human assets is much the same
as any other kind of outsourcing, but in other ways it is unique. While we have
previously argued that a security component exists in every outsourcing arrange-
ment, we still need to address the outsourcing of security itself when it is the pri-
mary function being outsourced.
Let us first try to put boundaries on the scope of this review in order to
ensure that the list of categories is reasonably complete and comprehensive. We
will do this by reviewing some of the standard classifications of areas that relate
to security. One source is the 10 security categories of the CISSP Body of
Knowledge1, listed here.
131
1. As mentioned in the preface, CISSP stands for certified information systems security profes-
sional, a credential bestowed upon individuals who meet a number of work experience and
knowledge criteria determined and examined by the International Information Systems Secu-
rity Certification Consortium, Inc., in other words, the IISSCC or (ISC)2. In order to
achieve the CISSP certification, a candidate must demonstrate proficiency in all ten compo-
nents of the Body of Knowledge.
TLFeBOOK

1. Security Management Practices;
2. Access Control;
3. Security Models and Architecture;
4. Physical Security;
5. Telecommunications and Network Security;
6. Cryptography;
7. Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity;
8. Law, Investigation and Ethics;
9. Application and System Development;
10. Operations Security.
Another source for categorizing areas of security is the ISO 177992, which
was derived from British Standard (BS) 7799. The ISO 17799 categories are:
1. Business Continuity Planning;
2. System Access Control;
3. System Development and Maintenance;
4. Physical and Environmental Security;
5. Compliance;
6. Personnel Security;
7. Security Organization;
8. Computer and Operations Management;
9. Asset Classification and Control;
10. Security Policy.
Table 8.1 matches the CISSP Body of Knowledge categories to those of
ISO 17799. As can be seen, they correspond quite closely to one another. Also,
in the third column of Table 8.1, we show whether or not the specific security
category readily lends itself to consulting or outsourcing services.
We will now go through each category and expand on the factors affecting
security as they relate to third-party services, whether they are consulting serv-
ices or outsourcing services, specific security services or not.
132
Outsourcing Information Security
2. ISO/IEC 17799:2000, The Code of Practice for Information Security Management, is a se-
curity standard that provides high-level guidelines and voluntary directions for information
security management covering 10 topics. More information on the standard is available at
http://www.securityauditor.net/iso17799/.
TLFeBOOK

Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
133
Table 8.1
Relationship Between CISSP Body of Knowledge and ISO 17799 Security Classifications
and Appropriateness for Outsourcing
CISSP Body of
Knowledge
ISO 17799
Appropriateness for
Consulting/Outsourcing
Security Management
Practices
Security Organization
Consulting firms will suggest various types of
security and information security organization,
with different reporting and responsibilities.
Personnel Security
Part or all of personnel security is often
assigned to an outside firm to handle since it
requires specific subject-matter expertise.
Here personnel security refers to safety of
human beings (staff, visitors).
Asset Classification
and Control
Predominantly developed and implemented
internally, but may be defined by laws and
regulations and may be imposed on both
customer organizations and outsourcers.
Security Policy
Policy can be readily created through
references to books, Web sites (such as http://
www.sans.org), and the like, but also it is
advisable to consult internal or outside
counsel and/or consulting firms, since policy
does have many legal implications.
Access Control
System Access Control
Usually handled internally, even when systems
operations have been outsourced. However, it
can be fairly easily outsourced if required
security controls are put in place.
Security Models and
Architecture
May be developed and implemented through
the use of vendor-provided software and/or
consulting services, since necessary
subject-matter expertise is hard to come by.
Qualified internal expertise usually gets
assigned to other tasks.
Physical Security
Physical and
Environmental Security
It is common to hire outside guard agencies
and third-party employee-screening
organizations. Here physical security refers to
the protection of plant, equipment, and other
assets from theft, damage, and/or destruction.
Telecommunications and
Network Security
Establishing secure network, system and
application architectures often requires the
help of external subject-matter experts.
Cryptography
Generally not offered as a separate service—
more often incorporated into another
capability, which may itself be outsourced.
TLFeBOOK

Security Management Practices
The way in which security is managed varies significantly across organizations,
and the degree to which those functions are handled internally or externally also
differs from one organization to the next. We will now look at how these func-
tions are dealt with by category.
Security Organization
Information security, or the securing of confidential information assets belong-
ing to organizations and personal information belonging to individuals
134
Outsourcing Information Security
Table 8.1 (continued)
CISSP Body of
Knowledge
ISO 17799
Appropriateness for
Consulting/Outsourcing
Disaster Recovery and
Business Continuity
Business Continuity
Planning
Common to use third parties for off-site
disaster recovery sites.
Consultants are often used for developing and
maintaining business continuity plans.
Law, Investigations,
Ethics
Compliance
Externally supplied forensics experts are often
brought in as needed, since such
subject-matter expertise is generally hard to
come by.
Application and
System Development
System Development
and Maintenance
Applications development and support are
quite frequently outsourced—increasingly to
offshore service providers.
Training in secure coding practices is often
performed by outside subject-matter experts.
Assessment of the security level of systems
throughout the application development life
cycle is commonly outsourced, if done at all, to
specialized security consulting firms or
security practices of larger consulting firms.
Operations Security
Computer,
Communications and
Operations
Management
Security aspects of operations and
management of communications and computer
systems can often be part of large
multimillion, and even multibillion, dollar
outsourcing agreements.
Alternatively, just the security components can
be outsourced, with actual operations
management being retained internally.
TLFeBOOK

(customers, employees), has always been important, in order to protect such
information from misuse. Increasingly, however, there are legal and regulatory
requirements for the protecting of information, particularly information about
individuals that is not of a public nature.
The roles, responsibilities, goals, functions, and structure of the security
organization are realized in many ways. For example, the scope of information
security can be limited to a high-level staff function, which determines policies
and standards and sponsors security-related initiatives, or it may include line
functions such as management of security devices, including firewalls and intru-
sion detection systems, and the management of access control. In some organi-
zations, physical security, human (or personnel) security, business continuity
planning, and disaster recovery fall under the responsibility of the security
officer.
The reporting hierarchy also varies significantly, with the chief informa-
tion security officer (CISO) or chief security officer (CSO) sometimes reporting
to the chief information officer (CIO). In other companies and agencies, the
CISO might report to the chief operating officer (COO) or general counsel or
chief administrative officer (CAO). A recent article in CIO Magazine discusses
how physical and information security are converging and how corporate
responsibility for security is moving out of the IT area to report to the COO or
chief financial officer (CFO) [1].
Accounting and auditing firms, general consulting firms with large secu-
rity practices, and specialty security consulting firms regularly offer to analyze
the general structure and culture of an organization and recommend how the
information security function fits in most effectively. As with many consulting
assignments, someone in the customer’s organization often hopes that their par-
ticular agenda will be satisfied through the findings and recommendations of the
consulting firm. And consultants sense pressure to support their clients’ percep-
tions. Another determinant of how the information security function is struc-
tured is what others in the industry are doing. Here published survey results,
magazine articles, discussions with peers, presentations at conferences, and con-
sulting and research firms’ pronouncements have the greatest influence.
The internal security structure also includes, and to some degree will
determine, what functions might be outsourced to third parties. If the consult-
ing firm also provides security outsourcing, or has alliances with companies that
do, then one must consider any such recommendations by the firm as possibly
being biased and having a potential for conflict of interest. It is therefore a better
practice to hire a consulting firm with no such capabilities or relationships to
help in evaluating one’s organizational structure and functions.
Often the particular structure of the information security area is very
much affected by the overall structure of the parent organization and its culture.
A third party may not be familiar with these factors and may not be willing to
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
135
TLFeBOOK

take the time to learn. Furthermore, the customer might not want to pay for
such a learning effort. It normally is well worth the cost, though, for the third
party to factor in the culture, in particular, as otherwise the recommendations
might be very much off the mark.
In summary, a third party’s advice as to how to organize and structure the
information security function can be helpful and reassuring if the consultants
are sensitive to how a specific organization functions or is perceived to function.
However, the advice can be damaging if the internal organization is
misconstrued. Bringing a significant amount of good judgment to the table is
necessary when making these types of decisions, since creating an ineffective
security organization could well cause severe damage. Of particular importance
is how the security organization aligns with the business functions. This critical
factor will determine how the function is perceived, which affects how effective
it can be.
Personnel Security
Personnel security can be interpreted in two ways. First, its goal is to protect
individuals working for a company from physical, financial, and other forms of
harm—this is physical well-being. Second, personnel security relates to dealing
with personal concerns, which, if left unattended, might pose a security risk to
the organization.
Physical Well-Being
Dealing with the physical aspect of a person’s well-being can be considered sim-
pler than handling other personnel-related issues. It involves such devices as:
• Performing thorough screening and background checks of new hires,
contractors, and consultants;
• Having guards posted at entrances and roaming the floors;
• Requiring employees, contractors, and part-time staff show their iden-
tity badges;
• Having visitors sign in and be picked up and signed in by those they are
visiting;
• Placing video cameras at strategic points, with security staff viewing
monitors and storing videotapes.
Quite commonly, companies hire third parties to perform many of
these functions. For example, few companies maintain a staff qualified to do
the necessary background checks and perform comprehensive screening inter-
views. This field is a well-defined specialty, and many commercial agencies are
136
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

available. On-site guards are often outsiders, although internal management
staff is often mixed with guards supplied by third parties. In some cases, even the
management level is made up of external staff, who often have law enforcement
backgrounds.
At the executive and management levels, additional security may be imple-
mented due to fears that executives are subject to kidnapping. Such a risk is con-
sidered especially high in certain foreign countries. In some situations, it is
necessary to provide all employees with guarded, gated housing, protected travel
(e.g., armored cars) and bodyguards in some cases, and a highly secured working
environment. Such protection is an even more specialized field that is practically
always staffed by third-party specialists.
Of course, this raises the important question as to who is checking on the
checkers. There have been many documented cases of firms in the guard business
unknowingly hiring ex-convicts because their own screening mechanisms are
inadequate. Following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attack on the World
Trade Center and Pentagon, it was discovered how unqualified, ill-trained, and
suspect some staff performing passenger screening at airports had been.
Because human beings are the most important asset for many companies,
the staff who select physical security agencies must perform comprehensive due
diligence to ensure that those agencies do not increase employee risk. Danger to
personnel is greatly increased if security agencies hire individuals who are in
cahoots with terrorists or other criminals.
Law enforcement and emergency services organizations, as members of a
particular community, draw upon the services provided at all levels by and for
that community, whether it is part of a town, city, state, county, nation, or
group of nations. In most situations, the costs of services for these organizations
are paid from taxes collected from the community directly benefiting from those
services. Smaller groups of businesses or citizens, rather than a particular organi-
zation, may hire security services and in some cases use local volunteers to sup-
plement local public fire and police services. While one might loosely say that
these services are outsourced, they are not generally subject to the type of out-
sourcing decision being handled in this book.
Other Human-Related Concerns of the Company
Job Security
The term job security has, of course, a different meaning—it does not mean
securing the components of a job; it refers to tenure. Neither does tenure, per se,
appear to affect the security of an organization. However, appearances are wrong
here.
If employees feel insecure about the long-term prospects of their position
or profession, they might become unhappy and, consequently, a threat to the
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
137
TLFeBOOK

organization to do the screening. A major risk is the insider threat that occurs
when a disgruntled employee, who has both knowledge and access, decides to
undermine an organization or to enrich himself or herself at the organization’s
expense. Thus a significant source of potential damage can be directly attributed
to employees’ feelings about job security.
Furthermore, the outsourcing of various job functions can affect the
remaining employees’ sense of job security, particularly if the jobs of those still
employed are thought to be at risk. This situation is exacerbated if the outsour-
ced jobs have been moved to an offshore service provider. In the latter case, the
foreign country providing the resources is probably a less-developed, low-
income country with a high-quality education system and a culture that encour-
ages education, such as in India and China. In this case, a contributing factor to
employee concerns is that the displaced workers have virtually no opportunity to
be employed by the offshore outsourcer. Indeed a number of countries actively
discourage the employment of foreign nationals.3
On the other hand, such employment is a possibility with domestic out-
sourcing, as outsourcers regularly hire staff from the customer organization as a
means of importing expertise. In some cases, internal staff is transferred to the
outsourcing company as part of the deal. In such a situation, job security in fact
increases for certain individuals. When outsourcing is seen as largely a transfer of
work and staff from one organizational entity to another, it can be thought of as
a zero sum game. In fact, employees who are transferred may find that their
future is more assured with the new outsourcing entity, which may be experi-
encing significant growth in staffing and profitability. The new environment
might compare favorably to a more stagnant customer environment.
From a security point of view, such a transfer may be the preferred
approach since it can reduce the number of disgruntled employees who could, as
stated above, represent a threat to the organization’s operation. These individuals
are insiders with the knowledge to do real harm to their original parent organiza-
tion if they so wished. In situations where jobs are lost, particularly when lost to
offshore entities, employee resentment can be high and the risk of angry employ-
ees and ex-employees taking damaging action is correspondingly high.
The disgruntled employee is a danger in many situations, of which out-
sourcing is only one. Such resentment is often expressed by current employ-
ees who see their jobs disappear and respond by getting back at management
and the company through subversive and destructive actions or by trying to
capitalize on their inside knowledge. For example, such employees are more
138
Outsourcing Information Security
3. Transferring existing staff often occurs when situations where the outsourcer, or facility man-
ager, takes over an existing plant, such as a data center. However, it rarely occurs with off-
shore outsourcing. In fact, countries such as India have refused to allow U.S. workers to take
employment, as in the sidebar “No Americans Need Apply” in [2].
TLFeBOOK

likely to engage in fraud or embezzlement or to try to sell valuable proprietary
confidential information.
Knowing that such dangers exist, how can the risks be mitigated? One way
is to be honest with employees. That does not mean being entirely open and dis-
closing everything to them—that could undermine the organization as a whole
and actually hurt the employees more. No, being honest means either to tell the
truth or not say anything. If asked a direct question, management might say that
they don’t know (if that is the case) or that they are unable to answer the ques-
tion at this particular time (if the answer must be kept confidential). Also, if pos-
sible, having employees involved in the decision-making process might alleviate
ill will, if it is seen, for example, that tough decisions involve a survival issue for
the organization and are not to be taken personally. Seeing the decision in
broader economic terms might reduce hostility towards the organization and its
management, and might deflect it towards political leaders, which may be more
appropriate in some cases. Of course, the best rationale in the world is not much
consolation to someone out of work and thrust into a difficult job market. If the
organization can be flexible, it might assign some staff to other functions at the
same facility or other locations. All this applies whether the job losses are due to
outsourcing, offshore competition, weak economic times, new technologies, or
other factors.
One related situation that particularly rankles employees is requiring them
to train their replacements at the outsourcer or to stay around in dual mode
until the transition to the service provider is complete. Often the magnitude of
severance pay is linked to successful training of the replacement. Such an exten-
sion of employment, particularly under such hostile circumstances, might lead
to damaging action by the employee who is to be let go, or to training in which
the trainer omits crucial components, putting the environment at risk.
Transition Issues
Job security is also affected during the outsourcing transition itself, when
employees become aware of the transfer of duties and that their employment
with the outsourcing company may be for a limited time. During this period, if
employees know that their positions are being eliminated internally, they may
become difficult, especially if they are asked to train their replacements at the
outsourcer. If employees are uncertain as to their future, they represent a danger
to the organization in that they may be distracted, become careless, or purposely
subvert the company. In any of these situations, threats to security exist that can
be protected against even if they are unavoidable.
As mentioned previously, a generous severance, assistance in finding new
work, or transfer to another position in the firm often alleviates employees’ con-
cerns and thereby reduces the chances that they will consider doing damage.
Often, the receipt of at least part of the severance package should be contingent
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
139
TLFeBOOK

upon the employee agreeing not to take legal action against the employer. This
further ensures that the employee will cooperate with the employer and not sub-
vert its reputation or financial health.4
While job security, as described earlier, can indirectly affect the security of
an organization’s information assets, physical and emotional security while
working on the job has quite a different impact.
Ameliorating the Concerns of Workers
Companies increasingly have taken on some measure of responsibility not only
to protect the physical well-being of staff, but also, to some extent, their emo-
tional, social, and financial states. In some ways, these latter aspects are as
important as physical security to the employee. Accepting this responsibility is
not purely altruistic on the part of the employer, because it yields considerable
payback. For example, if the organization arranges for financial planning semi-
nars or consultations and offers various forms of savings plans, employees may
feel more secure financially and therefore be less likely to defraud the company.
Other benefits and services, such as the provision of day care for employ-
ees’ children, may not have as direct an impact on the employees’ financial
health, but they can promote a positive and loyal view towards the organization.
Employees with access to these benefits are less likely to jeopardize their com-
fortable status through destructive activities. In particular, assistance for
employees who are having a particularly stressful time can result in major attitu-
dinal changes, not only making the employees more productive contributors but
also less of a security risk. Such positive support by an organization will deter
employees from destructive activities because they have more to lose.
Asset Classification and Control
The categorization of specific information assets is generally the responsibility of
the organization that owns the information. However, we are increasingly seeing
definitions imposed by regulators, particularly in regard to information about
individuals, such as customers or patients. Previously mentioned legislation,
such as GLBA and HIPAA in the United States, impose strict requirements for
protecting customer and patient data, respectively.
Along with classification of data come requirements for handling it protec-
tively. Legislators and regulators are placing responsibility for protecting
nonpublic personal information (NPPI) in the hands of organizations that
140
Outsourcing Information Security
4. While this type of arrangement is presumably legal, as it is frequently used by conservative
organizations, it smacks of bribery and has questionable ethical undertones.
TLFeBOOK

gather such information from individuals, regardless of whether or not that
information travels to third parties. Regulators in Europe, the United Kingdom,
the United States, and other countries are increasingly demanding that financial
and health services institutions, in particular, extend the oversight and protec-
tion of such data to when it is received, processed, stored, and distributed by
third parties. Such third parties include offshore entities. Regulators also require
that institutions be able to provide immediate access at any time to certain data
and evidence of controls wherever it resides—internally or externally, domesti-
cally or offshore.
Data classes can be defined in various ways. One method is to assess what
damage might be inflicted upon the institution, its customers, business partners,
and service providers were the information to be accessed and possibly mishan-
dled or misused by those who are not supposed to have access to it. Such unau-
thorized access might have been gained intentionally or by accident—either
way, it is bad news. However, the judgments as to what damage might be
incurred and what the chances are that damaging events will take place are
highly subjective. In addition, the estimate as to the extent of the damage is
extremely difficult to calculate because the harm will likely be to reputation and
goodwill, which are particularly hard to quantify. Consequently, organizations
usually provide examples of each category of information. In Table 8.2, we
define various classifications and offer examples in each category.
The spectrum of asset classification is illustrated in Figure 8.1. As you
can see, there are areas of overlap, as certain definitions can cut across several
categories.
Once information has been categorized, it is necessary to specify the dispo-
sition of such data over its creation, processing, storage, transmission, and dis-
posal, since each category is dealt with differently. We show how such handling
applies across various categories of information in Table 8.3.
The data owner or, more likely, the owner of the application that generates
and maintains the data establishes classifications for particular information. The
importance of the classification is that its handling and disposal policy and pro-
cedures must apply whether the information remains within the organization or
is passed on to an outsourcer.
Legislators and regulators are increasingly concerning themselves with the
protection of data, particularly NPPI, that is in the custody of an organization,
whether within itself or in the hands of an outsourcer. Thus, responsibility for
the safekeeping of such data and ensuring that it is not allowed to be seen, cop-
ied, or misused by unauthorized individuals or organizations, and that confiden-
tial data is suitably disposed of, extends beyond an organization’s own perimeter
into outsourcers, both at home and abroad.
In order for outsourcers to satisfy these demands, they must accommodate
the classification definitions and handling policy and procedures of the
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
141
TLFeBOOK

142
Outsourcing Information Security
Table 8.2
Asset Classification and Examples
Asset Category
Definition
Examples
Public
Information that is generally available
in the public domain, the divulgence of
which does not impact the
organization, its customers, or its
business partners.
End-of-day stock prices, newspaper or
Web news articles, public Web site
content, television and radio
announcements.
Internal
Information that is readily accessible
by those within the organization, such
as employees, contractors, and
(probably) service providers, but which
is not generally available to the
general public, the disclosure of this
category is unlikely to damage the
organization, its customers, or its
business partners.
This category might include high-level
descriptions of business systems and
processes, from which nothing
damaging to reputation and financial
health can be developed, such as
might otherwise result from disclosure
of trade secrets and other intellectual
property.
Confidential
Information which, if inappropriately
disclosed or misused, could cause
substantial harm to the organization,
its customers, or its business partners.
If such confidential data has to be
shared with a third party, a
nondisclosure agreement will need to
be drawn up and executed, prior to
sharing the information.
Confidential information might include
such items as internal and external
business communications, financial
information about the company, its
customers, business partners and/or
service providers.
Nonpublic Personal
Information relating to individuals that
may not be generally available to
others and which, if compromised,
could be used for bad purposes,
including identity theft. If
inadvertently disclosed, or otherwise
compromised, the disclosure could
lead to problems and inconvenience
for the individual and loss of
reputation for the organization. The
organization might also incur costs to
notify customers and provide
assistance for restoring damaged
credit ratings.
Generally includes a combination of
information, such as name, address,
and Social Security number.
TLFeBOOK

customer organization. Therefore, the handling of confidential and nonpublic
personal data is the subject of much of the due diligence performed on third
parties.
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
143
Table 8.2 (continued)
Asset Category
Definition
Examples
Sensitive Personal
Highly personal information that
generally should not be collected
without a specific, valid reason, and
for which the individual has given
consent. If inadvertently disclosed, or
otherwise compromised, the
disclosure could lead to significant
unwarranted problems for the
individual and major remediation costs
for the organization.
Such information might include
religion, sexual preferences, and the
like.
Secret
Very restricted information which, if
disclosed to unauthorized persons,
could result in major damage to the
organization, its customers,
employees, business partners and
service providers.
This category might include
information about upcoming mergers
or acquisitions, detailed business
process, intellectual property,
employees’ salaries.
Top Secret
Highly restricted information that is
made available to a very select group
and which, if used inappropriately,
could result in a major disaster for the
organization or others with an interest
in the information.
Such information might relate to such
areas as national defense (e.g.,
defense contracts). It could also
include crucial intellectual property,
such as the formula for Coca-Cola.
Public… Internal … Confidential … Nonpublic … Sensitive … Secret …Top Secret
Personal
Personal
Sensitive
Classified
Figure 8.1 Spectrum of asset categories.
TLFeBOOK

144
Outsourcing Information Security
Table 8.3
Creation, Handling, and Disposal of Information by Category
Category
Creation
Handling-
Processing-
Access
Transmission
Storage
Disposal
Public
General—may
be question of
information’s
authenticity.
No special
protection—
questions of
information’s
integrity and
accuracy.
No special
protection—
question of
information’s
integrity.
No special
protection—
question of
information’s
integrity.
No special
procedures.
Internal
Created by or
via internal
staff with
supervisory
review and
approval as
appropriate.
Designation as
to being “for
internal use” is
desirable.
No special
protection—
question of
integrity.
No special
protection—
question of
integrity.
No special
procedures.
Confidential
Created during
the course of
normal
business
operations.
Designation of
“confidential”
is required.
Two-factor
authentication
required for
remote access.
Should be
encrypted if
transmitted
over public
networks.
May have to be
encrypted
depending on
location and
protections in
place.
Requires
special
precautions so
as not to
divulge content
inadvertently,
such as
shredding
paper copies,
deleting and
overwriting
magnetic
media such as
disks and
tapes, and so
on.
Nonpublic
Personal
Created during
the course of
normal
business
operations
Designation of
“confidential”
is required in
all instances.
Two-factor
authentication
required for
access.
Must be
encrypted if
transmitted
over public
networks.
May have to be
encrypted
depending on
location and
protections in
place.
Requires
special
precautions so
as not to
divulge content
inadvertently.
TLFeBOOK

Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
145
Table 8.3 (continued)
Category
Creation
Handling-
Processing-
Access
Transmission
Storage
Disposal
Sensitive
Personal
Question as to
whether it
should be
collected in the
first place.
Created during
the course of
special
operations.
Designation of
“confidential”
or “highly
sensitive” is
required in all
instances.
Two-factor
authentication
required for all
access.
Access is very
limited.
Must be
encrypted if
transmitted
over public
networks.
Must be
encrypted
depending on
location and
protections in
place.
Requires
extremely
stringent
precautions so
as not to
divulge content
inadvertently.
Secret
Created during
the course of
normal
business
operations.
Designation of
“secret” is
required in all
instances.
Two-factor
authentication
required for
access.
Access is
restricted.
Must be
strongly
encrypted if
transmitted
over public
networks.
Must be
strongly
encrypted
depending on
location and
protections in
place.
Requires
special
precautions so
as not to
divulge content
inadvertently.
Top Secret
Created during
the course
of normal
business
operations.
Designation of
“top secret” is
required in all
instances.
Two-factor
authentication
required for
access.
Access is
extremely
limited.
Must not be
transmitted
over a public
network.
Must be
strongly
encrypted at all
times.
Requires
particularly
strict
precautions so
as not to
divulge content
inadvertently.
TLFeBOOK

A number of high-profile cases involving third-party organizations, such as
the data repository and analysis company Acxiom, have hit the headlines
recently. In the Acxiom case, a former employee of a contracting company (i.e.,
an outsourcer) downloaded an encrypted password file, cracked it, and used this
and other privileged information to download data about hundreds of thou-
sands of individuals with accounts at major banks and credit card companies. In
another case, several third parties analyzed data about passengers of an airline,
Jet Blue, whose data the airline had agreed to share with a government agency in
contravention of its own privacy policy. Subsequently, other airlines were found
guilty of doing the same. These examples bring us to the issue of security policy
and outsourcing.
Information Security Policy
Similarly as for asset classification, an organization can hire a third party to
develop its information security policy along with accompanying standards,
baselines, guidelines, and procedures. Third parties can also be used to imple-
ment a portal through which employees can gain ready access to the organiza-
tion’s policies and standards. External consultants are a recognized medium for
introducing industry best practices quickly and efficiently.
First, it is important to differentiate among the various directives and advi-
sories that make up the governance of an organization’s information security.
Coming up with reasonable definitions is important, since confusion among
such directives or advisories makes it difficult to communicate internally and
with outside parties. In general, policy is a high-level directive that expresses
management’s view of appropriate and required behavior under certain circum-
stances. Policy does not typically change much over time. For example, a infor-
mation security policy statement is “employees must use company-provided
electronic mail for business purposes.” Probably, such a policy would not
change over time, except when newer technologies, such as instant messaging,
arise and cause the policy to be expanded to accommodate them. However, if
the policy is stated in open-ended terms, such as “all forms of company-
provided electronic communications, including e-mail, instant messaging,” the
policy will usually remain in its original form longer. But even so, new technolo-
gies and new uses of existing technologies might result in its revision.
Policy is more resilient to change than standards, which represent means
of implementing policy. For example, a policy may state that “individuals must
access data on a need-to-know basis.” This will have a myriad of implications in
terms of access control—which includes identity management or authentication
and provisioning or authorization, as well as the mechanisms that facilitate these
controls. When the need-to-know policy is applied at the application and oper-
ating system levels, it must be expressed within the standards, baselines,
146
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

guidelines, and procedures that cover the specific architecture and hardware and
software configurations.
When dealing with an outsourcer, an organization must ensure that the
service provider complies with the customers’ security policies where appropri-
ate. Compliance can be achieved in a number of ways, which are described
below.
Adopt Customer Policy
The service might agree to adhere to relevant customer policy in its entirety.
This is the simplest approach from the point of view of the customer, but might
entail considerable effort by the outsourcer, depending on the number and size
of the gaps between the two sets of policy. There may also be national, regional,
and local regulations that restrict whether the service provider can follow certain
policy items.
Adopt Service Provider’s Policy
The customer might agree to adopt the service provider’s policy if the latter
meets industry standards and is considered superior to the policy of the cus-
tomer. It is quite likely that the service provider will have better policy, stan-
dards, and procedures, because they must satisfy many customers.
Evaluate Responses to Due-Diligence Questionnaire
If neither customer nor service provider is willing to share policy, standards, and
procedures, the customer needs to determine the degree to which the service
provider’s policy, standards, and procedures meet its requirements by asking a
series of questions as to the handling of various situations. Table 8.4 gives exam-
ples of security policy and standards and includes comments regarding their
application and audience.
Enforcement and Compliance
The prospective customer, when evaluating policy, standards, and procedures of
service providers, must carefully discern between the documented rules and how
well they have been enforced and how well they are followed. Developing the
rules is easy—making them happen is quite another matter. One of the better
means of determining the quality of adherence to policy, standards, and
baselines is to have a third party—an auditor or other assessor—review them to
determine whether procedures are in place to ensure compliance and that such
procedures are continually reviewed.
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
147
TLFeBOOK

148
Outsourcing Information Security
Table 8.4
Examples of Directives by Type
Type of
Directive
Examples
Comments
Policy
Electronic mail, Internet use,
remote access.
Generally applies to end-users, be they employed
by the organization or doing work for it on a
contractual basis (i.e., contractor, consultant,
service provider).
Minimal changes to policy over an extended
period of time.
Standard
Operating systems—such as Unix,
Windows, Linux—on servers,
desktop personal computers, and
laptops.
Firewalls, routers, wireless.
Following a standard somewhat
ensures that control is maintained
over how software and hardware
are configured. This facilitates
changes and emergency updates, if
needed.
More technical, though still somewhat generic.
Aimed at more technical staff.
Likely to change only if there is a major new
release of software or equipment.
Baseline
A specific implementation, which is
expected to be followed closely, of
a standard to, say, a particular
version of an operating system
(e.g., Windows, Unix, Linux).
Even more technical than standards and specific
to a particular environment and version of
software.
Will likely have to be updated quite frequently,
perhaps every few months as vendors modify
their software and come out with new versions,
often containing corrections to prior versions.
Guideline
A suggested means of following a
standard that is proposed as a good
approach but is not enforced to the
same degree as a standard or
baseline.
This type of suggested standard is meant for
environments that require some measure of
flexibility and variability.
Process
A relatively high-level series of
tasks that is designed to enable
those within the organization to
comply with policy.
A process is to a procedure much as a policy is to
a standard. The process is a management view
of activities, whereas a procedure is specific to
the person or persons performing the tasks.
Procedure
A lower-level process which
generally captures a particular
aspect or component of a process.
Procedures are usually required to be followed in
detail and may involve many serial, and some
parallel, steps, often requiring that forms are
completed and/or checks are made to ensure
that the procedure has taken place satisfactorily,
or if not, the procedure delineates subsequent
steps to recover from and repair error conditions.
TLFeBOOK

Access Control and Identity Protection
Perhaps the most important aspect of security is control of access to an organiza-
tion’s information assets, as required in HIPAA and GLBA in the United States,
as well as comparable non-U.S. laws such as the EU Directive and U.K. Data
Protection law. This area is the cause for the greatest concern by individuals as
well as legislators and regulators. Identity theft, which is the capture and use of
other people’s identifying information, usually to commit fraud, is epidemic.
Not only does identity theft result in significant monetary losses, but the incon-
venience, anguish, time, and effort that accompany it and remedies in response
to it exact a huge toll on the general population and business. Furthermore,
there is the recent recognition that individuals’ or customers’ nonpublic per-
sonal information is passed from one party to another, so that ensuring adequate
protection by third parties is equally important.
The factors that protect persons’ identities and the information that relates
to them include authentication, authorization, and access management and
control.
Methods of authentication, or means of knowing that someone is who he
or she claims to be, take many forms, such as:
• Identifying codes along with passwords, magnetic cards, and security
tokens (such as cards that change password displays every minute);
• Electronic certificates;
• Biometric features (e.g., fingerprints, retina scans);
• Other personal information (e.g., mother’s maiden name, month of
birth);
• Information readily familiar to the person but not to others (e.g., favor-
ite color, favorite breed of dog);
• Out-of-wallet information (e.g., mortgage lender, car loan payments);
• Two-factor authentication (such as password and ID card).
These methods of authentication are summarized in relation to security
level, technology, and cost in Table 8.5.
When someone or some system has been satisfactorily identified, they can
then be given access to information and functionality (such as trading stocks,
transferring money, or making purchases). Controlling who is entitled to access
is without question the most demanding and difficult aspect of electronic com-
merce and system management faced by organizations today. It becomes addi-
tionally complex and difficult when a number of parties are involved,
particularly outsourcers. Not only do the customers have access to information
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
149
TLFeBOOK

and functionality, but so do many employees within the various processing
organizations both within and external to an organization. It is important to
ensure that the screening and background checks of all these employees are cur-
rent, accurate, and complete. This is difficult enough to do with on-site employ-
ees, but is even more difficult for contractors, consultants, and employees of
service providers, particularly those located in a distant country.
As mentioned earlier, U.S. regulators, particularly those with oversight
responsibility for U.S. financial institutions (such as the Federal Reserve, the
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the Securities and
Exchange Commission), as well as regulators in Europe, the United Kingdom,
and other countries, are increasingly requiring executive management and
boards of directors to bear direct responsibility for ensuring the protection of
customer information and to answer for any deficiencies. The OCC, for exam-
ple, has issued specific guidance for banks’ transactions with service providers
both domestically and abroad [3, 4].
The State of California pioneered stringent requirements in its recent law,
SB 1386, which requires companies to notify customers living in California if
they believe that customers’ information has been compromised. Other states
have considered passing similar laws, and, at the national level, several Federal
banking agencies have issued proposed interagency guidance relating to the pro-
tection of sensitive customer information and the consequent notification of
customers if their data is compromised. The latter is based on GLBA.
150
Outsourcing Information Security
Table 8.5
Relationship Between Access Control Security Level and Other Factors
Security Level
Representative
Technology
Relative Cost
Examples of Areas of
Application
Low
Identifier (ID) and
password
Low cost of
implementation.
High cost of support.
Internet Web sites.
General internal organization
accesses.
Medium
Magnetic card and
PIN (personal
identification number)
Somewhat costly to
implement (cost of card
and its distribution and
replacement).
Relatively low support
costs.
Automated bank teller
machines.
High
Physical or software
tokens
Biometrics
High cost of
implementation.
Moderate-to-low
support costs.
Access to sensitive or highly
protected physical areas (e.g.,
data centers and sensitive
applications).
TLFeBOOK

As legislators and regulators raise the bar on unauthorized access to and
misuse of customer-sensitive nonpublic personal information, the need to
ensure that service providers are taking the necessary protective steps becomes
much more important as the price to be paid for failure, in monetary terms and
loss of reputation, is continually increasing.
Application and System Development
Organizations frequently have third parties develop applications for them, and
more and more they look to send that development, testing, and implementa-
tion offshore, especially to India, which has developed a large base of profession-
als with strong technical knowledge. This base is increasing rapidly as technical
colleges and universities churn out record numbers of graduates. The combina-
tion of highly trained individuals, greatly improved infrastructure, and
less-costly communications (particularly over the Internet) has served to pro-
mote cost-effective offshore development, despite increased overhead and logis-
tics issues.
Application and system development has always been outsourced in order
to gain expertise that may not be available at all or not available in sufficient
quantities in-house. The big push into offshore programming came prior to
2000, when a huge demand for modifying programs to be Y2K-compliant
forced organizations in North America and Europe, in particular, to seek help
abroad. However, the initial motivation of a skills shortage has changed into one
of cost reduction, as countries such as India, Singapore, and others are able to
provide quality work at a small fraction of the cost of domestic U.S. and Euro-
pean IT workers.
A number of security concerns arise when outsourcing programming work
both domestically and offshore. During the Y2K remediation effort, the fear
arose that source code had been sent out to third parties and also that “back
doors” had been written into software programs.5 Back doors allow those famil-
iar with them to gain unauthorized access to operating computer programs for
purposes of doing harm, stealing information, or using the access to gain further
access to other critical applications and data. Another risk is that theft of intel-
lectual property will be used for competitive economic advantage.
As application development outsourcers increase their skill levels, they
“move up the food chain” and work with and develop increasing critical
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
151
5. On page 37 of his book, Dan Verton suggests that it is highly likely that such malicious pro-
gram code was inserted into remediated programs to enable a foreign agent to activate the
code and gain access to, and control of, the computer applications at some future date [5].
TLFeBOOK

applications, and they go beyond pure coding into system integration, testing,
quality assurance, and the transition of applications from development and test-
ing to production. I call this “function creep,” and it can result in the outsourcer
gaining increasingly detailed knowledge of systems supporting critical busi-
nesses. Suddenly the risk profile changes dramatically with the potential of
large-scale compromise and destruction of critical parts of the infrastructure.
Such increases in dependency can alter the “balance of power,” making it
extremely difficult for companies to extricate themselves should the political cli-
mate change for the worse.
Operations Security and Operational Risk
Every outsourced service contains some operational and administrative compo-
nents, whether they consist of monitoring security devices, running computer
applications, entering data, producing reports, or billing for services rendered.
These comprise the typical human and human-machine activities and proce-
dures that actually produce and manage the services. Whenever there is human
involvement in a process, there is risk. Human participation means more signifi-
cant risk of error, greater variations in quality, and differences in time to pro-
duce the service. It also entails the full range of security-related risks, including
fraud, theft, damage, destruction, misuse, misrepresentation, unauthorized
access, and inappropriate disclosure.
While electronic, electrical, and mechanical machines are far from perfect,
they provide levels of reproducibility and consistency beyond which human
beings are generally capable. Furthermore, machines are not intrinsically
malevolent, although they can be programmed to be so.
Human-originated lapses, whether direct or indirect, may result in risk
exposures and security breaches. Such human influences are exacerbated when
third parties are involved. The client has relatively little control over who is
employed by the service provider and comparatively little oversight as to what
they are doing. This issue can be even greater when the facilities and workers
providing the services are offshore, often thousands of miles distant, in a differ-
ent culture with different values and laws and different ways of dealing with
employees and others who commit crimes.
The methods of mitigating such operational risk, whether the service is
domestic or offshore, include imposing control, improving training and aware-
ness, and monitoring activities. Organizations, particularly financial institu-
tions, increasingly delve deeply into the policies and procedures of their service
providers to ensure the institutions’ standards are met. I have used automated
tools that were very effective in controlling the operation of remote third-party
computer systems. Today it seems that U.S. banks in particular are being told by
152
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

regulators that they are fully responsible for how third parties handle their cus-
tomers’ information. The best way of managing such processes is to have close
oversight and, to the extent possible, a measure of direct control over third-party
processes.
Security Models and Architecture
There is increasing recognition that an organization should build a specific secu-
rity architecture in terms of security services being made available (such as
authentication, authorization, monitoring and auditing, and administrative
services), as well as the structure of information security components (such as
the configuration of firewalls, routers, and intrusion detection systems) and secu-
rity management tools and services (such as network scanning and vulnerability
assessment).
Security Services—Framework
The basic objective of developing a security framework, into which to plug
security-related modules that perform security services, is to increase control of
security functions and reduce the cost and time-to-market of applications. A
framework is different from an infrastructure in that a security framework is the
substructure to which the various security services modules, such as purchased
authentication and authorization software products or homegrown software, are
attached. These modules should be replaceable without disturbing the overall
structure or having to modify application programs to any significant degree.
This means that, from a security architecture viewpoint, security services are not
to be built into the applications themselves, but the applications should call
upon the services as needed. This provides much more flexibility as to which
services to implement, as well as much more control over a standardized security
environment.
Security Infrastructure
On the other hand, a security infrastructure is the combination of security poli-
cies, standards, procedures, and devices (hardware, software or both) that make
up deterrence, avoidance, prevention, protection, monitoring, reporting, and
responding capabilities within the information technology functions of an
organization. For example, the combination of intrusion detection and protec-
tion systems, personal and enterprise firewalls, desktop and gateway antivirus
software, e-mail screening and blocking software or services, and Web-site
blocking facilities represent physical renditions of security infrastructures.
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
153
TLFeBOOK

Conversely, the establishment, awareness, and enforcement of policies, stan-
dards, and procedures characterize human and logical security.
Security Management and Control
Overlaid on the above are the security management functions, which comprise
the management, control, and response aspects of operating the physical com-
ponents of the security infrastructure. Additionally, the security policy enforce-
ment functions consist of awareness, training, formal acceptance of policy,
standards, and procedures by subjects (i.e., employees, contractors, and service
providers) and the monitoring, auditing, and reporting of compliance. We
briefly look at the various items in this regard.
Framework
The situations in which third parties might get involved with the framework are
as consultants establishing the framework, helping to build it, and working to
incorporate the various security services into the framework, as described in [6].
Such a framework comprises both a set of design standards and a physical
realization of those standards, either in a commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)
product or in custom-built software, developed internally or externally or
through a combination of internal and external efforts.
The framework is a method of incorporating security services into the
overall application system and network architectures of the organization, if they
exist. The services might be in the form of software or product, such as a finger-
print reader and accompanying user registration and authentication software.
Or actual services might exist, such as a third party performing the technical and
management functions, as is the case in the models for public key infrastructure
(PKI).6
Application to Service Providers
How do these models apply to third parties providing services to an organiza-
tion? Ideally, any service provider will be in compliance with the policy and
standards of the customer, and its architecture will be compatible with that of
the customer organization. To the extent that this is not feasible—due to, for
example, technology or cost restrictions or legal and regulatory requirements—
154
Outsourcing Information Security
6. Public key infrastructure (PKI) has had a somewhat jaded history due to its complexity, cost,
and lack of acceptance. Vendors have provided both the software to perform the functional
and administrative tasks in-house, as well as offering PKI as a turnkey service.
TLFeBOOK

accommodations that are acceptable to both parties, but particularly the cus-
tomer, must be made.
The underlying approach here is to consider how any security-related serv-
ices and products that have architectural and framework implications might be
plugged into the framework or how they might fit within the overall security
architecture and management and control systems. For example, an organiza-
tion might be confronted with selecting a security access administration pack-
age, which comprises authentication and authorization components. Or an
organization could be assessing whether outsourcing the help desk function
makes both economic and operational sense. In both these cases, consideration
must be given as to whether the functions fit into the existing infrastructure and
can interface effectively with installed end-user and systems applications and
computer operating systems.
Verification that this is the case in each situation may require a number of
actions to be taken in the due diligence and proof-of-concept stages. Compati-
bility of products with the existing standards and infrastructure is determined by
a review of the product’s technical specifications followed by a well-crafted pilot
test, if practicable, for products that meet specifications, such as compatibility
with installed platforms (e.g., Microsoft Windows and Unix). Whether a prod-
uct fits within the framework is determined by examining the types of interfaces
available between the product and the framework and other components.
The same criteria apply when considering acquisition of management and
control products to be run at either the customer’s or service provider’s sites, or
both—the last being cosourcing. For example, an MSSP might monitor intru-
sion detection systems and firewalls installed on the customer’s facilities or
arrange for monitoring consoles to be installed both at the customer site and in
the MSSP’s facility. Which structure is selected will depend on the availability of
expertise and resources at the customer. Also, the actual security devices may be
located off-site, with the third-party provider hosting network and system assets
and their corresponding protective products.
In all of these situations, compliance with customer policy and standards
and compatibility with the customer’s infrastructure are all important. If there
are reasons why compliance cannot happen, the exceptions must be noted and
risk-mitigating processes and systems must be put in place.
Physical and Environmental Security
As previously stated, it is common to outsource physical security for the protec-
tion of an organization’s physical assets, whether or not specific assets have an
information component. In fact, many security arrangements are decidedly low
tech. However, the trend in physical access and environmental monitoring is
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
155
TLFeBOOK

toward remote centralized management and control, and the direction of such
technology and related economics leads to unmanned guard stations being
remotely managed from third-party facilities, including those at offshore
locations.
Furthermore, as the control of physical access converges with access con-
trol for information assets, the nature of such functions is changing to pave the
way for integrated physical and logical security. As the security system evolves to
be all-encompassing, it will require a different kind of broadly based security
firm to handle the nuances of a multidisciplined access management system. In
some regards, this requirement pushes the consideration of outsourcers, since
they are likely to have the requisite skills.7On the other hand, organizations may
be reluctant to entrust so much of their security access to third parties, particu-
larly a single third party as suggested by integrated systems.
Another aspect to consider, which might favor using a third party, is
handling emergency situations in which disaster recovery plans are invoked.
Here, an outsourcer might be able to cover a number of customer locations from
its own control center, and thus easily switch the customer’s security from a pri-
mary to backup location. This is very much preferable to trying to deal with the
transfer of security functions within the organization, which exposes the com-
pany to a series of risks as described in my paper on the subject [7].
Telecommunications and Network Security
Telecommunications is among the earliest technology-based areas outsourced on
a large scale. For example, the brokerage house Merrill Lynch gave up the deploy-
ment and management of its global voice and data networks to a major telecom-
munications company, as did Bankers Trust (which was later acquired by
Deutsche Bank). These companies recognized the cost and difficulty of estab-
lishing and maintaining a global support and management function to handle
communications with internal staff. They also realized that global telecommuni-
cations companies were better situated to handle the job, having already provi-
sioned advanced centers throughout the world to handle their own requirements.
So the match between customer and outsourcer appeared to be ideal.
Back then, prior to the Internet, high-speed, high-volume networks were
made up of dedicated leased lines. Security of those lines was not a major issue as
156
Outsourcing Information Security
7. An example of such a company is Kroll Associates, which started out in the physical protec-
tion field and diversified into information security. It seems less likely that an information se-
curity firm will migrate over to the physical side. However, as physical security becomes
more computerized, this latter trend might develop.
TLFeBOOK

access was restricted at either end. Important factors at that time (and today
where dedicated lines are installed) were high availability and the rapid deploy-
ment and repair of lines. Recently, with increasing use of public lines as a means
of significantly reducing communications costs, particularly over long distances,
use of the Internet has greatly increased. This phenomenon raises the issue of
securing the capacity used within the public networks and monitoring them to
ensure secure traffic.
In response to this need, some companies set up security operating centers
(SOCs), each staffed by persons with particular specialty knowledge. SOCs
are more specialized than network operating centers (NOCs). Some security-
consulting firms established their own SOCs and operated then as MSSPs, with
the primary purpose of managing security devices such as firewalls, routers, and
intrusion detection/prevention systems, for customer organizations.8
The nature of network security services provided now covers a broad
range of device locations, device management, and event detection and
response. System configurations vary from having devices at the customer’s
site, the outsourcer’s facility, or both. The service provider will usually handle
monitoring and reporting, but some customers favor a cosourcing arrange-
ment whereby both the customer and outsourcer have control consoles and
share management of the devices. I have always thought that sharing based on
time of day and day of week makes sense, with internal staff providing the bulk
of support during prime business hours and handing over control to the out-
sourcer for nights, weekends, and holidays. In this way, a certain level of exper-
tise is retained in-house, so that the customer does not depend completely on
the third party, which situation represents a risk, as described earlier. Some serv-
ice providers report an event and leave it up to the client to follow up with noti-
fication of business units and the client’s customers, along with remediation and
restoration. In other cases, the outsourcer will provide full incident response
support.
There is an increasing trend towards linking SOCs to NOCs, as well
as merging their physical entities. Increasingly, security-only tools “talk to”
network management software, and network engineers are becoming more
familiar with the management and use of security monitoring, analysis, and
reporting tools. Indeed, many security devices are implemented and controlled
by the telecommunications staff. As discussed later, frequently network adminis-
trators first detect a security incident, raise the alert, and bring in the secu-
rity team to assist, based on their specialized knowledge. The security team,
on the other hand, is attuned to monitoring events in the outside world and
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
157
8. Among the early providers of security management services were Counterpane and ISS
(Internet Security Systems), for which the services are based on specific security expertise.
TLFeBOOK

determining any possible effects on the organization resulting from attacks on
known vulnerabilities.
To date, most outsourcing has followed organizational lines, with security
and networks being handled by different groups. Increasingly, with the merger
of the operational aspects of security into the network and system environments,
the line between security and networks is becoming fuzzy. We are likely to see a
trend towards network carriers and Internet service providers (ISPs) providing
more specialized security services. From technical and organizational perspec-
tives, this makes a lot of sense, but it does increase the number of eggs in a single
basket, and therefore increases the risk to the client organization if the service
provider experiences viability or operational difficulties.
The main drivers towards outsourcing are a dearth of experts and lower
cost for 24/7 coverage than for in-house operation. The major concerns are put-
ting such critical functions into outsiders’ hands.
Cryptography
When computer cryptography was developed, it was considered a product
to be bought and applied to a particular situation. That seemed to work
when the methods were quite distinct and highly technical in nature and
where the actual transfer of encrypted data was sparse and the methods
could be handled without setting up an expensive and complex administra-
tive function. The situation changed markedly with the introduction of
public key infrastructure (PKI), which immediately involved establishing a
number of administrative functions and entities to authenticate users, and man-
age keys (e.g., issuance, registration, tracking, and revoking). The scaling up of
the use of PKI made for huge implementation and management efforts, with
complex rules and difficult handling of the various required functions. There-
fore, a number of companies began offering turnkey management of PKI for
large, medium-sized, and small organizations. Some of these same service pro-
viders offered to sell the product and have customers manage their own
environments.
One of the major issues surrounding PKI and similar implementations
is the high-level of trust that must be bestowed upon certificate authorities
(CAs), whose function is to issue, protect, and revoke encryption keys. If the
databases held by a CA are compromised, the intrusion leads to significant loss
of credibility and a major problem for the customer organization, which must
have keys revoked and reissued. Such a breach did in fact take place and
was broadly publicized when several keys belonging to Microsoft were compro-
mised through a VeriSign facility that inadvertently gave keys to unauthorized
individuals [8].
158
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity
Despite organizations’ best efforts, disasters do take place, usually with security
implications. To account for such events, firms maintain business continuity
and disaster recovery plans, which are collectively referred to as contingency
plans.
Disaster recovery and business continuity comprise several phases. The
first is an analysis of the business impact of losing certain facilities and capabili-
ties, followed by the development of a proposed plan for developing, imple-
menting, and maintaining disaster recovery and business continuity plans. For
our purposes, disaster recovery is the reaction to a loss of major computer and
operational support capabilities, by relying on backup facilities when the pri-
mary site is out of action. On the other hand, business continuity relates to
maintaining business capabilities if primary locations or capabilities of primary
locations are disrupted and rendered inoperable.
Business Impact Analysis
Business continuity and disaster recovery plans should be based on sound risk
analyses which compare the potential losses resulting from an incident, such as a
fire or flood, compared to the cost of providing backup facilities. Such a business
impact analysis (BIA) can be performed internally, using one of the many tools
available in the marketplace, but this responsibility is often given to outside
experts who specialize in such evaluations, often using proprietary tools.
Planning
Creating a business continuity and disaster recovery plan can be done in-house,
but it is usually much easier and cost-effective to engage a third party to develop
and maintain the plans. Maintenance is the most important factor, because such
plans are often ignored after being enthusiastically put together. A third party
can inject the discipline needed to keep the plans current.
Implementation and Testing
While putting together a plan and keeping it current are important, even more
so is testing the plan periodically to ensure that it will work when needed. The
testing and resulting revisions to the plan keep it viable. And the periodic retest-
ing of the plan is required to ensure that it accounts for any changes in the busi-
ness and systems environments.
Again, a third party might assist in the testing process, especially if the test-
ing goes beyond the boundaries of the organization and involves business part-
ners, suppliers, and others. Increasingly, organizations, particular large financial
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
159
TLFeBOOK

services companies, recognize the importance of testing business continuity and
disaster recovery plans with their business partners.
Because provision of backup facilities that reasonably mimic the primary
facilities can be extremely costly, it is common to engage a third party to provide
backup facilities, which are generally shared among a number of customers. In
this way, the high cost of building and maintaining the disaster recovery and
business continuity facilities, systems, and networks is spread over a number of
customers, while still providing reasonable assurance that the facilities will be
available to all customers in the event of a regional disaster.
When third parties are retained for disaster backup and business continuity
purposes, it is very important to protect the confidentiality of the organization’s
customer data and other sensitive and proprietary information, in particular
throughout the recovery and restoration processes. It is highly likely that such
data will, in the course of a recovery process, reside on shared computer
resources. Establishing such trustworthiness at the service provider is not easy,
but it is important. This can be achieved largely by means of a thorough due-dili-
gence evaluation of the outsourcer, including understanding its security policy,
standards, and procedures and reviewing physical security, application, system,
and network security, and operational integrity and resiliency. In addition, secure
procedures need to be set up and reviewed periodically.
Legal Action
Of all the areas covered here, perhaps the one most needing specific expertise is
taking legal action when something has gone badly wrong, especially with
respect to one’s service provider. But legal advice should be sought well before
there are indications of problems; it should be sought when the relationship is
being created and contracts are being negotiated. Internal counsel, if available,
can handle these issues; otherwise outside counsel must be retained.
If something bad does happen, despite precautions taken, a clear-cut
investigation is needed, allowing for adequate information to be gathered and
reported. Again, outside experts will often be called in because of their under-
standing of the due process of law. It is also important to gather uncontami-
nated evidence for the eventuality of a prosecution. It is so much more difficult
to achieve this if the offending entity is a third-party service provider, especially
when it is under another country’s jurisdiction.
Summary
In this chapter, we have looked in depth at a broad array of security issues sur-
rounding outsourcing decisions and operations. In the past, the level of trust of
160
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

third parties seemed higher, but that may have been because the latitude avail-
able for misusing and damaging information and information systems was much
less. Today our systems and processes are more tightly coupled and spread across
the world, and much more of our critical information is at risk. It behooves us to
recognize the security risks inherent in these new business models and to take
the precautions necessary to mitigate those risks, since if they cannot be com-
pletely eliminated.
References
[1]
Koch, C., “Hand Over Security,” CIO Magazine, Vol. 17, No. 13, April 15, 2004, pp.
48–54.
[2]
Worthen, B., “The Radicalization of Mike Emmons,” CIO Magazine, Vol. 16, No. 22,
September 1, 2003.
[3]
“Third-Party Relationships: Risk Management Principles,” OCC Bulletin 2001-47, Office
of the Comptroller of the Currency, U.S. Department of the Treasury, November 1,
2001, http://www.occ.treas.gov/ftp/bulletin/2001-47.txt.
[4]
“Bank Use of Foreign-Based Third-Party Service Providers: Risk Management Guidance,”
OCC Bulletin 2002-16, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, U.S. Department of
the Treasury, May 15, 2002, http://www.occ.treas.gov/ftp/bulletin/2002-16.txt.
[5]
Verton, D., Black Ice: The Invisible Threat of Cyber-Terrorism, Emeryville, CA: McGraw-
Hill/Osborne, 2003.
[6]
Hartman, B., et al., Mastering Web Services Security, New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
2003.
[7]
Axelrod, C. W., “Systems and Communications Security During Recovery and Repair,” in
Business Continuity Planning: Protecting Your Organization’s Life, K. Doughty, (ed.), Boca
Raton, CRC Press, FL: Auerbach Best Practices Series, 2000.
[8]
Lemos, R., “Microsoft Warns of Hijacked Certificates,” C-Net News.Com, March 22,
2001, http://news.com.com/2100-1001-254586.html.
Outsourcing Security Functions and Security Considerations When Outsourcing
161
TLFeBOOK

.
TLFeBOOK

9
Summary of the Outsourcing
Process—Soup to Nuts
Throughout the book, we have looked into various security aspects and compo-
nents of the outsourcing decision. In this chapter, we will go through the steps
in the process and describe how they relate to one another. This will enable the
reader to put the various concepts, evaluations, and decisions into the context of
an overall process. The events, tasks, and steps (or phases) that make up the typi-
cal outsourcing process are:
1. Observe and respond to a trigger event. Such an event causes someone in
the organization (usually a member of the senior management team)
to focus on a business or operational need for a particular enhanced or
modified function or activity or to enter a new line of business. Simi-
larly, in a start-up situation, the initiation of a new business or other
form of organization might result in the need to consider outsourcing
at the outset rather than establishing certain functions internally. Over
time, a growing company determines that, at a certain level of activity,
it might make more sense to consider internalizing certain outsourced
functions. Typical events might include market forces or regulatory
requirements. For example, for financial institutions, the burden of
new regulations might make firms consider outsourcing some of their
operational and IT functions rather than attempt to comply on their
own. Here economies of scale will likely predominate. In other cases,
the news that a large firm has outsourced a major function, to an
MSSP, for instance, might get other firms’ management teams to
think along the same lines.
163
TLFeBOOK

2. Determine the actual business or operational need for the existing or
suggested service or function. This first step is important. Before
making an outsourcing decision, the function or business must be
justified in its own right, usually in the form of a business plan.
There has to be a “leap of faith” in the business plan, since it
might assume the use of service providers for various functions prior to
actually determining the feasibility and cost-effectiveness of such
decisions.
3. Determine the scope, service requirements, and possible means of providing
service. This is the next level down from the business plan. If the plan is
accepted in principle, the effort necessary to backfill the details is
worthwhile. The full range of options for the service needs to be deter-
mined, whether internal, external or joint (cosourced), and whether
the provider is domestic, near-shore or offshore, small or large, or rela-
tively new or established.
4. Perform research to determine the degree to which specific services are out-
sourced. Find out about experiences others may have had with specific
outsourcers and outsourcing in general. Today, the Internet is a rich
source of free information through news and magazine articles, discus-
sion forums, and associations. In addition, many conferences, proprie-
tary research papers, books, and other commercially available items
can be accessed. Through these resources, an organization gains access
to the analysis and opinions of experts and, at conferences, seminars,
and vendor-supported presentations, one can discuss experiences with
peers as well as the speakers and panelists. Today, there are specialty
conferences about outsourcing across all lines of business and govern-
ment as well as industry-specific meetings. Each has its benefits. I have
listed relevant books, articles, papers, conferences, Web sites, and
other sources in the Selected Bibliography.
5. Determine whether outsourcing is a feasible alternative as a result of the
research. In general, there will be favorable and negative views and
experiences. However, changes of opinion are relatively inexpensive in
the discovery and analysis phases. Once an organization embarks on
the subsequent phases, a measure of commitment results from the
investment in time and energy made to date. This alone can greatly
influence the decision. After all, if someone or a team has spent
months investigating the outsourcing alternative, it would be disap-
pointing to realize that it is not feasible or is ineffective, and the effort
would appear to have been a waste of time. Therefore, there is a self-
fulfilling aspect of the process that should be recognized and removed.
In any event, let us assume that the research has pointed to the
164
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

feasibility and potential benefit of outsourcing, so that we can proceed
to the next step.
6. Prepare and send out a Request for Information (RFI) to outsourcing serv-
ice providers. While good research can provide substantial information,
particularly as to who the major players might be, there is no real sub-
stitute for the more detailed information that can only be obtained
from the service providers themselves. Nevertheless, the cost of issuing
and analyzing an RFI is not always justified. Depending upon the size
of the potential service contract as well as the riskiness of the arrange-
ment, or if the activity to be outsourced is highly critical, more detailed
information may be warranted. Assuming that an RFI is worthwhile, it
should be carefully crafted to provide all necessary information.
7. Collect information from providers and perform preliminary analysis. The
results from analyzing the data obtained from the RFI will likely sup-
port or refute the original idea to consider outsourcing. If necessary, it
is better to abandon the idea of outsourcing at this point, where the
time and effort has been relatively small, than to invest further
resources in the evaluation. However, if the outsourcing approach still
appears feasible and cost-effective, it supports the decision to proceed
to the next step, since the question is no longer “should we?” but “who
should we use?”
8. Prepare and distribute a Request for Proposal (RFP). To many, the RFI
and RFP are seen as interchangeable, but there are (or should be)
major differences between them. Information that is included in the
RFP will often appear in the final agreement negotiated between out-
sourcer and customer. And information that is excluded from the RFP
will sometimes need to be included in the final agreement. Therefore,
it behooves the RFP writer to think ahead about what terms and con-
ditions will be requested during contract negotiation and to include
such items, specified as wanted, in the RFP. It is not unusual to attach
the proposal received in response to the RFP within, or appended to,
the actual service agreement. Secondly, it is important to prescreen
recipients of the RFP so that, if they respond with an appealing offer-
ing, you are not dealing with an unreliable provider, especially one
with a bad reputation. Were one of the latter to respond with an
attractive price and other good terms, it becomes most difficult to
explain to superiors why that provider should not be chosen. On the
other hand, it is important to send RFPs to a fairly large selection of
vendors to get a good feel for what is being offered under what terms
and conditions. The RFP should require that proposals be received by
a specific time and date. This avoids stragglers and provides some
Summary of the Outsourcing Process—Soup to Nuts
165
TLFeBOOK

assurance that an early and prompt response represents an eager and
responsible provider.
9. Since the receipt of proposals is fraught with potential problems, it must be
handled in a formal manner. The date and time of receipt of the physi-
cal proposal, whether on paper, on other media or in electronic form,
should be carefully logged, particularly for those proposals received at a
time close to the suggested deadline. Heated arguments might occur if
a provider is eliminated due to purported late submission, and so the
decision should be made in advance as to what extenuating factors will
and will not be acceptable. For example, a regional blackout may be an
acceptable reason for delaying the deadline, whereas the provider
claiming that their PC crashed and the document was lost may or may
not be considered reasonable. In any event, some population of pro-
posals will have been received and are then subject to analysis and
evaluation.
10. The customer should perform preliminary and in-depth evaluations of the
proposals received. An initial scan of the proposals might eliminate
some outliers. Perhaps the charges are far in excess of other reputable
bids or the proposal may lack key ingredients. Even the professional-
ism of the form of the proposal may indicate a questionable outsour-
cer, although one must beware of the impressive, elaborate, expensive
proposal that contains little of substance. In other situations, the out-
sourcer may not have followed the guidelines for format and content
and may have omitted key sections or ancillary documents, but instead
submitted their own boilerplate. Again, the requestor has an opportu-
nity to decide whether or not the submission is acceptable or should be
rejected based on such differences. However, the requestor should con-
sider being flexible enough to allow for bidders to make up moderate
deficiencies within a specified time frame, so as not to disadvantage
those who got the requirements right the first time. Ideally, all bidders
will have submitted proposals exactly in conformance with the speci-
fied format, since this makes the analysis so much simpler. However,
the requestor should realize that their RFP will not have considered
everything, or that the format precluded the inclusion of important
information, and adjust accordingly. In some cases, a provider might
raise an important issue that was not included in the RFP, so that it
then becomes necessary to request additional information from all bid-
ders. The right balance between structure and flexibility must be
achieved, but this is not easy to do.
11. Having gone through each the proposals and eliminated some in an initial
scan and others after more detailed analysis, the requestor should then select
166
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

a short list of three or four top contenders. A polite note should be sent to
those not making the short list, thanking them for their efforts, com-
plimenting them on their submissions, regretting that they did not
make the short list, and assuring them that they will be kept in mind
for future projects. The note might indicate that, should the process
not select among the remaining vendors, other applicants would be
reconsidered—there is nothing to be gained in burning bridges. It has
indeed happened that leading contenders have been eliminated for one
reason or another, and that it has been necessary to revisit those out-
sourcers who did not make the short list initially. After all, it is appar-
ent that, for many of the proposals, considerable effort and cost were
expended, so that a brief thank-you note is warranted. It is important
to note here that the RFP should contain language indicating that the
requesting company will not be liable for any costs incurred by the
bidder in responding the RFP. An organization does not want to be
pressured by bidders because of their investment to date in the process.
12. At this point, it is usual to review the proposals from the short list in greater
detail. This might involve investing in credit checks and other financial
analyses, and calling or preferably visiting references,1 having the bid-
ders come on site to make presentations of their proposals and answer
questions, and visiting the providers’ own facilities or facilities they
manage for others. The degree to which this is done depends very
much on the magnitude of the deal and its criticality to the business.
Clearly, for those on the short list, significant costs are incurred, and
the requestor also incurs the cost of site visits. Consequently, this addi-
tional review should only be done for serious candidates, and it should
be emphasized to them that their costs in responding will not be cov-
ered. An organization should make it a policy not to have service pro-
viders pay for visits by potential customers to their facilities or for
other work done in regard to evaluating their proposals, as this can
cause problems if the service provider is not chosen. The service pro-
vider might well apply pressure to an organization to select them based
on such monies spent in the proposal stage.
13. Ultimately and usually, only one outsourcer is selected as the preferred ven-
dor. This means having to notify the others that they were not chosen.
Summary of the Outsourcing Process—Soup to Nuts
167
1. Even a visit to a customer site is no guarantee of an honest tour. I experienced a situation in
which an employee of the vendor masqueraded as an employee of the reference company.
Obviously, the opinion of the “customer” was a glowing one. It was only because I knew
someone at the reference company and called him directly that the fraud was uncovered.
TLFeBOOK

Here, it might be appropriate to make a personal call as well as send a
thank-you note. The final contenders will have put even more effort
and money into this effort. Showing appreciation is the right thing to
do, and maintaining good relationships with the other vendors will be
important if the deal with the number-one choice is not consummated
or if proposals are sought from them in the future.
14. By the time the selection has been made, many of the terms and conditions
of the SLA should have been decided. In fact, it might well be appropri-
ate to begin discussions with those who are still under consideration on
the agreement at the point the short list is named. However, it is not
until the final selection is made that one can formally initiate serious
negotiations of the SLA. This stage should not entail any surprises, but
often does. Attention will not generally have been focused on this area,
and when it is, new issues will surely arise.
15. This is also the time to perform an in-depth due diligence of the selected
outsourcer. This is usually accomplished through one or more site vis-
its; completion of questionnaires about such aspects as security posture
and practices, network, and system architectures; typical processes for
answering day-to-day questions; and procedures to respond to inci-
dents (such as system outages or compromises). A very extensive and
complete questionnaire, designed for U.S. financial institutions and
called the “Expectations Matrix” is available on the BITS Web site at
http://www.bitsinfo.org. The narrower the field of contestants, the
more the analysis, so that with one choice to deal with, the effort to
ensure that no problems will be uncovered later can be very large,
depending again on magnitude and criticality of the project. It is
important to remember here that these costs should have been antici-
pated and included in the original outsourcing analysis.
16. Once the appropriate due diligence and analysis have been done, and
the terms and conditions of the contract with preferred service pro-
vider have been agreed to by everyone involved, the contract is executed
and work begins on setting up the newly agreed-upon relationship.
17. The transition or conversion period during which a service is cut over from
an internal to external provider, from another provider, or from “scratch,”
must be carefully and closely managed to ensure that it goes smoothly and
meets everyone’s expectations. This phase should be fully scripted in
advance with individual tasks, accomplishments, and milestones speci-
fied in a project work plan. Progress should be reported against the
plan, with mitigating actions being taken if gaps arise.
18. Once the transition has taken place, it is necessary to manage the relation-
ship. This is accomplished in part by using metrics and scorecards to
168
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

monitor performance on an ongoing basis. Regular contact, through
meetings and interchanges, is critical for any such relationships.
Meetings require an agenda listing such items as reviews of perform-
ance measures, highlighting of exceptions, discussions as to which
measures are resolved and which are in process, along with notations as
to when pending items will be completed. It is also necessary to report
any material changes in either party’s condition, such as loss of key
staff, mergers, acquisitions, and changes in business plan. Some
changes might trigger actions as described in the agreement between
the parties. For example, the acquisition of one or the other party by a
third entity could activate an option to terminate the arrangement.2
19. Under normal circumstances, the term of the service agreement is a specific
time period, such as 1 year, 3 years, or even 10 years. Often the agree-
ment automatically renews for a specified period unless one party or
another takes action. Sometimes terminating a contract early and pay-
ing a penalty makes sense rather than enduring inadequate service
until an opportune end date. In any event, at some point in time, the
parties must determine whether to renew or terminate the contract.
This determination consists of revisiting each of the prior evaluation
steps, since much in the environment may have changed during the
life of the service arrangement.
20. At this point, the parties to a contract must decide whether an auto-
matic renewal or a renewal with minimal analysis will be instituted or
whether the time is appropriate to reevaluate the whole arrangement in
detail and consider other options. A simple renewal continues virtually
all aspects of the relationship, except possibly for an increase in price,
which is generally tied to some economic inflation factor. If the mar-
ket price of such services has dropped, due to, say, the competitive
impact of offshore services, the specific price of this service might be
reduced if other factors remain the same. Invoking the termination of
the agreement activates the evaluation process again, with concomi-
tant RFIs, RFPs, and proposals, unless the customer organization has
decided to exit that particular business.
Summary of the Outsourcing Process—Soup to Nuts
169
2. In some cases, the option to terminate an agreement may be exercised due to something
within the control of the service provider, such as dissatisfaction with the quality of service.
In other cases, the reason for termination may have nothing to do with service level or even
relative cost. An acquiring party might have a similar service in-house to the one being out-
sourced and want to consolidate these particular services in-house; or the acquiring company
might be a competitor of the outsourcer or of the outsourcer’s parent company.
TLFeBOOK

The evaluation of outsourcing opportunities has become a continuous
process as new services become available, new sources of those services appear,
and business takes on more of a global aspect. While the parameters will change
and the answers will vary, the process remains the same. It behooves a nimble
organization in a competitive market to keep its options open and its ability to
evaluate choices finely tuned.
170
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Appendix A:
Candidate Security Services for
Outsourcing
The number of security services is expanding and so are the opportunities to
outsource them. While organizations commonly use third-party physical secu-
rity providers (e.g., for guard service), active debate exists on the appropriateness
and cost-effectiveness of outsourcing many information security services, par-
ticularly if those services are provided from offshore locations.
In the following section, we shall look at the full range of security services
and suggest whether they might be candidates for outsourcing and, if so, which
factors should be considered prior to finalizing the decisions. In some cases, the
security service providers offers expertise not generally or easily available, and in
other situations, the tools or products needed for the job are prohibitively
expensive for a small or medium-size organization, but viable when shared
across a number of customers.
We now expand on the categories listed in Chapter 6, so as to represent
more specifically the types of services offered in the marketplace.
Security policy:
• Policy;
• Standards;
• Baselines;
• Guidelines;
• Procedures;
171
TLFeBOOK

• Awareness and training;
• Monitoring and enforcement;
• Response and disciplinary action.
Information security infrastructure:
• Firewalls, routers;
• Intrusion detection systems;
• Intrusion prevention systems.
Access control:
• Authentication;
• Authorization;
• Monitoring/reporting;
• Security administration;
• Help desk.
Personnel security:
• New-hire screening;
• Background checks;
• Regular verification;
• Ongoing attestations;
• Bodyguards, armored vehicles;
• Safety training and awareness.
Physical and environmental security:
• Physical authentication;
• Physical authorization;
• Intrusion detection;
• Alarms, notifications;
• Physical site protection (obscurity locks, gates, fences, metal bars);
• High-security area protection;
• Facility guards;
172
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

• Cameras, motion detectors, dogs;
• Training and awareness (e.g., fire drills).
Operations management:
• Operational responsibilities and procedures;
• Monitoring;
• Intrusion detection;
• Alerts;
• Incident response.
Protection against malicious software:
• Viruses, worms, Trojan horse protections;
• Denial of service avoidance and prevention;
• External attacks avoidance and prevention;
• Internal misconduct, negligence;
• Content management (screening) of e-mail;
• Web-site blocking and monitoring;
• Incident response plan and procedures;
• Forensics preparation and processing.
Network management:
• Monitoring;
• Intrusion detection and monitoring;
• Alerts processing;
• Incident response;
• Forensics.
Media and data handling:
• Acquisition of media;
• Use of media;
• Deletion of data;
• Disposal of media;
Appendix A
173
TLFeBOOK

• Creation of data;
• Transmission of data;
• Storage of data.
System/application management:
• System planning and acceptance;
• Vulnerability management (patching);
• Monitoring;
• Intrusion detection;
• Alerts;
• Incident response;
• Forensics.
System/application development:
• Secure system development life cycle (SDLC);
• Secure programming standards;
• Secure coding and testing training;
• Security-oriented testing.
Business continuity and disaster recovery management:
• Business continuity planning;
• Disaster recovery planning;
• Contingency planning;
• Plan testing and correction;
• Regular plan updating.
Compliance with legal and regulatory requirements:
• Development of policies and procedures for compliance;
• Review of technical compliance;
• Awareness and enforcement;
• Auditing against policies and procedures.
174
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

For each of the above categories, we list some of the advantages and disadvan-
tages of outsourcing and make comments and recommendations as to what to
do in Table A.1.
Appendix A
175
Table A.1
Advantages and Disadvantages of Outsourcing
Category
Advantages
of Outsourcing
Disadvantages
of Outsourcing
Recommendations
and Comments
Security
policy,
standards*
Access to experienced subject
matter experts, particularly in
the legal area, for
development of policy,
standards, and so on, and for
training and awareness.
Monitoring and enforcement
might be better effected by
third parties, such as private
investigators. Disciplinary
action might involve law
enforcement and result in legal
action, which is a recognized
third-party activity.
Relatively high cost of
consulting for custom
development of policy
and implementation of
automated delivery and
distribution mechanisms.
Involving law
enforcement might have
unintended
consequences, such as
confiscation of critical
systems.
At a minimum, adapt
generally available
boilerplate policy.
Preferably, have
security policy
developed and certified
by outside experts.
Training is often better
done by qualified
trainers.
Information
security
infrastructure
Even if the information security
function is managed in-house
it is often beneficial for a third
party to design, implement,
and/or validate
implementation of the
infrastructure.
Such enterprise security
assessments often provide
certifications, which can be
presented to customers,
business partners, and
regulators, to demonstrate a
good security posture.
Third parties generally have a
broader view of threats and
incidents, which they can bring
to the evaluation of firewall
monitoring and intrusion
detection/prevention service
setups.
Third parties might
over-engineer the
solution and/or propose
a solution that may be
better suited to
third-party
implementation and
management.
Use of external providers
for firewall monitoring,
intrusion detection, and
so on might cause
internal expertise to
atrophy, unless some
form of cosourcing is
implemented.
Intrusion detection and
intrusion prevention
require knowledge of
various applications, not
generally known by third
parties.
For the design, use a
provider who is not in
the managed security
services business, and
get a second opinion, if
feasible.
Third-party
certifications are
recommended as they
can bring with them a
measure of credibility
not usually attributed to
assessments by
in-house staff.
Concerns surround not
knowing who might be
looking at message
traffic and the like,
especially offshore.
TLFeBOOK

176
Outsourcing Information Security
Table A.1 (continued)
Category
Advantages
of Outsourcing
Disadvantages
of Outsourcing
Recommendations
and Comments
Access control The access control function is
generally performed in-house,
except for the help desk, which
is often outsourced,
sometimes offshore.
Outsourced help desk services
are usually better able to
provide round-the-clock,
around-the-globe services.
Authentication services, such
as those offered under
outsourced versions of PKI, can
handle the burdensome
administrative overhead.
Some technical help desk
services have come
under criticism,
especially offshore units,
because of lack of
training and expertise,
and possibly due to
cultural differences.
Access control is
becoming more visible
because of laws and
regulations designed to
protect individuals’
personal information. It
is therefore important
to establish world-class
management of access
to systems and
networks.
Personnel
security
Much of the preliminary
screening can be done by
in-house staff except that, for
critical roles dealing with
highly confidential information,
an outside agency can provide
additional expertise.
Personal security, such as that
afforded to executives working
in dangerous regions, needs
particular knowledge and
experience that is not usually
available in-house.
Outsiders may not be
sensitive to the particular
needs of the organization
or might miss the
absence of essential
attributes.
Many personal and
personnel security tasks
are better farmed out to
specialists.
Physical
security
Generally an organization will
find it more economical and
less burdensome to use
third-party guard services to
secure a facility and check
identities and authorized
destinations (i.e., who they
came to visit) of those wanting
access.
It is common to have external
parties provide intrusion
detection systems linked up to
third-party command centers
to respond to alarms.
A significant amount of
trust is put on these
outside services, so that,
when there is a problem
(e.g., a guard with
criminal intentions), it
can be doubly dangerous
because the outsider has
insider access.
There has to be a
tradeoff between
bringing in specialists
for physical security and
trusting your critical
facilities to an outsider.
In general, it is cheaper
and more effective to
hire a security firm to
secure your physical
facilities.
TLFeBOOK

Appendix A
177
Table A.1 (continued)
Category
Advantages
of Outsourcing
Disadvantages
of Outsourcing
Recommendations
and Comments
Operations
management
Certain operational functions,
such as payroll processing, are
specialty commodity services
and are generally outsourced
by all but the very smallest or
largest organizations.
It can be cost-effective to
outsource operations and the
management of those
operations across a broad
range of business processes
and systems operations.
Loss of control is a
considerable concern
here, as is reduced
flexibility.
The outsourcing of the
management of
operations is easy to
justify for functions,
such as payroll, that are
important but not core
to the business of the
organization, whereas it
is more difficult for core
business and technical
operations to be
justified.
Protection
against
malicious
software
Outside services generally
have the size and scope to be
able to provide a broader
perspective. Also, they have an
incentive to maintain their
antivirus signatures very
current and to screen out a
high proportion of spam and
similarly unauthorized
messages.
Development and maintenance
of a workable incident
response plan is better done
by a third party that is in the
business of preparing and
testing such plans and
advising on what to collect as
evidence.
If there are false
positives, it may be more
difficult to retrieve
quarantined e-mails from
outsourcer.
Third party may not be
available at a time of
crisis if they have to
respond to many
customers
simultaneously.
Many organizations do
not have adequate
internal expertise for
protecting against
viruses and worms and
for incident response
and so it is usually
advisable to seek
outside help in these
areas.
Network
management
There have been quite a
number of highly visible, large
scale and successful
outsourcing programs in which
a third party is assigned full
responsibility for managing
large firms’ networks. There
are considerable savings and
other benefits to be had,
especially for 24/7 global
networks.
High dependency on an
outsourcer for such a
critical area might lead
to significant problems
were the provider to go
out of business.
It is common for part of
an organization’s
network management
to be outsourced, and
for good reasons.
TLFeBOOK

178
Outsourcing Information Security
Table A.1 (continued)
Category
Advantages
of Outsourcing
Disadvantages
of Outsourcing
Recommendations
and Comments
Media and
data handling
Appropriate handling of media
is often neglected by internal
staff and therefore it is a good
candidate for the discipline
that often comes with
outsourcing.
Having a third party work
with the personal
information of an
organization’s customers
is very risky and can lead
to unintended
consequences in regard
to unauthorized
disclosure of information.
Handling of sensitive
data is quite common in
many third-party
arrangements and,
while required in order
to use the services,
suggests a higher level
of due diligence and
assurance that the data
is being protected
adequately.
Management
of systems
and
applications
Although less common than
outsourcing specific
operations, computer
applications, which were
developed in-house, developed
under contract or purchased
off-the-shelf, can be managed
by third parties. The latter will,
due to their specializing in the
area, be better equipped to
ensure that patches have been
applied and no intrusions have
occurred, or if they do occur, to
respond appropriately.
Often such applications
and systems are the
“crown jewels” of an
organization, as opposed
to commodity
applications that are
readily outsourced.
Consequently, any
compromise that is
effected is that much
more damaging.
Such a decision needs
to be made carefully
with all security
concerns having been
addressed before
moving ahead with this
type of service.
Development
of systems
and
applications
Third-party expertise is
valuable in helping
establishing secure system
development standards and
practices.
It is often preferable to have
expert third parties train
internal staff in the techniques
of secure programming and
testing and to regularly
monitor that the staff is
adhering to the standards.
In order to provide
targeted methods and
training, the third-party
staff members will need
to learn a great deal
about the internal
applications. This
exposes these systems
to the possibility of
someone stealing
intellectual property or
introducing malware into
the code.
On the whole, it is a
good idea to bring in
outside help, at least to
establish a secure
development
environment and train
the staff. Further
involvement may be
desirable based upon
whether internal staff
takes ownership of the
process or not.
TLFeBOOK

Appendix A
179
Table A.1 (continued)
Category
Advantages
of Outsourcing
Disadvantages
of Outsourcing
Recommendations
and Comments
Business
continuity and
disaster
recovery
planning and
management
Third parties have the
expertise and experience to
develop contingency plans for
business units and computer
systems and networks. They
also introduce a level of
discipline, which usually does
not exist within an
organization.
Professionally developed plans
are effective and are also
readily accepted by business
partners, customers, and so
on, as a measure of the
integrity and commitment to
continuance by the
organization.
Cost is generally higher
than having in-house
staff perform this
function.
Third parties may not
have good business
knowledge relating to
the organization.
It is usually better to
have one or more third
parties work on the
organization’s
contingency plans as
they are likely to be
more complete and will
be maintained and
tested.
Legal and
regulatory
compliance
Audits and recommendations
by outside legal and
accounting firms draw upon
expertise and resources that
are usually not available
in-house. Such reviews sit well
with regulators and auditors.
Cost is an issue here.
If used judiciously, such
services can be well
worth the cost.
* Many sample policy, standards, procedures, guidelines, and other boilerplates are available at little or no cost
through publications or over the Internet. While these might serve as the basis for an organization’s policies, there is
a danger that they may lack appropriate legal, compliance, and personnel expertise and so should be reviewed by
qualified professionals prior to distribution.
TLFeBOOK

.
TLFeBOOK

Appendix B:
A Brief History of IT Outsourcing
The Early Days
Electronic data processing systems were first developed in the mid-twentieth
century essentially for military and scientific purposes. They began to see limited
commercial use in the 1960s.1 At that time, computers were physically large
devices, typically being made up of dozens of single-function interconnected
cabinets the size of large refrigerators. The computer equipment required special
cooling, cabling, and power systems. Consequently, computers were confined to
specially constructed rooms (or data centers). The operation of such machines
required both physical access to them and particular technical knowledge.
To the extent that outsourcing took place at all, it was generally in the
form of services from what are today referred to as applications service providers
(ASPs). Not that an individual or organization had much choice in the matter.
The few computers that existed were in the hands of the military or academic
and scientific research organizations, so that everyone else with a need and the
requisite funding had to request and buy time on someone else’s computer, if
available. Because computing power was such a rare commodity, applications
were usually scientific and sophisticated in nature, and those persons requesting
181
1. Thomas Watson, Sr., who founded IBM Corporation in 1924, was said to have stated in
1953 that he believed that there was a market for only five computers worldwide. Apparently
IBM believes he was commenting on orders for a particular model of computer, not the en-
tire population.
TLFeBOOK

computer time were knowledgeable in the technical aspects of computing
machinery2 and the software running on it.
In the early years of computing, organizations sprang up that offered to
house and operate another company’s computer systems. The offerer of this
type of service was referred to as a “facilities manager.” Today the term used for
such an outsourcer is “hosting services provider” (HSP). One rarely, if ever,
hears the term facilities management these days.
My first exposure to digital computers (as opposed to the analog comput-
ers with which I worked as an engineering student) was in an Algol 60 course
taken during my electrical engineering studies at the University of Glasgow in
the mid-1960s. The university’s only digital computer was housed in the base-
ment of the Chemistry Department and jealously guarded. The programming
course took place solely in the classroom as the Chemistry Department would
not allow lowly engineers, or anyone else for that matter, near their precious
machine.
During that same time, I took a course in econometrics taught by someone
who commuted from Edinburgh—a distance of about 50 miles. Students wrote
data on coding sheets, which the professor carried back to Edinburgh. There the
data was entered into a multiple correlation program running on a university
computer. The results of the correlation and regression analysis were returned to
students some two weeks later. Back then, turnaround times of days or weeks
were not unusual. In today’s vernacular, the computer facility in Edinburgh
would have been called an ASP, since it offered the use of a statistical analysis
application to “customers.”
Imagine my surprise and delight when, in the late 1960s, I moved to the
United States as a graduate student at Cornell University and took a course in
which we actually wrote computer programs (in FORTRAN) and ran them. We
used keypunch machines to perforate 80-column Hollerith cards with little rec-
tangular holes, representing alphanumeric characters of our programs and data,
and submitted the cards to run on a real computer. Submission of jobs was via a
distant card reader, using remote job entry (RJE) technology. The modern com-
puting era had arrived.
Remote Job Entry
This remote job entry (RJE) breakthrough in computing, which comprised the
attaching of telecommunications networks via which the computer could be
182
Outsourcing Information Security
2. When electronic computers first hit the marketplace they were called “computing machines,”
not computers. At that time, the term “computer” meant a person who did calculations on
the various machines. The preeminent professional association in the computer industry is to
this day called the Association of Computing Machinery.
TLFeBOOK

accessed, enabled the power of large centrally located mainframe computers to
be available to many programmers from remote locations. Initial applications of
this nature involved the transmission of “batch jobs” over telephone lines. These
jobs were loaded into a card reader, transmitted to the central computer, and
run. Then the results were transmitted back to the original remote location (or
possibly a different remote location) where they were printed on a unit also in
contact with the central mainframe computer over communications lines. Dur-
ing this period, IBM dominated the world of mainframe computers, which was
the only type of computing machine in common use.
This remote capability facilitated ASP relationships, since access no longer
depended on geography and the need for direct physical access. For this type of
outsourcing, a customer organization might use several third-party data centers
accessible via communications lines from its own place of business. The seller of
these services might have purchased the computers in order to sell time. On the
other hand, an organization might have found itself with excess capacity during
idle periods and recognized that incremental revenues might be gained by selling
otherwise wasted capacity.3
As students at Cornell University, during peak periods of demand, we
sometimes waited days or more than a week, for the results of a single computer
run. When we received the results, we would often discover that simple errors
meant that jobs had to be resubmitted, which subjected us to additional days or
weeks of delay. It could take a month or more to complete a single project,
which today can be done in a matter of hours, or even minutes. This system
became particularly frustrating towards the end of a semester when students,
faculty, and outside contractors were trying to complete their work by the
end-of-semester deadline and were competing for the limited available
resources.
During that time, I happened to work on a project with outside funding.
Outside funds, or “hard money,” bought the highest priorities. Jobs would be
returned within minutes, whereas students running similar work waited days for
output. It occurred to me that the intrinsic value of the work had much less to
do with the priority of service than the source of funds (i.e., internal, grant, hard
money) and the identity of the person submitting the job (e.g., student, faculty
member, consultant). My observation of this approach to assigning computer
resources led to a dissertation topic on the effective allocation of computing
resources, later to be published in book form [1, 2].
Appendix B
183
3. I recall being on a consulting engagement in the early 1970s where we had to run a very large
multiple regression analyses. While we had used several smaller machines in the Greater New
York City area, the only machines with adequate speed and capacity that were available for
purchasing of time-sharing belonged to aircraft manufacturers. We ended up using a com-
puter in Canada, connecting via an RJE link from Manhattan.
TLFeBOOK

Time-Sharing
When it became technically feasible for an individual to run jobs on a central
computer system from a terminal, usually situated at a remote location, we saw
the next major breakthrough in the use of computers, which was called
time-sharing. Time-sharing, which had its heyday in the 1970s, became the
model for future directions in computer use, with the latest incarnation being
Web services, which is time-sharing taken to the extreme.
The idea behind time-sharing was that each person sitting at a terminal
(these days we call such a device a “dumb” terminal, as opposed to an “intelli-
gent” workstation or personal computer) had access to a specific set of computer
resources. These resources (e.g., processing time, storage space, and input and
output capabilities) were under that person’s direct control. The magic of such a
system was its ability to schedule numerous requests for services in such a man-
ner that, to the person sitting at the terminal, the resources appeared to be dedi-
cated, while in fact they were shared.
This use of computer technology gave rise to considerable interest in
scheduling algorithms and priority setting. A number of time-sharing service
providers sprang up. Again, some were dedicated solely to providing the “plain
vanilla” use of computer resources to customers. Other companies, which were
not in the primary business of selling computer time but found themselves with
excess capacity, offered these unused resources on a time-shared basis, often at
prices well below market. These providers were able to do this because their
internal use covered most, if not all, of the fixed costs of the system, so that any
revenues above the fixed cost were profit except for the relatively small cost
directly attributable to providing the services.
Many time-sharing customers saw cost and operational benefits in using
third-party services as opposed to building or expanding capacity in-house. This
was particularly true when specific short-term requirements existed or if the out-
sourcer could provide certain capabilities not available internally. Such capabili-
ties might include the ability to write programs in a particular computer
language or to support specific commercially available applications or operating
systems. In today’s terminology, a time-sharing company would be called an
HSP if it provided raw computer power along with system and communications
software and little else. If the company provided use of certain applications, it
would be equivalent to an ASP.
My first time-sharing experience was in the 1960s when working for the
summer at IBM World Trade Corporation. I used an internal time-sharing serv-
ice and wrote programs in APL (A Programming Language)4 on the system.
184
Outsourcing Information Security
4. APL is a relatively obscure language that takes the form of strings of operators represented
mostly by Greek characters. A special keyboard is needed. The language is interpretive rather
TLFeBOOK

Besides being very slow by today’s standards, the system would abruptly termi-
nate sessions and disconnect terminals after ten minutes of use—ready or not.
Users developed a strategy of saving their work every minute or two, to avoid its
being lost due to summary disconnection, and immediately upon being cut off
madly dialing back to reconnect before someone else could jump in and take
control. With demand much greater for access ports than the supply available,
capturing scarce resources and maintaining some semblance of continuity
became something of a game.
My second experience with time-sharing, this time provided by a third
party, was in the early 1970s. Access was via an ancient Teletype machine, much
like the ones used at the time for sending and receiving telegrams. The Teletype
terminal was painfully slow and noisy, chugging away as the type head rotated
and applied each character painstakingly to the paper. However, the service was
relatively inexpensive compared to other services, with a flat hourly charge for
unlimited use. Unfortunately, only 8,000 bytes of memory were available to
each user session, so that much time was spent transferring data to and from
higher capacity, but slower, disk storage. Nevertheless, the luxury of having
unlimited, apparently dedicated resources available at a reasonable cost was a
delight and outweighed the inconveniences.
Time-sharing evolved from the provision of raw computer power, with
which one could write and run programs, to making applications available, such
as early spreadsheet, database, and statistical analysis programs. This was the
transition from HSP to ASP.
Distributed Systems
During this same era of time-sharing in the early 1970s, the architecture of com-
puter systems was changing from large centralized mainframes to include
smaller departmental minicomputers, popularized by such defunct brands as
Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), Perkin-Elmer, Prime, and Data Gen-
eral (DG). Minicomputers could run standalone as “departmental computers,”
or act as “front ends” to mainframes. At that time, departments that had previ-
ously insourced their computer processing to centralized corporate mainframes
or outsourced to third parties could now take control of their own computer
needs. Accordingly, the industry saw smaller organizational units owning and
operating their own minicomputers.
Appendix B
185
than being compiled, which means that each time a change is made to the source code it is
automatically reflected in machine language, or “object,” form.
TLFeBOOK

It was not clear at the time how the introduction of minicomputers would
affect IT outsourcing. To some extent, one expected that departments would
reduce their outsourcing activities because they would now be able to bring in a
computer solely to suit their needs and thereby control their own systems. How-
ever, the other factors favoring outsourcing, such as inadequate or unqualified
internal staff, tended to push departments towards outsourcing anyway. Often
departments discovered that running a computer was a big headache distracting
them from their main line of business, so they would return to the centralized
model with services provided internally or externally. This trend towards spread-
ing computer capabilities to the departmental level grew with the appearance on
the scene of the personal computer and the more highly powered desktop work-
station discussed in the next section.
In a parallel trend, the minicomputer evolved into the modern-day
“server.” Typically, today, large organizations run hundreds and even thousands
of servers networked together in a server farm, where once they may have had a
couple of mainframes. Surprisingly, the mainframe computer’s demise was
greatly exaggerated, and mainframe and server still coexist in many organiza-
tions. With servers’ increasing power and capabilities, it is becoming more diffi-
cult to distinguish between the two—the main distinction being the different
system software they run (i.e., Unix, Microsoft Windows, and Linux on servers,
and IBM’s operating systems on mainframes).
Personal Computers and Workstations
The initial versions of personal computers (PCs) were standalone units with
much of the power of mainframes from a previous generation. Early PCs did not
generally have communications capabilities and were often purchased by depart-
ments as “office equipment,” even though they had significant computational
power. In this way, they easily infiltrated into the workplace with little attention
paid to the policy, standards, and practices that mostly governed mainframes,
minicomputers, and servers.5 The PCs of the early 1980s were frequently used
in the workplace for word-processing and spreadsheet analysis, and these appli-
cations tended to replace typewritten documents and hand-written spreadsheets.
186
Outsourcing Information Security
5. This “infiltration” without appropriate controls is often seen when significant new technolo-
gies are introduced. It happened again in the early to mid-1990s with the Internet, which in-
dividuals had implemented at home often well before corporations got control of the
technology. It is happening today with wireless networks, where organizations are struggling
with the security implications of the technology, whereas individuals have installed the net-
works at home, are using them in Internet cafés, and may have sneaked unauthorized wireless
devices into the corporate environment.
TLFeBOOK

Early PCs were generally not used for off-loading work from departmental mini-
computers and central mainframes.
Another view of PCs, mostly held by mainframe manufacturers and other
likeminded proponents, was that they functioned in much the same role as their
dumb terminal predecessors. With this model, there would be little need to
change the overall architecture whereby processing power and control would
remain under the purview of the mainframe owners. This centralized configura-
tion did not allow for partial outsourcing—it was all or nothing, for the most
part.
How wrong they were.6 This model was incomplete and quite misleading.
Workstations and PCs were and still are used to access legacy mainframe appli-
cations. But over time more and more PC interactions were directed towards
server applications and to outside networks, particularly to the Internet, with
the PC acting as a “client.” This trend has made the outsourcing of individual
applications, services, and functions relatively simple to do, although many con-
trol and security issues have arisen.
However, a major use of PCs is the running of computer software—vari-
ously called standalone applications, end-user computing, or desktop applica-
tions—by the person authorized to use a particular dedicated PC. These
stand-alone programs may run independently of connections to other comput-
ers or may require that data or programs be downloaded from other computer
sources. These PC-based programs also supply information to other receiving
computers. There is a whole range of control and security issues with standalone
end-user supported programs, as well as concerns about the potentially damag-
ing interactions between these and other systems.
In any case, the advent of the PC and workstation did not change the out-
sourcing model that much from the one where dumb terminals were used,
except that the sharing of work between the clients’ PCs and the outsourcers’
servers or mainframes became much more flexible.
The Advent of Big-Time Outsourcing
In the late 1980s, around the same time that we witnessed the proliferation of
PCs and the emergence of servers in the workplace, an IT outsourcing
Appendix B
187
6. It is really quite remarkable that mainframe-oriented IBM became a pioneer in the PC arena,
considering the shakeout among the manufacturers of older technologies that this new tech-
nology caused. Minicomputer manufacturers, with the exception of Hewlett Packard (HP),
missed the boat entirely. Ken Olsen, the founder of DEC, considered the PC a toy and did
not take it seriously. Years later, DEC (then called Digital) was purchased by portable PC
pioneer Compaq Corporation, which in turn was bought by the Hewlett-Packard Company.
TLFeBOOK

revolution took place. It is a testament to the stability and measurability of their
computer and network operational functions that companies felt more comfort-
able in having a third party manage the computer and network “factories” that
had evolved in the prior two decades.
In October 1989, Kodak signed a 10-year, $250 million outsourcing deal
with the IBM Corporation, Digital Equipment Corporation, and Businessland
Inc. (the latter two of which are no longer in business) to operate its data centers
and support its PCs. In an article published 10 years later, in October 1999,
Tom Field looked back to explain why Kodak is credited with having been the
originator of the large-scale IT outsourcing deal, even though Enron Corpora-
tion had executed a deal of three times the value that same year. Field credits the
fact that Kodak was the first well-known, Dow Jones Industrial Index company
to have engaged in this type of outsourcing [3].
Previously, the equivalent of outsourcing (i.e., facilities management) was
viewed negatively as something companies used if they were unable to run their
own operation properly. This view was still pervasive in 1989. However, Kodak
was not seen as badly managed at that time.
In the 15 years since 1989, we have seen the Kodak deal dwarfed by out-
sourcing megadeals such as the J. P. Morgan’s $2 billion outsourcing arrange-
ment with Pinnacle Alliance, a consortium consisting of CSC (Computer
Sciences Corp.), Andersen Consulting (now Accenture), AT&T Solutions, and
Bell Atlantic Network Integration (BANI), which was signed in 1996. In Janu-
ary 2003, the consolidated J. P. Morgan Chase bank decided not to renew the
Pinnacle Alliance contract but instead signed a $5 billion 7-year outsourcing
deal with IBM Corporation.
Many domestic IT professionals were affected directly by these out-
sourcing arrangements. However, all in all, it was really a “zero sum” situation
whereby groups of IT professionals at outsourcers were, for the most part, sub-
stituted for the customer organizations’ staff. In fact, in many arrangements staff
was transferred from the customer organization to the outsourcer. For example,
in the Kodak arrangement, 300 Kodak employees transferred to IBM and
another 400 to Digital and Businessland. This could be done because, in many
cases, although the infrastructure changed ownership, it was not moved physi-
cally. Customer organizations were able to reduce capital expenditures, save
costs, and increase shareholder value [4].
The Move Offshore
The use of contract programmers and consultants is not new. For decades, com-
panies and government agencies have hired specialized programmers to develop
188
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

projects beyond the technical skills of internal staff, or for one-time projects for
which it was not worth hiring internal staff that would be unneeded once the
project was over. For example, fixing programs to prevent a Y2K meltdown was
the ultimate one-time project.
This need for Y2K remediation programmers did much to promote the
extension of outsourcing beyond computer operations and network manage-
ment to software development. It also created a huge demand for programming
work in the developed countries, since they had the bulk of older programs, in
which demand for expertise greatly exceeded the domestic supply. This resulted
in a global search for programming talent—and countries such as Russia, Ire-
land, and India were only too ready to oblige.
But once the need for Y2K remediation was over, the supply of program-
ming talent soon exceeded the demand, especially with the dot-com bursting
bubble jettisoning hundreds of thousands of programmers into the marketplace.
At the same time, technical schools and universities, particularly in Asia, had
geared up to satisfy the surge in demand towards the end of the twentieth cen-
tury. Large numbers of newly minted graduates were joining the many who had
been displaced, to generate a huge pool of programmers just as the demand had
fallen off.
With improved global telecommunications and the portability of design
and development work, the outsourcing of application development, help-desk
functions, and business processing can now move quickly and somewhat seam-
lessly from continent to continent. No longer is outsourcing tethered to particu-
lar locations, as it was when operational functions and physical facilities were
being outsourced. With the technical limitations of going offshore eliminated
and communications costs much reduced, the pricing difference of labor has
become a determining factor in many cases. This price differential will stay in
force into the foreseeable future so that, barring major political and economic
changes, the rapid growth in offshore application development and business
process outsourcing will continue.
And Now to Security
In this book, we have discussed the appearance and establishment of managed
security services providers. This area has generally seen small-scale arrange-
ments, in which a third party might manage firewalls or intrusion detection sys-
tems (IDS). This business is projected by the Gartner Group to grow from $548
million in 2002 to $1.2 billion in 2006, which is the fastest-growing service type
across all vertical markets.
As part of this growth, Merrill Lynch has again been a pioneer in the scale
of its May 2003 deal with VeriSign, where the latter is to manage more than 300
Appendix B
189
TLFeBOOK

firewall and IDS devices [5]. This agreement clearly relates to the Internet, and
therefore we will now go back a little in time to see other aspects of its impact.
Networked Systems and the Internet
That ubiquitous public communications highway, the Internet, with its myriad
of information and transactional sites is called the World Wide Web. It arose
from an exclusive means of communications that was originally developed by
academics under the sponsorship of the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA). The resulting ARPAnet facilitated reliable and resilient com-
puter communications among academics and government scientists. The net-
work architecture was designed to be redundant in order to survive major
outages affecting large segments of the network. It was developed as a means of
ensuring that messages could be exchanged even if there was major damage to
the communications infrastructure.
Prior to the Internet, setting up communications links between two dis-
tant entities involved a costly and lengthy coordination effort in which lines
were ordered, installed, tested, and operated at costs in the hundreds and thou-
sands of dollars per month. Each network connection had to be dealt with sepa-
rately. Since much of IT outsourcing did (and still does) involve extensive
communications linkages between entities, the costs and inconvenience of
installing lines inhibited the expansion of remote-access outsourcing.
Suddenly, we were confronted with the Internet and its protocols, which
operate on a whole range of operating systems and hardware platforms and
across many types of communications links. Thus, a major impediment to com-
munications between entities and with individuals’ computers disappeared. The
freedom of choice of implementation environment and the capability for rapid
deployment were major factors behind the explosive growth of the Internet in
the late 1990s and early 2000s. The more individuals and entities attached to
the Internet, the more valuable the Internet became as a means to connect with
business partners, customers, and service providers.
In no time at all, a whole compendium of service providers sprang up.
Some were merely spruced-up old-style service bureaus with Internet access
and Web sites bolted on the front. However, others were truly new forms of
enterprise made possible through the universal access provided by the Inter-
net and World Wide Web. Along with the new format came a new term,
the service provider (SP), as in XSP, where X stands for the letters as A (applica-
tion), B (business), H (hosting), I (Internet), M (managed), MS (managed secu-
rity), and MSM (managed security monitoring). To add to the confusion, the
same letter can have different meanings in different contexts (e.g., “A” can stand
for application or authentication).
190
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

The Brave New World of Service Providers
This plethora of service providers has, as stated above, all sorts of names and
abbreviations. Perhaps best known are application service providers (ASPs),
which offer customers the use of particular applications, such as human resource
services (payroll, benefits), customer relationship management (CRM), and
enterprise resource management (ERM). These applications can be either
homegrown by the ASP or purchased, or even supplied by the customer,
although in this case the customer may be dealing with a hosting service
provider (HSP). In the case of an HSP, the customer’s staff can access resources
and facilities, often over the Internet, which are located and managed on the
service providers’ premises.
There are also arrangements in which facilities remain in-house at the cus-
tomer’s site, and the service providers’ employees access some of these in-house
facilities, usually from their own locations. Examples of this might include off-
hours help-desk services and some MSM services, which could fall under
cosourcing.
For the most part, such services have existed for many years, even when
communications choices were limited and took the form of dedicated lines and
switched circuit services. However, what is different today with the Internet is
the ease of setting up access and low cost of entry. Such arrangements often
depend on the ability of the parties to ensure secure transmissions, storage, and
use of each other’s information assets. Still, the low cost of Internet access made
many services economically feasible that were not so under the costly dedicated
communications line alternative.
The extension of services across the Internet characterizes the recent
advent of Web services. Here the overall application can be broken down
into discrete functions that can be acquired from a number of different provid-
ers specializing in subcomponents of the application. This is expanded upon
later.
The Electronic Commerce Model
It might appear that we may have glossed over what is surely the primary com-
mercial use of the Internet, namely electronic commerce, or e-commerce.
E-commerce is essentially the use of architectures consisting of Web servers and
supporting services for the purposes of transacting business.
During the dot-com era at the close of the twentieth century and the
beginning of the twenty-first century, many e-commerce activities included only
the informational broadcast of the Web site and corresponding transactional
services. Such organizations often did not have any product on hand in
Appendix B
191
TLFeBOOK

warehouses and used third parties to actually store and ship product or provide
services. In a certain sense this might be considered the reverse of the IT out-
sourcing model, where organizations retain the IT function, since IT is their pri-
mary added value, and they have others stock products, pick them in response to
orders, and ship them directly to the customer. Whether, in this case, the ware-
housers and shippers could be considered as having outsourced the marketing
and sales functions is an interesting question.
Taking another view, many organizations do not develop their own Web
sites. Instead, they arrange for specialist firms to design and implement custom-
ized Web sites. This is not outsourcing per se. However, in some cases, one
company will host the Web site for another firm, which is considered out-
sourcing according to our definition, since the service provider manages and
operates the site. Although the distinguishing line is fuzzy, we can differentiate
between consulting services and outsourcing services by considering the former
to apply to finite development and implementation projects and the latter to
refer to ongoing operations.
At this point in time, the shakedown in dot-com firms is mostly over and
those Web-based sites remaining have matured and reduced their ambitions and
expectations to realistic levels. This has not, however, stymied the inventiveness
and creativity of leading-edge technologists and we are seeing continuing devel-
opment in capabilities offered over the Web.
Portals, Aggregation, and Web Services
A Web site typically supports a single application or service, albeit a complex
one. In such cases, managers of Web sites provide and support the form and
content of Web sites, even if the sites contain information supplied by third
parties.
Over time it was realized that, in certain situations, it might be very con-
venient for someone accessing a particular Web site to be able to get to a number
of applications or services through that single Web site, rather than having to log
on to each application separately. In response to this, along came the portal.
Portals are single points of entry into a portfolio of services. The services may be
internal to an organization, external, or a combination of both. Likewise, those
using the portal may be employees (in which case it is termed an “enterprise por-
tal”), customers, or some combination of internal employees and external
customers.
Portals can in fact encourage outsourcing since they provide ready access
to numerous applications, whether those applications reside within the organi-
zation hosting the portal or not. Thus, management of the portal may be out-
sourced and so can the applications accessed via the portal. It is readily seen that
192
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

portal technology facilitates sharing and can blur pure ownership and branding,
making for a potentially promiscuous business environment.
Whereas portals provide gateways through which access to applications is
gained, aggregation is a different concept. With aggregation, for example, infor-
mation about a particular customer can be gathered together from a number of
sources and displayed on a single screen. For instance, a customer may want to
have current information from his or her bank checking and savings accounts,
brokerage accounts, credit card accounts, and mortgage status, all displayed on
or immediately accessible from a single screen. The aggregation application pro-
gram links to various Web sites that have access to each such piece of informa-
tion, logs on to that site on the customer’s behalf, and downloads the required
information.
Often, the development and operation of the aggregation site is outsour-
ced to a third party. Sometimes this is at the behest of a financial institution,
which provides some of the data itself. However, it may also be implemented for
another party, such as a Web portal company, that is not responsible for any
particular piece of information displayed.
Aggregation Web sites are very similar to Web portals in appearance
and operation as far as the customer is concerned. Both aggregation sites and
portals offer single sign-on, in that a customer only need log on to the hosting
site once, and connections to other facilities, whether they be applications
(in the case of portals) or information (for aggregators), are made “under the
covers.”
As it turns out, aggregation has not been particularly well received by retail
customers, and may not be successful in the long run. Apparently, customers are
not comfortable, from privacy and confidentiality points of view, with having so
much data about themselves collected and available in one place. After all, if
someone were to compromise that site, a person’s entire financial position might
be accessible and misused.
Portals, on the other hand, have seen some success and will likely be the
predominant way to access systems, whether from the Web or internally, in the
future. The first rush of companies wanting to supply organizations with portal
development, implementation, operation, and support has been tempered by
the complexity of implementation. However, over time, this will improve, and
many organizations will likely not have direct control of the way in which their
own applications and data are accessed, but will depend on one or more service
providers to take care of the intricacies.
A related upcoming facility, which is receiving a great deal of press, is the
“Web services” initiative. Web services are defined as a “standardized way of
integrating Web-based applications using open standards …” [6]. In a sense,
this technology provides an aggregation of applications, versus aggregation of
data, as described earlier.
Appendix B
193
TLFeBOOK

Straight-Through Processing (STP) and Grid Computing
Traditional data processing took place in what was called “batch mode.” That is
to say, even when transactions were done and recorded in real time, the bulk of
the processing was done, and is still done in may cases, by means of a nightly
batch run. Computer jobs are assembled together and run in a predetermined
sequence, accounting for interdependencies of processes and data modification
requirements.
In the financial services industry, in particular, there has been a push
towards instantaneous processing of transactions so as to eliminate the batch
cycles and to achieve global access and reporting of such transactions 24 hours a
day and 7 days per week. This is resulting in a major redesign of the architec-
tures of business processes and the systems that support them.
The demands of real-time instantaneous processing of transactions across
financial entities, such as banks and securities firms, will produce a need for
high-security, high-availability logical and physical links and interdependencies
between the various components and phases in the processing cycle. Thus, STP
initiatives will have major security implications for outsourcing from the per-
spectives of both the buyers and providers of services.
Relationships between organizations and service providers will increasingly
be more like partnerships rather than buyer-seller relationships. The interde-
pendencies will be so great as to require exceptional understanding of each
other’s businesses, well beyond the requirements of today. Any failure on any
party’s behalf will likely have an immediate impact across the entire process.
An even newer concept is grid computing. In one sense, grid computing
can be thought of as a massively parallel version of STP, which follows a sequen-
tial processing paradigm. In grid computing, a particular process or calculation
is split into many small parts, each of which is run on a different computer. The
results are then combined. This process is more often insourced, since it is easier
to arrange for the use of hundreds or thousands of computers if they are under a
single organization’s control. However, there have been outsourcing examples of
requesting access to the processing power of many hundreds or even thousands
of computers across the World Wide Web. In one case, computers were used to
perform an enormous number of calculations to assist in the search for
extraterrestrial life.
Mobile Computing
Mobile computing is really just another way of communicating between com-
puters. But mobile computing operates over the ether rather than across wires or
optical fiber. However, it does have some specific requirements that favor
194
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

outsourcing, such as the need to receive and transmit signals across a wide area.
With mobile computing there is significant concern over threats to the integrity
and confidentiality of customers’ information due to the relative ease of inter-
cepting signals. With wireless one does not have to tap into a physical circuit,
but can scan for signals in the proximity of the source. Consequently, the rela-
tively new, but rapidly growing, area of mobile computing only exacerbates the
risks and fears that already exist with wire or fiber-based communications.
Here again, the nature of the technology makes the outsourcing of the
technology and its support viable for many organizations. The ubiquity and
ability to communicate from practically anywhere serves well the outsourcing
model since the person on the sending end may not even be aware of who is
handling the signals at the receiving end.
References
[1]
Axelrod, C. W., “The Allocation of Computer Resources Among Semi-Autonomous
Users,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Cornell University, 1971.
[2]
Axelrod, C. W., Computer Effectiveness: Bridging the Management-Technology Gap, Wash-
ington, D.C.: Information Resources Press, 1979.
[3]
Field, T., “Outsourcing: 10 Years that Shook IT,” CIO Magazine, October 1, 1999,
http://www.cio.com.
[4]
Glassman, D., “IT Outsourcing and Shareholder Value,” EVAluation, New York: Stern
Stewart Research, 2000.
[5]
Hulme, G. V., “Merrill Lynch Hands Off Network Security to VeriSign,” Information-
Week, May 21, 2003.
[6]
Hall, M., “Web Services Open Portal Doors,” Computerworld, Vol. 36, No. 26, June 24,
2002, pp. 28–29.
Appendix B
195
TLFeBOOK

.
TLFeBOOK

Appendix C:
A Brief History of Information Security
As expected, the history of security parallels or, to be more accurate, follows that
of computing. It is regrettable—but largely unavoidable—that security is practi-
cally always trying to catch up with threats and repair vulnerabilities. Warnings
of impending attacks seldom are given the attention they deserve and require.
When something does raise concerns, such as the dire predictions of adverse
Y2K scenarios, the mitigation strategies, when successful, turn the threatened
attack into a nonevent. As a result, credibility can be lost and subsequent warn-
ings are not taken seriously enough. In such cases it is difficult to recover from
the resulting sense of invincibility, until the next incident.1
We now trace the development of information security through the vari-
ous generations of information technology, as outlined in Appendix B.
The Mainframe Era
Isolated Data Centers
In the early days, when mainframe computers were physically isolated in their
own data centers and were not accessible via network connections from the out-
side, the protection of systems, applications, and data was accomplished through
197
1. Stanley “Stash” Jarocki, former vice president of Morgan Stanley and former chairman of the
FS/ISAC, noted that the half-life of management’s concern following a security event (such
as a virus or denial of service attack) is about 3 months.
TLFeBOOK

physically securing the site. At least initially, logical access to a computer system
required that the person actually be within the walls of the data center. At that
time, knowledge of the systems and access to the systems was held by those few
knowledgeable “high priests” who ruled within their “glass temples.”
Computers of that time lent themselves to this form of public display since
control panels boasted rows of blinking lights, tape drives had whirling reels,
and printers chattered away, spitting out box upon box of sprocket-holed fan-
fold paper. Later, this visual openness was not considered good practice since
anyone with evil intentions could readily reconnoiter the facility through the
glass walls. Today the norm is to have data centers and network control centers
hidden away in windowless internally located rooms within unmarked and
inconspicuous buildings.
Remote Access
When remote access to central computers became generally available, through
the use of remote job submission and remote printing in the 1960s and hard-
wired dumb terminals in the 1970s, the concept of protected physical areas still
prevailed. Restricted physical access to facilities, whether they contained com-
puter equipment or data-entry terminals, remained the dominant form of
security.
However, in the 1970s, we saw the arrival of time-sharing, usually
enabled through remotely connected terminals. Then, the physical security
of an area in which the terminals were located was not assured. At that point,
it became necessary to identify the person using the terminal, and then to ver-
ify that person’s identity. This was achieved by giving those with authorized
access to various computer applications an ID, or identifier, which dis-
played such features as the person’s name, department, and company, and was
linked to a password presumed to be known only by the specific owner of that
identity. The password verified that the ID holder was the authorized person.
While it is widely recognized that this combination of ID and password is
among the easiest authentication methods to compromise, it is still by far the
most popular, as it is simpler and cheaper to implement than most other forms
of authentication.2
Over time, technologies for remote access advanced dramatically. Today
they are readily available, at reasonable cost, to virtually anyone with access to a
198
Outsourcing Information Security
2. Today there are a large number of authentication technologies from which to choose. They
include magnetic cards (i.e., with a magnetic stripe running across the surface), smart cards
(i.e., with a microchip embedded in the card), biometrics (e.g., fingerprint, iris, face, and
voice recognition), and tokens (that automatically generate one-time passwords).
TLFeBOOK

personal computer and a telecommunications link. This makes fraud that much
easier.3
Along with the greatly expanded access came more stringent requirements
for authenticating the person, process, or system being granted that access. Also,
it became more critical to be effective at authorizing use of specific functions of
one or more applications and access to specific data. No longer could one rely
on physical restrictions to preserve the security of a remote access node.
The basic “law” of authentication is that a person, in particular, can be
authenticated by “what they have,” “what they know,” and/or “what they are.”
In today’s terms, these requirements can be realized as follows:
• What you have: This is usually in the form of a piece of paper or card
(e.g., a driver’s license or passport) or a magnetic or smart card, a secu-
rity “token,” or even a key, either physical or electronic.
• What you know: This is usually a password or personal identification
number (PIN), but can also be a lock or safe combination. It often also
includes the knowledge of an identifier.
• What you are: This refers to some physical characteristic as would be
used with biometrics, such as a fingerprint, voice print, face structure,
or iris.
It is generally held that at least two of these factor classes are needed in
order to achieve “strong authentication.” Therefore, a combination of a mag-
netic card and a PIN (which is often used for ATM cash machines) is considered
strong authentication. Similarly a smart card and a fingerprint reader, or a token
and a PIN, are also acceptably strong methods of authentication. It is not usual
to have two factors in the same category used for authentication, such as a mag-
netic card and a key. However, such a combination is still strong authentication.
On the other hand, authentication via two things that you know, such as ID and
password, is not generally considered strong, since IDs usually follow some
Appendix C
199
3. The transition during the 1980s from the “dumb” terminal or CRT (which stands for the
“Cathode Ray Tube”) to the “intelligent” multipurpose PC, provided tremendous capability
and flexibility to the person using the PC and at the same time, increased the security risks
by orders of magnitude. The main culprit of the increased risk exposure was the standard in-
stallation of a disk drive to write to, and read from, a removable floppy disk. Suddenly, what
was a relatively difficult and inconvenient task of removing significant amounts of informa-
tion from what was previously a closed system, became as easy as copying a file to the floppy
disk and sneaking it off the premises. Newer technologies, such as memory cards and USB
memory sticks, make the task even harder to detect.
TLFeBOOK

easily learned rule and passwords can be easily cracked by someone with access
to password files and readily available software tools.
In addition to determining who or what should be able to access which
systems and applications (and functions and data within applications)—which
is the authorization challenge—there arose the need to protect messages or traf-
fic traversing communications lines. With earlier technologies, most access was
over dedicated or shared telephone lines that were isolated physically from ready
access. It was held that, in order to gain access to the information being trans-
mitted over these lines, there was a need to have physical access and specialized
monitoring equipment. These requirements formed a barrier that was adequate
for most purposes, other than very high security situations, in which case
encryption of the messages might be used.
Distributed Systems
Minicomputers
As computer system architectures moved from mainframes with local, and then
remote, access to minicomputers front-ending mainframes, then operating inde-
pendently, to client-server in all its many varieties (two-tier, three-tier, thin cli-
ent, fat client), so did security needs and solutions.
Mainframe architectures advanced from one-program-at-a-time, sequen-
tial processing to multiprocessing (a number of processors, each running appli-
cation programs within the same “box”) and multiprogramming (a number of
programs running simultaneously on one processor). As a consequence, the
need increased to protect each program and its related data from other applica-
tions and data running on the same machine, and from others who had access to
that machine. This resulted in the appearance of mainframe security access pro-
grams such as RACF (pronounced “rack-eff”) from IBM, and ACF2 and Top
Secret from Computer Associates.
When minicomputers came on the scene, they often reverted to single-use
platforms. In general, the security of such systems was similar to that of single-
processing mainframes, and, as a result, security software was lacking—there
just didn’t seem to be the same need. Also, minicomputers were touted as
requiring far fewer support staff than mainframes, so that there generally was
not as many, if any, dedicated resources focusing on security matters, as was
more usual in the mainframe world.
As minicomputers became larger and faster, and demands on them became
greater, they began to take on many of the same multiprocessing attributes
and multiprogramming applications, some of which were business critical, so
the need for access security increased commensurately. Also, minicomputers
were designed, as a matter competitive advantage—versus proprietary mainframe
200
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

designs—to be compatible with other systems and networks, with their manufac-
turers subscribing to open systems designs. Minicomputers were able to interface
with many communications protocols. However, this very openness increased the
risk of compromise, and consequently the need for stronger security tools. Ironi-
cally, capable minicomputer security products did not have time to mature before
the minicomputer was eclipsed by the client-server world, and is still not up to par
for servers.
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, it was a difficult task to find access
administration software that could run on minicomputers. The requirement to
implement such a security system would often come from internal auditors
familiar with the tightly controlled mainframe environment. The auditors
would extend mainframe security concepts to minicomputers, which appeared
on the surface to be a perfectly reasonable assumption. However, comparable
security tools were just not as available at the time for minicomputers. In a
less-than-good example of timing, a number of security products were launched
just about the time of the general demise of minicomputers, as they were
replaced with powerful workstations, intelligent client machines, and high-
powered servers.
Client-Server Architecture
Unfortunately, because the early versions of client-server systems often came out
of research and development academic arenas (the Unix operating system, for
example, was created at Bell Labs), access security was not given much of a prior-
ity.4 The various types of Unix, the first credible Unix challenger, Microsoft
Windows, and the recent Windows and Unix challenger, Linux, were all notori-
ous for their lack of security. They were, and still are, known to grant overriding
priority access to administrators without having to go through reasonable checks
and balances.
Adding to this weakness has been the accepted design, development, and
operational environments of the client-server world. As with minicomputers,
many smaller “shops" and some that weren’t so small, embarked on the con-
struction of client-server systems without much thought to security. Often the
pressure to show dramatic improvements in price-performance caused nice-to-
have features (among which security was often inappropriately included) to be
Appendix C
201
4. Even today, the academic world is known for its lax security practices. Such freedom of use
has facilitated a number of distributed denial-of-service attacks, such as those experienced in
February 2000, as university-owned machines were compromised and used as “zombies”
(i.e., launching pads) for such attacks. The research laboratories, particularly those involved
in highly classified government work, have purportedly strengthened the security of their sys-
tems following a number of embarrassing incidents.
TLFeBOOK

neglected. Security was, and largely still is, an afterthought (when someone does
indeed think of it) to be bolted onto a system after the fact, with mostly inade-
quate results. Without security having been part of each stage of the system
development life cycle, from design through development and testing and on to
implementation and operation, any postimplementation ideas as to how the sys-
tem might be made more secure are generally too little and too late.
While there were some notable instances where vendors did introduce
security aspects into client-server and database products, the norm was to ignore
it. Scott McNealy, founder and CEO of Sun Microsystems, made the comment
in January 1999, “You have zero privacy anyway—get over it.” In mid-2001,
McNealy came out with: “…absolute privacy is a disaster waiting to happen.”
It took until January 2002 for Bill Gates, cofounder and chairman of
Microsoft, to make security an official priority for his company with the Trust-
worthy Computing Initiative. Although many question Gate’s level of commit-
ment based on Microsoft’s prior performance in the security arena as a whole, it
remains to be seen whether or not this is a bona fide commitment.
The Wild World of the Web
The major driving force behind the realization that security mattered in the
1990s and into the second millennium was the rapidly increasing number of
applications and services dependent on the Internet. In order to meet the pub-
lic’s and businesses’ growing demands to be able to act unencumbered, an envi-
ronment was needed that would protect personal and confidential information
and ensure that no unauthorized persons or systems could access, change, or
destroy critical information.
The challenge of maintaining such a secure environment increased by
orders of magnitude when the World Wide Web became available over the
Internet and personal and corporate use of the Web exploded. The Internet
itself was designed for reliability and availability, in particular if significant seg-
ments of the interconnecting networks were to break or become nonoperational.
The Internet was built originally to facilitate the sharing of information among
an exclusive and self-policing population of military personnel and academics.
There was little or no consideration of having to protect system use or the trans-
mission of information from one person or system to another.
Initially, security concerns about misuse and misappropriation of informa-
tion on the Internet were few because the Internet was shared among a relatively
small cohort of knowledgeable military personnel, professors, and graduate stu-
dents. As the Internet became popular with other groups (e.g., business and the
general public), not only were the best and the worst elements of society intro-
duced, but renegades showed up even in the academic world. Academic
202
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

institutions frequently became spawning grounds for hackers as well as breeding
environments for viruses and launch pads for distributed denial of service
(DDoS) attacks. The laissez faire attitude of the select group of early Internet
users, which was really successful in furthering knowledge, became a severe
handicap as the Internet extended itself into the world at large.
The task to secure the Web became particularly difficult and burdensome
precisely because security was given such short shrift during its creation and
expansion. The inadequacy of security continues, in part, because the image of
the playful geek hacker persists, rather than the recognition that hackers are
destructive criminals. In reality, there are many malevolent individuals or
groups crawling the Internet for easy, valuable pickings or to create as much
havoc as they know how. We see one vulnerability after another being exposed
and exploited. We learn of new threats practically every day. And although there
are many reported events, the vast majority of such incidents never appear in the
public arena.
The information security scene of today was virtually unknown as late as
the mid-1990s. Then, the firewall, which has become ubiquitous in commercial,
government, and academic networks today, was not known outside the mili-
tary.5 In fact, former Israeli military personnel developed the first widely used
commercial firewall, produced by Checkpoint. A number of other popular secu-
rity products have similar military origins.
The proliferation of information security products was, of course, related
to both real and perceived risks. During the Cold War, there was major concern
that the other side would get hold of military secrets stored on computers. The
most feared security events were inside jobs, such as those perpetrated by spies
infiltrating internal operations or capturing or luring key knowledgeable person-
nel, since physical presence was paramount in those early days.6
The first real jolt to that reality that communications networks could be
compromised and through them the computer systems could be taken down or
searched, was the Morris worm in 1988. For the first time it was realized that an
Appendix C
203
5. As reported in [1], a survey of 1,716 IT security professionals by the Information System Se-
curity Association (ISSA) and Business Software Alliance (BSA), 97% had firewalls deployed
as of the third quarter of 2003 and 1% plan to deploy firewalls over the following 12
months.
6. Back in the 1970s, a colleague, who had in-depth knowledge of certain mainframe computer
systems’ “internals,” told me that he belonged to a group of similarly expert individuals, who
were so concerned about their being kidnapped by foreign governments that they set up a
calling chain to keep track of one another. He told of one situation in which a group mem-
ber was contacted and asked to fly somewhere. When he activated his calling chain from the
airport, his colleagues appealed to him not to board the plane as they did not recognize the
names or affiliation of his contacts.
TLFeBOOK

attack could occur from the outside, and that a piece of programming code
could replicate across an extensive network and infect thousands and, today,
millions of computers attached to that network.
In the 1980s, paralleling the growth in the number of PCs deployed but
not yet attached to networks, we saw computer viruses spread through the
exchange of removable media, such as “floppy disks” or “diskettes.” Transmis-
sion of these wicked programs was slow compared to today, because of their reli-
ance on the “sneaker net” for spreading. Nevertheless, practically everyone
experienced them, which was indicative of the promiscuous sharing of floppies
at that time. This latter “vector” has been replaced, as the dominant means of
spreading viruses, worms, and other forms of attack, by networks, in particular
the Internet. The current most popular spreading mechanism is via macros (or
programmed routines) in documents and by executables attached to e-mails.
Some viruses are spread through access to Web sites. Because of the lightning
speed at which huge volumes of messages are shared over the Internet, the rate of
proliferation of viruses and other malware has been reduced from weeks and
days to hours and minutes.
Another form of security breach that can be much more damaging, but
which is far less dramatic, is the unauthorized access of wrongly (or rightly)
authenticated individuals, often employed by the organization, to information
assets that they are not entitled to access. A refinement of this is type of breach
occurs when someone, who is authorized to access a specific application with
limited powers, discovers that he or she can access information beyond their
proscribed limits. For example, they may be able to modify information that a
person, with their particular role, should only be able to view and not change.
This bypass of a restriction of function within a legitimately accessed
application is often due to a failure in the access administration process to apply
the appropriate constraints or it could be due to a “hole” in the application.
There is a difference between someone having been given inappropriate access
to a system and actually using it. Those discovering that they can see data that
they should not be able to, or operate functions that they should not have the
capability of doing, have a choice. They can report the error to management or
they can exploit it. In the latter case they will be subject to disciplinary action if
they are caught.7
The Web has provided many opportunities for exploitation and misuse. It
is not inherent in the systems. It is due to the fact that prevention of such
204
Outsourcing Information Security
7. It was reported in [2] that the director of admissions at Princeton University had hacked into
the Yale admissions site and accessed students’ statuses regarding their Yale applications. He
had used personal information of students, to which he had access through Princeton’s applica-
tion process. While the Yale admissions department could be faulted for having weak security
on its Web site, that is not an excuse for a competitor to take advantage of the vulnerability.
TLFeBOOK

misdeeds can be complex and expensive and require a high level of expertise not
readily available to an organization.
The Wireless Revolution
Just when security professionals thought that they were getting a handle on
Internet security, along came wireless. The ubiquity of wireless communications
can be traced back to the growth in use of cellular telephones. Until then, the
average member of the public did not have the capability for two-way commu-
nication over the ether. There were Citizens Band (CB) radios, radio communi-
cations, and beepers. But these were generally available to a select few for whom
the high cost and difficulty of use could be justified. Once the cellular telephone
became palm-size and the cost of the equipment itself dropped dramatically, the
acceptance rate became very high.
Initially there was justifiable concern that cellular phone conversations
could be intercepted using a simple scanner, as several very embarrassing high-
profile personal conversations have been made public. Analog communications
could be relatively easily listened to, so there was a push toward digital cellular
telephone service, which is much more difficult, although not impossible, to
intercept and interpret.
The next trend was the combination of the pager, cellular phone, and
personal digital assistant (PDA). For example, the ubiquitous Blackberry pager
device allows for the receipt and sending of electronic mail messages. However,
as the features and capabilities of these units advanced, so did the risk related to
the interception of these messages. Regrettably, as with many other technolo-
gies, the security of wireless networks lags woefully behind their rapid adoption.
Where IT Outsourcing and Security Meet
As we look back over the relatively brief history of IT outsourcing—and the
even shorter time for which information security has become an issue for the
public at large (it was always an issue for the military and the intelligence agen-
cies)—it is clear that security professionals have been playing catch-up. That is,
security attacks have outpaced defenses except (arguably) for a very short time in
their early history during which computers were locked away in glass houses and
the protection of information assets was under direct physical control.
Minicomputers were intrinsically secure as long as they were cloistered and
isolated and they followed the mainframe model. However, it was their deploy-
ment across many areas and their interconnectivity that created the risk of com-
promise at an unguarded location. Even then, however, security was at least
Appendix C
205
TLFeBOOK

somewhat controllable. Although adequate auditing, monitoring, and reporting
tools were not readily available, the limited population with access and restric-
tions of access did mitigate some of the security problems. However, “superuser”
status, which gave the system administrator universal access, required many con-
trols and not a little trust. This trust was not always warranted.
It was the introduction of the PC in the early 1980s, however, that really
let the cat out of the bag. At first security risks came through the exchange of
floppy disks, spreading viruses at what was then an alarming rate, but which
appears decidedly sluggish by today’s standards. But it was only a short time
before many of these PCs were connected to networks and the spread of mal-
ware jumped at an accelerating rate as viruses, worms, Trojan horses, and denials
of service passed across the network at lightening speed.
The fact that security has, and still is, lagging compared to the creation of
new threats has important and far-reaching implications for IT outsourcing.
One must be concerned about the level of security at the outsourcer and on the
security of communications links between the outsourcer and its customers. Not
only has one to be reassured that one’s own information is being protected, but
the concern must carry over to how well the protective mechanisms have been
applied throughout the outsourcer’s customer base.
Customers’ confidential and secret information has been made available
from the genesis of IT outsourcing, as in the case of payroll services. Again, in
the early stages, physical security prevailed and was sufficient to meet the secu-
rity needs as they were.
Even when distributed processing and time-sharing became popular, out-
sourcers could maintain security by physically isolating services and having
information transmitted over secured links from known and protected sources.
There were breaches, of course, but many of these were due to “human error,”
where an operator would not follow set procedures fully or where an error was
made in defining the destination of a printout, for example. That is, most
breaches were by insiders using authorized or unauthorized access, either inten-
tionally or accidentally.
Over the past 5 years or so, we have seen the growth and change in nature
of IT outsourcing. With the advent of the Internet, outsourcers have taken
advantage of the low cost and rapidity of deployment that this ubiquitous net-
work allows. At first, the Internet was used as a quick, cheap method of making
connections, where all that was needed at the client end was a PC, modem (or
other network connection), and browser software. However, such ease of setup
and access also meant that evildoers could also easily and cheaply set up means
for access. This brought the technologies of strong authentication and encryp-
tion to the “common man” where, in the past, it had been restricted to very
high-security networks and applications. This raising of the bar, meant that out-
sourcing relationships had to consider additional security factors, not previously
206
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

included, in the due diligence performed by customers and in the service agree-
ments negotiated between the corporate parties and with the public.
The outsourcing of Web site development, management, and operations
has brought with it a whole new set of issues in regard to the preservation and
protection of customers’ image and reputation. And, as these Web sites evolve
into aggregation sites and corporate and customer portals, the need for protec-
tion against damage and misuse is taking another leap upward.
The latest development, that of Web services, has intensified the relation-
ship between customer and outsourcers, where many sources in combination
must be relied upon to provide secure processing environments. This spreading
out of responsibility for maintaining security across multiple applications, plat-
forms, and networks confronts security professionals with what is by far their
greatest challenge to date. Given that our tools, processes, and practices can
barely manage the current environment from a security perspective, how are we
to handle the next phase?
References
[1]
Verton, D., “IT Security Pros Confident of Defenses,” Computerworld, Vol. 37, No. 49,
December 8, 2003, p. 16.
[2]
Arenson, K. W., “Princeton Pries into Web Site for Yale Applicants,” The New York
Times, Vol. CLI, No. 52,191, July 26, 2002, p. A1.
Appendix C
207
TLFeBOOK

.
TLFeBOOK

Selected Bibliography
Annotated References and Resources
This selected bibliography is in the form of lists of books and magazines, articles
and papers, conferences and seminars, and on-line (Web) references. These are
intended to bridge your way to further research and inquiry on the topics of out-
sourcing, security, or, more specifically, outsourcing information security.
Because we are cutting across two disciplines, we generally find only a few
references specific to outsourcing security and securing outsourcing. We have to
go to IT outsourcing references and filter through to find specific mention of
security. We can plough though the security literature and select references to
outsourcing. However, in the latter case we are more likely to find a focus on the
outsourcing of security services, as in engaging MSSPs.
I have attempted to differentiate among three categories, namely:
• Security referenced in outsourcing sources;
• Outsourcing referenced in security sources;
• Specific references to third party security services.
Now a disclaimer: The scope of each category is broad and rapidly expand-
ing in reach and in depth. We are seeing many players, or professed players,
jumping on the bandwagon and considerable reportage, increasingly appearing
in the popular press, particularly in regard to offshore IT outsourcing and the
domestic loss of well-paying, white-collar jobs. The rate of change is so fast that
it is well nigh impossible to keep up—the best one can hope to do is to just con-
tinue to read, learn, and expand one’s horizons as an independent researcher.
209
TLFeBOOK

So please consider this bibliography as a jumping-off point, not as all-
inclusive, and continue to scan publications, conferences, and the Web for new
developments, trends, and insights.
Books
Butler, J., Winning the Outsourcing Game: Making the Best Deals and Mak-
ing Them Work, Boca Raton, FL: Auerbach, 2000.
This book provides a framework for developing an outsourcing strategy,
choosing what to outsource, and managing the risks of using third-party
contractors.
Kuong, J., (ed.), Security and Privacy for Application Service Provisioning
(ASP)—Best Practices and SLAs for ASP Providers and Outsourcers, Welles-
ley Hills, MA: Management Advisory Publications, 2001.
This report primarily covers security as it relates to application service pro-
viders. This is more targeted to our topic, but limited to one particular category
of outsourcer, namely, the ASP.
McCarthy, L., IT Security: Risking the Corporation, Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002.
Chapter 9 of this book is entitled “Outsourcing Security” and it illustrates
the importance of thoroughly checking the security of third-party providers as
well as the customer’s security as it relates to the outsourcer.
In order to achieve a satisfactory overall security posture, the author rec-
ommends the following:
• Conduct security assessments using commonly available security audit-
ing tools.
• Develop detailed procedures for the audits themselves.
• Perform such audits on a regular basis and when a new system is
introduced.
• Ensure that the problems found are in fact resolved.
Purser, S., A Practical Guide to Managing Information Security, Norwood,
MA: Artech House, 2004.
This book provides a complete guide to how information should be
secured and how the information security function should be managed. It is
typical of many information security books in that it merely touches upon
210
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

outsourcing as one aspect of risk related to information security management.
However, as pointed out in this book, it is necessary to get a good grounding in
the security issues, which this book provides.
Stees, J. D., Outsourcing Security: A Guide for Contracting Services, Boston,
MA: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1998.
This book provides a guide for contracting services, especially those relat-
ing to protective organizations. It is aimed at helping security and facility man-
agers in planning, evaluation of proposals, and contract negotiation. The focus
is physical security rather than information security. However, as the worlds of
IT and physical security converge, it serves each group to understand the other.
Verton, D., Black Ice: The Invisible Threat of Cyber-Terrorism, New York:
McGraw-Hill/Osborne, 2003.
Dan Verton examines issues specifically relating to cyber-terrorism and
does not discuss outsourcing per se. However, some have voiced concerns that
cyber-terrorists will take advantage of their access to source code and production
systems to effect cyberattacks, possibly through the introduction of Trojan horse
code or just in the knowledge of critical systems and their weaknesses. Verton
suggests that, while such acts are feasible, there is no evidence that this has been
done.
Williams, O. D., Outsourcing: A CIO’s Perspective, Boca Raton, FL: St. Lu-
cie Press, 1998.
This book addressed frequently asked questions regarding IT outsourcing
and reviews the advantages and disadvantages of it. It does not focus on the
security aspects of outsourcing.
Newspapers, Journals, and Magazines
Computer-Related Publications
Understandably, many IT-related publications report negatively about offshore
IT outsourcing since it is the jobs of their readership that are most threatened by
the trend. Given the obvious bias, there are some important lessons to be
learned from the adverse experiences of others as depicted in a number of the
following articles. Interestingly, when the outsourcing is domestic, with the
transfer of many employees from the customer to the provider, it is seen in a
much more positive light.
Anonymous, “Why Outsourcing Won’t Work,” CSO Magazine, Vol. 2,
No. 3, March 2003, pp. 58–60.
Selected Bibliography
211
TLFeBOOK

This article was apparently written by an embittered security officer,
whose function is being outsourced, although seemingly not offshore. It criti-
cizes the “number-crunchers” for their not having taken into account in the
ROI analysis such intangible, difficult-to-measure factors as loyalty, dedication,
and willingness to go the extra mile.
Bertch, W., “Why Offshore Outsourcing Failed Us,” Network Computing,
Vol. 14, No. 21, October 16, 2003, pp. 65–70.
Weslet Bertch describes the experiences of Life Time Fitness when they
outsourced the development of a relatively small Web application to a “Tier 1
Indian vendor.” The causes for failure were given as inexperienced labor, over-
emphasis on process, and performance metrics that masked problems.
A sidebar to the article quotes a Deloitte Consulting report stating that the
80% lower wages in India, as compared to the United States, are eaten up by a
number of factors, with the actual resulting labor cost saving being in the 10%
to 15% range.
Boardman, B., “The Handoff,” Network Computing, Vol. 14, No. 14, July
24, 2003, pp. 34–38.
This article examines the factors underlying the network and systems man-
agement outsourcing decision, be they cost savings, expertise, or degree of con-
trol. Particularly interesting is the variation in the types of network problems
typically encountered with the size of the company. While cost containment is
fairly standard across the board, smaller companies outsource defensively to
make up for lack of in-house skills, whereas larger companies are looking to sup-
port mobile and wireless connections, obtain international coverage, and offload
legacy technologies.
Coffee, P., “Epicenters: Offshore Coding Myth,” eWeek, May 3, 2004,
p. 60.
The subtitle of Peter Coffee’s column is “Setting the Record Straight on
Programming Quality.” He backtracks from his prior siding with a panel of
“software security experts,” which asserted that the programmers in India do
better quality work than those in the United States. He writes that he came
upon a report, published in June 2003, which showed that the defect rate of
U.S. programmers was better than for those in India, but much worse than than
produced by Japanese programmers.
Collett, S., “Losing Control,” Computerworld, Vol. 38, No. 11, March 15,
2004, p. 38.
With increased legislation and regulation relating to protecting personal
sensitive data, in particular, there is a need to ensure that such data is safe. The
212
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

article provides some very useful tips to how this can be accomplished,
including:
• Visit the outsourcing site.
• Require a security audit by a reputable third party.
• Conduct remote vulnerability scans.
• Provide partial information about customers.
• Limit subcontracting in the contract.
• Limit employee turnover at outsourcer contractually.
• Have vendor provide a paperless clean-room environment.
• Keep centralized databases at home site.
Datz, T., “Outsourcing World Tour,” CIO Magazine, Vol. 17, No. 19,
July 15, 2004, pp. 42–48.
Todd Datz’s article gives very useful country-by-country ratings for geopo-
litical risk, English proficiency, and average programmer salary, as well as pros,
cons, and an insider tip for each country for countries in Asia, Europe, and the
Americas.
Ferranti, M., “Going Abroad,” InfoWorld, Vol. 26, Issue 6, March 8,
2004, pp. 39–43.
Marc Ferranti’s lengthy article provides good insights into the offshore
outsourcing decision. He quotes Forrester Research regarding the top out-
sourcing concerns expressed in a survey of 45 IT executives, ranked in order
from the highest, as follows:
• Security concerns about moving work to the provider’s county;
• Long-term viability of vendor;
• Resistance from IT staff or business executives;
• Overhead costs of managing offshore projects and services;
• Cultural and language differences;
• Lack of internal management skills.
The article also quotes the Giga Information Group, which was purchased
by Forrester Research, as listing the “six steps to offshore success” as follows:
1. Understand why you are outsourcing.
Selected Bibliography
213
TLFeBOOK

2. Focus on management.
3. Include senior executives.
4. Use project management tools.
5. Institute pilot projects.
6. Send appropriate projects offshore.
Field, T., “Outsourcing 10 Years that Shook IT,” CIO Magazine, October
1, 1999.
Field describes the major historic IT outsourcing deal initiated by Kather-
ine Hudson of Kodak in 1989. This is viewed as a watershed event, which, while
not the first or the largest at the time, had the most impact because Kodak was
such a prominent company. This tenth anniversary look back provided some
lessons learned and things that Kodak might have done differently in hindsight,
such as contract for 5 years rather than 10.
Hayes, M., “Taboo,” InformationWeek, Issue 949, July 28, 2003, pp.
32–38.
In the first of a two-part series, Mary Hayes describes how many compa-
nies are uncomfortable about discussing their offshore outsourcing decisions for
fear of a backlash from employees, customers, IT workers, politicians, and the
press.
Hayes, M., and E. Chabrow, “Foreign Policy: Should Government Pursue
Offshore Outsourcing If It Means U.S. Jobs?” InformationWeek, Issue
931, March 17, 2003, pp. 20–22.
As the title suggests, U.S. government agencies are looking to reduce costs
through offshore outsourcing. Some politicians appear to support such a trend,
whereas others are looking to have businesses and government agencies look to
local vendors.
Hayes, M., and P. McDougall, “Gaining Ground,” InformationWeek,
Issue 933, March 31, 2003, pp. 34–42.
This article describes how competition from China, Eastern Europe, and
the Philippines in the software development arena is pushing Indian outsourcers
to offer higher-end services such as consulting and systems architecture work.
In a sidebar with the title “Foreign Intrigue: Continuity Is a Legitimate
Concern,” Mary Hayes discusses concerns customers have about offshore IT
service companies having confidential data and intellectual property in countries
with different regulations and ownership laws. These concerns extend to the
business continuity plans such service providers have in place. In another sidebar
entitled “Made in the U.S.A.: Small Firms Tout Cheap Native Talent,” John
214
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Soat mentions domestic firms that have lowered their charges so as to compete
effectively with offshore providers.
Hoffman, T., and P. Thibodeau, “Exporting IT Jobs,” Computerworld,
Vol. 37, No. 17, April 28, 2003, pp. 39–42.
The authors play upon the fear of U.S. IT workers who are concerned that
their jobs may be transferred to outsourcing firms in foreign countries. They
quote a Forrester Research study that predicts about 473,000 IT and mathemat-
ics jobs will go offshore by 2015. In a sidebar, called “There’s More to Consider
Than Cheaper Labor,” Hoffman and Thibodeau discuss political risks, addi-
tional indirect project and program management costs, including travel costs
and productivity losses during the time away from the office, project require-
ments “creep” (when it occurs), and the potential loss of intellectual property
and trade secrets. The latter two can occur under any outsourcing conditions.
The implication is that the risk is greater offshore.
Horwitt, E., “Outsourcing Grows Up,” Microsoft Executive Circle, Vol. 2,
No. 4, Winter 2003, pp. 28–31.
The author states that the cost-cutting benefits of outsourcing are taken as
given and that emphasis should be placed on agility and time to market. The
article provides a very useful categorization of functions and applications that
are most suited to outsourcing, namely:
• Generic, nonbusiness-specific applications;
• Underlying infrastructures;
• Stable applications that are in production;
• Managed hosting of Web-based applications and platforms;
• Strategic applications and services that need to be deployed quickly.
Those candidate applications and services less suited to outsourcing
include:
• Business-specific applications;
• Applications and functions that involve sensitive and competitive
information;
• Applications still under development;
• Applications that require customized configurations;
• Legacy applications with established support infrastructures.
Selected Bibliography
215
TLFeBOOK

Hulme, G., “Security’s Best Friend?” InformationWeek, Issue 846, July 16,
2001, pp. 38–44.
This article describes the growing use of MSSPs, with an estimate by the
Yankee Group of $1.7 billion in security services by 2005, as well as the con-
cerns voiced by some security officers and the satisfaction expressed by others. A
sidebar with the title “Use Caution When Choosing a Managed Security Ven-
dor” warns of the risk related to the viability of MSSPs, of which the Gartner
Group predicts a 60% failure or acquisition rate.
Johnson, M., “Indian Outsourcer Taps Skills of U.S. IT Workers,” Com-
puterworld, Vol. 37, No. 30, July 28, 2003, p. 14.
In an interview with Kumar Mahadeva, CEO of Cognizant Technology
Solutions Corp., a rapidly growing Indian outsourcer, Maryfran Johnson,
editor-in-chief of Computerworld, highlights the fact that Cognizant, during the
latter part of 2003, was hiring about a quarter of new staff locally in the United
States for senior-level positions in particular.
King, J., “Damage Control,” Computerworld, Vol. 38, No. 28, July 12,
2004, pp. 31-32.
In this article, suggestions are provided as to how to guard against the
anticipated backlash of offshore outsourcing from employees and customers.
Preventive measures when dealing with employees include:
• Centralizing communications and delivering previously agreed-upon
key messages;
• Including all stakeholders in the decision-making process;
• Reinvesting some of the savings in the management of the arrangement.
With regard to customers, the article suggests:
• Minimizing the movement offshore of customer-facing applications;
• Guaranteeing service levels to customers;
• Stating benefits in terms of customer value rather than cost savings.
Krishna, S., S. Sahay, and G. Walsham, “Managing Cross-Cultural Issues
in Global Software Outsourcing,” Communications of the ACM, Vol. 47,
No. 4, April 2004, pp. 62–66.
The focus of this article is on cross-cultural issues as they relate to choosing
appropriate projects to outsource offshore, managing the relationship, selecting
216
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

the right mix of staff, and cultural training for employees prior to being assigned
to a project.
Levinson, M., “Life After Outsourcing,” CIO Magazine, Vol. 17, No. 15,
May 15, 2004, pp. 36–43.
This article takes a very positive look at the impact of three major out-
sourcing agreements, which Nextel executed with Amdocs, IBM, and EDS dur-
ing the 2000–2002 period for some $2.2 billion. The contracts were for terms
ranging from 5 to 9 years. Levinson reports on interviews with Nextel’s CIO, a
senior operations manager, a business unit vice-president, and an employee who
was among about 4,800 employees who transferred to the outsourcers. The gen-
eral tenor of the article is upbeat with descriptions of real operational and busi-
ness benefits derived from these arrangements.
Lynch, R., “Outsourcing Leadership: Hands On, Hands Off,” CIO Maga-
zine, August 15, 2000; http://www.cio.com.
This article discusses what it takes to manage outsourcing relationship suc-
cessfully and asks whether one person, namely, the CIO, can handle both high-
level and detailed aspects. The article points to the importance of setting up a
sustaining structure and direction, building processes and monitoring the day-
to-day relationship. It also describes how successful outsourcing relationships
optimize the skills of the leader supplemented by those of persons delegated
operational responsibilities.
Mearian, L., “Merrill Lynch Hands over SAN Management,” Computer-
world, August 20, 2001; http://www.computerworld.com.
Merrill Lynch is again shown to be a pioneer in outsourcing. This time it
is with storage area networks. The focus is on control and costs. Security issues
or protection of customer information is not mentioned in the article. Consider-
ing that securing customer data under the control of a third party has become
a major regulatory requirement for U.S. financial firms, one would hope
that adequate due diligence was done on protecting customer data in a SAN
environment.
Overby, S., “Lost in Translation,” CIO Magazine, Vol. 17, No. 19, July
15, 2004, pp. 50–56.
Stephanie Overby addresses the issue of knowledge transfer to offshore
vendors—what makes it successful, what to expect, which projects are favorable,
and which are not.
Rae-Dupree, J., “Offshore Winds,” CIO Insight, Number 38, April 2004,
pp. 50–56.
Selected Bibliography
217
TLFeBOOK

While the article does not address security specifically, it does touch on
risks due to political, economic, and social uncertainty. According to a CIO
Insight survey, conducted in February 2004, only 3% of respondents considered
these risks to be the most significant management issue. One interesting item is
the comparison of the actual hourly software development rate and the risk-
adjusted rate. Using such a comparison, China’s risk-adjusted rate is half, or less
than half, of that of any other country considered, which includes Canada, Ire-
land, Mexico, Poland, India, and Israel. This is despite it having one of the high-
est ratios between risk-adjusted rates to regular rates.
Rothfeder, J., “The Road Less Traveled,” CIO Insight, No. 37, March
2004, pp. 42–52.
Merrill Lynch’s human resources (HR) management determined that they
could reduce costs by more than double were they to streamline their in-house
HR call center rather than outsource to a third party.
Solomon, M., “Outsourcing Overhauls,” Computerworld, Vol. 34, No.
35, September 2, 2002, pp. 40–41.
The subtitle of this article is “How to Renegotiate Troubled Relationships
and Live Happily Until a Contract’s End,” which referred to an IT outsourcing
contract farmed out by Johns Manville to (I)Structure Inc. The article describes
how a troubled relationship was renegotiated and brought back into line. Such
real-life articles are extremely valuable, since they provide readers with a sug-
gested roadmap for repairing unhappy outsourcing relationships.
Tas, J., and S. Sunder, “Financial Services Business Process Outsourcing,”
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 47, No. 5, May 2004, pp. 50–52.
Tas and Sunder extend the concept of business process outsourcing in
manufacturing to workflow processes in financial services in the belief that the
latter will soon follow the pattern of the former. Driving factors for offshore
outsourcing include the increasing sophistication of software and other tech-
nologies, the falling cost of infrastructure, and the increasing availability of com-
munications lower-priced bandwidth.
Thibodeau, P., “Another State Looks Offshore,” Computerworld, Vol. 37,
No. 51, December 22, 2003, pp. 1 and 49
In response to Washington State Health Care Authority’s problems in
regard to an offshore outsourcing contract, State Representative Zack Hudgins
was planning to introduce a bill in the Washington State Legislature blocking
the state from sending work offshore.
Thibodeau, P., “Banks Plan Offshore Sharing,” Computerworld, Vol. 38,
No. 8, February 23, 2004, pp. 1 and 14.
218
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

A meeting, organized by the Financial Services Technology Consortium
(FSTC) of financial services firms, including J.P. Morgan Chase, Citibank, and
Wells Fargo, was arranged to develop best practices for offshore outsourcing
operations related to basic services, such as business continuity planning, where
the firms are not competing. They were to consider sharing information on
political and environmental risks in foreign countries. Baseline practices were to
be considered in physical, information, and personnel security, protecting intel-
lectual property, software change management, and so on.
Thibodeau, P., and S. Lemon, “R&D Starts to Move Offshore,” Com-
puterworld, Vol. 38, No. 9, March 1, 2004, pp. 1 and 16.
The reporters describe a trend for U.S. companies to send more sophisti-
cated IT work, such as research and development, to facilities in India, for
example.
Verton, D., “Offshore Coding Work Raises Security Concerns,” Com-
puterworld, Vol. 37, No. 18, May 5, 2003, pp. 1 and 16.
Reporting on a Techno-Security Conference in Myrtle Beach, South
Carolina, Dan Verton voices the concerns, which were expressed by a panel
of corporate security officers, regarding the risks related to outsourcing critical
software development to countries, particularly China, which already is
claimed to have “a significant economic espionage program that targets U.S.
technology.”
Vijayan, J., “Premier 100 IT Leaders 2004: Outsourcing,” Computerworld,
Vol. 38, No. 1, January 5, 2004, pp. 30–32.
Of course, it is better to avoid outsourcing problems than to have to fix
them. CNA Financial Corp. pulled the plug on a $20 million software applica-
tion upgrade project gone wrong, which had been outsourced to a provider in
India. The article provides advice and how to avoid the problems encountered
by CNA.
Security Publications
Ollman, G., “Third Party or Third Rate?” SC Magazine, May 2004, p. 29.
As a security consultant, his more security-savvy customers occasionally
ask Ollmann to perform security assessments of third-party service providers.
Among other things required of providers, he suggests examining reports by any
third-party security reviewers and finding out which of the recommended
changes have been implemented and whether resources are shared with other
customers. He also says that the customer, in demanding that an assessment be
done, may be able to split the costs with the provider, who also benefits.
Selected Bibliography
219
TLFeBOOK

Schneier, B., “Outsourcing Security,” Password: The ISSA Magazine, Feb-
ruary 2002, pp. 4–6.
As the CTO and founder of Counterpane Internet Security, Inc., a man-
aged security services provider, Bruce Schneier is clearly biased in favor of
organizations using third parties to take on certain information security func-
tions, such as vulnerability scanning, monitoring, consulting, and forensics. He
suggests that the customer retain management of its own security. His argu-
ments in favor of outsourcing include cost-effectiveness, around-the-clock cov-
erage by specialists, aggregation of expertise, a broader view of the Internet, and
frequent exposure to attacks.
Business and Business/Technology Publications
Ante, S. E., with Hof, R. D., “Look Who’s Going Offshore,” Busi-
nessWeek, May 17, 2004, pp. 64–65.
This is one of an increasing number of articles appearing in newspapers
and magazines which point to what is viewed as a new trend, namely, technol-
ogy start-ups looking to set up research centers offshore. There is also an interest
by venture capitalists in funding such start-ups since they believe that the lower
costs thereby incurred will increase the chances of success for a given invest-
ment. The article does not mention such aspects as the theft of intellectual prop-
erty or industrial sabotage, yet these should be real concerns when such
leading-edge functions are set up in other countries.
Axelrod, C. W., “The Risks of Outsourcing,” Securities Industry Manage-
ment, Vol. 2, No. 1, February/March 1994, pp. 50–51.
Written in the wake of major IT outsourcing arrangements by Kodak,
Merrill Lynch, and Salomon Brothers, this article is somewhat negative towards
management who engaged in such ventures. Certain areas were seen to be suit-
able for outsourcing, if conducted subject to specific factors.
Daly, R., “Navigating the Offshoring Seas,” Waters, February 2004, pp.
22–26.
The article describes investment bank Lehman Brothers’ experiences with
outsourcing software development and help-desk support to four centers in
India in order to reduce costs. Lehman partnered with Tata Consultancy Serv-
ices (TCS) and Wipro Technologies. At the end of the article, Lehman acknowl-
edged that there were problems with some of the relationships and that it was
discontinuing its arrangement with Wipro’s Sprectramind unit because of
service-level problems with help desk support. A Lehman spokesperson recom-
mended not sending services requiring 24-hour, 7-day support and client
220
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

interaction offshore, but keeping them in the United States or Canada, if they
are to be outsourced.
Dobbs, L., “Is Nothing Private Anymore?” The Dobbs Report, U.S. News
& World Report, Vol. 136, No. 17, May 17, 2004, p. 57.
This column raises the issue of the transfer abroad of proprietary informa-
tion, intellectual property, and business intelligence. In particular, personal
financial information and private medical records are being shipped offshore to
meet processing requirements. Legislators are active at the national and state level
proposing bills to protect such information from unauthorized use and abuse.
Einhorn, B., and M. Kripalani, “China: Move Over, India,” BusinessWeek,
August 11, 2003, pp. 42–43.
The article quotes a Gartner Dataquest prediction that China will have
practically caught up with India in its revenues from software and computer
services by 2006, fueled in part by India’s companies seeking cheaper skilled
labor in China.
Hulme, G., “Security Handoff: More Large Companies Are Turning to
Service Providers to Handle Their Security,” Wall Street & Technology,
July 2003, pp. 26–28.
George Hulme, who is also a senior editor at InformationWeek, quotes
from executives at financial services companies, such as Merrill Lynch and Ray-
mond James Financial, who have outsourced security services.
Marlin, S., “The Right Fit,” Bank Systems & Technology, June 2002, pp.
27–30, and 46.
The article describes how major outsourcing deals fall into categories
defined by Gartner Dataquest. Dataquest distinguishes between the extent to
which the outsourcer provides shared or dedicated services and to whether the
primary benefit is value or efficiency.
Marlin, S., “Opening Gambit,” Bank Systems & Technology, February
2003, pp. 22–25, and 37.
As with many business-oriented, rather than computer-related, publica-
tions, Marlin’s article is favorable to outsourcing and describes a series of major
outsourcing deals to providers, such as IBM and EDS, from financial institu-
tions including JP Morgan Chase, Bank of America, ABN Ambro, Deutsche
Bank, American Express, and CIBC. The first four deals alone totaled $13.3
billion.
Ramsaran, C., “Special Report: Outsourcing Obstacles,” Bank Systems &
Technology, June 2004, pp. 38–39.
Selected Bibliography
221
TLFeBOOK

Cynthia Ramsaran maintains that, despite political pressure and concerns
about security, U.S. financial institutions can establish and benefit from safe off-
shore outsourcing relationships if goals are realistic and strict legal guidelines are
defined in advance. The “rules of the game” are given as follows:
• Know the company with whom you are dealing.
• Know your overseas staff.
• Find out the company’s technology infrastructure.
• Don’t fall into the legal trap.
• Prepare for more downstream outsourcing.
The last item refers to further subcontracting by an offshore outsourcer to
another country.
Safire, W., “On Language: Outsourcing—And the Urge to Insource,”
New York Times Magazine, March 21, 2004, Section 6, p. 30.
William Safire gives interesting origins, histories, and definitions of words
such as “outsourcing,” “insourcing,” and “intersourcing.”
Schmerken, I., “Offshore Outsourcing: Is Your Data Safe?” Wall Street &
Technology, May 2004, pp. 14–20.
Ivy Schmerken’s article is one of the few to date that actually is directed at
the security of outsourcing. Ivy, whom I have known for many years, called me
early in the writing of the article and I was able to assist with background infor-
mation only (no quotes), as I did not have permission for attribution. The arti-
cle provides a good summary of the threats and risks related to offshore
outsourcing.
“Business Keeps Getting Better for Offshore-Outsourcing Vendors,” Wall
Street & Technology, June 2003, p. 10.
This brief, one-page summary quotes from industry analysis firm The
TowerGroup, which lists major clients of firms such as I-flex, Infosys, and
Wipro and describes the nature of the providers’ services. It also lists the securi-
ties industry activities outsourced to Indian vendors and their extent of use of
those activities.
Web-Based Resources
The Web is an incredible resource. Research that once took weeks or months to
complete can now be accomplished in a matter of minutes. The vast amount of
222
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

information available at little or no cost on the millions of Web sites, each of
which can be accessed in seconds, combined with extremely fast search engines,
such as Google, makes for rapid convergence upon needed information. Com-
bined with hot links that bring you immediately to other referenced Web sites,
this makes for highly efficient searches and very effective narrowing down to
relevant sources.
Nevertheless, there are some downsides to the Web, which bring a meas-
ure of caution to providing and following up on Web references, as follows:
• Much of the information available on the Web has not been subjected
to a reviewer or referee’s scrutiny, so that its validity or accuracy may be
questionable. Sometimes the source of the information is sufficiently
well respected to itself validate the quality of a reference.
• With the shenanigans of hackers on the Internet, it is possible for infor-
mation on a Web site to have been tampered with and therefore a
reader might be tricked into assuming that something is from a
respected and trusted source when it is not.
• Site owners can withdraw information, in the form of reports, articles,
news items, and the like, from Web sites at any time. Consequently,
one might provide a Web address as a source and that information may
no longer be available. Sometimes, a search engine, such as Google,
might cache the information. In such a case, clicking on “cache” might
retrieve the noncurrent version of a reference.
In his popular book Secrets & Lies: Digital Security in a Networked
World (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2000, p. 399), Bruce Schneier
states the following in a preamble to his “Resources” section:
All URLs [Web site addresses] are guaranteed as of … [date]. Some Inter-
net pundits have decried the Web as useless for scholarly archives, claiming
that URL’s move and disappear regularly. Consider this list to be an ongo-
ing experiment to prove or disprove that thesis.
I accessed the Web site addresses mentioned here and throughout
the book in the April–August 2004 period, and referenced documents
were available at that time. As I mentioned elsewhere, in the event that
a particular reference is not available, it can often be obtained by con-
tacting the owner of the Web site or the author(s) of the document.
• Some references may not have ever been posted to a Web site, possibly
due to their having been created prior to the setup of a particular Web
site or even prior to the Internet itself in its current ubiquitous form.
Here again, the Web-site owner or author(s) may be willing to oblige
with a copy of the document(s).
Selected Bibliography
223
TLFeBOOK

Despite all the above disclaimers, the Web remains the primary source of
current information and thinking and, when used judiciously, supplies invalu-
able information often at a very low cost. Here is a small sample of Web sites
relevant to our topics:
http://www.aspnews.com
News headlines related to ASPs, news articles, discussion forums, analy-
sis, and articles on industry trends are provided at this Web site. There is
also an ASP Industry Directory, which listed about 1,800 ASPs and 200 prod-
ucts as of May 2004. Articles available at the Web site are well written and
informative.
http://www.aspstreet.com
There is an ASP directory at this site, which lists a variety of ASP
organizations.
http://www.bitpipe.com
Bitpipe provides access to many IT-related reports and papers produced by
vendors, which are generally free, and by research groups, for which there is gen-
erally a charge that can be quite high.
http://www.outsourcing.com and http://www.outsourcing institute.com
The Outsourcing Institute touts itself as “the first and only global profes-
sional association dedicated solely to outsourcing.” Be that as it may, the Web
site has separate categories for buyers, service providers and industry “influenc-
ers.” While clearly marketing oriented, the site does provide access to a number
of publications and issues an “Annual Outsourcing Index,” which contains arti-
cles of interest to the various constituencies, mostly the providers.
http://www.outsourcing-center.com
The OutsourcingCenter (run by the Everest Group) is a very extensive
resource containing a wide variety of publications and other material. It is a
commercial site, clearly funded by those in the outsourcing business or support-
ing outsourcing (such as consultants and law firms), and it is often necessary
to give up contact information in order to obtain referenced information.
However, the richness and scope of the information make it well worth a visit.
There is an on-line magazine called Outsourcing Journal, which includes write-
ups of major outsourcing deals and has an annual awards program. There is a
research area where “sponsored research” is available. With the warning that
content is clearly biased in favor of outsourcing, the site provides interesting
insights and keeps the reader up to date with outsourcing activity throughout
the world.
224
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Web-Based Resources Related to Specific Publications
Some publications have really good research or resource centers on the Web,
which specialize in outsourcing and security. Here are some examples.
Computerworld has an excellent site called the “Outsourcing Knowledge
Center”
at
http://www.computerworld.com/managementtopics/outsourcing.
The site contains a special report entitled Outsourcing: Offshore Buyer’s Guide,
which includes such on-line articles as Mark Willoughby’s “Offshore Secu-
rity: Considering the Risks” and “Hidden Malware in Offshore Products
Raises Concerns” (Computerworld, September 15, 2003), which specifically deal
with security issues relating to outsourcing. While these particular articles focus
on offshore outsourcing, they apply for the most part to all forms of IT out-
sourcing. Computerworld’s “Outsourcing Knowledge Center” also very useful
links to other sources, obtained by clicking on the word “Resources” on the
home page.
CIO Magazine has so-called research centers for outsourcing as well as
security and privacy available at http://www.cio.com/research/outsourcing and
http://www.cio.com/research/security respectively. CIO Magazine also has a sec-
tion of its Web site called “Executive Summaries,” of which one is devoted to
outsourcing at http://www.cio.com/summaries/outsorcing. Of particular inter-
est are the subsections on ASPs and SLAs. In the ASP subsection, there is a
checklist that includes the following pieces of useful advice:
• Keep the contract term as short as possible.
• Benchmark through vendor competition by getting bids from a
number of vendors.
• Establish one or two simple metrics to track growing use, number of
users, or number of transactions processed.
• Create really effective performance penalties, which motivate good
service.
• Arrange for cost-free termination in the case of underperformance.
The site also provides a number of good resources, some of which are
given in the next section.
NetworkWorld magazine has a very informative Web site called Network-
WorldFusion at http://www.nwfusion.com. Of interest are the Outsourcing
Research Center, in particular, and the Security Research Center, which provide
news items, breaking news, case studies, special reports, white papers, and
articles.
Selected Bibliography
225
TLFeBOOK

Conferences and Seminars
While the conferences listed have already taken place, they are often annual
events. Consequently, you can check the various Web sites mentioned for
upcoming conferences, seminars, and the like. Also, it might be possible to
obtain copies of presentations, not currently available on the Web sites, from
conference organizers or directly from presenters.
“Managing Risk for Service Provider Relationships,” BITS/American
Banker Financial Services Outsourcing Conference, Washington, D.C., No-
vember 14–15, 2002.
As spelled out in the conference title, the presentations addressed issues
facing financial services firms in regard to outsourcing IT and business
processes. Specific security-related presentations included the following: “Out-
sourcing Security: Shifting the Function but Never the Responsibility” by Susan
M. Koski, Mellon Financial Corporation, “SAS 70, Systrust and WebTrust:
The Third-Party Assurance Shootout” by Everett C. Johnson, Deloitte &
Touche, LLP, and “Outsourcing Managed Security Services” by Dr. Carol
Sledge, Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, and “BITS
IT Service Provider Security Assessments Framework” by Lari Sue Taylor, Fleet
Bank. At the same conference, I was on a panel on “Cross-Border Outsourcing:
Tales from the Front” which was moderated by Stephanie Moore, Giga Infor-
mation Group. Presentations are no longer available on the Web.
“Critical and Emerging Outsourcing Issues and Trends,” Second Annual
BITS/American Banker Financial Services Outsourcing Conference, Wash-
ington, D.C., November 6–7, 2003.
Continuing from the previous year’s successful meeting, the 2003 confer-
ence provided updates from regulators and industry practitioners. Laura Berger of
the Federal Trade Commission presented “Service Provider Requirements under
the Safeguards Rule,” relating to the information security programs that financial
institutions must develop, including oversight of service providers. Many of the
presentations, including the above, are available at http://www.tfconferences
.com/conferences/Archives/FSO03/presentations.html.
“The Offshore IT Outsourcing Forum,” Outsourcing Strategies 2004 Con-
ference, Las Vegas, NV, March 3–5, 2004.
This conference consisted of keynote presentations, thought-leader round-
tables, sessions, and case studies covering such topics as:
• RFP Outsourcing Due Diligence Strategies;
• Offshore
Outsourcing
to
China:
A
Case
Study
in
Software
Development;
226
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

• Offshore Outsourcing Backlash.
High-level descriptions of the sessions are available at http://www.out-
sourcingstrategies.biz/live/25/.
Second Annual Cyber Security in the Financial Services Sector Executive Sum-
mit, New York, October 9–10, 2003.
Security-oriented, this conference had a couple of sessions relating to out-
sourcing. One was entitled “International Network Complexities” and touched
on the following items:
• Offshore outsourcing;
• International privacy regulations;
• Security concerns with international third parties;
• Internal system exposures of non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches;
• Considering country risk;
• Regulatory and audit requirements.
Another session had the title “The Outsourcing Lifecycle: Keys to Success-
fully Managing the RFP/Selection/Vendor Management/Service Level Agree-
ment Lifecycle” and addressed the following topics, among others:
• Is outsourcing the future of cyber security?
• Offshore outsourcing: can you be sure that it is safe?
• Assessing your potential outsourcers: keys to successful due diligence;
• Monitoring service providers;
• Third-party assessments.
The third annual conference was scheduled for October 27–28, 2004.
Information regarding theses conferences can be found at http://www.imn.org.
The 2004 India Outsourcing Summit, Bangalore, India, October 12–14,
2004.
This is an annual conference, which is organized by TFCI (Trade Fairs &
Conferences International), that covers the outsourcing business from the per-
spective of Indian vendors.
Selected Bibliography
227
TLFeBOOK

Publications from Professional Associations and Academic
Institutions
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Bank for International Settle-
ments (BIS), “The Joint Forum: Outsourcing in Financial Services,”
August 2004; http://www.bis.org/publ/joint09.pdf.
The BIS is an influential international organization, which serves to main-
tain global monetary and financial stability through fostering cooperation
among central banks and international organizations. This paper presents a set
of principles designed to mitigate the risk aspects of outsourcing that are par-
ticularly relevant to the banking, securities, and insurance sectors and from
which more focused guidance is to be developed by each sector. The report
emphasizes that, when outsourcing, financial institutions transfer risk, manage-
ment and compliance to third parties. The Committee expressed particular con-
cern in regard to possible over-reliance on outsourcers for critical activities
affecting the viability of a financial institution and the institution’s obligations
to its customers.
BITS IT Service Provider Working Group, BITS Framework for Managing
Technology Risk for IT Service Provider Relationships, Version 2, Washing-
ton, D.C.: Banking Industry Technology Secretariat (BITS), November
2003; http://www.bitsinfo.org.
This report provides a detailed framework for evaluating proposals from
IT service providers. It includes advice on developing a request for proposal,
performing due diligence, negotiating service level agreements, implementing
services and managing ongoing relationships with both U.S. onshore (domestic)
and offshore providers. This is one of the best and most comprehensive publicly
available guides to selecting IT service providers and represents the combined
intelligence and experience of practitioners from some 75 of the largest U.S.
financial institutions. And it’s free!
Network Systems Survivability Program, Outsourcing Managed Security
Services, Pittsburgh, PA: Software Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon
University, 2003, http://www.fedcirc.gov.
The report deals with the process for evaluating and implementing an out-
sourcing relationship with an MSSP. While it emanates from academia, the
researchers took pains to consult with practitioners and created a document that
follows a particular framework that the Software Engineering Institute has
developed and used throughout a series of reports. Yet the report is also valuable
as a guide for the practitioner. In fact, members of the BITS IT Service Provider
Working Group, mentioned earlier, participated in the writing and editing of
this report.
228
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Research Groups
The reports referenced in this section are not generally available without first
subscribing to the information services of the respective research groups. The
information provided by the groups with which I am familiar, is well worth the
cost as it is not in the public domain and often gives a view of the outsourcing
and security industries, which is not accessible elsewhere. For any organization
expecting to invest heavily in these outsourced services, being aware of the
industry dynamics and the experiences of other companies, as well as benefiting
from the subject matter expertise of the analysts, can easily justify the
expenditure.
Forrester Research
Rasmussen, M., “Securing Business Partner and Outsourcing Relation-
ships,” Forrester Research “ForrTel,” March 4, 2004.
Mike Rasumussen, who wrote the foreword to this book, is a director at
Forrester Research. Forrester conducts periodic teleconferences, accompanied
by simultaneous slide presentations accessible from their Web site, which they
call “ForrTels.” This particular ForrTel discussed “securing the extended busi-
ness,” meaning that it necessary to assure oneself that business partners are
secure and comply with many of the same requirements as the customer organi-
zation. The discussion covered the components of due diligence as well as spe-
cifically addressing general security, security management, personnel security,
access control, system development and maintenance, network security, and dis-
aster recovery/business continuity.
Gartner
The Gartner Group, at http://www.gartner.com, provides a range of informa-
tion technology research and papers on their Web site at no charge. There is
a specific focus area with the title “IT Services and Outsourcing” and another on
“Security and Privacy.” Gartner offers a free Outsourcing Handbook and a special
report with the title “India Offshore Sourcing Options.” Gartner also held an
Outsourcing Summit in May 2004 in Las Vegas and was planning Gartner Sum-
mit India 2004 for August 2004 in Mumbai (formerly Bombay) in India.
Government Sources: Legal and Regulatory
FDIC, Offshore Outsourcing of Data Services by Insured Institutions and Asso-
ciated Consumer Privacy Risks, June 2004. Available at http://www.fdic.gov/
regulations/examinations/offshore/offshore_outsourcing_06-04-04.pdf.
Selected Bibliography
229
TLFeBOOK

The FDIC (Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation), which is an inde-
pendent agency created by the U.S. Congress in 1933 to supervise banks and
insure deposits, issued this report. The report contains findings of a study of
risks associated with offshore outsourcing with emphasis on threats to the pri-
vacy of customers. It provides an excellent listing of risks, including country
risk, operations/transaction risk, compliance risk, strategic risk, and credit risk.
The main recommendations from the study is that financial institutions should:
• Encourage
identification
of
undisclosed
third-party
contracting
arrangements.
• Consider enhancing Bank Service Company Act (BSCA) retention pro-
cedures through the creation of a central database.
FFIEC, IT Examination Handbook: Supervision of Technology Service Pro-
viders, March 2003.
As indicated on their Web site (http://www.ffiec.gov), the U.S. Federal
Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) is a formal interagency
body empowered to prescribe uniform principles, standards, and report forms
for the federal examination of financial institutions. FFIEC members are the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal Deposit Insur-
ance Corporation, the National Credit Union Administration, the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision. The FFIEC
also makes recommendations to promote uniformity in the supervision of finan-
cial institutions.
The FFIEC has published a series of booklets that provide guidance to the
examiners. When completed, the booklets will replace the 1996 FFIEC Informa-
tion Systems Examination Handbook.
In the current series of booklets, the FFIEC published “The Supervision of
Technology Service Providers (TSPs)” in March 2003 (http://www.ffiec.gov/
ffiecinfobase/booklets/tsp/tech_ser_provider.pdf),
which
provides
excellent
guidance in managing risks related to financial institutions’ engaging IT service
providers.
The FFIEC issued a booklet in June 2004 on “Outsourcing Technology
Services (OT),” which “provides guidance and examination procedures to assist
examiners and bankers in evaluating a financial institution’s risk management
processes to establish, manage, and monitor IT outsourcing relationships.” This
booklet is available at http://www.ffiec.gov/ffiecinfobase/booklets/outsourcing/
Outsourcing_Booklet.pdf.
Another booklet, namely, “Development and Acquisition,” published
in April 2004, addresses risk issues related to the management of software devel-
opment outsourcing. It is available at http://www.ffiec.gov/ffiecinfobase/ book-
lets/d_a/d_and_a.pdf.
230
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Outsourcing risk management is also addressed in the “Management,”
booklet, published in June 2004 and available at http://www.ffiec.gov/ffiecinfo-
base/booklets//mang/mang.pdf
On page 32 of the booklet, institutions are advised to consider the follow-
ing factors:
• Ensuring that the institution’s overall objectives and strategic plans are
supported by each outsourcing arrangement;
• Performing evaluations of outsourcers with regard to the scope and
criticality of the services to be outsourced;
• Developing a degree of monitoring justified by the initial and continu-
ing risks related to the outsourcing arrangement.
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, OCC Bulletin: Third-Party Re-
lationships, OCC 2001-47, November 1, 2001.
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, OCC Bulletin: Bank Use of
Foreign-Based Third-Party Service Providers, OCC 2002-16, May 1, 2002.
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) issues bulletins to
provide guidance to national U.S. banks for managing risks. The above two bul-
letins, OCC 2001-47 and OCC 2002-16, deal specifically with business rela-
tionships
with
third
parties
and
with
outsourcing
relationships
with
foreign-based third-party service providers respectively. The bulletins are avail-
able at http://www.occ.treas.gov/ftp/bulletin/2001-47.doc and http://www.occ
.treas.gov/ftp/bulletin/2002-16.doc.
United States General Accounting Office, Information Technology: Leading
Commercial Practices for Outsourcing of Services, GAO-02-214, November
2001.Available at no charge at http://www.gao.gov.
The General Accounting Office (GAO) is the investigative arm of Con-
gress and, as such, analyses, recommends and otherwise provides assistance to
support Congress in its oversight responsibilities. In order to address concerns
relating to the acquisition of IT services, particularly with respect to the Depart-
ment of Defense, the GAO identified what they considered to be leading com-
mercial practices for acquiring IT services. This report provides an excellent
overview of best practices for IT outsourcing.
Vendors and Service Providers
As part of their marketing and public relations efforts, many vendors and IT
service providers, and their associations and lobby groups, offer an abundance of
Selected Bibliography
231
TLFeBOOK

marketing brochures, white papers, and other forms of informational literature.
Of course, these are heavily biased in favor of outsourcing and using MSSPs, but
they can provide additional perspectives and some useful information for when
a justification has to be made.
Counterpane Internet Security, Inc.
Perhaps the most outspoken proponent of the MSSP concept is Bruce Schneier,
founder and chief technology officer of Counterpane, which pioneered the
MSSP marketplace and continues to be a leader in its field. On May 19, 2004,
Counterpane announced that it had received a 2004 Red Herring 100 award.
Counterpane’s Web site, at http://www.counterpane.com, contains a
number of essays, white papers, and presentations by Bruce Schneier presenting
a strong justification for the use of MSSPs.
Wipro Technologies
Wipro is a major offshore outsourcing company based in India. The company’s
Web site, which is at http://www.wipro.com, contains many interesting and
informative white papers and presentations, which they sponsor. For example,
the carry a white paper by S. M. Torto and R. Yesner of the research group,
IDC, with the title “The Role and Benefits of Quality in Delivering Offshore IT
Services.” This paper addresses many of the items mentioned in this book,
although the bias is very much towards the more positive aspects of offshore IT
services.
Similarly, a Wipro white paper, entitled “Outsourcing Total Cost of Man-
agement Benefits,” looks at all the costs and cost savings and shows significant
benefits for offshore outsourcing versus internal operations. Most of the benefits
derive from invisible or hidden costs, particularly productivity and revenue
losses due to down time.
Education and Certification
Kenneth van Wyk, noted expert and author on secure application program-
ming, mentioned in May 2004 that his nephew had just obtained an under-
graduate computer science degree from a respected institution of higher
education without once touching on the subject of how to write secure code.
This appears to be the norm, rather than the exception. Some information secu-
rity or security-related courses are appearing in certain information technology
graduate programs, however. In 2001 the U.S. government initiated a program
called Federal Cyber Service Scholarship for Service (SFS), under which stu-
dents obtain scholarships if they commit to working for a certain period of time
in government. Whereas the latter is meant to address the shortage of security
232
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

professionals, it appears that the graduates of the government program had diffi-
culty in placing graduates into suitable employment within government.
Leading U.S. business schools have recently added outsourcing courses to
their curricula, as described in the New York Times article “Executive Life: Out-
sourcing Joins the M.B.A. Curriculum” (March 28, 2004, Section 3, p. 11).
Currently, the main sources of education are the several security-related
certifications offered by organizations such as (ISC)2 or IISSCC (International
Information Systems Security Certification Consortium), ISACA (Information
Systems Audit and Control Association), and the SANS (SysAdmin, Audit,
Network, Security) Institute. The (ISC)2 offers the Certified Information
Systems Security Professional (CISSP); ISACA has the Certified Information
Security Manager (CISM) and SANS has the more technical Global
Information Assurance Certification (GIAC) program. You can learn more
about these at http://www.isc2.org, http://www.isaca.org, and http://www.sans.
org, respectively.
Selected Bibliography
233
TLFeBOOK

.
TLFeBOOK

About the Author
C. Warren Axelrod is a director of Pershing LLC, a BNY Securities Group Co.,
with global responsibility for information security. He develops and enforces
corporate security policies, standards, and architectures for Pershing. He has
worked in many areas of the securities industry, at firms such as SIAC and
HSBC Securities, and is involved at both industry and national levels with secu-
rity and critical infrastructure protection issues.
Dr. Axelrod was honored with a Computerworld Premier 100 IT Leaders
Award for 2003 and his department’s implementation of an intrusion detection
system earned a Best in Class award.
He represented financial services security interests at the Y2K command
center in Washington over the century date rollover. He also served two terms
on the Board of Managers of the Financial Services Information Sharing and
Analysis Center (FS/ISAC), which is a public-private collaborative effort to
share information on security threats, vulnerabilities, and incidents among
members.
Dr. Axelrod testified at a Congressional Hearing on November 15, 2001,
on the subject of cyber security and contributed a section on physical security to
the Banking and Finance Sector’s “National Strategy for Critical Infrastructure
Assurance,” which was published in May 2002.
He is on the editorial advisory board of The ISSA Journal, and is also chair-
man of the Generally Accepted Information Security Principles (GAISP) Infor-
mation Security Policy Principles Working Group. The latter group is charged
with developing a set of detailed global principles relating to information secu-
rity policy, standards, guidelines, and practices.
235
TLFeBOOK

Dr. Axelrod has chaired and participated in many professional and indus-
try conferences throughout the United States, Europe, and Asia. He has pub-
lished two previous books on computer management and more than 50 articles
on many aspects of information technology, including computer and network
security, contingency planning, and computer-related risks. He has chaired and
presented at about 60 conferences for the financial services industry and for
computer management, technology, and security professionals.
Dr. Axelrod holds a Ph.D. in managerial economics from the Johnson
Graduate School of Management at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York. He
also earned a B.A. in electrical engineering and an M.A. in economics and statis-
tics, both from the University of Glasgow, Scotland. He is certified as a CISSP
and CISM.
236
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Index
24/7 (twenty four by seven) coverage, 45,
158
A Programming Language (APL), 184
Abandoning services
reasons for, 54
Accenture. See Andersen Consulting
Access control, 39, 132–33, 149–51, 176
to applications, 39
to networks, 39
Access management. See access control
Accuracy measures, 123
ACF2, 200
Acquisitions. See mergers and acquisitions
Acxiom, 145–46
Administrative costs. See costs of
administration
Administrative fee. See surcharge for
administrative support
ADP, 114
Afghanistan, 64
Aggregation, 192–93
Alert service, 120, 174
Algol 60, 182
Amazon.com, 120
American Airlines, 127. See also SABRE
system
Analysis
structured and unbiased, 71–72
Andersen Consulting, 188
Anthrax, 6
Antivirus software. See Information security
software, antivirus
APL. See A Programming Language (APL)
Application development, 39, 151–52, 177
Application development
outsourcing of, 21, 132
Application service provider (ASP), 32, 41,
181, 182, 183, 184, 185, 190, 191
Applications and systems management, 177
Around-the-clock. See round-the-clock
ARPAnet, 190
ASP. See application service provider (ASP)
Assessment
of vulnerabilities. See vulnerability
assessment
Asset classification, 132–33, 140–46
Asset control, 132–33
Assurance. See quality measure, assurance
AT&T Solutions, 188
ATM cash machine, 199
Attacks
purposeful, 9
Auditing, 174
Authentication, 172, 198
using two factors. See two-factor
authentication
Authorization, 172
Availability, 36, 58–59, 62, 123
intrinsic. See intrinsic availability
Avoidance, 153, 173
237
TLFeBOOK

Awareness
of security. See security awareness
Back door, 151
Background checks, 136, 172
Backup, 34, 79, 80
Bait-and-switch tactics, 63
Balance of power, 152
BANI. See Bell Atlantic Network Integration
(BANI)
Bankers Trust, 156
Banking Industry Technology Secretariat
(BITS), 38, 39, 112, 168
Bankruptcies, 8
Base rate
for service providers, 31–32, 92
Baseline
for security. See security baseline
Batch jobs, 183
Bathtub curve
for equipment failures, 22
BCP. See business continuity planning (BCP)
Bell Atlantic Network Integration (BANI),
188
Benefits
certain. See certain benefits
controllable. See controllable benefits
direct. See direct benefits
fixed. See fixed benefits
for requirements phase, 93
indirect. See indirect benefits
intangible. See intangible benefits
noncontrollable. See noncontrollable
benefits
objective. See objective benefits
of RFI, 96–99
of RFI/RFP to customer, 96–98
of RFI/RFP to service provider, 98–99
of RFP, 96–99
of transition. 103–4
one-time. See one-time benefits
ongoing. See ongoing benefits
overrated, 103
probabilistic. See probabilistic benefits
subjective. See subjective benefits
tangible. See tangible benefits
tangible-objective-direct. See tangible-
objective-direct benefits
tangible-objective-indirect. See tangible-
objective-indirect benefits
variable. See variable benefits
Benefits costs
for employees. See costs of employee
benefits
Best practices, 58
BIA. See business impact analysis (BIA)
Biometrics, 149
BITS. See Banking Industry Technology
Secretariat (BITS)
Blackberry pager, 205
Breakeven analysis, 108
British Standard (BS) 7799, 132–34
BSP. See business service provider (BSP)
Business
nature of, 121
structure of, 120–21
Business continuity planning (BCP), 34, 36,
39, 64, 78, 132, 134–35, 159–60,
174, 177
Business decision, 112
Business failures, 8, 122
Business impact analysis (BIA), 159
Business life cycle, 112
bankruptcy , 112
declining, 112
maturity, 112
rapid growth, 112
start-up, 112
Business process
operations, 4
Business prospects, 117–18
Business recovery, 79
Business requirements, 112–16, 164
Business service provider (BSP), 32, 190
Businessland Inc., 188
CA. See certificate authority (CA)
CAO. See chief administrative officer (CAO)
Capacity metrics, 62, 123
CB radio. See Citizens Band (CB) radio
CBA. See cost-benefit analysis (CBA)
Certain benefits, 73
Certain costs, 73
Certificate authority (CA), 158
Certification
of software, 120
of staff, 31
Certified information security professional
(CISSP), 131
238
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

CEUs. See continuing education units
(CEUs)
CFO. See chief financial officer (CFO)
Checkpoint, 203
Chief administrative officer (CAO), 135
Chief financial officer (CFO), 135
Chief information officer (CIO), 124
Chief information security officer (CISO),
110, 135
Chief operating officer (COO), 135
Chief security officer (CSO), 135
China
as an offshore location, 118
outflow of work to,7, 138
CIA. See confidentiality, security and
integrity (CIA)
CIO. See chief information officer (CIO)
CISO. See chief information security officer
(CISO)
CISSP. See certified information security
professional (CISSP)
CISSP Body of Knowledge, 131–34
Citizens Band (CB) radio, 205
Client-server architecture, 201–2
Cold War, 203
Communications management, 39
Compensation
limitations to, 42
Competitive environment, 119–20, 151
Completion time metrics, 123
Complexity
of systems and services, 53
Compliance, 132, 134, 147, 148
with legal requirements, 39
Computer and network costs
categories of, 32–35
Computer applications
design of. See design of computer
applications
development of. See development of
computer applications
implementation of. See implementation of
computer applications
operation of. See operation of computer
applications
Computer Associates, 200
Computer viruses, 6, 14, 173
MyDoom, 6
Computer worms, 6, 14
Code Red, 6
Nimda, 6
Concentration of functions, 124–26
Concentration of power, 124–26
Confidence
loss of, 122
Confidential information, 38, 60, 142–44
Confidentiality, 37–38
Confidentiality, security and integrity (CIA),
37
Confirm system, 127
Conglomerate, 120
Contingency planning, 174
offshore, 64–65
Continuing education units (CEUs), 31
Contract negotiation, 58
Control, 51
loss of, 49–50
retention of, 20–21
Controllable benefits, 73
Controllable costs, 73
Conversion
to another service. See setup
COO. See chief operating officer (COO)
Cornell University, 182, 183
Cosourcing
definition, 2
Cost
per unit of service, 51
Cost savings, 29–35
from labor, 29–32
Cost-benefit analysis (CBA), 107–8
Costs
certain. See certain costs
controllable. See controllable costs
direct. See direct costs
excessive, 103
fixed. See fixed costs
for requirements phase, 92–93
for RFI, 94–96
for RFI/RFP to customer, 95
for RFI/RFP to service provider, 96
for RFP, 94–96
indirect. See indirect costs
intangible. See intangible costs
noncontrollable. See noncontrollable costs
objective. See objective costs
of overtime, 29, 32
of administration, 29, 32, 92
Index
239
TLFeBOOK

Costs (continued)
of customization, 43
of employee benefits, 29, 32, 92
of equipment, 32–33, 75–77
of facilities, 29, 32, 34
of furniture and fixtures, 77
of implementation, 93
of integration, 43
of labor, 29–32, 75
of obsolescence, 102
of payroll taxes, 29, 32
of salaries, 29, 32, 92
of security, 34, 39
of software, 32–33, 75–77, 93
of supplies, 93
of telecommunications, 33
of third-party services, 77–78
of training, 30–32
of transition, 102
of travel and accommodation, 29, 32, 92
one-time. See one-time costs
ongoing. See ongoing costs
phasing of, 74
probabilistic. See probabilitic costs
subjective. See subjective costs
tangible. See tangible costs
tangible-objective-direct. See tangible-
objective-direct costs
tangible-objective-indirect. See tangible-
objective-indirect costs
uncertain. See uncertain costs
underestimation of, 103
variable. See variable costs
Costs and benefits
analysis of, 87–93
categorization of, 71–83
throughout evaluation process, 85–106
Countermeasures, 16
Credit risk, 80, 116
CRM. See customer relationship management
(CRM)
Cryptography, 132–33, 158
CSO. See chief security officer (CSO)
Customer
requirements of, 107–28
Customer relationship management (CRM),
191
Customer’s policy
adoption of, 148
Customization, 66
Customization costs. See costs of
customization
Cyber National Information Center, 5
Cyber security, 8
Cyber terrorism, 15–16
Damage, 11, 152
DARPA. See Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA)
Data creation, 141–46, 173
Data disposal and destruction, 141–46, 173
Data General (DG), 185
Data handling and processing, 141–46, 173,
177
Data owner, 141
Data storage, 141–46, 173
Data transmission, 141–46, 173
DdoS. See distributed denial of service
(DDoS)
DEC. See Digital Equipment Corporation
(DEC)
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
(DARPA), 190
Defenses
penetration of, 11
Defensive measures, 11
Department of Homeland Security (DHS),
6, 119
Dependency
on single customer, 121
Design
of computer applications, 41
Destruction
willful, 9
Deterrence, 11, 153
Deutsche Bank, 156
Development
of computer applications, 41
DG. See Data General (DG)
DHS. See Department of Homeland Security
(DHS)
Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC), 185,
188
Direct benefits, 73
Direct costs, 73, 92
for consultants, 92
Disaster recovery planning (DRP), 64, 78,
132, 134–35, 159–60, 174, 177
Disaster recovery services (DRS), 34, 36, 45,
46
240
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

overbooking of facilities. See overbooked
resources in DRS facilities
Disciplinary action, 172
Discontinuance of service, 52
Discretionary services, 114–15
Diskettes. See floppy disks
Dispute resolution, 104
Dissatisfaction of customer, 54, 93
Distributed denial of service (DDoS), 6, 173,
203
Distributed systems, 185–86, 200–2
Dot-com
bubble, 4, 191
companies, 5, 120
Dow Jones Industrial Index, 188
DRP. See disaster recovery planning (DRP)
DRS. See disaster recovery services (DRS)
Due diligence, 7, 110
efforts, 6, 168
evaluation of responses to, 147
questions and requests, 38
Dumb terminal, 185
Dun & Bradstreet, 116
Ease of use, 53
Eastern Europe, 15
eBay, 120
Economic value added (EVA), 109
Economies of scale, 55, 122, 163
Economy
health of, 118
Effectiveness, 31
Electronic certificates, 149
Electronic commerce model, 191
E-mail content screening software, 153, 173
Embezzlement, 139
Empathy. See quality measure, empathy
Encrypted password file, 146
Enhancement. See customization
Enron, 19, 20, 188
Enterprise resource management (ERM), 191
Environmental security. See physical security
Equipment costs. See costs of equipment
ERM. See enterprise resource management
(ERM)
Ethics, 132, 134
Europe, 59, 141, 150, 151
EVA. See economic value added (EVA)
Expectations
meeting of, 123–24
Expectations Matrix. See IT Service Provider
Expectations Matrix
Expertise, 40–41, 63
Extrication from agreement, 105
Facilities costs. See costs of facilities
Facilities manager, 182
Failure
impact of. See viability of service provider
Failure rate curve
for software, 22
Failures
during off-hours, 36
Feasibility of projects, 46
Federal Reserve Board, 68, 150
Financial difficulty
of service provider. See viability of service
provider
Firewalls, 153, 172, 190, 203
Fixed benefits, 73–74
Fixed costs, 73–74
Floppy disks, 204, 205
Fluctuations
relating to projects, 43
Forensics, 174
Forrester Research, 117
FORTRAN, 182
Fraud, 139, 152
Frontier-technology products, 112
Function creep, 152
Funding
inadequate, 54
Gartner Group, 117, 189
Gates, Bill, 18, 202
Geographic match
of customer and outsourcer, 121
Giga Information Group, 117
Glass temples, 198
GLBA. See Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA)
Google, 120
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA), 68, 140,
150
Grid computing, 19, 194
Guards, 136, 172
Guideline
for security. See security guideline
Hacker as criminal, 14, 203
Hacker attacks, 40
Index
241
TLFeBOOK

Hard money, 183
Hardware costs. See costs of equipment
Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA), 140
Help desk, 44, 172
Hidden costs, 27, 50, 63–66
High priests, 198
HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act (HIPAA)
Hiring practices, 38
History of information security, 197–207
History of IT outsourcing, 181–95, 205
Hosting services provider (HSP), 182, 184,
185, 190, 191
HSP, See hosting services provider (HSP)
IBM Corporation, 183, 186, 188, 200
IBM World Trade Corporation, 185
Identification codes. See identifiers
Identifiers, 149, 198
Identity badges, 136
Identity protection, 149–51
IDS. See intrusion detection system (IDS)
Implementation
of computer applications, 41
Implementation of service, 101
Inappropriate disclosure, 152
Incident response, 105, 173, 174
India, 138
outflow of work to, 7, 44, 151
Indirect benefits, 73, 80–81
Indirect costs, 73, 78–79, 92
Information
confidential. See confidential information
Information Coordination Center, 6
Information security, 79–81
Information security outsourcing. See
outsourcing of information security
Information security risks, 11–25
Information security software
antivirus, 8, 153
vulnerabilities of, 8
Information technology (IT) outsourcers
able to use, 28–29
Information technology (IT) outsourcing
clarification of, 2
definition of, 2
Insourcing
definition, 2
examples of, 88–91
Intangible benefits, 72
Intangible costs, 72
Intangible-objective-direct benefits, 82
Intangible-objective-direct costs, 82
Intangible-objective-indirect benefits, 82–83
Intangible-objective-indirect costs, 82–83
Intangible-subjective-direct benefits, 83
Intangible-subjective-direct costs, 83
Intangible-subjective-indirect benefits, 83
Intangible-subjective-indirect costs, 83
Integration
of systems, 8
Integration costs. See costs of integration
Integrity
of data, 36–37, 58
Intellectual property, 37, 60 151
Intelligent workstation, 185, 186–87
Internal information, 142, 144
Internal rate of return (IRR), 107–9
Internet, 150, 190, 191, 202, 206
research on, 117
Internet economy, 120
Internet service provider (ISP), 158, 190
Intersourcing
definition, 2
Intrinsic availability, 59
Intrusion detection system (IDS), 172, 173,
174, 190
Intrusion prevention system (IPS), 172
Investigation, 132, 134, 160
IPS, See intrusion prevention system (IPS)
Iraq, 64
Ireland
outflow of work to, 7
IRR. See internal rate of return (IRR)
ISO 17799, 132–34
Isolated data centers, 197–98
Israeli military personnel, 203
IT outsourcing. See information technology
(IT) outsourcing
history of. See history of IT outsourcing
IT Service Provider Expectations Matrix, 38,
39, 168
J. P. Morgan Chase, 188
Job security, 137–38
Kidnapping, 136
Knowledge transfer, 50, 66
Kodak, 188
242
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Labor costs. See costs of labor
categories of, 29–32
Law, 132, 134, 160
Leap of faith, 164
Leasing
of equipment and facilities, 33
Legal and compliance risk, 81, 177
Legal and regulatory measures, 67–68, 163,
174
Licensing
of software products, 33
Linux, 186
Liquidity risk, 80
Magnetic card, 149–50, 199
Mainframe computer, 183, 186, 197–200
Malicious code, 18
Managed security monitoring service
provider (MSMSP), 190, 191
Managed security services provider (MSSP),
6–7, 46, 50, 116, 153, 157, 163,
190
Management
poor, 54
Mandatory services, 114
Market prospects, 117–18
Marketplace segmentation, 118
McNealy, Scott, 202
Mean time between failures (MTBF), 36, 59,
126–27
Mean time to repair (MTTR), 36, 59, 127
Mergers and acquisitions, 54–55, 64
Merrill Lynch, 156, 189
Metrics
capacity. See capacity metrics
performance. See performance metrics
response time. See response time metrics
security. See security metrics
throughput. See throughput metrics
Microsoft, 18, 158, 202
Microsoft Windows, 186
Millennium
turn of, 3
Minicomputer, 185, 200–1, 205
Misrepresentation, 152
Misuse, 152
Mobile computing, 194–95
Monitoring, reporting, review
of SLA, 104, 153, 172, 174
Moore, Stephanie, 44
Morris, Robert T., 14, 203
MSMSP. See managed security monitoring
service provider (MSMSP)
MSSP. See managed security services provider
(MSSP)
MTBF. See mean time between failures
(MTBF)
MTTR. See mean time to repair (MTTR)
National Cyber Alarm System, 6
National Cyber Security Division, 6
National differences
cultural, 8
political volatility, 8
structural, 8
National Strategy for Critical Infrastructure
Assurance, 6
Negotiation
of contracts. See contract negotiation
Net present value (NPV), 107–8, 110
Network operating center (NOC), 157
Network security, 132–58, 177
New economy, 4
New-hire screening, 172
Nice-to-have services, 114–15
NOC. See network operating center (NOC)
Noncontrollable benefits, 73
Noncontrollable costs, 73
Nonpublic personal information (NPPI), 38,
59–60, 68, 140–41, 149–51
North America, 151
North Korea, 64
Notification service. See alert service
NPPI. See nonpublic personal information
(NPPI)
NPV. See net present value (NPV)
Objective benefits, 72–73
Objective costs, 72–73
Obstacle
change in strategic direction, 103
expensive to implement, 103
overrated benefits, 103
shift in technology management, 103
underestimation of time and staff, 103
unstable technology, 103
Obstacles to completion of transition, 102–3,
139–40
OCC. See Office of the Comptroller of the
Currency (OCC)
Index
243
TLFeBOOK

Office equipment, 186
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
(OCC), 150
Offshore move, 188–89
Offshore outsourcing, 8, 151
barriers to, 8
concerns, 64
costs of, 30, 33
Offshore resources, 4, 64
Offshore services, 4
One-time benefits, 74–75
One-time costs, 74–75
for firing personnel, 31, 32
for hiring personnel, 31, 32
for recruiting personnel, 31, 32
Ongoing benefits, 74–75
Ongoing costs, 74–75, 93
Operation
of computer applications, 41
of services, 53
Operational readiness, 59
Operational requirements, 164
Operations management, 39, 132, 134, 173,
177
Operations risk, 81, 152–53
Operations security. See operations risk
Out-of-wallet information, 149
Outsource
reasons to, 27–28
Outsourcer
financial health of, 42, 116–17
requirements of, 107–28
Outsourcers
of information technology. See
information technology (IT)
outsourcers
Outsourcing
definition, 1, 2
different approaches to, 87
effects of threats and vulnerabilities,
11–25
evaluation process for, 91–93, 107–28
everyday examples, 1
examples of, 88–91
goods and services, 1
justification of, 27–47, 88–91, 114, 164
of information security, 131–61
operational and administrative functions,
20–21
partnership, 17
post Y2K, 5
potential advantages of, 118
reasons to consider, 28–47
relevant decision factors for, 88–91, 164
Outsourcing decision, 41, 64
basis, 28
other side of, 47
Outsourcing process, 163–70
Outsourcing risks, 49–68
Outsourcing triggers. See triggers for
outsourcing
Overbooked resources
in DRS facilities, 46
Overhead costs, 29–32, 92
Oversight, 65
Overtime costs. See costs of overtime
Password, 149–50, 198
Patching of programs, 120, 174
Payback period (PP), 107–8
Payroll processing, 114
Payroll taxes costs. See costs of payroll taxes
PC. See personal computer (PC)
PDA. See personal digital assistant (PDA)
Penetration testing, 120
Pentagon
attack on. See September 11, 2001
Performance, 35–37
improvement of, 35
intangible aspects of, 37
integrity. See integrity
of computer applications, 41–43, 62–63
quality of service. See quality of service
reliability. See reliability
security. See security
service level, 35, 62–63
Performance metrics, 168–69
Perimeter scanning, 120
Perkin-Elmer, 185
Personal computer (PC), 185, 186–87
Personal digital assistant (PDA), 205
Personal identification number (PIN), 150,
199
Personnel
highly qualified, 40
Personnel security, 39, 132, 136–37, 172,
176
Physical security, 39, 79–81, 132–33,
155–56, 172, 176
244
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Physical well-being, 136
PIN. See personal identification number
(PIN)
Pinnacle Alliance, 188
PKI. See public key encryption (PKI)
Policy
regarding security. See security policy
Portals, 192–93
Portfolio
of customers, 118
Portfolio approach
to outsourcing investments, 109
Positive net benefit, 107
PP. See payback period (PP)
Practices
best. See best practices
essential. See TruSecure Corporation,
essential practices
Precision
of requirements, 93
Preferred vendor, 167
Presidential Decision Directive 63, 6
Prevention, 153, 173
Prime Computer, 185
Privacy, 37
Private information. See nonpublic personal
information (NPPI)
Probabilistic benefits, 73
Probabilistic costs, 73
Procedure
for security. See security procedure
Productivity, 31
Projects
feasibility of. See feasibility of projects
Proprietary information, 37, 60, 139
Protection
of customer information, 60
against identity theft. See identity
protection
Protective measures, 11, 67, 153, 177
Public information, 142, 144
Public key encryption (PKI), 154, 158
Quality of outsourced work, 7
Quality measure
assurance, 56, 57
empathy, 56, 57
reliability. See reliability
responsiveness, 56, 57, 153
tangibles, 56
Quality of service, 37, 51, 56–59, 123
RACF, 200
Readiness
operational. See operational readiness
Recovery, 79, 80, 105
Redundancy
of systems and networks, 122, 125
Relationship managers, 30
Relative size
large customer, small outsourcer, 121–22
large outsourcer, large customer, 122–23
large outsourcer, small customer, 122
small outsourcer, small customer, 123
Reliability, 36, 59, 125
Remediation
of Y2K applications, 3, 151
Remote access, 198–200
Remote job entry (RJE), 182–83
Reputation and goodwill
damage to, 54, 93
Reputation risk, 80
Request for information (RFI), 94–99, 165,
169
Request for proposal (RFP), 94–99, 165–67,
169
Requirements
gathering of, 111
Resiliency
of systems and networks, 125
Response time metrics, 62, 123
Responsiveness. See quality measure,
responsiveness
Retention
of staff, 41
Return on investment (ROI), 107–8
Revenue
new opportunities, 43
RFI. See request for information (RFI)
RFI/RFP process
Documentation, 97
RFP. See request for proposal (RFP)
Ricin, 6
Risk
administrator, 20–21
complexity, 21
conversion, 24–25
credit. See credit risk
dependency on key individuals, 25
from SDLC, 21
Index
245
TLFeBOOK

Risk (continued)
legal and compliance. See legal and
compliance risk
life cycle, 21–23
liquidity. See liquidity risk
operational, 19
operations. See operations risk
operator, 20–21
quality of support, 24
reputation. See reputation risk
vendor viability, 24
Risk analysis, 64
Risk preferences
of management, 8
Risk profile, 152
Risk reduction
from RFI/RFP exercise, 96
Risks, 9
information security, 11–25. See also
information security risks
of outsourcing. See outsourcing risks
systemic, 19
RJE. See remote job entry (RJE)
ROI. See return on investment (ROI)
Round-the-clock work, 7
Russia, 15
SABRE system, 127
Salary costs. See costs of salaries
SARS. See severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS)
SAS 70 Report, 20
Satisfaction
of customer, 123–24
Satisfactory service
customer view of, 126–27
SB 1386. See State of California
Scalability
of systems and services, 53
Scorecards. See performance metrics
SDLC. See System Development Life Cycle
(SLDC)
Secret information, 143, 145
Secure coding training, 174
Secure programming standards, 174
Securities and Exchange Commission, 68,
150
Security, 37–40
of information. See information security
of personnel. See personnel security
of physical plant and equipment. See
physical security
Security administration, 172
Security and trust, 38–40
Security architecture, 132–33, 153
Security awareness, 38, 154, 172
Security baseline, 146–48, 171
Security costs. See costs of security
Security framework, 153–55
Security guideline, 147–48, 171
Security infrastructure, 153, 175
Security management practices, 132–40
Security metrics, 58
Security operating center (SOC), 157
Security organization, 132–36
Security policy, 39, 61, 132–33, 146–48,
171, 175
Security policy enforcement, 154, 172
Security procedure, 147–48, 171
Security services, 153–55
outsourcing candidates for, 171–79
Security standard, 146–48, 171
Security testing, 174
Security tokens, 149–50
Sensitive personal information, 143, 145
September 11, 2001, 15, 64, 119, 137
Service
requirements of, 123–27
Service agreement. See service level agreement
(SLA)
Service contracting
definition, 3
Service level agreement (SLA), 40, 49–50, 58,
62, 100–5, 123, 126, 168
Service provider
application. See application service
provider (ASP)
business. See business service provider
(BSP)
Internet. See Internet service provider
(ISP)
model, 8. See also outsourcer
Service provider’s policy
adoption of, 148
Service requirements, 164
Service standards, 62, 123
Services
by third party, 3
Setup, 52
246
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Severance pay, 139
Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS),
64
Shared environments, 67
Short list of contenders, 167
Singapore
outflow of work to, 7, 151
Size
of customer, 50, 55–56, 121–23
of outsourcer, 121–23
relative. See relative size
SLA. See service level agreement (SLA)
Smart card, 199
SOC. See security operating center (SOC)
Software costs. See costs of software
SOW. See statement of work (SOW)
Specialists, 1, 40
Specialization
degree of, 1
Speed to market, 43, 93
Standard
for security. See security standard
State of California, 150
Statement of work (SOW), 99–100
Stern Stewart & Co., 109
STP. See straight through processing (STP)
Straight through processing (STP), 194
Strategic direction
change of, 103
Strong authentication, 199
Subcontractors, 61
Subjective benefits, 72–73
Subjective costs, 72–73
Subsecond response time, 126
Sun Microsystems, 202
Support
relative to performance, 43
Surcharge
for administrative support, 29–30
System Development Life Cycle (SDLC), 21,
174
Systems development, 39, 151–52
Systems maintenance, 39
Systrust, 20
Tangible benefits, 72
Tangible costs, 72
Tangible-objective-direct benefits, 75–78
Tangible-objective-direct costs, 75–78
Tangible-objective-indirect benefits, 78–81
Tangible-objective-indirect costs, 78–81
Tangible-subjective-direct benefits, 81
Tangible-subjective-direct costs, 81
Tangible-subjective-indirect benefits, 81–82
Tangible-subjective-indirect costs, 81–82
Technical support, 45, 61, 123
Technology
instability of, 103
Technology management
change of, 103
Telecommunications
companies, 5
costs. See costs of telecommunications
security, 132–33, 156–58
Teletype machine, 185
Tenure. See job security
Terrorist attacks, 6
Theft, 152
Threat
from cyber terrorists, 15
from disgruntled employees, 12, 138
from hackers and crackers, 13, 146
from inadvertent destroyers, 12
from insiders, 12
from opportunists, 12
from spies, 15
from virus creator, 14
Threats, 8, 11–17
from external sources, 13–16
from internal sources, 11–13
review of, 16, 120
Throughput metrics, 62, 123
Time differences
for offshore outsourcing, 8
Time value of money, 108
Time-sharing, 184–85
Top secret information, 143, 145
Top Secret software product, 200
Training costs. See costs of training
Transfer
of knowledge. See knowledge transfer
Transferring for in-house to out-of-house,
101–4
Transition
completion of, 103
Transition phase, 101, 168
Travel-related costs. See costs of travel
Treatment
of customer, 55
Index
247
TLFeBOOK

Triggering evaluation process, 85–87, 163
Triggers for outsourcing, 112
acquisition of customer, 113
acquisition of service provider, 113
cost-related, 113
dissatisfaction with service, 113
dissolution of customer, 113
dissolution of service provider, 113
downturn in business, 113
end of term of agreement, 112, 169
event-related, 112–14
increase in costs, 113
negative information about other deals,
113
performance-related, 113
positive information about other deals,
113
time-related, 112
Trojan horse, 14
TruSecure Corporation
Enterprise Certification, 20
essential practices, 58
Trust, 59–62
Trust-e, 20
Trustworthy Computing Initiative, 202
Two-factor authentication, 149
Tyco, 19
U.S. banks, 152
Unauthorized access, 152
Uncertain costs, 63–66
United Kingdom, 59, 141, 150
United States, 59, 60, 118, 119, 141
Unix, 186
User authentication software, 154
User registration software, 154
Variable benefits, 73–74
Variable costs, 73–74
Venture capitalists, 63–64
VeriSign, 158, 189
Viability
of customer, 52, 122
of service provider, 35, 50–55, 63,
116–23
Video cameras, 136
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), 121
Vulnerabilities, 8, 11, 17–25, 120
from systemic risks, 18. See also risks,
systemic
of computer systems and networks, 17
of software development, 17–18
relating to risks of obsolescence, 23–24
relating to complexity risk, 21
relating to conversion risk, 24–25
relating to dependency on key individuals,
25
relating to life-cycle risk, 21–23
relating to operational risk, 19. See also
risk, operational
relating to operator and administrator
risk, 20–21. See also risk, operator
and risk, administrator
relating to poor quality support, 24
relating to vendor viability risk, 24
Vulnerability assessment, 120
War Games, 13
Web services, 18–19, 192–93
Web site blocking software, 153, 173
Web sites, 150
WebTrust, 20
What you are, 199
What you have, 199
What you know, 199
Wireless revolution, 205
World Trade Center. See September 11,
2001
World Wide Web, 190, 194, 202–4
WorldCom, 19
XSP, 190
Y2K, 3–6, 197
as a turning point, 3
contingency planning, 5
outsourcing, 4
related computer applications, 3
remediation effort, 3, 189
Zero sum game, 138
248
Outsourcing Information Security
TLFeBOOK

Recent Titles in the Artech House
Computer Security Series
Rolf Oppliger, Series Editor
Bluetooth Security, Christian Gehrmann, Joakim Persson and
Ben Smeets
Computer Forensics and Privacy, Michael A. Caloyannides
Computer and Intrusion Forensics, George Mohay, et al.
Defense and Detection Strategies against Internet Worms,
Jose Nazario
Demystifying the IPsec Puzzle, Sheila Frankel
Developing Secure Distributed Systems with CORBA, Ulrich Lang and
Rudolf Schreiner
Electric Payment Systems for E-Commerce, Second Edition,
Donel O'Mahony, Michael Peirce, and Hitesh Tewari
Evaluating Agile Software Development: Methods for Your
Organization, Alan S. Koch
Implementing Electronic Card Payment Systems, Cristian Radu
Implementing Security for ATM Networks, Thomas Tarman and
Edward Witzke
Information Hiding Techniques for Steganography and Digital
Watermarking, Stefan Katzenbeisser and Fabien A. P. Petitcolas,
editors
Internet and Intranet Security, Second Edition, Rolf Oppliger
Java Card for E-Payment Applications, Vesna Hassler, Martin
Manninger, Mikail Gordeev, and Christoph Müller
Multicast and Group Security, Thomas Hardjono and
Lakshminath R. Dondeti
Non-repudiation in Electronic Commerce, Jianying Zhou
Outsourcing Information Security, C. Warren Axelrod
Privacy Protection and Computer Forensics, Second Edition,
Michael A. Caloyannides
TLFeBOOK

Role-Based Access Controls, David F. Ferraiolo, D. Richard Kuhn, and
Ramaswamy Chandramouli
Secure Messaging with PGP and S/MIME, Rolf Oppliger
Security Fundamentals for E-Commerce, Vesna Hassler
Security Technologies for the World Wide Web, Second Edition,
Rolf Oppliger
Techniques and Applications of Digital Watermarking and Content
Protection, Michael Arnold, Martin Schmucker, and
Stephen D. Wolthusen
For further information on these and other Artech House titles,
including previously considered out-of-print books now available through our
In-Print-Forever
® (IPF
®) program, contact:
Artech House
Artech House
685 Canton Street
46 Gillingham Street
Norwood, MA 02062
London SW1V 1AH UK
Phone: 781-769-9750
Phone: +44 (0)20 7596-8750
Fax: 781-769-6334
Fax: +44 (0)20 7630-0166
e-mail: artech@artechhouse.com
e-mail: artech-uk@artechhouse.com
Find us on the World Wide Web at:
www.artechhouse.com
TLFeBOOK

