PAINT EFFECTS  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
There are varying levels of skill involved in paint effects, but 
some of the simplest techniques will produce very attractive 
results. 
  
 
 
Be sure all ladders are safe and correctly placed. Keep 
children and animals away from the work area. Work in a 
well-ventilated room and away from naked flames. 
  
 
 
Paint effects are great fun and can make your home 
attractive, adding texture and interest. 
  
Most of the techniques covered here are best suited to large 
areas, such as walls. Some, such as stencilling and graining, 
are equally effective on smaller areas, on woodwork and 
furniture. 
  
Paint effects mainly consist of applying a coloured glaze over
a basecoat of a lighter or contrasting colour, which has 
already dried, then working the surface in a number of 
creative ways whilst the glaze is still wet. All the effects can 
be achieved with inexpensive tools and materials, and all are
open to experimentation. You may even create a new style 
and unique effects! 
 
2  - Planning the work 
Decide in advance the size and area that you need to cover 
in one go, and where your finishing point will be. Try to 
make this at a natural break in the surface area, such as the 
corner of the wall or a skirting board, as it is very difficult to 
blend in an edge of paint once it has dried.  
 
 
 
With large areas, you may need a helping hand to enable 
you to work quickly over the surface.  
 
 
 
Have all materials and tools to hand before starting the 
work, with all ladders or steps set up in their best position to 
get the area covered quickly and efficiently.  
 
 
 
Practice the paint technique and experiment with colour on a
board before embarking on a whole wall. 
 
3  - Preparation  
The majority of paint effects today are created using water-
based paints and products that are easier and friendlier to 
use as opposed to the oil-based products which need some 
experience to master. 
 
 

 
Apply the basecoat of silk 
emulsion (1) to a surface that
has been well prepared with 
all the 'making good' work 
done well in advance. See ou
'How To' on Interior Painting. 
Matt emulsion is not a 
suitable basecoat becaus
is too porous, making it ha
to move the glaze over the 
surface and create the effect
Apply the basecoat evenly to 
achieve the best finished result.  
r
e it 
rd 
. 
 
 
 
The basecoat must be perfectly dry before starting work with
the glaze.  
 
 
 
Some of these techniques can get a little messy so make 
sure any furniture left in the room, and surfaces not being 
worked on, are well protected.  
 
4  - Preparing the glaze  
Traditionally, paint effects were created using a glaze made 
from oil paints and an oil-based scumble glaze applied over 
an eggshell base. But these are really quite difficult to use. 
Luckily, there are now water-based equivalents available, 
which are much easier and more pleasant to use, and can be
applied over a silk emulsion paint base.  
 
 
 
You can buy ready mixed water-based glaze products or 
effects paint. But if you can't find the colour you want there 
are many ways of making up a water-based glaze.  
 
 
 
It is possible to just add water to emulsion, but this dries 
almost immediately once applied, giving you very little time 
to work, and is quite tricky. If using emulsion paint, adding 
three parts water to one part emulsion is a good start. Test 
out the mixture on a board to see the effect and add more 
water or emulsion as required.  
 
 
 
You can buy clear glaze products so that you can add paint 
to make up your own coloured paint effects glaze. These 
glazes are sold under a great variety of names, including 
'scumble' and 'clear base', and can be used with various 
paints, but the way they work is basically the same. This 
'product' prolongs the drying time of your glaze, and 
therefore making the whole process easier, as well as giving 
a translucent effect. Follow the instructions of the glaze 
product you have chosen to use.  
 
 
 

Make sure you mix up enough mixture to complete the job, 
but keep a record of the proportions of materials in your 
glaze in case have to mix more. 
 
 
 
Be prepared to experiment; try out a few mixes on pieces of 
hardboard painted in your chosen basecoat and look at them
from a distance to gauge the overall effect.  
 
 
 
 
5  - Colour washing  
This is perhaps the most 
basic technique, which can 
produce a variety of effects 
from bold brush strokes to a 
soft-feathered look. First 
apply your basecoat and 
allow this to dry thoroughly. 
When dry, apply your glaze 
liberally to the surface with a 
colourwash brush, working in 
a random criss-cross manner 
through the glaze over the 
surface (2). The more you 
brush, the softer the brush strokes become. You can further 
work the glaze with a dry softening brush, again used in a 
random criss-cross direction. 
 
 
 
When dry, you can add another coat to deepen the effect if 
you wish or even add a toning colour of very thin glaze of a 
different shade. Building colour with a number of coats is the
way to create a rich, deep-bodied effect.  
 
 
 
Clouding is similarly easy; instead of manipulating the glaze 
with a large brush, you can use a soft cloth or sheep skin 
painting mitten to 'wash' the glaze onto the surface in small 
or large circular motions.  
 
6  - Rag rolling  
Apply your basecoat and allow it to dry thoroughly, then 
apply your diluted glaze randomly using a brush or roller, 
with the basecoat just showing through. Take a slightly 
dampened cotton rag, roll it into a sausage shape and then 
roll it randomly across the wet surface of the glaze (3). This 
will have the effect of removing areas of glaze to reveal an 
intricate pattern. Renew or wash out your rags as they 
become saturated. Shammy leather is another good material
for this technique, as are rag rollers made especially for this 
effect (4).  
 
Alternatively, ragging is a very similar effect, using a damp 
cloth that has been scrunched up into a ball. This can then 
be dabbed randomly over the wet glaze. 
 

 
 
7  - Bagging 
This is essentially the same as rag rolling but is done with a 
crumpled plastic bag or with a bagging roller. It gives a 
much crisper effect with sharper contrasts between the 
basecoat and the glaze. Again, you can alter the technique 
by scrunching up a plastic bag into a ball. 
 
8  - Combing 
When your basecoat is dry, apply your glaze evenly over the 
surface with a brush. Take a rubber paint effects comb and 
drag it across the surface in either random or geometrical 
patterns to obtain the effect you want. Wash out the comb 
regularly to avoid clogging. Most combs come with various 
sized teeth for different textures and effects.  
 
 
 
The combing technique can also be used to create a wood 
graining effect.  
 
9  - Graining  
Combing, dragging and graining can be combined to create 
quite stunning wood-grain effects.  
 
 
 
This technique is ideal for smaller areas and furniture. Use a 
paintbrush to apply the basecoat, finishing in straight lines 
to simulate the direction of wood-grain. Allow it to dry.  
 
 
 
Apply the glaze, again with a paintbrush along the 'grain', 
you can then either comb or drag over the glaze to achieve 
a basic wood pattern. Straight away, using a rubber rocker 
or a specially designed graining tool, you can now work over 
the glaze to create 'knots' and more elaborate grain effects. 
Starting from the top, with the graining tool tilted so that 
the semi-circular ridges are facing you, pull the grainer 
through the glaze. Rock it slightly as it glides through to give
some knots, remembering to keep it moving. By 
experimenting with the tool, you can either create elongated 
knots by pulling the tool in long sweeping motions, or small 
knots by using short sharp movements. Always keep the tool
moving along the surface as you rock it back and forth. 
Dragging the rocker straight through the glaze will also give 
a different finish. 
 
 
 
A soft dry paintbrush can then be dragged across the 

surface to soften the whole impact.  
 
 
 
Experimentation is the best way to perfect this slightly more 
complicated technique.  
 
1 0 - Sponging 
For this you will need a natural sponge; imitation ones 
simply don't work as well. Sponging can be built up using 
two or more colours to add to the effect. 
 
 
 
Apply the basecoat and allow 
to dry. Next, wet your sp
and allow it to swell to full 
size, then wring it out well 
until it's slightly damp. Dip it 
into the glaze and dab it over 
the surface with light 
pressure covering the whole 
surface with slightly 
overlapped dabs (5).  
onge
 
 
 
Allow this to dry, then add another coat, if required, either 
of the same colour or of a matching tone. You will need to 
clean your sponge fairly regularly to avoid it becoming 
clogged, making a splodge rather than a textured pattern. 
 
1 1 - Stippling 
This is very similar to sponging and gives a finer, more 
mottled appearance.  
 
 
 
Stippling can be used as an effect in its own right, or can be 
used to disguise brush or roller marks before applying 
another technique such as rag rolling. When the basecoat is 
dry, apply the glaze and stipple it with the bristles of a 
special stippling brush. This will create a fine, even effect 
with a textured finish.  
 
1 2 - Stencilling  
This is quite a different paint effect to the others mentioned, as 
it is usually used to create a specific design or pattern onto a 
previously painted surface. It uses its own paints and generally 
is used in smaller areas such a furniture or as a border. The 
advantage of this is that it can be done in stages, working on 
one small area at a time.  
 
 
You can buy ready-made stencils or you can make your own. 
There are also a great variety of stencil paints available, but you
can also use any emulsion paint, wood dyes and oil paints.  
 
 

 
Once you have decided where you would like to apply the 
stencil, attach it with low tack masking tape. With a stencil 
brush or sponge, stipple the paint through the stencil (6). Use 
very little paint and build up the design and colours in stages. If 
you use too much paint, the pattern will smudge. Stencil 
patterns can be created using a single colour and motif or 
several colours and designs. 
 
1 3 - Spattering  
Once again, this is a very simple process, well known to 
toddlers and schoolchildren - who are natural-born experts. 
It involves splashing wet paint, varnish, ink or stain onto a 
clean, dry surface.  
 
 
 
The method is to use a short stick held in the hand and to 
knock a loaded paintbrush against it so that a spray of 
droplets spatter onto the basecoat. Don't have your brush 
too wet. You can control this by knocking off the excess 
paint into a tray or onto a rag before approaching the work 
area. You will soon find the optimum amount you need on 
the brush and learn how hard you should knock it to obtain 
your desired spatter.  
 
 
 
This technique can be used on projects of all sizes, using 
very small paint brushes and thin glazes on small objects, or 
large ones on walls. Once again, you can stop in the middle 
of the process if you wish. 
 
 
 
It's very effective in giving stone effects, such as granite, 
when three or four colours are overlaid. Allow each coat to 
dry before adding another. Finally, you may want to seal the 
whole surface with varnish for protection, especially if you 
have used inks and stains for any of the coats.  
 
 
 
Paint effects are creative fun so, above all, enjoy doing 
them!  
 

1 4 - Dragging 
Dragging is another method of wood graining, and can be 
developed further to achieve fabric and linen effects.  
 
 
 
Apply the glaze to the dry basecoat. Then, using a long 
bristled dragging or flogging brush, firmly drag the brush 
over the glaze holding it as flat as possible. Keep going until 
you have reached the edge of the area that you wish to 
paint. Repeat this all along the surface.  
 
 
 
By dragging over the surface again at right angles to the 
first coat you can produce a fabric effect.  
 
 
 

