Welcome to our guide to painting interior panel doors.  
 
 
To complete this task you will need the following items: 
• 
Suitable primer (new wood)  
• 
2 Paint brushes  
• 
Suitable undercoat  
• 
Suitable top coat  
• 
Fine sand paper  
• 
White spirit and cloth  
• 
Screwdriver  
• 
Knotting (if required)  
• 
Wood filler (if required)  
• 
Paint scraper (old wood)  
• 
Sugar Soap (or similar)  
 
 
Preparing the door for painting 
The first thing to do is to remove the handles, plates and lock mechanism, this makes 
the painting job much easier.  
 
New Wood  
 
To prepare new wood for painting, first sand down the door with a fine sand paper 
following the grain, any sharp edges should be slightly rounded off.  
 
Wipe the door down with a cloth and white spirit to remove any dust. Apply knotting 
to any knots, this will stop any resin leaking from the wood and spoiling the finish.  
 
Use a suitable wood filler to repair any joints or cracks, leaving the filler slightly proud 
and then rubbing down with fine sand paper.  
 
Wipe the door down with a clean cloth and white spirit to remove all dust and debris.  
 
Old Paintwork  
 
Check for any flaking paint, remove with a scraper and then feather the surrounding 
paint with fine sand paper to even the surface, fill any open joints or cracks leaving 
the filler slightly proud and then rubbing down with fine sand paper.  
 
Rub the entire door down with a fine sandpaper (especially if it is gloss paint).  
 
Wash the door down with sugar soap and allow to dry out.  
 
 
Painting the Door 
New Wood  
 
Applying the Primer  
 
Apply an even coat of primer working it well into the grain of the wood, ensure to give 
a good coat to the end grain and any knots.  
 
Allow to dry and then rub down with a fine sandpaper, then wipe the door down with a 
clean cloth to remove any dust.  
 
Applying the Undercoat  
 

Choose a suitable undercoat for the top coat, preferably from the same manufacturer. 
 
Apply an even coat using smooth wrist actions following the grain of the wood 
ensuring to catch any runs as you work.  
 
If the door requires two coats the wait until the first coat is dry, rub down with fine 
sand paper, wipe the door down to remove any dust and apply the second coat in the 
same way.  
 
Rub down the door with fine sandpaper and then remove any dust/debris with a clean 
cloth.  
 
Old Paintwork  
 
If the paintwork is in sound condition then you may not need to prime or undercoat 
the door (especially if it is the same colour), although it is advisable to sand down the 
existing paintwork and apply a thin undercoat, for this follow the instructions above.  
 
 
 
Applying the top coat 
Apply the top coat in the order as shown in Fig 1.1, start 
with the beading around the panels (A) ensuring to catch 
any runs, then coat the panels themselves (B) with smooth 
strokes of the brush again following the grain of the wood.  
 
Next paint the vertical stiles (C) with smooth vertical 
strokes following the grain of the wood.  
 
Then coat the horizontal rails (D) using horizontal strokes 
with the brush.  
 
Now coat the vertical runs (E) using smooth vertical 
strokes with the brush ensuring to leave an even finish 
where the joins of the horizontal rails meet.  
 
Finally coat the edges of the door (F) with smooth vertical 
strokes, ensuring to catch any runs or build ups of paint on 
the corners.  
 
Allow to dry and then rub down the door with fine 
sandpaper, wipe the door down with a clean cloth to 
remove any dust, and then apply the second coat in the 
same way.  
 

