 
 
Painting Walls and Ceilings  
 
•  Which Paint, Where?  
•  Selecting Tools for the Job  
•  Preparation  
•  Painting  
•  Cleaning Up  
•  Checklist  
 
1. Which Paint, Where?  
 
There are two types of paint available for interior surfaces: water 
based or solvent based. Within each paint type there are also 
several finishes to choose from. Your choice depends on the 
area that you are painting.  
Water based paints, or acrylics, are the popular choice for 
walls and ceilings. They are easy to apply, have very low fume 
levels, are touch dry in 20 minutes, can usually be re-coated in 
two hours and they clean up in water. Solvent based enamel 
paints must be cleaned up with mineral turpentine or an 
equivalent product. They have stronger fumes. They are also 
generally considered to provide a tougher, more hard-wearing 
surface than acrylic paints. Enamels are often preferred for 
areas that need constant cleaning, such as doors and furniture 
or walls subjected to frequent dampness. Kitchens, bathrooms 
and laundries may be worth the extra time that it takes to apply 
enamel.  
The finish of your paint generally depends upon the purpose of 
the room you are painting. Gloss and semi-gloss finish paints 
provide a hardy surface for high traffic areas such as the 
kitchen, family rooms, bathrooms or children's rooms where 
frequent cleaning is likely.  
Flat or low sheen finishes are commonly used for more formal, 
less frequented areas like dining rooms, bedrooms and lounge 
rooms and where the light matt effect subdues the atmosphere.  
For ceilings, try a special ultra flat acrylic known as ceiling 
white that helps to mask imperfections. Choose a formulation 
that does not drip. A tint can be added to match your overall 
colour scheme. Some decorators suggest using a tint that is a 
half or quarter shade of the colours on their walls for the ceilings 
so as not to have too sharp a contrast between the walls and 
ceiling. Remember to record the formula of your paint tint on the 
paint so that you can re-order it at another time.  
 
2. Selecting Tools for the Job  
 
Make your job easier by assembling all the tools and materials 
you need before you start. You don't want to interrupt your work 
by having to dash off to your local Mitre 10 to buy the missing 
item.  
Choose brushes with no gaps in the bristles and with a springy 
feel to them. A sparse or limp brush will have you dipping into 
the paint more often, will be hard to control and will leave a 

streaky finish.  
The choice of roller sleeve depends on the surface you're 
painting as well as the paint you're using. For smooth surfaces 
and higher gloss paints, use a shorter nap sleeve (around 10 
mm). For rougher surfaces and lower gloss paints, use a 
medium nap (20mm). For very rough surfaces, use a long nap 
roller (around 35mm).  
Select a roller frame with a threaded handle if you want to fit an 
extension to it. This will take the backache out of reaching 
ceilings and high walls.  
 
3. Preparation  
 
Preparation is the key to a good end result. It not only speeds up 
the finishing coats, but also lays a smooth base, ensuring a fine 
result.  
It's worth taking time to mask all windows, door frames and light 
switches, etc, before you start painting - it will provide nice sharp 
lines and means you won't get paint on these areas.  
New Surfaces  
Even new surfaces need to be sanded smooth and then dusted 
off. Prime raw timber surfaces with a primer product before 
repairing any nicks with timber filler. Check the plaster and 
plasterboard for any nail depressions or cracks, and fill these 
with interior filler, overfilling so you can sand it back to a smooth, 
even finish. Then apply an undercoat like Dulux Undercoat and 
Wallboard Sealer. Dulux Mouldshield is good to use in an area 
prone to dampness.  
Painted Surfaces in Good Condition  
If there is no flaking or peeling, wash the surface down well with 
sugar soap to remove dirt, grease and smoke stains. If there's 
any mould use sugar soap, then treat with an anti-mould 
preparation. Check for any cracks and fill with interior filler. 
Overfill, then sand to an even finish. If the existing surface is an 
enamel paint, sand thoroughly to remove gloss. Now undercoat.  
Painted Surfaces in Poor Condition  
Scrape away flakes and blisters and then smooth edges with 
sandpaper. Touch up bare areas with an undercoat or primer. 
Use a heat gun (but not around windows or you will break the 
glass) or chemical paint stripper to soften the old paint, then 
scrape with a scraping blade. Really bad surfaces should be 
scraped right back to a bare surface. Apply an undercoat to the 
bare surface.  
Tape Test - If you're unsure just how bad the old surface is, use 
the tape test. Scratch the paint and press on a small piece of 
masking tape, then rip it off. If paint comes off with the tape, the 
surface should be stripped back.  
 
4. Painting  
 
Protect the floor and any furniture that you are unable to move 
with plastic drop sheets. (Dripped paint may seep through 
ordinary bed sheets and onto the surface beneath.)  
Before you start, it is important to mix the paint thoroughly. Use 
a flat paddle stick or ruler and stir from the bottom upwards (not 
just around) until all the paint is quite smooth.  
Ceiling first.  

Start with the ceiling. Paint the cornices with a brush. Fill in the 
main area of the ceiling with a roller, working from the darkest 
corner of the room towards the light. Work in narrow strips so 
you clearly see where you stopped and started. Paint around 
ceiling light fittings, then complete the rest of that band. Do not 
load the roller too heavily or it will drip down the roller frame.  
The walls.  
Start in a corner using a paint brush to cut into wall edges, 
window and doorframes. Use a roller to fill in the main areas, 
working along the wall evenly in an up and down motion.  
Work from right to left unless you are left handed.  
For window frames, doors and door frames, do the edges first, 
then the face, returning to the edges to lightly feather off any 
surplus paint with the tip of the brush. You'll probably be using 
an enamel here.  
 
5. Cleaning Up  
 
Clean brushes and rollers using turpentine for solvent-based 
paints, or water for acrylic paints. For brushes, work the bristles 
in the turpentine or water until all paint has been flushed out. 
Make sure you get all the paint out of the handle, as this will 
increase the life of your brush. Clean rollers by flushing out 
under running water or by working turpentine through the nap. 
Then wash in warm soapy water and rinse well. Always store 
brushes flat or hanging up, never standing on the bristles. Set 
rollers on end or hang them, otherwise the nap of the roller is 
flattened.  
 
Checklist  
•  Undercoat  
•  Paint in the finish and quantity to suit your job  
•  Paint brushes  
•  Roller frame and roller tray to suit  
•  Roller covers to suit roller frame and paint finish  
•  Extension handle for roller frame  
•  Primer or sealer  
•  Interior filler (for cracks and imperfections)  
•  Filling blade (for applying filler)  
•  Scraper blade  
•  Drop sheets  
•  Utility knife  
•  Sugar soap, sponge and gloves  
•  Stepladder  
•  Flat paddle or ruler  
•  Sandpaper  
•  Masking tape  
•  Clean up rags for spills and drips  
•  Turpentine (if using solvent-ba
aints)  
sed p
 
 
 
 
 

 
Paint Brushes, Paint Rollers and Paint Pads.  
 
Even as we work and play our way through the high tech world of the 
21st century, the good old fashioned paint brush is still the most 
preferred tool for applying paint in and around the home.  
 
1. Paint Brushes  
 
The best rated brushes are those made from natural bristle, with pig or 
boar being the most preferred. However as with most things, you get 
what you pay for and natural bristle brushes are usually the most 
expensive to purchase. A tradesman painter mate of mine always used 
to say that good quality brushes were like good wine - they improve with 
age! His method of "breaking in" a new brush was to first use it to apply 
primer and undercoats where it didn't matter when the brush shed a few 
hairs as all new brushes will. Plus as you use a brush, the tips of the 
bristles become round and this gives a smoother finish to your paint job. 
Cheaper brushes made from synthetic fibres are also available and 
some are getting almost to the quality of the natural bristle brushes.  
 
If you are contemplating purchasing new paint brushes, first spend a 
little time browsing through the selection available at your local Mitre 10 
store. Take into account quality, price and the job you want the brush to 
do.  
 
You can do most DIY work with four sizes of brushes: 50mm, 25mm and 
13mm for general work and a 100mm brush for walls and ceilings. An 
angled cutting-in brush (13mm) is a useful addition if you have a lot of 
work to do around window frames. A cutting-in brush will help you get a 
nice neat finish without paint getting on to an adjacent surface.  
 
2. Paint Rollers  
 
You can apply paint more quickly using a roller than you can do with a 
brush and they are also less tiring to use. Rollers come covered in a 
variety of materials to suit specific jobs: foam for general-purpose work; 
mohair for a smooth finish; shag pile for textured or roughcast surfaces. 
The disadvantages of rollers are that they tend to use a lot of paint, 
rarely give a truly smooth surface finish, and you will still need a brush 
for corners and cutting-in work.  
 
3. Paint Pads  
 
My most preferred option for large surfaces is the Paint Pad. These pads 
are usually made from a layer of foam with mohair bonded to on to the 
surface. The pads in turn are fitted to a plastic handle. Paint is poured 
into a tray with a roller applicator fitted and the pad is drawn across the 
roller taking up paint into the mohair. The paint is then simply 'wiped' 
onto the surface being painted. A very easy and clean method of 
applying paints.  
 
  
 
 

 
 
Painting Exteriors  
 
•  Which Paint, Where?  
•  Preparation  
•  Applying the Paint  
•  Checklist  
 
If you're painting a large exterior area, a little psychology helps. 
Identify sections and then prepare and paint one section at a 
time. That way you set yourself intermediate goals, for instance 
a wall at a time. One finished wall is really motivating and you'll 
feel less daunted by the remaining ones, which look shabby by 
comparison.  
Use ladders with care. Secure extension ladders safely when 
working at heights. Lean the ladder so that the base is 1 metre 
from the wall for every 4 metres of height. Tie the ladder 
securely at the top or bottom to stop it slipping.  
 
1. Which Paint, Where?  
 
You have a choice of two paint-types: water based or solvent-
based. Water-based paints offer a number of advantages, 
including easy application, rapid-drying and easy cleaning up 
after painting. Gloss Acrylic paints are commonly used for 
weatherboard homes, while Matt Acrylic paints are popular on 
brick, cement render and concrete surfaces.  
Generally, solvent based enamel paints are to be preferred 
wherever a tough, hard-wearing, easy-to-wipe-clean surface is 
required. They take a little extra time to apply but can be well 
worth the trouble for doors, door frames, windows and other 
high wear areas.  
 
2. Preparation  
 
Take a critical look at your house to see what needs to be done. 
Look for any defects that might affect the final finish. It's 
important to fix every fault before you begin or the paint won't be 
able to do it's job properly. There is no point spending time and 
money on a paint job that will have to be redone because it is 
starting to flake and look bad.  
New Surfaces  
New bare Timber should be primed first, then cracks and holes 
filled with an exterior wood filler, sanded smooth and dusted 
down.  
Brick and cement render should be rubbed down to remove 
loose sand, and cracks or holes filled with an exterior filler, then 
sanded, dusted off and undercoated so repairs won't show 
through. Bricks and cement surfaces are not perfectly smooth, 
so smooth sanding may not be required.  
Metal gates, gutter and downpipes should be washed with 
turpentine and coated with an all purpose metal primer.  
Painted Surfaces  
All peeling paint must be scraped or wire brushed away, then 

primed. If you're unsure just how bad the old surface is, try the 
tape test. Scratch the paint and press on a finger length of 
masking tape. Then rip it off. If some of the paint comes off with 
the tape then the surface should be stripped.  
For large areas, use a heat gun to soften the old paint, making it 
easy to scrape off with a stripping knife. Use a chemical stripper 
for around windows - where heat might crack the glass.  
Next, fill cracks and holes use Selleys Permafill on flat surfaces 
and Selleys No More Gaps on the two joining surfaces where 
movement is likely. Sand the filler level with the rest of the 
surface. Thoroughly sand the whole area to be painted to clear 
any uneven spots and five the new paint a slightly roughened 
surface it can stick to, especially if the existing paint is a gloss 
enamel. Exposed nail heads, if they are not galvanised, should 
be punched below the surface, and the holes filled and sanded 
smooth to prevent rust stains. Use a sugar soap to remove all 
grease, dirt and dust.  
Rust on metal guttering, downpipes, gates or metal window 
frames (not aluminium) should be cleaned away with a wire 
brush and the metal primed with Dulux Rustguard. Gutter leaks 
should be repaired and sealed with a silicon sealant, such as 
Selleys Roof & Gutter. This will give a long-lasting and 
weatherproof seal. Think about using a transparent sealant that 
will be virtually invisible.  
 
3. Apply the Paint  
 
If painting the whole house, start with the fascia board and 
under the eaves, followed by the gutters. The walls come next, 
then the windows, sills and doors and finally the downpipes. In 
this way, any paint that is dripped onto a wall under a fascia or 
gutter will be covered up when you come to paint the wall.  
Use a roller, if possible, on flat surfaces as paint will go on much 
faster this way than with a brush. Paint pads, especially 100mm 
or 180mm sizes, are an excellent alternative to brushes and 
rollers on smooth exterior cladding and weatherboards. After 
coating about one square metre, even out the paint by lightly 
rolling across the surface with an almost dry roller. Always work 
from the unpainted area back into the painted area, maintaining 
a wet edge to avoid lap marks.  
Be sure to prime any new or exposed metal on gutters and 
downpipes before painting.  
For windows, start by cutting in around the glass with a small 
sash brush, then use a larger brush for the surrounding frame. 
Use masking tape along the glass edge to give a clean finish.  
Doors are painted from the outside in, doing the moulding first. 
Paint the edges, then the face, returning to the edges to lightly 
feather off any surplus paint with the tip of the brush. You'll 
probably be using an enamel here, so it's better to remove the 
door completely and paint on trestles.  
When to Paint  
Always paint in the shade, never in the sun.  
Outside painting should only be done in temperatures between 
10 and 40 degrees Celsius. In summer, the best way is to follow 
the sun around your home and paint only on the shady side. A 
hot sun will dry out the surface too quickly, which may cause the 
paint to wrinkle.  

 
4. Checklist  
•  Primer or Undercoat  
•  Paint in the finish and quantity to suit your job  
•  Paint brushes - a selection of wider and smaller brushes  
•  Roller frame and roller tray to suit  
•  Roller covers to suit roller frame and paint finish  
•  Extension handle for roller frame · Exterior filler (such as 
Selleys Permafill for cracks and imperfections)  
•  Flexible sealant (such as Selleys No More Gaps)  
•  Filling blade (for applying filler)  
•  Heat gun or chemical paint stripper (for removing old paint)  
•  Sandpaper (for smoothing surfaces to be painted)  
•  Drop cloths (to protect driveways, paths, etc)  
•  Sugar soap, sponge and gloves (for washing down surfaces)  
•  Stepladder  
•  Flat paddle or ruler  
•  Masking tape  
•  Clean up rags for spills and drips  
•  Turpentine (if using solvent-ba
aints)  
sed p
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Types of Timber Stains and Finishes  
 
There are a variety of surface finishes on the market that offer 
protection and enhancement to timber while preserving its 
natural look.  
 
Interior Stains  
Dye Stains give a beautiful result on pine and whitewood 
furniture, cupboards, doors and panelling. Pigment Stains add 
colour without hiding the grain - they're available in decorator 
colours as well as timber tones. Clear Pine Finishes are 
intended for new, untreated pine.  
 
Clear Polyurethane Finishes  
These are commonly used to seal and protect stains, although 
the gloss, satin or matt polyurethane finish is attractive in its own 
right, especially on floors, benchtops and drawer units.  
 
Waxes  
Wax finishes offer the simplest of finishes, giving a natural 
sheen to bare or stained woods. Not hard-wearing but easy to 
maintain.  

 
Scandinavian Oils  
Exterior Oils are similar to Scandinavian Oils. These penetrating 
oils produce a soft, lustrous 'hand-rubbed' finish on doors, 
panelling and furniture. After waxes, they are the easiest to 
apply and maintain because the finish is in the surface and not 
on top of it. You may need to apply more coats of an oil than you 
would have to apply of a polyurethane.  
 
Exterior Timber Stains  
These are used for gables, weatherboards, windows, fascias, 
pergolas, decks and fences. These stains are lightly pigmented 
yet semi-transparent, allowing grain and texture to show 
through.  
 
Acrylic Finishes  
These are recommended for areas exposed to strong sunlight. 
The tough, flexible finish of a good product such as Dulux 
Timbacryl gives protection to a surface and needs less 
maintenance than a stain.  
 
Pick your Colour  
When choosing stain colours, remember that the shade may be 
slightly different to that shown on the colour chart. This is due to 
the colour and porosity of the timber. As a general rule, the 
lighter the stain colour, the more it will be affected by the colour 
of your timber. Additional coats will intensify the colour. Most 
stains darken as they dry.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creating a Marbled Paint Effect  
 
Materials Needed  
•  Dulux Acrylic Sealer Undercoat  
•  Dulux acrylic base paint, colour of your 
choice.  
•  Dulux acrylic top coat, colour of your 
choice.  
•  Standard roller (10mm sleeve)  
•  Sponge  
•  Goose or swan feathers  
•  Rubber Gloves  
 
Note: The success of your special paint 
effect will depend on the consistency of 
your technique. We recommend you 
(pic 1) 
 
(pic 2) 
 
(pic 3) 
 
(pic 4) 

practise on trial samples until you are 
happy with the effect and comfortable that 
you can duplicate the technique on your 
final surface.  
 
Prepare your Wall  
All surfaces to be painted must be firm, 
clean and dry.  
If the surface has been previously painted 
and it's in poor condition, the area should 
be sanded to give a sound surface.  
Fill in cracks or dents where necessary.  
Apply Dulux Acrylic Sealer Undercoat.  
 
1) Apply Base Colour  
Using a paint roller, apply 2 coats of 
acrylic base colour and allow it to dry 
thoroughly.  
We have used Dulux Vanilla Cream as 
the base in our example. (pic1)  
 
2) Roll on Top Coat Colour  
Roll on the top coloured coat with a 
standard roller (10mm sleeve) as if you 
were painting the wall (cutting in where 
required with a paint brush). If working 
alone, only paint a manageable area, 
approximately 1 metre across the wall, 
this will maintain a wet edge. If two 
people work together, the first person 
applies the top colour coat using the 
standard roller and the second person 
follows with the sponge and dragging 
feathers.  
Our top coat colour of choice was Dulux 
Colour Effect, Classic Ochre. (pic2)  
 
3) Sponge Off Colour  
This should be done while your top coat 
of paint is still wet. (see Pic3)  
By using the sponge and feathers we 
recreate the subtle veining of marble.  
The sponge should be thoroughly 
dampened (squeeze out any excess 
water). Sponge the wet paint to randomly 
remove some of the top colour, thus 
revealing the colour underneath, and 
create a soft cloudy background. Rinse 
the sponge regularly. Wear gloves to 
keep clean.  
 
4) Use a Feather to Create Marble 
Veins  
Rework the same area while the Colour 
Effects is still damp to create the veining 
with feathers. Use Goose or Swan 
feathers for best results.  
 
(pic 5) 
 
(pic 6) 
 
(pic 7) 
 

Lightly hold the feather by the quill and 
pull it diagonally across the surface, 
turning it from side to side. The secret to 
believable veining is to have subtlety.  
Our combination included: Base 
colour = Dulux Vanilla Cream and 
Colour Effects = Classic Ochre. (See 
pic 4)  
 
Alternative Colour Combinations for 
the Marbling Effect:  
Base colour Russett with Dulux Colour 
Effect Tuscany (Pic 5)  
Base colour Guacomole with Dulux 
Colour Effect Sistine Green or (pic 6)  
Base colour Peach Pink with Dulux 
Colour Effect Cherub White. (Pic 7)  
Keep in mind that the colours you see on 
your screen may be different to the actual 
paint colour. (This is due to different 
monitor settings and resolutions.) We 
recommend that you test all colour 
schemes with colour cards and test pots  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Creating a Ragged Paint Effect  
 
Materials Needed  
•  Dulux Acrylic Sealer Undercoat  
•  Dulux acrylic base colour of your choice  
•  Dulux top coat paint, colour of your choice  
•  A collection of dry, lint free cloths sized about 0.5m x 0.5m  
•  Rubber gloves  
•  Paint Roller  
Note: The success of your special paint effect will depend on the 
consistency of your technique. We recommend you practise on 
trial samples until you are happy with the effect and comfortable 
that you can duplicate the technique on your final surface.  
 
Prepare your Wall  
All surfaces to be painted must be firm, clean and dry.  
If the surface has been previously painted and it's in poor 
condition, the area should be sanded to give a sound surface.  
Fill in cracks or dents where necessary.  
Apply Dulux Acrylic Sealer Undercoat.  
Note: Paints must be thoroughly stirred before and during 

application.  
 
1) Apply Base Colour  
Using a paint roller, apply 2 coats of acrylic base colour and 
allow it to dry thoroughly.  
We have used Dulux Haze as our base colour. (See Pic 1)  
 
(pic 1) 
 
 
2) Apply Top Coats  
Roll on another colour of acrylic paint as your top coat with a 
standard roller, 10mm sleeve as if you were painting the wall 
(cutting in where required with a paint brush.)  
If you're working alone, paint a manageable area, approximately 
1 metre across the wall - this will maintain a wet edge. If two 
people work together, the first person applies the top colour coat 
using the standard roller and the second person follows with the 
bunched up rag or cloth.  
We have used Dulux Colour Effects, Florentine Blue as our 
second coat. (See Pic 2)  
 
(pic 2) 
 
 
3) Ragging  
By removing the top layer of paint with a bunched rag, a 
textured look of crushed velvet is created.  
The dry lint free cloth/rag is held loosely in a bunch (not rolled 
into a sausage). Use a cloth that is large in size - about 0.5m x 
0.5m, rather than using a small cloth. Have a collection of rags 
ready to used. Wear gloves to keep clean.  
The bunched cloth should be lightly dabbed across the wall. 
Change the shape of the cloth regularly. Once the cloth is laden 
with paint, change to a new clean cloth.  
 
Our combination included: Base colour = Dulux Haze and 
Colour Effects = Florentine Blue. (See Pic 3)  
 
(pic 3) 
 
 
Alternative colour combinations for ragging:  
Base colour Pure Cream and Colour Effect Classic Ochre (See 
Pic 4) or  

 
(pic 4) 
 
 
Base colour Tortoise and Colour Effect Monacco Green (See 
Pic 5)  
 
(pic 5) 
 
 
Keep in mind that the colours you see on your screen may be 
different to the actual paint colour. (This is due to different 
monitor settings and resolutions.) We recommend that you test 
all colour schemes with colour cards and test pots.  
 
 
 
 

