Welcome to our guide to painting ceramic tiles.  
 
Painting ceramic tiles is a cheap and easy way to bring life back into your kitchen 
or bathroom, in this guide we will show you how to do it with the least amount of 
fuss.  
 
 
To complete this task you will need the following items: 
• 
Suitable tile primer  
• 
Suitable top coat (gloss)  
• 
Synthetic bristle brush  
• 
Natural bristle brush  
• 
Fine sandpaper  
• 
Lint free cloth  
• 
Dust sheets  
• 
Detergent  
• 
Nail brush (or similar)  
 
 
Preparing the tiles for painting 
The first thing to do (as with most DIY tasks) is the preparation.  
 
First make sure the surrounding area is protected from any dust or paint.  
 
Next take a suitable detergent and wash down the tiles to remove all dust and grease. 
For the grouted areas use a nail brush or similar to get right into the joins.  
 
If there are any cracked or chipped tiles then these need to be replaced not filled, if 
you need a hand with this then see our guide to replacing broken tiles.  
 
Once you have cleaned the tiled area thoroughly then wash it down with some clean 
water to remove all traces of detergent and allow to dry.  
 
 
 
Applying the primer 
When the area is clean and thoroughly dry you can then apply 
the tile primer.  
 
Take your synthetic bristle brush and coat the tiled area 
evenly with the primer, use a smooth vertical action as shown 
in Fig 1.1 to give an even coat ensuring you catch any runs.  
 
Once you have coated the entire area you will need to leave 
the primer to dry normally for several hours, although 
always read the manufacturer's instructions.  
Fig 1.1  
Once dry rub down the entire surface with a fine sandpaper and then remove all dust 
with a lint-free cloth.  
 
Now apply the second coat of primer in the same way, esuring to give a nice even 
finish.  
 
Again rub down with some fine sandpaper and clean off with a lint-free cloth.  
 
 
 

Applying the gloss 
Take your natural bristle brush and apply the gloss in much 
the same way as you did the primer, although it may give a 
better finish if you paint the grout first and then using a 
smooth vertical stroke as shown in Fig 1.2 coat the rest of 
the area ensuring to catch any runs in the paint.  
 
Once you have covered the entire area leave the gloss to dry 
according to the manufacturer's instructions.  
 
After the paint has dried continue with the second coat using 
the same technique as before and leave to dry thoroughly.  
Fig 1.2  
 
 

