Welcome to our guide to painting a ceiling. 
 
In this section we will take you through the whole process including the 
preparation through to the final coat.  
 
 
Painting/decorating the ceiling should always be the first task if you are 
decorating a whole room, doing the ceiling first makes the subsequent tasks 
easier.  
 
 
To complete this task you will need the following items: 
• 
Suitable Interior Paint  
• 
Small Brush (cutting in)  
• 
Large Brush or Roller  
• 
Paint Kettle  
• 
Suitable filler (if required) and 
Trowel  
• 
Dust Sheets  
• 
Sugar Soap and rag  
 
 
When working at heights always ensure that the structure is safe and 
secure. Never stretch out, always get down and re-position the scaffold. 
 
 
 
Preparing the ceiling 
First remove curtains, fixtures and any light furniture, place all heavy furnishings in 
the middle of the room and cover with dustsheets. Remove any loose floor coverings 
and use dustsheets to protect any other floor covering from paint splashes and dust.  
 
Wash down the wall with sugarsoap or a suitable detergent to remove all dust and 
debris.  
 
Inspect the ceiling for cracks, holes and any loose plaster.  
 
For small cracks use a suitable fine filler, for larger cracks and holes use a stronger 
more suitable filler (see manufacturer's instructions).  
 
When filling try and leave a nice smooth finish, it is better to leave the filled area 
slightly proud of the surrounding area and then sand down with a fine sandpaper until 
flush.  
 
 
 
Cutting in the ceiling 

The first task is to cut-in the ceiling, to do this take the 
smaller paint brush and fill your paint kettle so the paint 
comes halfway up the bristles of the brush (to avoid 
overloading the brush).  
 
Start in one corner and coat the ceiling holding the brush 
as shown in Fig 1.1 ensuring to get right into the corner, if 
you are painting/decorating the walls after then you don't 
need to worry too much about getting paint on the walls.  
 
Then holding the brush at the angle shown in Fig 1.2 go 
over the paint to even out the coat.  
 
To cut in around any light fittings you may find it easier to 
isolate the electricity at the main fuse box and then 
remove the fitting for painting.  
Fig 1.1  
Fig 1.2  
 
 
 
Using a Brush 
After you have cut in around the entire ceiling and any light fittings take the larger 
brush and coat the ceiling using smooth parallel strokes, if you paint in 1 metre 
sections you will find the wet edges stay fresher and therefore improve the finish.  
 
Once you have finished the first coat, allow to dry thoroughly and then repeat the 
process for the second coat.  
 
 
Using a Roller 
After cutting-in around the ceiling fill your roller tray to a 
depth so that the paint doesn't rise above the pile of the 
roller (to avoid overloading the roller). Place the roller in 
the paint then distribute the paint evenly by bringing the 
roller back and forth over the top section of the tray.  
 
Now start in one corner and use the roller in smooth 
parallel actions (see Fig 1.4), if you work in 1 metre 
square sections you will find it easier to keep the wet edges
fresh. Coat the entire ceiling and then allow the paint to 
dry thoroughly.  
 
Once dry apply the second coat in the same way.  
 
 

