Welcome to our guide to painting interior walls. 
 
In this section we will take you through the whole process including the 
preparation through to the final coat.  
 
Painting is one of the easiest and most rewarding DIY tasks around the home, 
you can transform a room with the minimum amount of work and time.  
 
We will assume you have decorated/painted the ceiling and any woodwork. If not, 
and you are intending to then it is advisable to complete these tasks first, please 
see our guides:  
• 
Papering a ceiling  
• 
Painting a ceiling  
Doing the tasks which apply in this order will make the job easier.  
 
 
To complete this task you will need the following items: 
• 
Suitable interior paint  
• 
small brush (cutting in)  
• 
Large brush and kettle or Roller and
Tray  
• 
Filler (if required)  
• 
Dust Sheets  
• 
Fine Sand paper (if required)  
• 
Sugar soap (or similar)  
 
 
 
When working at heights always ensure that the structure is safe and 
secure. Never stretch out, always get down and re-position the scaffold. 
 
Preparing the walls for painting 
If your walls need stripping before painting then please see our guide to removing 
wallpaper.  
 
If you have a radiator that needs removing the please see our guide to removing a 
radiator.  
 
First remove curtains and fixtures, place all furnishings in the middle of the room and 
cover with dustsheets. Remove any loose floor coverings and use dustsheets to 
protect any other floor covering from paint splashes and dust.  
 
Wash down the wall with sugarsoap or a suitable detergent to remove all dust and 
debris.  

Inspect the wall surfaces for cracks, holes and any loose 
plaster.  
 
For small cracks use a suitable fine filler, for larger cracks 
and holes use a more suitable filler (see manufacturer's 
instructions).  
 
To check for any loose plaster, tap the wall around any 
suspect areas and remove any loose flaky plaster.  
 
When filling try and leave a nice smooth finish, it is better 
to leave the filled area slightly proud of the surrounding 
area and then sand down with a fine sandpaper until flush. 
Fig 1.1  
 
 
 
Cutting in to the ceiling 
Note: To give the best finish only cut in one wall at a time, 
paint that wall, then start on the next.  
 
The next step is to cut in around the ceiling, skirting, 
corners, light switches, sockets and any doors/windows.  
 
To cut in to the ceiling use the brush as shown in Fig 1.2 
paint along the top of the wall keeping the edge of the 
brush tight to the ceiling, use firm steady strokes to give 
yourself a nice straight edge.  
 
Then turn the brush and hold as shown in Fig 1.3 and go 
over the paint again with a steady stroke to smooth the 
previous coat, this time there is no need to get too close to 
the ceiling but close enough to smooth the paint out nicely. 
 
You can use this technique to cut in around the horizontal 
runs of any windows, doors, sockets and light switches.  
 
To cut in to the skirting boards use a similar technique 
holding the brush at a 90 degree angle to the skirting 
board, then turn the brush and go over the paint again to 
smooth the coat.  
Fig 1.2  
Fig 1.3  
 
 
 
Cutting in around windows and doors 
To cut in around the vertical runs of doors and windows is 
the technique used above but this time hold the brush as 
shown in Fig 1.4 keeping tight into the corner with the 
edge of the brush.  
 
Then using the brush as shown in Fig 1.5 go over the paint 
again with a firm steady stroke to smooth the previous 
coat, again there is no need to get too close to the corner, 
just enough to smooth the paint out nicely at the edge.  
 
You can use this technique to cut in around the vertical 
 
Fig 1.4  

runs of any windows, doors, sockets and light switches.  
Fig 1.5  
 
 
Applying the first coat - Using a brush 
When painting interior walls paint from top to bottom 
working away from windows as in Fig 1.6.  
 
Using a brush  
 
Use the biggest brush you feel comfortable with, this will 
allow you to cover a greater area quicker and therefore 
lessen the chance of the paint drying out too quickly at any 
edges.  
 
If you are using a paint kettle (recommended) then fill the 
kettle so it is half the depth of the bristles on your brush, 
this will help avoid overloading the brush.  
 
Use the brush as shown in Fig 1.7 making a nice smooth 
vertical action with your wrist, paint one section at a time 
ensuring to keep any wet edges fresh as this will improve 
the finish.  
 
With corners always paint outwards over the edge as 
shown in Fig 1.8 this will reduce the chances of any paint 
collecting at the edge and forming runs.  
 
Try to ensure you catch any runs in the paint as they 
happen, if you find a run that has already dried out too 
much to smooth with the brush then you will need to sand 
it down with fine sandpaper, and then recoat.  
 
Apply the second coat in the same way.  
Fig 1.6  
Fig 1.7  
Fig 1.8  
 
 
 
Applying the first coat - Using a roller 

Using a roller - short pile  
 
Fill the roller tray to a depth so that the paint doesn't rise 
above the pile of the roller, this will help to avoid 
overloading the roller.  
 
Place the roller into the paint and then roll it back and forth 
over the top section of the tray to distribute the paint 
evenly around the pile.  
 
With your roller use smooth vertical actions (see Fig 1.9) 
to give an even coat, ensuring to keep the wet edges fresh 
as do each section of the wall, finish each section with 
smooth strokes in one direction (down or up) this will 
improve the finish.  
 
When painting to an edge always roll to the edge as shown 
in Fig 2.0 this will help avoid a build up of paint on the 
edge.  
 
Apply the second coat in the same way.  
Fig 1.9  
Fig 2.0  
 
 

