
 
WHOLE-CELL BIOCATALYSIS  
Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of  
Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, and Biofuels  

 
WHOLE-CELL BIOCATALYSIS  
Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of  
Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, and Biofuels  
Edited by 
Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, PhD  
Sushma Chauhan, PhD  
Balasubramanian Velramar, PhD  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
First edition published 2024 
Apple Academic Press Inc. 
1265 Goldenrod Circle, NE, 
Palm Bay, FL 32905 USA 
4164 Lakeshore Road, Burlington, 
ON, L7L 1A4 Canada 
CRC Press 
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, 
Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, 
Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN UK 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. 
Apple Academic Press exclusively co-publishes with CRC Press, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors, editors, and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors, editors, and publishers have attempted 
to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to 
publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so 
we may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any 
form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC 
please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identification 
and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication 
Title: Whole-cell biocatalysis : next-generation technology for green synthesis of pharmaceuticals, chemicals, and biofuels/ 
edited by Sudheer D.V.N. Pamidimarri, PhD, Sushma Chauhan, PhD, Balasubramanian Velramar, PhD. 
Names: Pamidimarri, Sudheer D. V. N., editor. | Chauhan, Sushma, editor. | Velramar, Balasubramanian, editor. 
Description: First edition. | Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: Canadiana (print) 2023053953X | Canadiana (ebook) 20230539564 | ISBN 9781774914427 (hardcover) | 
ISBN 9781774914434 (softcover) | ISBN 9781003413134 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Enzymes—Biotechnology. | LCSH: Biocatalysis. | LCSH: Biotechnology—Industrial applications. 
Classification: LCC TP248.65.E59 W46 2024 | DDC 660.6/34—dc23 
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data 
CIP data on file with US Library of Congress 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-442-7 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-443-4 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-00341-313-4 (ebk) 

About the Editors  
Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, PhD 
Head & Associate Professor, Discipline of Industrial 
Biotechnology, Gujarat Biotechnology University, India 
Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, PhD, is presently working 
as an Associate Professor and is Ramalingaswami Fellow 
at Gujarat Biotechnology University, India. He obtained 
his PhD from the Central Salt and Marine Chemical 
Research Institute-CSIR, India (2009) in Biological 
Sciences, after which he joined Prof. Taek Jin Kang and worked on the aspects 
of protein backbone cyclization and the development of novel protocols 
for the selective purification of cyclic proteins using engineered eMyc-tag. 
Later, he worked in various institutions like the Korean Institute of Energy 
Research, Daejeon, South Korea; Ajou University, Suwon; South Korea; 
Kyung Hee University, Suwon, South Korea; etc., in various positions. He 
started his regular faculty position in India, focusing on developing novel 
routes of producing industrially important chemicals and biofuels utilizing 
waste biomass. His major research interests are studying and establishing 
novel whole-cell biocatalysis systems for biofuel and biochemical synthesis 
metabolic flux engineering, green synthesis of fuels, and bacterial hydrogen 
production from various waste biomasses. He is a recipient of various awards 
and scholarships from the Indian government, such as CSIR-JRF, SRF, RA, 
and the prestigious Ramalingaswami re-entry fellowship, DBT-India. He 
is also a recipient of various research grants from government bodies and 
industries. 
Sushma Chauhan, PhD 
Assistant Professor and Research Coordinator,  
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University 
Chhattisgarh, Raipur, India 
Sushma Chauhan, PhD, is currently working as an 
Assistant Professor and Research Coordinator at Amity 
University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, India. Her research 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vi 
About the Editors 
work currently focuses on antimicrobial peptide sequence identification 
from various medicinal plants and in-vivo synthesis and application as 
next-generation peptide-based drugs. Previously, she worked as an Assis­
tant Professor in the Department of Biotechnology at the School of Life 
Science, Guru Ghasidas Central University, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh, India. 
She obtained her PhD from the Department of Chemical and Biochemical 
Engineering, Dongguk University, Republic of Korea, in 2018. She is the 
proud recipient of the SRD (Study and Research Scholarship at Dongguk 
University) international fellowship for pursuing her doctoral studies at 
the Republic of Korea. She worked on the protein and enzyme stabiliza­
tion for its next-generation advanced application in drug designing and 
industrial applications. She developed an in-vivo technique for the backbone 
cyclization of protein, which makes the protein thermodynamically stable. 
In continuation of the same work, she has worked on the antibody engi­
neering of eMyc-antibody (9E10) for the selective immune purification of 
the Myc-tagged cyclic proteins and detection via western blotting. Also, she 
has worked on cyclic peptide synthesis as a promising inhibitor to block the 
matrix-metallo-proteases enzyme. She is well-versed in recombinant DNA 
technology, molecular biology, molecular cloning, enzymology, and all the 
high-throughput techniques. Her work has been published in internationally 
reputed journals. 
V. Balasubramanian, PhD 
Assistant Professor, Amity Institute of Biotechnology, 
Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, India 
V. Balasubramanian, PhD, is currently working as an 
Assistant Professor at Amity Institute of Biotechnology, 
Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, India. He is 
well recognized internationally in the field of biodeg­
radation of plastic wastes, especially in finding genes 
and enzymes involved in the process of biodegradation. He is also working 
on developing a band-aid or dressing material coated with an antimicrobial 
compound and with nanoparticles that has potential activity on uncurable 
wounds such as diabetic and leprosy wounds. He is a recipient of awards, 
honors, and fellowships, such as the DST-SERB Young Scientist Award 
and the UGC-DR. D.S. Kothari Post-Doctoral Fellowship, Best Young 
Researcher from GRABS Educational Charitable Trust, CSIR-Senior 

 
 
 
 
 
vii 
About the Editors 
Research Fellowship. He has written and co-written more than 40 publica­
tions, including research articles (30 peer-reviewed) and book chapters (13). 
He has completed one research project from DST-SERB, the Government 
of India, and currently, he has two ongoing projects from state and central 
government funding agencies. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contributors...........................................................................................................xiii  
Abbreviations ......................................................................................................... xix  
Acknowledgment .................................................................................................. xxix  
Preface ................................................................................................................. xxxi  
PART I: INTRODUCTION TO WHOLE‑CELL CATALYSIS .........................1  
1.  Whole‑Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept.....................3  
Tanushree Baldeo Madavi, Sushma Chauhan, Nalini Soni,  
Somesh Hariharno, and Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri  
2.  Tools and Techniques for the Development of  
Whole‑Cell Biocatalysis................................................................................33 
Sushma Chauhan, Tanushree Baldeo Madavi, and Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri 
PART II: WCB FOR CHEMICALS ...................................................................69  
3.  Whole‑Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green‑Chemical 
Producing Entities.........................................................................................71 
Tanushree Baldeo Madavi, Sushma Chauhan, Sai Nandhini Ravi,  
Sathya Narayanan Venkatesan, Vasantha Kumar Kulothungan, B. Bharathiraja,  
Somesh Hariharno, Mugesh Sankaranarayanan, Ravikanth Singh, and  
Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri  
4.  Microbial Whole‑cell Platforms for the Synthesis of  
Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle‑Based Platform Chemicals..............................123 
Nirmala Nithya Raju, Sathya Narayanan Venkatesan, Sai Nandhini Ravi, 
Shengfang Zhou, Vasantha Kumar Kulothungan, and Mugesh Sankaranarayanan 
5.  System‑Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the  
Production of Biomolecules........................................................................173 
M. Mohan, M. Manohar, R. Mothi, Nazeerullah Rahamathullah, 
P. Ganesh and M. Dhanalakshmi 
6.  Biotherapeutic Potential and Properties of Seaweeds .............................199  
Muthusamy Sanjivkumar, Silambarasan Tamil Selvan,  
Balasubramanian Velramar, Kasilingam Nagajothi,  
Sylvester Sayen Merlin Sophia, and Alagarsamy Parameswari  
Contents  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.  Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals from   
Whole‑Cell Actinobacterial Isolates ..........................................................221  
Sumathi C. Samiappan, Sharmila Devi Natarajan, Prathaban Munisamy,   
Rajesh Pandiyan, Suriyaprabha Rangaraj, Mahadevan Kumaresan, and  
Mythili Ravichandran  
III. WCB FOR FUELS......................................................................................267  
8.  Microbial Consortia: A Mixed Cell Catalyst for  
Biotransformation of Biomass into Biofuels and Chemicals...................269  
Nidhi Sahu, Augustine Omoniyi Ayeni, Deepika Soni, and B. Chandrashekhar  
9.  Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole‑Cell‑Derived Fuels.................309  
Tanushree Baldeo Madavi, Somesh Hariharno, Ananya Singh,   
Sushma Chauhan, and Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri  
10.  Bioelectrochemical Systems for the Conversion of CO2 into  
Sustainable Production of Fuels ................................................................335  
Leela Manohar Aeshala and Sushant Singh  
11.  State‑of‑the‑Art of Microbial Whole‑Cell Catalysts for  
Biofuel Production ......................................................................................355  
Manju M. Gupta, Rudrani Dutta, Abha Kumari, and Kumud Bala  
12.  Microbial Fuel Cells: Whole‑Cell System for MFC, Current   
Trends, and Future Prospects for the Green Energy...............................377  
Enosh Phillips, Mehak Bhardwaj, Reecha Sahu, and Piyush Parkhey  
13.  Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production...........................393  
Silambarasan Tamil Selvan, Balasubramanian Velramar, Anandakumar Nadarajan, 
Dhandapani Ramamurthy, and Prabhu Manickam Natarajan 
14.  Microalgal Cell System for Biofuel Production:   
Present Leads and Future Prospects.........................................................423  
Rushita Lal, Anjali Ranjan, Vijay Jagdish Upadhye and Anupama Shrivastava  
15.  Recent Advances in Algal Bio‑Cathode Powered Microbial Fuel Cells.....443  
Nishit Savla and Anshul Nigam 
PART IV: WHOLE‑CELL BIOCATALYSTS FOR   
ENVIRONMENT RESTORATION..........................................................465  
16.  Production of Biosurfactant by Microbes and Its  
Application in Biodegradation of Pollutants ............................................467  
Nalini Soni, Anushri Keshri, Shilpa Nayak, Saurabh Gupta,   
Abhimanyu Kumar Jha, and Balasubramanian Velramar  
x 
Contents 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
17.  Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells..............................483  
Saurabh Gupta, Nalini Soni, Abhimanyu Kumar Jha, and  
Balasubramanian Velramar  
18.  Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal  
Whole‑Cell Support: An Eco‑Technological Approach...........................515 
Silambarasan Tamil Selvan, Balasubramanian Velramar, 
Ravi Kumar Chandrasekaran, Dhandapani Ramamurthy, and  
Prabhu Manickam Natarajan 
 Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
of Fermentation‑Based Products Produced via Whole‑Cell  
Biotransformation.......................................................................................555 
Mohit Mishra, Bhairav Prasad, Arunima Sur Karkun, Arpita Srivastava, 
Aditya Kate, Sharda Dhadse, and Akanksha Choubey 
  Microbial Cell Systems for Polyhydroxyalkanoate  
Production and Its Diverse Applications ..................................................585 
Nidhi Kunjar, Priyanka Singh, Vijay Jagdish Upadhye and Anupama Shrivastava 
Index.....................................................................................................................607  
xi 
Contents 
19.
20.

Contributors  
Leela Manohar Aeshala 
Assistant Professor (Grade-I), Department of Chemical Engineering, National Institute of Technology, 
Srinagar, Jammu, and Kashmir, India 
Augustine Omoniyi Ayeni 
Chemical Engineering Department, Covenant University, Ota, Nigeria 
Kumud Bala 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 
B. Bharathiraja 
Department of Chemical Engineering, Vel Tech High Tech Dr. Rangarajan Dr. Sakunthala Engineering 
College, Avadi, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
Mehak Bhardwaj 
Department of Biotechnology, St. Aloysius College (Autonomous), Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India 
Ravi Kumar Chandrasekaran 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
B. Chandrashekhar 
Catalysts Biotechnologies Pvt. Ltd., Delhi, India 
Sushma Chauhan 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Department of Chemical Engineering, Dongguk University–Seoul, Seoul 100-715, Republic of Korea 
Akanksha Choubey 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Sharda Dhadse 
Environmental Biotechnology and Genomics Division, NEERI, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India 
M. Dhanalakshmi 
Department of Mathematics, Sri Shanmugha College of Engineering and Technology, Sankari, Salem, 
Tamil Nadu, India 
Rudrani Dutta 
University of Delhi, Sri Aurobindo College, Delhi, India 
P. Ganesh 
Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Annamalai University, Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu, 
India 
Manju M. Gupta 
University of Delhi, Sri Aurobindo College, Delhi, India 
Saurabh Gupta 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Somesh Hariharno 
Discipline of Industrial Biotechnology, Gujarat Biotechnology University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India 

 
xiv 
Contributors 
Abhimanyu Kumar Jha 
Department of Biotechnology, Sharda University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Arunima Sur Karkun 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Aditya Kate 
Environmental Biotechnology and Genomics Division, NEERI, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India 
Anushri Keshri 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Vasantha Kumar Kulothungan 
Department of Biotechnology, Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. Sagunthala R&D Institute of Science and 
Technology, Avadi, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
Mahadevan Kumaresan 
Department of Microbial Biotechnology, Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 
Abha Kumari 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Nidhi Kunjar 
Department of Microbiology, Parul Institute of Applied Sciences, Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat, 
India 
Rushita Lal 
Department of Microbiology, Parul Institute of Applied Sciences, Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat, 
India 
Tanushree Baldeo Madavi 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India; 
Discipline of Industrial Biotechnology, Gujarat Biotechnology University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India 
M. Manohar 
Department of Microbiology, Sadakathullah Appa College (Autonomous), Tamil Nadu, India 
Mohit Mishra 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
M. Mohan 
Department of Chemistry, Mahendra Engineering College (Autonomous), Namakkal, Tamil Nadu, India 
R. Mothi 
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Dr. N.G.P. Institute of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, 
India 
Prathaban Munisamy 
Department of Microbiology, Pondicherry University, Pondicherry, Tamil Nadu, India 
Anandakumar Nadarajan 
Department of Education, The Gandhigarm Rural Institute, Gandhigram, Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India 
Kasilingam Nagajothi 
Department of Microbiology, K.R. College of Arts and Science, Kovilpatti, Tamil Nadu, India 
Prabhu Manickam Natarajan 
Department of Clinical Sciences, Center of Medical and Bio-Allied Health Sciences and Research, 
College of Dentistry, Ajman University, Ajman, UAE 

 
xv 
Contributors 
Sharmila Devi Natarajan 
Department of Microbiology, Karpagam Academy of Higher Education, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 
Shilpa Nayak 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Anshul Nigam 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Maharashtra, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India; FBE 
Technologies Private Limited, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India; Department of Biotechnology, Kanpur 
Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri 
Discipline of Industrial Biotechnology, Gujarat Biotechnology University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India 
Rajesh Pandiyan 
Center for Materials Engineering and Regenerative Medicine, Bharath Institute of Higher Education 
and Research, Bharath University (Deemed to be University), Selaiyur, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
Alagarsamy Parameswari 
Department of Microbiology, K.R. College of Arts and Science, Kovilpatti, Tamil Nadu, India 
Piyush Parkhey 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Enosh Phillips 
Department of Biotechnology, St. Aloysius College (Autonomous), Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India; 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Bhairav Prasad 
Chandigarh College of Technology, Chandigarh Group of Colleges, Mohali, Punjab, India 
Nazeerullah Rahamathullah 
Department of Biomedical Science, College of Medicine, Gulf Medical University, Ajman, United Arab 
Emirates 
Nirmala Nithya Raju 
Department of Biotechnology, Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. Sagunthala R&D Institute of Science and 
Technology, Avadi, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
Dhandapani Ramamurthy 
Department of Microbiology, School of Biosciences, School of Microbiology, Periyar University, 
Salem, Tamil Nadu, India; Department of Physics, Thanthai Periyar EVR Government Polytechnic 
College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India 
Suriyaprabha Rangaraj 
Department of Biotechnology, Sona College of Arts and Science, Salem, Tamil Nadu, India 
Anjali Ranjan 
Department of Microbiology, Parul Institute of Applied Sciences, Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat, 
India 
Sai Nandhini Ravi 
Department of Biotechnology, Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. Sagunthala R&D Institute of Science and 
Technology, Avadi, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
Mythili Ravichandran 
Department of Microbiology, Vivekanandha Arts and Science College for Women, Sankari, Tamil Nadu, 
India 

 
xvi 
Contributors 
Nidhi Sahu 
National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur, Maharashtra, India 
Reecha Sahu 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Sumathi C. Samiappan 
Department of Chemistry and Biosciences, Srinivasa Ramanujan Center, SASTRA Deemed to be 
University, Kumbakonam, Tamil Nadu, India 
Muthusamy Sanjivkumar 
Department of Microbiology, K.R. College of Arts and Science, Kovilpatti, Tamil Nadu, India 
Mugesh Sankaranarayanan 
Associate Professor, Department of Biotechnology, Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. Sagunthala R&D 
Institute of Science and Technology, Avadi, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India; Park’s Biolabs LLP, Vel Tech 
Technology Incubator, Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. Sagunthala R&D Institute of Science and Technology, 
Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
Nishit Savla 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Maharashtra, Mumbai, Maharashtra, India 
Silambarasan Tamil Selvan 
Department of Microbiology, School of Allied Health Sciences, Vinayaka Missions Research 
Foundation (Deemed to be University), Salem, Tamil Nadu, India 
Anupama Shrivastava 
Faculty of Life Health and Allied Sciences, Institute for Technology and Management (ITM), 
Vocational University, At and Po-Raval, Ta-Waghodia, Vadodara, Gujarat, India 
Ananya Singh 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Priyanka Singh 
The Novo Nordisk Foundation, Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens 
Lyngby, Denmark 
Ravikanth Singh 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Uttar Pradesh, Noida, U.P.-201313, India 
Sushant Singh 
Associate Professor, Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Deepika Soni 
School of Biotechnology, Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi, India 
Nalini Soni 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Sylvester Sayen Merlin Sophia 
Department of Microbiology, K.R. College of Arts and Science, Kovilpatti, Tamil Nadu, India 
Arpita Srivastava 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
Vijay Jagdish Upadhye 
Center of Research for Development (CR4D), Parul Institute of Applied Sciences (PIAS), Parul 
University (DSIR-SIRO Recognized), PO Limda, Tal Waghodia, Vadodara, Gujarat, India 

 
Contributors 
xvii 
Balasubramanian Velramar 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India; 
Department of Microbiology, School of Biosciences, School of Microbiology, Periyar University, 
Salem, Tamil Nadu, India 
Sathya Narayanan Venkatesan 
Department of Biotechnology, Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. Sagunthala R&D Institute of Science and 
Technology, Avadi, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
Shengfang Zhou 
The Key Laboratory of Biotechnology for the Medicinal Plant of Jiangsu Province, School of Life 
Sciences, Jiangsu Normal University, Xuzhou, China 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations  
1,4-BDO 
1,4-butanediol 
2,3-BDO 
2,3-butanediol 
3-HP 
3-hydroxypropionic acid 
AA 
adipic acid 
AADS 
absorbance-activated droplet sorter 
AAR 
acyl-ACP/-CoA reductase 
ABA 
aminobutyric acid 
ABE 
acetone-butanol-ethanol 
ACK 
acetate kinase 
ACS 
active center stabilization 
AD 
aldehyde decarbonylase 
AD 
anaerobic digestion 
ADC 
arginine decarboxylase 
ADO 
aldehyde deformylating oxygenase 
ADS 
amorphadiene synthase 
AF 
anaerobic filter 
AFPs 
antifungal peptides 
AHR 
aldehyde reductases 
AI 
artificial intelligence 
ALDC 
α-acetolactate decarboxylase 
aldH 
aldehyde dehydrogenase 
ALE 
adaptive laboratory evolution 
ALR 
air-lift reactor 
ALS 
α-acetolactate synthase 
AM 
additive manufacturing 
A-MFC 
algal-microbial fuel cell 
AMP 
2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol 
AMY 
amycomicin 
AnMBR 
anaerobic membrane bioreactor 
API 
active pharmaceutical ingredients 
asRNA 
antisense RNA 
ATP 
adenosine triphosphate 
BAR 
benzalacetone reductase 
BAS 
benzalacetone synthase 

 
xx 
Abbreviations 
BBMP  
Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike 
BEC 
bio-electrochemical cells 
BES  
bioelectrochemical systems 
BESA  
2-bromoethanesulfonic acid 
BGC 
biosynthetic gene clusters 
BioICEP  
bio-innovation of a circular economy for plastics 
BL  
1,4-butanolide 
BOD 
biological oxygen demand 
BPA  
bisphenol A 
BZA  
benzylamine 
CA  
cellulose acetate 
CAD 
cis-aconitase decarboxylase 
CAD 
computer-aided design 
CAGR 
compound annual growth rate 
CAM 
crassulacean acid metabolism 
CAR 
carboxylic acid reductase 
CAWS 
computer-aided wet-spinning 
CBB 
Calvin-Benson Bassham 
CBP  
consolidated bioprocessing 
CCM 
carbon concentration mechanism 
CD 
compact discs 
CFCs 
chlorofluorocarbons 
CLC 
chemical looping combustion 
CLP  
calcium looping process 
CMC 
critical micelle concentration 
CO2  
carbon dioxide 
COD 
chemical oxygen demand 
CRIM  
conditional-replication, integration, and modular 
CRISPR 
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats 
CRISPR-Cas  
clustered regularly interspaced short palindrome 
region-Cas 
crRNA  
CRISPR RNA 
CSRs 
cluster-situated regulators 
CT  
computed tomography 
CuNP  
copper nanoparticles 
DCAs 
dicarboxylic acids 
DDT  
dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane 
DERA  
deoxyribose-5-phosphate aldolase 
DFE 
because difluoroethane 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxi 
Abbreviations 
DHAA 
dihydroartemisinic acid 
DHAP 
dihydroxyacetone phosphate 
DIW 
direct ink writing 
DMAPP 
dimethylallyl diphosphate 
DMBPO 
5-(2,4-dimethylbenzyl) pyrrolidine-2-one 
DMSO 
dimethyl sulfoxide 
DoE 
department of energy 
DSBs 
double-strand breaks 
DSP 
downstream processing 
DXP 
1-deoxyxylulose-5-phosphate 
EBP 
ethanol blending program 
ECM 
extracellular matrix 
EDP 
Entner-Doudoroff pathway 
EIA 
energy information administration 
EMP 
Embden-Meyerhof pathway 
EPR 
extended producers' responsibility 
EVOH 
ethylene vinyl alcohol 
FA 
fumaric acid 
FAAE 
fatty acid alkyl esters 
FACS 
fluorescence-activated cell sorting 
FAEE 
fatty acid ethyl esters 
FAME 
fatty acid methyl esters 
FAP 
fatty acid photo 
FaS 
farnesene synthesize 
FCV 
feline calicivirus 
FDH 
fumarate dehydrogenase 
FDM 
fused deposition modeling 
FDP 
farnesyl diphosphate 
FFA 
free fatty acid 
FRT 
FLP recombination target 
FTIR 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy 
FTO 
fluorine tin oxide 
FUM 
fumarase 
G1 
generation 1/I generation 
G2 
generation 2/II generation 
G3 
generation 3/III generation 
G3P 
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate 
GA 
glucaric acid 
GABA 
γ-amino butyric acid 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxii 
Abbreviations 
GC-FID 
gas chromatograph-flame ionization sensor 
GDH 
glutamate dehydrogenase 
HG 
greenhouse gases 
GPGP 
great Pacific garbage patch 
GPP 
geranyl diphosphate 
GPR 
gene-protein-reaction 
GRAS 
generally regarded as safe 
GSM 
genome-scale models 
h-BeReTa 
hierarchical-beneficial regulatory targeting 
HDPE 
high-density polyethylene 
HDR 
homology-directed repair 
HIV 
human immunodeficiency virus 
HMF 
5-hydroxymethylfurfural 
HMG-CoA 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzymeA 
HmgR 
Hmg-CoA reductase 
HmgS 
Hmg-CoA synthase 
HSV 
herpes simplex virus 
HTL 
hydrothermal liquefaction 
HTS 
high throughput screening 
IA 
itaconic acid 
IBDV 
infectious brucellosis disease virus 
ICPE 
Indian Center for Plastic in the Environment 
IGCCs 
integrated gasification combined cycles 
IoT 
internet of things 
IPP 
isopentenyl diphosphate 
IPTG 
isopropylthio-β-galactoside 
IR 
infrared 
ITCHY 
incremental truncation for the creation of hybrid enzymes 
ITO 
indium tin oxide 
LA 
lactic acid 
LAA 
L-aminoacylase 
LAB 
lactic acid bacteria 
Lac 
laccase 
LDC 
lysine decarboxylase 
LDH 
lactate dehydrogenase 
LimS/LS 
limonene synthase 
LiP 
lignin peroxidase 
LMEs 
lignin-modifying enzymes 
L-Phe 
L-phenylalanine 

 
Abbreviations 
xxiii 
LPS  
lipopolysaccharide 
MA  
malic acid 
MBC  
minimal bactericidal concentration 
MCC  
microbial carbon capture cell 
MCS  
multiple cloning site 
MDEA  
N-methyl diethanolamine 
MDH 
malate dehydrogenase 
MDR 
multi-drug resistant 
MEC 
microbial electrolysis cell 
MEG 
mono-ethylene glycol 
MEL  
manosilerythritol lipid 
MEP  
2-C-methyl-D-erythritol-4-phosphate pathway 
MES 
microbial electrosynthesis 
MFA  
metabolic flux analysis 
MFC  
microbial fuel cell 
MFC  
minimal fungicidal concentration 
MI 
myo-inositol 
MIC 
minimal inhibitory concentration 
MIOX  
myo-inositol oxygenase 
MIP  
myo-inositol-1-phosphate 
ML  
machine learning 
mMIOX  
mouse MIOX 
MnP  
manganese peroxidase 
MoPNG 
ministry of petroleum and natural gas 
MRI 
magnetic resonance image 
MRS  
Man–Rogosa–Sharpe 
MRSE  
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis 
MSC  
mesenchymal stem cell 
MSC  
molecular sieving carbon 
MSG 
mono-sodium glutamate 
MTBC  
mycobacterium tuberculosis complex 
MTT  
mitochondrial tricarboxylic transporter 
MVA  
mevalonate pathway 
NAAAR 
N-acylamino acid racemase 
NAc-HPA  
N-acetyl-homophenylalanine 
NBM 
National Biodiesel Mission 
NDPS1  
neryl diphosphate synthase 1 
NDV  
Newcastle disease virus 
NGS 
next-generation DNA sequencing 

 
xxiv 
Abbreviations 
NMP  
N-methyl pyrrolidone 
NMR 
nuclear magnetic resonance 
NO 
nitric oxide 
NOAA  
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
NOX  
nitrogen oxide 
NOx 
nitrogen oxides 
NP  
natural products 
NP  
nonylphenol 
NRDA  
National Rural Road Development Agency 
NRPS  
non-ribosomal peptide synthetase 
NSARs  
N-succinyl-amino acid racemase 
OASS 
O-acetylserine sulfhydrylase 
ODC 
ornithine decarboxylase 
OMCs 
oil marketing companies 
OmpA  
outer membrane protein A 
OPS  
open pond system 
OSMAC  
one strains many compounds 
PA  
protocatechualdehyde 
PAAS 
phenylacetaldehyde synthase 
PAHs 
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
PAM  
protospacer adjacent motif 
PAT  
phosphate acetyltransferase 
PBDEs  
polybrominated diphenyl ethers 
PBRs 
photo-bioreactors 
PC 
polycarbonates 
PCBs 
polychlorinated biphenyls 
PCCP  
post-combustion CO2 capture 
PCL  
polycaprolactone 
PCR 
polymerase chain reaction 
PCx 
pyruvate carboxylase 
PDB 
protein data bank 
PDCs  
prodegradant concentrates 
PDO 
1,3-propanediol 
PDOR 
1,3-propanediol oxidoreductase 
PE 
polyethylene 
PEDV  
porcine epidemic diarrhea virus 
PEG 
polyethylene glycol 
PEM 
proton exchange member 
PEPCK  
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 

 
Abbreviations 
xxv 
PETG 
polyethylene terephthalate glycol 
PFL  
pyruvate formate-lyase 
PFOR 
pyruvate ferredoxin oxidoreductase 
PGA  
polyglycolate 
PGA  
polyglycolic acid 
PGA  
poly-γ-glutamate 
PHA  
polyhydroxyalkanoates 
PHB 
polyhydroxy butyrate 
PKS  
polyketide synthases 
PLA  
polylactic acid 
PLLA  
poly(L-lactic acid) 
PLT  
powder layer thickness 
PMFC 
photosynthetic MFC 
PPC 
PEP carboxylase 
PPP  
pentose phosphate pathway 
PSCat 
psychrophile-based simple biocatalyst 
PSII  
photosystem-II 
PTA  
phosphotransacetylase 
Pts 
phosphotransferase 
PTS  
phosphotransferase system 
PVA  
polyvinyl alcohol 
PVC 
polyvinyl chloride 
PVOH 
polyvinyl alcohol 
PWR 
plastic waste rules 
R-3HB 
R-3-hydroxybutyric 
R5P  
ribose-5-phosphate 
RACHIT  
RAndom CHImera genesis on Transient Templates 
RBS  
ribosomal binding site 
RIC 
resin identification code 
RK 
raspberry ketone 
RNAi 
RNA interference 
RPS 
raceway pond system 
RSM 
response surface methodology 
rTCA  
reductive TCA 
RuBP  
ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate 
RVD  
repeat variable diresidue 
SA  
succinic acid 
SAO 
syntrophic acetate oxidation 
SAOB 
syntrophic acetate-oxidizing bacteria 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xxvi 
Abbreviations 
SARPs 
streptomyces antibiotic regulatory proteins 
SARS-CoV-2 
severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 
SBPase 
sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphatase 
SCF 
supercritical fluid 
SCO 
single-celled organisms 
SD 
Shine Dalgarno 
SDHPP 
sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphate 
SEIZs 
streptomyces-fungus interaction zones 
SEM 
scanning electron microscopy 
SeSaM 
sequence saturation mutagenesis 
sgRNA 
single guide RNA 
SHF 
separated hydrolysis and fermentation 
SHIPREC 
sequence homology-independent protein recombination 
SLS 
selective laser sintering 
SM 
specialized metabolites 
SM-BGC 
secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters 
SMGs 
secondary metabolite genes 
SPL 
synthetic promoter library 
SSF 
simultaneous saccharification and fermentation 
ST 
streptothricin 
STD 
sexually transmitted disease 
STR 
stirred tank reactor 
SWM 
solid waste management 
TAG 
triacylglycerol 
TALENs 
transcription activator-like effector nucleases 
TALEs 
transcription activator-like effectors 
TAR 
transformation associated recombination 
TBAE 
2,2′-dimethylethyl-amino-ethanol 
TCA 
tricarboxylic acid 
TCP-PHB 
tricalcium phosphate-PHB 
TEA 
terminal electron acceptor 
TEM 
transmission electron microscopy 
TERI 
The Energy and Resource Institute 
tHMGR 
truncated 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase 
TM 
toyocamycin 
tracrRNA 
trans-activating crRNA 
TRN 
transcriptional regulatory network 
TS 
total solids 
udh 
uronate dehydrogenase 

 
Abbreviations 
xxvii 
ULB 
urban local bodies 
USEPA  
US Environmental Protection Agency 
VFA  
volatile fatty acids 
VLPs 
violapyrones 
VRE 
vancomycin-resistant enterococcus 
VS 
volatile solids 
VTPBR 
vertical column TPBR 
WCB 
whole-cell biocatalysis 
WL  
Wood-Ljungdahl 
WSSV  
white spot syndrome virus 
ZFNs 
zinc finger nucleases 

Acknowledgment  
Thanks to all the authors of the various chapters for their contributions to 
this book. It has been a long process from the initial outlines to developing 
the full chapters because of the COVID pandemic, and we deeply appreciate 
those authors who persistently supported and completed their duty as authors 
and contributed to the chapters. We sincerely acknowledge the authors' 
persistent willingness to go through this process. I also acknowledge the 
work and knowledge of the members of our review panels, many of who had 
to work within short deadlines while contributing significant time to review. 
Thanks to all the people at Apple Academic Press, CRC Press (Taylor & 
Francis Group), as well as the members with whom we corresponded, for 
their advice and facilitation in the production of this book. We are grateful to 
our family members and parents for their incredible and selfless support all 
the time. Last but not least, we are grateful to the Lord Almighty for making 
this book possible. 
— Editors 

 
 
Preface  
Biocatalysis is the process of conducting reactions to convert substrates to 
target products utilizing biocatalytic molecules (enzymes), unlike chemical 
catalysis, where diverse chemical catalysts are needed for conducting the 
desired reaction. Biocatalytic reactions need simple and ambient conditions. 
Besides, chemical catalytic reactions need typical and non-safe conditions, 
making them complicated and non-environmental-friendly processes. 
In modern biological science the advancement in biosystem engineering, 
enzyme catalysis became the crucial area of interest in the catalysis era, 
getting accelerated in the process development for replacing many chemical 
reactions at the industrial level. However, more advanced systems are needed 
to bypass multiple limitations harbored by these biocatalysts (enzyme/s) via 
in-vitro reactions to translate at the industrial level. This is much required for 
the next-generation biocatalysis for the production of chemicals, pharma­
ceuticals, and fuels. The bottlenecks of biocatalysts are (i) turnover count of 
catalysts; (ii) selective requirement of buffering conditions for reaction, and 
most importantly; (iii) co-factor/co-enzyme regeneration. For a long time, 
researchers have been looking for solutions for these limitations giving birth 
to the concept of whole-cell biocatalysis. 
In the past decade, researchers recognized the potential of whole-cell 
biocatalysis because of its advantages that could bypass all the hinges in 
the traditional enzyme-based in-vitro biocatalysis. Besides, whole-cell 
biocatalysis bypasses the process of tedious purifications of the enzymes, 
addition/recycling of the co-factors, waste disposal, etc. And the process is, 
more importantly, eco-friendly and could utilize renewable biomass for the 
generation of catalytic cells. Hence, this system is acquiring significance as 
next-generation cell factories for the production of a various array of chemi­
cals and fuels globally. This book provides the recent advances in establishing 
whole-cell biocatalysis, which includes bio-system engineering techniques 
innovated for establishing the possible pathways to produce novel chemicals 
and fuels. This book also provides information regarding advanced tools in 
the area of genomics and proteomics studies useful for establishing a desired 
cellular system for the establishment of whole-cell biocatalysis. 
The book titled Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology 
for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, and Biofuels covers the 

 
xxxii 
Preface 
latest technology and developments in the field. Promising developments 
that have taken place in the past decade are comprehensively discussed. 
The discussions are also put forward on the application of computational 
tools, metabolic flux systems, the role of metabolic networks for cell system 
development for whole-cell catalysis, and the success stories in the past 
decade. Further, the prospects of developing technologies in this field are 
comprehended for the advancement of whole-cell biocatalysis in the indus­
trial translation for the scaleup. 
The editors and authors who have contributed to the chapters included 
their knowledge in the field, including their research contributions in the 
field of WCB. 
— Prof. Kwon-Young Choi 
Ajou University, Suwon, Republic of Korea 

Part I  
Introduction to Whole-Cell Catalysis 


CHAPTER 1
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, 
Origin, and Concept 
TANUSHREE BALDEO MADAVI,1,2 SUSHMA CHAUHAN,1 NALINI SONI,1 
SOMESH HARIHARNO,1 and SUDHEER D. V. N. PAMIDIMARRI2 
1Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, India 
2Discipline of Industrial Biotechnology, Gujarat Biotechnology University, 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India 
3Department of chemical engineering, Dongguk University–Seoul, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea 
ABSTRACT 
The industrial revolution, increasing market demands for chemicals and 
fuels, and soaring levels of greenhouse gases (GHGs) accumulation have 
made humans change the trajectory of industrial production processes 
towards green and sustainable options. Industrial production of chemicals 
and fuels incurs a toll on nature via releasing harmful by-products as a result 
of the use of harsh chemicals but also cost and labor-intensive processes, 
and thus alternative methods are now developed and pursued. Catalysis 
plays an important role in any industrial chemical reaction involved in a 
significant production process. Using enzymes as a biocatalyst is a usual 
option but imposes an economic burden as the cost of purified enzymes is 
high, and also, they are non-renewable in nature. Whereas, when a whole-
cell is considered as a biocatalyst, it could surpass the technical difficulties 
and provides much longer sustaining enzymatic activity as it is protected 
by the cellular wall from harsh environment of the reaction condition. The 
cofactor regeneration capability, optimal micro- and macro-environment for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
the enzymatic reactions, and many more advantages of whole-cells when 
used as biocatalysts are discussed in this introductory chapter, including 
the history of origin and concepts of selecting and designing the whole-cell 
biocatalyst. 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Industrial production of various chemicals involves different types of chemical 
transformations. Chemical transformation is a change of one form (substrate) 
to another (product) with different chemical properties. Though some are 
spontaneous in nature, much of industrially significant transformation 
reactions are energy intensive. To minimize the energy requirements and 
accelerate the rate of the reaction, certain chemicals were used, and the 
concept called ‘Catalysis’ came into existence [1]. It is an energy-favorable 
mechanism for transforming the substrate into the product as it lowers the 
activation energy required for the transformation. Catalysts are unique 
substances which are not actually consumed in the reaction and are needed in 
fractions which could be recycled multiple times. The existence of the catalysis 
process is ancient. However, the conceptualization and better application as 
technology were accelerated during the early ages of industrialization. The 
origin of the term “catalysis” was introduced by Jöns Jakob Berzelius in 
1935, derived from the Greek words “kata” and “lying” stating the meaning 
of ‘down’ and ‘loosen,’ respectively. The name proposed with the view of ‘the 
process of decomposition of bodies (chemical entities) to new forms which 
chemically differ from substrate [2]. In modern industrialization, catalysis is 
the fundamental process for the manufacturing and refinery industry which 
accounts for the vast array of products used either for domestic, industrial, 
or energy purposes. With the award of the Nobel prizes in the field in 1909 
and 1912, significant growth in the manufacturing and petroleum industry 
was observed. This development led to the conceptualization of catalysis as a 
significant and independent field in chemistry. Though catalysis developed as 
an independent field in chemistry, and gained importance in the past century, 
in the early 90s significant attention was also attained on bio-catalysis to 
replace chemical transformation reactions. 
A long-known history of chemical catalysis is evident; however, bio­
catalysis is an inherent part of cellular metabolism and is one of the vital 
processes involved in giving birth to life on Earth. Starting from harvesting 
solar energy by photosynthesis to respiration, sustenance and maintenance 
of the cell is conducted by bio-catalytic molecules such as enzymes. The 

 
 
5 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
roots of biocatalysis were conceptualized a century ago, and it is a well-
documented process and was reported by Rosenthaler. He synthesized the 
(R)-mandelonitrile using plant-extracted enzyme hydroxy nitrile lyase, 
taking substrates benzaldehyde and hydrogen cyanide this planted the seed 
to biocatalysis [3]. Such enzymes are part of an inherent system carefully 
curated by nature. However, industrial applications of biocatalysis have got 
popular in the ‘90s’ due to their superior performance in many instances 
compared to chemical catalysis. Qualities such as directed group selectivity 
on substrate molecule, optical selectivity, use of non-toxic (biologically 
and environmentally safe) reaction environment, more importantly, ease of 
downstream processing (DSP), are pros of this. However, catalyst regen­
eration fewer scalability issues are encouraging the scientific community to 
look into much innovative biocatalytic processes which could offer multiple 
reactions integrated into to ‘one-pot synthesis’ concept. The majority of 
enzymatic reactions run in an aqueous environment. Hence, enzyme-based 
biocatalytic processes are presently employed in a wide range of product 
synthesis, such as polymers, fine chemicals, cosmetics, additives, confec­
tionaries, pharmaceuticals, etc. [4]. In the past couple of decades, many 
developments were made to create synthetic enzyme cascades via mixing 
multiple enzymes to create novel reaction pathways with superior benefits 
to classical chemical catalysis. In addition, biocatalysis is becoming more 
popular in the pharmaceutical industry since the products are stereoselective 
and compatible with the biological environment to be used as drugs [5]. 
Owing to the various technologies and concepts developed for enzyme 
engineering and fabrication to achieve the desired novel reactions through 
biocatalysis displays the superiority over traditional chemical catalyst-
based reactions. In axillary, for advancing concepts of biocatalysis, several 
methodologies were developed, and among them, ‘Whole-cell Biocatalysis’ 
is originating as a novel platform for its wide and soaring applications for 
the production of fuels, fine/plant-based chemicals and polymers [6, 7]. 
The utilization of whole-cell as the catalytic platform as a concept has been 
developed in the last decade. However, its applications are well documented 
for the production of various commodity products such as organic acids and 
alcohols using various substrates via biotransformation. Hence, biotransfor­
mation and fermentation are also discussed as a part of whole-cell bioca­
talysis (WCB) in this book. This chapter introduces the history of WCB, 
starting from the basic concept of catalysis, its transition to biocatalysis, and 
its evolution toward whole-cell biocatalysis. In addition, molecular tools 
explored for the establishment of WCB are also briefed in the discussion. 

 
 
6 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
1.2 CATALYSIS VS. BIOCATALYSIS 
1.2.1 TRADITIONAL CATALYSIS 
Catalysis as a concept is a century old, as stated in the previous section; the 
actual history recorded is way beyond the mid-15th century [1]. The most 
ancient record of catalysis is by Valerius Cardius in 1552, who reported 
the use of sulfuric acid as an inorganic catalyst to convert alcohol to ether 
[8]. Later the concept of catalysis was intensified by the efforts of many 
researchers, and a few significant contributions of those are as follows. In 
the 18th century, it was reported that chemical substances such as sulfuric 
acid could eliminate the need of heating for the preparation of ethylene [1]. 
Later to this, metal catalysis was also introduced (Figure 1.1(a)), and the first 
technology developed in this respect was synthesis of ethylene by passing 
alcohol along with sulfuric acid through the glass tube of silica and alumina 
which is considered to be a systematic study in the area of catalysis. This 
opened new gates in the catalysis field and attracted many researchers to 
pursue the field. Thermodynamically, the difference between the energies 
is stated to be ΔE. When a hypothetical reaction is considered, where A is 
transformed to B, the required activation energy is considered to be EP, and 
the function of the catalyst is said to reduce this activation energy. Hence, 
in the presence of a catalyst, the energy needed to transform A to B will be 
EC which is several folds less than the EP. This makes the reaction progress 
very fast with minimum input of energy. Chemical catalysis has prevailed in 
the industrial manufacturing sector, especially for the synthesis of commodi­
ties, fine, platform chemicals, and also fuel refineries, for a very long time. 
Though chemical catalysis is pursued at the industrial level; however, they 
are reported to impose serious environmental issues. Especially the byprod­
ucts and DSP for product recovery have deficiencies from an environmental 
perspective. Hence, many nations started exerting environmental policies 
to prevent environmental deterioration. This led to the origin of greener 
catalytic processes with an environmentally neutral agenda by introducing 
the biocatalytic processes. 
1.2.2 CONCEPT OF BIOCATALYSIS 
Enzymes are naturally evolved catalysts in nature to catalyze the metabolic 
reactions in living cells. Chemically they are polymers of amino acids 
(polypeptides), and upon systematic assembly, they function as catalysts. 
In biological cells, the enzymes carry out multi-complex chemical reactions 

 
 
7 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
which support and maintain life, starting from simple single-cell organisms 
to complex organized higher organisms such as plants and animals, including 
ourselves. The enzymes are, by evolution, tailored to conduct the reactions 
in ambient cellular physiological conditions at ambient temperatures, pH, 
and pressures. This virtue of living cells has attracted many researchers to 
imply the enzymatic catalysis in short biocatalysis process for the industrial 
important reactions, especially the inevitable process for the synthesis of 
pharmaceuticals and fine/platform chemicals, which relieves the environ­
mental burden. The application of biocatalysis is hence getting popular, 
and the last couple of decades have evidenced the progress in the area of 
biocatalysis [9]. 
FIGURE 1.1 Schematic representation of different types of catalytic processes. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Theoretically, enzymes function the same as chemical catalysts and 
follow the same thermodynamic principles of reaction progress by reducing 
the energy needed to conduct transformation or conversion of substrate to 
product (as shown in Figure 1.1(b)). In addition, the enzymes are naturally 
selected by evolution to conduct the reactions in much milder conditions 
compared to chemical catalysis, which is an added advantage to the industry 
(Figure 1.1(b)). However, the transformation of substrate to products occurs 
under certain conditions which are deviated from the native host conditions 
of enzymes from which they are originally derived. Moreover, finding a suit­
able enzyme is a very tedious job. Finding new enzymes with novel proper­
ties and suitable reaction activity is a very tough task since the enzymes are 
very specific to the substrate. However, the microbial natural consortia with 
diverse characteristics are natural sources of the library of enzymes that could 
be sorted for suitable purposes. Microbial screening and isolation of pure 
cultures harboring the enzymes needed for the selective catalytic purpose 
is the major strategy explored by the majority of researchers. However, the 
wild-type enzymes prominently exhibit limited turnover activity, and many 
times, the pH and solvent environments may not be suitable for the applica­
tion. Hence, even if researchers find a suitable enzyme catalyst for the target 
purpose, they face challenging tasks such as designing suitable conditions 
for the enzyme to progress the reaction; hence engineering/fabricating the 
enzyme molecule suitable reaction conditions were explored [10]. Much 
little could be done in the earlier one; however, many efforts made it possible 
by the advancements in molecular and system engineering technologies to 
recreate and engineer the enzymes to attain robust characteristics to with­
stand harsh reaction conditions and unsuitable solvent environments [5, 11]. 
Though modern engineering technologies are complementing bioca­
talysis for the industrial manufacturing sector, finding the suitable enzyme 
to perform the desired target transformation reaction to attain the desired 
product is always crucial. A detailed description of these modern technolo­
gies is beyond the scope of this chapter. However, details are well described 
by various authors in their published works [4, 9–11]. When compared to 
traditional chemical catalysis, biocatalysis adds several advantages such 
as the availability of enzymes, renewable production in desired quanti­
ties with a naturally green process without exerting any environmental 
burden, work in very mild conditions to conduct the transformation reac­
tion, product stereo-selectivity, devoid of toxic byproducts, etc. Adding an 
ample number of advantages to the catalytic industry, biocatalysis is also 
not free from drawbacks. The first issue is the purification of the desired 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Biocatalysis 
Enzyme Only or
Parameters 
Chemical Catalysis 
Whole‑Cell 
Purified Enzyme Biocatalysts
as a Catalyst 
Nature 
Co-factor 
regeneration 
Specificity 
Inorganic chemical 
molecules or complexes 
in nature. 
No regeneration, 
externally added. 
Non-specific; can 
catalyze a range of 
reactions. 
Protein 
Proteinaceous enzymes 
complexes in 
are immobilized within 
nature. 
the cell system. 
No regeneration, 
Efficiently regenerates 
externally added. co-factors. 
Highly specific 
Highly specific 
complexes. 
systems. 
9 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
enzymes from the background pool of cellular proteins is a tedious and 
cost-intensive task. 
Adding to this the maintenance of purified enzyme, need of cold/ 
freezing temperatures for transportation, selective reaction conditions, the 
continuous need for cofactors (at times much more costly than a product 
to be formed), recycling of the enzymes for multiple rounds of reaction, 
narrow range of substrate acceptance by enzymes, etc., are few major 
issues in enzyme-based biocatalysis [12]. These issues with biocatalysis 
and increasing demands of green catalysis researchers looked into many 
advanced strategies circumventing the issues of biocatalysis, and the 
concept of whole-cell biocatalysis originated (Figure 1.1(c)). The WCB 
system offers superior advantages such as renewable regeneration of catal­
ysis in unlimited quantity, bypassing purification step, which is laborious 
and cost-intensive, unlimited cofactor regeneration by whole-cells, ease of 
conducting cascade of multistep reaction in a single cell etc, in addition, 
the whole-cell harboring the target enzyme/s provide a suitable environ­
ment for the transformation reaction is completely environmental friendly 
system. The system is very cost-effective with ease of scaling up to indus­
trial application without stability issues [6, 7, 13]. Moreover, the products 
produced by microorganism-based catalytic systems are considered to be 
safe, which is attracting many pharmaceutical, food, and confectionary 
industries to implement this system as their production strategy [14, 15]. 
The detailed comparison of each catalytic system evolved, starting from 
chemical catalysis to WCB, is detailed in Table 1.1. 
TABLE 1.1 Comparative Analysis of Different Catalytic Processes Using Various Parameters 

 
 
Biocatalysis 
Enzyme Only or
Parameters 
Chemical Catalysis 
Whole‑Cell 
Purified Enzyme Biocatalysts
as a Catalyst 
Sensitivity to pH 
and temperature 
Ecological burden 
Economic burden 
Renewability 
Future 
sustainability 
Operational at 
harsh physiological 
conditions. 
Disrupts ecological 
balance when released 
in the environment; 
may be toxic in nature. 
Cost-intensive 
Ecologically 
non-renewable 
Non-sustainable in the 
long run 
Operational at 
very specific 
conditions and 
non-functional 
when said 
conditions are not 
provided. 
No ecological 
burden is 
imposed. 
Cost-effective 
Ecologically 
renewable 
Fairly sustainable 
Depends on the 
microenvironment 
inside the cellular 
system. It can be 
flexible when the 
cell’s physiological 
conditions change. 
No ecological burden is 
imposed. 
Cost-effective 
Ecologically renewable 
The best strategy for 
future applications. 
 
10 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
TABLE 1.1 (Continued) 
1.2.3 ORIGIN OF WCB 
Biocatalysis has been developed and documented parallelly and, past 
decade has evidenced a significant amount of progress in this area and was 
addressed as distinct waves of advancements in this area. Initial work on the 
catalysis in the first wave rippled up in advancing to the 2nd and 3rd wave of 
biocatalysis [16]. Development of protein engineering approaches has been 
started for the complete structural characterization of enzymes with specific 
substrate analysis for the production of quality as well as fine product for 
the unique application such as lipase-catalyzed resolution of chiral products. 
Parallel developments in molecular biology techniques and the availability 
of a plethora of genomics and proteomics data elevated the technological 
evolution of WCBs. With the approaching 4th wave of biocatalysis, meta­
bolic engineering and system biology methods, along with computational 
biology methods, have elaborated the understanding of enzyme kinetics 
and dynamics, chassis optimization, and product recovery techniques [17]. 
The systems and computational biology is a futuristic technology that helps 
to reduce the on-bench experiment time by mathematically predicting the 

 
 
11 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
solutions for the said biological problem. This can help in saving time, 
cost, and resources. The advent of greener technology has the prospect of 
sustaining future endeavors. Developments of genome-scale models (GSM) 
using omics data to mimic the actual metabolic networks of organisms now 
aids in assisting the experiments. Many industrially applicable WCBs are 
now developed, such as Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Cory-
nebacterium glutamicum, Zymomonas mobilis, Synechococcus elongatus, 
etc. [18]. The understanding of the basic outlining of the concept of WCB 
will help to better comprehend the subject and will provide insights for 
future c. 
1.3 CONCEPT OF WHOLE-CELL BIOCATALYSIS 
Developing whole-cell biocatalysts has been an efficient strategy for the 
production of chemicals important for industrial and commercial applica­
tions. Whole-cells are capable of using diverse feedstock as raw materials 
and convert them into value-added chemicals. The cellular dynamics is a 
challenge for the researchers to establish a cellular system as a catalyst. On 
the basis of type of reactions, cell biocatalysis can be of two types, namely, 
biotransformation and fermentation [19]. 
Biotransformation is described as a two-step process where the bioca­
talysis phase is separated by the cellular growth phase, and the arbitrary 
substrate is converted into a product. The process involves the expression 
of enzymes or cascades in the microbial chassis for the biotransformation 
[20]. Lipases and oxidoreductases are examples of enzymes involved in 
biotransformation which can be used for biodiesel production [21]. Since the 
biotransformation takes place in the resting phase of the cell cycle, there are 
many antibiotics and other metabolites which are produced in the starving or 
declining phase of the cell cycle [22]. Harboring this quality of cells, retro­
synthetic pathway designing has paved the way towards unique and novel 
metabolite production strategies. Whereas fermentation involves product 
formation involving the native metabolic pathways, and the precursors 
involved are indistinct from the growth substrate of the cellular system [23]. 
Fermentation has already been studied for decades and applied to alcohol 
production for centuries. The history of alcohol production has already been 
extensively studied regarding its biochemistry and physiology of the model 
eukaryotes (S. cerevisiae). Fermentation products are accompanied by other 
by-products, which makes DSP a bit tedious. Hence, DSP can be facilitated 

 
12 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
by the localization of enzymes in or on the cell, which is also known as 
the immobilization of intracellular and extracellular enzymes. Immobilizing 
the enzymes to a certain cellular compartments or organelles can increase 
the feasibility of bioconversion and eases the DSP directly proportional to 
product efficacy [24]. Immobilization of enzymes enhances the production 
rate considering the spatial organization for better substrate accessibility 
and mass transfer through the cellular system. Thus, immobilization based 
on the localization of the enzymes can be majorly of three types, namely, 
surface immobilization, intracellular membrane immobilization, and biofilm 
immobilization [25–27]. The immobilization of enzyme or multienzyme 
cascades confers elevated stability, reusability, and efficient coupling with 
the co-factor regeneration. The type of immobilization also depends on the 
type of reaction, substrate, and product. Thus, whole-cells can ferment or 
biotransform the low-cost substrate into industrially important chemicals at 
ambient temperatures and pH with minimum energy input as compared to 
the chemical catalytic processes, which are much harsher in nature. 
Surface immobilization of proteins is a wise strategy to circumvent the 
problem of mass transfer and product separation. Major factors influencing 
the cell surface immobilization are passenger (enzyme), carrier (membrane 
protein for the localization on the host surface) and host (anchoring matrix 
and acts as a substratum). Cellular structures such as the cell envelope, cell 
wall, surface of the spore, and surface layers are used to express the enzyme 
proteins to display. The protein anchors, carriers, are the central structure 
and play an important role in displaying and stabilizing the enzyme protein. 
Depending on the type of cellular system used for the biocatalysis, they can 
be of varied types, and the display systems are well elaborated in model 
systems such as in E. coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus subtilis, Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae. The extensive insights gained over time regarding the 
structure and composition of the cellular envelopes and cell wall proteins 
have aided the cell surface immobilization of proteins. Extracellularly 
easily accessible membrane proteins of outer surfaces of cell wall such as 
C-terminal of Protein A of S. aureus, outer membrane protein A (OmpA), 
poly-γ-glutamate (PGA) synthetase complex (PgsA), phosphate-inducible 
porin (PhoE), are used for displaying the enzymes such as amylases, lipases 
[28, 29]. Eukaryotic model, S. cerevisiae has got a range of surface-displaying 
carrier anchors developed and conferring its ability of flocculation and 
agglutination proteins [30, 31]. Cell wall proteins such as Pir proteins, some 
virulence factors associated with proteins involved in the protein hydrolysis 
and adhesion, autotransporter proteins, are also exploited for their structural 

 
 
 
 
 
13 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
ability to display. The nitrilase, foldase, and lipases using carrier proteins 
such as EstA, AIDA-I, etc. [32, 33]. Conferring to the complexity of the 
cell wall, some proteins can be secreted out to the loosely composed outer 
layers, such as in Lactobacillus acidophilus [34]. Strategizing the display 
of proteins is a wise method to improve the production qualities but can 
be applied only to limited enzymes, and thus, major WCB is conferred by 
intracellular expression of enzymes as it provides the protection and eased 
separation of products for optimal productivity. Apart from the enzymes, 
chassis selection is another crucial factor as it depends on the type of product 
to be obtained and other physiological conditions. For instance, there are 
certain enzymes that are less productive in native organisms, or the native 
producers are difficult to grow in laboratory conditions, and thus, to use 
these enzymes, they are tailored in model organisms that are manageable 
and cultivable at larger scales. Thus, to define the candidature of an organism 
as a suitable chassis, there are certain criteria to be satisfied and are discussed 
in the following sections. 
1.4 PREREQUISITES FOR OPTIMAL CHASSIS SELECTION 
Biocatalysis is attributed to the biotransformation of low-cost substrates 
into value-added products and the fermentation of readily available carbon 
substrates to industrially important chemicals. Choosing the appropriate 
chassis is a prime concern, which can facilitate the easy availability of 
substrates and accessibility to enzymes with eased DSP of products. The 
prerequisite of choosing a whole-cell biocatalyst depends on various factors, 
and among them, primary is to choose a chassis that is readily modifiable 
and has a fairly elaborated genetic and biochemical constitution, which could 
save time for cellular modifications. Model systems used in biotechnology 
such as Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Pichia pastoris, Pseu-
domonas putida, Bacillus subtilis, etc., are examples of such prokaryotic 
and eukaryotic cellular systems which can be readily vested with metabolic 
tools and have been well elaborated and applied for industrial applications 
[19, 35]. The ease of manipulation in these industrially important strains 
has enabled to broaden the production scope and spectrum of metabolites. 
Another important aspect is the categorization of these systems as gener­
ally regarded as safe (GRAS) in order to establish a non-toxic production 
strategy. As there are pathogenic strains that have higher production rates 
but are riskier as they could be intoxicating the downstream processes (e.g., 
Klebsiella and Serratia are used for the production of commodity chemicals 

 
 
14 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
(see Chapter 3 – Section 3.2.2 – Diols). A system harboring the related 
precursor or pathway to the target product also accounts for the selection of 
an ideal strain. Cells with the wider substrate utility are of prime importance 
as they are able to use various substrates for bioconversions which could 
facilitate economically efficient production strategies (e.g., E. coli can use 
hexoses as well as pentoses when aided with the cellulases). There are photo­
trophic systems available that can transform light energy into chemicals and 
which could be used as substrates for various valuable productions. Cellular 
spatial or temporal localization of enzymes and products helps with the DSP, 
and thus, systems like cyanobacteria/microalgae and yeasts are preferred for 
the production (e.g., Hydrogen production in E. coli v/s cyanobacteria) [6]. 
Also, control over the micro- and macro-environment of enzyme localiza­
tion, especially in biotransformation, plays an important role in product 
efficiency. Natural producers can be metabolically engineered to increase 
the flux towards the targeted product, or the pathway can be heterologously 
expressed in a user-friendly chassis such as E. coli. Non-natural producers 
can be introduced with the de-novo pathways for an efficient production 
[36]. Biotransformation of substrates requires efficient enzyme cascade, 
which could be heterologously expressed in a compatible system pertaining 
to the co-factor regeneration and flux management with special consider­
ation of cellular health. Keeping all these factors in account while choosing 
the whole-cell biocatalyst is a primary step that influences and determines 
the productivity of the targeted product. Pertaining to their well elaborated 
genetic and biochemical constitution with advanced molecular biology tools 
has imparted power over modulation of such chassis for optimum produc­
tion. So, keeping all these points while selecting the cellular chassis could 
efficiently increase the enzymatic activity as well as productivity. Apart from 
choosing an appropriate cellular system, it still may lack at various fronts, 
such as competing metabolites for the same enzyme, etc., which could give 
suboptimal results, and thus, cellular optimization is the next step to be taken 
care in WCB [35]. 
1.5 STRATEGIES USED FOR DEVELOPMENT OF WCB 
In biocatalysis, when a whole-cell is considered as a catalyst rather than 
emphasizing a single enzyme, the variability factors multiply as the cell is 
a rather complex and larger entity having varying levels of networks. Thus, 
developing an efficient WCB is a crucial step as it ultimately influences 

 
 
15 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
productivity. Keeping the optimal titers as a prime agenda, the strategic 
designing of the WCB requires consideration of many influencing factors 
like chassis selection with or without relative precursor availability, physi­
ological requirements of cells, type of catalysis, localization of reaction, etc. 
(Figure 1.2). All these factors are considered while developing a whole-cell 
biocatalyst after defining an ideal cell system for considered reaction. The 
influencing factors that should be kept in consideration while developing a 
WCB are discussed in subsections. 
FIGURE 1.2 Diagrammatic representation of the functioning of a whole-cell biocatalytic 
system. 
1.5.1 BLOCKING OF COMPETITIVE PATHWAYS 
Cell tends to maintain homeostasis in order to survive and reproduce, and 
it is a prime agenda to maintain it as a living biological entity. The natural 
flux of metabolites and reactions is well distributed according to the cellular 
necessities, and in order to concentrate the flux towards a desired metabolite, 
manipulations are needed. To increase the flux towards a certain product, 
production strategies usually involve either repression or activation of 
enzymes/pathways in order to maximize the product output. This happens 
when the catalysis involves endogenous pathways interfering with and 
scavenging the nodal metabolites, substrates, or cofactors involved in the 
production of the target product. Thus, flux improvement for increasing the 
production of target metabolite involves blocking of competitive pathways 

 
 
 
 
16 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
and concentrating the flux towards the desired product formation. Increasing 
the titer by inhibiting the competitive pathways is one of the primary 
strategies followed in WCB. Some products use prime metabolites such 
as pyruvate, acetyl-CoA, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate, etc., as precursors. 
In many instances, such as in ethanol production, pyruvate or acetyl CoA 
being an important and nodal intermediate, the competitive pathways for 
lactate, acetate, succinate has been suppressed by deleting the respective 
genes responsible for the corresponding enzymes [6]. These manipulations 
may result in redox imbalance and co-factor scarcity. And thus, advanced 
tools of system biology like in-silico-based GSM, which can predict the final 
phenotype based on the perturbations done for the strain development, stand 
as an important aspect of designing a whole-cell biocatalyst. 
1.5.2 EXPRESSION OF HETEROLOGOUS PATHWAYS OR ENZYME 
For the increased production and efficient bioconversions, the heterologous 
expression of enzyme/s or cascades aid the production of target products. 
Many times, the endogenous enzymes are inefficient or are absent for a 
specific bioconversion process or contain rate-limiting enzymes resulting 
in less or no production of target metabolite [37]. Thus, the advent of 
technology and increasing demands for novel and unnatural products has 
led to the search for novel enzymes/pathways which can be transferred and 
expressed in whole-cell catalysts such as E. coli, B. subtilis, S. cerevisiae, 
etc. [38]. Tending to the scarcity of native overproducers, heterologous 
expression of pathways or enzymes are preferred, as they are independent of 
native metabolism and can be modified as per the requirement of the produc­
tion conditions. These pathways may or may not depend on the host’s native 
metabolism for the co-factor regeneration. There are pathways available and 
successfully applied for co-factor regeneration [39]. Transferring and assem­
bling a pathway using different enzymes catalyzing the chain of reactions for 
the production is known as de-novo synthesis. Unnatural biotransformation 
of substrates requires the assembly of artificial pathways, which consist 
of enzymes from different cellular sources catalyzing different sequential 
reactions enlarging the scope of biocatalysis. Retrosynthesis of compounds 
has opened the way to novel molecules and the use of non-conventional 
substrates for cellular systems, increasing the variety of biocatalysis. 
The bioconversion of glucose into propanediol is an example of de-novo 
synthesis in E. coli, where genes from K. pneumonia and S. cerevisiae were 

 
 
17 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
transferred [40]. Such transformations are well known in the biosynthesis of 
flavors and fragrances and chiral chemicals that play an important role in the 
pharmaceutical industry. Heterologous biotransformation can be performed 
in single or multiple-step cascades. This strategy has opened a new arena for 
the biosynthesis of novel and unnatural chemicals and may involve single or 
multistep bioconversions. 
1.5.3 SINGLE AND MULTISTEP BIOCATALYSIS 
Bioconversion is done using single-step biocatalysis, which is widely 
applicable in the organic synthesis of chemicals (especially fine chemicals) 
in industries. In whole-cell biocatalysts, the enzymes are heterologously 
expressed or endogenously overexpressed for a particular bioconversion 
using plasmid vectors. Expression of non-native enzymes is aided by cofactor 
regeneration and concentrated micro- and macro-environments for optimal 
bioconversions. The classic example of this single-step biotransformation 
is the esterification of triglycerides into biodiesel catalyzed by lipases [41]. 
Single-step biocatalysis through heterologous expression is preferred when 
an enzyme has suboptimal productivity in the native producer, inability to 
culture the native producer, substrate or co-substrate requirements with better 
accessibility to co-factor regeneration, etc. The single-step biotransformation 
has been applied in bio-oxidation and bio-metallurgy when thermophiles or 
thermophilic enzymes were heterologously expressed in mesophilic cell 
catalysts such as E. coli were used as a whole-cell biocatalyst [42]. 
Whereas the multi-step pathways are much more complex and can be 
of different types. The native pathways can be modified and exploited for 
the production of industrial intermediates by using non-native substrate 
by selective catalysis (Pseudomonas putida for heteroaromatic carboxylic 
acid production) or for the relevant intermediate production, downstream 
genes for respective enzymes are knocked out and transferred in the suitable 
cellular chassis for the complex sequential bioconversion reactions (polymer 
building-block synthesis) [42, 43]. Apart from multiple enzymes catalyzing 
sequential reactions, there are also enzymes available which can catalyze 
multiple reactions at a time. This type of multistep biotransformation is 
performed by a single enzyme, which is capable of catalyzing successive 
reactions. Multicomponent enzymes which have multiple catalytic sites and 
favor the production. Enzymes such as oxidoreductases are a classic example 
of this single-enzyme multistep catalysis [44]. The expansion of multistep 

 
 
 
 
 
18 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
biocatalysis in whole-cells also opened the perspective for the construction 
of synthetic pathways consisting of enzymes from different sources cata­
lyzing the substrate bioconversion, called de-novo synthesis. Assembling 
genes from distinct microbial cells in a WCB offers the retrosynthetic 
designing of pathways with increased substrate spectrum. These multistep 
artificial synthetic pathways have wide applications in the production of 
therapeutics, synthons, etc., used in various industrial applications. Fatty 
acids were biotransformed into terminally hydroxylated/carboxylated acids 
using artificially arranged pathway with enzymes from Stenotrophomonas 
maltophilia (oleate hydratase), Micrococcus luteus (alcohol dehydrogenase) 
and P. putida KT2440 and P. fluorescens DSM 50106 (Bayer-Villiger Mono­
oxygenases) expressed in E. coli [45]. Hybrid pathways are constructed 
by combining artificially assembled pathways with the native metabolic 
pathway in a manageable cell system. This is demonstrated in two-step 
conversion of eugenol to vanillin via ferulic acid by the pathway designed 
with a gene from Penicillium simplicissimum CBS 170.90 combined with 
the genes from Pseudomonas sp. strain HR199 and was arranged in a strain 
of E. coli [46]. Similar strategies of coupling heterologous expression of 
enzyme or pathway with fermentation pathway leads to increased substrate 
spectra allowing to produce variety of compounds. Heterologous expression 
of the pathways with the metabolic engineering and system biology tools has 
widened the scope of production strategies leading to whole-cell biocatalysts 
for industrial applications [47]. 
1.5.4 ENHANCING THE PRECURSOR SUPPLY AND CO-FACTOR 
REGENERATION 
In biocatalysis, when whole-cells are considered, efficiency also depends 
upon the availability of precursors. The precursor turnover for the targeted 
pathway is a crucial aspect as it decides the productivity of the whole-cell 
catalyst. In the case of heterologous and de-novo pathways, the competition 
for the precursor against native metabolism increases, and thus, increasing 
the precursor concentrations could help in improving the titers. Systemic 
modifications for increasing the common precursors such as glyceraldehyde­
3-phosphate (G-3-P), pyruvate, and acetyl-CoA could help the productivity 
[48]. In B. subtilis, the 2-ketoisovalerate was overexpressed as a precursor 
for biobutanol production, for which heterologous expression of the Ehrlich 
pathway was done [49]. Similarly, in E. coli, optimization for the production 

 
19 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
of amorpha-4,11-diene (precursor to anti-malarial drug) was done by tuning 
the isoprenoid pathway. Optimizing the process by enhancing the expression 
of rate-limiting enzymes in this pathway certainly helped with the increased 
production, codon optimizations, increasing promoter strength, and removal 
of other competitive drains, and competing pathways are a few of the strate­
gies which could be used for increasing the precursor supply. 
Cellular energy currency and cofactor availability are biased towards 
the housekeeping pathways, and thus, modifying cells by heterologously 
expressing genes, flux diversion, or de-novo synthesis using substrates creates 
a competition for the cofactor regeneration, interfering with the availability 
of the native pathways. The native regulatory pathways of the cells may 
interfere with the heterologous enzymes or genes expressed hence, compro­
mising cellular health. In whole-cell catalysis, the entire cell is considered 
as a catalyst rather than a particular enzyme/s, which makes this biocatalysis 
unique. Thus, rapid biosynthetic pathways tend to consume the cofactors 
much more rapidly, creating a scarcity for other native pathways. This void 
could lead to hampering cellular growth. Cellular survival being the basic 
instinct and a crucial factor for prolonged use for biocatalysis, has made to 
seek the pathways or enzymes which could cope with the consumption of 
these cofactors. Most cofactors, such as reducing equivalents, are crucial 
as carriers for many important reactions. They are recycled via metabolic 
engineering or accessory regeneration reactions of cascades where hydrog­
enases are employed along with the deriving of electrons from sacrificial 
co-substrates such as formate, glucose, etc., which could be readily oxidized 
to donate electrons [50]. To increase the endogenous reservoirs of co-factors, 
overexpression of respective enzymes or increasing the flux in the respective 
pathway can account for satisfying the need. Whereas in heterologous regen­
eration systems, the co-factor regenerating enzyme is co-expressed with the 
target pathway. This was demonstrated well in the production of (2S,3S)­
2,3-Butanediol in E. coli, where the glucose and formate dehydrogenases 
were co-expressed to aid the co-factor necessity for optimal production [51]. 
Closed-loop redox systems are much more advanced and convenient and 
circumvent the necessity of sacrificial co-substrates. As they are devoid of 
any requirement of additional substrate and further regenerating enzyme. 
Both reactions are catalyzed by a single enzyme and have an advantage over 
the reactions with unstable precursors Figure 1.3 shows an example of a 
NADP-based reaction of the closed-loop type where the reaction itself regen­
erates the NAD-based co-factor [52]. Also, recently the cell surface display 
of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase has been demonstrated, establishing 

 
 
 
20 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
a more accessible way for extracellular biotransformations using whole-cell 
catalysts [53]. 
FIGURE 1.3 Schematic representation of closed-loop recycling system for nicotinamide 
coenzymes catalyzing two-step reaction. 
1.6 TOOLS FOR ENGINEERING THE WCBS 
To harness the full potential of a whole-cell as a biocatalyst, the optimization 
of the cellular system is needed. To enhance the natural potential of the cell, 
there is a range of molecular and genetic tools developed. With the second 
wave of biocatalysis in the 1980s, the advancement of gene-based technolo­
gies to improve the catalytic activity of enzymes and their expression in suit­
able chassis were extensively studied, and structural studies for increasing 
the substrate range. This wave brought technical insights into biocatalysis 
and helped in the synthesis of synthetic intermediates. In the following 
years, the biocatalysis branch has endured technological advancements in 
recombinant DNA technologies with many molecular tools at its disposal for 
engineering cellular systems. 
Improving the initial rate of catalysis involved with the extensive work in 
increasing the enzyme efficiency by optimizing the enzyme structure, which 
usually involves the plasmid-based technologies. The use of natural enzymes 

 
 
21 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
and their optimal turnover frequency is better than using chemical catalysts, 
as they are expensive options, or using isolated enzymes, as they require 
expensive co-factors. Initial strategies included site-directed mutagenesis 
to improve the accessibility of enzymes to increase the turnover frequency, 
stability, and enantioselectivity. With the advancement of tools and technolo­
gies in the third wave of biocatalysis enabled the heterologous expression of 
genes in a better host for increased and controlled expression. DNA-based 
tools, protein engineering, genomics, proteomics-based bioinformatic tools, 
omics-based technology, and computational tools have enabled the develop­
ment of robust whole-cell-based biocatalysts. Tools and technologies used in 
their development and improvement are as in subsections. 
1.6.1 DNA ELEMENTS AND THEIR USE FOR CONTROLLED 
EXPRESSION 
The heterologous expression of enzymes and cascades is usually aided by the 
plasmids expressing the genes responsible for the enzymes of bioconversion. 
The evolution of plasmids and their applications in the WCB enhancement 
has been a parallel growth. There is a plethora of plasmids available which 
could be used for the appropriate applications as per the expression host. 
The transcriptional control of expression via promoter engineering devel­
oped promoters of various strengths of expression. The orthogonality of the 
prokaryotic transcription system plays an important role when promoters of 
viral origin are considered. A well-known viral promoter, T7 promoter, has 
been extensively used for variable expression studies, especially when E. coli 
is used as a cellular system. Whereas eukaryotic promoters such as GAL1 
and TDH3, along with their minimalistic versions are used for multigene 
expression studies [54]. The strength of the expression systems significantly 
depends on the promoters used as well require regulation over the promoter, 
which could be easily induced. The inducible promoters use inducers for 
the expression of genes regulated by the said promoters. Promoters have 
been developed which can use inducers that could be an alternate substrate 
for the biotransformation (xylose), a precursor for the said reaction. The 
chemical inducer such as isopropylthio-β-galactoside (IPTG), etc are also 
popular. Induction of promoters by metabolite intermediates or chemical 
inducers suffers from the drawbacks such as cellular toxicity, metabolic 
burden, interference with native metabolism, chemical inducers impart 
increased production cost, etc. To circumvent these drawbacks, there are also 
promoters which could be induced by altering the physiological conditions 

 
 
 
 
 
22 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
such as temperature, light, and pH. Recent advancements in the area of 
optogenetics have enabled to explore the light-regulated transcriptional 
control systems. Optogenetics offers the dynamic control over spatial and 
inducible expression with fine tunability and reversibility. The successful 
application of these light-dependent expression regulons was demonstrated 
in isobutanol production via easily tunable metabolic engineering using blue 
light with a wavelength of 470 nm [55]. Strong promoters for the constitu­
tive expression of the gene, such as in biodiesel production using lipases, 
the gene was expressed under the strong enolase promoter (P-enoA142) in 
the pSENSU-FHL expression vector, which resulted in successful produc­
tion of biodiesel using the Aspergillus oryzae as a WCB [56]. To design 
the heterologous and de-novo synthetic pathways for the multistep catalysis, 
there are molecular engineering tools developed which can be used for high 
throughput results and increase the efficiency of the WCB. Modern cloning 
strategies, such as Gibson assembly, could assemble the DNA overlapping 
fragments up to 300 kb (in E. coli) in an isothermal single reaction is a good 
example [57]. The multitude of reactions and rapid assemblies using oligo­
linker mediated assembly, Golden Gate, and BioBrick for combinatorial 
libraries has revolutionized the optimization of WCB [58]. These tools of 
DNA assembly are complemented by strong ribosome binding sites (RBS), 
which are synergistically effective with the promoters used. Rational tuning 
of expression levels can be achieved by using appropriate RBS for distinct 
enzymes when multiple genes are under the regulation of a single promoter 
[59]. Developments in synthetic RBS have expanded the use of artificial 
RBS for controlled gene expression. 
Another strategy includes the codon optimization for enhanced protein 
expression of heterologous genes. The codon optimization is a synthetic 
gene technology where a codon synonymous in function with the original 
codon replaces to increase the translational efficiency [16]. Availability 
of different strategies for codon optimization, such as using frequently 
used codons depending on the species, interspecies conversion of DNA 
sequences based on the codon bias, codon coordination for proper folding 
of the protein, selection of codons based on the abundance and frequency of 
respective tRNAs to avoid the slow translation, etc facilitated WCB setup. 
The codon optimization strategy to improve the heterologous gene expres­
sion in model WCBs, such as in Pichia pastoris, was used for the xylanases 
production and the codon-optimized xylanase gene of Thermotoga maritima 
[60]. Another example of bisabolene production using WCBs such as E. coli 
and S. cerevisiae by optimizing the codons for genes involved in mevalonate 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
pathway (MVA) heterologously expressed coupled with the introduction of 
promoters for a key enzyme for enhanced production which resulted in the 
final titers more than 900 mg l–1 of the product [61]. Heterologous expres­
sion using synthetic biology methodologies, as discussed here, has improved 
the scope of applications of WCB and widened the prospects for industrial 
applications. 
1.6.2 GENOME EDITING USING MOLECULAR TOOLS 
Genome editing is one of the prime strategies to develop WCBs when the 
genetic modulation of significant insertion or deletion of gene or multi-
gene cascades is required. The development of advanced methods in past 
decades such as affordable sequencing technologies, DNA synthesis, etc., 
have helped to discover novel enzymes and catalysts. The development of 
omics technologies has broadened the scope of biocatalysis and its acces­
sibility toward metagenomics. Altering the genome requires sophisticated 
methodologies which could be able to give optimal productions for strain 
development. Earlier technologies involved homology-based gene editing 
and RNA interference (RNAi) technologies which suffered drawbacks such 
as off-target hits, low efficiency, labor, and time-intensive processes. To 
circumvent these drawbacks and to increase the specificity of targeted DNA 
editing, based on the DNA interacting protein domains were explored for 
the specificity. Protein domains are used for recognizing the specific target 
sites coupled with the appropriate non-specific nucleases, which cleaves 
the recognized site by the former domain. These chimeric nucleases induce 
double-strand breaks (DSBs), which could stimulate the homology-directed 
repair (HDR) or non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) [62]. Based on these 
site-specific nucleases, there are three most popular molecular method­
ologies adapted for genome editing, namely zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs), 
transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), and clustered 
regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats/CRISPR-associated proteins 
(CRISPR-Cas) [63]. 
The DNA binding domains and effector proteins can be customized 
according to the applications. The binding domain of ZFNs is adapted from 
the eukaryotic Cys2-His2 zinc-finger domain consisting of ββα conserved 
configuration comprising ~30 amino acids. The α-helix consists of 3–4 
amino acids, which are involved in the DNA interaction for recognition 
where it interacts with the major groove of the DNA. Thus, these sequences 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
of ZNFs can be modulated as per the target sequence, and up to three zinc 
fingers can be used to recognize the sequence and impart specificity. Avail­
ability of rationally designed libraries of zinc-finger modules, which can 
recognize codons for all the canonical amino acids, can be used in tandem to 
target the sequence or can be designed as per the requirement, which is also 
commercially designed, constructed and modulated, making the method 
more convenient. Whereas the TALENs consist of transcription activator-
like effector domains naturally derived from the genus Xanthomonas, a 
plant pathogen. They are characterized by single base pair recognizing 
domain consisting of 33–35 amino acids, and such multiple domains are 
linked together to recognize the target site in the genome with highly vari­
able, repeat variable diresidue (RVD), which are critical to determining 
the target sequence [64]. These DNA binding domains are linked with the 
domain of FokI endonucleases (Type IIs restriction endonucleases) or its 
hyper-activated variant known as Sharkey [65]. TALEN was successfully 
applied in fatty acid synthesis by modulating the key enzyme involved, 
fatty acid synthase; it was modulated for the medium-chain fatty acid such 
as myristic acid with enhanced production using Yarrowia lipolytica as a 
eukaryotic chassis [66]. 
The most recent and advanced method for genome editing is the 
CRISPR-Cas system which is derived from the native defence system of 
archaea and bacteria. Unlike ZNFs and TALENs, it is an RNA-guided 
DNA endonuclease. There are three major types of CRISPR systems, and 
Type II is the most extensively studied. The short segments of foreign 
DNA, “spacers,” are integrated in the CRISPR genomic loci flanked by the 
direct repeats and further transcribed as CRISPR RNA (crRNA). Further 
processing of crRNA with trans-activating crRNAs (tracrRNAs) coupled 
with the Cas endonucleases results in the chimeric guide RNA which directs 
the double-strand cleavage at the target site. The specificity of the target 
binding relies on the protospacer adjacent motifs (PAM) located upstream 
of the crRNA binding region and a “seed” sequence within the crRNA 
[67]. Thus, designing the crRNA against any target sequence has made this 
method a reliable and powerful tool for genome editing. Applications of 
CRISPR-Cas in the area of WCB are well evaluated and used for biofuel 
production using various cellular systems such as Clostridium species, E. 
coli, etc., which were modified for increasing the substrate utility, meta­
bolic engineering, optimizing the cellular pathways and cellular feasibility 
for industrial applications [68]. 

 
25 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
1.6.3 COMPUTATIONAL TOOLS FOR IN-SILICO ANALYSIS 
Rational designing of whole-cells to be applied as biocatalysts is a tedious 
process and requires layers of information which could be segregated and 
applied appropriately to obtain an optimal system. The advancement of 
computational tools which can predict the phenotype based on the manipu­
lations performed genotypically has revolutionized the field of metabolic 
engineering and system biology. Availability of metabolic models designed 
mathematically, reflecting the biological reactions to ease the application 
of metabolic engineering to design the WCB. Availability of a plethora of 
genome information of model organisms at repositories such as KEGG 
and BiGG models, which uses C13 mapping of carbon flux to design GSM 
based on the various substrate utility and gene-protein reactions provided 
good tool for in silico estimation of flux movement [69]. There are various 
algorithms developed which facilitate users to determine various flux-related 
parameters in order to design a rational cellular system. Algorithms such as 
OptKnock, OptGene, etc., have been in use to determine the flux, keeping 
the thermodynamic changes of a cell in check with cellular growth aspects. 
Stoichiometric analysis using various tools developed, such as flux balance 
analysis, metabolic pathway analysis, minimization of metabolic adjust­
ment, etc., to analyze the metabolic networks and their flux with the desired 
constraints. Metabolic engineering and system biology have been applied 
in the production of industrially valuable commodities using low-cost 
renewable resources such as agricultural and industrial wastes. Cadaverine 
production was shown by metabolically engineered E. coli and C. glutam-
icum, optimizing the production by inactivating the utilizing and degrading 
pathways of cadaverine and optimizing the L-lysine pathway to increase the 
production [70, 71]. Another example in biofuels is hydrogen production, 
where E. coli is extensively studied and metabolically engineered to increase 
the flux towards hydrogenases and to increase the substrate range where it 
can use pentose sugars for hydrogen production [72]. 
1.7 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PROSPECTIVE 
Chemical catalysis-based technologies are labor and cost-intensive and 
significantly add up to the environmental perturbation. Increasing concerns 
over climate change and future resource sustainability have empowered 
the movements towards green technology. Thus, to revolutionize industrial 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
26 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
production strategies, using whole-cells as a catalyst is expected to be one of 
the best strategies. WCB, as a broad prospect, holds the capability of resolving 
the future problems associated with chemical catalysis. There are multiple 
factors that play an important role, right from selecting to implementing a 
cellular system as a whole-cell biocatalyst. The layering data and technology 
availability have aided the development of various WCBs. The approaching 
future of biocatalysis will be able to answer some questions regarding the 
industrial applications of these catalysts and will help to circumvent the 
problems raised by the chemical catalytic processes. Wielding nature’s most 
fundamental units (cells) for addressing the upcoming future demands is the 
wisest strategy in view of sustainability and efficiency. There is still a lot of 
knowledge gap in understanding cellular complexities, and uncovering them 
in the future will help us discover novel strategies and methodologies to be 
applied industrially. Green technology has now been slowly taking over, and 
thus, WCB is promising for future applications. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
biocatalysis 
• 
biotransformation 
• 
chassis 
• 
co-factor regeneration 
• 
CRISPR 
• 
fermentation 
• 
genome editing 
• 
in-silico analysis 
• 
whole-cell 
REFERENCES 
1. Wisniak, J., (2010). The history of catalysis. From the beginning to Nobel prizes. 
Educación Química, 21(1), 60–69. 
2. Berzelius, J. J., (1985). Sur un force jusqu’ici peu remarquée qui est probablement 
active dans la formation des composes organiques, section on vegetable chemistry. 
Ahres-Bericht, 14, 237. 
3. Rosenthaler, L., (1908). In Durch Enzyme Bewirkte Asymmetrische Synthesen. Biochem 
Z, 14, 238. 

 
27 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
4. Bell, E. L., Finnigan, W., France, S. P., Green, A. P., Hayes, M. A., Hepworth, L. J., 
Lovelock, S. L., et al., (2021). Biocatalysis. Nature Reviews Methods Primers, 1(1), 46. 
5. Illanes, A., Cauerhff, A., Wilson, L., & Castro, G. R., (2012). Recent trends in biocatalysis 
engineering. Bioresource Technology, 115, 48–57. 
6. Madavi, T. B., Chauhan, S., Keshri, A., Alavilli, H., Choi, K. Y., & Pamidimarri, S. D. 
V. N., (2022). Whole-cell biocatalysis: Advancements toward the biosynthesis of fuels. 
Biofuels, Bioproducts, and Biorefining, n/a (n/a). 
7. Sudheer, P. D. V. N., Seo, D., Kim, E. J., Chauhan, S., Chunawala, J. R., & Choi, K. 
Y., (2018). Production of (Z)-11-(heptanoyloxy) under-9-enoic acid from ricinoleic 
acid by utilizing crude glycerol as a sole carbon source in engineered Escherichia coli  
expressing BVMO-ADH-FadL. Enzyme and Microbial Technology, 119, 45–51. 
8. Cordus, C. A., Coudenberg, P., & Dubois, J., (1572). Le Guidon des Apotiquaires. C’est 
à dire, la vraye forme & maniere, de composer les medicamens... Traduite de latin en 
françoys, & repurgee d’une infinité de fautes. Loys Cloquemin. 
9.  Woodley, J., (2008). New opportunities for biocatalysis: Making pharmaceutical 
processes greener. Trends in Biotechnology, 26, 321–327. 
10. Yi, D., Bayer, T., Badenhorst, C. P. S., Wu, S., Doerr, M., Höhne, M., & Bornscheuer, U. 
T., (2021). Recent trends in biocatalysis. Chemical Society Reviews, 50(14), 8003–8049. 
11. Khersonsky, O., & Tawfik, D. S., (2010). Enzyme promiscuity: A mechanistic and 
evolutionary perspective. Annual Review of Biochemistry, 79, 471–505. 
12. Garzón-Posse, F., Becerra-Figueroa, L., Hernández-Arias, J., & Gamba-Sánchez, D., 
(2018). Whole-cells as biocatalysts in organic transformations. Molecules, 23, 1265. 
13. Sudheer, P. D. V. N., Yun, J., Chauhan, S., Kang, T. J., & Choi, K. Y., (2017). Screening, 
expression, and characterization of Baeyer-Villiger monooxygenases for the production 
of 9-(nonanoyloxy)nonanoic acid from oleic acid. Biotechnology and Bioprocess 
Engineering, 22(6), 717–724. 
14. De Carvalho, C. C. C. R., (2017). Whole-cell biocatalysts: Essential workers from 
nature to the industry. Microbial Biotechnology, 10(2), 250–263. 
15. Park, S. A., Bhatia, S. K., Park, H. A., Kim, S. Y., Sudheer, P. D. V. N., Yang, Y. H., 
& Choi, K. Y., (2021). Bacillus subtilis is a robust host for biochemical production 
utilizing biomass. Critical Reviews in Biotechnology, 41(6), 827–848. 
16. Bornscheuer, U. T., Huisman, G. W., Kazlauskas, R. J., Lutz, S., Moore, J. C., & Robins, 
K., (2012). Engineering the third wave of biocatalysis. Nature, 485(7397), 185–194. 
17. Poppe, L., & Vértessy, B. G., (2018). The fourth wave of biocatalysis emerges—The 
13th international symposium on biocatalysis and biotransformations. ChemBioChem, 
19(4), 284–287. 
18. Wang, C., Pfleger, B. F., & Kim, S. W., (2017). Reassessing Escherichia coli as a cell 
factory for biofuel production. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 45, 92–103. 
19. Lin, B., & Tao, Y., (2017). Whole-cell biocatalysts by design. Microbial Cell Factories, 
16(1), 106. 
20. Wachtmeister, J., & Rother, D., (2016). Recent advances in whole-cell biocatalysis 
techniques are bridging from investigative to industrial scale. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 42, 169–177. 
21. Robles-Medina, A., González-Moreno, P. A., Esteban-Cerdán, L., & Molina-Grima, 
E., (2009). Biocatalysis: Towards ever greener biodiesel production. Biotechnology 
Advances, 27(4), 398–408. 

 
28 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
22. Lin, B., Fan, K., Zhao, J., Ji, J., Wu, L., Yang, K., & Tao, Y., (2015). Reconstitution 
of TCA cycle with DAOCS to engineer Escherichia coli into an efficient whole-cell 
catalyst of penicillin G. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(32), 
9855–9859. 
23. Ladkau, N., Schmid, A., & Bühler, B., (2014). The microbial cell—Functional unit 
for energy-dependent multistep biocatalysis. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 30, 
178–189. 
24. Liu, Y., Zhang, R., Lian, Z., Wang, S., & Wright, A. T., (2014). Yeast cell surface display 
for lipase whole-cell catalyst and its applications. Journal of Molecular Catalysis B: 
Enzymatic, 106, 17–25. 
25. Schüürmann, J., Quehl, P., Festel, G., & Jose, J., (2014). Bacterial whole-cell biocatalysts 
by surface display of enzymes: Toward industrial application. Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol., 98(19), 8031–8046. 
26. Han, L., Zhao, Y., Cui, S., & Liang, B. (2018). Redesigning of microbial cell surface 
and its application to whole-cell biocatalysis and biosensors. Applied Biochemistry and 
Biotechnology, 185(2), 396–418. 
27.  Dagher, S. F., Ragout, A. L., Siñeriz, F., & Bruno-Bárcena, J. M., (2010). Chapter 5 – 
cell immobilization for production of lactic acid: Biofilms do it naturally. In: Advances 
in Applied Microbiology (Vol. 71, pp. 113–148). Academic Press. 
28. Narita, J., Okano, K., Tateno, T., Tanino, T., Sewaki, T., Sung, M. H., Fukuda, H., & 
Kondo, A., (2006). Display of active enzymes on the cell surface of Escherichia coli  
using PgsA anchor protein and their application to bioconversion. Applied Microbiology 
and Biotechnology, 70(5), 564–572. 
29. Ståhl, S., Robert, A., Gunneriusson, E., Wernérus, H., Cano, F., Liljeqvist, S., Hansson, 
M., et al., (2000). Staphylococcal surface display and its applications. International 
Journal of Medical Microbiology: IJMM, 290(7), 571–577. 
30. Zhao, H., Shen, Z. M., Kahn, P. C., & Lipke, P. N., (2001). Interaction of alpha-agglutinin 
and a-agglutinin, Saccharomyces  cerevisiae sexual cell adhesion molecules. Journal of 
Bacteriology, 183(9), 2874–2880. 
31. Ecker, M., Deutzmann, R., Lehle, L., Mrsa, V., & Tanner, W., (2006). Pir proteins of 
Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  are attached to β-1,3-glucan by a new protein-carbohydrate 
linkage. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 281(17), 11523–11529. 
32.  Kranen, E., Detzel, C., Weber, T., & Jose, J., (2014). Autodisplay for the co-expression 
of lipase and foldase on the surface of E. coli: Washing with designer bugs. Microbial 
Cell Factories, 13, 19. 
33. Detzel, C., Maas, R., Tubeleviciute, A., & Jose, J., (2013). Autodisplay of nitrilase from 
Klebsiella pneumoniae and whole-cell degradation of oxynil herbicides and related 
compounds. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 97(11), 4887–4896. 
34. Boot, H. J., & Pouwels, P. H., (1996). Expression, secretion, and antigenic variation of 
bacterial S-layer proteins. Molecular Microbiology, 21(6), 1117–1123. 
35. Tyo, K. E. J., Kocharin, K., & Nielsen, J., (2010). Toward design-based engineering of 
industrial microbes. Current Opinion in Microbiology, 13(3), 255–262. 
36. Foo, J. L., Susanto, A. V., Keasling, J. D., Leong, S. S. J., & Chang, M. W., (2017). 
Whole-cell biocatalytic and de novo production of alkanes from free fatty acids in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 114(1), 232–237. 

 
29 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
37. Lin, B. X., Zhang, Z. J., Liu, W. F., Dong, Z. Y., & Tao, Y., (2013). Enhanced production 
of  N-acetyl-d-neuraminic acid by multi-approach whole-cell biocatalyst. Applied 
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 97(11), 4775–4784. 
38. Feng, F., Xu, Y., Tao, Y., Liu, W., & Lin, B., (2015). [Improving isoprene production 
by engineered heterologous mevalonate pathway in Escherichia coli]. Sheng Wu Gong 
Cheng Xue Bao = Chinese Journal of Biotechnology, 31(7), 1073–1081. 
39. Zhao, H., & Van, D. D. W. A., (2003). Regeneration of cofactors for use in biocatalysis. 
Curr Opin. Biotechnol., 14(6), 583–589. 
40. Nakamura, C. E., & Whited, G. M., (2003). Metabolic engineering for the microbial 
production of 1,3-propanediol. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 14(5), 454–459. 
41. Fukuda, H., Kondo, A., & Tamalampudi, S., (2009). Bioenergy: Sustainable fuels from 
biomass by yeast and fungal whole-cell biocatalysts. Biochemical Engineering Journal, 
44(1), 2–12. 
42. Frock, A. D., & Kelly, R. M., (2012). Extreme thermophiles: Moving beyond single-
enzyme biocatalysis. Current Opinion in Chemical Engineering, 1(4), 363–372. 
43. Huf, S., Krügener, S., Hirth, T., Rupp, S., & Zibek, S., (2011). Biotechnological synthesis 
of long-chain dicarboxylic acids as building blocks for polymers. European Journal of 
Lipid Science and Technology, 113(5), 548–561. 
44. Clouthier, C. M., & Pelletier, J. N., (2012). Expanding the organic toolbox: A guide to 
integrating biocatalysis in synthesis. Chemical Society Reviews, 41(4), 1585–1605. 
45. Jang, H. Y., Jeon, E. Y., Baek, A. H., Lee, S. M., & Park, J. B., (2014). Production of 
ω-hydroxyundec-9-enoic acid and n-heptanoic acid from ricinoleic acid  by recombinant 
Escherichia coli-based biocatalyst. Process Biochemistry, 49(4), 617–622. 
46. Overhage, J., Steinbüchel, A., & Priefert, H., (2003). Highly efficient biotransformation 
of eugenol to ferulic acid and further conversion to vanillin in recombinant strains of 
Escherichia coli.  Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 69(11), 6569–6576. 
47. Yadav, V. G., De Mey, M., Giaw, L. C., Kumaran, A. P., & Stephanopoulos, G., (2012). 
The future of metabolic engineering and synthetic biology: Towards a systematic 
practice. Metabolic Engineering, 14(3), 233–241. 
48. Meadows, A. L., Hawkins, K. M., Tsegaye, Y., Antipov, E., Kim, Y., Raetz, L., Dahl, R. 
H., et al., (2016). Rewriting yeast central carbon metabolism for industrial isoprenoid 
production. Nature, 537(7622), 694–697. 
49. Li, S., Wen, J., & Jia, X., (2011). Engineering Bacillus subtilis for isobutanol production 
by heterologous Ehrlich pathway construction and the biosynthetic 2-ketoisovalerate 
precursor pathway overexpression. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 91(3), 577–589. 
50. Kratzer, R., Woodley, J. M., & Nidetzky, B., (2015). Rules for biocatalyst and reaction 
engineering to implement effective, NAD(P)H-dependent, whole-cell bioreductions. 
Biotechnology Advances, 33(8), 1641–1652. 
51.  Wang, Y., Li, L., Ma, C., Gao, C., Tao, F., & Xu, P., (2013). Engineering of cofactor 
regeneration enhances (2S,3S)-2,3-butanediol production from diacetyl. Scientific 
Reports, 3(1), 2643. 
52. Hummel, W., & Gröger, H., (2014). Strategies for regeneration of nicotinamide 
coenzymes emphasizing self-sufficient closed-loop recycling systems. Journal of 
Biotechnology, 191, 22–31. 
53. Schüürmann, J., Quehl, P., Lindhorst, F., Lang, K., & Jose, J., (2017). Autodisplay of 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase for redox cofactor regeneration at the cell surface. 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 114(8), 1658–1669. 

 
30 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
54. Temme, K., Hill, R., Segall-Shapiro, T. H., Moser, F., & Voigt, C. A., (2012). Modular 
control of multiple pathways using engineered orthogonal T7 polymerases. Nucleic 
Acids Research, 40(17), 8773–8781. 
55. Lalwani, M. A., Ip, S. S., Carrasco-López, C., Day, C., Zhao, E. M., Kawabe, H., & 
Avalos, J. L., (2021). Optogenetic control of the lac operon for bacterial chemical and 
protein production. Nature Chemical Biology, 17(1), 71–79. 
56. Takaya, T., Koda, R., Adachi, D., Nakashima, K., Wada, J., Bogaki, T., Ogino, C., & 
Kondo, A., (2011). Highly efficient biodiesel production by a whole-cell biocatalyst 
employing a system with high lipase expression in Aspergillus oryzae. Applied 
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 90(3), 1171–1177. 
57. Gibson, D. G., Young, L., Chuang, R. Y., Venter, J. C., Hutchison, C. A., & Smith, H. O., 
(2009). Enzymatic assembly of DNA molecules up to several hundred kilobases. Nature 
Methods, 6(5), 343–345. 
58. Li, C., Ying, L. Q., Zhang, S. S., Chen, N., Liu, W. F., & Tao, Y., (2015). Modification of 
targets related to the Entner-Doudoroff/pentose phosphate pathway route for methyl-D­
erythritol 4-phosphate-dependent carotenoid biosynthesis in Escherichia coli. Microbial 
Cell Factories, 14, 117. 
59.  Salis, H. M., Mirsky, E. A., & Voigt, C. A., (2009). Automated design of synthetic ribosome  
binding sites to control protein expression. Nature Biotechnology, 27(10), 946–950. 
60. Jia, H., Fan, G., Yan, Q., Liu, Y., Yan, Y., & Jiang, Z., (2012). High-level expression 
of a hyperthermostable Thermotoga maritima xylanase in Pichia pastoris by codon 
optimization. Journal of Molecular Catalysis B: Enzymatic, 78, 72–77. 
61. Peralta-Yahya, P. P., Ouellet, M., Chan, R., Mukhopadhyay, A., Keasling, J. D., & Lee, 
T. S., (2011). Identification and microbial production of a terpene-based advanced 
biofuel. Nat. Commun., 2, 483–483. 
62. Joung, J. K., & Sander, J. D., (2013). TALENs: A widely applicable technology for 
targeted genome editing. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 14(1), 49–55. 
63. Gaj, T., Gersbach, C. A., & Barbas, C. F. 3rd., (2013). ZFN, TALEN, and CRISPR/ 
Cas-based methods for genome engineering. Trends Biotechnol., 31(7), 397–405. 
64. Cermak, T., Doyle, E. L., Christian, M., Wang, L., Zhang, Y., Schmidt, C., Baller, J. A., 
et al., (2011). Efficient design and assembly of custom TALEN and other TAL effector-
based constructs for DNA targeting. Nucleic Acids Research, 39(12), e82. 
65. Boch, J., & Bonas, U., (2010). Xanthomonas AvrBs3 family-type III effectors: Discovery 
and function. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 48, 419–436. 
66. Rigouin, C., Gueroult, M., Croux, C., Dubois, G., Borsenberger, V., Barbe, S., Marty, 
A., et al., (2017). Production of medium chain fatty acids by yarrowia lipolytica: 
Combining molecular design and TALEN to engineer the fatty acid synthase. ACS 
Synthetic Biology, 6(10), 1870–1879. 
67. Makarova, K. S., Haft, D. H., Barrangou, R., Brouns, S. J. J., Charpentier, E., Horvath, 
P., Moineau, S., et al., (2011). Evolution and classification of the CRISPR–Cas systems. 
Nature Reviews Microbiology, 9(6), 467–477. 
68. Shanmugam, S., Ngo, H. H., & Wu, Y. R., (2020). Advanced CRISPR/Cas-based 
genome editing tools for microbial biofuels production: A  review. Renewable Energy, 
149, 1107–1119. 
69.  Norsigian, C. J., Pusarla, N., McConn, J. L., Yurkovich, J. T., Dräger, A., Palsson, B. 
O., & King, Z., (2020). BiGG models 2020: Multi-strain genome-scale models and 
expansion across the phylogenetic tree. Nucleic Acids Research, 48(D1), D402–D406. 

 
31 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts: Introduction, Origin, and Concept 
70. Qian, Z. G., Xia, X. X., & Lee, S. Y., (2011). Metabolic engineering of Escherichia 
coli for the production of cadaverine: A five-carbon diamine. Biotechnology and 
Bioengineering, 108(1), 93–103. 
71. Kim, H. T., Baritugo, K. A., Oh, Y. H., Hyun, S. M., Khang, T. U., Kang, K. H., Jung, 
S. H., et al., (2018). Metabolic engineering of Corynebacterium glutamicum for the 
high-level production of cadaverine that can be used for the synthesis of biopolyamide 
510. ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 6(4), 5296–5305. 
72. Maeda, T., Sanchez-Torres, V., & Wood, T. K., (2012). Hydrogen production by 
recombinant Escherichia coli strains. Microbial Biotechnology, 5(2), 214–225. 


Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2  
Tools and Techniques for the 
Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
SUSHMA CHAUHAN,1 TANUSHREE BALDEO MADAVI,1,2 and 
SUDHEER D. V. N. PAMIDIMARRI2 
1Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, India 
2Discipline of Industrial Biotechnology, Gujarat Biotechnology University, 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India 
ABSTRACT 
The idea of using whole-cells as catalysts is intriguing, challenging, and a 
complex task. While considering a particular production process involving 
the use of a cellular system as a catalyst requires multifactorial adjustments. 
Developing a whole-cell biocatalyst (WCB) requires a robust chassis with 
the desired qualities of harboring the natural or acquired enzyme/cascades 
involved in the production strategies. Not only the physiological adjust­
ments but also the genetic and biochemical adjustments are critical. The 
availability of information regarding genome annotation and tools for 
genome editing accelerated the developments in the field of WCB. Efforts 
of rational protein engineering, developments in the vectors, chimeric 
nucleases, etc., supported with the in-silico tools for predicting the pheno­
types in advance, have laid the support system for designing a robust WCB 
process of targeted production. Enriched knowledge of modern developed 
tools for genetic manipulation has aided the development of robust WCB 
chassis. The plethora of these tools and methods for the advancements in 
the WCB field has been elaborated in this chapter to help the fraternity for 
better comprehension of the field. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
In mid-20th century the revolution in industrial sector accelerated the 
manufacturing and refinery sector with the development of knowledge 
in catalysis. The crucial technologies developed in the areas of cracking 
and reforming reactions via platinum-based catalysts fueled chemical 
industry. In the process, researchers also identified the issues related to 
the toxic environmental sustenance of the catalyst preparation or recovery 
as well as coupled with the toxic byproducts from the reaction [1–3]. This 
made the researchers to reroute the process with greener practices without 
exerting any environmental turbulence and carbon footprint. In parallel 
the bio-based catalysis came into existence due to the process completely 
green in nature. The advantages such as high regio-, stereo-, chemo-, 
enantio-selectivity made the enzyme-based catalysis superior especially, 
for the production of biologically related fine/platform chemicals and 
pharmaceuticals [3–5]. Catalytically they have added advantages, such as, 
no requirement of protecting group, minimal/no side reaction products, 
easier downstream separation of products and most important neutral 
towards environment, made many industries to look into adoption for 
their production [6]. 
Biocatalysis is conducted by either using the crude extracts of enzymes 
or purified enzymes from the source. These enzymes are usually implied for 
the desired reaction execution for the substrate transformation to product. 
The advantage of using the purified enzyme is that the undesired reaction 
could be controlled, and selective products could be attained, in addition 
the product recovery will be easy. However, these advantages come with 
added costs such as cost incurred for the enzyme purification, storage, and 
maintenance. Moreover, the cofactors are necessary to be supplied to the 
reaction mixture in surplus to make the reaction uninterrupted. These issues 
make the system economically inferior from the industrial point of view. 
Hence the concept of whole-cell biocatalysis came into existence as a novel 
branch of catalysis science while circumventing all the issues of enzyme-
based catalysis [7, 8]. 
Whole-cell biocatalysis (WCB) is the process of establishing the 
whole-cell (microorganisms such as bacteria, fungi, microalgae, etc.) as 
biocatalyst for making desired product. In general whole-cell biocatalysis 
approach includes two approaches: (a) biotransformation and (b) fermen­
tation process. The catalysts (enzymes) which perform the selective 
transformation of substrates to get the target product are expressed within 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
the cell to conduct the desired biotransformation reaction in protected 
environment of cell. In many cases the researchers are required to screen 
and isolate the large library of microbial sources to get the desired micro­
bial cell with the ability of conducting the target transformation reaction. 
However, in many situations, it demands engineering and fabrication of 
the natural microbial cells to conduct the desired reaction or may need to 
engineer the non-native cells to perform the desired transformation via 
including the enzyme cascade or pathway fabrication [9]. The concept of 
WCB was advanced in the third wave of biocatalysis and led to the next 
wave comprising technological advancements in ‘omics’ and considered 
to be the present era starting at late 1990’s [10]. Developing desired 
WCB for the selective purpose is quite a complex process, depends on 
the feasible bioprocess and intended properties to be incurred in the cell 
to conduct catalysis. The development of pioneered molecular biology 
techniques and system engineering protocols made it easier to develop 
lucrative WCB systems which could do the desired catalysis function. 
In this chapter, the details of the technical advancements reported and 
have application in creating an efficient WCB system are discussed in 
comprehensive manner. 
2.2 SYSTEM DESIGN AND APPROACH FOR BUILDING A WCB 
To make whole-cell act as a chassis for catalysis and creating the attributes 
for the successful catalytic platform, it needs introduction of enzyme/ 
pathway, active expression of one or few enzymes to construct synthetic 
pathway/s (Figure 2.1), and metabolic fabrication to provide substrate, 
co-factors, etc. This rationally engineered whole-cell now acts as catalytic 
platform to biotransform the feedstocks/substrate into target product. 
Rational designing of WCB involves critical strategies attributing to various 
tools such as in-silico analysis and pathway optimization, rational design of 
pathway and construction, design optimization, and substrate flux analysis 
for catalytic success. Among all these, pathway analysis and understanding 
of the host metabolism and physiology are very important. Traditionally the 
researchers used to analyze these aspects by experimentation, but advance­
ments in the analytical techniques via mass spectroscopy tools and utilizing 
documentation of data and computational portfolio, the information was 
combined to be computationally translated for easy access and utilization 
which are now available as genome scale models (GSMs). In this section, 

 
 
36 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
we will start with introducing the concept of GSM and further how it helps 
in WCB development. 
2.2.1 GENOME SCALE MODELS (GSMS)-COMPUTATIONAL 
SIMULATOR OF CELL METABOLISM 
GSMs are mathematically curated and computationally assembled tools of a 
specific organism, which are developed by integrating information derived 
from various sources such as the whole set of genomic sequence annotation 
information together with the metabolic stoichiometry data, and mass-
balance data of metabolic reactions tested experimentally and supported by 
metabolomic analysis [11, 12]. 
FIGURE 2.1 Schematic representation of system biology and computational biology tools 
used to engineer a whole-cell biocatalyst. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
The first genome scale model was reported by Edward and Palsson in 
1999 from Haemophilus influenzae, since then GSM evolved as the best 
resource for modeling the metabolic studies in-silico. The ability of GSM 
to predict the metabolic flux and values are significantly optimized by 
references obtained through validated techniques combined and converted 
into linear and quadratic mathematical expressions and solved with linear 
programming allows us to understand the data for various objective 
functions. To establish an efficient WCB cell system engineering is very 
much necessary, and it includes various approaches such as metabolic 
engineering, pathway analysis, co-factor regeneration, oxidative-redox 
balance, etc., which are to be analyzed. The complexity lies in real-time 
experimental analysis which includes lot of cost, resources as well as 
time to get the conclusions. However, with the advent of GSMs which 
are developed using annotated genome sequence along with various omics 
data (transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, flux balance analysis 
data) gives insights of the cellular metabolism in various conditions. This 
enables us to assess the productivity/yields of targeted product. Due to these 
benefits, GSM evolved as a crucial platform and researchers developed 
the GSM models for model organisms such as Escherichia coli, Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae, Homo sapiens and plant model Arabidopsis [13–16]. 
GSM applications are expanding in various levels of research not limited 
to metabolic engineering, but also for cellular flux analysis of hypothesized 
phenotype, drug targeting, metabolic enzyme function, understanding of 
reactome, etc., and the field is expanding to many other fields of synthetic 
biology and in the present context to WCB also. 
To support the GSM many computational tools have been evolved for 
the model construction and application for various system engineering 
purposes [12]. Traditional manual construction of GSM models is very 
tedious and time consuming, presently many automated tools and proto­
cols are available and most popular among are AutoKEGGRec, FAME, 
MetaDraft, AuReMe, SuBliMinal Toolbox, merlin, etc. [17–22]. The 
output of the automated GSM model generation revolutionized the number 
of GSM deposited to the databases, and among the most popular one is 
CarveMe is a platform supported to generate more than 6,000. This plat­
form is an automated computational pipeline which integrates the reaction 
dataset of target organism models not only limited to construction, but also 
genome sequence annotation, development of GPR (gene-protein-reaction) 
associations, etc. The availability of such advanced computational tools 
have revolutionized the field of systems biology while simultaneously 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
opening the gates for plethora of resources to model a rational cell chassis 
to be used as WCB. 
Considering the case study describing the importance of GSM is 
iML1515, which is the latest and most complete GSM model developed 
for the workhorse organism E. coli. This was developed via integrating 
genome data along with several data sets of proteomics, transcriptomics, 
and metabolomics [23]. iML1515 consists of 1,516 gene ORFs with 2,719 
metabolic reactions along with 1,192 metabolic products making it one of 
the most updated model platforms developed for E. coli. The metabolic 
reconstitution mode was also integrated with the metagenomics data set of 
gut microbiome and clinical isolates E. coli. Hence, iML1515 will allow 
us to predict the metabolic capabilities. This model is the comprehensive 
inclusion of 3D protein structure data, and fluxomics data as well as the 
system is connected to the external data bases such as CHEBI, KEGG, and 
PDB allows us to conduct accurate flux balance analysis. In iML1515, all 
the reactions are linked to coding genes and proteins and in addition the 
PDB structural information, homology models of domain-GPR relation­
ship allows to analyze and predict metabolites in relation to the genetic 
perturbations in the cell. This assessment will help in the estimation of 
redox potentials in the cell, co-factor regeneration and accumulation 
during the whole-cell catalysis. Hence, GSM tools are getting attention in 
the field of WCB developments and are successfully explored by various 
researchers to enhance the productivity of various chemicals of interest. 
Utilizing GSM models in E. coli, helped in enhancement of biochemical 
accumulation such as butanol, propanol, propanediol [24]. Apart from 
these the GSM models are also explored for the production of succinic 
acid (SA), lycopene, threonine, L-valine, etc., using E. coli as host system 
[25]. Apart from the prokaryotic systems, eukaryotic system such as 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is widely explored and researchers utilized the 
GSM reconstructions for the enhancement of ethanol, 3-hydroxypropionic 
acid (3-HP) production, and terpenoid biosynthesis [26–28]. Tradition­
ally, GSM models are used in metabolic engineering to predict the target 
gene/s for manipulations such as silencing via knockout, over expression 
for increasing metabolic flux towards selective cellular pathways, heter­
ologous expression of selective enzymes, etc., for enhanced production 
of chemicals and materials. Notably these requirements are of parallel 
interest in establishing WCBs and hence have great potential in applica­
tion of GSMs in WCBs chassis development. 

 
 
39 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
2.3 ENGINEERING INHERENT ENZYMES FOR TARGET WCB 
PROCESS 
In WCB, the crucial component is an enzyme performing the catalytic func­
tion. Although whole-cell is used as biocatalyst, the actual functional unit 
within the cell is enzyme executing the function. Hence, enzyme with the 
ability to conduct the reaction with good stability, high turnover conversion 
efficiency, ability to operate catalysis in flexible conditions will minimize the 
cost and enhance the prospective application in industrial level [10, 29]. The 
primary criteria for attaining better productivity are enhancing the stability 
and activity of the enzyme. The engineering of proteins/enzymes is a topic 
of interest for many decades, and the approach followed by researchers 
is adopting the Darwinian principle of evolution via the technique called 
directed evolution. 
2.3.1 DIRECTED EVOLUTION 
Initial efforts of improving the enzymes via directed evolution is reported in 
1991, by Chen and Arnold for increasing the stability and activity of enzyme 
‘Subtilisin E’ belonging to protease. In past three decades, this technique has 
proved to be powerful to evolve the enzyme based on selection pressure by 
creating random mutations and selecting the desired properties in the mutants. 
This step is repeated for several rounds to attain the desired characteristics in 
the target enzyme. This entire process mimics the natural process of directing 
the evolution towards desired phenotypic changes and hence, the technique 
is named ‘directed evolution’ (Figure 2.2) [30, 31]. The significance of this 
technique is that no information regarding the structure, active site, neither 
structure nor mechanism of enzyme action is needed to execute the directed 
evolution protocols on selected enzymes. The directed evolution protocols 
mimic the principles of natural evolution; however, it can be completed in a 
short span of time in vitro to attain the desired characteristic in the enzyme. 
The mutations can be induced by various techniques where the initial step 
is to have the cloned gene or family of gene intended to be mutated. The 
mutations are induced by either error-prone PCR or DNA shuffling (among 
the family of genes mixed together) followed by the non-recombinant and 
recombinant approaches [32, 33]. Technical protocols are developed for both 
methods, namely Mod-PCR, sequence saturation mutagenesis (SeSaM), 
iterative saturation mutagenesis (ISM) etc., supports the non-recombination 

 
 
40 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
method and RACHIT (RAndom CHImera genesis on transient templates), 
ITCHY (Incremental Truncation for the Creation of HYbrid enzymes), 
SHIPREC (Sequence Homology-Independent Protein RECombination) are 
few techniques developed which are based on recombination methods [34]. 
In principle the method looks very promising and prospective; however, 
the process is tedious and time consuming. Major hindrance in the method 
is the requirement of high throughput screening (HTS) method for selecting 
desired phenotypes which is specific to each enzyme and reaction type. Some 
generalized methods such as FACS (fluorescence-activated cell sorting)­
based fluorescence-activated droplet sorting was developed and improved 
further to the level of 107 variants per day. More novel technology also 
developed such as microfluidic-based absorbance-activated droplet sorter 
(AADS) has been successfully applied for the selection of phenotype of 
ability to be expressed in soluble form with thermostability without affecting 
the enzyme core activity. Since directed evolution is a randomized process 
while selecting desired phenotype, many a times the core activity is disturbed 
or compromised. Hence many researchers looked into the more rational 
designs for targeting selective segments/amino acids of proteins. This way 
the rational designs for engineering of proteins came into existence. 
2.3.2 RATIONAL DESIGN FOR SELECTIVE ENGINEERING 
Rational design as a concept in protein engineering dates long back than 
randomized selection via directed evolution. In 1978 the first report was 
said to be applied for protein engineering according to Smith et al. [35]. 
In this method, the protein structural information, reaction mechanism as 
well as active site is analyzed critically utilizing various bioinformatics tools 
and further the changes are rationally decided. In this strategy the crucial 
information of protein structural information, amino acid sequence, and 
high-resolution protein crystal structure of protein is needed. The important 
criteria used for the rational design is via enhancing the folding energy if the 
objective is stability of the target enzyme. Another criterion researcher looks 
into expanding the substrate acceptance, most of the time is done by making 
selective modification of amino acids in and around the active sites. Site-
directed mutagenesis is the technique which is often explored to achieve the 
change of selective amino acids in the target proteins via codon replacement. 
Crucial bottleneck in this method is having structural information of target 
protein. Till date approximately 1.5 lakh structures are available in the PDB 

 
41 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
(protein data bank) providing solid support for the rational design. However, 
getting structural information for each target protein is time consuming as 
well as cost intensive, hence many more algorithms are applied for making 
the in-silico platform to get the structural information of proteins that 
doesn’t have the information of its own (Figure 2.1). For these, homology 
comparison-based structure buildup assists in rational design. For attaining 
this, many platforms such as Swiss-model, Rosetta, IntFOLD, I-TASSER, 
PHYRE2 are developed for getting the structure model [36–40]. Neverthe­
less, rational design needs expertise and deep structural information to do 
protein engineering. 
To make more prospective, the researchers tried to explore both directed 
evolution and rational design for attaining desired characteristics in target 
protein and gave the origin of semi-relational design for protein engineering. 
2.3.3 SEMI-RATIONAL DESIGN 
Semi-rational design strategy for protein engineering includes both the prin­
ciples of ‘directed evolution’ as well as the concept of ‘rational design.’ In 
this method, the rational decision of selecting the position of mutation will be 
done by taking comprehensive information from library of related family of 
protein 3D structures and are analyzed utilizing various computing analysis 
software. Further these selected regions are allowed for random mutations. 
This library of mutants is screened for the desired characters [41]. Here, the 
need of multiple rounds of selection in the directed evolution method will 
be minimized and saves time as well as avoids the infrastructural demands 
and cost incurred in conducting screening at high throughput level. These 
methods simplified the limitations of both methods as well as combines the 
advantages of both rational design and directed evolution process. 
There are many tools available for predicting the changes needed to 
be made for generalized characteristics such as protein stability towards 
temperatures and pH. The tools like CUPSAT, IMuttant, PoPMuSiC, 
Rosetta-ddG, and FolDX were some of the platforms that helps in rational 
selection of specific regions/residues [42, 43]. Further, approaches such as 
random mutagenesis (of selected region/residues), site-saturation mutagen­
esis and site directed mutagenesis are few approaches used to make desired 
changes in protein [43]. The technique is very much advanced compared 
to directed evolution or rational design alone. For instance, the potential 
regions/residues are detected using the empirical tools (CUPSAT, IMuttant, 

 
 
42 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
PoPMuSiC, Rosetta-ddG, and FolDX) with greater accuracy and mutations 
are created with the latter approaches can give fast process and save time 
and cost incurred for protein engineering. To imply the general strategy, 
few protocols are developed such as MD simulations, ACS (active center 
stabilization), B-factor analysis for improving the kinetics and stability of 
the enzymes. These advanced methods are helping many researchers, and 
the bio-simulation platforms are still in constructive stage. Recently, more 
advanced methods such as quantum-mechanic simulations, molecular 
dynamic simulations for protein improvement are being harnessed and are 
called ‘De novo design.’ 
FIGURE 2.2 Schematic representation of the enzyme fabrication strategies for the 
development of WCB. 

 
 
 
43 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
2.3.4 DE NOVO DESIGN 
De novo design is technically very novel which includes creating a protein 
from scratch for a certain function or attributes which does not exist. Creating 
a new protein is always challenging and in the present context we have not 
attained a full-fledged platform to design the same. However, many tools are 
proposed or explored for getting some success in de novo designing and engi­
neering protein (Figure 2.2) [44]. The demands of the proteins with selected 
attributes forced the researchers for innovating available tools to design the 
proteins, de novo. The challenging issue to be addressed here is absence of 
a natural template to start with, hence many advanced methodologies and 
tools are developed such as FastRelax, FastDesign, RelaxDesign to help in 
developing the primary amino acid template chain [45–47]. The evolutionary 
model template is initially generated, and the de novo process is handled in 
two steps: in first step the tertiary components of protein structure to conduct 
the desired function will be identified. This step will give tentative protein 
structure and followed by the second step of identifying the amino acids at 
the active site, side chains will be analyzed and folding conformations will 
be illustrated with substantial computational platforms and advanced simu­
lation/modeling software. The energy of structure buildup is considered as 
crucial function that is taken into consideration to finalize the model. More 
recently, multistage designing tools assess the energies of predicted protein 
structures and perturbations under different conformations which helps in 
achieving the lowest energy conformations [44, 48]. In conclusion, the de 
novo design in the stage of exponential development and recent concepts of 
big-data analysis and machine learning (ML) are revolutionizing the field 
for protein engineering. However, the work has given limited success due to 
the knowledge gaps in the structural repository and functional understanding 
of proteins. Moreover, no generalized protocols are developed as versatile 
solutions for the particular functional character. In future the integration of 
ML and big-data analysis may help in bypassing the potential challenges in 
the de novo designing of proteins to unlock full potential of the method for 
protein engineering. 
2.4 TOOLS FOR EXPRESSION OF ENZYMES/ENZYME CASCADE 
Core objective of WCB is creating a catalytic cell cascade for the produc­
tion of novel products, molecules or improving the production of certain 
molecules naturally produced by the cell or detoxification/degradation of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
environmental contaminants, etc. Hence, to suffice the projected purpose of 
catalysis in the cell, the expression of native/heterologous proteins is desir­
able. Many expression tools were developed to support synthetic biology 
and metabolic engineering which have application in establishing efficient 
WCB. Here, in this section, the various advancements of the past decades 
to support the expression of desired proteins and enzymes in the cell will be 
discussed. 
The expression of heterologous protein in the cell has well studied 
from past 2–3 decades. Selective plasmid vectors with various promoter-
based expression systems were developed for the heterologous expression. 
While considering for the large-scale production, two crucial factors are 
considered which are ‘ori’ (origin of replication) and ‘strong promoter.’ 
The former gives the dosage advantage by maintaining the copy number 
of gene/plasmid in the cell, and the latter controls mRNA copies available 
for the translation and protein/enzyme expression [49]. In general, the 
researchers are intended to keep high expression of cascade of enzyme/s 
for the concentrated production of target product. Hence, the researchers 
considered strong promoters with maximal expression capacity, followed 
by stable mRNA production, and use of favorable codon for high translation 
capacity [50]. However, in the context of WCB the high expression of the 
target enzyme/s is not sole purpose especially, when a cascade of enzymes 
are considered for the expression [3]. Many promoters are developed for 
the expression target proteins/enzymes such as phoA, trp, lac, araB, nirB, 
cadA, pfl, and T7, etc. (Table 2.1) [51]. The succeeding sections discuss 
these aspects in detail. 
2.4.1 PLASMID AND COPY NUMBER 
In the view of WCB, the basic strategy of achieving novel product is via 
fabricating a whole-cell as a catalytic factory by expressing the core cata­
lytic molecules such as enzymes. Expressing the heterologous proteins in 
higher concentrations is proportional to the copy number of gene in the cell 
and stable maintenance of vector harboring the gene. Plasmids are used 
as gene carrying vectors which are maintained in the cell autonomously. 
Many components vary with the type of the plasmid backbone used. Various 
plasmids are classified based on the compatibility, host range, copy number, 
stable maintenance and segregation capacity. Various plasmids are forged 
for the exclusive purpose of expressing target proteins in the host cell with 
diverse ‘ori.’Although the dosage of plasmid is proportional to the expression 

 
 
 
45 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
levels; however, it is not always a preferred one, since having a high copy 
number may impose the metabolic burden which limits the cellular health 
and growth rate, etc. Considering WCB, the plasmid ‘ori’ should provide 
the stable segregation capacity. Most commonly used vectors for expression 
studies are based on pMB1, and pET series plasmids and maintain 15–60 
copies in the host cell with good stability and segregation capacity [52]. 
ColE1, a popular ori which is used in pQE vectors maintains 15–20 copies, 
significantly reported to be efficient in expression of target protein in the host 
cell [53]. The plasmid incompatibility is one of the major issues dealt while 
expressing more than one protein at a time which could be circumvented by 
using compatible ori’s in two different plasmid vectors. The best example is 
p15A ori (pACYC and pBAD series) show compatibility with both pMB1 as 
well as ColE1 ori which allows researchers to co-exist and express proteins 
simultaneously [54, 55]. By introduction of the ‘Duet’ series of plasmids, 
allowed researchers to express multiple proteins. The Duet series namely, 
pET-DUET, pACYC-Duet, pRSFDuet, pCDFDuet, pCOLADuet with 
various compatible ori and compatible selection antibiotic markers facilitated 
researchers to express multiple proteins in a single instance via including 
two MCS (multiple cloning site) and under individual promoter or operator. 
In our previous work we were able to express multiple proteins, up to four, 
for creating a WCB system to generate various platform chemicals [3, 4, 8]. 
2.4.2 PROMOTERS 
The promoters are the upstream DNA elements which initiate the transcrip­
tion of genes. The well-studied promoter is a lac promoter which was well 
described and demonstrated in the operon concept of lac operon leading to 
the noble prize award in 1965 to François Jacob and Jacques Monod. Lac 
operon contains lactose utilizing genes controlled by promoter and other 
regulating elements such as inducer and operator. Since, the lac promoter is 
well studied one and many characteristic features are understood and many 
variable mutants with diverse characteristics are reported, even till date this 
promoter is utilized for many molecular applications [56, 57]. Moreover, 
many hybrid promoters are engineered with the lac promoters (lacUV5 
promoter, tac promoter) led to enhanced strength of expressing the desired 
protein in high quantities [58, 59]. pMAL series vectors are best example 
designed for the higher protein expression using tac promoters (Table 2.1). 
Apart from these promoters, viral promoters were also harnessed for the 
recombinantly modifying the cellular systems. Being hostile and robustness 

 
 
 
 
 
46 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
is the reflection of harboring such strong promoters and thus viral promoters 
are ideal to be used for controlled expression studies. The best example in 
this category is pET-vector series/BL21(DE3) set where the latter one is the 
engineered host cell with the integrated prophage (λDE3) which expresses 
T7 RNA polymerase. This highly efficient polymerase upon induction 
selectively expresses the target protein which is downstream to T7 promoter 
(pET series vectors). This is the highly effective system is still applied in the 
laboratory for establishing efficient expression of target protein including 
WCB. In our previous studies, we explored same system and were able 
to express multiple proteins to generate efficient WCB taking E. coli as 
a host and reported to be very efficient in biotransformation of oleic and 
ricinoleic acids to corresponding esters via WCB [3, 4]. Apart from these; 
trp promoters, pL promoters, araP, tatP, rjaBAD promoter, etc., are few more 
popular in expressing recombinant proteins/enzymes. 
TABLE 2.1 Frequently Used Promoters and Their Characteristics 
Type of Promoter 
Promoter 
Stimulator 
Alcohol regulated 
AlcA promoter 
Alcohols 
Steroid regulated 
LexA promoter 
Steroids 
Temperature regulated 
Hsp70 or Hsp90-derived 
promoters 
Heat or cold temperatures 
Light regulated 
FixK2 promoter 
Blue light (470 nm) 
Chemically regulated 
pTetO 
Tetracycline and its derivatives 
Chemically regulated 
pLac promoter 
Lactose/IPTG 
Chemically regulated 
pBAD 
Arabinose 
Chemically regulated 
pTac 
Lactose/IPTG 
Chemically regulated 
trc promoters 
IPTG 
Temperature regulated 
pL(λ) 
Temperature shift to 42°C 
Chemically regulated 
T7 bacteriophage 
IPTG 
Chemically regulated 
araBAD 
L-arabinose 
The majority of the promoters discussed above are either metabolic 
regulatory promoters or chemically inducible systems. They are preferred 
by many researchers because of their simplicity in application and provide 
attractive protein yields. However, in the case of WCB, not always the high 
yield of the protein is important. Nevertheless, these promoters do well in 
the laboratory conditions, and scale-up levels at the laboratory level perform 

 
47 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
well. However, autonomously expressing strong and reliable promotors are 
necessary for WCB systems. The stress and starvation promoters turned out 
to be good tools for fine tuning and expressing the recombinant proteins. 
Among these, stationary phase promoters are found to be valuable tools 
for the purpose. These promoters shown efficient high expression in the 
stationary phase and lower or negligible promoter activity at exponential 
growth phase. This offers a good podium to design the system for the phase 
specific expression of target gene which could be implied for WCB purpose 
[60]. Recently, the attention also gained towards using the promoters which 
expresses the target protein without control. Those promoters which express 
the protein continuously without control termed as constitutive promoters. 
Our recent studies proved that such type of constitutive promoters could 
be valuable tools for establishing the low cost WCB system eliminating 
the necessity of adding the costly inducer (either synthetic and natural) and 
in the industrial point of view are not sustainable [3, 61, 62]. Few popular 
promoters are discussed in Table 2.1. 
2.4.3 CODON BIAS 
Codon bias is the property of cell of particular species/strain preferring to 
use selective synonymous codons for protein synthesis [63]. This influ­
ences the amount of target heterologous protein express in the cell which in 
turn affects the catalytic capacity of the cell in WCB. This situation results 
because of variations in the abundance of tRNA of synonymous codons of 
an amino acid. The codons of low abundance tRNA of particular amino acid 
will lead to slow or incomplete translation. This issue is prominent when the 
gene source is from a distinct species and intended to express heterologously. 
To counteract this issue, the researchers either create the synthetic genes 
with suitable codons of intended host or introducing the plasmid which 
supplements the deficient tRNA for rare codons [64]. The prior one is much 
preferred since it eliminates the extra burden to the cell to maintain the added 
plasmid for tRNA expression. Various online platforms (nihserver.mbi.ucla. 
edu/RACC/, molbiol.ru/eng/scripts/01_11.html, and genscript.com/cgi-bin/ 
tools/rare_codon_analysis) are available for getting the gene with optimized 
codon sequence DNA with selective host. These platforms not only consider 
the use of abundant codons but also mix the alternative codons since the use 
of same codon for one amino acid will be the burden on a single type of codon 
tRNA. As well as mRNA secondary structures also taken into consideration 

 
 
48 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
which may shorten the life of the mRNA, and also support the uninterrupted 
translation [65, 66]. 
2.5 TOOLS FOR GENE EDITING 
The developments in the molecular biology in recent years widely opened the 
doors for the easy genome editing/targeting. Many genomic tools have been 
developed to address the generalized as well as specific need in synthetic 
biology and metabolic engineering which are much need for designing 
WCB chassis. Among these tools transcription activator-like effector nucle­
ases (TALENs) and Zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) systems developed by 
researchers are efficient tools in genome editing and further the most popular 
system developed in the past decade is clustered regularly interspaced short 
palindrome region-Cas (CRISPR-Cas) system. CRISPR-Cas system is soon 
recognized by many researchers, due to its speed and ease of execution in 
genome editing. It is evolving as a prominent technology in synthetic biology 
and system engineering. In this section, we will discuss in detail about these 
technologies and their mechanism of application in genome editing. 
2.5.1 ZINC FINGER NUCLEASE SYSTEM 
For genome editing, properties of target recognizing proteins and non­
specific nucleases were harnessed and fabricated together to give a chimeric 
molecule which could access specific DNA targets and cleaves them. 
Manipulation of genomes of diverse range of cells has been possible with 
bare minimum engineered nucleases complexed with the DNA recognizing 
modules which imparts the specificity for editing of the genome [67]. The 
chimeric nucleases involve specific DNA-binding domains initially derived 
from the eukaryotic sequence-specific transcription factors, associated with 
the non-specific nucleases (usually bacterial protein) which cleaves the DNA 
target site recognized by the former one. Zinc fingers acts as a DNA binding 
domain which recognizes three bases (usually 5′-GNN-3′, where N can be 
anyone of the four nucleotides) in the target sequences and thus altering 
these sequences, they can be devised against desired target sequences [68]. 
The specificity for the precise target cleavage by the nucleases is imparted 
by this domain and thus is a critical part to be designed as per the target 
sequences. The most common zinc-finger domain, Cys2-His2, is frequently 
encoded by the eukaryotic genes and are named so due to the presence of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
zinc ion which is co-ordinated by the cystine and histidine residues and 
helps in the stabilization of the ββα domain of the zinc finger. These zinc 
fingers arranged in covalent tandem repeats along with the modularity in the 
recognition sequences have aided them to be a dynamic module for the DNA 
recognition. These zinc fingers can be rationally designed as per the target 
sequences to be cleaved. The mechanism of recognition involves the interac­
tion of the α-helix with the major groove of the double helix making contact 
with the significant amino acid residues of the protein plays an important 
role. The key positions at α helix of each zinc finger for the interaction with 
the DNA strand involves amino acids at 1, 3, and 6 [69]. To increase the 
target specificity, rational design of the unnatural arrays of the ZFNs was 
facilitated by the linker sequence discovered to be highly conserved and 
enabled the target recognition of 9–18 bp in length lessening any off-target 
hits [70, 71]. Thus, combinatorial libraries of the designer ZFNs can be 
constructed as per the target sequences and complexed with endonucleases 
such as FokI [72]. Although the ease of programming these ZFNs for the 
applications for various instances, it certainly suffers from some drawbacks 
and may lead to some off-target hits; where the adjacent sequences of the 
target play a significant role in the specificity [73]. 
2.5.2 TRANSCRIPTION ACTIVATOR-LIKE EFFECTORS (TALES) 
Transcription activator-like effectors (TALEs) are transcription activators 
were discovered to be encoded by the plant pathogens such as Xanthomonas 
which plays an important role in the promotion of infection in plants. Since 
their structural ability of specifically binding the target sequences of the plant 
genome they were then exploited for application in genome editing. Unlike 
the ZFNs, TALENs hold structural similarities regarding the effector and 
nuclease domain. The DNA binding domain of these effector proteins consists 
of ~34 amino acids containing tandem repeat modules. These modules have 
highly conserved sequences with variability only at positions 12 and 13 with 
respect to the base pair present in the target. These variable residues are known 
as repeat variable di-residues (RVD), where residue 13 contacts the DNA and 
the side chain of residue 12 stabilizes the module. These RVD are critical 
for the target specificity. Various RVDs been recognized for the nucleotides 
and TALE repeats bind in a helical manner while all consecutive modules 
are placed in proximity. The target recognition domain requires only a single 
nucleotide unlike the ZFNs which are triplet confined. Thus, imparts greater 
design flexibility for the arrays which could be customized for the desired 

 
 
 
 
50 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
target efficiency [74]. Extensive research in the area of cloning protocols 
(Golden Gate assembly, Gibson assembly, etc.) has catalyzed the process of 
assembling the arrays of such effector modules. 
This technology is now industrially translated while enduring the capacity 
of targeting any DNA target. Similar to ZFNs, TALEs are also fused with 
the nucleases in order to be used for site directed genome editing purposes. 
Similar to ZFNs, nucleases such as FokI is fused with the TALE module 
and results into full effector-nuclease complex (Figure 2.3). To be identified 
as the target DNA site by the effector domain the site should have T base at 
its zero position and will be recognized by the additional protein sequences 
present upstream to the actual TALE modules [75]. Such additional protein 
sequences are also present in the downstream of the modules which are 
involved in the linkage and proper folding of the FokI nucleases [76]. There 
are two binding sites proposed to be taking part in the recognition by recog­
nizing and effector nucleases and each site should start with the T and these 
binding sites are of opposite orientation and consist of up to 21 additional 
base pairs. The availability of extensive studies on the structure and func­
tion of these modern tools has aided and accelerated programmable genome 
editing process which is applicable for metabolic engineering of the cellular 
catalysts for modifying them to produce the product of interests. 
FIGURE 2.3 Diagrammatic representation of the molecular tools used for genome editing 
for WCB genetic optimization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
2.5.3 CLUSTERED REGULARLY INTERSPACED SHORT PALINDROMIC 
REPEATS (CRISPR) 
The discovery and advancements of molecular tools for genome editing and 
modification purposes have led the scientific society to onlook the wide 
scope. Plethora of genome editing tools and techniques based on the targeted 
editing, using ZNFs and TALENS and other nucleases suffer through various 
technical difficulties (Figure 2.3). To circumvent these difficulties related 
to modularity and tractability can be overcome by more robust technique 
which is explicitly been used from prokaryotes to eukaryotes with better 
editing efficiencies. Molecular tool which is derived from the bacterial 
adaptive immune system has been extensively studied in the past decade. 
This immune system known as clustered regularly interspaced short 
palindromic repeats (CRISPR) associated with the protein and the whole 
system is known as CRISPR-Cas system. The origin of CRISPR is traced 
back to three decades ago, in 1987, when Atsuo Nakata’s group from Japan 
reported the presence of the regularly repeated sequences while studying iap 
gene in E. coli [77]. Later in 1991, reporting of interspaced direct repeats 
in Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) and their use as genetic 
markers [78]. Followed by these instances, the occurrence of similar clusters 
of repeats and spacers was reported in archaea Haloferax and Haloarcula 
species by Francisco Mojica in 1993 [79]. Following these there were many 
reports related to the CRISPR array, its origin and function. This established 
CRISPR as an adaptive immune system in bacteria and archaea and over the 
following years it was modified to be used as RNA-dependent DNA editing 
tool. 
Down the years, further discoveries uncovered two classes of CRISPR-
Cas systems that exist based on their functions and structures. Majorly 
divided into two classes; Classes 1 and 2, both containing different types and 
sub-types of CRISPR-Cas systems classified on their respective evolution. 
Based on the effector proteins and crRNA complex involved, they are clas­
sified into; Class 1 consists of type I (contains cas3 or cas3′ gene), type III 
(contains cas10 gene) and type IV and Class 2 consists of type II (contains 
cas9, cas1 and cas2 genes)and type V (contains cpf1 gene) described by 
the multisubunit crRNA-effector complexes present at the loci [80]. All the 
CRISPR-Cas systems consist of expression, interference, adaptation, and 
ancillary genes. While interference genes being the most crucial of all as they 
consist of effector module possessing crRNA and target cleavage encoding 
endonucleases. Owing to the complexities of evolution and adaptation of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
52 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
the CRISPR systems they are dynamic entities and their elaborated clas­
sifications can be observed in the well elaborated reference as cited [80]. 
Among both the classes, Class 2 system is mostly used for target cleavage 
applications due to its simpler functional proteins structure and easy 
programmability.  This makes the genome editing possible in prokaryotes 
and eukaryotes [81, 82]. Class 2 harbors single and large functional proteins 
whereas the Class 1 harbors much more complex multisubunit and thus are 
not readily modulated. 
2.5.3.1 MECHANISM 
About 40% of bacteria harbors CRISPR/CRISPR-associated systems 
(CRISPR-Cas) conferring resistance towards invading foreign DNA. As 
explained above the presence of diverse CRISPR systems in bacterial and 
archaeal domains, among them is the type II CRISPR system of Strepto-
coccus pyogenes which harbors simple single gene encoded Cas9 and guide 
RNA guiding the target-based silencing [83]. The adaptive immunization 
of the CRISPR-Cas system against lateral DNA infection occurs in remark­
able three phases known as adaptation, expression, and maturation, and 
interference. The first step of adaptation involves the spacer acquisition with 
the help of Cas1 and Cas2 proteins. This is a crucial part, as the invading 
DNA segment (protospacer processed into spacer unit, sequence of 30–40 
nucleotides based on the CRISPR-Cas system subtype) is inserted at 5′-end 
of CRISPR array by separating it by spacer unit. This insertion of foreign 
DNA sequentially creates an array which is then used in the future as a 
memory of previous infections and thus adaptation. This stage is followed 
by the expression of CRISPR RNA (crRNA) which are initially expressed 
as long precursor RNA known as precrRNA which is then processed into 
mature crRNA (repeat sequences flanking each spacer sequence) and cata­
lyzed by the Cas9, a crRNA-effector complex which is an active Cas-crRNA 
complex. Where, 3′-end of the crRNA is a heteroduplex with the tracrRNA 
(trans-activating crRNA) and associates with the Cas9 and 5′-end specifies 
the target binding sequences on the target DNA [84]. The crucial sequence 
which plays an important role in target recognition known as protospacer 
adjacent motif (PAM) (which is usually 5′-NGG-3′), is located in the 
vicinity of the target sequence recognized by the carboxy terminal domain 
of Cas9 and spans 2–5 nucleotides. After identification of the target site, 
crRNA binds to the foreign target site and activation of nucleases takes place 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
leading to the degradation of target sequence. Cas9 harbors two distinct 
nuclease domains, RuvC, and HNH, which cleaves cognate sites of crRNA 
at target non-complementary and complementary strands, respectively [85]. 
Well elaborated studies proving minimal requirements of the S. pyogenes 
CRISPR-Cas system have aided it to be harnessed as the modifiable tool for 
genome editing and transcriptional and translational control. 
The use of such protein and RNA-guided nucleases induces the double 
strand breaks (DSBs) which are repaired by the Homology directed repair or 
the non-homologous end joining of the dsDNA. The modularity of the ZFNs, 
TALENs, and CRISPR system to be used for the site-specific editing help 
with more precise and rational designing of the whole-cells for the produc­
tion of chemicals (Figure 2.3). Other than these tools there are methods 
available which are used for the site-specific integration of the genes and 
have profound use in metabolic engineering of the cellular systems. 
2.5.3.2 FOR FABRICATION OF CELLS 
Technologies evolved for genome editing and regulatory control for the fabri­
cation of whole-cells to harness their ability for the maximum production of 
chemicals and fuels. Two core constituents which could be programmed for 
the gene and transcriptional control, are by CRISPR system’s guide RNA 
and the Cas enzyme. Initial programming of regulations was using the single 
guide RNA (sgRNA) and Cas enzyme, where plasmid constructs were used 
to express the synthetically designed guide RNA for respective target gene 
coupled with the Cas9 and Cas12a (Cpf1) enzyme. CRISPR technology can 
be used for activation, repression, and editing of the genes. Programming of 
CRISPR systems involve the fusion of crRNA and tracrRNA to give a sgRNA 
in case of Cas9 and in the case of Cas12a it is only crRNA. Since guide RNA 
(gRNA) provides the target specificity, they can be designed against any 
target genes in bacterial and mammalian cells. There are studies showing the 
utilization of such gRNA for various genome targeting studies. With respect 
to genome editing studies such as site directed mutagenesis and knockout 
studies, gRNAs are designed and coupled with the suitable Cas enzymes to 
imply the changes. The target specificity of these systems is also exploited 
for the repression (CRISPRi) and activation (CRISPRa) of the genes by 
using nuclease-null mutants (dCas), which lacks the nuclease activity but 
retains the target specificity due to the gRNAs [86]. Such systems are used 
against the promoter regions for the repression and activation studies of the 

 
 
 
 
 
54 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
genes where CRISPR-Cas complex binds to the target but does not cleave it. 
Based on these studies, multiplexing the CRISPR-Cas systems provides the 
layered genetic circuits which are applicable for the fine tuning of transcrip­
tional regulations for enhancing the phenotypic changes while fabricating 
the whole-cells in metabolic engineering strategies [87]. Multiplexing 
significantly depends on the transcription and processing of the gRNA 
arrays which can be of different types based on the applications; they can 
be expressed under individual control of promoters, by native CRISPR-Cas 
derived mechanisms or by producing a single transcript encoding multiple 
gRNAs separated by RNA cleavage sequences. There are various methods 
available for assembling synthetic gRNA arrays such as PCR-based golden 
gate assembly, synthesis, and ligation method and oligo assembly [88]. Also, 
discovery of modified PAM sequences provides more specificity for the 
target DNA also the discovery of Cas9 orthologs recognizing different PAM 
sequences has expanded the target reach for example, PAM for Neisseria 
meningitidis Cas9 is 5′-NNNNGATT [89]. Vast applications of CRISPR 
has enlarged the scope of modifications and demonstrated the ability to be 
applied not only for targeting DNA but also RNA [90]. For translational 
regulation and fine tuning of the cellular expression is necessary in order 
to lessen the metabolic burden on cell for obtaining the maximum product 
output. This is promiscuous approach in the field of whole-cell biocatalysis 
(WCB). CRISPR being a dynamic module and keeping the latest discoveries 
in view, provides a futuristic platform for genome editing and this chapter 
could not do justice by summarizing the highlights of this technology and 
thus, further reading for the cited references are recommended [91]. 
2.5.4 CHROMOSOMAL INTEGRATION 
Plasmids being an indispensable tool as discussed in previous Section 2.4.1, 
for the controlled engineering of the genome has certainly helped with 
expanding the knowledge about the genomic structure and its regulation. 
Plasmids being the extrachromosomal DNA can deliver the genes of interest 
and impart many qualities as per the design. As explained earlier the useful­
ness of viral promoters, which are not the only viral elements used for the 
fabrication purposes of WCB. The evidence on the phage infection strategies 
and DNA elements related to it led to the development of tools which could 
be used for the genome integration strategies. DNA integration via plasmids 
has a history of harboring cre-lox system used for the genome integration and 
is carefully curated from the phage infection strategy. The Cre recombinases 

 
 
 
 
55 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
and loxP sites are of phage origin and thus a very minimalistic system to be 
adopted for the recombination of DNA segments which is an ideal condition 
in the field of biotechnology. This system is catered on the plasmid which 
contains lox sites for resolving the plasmid in ori+ and ori-DNA circles 
possessing characteristic attP site of bacteriophage, MCS, selectable marker 
and Notl site [92]. Further developments led to the adoption of FLP system 
derived from the yeast. The FLP system is comprised of FLP protein and 
34bp FLP recombination target (FRT) sites present on the chromosome and 
aids the inter- as well as intramolecular recombination. The tractability of 
this system was increased further by involving the Tn5 transposon to keep 
check on the FRT insertion location for the rapid and precise integration [93]. 
But, the methodology of using plasmids for the introduction of an individual 
extraneous traits evidently suffers from some drawbacks such as stability and 
copy number with limited gene insertion [92]. To circumvent such problems 
chromosomal integration was adopted which can be achieved mainly by 
two approaches namely, phage-derived methods and recombineering. Phage 
derived methods involves the development of plasmids harboring the phage 
attachment (attP) site, γ replication origin of R6K, a selectable marker with 
polylinker or promoter for ectopic expression [92]. These versatile plasmids 
are known as conditional-replication, integration, and modular (CRIM) plas­
mids and these are supplemented with helper plasmids for integration (Int), 
excision (Xis) or retrieval of the plasmids [94]. These techniques are well 
adopted in genome manipulation of whole-cell biocatalysts such as Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae and E. coli. Using the above-mentioned techniques is 
operable with the non-linear DNA fragment which is a laborious task and 
thus to ease the process, more techniques were developed which were 
capable of inserting the linear DNA into the chromosome of an organism. 
Chromosomal integration, and alterations by gene disruption now can be 
done in a single step and the technology developed is based on recombinases 
which can directly use PCR products for genome integration. The inability 
of bacterial cells to uptake and integrate linear DNA fragments owing to 
the presence of exonucleases persisted and led to the development of the 
lambda-red recombinase system which is adopted from the recombinase 
system of a phage as well. The λ-Red recombinase system involves genes 
encoding (i) gam, encodes for the inhibitor of RecBCD exonuclease and thus 
preventing the degradation of linear DNA to be integrated; (ii) exo, encodes 
for the 5′-3′ exonucleases produce 3′-overhangs at the target sites; and (iii) 
bet, encodes for a protein responsible for accessing the 3′-overhangs and 
processing the recombination for the integration of the target linear DNA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
[95]. This system has been successfully harnessed in combination with the 
FLP-FRT system for genome integration. Evolution of such powerful tech­
niques and their successful execution offered the development of cellular 
catalysts with robust production capabilities. Applications of these tools have 
been elaborately discussed in further chapters and readers are recommended 
to follow the mentioned references for more detailed discussion. 
2.6 TOOLS FOR GENE REGULATION 
In the view of whole WCB, the major focus is enhancing the transformation 
of substrate to product in more efficient and economically viable way. In this 
context, genetic manipulations are inevitable in fabrication of cellular metabo­
lism and divert the factors towards target product. In the previous sections we 
discussed much on how the target genes could be over expressed or knocked 
out. Despite of these options, metabolic engineering or system manipulations 
are explored in last three decades. Nevertheless, limitations are the number of 
genes that could be manipulated. The classical way of knocking out the genes 
in the cell may be promising, however, this may not be ideal for many cases. 
Moreover, the process is laborious, time consuming and cost intensive [96]. 
Instead, regulation or modulation of the level of gene expression or selective 
regulation of genes in a specific cell growth phase or at particular cell density 
during culturing may have much impact on productivity. In recent years, with 
the advent of RNA biology, researchers could design various tools and proto­
cols which allowed us to regulate and fine tune gene expression and control 
the cellular flux. In this section, we will be discussing about the gene regula­
tion and fine tuning of genes via various technologies and their advantages in 
metabolic flux engineering which led to the enhancement of productivity [97]. 
2.6.1 REGULATORY RNAS 
It has been evident that small RNAs (sRNAs), and regulatory noncoding 
RNAs (rnRNAs) are valuable tools in cellular flux engineering without 
implying metabolic stress via gene regulation at post-transcriptional level 
[96, 98]. The story of regulatory noncoding RNA and/or sRNAs is not a 
recent advancement, it was identified in 1967, characterized, and later is 
identified that it is increasingly abundant during change of growth from 
exponential to stationary phase. Later, it was shown to be 6A RNA that 
directly interacts with σ70-subunit of RNA polymerase and down regulates 

 
 
 
57 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
many of the σ70-RNA polymerase-controlled genes which helps in cell 
survival in nutritional limitation conditions in the cell. Naturally in the cell 
these sRNAs are crucial in regulating various genes in selective phases of 
cell. Advancements in synthetic biology protocols made us to explore these 
tools for cellular engineering and tailoring to attain certain products from the 
cell [97]. The researchers have designed various regulatory tools based on 
these sRNAs to regulate the genes in vivo to fine tune the gene expression. 
Here in this section, we will be briefly discussing how these helps in cell 
engineering. 
2.6.2 RIBOSWITCHES 
The term riboswitch was introduced by Ronald Breaker in 2002 [101], and 
riboswitches are cis-acting elements placed upstream to the RBS (ribosomal 
binding site) which have the ability of responding to various metabolites or 
ligands upon binding, alters the RNA secondary structure and hence could 
regulate the expression. These are reported in several bacteria which binds 
with the various metabolites and regulate gene expression in various stages 
of translation such as transcription attenuation, initiation of translation and 
downstream processing (DSP) like splicing and processing. Riboswitches 
are common in bacteria and are described in various species with the regula­
tory function of biosynthesis of diverse biomolecules such as nucleic acid, 
amino acids, vitamins, etc. [102, 103]. Majority of riboswitches described, 
negatively regulate the gene expression and this happens with the influence of 
ligand which directly binds with the optamer sequence, is a sensing module, 
and alters the secondary structure of downstream RNA which attenuates 
the expression hence called attenuator module. In this process, binding of 
metabolite or ligand to the sensor module, will change the secondary loop 
downstream to binding modules which alters the ribosomal binding to the 
mRNA via making SD (Shine Dalgarno) region not accessible. Most of the 
riboswitches rely on the structural interplay with and without ligand and 
influence the gene expression level at the translation or posttranscriptional 
level. Till date many riboswitches are designed for many model cell facto­
ries to generate valuable products such as platform chemicals, fuels, and 
pharmaceutically important biomolecules. Production of biomolecules via 
WCB needs a precise control of metabolic pathways and past couple of 
decades allowed researchers to design various riboswitches (Figure 2.4). The 
custom build riboswitches are made suitable for the applications of system 

 
 
 
 
58 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
engineering, system biology and metabolic engineering aspect to build novel 
whole-cell factories. 
FIGURE 2.4 Schematic representation of the molecular tools curated for systematic control 
of gene expression for controlled production studies in WCB. 
Various engineered riboswitches are designed for the construction of gene 
circuits for the purpose of pathway optimization, metabolic engineering and 
fine tuning of selective gene expression. Among the various riboswitches, 
most versatile and one of advanced riboswitch tools are developed by Ceres 
et al. [104]. These riboswitches are developed with a series of readouts of 
sensor module having the ability to bind with various ligands with diverse 
binding abilities. These riboswitches helped the researchers to modulate the 
desired cascade of the gene circuits both in vitro and in vivo. The working 
system of regulatory systems of riboswitches in vitro make this system as 
portable one for the rapid assessment of molecular engineering to attain the 
system for production of various products. And also this system will help in 

 
 
59 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
fine tuning of pathways and assessment for efficient productivity. The limita­
tions of this system is the nature of cis-acting function of riboswitches. The 
application of this system needs to be managed via genome level sequence 
manipulations. Hence, it limits the high-level metabolic engineering applica­
tions. In this context transacting RNAs would be valuable tools. 
2.6.3 NONCODING SMALL RNAS 
Most traditional transacting regulatory RNAs are noncoding small RNAs 
(snRNA) and antisense RNA (asRNA). Among these asRNAs are the simple 
type of system used for many genetic studies and metabolic engineering 
aspects [105]. In this technique, the researchers use the antisense template 
expressed in the host cell which upon transcription will bind to complimen­
tary mRNA and hinder the translation, thus negatively regulate the gene 
expression. To make it very efficient the scientist designed the asRNA in 
the region of SD and downstream part of coding sequence such that the 
translation will be efficiently controlled. Due to simplicity and technically 
easy to operate, these were soon adopted for the metabolic engineering to 
divert the metabolic flux towards selective pathways for enhancing the target 
product yields. asRNA regulatory mechanism is explored much in cases 
where the knocking out the gene is not possible, such gene are regulated 
using asRNA (Figure 2.4). Initial efforts of utilizing asRNA are reported as 
yearly as 1984 [106], they were mainly explored for solving the problem of 
metabolic management, growth conditioning as well as protein expression. 
The best example in this context is acetate modulation in E. coli for the 
protein overproduction. Acetate pathway is very essential in cell physiology, 
balances the cellular carbon flux via modulating the acetyl-CoA and acetyl 
phosphate. Acetyl phosphate acts as signal transduction regulator, hence, is 
a crucial one for maintenance of cell physiology. Thus, knockout strategy 
could not be implied. Hence, two genes phosphotransacetylase (PTA) and 
acetate kinase (ACK) were down regulated as a result, the better titter of 
overexpression attained in case of GFP. However, asRNA system suffers 
with its own drawbacks such as the size of antisense is few 100 nucleotides 
is a cellular burden and the antisense templates at times regulates non-target 
genes because of sequence similarity. Hence, the efficiency is not always 
similar for all targets. Thus, more advanced antisense systems were devel­
oped based on the small regulatory RNAs. srRNA are designed for more 
robust utilization for system engineering. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Small regulatory RNAs are much advanced tools for the regulation of 
the genes in the cell. Till date at least 100 sRNAs are reported in the model 
system E. coli either by computational methods or experimental demonstra­
tion. They are small in size and more efficient and unlike asRNA, srRNAs 
are more precise in target regulation. srRNAs are 30 to 100 nt and in some 
cases up to 300 nt in length are discovered in studies of phage, plasmid, and 
transposon regulation [100]. These srRNA hold two regions, one segment is 
complementary to the target mRNA region for binding, and another segment 
contains polyU and work in association with Hfq protein. Hfq protein binds 
with the polyU regions in association with the signature stem-loop structure 
of srRNA and facilitates the base paring of mRNA and srRNA duplex. Hfq 
protein stabilizes the complete complex and structurally inhibits the ribo­
some recruitment and initiation of translation. Hfq protein further recruits 
RNAseE and to other degradosome assist the degradation of mRNA [99]. 
The best model srRNA explored and developed for the metabolic engi­
neering and strain sections was demonstrated by the Na et al. [97]. In this 
study, the group explored nearly 130 synthetic srRNAs libraries and screened 
for the best srRNA system for synthetic biology and metabolic engineering. 
Among those, SgrS, MicF, and MicC scaffolds were found to be superior and 
finally MicC was selected for its better repression characteristics and found 
to be more controlled regulation in the system. This system was conveniently 
demonstrated to control up to four genes to regulate at single instance and is 
efficient in modulating the desired metabolic flux engineering. Moreover, this 
system is a trans-acting system, the single regulatory control which could be 
supplemented to the cell can anonymously act in any strain, hence could be 
helpful in screening the efficient strains for the target product. This system is 
successfully demonstrated to be very helpful in strain screening via selecting 
the most efficient tyrosine producing strain and the yields found to be best 
ever reported via this technology. In addition, the group also demonstrated the 
production of cadaverine via global screening of multiple central metabolic 
genes allowed us to identify the target genes to be regulated for the efficient 
production. This allowed to identify 31 genes which influence the production of 
cadaverine and at last narrowed down to one gene, murE regulation via sRNA 
resulted in 2.15 g/L of target product. The superiority of this system helps to 
design the gene circuiting in various bacterial cell factories. 
The advancement of tools in synthetic biology is expanding our knowl­
edge and understanding of their role in cellular physiology. In this section, 
we could comprehend the system developed for metabolic engineering and 
cellular gene circuiting for metabolic flux management. These systems 
are already found to be valuable tools for system engineering and cellular 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
61 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
tailoring and are helping in multidimensional expansion of WCB chassis for 
the production of various valuable products. 
2.7 CONCLUSIONS 
Framing and designing a robust whole-cell for optimal biocatalysis and scal­
able production of the target chemicals and biofuels requires multifaceted 
genomic and biochemical adjustment of cellular systems. This chapter has 
compiled the developed tools and technologies used to optimize cellular 
systems in order to amend them for the desired production of molecules. 
Ranging from the genetic tools to the computational algorithms which have 
been developed to fabricate a robust cell which could balance the production 
with cellular growth. The system biology and metabolic engineering are now 
pioneering the subject of WCB and holds promiscuous abilities for future 
cellular bio-factories. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
CRISPR 
• 
fabrication 
• 
gene editing 
• 
rational designing 
• 
riboswitches 
• 
tools 
• 
whole-cell biocatalysis 
• 
zinc finger nucleases 
REFERENCES 
1. Bell, E. L., Finnigan, W., France, S. P., Green, A. P., Hayes, M. A., Hepworth, L. J., 
Lovelock, S. L., et al., (2021). Biocatalysis. Nature Reviews Methods Primers, 1(1), 46. 
2. De Carvalho, C. C. C. R., (2017). Whole-cell biocatalysts: Essential workers from 
nature to the industry. Microbial Biotechnology, 10(2), 250–263. 
3. Sudheer, P. D. V. N., Seo, D., Kim, E. J., Chauhan, S., Chunawala, J. R., & Choi, K. Y., 
(2018). Production of (Z)-11-(heptanoyloxy)undec-9-enoic acid from ricinoleic acid by 
utilizing crude glycerol as sole carbon source in engineered Escherichia coli expressing 
BVMO-ADH-FadL. Enzyme and Microbial Technology, 119, 45–51. 

 
62 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
4. Sudheer, P. D. V. N., Yun, J., Chauhan, S., Kang, T. J., & Choi, K. Y., (2017). Screening, 
expression, and characterization of baeyer-villiger monooxygenases for the production 
of 9-(nonanoyloxy)nonanoic acid from oleic acid. Biotechnology and Bioprocess 
Engineering, 22(6), 717–724. 
5. Wachtmeister, J., & Rother, D., (2016). Recent advances in whole-cell biocatalysis 
techniques bridging from investigative to industrial scale. Current Opinion in 
Biotechnology, 42, 169–177. 
6. Pera, L. M., Baigori, M. D., Pandey, A., & Castro, G. R., (2015). Chapter 10 – biocatalysis. 
In: Pandey, A., Höfer, R., Taherzadeh, M., Nampoothiri, K. M., & Larroche, C., (eds.), 
Industrial Biorefineries & White Biotechnology (pp. 391–408). Elsevier: Amsterdam. 
7. Nikolova, P., & Ward, O. P., (1993). Whole-cell biocatalysis in nonconventional media. 
Journal of Industrial Microbiology, 12(2), 76–86. 
8. Madavi, T. B., Chauhan, S., Keshri, A., Alavilli, H., Choi, K. Y., & Pamidimarri, S. D. 
V. N., (2022). Whole-cell biocatalysis: Advancements toward the biosynthesis of fuels. 
Biofuels, Bioproducts and Biorefining, n/a (n/a). 
9. Schrewe, M., Julsing, M. K., Bühler, B., & Schmid, A., (2013). Whole-cell biocatalysis 
for selective and productive C–O functional group introduction and modification. 
Chemical Society Reviews, 42(15), 6346–6377. 
10. Bornscheuer, U. T., Huisman, G. W., Kazlauskas, R. J., Lutz, S., Moore, J. C., & Robins, 
K., (2012). Engineering the third wave of biocatalysis. Nature, 485(7397), 185–194. 
11. Kim, H. U., Kim, T. Y., & Lee, S. Y., (2008). Metabolic flux analysis and metabolic 
engineering of microorganisms. Molecular Biosystems, 4(2), 113–120. 
12. Thiele, I., & Palsson, B. Ø., (2015). A protocol for generating a high-quality genome-
scale metabolic reconstruction. Nature Protocols, 5(1), 93–121. 
13. Edwards, J. S., & Palsson, B. O., (2000). The Escherichia coli MG1655 I in silico  
metabolic genotype: Its definition, characteristics, and capabilities. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 97(10), 5528–5533. 
14. Förster, J., Famili, I., Fu, P., Palsson, B., & Nielsen, J., (2003). Genome-scale 
reconstruction of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae metabolic network. Genome Research, 
13, 244–253. 
15. Duarte, N. C., Becker, S. A., Jamshidi, N., Thiele, I., Mo, M. L., Vo, T. D., Srivas, R., & 
Palsson, B. Ø., (2007). Global reconstruction of the human metabolic network based on 
genomic and bibliomic data. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104(6), 
1777–1782. 
16.  Gomes De, Oliveira Dal’Molin, C., Quek, L. E., Palfreyman, R., Brumbley, S., & 
Nielsen, L., (2010). AraGEM, a genome-scale reconstruction of the primary metabolic 
network in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 152. 
17. Karlsen, E., Schulz, C., & Almaas, E., (2018). Automated generation of genome-scale 
metabolic draft reconstructions based on KEGG. BMC Bioinformatics, 19(1), 467. 
18. Boele, J., Olivier, B. G., & Teusink, B., (2012). FAME, the flux analysis and modeling 
environment. BMC Systems Biology, 6(1), 8. 
19. Hanemaaijer, M., Olivier, B. G., Röling, W. F. M., Bruggeman, F. J., & Teusink, B., 
(2017). Model-based quantification of metabolic interactions from dynamic microbial-
community data. PLOS One, 12(3), e0173183. 
20. Aite, M., Chevallier, M., Frioux, C., Trottier, C., Got, J., Cortés, M. P., Mendoza, S. 
N., et al., (2018). Traceability, reproducibility and wiki-exploration for “à-la-carte” 

 
63 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
reconstructions of genome-scale metabolic models. PLOS Computational Biology, 
14(5), e1006146. 
21. Swainston, N., Smallbone, K., Mendes, P., Kell, D., & Paton, N., (2011). The 
SuBliMinaL toolbox: Automating steps in the reconstruction of metabolic networks. 
Journal of Integrative Bioinformatics, 8(2), 186. 
22. Gu, C., Kim, G. B., Kim, W. J., Kim, H. U., & Lee, S. Y., (2019). Current status and 
applications of genome-scale metabolic models. Genome Biology, 20(1), 121. 
23. Monk, J. M., Lloyd, C. J., Brunk, E., Mih, N., Sastry, A., King, Z., Takeuchi, R., et 
al., (2017). iML1515, a knowledgebase that computes Escherichia coli  traits. Nature 
Biotechnology, 35(10), 904–908. 
24. Ohno, S., Furusawa, C., & Shimizu, H., (2013). In silico screening of triple reaction 
knockout Escherichia coli strains for overproduction of useful metabolites. Journal of 
Bioscience and Bioengineering, 115(2), 221–228. 
25. Simeonidis, E., & Price, N. D., (2015). Genome-scale modeling for metabolic 
engineering. Journal of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology, 42(3), 327–338. 
26. Borodina, I., Kildegaard, K. R., Jensen, N. B., Blicher, T. H., Maury, J., Sherstyk, S., 
Schneider, K., et al., (2015). Establishing a synthetic pathway for high-level production 
of 3-hydroxypropionic acid in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  via β-alanine. Metab. Eng., 
27, 57–64. 
27. Bro, C., Regenberg, B., Förster, J., & Nielsen, J., (2006). In silico aided metabolic 
engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for improved bioethanol production. Metab. 
Eng., 8(2), 102–111. 
28. Smallbone, K., Mendes, P., Kell, D., & Paton, N., (2011). The SuBliMinaL toolbox: 
Automating steps in the reconstruction of metabolic networks. Journal of Integrative 
Bioinformatics, 8, 186. 
29. Yang, D., Park, S. Y., Park, Y. S., Eun, H., & Lee, S. Y., (2020). Metabolic engineering 
of Escherichia coli for natural product biosynthesis. Trends Biotechnol, 38(7), 745–765. 
30. Chen, K., & Arnold, F. H., (1991). Enzyme engineering for nonaqueous solvents: 
Random mutagenesis to enhance activity of subtilisin E in polar organic media. Bio/ 
Technology, 9(11), 1073–1077. 
31. Tracewell, C., & Arnold, F., (2009). Directed enzyme evolution: Climbing fitness peaks 
one amino acid at a time. Current Opinion in Chemical Biology, 13, 3–9. 
32. Cadwell, R. C., & Joyce, G. F., (1992). Randomization of genes by PCR mutagenesis. 
Genome Research, 2(1), 28–33. 
33. Pritchard, L., Corne, D., Kell, D., Rowland, J., & Winson, M., (2005). A general model 
of error-prone PCR. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 234, 497–509. 
34. Liu, Q., Xun, G., & Feng, Y., (2019). The state-of-the-art strategies of protein engineering 
for enzyme stabilization. Biotechnology Advances, 37(4), 530–537. 
35. Nobel Lecture, (1994). Synthetic DNA and biology. Bioscience Reports, 14(2), 51–66. 
36. Waterhouse, A., Bertoni, M., Bienert, S., Studer, G., Tauriello, G., Gumienny, R., Heer, 
F. T., et al., (2018). SWISS-MODEL: Homology modelling of protein structures and 
complexes. Nucleic Acids Research, 46(W1), W296–W303.
37. Kiss, G., Çelebi-Ölçüm, N., Moretti, R., Baker, D., & Houk, K. N., (2013). Computational 
enzyme design. Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 52(22), 5700–5725. 
38. Roche, D. B., Buenavista, M. T., Tetchner, S. J., & McGuffin, L. J., (2011). The 
IntFOLD server: An integrated web resource for protein fold recognition, 3D model 
quality assessment, intrinsic disorder prediction, domain prediction and ligand binding 
site prediction. Nucleic Acids Research, 39(suppl_2), W171–W176. 

 
64 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
39. Yang, J., Yan, R., Roy, A., Xu, D., Poisson, J., & Zhang, Y., (2015). The I-TASSER 
suite: Protein structure and function prediction. Nature Methods, 12(1), 7–8. 
40. Kelley, L. A., & Sternberg, M. J. E., (2009). Protein structure prediction on the Web: A  
case study using the phyre server. Nature Protocols, 4(3), 363–371. 
41. Reetz, M. T., Carballeira, J. D., & Vogel, A., (2006). Iterative saturation mutagenesis on 
the basis of B factors as a strategy for increasing protein thermostability. Angewandte 
Chemie International Edition, 45(46), 7745–7751. 
42. Kellogg, E., Leaver-Fay, A., & Baker, D., (2011). Role of conformational sampling in 
computing mutation-induced changes in protein structure and stability. Proteins, 79, 
830–838. 
43. Guerois, R., Nielsen, J. E., & Serrano, L., (2002). Predicting changes in the stability 
of proteins and protein complexes:  A study of more than 1000 mutations. Journal of 
Molecular Biology, 320(2), 369–387. 
44. Meinen, B. A., & Bahl, C. D., (2021). Breakthroughs in computational design methods 
open up new frontiers for de novo protein engineering. Protein Engineering, Design 
and Selection, 34. 
45. Tyka, M. D., Keedy, D. A., André, I., Dimaio, F., Song, Y., Richardson, D. C., 
Richardson, J. S., & Baker, D., (2011). Alternate states of proteins revealed by detailed 
energy landscape mapping. Journal of Molecular Biology, 405(2), 607–618. 
46. Bhardwaj, G., Mulligan, V. K., Bahl, C. D., Gilmore, J. M., Harvey, P. J., Cheneval, 
O., Buchko, G. W., et al., (2016). Accurate de novo design of hyperstable constrained 
peptides. Nature, 538(7625), 329–335. 
47. Maguire, J. B., Haddox, H. K., Strickland, D., Halabiya, S. F., Coventry, B., Griffin, J. 
R., Pulavarti, S. V. S. R. K., et al., (2021). Perturbing the energy landscape for improved 
packing during computational protein design. Proteins: Structure, Function, and 
Bioinformatics, 89(4), 436–449. 
48. Davey, J. A., Damry, A. M., Goto, N. K., & Chica, R. A., (2017). Rational design of 
proteins that exchange on functional timescales. Nature Chemical Biology, 13(12), 
1280–1285. 
49. Miksch, G., Bettenworth, F., Friehs, K., Flaschel, E., Saalbach, A., Twellmann, T., & 
Nattkemper, T. W., (2005). Libraries of synthetic stationary-phase and stress promoters 
as a tool for fine-tuning of expression of recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli. 
Journal of Biotechnology, 120(1), 25–37. 
50. Young, E., & Alper, H., (2010). Synthetic biology: Tools to design, build, and optimize 
cellular processes. Journal of Biomedicine and Biotechnology, 2010, 130781. 
51. Rosano, G. L., & Ceccarelli, E. A., (2014). Recombinant protein expression in 
Escherichia coli: Advances and challenges. Frontiers in Microbiology, 5. 
52. Bolivar, F., Rodriguez, R. L., Greene, P. J., Betlach, M. C., Heyneker, H. L., Boyer, H. 
W., Crosa, J. H., & Falkow, S., (1977). Construction and characterization of new cloning 
vehicle. II. A multipurpose cloning system. Gene, 2(2), 95–113. 
53. Lin-Chao, S., & Bremer, H., (1986). Effect of the bacterial growth rate on replication 
control of plasmid pBR322 in Escherichia coli. Molecular and General Genetics MGG, 
203(1), 143–149. 
54. Chang, A. C., & Cohen, S. N., (1978). Construction and characterization of amplifiable 
multicopy DNA cloning vehicles derived from the P15A cryptic miniplasmid. Journal 
of Bacteriology, 134(3), 1141–1156. 

 
65 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
55. Guzman, L. M., Belin, D., Carson, M. J., & Beckwith, J., (1995). Tight regulation, 
modulation, and high-level expression by vectors containing the arabinose PBAD 
promoter. Journal of Bacteriology, 177(14), 4121–4130. 
56. Wanner, B. L., Kodaira, R., & Neidhardt, F. C., (1978). Regulation of lac operon 
expression: Reappraisal of the theory of catabolite repression. Journal of Bacteriology, 
136(3), 947–954. 
57. Jacob, F., Perrin, D., Sánchez, C., Monod, J., & Edelstein, S., (2005). The operon: 
A group of genes with expression coordinated by an operator. C.R.Acad. Sci. Paris, 
250(1960) 1727–1729. Comptes Rendus Biologies, 328(6), 514–520. 
58. Makoff, A. J., & Oxer, M. D., (1991). High level heterologous expression in E. coli  
using mutant forms of the lac promoter. Nucleic Acids Res., 19(9), 2417–2421. 
59. De Boer, H. A., Comstock, L. J., & Vasser, M., (1983). The tac promoter: A functional 
hybrid derived from the trp and lac promoters. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 80(1), 21–25. 
60. Miksch, G., Bettenworth, F., Friehs, K., Flaschel, E., Saalbach, A., Twellmann, T., & 
Nattkemper, T. W., (2005). Libraries of synthetic stationary-phase and stress promoters 
as a tool for fine-tuning of expression of recombinant proteins in Escherichia coli. J. 
Biotechnol., 120(1), 25–37. 
61. Jensen, P. R., & Hammer, K., (1998). Artificial promoters for metabolic optimization. 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 58(2, 3), 191–195. 
62. Jensen, P. R., & Hammer, K., (1998). The sequence of spacers between the consensus 
sequences modulates the strength of prokaryotic promoters. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 64(1), 82–87. 
63. Gustafsson, C., Govindarajan, S., & Minshull, J., (2004). Codon bias and heterologous 
protein expression. Trends in Biotechnology, 22(7), 346–353. 
64. Kane, J. F., (1995). Effects of rare codon clusters on high-level expression of heterologous 
proteins in Escherichia coli. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 6(5), 494–500. 
65. Goodman, D. B., Church, G. M., & Kosuri, S., (2013). Causes and effects of N-terminal 
codon bias in bacterial genes. Science (New York, N.Y.), 342(6157), 475–479. 
66. Li, G. W., Oh, E., & Weissman, J. S., (2012). The anti-Shine-Dalgarno sequence drives 
translational pausing and codon choice in bacteria. Nature, 484(7395), 538–541. 
67. Urnov, F. D., Rebar, E. J., Holmes, M. C., Zhang, H. S., & Gregory, P. D., (2010). 
Genome editing with engineered zinc finger nucleases. Nature Review. Genetics, 11(9), 
636–646. 
68. Dreier, B., Segal, D. J., & Barbas, III. C. F., (2000). Insights into the molecular 
recognition of the 5′-GNN-3′ family  of DNA  sequences by zinc finger domains. Journal 
of Molecular Biology, 303(4), 489–502. 
69. Pavletich, N. P., & Pabo, C. O., (1991). Zinc finger-DNA recognition: Crystal structure 
of a Zif268-DNA complex at 2.1 A. Science, 252(5007), 809–817. 
70. Liu, Q., Segal, D. J., Ghiara, J. B., & Barbas, C. F. 3rd., (1997). Design of polydactyl 
zinc-finger proteins for unique addressing within complex genomes. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 94(11), 5525–5530. 
71. Moore, M., Choo, Y., & Klug, A., (2001). Design of polyzinc finger peptides with 
structured linkers. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 98(4), 1432–1436. 
72. Li, L., Wu, L. P., & Chandrasegaran, S., (1992). Functional domains in Fok I restriction 
endonuclease. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 89(10), 4275–4279. 

 
66 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
73. Khalil, A. M., (2020). The genome editing revolution: Review. Journal of Genetic 
Engineering and Biotechnology, 18(1), 68. 
74. Reyon, D., Tsai, S. Q., Khayter, C., Foden, J. A., Sander, J. D., & Joung, J. K., 
(2012). FLASH assembly of TALENs for high-throughput genome editing. Nature 
Biotechnology, 30(5), 460–465. 
75. Mak, A. N., Bradley, P., Cernadas, R. A., Bogdanove, A. J., & Stoddard, B. L., (2012). 
The crystal structure of TAL  effector PthXo1 bound to its DNA  target. Science, 
335(6069), 716–719. 
76. Miller, J. C., Tan, S., Qiao, G., Barlow, K. A., Wang, J., Xia, D. F., Meng, X., et al., (2011). 
A  TALE nuclease architecture for efficient genome editing. Nature Biotechnology, 
29(2), 143–148. 
77. Ishino, Y., Shinagawa, H., Makino, K., Amemura, M., & Nakata, A., (1987). Nucleotide 
sequence of the IAP gene, responsible for alkaline phosphatase isozyme conversion 
in Escherichia coli, and identification of the gene product. J. Bacteriol., 169(12), 
5429–5433. 
78. Groenen, P. M., Bunschoten, A. E., Van, S. D., & Van, E. J. D., (1993). Nature of DNA  
polymorphism in the direct repeat cluster of mycobacterium tuberculosis; application 
for strain differentiation by a novel typing method. Molecular Microbiology, 10(5), 
1057–1065. 
79. Mojica, F. J. M., Juez, G., & Rodriguez-Valera, F., (1993). Transcription at different 
salinities of Haloferax mediterranei sequences adjacent to partially modified PstI sites. 
Molecular Microbiology, 9(3), 613–621. 
80. Makarova, K. S., Wolf, Y. I., Alkhnbashi, O. S., Costa, F., Shah, S. A., Saunders, S. 
J., Barrangou, R et al., (2015). An updated evolutionary classification of CRISPR-Cas 
systems. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 13(11), 722–736. 
81. Gasiunas, G., & Siksnys, V., (2013). RNA-dependent DNA endonuclease Cas9 of 
the CRISPR system: Holy grail of genome editing? Trends in Microbiology, 21(11), 
562–567. 
82. Shen, B., Zhang, J., Wu, H., Wang, J., Ma, K., Li, Z., Zhang, X., et al., (2013). Generation 
of gene-modified mice via Cas9/RNA-mediated gene targeting. Cell Research, 23(5), 
720–723. 
83. Wiedenheft, B., Sternberg, S. H., & Doudna, J. A., (2012). RNA-guided genetic silencing 
systems in bacteria and archaea. Nature, 482(7385), 331–338. 
84. Deltcheva, E., Chylinski, K., Sharma, C. M., Gonzales, K., Chao, Y., Pirzada, Z. A., 
Eckert, M. R., et al., (2011). CRISPR RNA maturation by trans-encoded small RNA and 
host factor RNase III. Nature, 471(7340), 602–607. 
85. Gasiunas, G., Barrangou, R., Horvath, P., & Siksnys, V., (2012). Cas9-crRNA  
ribonucleoprotein complex mediates specific DNA cleavage for adaptive immunity 
in bacteria. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 109(39), E2579–2586. 
86. Qi, L. S., Larson, M. H., Gilbert, L. A., Doudna, J. A., Weissman, J. S., Arkin, A. P., & 
Lim, W. A., (2013). Repurposing CRISPR as an RNA-guided platform for sequence-
specific control of gene expression. Cell, 152(5), 1173–1183. 
87. Ao, X., Yao, Y., Li, T., Yang, T. T., Dong, X., Zheng, Z. T., Chen, G. Q., et al., (2018). 
A multiplex genome editing method for Escherichia coli based on CRISPR-Cas12a. 
Frontiers in Microbiology, 9, 2307. 

 
67 
Tools and Techniques for the Development of Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
88. McCarty, N. S., Graham, A. E., Studená, L., & Ledesma-Amaro, R., (2020). Multiplexed 
CRISPR technologies for gene editing and transcriptional regulation. Nat. Commun., 
11(1), 1281. 
89. Hu, J. H., Miller, S. M., Geurts, M. H., Tang, W., Chen, L., Sun, N., Zeina, C. M., et al., 
(2018). Evolved Cas9 variants with broad PAM compatibility and high DNA  specificity. 
Nature, 556(7699), 57–63. 
90. O’Connell, M. R., Oakes, B. L., Sternberg, S. H., East-Seletsky, A., Kaplan, M., & 
Doudna, J. A., (2014). Programmable RNA recognition and cleavage by CRISPR/Cas9. 
Nature, 516(7530), 263–266. 
91. Pickar-Oliver, A., & Gersbach, C. A., (2019). The next generation of CRISPR-Cas 
technologies and applications. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 20(8), 490–507. 
92. Hasan, N., Koob, M., & Szybalski, W., (1994). Escherichia coli genome targeting, I. 
Cre-lox-mediated in vitro generation of ORI- plasmids and their in vivo chromosomal 
integration and retrieval. Gene, 150(1), 51–56. 
93. Huang, L. C., Wood, E. A., & Cox, M. M., (1997). Convenient and reversible site-
specific targeting of exogenous DNA into a bacterial chromosome by use of the FLP  
recombinase: The FLIRT system. J. Bacteriol., 179(19), 6076–6083. 
94. Haldimann, A., & Wanner, B. L., (2001). Conditional-replication, integration, excision, 
and retrieval plasmid-host systems for gene structure-function studies of bacteria. J. 
Bacteriol., 183(21), 6384–6393. 
95. Yu, D., Ellis, H. M., Lee, E. C., Jenkins, N. A., Copeland, N. G., & Court, D. L., (2000). 
An efficient recombination system for chromosome engineering in Escherichia coli. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 
97(11), 5978–5983. 
96. Chaudhary, A. K., Na, D., & Lee, E. Y., (2015). Rapid and high-throughput construction 
of microbial cell-factories with regulatory noncoding RNAs. Biotechnology Advances, 
33(6, Part 1), 914–930. 
97. Na, D., Yoo, S. M., Chung, H., Park, H., Park, J. H., & Lee, S. Y., (2013). Metabolic 
engineering of Escherichia coli using synthetic small regulatory RNAs. Nature 
Biotechnology, 31(2), 170–174. 
98. Massé, E., Escorcia, F. E., & Gottesman, S., (2003). Coupled degradation of a small 
regulatory RNA and its mRNA targets in Escherichia coli. Genes & Development, 
17(19), 2374–2383. 
99. Carpousis, A. J., (2007). The RNA degradosome of Escherichia 
 
coli: An mRNA­
degrading machine assembled on RNase E. Annual Review of Microbiology, 61(1), 
71–87. 
100. Thomason, M. K., & Storz, G., (2010). Bacterial antisense RNAs: How many are there, 
and what are they doing? Annual Review of Genetics, 44(1), 167–188. 
101. Winkler, W. C., Cohen-Chalamish, S., & Breaker, R. R., (2002). An mRNA structure 
that controls gene expression by binding FMN. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 99(25), 15908–15913. 
102. Coppins, R. L., Hall, K. B., & Groisman, E. A., (2007). The intricate world of 
riboswitches. Current Opinion in Microbiology, 10(2), 176–181. 
103. Vitreschak, A. G., Rodionov, D. A., Mironov, A. A., & Gelfand, M. S., (2004). 
Riboswitches: The oldest mechanism for the regulation of gene expression? Trends in 
Genetics: TIG, 20(1), 44–50. 

 
68 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
104. Ceres, P., Garst, A. D., Marcano-Velázquez, J. G., & Batey, R. T., (2013). Modularity 
of select riboswitch expression platforms enables facile engineering of novel genetic 
regulatory devices. ACS Synthetic Biology, 2(8), 463–472. 
105. Kemmer, C., & Neubauer, P., (2006). Antisense RNA based down-regulation of RNaseE 
in E. coli. Microbial Cell Factories, 5(1), 38. 
106. Pestka, S., Daugherty, B. L., Jung, V., Hotta, K., & Pestka, R. K., (1984). Anti-mRNA: 
Specific inhibition of translation of single mRNA molecules. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 81(23), 7525–7528. 

Part II  
WCB for Chemicals 


Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
  
  
  
 
 
 
CHAPTER 3  
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-
Chemical Producing Entities 
TANUSHREE BALDEO MADAVI,1,2 SUSHMA CHAUHAN,1,6 
SAI NANDHINI RAVI,3 SATHYA NARAYANAN VENKATESAN,3 
VASANTHA KUMAR KULOTHUNGAN,3 B. BHARATHIRAJA,4 
SOMESH HARIHARNO,1 MUGESH SANKARANARAYANAN,3,5 
RAVIKANTH SINGH,7 and SUDHEER D. V. N. PAMIDIMARRI2 
1Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, India 
2Discipline of Industrial Biotechnology, Gujarat Biotechnology University, 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India 
3Department of Biotechnology, Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. Sagunthala R&D 
Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
4Department of Chemical Engineering, Vel Tech High Tech Dr. Rangarajan 
Dr. Sakunthala Engineering College, Avadi, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
5Park’s Biolabs LLP, Vel Tech Technology Incubator, Vel Tech Rangarajan 
Dr. Sagunthala R&D Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai,  
Tamil Nadu, India 
6Department of chemical engineering, Dongguk University–Seoul,  
Seoul 100-715, Republic of Korea 
Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Uttar Pradesh,  
Noida, India 
ABSTRACT 
Chemical industries have thrived for decades on non-renewable resources and 
non-biological catalytic methodologies. Chemically catalytic processes are 
7

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
laborious and cost intensive. Biocatalysis confers the ability to perform the 
reactions at ambient environmental conditions and is eco-friendly with cost-
effective in nature. The plethora of information on designing the whole-cell as 
a catalyst has paved the way to be recognized at an industrial level. The history 
of using cellular systems for obtaining various chemicals is long known and is 
now pursued for sustainable developments in the field of biocatalysis. Chemi­
cals pertaining to their origin of synthesis and the process involved together 
contribute to the greener processes for their synthesis. Whole-cell biocatalysts 
are novel entities, and this chapter contributes towards compiling the type of 
metabolic networks involved in the synthesis of a particular chemical derived 
from a microbe. The strategies involves increased production using low-cost, 
sustainable, and renewable raw materials, bypassing the need for harmful 
inorganic catalysts or harsh production processes. This chapter gives insights 
into production strategies of industrially valuable chemicals via greener tech­
nology, whole-cell biocatalysis (WCB). 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
Chemicals are an indispensable part of day-to-day life. Chemical industries 
thrive in low-cost substrate and cost-efficient catalysts. Catalysis in general 
is defined as the modification of rate of a chemical reaction by the inclusion 
of a catalyst. Chemical catalysts have conventionally been a role player in the 
synthesis of fine chemical, platform chemical and pharmaceutical industries 
due to the higher yield of desired products. Non-renewable fossil fuels have 
been refined to form primary petrochemicals such as: aromatics, olefins, 
and alcohols [1]. Chemical catalysts involved in various reactions such as 
addition, alkylation, dehydrogenation, halogenation, nitration, oxidation, 
and polymerization, thereby leading to the conversion of petrochemicals into 
value added chemicals in the form of hydrocarbon intermediates or intermedi­
ates incorporated with nitrogen, chlorine, and oxygen [2]. The petrochemical 
intermediates are transformed into various monomers and polymers, finding 
applications as synthetic rubber, additives, fertilizers, explosives, adhesives, 
paints, plastics, pharmaceuticals, and solvents. However, the dominance 
of petroleum-based raw materials in petrochemical refineries for chemical 
catalysis has arisen environmental concerns due to the release of harmful 
by-products and generation of substantial number of wastes. In order to 
culminate this, the concept of green chemistry has emerged which utilizes 
renewable resources as raw materials and eco-friendly practices for the 
manufacturing [3]. 

 
 
73 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
Biocatalysis is a sustainable alternative to chemical catalysis, employed 
either with cell-free biocatalyst or whole-cell biocatalyst [4]. Cell-free 
biocatalyst commonly refers to enzymes extracted from biological cells and 
the catalytic reaction procedes either in the form of free-state or immobilized 
state. The high specificity of enzymes to the target biomass or chemical 
substrate has attracted their focus towards production of numerous chemicals 
either by a one step or multi-step catalytic conversion [5]. The cell free system 
eliminates the mass transfer barrier within the reactant as observed with the 
whole-cell system [6]. The major drawbacks of cell-free biocatalysts are the 
choice to prefer crude or purified enzymes, hampered reaction rate due to 
impurities in substrate and the need to develop appropriate immobilization 
matrix for enzyme re-usage. 
On the other hand, whole-cell biocatalysis (WCB) averts the complexities 
associated with cell free biocatalysis such as cell lysis, enzyme purification 
and inefficiency due to reaction impurities, since the entire catalytic process 
takes place inside the cell in WCB [7]. The innate availability of metabolic 
pathways for microbial synthesis of chemicals and/or the ability to construct 
synthetic pathways in specific microbial hosts are the added benefits of WCB 
[8]. The catalytic process is completely eco-friendly due to the replacement of 
petrochemical raw materials with biomolecules [9]. This chapter elucidates 
about the broad range of whole-cell biocatalysts employed for the produc­
tion of various industrial chemicals such as 3-hydroxypropionic acid (3-HP), 
glucaric acid (GA), succinic acid (SA), adipic acid (AA), diols, diamines, 
ethylene glycol, alcohol, terpenes, ketones, and artemisinin (Figure 3.1 and 
Table 3.1). 
FIGURE 3.1 Schematic representation of a whole-cell catalysis and chemicals that can be 
produced. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
3.2 PLATFORM CHEMICALS 
3.2.1 3-HYDROXYPROPIONIC ACID (3-HP) 
3-hydroxypropionic acid (3-HP) is a β-hydroxy acid, recognized as one 
of the top building block compounds from biomass as reported by the US 
Department of Energy (DoE) in 2004 and 2010 [10]. It has two functional 
groups (carboxyl and hydroxyl group), making it a versatile platform 
for the synthesis of a wide variety of high value-added compounds 
via simple reaction steps. It is used as a precursor for the production 
of many biodegradable polymers, acrylic acids, esters, and malonate 
which are involved in the manufacturing of adhesives, polymers, plastic 
packaging, textiles, cleaning agents, and resins [11]. Several chemical 
synthesis approaches have been established for producing 3-HP. Being a 
3-C molecule, its chemical synthesis from different compounds such as 
ketene, vinyl acetate, allyl alcohol, etc., is environmentally burdening. 
Also, the costs of these routes are prohibitively high due to the expense 
of starting resources and high operating costs. Biological pathways based 
on renewable resources have some advantages over chemical ones such 
as improved energy security by reducing dependency on ever-expensive 
petroleum, little or no net carbon dioxide (CO2) addition to the atmo­
sphere, less pollution in the environment and more comfortable working 
circumstances [12]. 
Based on the drawbacks of chemical synthesis, researchers turned towards 
the biological route of 3-HP synthesis. Being a hydroxy-functionalized 
carboxylic acid, it was first found to be an intermediate metabolite of 3-HP 
cycle of Chloroflexus aurantiacus and was later on biosynthesized using 
whole-cell catalysts such as Escherichia coli [13], Klebsiella pneumonia 
[14], Pseudomonas denitrificans [15], Lactobacillus reuteri [16], Bacillus 
subtilis [17], and Corynebacterium glutamicum [18]. The presence of 3-HP 
was also detected in unconventional WCBs such as Acidianus ambiva-
lens, Sulfolobus metallicus, and Acidianus brierleyi. Various biosynthetic 
pathways through β-alanine, propionyl CoA, lactate, and malonyl CoA 
are commonly employed in the manufacture of 3-HP by different bacterial 
strains [18–22]. On the other hand, two pathways (CoA-dependent pathway 
and the CoA-independent pathway) were established to produce 3-HP while 
using glycerol as substrate [23]. 
E. coli is a well-studied host for 3-HP production, because of the avail­
ability of a significant number of aldehyde dehydrogenase (aldH) genes in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
its genome. In E. coli, 3-HP production involves bioconversion of glycerol to 
3-HP by dehydration followed by oxidation in case of glycerol and optimiza­
tion of the process recently shown to yield 0.97 g 3-HP/g glycerol [1]. By 
cloning the dhaB and aldH genes in E. coli BL21 under distinct regulatory 
promoters, a recombinant strain SH254 generating 3-HP from glycerol 
produced 6.5 mmol/l [24]. Further, by evaluating the effect of different 
physicochemical parameters, Mohan Raj and his co-workers produced 3-HP 
at 31 g/l in 72 h using a recombinant E. coli under pH regulated conditions 
[25]. The modified levels of aldH expression improved the 3-HP titer with 
less 1,3-Propanediol (PDO) as by-product [26]. 
In another study, among nine E. coli strains, E. coli W was found to be 
a tolerant strain and produced 41.5 g/l of 3HP in 48 hrs. [13]. In addition, 
by fine tuning the gene expression and activity using synthetic cassette 
architecture, 3-HP synthesis was enhanced to ~57 g/L [27]. In the glycerol 
to 3-HP conversion pathway, the gene glycerol dehydratase undergoes 
rapid inactivation, which results in the shutdown of 3-HP production. The 
co-expression of glycerol dehydratase reactivase (GdrAB) can bring down 
the glycerol dehydratase inactivation [28]. By expressing the gene encoding 
NAD+-regenerating enzyme (glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase) 3-HP 
production yield was boosted [21]. By upregulating the glycerol kinase 
(glpK) and the glycerol facilitator (glpF), as well as by deleting the regula­
tory factor that suppressed the use of glycerol (glpR), the elimination of the 
major by-products and increased 3-HP production (42.1 g/L) were achieved 
[29]. E. coli harboring nitrilase was used as a whole-cell biocatalyst and 
immobilized cells resulted in 36.9 g/L/h of 3-HP with the reusability and 
viability up to 30 cycles [30]. 
Further, a 3-HP tolerant E. coli W strain was developed through adaptive 
laboratory evolution (ALE). The adapted strain E. coli WA, which can grow 
up to 800 mM of 3-HP and also found that a point mutation in yieP was 
responsible for the enhanced tolerance [31]. A novel aldH Gabd4 possessed 
the highest enzyme activity for the production of 3-HP [32]. 3-HP produc­
tion was low on acetate which was increased by the deletion of aceA [33]. 
As E. coli is not a natural producer of coenzyme B12, attempts were made 
to synthesize coenzyme B12 [34] and evaluated for 3-HP synthesis. Due to 
the minuscule levels of B12 synthesis, it did not produce any 3-HP while 
inserting 3-HP pathway in the host. 
K. pneumoniae can naturally synthesize the requisite coenzyme B12 
de-novo under limited aeration conditions. By the homologous expres­
sion of an aldH (PuuC) in K. pneumoniae DSM 2026 produced 16.8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
g/L [35]. Further, the deletion of dhaT and yqhD genes improved the 
production to 28 g/L [35]. A novel K. pneumonia J2B was isolated [36] 
and subjected to resting cell production. It co-produced 3-HP and PDO 
with excess lactate [37]. By deleting ldhA in the same strain, the cumu­
lative yield on glycerol and specific production rate of 3-HP and PDO 
were enhanced by 41.4% and 52% devoid of lactate [38]. To overcome 
the large by-product accumulation, potential use of nitrate as an elec­
tron acceptor restored NAD+ and reduced by-product formation during 
anaerobic 3-HP synthesis from glycerol [39, 40]. By controlling the aera­
tion levels in the culture could regulate the relative quantities of 3-HP 
and PDO. Increased aeration rate will enhance the cell growth and 3-HP 
production, whereas PDO production decreased. The dha operon, on the 
other hand, was repressed in fully aerobic circumstances, resulting in no 
synthesis of 3-HP or PDO. After 28 hours of cultivation in a fed-batch 
bioreactor, higher 3-HP concentration (48.9 g/L) was achieved under 
microaerobic conditions [41]. Researchers tried different methods to 
increase 3-HP production by K. pneumoniae. They developed a two-step 
procedure in which K. pneumoniae transformed glycerol to PDO, which 
was then converted to 3-HP by Gluconobacter oxydans, a bacterium 
that incompletely oxidizes a wide spectrum of ketones, organic acids, 
and aldehydes. The ultimate concentration of 3-HP was 60.5 g/L, with a 
conversion rate of 0.5 g/g from glycerol to 3-HP. It was also the first time 
that acrylic acid was recorded as a by-product of 3-HP synthesis from 
PDO [14]. K. pneumoniae has the disadvantage of low cell density and 
NAD+ regeneration. Also, it was unable to synthesize the coenzyme B12 
under aerobic conditions [40]. Being pathogenic and sensitive to low pH, 
it is not generally preferred for industrial production. 
Pseudomonas denitrificans is a polar flagellated, rod-shaped, Gram-
negative, aerobic, heterotrophic bacterial species. It has the capability to 
synthesize coenzyme B12 under aerobic conditions, and it will generate 
NADP efficiently. When the Klebsiella pneumoniae enzymes glycerol 
dehydratase (DhaB) and GdrAB were expressed heterologously, P. denitri-
ficans produced 37.7 mmol/L 3-HP. When an ALDH gene (puuC) from K. 
pneumoniae was overexpressed, the titer and yield of 3-HP were improved 
to 54.7 mmol/L [42]. 3-HP enhanced transcription of three genes involved 
in 3-HP degradation (hpdH, mmsA, and hbdH-4) through the action of a 
transcriptional regulator protein, LysR, and a cis-acting regulatory region for 
LysR binding. 

 
 
77 
TABLE 3.1 Types of Platform Chemicals Produced by Their Respective Whole-Cell Catalysts and Precursors Used
Type of 
Chemical Product Name 
Whole‑cell Biocatalyst 
Pathway 
Precursor 
References 
Chemical 
3-hydroxypropionic acid
β-hydroxy acid 
(3-HP)
1,2-propanediols
1,3-propanediol 
Diols 
1,4-butanediol and
2,3-butanediol 
coli 
E.
 pneumonia 
K.
 cerevisiae 
S.
Synechocystis sp. PCC 
6803
Thermoanaerobacterium 
thermosaccharolyticum 
Lactobacillus buchneri
coli 
E.
 pneumoniae 
K.
 pneumoniae 
K.
 coli 
E.
Klebsiella sp.
glutamicum 
C.
 coli 
E.
Glycerol pathway
Overexpresses an aldehyde
dehydrogenase
The β-alanine pathway
Malonyl-CoA reductase (MCR) 
pathway
Fermentation
–
Methylglyoxal pathway
Aldolase-based pathway
Mixed-acid fermentation
α-acetolactate synthase (budB)
and acetolactate decarboxylase
(budA) from K. pneumoniae
2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase
(bdhA), formate dehydrogenase
(fdh) and glucose dehydrogenase
(gdh) 
Glycerol 
[1] 
Glycerol 
[37] 
Glucose 
[43] 
Atmospheric 
[44] 
CO2
Cellulosic sugars 
[45] 
Lactate 
[46] 
– 
[47] 
Glycerol 
[48] 
Glucose 
[49] 
Formaldehyde 
[50] 
and ethanol 
[51] 
Glucose and 
[52] 
cassava powder
Acetoin 
[53] 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 

 
 
Type of 
Chemical Product Name 
Whole‑cell Biocatalyst 
Pathway 
Precursor 
References 
Chemical
Dicarboxylic
acids
Diamines 
Succinic acid
Adipic acid
Putrescine
Cadaverine
Ethylene glycol 
glutamicum 
C.
Methylomonas sp. DH-1 
 cerevisiae 
S.
 coli 
E.
 glutamicum 
C.
 coli 
E.
 glutamicum 
C.
 coli 
E.
 coli 
E.
 cerevisiae 
S.
Anaerobic succinate pathway
Oxidative branch of TCA cycle 
and glyoxylate shunt
Cis, cis-muconic acid (ccMA)
pathway
The arginine decarboxylase 
(ADC) pathway and the ornithine
decarboxylase (ODC) pathway
Genes of ODC and ADC pathway 
were heterologously expressed
Lysine degradation pathway 
Dahm’s pathway 
Glycolytic enzymes 
Glucose 
[54] 
Methane gas 
[55] 
Glucose 
[56] 
Glucose 
[57]
[58] 
Glucose 
[59] 
Hemicellulose 
[60] 
Xylose 
[61] 
Glucose 
[62] 
Xylose 
[63] 
 
78 
TABLE 3.1 (Continued) 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
79 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
Controlling the level of gene expression in response to 3-HP could be 
significant [64]. To improve the availability of NADH for putative oxido­
reductase (PDOR), oxidation of NADH in the electron transport chain 
was disturbed by the deletion of the nuo operon and/or ndh gene [65]. To 
enhance the sustainability and economics of bio-productions, acetate was 
used as carbon feedstock. By heterologously overexpressing mcr and 
accABCD yielded 19.3 mM 3-HP with cerulenin addition and 14.2 mM with 
fabF deletion, respectively. Furthermore, non-growing cells lacking fabF 
were able to continuously produce 3-HP up to 40.4 mM [66]. Finally, the 
Pseudomonas asiatica C1 as a host was developed, by the global regulatory 
protein encoded by crc and several putative oxidoreductases (PDORs) were 
disrupted to produce 3-HP at ~700 mM [67]. 
Lactobacillus reuteri (L. reuteri) is a well-studied probiotic bacterium that 
has the ability to produce coenzyme B12 and has high acid tolerance, which 
was required for the production of 3-HP and PDO. During the metabolic flux 
analysis (MFA), the synthesis of 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde was found to be 
10 times faster than the 3-HP. To overcome this problem, glycerol feeding 
rate was controlled and final titer 10.6 g/l of 3-HP and 9.0 g/l of PDO was 
produced by the L. reuteri cells [68]. In a two-step approach incorporating 
L. reuteri and G. oxydans, anaerobic cultivation of L. reuteri resulted in the 
synthesis of equimolar quantities of 3-HP and PDO, whereas in the second 
phase, G. oxydans selectively oxidized the PDO in the cell-free supernatant 
to 3-HP [69]. In order to enhance the production, using the same L. reuteri 
recombinant strain, mixture of synthetic macromolecular structures of acti­
vated polyethyleneimine and modified polyvinyl alcohol (Cryo-PEI/PVA) 
showed 3.3 g/L 3-HP [16]. 
Filamentous fungus of the genus Aspergillus is known for their ability to 
synthesize organic acids such as citric acid, malic acid (MA), and itaconic 
acid (IA) on a large scale and at pH levels much below 3-HP’s pKa = 4.5 
[52]. Because of its acid tolerance, high glycolytic flux and capacity to use 
a wide range of carbon and nitrogen sources, Aspergillus pseudoterreus as 
a host for bioconversion of sugars to 3HP via the β-alanine pathway was 
investigated. Strains with single and multi-copy integration events were 
isolated and multi-omics analysis was used to interrogate the A. pseudoter-
reus. Elimination of the 3-HP degradation pathway improved the yield of 
3-HP by 3.4 folds after 10 days in shake-flask culture. When compared to 
bacteria, time duration will be high to produce more titer value, and it has 
limited genetic tools and low titer value [70]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
80 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
S. cerevisiae is a well-established whole-cell catalyst [71], as it has an 
inherent capacity to tolerate low pH. S. cerevisiae was engineered with a 
de-novo pathway for 3-HP production involving β-alanine-pyruvate amino­
transferase from Bacillus cereus. Multiple copies of MCR from C. auran-
tiacus and phosphorylation-deficient acetyl-CoA carboxylase ACC1 genes 
were integrated into the yeast genome, resulting in a five-fold increase in 
3-HP titer compared to single integration. Further, increased availability of 
acetyl-CoA and interchanging the cofactor selectivity (NADH to NADPH) 
boosted the 3-HP production to (9.8 ± 0.4 g/L) [72]. On the other hand, 
co-culture fermentation was proposed as a cost-effective and efficient 
method of utilizing cyanobacterial strains. With advancement of metabolic 
engineering and system biology tools, cyanobacteria Synechocystis sp. PCC 
6803 was modulated to harvest CO2 and convert it into 3-HP using MCR 
pathway with increased NADPH and carbon flux with enhanced supply of 
malonyl-CoA. This advanced strain resulted in 837.18 mg L–1 3-HP. Under 
photoautotrophic growth conditions, S. elongatus UTEX 2973 and E. coli 
produced sucrose and 3-HP from CO2. The sucrose catabolic pathway and 
the malonyl-CoA-dependent 3-HP biosynthetic pathway were introduced 
into E. coli BL21 (DE3) and achieved 68.29 mg/l of 3-HP [73]. 
3.2.2 DIOLS 
Diols has a wide range of applications such as food additives, polymerization 
building blocks, cosmetics, anti-freezing, and de-icing agent and are well 
known platform chemicals. The conventional production of propanediols 
is by using petroleum derived propylene oxide under high temperatures 
involving acid or alkali. Depletion of petroleum due to the exhaustive use 
for energy purposes has urged to switch to greener and sustainable options. 
Also, the chemical catalysis results in a racemic mixture of propanediols 
whereas the pure chiral compounds have much potential to be readily appli­
cable in the industrial synthesis. The two stereoisomers of 1,2-propanediols 
(1,2-PDOs) are distinctly produced by different organisms based on the raw 
materials provided. These three-carbon molecules are naturally produced by 
many microbes as a part of their metabolism. Whole-cells such as Coryne-
bacterium, E. coli and S. cerevisiae which are workhorses for biotechno­
logical applications, also possess basic pathways that involve the production 
of intermediates necessary for diol productions. Apart from these, there are 
some strains of genera Salmonella, Klebsiella, Clostridium, Saccharomyces 

 
 
81 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
that are reported to naturally produce 1,2-PDO. Since the reporting of 
1,2-PDO production in Clostridium thermobutyricum, many organisms were 
reported to produce these diols naturally but only in lower or insignificant 
quantities. The advent of biotechnological approaches, especially in system 
and metabolic engineering has led to the development of such strains that are 
promiscuous to industrial applications. Using whole-cells for the 1,2-PDO 
production is advantageous as they produce stereo-specific products. The 
chirality could be decided on the basis of the substrate used for the produc­
tion of 1,2-PDO. Fructose and/or rhamnose were used as carbon sources for 
the anaerobic synthesis of S-1,2-PDO. Whereas, R-1,2-PDO was produced 
when glucose, xylose, and arabinose were used as sugar substrates. Although 
this is a general notion, there are many organisms like Clostridium thermo-
saccharolyticum which can use a wide range of sugars for diol production. 
Using cost-efficient substrates derived from corn and wood by-products, 
cheese whey, etc., also were reported for the R-1,2-PDO production by C. 
thermosaccharolyticum [45]. Similarly, Lactobacillus buchneri can biotrans­
form lactate into 1,2-PDO anaerobically which is a readily available 
substrate formed by fermentation and can act as a cost-effective option [46]. 
The biosynthetic routes for 1,2-PDO production are methylglyoxal pathway, 
lactate pathway and deoxyhexose pathway which are functional in aerobic 
conditions. Whole-cell catalyst such as E. coli possesses the methylglyoxal 
pathway which was aided with the expression of NADH-linked glycerol 
dehydrogenase genes and overexpression of methylglyoxal synthase gene 
of E. coli resulted in 0.7 g of 1,2-PDO per liter [47]. Also, yeast whole-cell 
catalyst such as S. cerevisiae has also been reported to harness the phosphate 
insensitive methylglyoxal synthase which could be used for prospective 
studies for 1,2-PDO production [74]. To increase the efficiency of produc­
tion of 1,2-PDO, strategies to improve the methylglyoxal synthase involving 
pathways has been a primary effort which was further aided with the cofactor 
regeneration strategies as the enzymes involved in the production are reduc­
tases and require NAD(P)H [75]. Whole-cell catalyst such as C. glutamicum, 
E. coli are proved to be potential candidates for the 1,2-PDO production 
when metabolically engineered, expressing key enzymes heterologously in 
the host [47, 76]. Unconventionally, Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942, a 
photosynthetic bacterium was engineered to produce 1,2-PDO by expressing 
genes of aldehyde reductase (yqhD), methylglyoxal synthase (mgsA) and 
glycerol dehydrogenase (gldA) from E. coli while exploiting the abundance 
of NADPH-pool and temporal distribution of production phase. This has 
resulted in the overall production of ~150 mg/L 1,2-PDO [77]. 

 
 
 
 
82 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
PDO is recognized for being a monomer for polyester. The chemical 
synthesis by Shell and Degussa (DuPont) process of PDO is cost intensive 
as it requires high pressure and temperature with addition of expensive 
chemical catalysts that raises a concern over environmental effect due to 
waste that is generated. Earlier biotechnological production of PDO by E. 
coli using glucose as a substrate was shown by DuPont and Genencor Inter­
national Inc. giving more than 130 g/L production of PDO. Later, studies 
were focused on production using glycerol as a substrate as it is a waste 
by-product of biodiesel and helps to reduce the production cost. Extensive 
studies are reported on Klebsiella pneumoniae regarding the PDO production 
[78]. Klebsiella pneumoniae DSM 4799 was used as a whole-cell biocata­
lyst using raw glycerol as a substrate for PDO production [48]. Other than 
Klebsiella, members of Clostridium, Lactobacillus, and Enterobacter genera 
are also reported to produce PDO. Shimwellia blattae ATCC 33430 was used 
as a whole-cell biocatalyst for PDO production and gave a yield of 0.45 g/g 
when raw glycerol was used [79]. The production pathway from glycerol 
is oxidoreductive and where the terminal reduction reaction is catalyzed by 
1,3-propanediol oxidoreductase (PDOR) which utilizes NADH [80]. Apart 
from glycerol, glucose is another substrate which is used for PDO produc­
tion by Klebsiella pneumoniae J2B, a cell factory which was modified and 
proved to be a potential host for future production [49, 81]. The conventional 
vitamin B12 dependent PDO biosynthesis pathways are prone to carbon 
loss of 30–50%. To harvest a maximum amount of carbon to increase the 
production of PDO, de-novo pathway was constructed in E. coli, where they 
report to utilize the C1 and C2 carbon compounds in which aldolase play 
an important role for aldol condensation. The ethanol and formaldehyde 
were processed to ultimately produce PDO where deoxyribose-5-phosphate 
aldolase (DERA) plays a vital role. This opens the possibilities of using C1 
and C2 compounds for future industrial applications [50]. 
In C4 diols, 1,4-butanediol (1,4-BDO) and 2,3-Butanediol (2,3-BDO) are 
readily used as precursors in cosmetics, polymers, and other industries. The 
natural occurrence of 2,3-BDO has accelerated biological production and 
application industrially. Its wide application in cosmetics, industrial solvents, 
drugs, precursor for synthetic rubber, etc., has gained it the popularity while 
having a biogenesis. 2,3-BDO is a product of mixed-acid fermentation by 
many microorganisms among which strains of Klebsiella sp. have proved to 
be apex producers and are studied extensively. But the pathogenicity of this 
model system hinders its applications and has to be taken care of when used. 
These systems suffer from the accumulation of by-products such as acidic 

 
 
 
 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
83 
metabolites and production of capsular polysaccharides hinder the down­
stream processing (DSP) [82]. To circumvent this problem, non-pathogenic 
cellular systems such as Bacillus subtilis and other strains were used having 
GRAS identity. E. coli and S. cerevisiae being a non-native producer has 
been modified for the diol production. 2,3-BDO production pathway 
involves the pyruvate as a nodal intermediate and which is further converted 
into acetoin, finally producing BDO. The enzymes involved in the fermenta­
tion of pyruvate to BDO are α-acetolactate synthase (ALS), α-acetolactate 
decarboxylase (ALDC) and 2,3-BD dehydrogenase (BDH) also known as 
acetoin reductase. The heterologous expression of this pathway in E. coli has 
resulted in the yield of 17.7 g/L of 2,3-BDO from glucose which was further 
increased by blocking the competitive pathways of by-products [83]. Also, 
the C. glutamicum being a WCB lacks the core enzyme for the conversion 
of pyruvate to BDO. Thus, α-acetolactate synthase (budB) and acetolactate 
decarboxylase (budA) from the native producer, K. pneumoniae, were intro­
duced to concentrate the flux towards the BDO production using the glucose 
and cassava powder as a substrate [52]. As the acetoin is converted into 
the 2,3-BDO the reductases catalyzing the step is coupled with the NADH 
consumption and manipulation of host cell results into cofactor imbalance 
which was circumvented by introducing the NADH regenerating system in 
the whole-cell biocatalysts such as B. Subtilis which was engineered with 
the enzymes 2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase (bdhA), formate dehydrogenase 
(fdh) and glucose dehydrogenase (gdh) from B. subtilis 168, C. boidinii and 
homologous gene, respectively [53]. Similarly, E. coli harboring NADH 
oxidases from Lactobacillus brevis was used for the regeneration of NADH 
[84]. 
3.2.3 DICARBOXYLIC ACIDS (DCAS) 
The biological production of dicarboxylic acids (DCAs) has been recently 
improved as a result of the advancements of system and synthetic biology 
tools and methodologies. Their applications in pharmaceuticals, food, 
textile, and material industries are well documented and processes involved 
in their production are usually based on chemical synthesis that are cost 
inefficient. The vast range of DCAs such as oxalic (OA), malonic (MA), 
succinic (SA), glucaric (GA), adipic (AA), fumaric (FA), and MAs can be 
obtained by various biosynthetic routes and their respective modifications 
based on the carbon number. Among these, succinic, malic, and fumaric 
acids are discussed in detail in Chapter 4. SA (C4), GA (C6), and AA (C6) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
are important DCAs as the former two were enlisted among top 12 building 
block chemicals by the U. S. Department and latter belongs to 50 most 
important chemicals [85]. And thus, these three are discussed in this chapter 
along with their production strategies using various cellular chassis. 
3.2.3.1 SUCCINIC ACID (SA) 
Succinic acid (SA) or succinate is a bulk chemical and has wide applications 
in pharmaceuticals and chemical industries. Traditional chemical synthetic 
processes involve the starting materials such as paraffin, acetylene, maleic 
anhydride, etc., and reaction conditions with chemical catalysts under high 
temperature and pressure. The petrochemical origin of conventional succi­
nate production is economically and environmentally burdening. Whereas 
biologically succinate is an important metabolite of many facultative bacteria 
and is an intermediate of citric acid (TCA) cycle and glyoxylate shunt. It can 
be produced aerobically and anaerobically, and natural producers include the 
rumen bacteria of family Pasteurellaceae (Mannheimia succiniciproducens, 
Basfia succiniciproducens, etc.) [54]. Among these bacteria, Actinobacillus 
succinogenes has been extensively studied for its high productivity, low pH 
tolerability, accessibility to wide range of substrates and biofilm formation 
quality proves it to be a good biocatalyst for SA production. The produc­
tion titers achieved up to 75 g/L with biofilm as a means of immobilization 
[86]. Since, anaerobic fermentation processes of succinate production is well 
studied and understood in non-native producers like E. coli and S. cerevi-
siae, they were extensively used as biocatalysts for production. To reduce 
the dependency on the chemical synthesis, biologically derived succinate 
production is now accelerated. Succinate is an intermediate metabolite and 
not an end product thus requires metabolic rearrangement in order to obtain 
the optimal quantity of succinate production. Whole-cell catalyst, E. coli 
produces succinate aerobically as well as anaerobically with the former being 
more productive. Optimization of metabolic pathways competing with the 
succinate production were blocked to increase the flux. Glyoxylate shunt over 
TCA cycle is preferred for production due to its relatively less requirement of 
reducing equivalents [87]. Moreover, utilization of non-conventional carbon 
sources by E. coli shows the cost-effective options for future production strat­
egies. A two stage production of succinate, where the resting cells are used 
for the biotransformation of acetate yields 61.7 mM succinate production 
showcases an efficient way to harmonize the complete utilization and carbon 
efficient production strategy [88]. C. glutamicum is another prokaryotic 
host used for the production of SA as it is a well-established chassis under 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
85 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
GRAS (Generally Recognized As Safe) category for industrial production. 
Well elaborated genetic and biochemical constitution for amino acid produc­
tion has helped it to be developed as a biocatalyst for SA production. Two 
stage production of SA was performed anaerobically and resting cells from 
the second stage bio-transformed glucose to SA with other by-products 
[89]. Further metabolic engineering for increasing the flux towards SA by 
inhibition of other by-products and optimizing the availability of reducing 
equivalents for the reduction resulted in 1.67 mol/mol glucose [54, 90]. The 
eukaryotic model, S. cerevisiae was metabolically engineered to redirect the 
carbon flux towards SA production by blocking the production of ethanol, 
acetate, and pyruvate. The oxidative production of SA in S. cerevisiae was 
shown by blocking the genes responsible for the downstream reaction after 
isocitrate and succinate in TCA cycle and grown on glucose which resulted in 
yield of 0.11 mol/mol glucose and was secreted out of cells, which facilitates 
the DSP after production [91]. Apart from existing conventional lab-based 
strategies have surely helped in increasing the productivity of the acids but 
development and availability of omics-databases have expanded the rational­
ization of strategy development. The advent of genome scale models (GSMs) 
and adaptive evolution of the developed strains with protein engineering have 
helped in developing promiscuous strategies to increase the productivity for 
industrial applications [92–94]. 
Advancing concentration of carbon in the atmosphere and its mitigation 
strategies have gained attention and thus carbon capturing techniques are 
adopted. Methanotrophs have an inherent quality of utilizing atmospheric 
carbon in the form of methane and one of the methanotrophs Methylomonas 
sp. DH-1 was recently used to biotransform the methane gas into SA. 
Methylomonas sp. DH-1 produces SA aerobically and thus the oxidative 
branch of TCA cycle and glyoxylate shunt is operable for the same. Meta­
bolic engineering for redirecting the flux via glyoxylate shunt by disrupting 
the gene of succinate dehydrogenase and acetate formation increased the 
production. This makes Methylomonas sp. DH-1 a promising biocatalyst for 
bio-transforming C1 to C4 compound [31, 95]. 
3.2.3.2 GLUCARIC ACID (GA) 
Glucaric acid (GA), commonly known as glucarate or saccharic acid, is a 
six carbon aldaric acid found in mammals as well as in a variety of fruits 
and vegetables [96]. It has been explored for medicinal applications such as 
cholesterol reduction and cancer chemotherapy [97] and is rich in dietary 
fiber in the presence of calcium D-glucarate. Pacific Northwest National 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Laboratory and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory recognized GA 
as a “top value-added chemical from biomass” [85], with all the potential 
to be used as a core element for a variety of polymers, including innovative 
polyamides and cross-linked polyesters [98]. GA is exploited as an imaging 
agent in tumor surveillance, a surfactant in sewage treatment, and a decolor­
izer in the treatment of synthetic materials since it merges effectively with 
metal ions [99]. Also, GA can be used as a drug to lower cholesterol levels 
and inhibit the growth of tumors [100]. As a food additive, GA boosts immu­
nity inhuman and lowers the rate of cancer cell multiplication [101]. 
Conventional synthesis of GA is achieved either through chemical 
oxidation or electrochemical oxidation. However, the oxidation results in 
lower yield [102] with a wide spectrum of difficult-to-separate glucose 
compounds. In addition, the involvement of metal catalysts increases the 
process cost [103]. To overcome the issues associated with chemical/elec­
trochemical methods, researchers diverted their focus towards renewable 
and alternative methods of synthesizing GA through microbial platform. 
Microbial synthesis has gained increasing interest because of its cheaper and 
eco-friendly nature [104]. The exceptional progress in metabolic engineering 
and synthetic biology tools laid a route for generating high-value chemicals 
in a cost-effective, efficient, and clean manner [105]. 
Though few plants and mammalian cells produce GA naturally, the 
minuscule level of synthesis and the complicated pathway with multiple steps 
are the major drawbacks. As there is no natural producer of GA reported so 
far, the microbial synthesis solely depends on the recombinant organisms. 
Genetically engineered strains of E. coli, S. cerevisiae and P. pastoris are 
the few well investigated hosts for GA production. A biosynthetic pathway 
is developed through myo inositol and glucuronic acid from glucose for the 
production of GA. The pathway is coexpressed with three genes encoding 
myo-inositol-1-phosphate synthase (Ino1), Myo inositol oxygenase (MIOX) 
uronate dehydrogenase (udh) to develop a biological mechanism to manu­
facture GA from glucose in above-mentioned hosts [106]. This portion of 
the chapter provides a brief knowledge about the different microbial sources 
and the novel strategies developed for the optimal synthesis of GA. Inositol­
1-phosphate synthase converts glucose 6-phosphate to inositol-3-phosphate 
throughout the inositol biosynthesis pathway (Ino1). Inositol monophos­
phatase (Inm1p and Inm2p) dephosphorylate inositol-3-phosphate to yield 
myo-inositol (MI). Despite the presence of GA in cultures, the intermedi­
ates MI and glucuronic acid accumulated due to MIOX’s low activity. As a 
result, improving MIOX’s stability and activity is critical for optimizing GA 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
87 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
flow. In order to improve the activity of MIOX and balance the flux towards 
GA, researchers used a variety of techniques, including directed evolution, 
synthetic scaffolds and fusion tags [107]. By introducing MIOX4 from 
Arabidopsis thaliana and udh from P. syringae into S. cerevisiae, 6 g/L of 
GA produced from co-substrates glucose (30 g/L) and MI (10.8 g/L) [104]. 
The first successful synthesis of GA was done with a metabolically 
engineered E. coli overexpressing three genes from different organisms. The 
first enzyme myo-inositol-1-phosphate synthase (Ino1) from Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae converts G6P to myo-inositol-1-phosphate (MIP) and the second 
mouse MIOX (mMIOX) enzyme catalyzes the conversion of MI into GlcA 
by the single molecule of oxygen consumption which is subsequently trans­
formed into GA with the help of udh enzyme from Pseudomonas syringae. 
This strain produced 1.13 g/L GA with a yield of 0.113 g/g glucose [106]. 
In another study, sucrose was used as substrate with the overexpression of 
three additional genes (cscA, cscB, and cscK) for the intake and digestion of 
sucrose into D-glucose and D-fructose, where the former is used for GA and 
later contributes the growth [108]. In another study, E. coli produced 4.85 
g/L of GA from 10.5 g/l of MI [109] but the production did not increase after 
a certain period of time. It was claimed that the quantity of MI and the func­
tion of MIOX were both rate-limiting variables in the uninterrupted synthesis 
of GA [110]. Interestingly in another study, numerous enzymes co-expressed 
on a scaffold in a single cell resulted in efficient synthesis of GA in E. coli 
by channeling and stabilizing the reaction intermediates. Co-localization of 
Ino1 and MIOX in a scaffold containing specific ligands enhanced the titer 5 
times higher than its counterpart without scaffolds [111]. 
Due to the low GA titers in E. coli, they tried to boost the GA titer in S. 
cerevisiae by incorporating MIOX4 from A. thaliana [112] into a multi-copy 
delta sequence of genomes. Higher acid tolerance and the stable expression of 
MIOX4 from A. thaliana made the researchers choose S. cerevisiae as a host 
for GA synthesis [113]. In a study conducted by Chen et al. by integrating 
the MIOX4 gene from A. thaliana and the udh gene from Pseudomonas 
syringae into the delta sequence of genomes GA titer was increased to 6 g/L 
in S. cerevisiae. Thus, the number of target gene copies and their stabilities 
were improved by the Delta-sequence-based integrative expression system 
[104]. Another study on GA production with various conditions using the 
S. cerevisiae overexpressing either MIOX from Musmusculus or from A. 
thaliana exhibited better production (1.6 g/L) ability at fed-batch mode with 
the co-supplementation of glucose and MI [110]. The effect of MgCl2 on 
GA production was studied using glucose-myo-inositol as co-substrates in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
88 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
S. cerevisiae and found that the addition of MgCl2 enhanced the activity of 
MIOX and improved the GA levels subsequently [114]. 
Chao Feng Li et al. developed a co-culture method with a recombinant S. 
cerevisiae LAGA-1 and Trichoderma reesei Rut-C30 for the GA production 
from lignocellulosic biomass and obtained GA in low titers (< 1 g/L) [115]. 
A study employing P. pastoris with overexpression of native MIOX and udh 
from P. putida exhibited GA synthesis (90.46 mg/L) while supplying MI as 
sole substrate. But the replacement of MIOX of P. pastoris with mMIOX 
resulted in GA production with both glucose (107.19 mg/L) and MI (785.4 
mg/L) [116]. Though there were many reports on GA production found in 
yeast, the titers achieved were not comparable with E. coli. The combinato­
rial use of metabolic engineering, systems biology and synthetic biology 
tools is believed to lay a way towards enhanced titers and yields in yeasts. 
Separated hydrolysis and fermentation (SHF), simultaneous saccharifica­
tion and fermentation (SSF), and consolidated bioprocessing (CBP) of ligno­
cellulose for D-GA production were explored in this chapter, and CBP by an 
artificial microbial consortium composed of Trichoderma reesei Rut-C30 and 
S. cerevisiae LGA-1 was found to have relatively high D-GA titers and yields 
[115]. In Pichia pastoris, a putative myo-inositol oxygenase (ppMIOX) was 
found as a functioning enzyme, and a GA synthesis pathway was first built. 
When the native ppMIOX and the udh from Pseudomonas putida KT2440 
were coexpressed, GA (90.46 mg/L) was evidently accumulated from MI, but 
no GA was identified from glucose. Coexpression of the heterologous mMIOX 
and udh, on the other hand, resulted in greater GA from glucose and MI titers, 
107.19 mg/L and 785.4 mg/L, respectively. The mMIOX specific activity and 
GA concentration were considerably boosted by using a fusion expression 
approach using flexible peptides. The production of GA was significantly 
increased using glucose and MI as carbon substrates [116]. 
3.2.3.3 ADIPIC ACID (AA) 
Adipic acid (AA) also known as hexanedioic acid, has wide applications as a 
food additive, precursor for the polymers and foam. The conventional multistep 
chemical synthesis of AA involves the conversion of benzene into AA via 
cyclohexane as an intermediate. Recently, the biological production of AA is 
sought due to its sustainability as it can be produced by renewable resources. 
Biological occurrence of AA is well studied, and different cellular systems were 
explored for developing an optimum production strategy. There are multiple 
biosynthetic pathways for AA reported in various model cellular systems. For 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
89 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
renewable production of AA in E. coli and S. cerevisiae, engineered fermenta­
tion pathway for muconic acid was further modified for the production of AA 
with glucose being the substrate and muconic acid as a precursor. Recent works 
on the S. cerevisiae reported to have expressed cis, cis-muconic acid (ccMA) 
pathway which is an extension of the 3-dehydroshikimate. The supplementa­
tion of 3-dehydroshikimate with the expression of enoate reductases of Bacillus 
coagulans catalyzes the hydrogenation of muconic acid to produce AA from 
glucose [56]. Similarly, E. coli was also engineered with the enoate reductases 
of Clostridium acetobutylicum which resulted into novel pathway which 
biotransforms the muconic acid onto AA [117]. Also, for sustainable produc­
tion, lignin derived monomer, catechol was used for its biotransformation in AA 
and muconic acid being an intermediate. This bio-transformation was tailored 
in E. coli and catalyzed by the catechol 1,2-dioxygenase and muconic acid 
reductase which resulted in 1.6 mg/L of AA [118]. 
The DCAs of long chain can be obtained by bio-transforming the fatty 
acids or alkanes via ω-oxidation. Thus, ω-oxidation of de-novo synthesis of 
medium chain fatty acids derived by the reversal of the oxidative pathway 
integrating with the alkane monooxygenase (Pseudomonas putida), alcohol, 
and aldehyde dehydrogenases (Acinetobacter sp. Strain SE19) which resulted 
in the mixture of medium chain dicarboxylic acid with one of the major 
products as an AA (170 mg/L) when glycerol was used as the carbon source 
[119, 120]. Regardless, reversal of the β-oxidation has also been directly 
applied for the AA production in E. coli by introducing an artificial synthetic 
pathway inspired by the reversal of its degradation pathway in Penicillium 
chrysogenum. The pathway was composed of six catalytic reactions where 
succinyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA were precursors. The sequential reduction, 
dehydration, and hydrogenation resulted in 0.6 mg/L AA production using 
E. coli [121]. Another WCB which was similarly tailored with heterologous 
expression of genes for the reversal of the β-oxidation in Corynebacterium 
glutamicum from E. coli (paaJ, paaH, and paaF), Treponema denticola (ter) 
and Acinetobacter baylyi (tesB) and yielded 37 µg/L of AA when glucose 
was used as a carbon source [122]. 
3.2.4 DIAMINES 
3.2.4.1 PUTRESCINE (C4) 
Biosynthesis of putrescine or l,4-diaminobutane has been well established 
to circumvent the chemical synthesis that involves non-renewable raw 

 
 
 
 
 
 
90 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
materials, expensive catalysts, and high energy input. The chemical synthesis 
involves the conversion of acrylonitrile and hydrocyanic acid into succino­
nitrile which is then hydrogenated into putrescine. In order to avoid this 
expensive and unsustainable route, biosynthesis of putrescine using WCBs 
like E. coli, C. glutamicum and S. cerevisiae have been adopted. There are 
two pathways known for putrescine production namely, the arginine decar­
boxylase (ADC) pathway and the ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) pathway. 
Putrescine is crucial for normal cell growth and cell proliferation thus it is 
critically regulated. The natural ability of tolerating the high titers of putres­
cine by WCB like C. glutamicum encouraged it to be used for industrial 
application. Natural occurrences of putrescine metabolism were studied in 
E. coli and were thus used for the optimization of production. Ornithine in E. 
coli can be converted to putrescine directly by speC encoding ODC which is 
constitutively expressed, or it can be converted by inducible ODC encoded 
by speF. Whereas, the putrescine pools are regulated by the degrading 
putrescine utilization pathway (Puu) and putrescine aminotransferase (patA) 
– gamma amino butyraldehyde dehydrogenase (patD) pathway enacting 
with or without γ-glutamylation, respectively [123, 124]. Thus, metabolic 
engineering was pursued for blocking the utilization and degrading pathway 
in order to increase the putrescine production. Direct conversion of ornithine 
to putrescine is industrially much feasible as it is independent of inducers 
and thus cuts cost of production. Hence, blocking the putrescine degradation 
and utilization pathways by deletion of argI gene to increase the precursor 
pool coupled with increasing the ornithine pool by overexpression of biosyn­
thetic genes, argC-E resulted in the productivity of 0.75 g/L/h of putrescine 
[125]. Since, the absolute knockout of ADC pathway genes impairs the 
growth of E. coli as it results in the auxotrophy of arginine. Further it was 
metabolically engineered using synthetic RNA for fine tuning of the expres­
sion levels of argF and glnA resulting in the strain producing 42.3 ± 1.0 
g/L of putrescine by promoter modulations [126]. E. coli was also used as 
a WCB to biotransform the exogenously added arginine into putrescine by 
optimizing the ADC pathway which resulted in the titer of 26.21 g/L in fed-
batch culture which was 79 times higher than the base strain [127]. Further 
optimization of ADC pathway, reliving of arginine feedback inhibition and 
use of T5 promoter, optimization of putrescine transporters and disrupting 
the first gene of putrescine utilization pathway resulted in a strain producing 
19.8 mM of putrescine [57]. Based on the knowledge of E. coli, the genes 
of ODC and ADC pathway were heterologously expressed in C. glutamicum 
in combination of knockouts of argR and argF which resulted in the overall 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
91 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
putrescine yield of 0.12 g/g of glucose [58]. These strains suffered from the 
growth-decoupled putrescine production due to arginine deficiency which 
was circumvented by leaky expression of argF by optimizing the promoter 
and ribosome binding site for increased productivity [128]. Further optimi­
zation of the C. glutamicum to increase the ornithine pool and blocking of 
snaA gene responsible for the acetylation of putrescine increased the titer to 
56.7 mM [129]. 
3.2.4.2 CADAVERINE (C5) 
Cadaverine or 1,5-diaminopentane is an intermediate lysine degradation 
pathway of microbes with lysine decarboxylase (LDC) as a major enzyme. 
Thus, the strategy of overexpressing this key enzyme by keeping the cadA 
gene under the transcriptional control of tac promoter gaining the constitu­
tive expression was one of the earliest strategies for increasing the produc­
tion. Along with the overexpression of key enzymes, concentrating the flux 
towards the lysine pathway was opted by overexpressing the dapA under 
trc promoter, and also disruption of genes involved in the degradation and 
utilization pathways namely, ygjG, speE, speG, puuA was done to increase 
the cadaverine titers in E. coli [130]. Native capacity of overproducing the 
amino acids of C. glutamicum was exploited for the production of cadaverine 
utilizing its lysine production ability. Cadaverine fermentation using glucose 
was performed by metabolically engineering the lysine flux by inhibiting the 
L-homoserine dehydrogenase and replacing it with L-lysine decarboxylase 
(E. coli) which catalyzed the bioconversion and resulted into 2.6 g/L of 
cadaverine [131]. Similar attempts were made to ferment starch into cadav­
erine by expressing cadA from E. coli and amyA from Streptococcus bovis 
148 α-amylase. Concentrating the flux by blocking the diversion of pathway 
towards threonine, C. glutamicum was further optimized in order to increase 
the flux towards lysine and cadaverine production by supplementing it with 
the overexpression of ldcC, lysC311, lysA, ddh, and dapB [132]. Acetylated 
cadaverine variant was found to be undesirable by-product interfering with 
the productivity, which was then eliminated by identifying and eliminating 
the diamino pentane acetyltransferases in C. glutamicum which increased 
the yield by 11% [133]. To make the production process more cost-efficient, 
lignocellulosic sugar, xylose was utilized for the fermentation by heter­
ologous expression of xylA and xylB genes [60]. Recombinant E. coli was 
also used for the cadaverine production expressing the cadA gene [134]. 

 
92 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Whole-cell biocatalytic process was developed using E. coli as a chassis 
and expressing the ldcC for the bioconversion of lysine to cadaverine [59, 
135]. Since, LDC is a pyridoxal 5′-phosphate (PLP)-fold type I enzyme 
and thus, PLP is an important cofactor for the LDC stability and activity. 
E. coli (cadA overexpressing strain) was then introduced as a whole-cell 
biocatalyst by expressing the genes, pdxS, and pdxT, of ribose-5-phosphate 
(R5P)-dependent pathway from Bacillus subtilis, for cadaverine production 
[136]. Further exploration of more robust LDCs from Hafnia alvei exhibited 
better conversion efficiency compared to E. coli ldcC and thus resulted into 
the XBHaLDC strain producing 136 g/L of cadaverine [137]. Advancements 
of systems biology and metabolic engineering tools, fine tuning of genes 
for diverting the flux towards the cadaverine production was demonstrated 
using small regulatory RNA which will be helpful for developing more 
robust industrial strains for the cadaverine production [138]. 
3.2.5 ETHYLENE GLYCOL 
Ethylene glycol or mono-ethylene glycol (MEG) or 1,2-ethanediol is used as 
a precursor in the polymer manufacturing for fibers, resins, and as an anti-
freezing agent in automobiles. The industrial production of MEG involves 
carbonation and hydroxylation of ethylene oxide catalyzed by base or thermal 
cracking of fossil-fuels and release green-house gases to the environment 
making the process non-viable for future applications [139]. Thus, strategies 
involving renewable resources for MEG production using whole-cells as 
a biocatalyst are a reliable option for the future applications relieving the 
environmental deterioration. MEG is not a natural product of biosynthetic 
pathways but is produced with engineered cellular systems and to make the 
production process more sustainable. E. coli has been rationally modified to 
use xylose as a carbon substrate which was processed in four-step conversion 
pathway involving D-xylonate, 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-D-pentonate, glycolal­
dehyde as an intermediate catalyzed by the D-xylose dehydrogenase (xdh, 
Caulobacter crescentus) and endogenous expression of yjhG, yagF, yjhH, 
and yagE resulted in the production of 11.7 g/L of MEG [61]. E. coli was 
further engineered to increase the molar yield by heterologous expression of 
human hexokinase (Khk-C) and aldolase (Aldo-B). This synthetic pathway 
was optimized by identifying the major glycolaldehyde reductases (yqhD) 
being while blocking the competitive endogenous pathway for xylulose by 
deleting xylB and deletion of glycolaldehyde dehydrogenase to prevent the 

 
 
 
 
 
93 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
glycolaldehyde oxidation and concentrate the flux to MEG [140]. Similarly, 
using the conventional carbon source, i.e., glucose resulted with the strain 
producing 4.1 g/L of MEG from 30 g/L of glucose [62]. The overexpression 
of D-tagatose 3-epimerase certainly increased the production levels of MEG. 
Bioconversion of xylose to MEG was also demonstrated using the D-xylulose 
1-Phosphate pathway. MEG biotransformation using Dahm’s pathway in E. 
coli aided with the NAD+-dependent xylose dehydrogenase resulted in the 
better MEG producing strain [141]. Recent insights in the native production 
capability of S. cerevisiae have been extensively elaborated for it being an 
ideal eukaryotic WCB for the MEG production. The metabolic engineering 
strategies were employed to establish and improve the production strategies 
implying it to be a cellular host for future large-scale applications. Based 
on the knowledge of native MEG production pathway in S. cerevisia, it was 
optimized further by heterologous expression of D-ribulose-1-phosphate­
dependent route coupled with the overexpression of native xylulose kinase 
activity of phosphofructokinase. Followed by the changes for the optimiza­
tion of production, the developed strain suffers from the growth coupled 
production and further optimization is recommended [63]. Actinobacteria 
was reported to produce a vast range of metabolites and enzymes which are 
biologically active. 
Biosynthesis of ethylene glycols is also shown using Corynebacterium 
glutamicum, an ideal producer. Ethylene glycol is derived from the serine by 
two distinct pathways catalyzed by two different sets of enzymes. The first 
pathway involves the bioconversion of serine via hydroxypyruvate and the 
other pathway is via ethanolamide and glycolaldehyde to produce ethylene 
glycol. The capability of C. glutamicum as a model WCB is metabolically 
engineered to use cellobiose, lactose, xylose as a carbon substrate [142, 143]. 
To mitigate the issue of increasing carbon footprint in the atmosphere, C1 
gasses are potential substrates for their biotransformation in value added 
chemicals and such pathways were recently discovered with the help of 
cheminformatics tools used in synthetic and system biology for the retro­
synthetic methods. Such tools were used to identify the pathways for MEG 
production and two potential acetogenic producers namely, Clostridium 
ljungdahlii and Moorella thermoacetica were shortlisted which can be 
metabolically modified for the future applications and can use syngas as a 
substrate and these novel pathways could be used and expressed in more 
manageable workhorses [144]. 

 
 
94 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
3.3 FINE CHEMICALS 
3.3.1 UNNATURAL AMINO ACIDS 
Amino acids are building blocks for many peptide-based pharmaceuticals 
and agrochemicals. Unnatural amino acids with chiral centers and different 
reactive groups have applications in stabilizing a peptide against proteases, 
mimicking natural peptides for altered chemical behavior and enriching 
peptide diversity for industrial applications. The chirality imparts selectivity 
as they contain chiral centers and are used for active pharmaceutical ingre­
dients (API). Synthesis of unnatural amino acids conventionally involves 
a chemical-based process which is followed by enzymatic separation from 
racemic mixture. WCB has addressed the problem of such labor and cost 
intensive production of unnatural amino acid production. Production of 
valuable amino acids through fermentation using rational chassis optimiza­
tion has shown efficient progress. S-phenyl-L-cysteine is a precursor for 
anti-AIDS drugs and has significant economical contribution. Unnatural 
amino acid like S-phenyl-L-cysteine is produced by nucleophilic substitu­
tion by sulfide in the β-substitution reaction catalyzed by O-acetylserine 
sulfhydrylase (OASS) (EC 4.2.99.8). 
The cysteine biosynthetic pathway involves the sulfide substitution in the 
final step catalyzed by OASS which was exploited for its relaxed substrate 
specificity and can use a number of thiol groups and other nucleophiles as a 
substrate. This quality of OASS was exploited recently for the production of 
unnatural amino acids such as pyrazole-1-yl-alanine, azidoalanine, cyano­
alanine, S-hydroxyethyl cysteine, etc. [145]. E. coli was used with the meta­
bolic engineering in cysteine biosynthetic pathway for constant supply of 
O-acetylserine was shown [145]. Whole-cell biocatalytic bio-transformation 
has aided the enantiomeric selectivity which could produce L-α- as well as 
D-α-unnatural amino acids. L-Homophenylalanine (l-HPA) was produced 
by expressing Deinococcus radiodurans BCRC12827 genes of N-acylamino 
acid racemase (NAAAR) and L-aminoacylase (LAA) genes in E. coli using 
N-acetyl-homophenylalanine (NAc-HPA) as a substrate [146]. Similarly, E. 
coli was engineered as a whole-cell catalyst to co-express three sequential 
enzymes mandelate racemase, D-mandelate dehydrogenase and L-leucine 
dehydrogenase for 3-step bio-transformation of racemic mandelic acid to 
L-Phenylglycine (L-PHG) which is used as a building block for antibiotics 
and for antithrombotic agent [161]. Stereospecific multi-enzyme cascades 
involving hydantoinases, carbamoylases, N-succinyl-amino acid racemase 

 
 
 
95 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
(NSARs) and hydantoin racemases were used for producing specific 
enantiomers reaching up to 100% racemization of either stereoisomer. 
The promiscuous application of this strategy was shown in production of 
β-alanine derivatives [162]. (S)-2-aminobutyric acid (ABA) is another 
example that can be produced using whole-cell systems using S. cerevisiae 
as a model chassis and heterologously expressing enzymes from Bacillus 
subtilis and E. coli using endogenous L-threonine has proved and paved 
a way to green synthesis of enantiomeric precursors for purely synthetic 
compounds [147]. WCB has now advanced with development of metabolic 
tools and techniques and its application in the production of unnatural amino 
acids is well evident. Covering the details of amazing production of these 
amino acids using whole-cells is beyond this chapter and further significant 
readings are recommended and are cited here [163–165]. Table 3.2 details 
the various chemicals produced from different organisms utilizing diverse 
carbon feedstock. 
3.3.2 FRAGRANCES AND FLAVORS 
3.3.2.1 FATTY ALDEHYDE DERIVED 
Industrial production of consumables is generally associated with qualitative 
perception aided with smell and fragrance which plays an important role in 
the economic aspects of the market. These perceptions are results of small 
molecules generally produced using chemical synthesis and unavoidable 
costlier techniques. Also, to avoid off-target flavors and fragrances, DSP of 
racemic mixture obtained from chemical synthesis is a tedious task. Bioca­
talysis has aided the production of such small molecules which are normally 
produced by microbial metabolism or at least their precursor which help to 
unload the pressure from chemical synthesis processes and is a cost-efficient 
strategy. The ability of whole-cell catalysts to produce regio- and enantio­
selective products is endured and thus applications have been vastly appreci­
ated. The molecules for flavors and fragrances belong to esters, ketones, 
phenolic aldehydes, alcohols, terpenoids, and lactones. 
Fatty aldehydes, especially C6 to C13 saturated aldehydes are prominently 
produced as flavors and fragrance. De-novo synthesis and biotransformation 
are used to produce these fatty aldehydes. Since aldehydes are endogenous 
metabolites of many microorganisms which are further converted into 
their respective alcohols (e.g., E. coli) as aldehydes cause toxicity when 

 
 
 
Type of 
Chemical Product Name 
Whole‑cell Biocatalyst 
Pathway 
Precursor 
References 
Chemical
Unnatural amino  L-α- as well as
acids  
D-α-unnatural amino acids
L-Homophenylalanine
(l-HPA) 
(S)-2-aminobutyric acid
(ABA) 
Fragrance and 
Fatty aldehyde derived
flavors 
Alcohols 
Escherichia coli  
Cysteine-biosynthetic pathway Glucose 
[145] 
Escherichia coli  
Heterologously expressing 
N-acetyl-
[146] 
enzymes from Bacillus 
homophenylalanine
subtilis and E. coli and using 
(NAc-HPA) 
endogenous L-threonine
 cerevisiae  
S.
Heterologously expressing 
L-threonine 
[147] 
enzymes from Bacillus 
subtilis and E. coli and using
endogenous L-threonine
subtilis  
B.
– 
Ferulic acid, 
[148] 
eugenol,
isoeugenol 
 cerevisiae 
S.
and
Heterologously expressing 
Glucose 
[149] 
Schizosaccharomyces 
3-dehydroshikimate
pombe 
dehydratase,
3-dehydroshikimate
dehydratase,
O-methyltransferase,
and phosphopantetheinyl
transferase 
 cerevisiae 
S.
Ehrlich pathway 
l-phenylalanine 
[150] 
Escherichia coli 
Overexpressing 2-keto acid 
– 
[151] 
decarboxylase, and aldehyde
reductase 
96 
TABLE 3.2 Types of Fine Chemicals Produced by Their Respective Whole-Cell Catalysts and Precursors Used
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 

 
 
 
 
Chemical 
Enterobacter sp. 
Shikimate pathway 
Sugar 
[152]  
Yarrowia lipolytica 
– 
Glycerol 
[153]  
Terpenes 
Escherichia coli 
2-C-methyl-D-erythritol-4-
Glycerol and 
[154]  
phosphate pathway (MEP) 
glucose 
and the mevalonate pathway
(MVA) 
Corynebacterium 
The mevalonate pathway 
FPP 
[155]  
glutamicum 
(MVA)  
Escherichia coli 
MEP pathway 
– 
[156]  
Fragrance and 
Ketones  
C. glutamicum and
Phenylpropanoid synthesis 
Fatty acids, 
[157, 158] 
flavors  
Escherichia coli (as 
p-coumaric acid
WCB for the production
of precursor malonyl
CoA) 
Pharmaceuticals Artemisinin 
S. cerevisiae,
The mevalonate pathway 
Simple sugars 
[159] 
Escherichia coli 
(MVA) 
–
– 
Escherichia coli 
The mevalonate pathway 
– 
[160] 
(MVA) 
Type of 
Chemical Product Name 
Whole‑cell Biocatalyst 
Pathway 
Precursor 
References 
97 
TABLE 3.2 (Continued) 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 

 
 
98 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
accumulated in cells. Biosynthesis of aldehydes from carboxylic acids is 
catalyzed by a variety of carboxylic acid reductases (CARs) [166]. Most 
prominent molecule among aromatic aldehydes is vanillin which imparts the 
vanilla flavor and is widely produced. The microbial production of vanillin 
usually involves degradation of substrates such as ferulic acid, eugenol, 
and isoeugenol. Bio-transformation of isoeugenol to vanillin was reported 
using B. subtilis as a whole-cell catalyst and resulted into 0.61 g/L vanillin 
[148]. Whereas, filamentous fungi like Phanerochaete chrysosporium can 
metabolize and transform vanillic acid to vanillin [167]. De-novo synthesis 
of vanillin was also reported recently, using glucose as a primary substrate in 
S. cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe by heterologously expressing 
3-dehydroshikimate dehydratase, O-methyltransferase, and phosphopan­
tetheinyl transferase. And aided with the knockout of endogenous alcohol 
dehydrogenase to prevent further reduction of vanillin into alcohol and 
expressing UDP-glycozyltransferase for conversion of vanillin into vanillin 
β-d-glucoside to reduce the cellular toxicity of vanillin [149]. Benzaldehyde 
is the second popular flavor after vanillin and can be produced by engineered 
aromatic amino acid biosynthetic pathway where phenylalanine is used as a 
precursor metabolite. 
3.3.2.2 ALCOHOLS 
Organoleptic alcohols are used as flavors such as 1,2-butanediol and 
2-phenylethanol (2-PE), an aromatic alcohol widely used in perfumes, 
beverages, pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, etc., and also acts as precursors for 
flavored compounds such as 2-phenylethyl acetate and phenylacetaldehyde 
[168, 169]. The primary pathway of production involves amino acid catabolic 
pathway but suffers from low productivity. Thus, alternative Ehrlich pathway 
was opted where L-phenylalanine (L-Phe) is used as a precursor and biocon­
version of L-Phe to 2-PE was shown in yeasts [170]. Genes responsible for 
aminotransferases were overexpressed for 2-PE production in S. cerevisiae 
as the Ehrlich pathway involves transamination of L-Phe to phenylpyruvate, 
followed by its decarboxylation to phenylacetaldehyde and reduction of 
phenylacetaldehyde to 2-PE. Phenylacetate being a competitor for 2-PE 
production, deletion of ald3 catalyzing phenylacetaldehyde oxidation to 
phenylacetate certainly increased the production and is promiscuous for 
industrial applications [150]. Similarly, E. coli was metabolically engineered 
by overexpressing 2-keto acid decarboxylase and aldehyde reductase for 

 
 
 
 
99 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
2-PE production with about 65% of L-Phe bio-transformation towards 2-PE 
and its ester has numerous industrial applications [151]. Bio-transformation 
of 2-PE involves the costly precursor, i.e., phenylalanine, and thus in many 
instances may incur economic burden. Apart from bioconversions in native 
producers, biotransformation using de-novo synthesis of sugar substrates is 
also demonstrated for 2-PE through shikimate pathway. Enterobacter sp. 
CGMCC 5087 has been reported using de-novo biosynthetic pathway for 
2-PE production aided with the overexpression of rate limiting enzymes for 
increased flux towards 2-keto phenylpyruvate resulting in elevated 2-PE 
production [152]. The market for 2-PE and its derivatives is large and the 
alcohol functional group pertains to easy transformation to other functional 
groups and thus, this molecule acts as a synthon for more complex compounds. 
Moreover, Yarrowia lipolytica is also reported as a GRAS category candi­
date to successfully produce 2-PE using glycerol as a carbon substrate while 
bioconversion of L-Phe to 2-PE [153]. There are other yeasts which produce 
2-PE via de-novo synthesis and stand as an eligible option with the help of 
metabolic engineering as a potential candidate for industrial applications. 
Other than 2-PE, secondary alcohols are also characterized as flavors and 
fragrances. Whole-cells of Saccharomyces uvarum were reported to produce 
secondary alcohol, (S)-1-(4-methoxyphenyl) ethanol obtained by the asym­
metric bio-reduction of 4-methoxy acetophenone. (S)-1-(4-methoxyphenyl) 
ethanol is used as pheromone and as flavor and fragrance and can be further 
derivatized for other applications [172]. 
3.3.3.3 TERPENES 
Terpenes are a large biomolecule family diversified among plants, animals, 
and microbes. Terpenoids are derived with the modifications in different 
functional groups and different carbon positions with oxidized methyl group 
[173]. De-novo production of flavored terpenes such as geraniol, citronellol, 
etc., is reported in fungi like Ceratocystis moniliformis, Kluyveromyces 
lactis [174]. De-novo biosynthesis starts with the universal precursors 
namely, dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP) and isopentenyl diphosphate 
(IPP) which are intermediates of the 2-C-methyl-D-erythritol-4-phosphate 
pathway (MEP) and the mevalonate pathway (MVA), where former being 
functional in bacteria and plant plastids and latter in archaea and eukaryotes 
[175]. De-novo synthesis is metabolically burdening if engineered to drain 
the flux towards a particular target production and also the pathways may 

 
 
 
 
100 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
result in a mixture of products. Whereas biotransformation is more preferred 
over de-novo production strategy due to the ease of availability of structurally 
related precursors with less production of toxic by-products. Their extensive 
use as fuels has been discussed in Chapter 9, few of them are also known to 
show fragrant characteristics and are also used as potent drugs as well. 
Limonene is attributed to citrus-odor, which is used in cleaning products, 
essential oils and as a flavor in eatables. Precursor of limonene biosynthesis 
is geranyl diphosphate (GPP) which is bio-transformed and catalyzed by 
synthetases via MEP or MVA pathway. E. coli as a biocatalyst was opti­
mized for limonene production using low-cost renewable substrate, glycerol, 
and glucose by systematic optimization. Limonene synthase (LimS), GPP 
synthase 2 and GPP synthase from Mentha spicata, Abies grandis and 
Streptomyces sp. strain KO-3988, respectively were expressed and assessed 
for limonene production in two-liquid phase fermentation [154]. Further 
optimization by limiting magnesium sulfate and using truncated 3-hydroxy-
3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase (tHMGR) of MVA pathway resulted in the 
increased production of limonene [154, 176]. Strategies like increasing the 
endogenous precursor supply like IPP and DMAPP, circumventing the carbon 
loss and energy efficient pathway, efficient removal of product to alleviate 
cellular toxicity or dividing the production phase from growth phase, etc., 
are used in metabolic engineering for optimum production [177]. Yarrowia 
lipolytica was also reported to be tailored by heterologously expressing 
limonene synthase (LS) and neryl diphosphate synthase 1 (NDPS1) with 
overexpression of genes involved in MVA pathway in different combinations 
with 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzymeA (HMG-CoA) reductase and 
resulted in 226-fold increase in limonene production [178]. 
Patchoulol is a sesquiterpenoid used in perfumes and incense. It is synthe­
sized using FPP as a precursor and catalyzed by sesquiterpene synthases. 
Corynebacterium glutamicum, being the industrial workhorse for amino 
acid production, has been metabolically engineered to produce patchoulol. 
The engineering involved optimizing the endogenous MEP-pathway for 
increased amount of precursor by overexpressing the rate limiting enzymes 
aided with the ispA (E. coli) gene and heterologous expression of patchoulol 
synthase from Pogostemon cablin and resulted in patchoulol titers up to 60 
mg L–1 [155]. Similarly, photoautotrophic cyanobacterial model system, 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, was also reported to produce patchoulol when 
Pogostemon cablin Benth synthases were expressed. This report shows the 
use of light and CO2 bioconversion into value-added chemicals in order 
to sustain on renewable energy for future applications [179]. The native 
pathway of the patchoulol production is depicted in Figure 3.2. 

 
 
101 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
FIGURE 3.2 Diagrammatic representation of the microalgal cell fabricated for the 
production of the patchoulol. 
Khusimol is another sesquiterpene used as a fragrance in the cosmetic 
industry, which imparts woody smell and has major applications in men’s 
perfume. The precursor for this sesquiterpene, (+)-zizaene, was aimed to 
be produced in E. coli as it possesses the endogenous pathway for farnesyl 
diphosphate (FDP) production via MEP pathway [180]. MEP pathway was 
exploited and overexpressed to increase the precursor supply (FDP) coupled 
with the multiple copies of zizaene synthase to catalyze the cyclization of 
FDP to zizaene. Collectively optimized fermentations of this developed 
strain resulted in titer of 25.09 mg/L of zizaene [156]. Ambrox, a well-known 
compound in perfume industry and is an oxidative product of (+)-ambrein, 
a triterpenoid, which is also a part of ambergris (intestinal secretion of 
sperm whale). Recently, a sequential expression strategy for increasing the 
squalene (triterpenoid precursor) concentration by adjusting the flux towards 
ergosterol biosynthesis with the heterologous expression of BmeTC and 
AαSHCD377C to catalyze the bioconversion of squalene to (+)-ambrein via 
3-deoxyachilleol in P. pastoris, same is depicted in Figure 3.3 [181]. This 
metabolic pathway was also demonstrated in E. coli when used as whole-cell 
biocatalyst for the production of (+)-ambrein [182]. 

 
 
102 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
FIGURE 3.3 Schematic representation of the heterologous reaction for the production of 
ambrein from FPP. 
3.3.3.4 KETONES 
Flavours such as 4-(4-hydroxyphenyl) butan-2-one or more commonly 
known as raspberry ketone (RK), naturally found in various fruits, vegetables, 
and bark of trees are used in cosmetic, food, and pharmaceutical industries. 
The availability of this compound naturally in low concentrations exerted 
the chemical manufacturing as its extraction is an expensive affair with low 
productivity. Also, chemical synthesis of this flavor involves the condensa­
tion of acetone and p-hydroxybenzaldehyde, which is not an eco-friendly 
method and also not considered as a “natural” flavor in the food industry 
and thus cannot be applied in the same [183]. Thus, biosynthesis of such 
a unique flavor has supported one of the most expensive and second most 
sought flavor in the world after vanillin [184]. The early efforts were relied 
on the plant-based production which was a tedious process in the large-
scale production. Biosynthesis using microbial whole-cells can reduce the 
production cost while increasing the production rate to satisfy the market 
demands. Inspired by the plant-based phenylpropanoid pathway of RK 
production, which initiates by the coumaroyl-CoA as a precursor followed 
by two step conversion catalyzed by the benzalacetone synthase (BAS) and 
benzalacetone reductase (BAR) which was later expressed in the cells of E. 
coli and S. cerevisiae for the increased and facilitated production [185]. The 

 
 
 
 
103 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
necessity of adding a precursor additionally was circumvented by de-novo 
synthesis of RK by heterologously expressing the cinnamate-4-hydroxylase, 
BAS, phenylalanine/tyrosine ammonia lyase and coumarate-CoA ligase 
genes for the endogenous production of p-coumaric acid, from phenylala­
nine and tyrosine, as a precursor in S. cerevisiae strain used for wine making 
with five-fold increase in the production [186]. Similarly, C. glutamicum, 
a well-established chassis for industrial production has been modified 
recently with the better productivity than earlier studies while establishing 
C. glutamicum to be used as a catalyst for the production of RK. The BAR 
activity was conferred by the curA from E. coli aided with the increased 
supply of NADPH directly reflecting the increased production of RK (99.8 
mg/L) [157]. To make the production process economically feasible, E. coli, 
a whole-cell biocatalyst, was modified in order to use fatty acids as feedstock 
for the production of precursor, malonyl CoA, and metabolically engineered 
this strain successfully produced 180.94 mg/L RK [158]. This established 
the production strategy which could be more economical for the future 
applications while considering the type of carbon source. 
3.3.3 PHARMACEUTICALS 
3.3.3.1 ARTEMISININ 
Tedious and costly synthesis of artemisinin urged its biosynthesis or its 
precursor, artemisinic acid. The first line antimalarial drug, artemisinin, is a 
sesquiterpenoid (C15) derived lactone and is naturally produced by Artemisia 
annua (sweet wormwood). The sesquiterpenoid precursor of artemisinin is 
farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP) which is converted to its immediate precursor, 
amorphadiene, and eventually into artemisinin. As earlier explained the 
MEV and MEP pathways result into the universal precursors for the terpe­
noid synthesis namely, IPP, and DMAPP which are then converted into 
sesquiterpene precursor, farnesyl pyrophosphate (FPP; C15). FPP is catalyzed 
into amorphadiene, by amorphadiene synthase (ADS) which can be further 
processed into artemisinin via artemisinic acid or dihydroartemisinic acid 
(DHAA) based on the oxidizing enzymes CYP71AV1/CPR or DBR2, 
ALDH1. 
WCB such as S. cerevisiae was metabolically engineered to produce arte­
misinic acid by increasing the FPP pool by inhibiting the sterol biosynthetic 
pathway and concentrating the flux for FPP production. Genes involved in 

 
 
 
 
104 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
the FPP biosynthetic pathway were upregulated such as overexpression of 
FPP synthases (erg20) and sterol synthesis was suppressed by down regula­
tion of squalene synthase. Also, ADS, and its oxidizing enzymes from A. 
annua and related plants tested for their catalytic activity were studied and 
cytochrome P450 monooxygenases with its redox partner was selected for 
the production of artemisinin [159]. To ease the semisynthetic production of 
artemisinin, the S. cerevisiae was also further optimized for amorphadiene 
production by overexpressing all the enzymes for MVA up to erg20 resulted 
in the strain CEN. PK2 which had dramatic increase in the amorphadiene 
production, >40 g/L [187]. Also, E. coli was engineered to produce the 
artemisinin precursor, amorpha-4,11-diene, by introducing the ads gene 
and heterologous expression of biosynthetic pathway for isoprenoid from 
Enterococcus faecalis with optimizing the competing pathways resulted into 
235 mg/L of amorphadiene [160]. Whole-cell biocatalytic bio-transformation 
of amorphadiene to DHAA was shown coupled with the overexpression 
of enzymes involved in the DHAA pathway. P450 enzyme catalyzes the 
three-step oxidation for the production of artemisinic acid. Thus, DHAA 
production was catalyzed by S. cerevisiae as a whole-cell catalyst harboring 
cytochrome P450 monooxygenases CYP71AV1 (A. annua) and artemisinic 
aldehyde reductase (DBR2) [188]. This system was optimized to circumvent 
the bottlenecks observed when E. coli was adopted as a WCB harboring 
P450 and showed the efficient conversion into DHAA [171]. Such semi 
synthetic processes could be helpful to aid the supply chain for intensifying 
market demands of artemisinin in considerable short time. 
3.4 CONCLUSION 
Biochemical insights have laid the foundation for accessing the metabolites 
that are economically important and can be obtained by means of metabolic 
engineering tools and methods. Enriched knowledge of genetic and metabolic 
manipulations for flux engineering has revolutionized the area of biocatalysis. 
Although the chemical synthetic processes are still in use, they will not be 
sustainable for the future and hence adopting the biosynthetic pathways will 
be comprehended in future. And in order to adopt these, whole-cell catalysts 
will need to be optimized more precisely for their industrial applications. 
Pathways like terpenoid synthesis and fatty acid synthesis offer a plethora 
of chemical precursors that are used directly or as building blocks. Overall 
optimization of such pathways can resolve significant demands in industries. 

 
 
105 
TABLE 3.3
Type of 
Chemical Product 
Whole‑cell Biocatalyst  
Pathway 
Precursor 
References 
Chemical 
Name 
Escherichia coli 
Glycerol pathway
Glycerol 
[1] 
Klebsiella pneumonia 
Overexpresses an aldehyde dehydrogenase
Glycerol 
[3] 
β-hydroxy
3-hydroxypropionic
Saccharomyces cerevisiae β-alanine pathway
Glucose 
[5] 
acid
acid (3-HP)
Synechocystis sp. PCC 
Atmospheric 
Malonyl-CoA reductase (MCR) pathway 
[6] 
6803
CO2 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
[11] 
Clostridium
[8] 
1,2-propanediols
thermosaccharolyticum 
Lactobacillus buchneri
Lactate 
[9]
Escherichia coli 
Methylglyoxal pathway
[10] 
Escherichia coli
Glucose
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Glycerol 
[17] 
1,3-propanediol
Diols 
Klebsiella pneumoniae
Glucose 
[20]
Escherichia coli
[21] 
Escherichia coli
Glucose 
[23] 
Glucose
Coryenebacterim 
α-acetolactate synthase (budB) and acetolactate and cassava 
[24] 
glutamicum 
decarboxylase (budA) from K. pneumoniae
1,4-butanediol 
powder 
2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase (bdhA), 
B. subtilis  
formate dehydrogenase (fdh) and glucose
[25] 
dehydrogenase (gdh) 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 

 
Whole‑cell Biocatalyst 
Pathway 
Precursor 
References 
Chemical 
Name 
C. glutamicum 
Glucose 
[33] 
S. cerevisiae 
Glucose
Dicarboxylic Succinic acid 
Oxidative branch of TCA cycle and glyoxylate 
acids 
 
Methylomonas sp. DH-1 
Methane gas 
[39, 40] 
shunt
Adipic acid 
S. cerevisiae 
Cis, cis-muconic acid (ccMA) pathway
Glucose 
[41] 
The arginine decarboxylase (ADC) pathway 
Escherichia coli
and the ornithine decarboxylase (ODC)
Glucose 
[48, 49, 53]
Putrescine 
pathway
Genes of ODC and ADC pathway were 
C. glutamicum 
[54, 56] 
heterologously expressed
Escherichia coli
Lysine degradation pathway 
Glucose 
[63, 64, 66] 
Cadaverine
Diamines 
C. glutamicum 
Starch 
[61] 
Escherichia coli 
Dahm’s pathway 
Xylose 
[69, 72] 
Glucose 
[71] 
Ethylene glycol 
S. cerevisiae 
Xylose 
[73] 
Corynebacterium
Cellobiose, 
Pathway via ethanolamide and glycolaldehyde 
[74, 75]
glutamicum 
lactose, xylose 
 
106 
TABLE 3.3 (Continued) 
Type of 
Chemical Product 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
107 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
This technology directs towards the independent green synthetic processes 
using manageable cellular chassis which are modified for the said produc­
tion reactions. Hence, helping the dependability on the chemical processes 
and diminishing the environmental toll. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
artemisinin 
• 
diamines 
• 
dicarboxylic acids 
• 
diols 
• 
E. coli 
• 
pharmaceuticals 
• 
Synechocystis sp. 
• 
terpenes 
• 
whole-cell biocatalyst 
REFERENCES 
1. Lim, H. G., Noh, M. H., Jeong, J. H., Park, S., & Jung, G. Y., (2016). Optimum rebalancing 
of the 3-hydroxypropionic acid production pathway from glycerol in Escherichia Coli. 
ACS Synth. Biol., 5(11), 1247–1255. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.5b00303. 
2. Speight, J. G., (2011). Petrochemicals. In: Handbook of Industrial Hydrocarbon Processes  
(pp. 429–466). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-7506-8632-7.10012-X. 
3. Sheldon, R. A., (2018). Metrics of green chemistry and 
 
sustainability: Past, 
present, and future. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 6(1), 32–48. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acssuschemeng.7b03505. 
4.  Sutton, P. W., Adams, J. P., Archer, I., Auriol, D., Avi, M., Branneby, C., Collis, A. J., et 
al., (2012). Biocatalysis in the fine chemical and pharmaceutical industries. In: Whittall, 
J., & Sutton, P. W., (eds.), Practical Methods for Biocatalysis and Biotransformations 
(Vol. 2, pp. 1–59). Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119943426.ch1. 
5. Jang, Y. S., Kim, B., Shin, J. H., Choi, Y. J., Choi, S., Song, C. W., Lee, J., et al., (2012). 
Bio-based production of C2-C6 platform chemicals. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 109(10), 
2437–2459. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.24599. 
6. Sheldon, R. A., & Woodley, J. M., (2018). Role of biocatalysis in sustainable chemistry. 
Chem. Rev., 118(2), 801–838. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.7b00203. 
7. Lin, B., & Tao, Y., (2017). Whole-cell biocatalysts by design. Microb. Cell Factories, 
16(1), 106. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-017-0724-7. 

 
108 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
8. Wachtmeister, J., & Rother, D., (2016). Recent advances in whole-cell biocatalysis 
techniques bridging from investigative to industrial scale. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 42, 
169–177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2016.05.005. 
9. Choi, S., Song, C. W., Shin, J. H., & Lee, S. Y., (2015). Biorefineries for the production 
of top building block chemicals and their derivatives. Metab. Eng., 28, 223–239. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2014.12.007. 
10. Bozell, J. J., & Petersen, G. R., (2010). Technology development for the production of 
biobased products from biorefinery carbohydrates—the US department of energy’s “top 
10” revisited. Green Chem., 12(4), 539–554. https://doi.org/10.1039/B922014C. 
11. Matsakas, L., Topakas, E., & Christakopoulos, P., (2014). New trends in microbial 
production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid. Curr. Biochem. Eng., 1(2), 141–154. 
12. Jiang, X., Meng, X., & Xian, M., (2009). Biosynthetic pathways for 3-hydroxypropionic 
acid production. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 82(6), 995–1003. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00253-009-1898-7. 
13. Sankaranarayanan, M., Ashok, S., & Park, S., (2014). Production of 3-hydroxypropionic 
acid from glycerol by acid tolerant Escherichia Coli. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 
41(7), 1039–1050. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-014-1451-2. 
14.  Zhao, L., Lin, J., Wang, H., Xie, J., & Wei, D., (2015). Development of a two-step 
process for production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol using Klebsiella 
Pneumoniae and gluconobacter oxydans. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 38(12), 2487–2495. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00449-015-1486-4. 
15. Zhou, S., Ashok, S., Ko, Y., Kim, D. M., & Park, S., (2014). Development of a deletion 
mutant of pseudomonas denitrificans that does not degrade 3-hydroxypropionic 
acid. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 98(10), 4389–4398. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00253-014-5562-5. 
16. Zaushitsyna,  O., Dishisha, T., Hatti-Kaul, R., & Mattiasson, B., (2017). 
Crosslinked, cryostructured Lactobacillus reuteri monoliths for production of 
3-hydroxypropionaldehyde, 3-hydroxypropionic acid and 1,3-propanediol from 
glycerol. J. Biotechnol., 241, 22–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2016.11.005. 
17. Jers, C., Kalantari, A., Gar
 
g, A., & Mijakovic, I., (2019). Production of 
3-hydroxypropanoic acid from glycerol by metabolically engineered bacteria. Front. 
Bioeng. Biotechnol., 7, 124. https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2019.00124. 
18. Chen, Z., Huang, J., Wu, Y., Wu, W., Zhang, Y., & Liu, D., (2017). Metabolic 
engineering of Corynebacterium glutamicum for the production of 3-hydroxypropionic 
acid from glucose and xylose. Metab. Eng., 39, 151–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ymben.2016.11.009. 
19. Jarboe, L. R., Zhang, X., Wang, X., Moore, J. C., Shanmugam, K. T., & Ingram, L. 
O., (2010). Metabolic engineering for production of biorenewable fuels and chemicals: 
Contributions of synthetic biology. J. Biomed. Biotechnol., 2010, 1–18. https://doi. 
org/10.1155/2010/761042. 
20. Liu, C., Ding, Y., Xian, M., Liu, M., Liu, H., Ma, Q., & Zhao, G., (2017). Malonyl-CoA  
pathway: A promising route for 3-hydroxypropionate biosynthesis. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 
37(7), 933–941. https://doi.org/10.1080/07388551.2016.1272093. 
21. Nitsos, C., Matsakas, L., Triantafyllidis, K., Rova, U., & Christakopoulos, P., (2018). 
Investigation of different pretreatment methods of Mediterranean-type ecosystem 
agricultural residues: Characterization of pretreatment products, high-solids enzymatic 

 
109 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
hydrolysis and bioethanol production. Biofuels, 9(5), 545–558. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
17597269.2017.1378988. 
22. Tingirikari, J. M. R., Ahmed, S., & Yata, V. K., (2016). 3-hydroxy-propionic acid. 
In: Platform Chemical Biorefinery (pp. 101–117). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
B978-0-12-802980-0.00006-7. 
23. Kumar, V., Ashok, S., & Park, S., (2013). Recent advances in biological production of 
3-hydroxypropionic acid. Biotechnol. Adv., 31(6), 945–961. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biotechadv.2013.02.008. 
24. Raj, S. M., Rathnasingh, C., Jo, J. E., & Park, S., (2008). Production of 3-hydroxypropionic 
acid from glycerol by a novel recombinant Escherichia Coli BL21 strain. Process 
Biochem., 43(12), 1440–1446. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procbio.2008.04.027. 
25. Mohan, R. S., Rathnasingh, C., Jung, W. C., & Park, S., (2009). Effect of process 
parameters on 3-hydroxypropionic acid production from glycerol using a recombinant 
Escherichia coli. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 84(4), 649–657. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00253-00-1986-8. 
26. Kim, J. W., Ko, Y., Chae, T. U., & Lee, S. Y., (2020). High-level production of 
3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol as a sole carbon source using metabolically 
engineered Escherichia coli. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 117(7), 2139–2152. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/bit.27344. 
27. Sankaranarayanan, M., Somasundar, A., Seol, E., Chauhan, A. S., Kwon, S., Jung, G. 
Y., & Park, S., (2017). Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid by balancing the pathway 
enzymes using synthetic cassette architecture. J. Biotechnol., 259, 140–147. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2017.07.027. 
28. Sankaranarayanan, M., Seol, E., Kim, Y., Chauhan, A. S., & Park, S., (2017). 
Measurement of crude-cell-extract glycerol dehydratase activity in recombinant 
Escherichia Coli using coupled-enzyme reactions. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 44(3), 
477–488. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-017-1902-7. 
29. Jung, W. S., Kang, J. H., Chu, H. S., Choi, I. S., & Cho, K. M., (2014). Elevated 
production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid by metabolic engineering of the glycerol 
metabolism in Escherichia Coli. Metab. Eng., 23, 116–122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ymben.2014.03.001. 
30. Yu, S., Yao, P., Li, J., Ren, J., Yuan, J., Feng, J., Wang, M., et al., (2016). Enzymatic 
synthesis of 3-hydroxypropionic acid at high productivity by using free or immobilized 
cells of recombinant Escherichia coli. J. Mol. Catal. B Enzym.  C, 129, 37–42. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.molcatb.2016.03.011. 
31. Nguyen-Vo, T. P., Liang, Y., Sankaranarayanan, M., Seol, E., Chun, A. Y., Ashok, S., 
Chauhan, A. S., et al., (2019). Development of 3-hydroxypropionic-acid-tolerant strain 
of Escherichia coli W and role of minor global regulator YieP. Metab. Eng., 53, 48–58. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2019.02.001. 
32. Park, Y. S., Choi, U. J., Nam, N. H., Choi, S. J., Nasir, A., Lee, S. G., Kim, K. J., 
et al., (2017). Engineering an aldehyde dehydrogenase toward its substrates, 
3-hydroxypropanal and NAD+, for enhancing the production of 3-hydroxypropionic 
acid. Sci. Rep., 7(1), 17155. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-15400-x. 
33. Lama, S., Kim, Y., Nguyen, D. T., Im, C. H., Sankaranarayanan, M., & Park, S., (2021). 
Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from acetate using metabolically-engineered 
and glucose-grown Escherichia coli. Bioresour. Technol., 320, 124362. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2020.124362. 

 
110 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
34. Ko, Y., Ashok, S., Ainala, S. K., Sankaranarayanan, M., Chun, A. Y., Jung, G. Y., & 
Park, S., (2014). Coenzyme B12 can be produced by engineered Escherichia Coli under 
both anaerobic and aerobic conditions. Biotechnol. J., 9(12), 1526–1535. 
35. Ashok, S., Raj, S. M., Rathnasingh, C., & Park, S., (2011). Development of recombinant 
Klebsiella pneumoniae ∆dhaT  strain for the co-production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid 
and 1,3-propanediol from glycerol. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 90(4), 1253–1265. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-011-3148-z. 
36. Arasu, M. V., Kumar, V., Ashok, S., Song, H., Rathnasingh, C., Lee, H. J., Seung, D., 
& Park, S., (2011). Isolation and characterization of the new Klebsiella pneumoniae  
J2B strain showing improved growth characteristics with reduced lipopolysaccharide 
formation. Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng., 16(6), 1134–1143. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s12257-011-0513-9. 
37. Kumar, V., Sankaranarayanan, M., Jae, K., Durgapal, M., Ashok, S., Ko, Y., Sarkar, 
R., & Park, S., (2012). Co-production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid and 1,3-propanediol 
from glycerol using resting cells of recombinant Klebsiella pneumoniae  J2B strain 
overexpressing aldehyde dehydrogenase. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 96(2), 373–383. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-012-4187-9. 
38. Kumar, V., Sankaranarayanan, M., Durgapal, M., Zhou, S., Ko, Y., Ashok, S., Sarkar, 
R., & Park, S., (2013). Simultaneous production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid and 
1,3-propanediol from glycerol using resting cells of the lactate dehydrogenase-deficient 
recombinant Klebsiella pneumoniae overexpressing an aldehyde dehydrogenase. 
Bioresour. Technol., 135, 555–563. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.11.018. 
39. Ashok, S., Yeounjoo, K. O., Raj, S. M., Sankaranarayanan, M., & Sunghoon, P., 
(2012). Effect of Nitrate on Glycerol Metabolism and Anaerobic Production Of 
3-Hydroxypropionic Acid by Recombinant Klebsiella Pneumoniae Overexpressing 
PuuC (p. 148). 한국생물공학회 학술대회. 
40. Ashok, S., Sankaranarayanan, M., Ko, Y., Jae, K. E., Ainala, S. K., Kumar, V., & Park, S., 
(2013). Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol by recombinant Klebsiella 
pneumoniae Δ DhaT Δ YqhD which can produce vitamin B12 naturally. Biotechnol. 
Bioeng., 110(2), 511–524. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.24726. 
41. Huang, Y., Li, Z., Shimizu, K., & Ye, Q., (2013). Co-production of 3-hydroxypropionic 
acid and 1,3-propanediol by Klebseilla pneumoniae expressing AldH under 
microaerobic conditions. Bioresour. Technol., 128, 505–512. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2012.10.143. 
42. Zhou, S., Catherine, C., Rathnasingh, C., Somasundar, A., & Park, S., (2013). Production 
of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol by recombinant Pseudomonas denitrificans: 
Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 110(12), 3177–3187. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.24980. 
43. Borodina, I., Kildegaard, K. R., Jensen, N. B., Blicher, T. H., Maury, J., Sherstyk, S., 
Schneider, K., et al., (2015). Establishing a synthetic pathway for high-level production 
of 3-hydroxypropionic acid in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  via β-alanine. Metab. Eng., 27, 
57–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2014.10.003. 
44. Wang, Y., Sun, T., Gao, X., Shi, M., Wu, L., Chen, L., & Zhang, W., (2016). 
Biosynthesis of platform chemical 3-hydroxypropionic acid (3-HP) directly from CO2 
in cyanobacterium Synechocystis Sp. PCC 6803. Metab. Eng., 34, 60–70. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ymben.2015.10.008. 

 
111 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
45. Altaras, N. E., Etzel, M. R., & Cameron, D. C., (2001). Conversion of sugars to 
1,2-propanediol by Thermoanaerobacterium thermosaccharolyticum HG-8. Biotechnol. 
Prog., 17(1), 52–56. https://doi.org/10.1021/bp000130b. 
46. Oude, E. S. J., Krooneman, J., Gottschal, J. C., Spoelstra, S. F., Faber, F., & Driehuis, 
F., (2001). Anaerobic conversion of lactic acid to acetic acid and 1, 2-propanediol 
by Lactobacillus buchneri. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 67(1), 125–132. https://doi. 
org/10.1128/AEM.67.1.125–132.2001. 
47. Altaras, N. E., & Cameron, D. C., (1999). Metabolic engineering of a 1,2-propanediol 
pathway in Escherichia coli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 65(3), 1180–1185. https://doi. 
org/10.1128/AEM.65.3.1180–1185.1999. 
48. Jun, S. A., Moon, C., Kang, C. H., Kong, S. W., Sang, B. I., & Um, Y., (2010). Microbial 
fed-batch production of 1,3-propanediol using raw glycerol with suspended and 
immobilized Klebsiella pneumoniae. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 161(1–8), 491–501. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12010-009-8839-x. 
49. Lama, S., Seol, E., & Park, S., (2020). Development of Klebsiella pneumoniae J2B as 
microbial cell factory for the production of 1,3-propanediol from glucose. Metab. Eng., 
62, 116–125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2020.09.001. 
50. Meng, H., Wang, C., Yuan, Q., Ren, J., & Zeng, A. P., (2021). An aldolase-based 
new pathway for bioconversion of formaldehyde and ethanol into 1,3-propanediol 
in Escherichia coli. ACS Synth. Biol., 10(4), 799–809. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acssynbio.0c00597. 
51. Hakizimana, O., Matabaro, E., & Lee, B. H., (2020). The current strategies and 
parameters for the enhanced microbial production of 2,3-butanediol. Biotechnol. Rep., 
25, e00397. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.btre.2019.e00397. 
52. Yang, J., Kim, B., Kim, H., Kweon, Y., Lee, S., & Lee, J., (2015). Industrial production 
of 2,3-butanediol from the engineered Corynebacterium glutamicum. Appl. Biochem. 
Biotechnol., 176(8), 2303–2313. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12010-015-1719-7. 
53. Samuel, N., Bao, T., Zhang, X., Yang, T., Xu, M., Li, X., & Rao, Z., (2017). Optimized 
whole-cell biocatalyst from acetoin to 2,3-butanediol through co-expression of acetoin 
reductase with NADH regeneration systems in engineered Bacillus subtilis. Journal of 
Chemical Technology and Biotechnology, 92(9), 2477–2487. 
54. Litsanov, B., Brocker, M., & Bott, M., (2012). Toward homosuccinate fermentation: 
Metabolic engineering of Corynebacterium glutamicum for anaerobic production of 
succinate from glucose and formate. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 78(9), 3325–3337. 
https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.07790-11. 
55. Nguyen, D. T. N., Lee, O. K., Hadiyati, S., Affifah, A. N., Kim, M. S., & Lee, E. Y., 
(2019). Metabolic engineering of the type I methanotroph Methylomonas Sp. DH-1 
for production of succinate from methane. Metab. Eng., 54, 170–179. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ymben.2019.03.013. 
56. Raj, K., Partow, S., Correia, K., Khusnutdinova, A. N., Yakunin, A. F., & Mahadevan, 
R., (2018). Biocatalytic production of adipic acid from glucose using engineered 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae.  Metab. Eng. Commun., 6, 28–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
meteno.2018.02.001. 
57. Thongbhubate, K., Irie, K., Sakai, Y., Itoh, A., & Suzuki, H., (2021). Improvement of 
putrescine production through the arginine decarboxylase pathway in Escherichia coli  
K-12. AMB Express, 11(1), 168. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13568-021-01330-5. 

 
112 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
58. Schneider, J., & Wendisch, V. F., (2010). Putrescine production by engineered 
Corynebacterium glutamicum. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 88(4), 859–868. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s00253-010-2778-x. 
59.  Oh, Y. H., Kang, K. H., Kwon, M. J., Choi, J. W., Joo, J. C., Lee, S. H., Yang, Y. H., 
et al., (2015). Development of engineered Escherichia coli whole-cell biocatalysts 
for high-level conversion of L-lysine into cadaverine. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 
42(11), 1481–1491. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-015-1678-6. 
60. Buschke, N., Schröder, H., & Wittmann, C., (2011). Metabolic engineering of 
Corynebacterium glutamicum for production of 1,5-diaminopentane from hemicellulose. 
Biotechnol. J., 6(3), 306–317. https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.201000304. 
61. Liu, H., Ramos, K. R. M., Valdehuesa, K. N. G., Nisola, G. M., Lee, W. K., & Chung, 
W. J., (2013). Biosynthesis of ethylene glycol in Escherichia coli. Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol., 97(8), 3409–3417. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-012-4618-7. 
62. Pereira, B., Zhang, H., De Mey, M., Lim, C. G., Li, Z. J., & Stephanopoulos, G., 
(2016). Engineering a novel biosynthetic pathway in Escherichia coli for production 
of renewable ethylene glycol. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 113(2), 376–383. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/bit.25717. 
63. Uranukul, B., Woolston, B. M., Fink, G. R., & Stephanopoulos, G., (2019). Biosynthesis 
of monoethylene  glycol in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  utilizing native glycolytic 
enzymes. Metabolic Engineering, 51, 20–31. 
64. Zhou, S., Ainala, S. K., Seol, E., Nguyen, T. T., & Park, S., (2015). Inducible gene 
expression system by 3-hydroxypropionic acid. Biotechnol. Biofuels, 8(1), 169. https:// 
doi.org/10.1186/s13068-015-0353-5. 
65. Zhou, S., Lama, S., Sankaranarayanan, M., & Park, S., (2019). Metabolic engineering of 
Pseudomonas denitrificans for the 1,3-propanediol production from glycerol. Bioresour. 
Technol., 292, 121933. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2019.121933. 
66. Zhou, S., Lama, S., Jiang, J., Sankaranarayanan, M., & Park, S., (2020). Use of 
acetate for the production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid by metabolically-engineered 
Pseudomonas denitrificans. Bioresour. Technol., 307, 123194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2020.123194. 
67. Thi Nguyen, T., Lama, S., Kumar, A. S., Sankaranarayanan, M., Singh, C. A., Rae, K. J., 
& Park, S., (2021). Development of Pseudomonas asiatica as a host for the production 
of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol. Bioresour. Technol., 329, 124867. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2021.124867. 
68. Dishisha, T., Pereyra, L. P., Pyo, S. H., Britton, R. A., & Hatti-Kaul, R., (2014). Flux 
analysis of the Lactobacillus reuteri propanediol-utilization pathway for production 
of 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde, 3-hydroxypropionic acid and 1,3-propanediol from 
glycerol. Microb. Cell Factories, 13(1), 76. https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2859-13-76. 
69. Dishisha, T., Pyo, S. H., & Hatti-Kaul, R., (2015). Bio-based 3-hydroxypropionic- 
and acrylic acid production from biodiesel glycerol via integrated microbial and 
chemical catalysis. Microb. Cell Factories, 14(1), 200. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s12934-015-0388-0. 
70. Pomraning, K. R., Dai, Z., Munoz, N., Kim, Y. M., Gao, Y., Deng, S., Kim, J., et al., 
(2021). Integration of proteomics and metabolomics into the design, build, test, learn 
cycle to improve 3-hydroxypropionic acid production in Aspergillus pseudoterreus.  
Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 9. 

 
113 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
71. Ji, R. Y., Ding, Y., Shi, T. Q., Lin, L., Huang, H., Gao, Z., & Ji, X. J., (2018). Metabolic 
engineering of yeast for the production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid. Frontiers in 
Microbiology, 9, 2185. 
72. Kildegaard, K. R., Jensen, N. B., Schneider, K., Czarnotta, E., Özdemir, E., Klein, T., 
Maury, J., et al., (2016). Engineering and systems-level analysis of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae for production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid via malonyl-CoA reductase­
dependent pathway. Microb. Cell Factories, 15(1), 53. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s12934-016-0451-5. 
73. Zhang, L., Chen, L., Diao, J., Song, X., Shi, M., & Zhang, W., (2020). Construction 
and analysis of an artificial consortium based on the fast-growing Cyanobacterium 
synechococcus elongatus UTEX 2973 to produce the platform chemical 
3-hydroxypropionic acid from CO2. Biotechnol. Biofuels, 13(1), 82. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s13068-020-01720-0. 
74. Martins, A. M., Cordeiro, C. A., & Ponces, F. A. M., (2001). In situ analysis of 
methylglyoxal metabolism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEBS Lett., 499(1, 2), 41–44. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0014-5793(01)02519-4. 
75. Tao, Y., Bu, C., Zou, L., Hu, Y., Zheng, Z. J., & Ouyang, J., (2021). A comprehensive 
review on microbial production of 1,2-propanediol: Micro-organisms, metabolic 
pathways, and metabolic engineering. Biotechnol. Biofuels, 14(1), 216. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s13068-021-02067-w. 
76. Niimi, S., Suzuki, N., Inui, M., & Yukawa, H., (2011). Metabolic engineering 
of 1,2-propanediol pathways in Corynebacterium glutamicum. Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol., 90(5), 1721–1729. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-011-3190-x. 
77. Li, H., & Liao, J. C., (2013). Engineering a cyanobacterium as the catalyst for the 
photosynthetic conversion of CO2 to 1,2-propanediol. Microb. Cell Factories, 12(1), 4. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2859-12-4. 
78. Menzel, K., Zeng, A., & Deckwer, W., (1997). High Concentration and Productivity of 
1,3-Propanediol from Continuous Fermentation of Glycerol by Klebsiella Pneumoniae.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0141-0229(96)00087-7. 
79. Rodriguez, A., Wojtusik, M., Ripoll, V., Santos, V. E., & Garcia-Ochoa, F., (2016). 
1,3-propanediol production from glycerol with a novel biocatalyst Shimwellia blattae  
ATCC 33430: Operational conditions and kinetics in batch cultivations. Bioresour. 
Technol., 200, 830–837. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2015.10.061. 
80. Vivek, N., Pandey, A., & Binod, P., (2016). Biological valorization of pure and crude 
glycerol into 1,3-propanediol using a novel isolate Lactobacillus brevis N1E9.3.3. 
Bioresour. Technol., 213, 222–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2016.02.020. 
81. Kumar, V., Durgapal, M., Sankaranarayanan, M., Somasundar, A., Rathnasingh, C., 
Song, H., Seung, D., & Park, S., (2016). Effects of mutation of 2,3-Butanediol formation 
pathway on glycerol metabolism and 1,3-propanediol production by Klebsiella 
pneumoniae J2B. Bioresour. Technol., 214, 432–440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2016.04.032. 
82. Cho, J. H., Rathnasingh, C., Song, H., Chung, B. W., Lee, H. J., & Seung, D., (2012). 
Fermentation and evaluation of Klebsiella pneumoniae and K. Oxytoca on the production 
of 2,3-butanediol. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 35(7), 1081–1088. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00449-012-0691-7. 
83. Li, Z. J., Jian, J., Wei, X. X., Shen, X. W., & Chen, G. Q., (2010). Microbial production 
of meso-2,3-butanediol by metabolically engineered Escherichia coli under low oxygen 

 
114 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
condition. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 87(6), 2001–2009. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00253-010-2676-2. 
84. Xiao, Z., Lv, C., Gao, C., Qin, J., Ma, C., Liu, Z., Liu, P., et al., (2010). A  novel whole-
cell biocatalyst with NAD+ regeneration for production of chiral chemicals. PloS One, 
5(1), e8860. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0008860. 
85. Werpy, T., Holladay, J., & White, J., (2004). Top Value Added Chemicals from Biomass: 
I. Results of Screening for Potential Candidates from Sugars and Synthesis Gas. https:// 
doi.org/10.2172/926125. 
86. Pateraki, C., Vlysidis, A., Koutinas, A. A., Webb, C., Patsalou, M., Koutinas, M., & 
Kopsahelis, N., (2016). Actinobacillus succinogenes: Advances on succinic acid 
production and prospects for development of integrated biorefineries. Biochem. Eng. J. 
87. Thakker, C., Martínez, I., San, K. Y., & Bennett, G. N., (2012). Succinate production in 
Escherichia coli. Biotechnol. J., 7(2), 213–224. https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.201100061. 
88.  Li, Y., Huang, B., Wu, H., Li, Z., Ye, Q., & Zhang, Y. H. P., (2016). Production of 
succinate from acetate by metabolically engineered Escherichia coli. ACS Synth. Biol., 
5(11), 1299–1307. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.6b00052. 
89. Inui, M., Murakami, S., Okino, S., Kawaguchi, H., Vertès, A. A., & Yukawa, H., (2004). 
Metabolic analysis of Corynebacterium glutamicum during lactate and succinate 
productions under oxygen deprivation conditions. J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 7(4), 
182–196. https://doi.org/10.1159/000079827. 
90. Okino, S., Noburyu, R., Suda, M., Jojima, T., Inui, M., & Yukawa, H., (2008). An efficient 
succinic acid production process in a metabolically engineered Corynebacterium 
glutamicum strain. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 81(3), 459–464. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00253-008-1668-y. 
91. Raab, A. M., Gebhardt, G., Bolotina, N., Weuster-Botz, D., & Lang, C., (2010). Metabolic 
engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae  for the biotechnological production of succinic 
acid. Metab. Eng., 12(6), 518–525. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2010.08.005. 
92. Otero, J. M., Cimini, D., Patil, K. R., Poulsen, S. G., Olsson, L., & Nielsen, J., (2013). 
Industrial systems biology of Saccharomyces cerevisiae enables novel succinic acid cell 
factory. PLOS One, 8(1), e54144. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0054144. 
93. Sun, D., Liu, X., Zhu, M., Chen, Y., Li, C., Cheng, X., Zhu, Z., et al., (2019). Efficient 
biosynthesis of high-value succinic acid and 5-hydroxyleucine using a multienzyme 
cascade and whole-cell catalysis. J. Agric. Food Chem., 67(45), 12502–12510. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.9b05529. 
94. Yan, D., Wang, C., Zhou, J., Liu, Y., Yang, M., & Xing, J., (2014). Construction of 
reductive pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae for effective succinic acid fermentation 
at low PH value. Bioresour. Technol., 156, 232–239. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2014.01.053. 
95. Nguyen, A. D., Hwang, I. Y., Lee, O. K., Hur, D. H., Jeon, Y. C., Hadiyati, S., Kim, M. 
S., et al., (2018). Functional analysis of Methylomonas Sp. DH-1 genome as a promising 
biocatalyst for bioconversion of methane to valuable chemicals. Catalysts, 8(3), 117. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/catal8030117. 
96. Walaszek, Z., Szemraj, J., Hanausek, M., Adams, A. K., & Sherman, U., (1996). 
D-glucaric acid content of various fruits and vegetables and cholesterol-lowering 
effects of dietary D-glucarate in the rat. Nutr. Res., 16(4), 673–681. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/0271-5317(96)00045-0. 

 
115 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
97. Singh, J., & Gupta, K. P., (2007). Induction of apoptosis by calcium D-glucarate in 
7,12-dimethyl Benz [a] anthracene-exposed mouse skin. J. Environ. Pathol. Toxicol. 
Oncol. Off. Organ Int. Soc. Environ. Toxicol. Cancer, 26(1), 63–73. https://doi. 
org/10.1615/jenvironpatholtoxicoloncol.v26.i1.70. 
98. Kiely, D. E., Chen, L., & Lin, T. H., (1994). Hydroxylated nylons based on unprotected 
esterified D-glucaric acid by simple condensation reactions. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 116(2), 
571–578. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja00081a018. 
99. Khaw, B., Silva, J., Petrov, A., & Hartner, W., (2002). Indium 111 antimyosin and 
Tc-99m glucaric acid for noninvasive identification of oncotic and apoptotic myocardial 
necrosis. J. Nucl. Cardiol., 9(5), 471–481. https://doi.org/10.1067/mnc.2002.124479. 
100. Aury, S., Rubini, P., Gérardin, C., & Selve, C., (2004). Amphiphilic amide derivatives of 
D-glucaric acid. Synthesis and complexing properties toward lanthanide(III) ions. Eur. 
J. Org. Chem., 2004(9), 2057–2066. https://doi.org/10.1002/ejoc.200300749. 
101. Marsh, C. A., (1963). Metabolism of D-Glucuronolactone in Mammalian Systems, 87, 9. 
102.  Pamuk, V., Yılmaz, M., & Alıcılar, A., (2001). The preparation of d-glucaric acid 
by oxidation of molasses in packed beds. Journal of Chemical Technology and 
Biotechnology: International Research in Process, Environmental and Clean 
Technology, 76(2), 186–190. 
103. Smith, T. N., Hash, K., Davey, C. L., Mills, H., Williams, H., & Kiely, D. E., (2012). 
Modifications in the nitric acid oxidation of D-glucose. Carbohydr. Res., 350, 6–13. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carres.2011.12.024. 
104. Chen, N., Wang, J., Zhao, Y., & Deng, Y., (2018). Metabolic engineering of 
Saccharomyces  cerevisiae for efficient production of glucaric acid at high titer. Microb. 
Cell Factories, 17(1), 67. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-018-0914-y. 
105. Keasling, J. D., (2008). Synthetic biology for synthetic chemistry. ACS Chem. Biol., 
3(1), 64–76. https://doi.org/10.1021/cb7002434. 
106. Moon, T. S., Yoon, S. H., Lanza, A. M., Roy-Mayhew, J. D., & Prather, K. L. J., (2009). 
Production of glucaric acid from a synthetic pathway in recombinant Escherichia coli. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 75(3), 589–595. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00973-08. 
107. Shiue, E., & Prather, K. L. J., (2014). Improving D-glucaric acid production from 
myo-inositol in E. coli by increasing MIOX stability and myo-inositol transport. Metab. 
Eng., 22, 22–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2013.12.002. 
108. Qu, Y. N., Yan, H. J., Guo, Q., Li, J. L., Ruan, Y. C., Yue, X. Z., Zheng, W. X., et al., 
(2018). Biosynthesis of D-glucaric acid from sucrose with routed carbon distribution 
in metabolically engineered Escherichia coli. Metab. Eng., 47, 393–400. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ymben.2018.04.020. 
109. Moon, T. S., Dueber, J. E., Shiue, E., & Prather, K. L. J., (2010). Use of modular, 
synthetic scaffolds for improved production of glucaric acid in engineered E. coli. 
Metab. Eng., 12(3), 298–305. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2010.01.003. 
110. Gupta, A., Hicks, M. A., Manchester, S. P., & Prather, K. L. J., (2016). Porting the 
synthetic d-glucaric acid pathway from Escherichia coli to Saccharomyces cerevisiae. 
Biotechnol. J., 11(9), 1201–1208. https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.201500563. 
111.   Dueber, J. E., Wu, G. C., Malmirchegini, G. R., Moon, T. S., Petzold, C. J., Ullal, A. V., 
Prather, K. L. J., & Keasling, J. D., (2009). Synthetic protein scaffolds provide modular 
control over metabolic flux. Nat. Biotechnol., 27(8), 753–759. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nbt.1557. 

 
116 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
112. Lorence, A., Chevone, B. I., Mendes, P., & Nessler, C. L., (2004). Myo
 
 -inositol 
oxygenase offers a possible entry point into plant ascorbate biosynthesis. Plant Physiol., 
134(3), 1200–1205. https://doi.org/10.1104/pp.103.033936. 
113. Wong, L., Engel, J., Jin, E., Holdridge, B., & Xu, P., (2017). YaliBricks, a versatile 
genetic toolkit for streamlined and rapid pathway engineering in Yarrowia lipolytica. 
Metab. Eng. Commun., 5, 68–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meteno.2017.09.001. 
114. Zhao, Y., Li, J., Su, R., Liu, Y., Wang, J., & Deng, Y., (2021). Effect of magnesium ions 
on glucaric acid production in the engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Biotechnol., 
332, 61–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2021.03.020. 
115. Li, C., Lin, X., Ling, X., Li, S., & Fang, H., (2021). Consolidated bioprocessing of 
lignocellulose for production of glucaric acid by an artificial microbial consortium. 
Biotechnol. Biofuels, 14(1), 110. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13068-021-01961-7. 
116. Liu, Y., Gong, X., Wang, C., Du, G., Chen, J., & Kang, Z., (2016). Production of glucaric 
acid from myo-inositol in engineered Pichia pastoris. Enzyme Microb. Technol., 91, 
8–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enzmictec.2016.05.009. 
117. Sun, J., Raza, M., Sun, X., & Yuan, Q., (2018). Biosynthesis of adipic acid via 
microaerobic hydrogenation of Cis,Cis-Muconic acid by oxygen-sensitive enoate 
reductase. J. Biotechnol., 280, 49–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2018.06.304. 
118. Kruyer, N. S., Wauldron, N., Bommarius, A. S., & Peralta-Yahya, P., (2020). Fully 
biological production of adipic acid analogs from branched catechols. Sci. Rep., 10, 
13367. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-70158-z. 
119. Clomburg, J. M., Blankschien, M. D., Vick, J. E., Chou, A., Kim, S., & Gonzalez, R., 
(2015). Integrated  engineering of β-oxidation reversal and ω-oxidation pathways for 
the synthesis of medium chain ω-functionalized carboxylic acids. Metab. Eng., 28, 
202–212. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2015.01.007. 
120. Dellomonaco, C., Clomburg, J. M., Miller, E. N., & Gonzalez, R., (2011). Engineered 
reversal of the β-oxidation cycle for the synthesis of fuels and chemicals. Nature, 476 
(7360), 355–359. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10333. 
121. Yu, J. L., Xia, X. X., Zhong, J. J., & Qian, Z. G., (2014). Direct biosynthesis of adipic 
acid from a synthetic pathway in recombinant Escherichia coli. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 
111(12), 2580–2586. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.25293. 
122. Shin, J. H., Andersen, A. J. C., Achterberg, P., & Olsson, L., (2021). Exploring 
functionality of the reverse β-oxidation pathway in Corynebacterium glutamicum for 
production of adipic acid. Microb. Cell Factories, 20(1), 155. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s12934-021-01647-7. 
123. Kurihara, S., Oda, S., Kato, K., Kim, H. G., Koyanagi, T., Kumagai, H., & Suzuki, 
H., (2005). A novel putrescine utilization pathway involves gamma-glutamylated 
intermediates of Escherichia coli K-12. J. Biol. Chem., 280(6), 4602–4608. https://doi. 
org/10.1074/jbc.M411114200. 
124. Samsonova, N. N., Smirnov, S. V., Novikova, A. E., & Ptitsyn, L. R., (2005). Identification 
of Escherichia coli K12 YdcW protein as a gamma-aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase. 
FEBS Lett., 579(19), 4107–4112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.febslet.2005.06.038. 
125. Qian, Z. G., Xia, X. X., & Lee, S. Y., (2009). Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli  
for the production of putrescine: A  four carbon diamine. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 104(4), 
651–662. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.22502. 

 
117 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
126. Noh, M., Yoo, S. M., Kim, W. J., & Lee, S. Y., (2017). Gene expression knockdown 
by modulating synthetic small RNA expression in Escherichia coli. Cell Syst., 5(4), 
418–426.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cels.2017.08.016. 
127. Li, G., Huang, D., Wang, L., & Deng, Y., (2021). Highly efficient whole-cell biosynthesis 
of putrescine by recombinant Escherichia coli. Biochem. Eng. J., 166, 107859. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2020.107859. 
128. Schneider, J., Eberhardt, D., & Wendisch, V. F., (2012). Improving putrescine production 
by Corynebacterium glutamicum by fine-tuning ornithine transcarbamoylase activity 
using a plasmid addiction system. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 95(1), 169–178. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s00253-012-3956-9. 
129.  Li, Z., Shen, Y. P., Jiang, X. L., Feng, L. S., & Liu, J. Z., (2018). Metabolic evolution 
and a comparative omics analysis of Corynebacterium glutamicum for putrescine 
production. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 45(2), 123–139. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10295-018-2003-y. 
130. Qian, Z. G., Xia, X. X., & Lee, S. Y., (2011). Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli  
for the production of cadaverine: A five carbon diamine. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 108(1), 
93–103. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.22918. 
131. Mimitsuka, T., Sawai, H., Hatsu, M., & Yamada, K., (2007). Metabolic engineering 
of Corynebacterium glutamicum for cadaverine fermentation. Biosci. Biotechnol. 
Biochem., 71(9), 2130–2135. https://doi.org/10.1271/bbb.60699. 
132. Wang, L., Li, G., & Deng, Y., (2020). Diamine biosynthesis: Research progress and 
application prospects. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  86(23), e01972–20. https://doi. 
org/10.1128/AEM.01972-20. 
133. Kind, S., Jeong, W. K., Schröder, H., Zelder, O., & Wittmann, C., (2010). Identification 
and elimination of the competing N-acetyldiaminopentane pathway for improved 
production of diaminopentane by Corynebacterium glutamicum.  Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol., 76(15), 5175–5180. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.00834-10. 
134. Nishi, K., Endo, S., Mori, Y., Totsuka, K., & Hirao, Y., (2007). Method for Producing 
Cadaverine Dicarboxylate. US7189543B2. 
135. Shin, J., Joo, J. C., Lee, E., Hyun, S. M., Kim, H. J., Park, S. J., Yang, Y. H., & Park, K., 
(2018). Characterization of a whole-cell biotransformation using a constitutive lysine 
decarboxylase from Escherichia coli for the high-level production of cadaverine from 
industrial grade L-lysine. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 185(4), 909–924. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s12010-018-2696-4. 
136. Ma, W., Cao, W., Zhang, B., Chen, K., Liu, Q., Li, Y., & Ouyang, P., (2015). Engineering 
a pyridoxal 5’-phosphate supply for cadaverine production by using Escherichia coli  
whole-cell biocatalysis. Sci. Rep., 5, 15630. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep15630. 
137. Kim, H. T., Baritugo, K. A., Oh, Y. H., Kang, K. H., Jung, Y. J., Jang, S., Song, B. K., 
et al., (2019). High-level conversion of L-lysine into cadaverine by Escherichia coli  
whole-cell biocatalyst expressing hafnia alvei L-lysine decarboxylase. Polymers, 11(7), 
1184. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym11071184. 
138. Na, D., Yoo, S. M., Chung, H., Park, H., Park, J. H., & Lee, S. Y., (2013). Metabolic 
engineering of Escherichia coli using synthetic small regulatory RNAs. Nat. Biotechnol., 
31(2), 170–174. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.2461. 
139. Rebsdat, S., & Mayer, D., (2000). Ethylene glycol. In:  Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of 
Industrial Chemistry (pp. a10–101) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Wiley-VCH 

 
118 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA: Weinheim, Germany. https://doi.org/10.1002/14356007. 
a10_101. 
140. Alkim, C., Cam, Y., Trichez, D., Auriol, C., Spina, L., Vax, A., Bartolo, F., et al., 
(2015). Optimization of ethylene glycol production from (D)-xylose via a synthetic 
pathway implemented in Escherichia coli. Microb. Cell Factories, 14, 127. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s12934-015-0312-7. 
141. Cabulong, R. B., Valdehuesa, K. N. G., Ramos, K. R. M., Nisola, G. M., Lee, W. K., 
Lee, C. R., & Chung, W. J., (2017). Enhanced yield of ethylene glycol production from 
d-xylose by pathway optimization in Escherichia coli. Enzyme Microb. Technol., 97, 
11–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enzmictec.2016.10.020. 
142. Brabetz, W., Liebl, W., & Schleifer, K. H., (1991). Studies on the utilization of lactose 
by Corynebacterium glutamicum, bearing the lactose operon of Escherichia Coli. Arch. 
Microbiol., 155(6), 607–612. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00245357. 
143. Kawaguchi, H., Vertès, A. A., Okino, S., Inui, M., & Yukawa, H., (2006). Engineering of 
a xylose metabolic pathway in Corynebacterium glutamicum. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 
72(5), 3418–3428. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.72.5.3418-3428.2006. 
144. Islam, M. A., Hadadi, N., Ataman, M., Hatzimanikatis, V., & Stephanopoulos, G., (2017). 
Exploring biochemical pathways for mono-ethylene glycol (MEG) synthesis from 
synthesis gas. Metab. Eng., 41, 173–181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2017.04.005. 
145. Maier, T. H. P., (2003). Semisynthetic production of unnatural L-alpha-amino acids by 
metabolic engineering of the cysteine-biosynthetic pathway. Nat. Biotechnol., 21(4), 
422–427. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt807. 
146. Hsu, S. K., Lo, H. H., Kao, C. H., Lee, D. S., & Hsu, W. H., (2006). Enantioselective 
synthesis of L-homophenylalanine by whole-cells of recombinant Escherichia coli  
expressing L-aminoacylase and N-acylamino acid racemase genes from Deinococcus 
radiodurans  BCRC12827. Biotechnol. Prog., 22(6), 1578–1584. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
bp0601241. 
147. Weber, N., Hatsch, A., Labagnere, L., & Heider, H., (2017). Production of (S)-2­
aminobutyric acid and (S)-2-aminobutanol in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microb. Cell 
Factories, 16(1), 51. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-017-0667-z. 
148. Shimoni, E., Ravid, U., & Shoham, Y., (2000). Isolation of a Bacillus Sp. capable of 
transforming isoeugenol to vanillin. J. Biotechnol., 78(1), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
s0168-1656(99)00199-6. 
149. Hansen, E. H., Møller, B. L., Kock, G. R., Bünner, C. M., Kristensen, C., Jensen, 
O. R., Okkels, F. T., et al., (2009). De novo biosynthesis of vanillin in fission yeast 
(Schizosaccharomyces Pombe) and baker’s yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae). Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol., 75(9), 2765–2774. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02681-08. 
150. Kim, B., Cho, B. R., & Hahn, J. S., (2014). Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae for the production of 2-phenylethanol via Ehrlich pathway. Biotechnol. 
Bioeng., 111(1), 115–124. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.24993. 
151. Guo, D., Zhang, L., Pan, H., & Li, X., (2017). Metabolic engineering of Escherichia 
Coli for production of 2-phenylethylacetate from L-phenylalanine. Microbiology Open, 
6(4). https://doi.org/10.1002/mbo3.486. 
152. Zhang, H., Cao, M., Jiang, X., Zou, H., Wang, C., Xu, X., & Xian, M., (2014). De-novo 
synthesis of 2-phenylethanol by Enterobacter sp. CGMCC 5087. BMC Biotechnol., 
14(1), 30. https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6750-14-30. 

 
119 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
153.  Celińska, E., Kubiak, P., Białas, W., Dziadas, M., & Grajek, W., (2013). Yarrowia 
lipolytica: The novel and promising 2-phenylethanol producer. J. Ind. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol., 40(3, 4), 389–392. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-013-1240-3. 
154. Willrodt, C., David, C., Cornelissen, S., Bühler, B., Julsing, M. K., & Schmid, A., 
(2014). Engineering the productivity of recombinant Escherichia coli for limonene 
formation from glycerol in minimal media. Biotechnol. J., 9(8), 1000–1012. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/biot.201400023. 
155. Henke, N. A., Wichmann, J., Baier, T., Frohwitter, J., Lauersen, K. J., Risse, J. 
M., Peters-Wendisch, P., et al., (2018). Patchoulol production with metabolically 
engineered Corynebacterium glutamicum. Genes, 9(4), E219. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
genes9040219. 
156. Aguilar, F., Scheper, T., & Beutel, S., (2019). Modulating the precursor and terpene 
synthase supply for the whole-cell biocatalytic production of the sesquiterpene 
(+)-zizaene in a pathway engineered  E. coli. Genes, 10(6), E478. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
genes10060478. 
157. Milke, L., Mutz, M., & Marienhagen, J., (2020). Synthesis of the character impact 
compound raspberry ketone and additional flavoring phenylbutanoids of biotechnological 
interest with Corynebacterium glutamicum. Microb. Cell Factories, 19(1), 92. https:// 
doi.org/10.1186/s12934-020-01351-y. 
158. Chang, C., Liu, B., Bao, Y., Tao, Y., & Liu, W., (2021). Efficient bioconversion of 
raspberry ketone in Escherichia coli using fatty acids feedstocks. Microb. Cell Factories, 
20(1), 68. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-021-01551-0. 
159. Ro, D. K., Paradise, E. M., Ouellet, M., Fisher, K. J., Newman, K. L., Ndungu, J. M., 
Ho, K. A., et al., (2006). Production of the antimalarial drug precursor artemisinic acid 
in engineered yeast. Nature, 440 (7086), 940–943. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04640. 
160. Wu, T., Wu, S., Yin, Q., Dai, H., Li, S., Dong, F., Chen, B., & Fang, H., (2011). 
Biosynthesis of amorpha-4,11-diene, a precursor of the antimalarial agent artemisinin, 
in Escherichia coli through introducing mevalonate pathway. Sheng Wu Gong Cheng 
Xue Bao Chin. J. Biotechnol., 27(7), 1040–1048. 
161. Tang, C. D., Shi, H. L., Jia, Y. Y., Li, X., Wang, L. F., Xu, J. H., Yao, L. G., & Kan, 
Y. C., (2020). High level and enantioselective production of L-phenylglycine from 
racemic mandelic acid by engineered Escherichia coli  using response surface 
methodology. Enzyme Microb. Technol., 136, 109513. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enzmictec.2020.109513. 
162. Martínez-Gómez, A. I., Clemente-Jiménez, J. M., Rodríguez-Vico, F., Kanerva, L. T., 
Li, X. G., Heras-Vázquez, F. J. L., & Martínez-Rodríguez, S., (2012). New biocatalytic 
route for the production of enantioenriched β-alanine derivatives starting from 5- and 
6-monosubstituted dihydrouracils. Process Biochem., 47(12), 2090–2096. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.procbio.2012.07.026. 
163. Gröger, H., Hummel, W
 ., & Wedde, S., (2016). Asymmetric synthesis with 
recombinant whole-cell catalysts. In: Green Biocatalysis (pp. 557–585). https://doi. 
org/10.1002/9781118828083.ch23. 
164. Martínez-Rodríguez, S., Torres, J. M., Sánchez, P., & Ortega, E., (2020). Overview on 
multienzymatic cascades for the production of non-canonical α-amino acids. Front. 
Bioeng. Biotechnol., 8, 887. https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2020.00887. 

 
120 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
165. Panke, S., Held, M., & Wubbolts, M., (2004). Trends and innovations in industrial 
biocatalysis for the production of fine chemicals. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 15(4), 
272–279. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2004.06.011. 
166.  He, A., Li, T., Daniels, L., Fotheringham, I., & Rosazza, J. P. N., (2004). Nocardia  
Sp. carboxylic acid reductase: Cloning, expression, and characterization of a new 
aldehyde oxidoreductase family. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 70(3), 1874–1881. https:// 
doi.org/10.1128/AEM.70.3.1874-1881.2004. 
167. Lesage-Meessen, L., Delattre, M., Haon, M., Thibault, J. F., Ceccaldi, B. C., Brunerie, 
P., & Asther, M., (1996). A two-step bioconversion process for vanillin production from 
ferulic acid combining Aspergillus Niger and Pycnoporus cinnabarinus. J. Biotechnol., 
50(2, 3), 107–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/0168-1656(96)01552-0. 
168. Etschmann, M. M. W., Bluemke, W., Sell, D., & Schrader, J., (2002). Biotechnological 
production of 2-phenylethanol. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 59(1), 1–8. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00253-002-0992-x. 
169. Guo, D., Zhang, L., Kong, S., Liu, Z., Li, X., & Pan, H., (2018). Metabolic engineering 
of Escherichia coli for production of 2-phenylethanol and 2-phenylethyl acetate 
from glucose. J. Agric. Food Chem., 66(23), 5886–5891. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
jafc.8b01594. 
170. Wang, H., Dong, Q., Meng, C., Shi, X. A., & Guo, Y., (2011). A continuous and adsorptive 
bioprocess for efficient production of the natural aroma chemical 2-phenylethanol 
with yeast. Enzyme Microb. Technol., 48(4, 5), 404–407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enzmictec.2011.01.006. 
171. Chang, M., Krupa, R., Trieu, W., Ro, D. K., & Keasling, J., (2007). Engineering 
Escherichia coli for production of functionalized terpenoids using plant P450s. Nat. 
Chem. Biol., 3, 274–277. https://doi.org/10.1038/nchembio875. 
172. Sahin, E., & Dertli, E., (2019). Efficient Biocatalytic Synthesis of (S)-1-(4-Methoxyphenyl) 
Ethanol by Saccharomyces Uvarum as a Whole-Cell Biocatalyst. 
173. Perveen, S., (2018). Intr
 
oductory Chapter: Terpenes and Terpenoids.  https://doi. 
org/10.5772/intechopen.79683. 
174. Bluemke, W., & Schrader, J., (2001). Integrated bioprocess for enhanced production 
of natural flavors and fragrances by Ceratocystis moniliformis. Biomol. Eng., 17(4, 5), 
137–142. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1389-0344(01)00072-7. 
175. Boronat, A., & Rodríguez-Concepción, M., (2015). Terpenoid biosynthesis in prokaryotes. 
Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol., 148, 3–18. https://doi.org/10.1007/10_2014_285. 
176. Zebec, Z., Wilkes, J., Jervis, A. J., Scrutton, N. S., Takano, E., & Breitling, R., (2016). 
Towards synthesis of monoterpenes and derivatives using synthetic biology. Curr. Opin. 
Chem. Biol., 34, 37–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpa.2016.06.002. 
177. Schempp, F. M., Drummond, L., Buchhaupt, M., & Schrader, J., (2018). Microbial cell 
factories for the production of terpenoid flavor and fragrance compounds. J. Agric. 
Food Chem., 66(10), 2247–2258. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.7b00473. 
178. Cao, X., Lv, Y. B., Chen, J., Imanaka, T., Wei, L. J., & Hua, Q., (2016). Metabolic 
engineering of oleaginous yeast Yarrowia lipolytica for limonene overproduction. 
Biotechnol. Biofuels, 9, 214. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13068-016-0626-7. 
179. Lauersen, K. J., Baier, T., Wichmann, J., Wördenweber, R., Mussgnug, J. H., Hübner, 
W., Huser, T., & Kruse, O., (2016). Efficient phototrophic production of a high-value 
sesquiterpenoid from the eukaryotic microalga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Metab. 
Eng., 38, 331–343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2016.07.013. 

 
121 
Whole-Cell Catalysts: Sustainable Green-Chemical Producing Entities 
180. Nybo, S. E., Saunders, J., & McCormick, S. P., (2017). Metabolic engineering of 
Escherichia coli for production of valerenadiene. J. Biotechnol., 262, 60–66. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2017.10.004. 
181. Moser, S., Strohmeier, G. A., Leitner, E., Plocek, T. J., Vanhessche, K., & Pichler, H., 
(2018). Whole-cell (+)-ambrein production in the yeast Pichia pastoris. Metab. Eng. 
Commun., 7, e00077. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mec.2018.e00077. 
182. Ke, D., Caiyin, Q., Zhao, F., Liu, T., & Lu, W., (2018). Heterologous biosynthesis of 
triterpenoid ambrein in engineered Escherichia coli. Biotechnol. Lett., 40(2), 399–404. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10529-017-2483-2. 
183. Smith, L. R., (1996). Rheosmin (“raspberry ketone”) and zingerone, and their preparation 
by crossed aldol-catalytic hydrogenation sequences. Chem. Educ., 1(3), 1–18. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s00897960034a. 
184. Wang, C., Zheng, P., & Chen, P., (2019). Construction of synthetic pathways for raspberry 
ketone production in engineered Escherichia coli. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 103(9), 
3715–3725. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-019-09748-5. 
185. Beekwilder, J., Van, D. M. I. M., Sibbesen, O., Broekgaarden, M., Qvist, I., Mikkelsen, J. 
D., & Hall, R. D., (2007). Microbial production of natural raspberry ketone. Biotechnol. 
J., 2(10), 1270–1279. https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.200700076. 
186. Lee, D., Lloyd, N. D. R., Pretorius, I. S., & Borneman, A. R., (2016). Heterologous 
production of raspberry ketone in the wine yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae via pathway 
engineering and synthetic enzyme fusion. Microb. Cell Factories, 15(1), 49. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s12934-016-0446-2. 
187. Westfall, P. J., Pitera, D. J., Lenihan, J. R., Eng, D., Woolard, F. X., Regentin, R., 
Horning, T., et al., (2012). Production of amorphadiene in yeast, and its conversion 
to dihydroartemisinic acid, precursor to the antimalarial agent artemisinin. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 109(3), E111–118. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1110740109. 
188. Chen, X., Zhang, C., & T oo, H. P., (2017). Multienzyme biosynthesis of 
dihydroartemisinic acid. Mol. J. Synth. Chem. Nat. Prod. Chem., 22(9), 1422. https:// 
doi.org/10.3390/molecules22091422. 


Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
  
  
 
CHAPTER 4  
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the 
Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle-
Based Platform Chemicals 
NIRMALA NITHYA RAJU,1 SATHYA NARAYANAN VENKATESAN,1 
SAI NANDHINI RAVI,1 SHENGFANG ZHOU,2 
VASANTHA KUMAR KULOTHUNGAN,1 and 
MUGESH SANKARANARAYANAN1,3 
1Department of Biotechnology, Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. Sagunthala R&D 
Institute of Science and Technology, Avadi, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
2The Key Laboratory of Biotechnology for the Medicinal Plant of 
Jiangsu Province, School of Life Sciences, Jiangsu Normal University, 
Xuzhou, China 
3Park’s Biolabs LLP, Vel Tech Technology Incubator, Vel Tech Rangarajan 
Dr. Sagunthala R&D Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai,  
Tamil Nadu, India 
ABSTRACT 
Platform chemicals are molecules with numerous functional groups 
that possess the ability to be transformed subsequently into other useful 
commodity chemicals. Until the recent past, most of the commercially valu­
able industrial chemicals were derived from fossil fuel-based resources. The 
growing population and industrialization lead to the continuous depletion of 
fossil fuels and their attributed adverse environmental impacts are a serious 
threat to mankind. Thus, microbial production of platform chemicals seeks 
significant attention in recent days due to its sustainable and renewable 

 
 
124 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
nature to overcome the dependence of petroleum-based resources. Microbial 
synthesis is a valuable approach that integrates enzyme engineering, meta­
bolic engineering, synthetic biology, and system biology along with process 
development strategies for the enhanced production of various platform 
chemicals and their derivatives. This chapter aims to provide an insight into 
the recent progress made in the synthesis of tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle-
based platform chemicals: succinic acid (SA), fumaric acid (FA), malic 
acid (MA), aspartic acid, glutamic acid and itaconic acid (IA) using various 
microbes as whole-cell biocatalyst factories. In addition, this chapter also 
discusses the importance of involving modern techniques used in the process 
development aspects. 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
Platform chemicals are chemical compounds that can be subsequently 
converted into other industrially valuable chemicals through minimized reac­
tion steps. Platform chemicals also possess multiple functional groups which 
makes its transformation easier into new families of other useful chemical 
moieties. The United States Department of Energy (DoE) categorized 12 
platform chemicals from the list of 300 candidates (Table 4.1) based on the 
potential market demand, properties of the derivatives and the technical 
complexity of the pathway for the synthesis [1]. In the recent past, the global 
market demand for the bio-based platform chemicals witnessed a significant 
growth due to the increased consumer adoption and relaxed government 
regulations [2]. According to the report of Allied Market Research, the 
global bio-based platform chemical production was ~9,200 kilo tons in the 
year 2014. The global market is poised to garner $18.8 billion by 2021 with 
an estimated compound annual growth rate (CAGR) between 8.3 and 12.6% 
for the forecast period of 2021–2025 [3]. 
TABLE 4.1 List of Top 12 Platform Chemicals Recommended by DoE 
SL. No. 
Platform Chemical 
1. 
Succinic, fumaric, and malic acid 
2. 
2,5-furan dicarboxylic acid 
3. 
3-hydroxypropionic acid 
4. 
Aspartic acid 
5. 
Glucaric acid 

 
 
125 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
TABLE 4.1 (Continued) 
SL. No. 
Platform Chemical 
6. 
Glutamic acid 
7. 
Itaconic acid 
8. 
Levulinic acid 
9. 
3-hydroxybutyrolactone 
10. 
Glycerol 
11. 
Sorbitol 
12. 
Xylitol/arabinitol 
The production of most of the carbon-based chemicals for several appli­
cations relied on fossil fuel derivatives for several decades [4]. However, 
the petrochemical-based synthesis of industrial chemicals was not a sustain­
able approach due to the continuous depletion of fossil debris. The finite 
sources of fossil fuels and highly fluctuating prices made the sustainable and 
renewable sources an inevitable alternative. In addition, the petrochemical 
method of synthesizing such industrial chemicals was not eco-friendly and 
categorized as a major ecological threat [5]. They play an imperative role in 
global warming, accumulation of recalcitrant wastes, acid rain and smog, 
etc. Increasing environmental awareness and strict policy regulations are 
the driving forces to the search for alternative resources for providing green 
energy, green chemicals and materials that do not cause any eco-hazard. 
Despite having several existing sources for sustainable energy, biomass-
based production of chemicals is an effective replacement in recent years. 
The rapid growth in the biorefineries attracted numerous researchers towards 
bio-based production of platform chemicals [6]. 
Biorefinery is a facility that combines the conversion of biomass into 
fuel and chemicals along with the equipment [7]. Though the production 
of chemicals through biorefineries achieves the goal of sustainable devel­
opment, the process of conversion is highly complex. The conversion of 
biomass into chemicals is quite laborious due to the association of a number 
of mechanical, chemical, and enzymatic steps involved in it. In order to 
overcome such complexities, whole-cell biocatalysts (WCB) are used 
[8]. In this method, the microorganism itself is acting as a cell factory for 
converting the raw or pre-treated biomass into value added chemicals with 
the help of enzymes synthesized on its own or from other sources as depicted 
in Figure 4.1. Employment of microorganisms for the production of valu­
able products through the fermentation process is not new. Microorganisms 

 
 
 
 
126 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
are the eminent sources of array of products ranging from small molecules 
(microbial metabolites, growth factors and signaling molecules, etc.) to 
macromolecules (complex sugars, proteins, fatty acids and nucleic acids, 
etc.) [9]. 
FIGURE 4.1 The process of whole-cell biocatalysis for the production of platform 
chemicals. 
In early days, the microbial production of chemicals was carried out by 
identifying the potential natural producers. Owing to improve the perfor­
mance of such natural producers, random mutagenesis and fermentation 
process optimization studies were carried out [10]. In recent days, with the 
advancements achieved in bioinformatics and whole genome sequencing 
methods, the genome information of several new organisms are well explored 
to develop recombinant organisms to produce valuable chemicals. In the 
meanwhile, the rapid progress in metabolic engineering, synthetic biology 
and systems\ biology tools boosted up the practice of employing different 
categories of host organisms such as bacteria, fungi, yeast, and algae for the 
production of various chemicals [10, 11]. All the organisms, both natural 
producers and genetically modified, tend to utilize central carbon metabolism 
for their growth and energy requirements [13]. Tricarboxylic acid (TCA) 
cycle is an integrated and vital part of the central carbon metabolism which 
plays an important role in the ATP generation by providing reducing equiva­
lents (NADH) to the electron transport chain in the presence of oxygen as 
a final electron acceptor [14]. Most of the intermediates of the TCA cycle 
are industrial chemicals (e.g., citric acid, succinic acid (SA), fumaric acid 
(FA) and malic acid (MA)) and a few are serving as the precursor for amino 
acid synthesis and other chemicals (Eg: alpha-ketoglutarate, oxaloacetate, 
and cis-aconitate) (Figure 4.2). Few of the top platform chemicals such as 
succinate, fumarate, malate, aspartate, glutamate, and itaconate are derived 
from TCA cycle either as intermediates or as precursors [15]. This chapter 

 
 
127 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
focuses specifically on the different group of hosts involved in the produc­
tion of TCA cycle-based platform chemicals and the strategies developed for 
strain engineering for the enhanced production of above stated chemicals. 
In addition, diverse process development and optimization methods also are 
discussed as a part of this chapter. 
FIGURE 4.2 Crucial metabolic pathways involved in production of platform chemicals. 
4.2 SUCCINIC ACID (SA) 
SA is a four-carbon dicarboxylic acid which is also known as butane 
dioic acid, 1,2-ethane dicarboxylic acid and amber acid. Because of its 
versatile physico-chemical characteristics and possessing the potential to 
act as a prime building block for drawing various speciality chemicals for 
diverse industrial needs, it has been ranked a top by US-DoE among the 
12 platform chemicals. SA has traditionally been used as food additives, 
pigments, cosmetics, pharmaceutical intermediates, bioplastics, detergents, 
cement additives, toners, and soldering fluxes. Additionally, it is also used 
as a precursor material for a number of industrial chemicals including AA, 
N methyl pyrrolidinone, 2-pyrrolidinone, succinate salts, 1,4-butanediol, 
maleic anhydride, tetrahydrofuran, and g-butyrolactone. 

 
 
 
128 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
As SA is an intermediate in several biochemical pathways, the microbial 
production is trouble free while compared to chemical synthesis. Numerous 
microbes have been reported to be the whole-cell biocatalysts (WCB) to 
synthesize SA using different carbon sources (Table 4.2). This chapter 
explains in detail about the different categories (bacteria, fungi, and yeast) 
of organisms that served as cell factories, the challenges encountered, and 
approaches used to improve the production of SA to commercial scale. 
4.2.1 BACTERIA 
SA is a common intermediate of TCA cycle and produced as a fermentative 
end product under limited oxygen conditions. Most of the natural producers 
of SA are strict anaerobic organisms. The best-known natural SA producers 
are Actinobacillus succinogenes, Mannheimia succiniciproducens, Bacte-
roids fragilis, and Anaerobiospirillum succinoproducens. Apart from these 
bacterial strains, Escherichia coli is also a prominent producer of SA with 
genetic manipulations. 
4.2.1.1 ACTINOBACILLUS SUCCINOGENES 
A. succinogenes is a gram-negative facultative anaerobic bacterium [16]. Due 
to its capnophilic nature, it requires carbon dioxide (CO2) for the production 
of SA. It requires four specific enzymes, namely phospho-enolpyruvate 
carboxykinase (PEPCK), malate dehydrogenase (MDH), fumarase (FUM) 
and fumarate dehydrogenase (FDH) and also found that the expression 
levels of these enzymes are significantly higher than E. coli K12 [17]. As 
PEPCK has a higher affinity towards ATP and oxaloacetate, it produces high 
levels of SA through the reductive TCA (rTCA) cycle [18]. Its capability 
of assimilating a wide spectrum of carbohydrates for carbon and energy 
requirements, makes it a versatile host for the production of SA from low 
cost carbon sources such as cane molasses, cheese whey and wheat hydro­
lysates to achieve an economical production [19–21]. On the other hand, A. 
Succinogenes produces a large amount of fermentative by-products (ethanol, 
acetate, and formate) which makes the purification process tedious [22]. 
Due to the lack of few essential genes of TCA cycle, rich media is required 
to compensate the TCA-based amino acid synthesis. However, recently 
developed shuttle vectors and other genetic tools shed light to overcome the 

 
 
 
Strain 
Substrate 
Strategy 
Titer
Yield (g/gsub) Productivity 
References 
(g/L) 
(g L–1 h–1) 
Bacteria
succinogenes 
A.
Corn steep liquor  
Bovine rumen isolate 
70 
– 
– 
[171] 
succinogenes 
A.
Wheat hydrolysates  
Solid-state fermentation 
22 
– 
– 
[172] 
succinogenes 
A.
Cane molasses  
Anaerobic bottles fermentation 
55.2 
– 
– 
[173] 
succinogenes  
A.
Cheese way 
Optimization of fermentation 
– 
0.57 
0.58 
[174] 
conditions 
 succiniciproducens  
A.
Wood hydrolysate 
Biological conversion of wood 
24 
– 
– 
[175] 
hydrolysate to succinic acid 
 succiniciproducens  
A.
Whey 
Steady-state fermentation 
24 
– 
– 
[176] 
parameters in continuous
culture at high CO2 levels 
 succiniciproducens  
M.
Glucose 
Deleting the genes of lactate, 
52 
– 
– 
[177] 
acetate, formate, and pyruvate
formation. 
coli 
E.
Glucose  
Aerobic, Fed-batch, pepck 
58.3 
0.72 
0.62 
[40] 
coli  
E.
Glucose 
Aerobic succinate production 
5.07 
0.7 
– 
[51] 
system is based on five
mutations – sdhAB, icd, poxB,
ackA-pta, and iclR. 
129 
TABLE 4.2 Microbes and Strategies for the Production of Succinic Acid
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 

 
 
 
 
 
Strain 
Substrate 
Strategy 
Titer
Yield (g/gsub) Productivity 
References 
(g/L) 
(g L–1 h–1) 
Fungi
niger
A.
, T. reesei, and 
Birch wood chips  
Two stage co-culture strategy 
61.2 
– 
– 
[43] 
chrysosporium 
P.
 saccharolyticus  
A.
Glucose and sorbitol 
Overexpression fumarate 
16.2 
– 
– 
[178] 
reductase (frd) 
niger 
A.
Molasses and wheat  
Deletion of gluconic acid (gox) 
23 
– 
– 
[179] 
straw hydrolysate.  
and oxalic acid (oah) pathways 
and the overexpression of frd.  
Yeast
 cerevisiae 
S.
TAM 
Glucose 
Overexpression of genes pyc2, 
8.09 
– 
– 
[49] 
mdh3R, fumC, and frdS1 along 
with the deletion of gpd1. 
kudriavzevii
P.
 13723 
Glucose 
Overexpression of pyc1 and 
48.2 
a0.69 
0.97 
[65] 
fum 
orientalis
I.
 SD108 
Glucose and fructose 
Overexpression pyc, mdh, 
11.6 
0.12 
0.11 
[66] 
fumR, and frd 
catenulate 
C.
VKM Y-5 Ethanol 
Mineral medium with pulse 
5.2 
– 
– 
[67] 
addition of ethanol.
zeylanoides
C.
 VKM 
Ethanol 
Mineral medium with pulse 
9.4 
– 
– 
[67] 
Y-2324 
addition of ethanol.
 rouxii  
Z.
Glucose (YPG 
Fermentation optimization 
7.7 
0.08 
– 
[113] 
medium) 
brumptii
C.
 IFO 0731 
n-Paraffin 
Process optimization 
24 
0.67 
– 
[68] 
a mol/mol. 
 
130 
TABLE 4.2 (Continued) 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 

 
 
 
 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
131 
problems associated with by-product accumulation and media cost for the 
effective SA synthesis. 
4.2.1.2 ANAEROBIOSPIRILLUM SUCCINICIPRODUCENS 
A. succiniciproducens is a strict anaerobic, capnophilic, gram-negative, and 
opportunistic pathogenic bacteria [23, 24]. As like other natural producers, A. 
succiniciproducens also ferments various cheaper carbon substrates. Though 
there is limited direct evidence on auxotrophies, it needs various components 
of complex medium for optimal growth and metabolism. In order to achieve 
higher yield and titer, yeast extract in combination with peptone is often used 
[25]. A. succiniciproducens requires high concentrations of CO2 for efficient 
growth and production of SA. Co-supplementation of hydrogen with CO2 
enhances yield and production rate by increasing PEPCK activity through 
the optimal supply of reducing equivalents. As PEPCK mediated production 
of SA results in ATP formation, the growth and production are coupled. The 
extreme sensitivity towards air and higher glucose concentration made this 
strain unsuitable for commercial scale productions [26, 27]. 
4.2.1.3 MANNHEIMIA SUCCINICIPRODUCENS 
M. succiniciproducens, a gram negative, rod shaped, facultative, and capno­
philic microbe is known initially as a mixed acid producer. M. succinicipro-
ducens ferments a broad variety of sugars and hydrolysates as similar as A. 
succinogenes. The possession of a complete TCA cycle supports the growth 
under both aerobic and anaerobic conditions efficiently. This facultative 
behavior is attributed to the presence of two component signal transduction 
system (ArcAB and FNR) as seen in E. coli [28, 29]. Though FNR shares a 
higher genome sequence identity (82%), the regulation differs significantly 
while comparing with E. coli due to the missing linker region in the ArcB. 
The recent advances in genome sequencing led to the development of genetic 
tools for gene deletion and gene expression in M. succiniciproducens. By 
deleting the genes accountable for the production of lactate, acetate, formate, 
and pyruvate, the titer and yield (52 g/L and 0.68) of SA were enhanced [30]. 
The metabolic flux analysis (MFA) studies revealed that a higher concentra­
tion of CO2 elevates the succinate yield up to 1.5 folds [31]. In addition, 
MFA also showed the necessity of CO2 over carbonate as a substrate. In 
contrast, the disadvantage of this strain is the many auxotrophies it displays 

 
 
 
 
 
 
132 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
[31]. The dependency on glycolysis for the reduced equivalents is another 
drawback of M. succiniciproducens. Development of effective strategies for 
cofactor engineering is inevitable to improve titer, yield, and productivity. 
4.2.1.4 ESCHERICHIA COLI 
Despite being a non-natural producer, E. coli is one of the prominent work 
horses [32] in the production of SA. Short doubling time, robustness, 
complete knowledge of its genome, vast availability of genetic tools and the 
ability to assimilate a variety of carbon sources are the characteristics that 
made E. coli a versatile organism for the synthesis of an array of products. As 
a facultative microbe, it overproduces acetate under aerobic condition and 
produces succinate in relatively small quantity along with formate, lactate, 
and ethanol [33–35]. However, it can be converted into a competent succinate 
producer by utilizing the genetic tools and knowledge available for extensive 
metabolic engineering approaches for this organism. In E. coli, succinate can 
be obtained through three different pathways, the PEP-pyruvate-oxaloacetate 
node, TCA cycle and the glyoxylate cycle [36]. As E. coli produces a mixture 
of lactate, formate, acetate, and ethanol under limited oxygen condition, the 
elimination of corresponding pathways is the primary target to enhance 
succinate yield. In order to have an uninterrupted synthesis of succinate, it 
is essential to maintain the pool of PEP, the entry gate for the rTCA cycle 
[37]. The glucose uptake through phosphoenolpyruvate-carbohydrate phos­
photransferase (Pts) system drains the availability of PEP needed for the 
synthesis of succinate through rTCA cycle. Disruption of Pts system and 
overexpression of alternative glucose uptake pathway enzymes galactose 
permease/glucokinase resulted in remarkable improvement in succinate with 
optimal growth rate [38]. Alternatively, by fine-tuning the expression of PEP 
carboxylase (PPC) and PEP carboxykinase (PEPCK), the succinate yield and 
growth rate were significantly improved [39]. The succinate production was 
further improved by adopting ppc gene from different organisms such as 
Sorghum vulgare and Rhizobium etli. The overexpression of malic enzyme 
also contributes to the enhanced succinate in E. coli [40]. 
Producing succinate through the oxidative TCA cycle is an alternative 
approach. But the loss of two CO2 results in diminished yield. This carbon 
loss can be compensated by directing the carbon towards the glyoxylate cycle 
[41]. Glyoxylate cycle is activated in the absence of glucose for instance 
in the presence of acetate. The deletion repressor gene iclR leads to the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
133 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
further enhancement of flux towards glyoxylate cycle and improved yield 
subsequently [40]. By combining different metabolic engineering strategies 
such as deletion of competing pathways, diversion of carbon flux towards 
glyoxylate cycle and overexpression of PPC from Rhizobium etli boosted the 
yield quite nearer to the theoretical yield [42]. However, deletion of certain 
TCA cycle genes truncates the synthesis of a few amino acids which needs 
complex media to reimburse the cellular amino acid requirements. 
4.2.2 FUNGI 
The majority of the succinate production studies were carried out in bacteria 
rather than fungi or other organisms. The pre-treatment of lignocellulosic 
biomass is required for bacterial production whereas; fungi can ferment raw/ 
minimally pre-treated biomass for the growth and production of succinate. 
An alternative approach to ferment ligno-cellulosic biomass as a means to 
overcome the pre-treatment difficulties faced in bacterial fermentation was 
addressed [43] through a fungal co-culture strategy involving two stages. 
In the first stage, cellulosic activity was enhanced by pre-fermentation of a 
nitrogen-rich substrate soybean hull with Aspergillus niger and Trichoderma 
reesei and a carbon-rich substrate (Birch wood chips) with Phanerochaete 
chrysosporium. Later in the next stage, simultaneous cellulosic activity and 
SA production (maximum titer of 61.2 g/L and productivity of 1.70 g L–1 
h–1) were achieved by combining the pre-cultures into a slurry fermentation 
process. 
Aspergillus saccharolyticus is found to be a potential cell factory for SA 
synthesis in a recent study. The activity of the enzymes present in the rTCA 
cycle is good enough to produce relatively higher amount of succinate (16.2 
g/L) with the overexpression fumarate reductase (frd) gene in pH buffered 
acid production media [44]. In another study, the deletion of gluconic acid 
(gox) and oxalic acid (oah) pathways and the overexpression of fumarate 
reductase (frd) in a genetically modified A. Niger produced 23 g/L of succi­
nate [45]. 
The co-culture fermentation of Aspergillus niger, Phanerochaete chryso-
sporium, and Trichoderma reesei with varying acetate concentrations in pre­
treated birch wood chip/soybean hull mixture revealed the fact that higher 
concentrations of acetate might inhibit the growth of Aspergillus species, 
which in turn affect the production of succinate in negative manner. The 
presence of acetic acid in the fermentation media plays a crucial role in the 
production of SA from a non-conventional source [43]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
134 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Though there have been remarkable attempts made on fungi for SA 
production in recent years, limited genetic tools and slower production 
rates are believed to be the bottlenecks for commercial SA production 
using fungal host. The development of genetic tools using the latest tech­
nologies such as CRISPR-Cas9 may open door towards a new avenue in 
SA synthesis. 
4.2.3 YEAST 
Yeasts are one of the competitive candidates in the microbial SA production 
due to its high tolerance in acidic environment. 
4.2.3.1 SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAE 
It is one of the important model organisms from ancient days. The essential 
characteristics such as availability of genome editing tools, efficient control 
of intracellular pH and high tolerance to adverse fermentation conditions 
makes it an unavoidable host for succinate production [46]. S. cerevisiae 
possess all the three common succinate pathways: (i) the reductive branch of 
the TCA cycle; (ii) the oxidative TCA cycle; and (iii) the glyoxylate pathway 
as seen in other succinate producers [47]. 
In S. cerevisiae, the reductive pathway is relatively active under 
anaerobic and microaerobic conditions and provides the highest theoretical 
yield (1.71 mol/mol glucose) when compared to other two pathways [48]. 
The fixation of CO2 is an added advantage of producing succinate via a 
reductive pathway. From the relatively fewer attempts, the highest produc­
tion (8.9 g/L) was achieved using recombinant S. cerevisiae TAM through 
the overexpression of genes pyc2, mdh3r, Ec fum, and frds1 along with the 
deletion of gpd1 [49]. The major drawback of the reductive pathway is the 
lack of NADH supply. 
Though the theoretical maximum yield is comparatively lesser than the 
rTCA cycle, oxidative TCA cycle in S. cerevisiae exhibited characteristics 
of lower by-products and favorable metabolism in terms of thermodynamics 
[48, 50]. By eliminating the activity of SDH, enhanced yield closer to 
stoichiometric maximum (1 mol/mol glucose) [40, 41, 51, 52] and 1.9-fold 
improved productivity were achieved in the presence of glucose [53]. The 
deletion of SDH, SER3/SER33 and overexpression of ICL1 contributed to 20 
folds higher titer in S. cerevisiae [54]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
135 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
The glyoxylate pathway is another prospective pathway which is active 
under aerobic conditions in the presence of acetate as the sole carbon source. 
The provision of extra NADH to the reductive pathway is beneficial for 
the succinate production [55]. As the glyoxylate cycle functions outside 
the mitochondria, the transport of succinate is easier and thereby results 
in higher yield [50, 56]. By implementing the combination of rTCA and 
glyoxylate cycle in dual phase fermentation, Vemuri et al. [57] reported 
99.2 g/L of titer, 110% yield and productivity of 1.3 g L–1 h–1. This is one 
of the most successful attempts of producing succinate using S. cerevisiae. 
The feasibility of conducting fermentation at lower pH is an advantageous 
feature of S. cerevisiae. Conversely, the lower yield and productivity needed 
to be extensively addressed for further progress [58]. 
4.2.3.2 YARROWIA LIPOLYTICA 
Y. lipolytica, an unconventional yeast strain attracts much attention in recent 
years as a host for the production of many values added chemicals. The 
availability of genome sequence, broad substrate assimilation and the ability 
to grow to higher density are the essential features of Y. lipolytica [59]. 
A study in Y. lipolytica reported 64.3 g/L of succinate from by the oxida­
tion of alpha ketoglutaric acid [60]. Though, the inactivation of succinate 
dehydrogenase (SDH2/SDH3) prevents glucose uptake, still it the effective 
glycerol assimilation enhanced the succinate titer [61]. A robust strain (Y. 
lipolytica PGC01003) with inactivated SDH5) generated the highest ever 
reported titer of 160 g/L from crude glycerol [62]. Interestingly, the truncated 
promoter of SDH1 reduced the activity to 77% without affecting the glucose 
uptake ability [63]. The overexpression of genes in the reductive carboxyl­
ation, glyoxylate, and oxidative pathways along with the deletion of ylach 
gene in Y. lipolytica eliminated the acetic acid formation with increased SA 
titer (110 g/L) at low pH [64]. 
Apart from S. cerevisiae and Y. lipolytica, other strains such as P. kudria-
vzevii 13723 (48.2 g/L) [65], I. orientalis SD108 (11.6 g/L) [66], C. catenu-
late VKM Y-5 (5.2 g/L), C. zeylanoides VKM Y-2324 (9.4 g/L), Z. rouxii 
(7.7 g/L) [67], and C. brumptii IFO 0731 (24 g/L) [68] were also employed 
for the succinate production and found to be less productive. Hence yeast is 
considered as a robust producer of SA due to its low pH tolerance. However, 
the cost-effective fermentation media needs to be developed for the commer­
cial succinate production using yeast as a microbial cell factory. 

 
 
 
 
 
136 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
4.3 FUMARIC ACID (FA) 
Fumaric Acid (FA) is a four-carbon dicarboxylic acid composed of a carbon-
carbon double bond and two carboxylic acid groups. It has the capability to 
be esterified and polymerized easily leading to the generation of precursors 
for a wide range of applications in the food, pharmaceutical, and petro­
chemical industries. Thus, it has been recognized as one among the top 10 
platform chemicals by the US DoE. The higher acidity of FA than citric 
acid renders it suitable for food and feed industry as a flavor enhancer, food 
acidulant, antibacterial agent and food sweeteners, etc. Apart from this, it is 
used in the manufacturing of biodegradable polymers, polyester resins and 
drug formulants in the pharmaceutical sector which validates its growing 
demand. Over the past few decades, the demand for FA grew from 4.53 Kt 
in 1959 to 225 Kt in 2012 and has surpassed 300 Kt in 2020. There exist two 
possible methods for FA production, chemical synthesis using petrochemical 
compounds and biological conversion method. Commercially adapted route 
through chemical synthesis includes the conversion of maleic anhydride 
into maleic acid followed by its cis-trans isomerization into FA. However, 
in the present scenario, the non-renewable nature of petrochemical raw 
materials and their associated environmental concerns necessitated the need 
for eco-friendly biological production methods. The capability of fungi to 
produce organic acids attracted researchers in the initial years to implement 
fermentation methods for FA production. The advancement of biotech­
nology, synthetic biology and the combined efforts of metabolic engineering 
led to the production of FA through other microorganisms such as bacteria 
and yeasts using low-cost raw materials with improved and cost-efficient 
downstream processes. 
The natural occurrence of FA became evident by its isolation from the 
plant Fumaria officinalis as it is an intermediate of the TCA cycle. The meta­
bolic pathways for fumarate synthesis are governed via both oxidative and 
reductive route. In the event of microbial fermentation for FA production, the 
reductive pathway has been a prime choice due to its maximum theoretical 
yield of approximately 2 moles of fumaric per mole of glucose. The reductive 
route for fumarate production primarily comprises three different enzymes. 
The first is pyruvate carboxylase (pyc) which catalyzes the formation of 
oxaloacetate from pyruvate, following a reduction by malate dehydrogenase 
(mdh) to form malate, a substrate for FUM leading to its conversion into FA 
(Table 4.3). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
137 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
Apart from utilizing fungal strains, through metabolic engineering 
strategies, several bacteria and yeast [69] were developed as a host for FA 
production (Table 4.3). The common challenges faced during large-scale 
production of FA using fungal strains include fungal morphology, economic 
sustainability, nutrient limitations, reaction conditions, culture rheology, 
dissolved oxygen availability, cost inefficient downstream process and the 
use of neutralizing agents. To overcome the above-mentioned challenges, 
effective strategies developed were discussed in the forthcoming sections. 
4.3.1 FUNGI 
Majority of the FA production studies were carried out in fungi since several 
decades when compared to other microbial hosts. Rhizopus is a highly 
preferred choice since 1911 when Felix Ehrlich first discovered the produc­
tion of FA in Rhizopus nigricans. Later, Foster & Waksman (1938) identified 
Rhizopus, Mucor, Cunninghamella, and Circinella species as FA producers, 
out of which Rhizopus species was found to be one of the best producers. Ever 
since that industrial scale production of FA has started to gradually emerge 
[70, 71]. Commonly utilized Rhizopus species for FA production include 
Rhizhopus arrhizus, Rhizopus oryzae, Rhizopus formosa and Rhizopus nigri-
cans. Numerous research has imparted to improve FA production through 
proper optimization of various parameters such as medium composition, 
inoculum size, strain morphology, culture pH, agitation speed, temperature, 
oxygen supplementation and by-product accumulation. Earlier, Carta et 
al. [72] achieved FA production up to 21.28 g/L using R. formosa from 
cassava baggase hydrolysate as substrate thereby promoting a cost-effective 
alternative for glucose. Recently, a FA production was attempted [73], using 
soybean cake hydrolysate and sugarcane molasses as glucose alternatives in 
R. arrhizus NRRL 2582 resulted in 40 g/L FA with reduced levels of SA and 
ethanol as by-products. Numerous morphological forms have been observed 
for submerged fungal cultures such as clumps, filaments, and pellets, out of 
these the pellet forms have been a preferred choice for organic acid produc­
tion due to its rheological benefits, whereas clump morphology is the most 
avoided due its detrimental effects in oxygen supply to the culture medium 
[74, 75]. The effect of agitation speed and aeration rate on the physical state 
of pellets elucidated the correlation between them to control the culture 
morphology [76]. The influence of pH on the fungal morphology was 
investigated and the highest FA production was evidenced at pH 3 [77]. In 
advancement to this, the use of immobilized fungal biomass had a positive 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Strain Used 
Substrate 
Strategy 
Titer
Yield 
Productivity 
References 
(g/L) 
(g/gsub) (g L–1 h–1) 
Fungi
oryzae
R.
ATCC 
Lignocellulosic syrup 
Optimization of C/N ration 
34.2 
0.43 
0.24 
[180] 
20344
 arrhizus
R.
 NRRL Soybean cake hydrolysate Substrate pre-treatment and fermentation 
40 
0.86 
– 
[73] 
2582 
and sugarcane molasses. 
optimization. 
Formosa  
R.
Cassava bagasse 
Optimization of media components under 
21.28 – 
– 
[72] 
hydrolysate 
submerged fermentation. 
oryzae
R.
 ME-F01 Glucose 
UV coupled mutagenesis with 
52.7 
– 
– 
[77] 
nitrosoguanidine (NTG).
oryzae  
R.
Glucose 
Overexpression of pyc and pepc 
– 
0.78 
– 
[78] 
Bacteria
thermophila  
M.
Glucose 
Multiple gene insertion and deletion by 
17 
0.24 
– 
[79] 
CRISPR-Cas9.
coli  
E.
Glucose 
Balancing metabolic flux by in silico
28.2 
0.389 
0.448 
[80] 
predicted genome-scale metabolic
simulation. 
coli
E.
E2 
Glycerol 
Strain engineering in a succinate evolved 
41.5 
0.44 
0.51 
[81] 
mutant. 
coli JM109
E.
Glucose 
Deletion of fumABC, frdABCD, and iclR. 
1.32 
– 
– 
[82] 
(DE3)
coli  
E.
Glucose 
Overexpression of acs and deletion of mdh 
– 
1.53 
– 
[84] 
Yeast
 cerevisiae  
S.
Glucose 
Deletion of fum1 and overexpression of pyc 
5.64 
– 
– 
[85] 
glabrata  
T.
Glucose 
Overexpression of asl, adsL, and Sp mae1 
5.62 
0.15 
0.12 
[86] 
 cerevisiae  
S.
Glucose 
Overexpression of mdh, fum1 and pyc2 
3.18 
– 
– 
[69] 
138 
TABLE 4.3 Microbes and Strategies for the Production of Fumaric Acid
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
139 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
influence in morphology control that resulted in 83% decreased fermentation 
time in R. arrhizus RH-07-13 compared to its free cell fermentation counter­
part [74]. Strain engineering and genetic tool box development for Rhizopus 
species hasn’t been explored, which halt the possibility to alter metabolic 
pathways for enhanced FA production. Mutation of R. oryzae ME-F01 with 
UV and nitrosoguanidine led to a decrease in ethanol production by 83% 
and increase in FA production by 21% [77]. One of the first attempts on 
strain engineering for FA production using filamentous fungi was achieved 
in R. oryzae by directing the metabolic flux towards fumaric through rTCA 
pathway and powered by the overexpression of pyc and pepc genes [78]. 
The strategic metabolic engineering of multiple genes using CRISPR-Cas9 
system in Myceliophthora thermophila resulted in 17 g/L of FA from glucose 
in a fed-batch fermentation process. The combined metabolic engineering 
strategies of introduction of carboxylic acid transporter, deletion of native 
FUMs and increased availability of malate precursor, along with the over-
expression of efficient FUM has led to a 42% increase in extracellular FA 
production compared to its parental strain [79]. Despite being a preferred 
host, the lack of genetic tools, susceptibility to the morphological changes 
and prolonged fermentation period are the few critical factors to be consid­
ered to overcome the challenges encountered in FA production using fungi 
as whole-cell biocatalyst. 
4.3.2 BACTERIA 
The vast genetic toolbox availability, flexible nutrient requirements and the 
rapid growth rate attracted researchers to utilize E. coli as an efficient host 
for FA production. Coupling of silico flux response simulation and rational 
metabolic engineering strategies, developed an engineered E. coli strain 
capable of producing 28.2 g/L FA [80]. A succinate evolved mutant E. coli 
E2, overexpressed with phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (ppc) produced 
41.5 g/L of FA from glycerol with subsidized levels of acetate [81]. In 
another study, deletion of fumABC, frdABCD, and iclR in E. coli JM109 
(DE3) boosted the titer of FA with declined by-product formation [82]. 
Mienda et al. [83] have reported the increased pyruvate flux towards the 
TCA cycle and decreased by-product formation by deleting lactate dehydro­
genase (LDH) and pyruvate formate-lyase (PFL) genes. The modification 
of glucose uptake route, overexpression of acs gene system and deletion of 
mdh in an E. coli strain resulted in 1.5 times higher FA production than its 
parent strain with low levels of MA accumulation and 51.2% reduction in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
140 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
acetic acid concentration [84]. Though significant efforts have been made 
to produce FA from E. coli, the titer and yield achieved are not satisfactory 
when compared to fungi. Developing effective strategies for the elimination 
of by-product accumulation under aerobic conditions may project E. coli as 
a competitive host for the production of FA. 
4.3.3 YEAST 
Though yeast has been used for the production of various acids and other 
chemicals, least number of studies only has been reported so far for the FA 
synthesis. The oxidative route of FA production was first introduced into S. 
cerevisiae by deletion of FUM1 gene [85] with a production titer of 5.64 g/L. 
Apart from S. cerevisiae, FA production have also been attempted in other 
yeasts such as T. glabrata and Scheffersomyces stipites. The manipulation 
of urea cycle and purine nucleotide cycle in Torulopsis glabrata led to a 
FA production titer of 5.62 g/L, which was further improved to 8.83 g/L 
by overexpression of a C4-dicarboxylic transporter gene – SpMAE1 [86]. 
A novel oleaginous yeast strain, Aureobasidium pullulans var. aubasidani 
was effective in the integrated production of single cell oil and fumarate, 
reaching a titer of 32.3 g/L under optimized reaction conditions in a 5 L 
fermentor [87]. A xylose-utilizing yeast – Scheffersomyces stipitis was 
found to be promising in the fumarate production (4.67 g/L) upon several 
effective modifications in the fumarate metabolic pathway [88]. Recently, 
the improved FA productivity (45.8 g/L) in Candida blankie, obtained by 
valorization of organic fraction of municipal solid waste, along with an elec­
trochemical-based product separation [89], solidifies the potential of yeast 
to be developed as a competitive host for fumarate production through the 
simultaneous reduction in substrate and downstream processing (DSP) costs. 
The foremost drawback in utilizing yeast for FA production is the highly 
efficient catalytic conversion of FA to MA by its cytosolic FUM. Hence, the 
development of effective strain engineering strategies is an essential pre­
requisite for improved FA production using yeasts. 
4.4 MALIC ACID (MA) 
Malic Acid (MA) is a TCA cycle intermediate that can be naturally stored by 
many microbes and plants. MA was declared as one of the 12 most signifi­
cant platform chemicals accessible from biomass by the US DoE in 2004 

 
 
 
141 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
[1]. The food and beverage industry are the primary beneficiaries of MA. It 
is used as an acidulant and flavor enhancer in a variety of items, including 
sweets, soft beverages, baked goods, and jellies. The flavor of MA is said to 
develop more slowly than that of citric acid and last longer, making it ideal 
for masking the aftertaste of artificial sweeteners [90]. MA has many other 
applications like its use as a tool in personal care and cleaning formula­
tions, pharmaceutical sector and semiconductor fabrication [91]. The global 
market for MA is estimated to be between 40,000 and 60,000 metric tons 
per year, with an annual growth rate of 4% [92]. The market is worth $130 
million, according to estimates. 
At present the petrochemical-based production routes are used to 
produce MA. The greatest advantage over chemical synthesis is the possi­
bility to produce enantiopure L-MA by microbial fermentation which is 
also a sustainable way [93, 94]. The MA in microorganisms is produced by 
three intracellular pathways such as oxidative TCA cycle, rTCA cycle and 
glyoxylate pathway as similar as succinate [95, 96]. The different microbial 
sources used for the biosynthesis are discussed in this part of the chapter 
(Table 4.4). 
TABLE 4.4 Microbes and Strategies for the Production for Malic Acid 
Strain 
Substrate Strategy 
Titer 
(g/L) 
References 
Fungi 
P. viticola 152 
Corn 
steep 
liquor 
One step fermentation process, 
calcium malate. 
168 
[109] 
A. niger 
Glycerol 
Kinetic model investigation 
using RSM. 
92.64 [107] 
A. niger 
Glycerol 
Morphological control of A. 
niger. 
83.23 [106] 
A. niger MTCC 281 
Crude 
glycerol 
Transesterification process. 
77.38 [105] 
Process characterization and 
A. oryzae DSM1863 
Glucose 
influence of alternative carbon 
58.2 
[103] 
sources. 
Process characterization and 
A. oryzae DSM1863 
Glycerol 
influence of alternative carbon 
45.4 
[103] 
sources. 
A. niger ATCC 9142 
Glycerol 
Usage of thin stillage 
19 
[104] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
142 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
TABLE 4.4 (Continued) 
Strain 
Substrate Strategy 
Titer 
(g/L) 
References 
A. niger ATCC 10577 
Glycerol 
Usage of thin stillage 
17 
[104] 
Bacteria 
T. fusca muC 
Cellulose 
Metabolic flux balance 
62.76 [101] 
B. subtilis 168 
Glucose 
Expression of pyc and mdh 
2.09 
[181] 
E. coli BA063 
Glucose 
Gene deletion and 
overexpression. 
41.5 
[182] 
Yeast 
S. cerevisiae 
Glucose 
Genetic modifications 
59 
[112] 
Z. rouxii V19 
YPG 
medium 
Addition of TCA precursors in 
YPG medium. 
74.9 
[113] 
4.4.1 BACTERIA 
4.4.1.2 ESCHERICHIA COLI 
The most common gram-negative bacterium E. coli is capable of producing 
significant amount of malate through rational genetic modification, even 
though it is not naturally a high-level producer. With the help of advanced 
genetic engineering tools such as multiplexed CRISPR interference for 
the redirection of the intracellular carbon flux towards malate through 
glyoxylate pathway resulted a final titer of 36 g/L in a recombinant E. coli 
B0013-44. Zhang et al. [97] reported an extensive metabolic engineering 
strategy to enhance the malate production from a E. coli strain (previously 
developed for succinate) and produced 21.8 g/L under anaerobic condition. 
This was further enhanced to 34 g/L with a yield of 1.42 mol/mol glucose 
while employing the same cells in a bi-phasic (aerobic growth and anaerobic 
production) fermentation process. A strain developed with the deletion of 
pta and overexpression of PEPCK (from M. succiniproducens), produced 
9.25 g/L of MA in E. coli [98]. Dong et al. developed a recombinant E. coli 
W3110 expressing mutated A. thaliana, which catalyzes the direct conver­
sion of pyruvate to malate with minimal modifications. However, E. coli 
requires numerous genetic manipulations for the diversion of carbon flux 

 
 
 
 
 
 
143 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
towards malate which makes E. coli a less preferred host for malate synthesis 
[99]. 
Apart from E. coli, B. Subtilis was also used for malate production. The 
overexpression of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase gene and MDH gene 
into mutant B. subtilis which lacks LDH gene was found to produce 15.65 
mM malate, which was still low to be used as a host for commercial produc­
tion [100]. Interestingly, Thermobifida fusca, a moderately thermophilic 
bacteria, was hit upon to be a good choice among bacterial strains for malate 
synthesis. A laboratory adapted mutant strain of T. fusca produced MA from 
cellulose through the phosphoenolpyruvate pathway. The strain was further 
improved by overexpressing pyruvate carboxylase (PCx) gene from Cory-
nebacterium glutamicum to show a higher titer of 62.76 g/L of malate [101]. 
4.4.2 FUNGI 
Some of the filamentous fungi such as Aspergillus sp., Penicillium sp. and 
Ustilago sp. were found to be the natural producers of MA. Aspergillus sp. 
is well known among them, and many studies have been carried out for the 
optimal production of malate. 
4.4.2.1 ASPERGILLUS SPECIES 
Aspergillus flavus was the first strain to be patented for its highest production 
(113 g/L) of MA. In spite of its good yield, A. flavus has not been recom­
mended for commercial production because of the secretion of carcinogenic 
aflatoxins during the fermentation process [102]. A. oryzae DSM 1863 was 
found to be a potential MA producer in variety of carbon sources at 35C. The 
malate production was found to be better with glycerol (45.43 g/L) than its 
counter-part glucose (39.40 g/L) [103]. 
When comparing the MA production ability of Aspergillus niger ATCC 
9142, ATCC 10577 and ATCC 12846 from crude glycerol at 25°C, A. 
niger ATCC 12846 shows the highest MA production of 23 g/L among the 
subjected strains. Other A. niger strains ATCC 9142 and ATCC 10577 were 
also investigated for the production of MA from thin stillage and achieved 
product titer of 17 and 19 g/L, respectively [104]. Iyyappan et al. [105] 
developed a methanol and MA adapted strain of A. niger MTCC281 at 25°C 
which produced 77 g/L in 192 h. By controlling the morphology through 
optimal media composition, 83.2 g/L of MA production was achieved in 

 
 
 
 
144 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
a shake flask study using A. niger PJR1 [106]. In continuation, through 
process optimization and kinetic analysis, 94.6 g/L of MA was obtained 
under optimal conditions with the help of response surface methodology 
(RSM) and artificial neural network [107]. 
4.4.2.2 PENICILLIUM SPECIES 
Among Penicillium species, P. viticola 152 and P. sclerotiorum K302 are 
known for their potential to accumulate malate at high levels. P. sclerotiorum 
K302 was found to be the best producer in the nine strains screened for 
MA. It exhibited high levels of titer (92 g/L), yield (0.88 g/g glucose) and 
productivity (1.23 g L–1 h–1) in 72 h [108]. On the other hand, P. viticola 152 
a marine algae isolate, produced 168 g/L of malate in its calcium salt form 
in the presence of 0.5% corn steep liquor which can be a competent host for 
the malate production [109]. 
4.4.2.3 USTILAGO TRICHOPHORA 
Ustilago trichophora TZ1 effectively produces MA from glycerol through 
adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE) and process optimization with the final 
MA titer of 196 g/L in a fed batch bioreactor. Though Ustilago sp. were 
considered to be one of the best producers it is not preferred for the large 
scale processes due to its potential plant pathogenicity and limited genome 
information [110]. 
4.4.3 YEAST 
4.4.3.1 SACCHAROMYCES CEREVISIAE 
MA was detected as a by-product in the yeast fermentation process since 
1924. Fatichenti et al. [111] conducted experiments to study the MA produc­
tion in S. cerevisiae, which resulted in 1 g/L of MA in 7 days. The wild-type 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains produce only low levels of malate, hence 
exclusive metabolic engineering is required to achieve higher malate produc­
tion. By introducing three genetic modifications in a glucose-tolerant, S. 
cerevisiae strain, 59 g/L of malate was produced in a glucose supplemented 
batch culture [112]. 

 
 
145 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
4.4.3.2 ZYGOSACCHAROMYCES ROUXII 
Zygosaccharomyces rouxii V19, an osmotolerant yeast associated with 
foods of low water activity was grown in YPG medium with the inclusion of 
glutamic, malic, and SA as precursors in the medium resulted an increased 
production of MA to the maximum of 74.9 g/L [113]. 
4.5 ASPARTATE 
L-aspartic acid (AA) is widely used in food, beverages, cosmetic, agricul­
ture, and pharmaceutical industries [114]. It combines with the amino acid 
phenylalanine to form an artificial sweetener called aspartame [1]. It has 
a broad clinical usage due to its ability to aid in the generation of energy, 
synthesis of DNA/RNA, detoxification of liver along with boosting up of 
immune function. It also serves as a precursor in the manufacture of pharma­
ceuticals and the building block of active pharmaceutical ingredients (API). 
The polymeric form of AA is used to produce a fertilizer synergist to improve 
nitrogen absorption and crop productivity in the agriculture industry. The 
extraordinary water holding abilities of poly-aspartic acid helps to produce 
modern day amenities like diapers and tissues. Based on its application and 
L-configuration, it was named as top value-added chemicals by the DoE. 
Due to its demand, the global aspartic acid market is expected to be worth 
$101 million by 2022 with a CAGR of 5.6%. Using whole-cell biocatalyst, 
high yield of L-AA can be produced from FA by overexpressing a single 
gene L-aspartase. Though there were reports on Pseudomonas, Bacillus, and 
Proteus for the production of AA, industries use E. coli and Corynebacte-
rium extensively. 
4.5.1 BACTERIA 
4.5.1.1 ESCHERICHIA COLI 
In the presence of high concentrations of ammonium, E. coli is capable of 
reversely converting FA into L-AA through the action of aspartase [115]. 
This study led to the use of aspartase as a prime target for the enhanced 
L-AA production in E. coli. Using a column packed with immobilized E. 
coli cells entrapped in a polyacrylamide gel lattice, continuous production of 
l-aspartic acid was obtained with good yield [116]. Following mutagenesis 

 
 
 
 
 
 
146 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
and selection, the mutant E. coli B-715 strain was identified, which was 
four times more active in L-aspartic acid production than the parental K-12 
strain. When the strain was grown in ammonium fumarate medium, the 
best production rate was achieved [117]. Immobilization of E. coli mutant 
B-715 in chitosan gel lowered the initial activity of the intact cells with long-
term stability. Upon on the influence of temperature, ammonium fumarate 
is converted in to L-AA with highest conversion rate of 99.8%, and the 
productivity of 6 g L–1 h–1 [118]. The metabolically modified E. coli enables 
the cost-effective fermentation of L-aspartic acid from biomass and gave 
a final titer of 33.1 g/l by overexpressing the L-asparate aminotransferase 
(AspC) and co expression of L-aspartate decarboxylase (PanD). In another 
study, free, and immobilized thermostable aspartase of Bacillus sp. YM55-1 
expressed in E. coli could yield over 57.2 g/L (430 mM) aspartic acid in a 
24-h fermentation [119]. 
4.5.1.2 CORYNEBACTERIUM GLUTAMICUM 
The usage of immobilized bacterial catalysis for the AA experiences low 
mass transfer rate and low volumetric productivity due to the increased 
volume catalysis in the reactor. Developing a membrane reactor system using 
resting cells enabled the simplified continuous operation with improved 
productivity [120]. By using malate as an alternative inexpensive substrate, 
the overexpression of malate isomerase and aspartase converted malate into 
AA in two step reaction with less production cost [121]. Yamagata et al. 
[120], upon combining the process of resting cell membrane reactor and 
malate as substrate enhanced the synthesis of AA. 
4.5.1.3 OTHER ORGANISMS 
Psychrophile-based simple bioCatalyst (PSCat) expressing E. coli aspartase 
in Shewanella livingstonensis Ac10 and exhibited the production of aspartic 
acid as well as the formation of malate as by-product. Heat treatment condi­
tions were optimized to inactivate native bacterial FUM and prevent malate 
synthesis from FA. For sustainable use of the catalyst, PSCat was immobi­
lized on alginate which produces high yields of aspartic acid and could be 
re-used nine times [122]. In addition to all these, merging the fungal-based 
production of FA is expected to ease the possibilities of producing AA 
through different microbial platforms. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
147 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
4.6 GLUTAMIC ACID 
L-Glutamic Acid (GA) (or 2-aminopentanedioic acid) was the first amino 
acid to be commercially produced. This non-essential amino acid acts as a 
neurotransmitter and also as precursor for several important biomolecules 
like proline, arginine, glutathione, and γ-amino butyric acid (GABA). L-GA 
has profound applications in numerous industries such as food, biochemical, 
pharmaceutical, and cosmetic industries. Due to such a range of applica­
bility, the demand for GA has exceeded 2 million tons/year. The chemical 
synthesis of GA was not preferred commercially due to the formation of 
both L and D-isomers, since L-GA alone is metabolically active. However, 
microbial fermentation leads to the formation of L-GA and several groups 
of microorganisms such as Corynebacterium sp., Brevibacterium sp. and 
Microbacterium sp. have been identified as L-GA producing strains. The 
metabolic pathway simply involves the conversion of α-ketoglutarate into 
glutamate by the action of glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH). So far numerous 
research have only focused on bacteria as a potent host for glutamate produc­
tion due to its simpler metabolic pathway over a wide range of species. In 
view of this, GA production potential by various bacterial species, the effect 
of various carbon sources and optimization of reaction parameters towards 
improving the yield of GA were discussed in subsections. 
4.6.1 BACTERIA 
The production of glutamate by bacteria differs from each species due to the 
variation in stress conditions and also influenced by the media components. 
C. glutamicum – a gram positive, aerobic bacteria was initially tested for its 
GA production capability in 1985 [123]. Later on, this particular strain was 
also utilized for the production of various amino acids. Out of various bacte­
rial isolates from tropical soil and water samples of Nigeria, Paenibacillus 
alvei and Corynebacterium glucuronolyticum – seminale were screened 
as best glutamate producers with a yield higher than 0.7 g/L [124]. Under 
RSM-based optimized fermentation conditions a GA production titer of 
16.36 g/L was resulted by C. glutamicum using glucose and urea as carbon 
and nitrogen sources, respectively [125]. The potential of C. glutamicum 
CECT690 to utilize palm date waste juice was evaluated by RSM-based 
optimization [126] and resulted in 17-fold increase in glutamate production 
than the earlier reports on this class of microorganism C. glutamicum has 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
148 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
strong resistance to lysosymal activity. As a means to study the influence of 
this property towards glutamate production, the ltsA mutant of C. glutamicum 
affected its sensitivity towards lysosymal activity and overproduction of 
glutamate was reported [127]. In the context of glutamate production using 
immobilized cells, sodium alginate concentration is one of the key contribu­
tors for yield enhancement. Along with an optimum alginate concentration 
the synergistic effect of immobilized mixed cultures of C. glutamicum and 
Pseudomonas reptilivora displayed an improved glutamate production (16 
g/L) than the immobilized C. glutamicum alone (13.02 g/L) [128]. Substrate 
inhibition is one of the least explored factors studied in view of increased 
glutamate production, yet it has a limiting effect on the specific growth rate 
of microorganisms, as reported by the cessation of glutamate formation in 
C. glutamicum MTCC 2745 [129] at a glucose concentration of 300 Kgm–3. 
The macromolecular proteins of corn syrup and soybean meal hydroly­
sate affects the fermentation process by foam formation and increases the 
viscosity of the medium, especially in the submerged culture fermentation 
of Brevibacterium sp. Therefore, the addition of trypsin during the fermenta­
tion of Brevibacterium flavum GDK-168, hydrolyzed those macromolecular 
proteins into simpler peptides and amino acids as well as improved GA 
production up to 177 g/L due to decline in viscosity as well as increase in 
mass and oxygen transfer [130]. GA production by a lactobacillus species 
was first reported by Zareian et al. [131] through screening a potent gluta­
mate producer (1.082 mmol/L) isolated from various fermented foods. 
A dual biosynthetic approach for production of GA and GABA was first 
reported by Zareian et al. [132] in Lactobacillus plantarum MNZ. A 3-fold 
increase in GA as well as a 10-fold increase in GABA opens the possibility 
of lactic acid (LA) bacteria to be developed as probiotic by food industries. 
The preferred type of substrate varies from strain to strain. In this sight, 
dextrin, and ammonium sulfate were found to be the most influential carbon 
and nitrogen sources for Brevibacterium strain NIAB SS-67 due to improved 
GA production (60.8 g/L) with a 0.61 g/g yield and 2.1 g L–1 h–1 produc­
tivity [133]. Glucose and ammonium nitrate were the preferred carbon and 
nitrogen sources for Arthrobacter globiformis during glutamate production 
(16.1 g/L), with enhanced excretion of glutamate out of the cell due to the 
action of vitamin (Biotin) and antibiotic (bacitracin) [134]. 
Though E. coli has been a preferred host to implement strain engineering 
approaches for increasing the production of a wide range of organic acids, 
very few researchers have reported the use of E. coli for GA production. In 
E. coli overproduction of amino acids (Glutamate and Lysine) was achieved 
by elevation in the intracellular guanosine-3′,5′-tetraphosphate (ppGpp) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
149 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
levels. Thus, resulting in a GA titer of 19.23 g/L [135]. A dynamic meta­
bolic simulation model-based approach increased the production titer (22.1 
g/L) of GA in E. coli MG1655 [136]. Since bacteria has been restricted as 
a suitable production host for glutamate production in the present scenario, 
aspects such as elimination of by-product formation and adaptability to 
various inexpensive substrates by strain engineering could further improve 
the production titer of GA. 
4.7 ITACONIC ACID (IA) 
Itaconic acid (IA), a white crystalline, unsaturated dicarbonic acid is one 
of the top 12 platform chemicals recommended by the US, DoE which 
can be obtained from TCA cycle. The chemical structure of IA consists 
of two carboxyl groups, with the conjugation of a methyl group with one 
carboxyl group, owing to its ability to either self-polymerize or act as a 
co-monomer to form heteropolymers leading to the manufacture of diverse 
of organic compounds. The co-polymers of IA find various applications 
such as synthesis of plastics, resins, adhesives, emulsions, and coatings. 
Its use for the making of synthetic glass and artificial gems has remark­
ably boosted the demand. In the biomedical field, substitutes of IA or its 
polymers have been reported to possess analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and 
anti-tumor activity [137]. Also, monoesters of IA have been employed for 
dental fillers. 
Biosynthesis of IA was first reported by Kinoshita [185] using a fungal 
strain Aspergillus itaconicus. Fungi has been a preferred host for industrial 
scale IA production due to the innate availability of the pathway for the 
acid formation and its flexible overexpression under phosphate-limited 
growth conditions. A brief description on the occurrence of various natural 
producers, common bottlenecks and remedies to improve IA titer in natural 
producers and the feasibility to prefer non-natural producers have been 
discussed in the underlying sections (Table 4.6). Table 4.5 highlights the key 
studies conducted by various microorganisms for glutamic and aspartic acid 
production. 
According to Kinoshita [185], the metabolic pathway for IA production 
in A. terreus is mediated through cis-aconitate, an intermediate in TCA 
cycle. In fungi, the transport of cis-aconitate into the cytosol is favored by 
mitochondrial tricarboxylic transporter (MTT), since the key enzyme for 
itaconate formation is located in cytosol. Cis-aconitate is de-carboxylated 

 
 
 
 
 
Strain Used 
Product 
Substrate 
Strategy 
Titer
Yield (g/
Productivity (g References 
(g/L) 
gsub) 
L–1 h–1) 
Bacteria
glutamicum 
C.
Glutamate 
Glucose  
Fermentation optimization 
16.36 
– 
– 
[125] 
glutamicum
C.
Glutamate 
Palm date 
RSM-based optimization 
0.142 
– 
– 
[126] 
CECT690 
waste 
glutamicum
C.
and P. 
Glutamate 
Glucose 
Optimization of sodium 
16 
– 
– 
[128] 
reptilivora 
alginate concentration.
flavum
B.
 GDK-168 
Glutamate 
Soybean meal  Macromolecular proteins 
177 
– 
– 
[130] 
hydrolysate 
hydrolysis 
Brevibacterium sp., 
Glutamate 
Dextrin 
Optimization of carbon and 
60.8 
0.61 
2.1 
[133] 
NIAB SS-67 
nitrogen sources.
globiformis  
A.
Glutamate 
Glucose 
Addition of vitamins and 
16.1 
– 
– 
[134] 
antibiotics 
coli  
E.
Glutamate 
Glucose 
Elevation of intracellular 
19.23 
– 
– 
[135] 
ppGpp levels 
coli
E.
 MG1655 
Glutamate 
Glucose  
Model-based simulation 
22.1 
– 
– 
[136] 
coli B715  
E.
Aspartate 
Fumarate 
Cultivation in ammonium 
0.35 
– 
– 
[183] 
fumarate medium.
coli mutant B-715 
E.
Aspartate 
Glycerol  
Immobilization 
– 
– 
6 
[118] 
coli  
E.
Aspartate 
Glucose 
Overexpression of L-aspartate 33.1 
– 
– 
[119] 
aminotransferase. 
150 
TABLE 4.5 Microbes and Strategies for the Production of Glutamic Acid and Aspartic Acid
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 

 
 
 
 
 
Strain Used 
Substrate 
Strategy 
Titer
Yield (g/
Productivity 
References 
(g/L) 
gsub) 
(g L–1 h–1) 
Fungi
 terreus 
A.
Glucose  
Overexpression of cadA and mfsA 
78.5 
– 
– 
[139] 
 terreus 
A.
AN37 
Glucose  
Overexpression of cadA and mfsA 
75
– 
– 
[140] 
 terreus  
A.
Glucose 
Deregulation of glycolytic flux by 
45 
0.06 
0.48 
[141] 
modification of pfkA 
 terreus 
A.
Glucose  
Process development for scale up 
86.2 
0.62 
1.2 
[184] 
 terreus  
A.
Sago starch 
Substrate pre-treatment and 
48.2 
0.34 
– 
[143] 
fermentation optimization.
 terreus  
A.
Jatropha curcas
Submerged fermentation process. 
48.7 
– 
– 
[144] 
seed cake 
niveus MG183809 
A.
Corn starch  
Fermentation optimization 
15.6 
– 
– 
[146] 
niveus MG183809  
A.
Algal biomass and 
Substrate pre-treatment and 
31.5 
– 
– 
[147] 
glycerol 
fermentation optimization.
niger  
A.
Glucose 
Overexpression of cadA, mttA, and
7.1 
– 
– 
[145] 
mfsA 4 
maydis 
U.
Glucose  
Optimization of reaction parameters 
29 
– 
– 
[149] 
vetiveriae 
U.
Glycerol  
ALE and by-product elimination 
34.7 
– 
0.09 
[152] 
rabenhorstiana 
U.
Glucose  
Optimization of reaction conditions. 
63.2 
0.48 
– 
[153] 
maydis  
U.
Glucose 
CRISPR-Cas9 and FLP/FRT-based 
220 
0.39 
0.32 
[154] 
strain modification.
maydis
U.
 (K14) 
Glucose 
Consolidation of various strain 
75.7 
0.66 
– 
[157] 
improvement strategies. 
151 
TABLE 4.6 Microbes and Strategies for the Production of Itaconic Acid
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 

 
Strain Used 
Substrate 
Strategy 
 
Titer
Yield (g/
Productivity 
References 
(g/L) 
gsub) 
(g L–1 h–1) 
T. reesei, and U. maydis Cellulose 
Co-culture with a cellulase producer. 
10.5 
0.134 
– 
[158] 
Yeast
P. antartica
 
NRRL 
Glucose 
Optimization of C/N ratio 
30 
– 
0.248 
[160] 
Y-7808 
C. lignohabitan  
Lignocellulosic 
Overexpression of cadA 
2.5 
– 
– 
[161] 
biomass 
P. stipites  
Xylose 
Overexpression of aconitase and 
1.52 
– 
– 
[162] 
fermentation optimization.
S. cerevisiae  
Glucose 
Deletion of non-rational gene targets. 
0.16 
– 
– 
[163] 
P. kudriavzevii  
Glucose 
CRISPR-Cas (mediated deletion of 
1.23 
0.03 
– 
[164] 
icd) 
Y. lipolytica Po1f 
Glucose 
 
Overexpression A. terreus cad and 
22.03 
0.056 
0.111 
[165] 
mttA 
Bacteria
C. glutamicum  
Glucose 
Overexpression cad fusion 
7.8 
0.29 
0.27 
[166] 
M. extorquens  
Methanol 
Overexpression of cad 
0.0054 
– 
– 
[167] 
E. coli  
Glucose 
icd inactivation and aconitase 
4.3 
– 
– 
[168] 
overexpression 
E. coli  
Glucose 
Model-driven iterative genome 
32 
– 
– 
[170] 
engineering. 
 
 
152 
TABLE 4.6 (Continued) 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
153 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
into IA by the action of cis-aconitase decarboxylase (CAD). Among the 
fungal strains studied for IA production, the abundant prevalence of A. 
terreus is due to its strong CAD activity. There hasn’t been much insight 
into the biosynthetic pathway for IA until [138] defined the gene cluster for 
IA production comprised of four genes: (i) reg (regulator) encoding for a 
putative regulator protein containing a zinc finger motif; (ii) MTT (mito­
chondrial transporter) encodes for a transporter functioning in the transport 
of TCA cycle metabolic intermediates in and out of mitochondria; (iii) CAD 
(cis-aconitate decarboxylase) for conversion of cis-aconitate into itaconate; 
and (iv) mfsA (Major facilitator superfamily) essential for export of IA out 
of the cell. 
4.7.1 FUNGI 
4.7.1.1 ASPERGILLUS TERREUS 
Conventionally, A. terreus has been a common host for IA, due to its pref­
erential overexpression of genes of itaconate gene cluster. Enhanced IA 
production level in an industrial A. terreus strain was attained by overex­
pression of two genes cadA (cis-aconitate decarboxylase) and mfsA (Major 
Facilitator Superfamily Transporter) out of various genes related to IA [139]. 
In addition to this, metabolic engineering approaches were imparted to a 
high IA yielding mutant strain (A. terreus AN37) since the traditional muta­
tion strategies to further improve the yield got saturated [140]. Also in their 
study, out of 4 genes in the IA gene cluster overexpression of only cadA 
and mfsA had a positive influence in improving the production yield up to 
to 5% and 18.3% respectively than the control stain. The significance of 
anaplerotic reactions playing a part in replenishing TCA cycle intermediates 
was indicated an increased IA production in A. terreus transformed with a 
modified pfkA gene of A. niger than its wild type counterpart [141]. The two 
particular modifications in the pfkA resulted in an enhanced metabolic flux 
towards anaplerotic reaction. The filamentous nature of A. terreus increases 
the viscosity of the reaction medium leading to detoreating effects in oxygen 
and mass transfer rate. When the volume of fermentation is scaled up from 
1.5 L to 15 L, a difference in morphology in fungal mycelia was observed 
and a maximum productivity (1.2 g L–1 h–1) was attained. Pertaining to this, 
the productivity was doubled (0.66 g L–1 h–1) in A. terreus IFO-6365 by the 
switch over from stirred tank reactor (STR) to air-lift reactor (ALR) which 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
154 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
was solely due to the change in morphology of the fungal strain from fila­
mentous form to pellet form [142]. 
Apart from glucose as carbon substrate, other cost-effective alternatives 
such as corn starch, sago starch, jatropha seed cake were also found to be 
effective for IA production in A. terreus with varied titer of 48.2 g/L from 
sago starch [143] and 48.70 g/L from jatropha seed cake [144]. However, 
the use of cost-effective alternatives arrives with an added difficulty of the 
requirement of a pre-treatment step either to cope with the strain used or for 
the suitability in fermentation conditions. 
4.7.1.2 OTHER ASPERGILLUS SP. 
A. niger lacks the capability to naturally produce IA due to the absence of 
an essential enzyme CAD. Initial attempts on expression of cadA gene in A. 
niger resulted only in very low amounts of IA production, which postulated 
the need to consider co-expression of other genes related to the IA gene 
cluster to improve the production yield. A 20-fold increase in IA production 
was observed in A. niger by simultaneous expression of 2 genes belonging 
to IA gene cluster (cadA and MTT) than the one expressing only cadA gene 
[145]. A. niveus MG183809 strain isolated from soil was evaluated for IA 
production from inexpensive carbon sources such as corn starch, sweet 
potato and wheat flour [146]. In their extended study, the same A. niveus was 
able to produce 31.5 g/L of IA from ultrasonicated algal (Gracilaria edulis) 
biomass and glycerol (Biodiesel by-product) [147]. 
4.7.1.3 USTILLAGO SPECIES 
Ustillago maydis is a competitive alternate for A. terreus due to its 
natural ability to combine the advantages of filamentous fungi (i.e., 
preferential expression of cadA gene) and yeast (i.e., less morphological 
complexity). The production of IA by Ustillago sp. was first confirmed by 
Haskins et al. [148] upon screening a Ustilago zeae strain for high yield 
of ustilagic acid. A maximum titer (29 g/L) was attained by submerged 
fermentation of U. maydis for 5 days through proper optimization of 
reaction parameters such as pH, temperature, agitation speed, inoculum 
size and medium composition [149]. IA production was improved up 
to 44.5 g/L in U. maydis under pH-controlled stirred batch fermenta­
tion [150]. Upon screening of 68 Ustilago strains, Ustilago cynodontis, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
Ustilago maydis and Ustilago avenae were identified as potent producers 
of various organic compounds from glucose such as itaconate, malate, 
succinate, and erythritol [151]. In another screening study, out of 126 
Ustilaginaceae screened using glycerol as substrate, Ustilago vetiveriae 
was prioritized for further strain improvement strategies due to high IA 
titer and glycerol-uptake rate. This strain designated as U. vetiveriae 
TZ1 attained a titer of 37 g/L after a series of optimization and ALE 
experiments. However, as a means to control the formation of malate as 
by-product in the evolved U. vetiveriae TZ1 strain, overexpression of 
ria1 (encoding for transcriptional regulator) decreased malate levels to 
75% with a 2-fold increase in itaconate production whereas, overexpres­
sion of MTT (encoding for mitochondrial transporter) resulted in 41% 
decrease in malate with 1.5-fold improved itaconate [152]. A potent 
alternative natural producer U. rabenhorstiana reached a maximum titer 
of 33.3 g/L IA from glucose, which was further improved to 50.3 g/L 
through optimized reaction parameters under fed-batch mode [153]. 
CRISPR/Cas9 
and 
FLP/FRT (Flippase-mediated 
recombination) 
mediated deletion of cyp3 gene (responsible for oxidation of IA into 
S-2-hydroxyparaconate) and fuz7 gene (involved in the regulatory cascade 
balancing fungal morphology) reported a highest ever IA titer of 220 g//L in 
U. maydis, overexpressing native ria1 and A. terreus MttA [154]. However, 
the overall yield (0.39 g/g) and productivity (0.32 g L–1 h–1) are still lower 
than the earlier reports in A. terreus [155] was attributed due to formation 
of malate as a by-product. Various metabolic engineering strategies for 
improved IA production in U. maydis such as deletion of fuz7 for stable 
unicellular morphology [154], deletion of cyp3 and genes responsible for 
glycolipid formation (MEL, UA, dgat) with a parallel overexpression of ria1 
and Mtt from A. terrus [156] were consolidated into one single strain of 
U. maydis designated as K14 [157]. The strain K14 reached a maximum 
titer and yield of 75.7 ± 1.3 g/L and 0.66 g/g, respectively under fed-batch 
fermentation with glucose feeding, as well as the by-product levels were 
greatly lowered. Since there exists a slight variation in the pathway for IA 
production between A. terreus and U. maydis, the effect of overexpression of 
the mttA transporter of A. terreus in U. maydis resulted in a 2.3-fold increase 
in IA production than its wild type strain, indicating its high metabolic flux 
for IA precursors [154]. For conversion of recalcitrant cellulose into IA, the 
need for separate cellulose hydrolysis was averted by a fully consolidated 
bioprocess using a consortium of cellulase producer T. reesei and engineered 
U. maydis strain reaching an IA titer and yield of 10.5 g/L and 0.134 g/g, 
respectively [158]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
156 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
4.7.2 YEAST 
Morphological complexity and sensitivity of filamentous fungi to metal 
ions and substrate impurities has opened up the need to utilize yeasts for IA 
production. Tabuchi et al. [159] isolated a Candida sp. from natural sources 
with IA producing capability. One particular strain, Pseudozyma antartica 
NRRL Y-7808 capable of producing IA from glucose under nitrogen-limited 
growth conditions out of 8 Pseudozyma sp. screened, indicates the IA 
producing capability is not a common trait of this genus [160]. Overexpres­
sion of CADA gene in an engineered Candida lignohabitans produced up 
to 2.5 g/L IA from lignocellulosic biomass [161]. A promising platform 
for utilization of xylose for IA production was evaluated by Pichia stipitis 
[162]. The overexpression of mitochondrial and cytoplasmic aconitase in 
P. stipitis reached a production titer of 1.52 g/L, thus justifying its possi­
bility to utilize lignocellulosic biomass for IA production. Metabolic flux 
towards IA production was controlled in S. cerevisiae by the deletion of ade3 
(C-1-tetrahydrofolate synthase), bna2 (Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase), and 
tes1 (Peroxisomal acyl-coenzyme A thioester hydrolase 1) which are identi­
fied as non-rational targets functioning outside the IA pathway [163]. The 
engineered strain overexpressing CAD1 gene produced seven-fold higher 
IA (titer – 160 mg/L) than its native strain due to reduced metabolic flux 
towards amino acid biosynthesis. A CRISPR/Cas9 mediated gene deletion 
(isocitrate dehydrogenase) implemented in an acid tolerant Pichia kudria-
vzevii attained an IA production titer and yield of 1.23 g/L and 0.03 g/L, 
respectively without pH control [164]. An acid tolerant Y. lipolytica could 
also be beneficial towards IA production by specific genetic manipulations. 
In support to this, overexpression of A. terrus CAD and MttA in Y. lipo-
lytica Po1f strain resulted in a IA titer, yield, and productivity of 22.03 g/L, 
0.056 g/g glucose and 0.111 g L–1 h–1, respectively, which is the highest ever 
reported for yeast at low pH [165]. 
4.7.3 BACTERIA 
Overexpression of the genes of IA cluster is the key to achieve IA production 
in non-native producers like bacteria. Overexpression of CAD from A. terrus 
fused with E. coli maltose binding protein in a C. glutamicum mutant with 
reduced iso-citrate dehydrogenase activity introduced the capability of this 
strain to produce IA with a titer, yield, and productivity of 7.8 g/L, 0.29 g/g 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
157 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
and 0.27 g L–1 h–1, respectively [166]. Methylorubrum extorquens – a methy­
lotrophic bacterium, capable of utilizing succinate, acetate, and methanol 
as carbon source was employed for IA production by the overexpression 
of CAD [167]. During fed-batch fermentation using methanol as an inex­
pensive carbon source, IA titer of 5.4 mg/L and productivity of 0.056 mg/L 
was achieved. E. coli – a strain with abundant flexibility towards genome 
engineering was explored for its IA production capability. An IA titer of 4.3 
g/L was achieved with an E. coli mutant by inactivating icd along with the 
overexpression of cad and acnB (aconitase B) [168]. To avoid the forma­
tion of insoluble aggregates of cadA, a codon optimized E. coli variant was 
developed for improved IA production of 7.2 g/L in 2-L fed-batch bioreactor 
[169]. A highest ever IA production (32 g/L) in a non-native producer (E. 
coli) was reported by Harder et al. [170] by a model-driven iterative genome 
engineering approach. 
4.8 FUTURE PERSPECTIVES 
The increased demand of platform chemicals in food, pharmaceutical, 
and agro-industries enforced the biobased production. Employing various 
microorganisms as the whole-cell biocatalyst shed light into the field of 
commercial production of industrial chemicals. However, the limitations 
associated with the best producers reported so far needed to be addressed in 
an efficient manner. Tremendous progress in the field of genome sequencing 
has provided an opportunity to understand the unconventional organisms 
better and gives the freedom to utilize them for improved titer, yield, and 
productivity. Despite the remarkable growth in the fields of metabolic engi­
neering, synthetic biology and systems biology, the complex physiological 
and genetic characteristics obstruct the process of developing genetic tools 
for the unexplored organisms. Channelizing more efforts towards developing 
robust genetic tools for flexible genome engineering in a wide class of micro­
organisms would create new hope towards commercial viability of platform 
chemicals. The further enhancements to be considered in the biorefinery 
aspects include, exploration of numerous cheap raw materials, effective pre­
treatment strategies, precise optimization methods and simpler DSP. On the 
other hand, the over-dependency of platform chemical synthesis on TCA 
cycle would impose a severe burden on the replenishment of cofactors and 
energy requirements. Hence, the advancements in metabolic rewiring are 
prerequisite for stable cell growth as well as improved product formation. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
158 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
4.9 CONCLUSION 
Concomitantly, this chapter has stood in its ultimate theme on elucidating 
the key considerations for employing microbes as whole-cell biocatalyst. 
The pros and cons of using various microbial factories for the production 
of TCA cycle-based platform chemicals were addressed critically. We have 
also discussed various metabolic engineering and process development 
strategies used for the enhanced synthesis of SA, FA, MA, AA, GA, and IA. 
A brief understanding on the principal factors along with critical assessment 
of the existing bottlenecks and their remedies were briefly discussed for the 
enhanced production of above-mentioned chemicals through microbes as 
whole-cell biocatalysts. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank the Vice chancellor, Dean R&D, Head of 
the Department and the Management of Vel Tech Rangarajan Dr. Sagunthala 
R&D Institute of Science and Technology for their continuous support and 
encouragement. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
fermentation process 
• 
platform chemicals 
• 
strain engineering 
• 
tricarboxylic cycle 
• 
whole-cell biocatalyst 
REFERENCES 
1. Werpy, T., & Petersen, G., (2004). Top Value Added Chemicals from Biomass: Results 
of Screening for Potential Candidates from Sugars and Synthesis Gas (Vol. I). p DOE/ 
GO-102004-1992, 15008859. https://doi.org/10.2172/15008859. 
2. Jose-Victor, B., Flavia, C. A., & Fabilo de, A. O., (2017). Developing new platform 
chemicals: What is required for a new bio-based molecule to become a platform chemical 
in the bioeconomy? Faraday Discuss., 202. https://doi.org/10.1039/c7fd00052a. 

 
159 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
3. Gérardy, R., Debecker, D. P., Estager, J., Luis, P., & Monbaliu, J. C. M., (2020). Continuous 
flow upgrading of selected C2 –C6 platform chemicals derived from biomass. Chem. 
Rev., 120(15), 7219–7347. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.9b00846. 
4. Pachapur, V. L., Sarma, S. J., Brar, S. K., & Chaabouni, E., (2016). Platform chemicals. 
In: Platform Chemical Biorefinery (pp. 1–20). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
B978-0-12-802980-0.00001-8. 
5. Li, J., Rong, L., Zhao, Y., Li, S., Zhang, C., Xiao, D., Foo, J. L., & Yu, A., (2020). 
Next-generation metabolic engineering of non-conventional microbial cell factories 
for carboxylic acid platform chemicals. Biotechnol. Adv., 43, 107605. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107605. 
6. Jang, Y. S., Kim, B., Shin, J. H., Choi, Y. J., Choi, S., Song, C. W., Lee, J., et al., (2012). 
Bio-based production of C2-C6 platform chemicals. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 109(10), 
2437–2459. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.24599. 
7. Fernando, S., Adhikari, S., Chandrapal, C., & Murali, N., (2006). Biorefineries: Current 
status, challenges, and future direction. Energy Fuels, 20(4), 1727–1737. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/ef060097w. 
8. Takkellapati, S., Li, T., & Gonzalez, M. A., (2018). An overview of biorefinery-derived 
platform chemicals from a cellulose and hemicellulose biorefinery. Clean Technol. 
Environ. Policy, 20(7), 1615–1630. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10098-018-1568-5. 
9. Octave, S., & Thomas, D., (2009). Biorefinery: Toward an industrial metabolism. 
Biochimie, 91(6), 659–664. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biochi.2009.03.015. 
10. Lee, J. W., Kim, H. U., Choi, S., Yi, J., & Lee, S. Y., (2011). Microbial production 
of building block chemicals and polymers. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 22(6), 758–767. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2011.02.011. 
11. Chubukov, V., Mukhopadhyay, A., Petzold, C. J., Keasling, J. D., & Martín, H. G., (2016). 
Synthetic and systems biology for microbial production of commodity chemicals. NPJ 
Syst. Biol. Appl., 2(1), 16009. https://doi.org/10.1038/npjsba.2016.9. 
12. Sankaranarayanan, M., Somasundar, A., Seol, E., Chauhan, A. S., Kwon, S., Jung, G. 
Y., & Park, S., (2017). Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid by balancing the pathway 
enzymes using synthetic cassette architecture. J. Biotechnol., 259, 140–147. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2017.07.027. 
13. Chen, X., Zhou, L., Tian, K., Kumar, A., Singh, S., Prior, B. A., & Wang, Z., (2013). 
Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli: A sustainable industrial platform for 
bio-based chemical production. Biotechnol. Adv., 31(8), 1200–1223. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2013.02.009. 
14. Becker, J., Lange, A., Fabarius, J., & Wittmann, C., (2015). Top value platform 
chemicals: Bio-based production of organic acids. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 36, 168–175. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2015.08.022. 
15.  Vuoristo, K. S., Mars, A. E., Sanders, J. P. M., Eggink, G., & Weusthuis, R. A., (2016). 
Metabolic engineering of TCA cycle for production of chemicals. Trends Biotechnol., 
34(3), 191–197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2015.11.002. 
16. Guettler, M. V., Rumler, D., & Jain, M. K., (1999). Actinobacillus Succinogenes Sp. 
Nov., a novel succinic-acid-producing strain from the bovine rumen. Int. J. Syst. 
Bacteriol., 10. 
17. Der Werf, M. J. V., Guettler, M. V., Jain, M. K., & Zeikus, J. G., (1997). Environmental 
and physiological factors affecting the succinate product ratio during carbohydrate 

 
160 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
fermentation by Actinobacillus Sp. 130Z. Arch. Microbiol., 167(6), 332–342. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s002030050452. 
18. Kim, P., Laivenieks, M., Vieille, C., & Zeikus, J. G., (2004). Effect of overexpression 
of Actinobacillus succinogenes phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase on succinate 
production in Escherichia coli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 70(2), 1238–1241. https:// 
doi.org/10.1128/AEM.70.2.1238-1241.2004. 
19. Du, C., Lin, S. K. C., Koutinas, A., Wang, R., Dorado, P., & Webb, C., (2008). A wheat 
biorefining strategy based on solid-state fermentation for fermentative production 
of succinic acid. Bioresour. Technol., 99(17), 8310–8315. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2008.03.019. 
20. Liu, Y. P., Zheng, P., Sun, Z. H., Ni, Y., Dong, J. J., & Zhu, L. L., (2008). Economical 
succinic acid production from cane molasses by Actinobacillus succinogenes. Bioresour. 
Technol., 99(6), 1736–1742. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2007.03.044. 
21. Wan, C., Shahbazi, Y. L. A., & Xiu, S., (2008). Succinic acid production from cheese 
whey using Actinobacillus succinogenes 130 Z 2. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol.  Mar., 
145(1–3), 111–119. 
22. McKinlay, J. B., Shachar-Hill, Y., Zeikus, J. G., & Vieille, C., (2007). Determining 
Actinobacillus succinogenes metabolic pathways and fluxes by NMR and GC-MS 
analyses of 13C-labeled metabolic product isotopomers. Metab. Eng., 9(2), 177–192. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2006.10.006. 
23. Tee, W., Korman, T. M., Waters, M. J., Macphee, A., Jenney, A., Joyce, L., & Dyall-
Smith, M. L., (1998). Three cases of Anaerobiospirillum succiniciproducens bacteremia 
confirmed by 16S RRNA gene sequencing. J. Clin. Microbiol. https://doi.org/10.1128/ 
JCM.36.5.1209-1213.1998. 
24. Rifkin, G. D., & Opdyke, J. E., (1981).Anaerobiospirillum succiniciproducenssepticemia. 
J. Clin. Microbiol., 13(5), 811–813. https://doi.org/10.1128/jcm.13.5.811–813.1981. 
25. Lee, P. C., Lee, W. G., Lee, S. Y., & Chang, H. N., (1999). Effects of medium components 
on the growth of Anaerobiospirillum succiniciproducens and succinic acid production. 
Process Biochem., 35(1), 49–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0032-9592(99)00031-X. 
26. Laivenieks, M., Vieille, C., & Zeikus, J. G., (1997). Cloning, sequencing, and 
overexpression of the Anaerobiospirillum succiniciproducens phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxykinase (PckA) gene. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 63(6), 2273–2280. https://doi. 
org/10.1128/aem.63.6.2273-2280.1997. 
27. Samuelov, N. S., Lamed, R., Lowe, S., & Zeikus, J. G., (1991). Influence of 
CO2-HCO3− levels and PH on growth, succinate production, and enzyme activities of 
Anaerobiospirillum succiniciproducens. Appl. Envir
 
on. Microbiol., 57(10), 3013–3019. 
https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.57.10.3013-3019.1991. 
28. Georgellis, D., Kwon, O., De Wulf, P., & Lin, E. C. C., (1998). Signal decay through 
a reverse phosphorelay in the arc two-component signal transduction system. J. Biol. 
Chem., 273(49), 32864–32869. https://doi.org/10.1074/jbc.273.49.32864. 
29. Schmitz, R. A., Achebach, S., & Unden, G., (2004). Analysis of fumarate nitrate 
reductase regulator as an oxygen sensor in Escherichia coli. In: Methods in Enzymology  
(Vol. 381, pp. 628–644). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0076-6879(04)81041-3. 
30. Lee, S. J., Song, H., & Lee, S. Y., (2006). Genome-based metabolic engineering of 
Mannheimia succiniciproducens for succinic acid production. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 
72(3), 1939–1948. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.72.3.1939-1948.2006. 

 
161 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
31. Song, H., Lee, J. W., Choi, S., You, J. K., Hong, W. H., & Lee, S. Y., (2007). Effects of 
dissolved CO2 levels on the growth of Mannheimia succiniciproducens and succinic 
acid production. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 98(6), 1296–1304. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
bit.21530. 
32. Sankaranarayanan, M., Ashok, S., & Park, S., (2014). Production of 3-hydroxypropionic 
acid from glycerol by acid tolerant Escherichia coli. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 
41(7), 1039–1050. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-014-1451-2. 
33.  Clark, D. P., (1989). The fermentation pathways of Escherichia coli. FEMS Microbiol. 
Lett., 63(3), 223–234. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.1989.tb03398.x. 
34. De Mey, M., De Maeseneire, S., Soetaert, W., & Vandamme, E., (2007). Minimizing 
acetate formation in E. coli fermentations. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 34(11), 
689–700. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-007-0244-2. 
35. Wolfe, A. J., (2005). The acetate switch. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. MMBR, 69(1), 
12–50. https://doi.org/10.1128/MMBR.69.1.12-50.2005. 
36. Beauprez, J. J., De Mey, M., & Soetaert, W. K., (2010). Microbial succinic acid 
production: Natural versus metabolic engineered producers. Process Biochem., 45(7), 
1103–1114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procbio.2010.03.035. 
37. Geerse, R. H., Van, D. P. J., & Postma, P. W., (1989). The repressor of the PEP: Fructose 
phosphotransferase system is required for the transcription of the Pps gene of Escherichia 
coli. Mol. Gen. Genet. MGG, 218(2), 348–352. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00331288. 
38. Chatterjee, R., Millard, C. S., Champion, K., Clark, D. P., & Donnelly, M. I., (2001). 
Mutation of the PtsG gene results in increased production of succinate in fermentation 
of glucose by Escherichia coli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 67(1), 148–154. https://doi. 
org/10.1128/AEM.67.1.148–154.2001. 
39. Song, H., & Lee, S. Y ., (2006). Production of succinic acid by bacterial 
fermentation. Enzyme Microb. Technol., 39(3), 352–361. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
enzmictec.2005.11.043. 
40. Lin, H., Bennett, G. N., & San, K. Y., (2005). Fed-batch culture of a metabolically 
engineered Escherichia coli strain designed for high-level succinate production and 
yield under aerobic conditions. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 90(6), 775–779. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/bit.20458. 
41. Lin, H., Bennett, G. N., & San, K. Y., (2005). Chemostat culture characterization 
of Escherichia coli mutant strains metabolically engineered for aerobic succinate 
production: A study of the modified metabolic network based on metabolite profile, 
enzyme activity, and gene expression profile. Metab. Eng., 7(5, 6), 337–352. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ymben.2005.06.002. 
42. Lin, H., Vadali, R. V., Bennett, G. N., & San, K. Y., (2004). Increasing the acetyl-CoA  
pool in the presence of overexpressed phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase or pyruvate 
carboxylase enhances succinate production in Escherichia coli. Biotechnol. Prog., 
20(5), 1599–1604. https://doi.org/10.1021/bp049843a. 
43. Alcantara, J. Z., & Mondala, A. H., (2020). Effect of acetic acid on succinic acid 
production of fungal co-culture in slurry fermentation. Chem. Eng. Trans., 80, 97–102. 
https://doi.org/10.3303/CET2080017. 
44. Yang, L., Lübeck, M., Ahring, B. K., & Lübeck, P. S., (2016). Enhanced succinic acid 
production in Aspergillus saccharolyticus by heterologous expression of fumarate 
reductase from Trypanosoma brucei. Appl. Micr
 
obiol. Biotechnol., 100(4), 1799–1809. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-015-7086-z. 

 
162 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
45. Meyer, V ., (2008). Genetic engineering of filamentous fungi–progress, obstacles 
and future trends. Biotechnol. Adv., 26(2), 177–185. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biotechadv.2007.12.001. 
46. Jansen, M. L., & Van, G. W. M., (2014). Towards large scale fermentative production 
of succinic acid. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 30, 190–197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
copbio.2014.07.003. 
47. Franco-Duarte, R., Bessa, D., Gonçalves, F., Martins, R., Silva-Ferreira, A. C., 
Schuller, D., Sampaio, P., & Pais, C., (2017). Genomic and transcriptomic analysis of 
Saccharomyces  cerevisiae isolates with focus in succinic acid production. FEMS Yeast 
Res., 17(6). https://doi.org/10.1093/femsyr/fox057. 
48. Ito, Y., Hirasawa, T., & Shimizu, H., (2014). Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces  
cerevisiae to improve succinic acid production based on metabolic profiling. Biosci. 
Biotechnol. Biochem., 78(1), 151–159. https://doi.org/10.1080/09168451.2014.877816. 
49. Yan, D., Wang, C., Zhou, J., Liu, Y., Yang, M., & Xing, J., (2014). Construction of 
reductive pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae for effective succinic acid fermentation 
at low PH value. Bioresour. Technol., 156, 232–239. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2014.01.053. 
50. Raab, A. M., & Lang, C., (2011). Oxidative versus reductive succinic acid production 
in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Bioeng. Bugs, 2(2), 120–123. https://doi. 
org/10.4161/bbug.2.2.14549. 
51. Lin, H., Bennett, G. N., & San, K. Y., (2005). Genetic reconstruction of the aerobic 
central metabolism in Escherichia coli for the absolute aerobic production of succinate. 
Biotechnol. Bioeng., 89(2), 148–156. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.20298. 
52. Lin, H., Bennett, G. N., & San, K. Y., (2005). Metabolic engineering of aerobic 
succinate production systems in Escherichia coli to improve process productivity and 
achieve the maximum theoretical succinate yield. Metab. Eng., 7(2), 116–127. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2004.10.003. 
53. Kubo, Y., Takagi, H., & Nakamori, S., (2000). Effect of gene disruption of succinate 
dehydrogenase on succinate production in a sake yeast strain. J. Biosci. Bioeng., 90(6), 
619–624. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1389-723(00)90006-9. 
54. Otero, J. M., Cimini, D., Patil, K. R., Poulsen, S. G., Olsson, L., & Nielsen, J., (2013). 
Industrial systems biology of Saccharomyces cerevisiae enables novel succinic acid cell 
factory. PLOS One, 8(1), e54144. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0054144. 
55. Cheng, K. K., Wang, G. Y., Zeng, J., & Zhang, J. A., (2013). Improved succinate 
production by metabolic engineering. BioMed Res. Int., 2013, e538790. https://doi. 
org/10.1155/2013/538790. 
56. Regev-Rudzki, N., Karniely, S., Ben-Haim, N. N., & Pines, O., (2005). Yeast aconitase 
in two locations and two metabolic pathways: Seeing small amounts is believing. Mol. 
Biol. Cell, 16(9), 4163–4171. https://doi.org/10.1091/mbc.E04-11-1028. 
57. Vemuri, G. N., Eiteman, M. A., & Altman, E., (2002). Succinate production in dual-
phase Escherichia Coli fermentations depends on the time of transition from aerobic 
to anaerobic conditions. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 28(6), 325–332. https://doi. 
org/10.1038/sj.jim.7000250. 
58. Choi, S., Song, C. W., Shin, J. H., & Lee, S. Y., (2015). Biorefineries for the production 
of top building block chemicals and their derivatives. Metab. Eng., 28, 223–239. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2014.12.007. 

 
163 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
59. Liu, H. H., Ji, X. J., & Huang, H., (2015). Biotechnological applications of Yarrowia 
lipolytica: Past, present and future. Biotechnol. Adv., 33(8), 1522–1546. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2015.07.010. 
60. Kamzolova, S. V., Yusupova, A. I., Vinokurova, N. G., Fedotcheva, N. I., Kondrashova, 
M. N., Finogenova, T. V., & Morgunov, I. G., (2009). Chemically assisted microbial 
production of succinic acid by the yeast Yarrowia lipolytica grown on ethanol. Appl. 
Microbiol. Biotechnol., 83(6), 1027–1034. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-009-1948-1. 
61. Yuzbashev, T. V., Bondarenko, P. Y., Sobolevskaya, T. I., Yuzbasheva, E. Y., Laptev, I. 
A., Kachala, V. V., Fedorov, A. S., et al., (2016). Metabolic evolution and (13) C flux 
analysis of a succinate dehydrogenase deficient strain of Yarrowia lipolytica. Biotechnol. 
Bioeng., 113(11), 2425–2432. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.26007. 
62. Gao, C., Yang, X., Wang, H., Rivero, C. P., Li, C., Cui, Z., Qi, Q., & Lin, C. S. K., 
(2016). Robust succinic acid production from crude glycerol using engineered Yarrowia 
lipolytica. Biotechnol. Biofuels, 9(1), 179. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13068-016-0597-8. 
63. Babaei, M., Rueksomtawin, K. K., Niaei, A., Hosseini, M., Ebrahimi, S., Sudarsan, S., 
Angelidaki, I., & Borodina, I., (2019). Engineering oleaginous yeast as the host for 
fermentative succinic acid production from glucose. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 7, 361. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2019.00361. 
64. Cui, Z., Gao, C., Li, J., Hou, J., Lin, C. S. K., & Qi, Q., (2017). Engineering of 
unconventional yeast Yarrowia lipolytica for efficient succinic acid production 
from glycerol at low PH. Metab. Eng., 42, 126–133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ymben.2017.06.007. 
65. Ahn, J. H., Jang, Y. S., & Lee, S. Y., (2016). Production of succinic acid by 
metabolically engineered microorganisms. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 42, 54–66. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.copbio.2016.02.034. 
66. Xiao, H., Shao, Z., Jiang, Y., Dole, S., & Zhao, H., (2014). Exploiting Issatchenkia 
orientalis SD108 for succinic acid production. Microb. Cell Factories, 13(1), 121. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-014-0121-4. 
67. Kamzolova, S. V., Yusupova, A. I., Dedyukhina, E. G., Chistyakova, T. I., Kozyreva, T. 
M., & Morgunov, I. G., (2009). Succinic Acid Synthesis by Ethanol-Grown Yeasts, 10. 
68. Sato, M., Nakahara, T., & Yamada, K., (1972). Fermentative production of succinic acid 
from n -paraffin by Candida Brumptii IFO 0731. Agric. Biol. Chem., 36(11), 1969–1974. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/00021369.1972.10860510. 
69. Xu, G., Liu, L., & Chen, J., (2012). Reconstruction of cytosolic fumaric acid biosynthetic 
pathways in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microb. Cell Factories, 11(1), 24. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/1475-2859-11-24. 
70. Kane, J. H., Finlay, A. C., & Amann, P. F., (1945). Pr
 oduction of Itaconic Acid. 
US2385283A. 
71. Goldberg, I., & Stieglitz, B., (1986). Fermentation Process for Production of Carboxylic  
Acids. US4564594A. 
72. Carta, F. S., Soccol, 
 
C. R., Ramos, L. P., & Fontana, J. D., (1999). Production of 
fumaric acid by fermentation of enzymatic hydrolysates derived from cassava bagasse. 
Bioresour. Technol., 68(1), 23–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0960-8524(98)00074-1. 
73. Papadaki, A., Papapostolou, H., Alexandri, M., Kopsahelis, N., Papanikolaou, S., De 
Castro, A. M., Freire, D. M. G., & Koutinas, A. A., (2018). Fumaric acid production 
using renewable resources from biodiesel and cane sugar production processes. Environ. 
Sci. Pollut. Res., 25(36), 35960–35970. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-018-1791-y. 

 
164 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
74. Gu, C., Zhou, Y., Liu, L., Tan, T., & Deng, L., (2013). Production of fumaric acid by 
immobilized Rhizopus arrhizus on net. Bioresour. Technol., 131, 303–307. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.12.148. 
75. Xu, Q., Li, S., Huang, H., & Wen, J., (2012). Key technologies for the industrial 
production of fumaric acid by fermentation. Biotechnol. Adv., 30(6), 1685–1696. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2012.08.007. 
76. Bai, D. M., Jia, M. Z., Zhao, X. M., Ban, R., Shen, F., Li, X. G., & Xu, S. M., (2003). L(+)­
lactic acid production by pellet-form  Rhizopus oryzae R1021 in a stirred tank fermentor. 
Chem. Eng. Sci., 58(3), 785–791. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0009-2509(02)00608-5. 
77. Fu, Y. Q., Xu, Q., Li, S., Chen, Y., & Huang, H., (2010). Strain improvement of Rhizopus 
oryzae for over-production of fumaric acid by reducing ethanol synthesis pathway. 
Korean J. Chem. Eng., 27(1), 183–186. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11814-009-0323-3. 
78. Zhang, B., Skory, C. D., & Yang, S. T., (2012). Metabolic engineering of Rhizopus 
oryzae: Effects of overexpressing Pyc and Pepc genes on fumaric acid biosynthesis from 
glucose. Metab. Eng., 14(5), 512–520. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2012.07.001. 
79. Gu, S., Li, J., Chen, B., Sun, T., Liu, Q., Xiao, D., & Tian, C., (2018). Metabolic 
engineering of the thermophilic filamentous fungus Myceliophthora thermophila  
to produce fumaric acid. Biotechnol. Biofuels, 11(1), 323. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s13068-018-1319-1. 
80. Song, C. W., Kim, D. I., Choi, S., Jang, J. W., & Lee, S. Y., (2013). Metabolic engineering 
of Escherichia coli for the production of fumaric acid. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 110(7), 
2025–2034. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.24868. 
81. Li, N., Zhang, B., Wang, Z., Tang, Y. J., Chen, T., & Zhao, X., (2014). Engineering 
Escherichia coli for fumaric acid production from glycerol. Bioresour. Technol., 174, 
81–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2014.09.147. 
82. Zhang, T., Wang, Z., Deng, L., Tan, T., Wang, F., & Yan, Y., (2015). Pull-in urea cycle 
for the production of fumaric acid in Escherichia coli. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 
99(12), 5033–5044. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-015-6556-7. 
83. Mienda, B. S., Shamsir, M. S., & Salleh, F. M., (2015). In silico evaluation of the effect 
of PFL gene knockout on the production of D-lactate by Escherichia coli genome scale 
model using the optFlux software platform. Indian J. Sci. Technol., 8(2), 172. https:// 
doi.org/10.17485/ijst/2015/v8i1/56501. 
84. Liu, H., Song, R., Liang, Y., Zhang, T., Deng, L., Wang, F., & Tan, T., (2018). 
Genetic manipulation of Escherichia coli central carbon metabolism for efficient 
production of fumaric acid. Bioresour. Technol., 270, 96–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2018.08.024. 
85. Xu, G., Chen, X., Liu, L., & Jiang, L., (2013). Fumaric acid production in Saccharomyces  
cerevisiae by simultaneous use of oxidative and reductive routes. Bioresour. Technol., 
148, 91–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.08.115. 
86. Chen, X., Wu, J., Song, W., Zhang, L., Wang, H., & Liu, L., (2015). Fumaric acid 
production by Torulopsis glabrata: Engineering the urea cycle and the purine nucleotide 
cycle: Fumaric acid production by Torulopsis glabrata. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 112(1), 
156–167. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.25334. 
87. Wang, G., Bai, T., Miao, Z., Ning, W., & Liang, W., (2018). Simultaneous production 
of single cell oil and fumaric acid by a newly isolated yeast Aureobasidium pullulans  
Var. aubasidani DH177. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 41(11), 1707–1716. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00449-018-1994-0. 

 
165 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
88. Wei, L., Liu, J., Qi, H., & Wen, J., (2015). Engineering Scheffersomyces STIPITIS  for 
fumaric acid production from xylose. Bioresour. Technol., 187, 246–254. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2015.03.122. 
89. Tatsi, C., Pateraki, C., Rabaey, K., & Koutinas, A., (2022). Valorization of the organic 
fraction of municipal solid waste for fumaric acid production and electrochemical 
membrane extraction using Candida blankii. Bioresour. Technol. Rep., 17, 100900. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biteb.2021.100900. 
90. Hornstein, I., (1969). Flavor Chemistry: Advances in Chemistry (Vol. 56). American 
Chemical Society: Washington, D.C. https://doi.org/10.1021/ba-1966-0056. 
91. Bellon, P., (2003). Cosmetic Complex Based on Malic Acid. EP1291012A1. 
92. Kajiyama, T., Taguchi, T., Kobayashi, H., Kataoka, K., & Tanaka, J., (2003). 
Synthesis of high molecular weight poly(α,β-malic acid) for biomedical use by direct 
polycondensation. Polym. Degrad. Stab., 81(3), 525–530. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0141-3910(03)00153-8. 
93. Chibata, I., Tosa, T., Yamamoto, K., & Takata, I., (1987). Production of l-malic acid 
by immobilized microbial cells. In: Methods in Enzymology (Vol. 136, pp. 455–463). 
Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0076-6879(87)36043-4. 
94. Naude, A., & Nicol, W., (2018). Malic acid production through the whole-cell hydration 
of fumaric acid with immobilized Rhizopus oryzae. Biochem. Eng. J., 137, 152–161. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2018.05.022. 
95. Ma, H., Kubicek, C. P., & Rohr, M., (1981). Malate dehydrogenase isoenzymes 
in Aspergillus Niger. FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 12(2), 147–151. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/j.1574-6968.1981.tb07630.x. 
96. Bercovitz, A., Peleg, Y., Battat, E., Rokem, J. S., & Goldberg, I., (1990). Localization 
of pyruvate carboxylase in organic acid-producing aspergillus strains. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol., 56(6), 1594–1597. https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.56.6.1594–1597.1990. 
97. Zhang, X., Wang, X., Shanmugam, K. T., & Ingram, L. O., (2011). L  -malate production 
by metabolically engineered Escherichia coli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 77(2), 
427–434. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.01971-10. 
98. Liu, P., & Jarboe, L. R., (2012). Metabolic engineering of biocatalysts for carboxylic 
acids production. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J., 3, e201210011. https://doi.org/10.5936/ 
csbj.201210011. 
99. Dong, X., Chen, X., Qian, Y., Wang, Y., Wang, L., Qiao, W., & Liu, L., (2017). Metabolic 
engineering of Escherichia coli  W3110 to produce L-malate. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 
114(3), 656–664. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.26190. 
100.  Mu, L., & Wen, J., (2013). Engineered  Bacillus subtilis 168 produces L-malate 
by heterologous biosynthesis pathway construction and lactate dehydrogenase 
deletion. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 29(1), 33–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11274-012-1155-6. 
101. Deng, Y., Mao, Y., & Zhang, X., (2016). Metabolic engineering of a laboratory-
evolved Thermobifida Fusca MuC strain for malic acid production on cellulose and 
minimal treated lignocellulosic biomass. Biotechnol. Prog., 32(1), 14–20. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/btpr.2180. 
102. Peleg, Y., Stieglitz, B., & Goldberg, I., (1988). Malic acid accumulation by Aspergillus 
flavus. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 28, 7, 69–75. 
103. Ochsenreither, K., Fischer, C., Neumann, A., & Syldatk, C., (2014). Process 
characterization and influence of alternative carbon sources and carbon-to-nitrogen 

 
166 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
ratio on organic acid production by Aspergillus oryzae DSM1863. Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol., 98(12), 5449–5460. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-014-5614-x. 
104. West, T. P., (2011). Malic acid production from thin stillage by aspergillus species. 
Biotechnol. Lett., 33(12), 2463–2467. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10529-011-0720-7. 
105. Iyyappan, J., Baskar, G., Bharathiraja, B., & Saravanathamizhan, R., (2018). Malic acid 
production from biodiesel derived crude glycerol using morphologically controlled 
Aspergillus Niger in batch fermentation. Bioresour. Technol., 269, 393–399. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2018.09.002. 
106. Iyyappan, J., Bharathiraja, B., Baskar, G., Jayamuthunagai, J., Barathkumar, S., & 
Anna, S. R., (2018). Malic acid production by chemically induced Aspergillus Niger  
MTCC 281 mutant from crude glycerol. Bioresour. Technol., 251, 264–267. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2017.12.055. 
107. Iyyappan, J., Bharathiraja, B., Baskar, G., & Kamalanaban, E., (2019). Process 
optimization and kinetic analysis of malic acid production from crude glycerol 
using Aspergillus Niger. Bior
 
esour. Technol., 281, 18–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2019.02.067. 
108. Wang, Z. P., Wang, G. Y., Khan, I., & Chi, Z. M., (2013). High-level production of 
calcium malate from glucose by Penicillium sclerotiorum  K302. Bioresour. Technol., 
143, 674–677. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2013.06.051. 
109. Khan, I., Nazir, K., Wang, Z. P., Liu, G. L., & Chi, Z. M., (2014). Calcium malate 
overproduction by Penicillium viticola 152 using the medium containing corn steep 
liquor. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 98(4), 1539–1546. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00253-013-5326-7. 
110. Zambanini, T., Sarikaya, E., Kleineberg, W., Buescher, J. M., Meurer, G., Wierckx, 
N., & Blank, L. M., (2016). Efficient malic acid production from glycerol with 
Ustilago trichophora TZ1. Biotechnol. Biofuels, 9(1), 67. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s13068-016-0483-4. 
111.   Fatichenti, F., Farris, G. A., Deiana, P., & Ceccarelli, S., (1984). Malic acid production 
and consumption by selected of Saccharomyces cerevisiae under anaerobic and aerobic 
conditions. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 19(6), 427–429. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
BF00454382. 
112. Zelle, R. M., De Hulster, E., Van, W. W. A., De Waard, P., Dijkema, C., Winkler, A. A., 
Geertman, J. M. A., et al., (2008). Malic acid production by Saccharomyces cerevisiae: 
Engineering of pyruvate carboxylation, oxaloacetate reduction, and malate export. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol., 74(9), 2766–2777. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.02591-07. 
113. Taing, O., & Taing, K., (2006). Production of malic and succinic acids by sugar-tolerant 
yeast Zygosaccharomyces rouxii. Eur. Food Res. Technol., 224(3), 343–347. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00217-006-0323-z. 
114. Singh, R., Kumar, M., Mittal, A., & Mehta, P. K., (2017). Microbial metabolites in 
nutrition, healthcare and agriculture. 3 Biotech, 7(1), 15. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s13205-016-0586-4. 
115. Yukawa, H., Ookino, S., & Inui, M., (2010). L-Aspartic acid, production processes. 
In: Encyclopedia of Industrial Biotechnology (p. eib383) John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: 
Hoboken, NJ, USA. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470054581.eib383. 
116. Tosa, T., Sato, T., Mori, T., & Chibata, I., (1974). Basic studies for continuous production 
of L-aspartic acid by immobilized Escherichia coli  cells. Appl. Microbiol., 27(5), 
886–889. 

 
167 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
117. Papierz, A., Gadomska, Y., Sobierajski, A., & Chmiel, A., (2007). Selection 
 
and 
Activation of Escherichia Coli Strains for L-Aspartic Acid Biosynthesis, 6. 
118.  Szymańska, G., Sobierajski, B., & Chmiel, A., (2011). Immobilized cells of recombinant 
escherichia coli strain for continuous production of L-aspartic acid. Pol. J. Microbiol., 
60(2), 105–112. 
119. Piao, X., Wang, L., Lin, B., Chen, H., Liu, W., & Tao, Y., (2019). Metabolic engineering 
of Escherichia coli  for production of L-aspartate and its derivative β-alanine with 
high stoichiometric yield. Metab. Eng., 54, 244–254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ymben.2019.04.012. 
120. Yamagata, H., Terasawa, M., & Yukawa, H., (1994). A novel industrial process for 
l-aspartic acid production using an ultrafiltration-membrane. Catal. Today, 22(3), 
621–627. https://doi.org/10.1016/0920-5861(94)80127-4. 
121. Hatakeyama, K., Asai, Y., Uchida, Y., Kobayashi, M., Terasawa, M., & Yukawa, H., 
(1997). Gene cloning and characterization of maleatecis-transisomerase from alcaligenes 
faecalis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 239(1), 74–79. https://doi.org/10.1006/ 
bbrc.1997.7430. 
122. Tajima, T., Hamada, M., Nakashimada, Y., & Kato, J., (2015). Efficient aspartic acid 
production by a psychrophile-based  simple biocatalyst. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 
42(10), 1319–1324. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-015-1669-7. 
123. Kinoshita, S., (1985). Glutamic acid bacteria. Biol. Ind. Microorg, 115–142. 
124. Adeogun, M., Omotayo, A., Oderinde, O., & Amund, O., (2017). A study of naturally-
occurring l-glutamic acid producing bacteria from tropical soil and aquatic environments. 
Egypt. Acad. J. Biol. Sci. G. Microbiol., 9(1), 57–63. https://doi.org/10.21608/ 
eajbsg.2017.16463. 
125. Alharbi, N. S., Kadaikunnan, S., Khaled, J. M., Almanaa, T. N., Innasimuthu, G. M., 
Rajoo, B., Alanzi, K. F., & Rajaram, S. K., (2020). Optimization of glutamic acid 
production by Corynebacterium glutamicum using response surface methodology. J. 
King Saud Univ. – Sci., 32(2), 1403–1408. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jksus.2019.11.034. 
126. Tavakkoli, M., Hamidi-Esfahani, Z., & 
 
Azizi, M. H., (2012). Optimization of 
Corynebacterium glutamicum glutamic acid production by response surface 
methodology. Food Bioprocess Technol., 5(1), 92–99. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11947-009-0242-7. 
127. Hirasawa, T., Wachi, M., & Nagai, K., (2001). L-glutamate production by lysozyme­
sensitive Corynebacterium glutamicum ltsA mutant strains. BMC Biotechnol., 5. 
128. Shyamkumar, R., Moorthy, I. M. G., Ponmurugan, K., & Baskar, R., (2014). Production 
of L-glutamic acid with Corynebacterium glutamicum (NCIM 2168) and Pseudomonas 
reptilivora (NCIM 2598): A study on immobilization and reusability.  Avicenna J. Med. 
Biotechnol., 6(3), 163–168. 
129. Khan, N. S., Singh, R. P., & Prasad, B., (2013). Studies on substrate inhibition in the 
microbial production of L-glutamic acid. Int. J. Eng. Res., 2(1), 7. 
130. Liu, X., (2019). Effects of proteases on L-glutamic acid fermentation. Bioengineered, 
10(1), 646–658. https://doi.org/10.1080/21655979.2019.1688224. 
131. Zareian, M., Ebrahimpour, A., Bakar, F. A., Mohamed, A. K. S., Forghani, B., Ab-Kadir, 
M. S. B., & Saari, N., (2012). A glutamic acid-producing lactic acid bacteria isolated 
from Malaysian fermented foods. Int. J. Mol. Sci., 13(5), 5482–5497. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/ijms13055482. 

 
168 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
132. Zareian, M., Ebrahimpour, A., Sabo, M. A. K., & Saari, N., (2013). Modeling of 
glutamic acid production by Lactobacillus plantarum MNZ. Electron. J. Biotechnol., 
16(4). https://doi.org/10.2225/vol16-issue4-fulltext-10. 
133. Nadeem, S., Niaz, B., Muzammil, H., Mahboob, S., Rajoka, M. I., & Shakoori, A., 
(2011). Optimizing carbon and nitrogen sources for L-glutamic acid production by 
Brevibacterium strain NIAB SS-67. Pak. J. Zool., 43, 285–290. 
134.  Roy, D. K., & Chatterjee, S. P., (1989). Production of glutamic acid by Arthrobacter 
globiformis: Influence of cultural conditions. Folia Microbiol. (Praha), 34(1), 11–24. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02821319. 
135. Imaizumi, A., Kojima, H., & Matsui, K., (2006). The effect of intracellular ppGpp levels 
on glutamate and lysine overproduction in Escherichia coli. J. Biotechnol., 125(3), 
328–337. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2006.03.015. 
136. Nishio, Y., Ogishima, S., Ichikawa, M., Yamada, Y., Usuda, Y., Masuda, T., & 
Tanaka, H., (2013). Analysis of L-glutamic acid fermentation by using a dynamic 
metabolic simulation model of Escherichia coli. BMC Syst. Biol., 7, 92. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/1752-0509-7-92. 
137. Tsukamoto, S., Yoshida, T., Hosono, H., Ohta, T., & Yokosawa, H., (2006). Hexylitaconic 
acid: A new inhibitor of P53-HDM2 interaction isolated from a marine-derived fungus, 
Arthrinium Sp. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., 16(1), 69–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bmcl.2005.09.052. 
138. Li, A., Van, L. N., Ter, B. M., Caspers, M., Punt, P., & Van, D. W. M., (2011). A clone-
based transcriptomics approach for the identification of genes relevant for itaconic 
acid production in Aspergillus. Fungal Genet. Biol. FG B, 48(6), 602–611. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.fgb.2011.01.013. 
139. Huang, X., Lu, X., Li, Y., Li, X., & Li, J. J., (2014). Improving itaconic acid production 
through genetic engineering of an industrial Aspergillus terreus Strain. Microb. Cell 
Factories, 13(1), 119. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-014-0119-y. 
140. Shin, W. S., Park, B., Lee, D., Oh, M. K., Chun, G. T., & Kim, S., (2017). Enhanced 
production of itaconic acid through development of transformed fungal strains of 
Aspergillus terreus. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 27(2), 306–315. https://doi.org/10.4014/ 
jmb.1611.11054. 
141.  Tevž, G., Benčina, M., & Legiša, M., (2010). Enhancing itaconic acid production 
by Aspergillus terreus. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 87(5), 1657–1664. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00253-010-2642-z. 
142. Okabe, M., Lies, D., Kanamasa, S., & Park, E. Y., (2009). Biotechnological production 
of itaconic acid and its biosynthesis in Aspergillus terreus. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 
84(4), 597–606. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-009-2132-3. 
143. Dwiarti, L., Otsuka, M., Miura, S., Yaguchi, M., & Okabe, M., (2007). Itaconic acid 
production using sago starch hydrolysate by Aspergillus terreus TN484-M1. Bioresour. 
Technol., 98(17), 3329–3337. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2006.03.016. 
144. Ahmed El-Imam, A. M., Kazeem, M. O., Odebisi, M. B., Oke, M. A., & Abidoye, A. 
O., (2013). Production of itaconic acid from Jatropha curcas seed cake by Aspergillus 
terreus. Not. Sci. Biol., 5(1), 57–61. https://doi.org/10.15835/nsb518355. 
145. Van, D. S. L., Vernooij, M., Lammers, M., Van, D. B. W., Schonewille, T., Cordewener, 
J., Van, D. M. I., et al., (2014). Expression of the Aspergillus terreus itaconic acid 
biosynthesis cluster in Aspergillus Niger. Microb. Cell Factories, 13(1), 11. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/1475-2859-13-11. 

 
169 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
146. Gnanasekaran, R., Dhandapani, B., Gopinath, K. P., & Iyyappan, J., (2018). Synthesis 
of itaconic acid from agricultural waste using novel Aspergillus niveus. Prep. Biochem. 
Biotechnol., 48(7), 605–609. https://doi.org/10.1080/10826068.2018.1476884. 
147. Gnanasekaran, R., Dhandapani, B., & Iyyappan, J., (2019). Improved itaconic acid 
production by Aspergillus niveus using blended algal biomass hydrolysate and 
glycerol as substrates. Bioresour. Technol., 283, 297–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2019.03.107. 
148. Haskins, R. H., Thorn, J. A., & Boothroyd, B., (1955). Biochemistry of the ustilaginales: 
Xi. metabolic products of Ustilago zeae in submerged culture. Can. J. Microbiol., 1(9), 
749–756. https://doi.org/10.1139/m55-089. 
149. Rafi, M., Hanumanthu, M. G., Rizwana, S., Venkateswarlu, K., & Rao, D. M., (2012). 
Effect of different physicochemical parameters on fermentative production of itaconic 
acid by Ustilago maydis. Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology Research, 2, 
794–800. 
150. Maassen, N., Panakova, M., Wierckx, N., Geiser, E., Zimmermann, M., Bölker, M., 
Klinner, U., & Blank, L. M., (2014). Influence of carbon and nitrogen concentration 
on itaconic acid production by the smut fungus Ustilago Maydis. Eng. Life Sci., 14(2), 
129–134. https://doi.org/10.1002/elsc.201300043. 
151. Geiser, E., Przybilla, S. K., Engel, M., Kleineberg, W., Büttner, L., Sarikaya, E., Hartog, 
T. D., et al., (2016). Genetic and biochemical insights into the itaconate pathway of 
Ustilago maydis enable enhanced production. Metab. Eng., 38, 427–435. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ymben.2016.10.006. 
152. Zambanini, T., Hosseinpour, T. H., Geiser, E., Merker, D., Schleese, S., Krabbe, J., 
Buescher, J. M., et al., (2017). Efficient itaconic acid production from glycerol with 
Ustilago vetiveriae TZ1. Biotechnol. Biofuels, 10(1), 131. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s13068-017-0809-x. 
153. Krull, S., Lünsmann, M., Prüße, U., & Kuenz, A., (2020). Ustilago rabenhorstiana—An 
alternative natural itaconic acid producer. Fermentation, 6(1), 4. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
fermentation6010004. 
154. Hosseinpour, T. H., Becker, J., Bator, I., Saur, K., Meyer, S., Rodrigues, L. A. C., Blank, 
L. M., & Wierckx, N., (2019). Integrated strain- and process design enable production of 
220 g L−1 itaconic acid with Ustilago maydis. Biotechnol. Biofuels, 12(1), 263. https:// 
doi.org/10.1186/s13068-019-1605-6. 
155. Krull, S., Hevekerl, A., Kuenz, A., & Prüße, U., (2017). Process development of itaconic 
acid production by a natural wild type strain of Aspergillus terreus to reach industrially 
relevant final titers. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 101(10), 4063–4072. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00253-017-8192-x. 
156. Becker, J., Hosseinpour, T. H., Gauert, M., Mampel, J., Blank, L. M., & Wierckx, N., 
(2019). An Ustilago maydis chassis for itaconic acid production without by-products. 
Microb. Biotechnol., 13(2), 350–362. https://doi.org/10.1111/1751–7915.13525. 
157.  Becker, J., Hosseinpour, T. H., Ernst, P., Blank, L. M., & Wierckx, N., (2021). An 
optimized Ustilago maydis for itaconic acid production at maximal theoretical yield. J. 
Fungi, 7(1), 20. https://doi.org/10.3390/jof7010020. 
158.  Schlembach, I., Hosseinpour, T. H., Blank, L. M., Büchs, J., Wierckx, N., Regestein, L., 
& Rosenbaum, M. A., (2020). Consolidated bioprocessing of cellulose to itaconic acid 
by a co-culture of Trichoderma reesei and Ustilago maydis. Biotechnol. Biofuels, 13(1), 
207. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13068-020-01835-4. 

 
170 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
159. Tabuchi, T., Sugisawa, T., Ishidori, T., Nakahara, T., & Sugiyama, J., (1981). Itaconic 
acid fermentation by a yeast belonging to the genus Candida. Agric. Biol. Chem., 45(2), 
475–479. https://doi.org/10.1080/00021369.1981.10864534. 
160. Levinson, W. E., Kurtzman, C. P., & Kuo, T. M., (2006). Production of itaconic acid by 
Pseudozyma antarctica NRRL Y-7808 under nitrogen-limited growth conditions. Enzyme 
Microb. Technol., 39(4), 824–827. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enzmictec.2006.01.005. 
161. Bellasio, M., Mattanovich, D., Sauer, M., & Marx, H., (2015). Organic acids from 
lignocellulose: Candida Lignohabitans as a new microbial cell factory. J. Ind. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol., 42(5), 681–691. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10295-015-1590-0. 
162. Qi, H., Du, Y., Zhou, X., Zheng, W., Zhang, L., Wen, J., & Liu, L., (2017). Engineering 
a new metabolic pathway for itaconate production in Pichia stipitis from Xylose. 
Biochem. Eng. J., 126, 101–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bej.2017.06.011. 
163. Blazeck, J., Miller, J., Pan, A., Gengler, J., Holden, C., Jamoussi, M., & Alper, H. 
S., (2014). Metabolic engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for itaconic acid 
production. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 98(19), 8155–8164. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00253-014-5895-0. 
164. Sun, W., Vila-Santa, A., Liu, N., Prozorov, T., Xie, D., Faria, N. T., Ferreira, F. C., et al., 
(2020). Metabolic engineering of an acid-tolerant yeast strain Pichia kudriavzevii for 
itaconic acid production. Metab. Eng. Commun., 10, e00124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
mec.2020.e00124. 
165. Zhao, C., Cui, Z., Zhao, X., Zhang, J., Zhang, L., Tian, Y., Qi, Q., & Liu, J., (2019). 
Enhanced itaconic acid production in Yarrowia lipolytica via heterologous expression 
of a mitochondrial transporter MTT. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 103(5), 2181–2192. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-019-09627-z. 
166. Otten, A., Brocker, M., & Bott, M., (2015). Metabolic engineering of Corynebacterium 
glutamicum for the production of itaconate. Metab. Eng., 30, 156–165. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ymben.2015.06.003. 
167. Lim, C. K., Villada, J. C., Chalifour, A., Duran, M. F., Lu, H., & Lee, P. K. H., 
(2019). Designing and engineering Methylorubrum extorquens  AM1 for itaconic acid 
production. Front. Microbiol., 10, 1027. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.01027. 
168. Okamoto, S., Chin, T., Hiratsuka, K., Aso, Y., Tanaka, Y., Takahashi, T., & Ohara, H., 
(2014). Production of itaconic acid using metabolically engineered Escherichia coli. J. 
Gen. Appl. Microbiol., 60(5), 191–197. https://doi.org/10.2323/jgam.60.191. 
169. Jeon, H. G., Cheong, D. E., Han, Y., Song, J. J., & Choi, J. H., (2016). Itaconic acid 
production from glycerol using Escherichia coli  harboring a random synonymous 
codon-substituted 5′-coding region variant of the Cad A gene: Itaconic acid production 
from glycerol using Escherichia. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 113(7), 1504–1510. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/bit.25914. 
170. Harder, B. J., Bettenbrock, K., & Klamt, S., (2016). Model-based metabolic engineering 
enables high yield itaconic acid production by Escherichia coli. Metab. Eng., 38, 29–37. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymben.2016.05.008. 
171. Guettler, M. V., Rumler, D., & Jain, M. K., (1999). Actinobacillus  succinogenes Sp. Nov., 
a novel succinic-acid-producing strain from the bovine rumen. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol. 10. 
172. Du, C., Lin, S. K. C., Koutinas, A., Wang, R., Dorado, P., & Webb, C., (2008). A wheat 
biorefining strategy based on solid-state fermentation for fermentative production 
of succinic acid. Bioresour. Technol., 99(17), 8310–8315. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2008.03.019. 

 
171 
Microbial Whole-cell Platforms for the Synthesis of Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle 
173. Liu, Y. P., Zheng, P., Sun, Z. H., Ni, Y., Dong, J. J., & Zhu, L. L., (2008). Economical 
succinic acid production from cane molasses by Actinobacillus succinogenes. Bioresour. 
Technol., 99(6), 1736–1742. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2007.03.044. 
174. Wan, C., Shahbazi, Y. L. A., & Xiu, S., (2008). Succinic acid production from cheese 
whey using Actinobacillus succinogenes 130 Z. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 145, 2, 
111–119. 
175. Lee, P. C., Lee, S. Y., Hong, S. H., Chang, H. N., & Park, S. C., (2003). Biological 
conversion of wood hydrolysate to succinic acid by Anaerobiospirillum 
succiniciproducens. Biotechnology Letters, 25, 4, 111–114. 
176. Samuelov, N. S., Datta, R., Jain, M. K., & Zeikus, J. G., (1999). Whey fermentation 
by Anaerobiospirillum succiniciproducens for production of a succinate-based animal 
feed additive. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 65(5), 2260–2263. https://doi.org/10.1128/ 
AEM.65.5.2260-2263.1999. 
177. Lee, S. J., Song, H., & Lee, S. Y., (2006). Genome-based metabolic engineering of 
Mannheimia succiniciproducens for succinic acid production. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 
72(3), 1939–1948. https://doi.org/10.1128/AEM.72.3.1939-1948.2006. 
178. Yang, L., Lübeck, M., Ahring, B. K., & Lübeck, P. S., (2016). Enhanced succinic acid 
production in Aspergillus saccharolyticus by heterologous expression of fumarate 
reductase from Trypanosoma brucei. Appl. Micr
 
obiol. Biotechnol., 100(4), 1799–1809. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-015-7086-z. 
179. Yang, L., Henriksen, M. M., Hansen, R. S., Lübeck, M., Vang, J., Andersen, J. 
E., Bille, S., & Lübeck, P. S., (2020). Metabolic engineering of Aspergillus Niger  
via ribonucleoprotein-based CRISPR–Cas9 system for succinic acid production 
from renewable biomass. Biotechnol. Biofuels, 13(1), 206. https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s13068-020-01850-5. 
180. Deng, F., & Aita, G. M., (2018). Fumaric acid production by Rhizopus oryzae  ATCC® 
20344TM from lignocellulosic syrup. BioEnergy Res., 11(2), 330–340. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s12155-018-9899-y. 
181. Mu, L., & Wen, J., (2013). Engineered  Bacillus subtilis 168 produces L-malate 
by heterologous biosynthesis pathway construction and lactate dehydrogenase 
deletion. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 29(1), 33–41. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11274-012-1155-6. 
182. Jiang, Y., Zheng, T., Ye, X., Xin, F., Zhang, W., Dong, W., Ma, J., & Jiang, M., (2020). 
Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for L-malate production anaerobically. 
Microb. Cell Factories, 19(1), 165. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-020-01422-0. 
183. Papierz, M., Gadomska, G., Sobierajski, B., & Chmiel, A., (2007). Selection and 
activation of Escherichia COLI strains for L-aspartic acid biosynthesis. Pol. J. 
Microbiol., 56(2), 71–76. 
184. Kuenz, A., Gallenmüller, Y., Willke, T., & Vorlop, K. D., (2012). Microbial production 
of itaconic acid: Developing a stable platform for high product concentrations. Appl. 
Microbiol. Biotechnol., 96(5), 1209–1216. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-012-4221-y. 
185. Kinoshita, K., (1932). Production of itaconic acid and mannitol by a new mold 
Aspergillus itaconicus. Acta Phytochim, 5, 271–287. 


Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
  
 
CHAPTER 5  
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories 
for the Production of Biomolecules 
M. MOHAN,1 M. MANOHAR,2 R. MOTHI,3 
NAZEERULLAH RAHAMATHULLAH,4 P. GANESH5 and 
M. DHANALAKSHMI6 
1Department of Chemistry, Mahendra Engineering College (Autonomous), 
Namakkal, Tamil Nadu, India 
2Department of Microbiology, Sadakathullah Appa College 
(Autonomous), Tirunelveli, Tamil Nadu, India 
3Department of Biomedical Engineering, Dr. N.G.P. Institute of 
Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 
4Department of Biomedical Science, College of Medicine, 
Gulf Medical University, Ajman, United Arab Emirates 
5Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Science, Annamalai University, 
Chithamparam, Tamil Nadu, India 
6Department of Mathematics, Sri Shanmugha College of Engineering and 
Technology, Sankari, Salem, Tamil Nadu, India 
ABSTRACT 
Biomolecule production by using microorganisms is a common phenomenon 
that requires the involvement of technical support like scaling up, produc­
tion strategies, and consumption of enormous quantities of chemicals. Many 
systems-derived bioengineering tools are involved in biomolecule produc­
tion in food, medicine, pharmaceuticals, and energy sectors. The system-
based tools involved in the molecular simulation, finding enzyme production 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
174 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
pathways, microbial gene expression modes, biosensor production, and de 
novo design for microbial production. The expansion of these microbial 
whole-cell factories is observed in food industries, pharmaceutical sectors, 
production of industrial chemicals, polymers, therapeutic agents, biocata­
lysts, amino acids, value-added proteins, biologically important molecules, 
biofuels, and organic acids. As a result of gene sequencing programs and 
genomic techniques, the availability of microbial genomes envisages the 
way to study microbial physiology, molecular mechanics, and metabolic 
pathways in a lucid manner. The improvement in modern molecular-based 
techniques provided more efficient microbial whole-cell factories by identi­
fying open reading frames in the gene sequences. Highly defined 3D printing 
techniques are used to visualize the miniature of bioreactors. This chapter 
imparts the area of system-based robust microbiological methods like multi­
omics approach, microbial genome-based modeling; bioengineering enabled 
tools for the construction of microbial whole-cell factory. 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
The increase of global population and demand for food and energy step 
forward the finding of novel techniques to provide innovations in many 
fields. The production strategies followed during present days adversely 
affecting the environment in view of climatic change. Industrial process 
consumes depleting fossil fuels, energy smashing catalysts. Microbial 
whole-cell factories focused to solve the challenges connected with the 
chemically produced industrial materials and consumption of huge quan­
tities of fuels. Microbial cells are considered to be a whole-cell factories 
potentially produce innumerous products. The evolution of molecular 
biology, genetic engineering and gene modeling projected to conceive site 
directed gene modifications, high throughput analytical tools validated by 
mathematical simulation are adding the new dimensions to whole-cell facto­
ries for the industrial production of various novel products. The findings 
predict quality in vivo experiments and standardize models for whole-cell 
factory formulation [1]. The idea to generate microbial cell factory imbibed 
through interdisciplinary area includes biology, biochemistry, molecular 
genetics, biotechnology, physics, mathematics, and computer technology. 
The complex nature of microbial cells are visualized and predicted by the 
integration of modern system-based technology. System enabled tech­
nology advances the next generation sequencing techniques, engineering 
of protein, enzymes, and metabolic products so as to improve the quality 

 
 
 
 
 
175 
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the Production of Biomolecules 
production through microbial cell factories. The inclusion of systems in 
biology and engineering concepts of industrial biotechnology led to enrich 
the development features of variety of microbial system such as Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae-based microbial cell factories for various products [2]. 
This chapter summarize the possible ways of microbial cell factories for the 
production of various products. 
5.2 PRODUCTION OF BIOORGANIC MOLECULES 
Biomolecules having economically significant market are produced by 
microbial cells as byproducts of cellular metabolism and it is essential for 
its biological processes, such as cell division, metabolism, development. 
The production of biomolecules such as organic acids, alcohols, and amino 
acids are well documented from ancient human civilization [3]. However, 
depending on the biological production rather than chemical route is encour­
aged very recently. Biomolecules such as proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, and 
nucleic acids, as well as small molecules like primary metabolites, secondary 
metabolites (antibiotics) and natural products (NPs) are now in demand and 
have chosen over the synthetic alternative because of the environmentally 
clean process. Biomolecules are often endogenous in nature produced within 
the microorganism [3], but various microorganisms also adopted secretary 
system which produces the products exogenous process. This section is 
intended to cover such products which are presently occupying the prime 
segment the industrial sector [4]. 
5.2.1 ORGANIC ACIDS 
Organic acids are chemical compounds widely distributed in nature as normal 
constituents of plants, animal tissues and microbial products. Microorgan­
isms able to produce several organic compounds such as lactic acid (LA), 
malic acid (MA), citric acid, fumaric, propionic, and itaconic acids (IAs), 
etc., are synthesized by microorganism via fermentation process. Organic 
acids constitute a key group among the building-block chemicals of living 
organisms also organic acids have been used for many years in the food, 
chemical, agriculture, and pharmaceutical industries [5]. Organic acids differ 
on the basis of the involvement of microbial metabolism like glycolysis, 
gluconeogensis, and tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle using carbon, hydrogen, 
and oxygen elements [6]. Major types of organic acid produced by aerobic 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
176 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
and anaerobic microbial fermentation process are citric acid, succinic acid 
(SA), LA, IA, lactobionic acid, gluconic acid, fumaric acid (FA), propionic 
acid, and acetic acid. 
5.2.1.1 AMINO ACIDS 
The requirement of amino acid in the market is constantly increasing 
due to pharmaceutical needs [7]. The application widely extends in the 
field of additives for animal feeds, flavors, and nutrients in medical 
and pharmaceutical sectors [8]. Amino acids are the building blocks of 
proteins a core cell mandatory and survival component. About 20 amino 
acids are synthesized by living cells, though higher evolved cell requires 
the some of the essential aminoacids; however, microbial cells have 
great ability to synthesize all 20 amino acids. Some microbial cells tend 
to produce and accumulate few amino acids specifically during various 
stages of cell growth and development. Fermentative production of amino 
acids has started by the discovery of glutamic acid producing bacterium, 
Corynebacterium glutamicum (Micrococcus glutamicum) [9]; later on 
number of microorganisms were isolated from natural environment, 
which are capable of producing amino acids by fermentation process in 
commercially feasible amount, especially from the auxotrophic bacteria. 
Table 5.1 shows the production of amino acids by microorganisms and its 
applications. 
TABLE 5.1 Production of Amino Acids by Microorganisms and Its Applications [10] 
Name of 
Microbial 
Organisms 
Applications 
References 
the Amino Process 
Involved in the 
Acid 
Production 
L-Arginine Fermentation 
L-Aspartic Enzymatic
acid 
Extraction,
L-Cysteine enzymatic 
Ingredient in dental products 
C. glutamicum 
(e.g., toothpastes) as provides 
Brevibacterium 
effective relief from sensitive 
[11] 
flavum; 
teeth by depositing adentin­
like mineral. 
Ingredient in food 
Escherichia coli supplementary ingredients 
[12] 
sweetener aspartame. 
E. coli; 
Precursor in pharmaceutical
Pseudomonas 
[12]
and personal care industry. 
thiazolinophilum 

 
 
177 
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the Production of Biomolecules 
TABLE 5.1 (Continued) 
Name of 
Microbial 
Organisms 
Applications 
References 
the Amino Process 
Involved in the 
Acid 
Production 
L-Histidine Fermentation 
Fermentation,
L-Leucine 
extraction 
L-Lysine 
Fermentation 
Protein 
L-Proline 
hydrolysis, 
fermentation 
Brevibacterium 
flavum 
Brevibacterium 
flavum; E. coli 
C. glutamicum 
Brevibacterium 
flavum; E. coli 
Pre-menstrual pain-food 
supplementary, antispasmodic, 
anti-inflammatory, etc. 
Ingredient for food 
supplements for muscle 
growth and muscular 
insurance. 
Ingredient for food 
supplements for ensuring 
adequate absorption of 
calcium and collagen 
formation, cartilage, and 
connective tissue. 
Stabilizer in many 
intravenous immunoglobulin 
pharmaceutical products. 
Sport drinks for athletes and 
bodybuilders. 
[13] 
[14] 
[11] 
[13] 
5.2.2 SECONDARY METABOLITES 
They have diverse nature of chemical structures, and their complex 
molecular frameworks often appeared to be distinctive. The specificity and 
physiological nature are essential for their production. The products obtained 
from highly unique metabolism in which many of the mechanism is not 
well understood. The product from secondary metabolism characterized to 
produce variety of products with structural modification [15]. The potential 
of secondary metabolites from microbial origin is recognized by several 
decades before the 20th century. 
Secondary metabolites have the ability for the inhibition of primary 
metabolic processes by their antibiotic activity and it acts as anti-metabolites 
and functionally resembled to normal metabolites involved in target binding 
and vital activity. These have a great application in pharmacognosy. Few of 
these are summarized in Table 5.2. 

 
 
 
178 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
TABLE 5.2 Secondary Metabolites and its Mode of Action [16] 
Metabolite 
Source 
Structural 
Commercial 
Mode of 
Microorganism 
Classification Product(s) 
Action 
Penicillins G 
Penicillium rubens, Nonribosomal Benzylpenicillin 
Interferes with 
and V 
P. chrysogenum 
peptide 
and 
biosynthesis 
phenoxymethyl­
of cell wall 
penicillin 
peptidoglycans 
Cephalosporin Acremonium 
Nonribosomal Cephalothin, 
Interferes with 
C 
chrysogenum 
peptide 
cephalexin, and 
biosynthesis 
cefadroxil 
of cell wall 
peptidoglycans. 
Pleuromutilin 
Clitopilus 
Diterpene 
Precursor for the 
Targets peptidyl 
passeckerianus, 
partial chemical 
transferase 
Clitopilus spp. 
synthesis of 
center of 
topical antibiotic 
bacterial 
retapamulin 
ribosome. 
(Altabax). 
Cyclosporin A Tolypocladium 
Nonribosomal Cyclosporine A 
Binds to 
inflatum 
peptide 
(Sandimmune, 
cyclophilin 
Neoral, Restasis, 
A, resulting 
Gengraf) 
in calcineurin 
inhibition 
Ergocryptine 
C. purpurea, C. 
Prenylated 
Partial chemical 
Agonist of 
fusiformis 
nonribosomal 
synthesis of 
dopamine 
peptide 
bromocriptine 
D2 receptors 
(Parlodel and 
and various 
other names). 
serotonin. 
Mizoribine 
Penicillium 
Imidazole 
Bredinin and 
Competitive 
brefeldianum 
nucleoside 
other names 
inhibitor of 
IMPDH. 
Source: Adapted from Ref. [16] 
5.2.3 BIOPOLYMERS 
Plastics are inseparable from our life and its demand is increased over the 
years. Biopolymers are biodegradable in nature produced from microorgan­
isms they are also biodegradable [17]. Various biopolymers are integrative 
part of cellular systems such as Carbohydrate derivatives of starch, cellulose, 
protein molecules, nucleic acids which includes monomers like sugar, amino 

 
 
 
179 
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the Production of Biomolecules 
acids for proteins and nucleotides for nucleic acids. To achieve environ­
mental sustainability biopolymers play many roles in terms of economic and 
environmental concerns. In addition to waste recycling process, biopolymers 
is the alternative for synthetic polymers and remove plastic scraps found in 
compost. It will contribute to more sustainable environment [18]. 
There are many types of biopolymer produced from microorganism 
includes starch, sugar, and cellulose. Starch-based natural polymer observed 
in plant tissues as granules which can be recovered from tissues in huge 
quantities. 
Sugar-based biopolymers are the starting materials for polyhydroxibu­
tyrate extracted from sucrose or starch materials by bacterial fermentation 
process. Polylactides, a form of LA polymers, are made from LA by micro­
bial process produced from sugar beet, potatoes, wheat, and maize [19]. 
The use of cellulose-based biopolymers for making packaging material 
like cellophane is well established they are heavily superior folding proper­
ties with transparent manner. The material is totally biodegradable either 
in the form of cellulose or nitro cellulose. Synthetic-based biopolymers 
are made by synthetic substances considered to be a costlier biodegradable 
polymers. They are used to make mats. Synthetic compounds obtained from 
the petroleum products also employed to make biodegradable polymers for 
example, aliphatic aromatic co-polyesters. 
5.4 INDUSTRIAL APPLICATIONS OF MICROBIAL WHOLE-CELL 
FACTORIES 
Microbial Whole-Cell Factories strongly evolved due to advancements in 
metabolic engineering, system biology for diverse substrate utilization, and 
making availability of WCB for new products substrates made it essential 
for industries. Glucose and sucrose abundant substances used in Industries 
stabilized for microbial cell factories. Process chain of the microbial cell 
factory host organism is followed by engineered microbial metabolism to 
synthesize bioorganic molecules like organic acids, amino acids, secondary 
metabolites and biopolymers, many more novel biomolecules such as 
platform chemicals, etc. More complex physiological pathways involved in 
microbial cell factories. The metabolic precursor molecules and metabolic 
products depicted in Figure 5.1. 

 
 
180 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
FIGURE 5.1 Potential pathways of microbial cell factory. 
5.4.1 FOOD INDUSTRIES 
The identification of significant metabolites from microbial cells prominently 
produced during the fermentation of food products or selected bioprocesses 
essential as food additives or nutraceuticals. Metabolically engineered 
Coli produced vanillin [20]. Ferulic acid converted to vanillin by E. coli 
JM109 cells without accumulate the unwanted vanillian redox products [21]. 
Spontaneous rose of lavin resistant mutants was selected and found to be an 
appropriate method to produce natural riboflavin using Lactobacillus plan-
tarum, Leuconostoc mesenteroides, and Propionibacterium freudenreichii 
[22]. The starter strains can be used to increase the vitamin of food prod­
ucts [23]. Microbial derived exopolysaccharides a unique food component 
produced from dairy bacteria like Lactococcus and Streptococcus spp. and 
nondairy bacteria. Laboratory-based synthesis creates rheology modulation, 
better mouth feel and texture of the dairy products providing health benefits 
through prebiotics [24]. 
5.4.3 PHARMACEUTICAL SECTORS 
Natural Products derived from microorganism in the area of pharmaceutical 
and nutraceutical production is highly essential and demand in recent years. 

 
 
 
181 
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the Production of Biomolecules 
The microbial enzymes produced by microorganisms are applicable in the 
food and pharmaceutical industries [23]. 
5.5 BIOFUEL AND ENERGY SECTORS PRODUCTION OF BIO­
ENERGY AND MATERIALS 
Current situation due to the increase of fuel cost and threat to the ecosystem 
urged the researchers to find energy rich biomolecules from engineering 
microbial fatty acid metabolism to serve as biofuels [25]. Photosynthetic 
microorganisms produce carbon rich molecules and make them commercial­
ized biofuels [26]. Conventional fuel can be blended with bio-butanol [27] 
but other biomolecules like fatty acids and fatty alcohol need to be extracted 
and chemically transesterified from biomass with expense energy rich 
fermentation steps [28]. Alkanes are abundantly appeared in the fossil fuel 
and these forms noted in the fatty acid derived fuel like molecules present 
as hydrocarbons expressed by genetically engineered microorganisms. 
Liquid hydrocarbons on the gaseous phase was recorded in the hydrocarbon 
forming pathway of algae Chlorella variabilis by its enzyme fatty acid photo 
decarboxylase (FAP) [29]. Escherichia coli expressed the enzyme FAP and 
formed volatile hydrocarbons from medium chain fatty acids [30]. 
There is a need of environmental friendly and economically feasible 
renewable energy sources potentially replace the traditional fossil fuels. 
Biological wastes progressively utilized to produce renewable energy by the 
action of microorganisms like bacteria and algae. 
Biofuel is made from biomass resources such as microbial cell mass. 
Biomass has different end products such as heating energy (thermal energy), 
power generation (electrical energy) and transportation fuels. Bioenergy 
is the energy derived from biomass including living microorganisms and 
their metabolic products. Electrochemical detection on a biochip a method 
to enable rapid identification and analysis of pathogenic loads in terms of 
microbial cells and spores in food evaluated. Evaluation of food and compar­
ison made by assays and finding indicator organism in view of bacteriocin 
analysis performed in processed food samples. 
Organic waste materials utilized as a microbial substrates passed through 
the metabolic pathways to produce valuable products, can be used to generate 
energy. 
Bio-electrochemical cells (BEC) generate bioenergy by consuming 
organic waste biomass and discharged waste water. Bioelectricity produced 

 
 
 
 
182 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
from microbial electrolysis cells (MECs) and biological hydrogen produced 
from microbial fuel cells (MFCs) [31, 32]. The working principles of the 
above two fuel cells are similar, therefore it is possible to use common 
microbial strains for the production of bioenergy. Special molecular 
machinery noted in the exo-electrogens (microbial strains) which transferred 
the electrons from conductive surfaces [33]. 
5.6 ENGINEERED PRODUCTION OF MICROBIAL STRAINS 
Improvement of microbial strains used in the industry is the prominent 
because it should be withstanding their genetic nature in many consecutive 
generations. The steps involved in the strain development are presented 
in Figure 5.2. Clustered regularly interspersed short palindromic repeats 
(CRISPR) technique employed for the production of gene integration for 
improvement of strains [34]. The strain improvement increased the devel­
opment of microbial cell factories through the bioprocess technology. The 
newly generated strain is capable of producing quality products with the 
specified conditions specified by industry. The microbes fulfill their nutrient 
requirement by utilizing penta and hexa carbon containing sugars like 
glucose, xylose extracted from disaccharides and polysaccharides along with 
fatty acids. These strains can withstand variety of feed stocks. They are easily 
growing and maintain genetic integrity in a wide range of pH, temperature, 
availability of O2 and other environmental conditions. The process is initiated 
with the selection of wild strain for gene alteration. The important criteria 
for the selection of industrial strain include adaption to gene modification, 
consumption of low-cost feed stocks, increased bioprocess rate. 
5.7 SCREENING AND ANALYSIS TOOLS 
There are many organisms employed to produce microbial strains for 
industrial application which include Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae, Corynbacterium glutamicum, Bacillus sp., Clostridium sp. and 
Psudomonas sp. Gene sequencing of microbial strains are considered to be a 
easy method with involvement of novel tool clustered regularly interspersed 
short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) [35, 36]. Mannheimia succinipro-
ducens produce SA by using its engineered organism [37]. System-based 
model genomically build its enzyme release potential performed in E. coli 
and its biosynthetic exposure to produce many chemicals [38]. Metabolic 

 
 
183 
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the Production of Biomolecules 
engineering participated in the production of quality improved microbial 
strains for the synthesis of chemicals and desired materials. System-based 
metabolic engineering incorporate traditional tools and strategies in the 
system related synthetic biology facilitating high performing strains [39]. 
Scalable fermentation process initiated by high throughput screening (HTS) 
system acting as industrial synthetic biological system monitoring real time 
performance of stains with its growth and productivity [40]. 
FIGURE 5.2 Steps involved in strain development. 

 
184 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
5.7.1 MICROBIAL PRODUCTION BY DE NOVO DESIGN 
Many tools are engaged to study the microbial genes and its characteristics. 
Among this omics tools are finding the way to understand the expression of 
genes, signaling pathway and its functionalities. Construction of transcrip­
tome using next generation sequencing using reference genome sequences 
are in practice. But the sequence data for all the organisms are not readily 
available. The de novo microbial genomic assembly without the specific 
genomic data is the modern approach to find solution for the specific prob­
lems. Trinity is a tool which can be available for studying transcriptome 
special assembly using bioinformatics application [41]. This can be used 
to perform assembly of trascriptome, gene expression analysis in different 
aspects, genome depth measurement using quality reads, clustering, and 
genomic functional analysis. 
5.8 METABOLIC ENGINEERING AND SYSTEM BIOLOGY 
5.8.1 COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY IN BIOPROCESS ENGINEERING 
Computational analysis of microbial colonies needs to understand micro­
bial metabolic concepts like enzyme involved reactions, transcription, 
and translation observation to form design tools. Microbial colonization 
models involved with stochastic models and differential equations [42, 43]. 
A genome scale model named hierarchical-beneficial regulatory targeting 
(h-BeReTa) and transcriptional regulatory network (TRN) were executed in 
the microbial cell factory constructed with Escherichia coli and Corynbac-
terium glutamicum. They can easily find out the transcriptional regulatory 
targets. The byproducts like acetone, fatty acids, tyrosine, and lycopene were 
observed and validated [44]. 
Artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI and ML) role in the field 
of bioprocess technology and system biology sharply increased in recent 
years [45, 46]. 
5.8.2 MATHEMATICAL MODELING 
Many mathematical models based on microbial genetic model for innumerous 
industrial bioprocesses are in practice for the recent years. Mechanistic 
models are not significantly applied to the microbial industrial production. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
185 
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the Production of Biomolecules 
The experimental techniques are potentially improved by the application of 
computational models to address highly multifarious models with the simple 
solutions. The advancement of mechanistic models through the computa­
tional techniques forms regular industrial process in future using microbial 
cell factories. Dynamic modeling provided design for carbon metabolism in 
E. coli [47] and Nitrogen source represented as NH4 which is considered to 
be a limiting source [48]. The dynamic model analyzed in the metabolism 
of E. coli for carbon consist of phosphotransferase system (PTS), glyco­
lytic pathway and pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). Adaptive laboratory 
evolution (ALE) is tool to analyze the growth rate of selected strains by its 
multiomics approach to find the microbial culture profiles by monitoring 
transcriptional and translational metabolism [49]. Genomes can be rewritten 
using the tools like (MAGE) Multiple Automated Genome Engineering [50] 
and (SCRaMbLE) Synthetic Chromosome rearrangement and modification 
by loxP-mediated evolution [51]. 
5.8.2.1 ANALYSIS BY DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS 
Mathematical modeling is supported by computer system and software 
and analysis and output of huge data is possible to apply the continuous 
production of biomass using microbial whole-cell factory. There are many 
microbial kinetics constants and algorithms instigate solution for industrial 
biotechnological problems. 
The following differential equations used in the mathematical modeling 
for microbial cell factories to measure the substrate concentration and 
nutrient requirement by the cells for their metabolic activity and its analysis 
(given in Eqns. (1)–(4)) [52]. 
dS t ( ) = − k µ  ( ) 
t
1 s 
(1)
dt 
dN ( ) 
t = − k µ
2 
N ( ) 
t 
(2)
dt 
t
dX ( ) = µ t( ) 
(3)
dt 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
dP t( ) 
3 ( ) + 4 
P( )t 
(4)
= k µ t  
k µ
dt 
where; S is the substrate (carbon source for energy); N is the Nitrogen (in terms 
of NH4 concentration); X is the biomass (microbial load); and P is the product. 
The rate of substrate consumption by the microbial cell mass is given in 
Eqns. (5) and (6). The values of m s and mN indicated that the consumption of 
substrate of NH4 by the microbial cells in active condition. They are directly 
proportional to the microbial cell mass present in the cell factories. Eqn. (5) 
is modeled based on Monad function providing the substrate (S) consumed 
by microbial cell mass at the rate represented by K1. 
X t( )
µ
t( ) = 
S t( )
S 
(5)
X t( ) + KS 
where; Ks is the constant or saturation of the substrate. 
The dynamics of NH4 is given in Eqn. (6): 
X t( )
µ
t( ) = 
N t( )
N 
(6)
X t( ) + KN 
where; KN is the constant or saturation of the Nitrogen. 
Microbial cell mass dynamics is given in Eqn. (7): 
 
S t( ) 
 
N t( ) 
 
µ t( ) = µmax 
X t( )
 S t( ) + K  N t( ) + K 
 
(7)
 
S1  
N1  
where; m max is the maximum growth rate of microbial cells. 
Ks1 and KN1 = constant value of X 
The differential equation applied model minimizes the deviation 
between experimentally collected data and output from the model algorithm. 
Computing of these parameters supported to find the real-time properties and 
confidence intervals. Microbial production can be estimated by using this 
mathematical modeling to develop productive cell factory. 
186 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
5.8.2.2 STUDY OF MICROBIAL KINETICS 
Growth and multiplication of microbial cells have strongly influenced 
by physical, chemical, and biological parameters of the surrounding 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
187 
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the Production of Biomolecules 
environment. Microbial growth kinetics mediated by enzymatic catalysis 
in which the growth of the microbial cell is directly proportional to the 
substrate concentration of the cell. The measurement of the growth can 
be done by counting the microbial cells, finding the concentration of the 
cell mass, density as its dry weight, turbidity through optical density and 
plate count method. The protein concentration, Adenosine tri-phosphate 
(ATP) and nucleic acid content utilized for the indirect measurement of the 
microbial growth. Growth curve initiate the availability of viable microbial 
cell which grow at lag phase in its new environment and acclimatized in the 
media for their growth and multiplication. The microbial cells enter into the 
log phase the number of cells increased exponentially. During this phase 
the utilization of nutrients increased and in declining phase attained after 
the stationery phase. The growth kinetics of the microorganisms explain 
the inter-relationship between the rate of specific growth of microbe and its 
concentration. The kinetics assessed by feeding process and the growth of 
the microbe is controlled by limiting nutrient content in the growth medium. 
The microbial kinetics can be studied based on its growth, non-growth 
and mixed growth parameters. Products like primary metabolites formation 
cohesively linked with the concentration of the cells. The non-growth linked 
secondary metabolites generated by the microbes not directly involved in the 
growth of the cell but it is strongly associated the function of the microbial 
cells. The microbial product is the combination of growth and non-growth 
associated metabolites of the cellular function. In industrial biotechnology 
the growth kinetics can be studied by using the parameters including specific 
growth rate (μ) and concentration of the substrate(s). These parameters are 
well explained by many models developed during the past decades. Monod 
kinetic model is given in Eqn. (8). 
µ
S
µ = 
max 
(8)
K
S
s + 
where; µ is the specific growth rate; S is the concentration of the substrate; 
K  is the Monad constant; and µ
 is the specific growth rate at maximum
S
(max)
level. 
The Contois model termed as Michaelis kinetic constant directly propor­
tional to the concentration of microbial cell and its specific growth rate is 
indirectly proportional to the concentration of the cell. Eqn. (9) is given as: 
µ
S
max 
µ = 
(9)
K X
S
s 
+ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
188 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
where; X is the concentration of microbial cell mass. 
The maintenance terms incorporated with Monad equation is given in the 
Herbert model presented in Eqn. (10). 
 
S 
 
µ = (µmax + m) 
− m 
(10)
 Ks + S  
Eqns. (8) and (9) used to study the enumeration of microbial cells and 
accumulation of product during batch culture in the bioprocessing. 
The relationship between the microbial growth and formation of the 
industrial product observed by Leudking-Piret equation (Eqn. (11)): 
dp 
dx 
= α 
+ β x 
(11) 
dt 
dt 
where; α is the associated growth factor; β is the non-associated growth 
factor; x is the dry cell weight; and p is the concentration of the product. 
The Leudking-Piret equation is used to estimate the kinetics of cellular 
production in the bioprocess. 
5.8.2.3 FINDING ENZYME PRODUCTION PATHWAY 
Enzymes involved in the metabolic pathways coded by many genes expressed 
as yield of the products [53]. The different expression of metabolic genes 
have complex genes can be studied by synthetic biology. The gene expres­
sion regulation can be studied by transcription and translation process [54, 
55]. Transcription process is well studied in Saccharomyces cerevisiae using 
metabolic engineering by altering the gene for the process. Endogenous and 
exogenous promoters of Saccharomyces cerevisiae are showing wide range 
of gene expression levels in which endogenous promoters mostly used to 
initiate mutagenesis to express desired characteristics. The mutated strains 
were subjected to establish libraries that are potentially modulate transcrip­
tion process and considered to be an effective tool [56]. The synthetic 
biology provides excellent metabolic fux during engineering of yeast genes. 
Translation studies were carried out after the transcription observation. 
Engineered and modified Ribosome binding sites (RBS) employed in the 
study of transcription and observe the protein production potential during 
the process. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
189 
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the Production of Biomolecules 
Shine Dalgarno (SD) sequence contains purine rich sequence observed 
in E. coli as 5′-AGGAGGU-3′ and it is observed in 6–8 bases of the start 
codon, AUG [57]. The SD sequence can be strongly paired with 16s rRNA 
of the 30S ribosomal small subunit. They utilized to determine the rate of 
translation initiation process [54]. Ribosome binding sites (RBS) are acting 
as a engineering tool by activating mutations in E. coli [58]. The scanning 
mechanism available in the initiation of translation requires Kozak sequence 
which is selecting the ribosomes. The recognition of start codon and initia­
tion of translation are mediated by Kozak sequences [59]. The consensus of 
the Kozak sequences of S. cerevisiae can be given as 5-(A/U)A(A/C)A(A/C) 
AAUG UC(U/C) [60] in which the purine is highly influencing the protein 
synthesis. Artificial small yeast promoter was utilized to demonstrate the 
applications of chimeric promoter of S. cerevisiae using Kozak variants [61]. 
5.8.2.4 PROTEIN PRODUCTION ENGINEERING 
Initially the biotechnological protein production implemented by using 
engineered biological cell factories. Escherichia coli as a microbial cell 
factory enable to produce proteins during the past decade. Protein concentra­
tion estimation exhibits the biological process of the bacterial cells. Protein 
abundance map for E. coli show the system-based allocation of proteome, 
its expression pattern and regulation of post translational adaptation and 
visualize resource systems biology for the selected bacteria [62]. 
5.9 MICROBIAL CELL FACTORIES 
5.9.1 BIOTECHNOLOGICAL APPLICATION OF MICROBIAL CELL 
FACTORIES 
Biotechnology facilitates sustainable production of chemicals based on feed 
stocks with minimum usage of conventional petrochemical mediated raw 
materials to the climatic change caused by the emission of greenhouse gases. 
Innovative methods implemented in the bioprocesses in the way of genomics, 
proteomics, molecular biotechnology and system biology [63]. Traditional 
microbial culture and transformation need to be invested more time, energy, 
and technical support and implementation of the specific findings take more 
duration. In the beginning of the cell factory concept, Escherichia coli and 
Saccharomyces cerevisae selected by many researchers, in the event of 

 
 
 
 
 
190 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
system-based biotechnological applications introduced engineering variants 
for the cost intensive large scale industrial production. Systems engineering 
in biotechnological applications are successful in the area of mutagenesis, 
selection of phenotype, gene modification, metabolic engineering [64–68]. 
Gene modification based on bio-operon, bioA, in the host organism Bacillus 
subtilis produced biotin [69]. Bacterial proteins damaged by the environ­
mental oxidants in which cysteine and methionine are readily oxidized. 
Bacteria are having repair system against the reactive oxygen species causing 
oxidative stress [70]. 
5.10 DEVELOPMENT OF BIOSENSORS 
Microbial Cell factory depend on transcription-based biosensors in terms of 
identification of potential production strains. Biosensors studied in Bacillus 
subtilis and Corynebacterium glutamicum using p-coumaric acid [71]. Engi­
neered cell dynamically produce metabolic products by overcoming laborious 
process in practice during the past years. Genetically encoded biosensors 
activated molecules provide readout of fluorescent metabolic products to 
study the transcription factors [72]. Engineered amino acids like L-valine is 
produced in the bacterial strain, Corynebacterium glutamicum based on the 
pyruvate dehydrogenase complex-deficient (PDHC) variety and the process 
is monitored by biosensor. This biosensor monitors the production levels, 
and this is confirmed by cell imaging of the bacterial colonies [73]. 
5.11 3D PRINTING TECHNIQUE 
Additive manufacturing (AM) is termed as 3D (3 dimensional) printing and 
the process involving in building the parts layer by layer by depositing mate­
rial with a specified digital 3D design data. 
Working principle is given as the following: 
i.  In a building platform, a thin layer of powder material is added, with 
the help of power full laser beam the powder is melted to a certain 
point specified by the computer-generated design data. 
ii.  The construction platform is lowered and melted again after addition 
of the powder into another layer. 
The production and processing of sustainable nano- or biomaterials are 
performed using an organic platform such as bacterial bio-films. It is three 

 
 
 
 
 
191 
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the Production of Biomolecules 
dimensional cells which involves a self-generated extra cellular polymetric 
matrix. The composition of proteins, nucleic acids, polysaccharides, and 
lipids constitute the cellular polymetric matrix. The biofilms exhibits high 
mechanical stiffness and inherently tolerant in nature with the effect of 
antibiotics, detergents, pollutants, and also the change of pH due to high 
temperature. The above features makes the biofilms becomes the hotspots 
in the material fabrication and 3D printing in the applications such as bio­
leaching, bio-remediation, material production and waste water purification. 
The three-dimensional (3D) bio-printing is the technology uses a biofab­
rication platform to make the living cells and biomaterial-based 3D objects 
using tissues. Using this type of method enables one to deposit various cells/ 
biomaterials in a predefined location as biofabrication. 
3D bio-printing involves layer by layer method for depositing materials 
known as bio-inks and create tissue like structures which can be used in 
various medical applications and field of tissue engineering. There are three 
steps involved in 3D bio-printing. The flow chart for 3D printing strategies 
presented in Figure 5.3. 
i. 
pre-bio-printing; 
ii. bio-printing; and 
iii. post-bio-printing. 
FIGURE 5.3 3D printing strategies. 

 
 
 
 
192 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
5.12 3D BIO-PRINTING TECHNIQUE 
The preprocessing of bio-printing technique focuses on two aspects, the 
specific cells from the microorganism isolated and enumerated to large 
number of cells. In the other hand the structural and morphology information 
of the targeting cells can be achieved using magnetic resonance image (MRI) 
or computed tomography (CT) or Image technologies. 
The second step is the creation of 3D cell-laden which is constructed by 
3D bio-printing process. The liquid mixture of cells, matrix, and nutrients 
are mostly used for the preparing the bio-inks and which are then placed in a 
printer cartridge of bio-printing systems [74]. 
There are three major subdivisions in 3D bio-printing system as the 
following: 
i. 
inkjet-based bio-printing; 
ii. laser-based bio-printing; and 
iii. extrusion-based bio-printing. 
3D bio-printing system the 3D-structures are constructed using a succes­
sive layer-by layer approach by depositing the cells on to a biocompatible 
scaffold. The bio-ink is referred as ink formulation that allows the printing of 
living cells. In order to achieve the bio-printing process, the bio-ink should 
be selected properly because it should ensure the properties for adequate 
printing fidelity and mechanical properties to ensure printability [75]. 
The maturation of cell-laden structure can be constructed to reinforce 
the development of desired microbial cell factory. The vitro-culture system 
or bio-reactors are used as one potential approach in generating the artificial 
cells by chemical and mechanical demands. Bioreactor is a kind of simulator 
can be controlled and modified the properties of temperature, O2 tension, 
pH, and cell perfusion as well as external stimuli like mechanical forces and 
shear stress. 
5.13 CONCLUSION 
The microbial cell factory role in the engineered production of biomolecules 
over chemical production has more advantages. The cell factories efficiently 
use the whole-cell potential of the microbial cell to produce many prod­
ucts including pharmaceuticals, food ingredients, additives, amino acids, 
antibiotics, and vitamins. Exploration of appropriate production from the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
193 
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the Production of Biomolecules 
microbial cell factory is possible through the novel enzymes catalyzing the 
reactions and providing robust tool for functional genomic, proteomic, and 
many molecular techniques. The emerging trend in computational biology 
create major platform for system-based microbiological cell factory startup 
like industries mediated synthetic chemistry mediated production units in 
wage of renewable resources. Engineered microbial cell with optimized 
enzyme production capacity to make it affordable production pathway 
expected to be tailored in future. System biology accompanied tools become 
a new generation of cell factory microorganism could function as affinity to 
programmable biological production. Better performing microbial cell facto­
ries with desired chemical production by the application of system-based 
molecular engineering. The production of engineered microbial cell is the 
primitive step to achieve our target to initialize novel product development. 
This technology should be ecofriendly, economically feasible and viable to 
all kind of substrates. There is a substantial need to find an appropriate meta­
bolic pathway design for the synthesis of industrially important enzymes. 
The system enabled microbial production is possible through the usage of 
ML and AI principles. The modern internet of things (IoT) era, it is possible 
to find efficient strain to answer the needs of the current situation using 
biomolecules production by accurate whole-cell microbial cell factory. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
3D printing 
• 
bioengineering tools 
• 
bio-printing 
• 
enzyme production pathway 
• 
mathematical modeling 
• 
microbial cell factory 
• 
microbial screening 
REFERENCES 
1. Price, N. D., Papin, J. A., Schilling, C. H., & Palsson, B. O., (2003). Genome scale 
microbial in silico models: The constraints based approach. Trends Biotechnology, 21, 
162–169. 

 
194 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
2. Nielsen, J., & Jewett, M. C., (2008). Impact of systems biology on metabolic engineering 
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. FEMS Yeast Research, 8, 122–131. 
3. Radisky, E. S., & Poulter, C. D., (2000). Biochemistry, 39, 1748–1760. 
4. Hayashi, H., Asabu, Y., Murao, S., & Arai, A., (1995). Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 59, 
246–250 (). 
5. Lee, J. W., Kim, H. U., Choi, S., Yi, J., & Lee, S. Y., (2011). Microbial production of 
building block chemicals and polymers. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 22, 758–767. 
6. Ochsenreither, K., Fischer, C., Neumann, A., & Syldatk, C., (2014). Process 
characterization and influence of alternative carbon sources and carbon-to-nitrogen 
ratio on organic acid production by Aspergillus oryzae DSM1863. Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol., 98, 5449–5460. 
7. Shiono, Y., Akiyama, K., & Hayashi, H., (2000). Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 64, 
103–110 (). 
8. Kuo, Y. H., Kai, K., Akiyama, K., & Hayashi, H., (2012). Tetrahedron Lett., 53, 429–431. 
9. Kinoshita, et al., (1957). Production of L-glutamic acid by various microorganisms. The 
Journal of General and Applied Microbiology, 3, 193–205. 
10. Kalin, I., Assena, S., Danka, O., & Luciano, S., (2013). Biotechnology in the production 
of pharmaceutical industry ingredients: Amino acids. Biotechnology & Biotechnological 
Equipment, 27(2), 3620–3626. 
11.  Amin, G. A., & Al-Talhi, A., (2007). Production of L-glutamic acid by immobilized cell 
reactor of the bacterium Corynebacterium glutamicum entrapped into carrageenan gel 
beads. World Appl. Sci. J., 2(1), 62–67. 
12. Daoust, D. R., (1976). Microbial synthesis of amino acids. In:  Miller, B. M., & Litsky, 
W., (eds), Industrial Microbiology (pp. 106–127). McGraw-Hill Book Company, New 
York. 
13. Kinoshita, S., Nakayama, K., & Kitada, S., (1958). L-lysine production using microbial 
auxotroph. J. Gen. Appl. Microbiol., 4(2), 128–129. 
14. Mahmood, Z. A., (2010). L-lysine: Production through Fermentation (pp. 1–166). VDM 
Verlag, Saarbruken, Germany. 
15. Barger, G., & Carr, F. H., (1907). Alkaloids of ergot. J. Chem. Soc., 9(1), 337–353. 
16. Bills, G. F., Martín, J., Collado, J., Platas, G., Overy, D., Tormo, J. R., Vicente, F., et al., 
(2009). Measuring the distribution and diversity of antibiosis and secondary metabolites 
in the filamentous fungi. Soc. Indus. Microbiol. News, 59, 133–147. 
17. Premraj, R., & Doble, M., (2005). Indian J. Biotechnol., 4, 186. 
18. Davis, L., (1993). Clements, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Cooperative State 
Research Service, Office of Agricultural Materials, Personal Communication. 
19. Alexander, S., (2001). Perspectives for biotechnological production and utilization 
of biopolymers: Metabolic engineering of polyhydroxyalkanoate biosynthesis 
pathways as a successful example. Macromol. Biosci., 1(1), 1–24. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/1616-5195(200101)1:1<1::AID-MABI1>3.0.CO;2-B. 
20. US Congress Office of Technology Assessment, Biopolymers: Making Materials 
Nature’s Way-Background Paper, OTA-BP-E-102 (Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office. September 1993. 
21. Kaplan, D. L., (1992). Mafenals Research Society Bullerin, 17(10), 41. 
22. Pham, C. B., Galvez, C. F., & Padolina, W. G., (1992). Methionine fermentation by 
batch fermentation from various carbohydrates. Asian Food J., 7, 34–37. 

 
195 
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the Production of Biomolecules 
23.  Windsor, E., (1951). α-Aminoadipic acid as a precursor to lysine in Neurospora. J. Biol. 
Chem., 192, 607–609. 
24. Nabot, M., Marie, G., Dharini, S., Fabienne, R., & Cyrielle, G., (2022). Variability 
of bacterial homopolysaccharide production and properties during food processing. 
Biology, 11, 171. 
25. Marella, E. R., Holkenbrink, C., Siewers, V., & Borodina, I., (2018). Engineering 
microbial fatty acid metabolism for biofuels and biochemicals. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 
50, 39–46. 
26. Meadows, C. W., Kang, A., & Lee, T. S., (2018). Metabolic engineering for advanced 
biofuels: Production and recent advances toward commercialization. Biotechnol. J., 13, 
1600433. https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.201600433. 
27. Harvey, B. G., & Meylemans, H. A., (2011). The role of butanol in the development of 
sustainable fuel technologies. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 86, 2–9. 
28. Delrue, F., et al., (2013). Comparison of various microalgae liquid biofuel production 
pathways based on energetic, economic and environmental criteria. Bioresource 
Technol., 136, 205–212. 
29. Sorigué, D., et al., (2016). Microalgae synthesize hydrocarbons from long-chain fatty 
acids via a light-dependent pathway. Plant Physiol., 171, 2393–2405. 
30. Solène, M., Bertrand, L., Stéphanie, B., Damien, S., Adrien, B., Pascaline, A., Li-Beisson, 
Y., et al., (2019). Continuous photoproduction of hydrocarbon drop-in fuel by microbial 
cell factories. Nature Research, 9–13713. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-50261-6. 
31. Logan, B. E., Wallack, M. J., Kim, K. Y., He, W., Feng, Y., & Saikaly, P. E., (2015). 
Assessment of microbial fuel cell configurations and power densities. Environ. Scie. 
Technol. Lett., 2, 206–214. 
32. Dai, H., Yang, H., Liu, X., Jian, X., & Liang, Z., (2016). Electrochemical evaluation of 
nano-Mg(OH)2/graphene as a catalyst for hydrogen evolution in microbial electrolysis  
cell. Fuel, 174, 251–256. 
33. Kracke, F., Vassilev, I., & Krömer, J. O., (2015). Microbial electron transport and 
energy conservation–the foundation for optimizing bioelectrochemical systems. Front. 
Microbiol., 6, 575. 
34. Bassalo, M. C., Garst, A. D., Halweg-Edwards, A. L., Grau, W. C., Domaille, D. W., 
Mutalik, V. K., et al., (2016). Rapid and efficient one-step metabolic pathway integration 
in E. coli. ACS Synth. Biol. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.5b00187. 
35. Tong, Y., Charusanti, P., Zhang, L., Weber, T., & Lee, S. Y., (2015). CRISPR-Cas9 based 
engineering of actinomycetal genomes. ACS Synth. Biol., 4, 1020–1029. 
36. Blin, K., Pedersen, L. E., Weber, T., & Lee, S. Y., (2016). CRISPy-web: An online 
resource to design sgRNAs for CRISPR applications. Synth. Syst. Biotechnol., 1, 
118–121. 
37. Choi, S., Song, H., Lim, S. W., Kim, T. Y., Ahn, J. H., Lee, J. W., et al., (2016). 
Highly selective production of succinic acid by metabolically engineered Mannheimia 
succiniciproducens and its efficient purification. Biotechnol. Bioeng. doi: 10.1002/ 
bit.25988. 
38. Zhang, X., Tervo, C. J., & Reed, J. L., (2016). Metabolic assessment of E. coli as a 
biofactory for commercial products. Metabolic Engineering, 35, 64–74. 
39. Choi, K. R., Jang, W. D., Yang, D., Cho, J. S., Park, D., & Lee, S. Y., (2019). 
Systems metabolic engineering strategies: Integrating systems and synthetic biology 

 
196 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
with metabolic engineering. Trends Biotechnol., 37(8), 817–837. doi: 10.1016/j. 
tibtech.2019.01.003. 
40. Matthew, R., Ke-Chih, L., Kellen, C. M., Eric, K. S., Volker, K., Adam, H. N., Jarett, 
K., et al., (2021). High-throughput optofluidic screening for improved microbial cell 
factories via real-time micron-scale productivity monitoring. Lab Chip, 21, 2901. 
10.1039/d1lc00389e. 
41. Grabherr, M. G., Haas, B. J., Yassour, M., Levin, J. Z., Thompson, D. A., Amit, I., 
Adiconis, X., et al., (2011). Full-length transcriptome assembly from RNA-Seq data 
without a reference genome. Nature Biotechnology, 29, 644. 
42. Gore, J., Youk, H., & Van, O. A., (2009). Snowdrift game dynamics and facultative 
cheating in yeast. Nat Commun., 459, 253256. 
43.  Holmes, E. E., Lewis, M. A., Banks, J. E., & Veit, R. R., (1994). Partial differential 
equations in ecology -spatial interactions and population-dynamics. Ecology, 75, 17–29. 
44. Koduru, L., Meiyappan, L., & Dong-Yup, L., (2018). In silico model
 
-guided 
identification of transcriptional regulator targets for efficient strain design. Microbial 
Cell Factories, 17, 167. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-018-1015-7. 
45. Angermueller, C., Pärnamaa, T., Parts, L., & Stegle, O., (2016). Deep learning for 
computational biology. Mol. Syst. Biol., 12, 878. 
46. Miotto, R., Wang, F., Wang, S., Jiang, X., & Dudley, J. T., (2018). Deep learning for 
healthcare: Review, opportunities and challenges. Brief. Bioinforma., 19, 1236–1246. 
47. Chassagnole, C., Noisommit-Rizzi, N., Schmid, J. W., Mauch, K., & Reuss, M., (2002). 
Dynamic modeling of the central carbon metabolism of Escherichia coli. Biotechnol. 
Bioeng., 79(1), 53–73. doi: 10.1002/bit.10288. PMID: 17590932. 
48. Khanna, & Srivatsava, (2005). Recent advances in microbial polyhydroxyalkanoates. 
Process Biochemistry, 40(2), 607–619. doi: 10.1016/j.procbio.2004.01.053. 
49. Ko, Y. S., Kim, J. W., Lee, J. A., Han, T., Kim, G. B., Park, J. E., & Lee, S. Y., (2020). 
Tools and strategies of systems metabolic engineering for the development of microbial 
cell factories for chemical production. Chem. Soc. Rev., 49(14), 4615–4636. doi: 
10.1039/d0cs00155d. PMID: 32567619. 
50. Wang, P., Xu, H., Li, H., Chen, H., Zhou, S., Tian, F., Li, B. Z., et al., (2020). 
SCRaMbLEing of a synthetic yeast chromosome with clustered essential genes reveals 
synthetic lethal interactions. ACS Synth. Biol., 9, 1181–1189. 
51. Fayu, Y., Changbao, L., Ding, C., Mengjun, T., Haihua, X., Huihui, S., Xianglian, 
G., et al., (2017). CRISPR/Cas9-loxP-mediated gene editing as a novel site-specific 
genetic manipulation tool. Molecular Therapy – Nucleic Acids,  7, 378–386. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.omtn.2017.04.018. 
52. De Jong, H., Casagranda, S., Giordano, N., Cinquemani, E., Ropers, D., Geiselmann, 
J., & Jean-Luc, G., (2017). Mathematical modeling of microbes: Metabolism, gene 
expression and growth. J. R. Soc. Interface, 14, 20170502. http://doi.org/10.1098/ 
rsif.2017.0502. 
53. Pfleger, B. F., Pitera, D. J., Smolke, C. D., & Keasling, J. D., (2006). Combinatorial 
engineering of intergenic regions in operons tunes expression of multiple genes. Nat. 
Biotechnol., 24, 1027–1032. 
54. Besada-Lombana, P. B., McTaggart, T. L., & Da Silva, N. A., (2018). Molecular tools for 
pathway engineering in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 53, 39–49. 
55. Jeschek, M., Gerngross, D., & Panke, S., (2017). Combinatorial pathway optimization 
for streamlined metabolic engineering. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 47, 142–151. 

 
197 
System-Enabled Microbial Cell Factories for the Production of Biomolecules 
56. Decoene, T., De Maeseneire, S. L., & De Mey, M., (2019). Modulating transcription 
through development of semi-synthetic yeast core promoters. PLoS One, 14, e0224476. 
57. Nishizawa, A., Nakayama, M., Uemura, T., Fukuda, Y., & Kimura, S., (2010). Ribosome 
binding site interference caused by Shine-Dalgarno-like nucleotide sequences in 
Escherichia coli cells. J. Biochem., 147, 433–443. 
58. Levin-Karp, A., Barenholz, U., Bareia, T., Dayagi, M., Zelcbuch, L., Antonovsky, N., 
Noor, E., & Milo, R., (2013). Quantifying translational coupling in E. coli synthetic 
operons using RBS modulation and fluorescent reporters. ACS Synth. Biol., 2, 327–336. 
59. Kozak, M., (1984). Selection of initiation sites by eucaryotic ribosomes: Effect of 
inserting AUG triplets upstream from the coding sequence for preproinsulin. Nucleic 
Acids Res., 12, 3873–3893. 
60. Hamilton, R., Watanabe, C. K., & De Boer, H. A., (1987). Compilation and comparison 
of the sequence context around the AUG start codons in Saccharomyces cerevisiae  
mRNAs. Nucleic Acids Res., 15, 3581–3593. 
61. Xu, L., Liu, P., Dai, Z., Fan, F., & Zhang, X., (2021). Fine-tuning the expression of 
pathway gene in yeast using a regulatory library formed by fusing a synthetic minimal 
promoter with different Kozak variants. Microbial Cell Factories., 20, 148. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/s12934-021-01641-z. 
62. Schmidt, A., Kochanowski, K., Vedelaar, S., et al., (2016). The quantitative and 
condition-dependent Escherichia coli proteome. Nat Biotechnol., 34, 104–110.https:// 
doi.org/10.1038/nbt.3418. 
63. Burk, M. J., & Van, D. S., (2016). Biotechnology for chemical production: Challenges 
and opportunities. Trends Biotechnol., 34, 187–190. 
64. Demain, A. L., & Adrio, J. L., (2012). Essential role of genetics in the advancement of 
biotechnology. Methods Mol Biol., 898, 1–40. 
65. Lee, S. Y., Kim, H. U., Park, J. H., Park, J. M., & Kim, T. Y., (2009). Metabolic 
engineering of microorganisms: General strategies and drug production. Drug Discov. 
Today., 14, 78–88. 
66. Na, D., Kim, T. Y., & Lee, S. Y., (2010). Construction and optimization of synthetic 
pathways in metabolic engineering. Curr. Opin. Microbiol, 13, 363–370. 
67. Lee, J. W., Kim, T. Y., Jang, Y. S., Choi, S., & Lee, S. Y., (2011). Systems metabolic 
engineering for chemicals and materials. Trends Biotechnol, 29, 370–378. 
68. Krainer, F. W., Dietzsch, C., Hajek, T., Herwig, C., Spadiut, O., & Glieder, A., (2012). 
Recombinant protein expression in Pichia pastoris  strains with an engineered methanol 
utilization pathway. Microb. Cell Fact, 11, 22. 
69. Van, A. S. W., et al., (2005). Removing a bottleneck in the Bacillus subtilis  biotin 
pathway: BioA utilizes lysine rather than S-adenosylmethionine as the amino donor in 
the KAPA-to-DAPA reaction. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 91, 75–83. 
70. Ezraty, B., Gennaris, A., Barras, F., et al., (2017). Oxidative stress, protein damage 
and repair in bacteria. Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 15, 385–396. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
nrmicro.2017.26. 
71. Binder, S., Siedler, S., Marienhagen, J., Bott, M., & Eggeling, L., (2013). Recombineering 
in Corynebacterium glutamicum combined with optical nanosensors: A general strategy 
for fast producer strain generation. Nucleic Acids Research, 41, 6360–6369. 
72. Rogers, J. K., & Church, G. M., (2016). Genetically encoded sensors enable real-time 
observation of metabolite production. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 113, 2388–2393. 

 
198 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
73. Nurije, M., Alexander, G., Regina, M., Stefan, H., Katharina, Bastian, B., Dietrich, K., 
& Julia, F., (2014). Application of a genetically encoded biosensor for live cell imaging 
of L-valine production in pyruvate dehydrogenase complex-deficient Corynebacterium 
glutamicum strains. PLOS One, 9(1), e85731. 
74. Yu, J., Su, A. P., Wan, D. K., Taeho, H., Yuan-Zhu, X., JunHee, L., & Donghyun, L., 
(2020). Current advances in 3D bioprinting technology and its applications for tissue 
engineering. Polymers, 12, 2958. doi: 10.3390/polym12122958. 
75. Ahangar, P., Megan, E. C., Michael, H. W., & Derek, H. R., (2019). Current biomedical 
applications of 3D printing and additive manufacturing. Appl. Sci., 9, 1713. doi: 
10.3390/app9081713. 

Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 6  
Biotherapeutic Potential and Properties 
of Seaweeds 
MUTHUSAMY SANJIVKUMAR,1 SILAMBARASAN TAMIL SELVAN,2 
BALASUBRAMANIAN VELRAMAR,3 KASILINGAM NAGAJOTHI,1 
SYLVESTER SAYEN MERLIN SOPHIA,1 and 
ALAGARSAMY PARAMESWARI1 
1Department of Microbiology, K.R. College of Arts and Science, Kovilpatti, 
Tamil Nadu, India 
2School of Allied Health Science, VIMS Hospital Campus, Vinayaka 
Missions Research Foundation, Salem, Tamil Nadu, India 
3Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, India 
ABSTRACT 
Marine natural products (NPs) are an eminent source of chemically derived 
groups which have more vital functions and to be developed efficient thera­
peutic products. Seaweed or macroalgae is one of the major sources to obtain 
various bio-therapeutic molecules and it is a multi-billion-dollar industries 
throughout the worldwide. It is based on farming of edible species for the 
production of pigments, polysaccharides, phenolic groups, fatty acids, 
phlorotannins, alkaloids, terpenoids, and halogenated compounds, etc. In 
the last three decades, the finding of metabolites with biotherapeutic and 
pharmaceutical activities from macroalgae has increased significantly. In 
biomedical field, it can be used to treat respiratory weakness, anticoagulant 
in blood product, stabilizing agents in drugs, lotions, medicinal creams, 
antidiabetic, antioxidant, and anticancer agent, etc. The biomolecules 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
200 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
from seaweeds could be used in cough medicines, especially combat 
colds, chronic coughs, and bronchitis. New research on the applications of 
biocidal characteristics of extracted sulfated polysaccharide from seaweeds 
may block the transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 
sexually transmitted disease (STD) viruses such as gonorrhea, genital 
warts and the herpes simplex virus (HSV). This chapter investigates the 
biopotential pharmaceutical, medicinal, and research applications of these 
compounds of macroalgae are discussed. 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
Algae are one of the most important group of organisms grow in various 
types of aquatic environments and some may be found in soil and air. 
They are the primitive type of plants growing in the earth and are micro­
scopic (microalgae) as well as macroscopic (macroalgae) in nature [1]. 
Macroalgae are generally occur in marine environment and they are 
known as seaweeds, belong to Protista kingdom. In the marine ecosystem, 
macroalgae are the predominant primary producers, having thallus like 
structure without true leaf and roots (rhizoids) [2]. They lack of a promi­
nent vascular system and have various color pigments such as gold, blue, 
red, or brown and green, etc. These algae preform photosynthesis through 
their fruiting body like thallus [3]. Seaweeds are occurring on the rocky 
bottom, and they are relatively distributed in various zonation like supra 
littoral (supra tidal), littoral (intertidal) and sublittoral (subtidal) regions 
of the marine ecosystems [4]. 
Macroalgae or Seaweeds are the major renewable bioresources in the 
marine ecosystems with about 6,000 algal species identified so far. Based on 
pigmentations (chlorophyll, phycobiliprotein, and fucoxanthin), seaweeds 
are categorized into different groups like Green (Chlorophyceae), Red 
(Rhodophyceae) and Brown (Phaeophyceae) seaweed [1, 5]. Seaweeds 
have various health promoting bioactive molecules, like pigments, sulfated 
polysaccharides, fibers, fatty acids (monounsaturated, polyunsaturated, 
and highly unsaturated fatty acids), essential amino acids, vitamins, poly-
phenolics, terpenoids, flavonoids, and vital micronutrients (iron, iodine, 
phosphorus, potassium, zinc, manganese, magnesium, calcium, and 
selenium), etc., which are essential food supplement for regular functions 
in living organism and the development of different nutraceuticals [6]. A 
nutraceutical product is a food that influences on human health beyond its 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
201 
Biotherapeutic Potential and Properties of Seaweeds 
nutritional value, thus it might help to prevent various health issues, like 
autoimmune diseases, diabetes, arthritis, ocular, cardiovascular, and cancer 
diseases [7]. 
Marine seaweeds are considered as an eminent source of various bioac­
tive molecules have precious value in recent years and they are widely 
used in food, medicine, fertilizer, bioethanol production and also used in 
different industries such as textiles, dairy, paper, and confectionaries [8]. The 
dried form of seaweeds contains total carbohydrate (21%–61%), proteins 
(3%–50%), lipids (0.5%–3.5%) and minerals (12%–46%) [7, 9, 10]. They 
are a rich source of structurally diversed phycocolloids especially sulfated 
polysaccharides with high nutritional, medical, and industrial importance 
[7]. These molecules from marine seaweeds have been reported various 
broad spectrum of bio-therapeutic and pharmacological activities such as 
antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, antioxidant, anti-neoplastic, antifouling, 
anti-inflammatory, antidiabetic, cytotoxic, and antimitotic activities. They 
can also be utilized effectively to synthesize inorganic nanoparticles and 
discovery of new drugs [11]. 
6.1.1 SEAWEED POLYSACCHARIDES 
Seaweeds consist large amount of polysaccharides such as carrageenan, 
laminaran, galactan, agar, alginates, fucoidan, and ulvans and found in cell 
wall of green, brown, and red algae. These polysaccharides are responsible 
for the storage and structural support in algae [12]. They are the polymers 
of monosaccharides bonded with glycosidic linkages and some also have 
linear backbones with repeat disaccharides [13]. These polysaccharides 
have various applications and are used as stabilizers, thickeners in food and 
beverage industries. These are also an important source in cosmetic formula­
tions like moisturizers, emulsifiers, hair conditioners and wound-healing 
agents, etc. [14]. 
Agar, alginate, fucoidan, and laminarinan are the most predominantly 
found in the cell wall structure of brown seaweed (Phaeophyceae), including 
Macrocystis pyrifera, Laminaria digitata, L. hyperborean, L. japonica, 
Fucus vesiculosis, and Ascophyllum nodosum [14, 15]. Carrageenan (kappa, 
lambda, and iota forms) as sulfated polysaccharide are mostly extracted 
from red seaweed such as Kappaphycus sp., Euchema sp., Chondrus cripus, 
Gigartina stellate and Hypnea. Ulvan and cellulose are usually from the 
cell wall of green algae belongs to Ulvales [16, 17]. The polysaccharides 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
202 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
especially alginate, carrageenan, fucoidan, and ulvan have expressed strong 
biotherapeutic applications such as antimicrobial, antiviral, antioxidant, 
anti-inflammatory, antitumor, anti-thrombosis, anti-coagulation, immuno­
stimulatory, pulmonary fibrosis, hyperplasia prevention, gastrointestinal, 
regenerative, wound dressing, drug delivery and nano-medicine applications 
[17]. 
6.1.2 OTHER BY-PRODUCTS FROM SEAWEED 
Pigments are determining the color of algae. Especially, green color is 
responsible for the occurrence of a-chlorophylls and b-chlorophylls, 
red color is favored to phycobilins, like phycocyanin and phycoerythrin 
[16]. The brown algae are usually containing β-carotene, fucoxanthin, 
chlorophylls a, c1, and c2 [13]. Algae also consist of lipid groups such 
as glycolipids, non-polar glycerolipids (neutral lipids) and phospholipids 
(phosphatidylinositol, phosphatidylserine, phosphatidyl-ethanolamine, 
phosphatidic acid, phosphatidyl-glycerol, and phosphatidylcholine) [18]. 
They are also containing phenolic groups including phlorotannins, flavo­
noids, phenolic terpenoids, bromophenols, and mycosporine-like amino 
acids as secondary metabolites with a broad spectrum of biotherapeutic 
property [11]. Apart from the above given components, there are few more 
biotherapeutic molecules are observed like alkaloids, terpenes, lectins, 
and halogenated groups. These biomolecules are extracted from marine 
seaweeds with high potential of antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, anti-
inflammatory, antioxidant, anticancer property and also influences in 
cosmeceutical, food, pharmaceutical, and nutraceutical industries [15, 17]. 
By keeping this view, this chapter discusses the bio-therapeutic efficacy of 
seaweed components. 
6.1.3 BIO-THERAPEUTIC POTENTIAL OF SEAWEED COMPONENTS 
Seaweeds are the major marine bioresources, have been widely used in 
recent years due to their bio-therapeutic and chemical properties to find new 
bioactive molecules with economic and valuable applications for animal and 
humankind (Figure 6.1). Bio-therapeutic properties of seaweeds are given in 
Figure 6.1. 

 
 
203 
Biotherapeutic Potential and Properties of Seaweeds 
FIGURE 6.1 Schematic diagram of bio-therapeutic efficacy of seaweed components. 
6.2 ANTIMICROBIAL PROPERTY OF SEAWEEDS 
6.2.1 ANTIBACTERIAL ACTIVITY 
The antimicrobial efficacy of marine seaweeds was mainly attained by  
the presence of number of chemical groups including fatty acids, phenols,  
terpenes, acetogenins, indoles, and volatile halogenated hydrocarbons  
[17] (Table 6.1). In accordance with these, Shanmughapriya et al. [19]  
reported that the antimicrobial efficacy of bioactive component extracted  
from various seaweeds such as Acrosiphonia orientalis, Chaetomorpha  
antennina, Gracilaria corticata, Sargassum wightii and Stocheospermum  
against different clinical pathogens like Staphylococcus aureus, Strepto
coccus epidermidis, Bacillus subtilis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Esch
erichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Proteus mirabilis. Enterococcus  
faecalis, non-hemolytic Streptococcus and Micrococcus luteus through  
agar-well diffusion assay method. They also expressed that the sea weeds  
A. orientalis showed maximum activity (70%) against all the tested organ
isms. S. marginatum displayed 20.0 mm activity against K. pneumoniae  
-
-
­

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
204 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
with the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) and minimal bactericidal 
concentration (MBC) values are less than 1 µg/ml. In another report, Mani­
kandan et al. [20] documented that the antimicrobial activity of methanol 
mediated secondary metabolite extract of seaweeds (P. tetrastromatica, S. 
margintum, G. lithophila, Caulerpa sp., G. corticate, and V. paachanima) 
against multi-drug resistant (MDR) and Non-MDR isolates like S. aureus, 
P. aeruginosa, E. coli and Klebsiella sp., under laboratory condition. They 
also stated that the methanolic extracts of G. lithophila expressed maximum 
(23 mm) growth inhibition against MDR of S. aureus. 
The bioactive secondary metabolite extracted from Rhodophyceae 
showed that the maximum zone of growth inhibition against the clinical 
pathogens like E. coli (20 mm), S. aureus (22 mm) and E. faecalis (24 mm), 
respectively through agar-well diffusion method by Zbakh et al. [21]. El 
Shafay et al. [22] evaluated that the antibacterial activity of chloroform, 
diethyl ether, ethanol, and methanol mediated secondary metabolite extracts 
(50, 75 and 100 µl) of red algae C. rubrum, S. vulgare, S. fusiforme, and 
P. pavonia against MDR clinical bacterial strains like P. aeruginosa (PA1 
and PA2), S. aureus (SA1, SA2, SA3, and SA4), S. flexneri, E. coli, K. 
pneumoniae, and Corynebacterium sp. under laboratory conditions through 
agar-well diffusion assay. They also denoted that 100 µl of diethyl ether 
extract of S. fusiforme expressed maximum (22 mm) inhibition zone against 
Staphylococcus aureus (SA2). Vimala and Poonghuzhali [23] evaluated 
that the antimicrobial efficacy of secondary metabolite from Hydroclathrus 
clathratus against various clinical pathogens such as P. aeruginosa (26.33 
mm), S. aureus (21.00 mm), E. coli (19.32 mm), Bacillus subtilis (18.33 
mm), K. pneumoniae (18.14 mm), A. niger (18.33 mm) and A. flavus (18.00 
mm) through agar-well diffusion assay. Likewise, the methanolic extracts of 
secondary metabolite from Turbinaria ornata and Padina tetrastromatica 
showed that 13 mm of growth inhibition against B. subtilis and 12 mm for 
Micrococcus luteus, respectively using agar-well diffusion method by Rani 
et al. [24]. 
In another report, Sasikala & Geetha Ramani [25] studied that the 
antibacterial efficiency of methanolic extract of bioactive metabolites from 
seaweeds S. swartzii exhibited the maximum inhibition activity against the 
clinical human pathogens like E. faecalis (27 mm) and S. pyogenes (23 
mm) as well as the metabolites of J. rubens showed the activity against 
E. faecalis (26 mm) and S. pyogenes (22 mm), respectively under labora­
tory condition. Similarly, Li et al. [8] evaluated the antimicrobial efficacy 
of secondary metabolites obtained from U. prolifera expressed highest 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
205 
Biotherapeutic Potential and Properties of Seaweeds 
zone of growth inhibition (14 mm) against A. hydrophila under labora­
tory conditions. Klomjit et al. [26] portrayed the antibacterial efficacy of 
bioactive compound (fucosterol & (3β,24Z)-Stigmasta-5, 24(28)-dien-3-ol 
and phloroglucinol) extracted from Padina australis showed the inhibition 
zone against methicillin-resistant S. aureus (14 mm) through disc diffusion 
assay. 
6.2.2 ANTIFUNGAL ACTIVITY 
Antifungal efficiency of methanol mediated bioactive molecules (1 mg/ml 
concentration) extracted from Usnea sp. showed maximum growth inhibi­
tion zone (34 mm) against M. furfur with the MIC and minimal fungicidal 
concentration (MFC) values of 16 and 64 μg/ml, respectively under in vitro 
condition was reported by Rukayadi et al. [27]. Chanthini et al. [28] performed 
antifungal efficacy of ethyl acetate mediated bioactive molecules extracted 
from marine seaweed likes E. flexuosa and C. antennina showed maximum 
activity (94 and 84%) against a phyto-fungal pathogen Alternaria solani 
under laboratory condition through agar-well diffusion assay. In another 
study, Lopes et al. [29] portrayed the antifungal activity of phlorotannins 
extracted from C. usneoides expressed highest activity (20 mm) against E. 
floccosum and T. rubrum with the MIC value of 15.6 mg/mL, respectively 
under laboratory condition. Kim et al. [30] documented the extraction of 
bioactive molecule (fucofuroeckol-A) from E. bicyclis expressed highest 
antifungal activity (19 mm) against C. albicans with the MIC value of 512 
µg/mL. 
Similarly, Subbiah et al. [31] studied the antifungal activities of both 
chloroform and methanol mediated secondary metabolite extract of Spato-
glossum asperum against various clinical pathogens like C. albicans, C. 
tropicalis, T. mentagrophytes, and A. flavus using disc diffusion method. They 
also stated that the chloroform mediated extract showed highest (98.83%) 
activity against A. flavus as well as the methanol mediated extract exhib­
ited the activity against C. albicans (57.14%) and C. tropicalis (54.75%). 
In another study, Saleh & Mariri [32] achieved the antifungal activity of 
different extracts of seaweeds from Latakia Coast, Syria, using fungal 
pathogens like A. niger and C. albicans under laboratory conditions using 
disc diffusion method. They also observed that the hexane mediated extract 
of L. papilosa exhibited 17 mm of activity against A. niger with the MIC 
value of 0.11 mg/l. Shibu [33] studied the antifungal efficiency of ethanol 
mediated secondary metabolite extracted from S. wightii expressed the zone 

 
 
 
 
 
 
206 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
of inhibition (11 mm) against C. albicans with 2,000 μg/ml concentration 
through disc diffusion method. 
6.2.3 ANTIVIRAL ACTIVITY 
Ghosh et al. [34] attained the antiviral efficiency of sulfated polysaccharides 
extracted from marine seaweed Sebdeniia polydactyla showed activity 
against Influenza, Herpes, and HIV viruses. Similarly, various researchers 
have been studied the extracted polysaccharides from Monostroma nitidum, 
Chaetomorpha crassa, Ulva fasciata, Codium latum and Caulerpa racemose 
expressed activity against HSV 1 and 2 viruses [16, 35, 36]. In another study, 
Wang et al. [37] documented the antiviral property of bioactive secondary 
metabolites extracted from brown seaweed H. clathratus against HSV-1 
and HSV-2, respectively with the EC50 values of 6.25 μg/ml using MTT 
[3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenlytetrezolium bromide] method. 
Kim et al. [38] displayed the antiviral efficacy of methanol mediated bioac­
tive compound extracted from Undaria pinnatifida showed highest activity 
with the EC50 0.05 mg/mL and CC50 1.02 mg/mL values against feline 
calicivirus (FCV) through plaque reduction assay. Likewise, the bioactive 
compounds from both U. fasciata and C. decorticatum expressed highest 
antiviral activity (99.9%) against HSV-1 than the HSV-2 (55.5%) as well as 
P. capitatus and S. zonale were also showed more activity (96 and 95.8%) 
against HSV-2 by Soares et al. [39]. 
Bedoux et al. [3] evaluated the antiviral efficiency of extracted sulfated 
polysaccharides of R. pseudopalmata, S. fluitans, S. filiformis and H. cornea 
against Herpes simplex virus (HSV-Type 1) by neutral dye method. They 
were also observed that the extracted polysaccharide from S. fluitans and 
S. filiformis showed maximum activity (89%) against HSV Type-I with the 
EC50 values of 42.8 and 136.0 μg/ml, respectively, under in-vitro condi­
tion. In another report, Gheda et al. [40] performed the antiviral activity 
of bioactive molecules extracted from marine seaweeds L. obtusa and S. 
vulgare expressed highest percentage of inhibition 82.36 and 81.61% against 
hepatitis C virus under in-vitro conditions. Jang et al. [41] investigated the 
antiviral property sulfated polysaccharide lambda-carrageenan (λ-CGN) 
from red algae expressed highest activity (90%) against influenza virus A 
and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) with 
1.4 and 0.9 μg/ml EC50 values. 

 
 
 
Bioactive
Sources 
Applications 
References 
Compounds 
U. fasciata 
Ulvan 
Antibacterial and antifungal activity 
[42] 
S. wightii 
Fucoidan 
Antibacterial activity 
[43] 
S. wightii 
Fucoidan 
Antimicrobial activity 
[44] 
H. elongata 
Fucoxanthin 
Antibacterial and antioxidant activity 
[45] 
S. asperum 
Fucoidan 
Antibacterial and antioxidant activity 
[46] 
A. nodosum and F. 
Polyphenols 
Antimicrobial activity 
[47]
serratus  
Fucus vesiculosus 
Fucoidan 
Antibacterial activity 
[48]  
S. ilicifolium and S. 
Antibacterial, antioxidant, and
Fucoidan 
[49]
angustifolium 
antiviral activity 
D. indica, P. tenuis, C. Fucoxanthin 
Antibacterial and antioxidant activity 
[50] 
sinuosa and I. stellate 
 
 
207 
Biotherapeutic Potential and Properties of Seaweeds 
TABLE 6.1 Antimicrobial Efficacy of Bioactive Compounds Derived from Marine 
Seaweeds 
6.2.4 ANTIOXIDANT ACTIVITY 
The bioactive compounds from marine seaweeds possessed high antioxidant 
property and they could able to neutralize the free oxygen radicals evolved 
from metabolism. Various researches have been done to determine such 
activity by different researchers (Table 6.2). Qi et al. [51] evaluated the 
antioxidant property of various sulfated polysaccharides extracted from 
Ulva pertusa showed high (91%) hydroxyl radical scavenging activity and 
88% of reducing power activity under in-vitro condition. Souza et al. [52] 
investigated the antioxidant activity of extracted polysaccharides like iota, 
kappa, and lambda carrageenans as well as fucoidan from F. vesiculosus and 
fucans exhibited high superoxide radical scavenging activity with the IC50 
values of 0.112, 0.332, 0.046, and 0.05 mg/mL, respectively. Souza et al. [53] 
documented the antioxidant potential of sulfated polysaccharides from red 
algae G. birdiae expressed maximum (90%) DPPH scavenging activity with 
the IC50 value 1.62 mg/ml. In another study, Shonima et al. [54] reported that 
the polysaccharide extracted from U. fasciata possessed maximum (81%) 
hydroxyl radical scavenging activity with 70 mg/ml of IC50 value. 
Mahendran & Saravanan [55] suggested that the extracted sulfated 
polysaccharide from marine green seaweed C. racemosa expressed highest 
(80.24%) antioxidant activity at 1,000 mg/ml concentration. Maruthupandi 

 
 
 
 
 
208 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
et al. [56] assessed the antioxidant efficiency of sulfated polysaccharide from 
S. tennerimum under in-vitro condition. Who also observed the extracted 
polysaccharide showed maximum scavenging activity like DPHH (84%), 
super oxide radical (82%) assay and total antioxidant (42 mg/g) assay, respec­
tively. Likewise, antioxidant efficacy of extracted seaweed polysaccharide 
carrageenan from Kappaphycus alvarezii exhibited total antioxidant (87%) 
activity, nitric oxide (NO) radical (80.42%), DPPH (56.26%), hydroxyl 
radical (61.4%) scavenging activities and reducing power assay (46.57%) 
at 100 mg/ml concentration were documented by Suganya et al. [17]. In 
accordance with this, the polysaccharides from S. ceylonensis and U. lactuca 
showed the maximum (83.3%) ABTS and hydroxyl radical (80%) scav­
enging activities at 4 mg/ml. concentration [57]. Dave et al. [58] documented 
the antioxidant potential of extracted polysaccharide from S. tenerrimum and 
S. cinctum, respectively, at 1,000 μg/ml concentration showed highest (71.18 
& 75.0%) DPPH radical scavenging activity. 
Wang et al. [59] evaluated the antioxidant properties of sulfated polysac­
charides from S. fulvellum showed highest percentage of inhibition (74.55%) 
of DPPH scavenging assay through in-vitro condition. Arunkumar et al. [60] 
performed the extraction and biomedical application of sulfated polysac­
charides from different seaweeds such as P. hornemannii, S. hypnoides, 
A. taxiformis, C. clavulatum, and P. pavonica. They were observed the 
extracted polysaccharide of P. pavonica showed the maximum (63%) DPPH 
scavenging activity at 1 mg/ml concentration. Wang et al. [61] reported the 
antioxidant activity of ulvan extracted from U. pertusa expressed the highest 
percentage of inhibition 83.14% of superoxide radical, 58.45% of ABTS, 
43.65% of hydroxyl radical and 57.37% of DPPH scavenging activity at 
0.2–8.0 mg/ml concentration, respectively, under in-vitro condition. 
TABLE 6.2 Antioxidant Activity of Bioactive Compounds Derived from Marine Seaweeds 
Sources 
Bioactive 
Applications 
References 
Compounds 
S. thunbergii 
Fucoidan 
Antimicrobial and anticancer 
activity 
Zhuang et al. [62] 
Cytophaga sp. 
κ-carrageenan 
Antioxidant and anti-tumor 
activity 
Haijin et al. [63] 
Brown seaweeds Fucoidan 
Anticoagulant, anti-
inflammatory activity 
Cumashi et al. [64] 
M. latissimum 
Sulfated 
polysaccharide 
Antioxidant and anti-coagulant 
activity 
Zhang et al. [65] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
209 
Biotherapeutic Potential and Properties of Seaweeds 
TABLE 6.2 (Continued) 
Sources 
Bioactive 
Applications 
References 
Compounds 
S. confusum 
Polysaccharide 
hydrolysates 
Antioxidant and antidiabetic 
activity 
Yang et al. [1] 
H. musciformis 
κ-carrageenan 
Antioxidant, antimicrobial, and 
anticancer activity 
Souza et al. [5] 
Red seaweed 
Carageenan 
Antioxidant and anticoagulant 
activity 
Saluri & Tuvikene 
[66] 
S. muticum 
Fucoidan 
Antioxidant activity 
Kurnialahi et al. 
[67] 
6.2.5 ANTICANCER ACTIVITY 
The secondary metabolites from different seaweeds are the excellent source 
of anticancer activity. Zhou et al. [68] attained the anticancer efficacy of 
extracted polysaccharide carrageenan from C. ocellatus showed maximum 
activity (80%) on H-22 (mouse liver cell line) under laboratory condition. 
Likewise, Gomez et al. [69] evaluated the anticancer property of extracted 
bioactive molecules from different seaweeds like E. menziesii, C. fragile, 
S. muticum, E. binghamiae, C. clavulatum and L. pacifica through in-vitro 
condition. Among them, they also observed the compound from C. clavu-
latum, S. muticum and E. binghamiae expressed the maximum percentage of 
HCT-116 colon cancer cells with the IC50 values of 6.492, 5.531, and 2.843 
μg/ml, respectively. The antitumor activity of extracted bioactive molecules 
from brown alga S. oligocystum against K562 cell lines was performed 
through MTT assay and trypan blue exclusion test by Zandi et al. [70]. Like­
wise, Ahna et al. [71] documented that the sulfated polysaccharide extracted 
from E. cava expressed the highest percentage of cell inhibition against the 
cell lines such as mouse mammary carcinoma (FM3A) and colon carcinoma 
(B16F10) cell lines, respectively at 9.4–75 mg/ml concentration. 
In another research, the sulfated polysaccharides (SP1) from I. cordata 
expressed the antitumor activity against HeLa, HT-29, and PC-3 cell lines 
through laboratory condition. The SP1 displayed an excellent percentage 
cell inhibition against HeLa (68.4%), HT-29 (59.9%) and PC-3 (59.8%) cell 
lines. at 1,000 μg/ml [72]. Deepika [73] assessed the anticancer efficiency 
of sulfated polysaccharides from S. wightii by MTT assay using HCT116 
cell lines expressed highest percentage of cell inhibition (80%) with the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
210 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
IC50 value of 80 μg/ml. Similarly, Omar et al. [74] evaluated the anticancer 
activity of extracted bioactive molecules from red algae L. papillosa under 
in-vitro condition. Yousefi et al. [75] portrayed the anticancer activity of 
fucoxanthin from different species P. tenuis, C. sinuosa, I. stellate and D. 
indica of brown seaweeds against breast cancer cell lines through MTT 
assay. They were observed the extracted fucoxanthin from D. indica showed 
highest percentage of cell inhibition (81%) at 50 μg/ml concentration. Gheda 
et al. [76] reported the cytotoxic property of extracted polysaccharides of J. 
rubens using breast (MCF7) and colon cancer cell lines by MTT assay. Who 
also denoted that the inhibitory concentration value at 50 (IC50) of extracted 
polysaccharide was found to be 31.25 and 20.0 mg/ml, respectively. 
Shofia et al. [77] achieved the cytotoxic effect of bioactive compound 
from brown seaweed S. longifolium using colon cancer (HCT 116) cell lines 
with highest percentage of cell inhibition (80%) through MTT assy. Haq et al. 
[78] investigated the anticancer properties of Chaetomorpha sp. using breast 
cancer cell lines through MTT assay, exhibited maximum percentage of cell 
inhibition with the IC50 value 225.18 μg/ml. Banuelos et al. [79] documented 
that the cytotoxic and anti-proliferative activity of hexane mediated bioac­
tive molecule extract of E. menziesii showed maximum activity (79%) under 
laboratory condition. In accordance with these, Su et al. [80] investigated the 
anticancer effect of fucoidan from brown seaweeds using HCT-116 cell lines 
under in-vitro condition exhibited the percentage of cell inhibition (61.08%) 
at 500 μg/ml concentration. Karthick et al. [81] tested the anticancer activity 
of secondary metabolites from S. swartzii and S. wightii using human breast 
adenocarcinoma (MCF-7) cell line displayed 89% of cell inhibition. 
6.2.6 ANTI-INFLAMMATORY ACTIVITY 
Cumashi et al. [64] studied the anti-inflammatory efficacy of fucoidan 
obtained from brown algae using albino rats. In another report, Coura et 
al. [82] evaluated the anti-inflammatory effect of sulfated polysaccharides 
from red seaweed G. cornea significantly inhibited (67%) paw edema at 9 
mg/kg concentration. They also observed while increasing the concentra­
tion of the polysaccharide (27 mg/kg), the percentage of inhibition (32%) 
was also decreased (Table 6.3). Likewise, Sanjeewa et al. [83] assessed the 
anti-inflammatory potential of crude polysaccharide from S. horneri showed 
highest percentage of inhibition (79%) with the IC50 value of 95.7 μg/mL 
under in-vitro condition. Makkar and Chakraborty [84] documented the 

 
 
 
 
211 
Biotherapeutic Potential and Properties of Seaweeds 
anti-inflammatory property of sulfated polygalactans extracted from red 
seaweed G. opuntia showed maximum inhibitory activities with the IC50 
values of 0.01, 0.03, and 0.24 mg.ml. respectively for cyclooxygenase-1, 
cyclooxygenase-2 and 5-lipoxygenase. Wang et al. [61] documented both 
the in-vitro and in-vivo anti-inflammatory activity of sulfated polysaccharide 
extracted from S. fulvellum showed maximum inhibition activity with the 
decreased production rate of inflammatory molecules including NO, tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha, interleukin-1 and interleukin-6, and prostaglandin E2, 
in polysaccharide treated cells in zebrafish. 
TABLE 6.3 Anti-Inflammatory Activity of Bioactive Compounds Derived from Marine 
Seaweeds 
Sources 
Bioactive 
Compounds 
Applications 
References 
C. racemose 
Sulfated 
polysaccharides 
Anti-inflammatory activity 
Ribeiro et al. [85] 
S. micracanthum Sargachromenol 
Anti-inflammatory activity 
Yang et al. [86] 
S. siliquastrum 
Fucoxanthin 
Anti-inflammatory activity 
Heo et al. [87] 
S. henslowianum Fucoidan 
Anti-inflammatory activity 
Han et al. [88] 
S. binderi 
Fucosterol 
Anti-inflammatory activity 
Fernando et al. [15] 
6.2.7 ANTIDIABETIC ACTIVITY 
Hardoko et al. [89] investigated the antidiabetic activity of bioactive mole­
cules like laminaran, fucoidan, and alginic acid from the brown seaweeds 
S. duplicatum and T. decurens through standard procedure. Among them, 
laminaran from S. duplicatum expressed highest activity against type 2 
antidiabetic with the IC50 value of 36.13 ppm, followed by laminaran of 
T. decurens with 44.48 ppm IC50 value. In another study, the anti-diabetic 
activity of different concentrations (25, 50, 75, and 100 μg) of extracted 
polysaccharide fucoidan from P. distromatica was determined through an 
inhibitory effect of both α-amylase and α-glucosidase by Paul [90]. Who 
also observed the maximum percentage inhibition of α-amylase (65.6%) 
as well as α-glucosidase (70.43%), respectively at 100 μg concentration of 
polysaccharide. Unnikrishnan et al. [91] studied the antidiabetic potential of 
extracted secondary metabolites from S. polycystum and S. wightii by using 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
212 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
in-vitro enzyme inhibitory assays. They were displayed that the methanol 
mediated extract of S. wightii showed the highest (81%) inhibition against 
dipeptidyl peptidase-IV with the IC50 value 38.27 μg/ml. Similarly, the ethyl 
acetate mediated extract of S. polycystum exhibited maximum (79%) inhibi­
tion against α-amylase with 438.5 μg/ml of IC50 value. Mohapatra et al. [92] 
studied the antidiabetic activity of ethyl acetate mediated secondary metabo­
lite extract (EAU) of U. fasciata under in-vitro alpha-amylase inhibiting 
assay. This extract effectively reduced the fasting plasma glucose level in 
normal mice at 200 mg/kg dose concentration after 6 days of EAU treatment. 
Makkar and Chakraborty [84] assessed the antidiabetic efficiency of 
sulfated polygalactans extracted from K. alvarezii and G. opuntia through 
in-vitro condition. Who also denoted that the sulfated polygalactans from 
G. opuntia expressed significant inhibitory effect against α-amylase, 
α-glucosidase and dipeptidyl peptidase-4 with the respective IC50 of 
0.04, 0.09, and 0.09 mg/mL Ponnanikajamideen et al. [93] attained the 
antidiabetic activity of bioactive molecule from marine brown seaweed P. 
tetrastromatica using male albino rats at the concentrations of 250, 500 
mg/kg and 1 g/kg. About 500 mg/kg of bioactive molecules treated rats 
gained more body weight and a significant decrease in food and water 
intake in comparison with diabetic control rats. They also denoted that the 
biomolecule treated rats have more plasma insulin, total hemoglobin and 
decreased plasma glucose and glycosylated hemoglobin than the control 
rats. The antidiabetic activity of ethyl acetate mediated biotherapeutic 
molecules extract of L. dendroidea showed highest (82%) α-glucosidase 
inhibitory activity. In comparison with diabetic control group, after 3 
hours of treatment [94]. Osman et al. [95] tested the antidiabetic efficacy 
of methanolic extract of bioactive molecules from different seaweeds A. 
fragilis, C. myrica, H. cuneiformis, L. papillosa, S. cinereum, and T. turbi-
nate through inhibition of α-glucosidase method. Subsequently, the highest 
inhibition activity was found to be 53% for H. cuneiformis at 1,000 μg/ml 
concentration with 676.9 μg/ml IC50 value. 
6.2.8 MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITY 
Seaweeds are also a source of wound healing process and it is a notable process 
leading to the restoration of injured tissues. There are various researches 
have been done the bioactive molecules especially polysaccharides and 
flavonoids from seaweeds could able to restore the damaged tissues, wound 

 
 
 
213 
Biotherapeutic Potential and Properties of Seaweeds 
contraction and increased rate of epithelization [96]. Likewise, Trombetta 
et al. [97] reported that the wound healing property of aqueous extract of 
polysaccharides from O. ficus-indica using albino rats. Fard et al. [98] 
studied the wound healing property of ethanol mediated bioactive molecules 
extract of E. cottonii had better wound healing promoting property than 
honey. Premarathna et al. [99] documented the wound healing activity of 
aqueous extracts of biotherapeutic molecules from S. illicifolium expressed 
significant (87.83%) effect within 24 h of incubation in comparison with the 
control (46.11 ± 0.54%) groups. 
Marine macroalgae can also be produced bioplastic, is an alternative 
source to reduce environmental pollution and it is one of the most emerging 
applications. Bioplastics are mostly biosynthesized by using sorghum and 
red seaweed E. spinosum with the properties of density (0.95 g/cm3), water 
uptake (21.265%), tensile strength (21.265 MPa) and elongation (4.467%) 
[100]. Seaweeds are acted as an eminent source of bioethanol. Macro-algae 
contain quite a sufficient quantity of carbohydrates (more than 60% dry 
weight) vital for the biosynthesis of bioethanol through fermentation condi­
tion [101]. Which is predominately synthesized from the extract of marine 
brown seaweed L. hyperborean [101]. Afterward, different researchers 
documented the potential of various seaweeds for bioethanol production 
[102]. Marine seaweed like K. alvarezii also serve in clean-up process 
namely bioremediation to remove waste toxic metals such as lead, copper, 
and cadmium, etc. [103]. 
6.3 CONCLUSION 
Seaweeds are the major bioresources and most essential component of all 
ecosystems. They have different active bio-components with various appli­
cations in biotherapeutic and biomedical field. The bioactive compounds 
can overcome many health issues and problems of humankind as well as to 
develop new technologies such as natural anticoagulant, antidiabetic, and 
anti-foulants, etc. This review touch the major facts of the most important 
bioactive metabolites, as well the antimicrobial, antioxidant, and anti-cancer 
efficacy of seaweeds in detail, there are also numerous biotherapeutic 
molecules or metabolites which are still a mystery and researchers are tries 
to discover all the significant compounds to help the human and animal 
welfare. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
214 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are gratefully acknowledged the management and the Principal 
of K.R. College for their moral support. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
anticancer agent 
• 
antidiabetics 
• 
antioxidant 
• 
antiviral activity 
• 
bioactive components 
• 
bio-therapeutic potential 
• 
polysaccharides 
• 
seaweed 
REFERENCES 
1. Yang, C., Chen, Y., Chen, M., Jia, R., Liu, B., & Zhao, C., (2017). The antidiabetic 
activity of brown seaweed Sargassum confusum polysaccharide hydrolysates in insulin 
resistance Hep G2 cells in vitro. Res. J. Biotechnol., 12(8), 1–9. 
2. Ramasubramani, R., Praveen, R., & Sathyanarayanan, K. S., (2016). Study on the 
strength properties of marine algae concrete. Rasayan J. Chem., 4, 706–715. 
3. Bedoux, G., Fuentes, E. C., Boulho, R., Marty, C., Bourgougnon, N., Pelegrín, Y. F., 
& Robledo, D., (2017). Antiviral and cytotoxic activities of polysaccharides extracted 
from four tropical seaweed species. Nat. Prod. Commun., 12
 
(6), 807–811. 
4. Stephenson, T. A., & Stephenson, 
 
A., (1949). The universal features of zonations 
between tide marks on rocky coasts. J. Ecol., 37, 289–305. 
5. Souza, R. B., Frota, A. F., Silva, J., Alves, C., Neugebauer, A., & Pinteus, S., (2018). 
In-vitro activities of kappa-carrageenan isolated from red marine alga Hypnea 
musciformis: Antimicrobial, anticancer and neuroprotective potential. Int. J. Biol. 
Macromol., 112, 1248–1256. 
6. Rodrigues, D., Alves, C., Horta, A., Pinteus, S., Silva, G., Culioli, G., Thomas, O. P., & 
Pedrosa, R., (2015). Antitumor and antimicrobial potential of bromoditerpenes isolated 
from the red alga, Sphaerococcus coronopifolius. Mar. Drugs., 13, 713–726. 
7. Baghel, R. S., Reddy, C. R. K., & Singh, R. P., (2021). Seaweed-based cellulose: 
Applications, and future perspectives. Carbohydr. Polym., 267, 118241. 
8. Li, Y., Sun, S., Pu, X., Yang, Y., Zhu, F., Zhang, S., & Xu, N., (2018). Evaluation of 
antimicrobial activities of seaweed resources from Zhejiang Coast, China. Sustainability, 
10, 2158. 

 
215 
Biotherapeutic Potential and Properties of Seaweeds 
9. Kumar, C. S., Ganesan, P., Suresh, P. V., & Bhaskar, N., (2008). Seaweeds as a source of 
nutritionally beneficial compounds: A review. J. Food Sci. Technol, 45, 1–13. 
10. Baghel, R. S., Suthar, P., Gajaria, T. K., Bhattacharyaa, S., Anil, A., & Reddy, C. R. K., 
(2020). Seaweed biorefinery: A sustainable process for valorizing the biomass of brown 
seaweed. J. Clean. Prod., 12, 121359. 
11. Badmus, U. O., Taggart, M. A., & Boyd, K. G., (2019). The effect of different drying 
methods on certain nutritionally important chemical constituents in edible brown 
seaweeds. J. Appl. Phycol.,  31(6), 3883–3897. 
12. Goo, B. G., Baek, G., Jin, C. D. I., Park, Y., Synytsya, A., Bleha, R., Seong, D. H., et 
al., (2013). Characterization of a renewable extracellular polysaccharide from defatted 
microalgae Dunaliella tertiolecta. Bioresour. Technol., 129, 343–350. 
13. Perez, M. J., Falqué, E., & Domínguez, H., (2016). Antimicrobial action of compounds 
from marine seaweed. Mar. Drugs, 14(3), 52. 
14. Venkatesan, J., Lowe, B., Anil, S., Manivasagan, P., Al Kheraif, A. A., Kang, K. H., & 
Kim, S. K., (2015). Seaweed polysaccharides and their potential biomedical applications. 
Starch, 67, 381–390. 
15. Fernando, I. S., Kim, M., Son, K. T., Jeong, Y., & Jeon, Y. J., (2016). Antioxidant 
activity of marine algal polyphenolic compounds: A mechanistic approach. J. Med. 
Food., 19(7), 615–628. 
16. Ghosh, P., Adhikaria, U., Ghosala, P. K., Pujolb, C. A., Carluccib, M. J., Damonteb, E. 
B., & Ray, B., (2004). In-vitro anti-herpetic activity of sulfated polysaccharide fractions 
from Caulerpa racemosa. Phytochem.,  65, 3151–3157. 
17. Suganya, A. M., Sanjivkumar, M., Navin, C. M., Palavesam, A., & Immanuel, G., 
(2016). Pharmacological importance of sulphated polysaccharide carrageenan from red 
seaweed Kappaphycus alvarezii in comparison with commercial carrageenan. Biomed. 
Pharmacother., 84, 1300–1312. 
18. Ansari, F. A., Shriwastav, A., Gupta, S. K., Rawat, I., Guldhe, A., & Bux, F., (2015). 
Lipid extracted algae as a source for protein and reduced sugar: A step closer to the 
biorefinery. Bioresour. Technol., 179, 559–564. 
19. Shanmughapriya, S., Manilal, A., Sujith, S., Selvin, J., Kiran, G. S., & Natarajaseenivasan, 
K., (2008). Antimicrobial activity of seaweeds extracts against multiresistant pathogens. 
Ann. Micro, 58(3), 535–541. 
20. Manikandan, S., Ganesapandian, S., Singh, M., Sangeetha, N., & Kumaraguru, A. K., 
(2011). Antimicrobial activity of seaweeds against multi drug resistant strains. Int. J. 
Pharmacol., 7(4), 522–526. 
21. Zbakh, H., Chiheb, H., Bouziane, H., Sánchez, V. M., & Riadi, H., (2012). Antibacterial 
activity of benthic marine algae extracts from the Mediterranean coast of Morocco. J. 
Microbiol. Biotech. Food Sci., 
 
 2(1), 219–228. 
22. El Shafay, S. M., Ali, S. S., & El-Sheekh, M. M., (2016). Antimicrobial activity of some 
seaweeds species from red sea, against multidrug resistant bacteria. Egypt. J. Aquat. 
Res., 42(1), 65–74. 
23. Vimala, T., & Poonghuzhali, T. V., (2017). In-vitro antimicrobial activity of solvent 
extracts of marine brown alga, Hydroclathrus clathratus (C. Agardh) M. Howe from 
Gulf of Mannar J. Appl. Pharm. Sci.,  7(4), 157–162. 
24. Rani, V., Jawahar, P., Jeya, S. R., & Srinivasan, A., (2016). Antibacterial activity of 
some brown seaweeds of Gulf of Mannar, South East Coast of India. J. Pharm. Bio. 
Sci., 4 (3), 14–21. 

 
216 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
25. Sasikala, C., & Ramani, D. G., (2017). Comparative study on antimicrobial activity of 
seaweeds. Asian J. Pharm. Clin. Res.,  10(12), 384–386. 
26. Klomjit, A., Praiboon, J., Tiengrim, S., Chirapart, A., & Thamlikitkul, V., (2021). 
Phytochemical composition and antibacterial activity of brown seaweed, Padina 
australis against human pathogenic bacteria. J. Fish. Envi, 45(1), 8–22. 
27. Rukayadi, Y., Diantini, A., & Lestari, K., (2012). Anti-fungal activity of methanolic 
extract of Usnea sp. against Malassezia furfur. Bionatura, 14(1), 31–37. 
28. Chanthini, K., Sreenath, K. C., & Kingsley, S. J., (2012). Antifungal activity of seaweed 
extracts against phytopathogen Alternaria solani. J. Acad. Indus. Res., 1(2), 86–90. 
29. Lopes, G., Pinto, E., Andrade, P. B., & Valentao, P., (2013). Antifungal activity of 
phlorotannins against dermatophytes and yeasts: Approaches to the mechanism of 
action and influence on Candida albicans virulence factor. PLoS One, 8, 72203. 
30. Kim, H. J., Dasagrandhi, C., Kim, S. H., Kim, B. G., Eom, S. H., & Kim, Y. M., (2018). 
In-vitro antibacterial activity of phlorotannins from edible brown algae, Eisenia bicyclis  
against streptomycin-resistant Listeria monocytogenes. Indian J. Microbiol., 58, 
105–108. 
31. Subbiah, M., Pandithurai, M., Vajiravelu, S., & Thamizh, S. N., (2015). Antifungal 
activity of various solvent extract of marine brown algae Spatoglossum asperum. Int. J. 
Pharm. Chem., 5(8), 277–280. 
32. Saleh, B., & Mariri, A. A., (2018). Antifungal activity of crude seaweed extracts 
collected from Latakia Coast, Syria. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci., 13(1), 49–55. 
33. Shibu, A., (2019). Antifungal activity of marine brown algae Sargassum wightii collected 
from gulf of Mannar biosphere reserve. Int. J. Rec. Sci. Res.,  10(12), 36608–36610. 
34. Ghosh, T., Chattopadhyay, K., Marschall, M., Karmakar, P., Mandal, P., & Ray, B., 
(2009). Focus on antivirally active sulfated polysaccharides: From structure-activity 
analysis to clinical evaluation. Glycobiol., 19, 2–15. 
35. Faulkner, D. J., (2001). Marine natural products. Nat. Prod. Rep., 18, 1–49. 
36. Lee, J. B., Hayashi, K., Hashimoto, M., Nakano, T., & Hayashi, T., (2004). Novel 
antiviral fucoidan from sporophyll of Undaria pinnatifida (Mekabu). Chem. Pharm. 
Bull., 52, 1091–1094. 
37. Wang, H., Ooi, E. V., & Ang, P. O., (2008). Antiviral activities of extracts from Hong 
Kong seaweeds J. Zhejiang Uni. Sci. B.,  9(12), 969–976. 
38. Kim, K. L., Lee, D. S., Park, M. S., Eom, S. H., Lee, D. H., Kang, C. K., Kimand, Y. M., 
& Lee, M. S., (2010). Antiviral activity of seaweed extracts against feline Calici virus. 
Fish Aqua. Sci, 13(2), 96–101. 
39.  Angélica, R. S., Marcela, C. S. R., Gabriella, S. M., Thalia, S. L. S., Lísia, M. S. G., 
Odinéia, S. P., Yocie, Y.-V., Carlos, R. K., & Maria, T. V. R., (2012). Antiviral activity of 
extracts from Brazilian seaweeds against herpes simplex virus. Braz. J. Pharm, 22(4), 
714–723. 
40. Gheda, S. F., El-Adawi, H. I., & EL-Deeb, N. M., (2016). Antiviral profile of brown 
and red seaweed polysaccharides against hepatitis C virus. Iran. J. Pharm. Res., 15(3), 
483–491. 
41. Jang, Y., Shin, H., Lee, M. K., Kwon, O. S., Shin, J. S., Kim, Y., Kim, C. W., et al., 
(2021). Antiviral activity of lambda-carrageenan against influenza viruses and severe 
acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2. Sci. Rep, 11, 821. 
42. Paulert, R., Junior, A. S., Stadnik, M. J., & Pizzolatti, G. M., (2007). Antimicrobial 
properties of extracts from the green seaweed Ulva fasciata  against pathogenic bacteria 
and fungi. Algol. Stud., 123–130. 

 
217 
Biotherapeutic Potential and Properties of Seaweeds 
43. Marudhupandi, T., & Ajith, K. T. T., (2013). Antibacterial effect of fucoidan from 
Sargassum wightii against the chosen human bacterial pathogens. Int. Curr. Pharm. J., 
2(10), 156–158. 
44. Prabu, D. L., Sahu, N. P., Pal, A. K., & Narendra, A., (2013). Isolation and evaluation 
of antioxidant and antibacterial activities of fucoidan rich extract from Indian brown 
seaweed Sargassum wightii. Cont. J. Pharm. Sci.
 
, 7(1), 11–21. 
45. Rajauria, G., Foley, B., & Abu-Ghannam, N., (2017). Characterization of dietary 
fucoxanthin from Himanthalia elongata brown seaweed. Food Res. Int., 99, 995–1001. 
46. Palanisamy, S., Vinosha, M., Marudhupandi, T., Rajasekar, P., & Prabhu, M., (2017). 
In-vitro antioxidant and antibacterial activity of sulfated polysaccharides isolated from 
Spatoglossum asperum. Carbohydr. Polym., 170, 296–304. 
47. Ford, L., Stratakos, A. C., Theodoridou, K., Dic, J. T. A., Sheldrake, G. N., Linton, 
M., Corcionivoschi, N., & Walsh, P. J., (2020). Polyphenols from brown seaweeds as a 
potential antimicrobial agent in animal feeds. ACS Omega, 5, 9093−9105. 
48. Ayrapetyan, O. N., Obluchinskaya, E. D., Zhurishkina, E. V., Skorik, Y. A., Lebedev, D. 
V., & Lapina, I. M., (2021). Antibacterial properties of fucoidans from the brown algae 
Fucus vesiculosus L. of the Barents Sea. Biol., 10, 1–17. 
49. Kordjazi, M., Etemadian, Y., Shabanpour, B., & Pourashouri, P., (2019). Chemical 
composition antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of fucoidan extracted from two 
species of brown seaweeds (Sargassum ilicifolium and Sargassum angustifolium) 
around Qeshm Island. Iran. J. Fish. Sci., 18(3), 457–475. 
50. Yousefi, M. K., Hashtroudi, M. S., Moradi, A. M., & Ghassempour, A. R., (2020). 
Seasonal variation of fucoxanthin content in four species of brown seaweeds from 
Qeshm Island, Persian Gulf and evaluation of their antibacterial and antioxidant 
activities. Iran. J. Fish. Sci., 19(5), 2394–2408. 
51. Qi, H., Zhang, Q., Zhao, T., Chen, R., Zhang, H., Xizhen, N., & Li, Z., (2005). 
Antioxidant activity of different sulfate content derivatives of polysaccharide extracted 
from Ulva pertusa (Chlorophyta) in-vitro. Int. J. Bio. Macromol., 37
 
(4), 195–199. 
52. Souza, M. C. R. D., Cybelle, M. T., Dore, C. M. G., Silva, F. R. F. D., Rocha, H. A. O., & 
Leite, E. L., (2007). Antioxidant activities of sulfated polysaccharides from brown and 
red seaweeds. J. Appl. Phycol., 19, 153–160. 
53. Souza, B. W. S., Cerqueira, M. A., Bourbon, A. I., Pinheiro, A. C., Martins, J. T., 
Teixeira, J. A., Coimbra, M. A., & Vicente, A. A., (2012). Chemical characterization and 
antioxidant activity of sulfated polysaccharide from the red seaweed Gracilaria birdiae. 
Food Hydrocoll.,  27, 287–292. 
54. Shonima, G., Jiji, T., & Kurup, G. M., (2012). In-vitro antioxidant and antitumor activity 
of polysaccharide isolated from Ulva fasciata. IJPBS., 3(3), 238–246. 
55. Mahendran, S., & Saravanan, S., (2013). Purification and in vitro antioxidant activity 
of polysaccharide isolated from green seaweed Caulerpa racemose. IJPBS., 4(4), 
1214–1227. 
56. Muthupndi, T., Ajith, K. T. T., Lakshmana, S. S., & Nanthini, D. K., (2014). In-vitro 
antioxidant properties of fucoidan fractions from Sargassum tennerimum. Pak. J. Biol. 
Sci., 17(3), 402–407. 
57. He, J., Xu, Y., Chen, H., & Sun, P., (2016). Extraction, structural characterization, and 
potential antioxidant activity of the polysaccharides from four seaweeds. Int. J. Mol. 
Sci., 17, 1–17. 

 
218 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
58. Dave, P. N., Marvaniya, P. N., Ram, V. R., Thirumaran, G., & Khosla, E., (2017). 
Antibacterial and antioxidant activity of sulphated polysaccharides from selected 
seaweeds of Vadinar coast. Acta Chim. Pharm. Indica, 7(3), 1–13. 
59. Wang, L., Oh, J. Y., Hwang, J., Ko, J. Y., Jeon, Y., & Ryu, B. M., (2019). In-vitro and 
In-vivo antioxidant activities of polysaccharides isolated from celluclast-assisted extract 
of an edible brown seaweed, Sargassum fulvellum. Antioxidants,  8, 493. 
60. Arunkumar, K., Raja, R., Sameer, K. V. B., Joseph, A., Shilpa, T., & Carvalho, I. S., 
(2021). Antioxidant and cytotoxic activities of sulfated polysaccharides from five 
different edible seaweeds. J. Food Meas. Charact., 15, 567–576. 
61. Wang, L., Yang, H. W., Ahn, G., Fu, X., Xu, J., Gao, X., & Jeon, Y. J., (2021). In-vitro  
and In-vivo anti-inflammatory effects of sulfated polysaccharides isolated from the 
edible brown seaweed, Sargassum fulvellum. Mar
 
. Drugs, 19
 
, 277. 
62. Zhuang, C., Itoh, H., Mizuno, T., & Ito, H., (1995). Antitumor active fucoidan from 
the brown seaweed, Umitoranoo (Sargassum thunbergii), Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 
59(4), 563–567. 
63.  Haijin, M., Xiaolu, J., & Huashi, G., (2003). A  κ-carrageenan derived oligosaccharide 
prepared by enzymatic degradation containing anti-tumor activity. J. Appl. Phycol., 15, 
297–303. 
64. Cumashi, A., Ushakova, N. A., Preobrazhenskaya, M. E., Dincecco, A., Piccoli, 
A., Totani, L., & Usov, A. I., (2007). A  comparative study of the anti-inflammatory, 
anticoagulant, antiangiogenic, and antiadhesive activities of nine different fucoidans 
from brown seaweeds. Glycobiol.,  17(5), 541–552. 
65. Zhang, H. J., Mao, W. J., Li, H. Y., Sun, H. H., Chen, Y., & Qi, X. H., (2008). Chemical 
characteristics and anticoagulant activities of a sulphated polysaccharide and its 
fragments from Monostroma latissimum. Carbohydr. Polym., 71, 428–434. 
66. Saluri, K., & Tuvikene, R., (2020). Anticoagulant and antioxidant activity of lambda- 
and theta-Carrageenans of different molecular weights. Bioact. Carbohydr, Diet. Fibre., 
24, 100243. 
67. Kurnialahi, I. D., Husni, A., Sinurat, E., & Isnansetyo, A., (2020). Antioxidant activity 
of tropical seaweed Sargassum muticum fucoidan. AACL Bioflux., 13(1), 230–240. 
68. Zhou, G., Xin, H., Sheng, W., Li, Z., & Xu, Z., (2005). In-vivo growth-inhibition of 
S180 tumor by mixture of 5-Fu and low molecular lambda-carrageenan from Chondrus 
ocellatus. Pharmacol. Res., 51, 153–157. 
69. Gomez, L. J. V., Mercado, I. E. S., Rivas, G., & Sanchez, N. E. A., (2010). Antibacterial 
and anticancer activity of seaweeds and bacteria associated with their surface, Revista 
de Biologia Marina Y Oceanografia, 45(2), 267–275. 
70. Zandi, K., Ahmadzadeh, S., Tajbakhsh, S., Rastian, Z., Yousefi, F., Farshadpour, F., & 
Sartavi, K., (2010). Anticancer activity of Sargassum oligocystum  water extract against 
human cancer cell lines. Euro. Rev. Med. Pharmacol. Sci, 14, 669–673. 
71. Ahna, G., Lee, W. W., Kim, K. N., Lee, J. H., Heo, S. J., Kang, N., Ahn, C. B., & Jeon, 
Y. J., (2015). A sulfated polysaccharide of Ecklonia cava inhibits the growth of colon 
cancer cells by inducing apoptosis. EXCLI. J., 14, 294–306. 
72.  Kim, H. J., Kim, W. J., Koo, B. W., Kim, D. W., Lee, J. H., & Nugroho, W. S. K., (2016). 
Anticancer activity of sulfated polysaccharides isolated from the Antarctic red seaweed 
Iridaea cordata. Ocean Polar Res.,  38(2), 129−137. 
73. Deepika, R. C., (2017). Fucose containing sulfated polysaccharides from Sargassum 
wightii: Extraction technology and anticancer activity assessment. Int. J. Pharm, Chem 
Biol Sci, 7(3), 279–284. 

 
219 
Biotherapeutic Potential and Properties of Seaweeds 
74. Omar, H., Al-Judaibiand, A., & El-Gendy, A., (2018). Antimicrobial, antioxidant, 
anticancer activity and phytochemical analysis of the red alga, Laurencia papillosa.  Int. 
J. Pharmacol., 14
 
(4), 572–583. 
75. Yousefi, M. K., Hashtroudi, M. S., Moradi, A. M., & Ghasempour, A. R., (2018). In-vitro  
investigating of anticancer activity of focoxanthin frommarine brown seaweed species. 
Global J. Environ. Sci, 4(1), 81–90. 
76. Gheda, S., El-Sheekh, M., & Abou-Zeid, A., (2018). In-vitro anticancer activity of 
polysaccharide extracted from red alga Jania rubens against breast and colon cancer 
cell lines Asian Pa. J. Trop. Med., 11(10), 583–589. 
77. Shofia, S. I., Jayakumar, K., Mukherjee, A., & Chandrasekaran, N., (2018). Efficiency of 
brown seaweed (Sargassum longifolium) polysaccharides encapsulated in nanoemulsion 
and nanostructured lipid carrier against colon cancer cell lines HCT 116. RSC Adv., 8, 
15973. 
78. Haq, S. H., Al-Ruwaished, G., Al-Mutlaq, M. A., Naji, S. A., Al-Mogren, M., Al-Rashed, 
S., Ain, Q. T. U., et al., (2019). Antioxidant, anticancer activity and phytochemical 
analysis of green algae, Chaetomorpha collected from the Arabian Gulf. Sci. Rep, 9, 
18906. 
79. Banuelos, T. O., Rodríguez, A. G., Bellido, R. M., Miranda, R. T., Helguera, O. A., 
Portilla, C. J., Menchaca, T. M., & Zepeda, R. C., (2019). Brown seaweed Egregia 
menziesii’s cytotoxic activity against brain cancer cell lines. Molecules, 24, 260. 
80. Su, Y., Wang, Z., Li, K., & Zhao, L., (2012). Anticancer activity in-vitro  polysaccharides 
fermented from brown algae. Mat. Sci. Eng.,  612, 022071. 
81.  Karthick, V., Akhila, C., Kumar, V. G., Subashini, D., Dhas, S., Govindaraju, K., & 
Vasanth, K., (2019). In vitro anticancer activity of Sargassum sp. polysaccharides 
against MCF-7 cell lines. Indian J. Geo Marine Sci, 48(8), 1267–1273. 
82. Coura, C. O., Araffljo, I. W. F. D., Vanderlei, E. S. O., Rodrigues, J. A. G., Jorge, R. J. 
B., Evangelista, J. S. A. M., & Benevides, N. M. B., (2012). Antinociceptive and anti-
Inflammatory activities of sulphated polysaccharides from the red seaweed Gracilaria 
cornea. Basic Clin. Pharmacol. T
 
oxicol., 110, 335–341. 
83. Sanjeewa, K. K. A., Fernando, I. P. S., Kim, E. A.,  Ahn, G., Jee, Y., & Jeon, Y. J., (2017). 
Anti-inflammatory activity of a sulfated polysaccharide isolated from an enzymatic 
digest of brown seaweed Sargassum horneri in RAW 264.7 cells, Nut. Res. Prac.,  11(1), 
3–10. 
84. Makkar, F., & Chakraborty, K., (2017). Antidiabetic and anti-inflammatory potential 
of sulphated polygalactans from red seaweeds Kappaphycus alvarezii  and Gracilaria 
opuntia Int. J. Food Pr
 
op, 20(6), 1326–1337. 
85. Ribeiro, N. A., Abreu, T. M., Chaves, H. V., Jorge, R. J. B., & Benevides, N. M. B., 
(2014). Sulfated polysaccharides isolated from the green seaweed Caulerpa racemosa  
plays antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activities in a way dependent on HO-1 
pathway activation. Inflamm. Res., 63(7), 569–580. 
86. Yang, E. J., Ham, Y. M., Yang, K. W., Lee, N. H., & Hyun, C. G., (2013). Sargachromenol 
from Sargassum micracanthum inhibits the lipopolysaccharide-induced production of 
inflammatory mediators in RAW 264.7 macrophages. Sci. World J., 1–6. 
87. Heo, S. J., Yoon, W. J., Kim, K. N., Choi, Y. U., Yoon, K. T., Kang, D. H., Choi, I. W., & 
Jung, W. K., (2012). Anti-inflammatory effect of fucoxanthin derivatives isolated from 
Sargassum siliquastrum in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated RAW 264.7 macrophage. 
Food Chem. Toxicol., 50, 3336–3342. 

 
220 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
88. Han, M., Sun, P., Li, Y., Wu, G., & Nie, J., (2018). Structural characterization of a 
polysaccharide from Sargassum henslowianum, and its immunomodulatory effect on 
gastric cancer rat. Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 108, 1120–1127. 
89. Hardoko, M., Siratantri, T., Eveline, C., Yogabuana, M., & Olivia, S., (2014). An 
in-vitro study of antidiabetic activity of Sargassum duplicatum  and Turbinaria decurens 
seaweed. Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Invent., 3, 13–18. 
90. Paul, J. J. P., (2014). Screening of anti-diabetic properties of fucoidan extracted from 
Padina distromatica Hauck (brown seaweed) from hare island, Thoothukudi, Tamil 
Nadu, India. Int. J. Innov. Drug Discov., 4(3), 164–169. 
91. Unnikrishnan, P. S., Suthindhiran, K., & Jayasri, M. A., (2015). Antidiabetic potential 
of marine algae by inhibiting key metabolic enzymes. Front. Life Sci.,  8(2), 148–159. 
92. Mohapatra, L., Bhattamisra, S. K., Panigrahy, R. C., & Parida, S. K., (2016). Evaluation 
of the antioxidant, hypoglycaemic and antidiabetic activities of some seaweed collected 
from the East Coast of India. Biomed. Pharm., 9 (1), 365–375. 
93. Ponnanikajamideen, M., Suneetha, V., & Rajeshkumar, S., (2017). Antidiabetic, 
anti-hyperlipedimic and antioxidant activity of marine brown seaweed Padina 
tetrastromatica. J. Chem. Pharm. Sci.
 
, 10(1), 379–384. 
94. Nguyen, T. H., Nguyen, T. H., Nguyen, V. M., Nguyen, T. L. P., Tran, T. V. A., Do, A. D., 
& Kim, S. M., (2019). Antidiabetic and antioxidant activities of red seaweed Laurencia 
dendroidea, Asian Pacific J. Trop. Biomed., 9 (12), 501–509. 
95. Osman, N. A. H. K., Siam, A. A., El-Manawy, I. M., & Jeon, Y. J., (2019). Anti-microbial 
and anti-diabetic activity of six seaweeds collected from the red sea, Egypt. CATRINA, 
19(1), 55–60. 
96. Boateng, J. S., Matthews, K. H., Stevens, H. N., & Eccleston, G. M., (2008). Wound 
healing dressings and drug delivery systems: A review. J. Pharm. Sci., 97, 2892–2923. 
97. Trombetta, D., Puglia, C., Perri, D., Licata, A., Perogolizzi, S., Saija, A., & Bonina, F. 
P., (2006). Effect of polysaccharides from Opunta ficus-indica cladodes on the healing 
of dermal wounds in the rat. Phytomed., 13, 289–294. 
98. Fard, S. G., Tan, R. T. R., Mohammed, A. A., Meng, G. Y., Muhamad, S. K. S., 
AL-Jashamy, K. A., & Mohamed, S., (2011). Wound healing properties of Eucheuma 
cottonii extracts in Sprague-Dawley rats. J. Med. Plants Res,  5, 6373–6380. 
99. Premarathnaa, A. D., Ranahewaa, T. H., Wijesekerab, S. K., Wijesundaraa, R. R. M. K. 
K., Jayasooriy, A. P., Wijewardana, V., & Rajapakse, R. P. V. J., (2019). Wound healing 
properties of aqueous extracts of Sargassum illicifolium: An in-vitro assay. Wound Med.,  
24, 1–7. 
100. Darni, Y., Sumartini, S., Lismeri, L., Hanif, M., & Lesmana, D., (2019). Bioplastics 
synthesis based on sorghum–Eucheuma spinosum  modified with sorghum stalk powder. 
Int. J. Phys. Conf.,  1376(1), 012042. 
101. Horn, S. J., Aasen, I. M., & Østgaard, K., (2000). Ethanol production from seaweed 
extract. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 25(5), 249–254. 
102. Lee, S. M., & Lee, J. H., (2012). Ethanol fermentation for main sugar components of 
brown-algae using various yeasts. J. Ind. Eng. Chem, 18, 16–18. 
103. Sureshkumar, K., Ganesan, K., & Subba, R. P. V., (2007). Phycoremediation of heavy 
metals by the three-color forms of Kappaphycus alvarezii.  J. Hazardous Mat., 143, 
590–592. 

Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
  
  
 
 
CHAPTER 7  
Synthesis and Applications of 
Biopharmaceuticals from Whole-Cell 
Actinobacterial Isolates 
SUMATHI C. SAMIAPPAN,1 SHARMILA DEVI NATARAJAN,2 
PRATHABAN MUNISAMY,3 RAJESH PANDIYAN,4 
SURIYAPRABHA RANGARAJ,5 MAHADEVAN KUMARESAN,6 and 
MYTHILI RAVICHANDRAN,7 
1Department of Chemistry and Biosciences, Srinivasa Ramanujan Center, 
SASTRA Deemed to be University, Kumbakonam, Tamil Nadu, India 
2Department of Microbiology, Karpagam Academy of Higher Education, 
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 
3Department of Microbiology, Pondicherry University, Pondicherry, 
Tamil Nadu, India 
4Center for Materials Engineering and Regenerative Medicine, 
Bharath Institute of Higher Education and Research, Bharath University 
(Deemed to be University), Selaiyur, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India 
5Department of Biotechnology, Sona College of Arts and Science, Salem, 
Tamil Nadu, India 
6Department of Microbial Biotechnology, Bharathiar University, 
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 
7Department of Microbiology, Vivekanandha Arts and Science College for 
Women, Sankari, Tamil Nadu, India 

 
222 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
ABSTRACT 
The hastily emerging antimicrobial resistance and the onset of deadly 
diseases have constantly built demand on hunting novel, unique, effective, 
sustainable exploitation of new antimicrobials for infinite therapeutics. 
However, these are the leading root of significant mortality all over the 
Globe. Despite this commitment, we are lusting to make novel therapeutic 
agents from biological sources. The natural compound has acted as an 
immune booster and a remedy for numerous ailments. It is sourced from 
plants, animals, and microbes. Connected to other origins, microbial-based 
natural products (NPs) occupy an appealing point for drug discovery. In 
particular, actinomycetes are known as well-documented biosynthetic facto­
ries and are contributing to producing an effectively extended spectrum of 
secondary entities with a wide range of biotechnological, pharmaceutical, 
and agricultural potentials. Actinomycetes are a copious supplier to find 
out a large number of lead compounds with multiple degrees of biological 
activities. Despite its historical multiplicity, remarkable novelty, prominent 
metabolism, genome versatility, and superior activity, actinomycetes have 
been continuing for the development of drug leads. Based on their silent 
secondary metabolite biosynthetic gene clusters (SM-BGC), they are not 
fully unrevealed. Of fresh, the stab of activation, whole-cell activation, and 
synthetic biology have evolved as a potent protocol to explore and enhance 
entire biosynthetic potentials of actinomycetes. In this chapter, we examine 
around to solidify an assortment of actinobacteria-derived natural commodi­
ties, principally antibacterials, antivirals, antifungals, and anti-cancer agents. 
In addition, it is a special endeavor to spotlight and activate the biosynthesis of 
secondary metabolites from actinomycetes using the whole-cell-biocatalysis 
and synthetic biology approach. 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, antimicrobial resistance and deadly infectious disease make 
desperate circumstances. In this respect, we are burning to make novel 
therapeutic agents. Nature accommodates boundless beginnings of unique 
bioactive metabolites or by-products named as natural products (NPs) or 
secondary or specialized metabolites (SM) [1]. It is sourced from higher 
level of organism such as plants and animals, to lower range of microbes 
[2]. In the running records of history, they are industrious agents for curing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
223 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
human illness [3]. They are the surpassing part of patrons in the modern 
pharmaceutical arsenal. Also, the NPs are typically distributed among 
assorted structural classes such as peptides, alkaloids, polyketides (including 
macrolides), nucleosides, polyphenols, polysaccharides, diketopiperazines, 
and terpenoids [4]. 
Connected to other origins, microbial-based NPs occupy an appealing 
point for drug discovery. It is based on their great biodiversity, availability, 
variability, and exclusive metabolisms [5]. Out of all these sources, from 
centuries ago, actinobacterial NPs impersonate a pivotal position in drug 
discovery. Also, actinomicrobial products have been stand as the most 
suitable prokaryotic candidate to deliver a plethora of bioactive leads 
for the past seven decades [6]. Actinomycetes are a copious supplier for 
finding out a large number of lead compounds with multiple degrees of 
biological activities including antibiotics, antibacterials, antifungals, anti­
virals, and anti-tumors. Actinomycetes are known as well-documented 
biosynthetic factories [7]. It plays a vital component in microbial-based 
drug discovery [8]. 
In the advancement of the post-genomic era, actinomycetes construct 
a massive count of NPs based on their practical genetic capability. In 
general, 70% of the antibiotics are derived from actinobacteria are used 
for effective drug leads and human therapeutics [9]. In actinomycetes, 
order Actinomycetales generates approximately 10,000 new-fangled 
bioactive substances. About three-quarters of microbial-based bioactive 
compounds are obtained from actinomycetes chiefly Streptomyces [10]. It 
delivers 39% of microbial metabolites principally 80% of the compounds 
achieved by the order of Streptomycetales [11]. Streptomyces-based 
antibiotics to arbitrate competing interspecies interactions based on its 
efficient security operation [12]. But we have limited the benefits from 
actinomycetes due to its silent or cryptic secondary metabolite biosyn­
thetic gene clusters (SM-BGC). With the continued motions of genome 
sequencing tools, synthetic biology strategy whole-cell-biocatalysis 
explored its genetic potential. 
In this chapter, we explore around to solidify an assortment of actino­
bacteria-derived natural commodities principally antibacteriales, virales, 
fungales, and anti-cancer. In addition, it is a special endeavor to spotlight 
and activate the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites from actinomycetes 
using whole-cell biocatalysis (WCB) and synthetic biology approach for 
betterment of actinomycetes-based therapeutics. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
224 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
7.2 ACTINOBACTERIA ACT AS DISCOVERY IMPETUS FOR 
ANTIBIOTICS 
Actinobacteria are the largest well-defined evolutionarily and ecologically 
divergent taxonomical prokaryotic assembly with extended ranges of niches. 
It is a Gram-positive filamentous form with higher G+C DNA content under 
a bacterial domain. It is having a unique filamentous morphology. It follows 
mycelia existence with multifarious morphological differentiation. Freshly, 
they are a diverse population with 350 genera [13]. They are regularly 
mesophilic and grow glowing on neutral pH. They are adapted in various 
ecosystems on the Earth. They are heterotrophs or chemoautotrophs [14]. 
They are exposed at both soil surface and more than 2 M depths with a 
population density of 106 to 109 cells/g of soil [15]. 
Nevertheless, they are natural and novel sustained dwelling for dynamic 
secondary metabolites or SM, which is employed for the production of 
stalwart antibiotics [14]. Nonetheless, the dominant source of antibiotics for 
contemporary clinical settings is derived from NPs. Amidst all microbial-
based antibiotic classes, 10 classes are offered by actinomycetes [16]. The 
entire Actinobacteria is acknowledged to have the genetic prospective for 
the synthesis of sturdy compounds. In addition, it also produces industrially 
recognized and explored microbial enzymes [17]. Actinomycetes has wide 
spectrum of application as displayed in Figure 7.1. 
In specific, the Genus Streptomyces accounts for pipelines about the 
preponderance (7,600 compounds), the resting coming under rare acti­
nomycetes [5]. Streptomyces has been the peak antibiotic raiser [18]. It 
is one strain many compounds (OSMAC) criteria-based strategy. The 
Streptomyces are aerobic, filamentous regularly soil-dwelling bacteria. 
Owing to its complex morphogenesis potentials, Streptomyces has 
sequentially documented as a model prokaryotic microbe for a multicel­
lular differentiation research platform. Besides, it has been certified as a 
tremendous antibiotic’s supplier because of its ample range of secondary 
metabolites synthesis [19]. However, the morphological and physiological 
traits differentiation of Streptomyces is carried out with the aid of their 
chemical signaling molecule such as gamma-butyrolactones, which is 
actively working together with their receptors [19]. Actinomycetes have 
been sourced for compelling antimicrobials principally actinomycin, 
streptomycin, gentamicin, rosamicin, teicoplanin, vancomycin, fortimicin, 
chloramphenicol, streptothricin (ST), tetracycline, nocardicin, leucomycin, 
and erythromycin [14, 20]. 

 
 
225 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
FIGURE 7.1 Pictorial view of broad-spectrum applications of actinobacteria-based natural 
products. 
Of fresh, halogen (F, Cl, Br, I) carrying metabolites acknowledged as 
halometabolites has been considered as a persuasive supplier for antibiotics. 
Naturally, copious halometabolites are reviewed on Actinobacteria. Chlo­
rinated antibiotics were discovered from soil actinobacteria, and some are 
commercialized presently. Kasanah & Triyanto [21] received a shred of 
substantial evidence to sustain this point of view. Furthermore, he has isolated 
chlorinated antibiotic, chlortetracycline of Streptomyces aureofaciens. It is 
effectually appropriated to raise animals, chickens, turkeys, ducks, swine, 
calves, beef cattle wellness, and growth rate. 
The Streptomyces hygroscopicus holds well-built anti-infectivity in 
the battle to Botrytis cinerea, Candida albicans, and Herpes simplex [22]. 
In another investigation, Hohmann et al. [23] proposed a marine derived 
Streptomyces sp. NTK 937 collected from Canary Basin deep-sea deposits. 
Notwithstanding, it has been delivered an unusual benzoxazole antibiotic 
labeled caboxamycin. It manifests a broad array of potentials towards Gram-
positive clinical pathogens, cancer cell lines, and phosphodiesterase enzyme 
[23]. Furthermore, the bioactive compounds benhamycin from terrestrial 
Streptomyces sp. isolate NR12 [24] and chlorinated 3-phenylpropanoic acid 
from Streptomyces coelicolor LY001, which was isolated from the sponge 
Callyspongia siphonellahala are quite documented for their antimicrobial 
activities [25]. 

 
 
 
226 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Other than Streptomyces, interestingly, Stroch et al. [26] extorted numerous 
unique secondary bioactive metabolites including 1-(α-ribofuranosyl)­
lumichrome, retymicin, galtamycin B and saquayamycin Z from Micromono-
spora sp. strain Tu 6368 with biotechnological potential. Fascinatingly, the 
principal NP is thiasporine A. It is a 5-hydroxy-4H-1,3-thiazin-4-one moiety 
with two distinct thiazole derivatives of marine-based Actinomycetospora 
chlora SNC-032 [27]. In addition, Salinispora is an ideal source for novel 
metabolites. It also draws a parallel between biodiversity and secondary 
compounds synthesis [28]. However, in 2001 and 2008, the detection of 
dynamic metabolites from Streptomyces gradually touches down point 
because of its confronting perplexity of rediscovery analysis [3]. Afresh 
high-level techniques including physiological or genetic manipulation, 
new source sampling, rare actinomycetes isolation, and co-culturing are the 
methods adopted for stiff actinomycetes exploration. In addition, genomic 
miming is the superior accelerating approach to explore concealed prospec­
tive of unexpressed metabolic profile [29] of NPs through their gene cluster 
sequence and metabolic pathways [30]. It is applied to perk up drug-based 
therapeutics generally. Recent advancements in sequencing and omics tech­
nology are expediting the identification and development of novel molecules 
[31]. Among them whole-cell-biocatalysis and synthetic biology creating 
improved advancements in drug discovery and designing. 
7.2.1 ANTIBACTERIAL AND ANTIFUNGAL POTENTIALS 
Actinomycetes have a stunning multitude of diversified chemical scaffolds 
with potent anti-bacterial and antifungals activity as delineated in Tables 7.1 
and 7.2. Directly, it is a fecund reference for pharmaceutical engineering. 
Of novel, angumycinones C and D, and other substances like X-14881 E 
were secured based on 1D, 2D NMR, and HRMS assay of soil-derived 
Streptomyces strain P294. These compounds signify potentials against an 
assortment of bacterial pathogens [32]. In a further examination, the marine-
based Streptomyces sp. G278 typically made a range of natural metabolites 
such as 2,5-Bis(5-tert-butyl-2-benzoxazolyl) thiophene, and 3-hydroxyl­
2-methylpyridine. Furthermore, those essences evinced a far-flung array 
of activity against a panel of the clinically considerable microbiome [33]. 
One of the recent studies investigated, the sponge-derived Streptomyces 
strain G246 contrary to a series of clinically significant pathogens including 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Salmonella enterica, Enterococcus faecalis, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SL. 
No. 
Source 
Compound 
Applications 
References 
1. 
Micromonospora Diazepinomicin 
Antimicrobial activity 
[35] 
sp. 
2. 
Streptomyces 
violaceusniger 
strain HAL64 
Kosinostatin 
Inhibitory activity against 
gram-positive pathogens 
[36] 
3. 
Streptomyces sp. 
Eg5 
Mansoquinone (2) 
Exhibits moderate 
antibacterial activities 
against Escherichia coli, 
Bacillus subtilis and 
[37] 
Staphylococcus aureus. 
4.  
Streptomyces sp. 
Neopyrrolomycins 
Inhibitory activity 
[38] 
towards gram-positive 
pathogens. 
227 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus cereus, and Candida albicans based on 
their antimicrobial lavandulylated flavonoids synthesis mechanism [34]. 
Rocheicoside A obtained from the marine-derived Streptomyces rochei 
06CM016, as a nucleoside analog. Besides, these show different degrees of 
inhibitory activity against archaea, bacteria, and eukarya including E. coli, 
MRSA, and C. albicans with MIC ranges from 4–16 µg/mL, respectively 
[55] as well, the marine-based Streptomyces sp. strain TPU 1236A extracted 
from a seawater sample at Iriomote Island in Okinawa, Japan. It produces 
metabolically active nucleoside substances named streptcytosines A–E. 
streptcytosine A arrives under the amicetin group antibiotics, and streptcy­
tosines B–E attains beneath the derivatives of de-amosaminyl-cytosamine, 
2,3,6-trideoxyglucopyranosyl cytosine. Streptcytosine A reveals high-flying 
activity against M. smegmatis at MIC = 32 µg/Ml [56]. Further along, 
actinomycetes expose antifungal prospective also towards plant pathogens 
of various crops. As documentation, new antifungal peptides (AFPs) are 
used as plant fungal pathogen control [57]. In the same year, Wei et al. [58] 
captured Streptomyces sp. YYS-7, which contributes great lofty antifungals 
against Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. with intensified banana plant resistance. 
One of the potent antifungals programs was made by Streptomyces sp. 
strain SLR03 obtained from soil samples. It exhibits antifungal potential 
against Pestalotiopsis theae, plant pathogenic fungi [59]. These verdicts are 
affording escalating records on Streptomyces spp. could be a high-priced 
supplier for persuasive antimicrobials metabolites for controlling bacterial 
and fungal infections. 
TABLE 7.1 Short Reported Accounts of Antibacterial Activity of Actinobacteria 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SL. Source 
Compound 
Applications 
References 
No. 
5. 
Streptomyctes sp.  Alchivemycin A 
6.  
Streptomyctes sp., Heronapyrroles 
A-C & farnesylated 
2-nitropyrroles 
7.  
Micromonospora Maklamicin 
sp. 
8.  
Pseudonocardia 
Pseudonocardians 
sp. SCSIO 01299 
9.  
Streptomyces sp. 
Lobophorins 
SCSIO 01127 
10.  Marinactinospora Marthiapeptide A 
thermotolerans 
SCSIO 00652 
11.  Streptomyces 
Lobophorin G and A 
MS100061 
12.  Streptomyces sp. 
Anthracimycin 
strain CNH365 
13.  Streptomyces 
Xinghaiamine A 
xinghaiensis 
NRRL B24674 
Antimicrobial activity 
[39]  
against Micrococcus  
luteus.  
Antimycobacterial 
[40]  
activity against gram  
positive bacteria.  
Antimicrobial activity 
[41]  
against gram positive  
bacteria.  
Antibacterial activities 
[42]  
on Staphylococcus  
aureus ATCC 29213,  
Enterococcus faecalis  
ATCC 29212 and  
Bacillus thuringensis 
SCSIO BT01.  
Aantibacterial activities 
[43]  
against Staphylococcus  
aureus ATCC 29213 and  
Enterococcus faecalis  
ATCC 29212.  
Exhibited antibacterial 
[44]  
activity against a panel of  
Gram-positive bacteria.  
Anti-BCG activity and 
[45]  
antibacterial activity  
including Bacillus  
subtilis.  
Anthrax antibiotic 
[46]  
Antibacterial 
[47]  
activity against both  
Gram-negative like  
Acinetobacter baumannii,  
Pseudomonas aeruginosa  
and Escherichia coli and  
gram-positive including  
Staphylococcus aureus 
and Bacillus subtilis 
hospital pathogens. 
 
228 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
TABLE 7.1 (Continued) 

 
 
 
 
SL. Source 
Compound 
Applications 
References 
No. 
14.  Streptomyces 
Napyradiomycins 
Antibacterial activities 
[48] 
strain SCSIO 
against gram-positive 
10428 
bacteriaincluding 
Staphylococcus and 
Bacillus sp. 
15.  Streptomyctes sp. Wollamides 
Antimycobacterial 
[49] 
potential against Gram 
positive bacteria. 
16.  Streptomyctes sp. Aranciamycins 1–4 
Antimicrobial activity 
[50] 
against gram positive 
bacteria. 
17.  Streptomyces sp. 
SPE-B11.8 
Inhibitory activity against 
[51] 
HUST012 
methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus epidermis 
ATCC 35984, methicillin­
resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus ATCC 25923, 
Escherichia coli ATCC 
25922, and Klebsiella 
pneumoniae ATCC 
13883. 
18.  Streptomyces sp. 
Anthraquinone 6,6 1-bis 
Potential towards 
[52] 
ERI-26  
(1,5,7-trihydroxy-3-
Staphylococcus 
hydroxymethylanthraqu-
aureus, Staphylococcus 
inone) 
epidermidis, and Bacillus 
subtilis. 
19.  Streptomyces 
Anthracimycin B 
Potent antibiotic against 
[53] 
cyaneofuscatus 
gram-positive Bacteria 
M-169 
20.  Streptomyces sp. 
Polyketides 
Antibacterial activity 
[54] 
against Enterococcus sp. 
TABLE 7.2 Concise View of Antifungal Activity of Actinobacteria 
SL. 
Source 
Compound 
Applications 
References 
No. 
1.  
Streptomyces 
AM-2282, a new 
Antimicrobial activity 
[60] 
staurosporeus 
alkaloid 
against fungi and yeast. 
2.  
Bacillus subtilis 
Iturin 
Antifungal activity 
[61] 
3.  
Spirillospora 
Spirillomycin 
Antifungal activity 
[62] 
 
229 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
TABLE 7.1 (Continued) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SL. 
Source 
Compound 
Applications 
References 
No. 
4.  
Actinoplanes 
species. Sch 
54445 
5.  
Actinomycetes sp. 
culture Y-8620959 
6.  
Streptomyces sp. 
GK9244 
7.  
Streptomyces 
halstedii K122 
8.  
Streptomyces 
purpeofuscus CM 
1261 
9.  
Streptomyces 
halstedii 
10.  Streptomyces GS 
1322 
11.  
Streptomyces 
alboflavus TD-1 
12.  Nocardiopsis gilva 
YIM 90087 
Sch 54445 
Mathemycin B 
Tetrin C 
Bafilomycins B1 
and C1, 
Heptaene group of 
polyenes 
Antifungal 
compound 
Heptaene group of 
polyenes 
Volatile organic 
compounds 
p-terphenyls 
Inhibitory activities against  
numerous yeasts and  
dermatophytes.  
Antiphytopathogenic  
activity.  
Antifungal activity against  
Mortierella ramannianus.  
Antifungal potentials 
against Aspergillus 
fumigatus, Mucor hiemalis, 
Penicillium roqueforti, 
and Paecilomyces variotii. 
Penicillium roqueforti. 
Antifungal activity against 
Candida albicatns, 
Aspergillus niger, 
Microsporum gypseum, and 
Trichophyton sp. 
Biological potentials against 
Phytophthora capsici 
Antifungal activity 
towards Candida albicans, 
Aspergillus niger, 
Microsporum gypseum, and 
Trichophyton sp. 
In-vitro antifungales against 
Fusarium moniliforme 
Sheldon, Aspergillus flavus, 
Aspergillus ochraceus, 
Aspergillus niger, and 
Penicillum citrinum. 
Antifungal activity against 
Fusarium avenaceum, 
Fusarium graminearum, and 
Fusarium culmorum 
[63] 
[64] 
[65] 
[66] 
[67] 
[68] 
[69] 
[70] 
[71] 
 
230 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
TABLE 7.2 (Continued) 
7.2.2 MULTI-DRUG RESISTANCE (MDR) AND BIOFILM OPPONENT 
Multi-drug resistant (MDR) bacteria feign considerable health concerns 
because of their steadily rising and treatment challenge record [72]. 

 
 
 
 
 
231 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) makes confronting 
subjects in both community and hospital sectors [73]. The actinomycetes are 
an influential agent to combat MDR by delivering clinically valuable NPs. 
To overcome these dilemmas, Kemung et al. [74] suggested Streptomyces 
strain produced potent anti-MRSA compounds including polyketides (PKS) 
(polyketomycin), NRPS (Nonribosomal peptides) (Nosiheptide), Noso­
komycin B, A Phosphoglycolipid, Marinopyrrole A alkaloid compounds, 
hybrids of PKS/NRPS and PKS/terpenoids. The PKS such as polyketomycin, 
heliquinomycin, griseusin A, 4′-deacetyl griseusin A, citreamicin θ A, as 
well as chaxamycin D. 
However, lately, Streptomyces-based synergism as therapeutics such 
as 1-Acetyl-β-Carboline and Penicillins, Cyslabdan, and Carbapenems are 
reported against MRSA [74]. Lately, Kim et al. [75] obtained tetraceno­
mycin D, resistoflavin, resistomycin, and a novel tetracene derivative named 
mersaquinone from marine founded Streptomyces sp. EG1. It has exposed 
activity on methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) with MIC 
ranges of 3.36 µg/mL. In the year 2006, Kwon et al. [76] derived marine 
rooted marinomycins from Marinispora sp. which illustrates remarkable 
antimicrobial action in opposition to multidrug resistance clinical pathogens. 
Diperamycin is a class of cyclic hexadepsipeptide antibacterial antibiotics, 
which was taken from Streptomyces griseoaurantiacus MK393-AF2. It 
had a suitable inhibitory effect against and MRSA. In addition, it contends 
against numerous Gram-positive bacteria including Enterococcus seriolicida 
[77]. Furthermore, Matsumoto et al. [78] derived lactonamycin sourced from 
Streptomyces rishiriensis MJ773-88K4. It recorded competence particularly 
against MRSA and vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus (VRE). In addition, 
Hughes et al. [79] yielded halogenated marinopyrrole compound from 
obligate marine Streptomyces strain (CNQ-418). It owns noteworthy activity 
towards MRSA with MIC ≤ 2 μM. In addition, it also exposes dominant 
cytotoxicity on cancer cells. 
Newsworthy findings made by Chen et al. [80]. He has isolated diketo­
piperazines such as maculosin and maculosin-O-α-L-rhamnopyranoside. It 
was obtained from marine-originated Streptomyces sp. ZZ446. These aggres­
sive metabolites presented their activity notably against clinically significant 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. In addition, those are exhibited 
antimicrobial potential against Escherichia coli, and Candida albicans. Their 
postulated MIC covers from 26 to 37 μg/mL. Hensler et al. [81] reported that 
anthacimycin, anthrax antibiotic, exposed extended inhibitory effects against 
MRSA and VRSA. Both are sensitive with MIC of < 0.25 mg/L. In addition, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
232 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
the actinomycins V, X2, and D provided by S. antibioticus strain M7, which 
holds the potential towards multidrug-resistant bacteria including MRSA 
and VRE [82]. In another study, a sequence of chlorinated bisindole pyrroles, 
lynamicins A-E, was isolated from a Marinispora NPS12745. The source 
sample was obtained from San Diego coast marine sediments, California. 
It possesses broad-spectrum against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus and VRE faecium [83]. 
Streptomyces sp. 7–145 was found to be synthesis multiple glycosyl­
ated antibiotics. Among the purified metabolites, 11′,12′-dehydroelaio­
phylin, elaiophylin, 11-O-methylelaiophylin, and efomycin G were posted 
as anti-MRSA and VRE operators. Its MIC values ranging from 1 to 4 μg/ 
ml. In addition, the efomycin G also unveils inhibitory activity inimical 
to methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis (MRSE) with MIC 
of 2 to 16 μg/ml [48]. In another investigation, Rho et al. [84] purified 
gargantulide (complex 52-membered macrolactone) from Streptomyces 
sp. A42983. It exhibits promising activity averse to MRSA. Besides, 
the marine-based actinomycete NPS12745 was obtained from the coast 
of San Diego, California. It was found to produce chlorinated bisindole 
pyrroles, lynamicins A-E. It shows an effective inhibitory spectrum 
against clinical pathogens [83]. Interestingly, the dionemycin compound 
acquired from deep-seas-based Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 1179. It was 
observed to represent an inhibitory impression on diverse clinical strains 
of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), which was 
isolated from humans and pigs. The MIC range was to be 1–2 μg/mL 
[85]. Another compound, ehydroxyaquayamycin derived from deep-sea 
sediment-based Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 11594. It was active towards the 
direction of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis (MIC: 16 
μg/mL) [86]. Recently, Ibrahimi et al. [87] stated that the Streptomyces 
predator’s manifest antibacterial activity in the direction to Micrococcus 
luteus, S. aureus (native and methicillin-resistant), and E. coli (native and 
ampicillin-resistant). 
On the flip side, biofilm exploits as a notable virulent factor for MRSA 
[74]. Complicating this fact, it underlines the pressing demand for dominant 
therapeutics. Actinomycetes are a prolific source of stiff bioactive metabo­
lites because of their chemically distinct structure. However, Streptomyces 
have great potential for anti-MRSA and anti-biofilm metabolites [74]. The 
Saharan soil-based-Actinomycetes AT37 also exhibits their anti-MRSA and 
biofilm activity against MRSA ATCC 43300 and VRSA S1. The MIC and 
Minimum biofilm formation (MBIC50) of MRSA was recorded as 15–30 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
233 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
and 10–15 μg/mL, sequentially [88]. In addition, the methanolic fraction 
of Streptomyces sp. strain MUSC 125 has anti-MRSA, and anti-biofilm 
activities. Other findings are supported by Mangzira Kemung et al. [89]. 
He obtained the methanolic extract of actinomyces from mangrove soil 
showed anti-MRSA, anti-biofilm, and antioxidant activities because of the 
presence of both polyketide synthase (pks) gene clusters including pksI and 
pksII. Overall, these findings bolster the actinobacterial metabolites act as a 
promising resource for succeeding anti-MRSA and anti-biofilm metabolite 
synthesis. Based on these investigations, actinomycetes-based NPs grip and 
sustain a viable opportunity for succeeding anti-MRSA antibiotic and anti­
biofilm drug discovery and advancement. 
7.2.3 VIRAL CONTENDER 
Available therapeutics for several viral infections have very slow and 
limited. Although, few of the viruses accomplishing multi-drug resistance 
including paramyxo and influenza viruses [90], resulting in health and 
economic burden. Despite this core apprehension, few only achieved for 
clinically successful. Indeed, the exploration of actinomycetes-based NPs 
has furnished pharmaceutical metabolites with robust antiviral activity. 
It embraces various alkaloids, peptides, polyketones, pyrones, sterols, 
quinones, terpenoids, etc. [91]. 
One of the antiviral skeleton compounds antimycin A1a has been 
isolated from marine-based Streptomyces kaviengensis. It had been obtained 
from marine sediments of the coast of New Ireland, Papua New Guinea. 
Supported the host mitochondrial electron transport target mechanism, this 
metabolite showed its potential on the western equine encephalomyelitis 
virus with IC50 of less than 4 nM with selectivity index is bigger than 550. 
Besides, antimycin A has a thorough spectrum potential towards RNA 
viruses viz. Togaviridae, Flaviviridae, Bunyaviridae, Picornaviridae, 
and Paramyxoviridae [92]. In another investigation, the marine-derived 
Streptomyces youssoufiensis OUC6819 synthesis violapyrones (VLPs) 
(Q-T, B&I) through Heterologous traits of the polyketide synthase (PKS) 
III gene vioA. The Anti-influenza A (H1N1 and H3N2) virus activity was 
evaluated by VLPs with ribavirin as a positive control. VLPs showed 
better anti-H1N1 and anti-H3N2 potentials. The shown IC50 values of 
30.6–132.4 μM and 45.3–150.0 μM, respectively [93]. A completely 
unique bioactive compound, (Z)-1-((1-hydroxypenta-2,4-dien-1-yl)oxy) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
234 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
anthracene-9,10-dione sourced from a strain of Nocardia alba KC710971. 
It exposed antiviral activity against two poultry viruses Newcastle disease 
virus (NDV) and infectious brucellosis disease virus (IBDV) [94]. 
Furthermore, the marine-derived Streptomyces koyangensis SCSIO 5802 
obtained from the South China Sea. It offered a butenolide derivative, 
(4S)-10-hydroxy-10-methyl-11-oxo-dodec-2-en-1,4-olide featuring octyl 
substitution at γ-position. It had been displayed anti-HSV-1 activity with 
an EC50 value of 25.4 μM with ganciclovir worked as a positive control 
with an EC50 value of 0.025 μM [95]. 
Of current, the extremophilic actinomycetes K-192, K-340, and 
K-362 are acknowledged as promising sources for antivirals. It displayed 
antiviral activities against influenza viruses, Sendai virus, and NDV 
[90]. Reported about their antiviral properties, a secondary metabolite 
9 (10H)-acridanone was reported against white spot syndrome virus 
(WSSV). It had been isolated from Streptomyces fradiae strain VITMK2, 
which is sourced from marine sediments of mangrove forest. It is 
employed for aquaculture farms’ betterment [96]. Liu et al. [97] elic­
ited phenolic polyketides including wailupemycin J, R-wailupemycin 
K, 5-deoxyenterocin identified from Streptomyces sp. OUCMDZ-3434 
using fermentation broth. It had been bracketing together Enteromorpha 
prolifera, marine chlorophyte. These compounds hold forceful anti-H1N1 
virus activity. It’s inhibitions as 47.8%, 42.5%, and 60.6%, respectively, 
at concentration of 50 μg/mL with ribavirin, 45.3% inhibition as a posi­
tive control. Additionally, the dimeric neoabyssomicins (abyssomicin 
monomers) extracted from marine-inhabiting Streptomyces koyangensis 
SCSIO 5802. It showed inhibitory activity against stomatitis virus also as 
effectiveness against MRSA [98]. 
Another strain of Streptomyces sp. (#HK18) obtained from the topsoil 
during a Korean solar saltern. It produced novel compounds named xiamycins 
C, D &E. Those are reported as carbazole-bearing indolosesquiterpenoids. 
It’s a dominant activity on the porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV). 
Among these, xiamycin D displays the foremost powerful activity on PEDV 
replication (EC50 = 0.93 μM) with low cytotoxicity (CC50 = 56.03 μM). It 
had been recorded with a highly selective index of 60.31. Besides, it had 
been evidenced of the GP2 spike and GP6 nucleocapsid protein by both by 
Western blotting [99]. Building on this premise, the marine-derived S. seou-
lensis IFB-A01 sourced from the gut of shrimp Penasus oriental. It generates 
various natural NA inhibitors like streptoseolactone, and limazepines G and 

 
235 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
H supported the dose-dependent manner with IC50 values ranges of 3.92, 
7.50, and 7.37 μmol l–1, respectively. It has a notable impact on viral drug 
discoveries [47]. The above breakthroughs stimulate new budding potentials 
in viral disease controls. Those are effectively suggesting their potential as 
fungales. 
7.3 ANTICANCER AND ANTIOXIDANT POTENTIALS 
Worldwide the cancer occurrence and mortality are one of the second 
greatest threats to public health and core point of global solicitude. In 2018, 
9.6 million mortalities were noted due to cancer [99]. In the anticancer 
drug improvement platform, actinobacteria-based chemotherapy has been 
well-familiar and gained giant impact because of their target-based affinity 
potential and fewer entropy attributes. It is a secure target for sustained 
tumor inhibitor signaling pathways. It may have the prospective to regu­
late carcinogenic progression and revolutionize cancer. A great number of 
antitumor compounds obtained from actinobacteria including polyketides, 
non-ribosomal peptides, combined polyketide-nonribosomal peptides, 
isoprenoids, indolocarbazoles, and others [101] as compiled in Table 7.3. 
Of recent, 20S proteasome inhibitors-based therapeutics practiced for 
cancer treatment. These inhibitors make pro-apoptotic proteins aggregation 
in tumorigenic cells [129]. Salinosporamide A an antileukemic chemo­
therapeutic agent because of its proteasome inhibitor mechanism including 
various malignancies like acute leukemia [130]. An enediyne metabolite 
with iodine acknowledged as calicheamicin obtained from Micromonos-
pora echinospora. It has transcendent anti-cancerous activity. Currently, 
calicheamicin combined with monoclonal antibody is used as acute myeloid 
leukemia therapeutics [21]. Another interesting naturally occurring organic 
compound lactacystin, from soil-based Streptomyces utilized for remarkable 
cancer therapy. On the additional aid, the antioxidants diminish the risk of 
chronic diseases and regulate neurodegenerative diseases through neuronal 
cell protection and free radical and oxidative stress-induced damage reduc­
tion. Oxidative stress plays a core part in cancer risk also [131]. Given the 
significance of antioxidants, attempts have been taken to hunt microbial-
based antioxidants. In that, actinobacterial NPs assist as a potent pool for 
antioxidants. A range of antioxidants derived from actinomycetes principally 
Streptomyces. 

 
 
 
 
236 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
TABLE 7.3 Summarizing Outlook of Anticancer Records of Actinobacteria 
SL. 
No. 
Source 
Compound 
Applications 
References 
1. 
Streptomyces 
hygroscopicus P247-71 
(ATCC 53709) 
Eponemycin 
In-vivo antitumor 
effect against B16 
melanoma. 
[102] 
2. 
Streptomyces sp. A-230 
TMC 
In-vitro cytotoxic 
activities against 
various tumor cell 
[103] 
lines. 
3. 
Salinospora sp. 
Salinosporamide A 
Cytotoxic activity 
[104] 
4. 
Streptomyces sp. 
BL-49-58-005 
Cytotoxic 
3,6-disubstituted 
indoles (1–3) 
Cytotoxic potentials 
against various 
tumor cell lines. 
[105] 
5. 
Streptomycetes B6007 
Caprolactones 
Cytotoxicity against 
[106] 
numerous cancer 
cells. 
6. 
Streptomyces chibaensis 
AUBN1/7 
1-Hydroxy-1­
norresistomycin 
In-vitro cytotoxic 
potentials 
against gastric 
adenocarcinoma 
[107] 
(HMO2), and 
hepatic carcinoma 
(HepG2). 
7. 
Streptomyces sp. 
Chinikomycins 
Antitumor activity 
against various 
human cancer cell 
[108] 
lines. 
8. 
Streptomyces strain 
CNQ-085 
Daryamides 
Cytotoxic potentials 
against the human 
colon carcinoma cell 
[109] 
line HCT-116. 
9. 
Streptomyces sp. 
KORDI-3238 
Streptokordin 
Cytotoxicity against 
several human 
[110] 
cancer cell lines. 
10. Marinispora sp. 
Marinomycins 
Cytotoxicity against 
melanoma cell lines. 
[76] 
11. Streptomyces sp. 04DH110 Streptochlorin 
Antiproliferative 
activity against 
human cultured cell 
[111] 
lines. 

 
 
 
237 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
TABLE 7.3 (Continued) 
SL. 
No. 
Source 
Compound 
Applications 
References 
12. Streptomyces sp. 
Marmycins 
Cytotoxicity against 
several cancer cell 
[112] 
lines. 
13. Streptomyces sp. KY002. 
Moromycins 
Cytotoxicity 
towards H-460 
[113] 
human lung cancer 
and MCF-7 human 
breast cancer cells. 
14. Streptomyces sp. isolate 
Mei37 
Mansouramycins 
A-D 
Cytotoxicity against 
melanoma, lung, 
breast, and prostate 
[114] 
cancer. 
15. Streptomyces avermitilis 
Oligomycin A 
In vitro potent anti­
tumor activity on 
human cancer cell 
[115] 
lines. 
16. Streptomyces sp. 
MDG-04-17-069 
Tartrolon D 
Cytotoxic activity 
against three human 
tumor cell lines. 
[116] 
17. Pseudonocardia sp. SCSIO 
01299 
Pseudonocardians 
B&C 
Cytotoxic activities 
to tumor cell lines of 
[42] 
SF-268, MCF-7 and 
NCI-H460. 
18. Streptomyces sp. FMA 
Streptocarbazoles 
Cytotoxic effect on 
HL-60, A-549 and 
HeLa cells cell lines. 
[117] 
19. Streptomyces fradiae 
007M135. 
Fradcarbazoles 
Cytotoxicity 
against HL-60, 
K562, A-549, and 
BEL-7402 cell 
[118] 
lines and inhibitory 
effects on the kinase 
PKC-α. 
20. Streptomyces 
spinoverrucosus 
Anthraquinones 
Cytotoxicity against 
non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC) 
cell lines Calu-3 and 
[119] 
H2887. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
238 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
TABLE 7.3 (Continued) 
SL. 
No. 
Source 
Compound 
Applications 
References 
21. Streptomyces lusitanus 
Grincamycins 
In vitro 
[120] 
SCSIO LR32 
cytotoxicities 
against the human 
cancer cell lines like 
HepG2, SW-1990, 
HeLa, NCI-H460, 
and MCF-7 and the 
mouse melanoma 
cell line B16. 
22. Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 
Spiroindimicins 
Cytotoxicities 
[121] 
03032 
against various 
cancer cell lines. 
23. Streptomyces sp. 
Chlorizidine 
Cytotoxicity against 
[122] 
HCT-116 human 
colon cancer cells. 
24. Streptomyces xinghaiensis Xinghaiamine A 
Cytotoxic activity 
[47] 
NRRL B24674 
against human 
cancer cell lines of 
MCF-7 and U-937. 
25. Streptomyces sp. 
Carpatamides A-C 
Activity to 
[123] 
non-small-cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC). 
26. Streptomyces sp. 
Ctotoxic alkylated 
Cytotoxicity against 
[124] 
WS-13394 
anthraquinone analog HepG2, A875, 
2. 
BGC-823 and 
MCF-7. 
27. Actinomycetospora chlora Thiasporine A 
Cytotoxicity against 
[27] 
SNC-032 
the non-small-cell 
lung cancer cell line 
H2122. 
28. Streptomyces sp. HUST012 SPE-B11.8 
Activity against Hep 
[51] 
G2 and MCF-7. 
29. Streptomyces sp. IMB094 
Neo-actinomycins A Cytotoxic efficacy 
[125] 
and B 
against human 
cancer HCT116, and 
A549 cell lines. 

 
 
SL. Source 
Compound 
Applications 
References 
No. 
30.  Streptomyces sp. 
Angucyclines and 
Cytotoxicity against 
[127] 
XZHG99T  
actinomycins 
human cancer cell 
lines including 
A549, H157, MCF7, 
MDA-MB-231, and 
HepG2. 
31.  Streptomyces sp. 
2-Epi-anthracimycin Cytotoxicity 
[127] 
OPMA00631 
towards Jurkat cells. 
32.  Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 
Dionemycin 
Cytotoxic activity 
[85] 
11791  
for human cancer  
cell lines viz.,  
HepG2, NCI-H460,  
MDA-MB-231,  
HCT-116, and  
noncancerous  
MCF10A.  
33.  Streptomyces sp. strain 
Baikalomycins 
Activity against 
[128] 
IB201691-2A  
cancer cell lines  
A549 (lung  
carcinoma), Huh7.5  
(hepatocellular  
carcinoma),  
MCF7 (breast  
adenocarcinoma),  
and SW620  
(colorectal  
adenocarcinoma).  
34.  Streptomyces sp. 
Bluemomycin 
Cytotoxicity against 
[17] 
ERINLG-201  
A549, Skvo-3 and  
HepG2 cell lines.  
 
 
 
239 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
TABLE 7.3 (Continued) 
Freshly, an influential antioxidant compound, pyrrolo [1,2-a]pyrazine­
1,4-dione, hexahydro has obtained from Streptomyces mangrovisoli sp. Nov 
[131]. Other supporting findings were investigated by Kim et al. [132]. He 
has obtained protocatechualdehyde (PA), butanol extract of Streptomyces 
lincolnensis M-20. It had solid antioxidant potential through 1,1-diphenyl­
2-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical scavenging activity. In addition, PA 
also exhibits cytotoxic potential explicitly against MCF-7 human breast 
cancer cells. It was measured by 3-(4,5-dimethylthazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl 
tetrazolium-bromide (MTT) assay. However, PA dose-dependently arrested 

 
 
 
 
 
 
240 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
apoptosis because of its enhanced cell viability and inter-nucleosomal DNA 
fragmentation. Another anticancer and antioxidant substance 5-(2,4-dimeth­
ylbenzyl) pyrrolidine-2-one (DMBPO) received from marine-derived Strep-
tomyces VITSVK5 spp. The DMBPO revealed efficacy against various cell 
lines including Hep G2 and Hep-2 cell lines. In addition, DMBPO produced 
human erythrocytes hemolytic EC50 value of 288 μg/ml. However, compared 
with human chromosome controls, DMBPO reveals aberrations, gaps, and 
chromatid breaks. Moreover, DMBPO additionally showed DPPH radical 
scavenging activity as 44.13% at 5 μg/ml DMBPO and total antioxidant 
activity as 50.10% at 5 μg/ml DMBPO [133]. As a matter of fact, Law et al. 
[134] have obtained a total of 88 Streptomyces isolates exhibited noteworthy 
antioxidant and cytotoxic consequence against colon cancer cell lines 
including HCT-116, HT-29, Caco-2, and SW480. 
The mangrove soil-based Streptomyces sp. MUM273b toiled as prom­
ising antioxidants viz. DPPH, ABTS, and superoxide radical scavenging 
activities. Furthermore, it shows effective metal-chelating activity to inhibit 
the production of malondialdehyde in metal-induced lipid peroxidation. 
Moreover, it is also recorded cytoprotective activity on the UVB-induced 
cell death in HaCaT keratinocyte [135]. Law et al. [136] has isolated Strepto-
myces colonosanans sp. exhibited antioxidative, and cytotoxic potential. The 
mangrove Streptomyces MUM292 elucidated antioxidant action like DPPH, 
ABTS, and superoxide radical scavenging with metal-chelating activities 
[137]. The mangrove sourced Streptomyces sp. strain MUSC 14 synthesis 
potent antioxidants by ABTS, DPPH free radicals, and metal chelation [89]. 
These findings are conceivably highlights, actinobacterial structural classes 
could act as vibrant antioxidant and cytotoxic regimens. This became a 
pivotal role for further cancer therapeutics. 
7.4 ANTIMALARIAL AND OTHER POTENTIALS 
Malaria is one of the devastating diseases. Based on the continuous emergence 
of drug resistance, its eradication facing a very challenging task. However, 
it causes a paradigm shift in malarial drug preparation and development 
[138–140]. Usually, Plasmodium falciparum, P. vivax, and P. malariae 
have been reported as developing resistance. Hopefully, the breakthrough in 
malarial treatment is based on actinomycetes-based metabolites. The marine 
actinomycete, Salinispora tropica was recorded to produce salinosporamide 
A, which is a proteasome inhibitor. It shows a vigorous inhibitory impact 

 
 
 
 
241 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
against P. falciparum [138]. Closely, a Gancidin-W compound obtained 
from actinomycetes was also showed antimalarial potential [141]. 
Similarly, Huang et al. [142] take out β-carboline alkaloids (marinacar­
bolines A-D), indolactam alkaloids (13-N-dimethyl-methylpendolmycin and 
methylpendolmycin-14-O-α-glucoside), from Marinactinospora thermotol-
erans SCSIO 00652 fermentation broth. These new metabolites represent 
their antiplasmodial potential specifically against Plasmodium falciparum 
lines 3D7 and Dd2 (IC50 is 1.92 to 36.03 μM). In addition, Maskey et al. 
[143] isolated another bioactive antiplasmodial compound named trioxacar­
cins A and D extracted from ethyl acetate extract of Streptomyces sp. B8652. 
It showed potential against Plasmodium falciparum with IC50 ranges from 
1.6 ± 0.1 and 2.3 ± 0.2 ng/mL, respectively. Of fresh, actinomycetes-based 
metabolites as a source of anti-malarial compounds, Na et al. [144] reported a 
compound, polyether metabolite from marine Streptomyces sp. strain H668. 
This new metabolite demonstrates competent in vitro antimalarial activity 
particularly against the chloroquine-susceptible and -resistant isolates of 
Plasmodium falciparum. 
Provocatively, effective anti-infective compounds named valinomycin, 
staurosporine, and butenolide recovered from actinomycetes. These active 
metabolites illustrate antiparasitic activity against Leishmania major and 
Trypanosoma brucei brucei. The reported IC50 range of valinomycin and 
butenolide particularly against Leishmania major is < 0.11 μM and 5.30 
μM, respectively. In addition, the reported IC50 range of valinomycin, stau­
rosporine, and butenolide particularly against Trypanosoma brucei brucei is 
0.0032 μM, 0.022 μM, and 31.77 μM, respectively [145]. 
Likewise, a unique bioactive compound, (Z)-1-((1-hydroxypenta-2,4­
dien-1-yl) oxy) anthracene-9,10-dione rooted from Nocardia alba KC710971. 
It displayed significant broad-spectrum antilarvicidal activity against Aedes 
egypti, Culex quinquefasciatus, and Anopheles stephensi [94]. One of the 
present series reported that the marinacarbolines (β-carboline alkaloids) 
were purified from actinomycete Marinactinospora thermotolerans from 
the deep South China Sea. They showed strong evidence of antiplasmodial 
activities towards the drug-sensitive line 3D7 and drug-resistant line Dd2 of 
Plasmodium falciparum [146]. The Streptomyces sp. strain KS84 produces 
Oridamycins A and B compounds. Based on the NMR and spectroscopic 
analyzes, the compounds are acknowledged as pentacyclic indolosesquiter­
penes. However, oridamycins A demonstrates potent anti-Saprolegnia para­
sitica activity with a MIC of 3.0 mg/mL [147]. As biofouling causes huge 
pecuniary disappointment. Xu et al. [148] extracted effective anti-fouling 

 
 
 
 
242 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
agents by marine Streptomyces strain. Newly, napyradiomycin derivatives 
were acquired from the Madeira Archipelago Ocean sediments actinomy­
cetes. This compound was shown to have potent antifouling activity on the 
marine biofilm-forming bacteria with an inhibition of ≥80%. Furthermore, it 
shows activity on the Mytilus galloprovincialis larvae settlement. The value 
of EC50 < 5 µg/ml and LC50/EC50 >15 [149]. Despite on spectrum of larvicidal 
compounds, actinomycetes have been explored as an antilarvicidal drug 
candidate. Furthermore, these grades emphasize the impact of these actino­
mycetes metabolites as potential drug leads. Therefore, that emphasized the 
importance of actinobacterial-based NPs for mankind. It has afterward been 
exploited for future effective drug additives. 
7.5 ACTINOMYCETES AS WHOLE-CELL BIOCATALYSTS THROUGH 
SYNTHETIC BIOLOGY 
In the biotransformation, the substrates are converted into products through 
whole-cell or their enzymes biocatalysts. Freshly whole-cell actinomycetes 
used for synthesis and manufacturing pharmaceutical-based products based 
on their selectivity, calalytic activity, operation conditions, low environ­
mental impact. Actinomycetes used for synthesis most of the biologically 
active compounds, various enzymes [150]. Genetic techniques especially 
synthetic biology used for whole-cell biocatalysts. 
Actinomycetes are large genomes with multiple structurally diverse 
hidden or orphan and novel secondary metabolite genes (SMGs) [151]. Only 
less than 10% secondary metabolite gene clusters (SMGCs) were expressed 
in typical laboratory growth conditions. Others need distinctive techniques to 
investigate their metabolites. Among actinomycetes, Streptomyces genomes 
broadly code SM-BGC (secondary metabolites biosynthetic gene clusters). 
It has been encoded secondary metabolites protein machinery with various 
chemotypes namely type I, II, and III polyketides, lactams, terpenes, alka­
loids, and non-ribosomal peptides [152]. In addition, these genes encompass 
potential diverse metabolites patterns for peptide assembly, metabolic regula­
tion, expression, and cryptic secondary metabolites. These are arranged into 
physical clusters, i.e., biosynthetic gene clusters (BGC) [153]. Employing 
cryptic or orphan gene pathways is one of the modish experimental platforms 
for drug discovery through intensified biosynthesis of actinobacterial hidden 
natural compounds. With the onset of the genomics-driven era, synthetic 
biology is one of the emerging tools, that is based on engineering postulates 

 
 
 
 
243 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
to biological operations. It is activated and identifies and re-designs the 
NPs cryptic genes based on the three-step strategy “Design-Build-Test.” 
The engineered microbial NPs are the source for fertile bio-economy-based 
applications in industries as showed in Figure 7.2. 
Several target-based promising synthetic biology strategies are opened at 
analyzing the biosynthetic potential of actinomycetes. These are activating 
cryptic SM-BGCs and are implemented to discover and rediscover the acti­
nomycetes metabolites. It is used to well construct, rewiring, and develop­
ment of actinomycetes genetic circuits and their engineering (Figure 7.3). 
FIGURE 7.2 Schematic illustration of applications of whole-cell biocatalysts through 
synthetic biology towards future. 
FIGURE 7.3 Schematic depiction of various techniques used in synthetic biology. 

 
 
 
 
 
244 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
7.6 GENOME MINING 
Anew, multiple Omics-inspired approaches have been providing paradigm 
shift and used to trigger poorly expressed or unexpressed novel NPs 
biosynthetic metabolites. Genome miming is an in-silico computational 
and bioinformatics-based engineering approach for microbial secondary 
metabolites detection and production. It is biosynthetic potential based on 
automatic detection and annotation of gene cluster sequence and metabolic 
pathways. It acts as a milestone for NP research. In addition, it is adopted to 
retrieve novel NPs based on its structure and function prediction databases. 
It is actively involved in the identification and activation of cryptic BGCs 
as compiled in Table 7.4. The BGCs commonly encode the multimodular 
enzymes, which act as biosynthetic pipelines for the acceleration of NPs’ 
biosynthesis. It includes polyketide synthases (PKS) and non-ribosomal 
peptide synthetase (NRPS) enzymes. Currently many tools including clust-
Scan, NP. searcher, SBSPKS used to explore non-ribosomal peptide and 
polyketide biosynthesis pathways. Of fresh, Shell (antiSMASH) has been 
resourced as a web-based automatic genomic identification tool and analysis 
BGCs for genomic miming [154]. Tremblay et al. [155] developed two anti-
SMASH-based ClusterMine360 database for cryptic secondary metabolite 
analysis. Based on the traditional approach only five compounds were 
recognized in Streptomyces ambofaciens, whereas genome miming recov­
ering 23 additional clusters for effective secondary metabolites-based drug 
production. Based on these investigations, genomic mining grip and sustain 
a viable opportunity for succeeding actinomycetes-based NPs discovery and 
advancement. 
TABLE 7.4 Concise View of Genomic Mining Biosynthetic Gene Clusters (BGC) 
SL. 
No. 
Source 
Miming Compound 
Class 
References 
1. 
Streptomyces 
coelicolor M145 
Coelichelin 
(siderophore) 
Nonribosomal peptide 
synthetase (NRPS) 
[156] 
2. 
Streptomyces 
ambofaciens 
ATCC23877 
Stambomycins A–D 
Type I polyketide 
synthase. 
[157] 
3. 
Streptomyces. 
sp. TP-A0356 
Streptothricins (STs) 
(Streptothricin F & 
Streptothricin D). 
Biosynthetic gene cluster 
(BGC) 
[158] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
245 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
TABLE 7.4 (Continued) 
SL. 
No. 
Source 
Miming Compound 
Class 
References 
4. 
S. ambofaciens 
ATCC 23877 
Kinamycins 
Type II polyketide 
synthase (PKS). 
[159] 
Stambomycins 
Type I polyketide 
synthase (PKS). 
Antimycins and 
related volatiles. 
Hybrid NRPS-PKS 
cluster. 
5. 
Streptomyces 
albus J1074 
Antimycin and 
6-epi-alteramides. 
Hybrid polyketide­
non-ribosomal peptides 
(PK-NRP). 
[160] 
Candicidin 
Type I polyketide 
synthase (PKS). 
Indigoidine 
Non-ribosomal peptides 
(NRP). 
Paulomycins 
Glycosylated compounds 
6. 
Streptomyces 
chattanoogensis 
L10 (CGMCC 
2644) 
Chattamycins A and B Angucycline antibiotic 
family 
[161] 
7. 
Streptomyces sp. 
SD85 
Sceliphrolactam 
Type I polyketide 
synthase (PKS) 
[162] 
8. 
Streptomyces sp. 
strain fd1-xmd 
Streptothricin (ST) 
and tunicamycin 
(TM). 
Biosynthetic gene cluster 
(BGC). 
[163] 
7.5.1 HETEROLOGOUS EXPRESSION 
Commonly, actinomycetes harbor freakish gene clusters. The preponder­
ance of BGCs is cryptic in native hosts. In that, the transfer of gene clus­
ters of actinobacterial secondary metabolome pathway for heterologous 
expression is a viable tool for expression and increased production of NPs. 
It has three steps including cloning, engineering, and transformation [97]. 
Usually, Streptomyces species act as a suitable heterologous tool for NP 
production based on their simple genetic manipulations. It is a genetically 
well-studied host. Notably, S. coelicolor, S. lividans, S. avermitilis, S. 
albus, and S. venezuelae have been used for suitable heterologous host 
strains [152, 164]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
246 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
The S. coelicolor was used as a vector for the heterologous production 
of secondary metabolites. Besides various mutants of S. coelicolor were 
used for better heterologous expression including CH999, M512, M1146, 
M1152, M1154, and M1317 [164]. Newsworthy findings made by Li et al. 
[158] exploited STs antibiotic using heterologous expression of S. coelicolor 
M145 from S. Sp. TP-A0356. Similarly, Yu et al. [163] used S. coelicolor as 
a potent vector for the expression of ST gene assembly from Streptomyces 
sp. Strain fd 1-xmd. However, it was produced 0.5 g/L under optimized 
conditions. 
On account of well understood genetic background, small genomic size, 
and rapid growth, S. albus J1074 is also used in heterologous chassis for 
heterologous expression of prolific silent secondary metabolites research 
[165]. Despite its enhanced metabolites manufacture, fast-growth potentials, 
clutter-free S. albus strain utilized as an effectual vector for fralnimycin 
production [166]. Recently, Lasch et al. [167] isolated novel unique dudo­
mycins (A-D) based on heterologous expression by S. albus Del14. In that, 
the silent NRPS clusters from S. albus sp. chlorinus Nrrl B-24108. Based 
on yeast-mediated transformation-associated recombination (TAR) cloning, 
the type II polyketide synthase pathway was captured from the marine Sali-
nispora pacifica and carried out heterologous expression in Streptomyces 
maritimus for enterocin production [168]. 
The mithramycin A was obtained from S. argillaceus ATCC12956. It was 
cloned using Saccharomyces cerevisiae assisted by transformation-based 
recombination. Further, heterologous expression was carried out by S. livi-
dans TK24. The production rate was calculated as 3 g/L, under optimized 
fermentation conditions [169]. In another study, the engineered S. lividans 
ΔYA9 and S. albus Del14 were utilized for the heterologous expression of 
seven active secondary metabolites from S. albus ssp. chlorinus Nrrl B-24108 
[170]. In addition, the lassopeptides are a group of ribosomally synthesized 
and post translationally modified peptides (RiPP). It was obtained from S. 
leeuwenhoekii C34. It was identified through heterologous expression by S. 
coelicolor [171]. These findings are furnishing escalating records on Strep-
tomyces spp. could be a high-priced chassis for the expression of NPs for 
powerful drug lead production. 
7.6 CO-CULTIVATION APPROACH 
Ordinarily most of the cryptic genes in actinomycetes that are chemical 
dark matter do not express in optimize growth conditions at the laboratory. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
247 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
Recently, one strain many compounds (OSMAC) framework is an emerging 
principle. It has been worked under one strain synthesis various compounds 
under co-cultivation, the addition of enzyme inhibition, and various envi­
ronmental and cultivation parameters [172]. In that respect, the combined 
culture of two or more microbes is one of the most exploitation directions 
to investigate the complete metabolic potential and unlocking unexpressed 
NPs. BGCs expressions in actinomycetes based on their biotic cues. It is 
a significant stage in chemical diversity enhancement and drug discovery. 
Culture conditions and interspecies-regulated lines of crosstalk of strains 
facilitate the formation of cryptic NPs. 
To induce cryptic metabolites, Pishchany et al. [173] co-cultured nine 
actinomycetes strains for amycomicin (AMY) production based on reduced 
nutrient uptake neighbor interactions. Streptomyces endus S-522 co-cultured 
with mycolic acid synthesis bacterium Tsukamurella pulmonis TB-B0596, 
which interacts and triggers biosynthesis of secondary metabolite alchive­
mycin [174]. In order to decipher the dual induction-based genomic induction, 
Nicault et al. [175] have been studied intensively co-cultivation biosynthesis 
by Streptomyces-fungi co-cultures. They have extracted two effective Strepto-
myces-fungus interaction zones (SEIZs) through metabolic interactions. 
Similarly, Streptomyces sp. MA37 was expressed effective unexpressed 
pyrroloindolocarbazole alkaloid BE-13793C1 through a mixed fermentation 
mechanism co-fermented with Pseudomonas sp. [176]. Similarly, the Strepto-
myces sp. NZ-6 co-cultured with a mycolic acid producer named Tsukamurella 
pulmonis TB-B0596 for niizalactams A-C production. It is grouped under 
unprecedented di- and tricyclic macrolactams [177]. Other supporting findings 
were investigated by Hoshino et al. [177] was screened butanolide chojalac­
tones A-C from Streptomyces sp. CJ-5 is co-combined with Tsukamurella 
pulmonis TB-B0596. In addition, he also isolated novel cytotoxic indolocar­
bazole alkaloid arcyriaflavin E from S. cinnamoneus NBRC 13823, which is 
co-cultured with mycolic acid-producing bacteria [178]. Furthermore, various 
compounds named desferrioxamines and promomycin were also synthesized 
based on Streptomyces crosstalk [179]. The above breakthroughs are effec­
tively suggesting co-combined maneuvering is a new budding potential for 
active NPs production in actinomycetes populations. 
7.7 CRISPR-CAS9 TECHNOLOGY 
CRISPR/Cas (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats 
and CRISPR-associated protein) could be worked under adaptive immune 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
248 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
framework. It has been utilizing RNA-guided nucleases, which is cleaving 
foreign materials. CRISPR-Cas9 (Clustered regularly interspaced short 
palindromic repeats and CRISPR-associated protein 9) is the in-vivo RNA-
based DNA gene-editing tool with delete gene or gene clusters. It is based 
on the cooperation of the CRISPR display with CRISPR-associated proteins 
(CRISPR-Cas). In addition, it is rewired from a prokaryotic type II CRISPR 
arrangement. However, it has been contributing to enhance the production of 
new silent metabolites with unique bioactivities based on enhanced sequence 
specificity, artificial-based guided targeting with enhanced editing strategy 
[180, 181]. Furthermore, it is employed using the insertion of double-
stranded DNA breaks with insertion or deletion [180, 182]. It is categorized 
into stages of adaptation, expression, and interference [183]. 
Of recent, the CRISPR-Cas9-based gene editing by pCRISOPomyces, 
CRISPR-Cas9-based gene editing by pKCCas9dO, CRISPR-Cas9-based 
gene editing by pCRISPR-Cas9, CRISPR-Cas9-based multiplex gene 
repression, CRISPR-Cas9-base editing system (CRISPR-BEST), CRISPR/ 
Cas9-CodA (sm) combined system, CRISPR-Cas9 knock-in strategy, 
Generic CRISPR-Cas9 approach using the same sgRNA for editing, fine-
tuning of Cas9 expression, CRISPR-Cas9 TAR (transformation associated 
recombination) cloning approach, Cas9-assisted targeting of chromosome 
segments (CATCH), Gibson assembly combined with CRISPR/Cas9, in-vitro 
packaging mediated one-step targeted cloning, all were well constructed for 
Streptomyces genetic manipulations [183]. 
In the year 2017, Zhang et al. [184] used CRISPR-Cas9 knock-in 
approach to trigger pentangular type II polyketide metabolites in Strepto-
myces viridochromogenes. In addition, he also activated various cryptic 
secondary metabolites in numerous Streptomyces strains. Similarly, Lim et 
al. [185] used the CRISPR-Cas9 gene cluster for activation and biosynthesis 
of auroramycin, a rare isobutyrylmalonyl extender unit in Streptomyces 
roseosporus. It showed potent anti-MRSA activity. In another study, Tong 
et al. [186] developed a CRISPR-Cas9 toolkit for genome detection by a 
framework for spacer identification software (sgRNA), gene/gene cluster 
knock-out, the study of gene loss-of-function random size deletion library, 
gene knock-down in S. coelicolor A3(2) and S. collinus Tu 365. A similar 
study was conducted by Wang et al. [187]. He developed an engineered type 
II CRISPR/Cas method named as pCRISPomyces. It is worked based on 
multiplex deletions of the gene in S. lividans, S. albus, and S. viridochromo-
genes. The editing potential is calculated as 70–100%. Despite its single-step 
intergeneric transfer, the CRISPR-Cas9 mediated genome editing plasmid 

 
 
249 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
pKCcas9dO was transported into S. coelicolor M145 with 60–100% of effi­
ciency potential, which is utilized for novel metabolites production [182]. 
These findings are conceivably highlights, the CRISPR/Cas9 might act as a 
vibrant tool to express actinobacterial-based NPs synthesis. This became a 
polar role for more NPs-based therapeutics. 
7.8 METABOLIC ENGINEERING-RIBOSOME ENGINEERING AND 
PROMOTER ENGINEERING 
The cellular metabolism was engineered using rDNA technology for 
enhanced production of needed metabolites or novel product production. 
In order to achieve that, optimize genetic and regulatory circuits. In recent, 
rational ribosomal engineering was used to trigger silent gene activation and 
enhanced secondary metabolites production using common antibiotics in 
a vast number of actinobacterial populations based on ribosomal compo­
nent modulations including ribosomal proteins and rRNA [188]. On the 
supporting aid, the Streptomyces albus was produced an increased amount of 
salinomycin based on their ribosomal engineering approach [189]. In addi­
tion, The rpsL gene-encoded ribosomal protein S12. Some of the mutated 
streptomycin resistance rpsL alleles or 16S rRNA methylation (rsmG) 
develop actinobacterial strain improvement. It changes physiological traits 
and helps to triggers the enhanced production of antibiotics. In the year 2003, 
Okamoto-Hosoya [190] synthesized actinorhodin from S. coelicolor A3(2) 
based on the insertion of rpsL gene mutation. Double mutation of combing 
rpsL and rsmG also enhanced improved antibiotics production. Based on 
these, the engineering of ribosomes is the best genetic manipulation towards 
successful actinobacterial cryptic gene expression, which is further used for 
pharmaceutical leads. 
The suitable gene regulation elements particularly promoter regions are 
important for robust transcription-mediated gene expression and genetic 
manipulation in actinomycetes. Besides synthetic biology, a plug-and-play 
strategy is accomplished for various promoters, which is used for transcrip­
tional-based activation and enhanced production of cryptic clusters [191]. 
The synthetic promoter library (SPL) was achieved for enhanced synthetic 
of NPs in actinomycetes. As a proof of concept, Xu et al. [192] used 
synthetic SPL-21 promoter for enhanced double-fold production of toyoca­
mycin (TM) in S. diastatochromogenes 1628 than wild type. Similarly, the 
SPL-21 promoter in S. rimosus M527 exhibited potent gene expression and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
250 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
2.2-fold improved activity in beta-glucuronidase (GUS) [193]. In another 
study, the SPL-20 promoter modulation was used to enhance actinorhodin 
production in S. coelicolor A3(2). Similarly, Ptac* RBS3 promoter was 
used in S. lividans for effective gene expression [194]. Barreales et al. [195] 
used pimM promoter for activation of pimaricin production in S. natalensis. 
Therefore, these grades emphasized the importance of promoter engineering 
for actinobacterial-based NP activation and expression. It has afterward been 
exploited for future effective drug additives. 
7.9 NEXT GENERATION SEQUENCING 
Biosynthesis from the actinomycetes group of bacteria has become the 
emerging trend towards the search for novel bioactive products, and the 
whole system of this approach by using the next-generation DNA sequencing 
(NGS). All over the world, researchers are interestingly implementing a 
wide number of projects aiming to bring out healthy outputs using NGS. 
The advanced technologies in the actinomycetes research have shown mile­
stones in the successful resources on quality data comprised of hundreds 
of short contigs, which provides a detailed data of gene cluster. Thus, the 
next-generation technologies and their growing updations were showing a 
remarkable development in identifying the potential bioactive compounds 
from soil and marine environment [196]. 
Even the very first antibiotic streptomycin from the actinomycetes is 
a benchmark discovery in the medical field which makes the researchers 
think beyond this for a consistent focus on searching bioactive compounds 
from the action bacteria for antibiotic products. The attention towards this 
isolation of actinomycetes is attracted with the new generation techniques 
for the genetic level pattern study of targeting novel products in an easier 
and faster way. After this introduction of NGS has filled the gap between 
the observation of genetic resources and achieving the potential nature of 
the same bioactive compound rich actinomycetes and now it leads to an 
increase in the discovery of novel compounds. The noticeable techniques 
of next-generation techniques in the development of antibiotics from the 
actinomycetes include genome editing, analytical separation, and high-
resolution spectroscopic methods. Unrevealed resources of the actino­
bacteria from the year 1940 are now getting realistic using the molecular 
and analytical tools utilized in the next generation techniques [197]. The 
medical field on the diagnosis of Actinomycetes species particularly the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
251 
Nocardia sp. using the Next Generation techniques has become the prom­
ising tool for reliable results. Since most of the Nocardia sp. is having 
the ability to cause localized and suppurative infections to sin the human 
beings. To avoid such mortality cases, the application of Next-generation 
techniques is playing a vital role in the medical diagnosis field [198]. The 
NGS provides valuable insights for the detection of the actinomyctes popu­
lation for novel NPs synthesis. 
7.10 IN VIVO-BIOSENSORS AND OTHER TECHNIQUES 
Biosensors are an important synthetic biology tool. In actinobacteria, 
various NP BGCs encode cluster-situated regulators (CSRs) used to detect 
production state, environmental alteration, and population mass that is used 
for detecting cryptic metabolites. The CSRs includes Streptomyces antibi­
otic regulatory proteins (SARPs) and Tet-R like repressor [189]. Interest­
ingly, a TetR-like Repressor-based biosensor constructed to detect BGCs 
for undecylprodigiosin and coelimycin in Streptomyces lividans TK24. By 
the same token, a biosensor by TetR-like repressor for pamamycin produc­
tion also developed [199]. To address the expression of silent pathways, 
genetic manipulation through chemical mutagenesis and recombination by 
protoplast fusion is used for industrial strain improvement, now which is 
combining with genome shuffling, a genome engineering approach based 
on protoplast fusion. It is a rapid, practical strain improvement strategy 
in actinomycetes. On the additional aid, HiTES (High-throughput elicitor 
screens) and high throughput screening (HTS) were used to identify and 
activate unexpressed gene clusters in actinomycetes. Interestingly the anti-
fungal compound named acyl-surugamide, which was identified through 
the HiTES approach from S. albus J1074. This compound showed potent 
antifungal activity against Saccharomyces cerevisiae with 3.5 µm of IC 50 
potential [200]. 
7.11 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES 
In conclusion, despite passionate research, there are no hesitation that acti­
nobacteria acts as an untapped reservoir for natural metabolites. Those are 
highly estimable and outstanding sources for novel therapeutics. It needs to 
study for NP research since the dawn of the antibiotic era. Actinobacteria 
offers an enormous, underexploited resource for novel bioactive compounds. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
252 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Its emergence directly enhances drug discovery and developmental potential. 
It is a new dimension of actino-microbial research. It proffers a myriad of 
active ingredients for the healthcare sector. It contributes significant metabo­
lites towards mankind. 
The actino-based foundation using for the lifesaving leads. Bioac­
tive natural metabolites from actinobacteria enlighten the likelihood of 
developing novel therapeutics. These actinobacteria became a meticu­
lous focal point in these endeavors for drug discovery platforms to help 
maintain and promote advances in global public health. To discover the 
effective natural medicines, actinomycetes especially Streptomyces act 
as a dominant source for potent therapeutics, which can deliver unique 
scaffolds. Recent whole-cell biocatalysts through synthetic solutions 
including genomic sequencing with bioinformatics tools viz. genomic 
mining, heterologous expression, genetic or physiological manipulation, 
co-cultivation, NGS, in vivo sensors have mined and explored diversified 
cryptic NPs. 
Future work should core focus on actinomycetes population, the study, 
and biochemistry of rare actinomycetes still in the infancy stage. Although 
evaluation of their concealed gene clusters is very limited. In addition, it offers 
a dominant platform for new taxa exploration. But it is a poorly explored and 
studied ecosystem. Furthermore, there is limited knowledge of the molecular 
mechanism of antioxidants in cells and livings. It needs further exploration 
to analyze genome-based anti-infective potentials as therapeutics. However, 
there is an inadequate investigation of NPs’ metabolic networks, regulatory 
pathways, adaptations with an antiviral activity that is still wide open. In this 
regard, future sources rely on using rapidly evolving whole-cell biocatalysts 
through genomic tools including synthetic biology, genome sequencing, 
and mining to discover and accelerate exists and novel active metabolites 
with the improvement of their pharmaceutical potentials. The advancement 
of synthetic biology makes new adventures in this action-research in the 
upcoming years. In addition, it inflames the unexpressed metabolites. More­
over, continuous, and dynamic efforts are needed to achieve viable health 
sustainability. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Authors thank Biorender for making drawing in this chapter. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
253 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
KEYWORDS 
• 
actinomycetes 
• 
biosynthetic gene cluster 
• 
CRISPR-Cas9 technology 
• 
natural compounds 
• 
next generation sequencing 
• 
synthetic biology 
• 
whole-cell-biocatalysis 
REFERENCES 
1. Ebada, S. S., Edrada, R. A., Lin, W., & Proksch, P., (2008). Methods for isolation, 
purification and structural elucidation of bioactive secondary metabolites from marine 
invertebrates. Nat. Protoc., 3(12), 1820–1831. 
2. Baker, W., Van, D. B. A., Camon, E., Hingamp, P., Sterk, P., Stoesser, G., & Tuli, M. A., 
(2000). The EMBL nucleotide sequence database. Nucleic Acids Res., 28, 19–23. 
3. Li, J. W., & Vederas, J. C., (2009). Drug discovery and natural products: End of an era 
or an endless frontier? Science, 325(5937), 161–165. 
4.  Barreca, M., Spanò, V., Montalbano, A., Cueto, M., Díaz, M. A. R., Deniz, I., Erdoğan, 
A., et al., (2020). Marine anticancer agents: An overview with a particular focus on their 
chemical classes. Mar. Drugs., 18(12), 619. 
5. Abdel-Razek, A. S., El-Naggar, M. E., Allam, A., Morsy, O. M., & Othman, S. I., (2020). 
Microbial natural products in drug discovery. Processes, 8(4), 470. 
6. Mahajan, G. B., & Balachandran, L., (2012). Antibacterial agents from actinomycetes: 
A review. Front. Biosci (Elite Ed)., 1(4), 240–253. 
7. Jose, P. A., Maharshi, A., & Jha, B., (2021). Actinobacteria in natural products research: 
Progress and prospects. Microbiol. Res., 246, 126708. 
8. Yang, C., Qian, R., Xu, Y., Yi, J., Gu, Y., Liu, X., Yu, H., et al., (2019). Marine 
actinomycetes-derived natural products. Curr. Top. Med. Chem., 19(31), 2868–2918. 
9. Berdy, J., (2005). Bioactive microbial metabolites. The Journal of Antibiotics (Tokyo), 
58, 1–26. 
10. Ceniceros, A., Dijkhuizen, L., Petrusma, M., & Medema, M. H., (2017). Genome-based 
exploration of the specialized metabolic capacities of the genus Rhodococcus. BMC 
Genomics, 18, 593. 
11. Berdy, J., (2012). Thoughts and facts about antibiotics: Where we are now and where we 
are heading. J. Antibiot., 65(8), 385–395. 
12. Chevrette, M. G., Carlos-Shanley, C., Louie, K. B., Bowen, B. P., Northen, T. R., & 
Currie, C. R., (2019). Taxonomic and metabolic incongruence in the ancient genus 
Streptomyces. Front. Microbiol., 10, 2170. 
13. Takahashi, Y., & Nakashima, T., (2018). Actinomycetes, an inexhaustible source of 
naturally occurring antibiotics. Antibiotics (Basel, Switzerland),  7(2), 45. 

 
254 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
14. Barka, E. A., Vatsa, P., Sanchez, L., Gaveau-Vaillant, N., Jacquard, C., Meier-Kolthoff, 
J. P., Klenk, H. P., et al., (2015). Taxonomy, physiology, and natural products of 
actinobacteria. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev., 80(1), 1–43. 
15. Goodfellow, M., & Williams, S. T., (1983). Ecology of actinomycetes. Annu. 
 
Rev. 
Microbiol., 37, 189–216. 
16. Subramani, R., & Sipkema, D., (2019). Marine rare actinomycetes: A  promising source 
of structurally diverse and unique novel natural products. Mar. Drugs, 17(5), 249. 
17. Balachandran, C., Al-Dhabi, N. A., Duraipandiyan, V., & Ignacimuthu, S., (2021). 
Bluemomycin, a new naphthoquinone derivative from Streptomyces sp. with 
antimicrobial and cytotoxic properties. Biotechnol. Lett. 
18. Watve, M. G., Tickoo, R., Jog, M. M., & Bhole, B. D., (2001). How many antibiotics are 
produced by the genus Streptomyces? Arch. Microbiol., 176(5), 386–390. 
19. Horinouchi, S., (2007). Mining and polishing of the treasure trove in the bacterial genus 
Streptomyces. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem., 71(2), 283–299. 
20. Waksman, S. A., Schatz, A., & Reynolds, D. M., (2010). Production of antibiotic 
substances by actinomycetes. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 1213(1), 112–124. 
21. Kasanah, N., & Triyanto, T., (2019). Bioactivities of halometabolites from marine 
actinobacteria. Biomolecules, 9(6), 225. 
22. Ilic, S. B., Konstantinovic, S. S., Todorovic, Z. B., Lazic, M. L., Veljkovicm, V. B., 
Jokovic, N., & Radovanovic, B. C., (2007). Characterization and antimicrobial activity 
of the bioactive metabolites in streptomycete isolates. Mikrobiologiia., 76(4), 480–487. 
23. Hohmann, C., Schneider, K., Bruntner, C., Irran, E., Nicholson, G., Bull, A. T., Jones, 
A. L., et al., (2009). Caboxamycin, a new antibiotic of the benzoxazole family produced 
by the deep-sea strain Streptomyces sp. NTK 937. J. Antibiot (Tokyo), 62(2), 99–104. 
24. Shaaban, M., & Abdel-Aziz, M. S., (2007). Benhamycin, novel alkaloid from terrestrial 
Streptomyces sp. Nat. Prod. Res., 21(13), 1205–1211. 
25. Shaala, L. A., Youssef, D. T. A., Alzughaibi, T. A., & Elhady, S. S., (2020). Antimicrobial 
chlorinated 3-phenylpropanoic acid derivatives from the red sea marine actinomycete 
Streptomycescoelicolor LY001. Mar. Drug, 18(9), 450. 
26. Stroch, K., Zeeck, A., Antal, & Fiedler, H. P., (2005). Retymicin, galtamycin B, 
saquayamycin Z and ribofuranosyllumichrome, Novel secondary metabolites from 
Micromonospora sp. Tu 6368. J. Antibiot., 58, 103–110. 
27. Fu, P., & MacMillan, J. B., (2015). Thiasporines A-C, thiazine and thiazole derivatives 
from a marine-derived Actinomycetospora chlora. J. Nat. Prod., 78(3), 548–551. 
28. Jensen, P. R., Moore, B. S., & Fenical, W., (2015). The marine actinomycete genus 
Salinispora: A model organism for secondary metabolite discovery. Nat. Prod. Rep., 
32(5), 738–751. 
29. Gross, H., (2009). Genomic mining--a concept for the discovery of new bioactive 
natural products. Curr. Opin. Drug. Discov. Devel., 12(2), 207–219. 
30. Li, Z., Zhu, D., & Shen, Y., (2018). Discovery of novel bioactive natural  products driven 
by genome mining. Drug Discov. Ther., 12(6), 318–328. 
31. Choudhary, A., Naughton, L. M., Montánchez, I., Dobson, A., & Rai, D. K., (2017). 
Current status and future prospects of marine natural products (MNPS) as antimicrobials. 
Mar. Drugs, 15(9), 272. 
32. Su, H., Shao, H., Zhang, K., & Li, G., (2016). Antibacterial metabolites from the 
actinomycete Streptomyces sp. P294. J. Microbiol., 54(2), 131–135. 

 
255 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
33. Cao, D. T., Tran, V. H., Vu, V. N., Mai, H. D. T., Le, T. H. M., Vu, T. Q., Nguyen, 
H. H., et al., (2019). Antimicrobial metabolites from a marine-derived actinomycete 
Streptomyces sp. G278. Nat. Prod. Res., 33(22), 3223–3230. 
34. Cao, D. D., Do, T. Q., Doan, T. M. H., Vu Thi, Q., Nguyen, M. A., Le Thi, H. M., Tran, 
D. T., et al., (2020). Antimicrobial lavandulylated flavonoids from a sponge-derived 
actinomycete. Nat. Prod. Res., 34(3), 413–420. 
35. Charan, R. D., Schlingmann, G., Janso, J., Bernan, V., Feng, X., & Carter, G. T., (2004). 
Diazepinomicin, a new antimicrobial alkaloid from a marine Micromonospora sp. J. 
Nat. Prod., 67(8), 1431–1433. 
36.  El-Naggar, M. Y., (2007). Kosinostatin, a major secondary metabolite isolated from 
the culture filtrate of Streptomyces violaceusniger strain HAL64. J. Microbiol., 45(3), 
262–267. 
37. Abdelfattah, M. S., (2009). Mansoquinone: Isolation and structure elucidation of new 
antibacterial aromatic polyketides from terrestrial Streptomyces Sp. Eg5. Nat. Prod. 
Res., 23(3), 212–218. 
38. Hopp, D. C., Rhea, J., Jacobsen, D., Romari, K., Smith, C., Rabenstein, J., Irigoyen, 
M., et al., (2009). Neopyrrolomycins with broad spectrum antibacterial activity. J. Nat. 
Prod., 72(2), 276–279. 
39.  Igarashi, Y., Kim, Y., In, Y., Ishida, T., Kan, Y., Fujita, T., Iwashita, T., et al., (2010). 
Alchivemycin A, a bioactive polycyclic polyketide with an unprecedented skeleton 
from Streptomyces sp. Org. Lett., 12(15), 3402–3405. 
40. Raju, R., Piggott, A. M., Barrientos, D. L. X., Khalil, Z., & Capon, R. J., (2010). 
Heronapyrroles A-C: Farnesylated 2-nitropyrroles from an Australian marine-derived 
Streptomyces sp. Org. Lett., 12(22), 5158–5161. 
41. Igarashi, Y., Ogura, H., Furihata, K., Oku, N., Indananda, C., & Thamchaipenet, A., 
(2011). Maklamicin, an antibacterial polyketide from an endophytic Micromonospora  
sp. J. Nat. Prod., 74(4), 670–674. 
42. Li, S., Tian, X., Niu, S., Zhang, W., Chen, Y., Zhang, H., Yang, X., et al., (2011). 
Pseudonocardians A-C, new diazaanthraquinone derivatives from a deap-sea 
actinomycete Pseudonocardia sp. SCSIO 01299. Mar. Drugs, 9(8), 1428–1439. 
43. Niu, S., Li, S., Chen, Y., Tian, X., Zhang, H., Zhang, G., Zhang, W., et al., (2011). 
Lobophorins E and F, new spirotetronate antibiotics from a South China Sea-derived 
Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 01127. J. Antibiot (Tokyo), 64(11), 711–716. 
44. Zhou, X., Huang, H., Chen, Y., Tan, J., Song, Y., Zou, J., Tian, X., et al., (2012). 
Marthiapeptide A, an anti-infective and cytotoxic polythiazole cyclopeptide from a 60 
L scale fermentation of the deep sea-derived Marinactinospora thermotolerans SCSIO 
00652. J. Nat. Prod., 75(12), 2251–2255. 
45. Chen, C., Wang, J., Guo, H., Hou, W., Yang, N., Ren, B., Liu, M., et al., (2013). Three 
antimycobacterial metabolites identified from a marine-derived Streptomyces sp. 
MS100061. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 97(9), 3885–3892. 
46. Jang, K. H., Nam, S. J., Locke, J. B., Kauffman, C. A., Beatty, D. S., Paul, L. A., & 
Fenical, W., (2013). Anthracimycin, a potent anthrax antibiotic from a marine-derived 
actinomycete. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. (English), 52(30), 7822–7824. 
47. Jiao, R. H., Xu, H., Cui, J. T., Ge, H. M., & Tan, R. X., (2013). Neuraminidase inhibitors 
from marine-derived actinomycete Streptomyces seoulensis. J. 
 
Appl. Microbiol., 114(4), 
1046–1053. 

 
256 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
48. Wu, Z., Li, S., Li, J., Chen, Y., Saurav, K., Zhang, Q., Zhang, H., et al., (2013). 
Antibacterial and cytotoxic new napyradiomycins from the marine-derived Streptomyces  
sp. SCSIO 10428. Mar. Drugs, 11(6), 2113–2125. 
49. Khalil, Z. G., Salim, A. A., Lacey, E., Blumenthal, A., & Capon, R. J., (2014). Wollamides: 
Antimycobacterial cyclic hexapeptides from an Australian soil Streptomyces. Org. Lett., 
16(19), 5120–5123. 
50. Khalil, Z. G., Raju, R., Piggott, A. M., Salim, A. A., Blumenthal, A., & Capon, R. J., 
(2015). Aranciamycins I and J, antimycobacterial anthracyclines from an Australian 
marine-derived Streptomyces sp. J. Nat. Prod., 78(4), 949–952. 
51. Khieu, T. N., Liu, M. J., Nimaichand, S., Quach, N. T., Chu-Ky, S., Phi, Q. T., Vu, T. 
T., et al., (2015). Characterization and evaluation of antimicrobial and cytotoxic effects 
of Streptomyces  sp. HUST012 isolated from medicinal plant Dracaena cochinchinensis  
Lour. Front. Microbiol., 6, 574. 
52. Duraipandiyan, V., Al-Dhabi, N. A., & Ignacimuthu, S., (2016). New antimicrobial 
anthraquinone 6,61-bis (1,5,7-trihydroxy-3-hydroxymethylanthraquinone) isolated from 
Streptomyces sp. isolate ERI-26. Saudi J. Biol. Sci., 23(6), 731–735. 
53. Rodríguez, V., Martín, J., Sarmiento-Vizcaíno, A., De La Cruz, M., García, L. A., 
Blanco, G., & Reyes, F., (2018). Anthracimycin B, a potent antibiotic against gram-
positive bacteria isolated from cultures of the deep-sea actinomycete Streptomyces 
cyaneofuscatus M-169. Mar. Drugs, 16(11), 406. 
54. Almalki, M. A., (2020). Isolation and characterization of polyketide drug molecule from 
Streptomyces species with antimicrobial activity against clinical pathogens. J. Infect. 
Public Health, 13(1), 125–130. 
55. Aksoy, S. Ç., Uzel, A., & Bedir, E., (2016). Cytosine-type nucleosides from marine-
derived Streptomyces rochei 06CM016. J. Antibiot., 69(1), 51–56. 
56. Bu, Y. Y ., Yamazaki, H., Ukai, K., & Namikoshi, M., (2014). Anti-mycobacterial 
nucleoside antibiotics from a marine-derived Streptomyces  sp. TPU1236A. Mar. Drugs, 
12(12), 6102–6112. 
57. Zhang, D., Lu, Y., Chen, H., Wu, C., Zhang, H., Chen, L., & Chen, X., (2020). Antifungal 
peptides produced by actinomycetes and their biological activities against plant diseases. 
J. Antibiot., 73, 265–282. 
58. Wei, Y., Zhao, Y., Zhou, D., Qi, D., Li, K., Tang, W., Chen, Y., et al., (2020). A newly 
isolated Streptomyces sp. YYS-7 with a broad-spectrum antifungal activity improves 
the banana plant resistance to Fusarium oxysporum  f. sp. cubense  tropical race 4. Front. 
Microbiol., 11, 1712. 
59. Marimuthu, S., Karthic, C., Mostafa, A. A., Al-Enazi, N. M., Abdel-Raouf, N., & 
Sholkamy, E. N., (2020). Antifungal activity of Streptomyces sp. SLR03 against tea 
fungal plant pathogen Peatalotiopsis theae. J. King Saud Univ. Sci., 32(8), 3258–3264. 
60. Omura, S., Iwai, Y., Hirano, A., Nakagawa, A., Awaya, J., Tsuchya, H., Takahashi, Y., 
& Masuma, R., (1977). A new alkaloid AM-2282 OF Streptomyces  origin. Taxonomy, 
fermentation, isolation and preliminary characterization. J. Antibiot (Tokyo), 30(4), 
275–282. 
61. Ohno, A., Ano, T., & Shoda, (1992). Production of antifungal antibiotic, iturin in a solid 
state fermentation by Bacillus subtilis NB22 using wheat bran as a substrate. Biotechnol 
Lett, 14, 817–822. 
62. Hacène, H., Sabaou, N., Bounaga, N., & Lefebvre, G., (1994). Screening for non-polyenic 
antifungal antibiotics produced by rare Actinomycetales. Microbios., 79(319), 81–85. 

 
257 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
63. Chu, M., Truumees, I., Mierzwa, R., Terracciano, J., Patel, M., Loebenberg, D., 
Kaminski, J. J., et al., (1997). Sch 54445: A new polycyclic xanthone with highly potent 
antifungal activity produced by Actinoplanes sp. J. Nat. Prod., 60(5), 525–528. 
64. Mukhopadhyay, T., Nadkarni, S. R., Bhat, R. G., Gupte, S. V., Ganguli, B. N., Petry, S., 
& Kogler, H., (1999). Mathemycin B, a new antifungal macrolactone from actinomycete 
species HIL Y-8620959. J. Nat. Prod., 62(6), 889–890. 
65. Ryu, G., Choi, W. C., Hwang, S., Yeo, W. H., Lee, C. S., & Kim, S. K., (1999). Tetrin C, 
a new glycosylated polyene macrolide antibiotic produced by Streptomyces sp. GK9244. 
J. Nat. Prod., 62(6), 917–919. 
66. Frandberg, E., Petersson, C., Lundgren, L. N., & Schnürer, J., (2000). Streptomyces 
halstedii  K122 produces the antifungal compounds bafilomycin B1 and C1. C. J. 
Microbiol., 46(8), 753–758. 
67. Jain, P. K., & Jain, P. C., (2005). Production of heptaene antifungal antibiotic by 
Streptomyces purpeofuscus CM 1261. Indian J. Exp. Biol., 43(4), 342–345. 
68. Joo, G. J., (2005). Production of an anti-fungal substance for biological control of 
Phytophthora capsici causing phytophthora blight in red-peppers by Streptomyces 
halstedii. Biotechnol. Lett., 27, 201–205. 
69. Jain, P. K., & Jain, P. C., (2007). Isolation, characterization and antifungal activity of 
Streptomyces sampsonii GS 1322. Indian J. Exp. Biol., 45(2), 203–206. 
70. Wang, C., Wang, Z., Qiao, X., Li, Z., Li, F., Chen, M., Wang, Y., et al., (2013). Antifungal 
activity of volatile organic compounds from Streptomyces alboflavus TD-1. FEMS 
Microbiol. Lett., 341(1), 45–51. 
71. Tian, S. Z., Pu, X., Luo, G., Zhao, L. X., Xu, L. H., Li, W. J., & Luo, Y., (2013). Isolation 
and characterization of new p-Terphenyls with antifungal, antibacterial,  and antioxidant 
activities from halophilic actinomycete Nocardiopsis gilva YIM 90087. J. Agric. Food. 
Chem., 61(12), 3006–3012. 
72. Pan, H. Q., Zhang, S. Y., Wang, N., Li, Z. L., Hua, H. M., Hu, J. C., & Wang, S. J., (2013). 
New spirotetronate antibiotics, lobophorins H and I, from a South China sea-derived 
Streptomyces sp. 12A35. Mar. Drugs, 11(10), 3891–3901. 
73. Ancheeva, E., El-Neketi, M., Daletos, G., Ebrahim, W., Song, W., Lin, W., & Proksch, 
P., (2018). Anti-infective compounds from marine organisms. In: Rampelotto, P., & 
Trincone, A., (eds.), Grand Challenges in Marine Biotechnology: Grand Challenges in 
Biology and Biotechnology (pp. 97–155). Springer, Cham. 
74. Kemung, H. M., Tan, L. T., Khan, T. M., Chan, K. G., Pusparajah, P., Goh, B. H., & Lee, 
L. H., (2018). Streptomyces as a prominent resource of future anti-MRSA drugs. Front. 
Microbiol., 9, 2221. 
75. Kim, M. C., Cullum, R., Hebishy, A. M. S., Mohamed, H. A., Faraag, A. H. I., Salah, N. 
M., Abdelfattah, M. S., et al., (2020). New tetracene derivative from the marine-derived 
Streptomyces sp. EG1 exhibiting activity against Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus 
aureus (MRSA). Antibiotics (Basel), 9(5), 252. 
76. Kwon, H. C., Kauffman, C. A., Jensen, P. R., & Fenical, W., (2006). Marinomycins 
A-D, antitumor-antibiotics of a new structure class from a marine actinomycete of the 
recently discovered genus “Marinispora.” J. Am. Chem. Soc., 128(5), 1622–1632. 
77. Matsumoto, N., Momose, I., Umekita, M., Kinoshita, N., Chino, M., Iinuma, H., Sawa, 
T., et al., (1998). Diperamycin, a new antimicrobial antibiotic produced by Streptomyces 
griseoaurantiacus MK393-AF2. I. Taxonomy, fermentation, isolation, physico-chemical 
properties and biological activities. J. Antibiot (Tokyo), 51(12), 1087–1092. 

 
258 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
78. Matsumoto, N., Tsuchida, T., Maruyama, M., Kinoshita, N., Homma, Y., Iinuma, H., 
Sawa, T., et al., (1999). Lactonamycin, a new antimicrobial antibiotic produced by 
Streptomyces rishiriensis MJ773–88K4. I. Taxonomy, fermentation, isolation, physico­
chemical properties and biological activities. J. Antibiot (Tokyo), 52(3), 269–275. 
79.  Hughes, C. C., Prieto-Davo, A., Jensen, P. R., & Fenical, W., (2008). The marinopyrroles, 
antibiotics of an unprecedented structure class from a marine Streptomyces sp. Org. 
Lett., 10(4), 629–631. 
80. Chen, S., Zhang, D., Chen, M., Zhang, Z., & Lian, X. Y., (2020). A rare diketopiperazine 
glycoside from marine-sourced Streptomyces sp. ZZ446. Nat. Prod. Res., 34(7), 
1046–1050. 
81. Hensler, M. E., Jang, K. H., Thienphrapa, W., Vuong, L., Tran, D. N., Soubih, E., Lin, 
L., et al., (2014). Anthracimycin activity against contemporary methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo), 67(8), 549–553. 
82. Sharma, M., & Manhas, R. K., (2019). Purification and characterization of actinomycins 
from Streptomyces  strain M7 active against methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus  
and vancomycin resistant Enterococcus. BMC Microbiol., 19(1), 44. 
83. McArthur, K. A., Mitchell, S. S., Tsueng, G., Rheingold, A., White, D. J., Grodberg, 
J., Lam, K. S., & Potts, B. C., (2008). Lynamicins A-E, chlorinated bisindole pyrrole 
antibiotics from a novel marine actinomycete. J. Nat. Prod., 71(10), 1732–1737. 
84. Rho, J. R., Subramaniam, G., Choi, H., Kim, E. H., Ng, S. P., Yoganathan, K., Ng, 
S., et al., (2015). Gargantulide A, a complex 52-membered macrolactone showing 
antibacterial activity from Streptomyces sp. Org. Lett., 17(6), 1377–1380. 
85. Song, Y., Yang, J., Yu, J., Li, J., Yuan, J., Wong, N. K., & Ju, J., (2020). Chlorinated 
bis-indole alkaloids from deep-sea derived Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 11791 with 
antibacterial and cytotoxic activities. J. Antibiot (Tokyo), 73(8), 542–547. 
86. Song, Y., Liu, G., Li, J., Huang, H., Zhang, X., Zhang, H., & Ju, J., (2015). Cytotoxic 
and antibacterial angucycline- and prodigiosin-analogues from the deep-sea derived 
Streptomyces sp. SCSIO 11594. Mar. Drugs, 13(3), 1304–1316. 
87. Ibrahimi, M., Korichi, W., Hafidi, M., Lemee, L., Ouhdouch, Y., & Loqman, S., (2020). 
Marine actinobacteria: Screening for predation leads to the discovery of potential new 
drugs against multidrug-resistant bacteria. Antibiotics (Basel), 9(2), 91. 
88. Driche, E. H., Sabaou, N., Bijani, C., Zitouni, A., Pont, F., Mathieu, F., & Badji, B., 
(2017). Streptomyces sp. AT37 isolated from a Saharan soil produces a furanone 
derivative active against multidrug-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. World J. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol., 33(6), 105. 
89. Mangzira, K. H., Tan, L. T., Chan, K. G., Ser, H. L., Law, J. W., Lee, L. H., & Goh, B. 
H., (2020). Streptomyces sp. strain MUSC 125 from mangrove soil in Malaysia with 
anti-MRSA, anti-biofilm and antioxidant activities. Molecules, 25(15), 3545. 
90. Berezin, V ., Abdukhakimova, D., Trenozhnikova, L., Bogoyavlenskiy, A., 
Turmagambetova, A., Issanov, A., & Azizan, A., (2019). Antiviral activities of 
extremophilic actinomycetes extracts from Kazakhstan’s unique ecosystems against 
influenza viruses and paramyxoviruses. Virol. J., 16, 150. 
91. Teng, Y. F., Xu, L., Wei, M. Y., Wang, C. Y., Gu, Y. C., & Shao, C. L., (2020). Recent 
progresses in marine microbial-derived antiviral natural products. Arch. Pharm. Res., 
43(12), 1215–1229. 

 
259 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
92. Raveh, A., Delekta, P. C., Dobry, C. J., Peng, W., Schultz, P. J., Blakely, P. K., Tai, A. 
W., et al., (2013). Discovery of potent broad spectrum antivirals derived from marine 
actinobacteria. PloS One, 8(12), e82318. 
93. Hou, L., Wang, S., Huang, H., Li, H., Wang, W., & Li, W., (2018). Generation of 
methylated violapyrones with improved anti-influenza A virus activity by heterologous 
expression of a type III PKS gene in a marine Streptomyces strain. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 
Lett., 28(17), 2865–2868. 
94. Avilala, J., Kumar, A. P., Viswanath, B., Gopal, S. D. V. R., & Golla, N., (2018). 
Antiviral and larvicidal properties of novel bioactive compounds produced from marine 
actinomycetes. Russ. J. Mar. Biol., 44, 424–428. 
95. Huang, H., Song, Y., Zang, R., Wang, X., & Ju, J., (2021). Octyl substituted butenolides 
from marine-derived Streptomyces koyangensis. Nat. Prod. Res., 35(15), 2602–2607. 
96. Manimaran, M., Rajkumar, T., Vimal, S., Taju, G., Majeed, S. A., Hameed, A. S., & 
Kannabiran, K., (2018). Antiviral activity of 9 (10H)-acridanone extracted from marine 
Streptomyces fradiae strain VITMK2 in Litopenaeus vannamei infected with white spot 
syndrome virus. Aquaculture, 488, 66–73. 
97. Liu, Z., Zhao, Y., Huang, C., & Luo, Y., (2021). Recent advances in silent gene cluster 
activation in Streptomyces. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 9, 632230. 
98. Huang, H., Song, Y., Li, X., Wang, X., Ling, C., Qin, X., Zhou, Z., et al., (2018). 
Abyssomicin monomers and dimers from the marine-derived Streptomyces koyangensis  
SCSIO 5802. J. Nat. Prod., 81(8), 1892–1898. 
99. Kim, S. H., Ha, T. K., Oh, W. K., Shin, J., & Oh, D. C., (2016). Antiviral 
indolosesquiterpenoid xiamycins C-E from a halophilic actinomycete. J. Nat. Prod., 
79(1), 51–58. 
100. (2017). Global burden of disease cancer collaboration global, regional, and national 
cancer incidence, mortality, years of life lost, years lived with disability, and disability-
adjusted life-years for 32 cancer groups, 1990 to 2015: A systematic analysis for the 
global burden of disease study. JAMA Oncol., 3, 524–548. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih. 
gov/27918777/. 
101. Olano, C., Méndez, C., & Salas, J. A., (2009). Antitumor compounds from marine 
actinomycetes. Mar. Drugs, (2), 210–248. 
102. Sugawara, K., Hatori, M., Nishiyama, Y., Tomita, K., Kamei, H., Konishi, M., & Oki, 
T., (1990). Eponemycin, a new antibiotic active against B16 melanoma. I. Production, 
isolation, structure and biological activity. J. Antibiot (Tokyo), 43(1), 8–18. 
103. Kohno, J., Nishio, M., Kawano, K., Nakanishi, N., Suzuki, S., Uchida, T., & 
Komatsubara, S., (1996). TMC-1 A, B, C and D, new antibiotics of the manumycin 
group produced by Streptomyces sp. Taxonomy, production, isolation, physico-chemical 
properties, structure elucidation and biological properties. J. Antibiot (Tokyo), 49(12), 
1212–1220. 
104. Feling, R. H., Buchanan, G. O., Mincer, T. J., Kauffman, C. A., Jensen, P. R., & Fenical, 
W., (2003). Salinosporamide A: A highly cytotoxic proteasome inhibitor from a novel 
microbial source, a marine bacterium of the new genus Salinospora. Angew. Chem. Int. 
Ed., 42(3), 355–357. 
105. Sanchez, L. J. M., Martínez, I. M., Perez, B. J., Fernández, P. J. L., & Cañedo, H. L. M., 
(2003). New cytotoxic indolic metabolites from a marine Streptomyces.  J. Nat. Prod., 
66(6), 863–864. 

 
260 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
106. Stritzke, K., Schulz, S., Laatsch, H., Helmke, E., & Beil, W., (2004). Novel caprolactones 
from a marine streptomycete. J. Nat. Prod., 67(3), 395–401. 
107. Gorajana, A., Kurada, B. V., Peela, S., Jangam, P., Vinjamuri, S., Poluri, E., & Zeeck, 
A., (2005). 1-hydroxy-1-norresistomycin, a new cytotoxic compound from a marine 
actinomycete, Streptomyces chibaensis AUBN1/7. J. Antibiot (Tokyo), 58(8), 526–529. 
108. Li, F., Maskey, R. P., Qin, S., Sattler, I., Fiebig, H. H., Maier, A., Zeeck, A., & Laatsch, 
H., (2005). Chinikomycins A and B: Isolation, structure elucidation, and biological 
activity of novel antibiotics from a marine Streptomyces sp. isolate M045. J. Nat. Prod., 
68(3), 349–353. 
109.  Asolkar, R. N., Jensen, P. R., Kauffman, C. A., & Fenical, W., (2006). Daryamides 
A-C, weakly cytotoxic polyketides from a marine-derived actinomycete of the genus 
Streptomyces strain CNQ-085. J. Nat. Prod., 69(12), 1756–1759. 
110. Jeong, S. Y., Shin, H. J., Kim, T. S., Lee, H. S., Park, S. K., & Kim, H. M., (2006). 
Streptokordin, a new cytotoxic compound of the methylpyridine class from a marine-
derived Streptomyces sp. KORDI-3238. J. Antibiot. (Tokyo)., 59(4), 234–240. 
111.   Shin, H. J., Jeong, H. S., Lee, H. S., Park, S. K., Kim, H. M., & Kwon, H. J., (2007). 
Isolation and structure determination of streptochlorin, an antiproliferative agent 
from a marine-derived Streptomyces sp. 04DH110. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 17(8), 
1403–1406. 
112. Martin, G. D., Tan, L. T., Jensen, P. R., Dimayuga, R. E., Fairchild, C. R., Raventos-
Suarez, C., & Fenical, W., (2007). Marmycins A  and B, cytotoxic pentacyclic 
C-glycosides from a marine sediment-derived actinomycete related to the genus 
Streptomyces. J. Nat. Prod., 70(9), 1406–1409. 
113. Abdelfattah, M. S., Kharel, M. K., Hitron, J. A., Baig, I., & Rohr, J., (2008). Moromycins 
A and B, isolation and structure elucidation of C-glycosylangucycline-type antibiotics 
from Streptomyces sp. KY002. J. Nat. Prod., 71(9), 1569–1573. 
114. Hawas, U. W., Shaaban, M., Shaaban, K. A., Speitling, M., Maier, A., Kelter, G., Fiebig, 
H. H., et al. (2009). Mansouramycins A-D, cytotoxic isoquinolinequinones from a 
marine streptomycete. J. Nat. Prod., 72(12), 2120–2124. 
115. Lin, X., Wen, Y., Li, M., Chen, Z., Guo, J., Song, Y., & Li, J., (2009). A new strain of 
Streptomyces avermitilis produces high yield of oligomycin A with potent anti-tumor 
activity on human cancer cell lines in vitro. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 81(5), 839–845. 
116. Perez, M., Crespo, C., Schleissner, C., Rodríguez, P., Zúñiga, P., & Reyes, F., 
(2009). Tartrolon D, a cytotoxic macrodiolide from the marine-derived actinomycete 
Streptomyces sp. MDG-04-17-069. J. Nat. Prod., 72(12), 2192–2194. 
117. Fu, P., Yang, C., Wang, Y., Liu, P., Ma, Y., Xu, L., Su, M., et al., (2012). Streptocarbazoles 
A and B, two novel indolocarbazoles from the marine-derived actinomycete strain 
Streptomyces sp. FMA. Org. Lett., 14(9), 2422–2445. 
118. Fu, P., Zhuang, Y., Wang, Y., Liu, P., Qi, X., Gu, K., Zhang, D., & Zhu, W., (2012). New 
indolocarbazoles from a mutant strain of the marine-derived actinomycete Streptomyces 
fradiae 007M135. Org. Lett., 14(24), 6194–6197. 
119. Hu, Y., Martinez, E. D., & MacMillanm, J. B., (2012). Anthraquinones from a marine-
derived Streptomyces spinoverrucosus. J. Nat. Prod., 75(10), 1759–1764. 
120. Huang, H., Yang, T., Ren, X., Liu, J., Song, Y., Sun, A., Ma, J., et al., (2012). Cytotoxic 
angucycline class glycosides from the deep sea actinomycete Streptomyces lusitanus  
SCSIO LR32. J. Nat. Prod., 75(2), 202–208. 

 
261 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
121. Zhang, W., Liu, Z., Li, S., Yang, T., Zhang, Q., Ma, L., Tian, X., et al., (2012). 
Spiroindimicins A-D: New bisindole alkaloids from a deep-sea-derived actinomycete. 
Org. Lett., 14(13), 3364–3367. 
122. Alvarez-Mico, X., Jensen, P. R., Fenical, W., & Hughes, C. C., (2013). Chlorizidine, 
a cytotoxic 5H-pyrrolo[2,1-a]isoindol-5-one-containing alkaloid from a marine 
Streptomyces sp. Org. Let., 15(5), 988–991. 
123. Fu, P., Johnson, M., Chen, H., Posner, B. A., & MacMillan, J. B., (2014). Carpatamides 
A-C, cytotoxic arylamine derivatives from a marine-derived Streptomyces sp. J. Nat. 
Prod., 77(5), 1245–1248. 
124. Wu, Z. Y., Fang, W., Shi, L. Q., Wan, Z. Y., Min, Y., & Wang, K. M., (2014). New 
cytotoxic alkylated anthraquinone analogues from a soil actinomycete Streptomyces sp. 
WS-13394. Chem. Pharm., 62(1), 118–121. 
125. Wang, Q., Zhang, Y., Wang, M., Tan, Y., Hu, X., He, H., Xiao, C., et al., (2017). 
Neo-actinomycins A and B, natural actinomycins bearing the 5H-oxazolo [4,5-b] 
phenoxazine chromophore, from the marine-derived Streptomyces sp. IMB094. Sci. 
Rep., 7(1), 3591. 
126. Bao, J., He, F., Li, Y., Fang, L., Wang, K., Song, J., Zhou, J., et al., (2018). Cytotoxic 
antibiotic angucyclines and actinomycins from the Streptomyces sp. XZHG99T. J. 
Antibiot (Tokyo)., 71(12), 1018–1024. 
127. Fukuda, T., Nagai, K., Kanamoto, A., & Tomoda, H., (2020). 2-Epi-anthracimycin, a new 
cytotoxic agent from the marine-derived actinomycete Streptomyces sp. OPMA00631. 
J. Antibiot (Tokyo), 73(8), 548–553. 
128. Voitsekhovskaia, I., Paulus, C., Dahlem, C., Rebets, Y., Nadmid, S., Zapp, J., Axenov-
Gribanov, D., et al., (2020). Baikalomycins A-C, New aquayamycin-type angucyclines 
isolated from lake Baikal derived Streptomyces sp. IB201691-2A. Microorganisms, 
8(5), 680. 
129.  Ōmura, S., & Crump, A., (2019). Lactacystin: First-in-class proteasome inhibitor still 
excelling and an exemplar for future antibiotic research. J. Antibiot., 72(4), 189–201. 
130. Gulder, T. A., & Moore, B. S., (2010). Salinosporamide natural products: Potent 20 S 
proteasome inhibitors as promising cancer chemotherapeutics. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
(English), 49(49), 9346–9367. 
131. Ser, H. L., Palanisamy, U. D., Yin, W. F., Abd, M. S. N., Chan, K. G., Goh, B. H., & 
Lee, L. H., (2015). Presence of antioxidative agent, pyrrolo [1,2-a]pyrazine-1,4-dione, 
hexahydro- in newly isolated Streptomyces mangrovisoli sp. Nov. Front. Microbiol., 6, 
854. 
132. Kim, K. J., Kim, M. A., & Jung, J. H., (2008). Antitumor and antioxidant activity of 
protocatechualdehyde produced from Streptomyces lincolnensis M-20. Arch. Pharm. 
Res., 31(12), 1572–1577. 
133. Saurav, K., & Kannabiran, K., (2012). Cytotoxicity and antioxidant activity 
 
of 
5-(2,4-dimethylbenzyl)pyrrolidin-2-one extracted from marine Streptomyces VITSVK5 
spp. Saudi J. Biol. Sci., 19(1), 81–86. 
134. Law, J. W., Chan, K. G., He, Y. W., Khan, T. M., Ab Mutalib, N. S., Goh, B. H., & 
Lee, L. H., (2019). Diversity of Streptomyces spp. from mangrove forest of Sarawak 
(Malaysia) and screening of their antioxidant and cytotoxic activities.  Sci. Rep., 9(1), 
15262. 

 
262 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
135. Tan, L. T., Mahendra, C. K., Yow, Y. Y., Chan, K. G., Khan, T. M., Lee, L. H., & Goh, 
B. H., (2019). Streptomyces sp. MUM273b: A mangrove-derived potential source for 
antioxidant and UVB radiation protectants. Microbiologyopen, 8(10), e859. 
136. Law, J. W., Ser, H. L., Duangjai, A., Saokaew, S., Bukhari, S. I., Khan, T. M., Ab Mutalib, 
N. S., et al., (2017). Streptomyces colonosanans sp. Nov.; A novel actinobacterium 
isolated from malaysia mangrove soil exhibiting antioxidative activity and cytotoxic 
potential against human colon cancer cell lines. Front. Microbiol., 8, 877. 
137. Tan, L. T., Chan, K. G., Chan, C. K., Khan, T. M., Lee, L. H., & Goh, B. H., (2018). 
Antioxidative potential of a Streptomyces sp. MUM292 isolated from mangrove soil. 
Biomed Res. Int., 4823126. 
138. Prudhomme, J., McDaniel, E., Ponts, N., Bertani, S., Fenical, W., Jensen, P., Le Roch, 
K., (2008). Marine actinomycetes:  A new source of compounds against the human 
malaria parasite. PloS One, 3(6), e2335. 
139. Klein, E. Y., (2013). Antimalarial drug resistance: A review of the biology and strategies 
to delay emergence and spread. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents, 41(4), 311–317. 
140. Fitri, L. E., Alkarimah, A., Cahyono, A. W., Lady, W. N., Endharti, A. T., & Nugraha, R., 
(2019). Effect of metabolite extract of Streptomyces hygroscopicus subsp. hygroscopicus  
on Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 in vitro. Iran. J. Parasitol., 14(3), 444–452. 
141. Ahmad, S. J., Abdul, R. M., Baharum, S. N., Baba, M. S., & Zin, N. M., (2017). 
Discovery of antimalarial drugs from Streptomycetes metabolites using a metabolomic 
approach. J. Trop. Med., 2189814. 
142. Huang, H., Yao, Y., He, Z., Yang, T., Ma, J., Tian, X., Li, Y., et al., (2011). Antimalarial 
β-carboline and indolactam alkaloids from Marinactinospora thermotolerans, a 
deep-sea isolate. J. Nat. Prod., 74(10), 2122–2127. 
143. Maskey, R. P., Helmke, E., Kayser, O., Fiebig, H. H., Maier, A., Busche, A., & Laatsch, 
H., (2004). Anti-cancer and antibacterial trioxacarcins with high anti-malaria activity 
from a marine streptomycete and their absolute stereochemistry. J. Antibiot (Tokyo), 
57(12), 771–779. 
144. Na, M., Meujo, D. A., Kevin, D., Hamann, M. T., Anderson, M., & Hill, R. T., (2008). 
A new antimalarial polyether from a marine Streptomyces sp. H668. Tetrahedron Lett., 
49(44), 6282–6285. 
145. Pimentel-Elardo, S. M., Kozytska, S., Bugni, T. S., Ireland, C. M., Moll, H., & 
Hentschel, U., (2010). Anti-parasitic compounds from Streptomyces sp. strains isolated 
from Mediterranean sponges. Mar. Drugs, 8(2), 373–380. 
146. Li, J., Tang, Y., Jin, H. J., Cui, Y. D., Zhang, L. J., & Jiang, T., (2015). An efficient 
synthesis method targeted to marine alkaloids marinacarbolines A-D and their antitumor 
activities. J. Asian Nat. Pr
 
od. Res., 17(3), 299–305. 
147. Takada, K., Kajiwara, H., & Imamura, N., (2010). Oridamycins A and B, anti-Saprolegnia 
parasitica indolosesquiterpenes isolated from Streptomyces sp. KS84. Nat. Prod., 73(4), 
698–701. 
148. Xu, Y., He, H., Schulz, S., Liu, X., Fusetani, N., Xiong, H., Xiao, X., & Qian, P. Y., 
(2010). Potent antifouling compounds produced by marine Streptomyces. Bioresour. 
Technol., 101(4), 1331–1336. 
149. Pereira, F., Almeida, J. R., Paulino, M., Grilo, I. R., Macedo, H., Cunha, I., Sobral, 
R. G., et al., (2020). Antifouling napyradiomycins from marine-derived actinomycetes 
Streptomyces aculeolatus. Mar. Drugs, 18(1), 63. 

 
263 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
150. Anteneh, Y. S., & Franco, C. M. M., (2019). Whole-cell actinobacteria as biocatalysts. 
Front Micr
 
obiol., 10, 77. 
151. Katz, L., & Baltz, R. H., (2016). Natural product discovery: Past, present, and future. J. 
Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 43(2, 3), 155–176. 
152. Zhao, Q., Wang, L., & Luo, Y., (2019). Recent advances in natural products exploitation 
in Streptomyces via synthetic biology. Eng. Life Sci., 19(6), 452–462. 
153. Medema, M. H., Kottmann, R., & Yilmaz, P., (2015). Minimum information about a 
biosynthetic gene cluster. Nat. Chem. Biol., 11(9), 625–631. 
154. Weber, T., Blin, K., Duddela, S., Krug, D., Kim, H. U., Bruccoleri, R., Lee, S. Y., et 
al., (2015). AntiSMASH 3.0-a comprehensive resource for the genome mining of 
biosynthetic gene clusters. Nucleic Acids Res., 43(W1), W237–W243. 
155. Tremblay, N., Hill, P., Conway, K. R., & Boddy, C. N., (2016). The use of clustermine 
360 for the analysis of polyketide and nonribosomal peptide biosynthetic pathways. 
Methods. Mol. Biol., 233–252. 
156. Lautru, S., Deeth, R., & Bailey, (2005). Discovery of a new peptide natural product by 
Streptomyces coelicolor genome mining. Nat. Chem. Biol., 1, 265–269. 
157. Laureti, L., Song, L., Huang, S., Corre, C., Leblond, P., Challis, G. L., & Aigle, B., 
(2011). Identification of a bioactive 51-membered macrolide complex by activation 
of a silent polyketide synthase in Streptomyces ambofaciens. PNAS, USA, 108(15), 
6258–6263. 
158. Li, J., Guo, Z., Huang, W., Meng, X., Ai, G., Tang, G., & Chen, Y., (2013). Mining of a 
streptothricin gene cluster from Streptomyces sp. TP-A0356 genome via heterologous 
expression. Sci. China Life Sci., 56(7), 619–627. 
159. Aigle, B., Lautru, S., Spiteller, D., Dickschat, J. S., Challis, G. L., Leblond, P., & 
Pernodet, J. L., (2014). Genome mining of Streptomyces ambofaciens. J. Ind. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol., 41(2), 251–263. 
160. Olano, C., Garcia, I., González, A., Rodriguez, M., Rozas. D., Rubio, J., Sánchez-
Hidalgo, M., Braña, A. F., et al., (2014). Activation and identification of five clusters for 
secondary metabolites in Streptomyces albus J1074. Microb. Biotecnol., 7(3), 242–256. 
161.  Zhou, Z., Xu, Q., Bu, Q., Guo, Y., Liu, S., Liu, Y., Du, Y., & Li, Y., (2015). Genome 
mining-directed activation of a silent angucycline biosynthetic gene cluster in 
Streptomyces chattanoogensis. Chembiochem., 16(3), 496–502. 
162. Low, Z. J., Pang, L. M., Ding, Y., Cheang, Q. W., Le Mai, H. K., Thi Tran, H., Li, J., 
et al., (2018). Identification of a biosynthetic gene cluster for the polyene macrolactam 
sceliphrolactam in a Streptomyces strain isolated from mangrove sediment. Sci. Rep., 
8(1), 1594. 
163. Yu, Y., Tang, B., Dai, R., Zhang, B., Chen, L., Yang, H., Zhao, G., & Ding, X., (2018). 
Identification of the streptothricin and tunicamycin biosynthetic gene clusters by 
genome mining in Streptomyces sp. strain fd1-xmd. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 
102(6), 2621–2633. 
164. Nepal, K. K., & Wang, G., (2019). Streptomycetes: Surrogate hosts for the genetic 
manipulation of biosynthetic gene clusters and production of natural products. 
Biotechnol. Adv., 37(1), 1–20. 
165. Zaburannyi, N., Rabyk, M., Ostash, B., Fedorenko, V., & Luzhetskyy, A., (2014). 
Insights into naturally minimised Streptomyces albus J1074 genome. BMC Genomics, 
15, 97. 

 
264 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
166. Myronovskyi, M., Rosenkränzer, B., Nadmid, S., Pujic, P., Normand, P., & Luzhetskyy, 
A., (2018). Generation of a cluster-free Streptomyces albus chassis strains for improved 
heterologous expression of secondary metabolite clusters. Matab. Eng., 49, 316–324. 
167. Lasch, C., Stierhof, M., Estévez, M. R., Myronovskyi, M., Zapp, J., & Luzhetskyy, 
A., (2020). Dudomycins: New secondary metabolites produced after heterologous 
expression of an Nrps cluster from Streptomyces albus ssp. Chlorinus Nrrl B-24108. 
Microorganisms, 8(11), 1800. 
168. Bonet, B., Teufel, R., Crüsemann, M., Ziemert, N., & Moore, B. S., (2015). Direct 
capture and heterologous expression of Salinispora natural product genes for the 
biosynthesis of enterocin. J. Nat. Prod., 78(3), 539–542. 
169. Novakova, R., Núñez, L. E., Homerova, D., Knirschova, R., Feckova, L., Rezuchova, 
B., Sevcikova, B., et al., (2018). Increased heterologous production of the antitumoral 
polyketide mithramycin A  by engineered Streptomyces lividans TK24 strains. Appl. 
Microbiol. Biotechnol., 102(2), 857–869. 
170. Ahmed, Y., Rebets, Y., Estévez, M. R., Zapp, J., Myronovskyi, M., & Luzhetskyy, A., 
(2020). Engineering of Streptomyces lividans for heterologous expression of secondary 
metabolite gene clusters. Microb. Cell Fact., 19(1), 5. 
171. Gomez-Escribano, J. P., Castro, J. F., Razmilic, V., Jarmusch, S. A., Saalbach, G., Ebel, 
R., Jaspars, M., et al., (2019). Heterologous expression of a cryptic gene cluster from 
Streptomyces leeuwenhoekii  C34T  yields a novel lasso peptide, leepeptin. Appl. Environ. 
Microbial., 1485(23), e01752–19. 
172. Romano, S., Jackson, S. A., Patry, S., & Dobson, A. D. W., (2018). Extending the “one 
strain many compounds” (OSMAC) principle to marine microorganisms. Mar. Drugs, 
16(7), 244. 
173. Pishchany, G., Mevers, E., Ndousse-Fetter, S., Horvath, D. J. Jr., Paludo, C. R., Silva-
Junior, E. A., Koren, S., et al., (2018). Amycomicin is a potent and specific antibiotic 
discovered with a targeted interaction screen. PNAS USA, 115(40), 10124–10129. 
174. Onaka, H., Mori, Y., Igarashi, Y., & Furumai, T., (2010). Mycolic acid-containing 
bacteria induce natural-product biosynthesis in Streptomyces species. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol., 77(2), 400–406. 
175. Nicault, M., Zaiter, A., Dumarcay, S., Chaimbault, P., Gelhaye, E., Leblond, P., & 
Bontemps, C., (2021). Elicitation of antimicrobial active compounds by Streptomyces
fungus co-cultures. Microorganisms., 9(1), 178. 
176. Maglangit, F., Fang, Q., Kyeremeh, K., Sternberg, J. M., Ebel, R., & Deng, H., (2020). A  
co-culturing approach enables discovery and biosynthesis of a bioactive indole alkaloid 
metabolite. Molecules, 25(2), 256. 
177. Hoshino, S., Wakimoto, T., Onaka, H., & Abe, I., (2015). Chojalactones A-C, cytotoxic 
butanolides isolated from Streptomyces sp. cultivated with mycolic acid containing 
bacterium. Org. Lett., 17, 1501–1504. 
178. Hoshino, S., (2015). Niizalactams A-C. multicyclic macrolactams isolated from 
combined culture of Streptomyces  with mycolic acid-containing bacterium. J. Nat. 
Prod., 78, 3011–3017. 
179. Ueda, K., & Beppu, T., (2017). Antibiotics in microbial co-culture. J. Antibiot., 70, 
361–365. 
180. Pellagatti, A., Dolatshad, H., Valletta, S., & Boultwood, J., (2015). Application of 
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to the study and treatment of disease. Arch. Toxicol., 
89(7), 1023–1034. 
­

 
265 
Synthesis and Applications of Biopharmaceuticals 
181. Tao, W., Yang, A., Deng, Z., & Sun, Y., (2018). CRISPR/Cas9-based editing of 
Streptomyces for discovery, characterization, and production of natural products. Front. 
Microbiol., 9, 1660. 
182. Huang, H., Zheng, G., Jiang, W., Hu, H., & Lu, Y., (2015). One-step high-efficiency 
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing in Streptomyces. Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sin 
(Shanghai)., 47(4), 231–243. 
183. Mitousis, L., Thoma, Y., & Musiol-Kroll, E. M., (2020). An update on molecular tools 
for genetic engineering of actinomycetes-the source of important antibiotics and other 
valuable compounds. Antibiotics, 9(8), 494–498. 
184. Zhang, M. M., Wong, F. T., Wang, Y., Luo, S., Lim, Y. H., Heng, E., Yeo, W. L., et al., 
(2017). CRISPR-Cas9 strategy for activation of silent Streptomyces biosynthetic gene 
clusters. Nat. Chem. Biol., 13, 607–609. 
185. Lim, Y. H., Wong, F. T., Yeo, W. L., Ching, K. C., Lim, Y. W., Heng, E., Chen, S., 
et al., (2018). Auroramycin: A  potent antibiotic from Streptomyces roseosporus  by 
CRISPR-Cas9 activation. Chembiochem. 
186. Tong, Y., Robertsen, H. L., Blin, K., Weber, T., & Lee, S. Y., (2018). CRISPR-Cas9 
toolkit for actinomycete genome editing. Methods. Mol. Biol., 1671, 163–184. 
187. Wang, Y., Cobb, R. E., & Zhao, H., (2016). High-efficiency genome editing of 
Streptomyces species by an engineered CRISPR/Cas system. Methods Enzymol., 575, 
271–284. 
188. Shentu, X., Liu, N., Tang, G., Tanaka, Y., Ochi, K., Xu, J., & Yu, X., (2016). Improved 
antibiotic production and silent gene activation in Streptomyces diastatochromogenes  
by ribosome engineering. J. Antibiot., 69(5), 406–410. 
189. Li, L., Liu, X., Jiang, W., & Lu, Y., (2019). Recent advances in synthetic biology 
approaches to optimize production of bioactive natural products in actinobacteria. 
Front. Microbiol., 5, 10:2467. 
190. Okamoto-Hosoya, Y., Hosaka, T., & Ochi, K., (2003). An aberrant protein synthesis 
activity is linked with antibiotic overproduction in rpsL mutants of Streptomyces 
coelicolor A3(2). Microbiology, 149(Pt 11), 3299–3309. 
191. Zhou, Q., Ning, S., & Luo, Y., (2020). Coordinated regulation for nature products 
discovery and overproduction in Streptomyces. Synth. Syst. Biotechnol., 5(2), 49–58. 
192. Xu, X., Wang, J., Bechthold, A., Ma, Z., & Yu, X., (2017). Selection of an efficient 
promoter and its application in toyocamycin production improvement in Streptomyces 
diastatochromogenes 1628. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 3(2), 30. 
193. Song, Z. Q., Liao, Z. J., Hu, Y. F., Ma, Z., Bechthold, A., & Yu, X. P., (2019). Development 
and optimization of an intergeneric conjugation system and analysis of promoter activity 
in Streptomyces rimosus M527. J. Zhejiang Univ. Sci. B., 20(11), 891–900. 
194. Zhao, M., Wang, S. L., Tao, X. Y., Zhao, G. L., Ren, Y. H., Wang, F. Q., & Wei, D. 
Z., (2019). Engineering diverse eubacteria promoters for robust gene expression in 
Streptomyces lividans. J. Biotechnol, 10(289), 93–102. 
195. Barreales, E. G., Vicente, C. M., De Pedro, A., Santos-Aberturas, J., & Aparicio, J. F., 
(2018). Promoter engineering reveals the importance of heptameric direct repeats for 
DNA binding by Streptomyces antibiotic regulatory protein-large ATP-binding regulator 
of the LuxR family (SARP-LAL) regulators in Streptomyces natalensis. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol., 84(10), e00246–18. 
196. Gomez-Escribano, J. P., Alt, S., & Bibb, M. J., (2016). Next generation sequencing of 
actinobacteria for the discovery of novel natural products. Mar. Drugs, 14(4), 78. 

 
266 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
197. Jose, P. A., & Jha, B., (2016). New dimensions of research on actinomycetes: Quest for 
next generation antibiotics. Front. Microbiol., 19(7), 1295. 
198. Weng, S. S., Zhang, H. Y., & Ai, J. W., (2020). Rapid detection of Nocardia by next-
generation sequencing. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol., 18(10), 13. 
199. Sun, Y. Q., Busche, T., Rückert, C., Paulus, C., Rebets, Y., Novakova, R., Kalinowski, 
J., et al., (2017). Development of a biosensor concept to detect the production of cluster-
specific secondary metabolites. ACS Synth. Biol., 6(6), 1026–1033. 
200. Xu, F., Nazari, B., Moon, K., Bushin, L. B., & Seyedsayamdost, M. R., (2017). Discovery 
of a cryptic antifungal compound from Streptomyces albus J1074 using high-throughput 
elicitor screens. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 139(27), 9203–9921. 

Part III  
WCB for Fuels 


Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 8  
Microbial Consortia: A Mixed Cell 
Catalyst for Biotransformation of 
Biomass into Biofuels and Chemicals 
NIDHI SAHU,1 AUGUSTINE OMONIYI AYENI,2 DEEPIKA SONI,3 and 
B. CHANDRASHEKHAR4 
1National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur, 
Maharashtra, India 
2Chemical Engineering Department, Covenant University, Ota, Nigeria 
3School of Biotechnology, Jawaharlal Nehru University, Delhi, India 
4Catalysts Biotechnologies Pvt. Ltd., Delhi, India 
ABSTRACT 
Adding value to waste using environmental biotechnological approaches 
is a promising concept for its management. Mixed culture fermentation is 
the way of utilizing two or more microorganisms as biocatalyst to produce 
valuable products from various substrates, including wastes. Mixed culture 
fermentation could become an excellent alternative to traditional pure 
culture-based biotechnology to enable next generation biofuels and bio­
commodity production. This caters the advantages over application of pure 
cultures, such as better utilization of the substrate, waste utilization, wider 
range of enzymes, ability to attack and convert greater variety of compounds, 
higher growth rates and product yield, multistep transformations in a single 
bioreactor and protection against unwanted contaminants. This chapter 
highlights some of the important and recent developments in bio-catalysis 

 
270 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
based on mixed microbial cultures for biofuel production with a special 
focus on understanding various factors that affect the metabolic pathways of 
mixed cultures fermentation for biofuel production such as ethanol, butanol, 
syngas, methane, and hydrogen. The chapter also reviews the technical 
constraints of the mixed fermentation process for practical and commercial 
applications, and applications of genetic engineering and nanotechnology 
tools for improving the mixed culture technology. 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
Coal, oil, and natural gas are the non-renewable conventional fossil fuels and 
primary energy source of today’s world. Excessive use of these has resulted 
in decreased amounts and environmental issues such as increased emission 
of greenhouse gases (GHGs) and climate change. The growing demand of 
fossil fuels and environmental issues has augmented the need for alterna­
tive energy sources. In this respect biomass and microbial consortia can be 
established as renewable energy sources which accounts for 80% of global 
bioenergy production through biological carbon dioxide (CO2) fixation 
[1]. Renewable biofuel resources consist of lignocellulosic and microalgae 
biomass. Microalgae biomass comprises of proteins, lipids, carbohydrates, 
and carotenoids [2] whereas lignocellulose biomass is a biopolymer of 
cellulose (40–60%), hemicellulose (10–40%) and lignin (15–30%) which 
supports plant structure [3] with smaller quantities of pectin, protein, extrac­
tives, and ash [4]. 
8.1.1 LIGNOCELLULOSES AS VIABLE PRECURSORS FOR BIOFUELS 
AND CHEMICALS PRODUCTION 
Lignocellulosic biomass includes all plants and plant derived materials 
such as agricultural crops and trees, wood, and wood residues, municipal 
residues, and other residue materials, and therefore lignocelluloses are one 
of the largest potential feedstock for biofuels like ethanol, methane, and 
biohydrogen (bio-H2) production and a viable alternative to other conven­
tional feed stocks [5, 6]. Lignocelluloses are also renewable feedstock for 
producing other value-added commodities like lactic acid (LA) and volatile 
fatty acids (VFA) [7]. Table 8.1 gives few sources of lignocellulosic biomass 
with their general compositions. 
Fermentative production of biofuel and other chemicals from lignocel­
lulosic biomass using the whole-cell biorefinery concept is an emerging 

 
 
271 
Microbial Consortia 
technology [9]. This involves treatment of lignocellulose with different 
microorganisms like bacteria, algae, fungi, and halophilic archaea along with 
different biocatalysts. This method is environmentally friendly and generates 
product at optimum pH, temperature, and pressure. However, the components 
of lignocellulosic biomass are compacted together by covalent bonds, many 
interconnecting bridges, and van der Waal’s forces which make the complex 
resistant to any chemical or microbial attack [10]. To reduce the recalcitrant 
nature of lignocellulose for production of useful chemicals like ethanol, an 
efficient pre-treatment and hydrolysis steps are required. Due to this the cost 
of biological processes is often higher than the chemical process and needs 
special attention. To overcome this problem different microorganisms are 
used to develop microbial consortia with different properties like substrate 
utilization and enzymatic degradation of the biomass for the production of 
biofuels and other chemicals [11, 12]. In this chapter, we take a look at the 
mixed microbial consortia used in different types of biomass conversion 
processes to produce biofuels and chemicals. 
TABLE 8.1 Biomass Composition (%w/w) of Some Agricultural Residues [8] 
Lignocellulosic Biomass 
Cellulose 
Hemicellulose 
Lignin 
Hardwood stems 
40–55 
24–40 
18–25 
Softwood stems 
45–50 
25–35 
25–35 
Nut shells 
25–30 
25–30 
30–40 
Corn cobs 
45 
35 
15 
Paper 
85–99 
0 
0–15 
Wheat straw 
30 
50 
15 
Rice straw 
32.1 
24 
18 
Sorted refuse 
60 
20 
20 
Leaves 
15–20 
80–85 
0 
Newspaper 
40–55 
25–40 
18–30 
Fresh bagasse 
33.4 
30 
18.9 
Swine waste 
6 
28 
NA 
Solid cattle manure 
1.6–4.7 
1.4–3.3 
2.7–5.7 
Coastal Bermuda grass 
25 
35.7 
6.4 
Switch grass 
45 
31.4 
12 
S32 rye grass (early leaf) 
21.3 
15.8 
2.7 
S32 rye grass (seed setting) 
26.7 
25.7 
7.3 
Orchard grass (medium maturity) 
32 
40 
4.7 
Source: Adapted from Ref. [8] 

 
272 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
8.2 METHANE PRODUCTION BY ANAEROBIC DIGESTION (AD) OF 
LIGNOCELLULOSIC BIOMASS 
Anaerobic digestion (AD) is a complex biochemical process involves 
methane formation typically carried out in four steps: (i) started from hydro­
lysis of the complex organic substrates like cellulose, protein, and lipid into 
the simpler compounds like glucose, amino acids and fatty acids; (ii) then 
converting the simpler bio-molecules into acids, alcohols, and CO2 (acido­
genesis); (iii) acetate formation (acetogenesis); and (iv) finally methane 
formation (methanogenesis) [13]. This process involves many microorgan­
isms working synergistically like hydrolytic and acid forming communities, 
acetogens, syntrophic acetate oxidizers and methanogens. 
AD for methane production is a widely practiced sustainable and environ­
mentally friendly solution for the management of various waste biomasses. 
Moreover, along with energy rich fuel, the spent digestate is often nutrient-
rich and has potential use as a fertilizer or soil conditioner. The process of 
AD is generally associated with low operating costs, low sludge generation 
and produce high value renewable energy such as methane. Chemical and 
physical characteristics of the waste like particle size, moisture, total solids 
(TS), volatile solids (VS), VFA, and nutrients content affect the biogas 
production rates and overall process stability. Other critical parameters are 
the pH and temperature at which the process is being carried out. The AD 
process has been optimized for psychrophilic, mesophilic, and thermophilic 
environmental conditions with respect to the nature of substrate and its avail­
ability by many researchers [14–16]. 
8.2.1 MIXED CULTURES FOR BIOGAS PRODUCTION 
During the AD process, various types of bacteria work together as a consor­
tium and participating syntrophically to oxidize/reduce the substrate/products 
via various interlinked metabolic pathways and ultimately form methane, 
with some by-products like NH3, H2S, and CO2, etc. [17, 18]. In this section, 
we review some of the important microbial communities involved in various 
steps of methane production from biomass. 
8.2.1.1 HYDROLYTIC MICROORGANISMS 
In the first step, most of the soluble organic material in the reactor medium 
is converted to volatile organic acids by hydrolysis and fermentation. The 

 
 
 
273 
Microbial Consortia 
insoluble compounds like cellulose and hemicellulose are converted into 
soluble glucose upon enzymatic hydrolysis by extracellular cellulases by a 
consortium of bacteria from different genera, which is easily utilized for 
further microbial consumption [19, 20]. Microbial consortium for hydro­
lysis can be developed from different types of microbes including fungus, 
yeast, and bacteria, screened from natural environments such as rotten 
lignocellulosic biomass. The most common cellulolytic bacteria used in an 
anaerobic digester for biogas production are selected from Cellulomonas, 
Clostridium, Bacillus, Thermomonospora, Ruminococcus, Bacteroides, 
Erwinia, Acetovibrio, Microbispora, and Streptomyces [21, 22]. Degrada­
tion of lignin and hemicellulose is also important for increased digestibility 
of cellulose [23]. This can be efficiently carried out by some fungi that have 
two specific systems; the oxidative ligninolytic system which exclusively 
attacks the phenyl bonds in lignin, and the other is hydrolytic enzyme system 
which degrades cellulose and hemicellulose. Some examples of fungi used 
for lignin and hemicellulose breakdown are Phanerochaete chrysosporium, 
Pleurotusostreatus, Trichodermareesei. 
However, in contrast to only fungal pretreatment, a microbial consortium 
of both bacteria and fungi has high cellulose and hemicelluloses degradation 
ability. A complex microbial agent containing yeast and cellulolytic bacteria, 
heat-treated sludge, Clostridium thermocellum, composting microbes and a 
mixture of fungi has been reported by Zhang [24] for an effective degradation 
process. Nevertheless, hydrolysis is considered to be the critical rate-limiting 
step, due to the presence of complex polymers in the biomass and also due 
to the accumulation of unwanted by-products that determine the conversion 
efficiency of the biomass feedstock [25–27]. Thus, the selection and growth 
of microbes with enhanced enzymatic activities is important for efficient 
hydrolysis, especially in the case of lignocellulosic materials. 
8.2.1.2 ACIDOGENS AND ACETOGENS 
A group of fermentative bacteria such as (Bacteroides, Clostridium, Eubac-
terium, Butyribacterium, Propionibacterium, Lactobacillus, Streptococcus, 
Pseudomonas, Ruminococcus, etc.) consume the solubilized hydrolysate to 
produce various intermediates such as VFA, H2, alcohol, and CO2. Aceto­
genic bacteria, or acetogens, are differentiated from acetate-forming fermen­
tative bacteria due to their capacity to reduce CO2 to acetate by means of the 
Wood-Ljungdahl (WL) pathway [28]. Among the products of fermentation, 

 
 
 
274 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
acetate, and CO2 contribute the most to methane production. Acetate acts as 
a methanogen substrate as well as, the ubiquity and diversity of acetogens 
makes AD a naturally robust phenomenon. However, acetogens are obligate 
H2 producers, which cannot survive under high partial H2 pressures, thus a 
symbiotic relationship exists between the H2 producing acetogens and the H2 
consuming methanogens [29, 30]. 
8.2.1.3 SYNTROPHIC ACETATE OXIDIZING BACTERIA (SAOB) 
The syntrophic acetate oxidation (SAO) reaction includes conversion of 
acetate to H2 and CO2 by syntrophic acetate-oxidizing bacteria (SAOB), 
such as Clostridium ultunense, Tepianaerobacter acetatoxydans, Pseudo-
thermotoga lettingae and Syntrophaceticus schinkii [31–34] followed by 
consumption of these products by hydrogenotrophic methanogens for the 
generation of methane. Now, it is widely known that the SAO pathway takes 
place in conditions resulting in inhibition of acetate-utilizing methanogenic 
communities, such as a high content of ammonia and fatty acids [35, 36] a 
feature that provides them with a competitive advantage over acetoclastic 
methanogens under ammonia and acid stressed conditions. 
8.2.1.4 METHANOGENS 
Methanogens are abundant in a wide variety of anaerobic environments where 
they catalyze the terminal step in the anaerobic food chain by converting 
methanogenic substrates into methane. Methanogenic bacteria obtain energy 
for growth from the conversion of specific substrates to methane. The major 
substrates are H2 + CO2, formate, and acetate. Methanogens are strictly 
anaerobic, methane-producing archaea and belong to the phylum Euryar-
chaeota. Although methanogens share a set of physiological characteristics, 
they are phylogenetically very diverse. The current taxonomy classifies 
methanogens into five well established orders: Methanobacteriales, Metha-
nococcales, Methanomicrobiales, Methanosarcinales, and Methanopyrales 
[37, 38]. This taxonomy has been formed as a result of 16S rRNA gene 
sequences as well as a number of physiological properties, e.g., substrates, 
and nutrients for methanogenesis, morphological features and the structure of 
cell envelopes. However, the abundance and diversity of the entire bacterial 
community in the anaerobic digester is always higher than the methanogenic 
archaeal community. Methanogenic archaeal community comprises only a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
275 
Microbial Consortia 
fraction of microbial species in any anaerobic digester [39] and consists of 
Methanomicrobiales, Methanosarcinales, Methanobacteriales, Methano-
pyrus, Methanococcales, and Methanocellales. 
8.2.2 EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON METHANOGENIC MICROBIAL 
COMMUNITIES 
Three main methanogenic pathways are classically defined: acetoclastic 
methanogenesis (WL pathway), methanogenesis from H2/CO2 (Hydroge­
notrophic Methanogenesis pathway), and methylotrophic methanogenesis. 
Under mesophilic conditions, the widely studied dominating pathway for 
biomethanation is the WL pathway. This pathway is also known as aceto­
clastic methanogenesis due to utilizing acetic acid for methane production. 
This pathway is carried out by methanogens belonging to the family Metha-
nosaetaceae order Methanosarcinales [13]. 
At the lower temperatures, all three groups of methanogens: H2 consuming 
Methanoculleus and Methanospirillum, methyl group-consuming Methano-
methylovorans and acetate-consuming Methanosarcinaare found. Increasing 
the temperature can cause significant shifting of the microbial communities. 
Under thermophilic conditions (~50–60°C) methanogens of the Methanosar-
cina group dominate over the Methanosaeta group due to higher resistance to 
survive in the presence of high concentration of toxicants, and faster growth 
rates. This group of methanogens can grow on different C-1 compounds. 
The phylum Thermotogaeis the predominant group at thermophilic tempera­
ture due to its broad spectrum of substrate, together with its high optimum 
temperature for growth (45–80°C) [40]. Chloroflexi has also been found 
solely in UASB reactors under thermophilic conditions [41]. 
The hydrogenotrophic methanogens are different from the acetoclastic 
methanogens as they utilize CO2 and H2 instead of acetic acid to form 
methane. Hydrogenotrophic methanogens belongs to the orders: Metha-
nobacteriales, Methanococcales, and Methanomicrobiales. The microbial 
community analysis revealed hydrogenotrophic methanogens (mainly 
Methanothermobacter thermautotrophicus and Methanobacterium ther-
moaggregans) as 98% of archaea, confirming that high temperature will 
select hydrogenotrophic methanogens over acetoclastic methanogens 
effectively. Hydrogenotrophic Methanomicrobiales and acetoclastic Meth-
anosarcinales have been frequently detected in bioactive landfills [42]. 
Since hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis is enhanced under thermophilic 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
276 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
conditions, the SAO reaction is also favored which includes conversion 
of acetate to H2 and CO2 by SAOB such as Clostridium ultunense. This is 
because SAO is energetically very favorable and under mesophilic condi­
tions the partial pressure of H2 is too high for SAO to occur, and SAOB 
can oxidize acetate to H2 only when the H2 is subsequently utilized by 
hydrogenotrophic methanogens [43, 44]. Therefore, the establishment of a 
symbiotic relationship between SAOB and hydrogenotrophic methanogens 
is more feasible under thermophilic conditions. Figure 8.1 shows the path­
ways involved in methanogenesis. 
FIGURE 8.1 Pathways involved in methanogenesis. 
8.2.3 EFFECT OF PH ON METHANOGENIC COMMUNITY 
pH is the measure of alkalinity/acidity of a solution and affects the produc­
tion of biogas. Methanogenic bacteria are extremely sensitive to change in 
the pH. They have an optimum pH between 6.5 and 7.5. The acidogens and 
acetogens are less sensitive to pH since they have a wide optimum pH range 
between 4.0 and 8.5. Production of VFA such as acetic acid, propionic acid 
and butyric acid occurs mainly at pH of 4.0. The presence of VFA tends to 
decrease the pH and can lower the methanogenic bacteria activity and hence 
the biogas production. At higher pH > 8.0, free ammonia accumulation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
277 
Microbial Consortia 
occurs in the system due high pH influence on the conversion of ammonium 
ions into its free form [45, 46]. 
AD reactors often encounter low pH inhibition during early phase due to 
elevated acetic acid levels and high organic loading. pH plays a significant 
role whose influence surpass the temperature since mixed culture reactor pH 
significantly affects the overall diversity and structure of microbial commu­
nities in an AD and the cultures are differentially enriched under acidic 
and basic conditions. An acetoclastic methanogenic culture acclimatized to 
pH down to 3.5 was found to have Methanothrix soehngenii belonging to 
Methanosaetacae family as the dominant bacteria of the total methanogenic 
population (96.3% at pH 4.5 and 86.75% at pH 3.5) over Methanosarcina, 
which is normally dominant under circumneutral pH conditions. After 
acclimatization, the culture could provide a similar methane yield at both 
pH 4.5 and under neutral pH [47]. It is well understood now that bacteria 
responsible for acetoclastic methanogenesis are enriched under acidic condi­
tions, while hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis dominates under alkaline 
conditions [48–50]. 
8.3 BIOHYDROGEN PRODUCTION USING MIXED MICROBIAL 
COMMUNITIES 
H2 is a clean fuel with zero carbon footprint and shows the highest energy 
potential among all commonly known fuels, i.e., 1 g of H2 produces 34 Kcal 
energy. The International Energy Agency envisions H2 as a potential energy 
fuel that will be extensively used in various sectors of the economy in the 
coming decades [51]. 
H2 can be produced from chemical routes that accompany CO2 emis­
sion and high cost, and from biological routes caters the advantages such 
as the process is renewable in nature as well as eco-friendly, way utilizing 
microorganisms will be a stand-up system for green process. The term 
‘biohydrogen/bio-H2’ is commonly used for the H2 which is produced 
by the process involving the biological agent like bacteria, algae, etc., 
and also for the process of chemical mediated H2 production that uses 
the biomass as a substrate. Bio-H2 produced from renewable resources 
like plant biomass is considered to be genuinely renewable [52]. Figure 
8.2 shows the possible ways of bio-H2 production and their respective 
challenges. 

 
 
 
 
 
278 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
FIGURE 8.2 Overview of biohydrogen production processes and their respective challenges. 
8.3.1 DARK FERMENTATION AND PHOTOFERMENTATION 
The most widely studied and implemented process for bio-H2 production 
is dark fermentation. Dark fermentation involves anaerobic bacteria which 
produce H2 from complex organic substrates along with CO2, and additional 
by-products of VFA in the absence of light. Because the by-products are 
formed in large quantities, low H2 yield is the main challenge during dark 
fermentation [53]. Additionally, according to the Thauer limit theory, 1 mol 
of glucose can produce up to 4 mol H2 when acetic acid is the only by-product 
and only up to 2 mol of H2 when butyric acid is the only by-product as 
depicted in the Eqns. (1) and (2) [54]. In practice, apart from H2 production 
some amount of glucose is used for bacterial cell growth, therefore the yield 
of H2 is less than 4 mol H2/mol of glucose. Despite the low yields, dark 
fermentation is a more popular process for industrial bio-H2 production due 
to its simplicity, high conversion rate, and ability to utilize a broad range 
of waste. Members of Enterobacteriaceae and Clostridiaceae families are 
the most studied bacteria having the capability to produce metabolic H2. 
These bacteria utilize the pyruvate-formate-lyase (PFL) pathway, pyruvate 
dehydrogenase pathway and pyruvate ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFOR) 
pathway for H2 production. 
C H O  + 2H O → 4H  (g) + 2CH COOH + 2CO  (g) 
(1)
6
12
6
2
2
3
2

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
279 
Microbial Consortia 
C6
O6 + 2H2O → 2H2 (g) + CH3CH2CH2COOH + 2CO2 (g) 
(2)
H12
Photofermentation is another process which involves fermentative 
conversion of organic substrates to bio-H2 by a diverse group of photosyn­
thetic bacteria only in the presence of light. This process converts VFA (such 
as acetic acid) into H2 and CO2 using photosynthetic non-sulfur bacteria 
underanaerobic conditions [55, 56] as shown in Eqn. (3). 
CH3COOH + 2H2O → 4H2 + 2CO2 
(3) 
Photofermentation can achieve higher H2 yield as compared to dark 
fermentation, but the growth rate of photosynthetic microbial cells is much 
lower than that of the dark fermentative bacteria. Due to this, H2 production 
by photo fermentative process would give about two times lower efficiency 
and hence require a significantly larger reactor size and operational costs than 
dark fermentation, for a similar H2 production rate [57]. Another disadvan­
tage of the photofermentation process is the low light conversion efficiency 
due to the high energy demand by the main enzyme nitrogenase [58, 59]. 
Nevertheless, photofermentation produces a good amount of H2 from 
organic acid rich wastes, therefore is suitable to convert VFA and other 
organic acids from the effluent of dark fermentation into H2. Since dark 
fermentation can only produce H2 at low yields and produces large quantities 
of by-products as organic acid, photofermentation can be used to produce 
extra H2 from the effluents of dark fermentation. Therefore, photofermenta­
tion has also gained importance for research and development, alongside 
dark fermentation. 
8.3.2 MIXED CULTURE BIOCATALYSTS FOR BIOHYDROGEN 
PRODUCTION 
In nature, the well-knownbio-H2 producers are obligate anaerobes, metha­
nogens, algae, photosynthetic heterotrophs, photosynthetic autotrophs, etc., 
which may function singly or in a consortium of similar or different types 
of bacteria (mixed cultures). Selection of appropriate inoculum is the most 
significant part for commercial bio-H2 production as this will proportionally 
affects the yield. In the beginning most of the research was focused on usage 
of pure culture as a biocatalyst for bio-H2 production [60]. Later, in order 
to enhance the yield of H2, the use of defined co-cultures and mixed culture 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
280 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
fermentation have gained more attention as it has several advantages over 
pure cultures mediated synthesis of H2 [61–63]. 
Mixed culture fermentation is the most practical approach for scaling 
up the dark fermentation process for bio-H2 production, due to several 
reasons like easy development and handling, tolerance to different types of 
substrates, pH, and temperature change, diverse biochemical function and 
most importantly no requirement of sterile conditions making the process 
more economical. In addition, pure cultured microorganisms have limited 
ability for H2 production by dark fermentation, while a composite microbial 
system can exhibit a synergistic effect due to which the degradation ability 
is greater than that of the individual microorganisms. It is now believed that 
the application of mixed consortia as biocatalyst is one of the promising 
and techno-economically feasible methods for the scaling up of the bio-H2 
production using lignocellulosic and other types of wastes biomass [64–66]. 
In the previous section, we reviewed the basic mechanism of biogas 
production. The initial steps for bio-H2 production are the same as methane 
generation, in which the complex organic substrates undergo a sequential 
degradation and conversion process by fermentative mixed consortia 
consisting of hydrolytic, acidogens, acetogens, and methanogens to produce 
methane. But since the microflora in the seed sludge usually also consists 
of H2 consuming bacteria, some of the H2 produced as a by-product during 
acidogenesis and acetogenesis is consumed by hydrogenotrophic methano­
gens to produce methane and cause a decrease in H2 yield. Therefore, for the 
higher H2 yields, suppression of methanogenic activity and enrichment of 
acidogens is required by eliminating the activity of H2 consuming bacteria. 
Pretreatment of seed culture using various physical (heat, microwave, 
electroporation, etc.) and chemical techniques (methanogens inhibitors) 
enables the shift of metabolic pathways towards acidogenesis and eliminates 
methanogens and other bacteria that consume H2 [67–70]. 
At industrial scale, sludge (anaerobic sludge/sewage sludge or compost) 
is considered as a good source of mixed inoculum for fermentative H2 
production [71, 72]. Many natural microorganisms of seed sludge inoculum 
can grow simultaneously and provide synergistic interactions that improve 
substrate degradation, bacterial growth rate and thus enhance H2 yield. This 
synergistic growth is mostly seen when using cellulosic biomass for H2 
production at high temperatures. For example, an application of a co-culture 
of Clostridium thermocellum, a thermophilic cellulolytic H2 producing 
bacteria, with a thermophilic H2 producing strain Thermoanaerobacterium 
thermosaccharolyticum shows improvement in the cellulosic biomass (e.g., 

 
 
 
281 
Microbial Consortia 
sugarcane bagasse) degradation and enhanced H2 yields (1.8 mol H2/mol 
glucose eq.) as compared with the monoculture of C. thermocellum (0.8 
mol H2/mol glucose eq.) [73]. C. thermocellum can degrade cellulosic and 
hemicellulosic biomass by producing cellulase, hemicellulase, and xylanase 
enzymes and fermentable sugars. These sugars (except pentose sugar) are 
metabolized via glycolytic and pentose-phosphate pathways and produce 
pyruvic acid, which is further converted into lactate, formate, acetyl-CoA, 
and CO2. Further, acetyl-CoA is catabolized into ethanol or acetate. In these 
metabolic pathways H2 production occurs by disposal of reducing equiva­
lents. C. thermocellum lacks the pentose sugar to pyruvic acid metabolism 
pathway, and xylose and xylooligomers are reported to be strong inhibitors of 
cellulase activity [74]. T. aotearoense is capable of producing H2 by utilizing 
xylose and xylooligomers which are produced from degradation of hemicel­
lulosic biomass as preferred carbon source. Therefore, a mixed consortium 
of C. thermocellum and T. aotearoense reduces or limits the inhibition effect 
of pentose sugar on cellulase activity and enhances the H2 yield. 
Several other examples of co-cultures as biocatalysts for bio-H2 produc­
tion are found. Li et al. [75] have utilized a co-culture of C. thermocellum and 
Clostridium thermosaccharolyticum to produce H2 from corn-stalk waste via 
thermophilic fermentation and observed that the H2 yield by the co-culture 
fermentation increased by 94.1% than that in the monoculture. Similarly, 
mixed consortia of C. butyricum and E. aerogenes, Caldicellulosiruptor 
kristjanssonii and Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus, C. thermocellum, 
and a non-cellulolytic H2 producer, C. thermopalmarium have also been 
reported to significantly enhance the H2 yield as a result of the synergistic 
relationship [73, 76]. 
In case of photosynthetic fermentation for bio-H2 production, the perfor­
mance of PSB determines the utilization range and conversion efficiency of 
the organic substrates to H2. Thus, it is very important to screen and select the 
most efficient bacteria for H2 production via the photofermentation process 
[79]. Most common examples of photo-fermentative whole-cell biocatalysts 
are the purple non-sulfur bacteria such as Rhodopseudomonas capsulata 
and Rhodobacter sphaeroides due to their demonstrated high H2 production 
yield. These bacteria produce two enzymes—nitrogenase and hydrogenase 
are involved in H2 metabolism in these bacteria [56] and responsible for 
H2 synthesis; however, nitrogenase is considered to be the major enzyme 
responsible for the molecular H2 production under anaerobic conditions 
[80, 81]. However, nitrogenase is a high energy demanding enzyme [82], so 
new strategies that could be applied in the future for improving the bacterial 

 
 
 
282 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
cultures and the overall process for photofermentative H2 production are 
necessary. 
8.3.3 EFFECT OF TEMPERATURE ON BIOHYDROGEN PRODUCTION 
Operating temperature is one of the key factors during the bio-H2 fermenta­
tion process as it can alter both the microbiology of the digester and also the 
H2 and other by-product production rates. Although the highest biological 
H2 productivities have been for mesophilic cultures [83], their low H2 yields 
remain a major problem. Higher temperature operation is thermodynami­
cally favorable for higher H2 yield because of the increased entropy of the 
system, which makes it more energetic [84]. It has been widely reported 
that higher temperatures (≥50°C) are more favorable for biological H2 
production, enabling thermophiles to reach higher H2 yields than mesophiles 
[85–87]. Thermophiles also produce fewer by-products, such as acetic 
acid [88]. Further, strictly anaerobic thermophilic conditions would also 
restrict contamination by hydrogenotrophic methanogens or other bacteria 
which may grow under the same conditions. Furthermore, thermophilic 
producers also have higher H  tolerance in many cases, as compared to 
H2
2
mesophilic H2 producers [89]. However, a major drawback of thermophiles 
is their low volumetric productivity, due to the tendency to grow in lower 
cell densities than mesophiles [90]. 
8.3.4 EFFECT OF PH ON BIOHYDROGEN PRODUCTION 
Bio-H2 production using different types of mixed bacteria is pH sensitive 
process. In case of feedstocks such as lignocellulosic hydrolysates, there is a 
significant drop in pH of the fermentation medium due to generation of VFA 
as a by-product which inhibits the H2 producing bacteria drastically. There­
fore, pH control is very important for better performance to keep up better 
H2 yields and productivity. Most efficient H2 production has been observed 
between 6 and 7 pH. Though it is a challenge to find cheap buffering agents 
and controlling the pH, several researchers have studied bio-H2 production 
using different types of pH control methods [91–93]. Bio-H2 production 
could be improved and stabilized by the combination of the high initial pH of 
11 and alkaline pretreatment [94]. It is also reported that in case of digestion 
performed without any pH control with undefined consortia, thermophilic 
acetoclastic methanogens might help in maintaining the pH to some extent 

 
 
283 
Microbial Consortia 
by converting acetic acid to methane [95]. An alternative strategy would be 
to perform fermentations at slightly acidic pH (~pH 6) and to increase the 
loading rate to compensate for the productivity. However, this will also cause 
high osmotic pressure exerted by high substrate/product concentrations that 
requires H2 producing microorganisms that can withstand the high osmotic 
pressure also [84, 95]. Therefore, careful selection of microbial seed and 
maintaining the specific type of microbial consortia is crucial to handle the 
variable pH and osmotic pressure inside the reactor. 
8.4 BIOETHANOL PRODUCTION FROM LIGNOCELLULOSIC 
BIOMASS 
Ethanol is useful as a household product as a solvent in paints, varnishes, 
lacquers as well as for cleaning, personal care products, food additives, food 
coloring and enhancing food extract’s flavors. Ethanol is used in the beauty 
and cosmetic industries. It is important in fuel technology as a blend with 
gasoline, decreasing air pollution and improving other properties. The two 
main processes of manufacturing ethanol are the hydration of ethylene and 
the fermentation of carbohydrates. Ethylene hydration is accomplished when 
the ethylene mixture and a huge surplus of high pressure and temperature 
steam are passed over an acid catalyst, while fermentation involves the 
conversion of carbohydrates to ethanol with the use of growing yeast cells 
[96]. Sustainable production of fuel ethanol affects humanity in several ways 
as provided in Figure 8.3. The usefulness and benefits of ethanol make the 
bioconversion process economically viable, as it is sustainable. 
FIGURE 8.3 The interconnectivity of factors sustaining the production of bioethanol from 
lignocelluloses. 

 
 
284 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
8.4.1 LIGNOCELLULOSES TO ETHANOL BIOCONVERSION PROCESS 
In general, when converting lignocellulosic biomass to bioethanol the 
starting point is adequate selection and preparation of feedstock which 
includes cleaning and reducing the size by grinding or chopping or milling. 
The first step requires a great quantity of energy [97, 98]. Thereafter, the 
process follows four important steps; (i) pretreatment; (ii) enzymatic hydro­
lysis/saccharification; (iii) fermentation; and (iv) recovery and dehydration 
[99, 100]. Figure 8.4 provides the insight to the procedures of lignocellulosic 
biomass bioconversion to ethanol. 
FIGURE 8.4 Lignocellulosic biomass bioconversion steps. 
8.4.2 ENZYMATIC HYDROLYSIS AND FERMENTATION STRATEGY 
The enzymatic conversion of lignocelluloses is efficient and relatively 
cost-effective. Enzymes convert pre-treated lignocellulosic material into 
sugar followed by microbial fermentation under slight and environmentally 
safe reaction circumstances [101]. Enzymatic hydrolysis process depends 
heavily on a number of influences such as time, temperature, pH, activities 
of the enzymes, and substrate specificity [102]. Notable saccharification by 
enzymes and subsequent fermentation by microbes could be separate hydro­
lysis and fermentation, SHF (enzymatic conversion and fermentation carried 
out in separate vessels) and simultaneous saccharification and fermentation 
(SSF) (a one-pot of enzymatic conversion and microbial fermentation). 
One other method that has gained greater attention as a means of reducing 
costs, simplifying processes and increasing performance is the consolidated 
bioprocessing (CBP) [103]. This involves the combination of four biological 
dealings essential for the bioconversion in this process and are all performed 
in a singular. This process involves special enzyme production, then after 
pretreatment of biomass, obtainable polysaccharides hydrolyzation, hexose 

 
 
 
 
 
285 
Microbial Consortia 
sugars fermentation, and pentose sugars fermentation. CBP uses the concept 
of microbial consortia (actions of two or more bacterial or microbial classes 
occurring in mutual interactions) for an effective biocatalyst strategy in 
converting biomass to useful chemicals like ethanol. 
8.4.3 MICROBIAL CONSORTIA FOR ETHANOL PRODUCTION 
Conversion of lignocellulose to ethanol has slowed down due to the inability 
to develop low-cost technologies, majorly, due to the recalcitrant nature of 
lignocelluloses chemical make-up composed mainly of cellulose, hemicellu­
lose, and lignin [104–106]. The cellulose and the hemicellulose components 
of the lignocelluloses can be digested by enzymes (through microorganisms 
that secret cellulolytic hydrolysate enzymes, mostly from fungi such as 
Trichoderma reesei, Penicillium echinulatum, Penicillium purpurogenum, 
Aspergillus niger, and Aspergillus fumigatus) [107]. β-glucosidase, 
β-glucosidases, endoglucanases, xylosidases, xylanases, and arabinofurano­
sidases are some of the classes of enzymes that are specific either on cellu­
loses or hemicelluloses. There are also some enzymes secreting by anaerobic 
bacteria like Clostridium thermocellum, Ruminococcus flavefaciens and 
Clostridium cellulovorans that develop large, extracellular multienzyme 
complexes called the cellulosomes. These multienzyme complexes interact 
mutually to produce ethanol from lignocelluloses [108]. Various approaches 
have been developed to improve CBP. With their inherent limitations (limited 
substrate range and unstable fermentation performance, high equipment 
and operation costs), genetically engineered microbes, artificial consortia 
composed of genetically engineered microbes are some of the methodolo­
gies explored to improve CBP technologies [104–109]. On the other hand, 
natural bacterial consortia are efficient in lignocelluloses conversion [110]. 
CBP has ability to use a wide variety of natural lignocellulosic biomass 
substrates [111, 112] optimum self-stability, and few operational require­
ments (sterilization or pretreatment) [113, 114]. Du [104] reported that a 
natural microbial consortia consisting of Pseudoxanthomonas taiwanensis, 
Acetivibrio cellulolyticus, Thermoanaerobacterium thermosaccharolyticum, 
Clostridium stercorarium, Clostridium thermosuccinogenes, Clostridium 
thermopalmarium, and Clostridium sporogene produced low ethanol (0.28 
to 1.5 g/L) to moderate values of 1.62 to 2.5 g/L. There are also studies using 
synthetic fungi-bacteria consortium (Tricodermareesei-engineered Esch-
erichia coli) [115] where cellulase enzymes secreted by cellulolytic fungus 

 
 
 
 
 
286 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
was used to hydrolyze pretreated corn stover into fermentable sugars and 
the soluble sugars were converted to isobutanol (about 1.88 g/L) by E. coli. 
8.5 LACTIC ACID (LA) PRODUCTION BY FERMENTATION 
Lactic acid (LA), a major organic acid, has versatile applications in the food 
industries as an emulsifier, taste enhancer, preservative, and improving agent 
in food products [116, 117]. It also has the potential for the production of 
biopolymer: Polylactide and acrylic polymer. 
Apart from chemical synthesis, LA is also produced by the microbial 
fermentation process. LA fermentation is performed by many microorgan­
isms and lactic acid bacteria (LAB) are used most often for this purpose, 
which convert different types of simple carbohydrates (sugars), such as 
glucose, fructose, galactose, and lactose to LA. There are two pathways 
for LA synthesis: the homolactic pathway and heterolactic pathway. In the 
homolactic pathway LA is the last product produced from the reduction of 
pyruvate (product of glycolysis pathway) in a single step using lactate dehy­
drogenase (LDH) enzyme, while in heterolactic pathway LA, ethanol, and 
CO2 is produced from the reduction of pyruvic acid (one of the end products 
of pentose phosphate pathway (PPP)). Glucose and lactose are the main 
precursor sugars for LA production in both pathways. Therefore, researchers 
as well as the industry focus on utilizing the glucose and lactose extracted 
from various waste/by-product substances as a substrate to produce LA by 
fermentation. 
8.5.1 MICROORGANISMS FOR LACTIC ACID (LA) PRODUCTION 
Many species have been used for LA production; however, Streptococcus, 
and other LAB are the most frequently used [118, 119]. Although LA can be 
produced by fermentation from different types of sugar substrates, among 
natural substrates, cheese whey is the predominant which usually contains 
5–6% lactose. Some of the most common microorganisms reported for LA 
production using whey are Lactobacillus casei [120, 121], Lactobacillus 
bulgaricus [122], L. plantarum [123], L. delbrueckii [124, 125], L. helveticus 
[126], L. rhamnosus [127, 128], and L. lactis [129]. Several attempts have 
been made to enhance LA production using genetic modification for the 
development of more efficient LAB strains [130, 131]. Metabolically engi­
neered yeast has also been used for LA production as they are pH tolerant 

 
 
 
 
 
 
287 
Microbial Consortia 
and easy to grow on mineral media, making the downstream process easier 
[132]. 
8.5.2 BIOMASS TO LACTIC ACID (LA) CONVERSION BY MIXED 
CULTURES 
More recently synergistic effects of several LAB have been reported 
regarding enhanced and more effective LA production than single cultures 
for improving LA production. Therefore, mixed cultures of LA are currently 
used in the dairy industry for production of cheese and other fermented 
products. Enhanced productivity of mixed cultures for LA production is due 
to symbiotic or synergistic relationships among various LABs observed in 
both synthetic media and non-synthetic media. It is now generally accepted 
that mixed culturing of lactobacilli is more effective than single culture of 
Lactobacillus for improving LA production. Lee [133] compared the fermen­
tation characteristics of mixed culture of five strains of LABs, Lactobacillus 
delbrueckii, Lactobacillus casei, L. delbrueckii, Lactobacillus helveticus, and 
L. casei with each of the single strains, in de Man–Rogosa–Sharpe (MRS) 
media and found that the nitrogen source consumption in mixed culture was 
lower than that of single culture while the cell density and LA production 
were higher in mixed culture. There are many reports available which show 
efficient LA production using natural substrates like whey too, by using a 
mixed culture of LAB. For example, Roukas et al. [134] investigated the 
lab-scale production of LA from deproteinized whey by mixed cultures of 
free and co-immobilized Lactobacillus casei and Lactococcus lactis cells 
in fed-batch culture to obtain maximum LA concentration (46 g/L) at a 
substrate concentration of 100 g/L and a feeding rate of 250 ml/L. 
Luongo et al. [135] have used the anaerobic digestate from the wastewater 
treatment plant of a dairy industry, which could be composed of several 
species of lactose utilizing bacteria, for semi-continuous LA production using 
cheese whey as the substrate. Plessas et al. [136] evaluated LA production 
using Kluyveromyces marxianus, Lactobacillus delbrueckii ssp. bulgaricus 
and Lactobacillus helveticus on cheese whey under different fermentation 
conditions and observed an increase in LA production, when mixed cultures 
were used in comparison to the pure cultures. Apart from Lactobacillus sp., 
other types of bacteria are also known for the high yield of LA production 
[137, 138]. Therefore, LA fermentation can also be carried out using mixed 
cultures of two or more bacteria belonging to different genera. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
288 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Xylose is one of the dominating sugars after hydrolysis of cellulose 
and hemicellulose in lignocellulosic biomass, which can be converted into 
various useful chemicals like LA. Efficient utilization of both cellulose 
and hemicellulose portions will improve overall LA production. But most 
microorganisms either cannot ferment xylose or follow a hierarchical sugar 
utilization pattern in which sugars like glucose and fructose are consumed 
first. Therefore, xylose utilization and its conversion to useful products by 
fermentation becomes challenging. 
In such cases, mixed culture, also called ‘co-culture’ is particularly bene­
ficial when the substrate, due to its complex nature, is not easily hydrolyzed 
or utilized by a single strain. In such cases, one culture is used to produce 
enzymes for substrate degradation and other cultures produce LA by using 
the simultaneous hydrolysis and fermentation process. For example, Ge et 
al. [139] has reported a high LA concentration of 120.5 g/l produced by A. 
niger and Lactobacillus in 36 h from Jerusalem artichoke tubers using SSF. 
Here, A. niger was used for the synthesis of inulinase and invertase enzymes 
which were involved in the degradation of the non-fermentable inulin which 
makes 70–90% of total carbohydrate (20%) present in the Jerusalem arti­
choke tubers. Chen et al. [140] studied LA production using co-culture of 
L. rhamnosus and B. coagulans by fermentation using cassava bagasse as 
a substrate and reported significant enhancement in LA yield (112.5 g/L) 
as compared to about 30 g/L using monocultures of the same bacteria after 
16–20 h of fermentation. 
Some LABs, because of their heterofermentative nature, produce 
considerable amounts of by-products such as acetic acid and ethanol, 
which decreases the productivity and also increases the overall cost due to 
additional downstream process steps required. Therefore, the addition of a 
homofermentative microorganism that can outcompete with other strains 
in glucose consumption will also lead other strains to choose a different 
metabolic pathway to convert xylose into LA and consequently, will reduce 
by-product accumulation. 
Zhang & Vadlani [141] produced LA from corn stover biomass-derived 
sugars using two strains namely, L. brevis ATCC 367 and L. plantarum ATCC 
21028 as co-cultures. L. brevis alone, as a hetero-fermentative strain, could 
consume glucose and xylose simultaneously with a LA yield of 0.52 g/g, 
which was very low compared to the theoretical potential, because it also 
produces ethanol and acetic acid as the by-products. But when L. brevis was 
co-cultured with L. plantarum, the yield was significantly increased to ~0.80 
g/g using sequential co-fermentation process, due to complete utilization of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
289 
Microbial Consortia 
hexose and pentose sugars and a lower by-product (such as ethanol) accu­
mulation (63%). It is postulated that L. plantarum outcompetes L. brevis in 
glucose consumption, so L. brevis is focused on converting xylose to LA and 
the formation of by-product ethanol is reduced due to less NADH genera­
tion. A similar study was previously performed by Cui et al. [142] and the 
highest productivity was 0.70 g/L/h in which L. rhamnosus and L. brevis 
were used in co-culture. 
8.5.3 LACTIC ACID (LA) FERMENTATION USING GENETICALLY 
ENGINEERED MIXED CULTURES 
The common problems in LA production are the low acid tolerance and 
limited number of favorable substrates of the strains. LA is naturally produced 
by most of the LAB as a primary metabolite. However, chemical, as well as 
optical purity of LA can vary since they consume substrate via inefficient 
pathways. In this context, genetic, and metabolic engineering is mostly 
used to increase acid tolerance, redirect pathways to consume substrate and 
produce LA more efficiently. 
Metabolic engineering is an advanced tool to create efficient strains that 
produce LA with higher productivity, reduced by-product and lower cost 
[143]. One of the most recent studies for LA production was conducted by 
co-culturing L. pentosus and genetically engineered Enterococcus faecalis 
N4 which gave a high LA productivity of 3.68 g/L/h [144]. It has also been 
reported recently that a co-culture of Lactobacillus delbrueckii and an 
engineered Lactococcus lactis enhances the stoichiometric yield of LA to 
around ~45 g/L using whey permeate. This is due to the uptake of accumu­
lated glucose by the engineered L. lactis strain, which reverses the inhibition 
on lactose uptake by L. delbrueckii, thus allowing complete utilization of 
lactose as well as the accumulated glucose while converting all the substrates 
to LA [145]. By using genetic and metabolic engineering tools together 
with co-culture techniques, it is possible to express the genes of natural LA 
producers in other high growth rate bacteria such as E. coli and E. faecalis in 
order to enhance the productivity and yield of LA. 
8.6 MIXED CULTURE FERMENTATION OF VFA PRODUCTION 
VFA are building blocks of various industrially important chemicals espe­
cially in the field of bioenergy (methane production), agriculture (production 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
290 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
of pesticides), food industries (production of flavoring chemicals), cosmetics 
industry (antimicrobial chemicals production) and biodegradable polymers 
production. Traditionally, VFA is produced from petro-chemicals fulfilling 
90% of the demand of VFA in the market. There is a potential sustainable 
route too which utilizes biological renewable resources for VFA production. 
However, the biological route of VFA production has lower productivity 
of VFA as low pH inhibits bacteria, and also the chemical route has low 
manufacturing cost, therefore, the biological route is not economical as the 
chemical route. Beside this, biological synthesis is gaining attention as it is a 
potential alternative to replace depleting sources of petroleum. Various waste 
streams like Food waste, dairy wastewater, beverage waste are the most suit­
able renewable resources for VFA production as it is converting waste to 
wealth. Co-digestion of sewage sludge, waste activated sludge, anaerobic 
digester sludge, rumen, etc., these waste streams can help in sustainable 
waste management and resource recovery. 
VFA is produced during the AD of biomass after the hydrolysis of 
biomass by acidogenesis and acetogenesis. During acidogenesis simpler 
biomolecules viz. monosaccharide, amino acids, and peptides converted into 
VFAs by acidogens, and acetic acid are produced by acetogens. Members of 
phylum bacteroidetes and firmicutes are mainly hydrolytic and acid fermen­
tative bacteria [146]. 
8.6.1 MICROORGANISMS FOR VFA PRODUCTION 
Acetic acid fermentative bacteria are classified in 10 genera under the family 
Acetobacteriaceae. Commercially, mostly Acetobacter, Gluconacetobacter, 
and Gluconobacter are used for acetic acid production [147]. Clostridium 
butyricumis most prominent and main butyric acid synthesizing bacteria 
among other known butyric acid producing bacteria such as C. kluyveri, C. 
beijerinckii, C. barkeri, C. acetobutylicum, C. thermobutyricum, etc. For the 
synthesis of propionic acid Propionibacterium freudenreichii, Propionibac-
terium acidipropionici, Propionibacterium thoenii, Propionibacterium sher-
manii, and Propionibacterium jensenii species have been used mostly [148]. 
8.6.2 MIXED CONSORTIA FOR VFA PRODUCTION 
Mixed culture fermentation is used for VFA production which produces a 
mixture of acids. Mixed microbial consortia affect the VFA quantitatively 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
291 
Microbial Consortia 
and compositionally. There are natural sources of microbial consortia such 
as rumen, sediments, activated sludge as well as engineered culture used 
for VFA production. pH and substrate are the important controlling factors 
for optimum VFA yield. Atasoy et al. [149] studied the VFA production 
using mixed culture and the effect of pH, inoculum type (large and small 
granular and slurry) and bacterial composition. The concentration of 
acetic acid was dominating without pH adjustment and acidic pH, while 
under acidic and alkaline pH butyric acid was dominating. Wang et al. 
[150] studied the effect of aerobic and anaerobic activated sludge on VFA 
production under different pH conditions and observed that with anaerobic 
activated sludge VFA yield was double (0.918 g VFA/g VSS) as compared 
to aerobic activated sludge (0.482 g VFA/g VSS), and butyric acid was the 
dominant VFA (70% of total VFA). Using mixed culture and controlled pH 
conditions, Jankowska et al. [151] have demonstrated that the highest VFAs 
concentration was achieved in neutral to alkaline pH using algal biomass 
and maize silage, and that the alkaline pH was favorable for hydrolysis 
of complex organic matter such as maize silage while the neutral pH was 
beneficial for the acidogenesis and the overall VFAs production. When 
using OFMSW as substrate at pH 6 and HRT 3.5 days VFA production 
was increased but under the same operating condition food waste produced 
stable concentrations of C2 and C4 VFA but reduced the concentration of 
C3 and C5 acids. During acidogenesis using KW at around alkaline pH 9, a 
predominant concentration of acetic acid (~91%) was obtained. Retention 
time is also an important parameter as it affects the yield and composition 
of VFA at different pH values. There is a significant correlation between all 
these parameters and changing simple operating parameters, it is possible 
to design the process to produce the desired concentration and composition 
of VFAs [152] using mixed anaerobic bacteria cultures. Characteristics 
of organic content of waste substrate influence the composition of VFA 
during mixed culture fermentation. Production of propionic and butyric 
acid is favored by carbohydrate rich waste while valeric and iso-valeric 
acids is favored by protein rich waste [153, 154]. 
Bio-augmentation of monoculture in mixed culture fermentation is used 
to increase the yield of one-dominant type of acid. Clostridium aceticum 
[155], Clostridium butyricum [156] and Propionibacterium acidipropi-
onici [157] are used for bioaugmentation of mixed culture fermentation 
to increase acetic acid, butyric acid, and propionic acid production, 
respectively. 

 
292 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
8.7 NANOPARTICLES AND NANOTECHNOLOGY FOR ENHANCED 
BIOPROCESS EFFICIENCY 
Nanoparticles are designed and developed using nanoscience and nanotech­
nology in a size range of 1–100 nm. At this scale nanoparticles have special 
physical and chemical properties of different size and shape, large surface 
area to volume ratio and increased reactivity than their bulk counterparts. 
Due to these properties nanoparticles have applications in different fields 
of electronics, energy, medicinal, pharmaceutical, consumer, industrial, and 
environmental sectors [158]. 
The cost of biological processes is often higher than the chemical process 
due to various reasons. As discussed in previous sections, researchers are 
looking for more efficient microorganisms to develop microbial consortia 
with better substrate utilization and enzymatic properties for the production 
of biofuels, and other chemicals. Nowadays different nanoparticles are also 
used along with efficient microbial consortia for more efficient conversion 
of biomass to biofuels by increasing production rates, substrate utilization 
rates and decreasing the cost. Nano-magnets, nano-fibers, nanocrystals, 
nano-droplets, and other non-toxic nanomaterials are being implemented in 
biofuel production [159, 160]. These are currently being used in different 
stages of microbial consortia cultivation, degradation of biomass by microbes 
and biofuel application in fuel engines. 
8.7.1 EFFECT OF NANOPARTICLE SIZE, SHAPE, AND 
CONCENTRATION ON THE MICROBIAL CONSORTIA 
The size and shape of nanoparticles has an impact on the bacterial growth 
and activity in the consortia. Particles of smaller size (<30 nm) are more 
cytotoxic to microorganisms (E. coli and S. aureus) than bigger one (>50 
nm) [161, 162]. Similarly nanoparticles are found in different shapes and 
can interact with microbes in different manners and also affect the growth 
and activity. For instance, silver nanoparticles exist in triangular, spherical, 
and rod shape with triangular being the most toxic to the microbial species 
(E. coli) [163]. Therefore surface functionalization of nanoparticles has been 
carried out to increase their stability and biocompatibility along with their 
properties for application in biofuel production [164]. 
At specific concentration metal oxide nanoparticles show enhanced bacte­
rial growth (ZnO) and biofuel production (CeO2 – 10 mg/L) in AD system 
[165]. Similarly iron nanoparticles (100 ppm) enhanced biogas (180%) and 

 
 
 
293 
Microbial Consortia 
methane (234%) production due to release of Fe3+ and Fe2+ ions in anaerobic 
waste digester [166]. Fe2+/Fe3+ ions are non-toxic and biocompatible with 
microorganisms and involved in electron transport, enzyme activity and 
bacterial growth stimulation [167]. In contrast, a 15 mg/L concentration of 
CuO nanoparticles reduced the biogas production (30%) whereas bulk CuO 
at 120–240 mg/L has shown 19% and 60% reduction [168]. This effect is due 
to the toxicity of Cu2+ ions to bacteria that damages bacterial cell membranes 
[169–171]. In this respect for efficient biofuel production from microbial 
consortia selection of nanoparticles must be driven according to the suit­
ability of growing consortia and their reactivity. 
8.7.2 NANOPARTICLES APPLICATION IN BIOFUEL PRODUCTION 
Enhanced production of bio-H2 has been reported from anaerobic microbes 
using Fe2O3 nanoparticles which increase reaction kinetics with increased 
transfer of electrons [172]. Similarly gold nanoparticles stimulate produc­
tion of H2 by substrate utilization (56%) and increasing yield (46%) by 
binding with microbial consortia and enzymes. This is due to small size and 
large surface to volume ratio of gold nanoparticle [173]. Microbial bio-H2 
production is also enhanced up to 62% by addition of silver nanoparticles 
that induces substrate utilization and increasing yield (2.48 mol H2/mole 
substrate) by reducing the lag phase of microbial consortia and activated 
acetic reaction [174]. Nano-composite or nano-conjugates mixture of two 
or more nanoparticles have more catalytic activity and stability and are used 
for biofuel production from microbial consortia. Silica (SiO2) combined with 
Fe2O3 nanoparticles enhances production of bio-H2 from acidogenic mixed 
consortia [175]. Yeast produces excess bioethanol when immobilized on 
the surface of magnetic nanoparticles [176]. ZnO nanoparticles are used to 
increase the stability (thermal and pH) of cellulase enzymes of Aspergillus 
fumigatus that degrade cellulose of plants for biofuel production [177]. In 
anaerobic conditions nanoparticles increase substrate utilization and act as 
electron donor and acceptors which enhances the production of biogas [178]. 
Such applications using microbial consortia can be applied with nanotech­
nology for enhanced production of biofuels. 
8.7.3 NANOPARTICLES APPLICATION IN CHEMICAL PRODUCTION 
Extensive application of nanoparticles has also been utilized for the enhanced 
production of chemicals (LA, 2-keto-L-gluconic acid, etc.) and VFA (acetic 

 
 
 
 
294 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
acid, butyric acid and propionic acid) using microbial consortia. Zero-valent 
iron (Fe0) nanoparticles are used in VFAs and methane recovery in organic 
fraction of municipal waste streams [179]. These enhanced the metabolic 
activity of dominant acidogenic microorganisms (Clostridium sp.) in the 
microbial consortia [173]. Similarly silver, graphene-based nanoparticles 
and nanocomposites (Si2CoFe2O4 and Fe3O4/alginate) also enriched acido­
genic process through increasing activity of acidogenic microorganism and 
increasing VFA recovery [174, 180, 181]. Integrative enhanced production 
of bio-H2 along with other bulk chemicals (bioethanol, LA, and VFAs) 
has been reported with the use of different types of nanoparticles in dark 
fermentative microbial consortia. Nanoparticles like silver, gold, copper, 
iron, nickel, palladium, silica, titanium, activated carbon, carbon nanotubes 
and nanocomposite were shown to influence microbial metabolism through 
efficient electron transfer and increased enzymatic activity [182–184]. Small 
size, large surface area and specific concentration of nanoparticles are the 
factors that influence the substrate utilization and product yield. Copper 
nanoparticles (CuNP) at lower concentration (2.5 mg/L) enhanced bio-H2 
production with higher acetate/butyrate ratio. In contrast at higher concentra­
tion CuNP shows enhanced propionate and alcohol production [185]. 
Similarly, production of bio-H2, ethanol, acetate, butyrate, valerate, and 
propionate has been altered with different concentrations of silver (10–20 nM) 
and gold (5 nM) nanoparticles [174, 186]. Palladium nanoparticles (5 mg/L) 
showed increase dehydrogenase activity in mixed culture as opposed to Pd2+ 
ions for H2 production and vice versa [187]. Therefore these studies showed 
that nanoparticles can increase the bulk chemical production by increasing 
microbial growth, substrate utilization, enzyme activity and product yield. 
Now day’s integrative approach of production of bio-H2 and other products 
(ethanol, methanol, VFAs, and chemicals) from microbial consortia and 
specific nanoparticles is under study for the efficient and economic process 
development [78]. 
8.8 CONCLUSION 
Lignocellulosic and other organic wastes are the most abundant sources of 
organic matter on earth, and therefore, different approaches to utilize them 
as precursors for production of renewable energy and valuable chemicals 
are a step toward sustainability and climate change mitigation. Depleting 
resources and increasing demand for energy has encouraged researchers and 
scientists to search for such alternative resources using microbial consortia 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
295 
Microbial Consortia 
for production of biofuels such as bioethanol, biomethane, and bio-H2, and 
chemical like volatile organic acids through AD and fermentation. The major 
issues associated with these processes are mainly related to digestibility, 
low productivity and yield, high operating costs and stability of the overall 
process which have limited the use of these technologies at commercial 
scale. Although physical and chemical hydrolysis, pre-treatments, and 
co-digestion seem to be suitable strategies to overcome these problems, the 
selection and use of selective and highly effective biocatalysts consisting of 
mixed cultures of microorganisms which work synergistically to enhance the 
process efficiency is also important. 
In this chapter, we have reviewed some of the important work done 
using mixed cultures or co-cultures for various waste-to-wealth conversion 
processes, and it is evident that using effective mixed cultures as biocatalyst 
is helpful for enhancing the overall productivity. It is also evident from the 
literature and data that the state-of-the-art of mixed culture approach is still 
not completely understood and developed, but there remains adequate scope 
for further development of more effective mixed culture biocatalysts for cost 
effective conversion of lignocellulosic wastes into biofuels and value-added 
chemicals. The biofuels production from biomass and microbial consortia 
can be increased using a combination of microorganisms and different types 
of nanoparticles. Nanoparticles’ small size, large surface area to volume ratio 
and other catalytic properties enables microorganisms to produce different 
biofuels like bio-H2, biodiesel, and bioethanol and other products. In future, 
interactions between novel microorganism and nanoparticles can improve 
the biofuel and chemical production through substrate utilization, increasing 
yield and reducing the cost. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
anaerobic bacteria 
• 
biofuels 
• 
bio-refinery 
• 
fermentation 
• 
microbial consortia 
• 
mixed culture 
• 
nanoparticles 
• 
nanotechnology 

 
296 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
REFERENCES 
1. Strzalka, R., Schneider, D., & Eicker, U., (2017). Current status of bioenergy technologies 
in Germany. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 72, 801–820. 
2. Khoo, K. S., Lee, S. Y., Ooi, C. W., Fu, X., Miao, X., Ling, T. C., & Show, P. L., 
(2019). Recent advances in biorefinery of astaxanthin from Haematococcus pluvialis.  
Bioresour. Technol., 288, 121606. 
3. Schutyser, R. T., Van, D. B. S., Koelewijn, S. F., Beckham, G. T., & Sels, B. F., (2018). 
Chemicals from lignin: An interplay of lignocellulose fractionation, depolymerization, 
and upgrading. Chem Soc Rev., 47, 852–908. 
4. Balat, M., (2011). Production of bioethanol from lignocellulosic materials via the 
biochemical pathway: A review. Energy Convers. Manag., 52, 858–875. 
5. Kim, S., & Dale, I. S., (2005). Global potential bioethanol production from wasted crops 
and crop residues. Biomass Bioenergy, 29
 
, 361–375. 
6. Wyman, C. E., (2001). Twenty years of trials, tribulations, and research progress in 
bioethanol technology. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 91, 2–12. 
7. Li, Y., Zhang, X., Xiong, L., Mehmood, M., Zhao, X., & Bai, F., (2017). On-site cellulase 
production and efficient saccharification of corn stover employing cbh2 overexpressing 
Trichodemareesei with a novel induction system. Bioresour. Technol., 238, 643–649. 
8. Walker, G. M., (2011). 125th anniversary review: Fuel alcohol: current production and 
future challenges. Journal of the Institute of Brewing, 117(1), 3–22. 
9. Limayem, A., & Ricke, S. C., (2012). Lignocellulosic biomass for bioethanol production: 
Current perspectives, potential issues and future prospects. Prog Energy Combust Sci., 
38, 449–467. 
10. O’ Sullivan, A. C., (1997). Cellulose: The structure slowly reveals. Cellulose
 
, 4, 
173–207. 
11. Valdivia, M., Galan, J. L., Laffarga, J., & Ramos, J. L., (2016). Biofuels 2020: 
Biorefineries based on lignocellulosic materials. Microb. Biotechnol., 9, 585–594. 
12. Jiang, Y., Wu, R., Zhou, J., He, A., Xu, J., Xin, F., Zhang, W., Ma, J., Jiang, M., & Dong, 
W., (2019). Recent advances of biofuels and biochemical production from sustainable 
resources using co-cultivation systems. Biotechnol. Biofuels, 12, 155. 
13. Solli, L., Håvelsrud, O. E., Horn, S. J., & Rike, A. G., (2014). A metagenomic study of 
the microbial communities in four parallel biogas reactors. Biotechnol Biofuels, 7, 146. 
14. Safari, M., Abdi, R., Adl, M., & Kafashan, J., (2018). Optimization of biogas productivity 
in lab-scale by response surface methodology. Renewable Energy,  118, 368–375. 
15.  Rattanapan, C., Sinchai, L., Tachapattaworakul, S. T., Kantachote, D., & Ounsaneha, 
W., (2019). Biogas production by co-digestion of canteen food waste and domestic 
wastewater under organic loading rate and temperature optimization. Environments,  6, 
16. 
16. Kazimierowicz, J., Bartkowska, I., & Walery, M., (2021). Effect of low-temperature 
conditioning of excess dairy sewage sludge with the use of solidified carbon dioxide on 
the efficiency of methane fermentation. Energies, 14
 
, 150. 
17. Wirth, R., Kovács, E., Maróti, G., Bagi, Z., Rákhely, G., & Kovács, K. L., (2012). 
Characterization of a biogas-producing microbial community by short-read next 
generation DNA sequencing. Biotechnol. Biofuels.,  5, 41. 

 
297 
Microbial Consortia 
18.  Ziemiński, K., & Frąc, M., (2012). Methane fermentation process as anaerobic 
digestion of biomass: Transformations, stages and microorganisms.  African Journal of 
Biotechnology, 11, 4127–4139. 
19. Mohanram, S., Amat, D., Choudhary, J., Arora, A., & Nain, L., (2013). Novel perspectives 
for evolving enzyme cocktails for lignocellulose hydrolysis in biorefineries. Sustain. 
Chem. Process, 1, 15. 
20. Arelli, V., Mamindlapelli, N. K., Juntupally, S., Begum, S., & Anupoju, G. R., (2021). 
Solid-state anaerobic digestion of sugarcane bagasse at different solid concentrations: 
Impact of bio augmented cellulolytic bacteria on methane yield and insights on microbial 
diversity. Bioresource Technology, 340, 125675. 
21. Poszytek, K., Ciezkowska, M., Sklodowska, A., & Drewniak, L., (2016). Microbial 
consortium with high cellulolytic activity (MCHCA) for enhanced biogas production. 
Front Microbiol., 7, 324. 
22. Chukwuma, O. B., Rafatullah, M., Tajarudin, H. A., & Ismail, N., (2021). A  review 
on bacteria contribution to lignocellulose breakdown into useful bio-products. Int. J. 
Environ. Res. Public Health, 18, 6001. 
23. Kudanga, T., & Le Roes-Hill, M., (2014). Laccase applications in biofuels production: 
Current status and future prospects. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.,  98, 6525–6542. 
24. Zhang, Q., He, J., Tian, M., Mao, Z., Tang, L., Zhang, J., & Zhang, H., (2011). 
Enhancement of methane production from cassava residues by biological pretreatment 
using a constructed microbial consortium. Bioresource Technology, 102, 8899–8906. 
25. Sträuber, H., Schröder, M., & Kleinsteuber, S., (2012). Metabolic and microbial 
community dynamics during the hydrolytic and acidogenic fermentation in a leach-bed 
process. Energ Sustain Soc., 2, 13. 
26. Rajagopal, R., Massé, D. I., & Singh, G., (2013). A critical review on inhibition of 
anaerobic digestion process by excess ammonia. Bioresource Technology, 143, 632–641. 
27. Yang, L., Xu, F., Ge, X., & Li, Y., (2015). Challenges and strategies for solid-state 
anaerobic digestion of lignocellulosic biomass. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 44, 824–834. 
28. Ragsdale, S. W., & Pierce, E., (2008). Acetogenesis and the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway 
of CO2 fixation. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA); Proteins and Proteomics, 
1873–1898. 
29.  Kushkevych, I., Kobzová, E., Vítězová, M., Vitez, T., Dordević, D., & Bartoš, M., 
(2019). Acetogenic microorganisms in operating biogas plants depending on substrate 
combinations. Biologia,  74, 1229–1236. 
30. Woraruthai, T., Kunno, J., Pongsopon, M., Yansakon, K., Phoopraintra, P., Chantiwas, R., 
Leartsakulpanich, U., et al., (2020). Identification and cultivation of hydrogenotrophic 
methanogens from palm oil mill effluent for high methane production. Int. J. Energy 
Res., 44, 10058–10070. 
31. Schnürer, A., Schink, B., & Svensson, B. H., (1996).  Clostridium ultunense sp. 
Nov., a mesophilic bacterium oxidizing acetate in syntrophic association with a 
hydrogenotrophic methanogenic bacterium. International Journal of Systematic and 
Evolutionary Microbiology, 46, 1145–1152. 
32. Hattori, S., Kamagata, Y., Hanada, S., & Shoun, H., (2000). Thermacetogenium phaeum  
gen. Nov., sp. Nov., a strictly anaerobic, thermophilic, syntrophic acetate-oxidizing 
bacterium. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology, 50, 
1601–1609. 

 
298 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
33. Westerholm, M., Moestedt, J., & Schnürer, A., (2016). Biogas production through 
syntrophic acetate oxidation and deliberate operating strategies for improved digester 
performance. Applied Energy, 179, 124–135. 
34. Balk, M., Weijma, J., & Stams, A. J., (2002). Thermotoga lettingae sp. Nov., a novel 
thermophilic, methanol-degrading bacterium isolated from a thermophilic anaerobic 
reactor. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology, 52, 
1361–1368. 
35. Gao, S., Zhao, M., Chen, Y., Yu, M., & Ruan, W., (2015). Tolerance response to in 
situ ammonia stress in a pilot-scale anaerobic digestion reactor for alleviating ammonia 
inhibition. Bioresource technology, 198, 372–379. 
36. Werner, J. J., Garcia, M. L., Perkins, S. D., Yarasheski, K. E., Smith, S. R., Muegge, 
B. D., & Angenent, L. T., (2014). Microbial community dynamics and stability during 
an ammonia-induced shift to syntrophic acetate oxidation. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 80, 3375–3383. 
37. Li, Z., Zhang, Z., Xu, C., Zhao, J., Liu, H., Fan, Z., Yang, F., et al., (2014). Bacteria 
and methanogens differ along the gastrointestinal tract of Chinese roe deer (Capreolus 
pygargus). PLoS One, 9, e114513. 
38. Gaci, N., Borrel, G., Tottey, W., O’Toole, P. W., & Brugère, J. F., (2014). Archaea and the 
human gut: New beginning of an old story. World J. Gastroenterol., 20, 16062–16078. 
39. Abendroth, C., Vilanova, C., Günther, T., Luschnig, O., & Porcar, M., (2015). Eubacteria 
and archaea communities in seven mesophile anaerobic digester plants in Germany. 
Biotechnol Biofuels, 8, 87. 
40. Prem, E. M., Stres, B., Illmer, P., & Wagner, A. O., (2010). Microbial community 
dynamics in mesophilic and thermophilic batch reactors under methanogenic, phenyl 
acid-forming conditions. Biotechnol Biofuels.,  13, 81. 
41. Yamada, T., Sekiguchi, Y., Imachi, H., Kamagata, Y., Ohashi, A., & Harada, H., (2005). 
Diversity, localization, and physiological properties of filamentous microbes belonging 
to Chloroflexi subphylum I in mesophilic and thermophilic methanogenic sludge 
granules. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 71, 7493–7503. 
42. Yadav, S., Kundu, S., Ghosh, S. K., & Maitra, S. S., (2015). Molecular analysis of 
methanogen richness in landfill and marshland targeting 16S rDNA sequences. Archaea,  
2015 |Article ID 563414. 
43. Hattori, S., (2008). Syntrophic acetate-oxidizing 
 
microbes in methanogenic 
environments. Microbes and Environments, 23, 118–127. 
44. Kimura, Z. I., & Okabe, S., (2013). Acetate oxidation by syntrophic association between 
Geobacter sulfurreducens  and a hydrogen-utilizing exoelectrogen. The ISME Journal, 
7, 1472–1482. 
45. Sahu, N., Deshmukh, S., Chandrashekhar, B., Sharma, G., Kapley, A., & Pandey, R. A., 
(2017). Optimization of hydrolysis conditions for minimizing ammonia accumulation 
in two-stage biogas production process using kitchen waste for sustainable process 
development. Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 5(3), 2378–2387. 
46. Sarker, S., Lamb, J. J., Hjelme, D. R., & Lien, K. M., (2019). A review of the role of 
critical parameters in the design and operation of biogas production plants. Appl. Sci., 
9, 1915. 
47. Ali, S., Hua, B., Huang, J. J., Droste, R. L., Zhou, Q., Zhao, W., & Chen, L., (2019). 
Effect of different initial low pH conditions on biogas production, composition, and 
shift in the aceticlastic methanogenic population. Bioresource Technology,  289, 121579. 

 
299 
Microbial Consortia 
48. Calicioglu, O., Shreve, M. J., Richard, T. L., & Brennan, R. A., (2018). Effect of pH 
and temperature on microbial community structure and carboxylic acid yield during the 
acidogenic digestion of duckweed. Biotechnology for Biofuels, 11, 1–19. 
49. Wormald, R., & Humphreys, P., (2019). Hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis dominates 
at high pH. Access Microbiology, 1 , 169. 
50. Wormald, R. M., Rout, S. P., Mayes, W., Gomes, H., & Humphreys, P. N., (2020). 
Hydrogenotrophic methanogenesis under alkaline conditions. Frontiers in Microbiology, 
11. 
51. Rosen, M. A., & Koohi-Fayegh, S., (2016). The prospects for hydrogen as an energy 
carrier: An overview of hydrogen energy and hydrogen energy systems. Energy, Ecology 
and Environment, 1, 10–29. 
52. Abbasi, T., & Abbasi, S. A., (2011). Renewable hydrogen: Prospects and challenges. 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 15, 3034–3040. 
53. Ding, C., Yang, K. L., & He, J., (2016). 11 – biological and fermentative production of 
hydrogen. In: Handbook of Biofuels Production (2nd edn., pp. 303–333). Woodhead 
Publishing. 
54.  Ergal, İ., Gräf, O., Hasibar, B., Steiner, M., Vukotić, S., Bochmann,  G., Fuchs, W., 
Simon, K. M., & Rittmann, R., (2020). Biohydrogen production beyond the Thauer limit 
by precision design of artificial microbial consortia. Commun Biol., 3, 443. 
55. Argun, H., & Kargi, F., (2011). Bio-hydrogen production by different operational modes 
of dark and photo-fermentation: An overview. International Journal of Hydrogen 
Energy, 36, 7443–7459. 
56. Craven, J. D., (2019). T argeted Illumination Strategies for Hydrogen Production 
from Purple Non-sulfur Bacteria. Theses and Dissertations--Chemical and Materials 
Engineering. 106. https://uknowledge.uky.edu/cme_etds/106 (accessed on 20 July 
2023). 
57. Zhang, Q., & Zhang, Z., (2018). Chapter 4 – biological hydrogen production from 
renewable resources by photofermentation. Advances in Bioenergy, 3 , 137–160. 
58. Gadhamshetty, V., Sukumaran, A., & Nirmalakhandan, N., (2011). Photoparameters in 
photofermentative biohydrogen production. Critical Reviews in Environmental Science 
and Technology, 41, 1–51. 
59. Mishra, P., Krishnan, S., Rana, S., Singh, L., Sakinah, M., & Wahid, Z. A., (2019). 
Outlook of fermentative hydrogen production techniques: An overview of dark, photo 
and integrated dark-photo fermentative approach to biomass. Energy Strategy Reviews, 
24, 27–37. 
60. Yokoyama, M. T., & Davis, C. L., (1971). Hydrogenation of unsaturated fatty acids by 
Treponema (Borrelia) strain B25, a rumen spirochete. Journal of Bacteriology, 107(2), 
519–527. 
61. Pachapur, L. V., Sarma, J. S., Brar, K. S., Bihan, L. Y., Soccol, R. C., Buelna, G., & 
Verma, M., (2015). Co-culture strategies for increased biohydrogen production. 
International Journal of Energy Research., 39
 
, 1479–1504. 
62. Chen, P., Wang, Y., Yan, L., Wang, Y., Li, S., Yan, X., & Li, H., (2015). Feasibility 
of biohydrogen production from industrial wastes using defined microbial co-culture. 
Biological Research, 48, 1–8. 
63.  Hasibar, B., Ergal, İ., Moser, S., Bochmann, G., Simon, K. M. R., & Fuchs, W., (2020). 
Increasing biohydrogen production with the use of a co-culture inside a microbial 
electrolysis cell. Biochemical Engineering Journal, 164, 107802. 

 
300 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
64. Wang, S., Ma, Z., Zhang, T., Bao, M., & Su, H., (2017). Optimization and modelling of 
biohydrogen production by mixed bacterial cultures from raw cassava starch. Frontiers 
of Chemical Science and Engineering, 11, 100–106. 
65. Patel, S. K., Gupta, R. K., Das, D., Lee, J. K., & Kalia, V. C., (2021). Continuous 
biohydrogen production from poplar biomass hydrolysate by a defined bacterial mixture 
immobilized on lignocellulosic materials under non-sterile conditions. Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 287, 125037. 
66. Karim, A., Islam, M. A., Mishra, P., Yousuf, A., Faizal, C. K. M., & Khan, M. M. R., 
(2021). Technical difficulties of mixed culture driven waste biomass-based biohydrogen 
production: Sustainability of current pretreatment techniques and future prospective. 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 151, 111519. 
67. Karim, A., Islam, M. A., Mohammad, F. C. K., Yousuf, A., Howarth, M., Dubey, B. 
N., & Rahman, K. M. M., (2018). Enhanced biohydrogen production from citrus 
wastewater using anaerobic sludge pretreated by an electroporation technique. Industrial 
& Engineering Chemistry Research, 58, 573–580. 
68. Yang, G., Wang, J., & Shen, Y., (2019). Antibiotic fermentation residue for biohydrogen 
production using different pretreated cultures: Performance evaluation and microbial 
community analysis. Bioresource Technology, 292, 122012. 
69. Banu, J. R., Merrylin, J., Usman, T. M., Kannah, R. Y., Gunasekaran, M., Kim, S. H., & 
Kumar, G., (2020). Impact of pretreatment on food waste for biohydrogen production: 
A review. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 45, 18211–18225. 
70. Stanislaus, M. S., Zhang, N., Yuan, Y., Zheng, H., Zhao, C., Hu, X., & Yang, Y., (2018). 
Improvement of biohydrogen production by optimization of pretreatment method and 
substrate to inoculum ratio from microalgal biomass and digested sludge. Renewable 
Energy, 127, 670–677. 
71. Yang, G., Hu, Y., & Wang, J., (2019). Biohydrogen production from co-fermentation of 
fallen leaves and sewage sludge. Bioresource Technology, 285, 121342. 
72. Sekoai, P. T., Yoro, K. O., & Daramola, M. O., (2016). Batch fermentative biohydrogen 
production process using immobilized anaerobic sludge from organic solid waste. 
Environments, 3, 38. 
73. Yan, L., Peng, Y., Xin, S., & Yinbo, Q., (2008). Hydrogen production from cellulose 
by co-culture of Clostridium thermocellum JN4 and Thermoanaerobacterium 
thermosaccharolyticum GD17. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 33, 
2927–2933. 
74. Qing, Q., Yang, B., & Wyman, C. E., (2010). Xylooligomers are strong inhibitors of 
cellulose hydrolysis by enzymes. Bioresour. Technol., 101, 9624–9630. 
75. Li, Q., & Liu, C. Z., (2012). Co-culture of Clostridium thermocellum and Clostridium 
thermosaccharolyticum for enhancing hydrogen production via thermophilic 
fermentation of cornstalk waste. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 37, 10648–10654. 
76. Yokoi, H., Saitsu, A., Uchida, H., Hirose, J., Hayashi, S., & Takasaki, Y., (2001). 
Microbial hydrogen production from sweet potato starch residue. J. Biosci. Bioeng., 
91, 58–63. 
77. Pawar, S. S., Vongkumpeang, T., Grey, C., & Van, N. E. W., (2015). Biofilm formation 
by designed co-cultures of Caldicellulosiruptor species as a means to improve hydrogen 
productivity. Biotechnology for Biofuels, 8, 1–13. 
78. Bhatia, S. K., Jagtap, S. S., Bedekar, A. A., Bhatia, R. K., Rajendran, K., Pugazhendhi, 
A., Rao, C. V., et al., (2021). Renewable biohydrogen production from lignocellulosic 

 
301 
Microbial Consortia 
biomass using fermentation and integration of systems with other energy generation 
technologies. Sci. Total Environ., 765, 144429. 
79. Liu, B. F., Jin, Y. R., Cui, Q. F., Xie, G. J., Wu, Y. N., & Ren, N. Q., (2015). Photo-
fermentation hydrogen production by Rhodopseudomonas sp. Nov. strain A7 isolated 
from the sludge in a bioreactor. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 40, 
8661–8668. 
80. Dasgupta, C. N., Gilbert, J. J., Lindblad, P., Heidorn, T., Borgvang, S. A., Skjanes, K., 
& Das, D., (2010). Recent trends on the development of photobiological processes and 
photobioreactors for the improvement of hydrogen production. International Journal of 
Hydrogen Energy, 35
 
, 10218–10238. 
81. Antonopoulou, G., Ntaikou, I., Stamatelatou, K., & Lyberatos, G., (2011). 13 – biological 
and fermentative production of hydrogen. In: Woodhead Publishing Series in Energy, 
Handbook of Biofuels Production (pp. 305–346). Woodhead Publishing. 
82.  Sağır, E., & Hallenbeck, P. C., (2019). Photofermentative hydrogen production. 
Biohydrogen, 141–157. 
83. Das, D., (2009). Advances in biohydrogen production processes: An approach towards 
commercialization. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 34
 
, 7349–7357. 
84. Chandrasekhar, K., Lee, Y. J., & Lee, D. W., (2015). Biohydrogen production: Strategies 
to improve process efficiency through microbial routes. International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences, 16, 8266–8293. 
85.  Luo, G., Xie, L., Zou, Z., Wang, W., & Zhou, Q., (2010). Exploring optimal conditions 
for thermophilic fermentative hydrogen production from cassava stillage. International 
Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 35, 6161–6169. 
86. Kongjan, P., Sompong, O., & Angelidaki, I., (2011). Performance and microbial 
community analysis of a two-stage process with extreme thermophilic hydrogen and 
thermophilic methane production from hydrolysate in UASB reactors. Bioresource 
Technology, 102, 4028–4035. 
87. Kivistö, T. A., Ciranna, A., Santala, P. V., & Karp, T. M., (2013). Extremophilic microbes 
in biohydrogen production. Current Biotechnology, 2, 345–359. 
88. Kengen, S. W., Goorissen, H. P., Verhaart, M., Stams, A. J., Van, N. E. W., & Claassen, P. 
A., (2008). Biological hydrogen production by anaerobic microorganisms. In: Soetaert, 
W., Verdamme, E., & Chichester, (eds.), Biofuels (p. 197). John Wiley & Sons. Wiley 
Series in Renewable Resources. 
89. Willquist, K., Pawar, S. S., & Van, N. E. W., (2011). Reassessment of hydrogen tolerance 
in Caldicellulosiruptor saccharolyticus. Microbial Cell Factories, 10, 1–11. 
90. Krakat, N., Westphal, A., Schmidt, S., & Scherer, P., (2010). Anaerobic digestion 
of renewable biomass: Thermophilic temperature governs methanogen population 
dynamics. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 76, 1842–1850. 
 
91. Chen, L., Du, S., & Xie, L., (2021). Effects of pH on ex-situ biomethanation with 
hydrogenotrophic methanogens under thermophilic and extreme-thermophilic 
conditions. Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering, 131, 168–175. 
92. Mota, V. T., Júnior, A. F., Trably, E., & Zaiat, M., (2018). Biohydrogen production at pH 
below 3.0: Is it possible? Water Research, 128, 350–361. 
93. Zagrodnik, R., & Laniecki, M., (2015). The role of pH control on biohydrogen production 
by single stage hybrid dark-and photo-fermentation. Bioresource Technology, 194, 
187–195. 

 
302 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
94. Cai, M., Liu, J., & Wei, Y., (2004). Enhanced biohydrogen production from sewage 
sludge with alkaline pretreatment. Environmental Science & Technology, 38, 3195–3202. 
95. Pawar, S. S., & Van, N. E. W., (2013). Thermophilic biohydrogen production: How far 
are we? Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 97, 7999–8009. 
96. Augustyn, A., & Sampaolo, M., (2019). Ethanol 
 
Chemical Compound. Retrieved 
from Encyclopaedia Britannica: https://www.britannica.com/science/propyl-alcohol 
(accessed on 20 July 2023). 
97. Sebayang, A., Masjuki, H., Ong, H. C., Dharma, S., Mahlia, T. M. I., & Aditiya, H., 
(2016). A perspective on bioethanol production from biomass as alternative fuel for 
spark ignition engine. RSC Advances, 6, 14964–14992. 
98. Binod, P., & Pandey, A., (2015). Introduction. In: Pretreatment of Biomass: Processes 
and Technologies (Vol. 35, p. 100). Elsevier Science: Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
99. Rocha, L., Raud, M., Orupold, K., & Kikas, T., (2017). Second-generation bioethanol 
production: A review of strategies for waste valorization. Agron. Res., 15, 830–847. 
100. Zabed, H., Sahu, J., Suely, A., Boyce, A., & Faruq, G., (2017). Bioethanol production 
from renewable sources: Current perspectives and technological progress. Renew. 
Sustain. Energy Rev., 71, 475–501. 
101. Wyman, C. E., Dale, B. E., Elander, R. T., Holtzapple, M. T., Ladisch, M., & Lee, 
Y. Y., (2005). Cordinated development of leading biomass pretreatment technologies. 
Bioresour. Technol., 96, 1959–1966. 
102. Ayeni, A. O., Omoleye, J. A., Hymore, F. K., & Pandey, R. A., (2016). Effective 
alkaline peroxide oxidation pretreatment of shea tree sawdust for the production of 
biofuels: Kinetics of delignification and enzymatic conversion to sugar and subsequent 
production of ethanol by fermentation using Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Braz. J. Chem. 
Eng., 33, 33–45. 
103. Lynd, L., Zyl, W., McBride, J., & Laser, M., (2005). Consolidated bio-processing of 
cellulose biomass: An update. Curr. Opin. Biotech., 16, 577–583. 
104. Du, R., Yan, J., Li, S., Zhang, L., Zhang, S., Li, J., Zhao, G., & Panlu, Q., (2015). Cellulosic 
ethanol production by natural bacterial consortia is enhanced by Pseudoxanthomonas 
taiwanensis. Biotechnol. Biofuels, 8, 10. 
105. Kalyani, D., Lee, K., Kim, T., Li, J., Dhiman, S. S., Kang, Y. C., & Lee, J. K., (2013). 
Microbial consortia for saccharification of woody biomass and ethanol fermentation. 
Fuel, 107, 815–822. 
106. Zuroff, T. R., & Curtis, W. R., (2012). Developing symbiotic consortia for lignocellulosic 
biofuel production. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 93, 1423–1435. 
107. Kumar, R., Singh, S., & Singh, O. V., (2008). Bioconversion of lignocellulosic biomass: 
Biochemical and molecular perspectives. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 35, 377–391. 
108. Bayer, E. A., Belaich, J. P., Shoham, Y., & Lamed, R., (2014). The cellulosomes: 
Multienzyme machines for degradation of plant cell wall polysaccharides. Ann. Rev. 
Microbiol., 58, 521–554. 
109. Olson, D. G., McBride, J. E., Shaw, A. J., & Lynd, L. R., (2012). Recent progress in 
consolidated bioprocessing. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 23, 396–405. 
110. Wongwilaiwalin, S., Rattanachomsri, U., Laothanachareon, T., Eurwilaichitr, L., 
Igarashi, Y., & Champreda, V., (2010). Analysis of a thermophilic lignocellulose 
degrading microbial consortium and multi-species lignocellulolytic enzyme system. 
Enzyme Microb. Tech., 47
 
, 283–290. 

 
303 
Microbial Consortia 
111.   Feng, Y., Yu, Y., Wang, X., Qu, Y., Li, D., He, W., & Kim, B. H., (2011). Degradation of 
raw corn stover powder (RCSP) by an enriched microbial consortium and its community 
structure. Bioresour Technol., 102, 742–747. 
112. Lv, Z., Yang, J., Wang, E., & Yuan, H., (2008). Characterization of extracellular and 
substrate-bound cellulases from a mesophilic sugarcane bagasse-degrading microbial 
community. Process Biochem., 43, 1467–1472. 
113. Argyros, D. A., Tripathi, S. A., Barrett, T. F., Rogers, S. R., Feinberg, L. F., Olson, D. 
G., Foden, J. M., et al., (2011). High ethanol titers from cellulose by using metabolically 
engineered thermophilic, anaerobic microbes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 77, 8288–8294. 
114. Haruta, S., Cui, Z., Huang, Z., Li, M., Ishii, M., & Igarash, Y., (2005). Construction of 
a stable microbial community with high cellulose-degradation ability. Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol., 59, 529–534. 
115. Minty, J. J., Singer, M. E., Scholz, S. A., Bae, C. H., Ahn, J. H., Foster, C. E., Liao, J. C., 
& Lin, X. N., (2013). Design and characterization of synthetic fungal-bacterial consortia 
for direct production of isobutanol from cellulosic biomass. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences,  110, 14592–14597. 
116. Martinez, F. A. C., Balciunas, E. M., Salgado, J. M., González, J. M. D., Converti, A., 
& Oliveira, R. P. D. S., (2013). Lactic acid properties, applications and production: A  
review, Trends in Food Science & Technology., 30, 70–83. 
117. Gao, C., Ma, C., & Xu, P., (2011). Biotechnological routes based on lactic acid 
production from biomass, Biotechnology Advances, 29, 930–939. 
118. Gezginc, Y., Topcal, F., Comertpay, S., & Akyol, I., (2015). Quantitative analysis of the 
lactic acid and acetaldehyde produced by Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactobacillus 
bulgaricus strains isolated from traditional Turkish yogurts using HPLC.  Journal of 
Dairy Science,  98, 1426–1434. 
119. Sheeladevi, A., & Ramanathan, N., (2011). Lactic acid production using lactic acid 
bacteria under optimized conditions. International Journal of Pharmaceutical & 
Biological Archives,  2, 1686–1691. 
120. Panesar, P. S., Kennedy, J. F., Knill, C. J., & Kosseva, M., (2010). Production of L(+) 
lactic acid using Lactobacillus casei from whey. Food/Feed Science and Technology 
Braz. Arch. Biol. Technol., 53. 
121. lonso, S., Herrero, M., Rendueles, M., & Díaz, M., (2010). Residual yoghurt whey for 
lactic acid production. Biomass and Bioenergy, 34, 931–938. 
122. Fakhravar, S., Najafpour, G., Heris, S. Z., Izadi, M., & Fakhravar, A., (2012). 
 
Fermentative lactic acid from deproteinized whey using Lactobacillus bulgaricus in 
batch culture. World Applied Sciences Journal,  17, 1083–1086. 
123. Sharma, A., Mukherjee, S., Tadi, S. R. R., Ramesh, A., & Sivaprakasam, S., (2021). 
Kinetics of growth, plantaricin and lactic acid production in whey permeate based 
medium by probiotic Lactobacillus plantarum CRA52. LWT,  139, 110744. 
124. Rojas, A. M., Montaño, L. P., & Bastidas, M. J., (2015). Production of lactic acid from 
whey using Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus and Streptococcus thermophilus. 
Revista Colombiana de Química., 44(3), 5–10. 
125. De La Torre, I., Ladero, M., & Santos, V. E., (2018). Production of D-lactic acid by 
Lactobacillus delbrueckii ssp. delbrueckii from orange peel waste: Techno-economical 
assessment of nitrogen sources. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.,  102, 10511–10521. 
126. Leite, M. T., Barrozo, M. A. D. S., & Ribeiro, E. J., (2012). Canonical analysis 
technique as an approach to determine optimal conditions for lactic acid production by 

 
304 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Lactobacillus helveticus ATCC 15009. International Journal of Chemical Engineering.  
Article ID 303874. 
127. Bernardo, M. P., Coelho, L. F., Sass, D. C., & Contiero, J., (2016). L-(+)-Lactic acid 
production by Lactobacillus rhamnosus B103 from dairy industry waste. Braz. J. 
Microbiol., 47. 
128. Lech, M., (2020). Optimization of protein-free waste whey supplementation used for the 
industrial microbiological production of lactic acid. Biochemical Engineering Journal,  
157, 10. 
129. Ramchandran, L., Sanciolo, P., Vasiljevic, T., Broome, M., Powell, I., & Duke, M., 
(2012). Improving cell yield and lactic acid production of Lactococcus lactis ssp. 
cremoris by a novel submerged membrane fermentation process. Journal of Membrane 
Science, 403, 404, 179–187. 
130. Zhang, Y., Kumar, A., Hardwidge, P. R., Tanaka, T., Kondo, A., & Vadlani, P. V., 
(2016). D-lactic acid production from renewable lignocellulosic biomass via genetically 
modified Lactobacillus plantarum. Biotechnol Progress, 32, 271–278. 
131. Yoshida, S., Okano, K., Tanaka, T., Ogino, C., &  Kondo, A., (2011). Homo-D-lactic 
acid production from mixed sugars using xylose-assimilating operon-integrated 
Lactobacillus plantarum. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.,  92, 67–76. 
132. Sauer, M., Porro, D., Mattanovich, D., & Branduardi, P., (2010). 16 years research on 
lactic acid production with yeast – ready for the market? Biotechnology and Genetic 
Engineering Reviews,  27, 229–256. 
133. Lee, K., (2005). Comparison of fermentative capacities of lactobacilli in single and 
mixed culture in industrial media. Process Biochemistry, 40, 1559–1564. 
134. Roukas, T., & Kotzekidou, P., (1996). Continuous production of lactic acid from 
deproteinized whey by coimmobilized Lactobacillus casei and Lactococcus lactis cells 
in a packed-bed reactor. Food Biotechnology, 10(3), 231–242. 
135. Luongo, V., Policastro, G., Ghimire,  A., Pirozzi, F., & Fabbricino, M., (2019). Repeated-
batch fermentation of cheese whey for semi-continuous lactic acid production using 
mixed cultures at uncontrolled pH. Sustainability, 11, 3330. 
136. Plessas, S., Bosnea, L., Psarianos, C., Koutinas, A., Marchant, R., & Banat, I., (2008). 
Lactic acid production by mixed cultures of Kluyveromyces marxianus, Lactobacillus 
delbrueckii ssp. bulgaricus and Lactobacillus helveticus. Bioresource Technology, 99, 
5951–5955. 
137. Yao, K., Zhou, Q. X., Liu, D. M., Chen, S. M., & Yuan, K., (2019). Comparative 
proteomics of the metabolic pathways involved in L-lactic acid production in Bacillus 
coagulans BCS13002 using different carbon sources. LWT, 116, 108445. 
138. Fu, Y. Q., Yin, L. F., Zhu, H. Y., & Jiang, R., (2016). High-efficiency l-lactic acid 
production by Rhizopus oryzae using a novel modified one-step fermentation strategy.  
Bioresource Technology, 218, 410–417. 
139. Ge, X. Y., Qian, H., & Zhang, W. G., (2009). Improvement of l-lactic acid production 
from Jerusalem artichoke tubers by mixed culture of Aspergillus Niger and Lactobacillus  
sp. Bioresource Technology, 100, 1872–1874. 
140. Chen, H., Chen, B., Su, Z., Wang, K., Wang, B., Wang, Y., Si, Z., et al., (2020). Efficient 
lactic acid production from cassava bagasse by mixed culture of Bacillus coagulans and 
Lactobacillus rhamnosus using stepwise pH controlled simultaneous saccharification 
and co-fermentation. Industrial Crops and Products., 146
 
, 112175. 

 
 
305 
Microbial Consortia 
141. Zhang, Y., & Vadlani, P. V., (2015). Lactic acid production from biomass-derived sugars 
via co-fermentation of Lactobacillus brevis and Lactobacillus plantarum. Journal of 
Bioscience and Bioengineering, 119, 694–699. 
142. Cui, F., Li, Y., & Wan, C., (2011). Lactic acid production from corn stover using mixed 
cultures of Lactobacillus rhamnosus  and Lactobacillus brevis. Bioresource Technology,  
102, 1831–1836. 
143. Upadhyaya, B. P., DeVeaux, L. C., & Christopher, L. P., (2014). Metabolic engineering 
as a tool for enhanced lactic acid production. Trends in Biotechnology, 32, 637–644. 
144. Eş, I., Khaneghah, A. M., Barba, F. J., Saraiva, J. A., Sant’Ana, A. S., & Hashemi, S. 
M. B., (2018). Recent advancements in lactic acid production: A review. Food Research 
International, 107, 763–770. 
145. Sahoo, T. K., & Jayaraman, G., (2019). Co-culture of Lactobacillus delbrueckii and 
engineered Lactococcus lactis enhances stoichiometric yield of D-lactic acid from whey 
permeate. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 103, 5653–5662. 
146. Liu, C. M., Wachemo, A. C., Tong, H., Shi, S., Zhang, L., Yuan, H., & Li, X. J., (2018). 
Biogas production and microbial community properties during anaerobic digestion of 
corn stover at different temperatures. Bioresource Technology, 261, 93–103. 
147. Gomes, R. J., Borges, M. F., Rosa, M. F., Castro-Gómez, R. J. H., & Spinosa, W. 
A., (2018). Acetic acid bacteria in the food industry: Systematics, characteristics and 
applications. Food Technol. Biotechnol., 56, 139–151. 
148. Du, G., Liu, L., & Chen, J., (2015). Chapter 11 – white biotechnology for organic acids. 
Industrial Biorefineries & White Biotechnology (pp. 409–444). Elsevier. 
149. Atasoy, M., Eyice, O., Schnürer, A., & Cetecioglu, Z., (2019). Volatile fatty acids 
production via mixed culture fermentation: Revealing the link between pH, inoculum 
type and bacterial composition. Bioresource Technology, 292, 121889. 
150. Wang, K., Yin, J., Shen, D., & Li, N., (2014). Anaerobic digestion of food waste for 
volatile fatty acids (VFAs) production with different types of inoculum: Effect of pH. 
Bioresour Technol., 161, 395–401. 
151. Jankowska, E., Chwialkowska, J., Stodolny, M., & Oleskowicz-Popiel, P., (2017). 
Volatile fatty acids production during mixed culture fermentation–The impact of 
substrate complexity and pH. Chemical Engineering Journal, 326, 901–910. 
152.  Jankowska, E., Chwiałkowska, J., Stodolny, M., & Oleskowicz-Popiel, P., (2015). 
Effect of pH and retention time on volatile fatty acids production during mixed culture 
fermentation. Bioresource Technology, 190, 274–280. 
153. Garcia-Aguirre, J., Aymerich, E., González-Mtnez De, G. J., & Esteban-Gutiérrez, M., 
(2017). Selective VFA  production potential from organic waste streams: Assessing 
temperature and pH influence. Bioresour Technol., 244, 1081–1088. 
154. Shen, L., Hu, H., Ji, H., Cai, J., He, N., Li, Q., & Wang, Y., (2014). Production of 
poly(hydroxybutyrate–hydroxyvalerate) from waste organics by the two-stage process: 
Focus on the intermediate volatile fatty acids. Bioresour. Technol., 166
 
, 194–200. 
155. Atasoy, M., & Cetecioglu, Z., (2020). Bioaugmented mixed culture fermentation by 
Clostridium aceticum to enhance acetic acid dominant volatile fatty acids production 
from dairy industry wastewater. Chemosphere. 
156. Atasoy, M., & Cetecioglu, Z., (2020). Butyric acid dominant volatile fatty acids 
production: Bio-augmentation of mixed culture fermentation by Clostridium butyricum. 
Journal of Environmental Chemical Engineering, 8, 104496. 

 
306 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
157. Atasoy, M., & Cetecioglu, Z., (2020).  Enhanced Propionic Acid Production via 
Bioaugmented Mixed Culture Fermentation by Propionibacterium Acidipropionici. 
Available from: http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:kth:diva-278715 (accessed on 
20 July 2023). 
158. Soni, D., Naoghare, P. K., Saravanadevi, S., & Pandey, R. A., (2015). Release, transport 
and toxicity of engineered nanoparticles. RECT, 234, 1–47. 
159. Palaniappan, K., (2017). An overview of applications of nanotechnology in biofuel 
production. World Appl. Sci J., 35, 1305–1311. 
160. Nizami, A., & Rehan, M., (2018). Towards nanotechnology-based biofuel industry. 
Biofuel Res. J., 18, 798, 799. 
161. Pelletier, D. A., Suresh, A. K., Holton, G. A., et al., (2010). Effects of engineered cerium 
oxide nanoparticles on bacterial growth and viability. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 76, 
7981–7989. 
162. Martinez-Gutierrez, F ., Olive, P. L., Banuelos, A., et al., (2010). Synthesis, 
characterization, and evaluation of antimicrobial and cytotoxic effect of silver and 
titanium nanoparticles. Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol. Med.,  6, 681–688. 
163. Pal, S., Tak, Y. K., & Song, J. M., (2007). Does the antibacterial activity of silver 
nanoparticles depend on the shape of the nanoparticles? A study of the gram-negative 
bacterium Escherichia coli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 73, 1712–1720. 
164. Pavlidis, I. V., T soufis, T., Enotiadis, A., Gournis, D., & Stamatis, H., (2010). 
Functionalized multi-wall carbon nanotubes for lipase immobilization. Adv. Eng. 
Mater., 12, B179–B183. 
165. Nguyen, M. D., (2013). Effects of CeO2 and ZnO Nanoparticles on Anaerobic Digestion 
and Toxicity of Digested Sludge. PhD dissertation, Asian Institute of Technology; 
Thailand. 
166. Casals, E., Barrena, R., García, A., González, E., Delgado, L., Busquets-Fité, M., Font, 
X., et al., (2014). Programmed iron oxide nanoparticles disintegration in anaerobic 
digesters boosts biogas production. Small, 10(14), 2801–2808. 
167. Ma, W., Xin, H., Zhong, D., Qian, F., Han, H., & Yuan, Y., (2015). Effects of different 
states of Fe on anaerobic digestion: A review. J. Harbin Inst. Technol., 22, 69–75. 
168. Luna-delRisco, M., Orupold, K., & Dubourguier, H. C., (2011). Particle-size effect 
of CuO and ZnO on biogas and methane production during anaerobic digestion. J. 
Hazardous Materials, 189, 603–608. 
169. Heinlaan, M., Ivask, A., Blinova, I., Dubourguier, H. C., & Kahru, A., (2008). Toxicity 
of nanosized and bulk ZnO, CuO and TiO2 to bacteria Vibrio fischeri and crustaceans 
Daphnia magna and Thamnocephalus platyurus. Chemosphere., 71(7), 1308–1316. 
170. Neal, A. L., (2008). What can be interfered from bacterium nanoparticle interactions 
about the potential consequences of environmental exposure to nanoparticles? 
Ecotoxicology, 17, 362–371. 
171. Kasemets, K., Ivask, A., Dubourguier, H. C., & Kahru, A., (2009). Toxicity of 
nanoparticles of ZnO, CuO and TiO2 to yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Toxicology in 
Vitro, 23(6), 1116–1122. 
172. Ali, A., Mahar, R., Soomro, R., & Sherazi, S., (2017). Fe3O4 nanoparticles facilitated 
anaerobic digestion of organic fraction of municipal solid waste for enhancement of 
methane production. Energy Sources, Part A, 37, 1815. 
173. Sekoai, P. T., Ouma, C. N. M., Du Preez, S. P., Modisha, P., Engelbrecht, N., Bessarabov, 
D. G., & Ghimire, A., (2019). Application of nanoparticles in biofuels: An overview. 
Fuel, 237
 
, 380–397. 

 
307 
Microbial Consortia 
174. Zhao, W., Zhang, Y., Du, B., Wei, Q., & Zhao, Y., (2013). Enhancement effect of silver 
nanoparticles on fermentative biohydrogen production using mixed bacteria. Bioresour. 
Technol., 142, 240–245. 
175. Venkata, M. S., Mohanakrishna, G., Reddy, S., David, R. B., Rama, R. K. S., & Sarma, P. 
N., (2008). Self-immobilization of acidogenic mixed consortia on mesoporous material 
(SBA-15) and activated carbon to enhance fermentative hydrogen production. Int. J. 
Hydrog. Energy, 33, 6133–6142. 
176. Ivanova, V., Petrova, P., & Hristov, J., (2011). Application in the ethanol fermentation 
of immobilized yeast cells in matrix of alginate/magnetic nanoparticles, on chitosan­
magnetic microparticles and cellulose-coated magnetic nanoparticles. Int. Rev. Chem. 
Eng., 3 , 289–299. 
177. Blanchette, C., Lacayo, C. I., Fischer, N. O., Hwang, M., & Thelen, M. P., (2012). 
Enhanced cellulose degradation using cellulase-nanosphere complexes. PloS One, 7, 
e42116. 
178. Abdelsalam, E., Samer, M., Attia, Y., Abdel-Hadi, M., Hassan, H., & Badr, Y., (2016). 
Comparison of nanoparticles effects on biogas and methane production from anaerobic 
digestion of cattle dung slurry. Renew Energy, 87, 592–598. 
179. Wei, W., Cai, Z., Fu, J., Xie, G. J., Li, A., Zhou, X., Ni, B. J., Wang, D., & Wang, Q., 
(2018). Zero valent iron enhances methane production from primary sludge in anaerobic 
digestion. Chemical Engineering Journal, 351, 1159–1165. 
180. Zhao, W., Zhao, J., Chen, G. D., Feng, R., Yang, J., Zhao, Y. F., Wei, Q., Du, B., & 
Zhang, Y. F., (2011). Anaerobic biohydrogen production by the mixed culture with 
mesoporous Fe3O4 nanoparticles activation. In: Advanced Materials Research (Vol. 
306, pp. 1528–1531). Trans Tech Publications Ltd. 
181. Elreedy, A., Ibrahim, E., Hassan, N., El-Dissouky, A., Fujii, M., Yoshimura, C., & Tawfik, 
A., (2017). Nickel-graphene nanocomposite as a novel supplement for enhancement of 
biohydrogen production from industrial wastewater containing mono-ethylene glycol. 
Energy Conversion and Management, 140, 133–144. 
182. Patel, S. K. S., Choi, S. H., Kang, Y. C., & Lee, J. K., (2017). Eco-friendly composite 
of Fe3O4-reduced graphene oxide particles for efficient enzyme immobilization. ACS 
Appl. Mater Interfaces, 9, 2213–2222. 
183. Patel, S. K. S., Kumar, P., Singh, S., Lee, J. K., & Kalia, V. C., (2015). Integrative 
approach for hydrogen and polyhydroxybutyrate production. Microbial Factories: 
Biofuels, Wastetreatment, 1, 73–85. 
184. Patel, S. K. S., Lee, J. K., & Kalia, V. C., (2018). Nanoparticles in biological hydrogen 
production: An overview. Indian J. Microbiol., 58, 8–18. 
185. Patel, S. K. S., Kumar, P., & Kalia, V. C., (2012). Enhancing biological hydrogen 
production through complementary microbial metabolisms. Int. J. Hydrog Energy,  37, 
10590–10603. 
186. Zhang, Y., & Shen, J., (2007). Enhancement effect of gold nanoparticles on biohydrogen 
production from artificial wastewater. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy, 32, 17–23. 
187. Mohanraj, S., Anbalagan, K., Kodhaiyolii, S., & Pugalenthi, V., (2014). Comparative 
evaluation of fermentative hydrogen production using Enterobacter cloacae and mixed 
culture: Effect of Pd(II) ion and phytogenic palladium nanoparticles. J. Biotechnol., 
192, 87–95. 


Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
  
CHAPTER 9  
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole­
Cell-Derived Fuels 
TANUSHREE BALDEO MADAVI,1,2 SOMESH HARIHARNO,1,2 
ANANYA SINGH,1 SUSHMA CHAUHAN,1,3 and 
SUDHEER D. V. N. PAMIDIMARRI2 
1Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, India 
2Discipline of Industrial Biotechnology, Gujarat Biotechnology University, 
Gandhinagar, Gujarat, India 
3Department of chemical engineering, Dongguk University–Seoul,  
Seoul 100-715, Republic of Korea 
ABSTRACT 
The world has fuel-driven economies, and as an integral part of day-
to-day life, one cannot imagine the world without it. The dependency on 
conventional fuels such as coal, petroleum, derived fuels, firewood, etc., 
are non-renewable resources and potentially contribute to the evolution of 
greenhouse gases (GHGs), which in turn results in climate change. Fuel is 
the core part, and its casual use led to its untimely exhaustion and increased 
levels of harmful gases. Whereas biofuels could be a bypass for such nega­
tive impacts imposed due to the use of conventional carbon-based fuels. 
Biofuels, such as ethanol, have a well-established market in many countries 
and show prospects for using such greener fuels obtained with the help of 
microorganisms. Microbial cells act as a catalyst and catalyze the conver­
sion of waste organic raw material to fuels. Whole-cells as catalysts display 
potential for future applications, and this chapter elaborates on the different 
types of chassis used, and initial raw materials consumed and converted in 

 
310 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
the various types of carbon-based and carbon-free fuels. This technology 
has shown promising results for sustaining in the future in alliance with 
environmental health. 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
Modernization and industrialization have led to surge in the energy demands. 
The consumption of fuel resources is accelerated with the global increase in 
population. Conventional fuels which are fossil or petroleum-based are non­
renewable in nature and are on the verge of exhaustion due to wide applica­
tions [1]. Advanced fuels that are derived from fossil fuels are required to be 
refined by chemical and physical processes for them to be applied and thus 
are rendered for the energy input. These fuels are hence, neither economi­
cally nor ecologically healthy and contribute to the increasing pollution [2, 
3]. To make the process and fuel more eco-friendly, biofuels were intro­
duced which can be derived biologically with minimal or no energy input 
[4]. Biofuel industry is in infancy stages but candidates such as ethanol and 
biodiesel are already being commercially applied and proved to be success 
which gives the prospects towards biofuel industry. Dynamically changing 
fuel market and hiking prices over the localization of fuel resources as a 
result of geopolitics has encouraged to lift the dependency on the conven­
tional fuels [5]. Countries like United States of America, Japan, United 
Kingdom, European countries along with other countries has already taken 
actions towards generating renewable energy sources. Increasing biofuel 
market and with concern over increasing global carbon emissions strategies 
biofuels are developed which can be derived from biological feedstocks such 
as industrial waste and by products, agricultural waste, or third generation 
feedstock such as algal biomass and catalyzed by the enzymatic reactions 
(Figure 9.1) [6]. Whole-cells when used as biocatalysts, display superior 
qualities as discussed in Chapter 1 and based on the extensive research in 
past decades range of microbial chassis were developed to be used in fuel 
industries. Development of system and synthetic biology have expanded the 
spectra of biomolecules having fuel properties. Developments in protein 
and metabolic engineering with advanced tools have demonstrated growth 
in the biocatalysis of fuel production. Fuels ranging from alcohols, fatty 
acid derived molecules, terpenoid derived biomolecules and superior fuels 
such as hydrogen devoid of any carbon moiety could answer the economic 
and ecological questions of future [7]. Profoundly elaborated knowledge of 
biochemical pathways and genetic constitutions of model organisms assist in 
the fine tuning for the optimum production pathways. This chapter discusses 

 
 
311 
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole-Cell-Derived Fuels 
about the conventional and modern biofuels which are being studied and 
developed for the future applications to attain the ecological and economic 
prosperity. Model cellular systems involved in the catalysis and their meta­
bolic engineering is discussed. 
FIGURE 9.1 Schematic representation of a whole-cell catalyst and the range of carbon 
substrates used for chemical and fuel production. 
9.2 BIOFUELS 
9.2.1 FATTY ACID DERIVED FUELS 
Fatty acids (FA) act as precursors to various potential biofuel compounds 
such as esters, alkanes/alkenes and alcohols. Biosynthesis and wide occur­
rence of these molecules make them an ideal candidate to be pursued to 
derive energy molecules for the future applications in the energy sector for 
their biological origins and comparable energy densities to conventional 

 
 
 
 
 
312 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
fossil fuels. Biosynthesis of fatty acids is well documented along with its 
regulatory pathways. Synthesis involves the repetitive cycle of carbon-chain 
elongation acetyl CoA as a primary molecule which is extended by malonyl 
CoA or methylmalonyl CoA catalyzed by fatty acid synthase I and II in fungi 
and bacteria, respectively. Depending on the acting enzymes, FA can be 
converted to esters by acyltransferases, to alkanes/alkenes by decarboxylases 
and to alcohols by reductases [8]. Production of these biofuel candidates is 
discussed as in succeeding sections. 
9.2.2 FATTY ACID DERIVED ESTERS 
Biodiesel has been a preferable candidate as a biofuel and adopted by many 
countries with significant market occupancy. The process being energy and 
labor intensive is attributable to environmental degradation and is non-
sustainable. The fatty acid alkyl esters (FAAE) of triacylglycerols (TAGs) 
are known as a biodiesel and can be fatty acid methyl esters (FAME) or fatty 
acid ethyl esters (FAEE) of vegetable oils and animal fats while depending 
on the short chain alcohols used as an acyl acceptor. In transesterification, 
the general equation is as follows. 
Alkali-catalyzed transesterification has been traditionally used for the 
biodiesel production which gives high conversion rates in short reaction 
times. But suffers from downstream processing (DSP) like removal of 
catalyst, glycerol from the product and waste water. Production cost also 
increases with the use of chemical catalysts and complexity of the DSP. To 
inculcate the idea of making this process cost efficient and greener option 
in order to decrease the environmental turbulence, biocatalysis is opted. 
Biocatalysis of the transesterification involves the catalysis using the natural 
catalysts, i.e., enzymes, and their natural abundancy make them an ideal 
candidate for the future applications. 
9.2.2.1 EUKARYOTIC PRODUCERS 
The evolution of biocatalysis paved a way to harvest enzymes and apply 
them directly in bioreactors for the bioconversions. Lipases are widely used 
for catalyzing the transesterification of triglycerols with alcohol acting as an 
acyl acceptor under alkaline conditions. Depending on the alcohol used in the 
process, methanol or ethanol, biodiesel can be composed of fatty acid methyl 
ester (FAME) or fatty acid ethyl ester (FAEE), respectively (Table 9.1). Other 

 
 
 
 
313 
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole-Cell-Derived Fuels 
higher alcohols can also be used as an acyl acceptors but are restricted due to 
their high cost. Whereas, methanol, and ethanol are relatively cost-efficient. 
Among various catalysts used such as alkaline, acidic, inorganic heteroge­
nous catalysts, biologically obtained enzymes are preferred now-a-days. The 
Novozyme 435, is a well-established lipase which is successfully applied 
commercially for biodiesel production. Using isolated enzymes certainly 
are advantageous over chemically catalyzed reactions in the perspective of 
environmental safety and sustainability but could suffer with the drawbacks 
such as upstream and DSP and are usually cost-intensive. Thus, using whole-
cells as a biocatalyst could circumvent these drawbacks and provide better 
options for bioconversions. The first whole-cell to be used as a biocatalyst 
for biodiesel production was fungus, Rhizopus oryzae supported by particles 
made of polyurethane foam and FAME was produced [9]. Followed by 
this, Saccharomyces cervisiae was aided with the overexpression of the R. 
oryzae lipases and resulted in 70% biodiesel yields with stepwise addition 
of methanol [10]. Other yeast such as Rhizopus chinensis was also adopted 
as a WCB as a biodiesel producer when olive oil was used as a substrate and 
proved to be one of the best substrates to be used for biodiesel production. 
Edible fats and oils were first generation feedstocks for the biodiesel produc­
tion but due to the food crisis and increasing production cost microbial lipids 
were opted which does not compete with the food and farmland, and can 
be easily cultivated according to the increasing demands. The use of nonre­
giospecific and regiospecific lipase catalyzed methanolysis has resulted into 
efficient fuel standard biodiesel [11]. Yeast and fungi WCB are widely used 
and easily cultivated and demonstrated successful expression of intracellular 
and cell surface displayed lipases [12]. Displaying lipases on the cell surface 
aids with the mass transfer problem with better accessibility to substrates and 
ease in the product separation. Examples include Pichia pastoris displaying 
Rhizomucor miehei lipase and yielded methyl esters up to 83.1% after 72 h 
[13]. Further it was also modified to express lipases from Candida antarctica 
on the cell surface facilitated with the GPI-anchored cell wall protein to 
improve biodiesel productivity [14]. Apart from displaying the single lipases 
on the surface, to enhance the bioconversion, co-displaying the lipases from 
Thermomyces lanuginosus and Candida antarctica is also demonstrated in 
P. pastoris. Exposing enzymes extracellularly is a wise method and signifi­
cantly increases the esterification efficiency which can further enhanced by 
improving the expression of lipases. Using strong promoter to increase the 
expression level enhanced the enzyme concentrations resulting into robust 
WCB [15]. The cellular systems explored need extraneous source of fats 

 
 
 
 
 
314 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
and oils that could be esterified into biodiesel which is one of the factors 
increasing the production cost. To circumvent this problem, oleagenous 
strains of yeast and fungi can be used for the microbial oil production [16]. 
Since, yeasts, and fungi are well explored for the biodiesel production, 
prokaryotic model systems were also modified for the same as they are more 
manageable in terms of growth and genetic and biochemical manipulation. 
9.2.2.2 PROKARYOTIC PRODUCERS 
The bacterial production of biodiesel is also reported especially using E. coli 
named as ‘Microdiesel.’ This concept introduces the FAEE production using 
prokaryotic model systems using sustainable carbon feedstocks which helps 
in cost-efficient production. The FAME biosynthesis is not truly renewable 
as the methanol is derived from the fossil sources and also it is hazardous 
and toxic for the cells. Whereas ethanol can be produced endogenously using 
renewable carbon sources rendering the production cost. Thus, microbes 
with endogenous ethanol pathway or heterologously supplemented with 
lipid storage, and biosynthesis using plant-based feedstock can make the 
process feasible. To increase the intrinsic capacity of E. coli fatty acid pools 
it was engineered by heterologously expressing plant thioesterase and native 
tioesterases, acetyl CoA carboxylase and blocking fatty acid degradation by 
knocking out fadD gene [17]. Acinetobacter baylyi strain ADP1 is reported 
to have intracytoplasmic lipid accumulation mediated by wax ester synthase/ 
acyl-coenzyme A: diacylglycerol acyltransferase (WS/DGAT) has broad 
substrate range with low specificity for acyl acceptor molecule. This property 
was exploited and WS/DGAT was engineered to be expressed in E. coli with 
the ethanol production genes of Zymomonas mobilis for endogenous ethanol 
production acting as an acyl acceptor. This recombinant strain resulted in 
the production of FAEE up to 26% of cellular dry mass using oleic acid 
as a renewable carbon resource [18]. The further advancements to relieve 
the constraints of adding exogenous fatty acid to the medium, E. coli was 
engineered to increase the endogenous capacity of fatty acid synthesis by 
deregulating the β-oxidation (ΔfadE) and overexpressing the native genes 
for truncated thioesterase (‘tesA) for its cytoplasmic localization, acyl-CoA 
synthetase (fadD) which resulted in the strain with the sixfold increase in the 
FAEE [19, 20]. To make the production more cost efficient, using hemicel­
lulosic feedstock by E. coli engineered with xylan utilizing genes from Clos-
tridium stercoainum (xyn10B) and Bacteoides ovatus (xsa) was demonstrated 

 
 
 
 
 
 
315 
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole-Cell-Derived Fuels 
to result in the strain with FAEE (11.6 mg/L) from xylan [19]. Use of oils 
and fats of soy bean, rape seed, jatropha for the biodiesel production adds 
for the production cost and thus lipase (Serratia marcescens YXJ-1002) 
which could use wastes such as grease as a feedstock has been discovered 
and expressed in the E. coli rendering it to be the one-pot synthetic process 
for the FAME production [21]. Also, alike the yeast surface display system, 
WCB like E. coli are modified to display lipases at the surface of cell [22]. 
The Staphylococcus haemolyticus L62 (SHL62) lipase was surface displayed 
on the E. coli anchored using the EstAβ8 domain of autotransporter protein 
from Pseudomonas putida [23]. 
9.2.3 ALKANES/ALKENES AND FATTY ALCOHOLS 
Alkanes and alkenes having long carbon chains are now considered for the 
biofuel purposes, especially for them being hydrocarbons having higher 
cloud points and energy densities [24]. Aliphatic hydrocarbons are biosyn­
thesized by varied life forms including plants, microbes, and microalgae. 
Biosynthesis starts with the formation of acetyl-acyl carrier protein (acetyl-
ACP) and malonyl-acyl protein (malonyl-ACP) catalyzed sequentially by 
acetyl-CoA carboxylase and acetyl- and malonyl-transacylases. Resulted 
molecules are further elongated by synthesis of acetoacetyl-ACP and 
sequential reduction of acetoacetyl-ACP to D-3-hydroxyl-butyryl-ACP and 
its dehydration to crotonyl-ACP which is further reduced to butyryl-ACP and 
the cycle is repeated for the elongation where malonyl-ACP is added in each 
cycle while adding two carbon each time [25]. The E. coli is well exploited 
WCB to study and produce the alkanes where at termination of the elonga­
tion of chain the molecule is transferred to glycerol-3-phosphate. The fatty 
acid produced can be converted into alkanes through fatty aldehydes. The 
heterologous expression of acyl-ACP reductase and aldehyde deformylase in 
E. coli resulted in the production of pentadecane/ene and heptadecane [26]. 
Fatty acyl-CoA can be reduced to fatty aldehydes and catalyzed by acyl-ACP 
reductases which can be further converted into alkane/alkenes and is cata­
lyzed by aldehyde deformylases or into fatty alcohols when catalyzed by the 
aldehyde reductases (AHR). To increase the endogenous pool of fatty acid 
to avail it for the further reduction, the fatty acid degradation pathway was 
blocked by knocking out the fadE gene of β-oxidation pathway rendering 
the flux towards the fatty aldehyde synthesis. Similarly, in yeast WCB such 
as S. cerevisiae, blocking the degradation pathways of fatty acids was opted 

 
 
 
 
 
 
316 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
to increase the fatty acid pool [27]. The two step production of alkanes in 
the S. cerevisiae was also shown by expressing the fatty AAR and aldehyde 
deformylating oxygenase (ADO) from Synechococcus elongatus catalyzing 
the fatty acyl-CoA to fatty aldehydes followed by alkane, respectively [28]. 
Concentrations were increased further by expressing carboxylic acid reduc­
tase (CAR) from Mycobacterium marinum instead of fatty acyl-ACP/-CoA 
reductase (AAR) along with the ADO resulted in the titer up to 0.82 mg/L 
[29]. Since, fatty aldehydes are common intermediates of alkanes/alkenes 
and fatty alcohols, many times fatty alcohols are obtained in significant 
quantities due to AHR. Thus, spatial localization of alkane biosynthesis in 
peroxisomes is an optimal strategy while using yeast cells for biocatalysis 
[30]. Whole-cell biocatalyst, E. coli has also been modified for the fatty acid 
derived biofuels and intrinsic concentration of free fatty acids (FFA) is one 
of the strategies in order to increase the productivity. Inhibiting the feedback 
inhibition of acyl-ACP helps in increasing the FFA pool in E. coli aided 
with the expression of cytoplasmic thioesterases. The chain length of FFAs is 
dependent on the type of thioesterases involved. The metabolic engineering 
of E. coli by overexpressing the native acyl-CoA synthetase and acyl-
CoA reductase gene of Acinetobacter baylyi ADPI resulted into increased 
concentrations fatty alcohols [31]. Acyl-CoA reductases from Acinetobacter 
calcoaceticus BD413 were expressed to obtain medium chain fatty alcohols 
[32]. Whereas, odd-chain fatty alcohols were also produced by metaboli­
cally engineering E. coli to produce fatty aldehydes with odd-chain (Cn–1)
catalyzed by α-dioxygenase (αDOX) from Oryza sativa (rice) by combining 
it with thioesterase and AHR. The substitution of AHR with aldehyde 
decarbonylase (AD) also resulted in the medium even-chain alkanes [33]. 
To make the process industrially more efficient in terms of ecologically and 
economically, the production strategies involving plant-based feedstock for 
the production is prospective and sustainable [19]. 
9.2.4 α-OLEFINS AND LONG-CHAIN INTERNAL ALKENES 
α-Olefins are hydrocarbons used as a diesel blending additievs with terminal 
double bonds formed by head-to-head condensation of fatty acids and are 
produced by various bacterial species. Structurally, they are derived from 
fatty acids and are either one carbon longer or shorter (Table 9.1). The initial 
studies reported the OleA, a homolog of FabH to be involved in the long 
chain olefin biosynthesis in bacteria. Whereas, medium, and long chain 

 
 
317 
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole-Cell-Derived Fuels 
olefins are found in eukaryotes and are formed by the decarbonylation of 
fatty aldehydes. Recently terminal olefins were reported to be produced by 
algae and is under scrutiny. Whereas, recently E. coli was modified using 
heterologously expressed oleTJE (Jeotgalicoccus oleT) which is a cytochrome 
P450 (CYP) and catalyzes the decarbonylation of fatty acids [34]. 
9.3 ISOPRENOID-BASED FUELS 
The natural abundancy of isoprenoids comprising thousands of compounds 
are produced by various life forms and can be primary or secondary metabo­
lites. Potential of isoprenoid derived precursors to be used as an additive 
of diesel and jet fuel can resolve the shortcomings of energy sector in 
future. Isoprenoids can be of different types based on the carbon number 
namely, hemiterpenes (C5), monoterpenes (C10) and sesquiterpenes (C15). 
The biosynthesis of isoprenoids is observed majorly by two pathways; the 
2-methyl-D-erythritol-4-phosphate (MEP) pathway or 1-deoxyxylulose­
5-phosphate (DXP) pathway and the mevalonate (MVA) pathway (Figure 
9.2). The MEP or DXP pathway is usually found in plastid of plants and 
bacteria whereas MVA pathway is found in mostly eukaryotes, plant cyto­
plasm, fungi, and archaea. 
TABLE 9.1 Different Types of Biofuels Produced by Various Whole-Cell Biocatalysts 
Functional 
Type of 
Structural 
Whole‑cell 
References 
Group 
Biofuel 
Characteristics 
Biocatalysts 
Fatty acid 
Biodiesel 
Rhizopus oryzae 
[9] 
Rhizopus chinensis 
[11] 
Pichia pastoris 
[13–15] 
E. coli 
[18] 
Fatty alcohols 
Biofuel 
E. coli 
[33] 
S. cerevisiae 
[27, 29] 
Diesel
Long-chain 
blending 
E. coli 
[34]
internal alkenes fuels 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Functional  
Type of 
Structural 
Whole‑cell 
References 
Group  
Biofuel 
Characteristics 
Biocatalysts 
Additive of 
Isoprenoid  
diesel and 
E. coli 
[35, 36] 
jet fuel 
S. cerevisiae 
[37] 
Streptomyces 
[38]
venezuelae 
Rhodosporidium 
[39]
toruloides 
Synechocystis, 
Synechococcus, 
[40] 
and Anabaena sp. 
Bioethanol  
Biofuel 
S. cerevisiae 
[41] 
E. coli 
[42] 
Z. mobilis 
[43, 44] 
C. thermocellum 
[45] 
Biobutanol 
Biofuel 
Clostridium 
[46] 
E. coli 
[47] 
Synechococcus 
[48]
elongatus 7942 
E. coli and 
Clostridium sp., 
Chlamydomonas 
reinhardtii, 
Carbon free 
Anabaena,
Hydrogen 
[49, 50] 
biofuel 
S. elongatus, 
Oscillatoria, 
Calothrix, 
Chlorococcales, 
and Nostoc 
 
318 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
TABLE 9.1 (Continued) 
Both pathways also differ in the precursor used to form primary C5 
monomers, isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl diphosphate 
(DMAPP), for various isoporenoids (Figure 9.1) [51]. The former uses 
glyceraldehyde-3-P and pyruvate whereas latter uses three molecules of 
acetyl-CoA derived from the glycolysis to form IPP and DMAPP. Produc­
tion of different chain elongated prenyl diphosphate precursors [geranyl 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
319 
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole-Cell-Derived Fuels 
diphosphate (GPP), farnesyl diphosphate (FDP), etc.] are formed as a result 
of different types of prenyltransferases (e.g., GPP synthases) followed by 
the production of respective type of terpene catalyzed by terpene synthases. 
Attributing to high cetane number comparable to existing diesel fuel and 
lower cloud points of many isoprenoids make them the potential alterna­
tive for diesel and jet fuels [51]. WCBs such as E. coli and S. cerevisiae 
in yeasts were metabolically engineered to increase the production of such 
valuable isoprenoids. Thus, mass production of these terpenes is vital for 
the industrial applications. The mono- and sesquiterpenes are preferred for 
the biofuel application owing to their carbon content and complexity of the 
structures. Monoterpenes (C10) such as myrcene, ocimene, α- and β-pinene, 
and limonene are good biofuel (RJ-4, JP-10) precursors and efforts were 
made to increase the microbial production. Increasing the precursor pool 
of IPP and DMAPP is a primary strategy for increasing the downstream 
precursors of terpenoid-based biofuels [52]. Thus, heterologous expression 
of MVA pathway derived from S. cerevisiae into E. coli helps to circumvent 
the regulation of innate MEP pathway and increase the universal precursors, 
IPP, and DMAPP pool [52]. Overexpression of the “gatekeeper” enzyme, 
i.e., dxs, and IPP isomerases (idi) has been done for increasing the IPP and 
DMAPP pools. Engineering the pathways feeding the feedstock precursors 
for IPP and DMAPP, by increasing the flux of G-3-P and pyruvate using 
pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) and Entner-Doudoroff pathway (EDP) has 
increased the titers in E. coli [35]. Similarly, in S. cerevisiae increasing the 
metabolic flux towards MVApathway by overexpressing the truncated HMGR 
coupled with the downregulation of competitive sterol pathway was done. 
Followed by the engineering of E. coli and S. cerevisiae with the respective 
sesquiterpene synthases to produce immediate precursors such as bisabo­
lene through codon optimization and using extra promoters for enhanced 
expression [37]. Production of hemiterpene derived alcohol biofuels such as 
isopentenol and isopentanol are produced by MVA pathway derived IPP and 
DMAPP precursors followed by their dephosphorylation by the native NudB 
of E. coli or NudF from B. subtilis [53]. Monoterpenes such as limonene and 
pinene are immediate precursors used for biofuel followed by hydrogenation. 
The heterologous expression of MVA pathway in E. coli coupled with GPP 
synthase (Arabidopsis thaliana) and limonene synthase (Mentha spicata) 
resulted in the titer of 650 mg L–1 [36]. Whereas, hydrogenated products 
and alcohols derived of sesquiterpenes such as farnesene, bisabolene are 
prospective for the diesel replacements owing to their fuel properties like 
favorable density and low cloud points [37, 54]. Model actinomycete such as 

 
 
 
320 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Streptomyces venezuelae, shows ideal traits of suitable chassis of a WCB like 
capability of using pentoses and hexoses, rapid doubling time, endogenous 
isoprenoid pathway and genetic tractability. It was modified and aided with 
the heterologous expression of codon-optimized bisabolene cyclase (Abeis 
grandis) and metabolic engineering to optimize the bisabolene production 
[38]. More robust chassis are being developed for them to be used as a 
biocatalysts which would have superior qualities of having broad substate 
range and inherent capacity to depolymerize the complex substrates such as 
lignocellulosic biomass. Rhodosporidium toruloides, is an oleaginous yeast 
with innate high flux towards terpenoid synthesis and hence was exploited for 
its abundance of terpenoid precursors aided with various terpene synthases 
resulted in the production of monoterpenes such as limonene, pinene, carene, 
etc., which are potential candidates as a petroleum blend stock [55]. R. toru-
loides was recently reported to produce commendable titers of bisabolene 
exploiting the lignocelluosic and other carbon sources such as corn stover for 
the production [39]. Cyanobacterial production of terpenoids has also been 
explored for them being the autotrophic single celled organisms (SCO) are 
manageable systems and can efficiently convert molecular carbon dioxide 
(CO2) into chemical products. Thus, they have also been exploited for the 
terpenoid production by metabolic engineering and using other molecular 
tools for optimization of production strategies. Model cyanobacteria such as 
Synechocystis, Synechococcus, and Anabaena sp. have been reported to have 
used for the production of limonene, isoprene, farnesene, and bisabolene by 
heterologous expression of enzymes/pathways for isoprene synthase (ispS), 
Hmg-CoA reductase (HmgR) and Hmg-CoA synthase (HmgS), limonene 
synthase (LimS), codon-optimized farnesene synthesize (FaS) gene and 
(E)-a-bisabolene synthase [40, 56, 57]. 
9.4 ALCOHOLS 
9.4.1 BIOETHANOL: THE REGULAR OPTION 
Bioethanol is a first-generation biofuel, long known for its fermenta­
tive production and utilization as a beverage and now as a green fuel. Its 
production mainly entails a central catabolic pathway which is followed 
by fermentation in microorganisms that are able to produce alcohol, i.e., 
in ethanologenic bacteria. Increasing demands of non-renewable fuels like 
petrol and diesel, questions its sustainability for future use. Bioethanol is 

 
 
 
 
 
321 
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole-Cell-Derived Fuels 
a well-established biofuel with significant global market. Its production 
strategies involving whole-cell biocatalysts like Z. mobilis, S. cerevisiae. E. 
coli, Bacillus subtilis, and Clostridium providing the framework to establish 
industrially sustaining strains to satisfy the future consumption demands 
(Table 9.1). The availability and ease of manipulating these cellular chassis 
with availability of biotransforming the low-cost substrates into bioethanol 
altogether defines the biocatalysis using whole-cells for better bioethanol 
productions [58]. 
Ethanol is a product of fermentation, which is preceded by the catabo­
lism of sugar substrates (Figure 9.1). Thus, cost of substrates used for the 
production directly influences the production cost. The production costs for 
WCB can be reduced by using renewable sources like lignocellulose, which 
are natural polymers and abundantly available in nature, and enzymes can 
be used for their saccharification and cellulose hydrolysis simultaneously 
converting the feedstock into ethanol. As a result, enzymes such as cellu­
lases, which include endoglucanases, exoglucanase, and β-glucosidases are 
used to achieve concurrent saccharification of feedstock for conversion into 
fermentable sugars followed by ethanol production [59]. Due to the endog­
enous fermentation ability of the eukaryotic model S. cerevisiae, it was also 
harnessed as a WCB for alcohol production. In bacteria, the intracellular 
enzyme immobilization is quite apparent whereas, in yeast and other fungal 
species it is also displayed on the surface of the cell which enhances the 
efficiency of biotransformation as it increases the exposure to substrate [60]. 
Hence, yeast is engineered to surface display enzymes such as xylanases 
from Trichoderma reesei are inculcated so that it assists in the degradation of 
hemicelluloses into xylobiose and xylotriose with stability over an extensive 
range of pH [41]. 
Owing to inherent quality of yeasts to ferment sugars, Pichia stipitis was 
engineered with a fragment of cDNA with xylanase gene of Cryptococcus 
albidus in a vector pJHS, which allowed it to utilize xylan as a carbon source 
and ferment it directly to ethanol [61]. It has been demonstrated by the long-
known history, that Saccharomyces cerevisiae are exceptional WCB. When 
S. cerevisiae harnessed cellulolytic enzymes from native producers like T. 
reesei, C. thermocellum and C. cellulovorans which enabled synergistic and 
sequential cellulose degradation reaction for production of ethanol [60]. 
Starch was allowed to be utilized as a carbon source for ethanol production 
upon expression of amylolytic enzymes from a variety of sources [62, 63]. 
It has been recently reported that expression of amylases and glucoamylase 
from different fungal species (Aureobasidium pullulans, Aspergillus terreus, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
322 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Cryptococcus sp. S-2 and Saccharomycopsis fibuligera) in S. cerevisiae 
improves biofuel production by replacing up to 90% of enzymes required 
for starch hydrolysis [64]. In a research, yeast with enzymes exhibited on the 
cell surface is shown to tone down the problems related to mass transfer and 
also explain better substrate utilization [60]. 
Clostridium thermocellum, a native cellulose hydrolyzing organism 
executes acetone-butanol-ethanol (ABE) fermentation which was engi­
neered such that it only produces ethanol and butanol (Figure 9.2) [46]. 
It was reported that lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) was knocked out in the 
ethanol-tolerant strain of C. thermocellum in order to redirect carbon and 
electrons towards the ethanol production pathway. The engineered C. 
thermocellum resulted in a 30% increase in ethanol yield [45]. Nonetheless, 
the inadequate accessibility of molecular engineering tools and because of 
Clostridial species being obligate anaerobes, it makes the system difficult to 
maintain and manipulate, hindering the ability to harness the full potential 
for optimum production. On the contrary, biocatalysis by E. coli is more 
advantageous and convenient, given that it is a facultative anaerobe and 
advanced molecular engineering tools are available for its engineering, 
which makes this system easy to maintain as whole-cell factories. And so, 
efforts have been made to express cellulases from Clostridium cellulolyticum 
on the surface of E. coli LY01 (mutant strain of E. coli KO11) to enhance the 
yield of bioethanol by developing the ability of utilizing C5 and C6 sugars 
as carbon source [58]. In E. coli, C5 carbon sources follow the PPP, in which 
33% of carbon is lost in the form of CO2. To control this loss E. coli is 
engineered in such a way that it uses the Weimberg pathway instead of the 
PP pathway wherein E. coli utilizes d-xylose constitutively to allow direct 
production of 2-oxoglutarate with no carbon loss [42]. To avoid the produc­
tion of by-products the competitive pathways for lactate, succinate, formate, 
and acetate were repressed by deleting the enzymes responsible for such 
by-product formation concentrating the flux towards formate. Though, these 
cellular manipulations for ethanol production inducing redox imbalance, 
leading to oxidized by-products and decreased the carbon towards ethanol 
production. To avoid the redox imbalance, E. coli KO11 strain with genes 
of pyruvate decarboxylase and alcohol dehydrogenase along with fumarate 
reductase deletion was developed to boost the ethanol yield [43]. But the 
optimization of cellular pathways, insufficiency of cofactors is to be taken 
care of by complementing it with co-factor regeneration pathways. The 
enzymatic cascades for NAD+ dependent pathways are readily available and 
could be tailored for better productivity [65]. 

 
 
 
 
323 
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole-Cell-Derived Fuels 
Z. mobilis (wild type) utilizes C6 sugars as its carbon source. Its recombi­
nant strain Z. mobilis AX101 is capable of co fermenting xylose, arabinose, 
and glucose to increase ethanol yield [44]. To enhance substrate accessibility 
in Z. mobilis, a recombinant strain (Z. mobilis GH3) was engineered for 
heterologous expression of glycosyl hydrolases from Cellvibrio japonicus 
Cel3A and Caulobacter crescentus CC_0968 to enable cellobiose utilization 
for ethanol production [66]. A problem that arises with Z. mobilis is that it 
employs the Entner Doudoroff pathway, i.e., it produces only one ATP, which 
poses a problem over cellular health when multiple genes are expressed 
altogether. Therefore, it is important to set up pathways that can assure the 
needs are fulfilled independently with nominal or no effect on cellular health 
or viability. Thus, keeping in mind, the primary cellular metabolic balance, 
protein engineering, flux, and chassis optimization tools must be applied for 
additional improvement. 
FIGURE 9.2 Schematic representation of various group of fuels and prime pathways 
involved in the production, respectively. 

 
 
 
324 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
9.4.2 BIOBUTANOL 
Butanol is a biofuel, alcohol preferred more relatively to ethanol but recently 
has gained attention due to its high energy content and low volatility. There 
are many organisms known to produce butanol such as native producers 
like Clostridium and non-native producers like E. coli, B. subtilis, P. putida, 
and S. cerevisiae are modified over the time for enhanced production of 
butanol. Clostridia being the native solventogenic bacteria it was preferred 
as a whole-cell catalyst for the butanol production. The native solventogen­
esis phase of fermentation is critical in Clostridia like C. acetobutylicum 
and C. beijerinckii to produce butanol and other solvents. Primarily the 
butanol production occurs while following the central catabolic pathway 
which generates pyruvate leading to butyryl-CoA and finally converts it 
into butanol catalyzed by butanol dehydrogenases. The theoretical yield of 
butanol from 1 mol of glucose is 1 mol of butanol. Glucose is a conventional 
carbon substrate which is used for energy as well as product generation. Also, 
clostridia suffer from bottlenecks such as slow growth rate, butanol toxicity, 
high cost of substrates, low concentrations and yield which affects the indus­
trial applications. Clostridial ABE fermentation results into ~13 g L–1 of 
butanol in ABE fermentation (Figure 9.2) [67]. Selective butanol production 
was also shown in C. acetobutylicum by regulating the expression of genes 
adhE1 and adc resulted in better productivity aided with the methyl viologen 
[68]. Butanol production involves the investment of reducing equivalents 
and thus increasing its availability helps with the production [69]. In order 
to reduce the production cost, C. beijerinckii is used instead when lignocel­
lulosic feedstock is considered for butanol production and shows prospects 
to be developed as a whole-cell catalyst especially, C. beijerinckii BA101 
which has capacity to use diverse renewable substrates for production [70]. 
Metabolic engineering of C. acetobutylicum and C. thermocellum by opti­
mizing the butanol pathways resulted in the butanol production and allowed 
latter to use cellulose as a substrate, establishing the competence for whole-
cell biocatalysts [46]. Clostridia being a complex system, lacks the genetic 
and metabolic tools which are relatively more developed in other model 
systems, also regresses the development of these cellular catalyst for robust 
production. Thus, non-native cellular catalysts were developed with the help 
of the metabolic engineering and systems biology tools which circumvents 
the problems faced while using the native producers such as slow growth, 
butanol toxicity, byproduct production, expensive feedstock [71]. 

 
 
325 
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole-Cell-Derived Fuels 
Non-native cells like E. coli, S. cerevisiae, Klebsiella pneumonia, B. 
subtilis, Lactobacillus brevis, C. cellulolyticum, etc., have their advantages 
of using low-cost feedstocks such as cellulose, glycerol, syngas, CO2. Thus, 
these model systems were engineered with the butanol pathway as they have 
their own advantages such as high growth rates, high solvent tolerance, 
etc. Expression of CoA-dependent pathway in non-native hosts like E. coli 
supplemented with the reversal of β-oxidation pathway led to successful 
bioconversion of acyl-CoA to n-alcohols, i.e., n-butanol. Similarly, CoA­
dependent pathway was also expressed in Synechococcus elongatus 7942, a 
cyanobacteria which was exploited for its bioproduction of butanol using light 
and CO2 [48]. Introduction of alternate pathways for n-butanol production, 
assisting the productivity and specificity, such as 2-ketoacid pathway aided 
with the intermediates from threonine pathway in E. coli (and valine pathway 
for iso-butanol production) [47]. Expression of such pathways when used for 
bioconversion of low-cost and environmentally abundant substrates such as 
glycerol, cellulose, syngas, and C1 molecules such as CO/CO2 has made the 
process more efficient for industrial prospect [72]. The native producers such 
as C. cellulolyticum has also been metabolically engineered by expressing the 
CoA-dependent pathway for n-butanol production from crystalline cellulose 
[73]. Use of third generation feedstock, microalgae, has been also considered 
in production strategies which is a sustainable option for future production 
[74]. Extensive elaboration of various butanol producing pathways in native 
and non-native producers have provided insightful prospects for industrial 
applications [75]. 
9.5 CARBON-FREE FUELS 
9.5.1 HYDROGEN: A CARBON-NEUTRAL BIOFUEL 
When it comes to a carbon-neutral biofuel, Hydrogen emerged as the only 
sustainable option because of its property like immense energy content, as 
a by-product, releasing only water molecules, can be produced biologically 
and the present infrastructure is amendable for future H2 applications thus can 
make the process environmentally as well as economically feasible [76]. For 
the past few decades, H2 was commercially produced via electro-chemical 
or physio-chemical methods. Electro-chemical methods include electrolysis 
(splitting water using electrical energy) whereas, physio-chemical methods 
include techniques of thermo-chemical, e.g., thermal dissociation, thermal 
pre-treatment (pyrolysis and gasification), reforming (By first converting 

 
 
 
326 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
hydro-carbonaceous matter into smaller constituents which will subse­
quently used for generating H2 molecule) and microbial hydrogen fuel cell 
(by harnessing the electrons/protons produced by microbes during redox 
reaction for breaking down organic matter). But these processes are reported 
to be energy and cost-intensive and harmful for environment because their 
production process requires a huge amount of energy input which is derived 
through conventional non-renewable sources. Thus, unless the production 
method becomes carbon-neutral, the benefit of H2 utilization cannot be 
extracted while using hydrocarbon-based fossil fuels [76–78]. Hence, in 
this context, Whole-cell-based H2 production represents a great strategy 
for commercial production because using microorganisms as a whole-cell 
biocatalyst to synthesize H2 is simpler and more robust, it is easier to recover 
hydrogenase activity with intact cells than via cell-free systems, therefore 
has more practical applications also this process is carbon neutral and is 
completely renewable [50, 79]. Majorly two enzymes, hydrogenases (H2ases) 
and nitrogenases (N2ases) catalyze the biological synthesis of hydrogen. The 
main difference in a reaction catalyzed by N2ases and H2ases is that N2ases 
conduct H2 production unidirectionally, whereas the latter catalyzes the reac­
tion bidirectionally. Organisms such as bacteria, microalgae, and cyanobac­
teria contain H2ases as the core enzyme and generates H2 by redox reaction 
to maintain formate and ferredoxin flux in the cell. Apart from H2ases, some 
cyanobacteria like Anabaena, Oscillatoria, Calothrix, Chlorococcales, and 
Nostoc are reported to produce H2 by using N2ases. These organisms use 
N2ases as essential metalloenzymes for nitrogen fixation and produce H2 
as a by-product. Hydrogen producing enzymes are reported to be highly 
oxygen-sensitive and thus require anoxic conditions to function. These two 
enzyme acts as a crucial drivers the catalysis of H2 production reaction and 
thus can be potentially engineered for functioning under different conditions 
as well as for using various substrates [80]. Majorly two groups of hydrogen-
producing microbial cells have been reported to be suitable for whole-cell 
biocatalysts, i.e., cyanobacteria/microalgae and fermentative bacteria. 
Fermentative bacterial groups belong to two categories; facultative (E. coli) 
and obligate anaerobes (Clostridium) these two are involved in hydrogen 
production using various substrates by dark fermentation (Table 9.1). 
9.5.1.1 DARK FERMENTATION 
Dark fermentation is named so, as it does not rely on light like photoauto­
trophic systems for harvesting energy. Fermentative hydrogen production 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
327 
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole-Cell-Derived Fuels 
is performed by well-known whole-cell catalysts; E. coli and Clostridium 
sp. They inherently possess hydrogenases and which are part of Formate 
Hydrogen Lyases (FHL) pathway (E. coli) and pyruvate ferredoxin 
oxidoreductase (PFOR) pathway (Clostridia) [49]. These pathways were 
exploited for the hydrogen production by metabolically engineering the 
cellular flux towards hydrogenases. Feeding the hydrogenases pathway 
exclusively result in the disturbance of cellular homeostasis which could 
hamper the cellular viability at varied degrees. Cell catalysts often suffer 
from such drawbacks as interfering with the central metabolism can create 
the scarcity of nodal metabolites such as pyruvate, acetyl-CoA, etc., and 
also results in redox imbalance as co-factors regeneration can decline 
based on the pathways that has been followed. For hydrogen production, E. 
coli was modified to biotransform C3 and C5 carbon substrates in order to 
expand the substrate spectrum for the ease of industrial applications, espe­
cially in economical perspective. Overexpression of endogenous regulators 
in favor of hydrogen production (fhlA), blocking of competitive metabo­
lites (ethanol, lactate, etc.), increasing formate production, expression of 
hydrogenases from Clostridia have been applied in E. coli for enhanced 
hydrogen productivity [79]. The theoretical yields were obtained in E. coli 
when formate was used as a carbon substrate [82]. To make E. coli as an 
industrial robust system for hydrogen production metabolic engineering 
involving other sugar substrates is seen in prospects of sustainability. With 
development of optogenetics, E. coli was also modified to be light-powered 
system for hydrogen production when photosensitizer and electron donor 
were expressed in the system driving the hydrogen production. Expressing 
such light-dependent foreign systems could help to reduce the substrate 
cost uplifting while the production efficiency. 
9.5.1.2 PHOTOBIOLYSIS 
Light-dependent autotrophic systems brought life on the earth and are 
now harvested to fulfill the energy demands. Photobiolysis for hydrogen 
production is used by photoautotrophic single-celled organisms, micro-
algae, a whole-cell biocatalyst which possess the photosystems to derive 
energy and necessary electrons for the hydrogen production using solar 
energy and CO2 [49]. The only conflict using these catalysts is that they 
evolve oxygen which inactivates the hydrogen producing machinery as 
it is oxygen-sensitive. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii first phototrophic 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
328 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
whole-cell biocatalyst to be reported for hydrogen production has prospec­
tive interests as it advantageous for future applications of fourth generation 
fuels. Expression of the heterologous gene of hydrogenases from Clos-
tridia in S. elongatus and C. reinhardtii has also shown a positive impact 
on hydrogen evolution. Gene-Modified Pure Whole-Cell Catalyst like an 
expression of a pyruvate oxidase gene (from E. coli) and a catalase gene 
(from S. elongatus PCC 7942) in C. reinhardtii chloroplast, were proven to 
improve the hydrogen yield [81]. Fusion of electron-donor ferredoxin (Fd) 
to hydrogenase increases the productivity to 4.5-fold and has more resis­
tivity to O2 than that of native C. reinhardtii hydrogenase. Modifications at 
molecular levels has certainly helped in elevating the hydrogen production 
concentrations but physiological conditions such as regulation of inorganic 
nutrients, maintaining the anaerobic conditions using reversible inhibitors 
of photosystem-II (PSII) in light also help in increasing the hydrogen 
production. Further explorations of cyanobacterial and microalgal whole-
cell catalysts are needed in order to satisfy the in general needs of future 
energy consumptions. 
9.6 CONCLUSION 
Biofuels are being sought for future sustenance and are derived from the 
renewable resources. Addressing the technological advancements and 
parallel progression in the field of biotechnology resulted in broadening 
the spectrum of biofuels which can be obtained using the whole-cells as a 
catalyst. Abundance of information available regarding the prokaryotic and 
eukaryotic biochemical and genetic constitution has elaborated the biotech­
nological approaches to fabricate them for the need of biofuel production. 
Metabolic engineering and system biology has expanded the reach of 
researchers in comprehending and translating the technology to industrial 
levels involving inter- and intra-disciplinary approaches. These factors 
contribute in advancing towards the greener future comprising of more 
sustainable technologies for the biofuel production at industrial levels. The 
biofuels discussed in this chapter which are carbon-based and carbon-free 
have promiscuous prospects and biofuels such as ethanol and biodiesel are 
already in use. This will help to uplift the ecological as well as economic 
burden for longer sustenance in the future. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
329 
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole-Cell-Derived Fuels 
KEYWORDS 
• 
biofuels 
• 
butanol 
• 
carbon-free fuels 
• 
E. coli 
• 
ethanol 
• 
fatty acid 
• 
hydrogen 
• 
photobiolysis 
REFERENCES 
1. Nel, W. P., & Cooper, C. J., (2009). Implications of fossil fuel constraints on economic 
growth and global warming. Energy Policy, 37(1), 166–180. 
2. Princen, T., Manno, J. P., & Martin, P. L., (2015). Ending the Fossil Fuel Era. MIT  
Press. 
3. Tahvonen, O., (1995). International CO2 taxation and the dynamics of fossil fuel 
markets. International Tax and Public Finance, 2(2), 261–278. 
4. Segovia-Hernández, J. G., Ramírez-Márquez, C., & Sánchez-Ramírez, E., (2020). 
Present and future of biofuels. Process Systems Engineering for Biofuels Development, 
341–355. 
5.  Ediger, V. Ş., (2019). An integrated review and analysis of multi-energy transition from 
fossil fuels to renewables. Energy Procedia, 156, 2–6. 
6.  Chowdhury, H., Loganathan, B., Mustary, I., Alam, F., & Mobin, S. M., (2019). Algae 
for biofuels: The third generation of feedstock. In: Second and Third Generation of 
Feedstocks (pp. 323–344). Elsevier. 
7. Rothstein, J., (1995). Hydrogen and fossil fuels. International Journal of Hydrogen 
Energy, 20(4), 283–286. 
8. Wang, C., Pfleger, B. F., & Kim, S. W., (2017). Reassessing Escherichia coli as a cell 
factory for biofuel production. Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 45, 92–103. 
9. Ban, K., Kaieda, M., Matsumoto, T., Kondo, A., & Fukuda, H., (2001). Whole-cell 
biocatalyst for biodiesel fuel production utilizing Rhizopus oryzae cells immobilized 
within biomass support particles. Biochemical Engineering Journal, 8(1), 39–43. 
10. Matsumoto, T., Takahashi, S., Kaieda, M., Ueda, M., Tanaka, A., Fukuda, H., & Kondo, 
A., (2001). Yeast whole-cell biocatalyst constructed by intracellular overproduction of 
Rhizopus  oryzae lipase is applicable to biodiesel fuel production. Applied Microbiology 
and Biotechnology, 57(4), 515–520. 
11. Kaieda, M., Samukawa, T., Matsumoto, T., Ban, K., Kondo, A., Shimada, Y., Noda, H., 
et al., (1999). Biodiesel fuel production from plant oil catalyzed by Rhizopus oryzae  
lipase in a water-containing system without an organic solvent. Journal of Bioscience 
and Bioengineering, 88(6), 627–631. 

 
330 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
12. Matsumoto, T., Fukuda, H., Ueda, M., Tanaka, A., & Kondo, A., (2002). Construction of 
yeast strains with high cell surface lipase activity by using novel display systems based 
on the Flo1p flocculation functional domain. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 
68(9), 4517–4522. 
13. Huang, D., Han, S., Han, Z., & Lin, Y., (2012). Biodiesel production catalyzed by 
Rhizomucor miehei lipase-displaying Pichia pastoris whole-cells in an isooctane 
system. Biochemical Engineering Journal, 63, 10–14. 
14. Jin, Z., Han, S. Y., Zhang, L., Zheng, S. P., Wang, Y., & Lin, Y., (2013). Combined 
utilization of lipase-displaying Pichia pastoris whole-cell biocatalysts to improve 
biodiesel production in co-solvent media. Bioresource Technology, 130, 102–109. 
15. Yoshida, A., Hama, S., Tamadani, N., Fukuda, H., & Kondo, A., (2012). Improved 
performance of a packed-bed reactor for biodiesel production through whole-cell 
biocatalysis employing a high-lipase-expression system. Biochemical Engineering 
Journal, 63, 76–80. 
16. Abghari, A., & Chen, S., (2014). Y arrowia lipolytica as an oleaginous cell factory 
platform for production of fatty acid-based biofuel and bioproducts. Frontiers in Energy 
Research, 2, 21. 
17. Lu, X., Vora, H., & Khosla, C., (2008). Overproduction of free fatty acids in E. coli: 
Implications for biodiesel production. Metabolic Engineering, 10(6), 333–339. 
18. Kalscheuer, R., Stölting, T., & Steinbüchel, A., (2006). Microdiesel: Escherichia coli  
engineered for fuel production. Microbiology (Reading, England), 152(Pt 9), 2529–2536. 
19. Steen, E. J., Kang, Y., Bokinsky, G., Hu, Z., Schirmer, A., McClure, A., Del Cardayre, 
S. B., & Keasling, J. D., (2010). Microbial production of fatty-acid-derived fuels and 
chemicals from plant biomass. Nature, 463(7280), 559–562. 
20. Duan, Y., Zhu, Z., Cai, K., Tan, X., & Lu, X., (2011). De novo biosynthesis of biodiesel 
by Escherichia coli in optimized fed-batch cultivation. PLoS One, 6(5), e20265. 
21. Li, A., Ngo, T. P., Yan, J., Tian, K., & Li, Z., (2012). Whole-cell based solvent-free 
system for one-pot production of biodiesel from waste grease. Bioresource Technology, 
114, 725–729. 
22. Fukuda, H., Hama, S., Tamalampudi, S., & Noda, H., (2008). Whole-cell biocatalysts 
for biodiesel fuel production. Trends in Biotechnology, 26(12), 668–673. 
23. Kim, S. J., Song, J. K., & Kim, H. K., (2013). Cell surface display of Staphylococcus 
haemolyticus L62 lipase in Escherichia coli and its application as a whole-cell biocatalyst 
for biodiesel production. Journal of Molecular Catalysis B: Enzymatic, 97, 54–61. 
24. Lennen, R. M., & Pfleger, B. F., (2013). Microbial production of fatty acid-derived fuels 
and chemicals. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 24(6), 1044–1053. 
25. Yan, Y., & Liao, J. C., (2009). Engineering metabolic systems for production of advanced 
fuels. Journal of Industrial Microbiology and Biotechnology, 36(4), 471–479. 
26. Li, N., Chang, W. C., Warui, D. M., Booker, S. J., Krebs, C., & Bollinger, J. M., (2012). 
Evidence for only oxygenative cleavage of aldehydes to Alk(a/e)nes and formate by 
cyanobacterial aldehyde decarbonylases. Biochemistry, 51(40), 7908–7916. 
27. Fernandez-Moya, R., & Da Silva, N. A., (2017). Engineering Saccharomyces cerevisiae  
for high-level synthesis of fatty acids and derived products. FEMS Yeast Research, 
17(7), fox071. 
28.  Buijs, N. A., Zhou, Y. J., Siewers, V., & Nielsen, J., (2015). Long-chain alkane 
production by the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 
112(6), 1275–1279. 

 
331 
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole-Cell-Derived Fuels 
29. Zhou, Y. J., Buijs, N. A., Zhu, Z., Qin, J., Siewers, V., & Nielsen, J., (2016). Production 
of fatty acid-derived oleochemicals and biofuels by synthetic yeast cell factories. Nature 
Communications, 7(1), 1–9. 
30. Zhou, Y. J., Buijs, N. A., Zhu, Z., Gómez, D. O., Boonsombuti, A., Siewers, V., & 
Nielsen, J., (2016). Harnessing yeast peroxisomes for biosynthesis of fatty-acid-derived 
biofuels and chemicals with relieved side-pathway competition. Journal of the American 
Chemical Society, 138(47), 15368–15377. 
31. Keasling, J. D., Hu, Z., Somerville, C., Church, G., Berry, D., Friedman, L., Schirmer, 
A., et al., (2007). Production of Fatty Acids and Derivatives Thereof. Google Patents. 
32. Reiser, S., & Somerville, C., (1997). Isolation of mutants of Acinetobacter calcoaceticus  
deficient in wax ester synthesis and complementation of one mutation with a gene 
encoding a fatty acyl coenzyme A reductase. Journal of Bacteriology, 179(9), 2969–2975. 
33. Cao, Y. X., Xiao, W. H., Liu, D., Zhang, J. L., Ding, M. Z., & Yuan, Y. J., (2015). 
Biosynthesis of odd-chain fatty alcohols in Escherichia coli. Metabolic Engineering, 
29, 113–123. 
34. Rude, M. A., Baron, T. S., Brubaker, S., Alibhai, M., Del Cardayre, S. B., & Schirmer, 
A., (2011). Terminal olefin (1-alkene) biosynthesis by a novel P450 fatty acid 
decarboxylase from Jeotgalicoccus species. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 
77(5), 1718–1727. 
35. Liu, H., Sun, Y., Ramos, K. R. M., Nisola, G. M., Valdehuesa, K. N. G., Lee, W. K., 
Park, S. J., & Chung, W. J., (2013). Combination of Entner-Doudoroff pathway with 
MEP increases isoprene production in engineered Escherichia coli. PLOS One, 8(12), 
e83290. 
36. Mendez-Perez, D., Alonso-Gutierrez, J., Hu, Q., Molinas, M., Baidoo, E. E. K., Wang, 
G., Chan, L. J. G., et al., (2017). Production of jet fuel precursor monoterpenoids from 
engineered Escherichia coli. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 114(8), 1703–1712. 
37. Peralta-Yahya, P. P., Ouellet, M., Chan, R., Mukhopadhyay, A., Keasling, J. D., & Lee, 
T. S., (2011). Identification and microbial production of a terpene-based advanced 
biofuel. Nature Communications, 2(1), 483. 
38.  Phelan, R. M., Sekurova, O. N., Keasling, J. D., & Zotchev, S. B., (2015). Engineering 
terpene biosynthesis in Streptomyces for production of the advanced biofuel precursor 
bisabolene. ACS Synthetic Biology, 4(4), 393–399. 
39. Yaegashi, J., Kirby, J., Ito, M., Sun, J., Dutta, T., Mirsiaghi, M., Sundstrom, E. R., et 
al., (2017). Rhodosporidium toruloides: A new platform organism for conversion of 
lignocellulose into terpene biofuels and bioproducts. Biotechnology for Biofuels, 10, 
241. 
40. Bentley, F. K., Zurbriggen, A., & Melis, A., (2014). Heterologous expression of the 
mevalonic acid pathway in cyanobacteria enhances endogenous carbon partitioning to 
isoprene. Molecular Plant, 7(1), 71–86. 
41. Fujita, Y., Katahira, S., Ueda, M., Tanaka, A., Okada, H., Morikawa, Y., Fukuda, H., & 
Kondo, A., (2002). Construction of whole-cell biocatalyst for xylan degradation through 
cell-surface xylanase display in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Journal of Molecular 
Catalysis B: Enzymatic, 17(3), 189–195. 
42. Rossoni, L., Carr, R., Baxter, S., Cortis, R., Thorpe, T., Eastham, G., & Stephens, 
G., (2018). Engineering Escherichia coli to grow constitutively on D-xylose using 
the carbon-efficient Weimberg pathway. Microbiology (Reading, England), 164(3), 
287–298. 

 
332 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
43. Ajit, A., Sulaiman, A. Z., & Chisti, Y., (2017). Production of bioethanol  by Zymomonas  
mobilis in high-gravity extractive fermentations. Food and Bioproducts Processing, 
102, 123–135. 
44. Mohagheghi, A., Evans, K., Chou, Y. C., & Zhang, M., (2002). Cofermentation of 
glucose, xylose, and arabinose by genomic DNA-integrated xylose/arabinose fermenting 
strain of Zymomonas mobilis AX101. Applied Biochemistry and Biotechnology, 98–100, 
885–898. 
45. Biswas, R., Prabhu, S., Lynd, L. R., & Guss, A. M., (2014). Increase in ethanol yield 
via elimination of lactate production in an ethanol-tolerant mutant of Clostridium 
thermocellum. PLoS One, 9(2), e86389. 
46. Tian, L., Conway, P. M., Cervenka, N. D., Cui, J., Maloney, M., Olson, D. G., & 
Lynd, L. R., (2019). Metabolic engineering of Clostridium thermocellum for n-butanol 
production from cellulose. Biotechnology for Biofuels, 12, 186. 
47. Atsumi, S., Cann, A. F., Connor, M. R., Shen, C. R., Smith, K. M., Brynildsen, M. 
P., Chou, K. J., et al., (2008). Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli  for 1-butanol 
production. Metab. Eng., 10(6), 305–311. 
48. Lan, E. I., & Liao, J. C., (2011). Metabolic engineering of cyanobacteria for 1-butanol 
production from carbon dioxide. Metabolic Engineering, 13(4), 353–363. 
49. Madavi, T. B., Chauhan, S., Jha, M., Choi, K. Y., & Pamidimarri, S. D. V. N., (2023). 
Biohydrogen machinery: Recent insights, genetic fabrication, and future prospects. 
Chemical Engineering & Technology, n/a (n/a). 
50. Chen, J., Li, Q., Wang, L., Fan, C., & Liu, H., (2021). Advances in whole-cell 
photobiological hydrogen production. Advanced NanoBiomed Research, 1(4), 2000051. 
51. Beller, H. R., Lee, T. S., & Katz, L., (2015). Natural products as biofuels and bio-based 
chemicals: Fatty acids and isoprenoids. Natural Product Reports, 32(10), 1508–1526. 
52. Lee, S. Y., Kim, H. M., & Cheon, S., (2015). Metabolic engineering for the production 
of hydrocarbon fuels. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 33, 15–22. 
53. George, K. W., Thompson, M. G., Kang, A., Baidoo, E., Wang, G., Chan, L. J. G., 
Adams, P. D., et al., (2015). Metabolic engineering for the high-yield production of 
isoprenoid-based C5 alcohols in E. coli. Scientific Reports, 5(1), 11128. 
54. Renninger, N. S., & Mcphee, D. J., (2008). Fuel Compositions Comprising Farnesane 
and Farnesane Derivatives and Method of Making and Using Same. Google Patents. 
55.  Zhuang, X., Kilian, O., Monroe, E., Ito, M., Tran-Gymfi, M. B., Liu, F., Davis, R. W., 
et al., (2019). Monoterpene production by the carotenogenic yeast Rhodosporidium 
toruloides. Microbial Cell Factories, 18(1), 54. 
56.  Davies, F. K., Work, V. H., Beliaev, A. S., & Posewitz, M. C., (2014). Engineering 
limonene and bisabolene production in wild type and a glycogen-deficient mutant of 
Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002. Front Bioeng Biotechnol., 2, 21–21. 
57. Halfmann, C., Gu, L., Gibbons, W., & Zhou, R., (2014). Genetically engineering 
cyanobacteria to convert CO2, water, and light into the long-chain hydrocarbon 
farnesene. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 98(23), 9869–9877. 
58.  Ryu, S., & Karim, M. N., (2011). A whole-cell biocatalyst for cellulosic ethanol 
production from dilute acid-pretreated corn stover hydrolyzates. Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol., 91(3), 529–542. 
59.  Schüürmann, J., Quehl, P., Festel, G., & Jose, J., (2014). Bacterial whole-cell biocatalysts 
by surface display of enzymes: Toward industrial application. Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 98(19), 8031–8046. 

 
333 
Biofuels: Fueling the Future with Whole-Cell-Derived Fuels 
60. Fujita, Y., Ito, J., Ueda, M., Fukuda, H., & Kondo, A., (2004). Synergistic saccharification, 
and direct fermentation to ethanol, of amorphous cellulose by use of an engineered yeast 
strain codisplaying three types of cellulolytic enzyme. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 70(2), 
1207–1212. 
61. Morosoli, R., Zalce, E., & Durand, S., (1993). Secretion of a Cryptococcus albidus 
xylanase in Pichia stipitis resulting in a xylan fermenting transformant. Current 
genetics, 24(1, 2), 94–99. 
62. Shigechi, H., Uyama, K., Fujita, Y., Matsumoto, T., Ueda, M., Tanaka, A., Fukuda, H., 
& Kondo, A., (2002). Efficient ethanol production from starch through development of 
novel flocculent yeast strains displaying glucoamylase and co-displaying or secreting 
α-amylase. Journal of Molecular Catalysis B: Enzymatic, 17(3), 179–187. 
63. Murai, T., Ueda, M., Yamamura, M., Atomi, H., Shibasaki, Y., Kamasawa, N., Osumi, 
M., et al., (1997). Construction of a starch-utilizing yeast by cell surface engineering. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 63(4), 1362–1366. 
64. Sakwa, L., Cripwell, R. A., Rose, S. H., & Viljoen-Bloom, M., (2018). Consolidated 
bioprocessing of raw starch with Saccharomyces cerevisiae strains expressing fungal 
alpha-amylase and glucoamylase combinations. FEMS Yeast Research, 18(7). 
65. Zhao, H., & Van, D. D. W. A., (2003). Regeneration of cofactors for use in biocatalysis. 
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 14(6), 583–589. 
66. Kurumbang, N. P., Vera, J. M., Hebert, A. S., Coon, J. J., & Landick, R., (2020). 
Heterologous expression of a glycosyl hydrolase and cellular reprogramming enable 
Zymomonas mobilis growth on cellobiose. PLOS One, 15(8), e0226235. 
67. Kumar, M., & Gayen, K., (2011). Developments in biobutanol production: New insights. 
Applied Energy, 88(6), 1999–2012. 
68. Jiang, Y., Xu, C., Dong, F., Yang, Y., Jiang, W., & Yang, S., (2009). Disruption of the 
acetoacetate decarboxylase gene in solvent-producing Clostridium acetobutylicum  
increases the butanol ratio. Metab. Eng, 11(4, 5), 284–291. 
69. Qi, F., Thakker, C., Zhu, F., Pena, M., San, K. Y., & Bennett, G. N., (2018). Improvement 
of butanol production in Clostridium acetobutylicum through enhancement of NAD(P) 
H availability. Journal of Industrial Microbiology & Biotechnology, 45(11), 993–1002. 
70. Lee, S. Y., Park, J. H., Jang, S. H., Nielsen, L. K., Kim, J., & Jung, K. S., (2008). 
Fermentative butanol production by clostridia. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 
101(2), 209–228. 
71. Nawab, S., Wang, N., Ma, X., & Huo, Y. X., (2020). Genetic engineering of non-native 
hosts for 1-butanol production and its challenges: A review. Microbial Cell Factories, 
19(1), 79. 
72. Lan, E. I., & Liao, J. C., (2013). Microbial synthesis of n-butanol, isobutanol, and other 
higher alcohols from diverse resources. Bioresource Technology, 135, 339–349. 
73. Gaida, S. M., Liedtke, A., Jentges, A. H., Engels, B., & Jennewein, S., (2016). Metabolic 
engineering of Clostridium cellulolyticum for the production of n-butanol from 
crystalline cellulose. Microbial Cell Factories, 15, 6. 
74. Wang, Y., Ho, S. H., Yen, H. W., Nagarajan, D., Ren, N. Q., Li, S., Hu, Z., et al., 
(2017). Current advances on fermentative biobutanol production using third generation 
feedstock. Biotechnology Advances, 35(8), 1049–1059. 
75. Green, E. M., (2011). Fermentative production of butanol—The industrial perspective. 
Current Opinion in Biotechnology, 22(3), 337–343. 

 
334 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
76. Sudheer, P. D., Chauhan, S., & Velramar, B., (2020). Bio-hydrogen: Technology 
developments in microbial fuel cells and their future prospects. In: Biotechnology for 
Biofuels: A Sustainable Green Energy Solution (pp. 61–94). Springer. 
77. Al-Shara, N. K., Sher, F., Iqbal, S. Z., Curnick, O., & Chen, G. Z., (2021). Design and 
optimization of electrochemical cell potential for hydrogen gas production. Journal of 
Energy Chemistry, 52, 421–427. 
78. Adeniyi, A. G., Otoikhian, K. S., & Ighalo, J. O., (2019). Steam reforming of biomass 
pyrolysis oil: A review. International Journal of Chemical Reactor Engineering, 17(4). 
79. Maeda, T., Sanchez-Torres, V., & Wood, T. K., (2012). Hydrogen production by 
recombinant Escherichia coli strains. Microbial Biotechnology, 5(2), 214–225. 
80. Madavi, T. B., Chauhan, S., Jha, M., Choi, K. Y., & Pamidimarri, S. D., (2021). 
Biohydrogen machinery: Recent insights, genetic fabrication, and future prospects. 
Chemical Engineering & Technology. 
81. Nagarajan, D., Lee, D. J., Kondo, A., & Chang, J. S., (2017). Recent insights into 
biohydrogen production by microalgae – from biophotolysis to dark fermentation. 
Bioresource Technology, 227, 373–387. 
82. Maeda, T., Sanchez-Torres, V., & Wood, T. K., (2008). Metabolic engineering to enhance 
bacterial hydrogen production. Microb. Biotechnol., 1(1), 30–39. 

Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 10  
Bioelectrochemical Systems for the 
Conversion of CO2 into Sustainable 
Production of Fuels 
LEELA MANOHAR AESHALA1 and SUSHANT SINGH2 
1Assistant Professor (Grade-I), Department of Chemical Engineering, 
National Institute of Technology, Srinagar, Jammu, and Kashmir, India 
2Associate Professor, Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, 
Raipur, Chhattisgarh, India 
ABSTRACT 
Primary energy consumption is dependent on the fossil fuels and carbon 
dioxide (CO2) concentration increased rapidly in the atmosphere which leads 
to rise in global atmospheric temperature. Major mechanical approaches to 
deplete CO2 from the environment take after either capture and sequestrate 
CO2 or conversion of CO2 to fuel. It is therefore conceptualized that bioelec­
trochemical systems (BES) exploring whole-cell microbial systems can 
contribute significantly by producing value-added products together with 
renewable energy sources such as solar, wind, thermal, etc. This chapter 
focuses on the potential impact of whole-cell-based bioelectrochemical 
system technologies like microbial electrosynthesis (MES) cell, microbial 
carbon capture cell (MCC) for generation of biofuel products. Effect of 
parameters on the performance of BES, present challenges, and future 
perspectives for effective reduction of CO2 are also discussed. 

 
 
 
336 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
10.1 INTRODUCTION 
One of the greatest challenges currently facing scientists and technologists 
is to ensure future generation’s energy supply. Primary energy demand 
increasing every year and it is observed increase up to by 2.9% in preceding 
year, is nearly double to the annual 10-year average and highest since 2010. 
In 2019, China, the US, and India claims the two-thirds of the global increase 
in energy demand, resulting in higher energy consumption in emerging 
economies [1]. Energy consumption is directly related to the nation’s socio­
economic growth; hence energy technologies are considered to be nation’s 
priority. The primary sources of energy such as fossil fuel and natural gas 
are deteriorating global climate; however, we are reliant on more than 85% 
of our energy needs [2]. Fossil Fuels should be exhausted by continuous 
generation of power by 2100 [3]. The burning of these fossil fuels excreting 
carbon footprint into the environment and has a direct impact on climate 
change. Carbon dioxide (CO2) is one of the main causes of global warming 
which is closely linked to growing use of primary energy. During the period 
of 1990–2020 electricity final consumption increases by 501.6% while the 
total CO2 emissions increase by 310.5% (see Figure 10.1(a)). The large 
increase in pollution has contributed to significant CO2 accumulation in the 
atmosphere. The increased CO2 in the atmosphere induces global tempera­
ture elevation. After 1988, the CO2 level has surpassed the safety limit, with 
the average annual rise over during 1994–2003 decade was 1.8 ppm per 
year, while the 2004–2019 annual increase was higher and approximately 
2.29 ppm per year provided by the NOAA Earth System Research Labo­
ratory. Hence, significant processes need to be developed to tackle these 
problems. It is therefore conceptualized that CO2 as an abundant carbon 
source can generate value added products together with renewable energy 
sources such as solar, wind, thermal [4]. A large number of processes, such 
as photochemical, bioelectrochemical, biochemical, electrochemical, etc., is 
being studied to generate the products by converting the CO2. Many of these 
methods need high temperature and/or high pressure but result in low product 
yields. Bioelectrochemical systems (BES) utilizing microbial whole-cell is 
therefore emerging as attractive system by simultaneously sequestrating CO2 
and producing value added products in the process (see Figure 10.1(b)). 
This chapter focuses on the ability of applying the BES derived technolo­
gies like microbial electrosynthesis (MES) cell, microbial carbon capture cell 
(MCC) for the synthesis of green fuels and CO2 sequestration. In addition, 
present challenges for BES in the application of CO2 reduction, as well as the 

 
 
 
337 
Bioelectrochemical Systems for the Conversion of CO2 
future perspective of the large-scale application of BES for CO2 capture and 
conversion are discussed. 
FIGURE 10.1 (a) Comparison of CO2 emissions with electricity final consumption during 
the year 1990–2020 in India; and (b) total number of articles published on bioelectrochemical 
conversion of CO2 to value-added products. 
Source: Adapted from Scopus databased published articles number. 
10.2 MICROBIAL ELECTROSYNTHESIS (MES) 
Microbial fuel cells (MFCs) generate electricity from metabolism of organic 
substrates with bacterial whole-cells acting as catalyst. Microbial electrosyn­
thesis (MES) synthesizes value added chemicals from CO2 using biocathode. 
In recent years, MES has attracted great attention for its several advantages 

 
 
338 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
[5] such as: (i) mitigation of CO2  concentration from atmosphere; (ii) the 
process is carried out at room temperature and pressure; (iii) overall chemical 
consumption can be minimized by using wastewater for the proton source; 
(iv) electricity used to drive the process using renewable energy sources; 
(v) storage of renewable energy in the form of value-added products (e.g., 
Hydrogen, hydrocarbons) causes decrease in dependency on fossil fuels [6]; 
and (vi) bioelectrochemical reaction systems are compact and easy for scale­
up applications. 
MFC generates protons, electrons, and CO2 at the anode from the organics. 
The protons diffuse through the proton exchange membrane and electrons 
moves to the cathode over an external circuit. O2 at cathode combines with 
protons and electrons and form water. Whereas, in microbial electrolysis 
cell (MEC), H2 will be generated from diffused protons by providing small 
amount of energy (0.2 V) in absence of O2 [7]. Similarly, reduction of CO2  
occurs at the cathode using the microbes which helps to shuttle the electron 
from the electrode to generate value-added products. The major products 
such as H2, acetate, and oxobutyrate during the MES process can be directly 
used as fuels or as a feedstock for higher energy density fuels. In MES 
novel technology, CO2 is sequestered by the microbes to produce organic 
compounds. In the MES cell, anodic, and cathodic chambers separated by 
a proton exchange member (PEM) as shown in Figure 10.2. The anodic 
chamber is abiotic whereas cathodic chamber is biotic. Water dissociates 
into protons and electrons at the anode, protons transferred through PEM 
and electrons through external circuit to the cathodic chamber where they are 
combined to generate the products by the microbes. 
FIGURE 10.2 Schematic of microbial electrosynthesis cell. 

 
 
 
 
Bioelectrochemical Systems for the Conversion of CO2 
339 
10.3 VALUE ADDED PRODUCTS DURING MES 
Various products will be generated during MES depending on the type of 
culture/enzyme used. When mixed anaerobic culture is used as inoculum, 
acetogens, and methanogens will produce methane and acetate in cathodic 
chamber. Medium chain fatty acids (C3–C8) can also be generated by 
operating the MES at different experimental conditions such as operational 
cathode potential and type of microbial catalyst [8]. In MES, the process 
initiates by reduction of CO2 to acetate/oxobutyrate in small concentrations 
using an acetogenic sporomusaovata as cathodic whole-cell biocatalyst at – 
0.6 V [9]. The acetate can also be produced in higher rates to the extent of 
0.05 mM/d using mixed cultures [9], 1.13 mM/d using S. ovata [10], 4.1 g/l 
using VITO along with activated carbon electrodes [11] and 17.25 mM/d 
using methanogenic bacteria and carbon bed cathode [12]. Much higher 
acetate concentration may also be achieved by different controlled cathode 
potentials using bicarbonate and CO2 as a substrate [13]. High production 
rates can be attained by simultaneous production and extraction techniques 
by terminating the acetate oxidation at the cathode [14]. Methane is generated 
at the expense of acetate utilization during MES, and it can be suppressed 
by using 2-Bromoethanesulfonic acid (BESA) or pH shock treatment [11, 
13, 15]. Along with above discussed, operational conditions such as applied 
voltage, electrode nature, whole-cell configuration and activity at the cathode 
will influence the production rate during MES. Table 10.1 shows the BES for 
generation of value-added products from CO2 under various operational and 
nutritional conditions. 
The major challenge for the researchers was to reduce the CO2 to prod­
ucts effectively and suppress the competitive hydrogen evolution reaction 
because the protons transferred through the PEM involved in both reactions 
[16]. Higher negative potentials may lead to H2 formation rather than CO2 
reduction reaction. This might be overcome by using pure cultures like Clos­
tridia, Moorella, and Sporomusa and high absorption of CO2 at the cathode 
[17]. 
Recently, the investigations of thermophiles for the synthesis of organic 
compounds from CO2 by MES has gained attraction due to their high rate of 
production. Moorella thermoautotrophica, Moorella thermoacetica, and M. 
thermoautotrophica were used to obtain the high rate of acetate production. 
Gebacillus sp. [18] and modified Gebacillus sp., by co-cultivated with Geoba-
cillus thermoglucosidasius used to produce the ethanol production. Acetone, 
ethanol, propanol, and butanol were obtained as major products during MES 

 
 
 
 
340 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
at various applied voltage. Maximum yield of ethanol was obtained using 
methyl violgen as mediator during MES [19]. The MES system has limited 
to selectivity of product distribution and extraction of product [20–22]; 
however, MES operated with dual biocathode for concurrent acetogenesis 
and solventogenesis favorable towards reduction in operational cost with 
concurrent rise in rate of productivity [23]. The selectivity of alcohols rather 
than acetate is more preferable due to its higher market price, applications as 
green fuel as well as the process found to be economically viable. 
Most of the MES studies used the proton exchange membrane for separa­
tion of anodic and cathodic chamber for proton conductivity. H2 evolution 
reaction and crossover of alcohols through PEM were the major challenges 
for this system. Anion exchange membrane may be alternative to PEM for 
the MES. The research in this regard needs to be addressed to tackle the 
challenges and to increase the production rate with simultaneous selectivity 
of product formation. 
It was found that, methane can be generated from CO2 either directly 
from optimized biocathode [15, 24–26] or by the hydrophilic methanogens 
by consuming H2 through abiotic water reduction. Biocathodes whole-cell 
mediated biofilm can accept electrons directly from electrode surface. In 
case of planktonic cells, various mediators are used to transfer electrons 
from cathode to cell. The methanogenic cultures play vital role on the 
performance of biocathode to generate methane from CO2 [25]. Biocathode 
systems in MES can reduce the overpotential for generation of methane. 
Double chamber MEC also used for methane generation by oxidation of 
acetate in anodic chamber [27]. Enriched activated sludge system was 
used to generate the methane from CO2 and it has been found that CO2 was 
completely converted after 96 hr. of incubation when CO2 as carbon and H2 as 
an electron source [28]. MES were emerging as economical and sustainable 
development systems to generate green fuels such as alcohols, medium chain 
fatty acids (C3–C8) and formate, methane from CO2 [29]. Various combina­
tion of species like Clostridium propionicum, Tissierella, Desulfotomaculum, 
Oscillibacter, Clostridium celerecrescens, Trichococcuspalustris, etc., have 
been found effective for reduction of CO2 in MES [30]. 
10.4 MICROBIAL CARBON CAPTURE CELL (MCC) 
MCC is used to sequester the CO2 using photosynthetic microorganism and 
recovers electrical energy during wastewater treatment. The CO2 generated 

 
 
TABLE 10.1 Bioelectrochemical Systems for Generation of Value-Added Products from CO2 under Various Operational and Nutritional 
Conditions
Substrate 
Dominant Catalyst 
Products 
Applied 
Operational Condition 
References 
(Microbes/Enzymes) 
Potential (V) 
CO2 injection + DSMZ Sporomusa, Geobacter,  
Acetate, formate, 
–0.6 
Continuous mode operation 
[31] 
medium 
Clostridium, Morella  
butyrate, propanol,
ethanol, and 2
oxobutyrate 
P2 electron carriers in 
Clostridium beijerinckii 
Acetone, butanol, 
0.7 
Batch type; anaerobic 
[32] 
medium + glucose 
IB4  
ethanol production 
fermentation
and butanol as primary
product 
Modifi ed P2 medium + C. pasteurianum 
Butanol and by 
1.32 
Batch type; electrochemical 
[33] 
SMM medium 
products as solvents 
cell 
and acids) 
CaCO3 
Clostridium
Butanol, ethanol, fatty 
+ 0.5 to –0.5 
Batch type; anaerobic 
[34] 
acids, hydrogen 
fermentation
Sporogenes BE01
Butyraldehyde + 
Alcohol
Butanol 
–0.6 
Batch type; enzymatic fuel 
[35] 
TRIS-HCl buffer 
cell 
Dehydrogenase enzymes
CO2 (no organics in 
Clostridium
Ethanol, butanol, 
–0.8 
Batch type; electrochemical 
[36] 
media) 
acetate, butyrate 
cell 
Species + 
Carboxydotrophic mixed 
culture  
CO2 
N/A 
Methane 
–0.55  
Batch type; electrochemical 
[37] 
cell 
 
341 
Bioelectrochemical Systems for the Conversion of CO2 

 
 
342 
TABLE 10.1 Bioelectr 
Substrate 
Dominant Catalyst 
Products 
Applied 
Operational Condition 
References 
(Microbes/Enzymes) 
Potential (V) 
CAB medium with 
Clostridium
Butanol and acetone 
–2.5 
Batch type; electrochemical 
[38] 
electron carrier in 
cell 
Acetobutylicum ATCC 
buffer 
4259 
CO2 
Acetobacterium and 
Acetate, formate, 
–0.59 
Batch type; electrochemical 
[39] 
Methanobacterium 
methane 
cell 
CO2 + buffer 
Clostridium spp. 
Acetate, butyrate, 
–0.8 
Batch type; anaerobic 
[40] 
ethanol, butanol 
fermentation 
CO2, H2, N2 
Sporomusa and 
Actetate, 2-oxobutyrate –0.4 
Batch type; H-type cell 
[41] 
Clostridium 
CO2, N2 + phosphate 
Enzymate formate 
Formate 
–1  
Batch type; H-type cell 
[42] 
buffer 
dehydrogenase 
CO2 
Clostridium ljungdahlii 
Acetate, ethanol 
–0.9  
Batch type; 
[43] 
bioelectrochemical cell
CO2 
Nanoweb-RVC 
Acetate 
–0.85  
Batch type; microbial cell 
[44] 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 At Anode: 
− 
+
−
CH COO + 2 H O →2CO + 7H + 8e
3 
2
2
 At Cathode: 
nCO + nH O →(CH O ) + nO
2
2 
2 
n 
2 
Light dependent
2 + 8H + + e−+ ?4 
2
2O 
8 
H O
C H O  
2 
4
2 + 2O2 →2CO  
2 + 2 H O
2
Light independent 
 
 
 
Bioelectrochemical Systems for the Conversion of CO2 
343 
in the anodic chamber by degrading the organic matter using anaerobic 
electrogenic microorganisms sent to the cathodic chamber, where it can be 
used by photosynthetic microorganisms for CO2 sequestration and further 
electricity generation and biomass synthesis [45]. 
The reactions in the MCC were given below: 
Microorganisms has proven to be attractive for CO2 reduction due to: 
(i) high yield and conversion efficiency; (ii) rapid production of biomass; 
(iii) able to produce value-added products; and (iv) high capability of CO2 
mitigation from the atmosphere or flue gases [46]. 
The performance of MCC depends on the various factors like pH of 
an electrolyte, type of electrolyte, electrode properties, the current density 
passing through an electrode, the presence of mediators (shuttle), the 
conductivity of an electrolyte, growth of photosynthetic microorganisms, 
CO2 concentration, etc., as well as depends on carbon source, light intensity 
affect the growth of microorganism and biomass production [17]. 
The waste water in the anodic compartment of MCC can be treated 
effectively using electrogenic microorganisms. The agricultural wastewater, 
domestic wastewater, waste activated sludge, effluent from food-processing 
industries, pharmaceutical waste, municipal wastewater, ligno-cellulosic 
waste, etc., were reported to be treated lucratively in MCC [47]. Around 93% 
of CO2 was recovered and 100% chemical oxygen demand (COD) removal 
from artificial wastewater whereas 56% for real wastewater [48]. MCC was 
proved to be very cost effective in the application of wastewater treatment 
and simultaneous mitigation CO2 concentration in the atmosphere [17]. 
10.5 CO2 REACTIONS AT THE CATHODE 
Selective and durable catalysts and high energy input were the major chal­
lenges for the CO2 reduction. The over potentials were too high for selective 

 
 
 
 
 
 
CO2 +8H + + 
2HCO 3 
−+9H 
2CO2 +1 2 H + 
4CO
 
2 +1 8 H + 
CO2 + 6H + + 
CO 2 + 2 H + + 
CO2 + 4 H + + 
− 
–0.24
8e → CH + 2H O 
4
2
+
− 
− 
–0.28
+ 8e → CH COO + 4H O 
3
2 
− 
–0.31
+12 e → CH CH OH + 3H O 
3
2 
2 
− 
–0.31
+18 e →(C H O
 
) + 6H O
4 
6
2 n 
2 
− 
–0.38
6e → CH OH + H O 
3
2 
− 
–0.427
2e → HCOOH 
− 
–0.48
2e → CH O 
2 
+ H O 
2
344 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
formation of products, clearly indicates that the CO2 reduction technolo­
gies are not suitable for commercial stage in terms of energy efficiency. 
If biocatalysts are used in the BES, CO2 fixing metabolism can made less 
energy demanding and sufficient low electrode potentials can be used for the 
CO2 reduction. In the electrochemical cell, reduction of CO2 carried out with 
the help of chemolithoautotrophic microbes to form fuels or value-added 
chemicals at low potentials [41, 49]. The major advantage of BES are: (i) 
energy required to activate the reduction was low due to the biocatalysts, ii) 
selective formation of product during CO2 reduction; (iii) microbes having 
the ability to produce various products; (iv) operation and design cost for 
the effective reduction of CO2 was low (v) Reaction can be done at room 
temperature and pressure; (vi) biocatalysts have the capability being reus­
able; and (vii) possibility of increase in market capitalization. It is stated 
that biofuel production using the renewable electricity can collect the solar 
energy more efficiently than a biochemical production by the photosynthesis 
[50]. Table 10.2 enlists a number of CO2 reduction reactions along with their 
standard reduction potentials. 
TABLE 10.2 Biologically Feasible Half Reactions of CO2 Reduction and Associated Redox 
Potentials 
Overall cell reaction for the production of acetate from bioelectrochemical 
reduction of CO2 is given below: 

 
 
 
 
345 
Bioelectrochemical Systems for the Conversion of CO2 
Bio-electrochemical reduction reactions of CO2 for the formation of acetate 
Electrolyte 
Electrochemical Reactions 
Potential 
(E°, V vs 
SHE) 
Cationic 
Cathode 
2HCO3 
–+ 9H+ + 8e– → CH3COO– + 3H2O 
–0.28 
0.82 
–1.1 
Anode 
4H2O → 2O2 + 8H+ + 8e– 
Overall 
2CO2 + 2H2O → CH3COOH + 2O2 
Electrons and protons generated at the oxidation of water combines with 
bicarbonate form of CO2 at the cathode using acetogenic microbes. The 
reaction is a non-spontaneous since the Gibbs free energy of reaction is posi­
tive. From the thermodynamic point of view, hydrogen evolution reaction 
takes place at lower redox potential than reduction of CO2. Bacteria helps 
to overcome the overpotential for conversion of CO2 to products [39]. The 
mechanism of electron transfer on the surface of the catalyst with CO2 is still 
unknown. 
10.5 PRESENT CHALLENGES IN BES FOR CO2 REDUCTION 
The biofilms development for reduction of CO2, inhibition of methanogenic 
activity low cathodic overpotential, design of reactor to maximize mass 
transfer rates and biofilm formation are the major challenges for CO2 reduc­
tion. Current efficiency of acetate production may be improved by devel­
oping cathode materials like graphite granules, carbon nanotubes, etc., and 
suitable reactor configurations which enhances the biofilm formation. Stable 
and robust biocathode which have electrochemically active bacteria was 
required for efficient CO2 reduction. The substrate synergetic effects, elec­
trode characterization and bacterial cell need to be investigated thoroughly 
for expanding. Multi-carbon products may be obtained from the microbial 
catalysis of CO2 by the prevention of methane production. Acetogens enriched 
by the short-term inhibition of methanogens using Sodium, 2-bromometh­
anesulfonate in microbial electro synthesis reactor was described elsewhere 
[40, 51–53]. Methanogen suppression with one time addition of Sodium, 
2-bromomethanesulfonate results in enhanced culture with 77% of profusion 
of Clostridium species [54]. Methanogenesis inhibitor was used after applying 
heat shock and a suitable inoculums was created under H2:CO2 for long term 
operation [55]. Faster adaptation to electron uptake for effective reduction 
of CO2 by mixing the strains such as facultative, autotrophic, electroactive, 

 
 
 
 
346 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
and biofilm forming bacteria into the system. The cell biomass yield and 
growth is to be reduced due to the nutritional constraints in the autotrophic 
growth of acetogens. Nutrient supplements may be useful to enhance the cell 
fast growth and adaptation but economically not feasible for MES operation. 
The mechanism of microbial interaction with the surface of electrode is still 
under study for effective CO2 reduction. The research is underway to utilize 
the lower cathode overpotential for reduction of CO2. Various acetogenic 
species such as C. ljungdahlii and S. ovata accelerate the reduction of CO2 
ahead of hydrogen evolution [9, 41]. The hydrogen produced using graphite 
felt biocathode at an overpotential of – 0.28 V [56]. The mixed culture first 
catalyzes hydrogen formation and thereafter helps to reduce CO2 effectively. 
Maximum production rates can be obtained via direct electron transfer is 
interesting but requires optimized electric power input. 
Various bacterial species shows the multiple mechanisms of electron 
transfer in BES. Protiens like cytochrome-c was exist in the exterior 
membrane of S. ovata bacteria which favors the direct electron transfer, 
whereas electron transfer in C. ljungdahlii takes place via H2 [57]. H2 evolu­
tion at the biocathode might be effective for CO2 reduction. The following 
factors required to be investigated for triumphant progress of BES for CO2 
reduction in utilization of various microbes are: (i) selection of suitable and 
effective strain for higher lipid generation (autotrophic carbon fixation rate, 
cell development, type of product and yield); (ii) optimization of opera­
tional parameters such as gas concentration/composition, etc.; (iii) batch or 
continuous operation; and (iv) type of reactors like CSTR, membrane reactor 
and fixed bed reactor. 
10.7 FUTURE PERSPECTIVES OF BES IN THE APPLICATION OF 
CO2 CONVERSION 
The significance of bioelectrochemical/electrochemical systems for genera­
tion of value-added products using CO2 as carbon source increasing rapidly 
[58]. Bioelectrochemical reduction of CO2 is an attractive process due 
to synthesis of wide variety of fuels as well as high value chemicals [5]. 
Acetyl-CoA is a primary precursor for the production of diverse high value 
chemicals and also the critical intermediate in the Wood-Ljungdahl (WL) 
pathway of CO2 reduction [59]. 
Ethanol, butyrate, 1,3-propanediol and butanol produced under appro­
priate conditions from CO2 reduction [59, 60]. Chain elongation mechanism 

 
 
 
 
 
347 
Bioelectrochemical Systems for the Conversion of CO2 
can be incorporated in MES technology for the diversification of end 
products like C3, C4, and C6 from acetate for economic viability [19, 61]. 
The value-added end products can be employed as precursors or substrates 
for synthesis of fuels (see Figure 10.3). Selective formation of particular 
product from CO2 reduction can be achieved with the use of identifying the 
suitable strains, biocatalytic process by economic assessment, mathematical 
modeling and optimization of operating conditions [15, 62]. 
FIGURE 10.3 Possible metabolic end products based on Wood-Ljungdahl pathway of CO2 
reduction in homoacetogens on the surface of cathode. 
Integrated product separation/extraction system approach is an attractive 
strategy that enables high recovery of the product without impeding the 
MES technology. Product suppression or microbial allowance approaches 
the specific product accumulation is a significant process constraint in MES. 
The feedback inhibition will hinder the continuous production, limiting the 
concentration at lower level. The recent trend on integration of different 
technologies is becoming attractive, and MES can also be merged with 
innovative technologies such as membrane electrolysis, anaerobic fermenta­
tion, microalgal photobioreactors, CO2 membrane separation, membrane 
contactors, and enzyme-assisted MES [5]. Combining MES with other 

 
 
 
 
 
 
348 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
technologies may enhance the performance of CO2 capture and conversion 
can be enhanced to several fold and would be a realistic approach. 
Separation of products such as acetate, butyrate, caproate using anion 
exchange membrane has been reported [63]. Developed membranes used 
in MES reactor for separation and recovery of products at high level is an 
important application of membrane electrolysis for CO2 reduction [64]. 
Acetic acid accumulated up to 13.5 g/L by passes through membrane one 
compartment to another and acetate produced at rate of 11.6 mM/d during the 
CO2 reduction. High electric energy needs to be supplied for extraction and 
membrane fouling are few areas need to be investigated for this membrane 
electrolysis approach. Acetate separation using anion exchange resins is a 
further technique for in-situ acetate sorption [55, 65]. Energy input needed 
is low compared to membrane electrolysis because the adsorbed carboxylate 
anions were recovered using hydroxide or carbonate solutions. In the large 
scale applications, sorption strategy might pose economical constraints. 
Moreover, the clogging and fouling in the resin column may hinder the MES 
process. Development of reactor with integrated separation/recovery of end 
product is vital for economical viability of CO2 reduction. 
MES process has remarkable advantages such as energy can be stored 
directly in the form of power source or high value chemicals, and it is 
independent of fertile land unlike other biofuel processes. Energy supply 
for MES process from the photovoltaic system has an efficiency of 25% 
and the overall organic matter production efficiency will be 3.75%. It can be 
noted that large amount of organic matter could be accumulated when the 
combination of photovoltaic system and MES process. Significant quanti­
ties of pure water and nutrients input can be prevented in the generation of 
products during BES in comparison with agricultural production. MES is an 
alternative to conventional methods which needs major intake of hazardous 
and exhaustible raw materials in untenable manner such as high temperature/ 
pressure, acid/alkaline solutions, etc. MES process promotes cell growth 
and redox state can be controlled by electric driven metabolic pathways in 
bioprocesses. MES process produces wide variety of value added products 
by reprocessing and reusability of the waste materials, effluent gasses 
and discharges. The integration of BES into biorefineries has applied and 
established to be technically viable process [15]. For industrial applications, 
further understanding of mechanisms and research advancements are still 
underway. Following areas need to be focused on innovative strategies to 
implement for commercialization of CO2 conversion bioprocess and are: 
(i) The input CO2 gas stream with minimum pretreatment costs for high 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bioelectrochemical Systems for the Conversion of CO2 
349 
performing CO2 upstream conversion technology; (ii) Efficient conversion 
of CO2 to selective formation of particular product with high yield in order 
to obtain a economically viable route by minimizing the operational and 
capital costs; (iii) strong value added chains suitable for given CO2 reduc­
tion to product pathway; and (iv) regulation for the final product in case of 
significant quantity application. 
10.8 CONCLUSION 
BESs for energy storage, CO2 capture, and conversion is an attractive tech­
nology in the fields of environmental and bioenergy areas since it caters the 
advantages like: (i) mitigate the greenhouse effect by depletion of CO2 in 
the atmosphere; and (ii) conversion of CO2 to value added bioproducts to 
relieve the energy crisis. This chapter presented critical review on the types 
of BES in the application of CO2 reduction, and different factors affecting the 
performance of BES. Diversification of microbial cultures, high activity and 
stability of catalyst materials and selective formation of bioproducts leaves 
much upside potential for MES. BESs will emerge as innovative sustainable 
CO2 conversion technology in the near future by optimizing the process 
with robust biocathodes and necessary to identify significant parameters to 
enhance their performance to be practically implemented at industrial scale. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
attractive technology 
• 
carbon dioxide 
• 
cathode 
• 
electrosynthesis 
• 
microbial carbon 
• 
microbial cultures  
• 
organic matter  
REFERENCES 
1. Ersoy, E., Schaffer, M. E., & Ditzen, J., (2019). BP  Statistical Review of World Energy  
(68th edn., p. 61). BP plc. 
2. Karyannis, V., Charalampides, G., & Lakioti, E., (2014). Socio-economic aspects of 
CCS technologies. Procedia Econ. Financ., 14, 295–302. 

 
350 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
3. IPCC, 2014. Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups 
I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change; Core Writing Team, Pachauri, R. K., & Meyer, L. A., (eds.); IPCC: Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2014. 
4. Eberle, D. U., & Helmolt, D. R., (2010). Sustainable transportation based on electric 
vehicle concepts: A brief overview. Energy Environ. Sci., 3, 689–699. 
5. Zhang, S., Jiang, J., Wang, H., Li, F., & Hua, T., (2021). A review of microbial 
electrosynthesis applied to carbon capture and conversion: The basic principles, 
electrode materials, and bioproducts. J. CO2. Util., 51, 101640–101652. 
6. Rabaey, K., Angenent, L., Schroder, U., & Keller, J., (2009).  Bioelectrochemical 
Systems. London: IWA Publishing. 
7. Logan, B. E., (2008). Microbial Fuel Cells. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and sons, Inc. 
8. Aryal, N., Ammam, F., Patil, S. A., & Pant, D., (2017). A overview of cathode materials 
for microbial electrosynthesis of chemicals from carbon dioxide. Green Chem., 19, 
5748–5760. 
9. Nevin, K. P., Hensley, S. A., Franks, A. E., Summers, Z. M., Ou, J., Woodard, T. L., 
Snoeyenbos-west, O. L., & Lovely, D. R., (2011). Electrosynthesis of organic compounds 
from carbon dioxide is catalyzed by a diversity of acetogenic microorganisms. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol., 77, 2882–2886. 
10. Zhang, T., Nie, H., Bain, T. S., Lu, H., Cui, M., Snoeyenbos-West, O. L., Franks, A. 
E., et al., (2013). Improved cathode materials for microbial electrosynthesis. Energy 
Environ. Sci., 6, 217–224. 
11. Mohanakrishna, G., Seelam, J. S., Vanbroekhoven, K., & Pant, D., (2015). An enriched 
electroactive homoacetogenic biocathode for the microbial electrosynthesis of acetate 
through carbon dioxide reduction. Faraday Discuss., 183, 445–462. 
12. Marshall, C. W., LaBelle, E. V., & May, H. D., (2013). Production of fuels and chemicals 
from waste by microbiomes. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 24, 391–397. 
13. Mohanakrishna, G., Vanbroekhoven, K., & Pant, D., (2016). Imperative role of 
applied potential and inorganic carbon source on acetate production through microbial 
electrosynthesis. J. CO2 Util., 15(Suppl. C), 57–64. 
14. LaBelle, E. V., & May, H. D., (2017). Energy efficiency and productivity enhancement 
of microbial electrosynthesis of acetate. Front. Microbiol., 8, 756. 
15. ElMekawy, A., Hegab, H. M., Mohanakrishna, G., Elbaz, A. F., Bulut, M., & Pant, D., 
(2016). Technological advances in CO2 conversion electro-biorefinery: A  step toward 
commercialization. Bioresour. Technol., 215, 357–370. 
16. Jang, J., Jeon, B. W., & Kim, Y. H., (2018). Bioelectrochemical conversion of CO2 to 
value added product formate using engineered Methylobacterium extorquens. Sci. Rep., 
8, 7211–7217. 
17. Das, S., Das, S., Das, I., & Ghangrekar, M. M., (2019). Application of bioelectrochemical 
systems for carbon dioxide sequestration and concomitant valuable recovery: A review. 
Mat. Sci. Eng. Technol., 2, 687–696. 
18. Bibra, M., Kunreddy, V. R., & Sani, R. K., (2018). Thermostable xylanase production 
by Geobacillus sp. strain DUSELR13, and its application in ethanol production with 
lignocellulosic biomass. Microorganisms., 6(3), 93. 
19. Steinbusch, K. J. J., Hamelers, H. V. M., Plugge, C. M., & Buisman, C. J. N., (2011). 
Biological formation of caproate and caprylate from acetate: Fuel and chemical 
production from low grade biomass. Energy Environ. Sci., 4, 216–224. 

 
351 
Bioelectrochemical Systems for the Conversion of CO2 
20. Rojas, D. P. A., Zaiat, M., Gonzalez, E. R., Wever, D. H., & Pant, D., (2018). Effect 
of the electric supply interruption on a microbial electrosynthesis system converting 
inorganic carbon into acetate. Bioresour. Technol., 266, 203–210. 
21. Li, X., Angelidaki, I., & Zhang, Y., (2018). Salinity-gradient energy driven microbial 
electrosynthesis of value-added chemicals from CO2 reduction. Water Res., 142, 
396–404. 
22. Vassilev, I., Hernandez, P. A., Batlle-Vilanova, P., Freguia, S., Kromer, J. O., Keller, 
J., Ledezma, P., & Virdis, B., (2018). Microbial electrosynthesis of isobutyric, butyric, 
caproic acids, and corresponding alcohols from carbon dioxide. ACS Sustain. Chem. 
Eng., 6, 8485–8493. 
23. Vassilev, I., Kracke, F., Freguia, S., Keller, J., Krömer, J. O., Ledezma, P., & Virdis, 
B., (2019). Microbial electrosynthesis system with dual biocathode arrangement 
for simultaneous acetogenesis, solventogenesis and carbon chain elongation. Chem. 
Commun., 55, 4351–4354. 
24. Cheng, S., Xing, D., Call, D. F., & Logan, B. E., (2009). Direct biological conversion 
of electrical current into methane by electromethanogenesis. Environ. Sci. Technol., 43, 
3953–3958. 
25. Villano, M., Aulenta, F., Ciucci, C., Ferri, T., Giuliano, A., & Majone, M., (2010). 
Bioelectrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH4 via direct and indirect extracellular 
electron transfer by a hydrogenophilic methanogenic culture. Bioresour. Technol., 101, 
3085–3090. 
26. Bajracharya, S., Yuliasni, R., Vanbroekhoven, K., Buisman, C. J. N., Strik, D. P. B. T. 
B., & Pant, D., (2017). Long-term operation of microbial electrosynthesis cell reducing 
CO2 to multi-carbon chemicals with a mixed culture avoiding methanogenesis. 
Bioelectrochemistry., 113, 26–34. 
27. Villano, M., Scardala, S., Aulenta, F., & Majone, M., (2013). Carbon and nitrogen 
removal and enhanced methane production in a microbial electrolysis cell. Bioresour. 
Technol., 130, 366–371. 
28. Mohd, Y. N. H., Maeda, T., Hu, A., Yu, C. P., & Wood, T. K., (2015). CO2 sequestration 
by methanogens in activated sludge for methane production. Appl. Energy, 142, 
426–434. 
29. Christodoulou, X., Okoroafor, T., Parry, S., & Velasquez-Orta, S. B., (2017). The use 
of carbon dioxide in microbial electrosynthesis: Advancements, sustainability and 
economic feasibility. J. CO2 Util., 18(Suppl. C), 390–399. 
30. Zaybak, Z., Pisciotta, J. M., Tokash, J. C., & Logan, B. E., (2013). Enhanced start-up 
of anaerobic facultatively autotrophic biocathodes in bioelectrochemical systems. J. 
Biotechnol., 168, 478–485. 
31. Lovley, D. R., & Nevin, K., (2018). Microbial Production of Multi-carbon Chemicals 
and Fuels from Water and Carbon Dioxide Using Electric Current. U.S. Patent, 9856449. 
32. He, A. Y., Yin, C. Y., Xu, H., Kong, X. P., Xue, J. W., Zhu, J., Jiang, M., & Wu, H., 
(2016). Enhanced butanol production in a microbial electrolysis cell by Clostridium 
beijerinckii IB4. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 39, 245–254. 
33. Khosravanipour, M. A., Drogui, P., Brar, S. K., Tyagi, R. D., Le Bihan, Y., Buelna, G., & 
Rasolomanana, S., (2016). Enhancement of biobutanol production by electromicrobial 
glucose conversion in a dual chamber fermentation cell using C. pasteurianum. Energy 
Convers. Manage, 130
 
, 165–175. 

 
352 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
34. Gottumukkala, L. D., Sukumaran, R. K., Mohan, S. V., Valappil, S. K., Sarkar, O., & 
Pandey, A., (2015). Rice straw hydrolysate to fuel and volatile fatty acid conversion by 
Clostridium sporogenes BE01: Bio-electrochemical analysis of the electron transport 
mediators involved. Green Chem., 17, 3047–3058. 
35. Schlager, S., Neugebauer, H., Haberbauer, M., Hinterberger, G., & Sariciftci, N. S., 
(2015). Direct electrochemical addressing of immobilized alcohol dehydrogenase for 
the heterogeneous bioelectrocatalytic reduction of butyraldehyde to butanol. Chem. Cat. 
Chem, 7, 967–971. 
36. Puig, S., Batlle-Vilanova, R. G. P., Dolors, B. M., & Colprim, J., (2015). Microbial 
electrosynthesis of C2-C4 platform chemicals from carbon dioxide. ACS Sustain. Chem. 
Eng., 6, 8485–8493. 
37. Van Eerten-Jansen, M. C. A. A., Heijne, A. T., Buisman, C. J. N., & Hamelers, H. V. M., 
(2012). Microbial electrolysis cells for production of methane from CO2: Long-term 
performance and perspectives. Int. J. Energy Res., 36, 809–819. 
38.  Kim, T. S., & Kim, B. H., (1988). Electron flow shift in Clostridium acetobutylicum  
fermentation by electrochemically introduced reducing equivalent. Biotechnol. Lett., 10, 
123–128. 
39. Marshall, C. W., Ross, D. E., Fichot, E. B., Norman, R. S., & May, H. D., (2012). 
Electrosynthesis of commodity chemicals by an autotrophic microbial community. 
Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 78, 8412–8420. 
40. Batlle-Vilanova, P., Puig, S., Gonzalez-Olmos, R., Balaguer, M. D., & Colprim, J., 
(2016). Continuous acetate production through microbial electrosynthesis from CO2 
with microbial mixed culture. J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 91, 921–927. 
41. Nevin, K. P., Woodard, T. L., Franks, A. E., Summers, Z. M., & Lovley, D. R., (2010). 
Microbial electrosynthesis: Feeding microbes electricity to convert carbon dioxide and 
water to multicarbon extracellular organic compounds. mBio, 1, e00103–10. 
42. Srikanth, S., Maesen, M., Dominguez-Benetton, X., Vanbroekhoven, K., & Pant, D., 
(2014). Enzymatic  electrosynthesis of formate through CO2 sequestration/reduction in 
a bioelectrochemical system (BES). Bioresour. Technol., 165, 350– 354. 
43. Bajracharya, S., Ter Heijne, A., Dominguez, B. X., Vanbroekhoven, K., Buisman, C. J. 
N., Strik, D. P. B. T. B., & Pant, D., (2015). Carbon dioxide reduction by mixed and pure 
cultures in microbial electrosynthesis using an assembly of graphite felt and stainless 
steel as a cathode. Bioresour. Technol., 195, 14–24. 
44. Jourdin, L., Freguia, S., Donose, B. C., Chen, J., Wallace, G. G., Keller, J., & Flexer, V., 
(2014). A novel carbon nanotube modified scaffold as an efficient biocathode material 
for improved microbial electrosynthesis. J. Mater. Chem. A.
 
, 2, 13093–13102. 
45. Wang, X., Feng, Y., Liu, J., Lee, H., Li, C., Li, N., & Ren, N., (2010). Sequestration of 
CO2 discharged from anode by algal cathode in microbial carbon capture cells (MCCs). 
Biosens. Bioelectron., 25, 2639–2643. 
46. Nowicka, B., & Kruk, J., (2016). Powered by light: Phototrophy and photosynthesis in 
prokaryotes and its evolution. Microbiol. Res., 186, 99–118. 
47. Jadhav, D. A., Neethu, B., & Ghangrekar, M. M., (2019). Microbial carbon capture cell: 
Advanced bio-electrochemical system for wastewater treatment, electricity generation 
and algal biomass production. In: Gupta, S., & Bux, F., (eds.) Application of Microalgae 
in Wastewater Treatment (pp. 317–338). Springer, Cham. 

 
353 
Bioelectrochemical Systems for the Conversion of CO2 
48. Lu, L., Huang, Z., Rau, G. H., & Ren, Z. J., (2015). Microbial electrolytic carbon capture 
for carbon negative and energy positive wastewater treatment. Environ. Sci. Technol., 
49, 8193–8201. 
49. Rabaey, K., & Rozendal, R. A., (2010). Microbial electrosynthesis - revisiting the 
electrical route for microbial production. Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 8, 706–716. 
50. Bajracharya, S., Srikanth, S., Mohnakrishna, G., Zacharia, R., Strik, D. P. B. T. B., & 
Pant, D., (2017). Biotransformation of carbon dioxide in bioelectrochemical systems: 
State of the art and future prospects. J. Power Sources, 356, 256–273. 
51. Marshall, C. W., Ross, D. E., Fichot, E. B., Norman, R. S., & May, H. D., (2013). 
Long-term operation of microbial electrosynthesis systems improves acetate production 
by autotrophic microbiomes. Environ. Sci. Technol., 47, 6023–6029. 
52. Jourdin, L., Grieger, T., Monetti, J., Flexer, V., Freguia, S., Lu, Y., Chen, J., et al., (2015). 
High acetic acid production rate obtained by microbial electrosynthesis from carbon 
dioxide. Environ. Sci. Technol., 49, 13566–13574. 
53. Su, M., Jiang, Y., & Li, D., (2013). Production of acetate from carbon dioxide 
in bioelectrochemical systems based on autotrophic mixed culture. J. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol., 23, 1140–1146. 
54. Patil, S. A., Arends, J. B. A., Vanwonterghem, I., Meerbergen, J. V., Guo, K., Tyson, 
G. W., & Rabaey, K., (2015). Selective enrichment establishes a stable performing 
community for microbial electrosynthesis of acetate from CO2. Environ. Sci. Technol., 
49, 8833–8843. 
55. Bajracharya, S., Van, D. B. B., Vanbroekhoven, K., De Wever, H., Buisman, C. J. 
N., Pant, D., & Strik, D. P. B. T. B., (2017). In situ acetate separation in microbial 
electrosynthesis (MES) from CO2 using ion exchange resin. Electrochim. Acta, 237, 
267–275. 
56. Jeremiasse, A. W., Hamelers, H. V. M., & Buisman, C. J. N., (2010). Microbial 
electrolysis cell with a microbial biocathode. Bioelectrochemistry, 78, 39–43. 
57. Sydow, A., Krieg, T., Mayer, F., Schrader, J., & Holtmann, D., (2014). Electroactive 
bacteria-molecular mechanisms and genetic tools. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 
8481–8495. 
58. Venkata, M. S., Modestra, J. A., Amulya, K., Butti, S. K., & Velvizhi, G., (2016). 
A circular bioeconomy with biobased products from CO2 sequestration. Trends 
Biotechnol., 34, 506–519. 
59. Schiel-Bengelsdorf, B., & Dürre, P., (2012). Pathway engineering and synthetic biology 
using acetogens. FEBS Lett., 586, 2191–2198. 
60. Kopke, M., Mihalcea, C., Liew, F., Tizard, J. H., Ali, M. S., Conolly, J. J., Al-Sinawi, 
B., & Simpson, S. D., (2011). 2,3-butanediol production by acetogenic bacteria, an 
alternative route to chemical synthesis, using industrial waste gas. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol., 77, 5467–5475. 
61. Agler, M. T., Wrenn, B. A., Zinder, S. H., & Angenent, L. T., (2011). Waste to 
bioproduct conversion with undefined mixed cultures: The carboxylate platform. Trends 
Biotechnol., 29, 70–78. 
62. Sadhukhan, J., Lloyd, J. R., Scott, K., Premier, G. C., Yu, E. H., Curtis, T., & Head, I. 
M., (2016). A critical review of integration analysis of microbial electrosynthesis (MES) 
systems with waste biorefineries for the production of biofuel and chemical from reuse 
of CO2. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 56, 116–132. 

 
354 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
63. Andersen, S. J., Hennebel, T., Gildemyn, S., Coma, M., Desloover, J., Berton, J., 
Tsukamoto, J., et al., (2014). Electrolytic membrane extraction enables production of 
fine chemicals from biorefinery side streams. Environ. Sci. Technol., 48, 7135–7142. 
64. Gildemyn, S., Verbeeck, K., Slabbinck, R., Andersen, S. J., Prevoteau, A., & Rabaey, 
K., (2015). Integrated production, extraction, and concentration of acetic acid from CO2 
through microbial electrosynthesis. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2(11), 325–328. 
65. Bajracharya, S., Vanbroekhoven, K., De Wever, H., Strik, D., Buisman, C., & Pant, 
D., (2016). Integrated product separation in bioelectrochemical CO2 reduction for 
improved process efficiency. Chem. Ing. Tech., 88, 1255–1256. 

Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 11  
State-of-the-Art of Microbial Whole-Cell 
Catalysts for Biofuel Production 
MANJU M. GUPTA,1 RUDRANI DUTTA,1 ABHA KUMARI,2 and 
KUMUD BALA2 
1University of Delhi, Sri Aurobindo College, Delhi, India 
2Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Noida,  
Uttar Pradesh, India 
ABSTRACT 
Isolated free enzymes, immobilized enzymes, and wild whole-cells of 
bacteria, fungi, microalgae, plants, and others are employed as catalysts for 
biofuel production and a surfeit of chemicals for more than 100 years. Natural 
enzymes and wild whole-cell catalysts have permitted the growth of several 
industries, such as foods, beverages, pharmaceuticals, chemical, and energy 
sector growth. Still, a few important factors, i.e., cost-effectiveness, environ­
mental issues, etc., act as a bottleneck for the growth of the sector dealing 
with energy and biofuel production from cheap feedstock using natural 
enzymes and whole-cells. With the advancement of technology in the field 
of metabolic engineering, synthetic biology, computational tools, molecular 
biology, computational tools, and metabolic engineering, progress has been 
made in the field of a rational design of enzyme and whole-cell biocata­
lysts, which has thus brought a revolution in the energy sector for biofuel 
production. The design and engineering of whole-cell catalytic cascades is 
the latest research for the valorization of fatty acids. The use of designed 
whole-cell catalysts has several advantages; it allows high enantioselectivity 
followed by a moderate or ambient range of reaction conditions, making it 

 
 
356 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
a preferable system. In addition, the process has no/lower toxicity levels 
and the possibility of recycling and production of eco-friendly wastes. The 
whole-cell system has the power to bestow an instinctive environment to the 
enzymes, arresting conformational orientation in the protein structure so that 
enzyme activity will be retained in the non-conventional medium. Cofactor 
regeneration will be attained without any deterioration. This book chapter 
presents a critical review of recent developments in whole-cell biocatalysts, 
with a close look at strategies undertaken in designing and optimizing the 
organisms which have been modified to an extent for realizing efficient 
production of biofuel, the role of the whole catalyst in biofuel production, 
design, and engineering of whole-cell biocatalytic cascades, future perspec­
tive, and challenges. 
11.1 INTRODUCTION 
Biofuels refer to the fuels produced from biomass material rather than very 
slow geological processes involved in the formation of fossil fuels [1, 2]. 
Biofuels can be produced from biomass-derived from plants known as 
energy crops, or from wastes that have a biological origin [3]. They hold the 
promise of being a renewable source of energy, biodegradable, non-toxic, 
and mostly carbon neutral [4]. Recently, Liu et al. [3] reviewed the scope 
of biofuels for a sustainable future and concluded that to meet the global 
fuel demand, biofuel technology advancements need to focus on providing 
long-term, cost-effective, and reliable production systems for the biofuel 
industry [3]. 
Lignocellulosic biomass or waste feedstocks are routinely used for the 
production of biofuels. Plant oils, animal fats, and other lipids in lignocel­
lulosic biomass are converted to bioethanol, hydrogen, or other types of 
biofuels through a step of enzymatic reactions. A generalized diagram for 
the production of biofuels from lignocellulosic biomass or waste material 
(food and plastic) is depicted in Figure 11.1. 
Enzymatic degradation of natural materials to devise a way to exploit the 
energy content came as a boon that revolutionized the entire procedure of 
biofuel production There are numerous steps and separate ways of producing 
different types of biofuels from different substrates. The catalysts for 
biofuel (biodiesel) production are classified into four types: heterogeneous, 
homogenous, biocatalysts, and nanocatalysts [5]. Biocatalysts either as 
isolated free enzymes, immobilized enzymes, and whole-cell catalysts, i.e., 

 
 
357 
State-of-the-Art of Microbial Whole-Cell Catalysts for Biofuel Production 
the whole-cells of bacteria, fungi, microalgae, plants, and others have been 
employed as catalysts for biofuel production and the surfeit of chemicals for 
more than 100 years [5, 6]. The point that has intrigued researchers lately 
is to devise processes that are clean in terms of both production and emis­
sions caused [7]. Whole-cells allow the production of compounds through 
multi-step reactions, with cofactor regeneration, with high regio- and stereo-
selectivity, under mild operational and environment-friendly conditions [1]. 
FIGURE 11.1 Production of biofuels from lignocellulosic biomass or waste material (food 
and plastic). 
The chapter presents a critical review of recent developments in whole-
cell biocatalyst, with a close-look on strategies undertaken in designing and 
optimizing the organisms which have been modified to an extent for real­
izing efficient production of biofuel, the role of whole-cell catalyst in biofuel 
production, design, and engineering of whole-cell biocatalytic cascades, 
future perspective, and challenges. 
11.2 SCOPE OF MICROBIAL WHOLE-CELL CATALYSTS 
Whole-cell catalysts are the cells of several microbes that are used as catalysts 
in organic reactions in industries [6]. The process of biocatalysis is defined 
as the use of isolated enzymes or enzymes that still reside inside living cells 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
358 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
to perform chemical conversions of organic compounds. The concept behind 
whole-cell biocatalysis is to separate the enzyme manufacturing phase and 
production phase in any microbial cell. The substrate which acts as the 
feedstock could be lignocellulosic biomass or waste material (food and 
plastic) which is converted to the desired product by the microbial cells [8]. 
These microbial factories or the whole-cell catalysts are obvious over the 
chemical catalysts in present days considering it being cheaper, cleaner, and 
sustainable technology and has the potential to meet the growing demands 
for energy [7, 9]. Traditional thermochemical processes for the production of 
biofuels had several limitations in terms of economic viability as well as foul 
emissions in the production. 
Enzymatic degradation through whole-cell catalysts offers a wide range 
of advantages some of which include high regio- and stereo-selectivity, 
catalytic efficiency, milder operational conditions, and low impact on 
the environment, help generation of cofactors, and allow transforming 
substrates through a spectrum of biological reactions [1, 10]. For an 
economically viable biocatalysis process, designing optimal whole-cell 
biocatalysts is required which would essentially include the introduction 
of single or multiple enzymes for the production of the desired product. 
Thus, it becomes necessary to analyze a microbial cell to function as a 
whole-cell catalyst in its entirety, not just as the individual active enzymes 
that are required [11]. 
With the advent of emerging technologies, integrated with omics 
data offer a range of applications employing efficient microbial whole-
cells as biocatalysts [12]. The evolution of the concept of biocatalysis 
had its own trajectory. The concept of biocatalysis culminated by the 
two sets of enzymatic transformations: first is using selected enzymes 
performing a specific organic reaction and the second being, emula­
tion of natural biological processes under normal conditions by using 
enzymes in cascades [9]. Amongst the three principal steps involved in 
any biotechnological process for production – namely upstream processing 
(inoculum and substrate preparation), fermentation, and biotransformation 
(by microorganisms, plants or animals or parts thereof), and downstream 
processing (DSP) (products recovery, waste disposal), the biotransforma­
tion component is the most difficult phase to fabricate [13]. This step 
mainly gave the direction to the line of evolution for the processes that are 
now known for producing industrial and commercial products. Initially, 
efforts were directed towards inducing changes in the genetic constitution 
of respective strains by UV radiation or via chemical mutagens. However, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
359 
State-of-the-Art of Microbial Whole-Cell Catalysts for Biofuel Production 
this method could allow limited levels of improvement only [13]. With the 
advent of recombinant DNA technology and other methods of molecular 
biotechnology, the rational designing of efficient whole-cell biocatalysis 
was witnessed in past decade. 
With advancements made in the field of protein engineering, exceptional 
progress in the field of biocatalysis was seen however there are still limita­
tions that need to be addressed. In Table 11.1 listed a few such limitations. 
One of the limitations is the barrier induced by the cell envelope in achieving 
higher reaction rates, reducing it by 1–2 orders of magnitude than that of 
purified enzymes [14]. Many strategies have been explored for improving 
reaction rates like permeabilizing by using electropermeabilization, organic 
solvents, detergents, and salts [15]. Molecular engineering of the enzyme or 
membrane is one of the other techniques devised for increasing the rate of 
reactions [16]. 
There are several examples of whole-cell catalysis successfully employed 
in the industries. For example, Lysine production as a result of whole-cell 
microbial catalysis carried out by Corynebacterium glutamicum strains 
accounts for a world market of 1.3 billion tons per year [17]. Due to several 
advantages associated with a pool of microorganisms like psychrophiles, 
halophiles, acidophiles, and other extremophiles, they have been readily 
applied as biocatalysts by major biotechnology-based companies like Swis­
saustral Biotech SA, ZyGEM NZ Ltd and bitop AG [1]. Another remarkable 
application of microbial whole-cells as a biocatalyst is for the production 
of industrially important components like lipases and esterases. Lipases 
have utmost importance in the industry for several reasons, especially in the 
ever-expanding field of biofuel production. Whole-cell lipases and esterases 
have gained prominence due to the cell’s organic solvent tolerance which is 
beneficial in the process of biodiesel production [1]. Whole-cell biocatalysis 
has found its applications in asymmetric reactions, involving reduction of 
prochiral ketones [18], oxidation of components like sulfides and sulfoxides, 
etc. 
Another important study that hints towards the extensive application of 
microbial whole-cell biocatalysis is execution of coupled oxygenase and 
transaminase catalysis in which the researchers explored the recombinant E. 
coli as whole-cell biocatalyst. The synthesis which resulted in the production 
of aminated compounds from the substrate was catalyzed by a recombinant 
microbial whole-cell catalyst which expressed the genes for alkane monooxy­
genase (AlkBGT) from Pseudomonas putida and ω-transaminase (CV2025) 
from Chromobacterium violaceum. This constituted a vibrant proof of how 

 
 
 
  
  
  
  
Advantages  
Limitations 
1.  Catalyst Cost: Naturally occurring or 
1. 
bioengineered microbial cells account 
for the cheapest catalyst formulation 
possible. In comparison to purified 
enzymes, whole-cell catalysts are roughly 
10 times cheaper [19]. Further, the need 
and cost involved in cell lysis and enzyme 
purification are absolutely nil in the case 
of whole-cell biocatalysis. 
Instability of Catalyst: The 
sensitivity of the microbial cell to 
the amount of substrate and product 
may facilitate or inhibit the overall 
reaction. At higher temperatures and 
other fluctuating conditions, like 
high pH, the whole-cell meant for the 
catalytic function is disrupted entirely 
[11]. 
2.  Regeneration of Cofactor: The natural 
2. Unwanted Side Reactions and 
regeneration of the cofactor and ease 
By‑Products: Since a cell in its 
of recycling in the case of whole-cell 
entirety is used for aiding the 
biocatalysis not only simplifies the 
production of desired products, the 
production but also largely cuts down on 
other metabolic pathways keep on 
the expenditure. There is no need for the 
continuing along with the required 
supply of expensive, external cofactors. 
one. This not only has an impact 
on the rate of reaction and increase 
difficulty in separation but also may 
end up causing toxic effects for the 
cells to grow 
360 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
versatile whole-cell microbial catalysis and could very well achieve results 
like specific functionalization of non-functional carbon, which otherwise 
was difficult by chemical methods [8]. Hence, a whole new venture for 
whole-cell microbial catalysis was opened for further applications. 
After the confirmation of drawbacks of chemical and thermochemical 
processes, scientists have been eager to research the biocatalysis approach. 
Following this, whole-cell biocatalysis is an emerging trend that holds the 
potential to revolutionize the large-scale production of biofuels. Not only 
does whole-cell biocatalysis provide a cheaper alternative to isolated, pure 
enzymes but also has an additional advantage of inherent stability due to the 
outer cell structure. Even though there are a few disadvantages associated 
with microbial whole-cell catalysts like mass transfer limitation, these can 
be overcome by engineering tools to modify outer cell structure and other 
permeabilization treatments. Microbial whole-cell catalysis, arrested at the 
resting stage or immobilized by efficient techniques, allows a continuous 
reaction mode which makes it unusually attractive as an alternative for 
commercial application. 
TABLE 11.1 Advantages and Limitations of Whole-Cell Catalysts 

 
  
  
  
Advantages  
Limitations 
3.  Scope for Usage in Non‑Conventional 
Medium: In non-conventional mediums, 
it is often seen that the enzymes lose their 
potential activity due to conformational 
changes in their protein structure. But in 
the case of whole-cells, it is devoid of 
such limitations and provides a natural 
environment for enzymes to express their 
activity well [1]. 
3.  Cell Membrane Barrier: In the 
absence of enzyme secretion due to 
the cell wall, the cells are to be lysed 
before the conversion process which 
makes the process complex and less 
feasible [20]. 
4.  Ease in Downstream Processing: After 
– 
the growth of fully cultured cells, they 
need to be washed and suspended in 
buffer solution for biocatalysis. During 
this entire process, unconsumed nutrients 
are removed which subsequently arrest 
cell growth. This in turn allows the cell 
to produce higher yields as the carbon 
source is directly consumed for energy 
rather than biomass. Thus, the entire event 
makes the process of downstream much 
more efficient allowing a high product 
recovery rate [11] 
 
361 
State-of-the-Art of Microbial Whole-Cell Catalysts for Biofuel Production 
TABLE 11.1 (Continued) 
11.3 DESIGNING AND OPTIMIZING WHOLE-CELL CATALYSTS 
The ultimate goal of designing microbial whole-cell catalysts is to optimize 
the cells to maximize the pathway flux to products [11]. For example, in a 
recent study compound DHMF (2,5-di(hydroxymethyl)furan), a high-value 
chemical block was optimized from 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), a 
platform chemical that resulted from the dehydration of biomass-derived 
carbohydrates from a strain of Fusarium [21]. The process was successfully 
scaled up at a bioreactor scale (1.3 L working volume) with excellent DHMF 
production yields (95%) and selectivity (98%). 
There are several steps to develop a catalytic process from a microbial 
whole-cell that need to be followed for optimal results. Certain factors 
determine the construction of an optimal whole-cell biocatalyst. The factors 
essentially comprise an optimal design for the desired biotransformation 
pathway, discovering, and then, engineering the enzymes within the cascade 
and finally carrying out a balanced and functional expression of the enzymes 
in the cells with the last bit of systematically engineering the whole-cell 
biocatalysis cascade [1]. 

 
 
 
362 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
The first step in designing whole-cell biosynthetic cascades is the selec­
tion of biotransformation pathways to produce the desired product. With 
the advent of technological advancements made in the field of genomics, 
proteomics, and bioinformatics, an array of potential enzymes and their 
pathways could be easily identified [22]. The identified pathways are then 
transferred to microbial hosts like Escherichia coli which further generates 
more heterologous pathways, thus allowing the production of exogenous 
molecules [22]. The design principle involved in microbial whole-cell 
biocatalysis can be demarcated into two distinct types based on the number 
of steps involved during the process – single-step biosynthesis pathways and 
multiple-step biosynthesis pathways. 
The single-step pathway of biosynthesis works on the concept of 
overexpression of the recombinant plasmid thus producing large amounts 
of recombinant enzyme available. This type of biosynthesis is remarkably 
revolutionary for catalysis involving unstable isolated enzymes or the 
requirement of expensive cofactors [23]. In a recent experiment carried out 
by a group of scientists to replace the use of lipases with esterases in the 
production of cinnamyl acetate; following single step biosynthesis, a high 
yield of up to 94.1% cinnamyl alcohol was achieved [24]. 
The multi-step biosynthesis pathway is of utmost use for bioconver­
sions involving multiple steps. In this type of biosynthesis, the genes from 
different unrelated organisms are assembled to construct artificial pathways 
in the microbial host that is selected. This allows a retrosynthetic pathway of 
production of the desired product [11]. A recombinant E. coli that harbored 
the three-step Ehrlick pathway in yeast and PAAS (phenylacetaldehyde 
synthase) pathway in plants for the synthesis of L-phenylalanine (L-Phe) 
resulted in 96% yield of the final product that is produced from L-Phe [25]. 
Similarly, Luo et al. (2019)  could optimize co synthesis of l-homophenyl­
alanine and 2-phenylethanol by recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae 
expressing aspartate aminotransferase from Escherichia coli BL21(DE3). 
After the successful creation of the required biosynthetic pathway in the 
host, the next step that follows is optimizing the biocatalyst cell for optimal 
results. Factors affecting biocatalytic reactions include substrate concentra­
tion, product concentration, enzyme or microorganism stability, inhibitors, 
temperature, and pH. As such, the optimization of biocatalytic processes is 
an important step and is to be carried out systematically to enhance both 
biosynthetic pathways along with the overall microbial cell. The strategies 
that have been devised essentially include, identifying the rate-controlling 
steps and relief of bottlenecks, balancing the biosynthesis pathway to avoid 

 
 
 
 
 
363 
State-of-the-Art of Microbial Whole-Cell Catalysts for Biofuel Production 
the accumulation of toxins, and finally maximizing the flux towards the 
product [26–28]. 
Once the microbial cell is substantially optimized and engineered to carry 
out the reactions to produce the desired product, the final and crucial step is 
to optimize the whole production process. The optimal production process 
will not only ensure a higher yield of product but also economic viability 
at the same time. There are a multitude of factors that need proper analysis 
and inspection. Starting with the expression of enzymes in the respective 
biosynthesis pathway will largely determine the extent of the product formed. 
For instance, a single-step biosynthesis pathway essentially needs to have 
overexpression of a single enzyme, while whole multiple-step biosynthesis 
demands optimal coordination in the expression of the enzymes involved. 
In either of these processes, biomass is a regulatory factor as it has a direct 
effect on the extent of cell growth obtained [29–32]. Similarly, the substrate 
needs to be optimized equally to carry forward the process. Several studies 
have pointed out how the cell membrane of microbial cells poses a difficulty 
as a transport barrier for both substrate and product. Thus, there is a need 
to regulate and improve the cell membranes to increase their permeability. 
Methods like chemical permeabilization using detergents and solvents as 
well as physical ones like temperature shock have been thoroughly studied 
in several studies accounting experiments involving microbial whole-cell 
biocatalysis [11]. Figure 11.2 shows the whole-cell biocatalytic cascade. 
FIGURE 11.2 Whole-cell biocatalysis cascade. 
11.4 ROLE OF MICROBIAL WHOLE-CELL CATALYSTS IN BIOFUEL 
PRODUCTION 
The concept of using microbial whole-cells over purified enzymes for biofuel 
production has its share of the stark advantages offered by the later on puri­
fied enzymes, likely, cost-effectiveness, cofactor regeneration, growth in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
364 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
unconventional media, etc. For more than a decade now, researchers have 
shown an avid interest in understanding and applying whole-cell biocatalyst 
in biofuel production which, hence, forms the background of the same, that is 
being used in today’s date. The display of lipase on the cell surface dates to the 
year 1994 [33]. This expression of lipases, which is an important component 
for biodiesel production, presented the advantage of substantial cost reduction 
in comparison to isolated enzymes [34, 35]. Thus, the search for thermo- and 
solvent tolerant enzymes both isolated and whole-cell continued for the biofuel 
industry. Similarly, the cell-surface display of enzymes like cellulase which is 
of crucial importance for bioethanol production, on bacteria and yeast [36, 37], 
sets the background for the development of microbial whole-cell catalysts for 
this industry. Here we discuss some examples of the application of whole-cell 
catalysts in the production of different types of biofuels. 
11.4.1 BIODIESEL PRODUCTION 
Biodiesel is defined as monoalkyl esters of long-chain fatty acids derived 
from various feedstocks, like plant oils, animal fats, or other lipids [5]. 
Biodiesel is produced using the transesterification or alcoholysis process, 
which is usually facilitated by acids, bases, enzymes, and other types and 
forms of catalysts [39]. The properties of feedstock that is exploited for 
biodiesel production is the presence of long chains of triglycerides which on 
treatment with constituents undergo the process of transesterification which 
breaks it into free fatty acids (FFAs) and glycerol. Lipase and phospholipase 
are the major enzymes involved in the production of biodiesel. In the case 
of phospholipase mediated production, the step works in two stages, conver­
sion of phospholipids to diacylglycerol which further acts as a substrate for 
the enzyme lipase. Lipase consists of a peptide loop that is amphiphilic in 
nature and undergoes conformational change on contact with a lipid-water 
interface allowing the substrate to attach to the active site. The water content 
required for the reaction to happen is varying for each lipase. 
Purifying lipase is a tedious job and at the same time involves complex, 
time-consuming steps all these add to major share in the overall cost. It also 
produces undesired by-products, namely, soaps, and polymeric pigments, 
which hinder the separation of product from glycerol and di- and monoacylg­
lycerols [40]. The drawback of the complexity of separation and purification 
procedures and its associated cost using extracellular enzymes as a catalyst 
can be lowered using microbial cells as whole-cell biocatalysts with accept­
able biodiesel yield. Filamentous fungi have been discerned. Whole-cell 

 
 
 
365 
State-of-the-Art of Microbial Whole-Cell Catalysts for Biofuel Production 
lipase production involved a lesser number of steps and was accomplished 
as a part of the upstream process [41]. 
Lipase-mediated transesterification of trans acetyl glycerate involves a 
two-step process; the first step is the hydrolysis of the ester bond and release 
of the alcohol moiety followed by an esterification with the second substrate 
[42]. The formation of biodiesel from its feedstock by the aid of either 
isolated enzymes or microbial whole-cells includes conversion of triglyc­
erides to diglycerides, followed by further conversion to monoglycerides. 
The final step is the conversion to glycerol molecules [43–45]. Each of these 
steps yields one fatty acid alkyl ester [46]. The transesterification reaction for 
the production of biodiesel by whole-cell catalysis was reported by research 
where the reaction was carried out in a 50 ml screw-cap bottle at 35°C on 
a reciprocal shaker (130 rpm). The yields achieved based on the feedstock 
ranged from 69%–75% [47]. Another such successful development was 
achieved by the research taken up by Wattanabe and coworkers, wherein 
93.8% degummed soybean oil was converted to its corresponding methyl 
esters, and the Candida antarctica microbial whole-cell lipase was able to 
reuse for 25 cycles without any loss of activity [48]. 
Microbial whole-cell catalysis has successfully been applied to release 
bottleneck effects in biodiesel production. A synergistic lipase from C. 
antarctica and Thermomyces lanuginosus co-displayed on Pichia pastoris, 
markedly cut down the biodiesel production cost [49]. Utilization of immobi­
lized R. oryzae cells as a whole-cell biocatalyst for biodiesel fuel production 
with a yield of 90% methyl ester content has been reported [50]. Thus, the 
role of microbial whole-cell catalysis in biodiesel production is to augment 
the transesterification process along with added benefits of solvent tolerance 
and cheap regulation. Recently Rizwanul et al. [5] reviewed and compared 
the performance and limitations of different catalysts in the production of 
biofuel (biodiesel) [5]. Their study concluded that using heterogeneous cata­
lysts over the homogenous ones for the production process of biodiesel from 
wastes essentially serves to address the purpose of sustainability. 
11.4.2 HYDROGEN PRODUCTION AND STORAGE 
Hydrogen is a source of clean fuel which has been gaining momentum as 
an alternative to fossil fuels in recent times. Hydrogen in its free form is not 
available, thus, tapping it from various sources like water molecules and 
hydrocarbons augments its availability. Several processes have been found 
successful to create hydrogen to date. Reformation of steam and combining 

 
 
 
 
 
 
366 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
natural gas with high-temperature steam accounts for the majority of 
hydrogen production. Other accepted methods include dark fermentation of 
cheap substrates, biophotolysis, or electrolysis of water [38]. 
Fermentative methods of hydrogen production have received substantial 
attention for their ability to produce hydrogen most feasibly. Fermentative 
production of hydrogen involves majorly two factors: a rich electron pump 
and an active hydrogenase enzyme [51]. There are a series of pathways that 
can be followed by fermentative bacteria to produce hydrogen. Pyruvate 
decomposition pathway which produces formate and acetate; up on the 
action of hydrogenases formate is decomposed to produce CO2 and evolves 
hydrogen. The NADH pathway is also capable of the same hydrogen produc­
tion. It happens by the reduction of NADH formed during the metabolic 
pathway of glycolysis to NAD+. In some species of Clostridium, which are 
strict anaerobes conducts re-oxidation of NADH which occurs by the action 
of the enzyme’s ferredoxin oxidoreductase and by the action of hydrogenase 
will produce hydrogen further [52]. 
A maximum H2 yield of 4 mol H2/mol glucose can be seen to be achievable 
in the dark fermentation process [53]. The low yield of glucose substrate 
fermentation led researchers to consider alternatives. Conversion of formate 
to hydrogen came up as a new approach towards hydrogen production. 
Formate oxidation by microbes is catalyzed by multiple enzymes. Kotten­
hahn et al. [54] reported Acetobacterium woodii as a whole-cell biocatalyst to 
result in a yield of 66 mmol H2 g–1 h–1 from formate at ambient temperatures. 
This is the highest yield reported ever for any organism without genetic 
modification. The enzyme involved was soluble hydrogen-dependent CO2 
reductase, which catalyzed the reduction of CO2 by electrons donated by H2 
to form formate [54]. Thus, it not only was for efficient hydrogen production 
but storage of hydrogen as well. Resting cells of A. woodii showed prom­
ising results for hydrogen production. A microbial whole-cell factory for 
thermophilic acetogenic bacteria Thermoanaerobacter kivui, proved to be 
an efficient microbial whole-cell catalyst for hydrogen storage, CO2 capture, 
and syngas conversion to formate [55]. Immobilized whole-cell biocatalysts 
have been found suitable for continuous hydrogen production [51]. 
11.4.3 ETHANOL PRODUCTION 
Bioalcohols are fuels that are synthesized from carbohydrate-rich feedstock. 
According to the classification of biofuels which includes first, second, 
and third generation, bioalcohols come in two forms [56]. Since the first 

 
 
 
367 
State-of-the-Art of Microbial Whole-Cell Catalysts for Biofuel Production 
generation of bioalcohol production demands food sources like crops as a 
feedstock to avoid adding to the already grim picture of food production 
in developing countries, the most accepted forms are the second genera­
tion bioalcohols. The inedible parts consisting of lignocellulosic sources, 
marine algae, agricultural residues, and forest woody remains are prominent 
feedstocks for bioalcohols. Lignocellulosic feedstock essentially comprises 
networks of cellulose (40%–50%), hemicellulose (20%–40%), and lignin 
(20%–30%); largely depending on the obtaining source [57]. The above-
described matrix of networks in the lignocellulosic feedstock is recalcitrant 
and requires a series of treatments before the final production process. 
Enzymatic saccharification involving a wide spectrum of enzyme solu­
tions to treat each constituent is done before the final production procedure 
[58]. The entire process of saccharification is essentially about breaking the 
protective layer of lignin to ensure hydrolysis of cellulose and hemicellulose 
for further degradation [59]. Lignin is degraded using a spectrum of enzymes, 
such as pectinases, lignin peroxidases (LiPs), xylanases, mannanases, 
manganese peroxidases (MnPs), and feruloyl esterase [60]. 
Following the step of enzymatic saccharification, the process of hydro­
lysis of cellulose and hemicellulose into hexoses and pentoses is done. The 
conversion of these sugars into alcohol takes place by adopting various 
metabolic pathways aided by the microorganisms depending on the starting 
substrate [61]. Glycolysis or Embden-Meyerhof pathway (EMP) is respon­
sible for the conversion of hexose [62]. Pentoses can be converted through a 
pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). 
An investigation by Karimi et al. [63] has conclusive results to show 
the efficacy of microbial whole-cells as a catalyst for bioethanol production. 
Ethanol was produced from rice straw by continuous saccharification 
and fermentation by Mucor indicus, Rhizopus oryzae and Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae. The studies found that, an average of three days was enough 
to achieve maximum ethanol production. Alcohol dehydrogenase was 
responsible for catalyzing the pathway for transformation of ethanol from 
pyruvate in Rhizopus oryzae [64]. Thus, the role of whole-cell catalyst in the 
production of ethanol has been well researched and even delivered promising 
results thus, indicating its feasibility in the near future. 
11.4.4 BIOGAS PRODUCTION 
Whole-cell catalysts in biogas production are being explored at the present 
times and projects immense potential shown to be prospective in laboratory 

 
368 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
scale to be applied on a large scale soon. The primary feedstock for biogas 
production is excretory products of livestock like pigs, or other waste prod­
ucts like wastewater coming out of industries. Each of the steps involved 
in biogas production takes an aid of a spectrum of certain microorganisms 
to catalyze the anaerobic digestion (AD) of the substrate and further allow 
fermentation. A study aimed at producing biogas from antibiotic-rich 
pharmaceutical industry wastewater using microbial whole-cell catalysts 
revealed promising results [65]. In this study Aspergillus niger was found to 
display high enzymatic activity, stability, and efficiently degraded β-lactam 
antibiotics, thus maintaining the toxicity of antibiotics in the sludge, and 
allowed aerobic granular sludge organisms to efficiently undertake the further 
processes [65]. Another efficient role played by microbial cell catalysis was 
reported by Alves et al. [66]. They used mycelium-bound lipases from Peni-
cillium citrinum as suspended free cells for successful utilization of dairy 
wastewater for biogas production. This not only made the production much 
cheaper but also had prospects of better yield. 
The breakdown of organic materials is mediated by metabolic pathways 
of anaerobic microorganism which is regulated by the action of various 
enzymes. Many mesophilic and thermophilic bacteria such as Clostridium 
stercorarium, Clostridium thermocellum, etc., produce cellulolytic, ligno­
lytic, amylolytic, pectinolytic, proteolytic, lipolytic, and other enzymes to 
degrade the biomass in the feedstock [67, 68]. The process of biogas produc­
tion by the means of AD occurs in 4 steps, namely: hydrolysis, acidogenesis, 
acetogenesis, and methanogenesis. 
The first step of hydrolysis is crucial to the yield of biogas at the end 
of the process. This stage is also a rate-limiting step for AD of high-solid 
organic solid wastes [69]. In this step, the complex biomolecules like fats, 
carbohydrates, and proteins present in the feedstock (which includes agricul­
tural crop remains, municipal solid wastes, market wastes and animal waste, 
lignocellulosic compounds), are broken down into simpler forms of fatty 
acids and amino acids. 
The next step that follows is acidogenesis wherein fermentation by 
acidogenic bacteria is carried out to further break down the molecules into 
substituents like volatile fatty acids (VFAs), alcohols, H2, and CO2. The 
acetogenesis step is the next, wherein the products formed in the acidogenic 
stage are further broken down into acetic acid (CH3COOH), CO2, and H2. 
Obligate H2-producing acetogens like Syntrophobacter (PUAs: propio­
nate utilizing acetogens) and Syntrophomonas (BUAs: butyrate-utilizing 
acetogens) represent the major part [70]. This step is essential to regulate 

 
369 
State-of-the-Art of Microbial Whole-Cell Catalysts for Biofuel Production 
the product in the next step of methanogenesis [71]. The final step in the 
production process is methanogenesis. As the name suggests, in this step 
methane is produced from the final products of the acetogenesis phase (i.e., 
CH3COOH and CO2). 
11.5 FUTURE PERSPECTIVES AND CHALLENGES 
Despite the variety of advantages offered by whole-cell microbial catalysts 
in biofuel production, there remain certain limitations that need immense 
exploration and optimizations. For instance, the cell membrane barrier of 
the catalyst is the most critical limitation. The rate of reaction not only dete­
riorates but the current procedure to tackle the limitation which essentially 
includes lysis of the cell, diminishes the advantages of whole-cell catalyst 
by a huge margin. Although there have been slow and steady advancements 
made to tackle the limitation. Genome shuffling techniques to improve the 
tolerance of whole-cell catalysts have been reported [72]. 
The limitation of occurrence of unwanted side reactions is also delimiting 
in exploiting the full potential of whole-cell catalysts. Lowering the rate of 
reaction and complex and costlier DSP in biofuel production due to this 
limitation hugely poses a roadblock. Maintaining an optimal temperature 
and pH throughout the process of biofuel production is essential to ensure 
whole-cell catalyst stability. 
Low lipase activity and display efficiency are some of the prominent 
limitations which are reported in several research studies which used 
microbial whole-cell catalysts for biodiesel production [73]. To counteract 
this, several novel strategies have been explored like gene co-expression, 
multi-enzyme co-displayed technique, micro-environmental interference, 
and self-assembly techniques, etc. Research by Surendhiran and team [74], 
reported a low yield of biodiesel on carrying out the step of agitation which 
otherwise is meant to mitigate mass transfer resistance between oil and acyl 
acceptor at the interface of the catalyst, in turn enhancing the rate of reaction. 
But in the case of microbial whole-cell catalyst, due to distortion of the cell, 
it led to inactivity of lipase thus, decreasing the yield of biodiesel. 
Bioethanol production has been impacted due to the limitation of 
the substrate and product inhibition which decreases the yield [75]. The 
robustness of the cellular metabolism of whole-cell catalysts is one of the 
impending limitations of the entire process. 
Microbial whole-cell catalysis, arrested at the resting stage or immobilized 
by efficient techniques, allows a continuous reaction mode which makes it 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
370 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
attractive for commercial application. Not only does whole-cell biocatalysis 
provide a cheaper alternative to isolated, pure enzymes but also has an addi­
tional advantage of inherent stability due to the presence of cellular environ­
ment encapsulated with outer cell structure. Even though there are a few 
limitations as stated above these can be overcome by engineering tools to 
modify outer cell structure and other permeabilization treatments. With the 
further advancements made in the field of omic studies and bioengineering 
tools, a huge spectrum of microorganisms can be studied and applied for 
promising results at a large scale whole-cell catalytic system. 
Whole-cell catalysts are widely accepted as an alternative to the most 
prominent enzymatic pathways. Several studies have now studied and 
proposed solutions to tackle challenges to take this field to the next level of 
industrial application. In conclusion, despite the limitations posed by whole-
cell biocatalysts, it has a huge potential to devise novel, sustainable, and 
feasible catalysis for efficient biofuels production in the near future. With 
the growing interest in sustainable and cleaner energy sources, biofuel offers 
a promising future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Abha Kumari would like to gratefully acknowledge and thank Department 
of Biotechnology, Government of India (102IIFD/SAN/173/2018–2019) for 
financially supporting work on biogas production and isolation of value-
added product from flower waste. I also thank Amity University, Noida for 
supporting and providing infrastructure for my research work. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
bioengineering tools 
• 
biofuel production 
• 
biogas 
• 
ethanol 
• 
hydrogen production 
• 
microbial whole-cell catalysts  
• 
omic studies  

 
371 
State-of-the-Art of Microbial Whole-Cell Catalysts for Biofuel Production 
REFERENCES 
1. De Carvalho, C. C., (2017). Whole-cell biocatalysts: Essential workers from nature to 
the industry. Microbial Biotech., 10, 250–263. 
2. Jayed, M. H., Masjuki, H. H., Saidur, R., Kalam, M. A., & Jahirul, M. I., (2009). 
Environmental aspects and challenges of oilseed produced biodiesel in Southeast Asia. 
Renew. Sustain. Energy Reviews, 13, 2452–2462. 
3. Liu, Y., Cruz-Morales, P., Zargar, A., Belcher, M. S., Pang, B., Englund, E., Dan, Q., et 
al., (2021). Biofuels for a sustainable future. Cell, 184(6), 1636–1647. 
4. Arbab-Zadeh, A., & Fuster, V., (2015). The myth of the “vulnerable plaque” transitioning 
from a focus on individual lesions to atherosclerotic disease burden for coronary artery 
disease risk assessment. J. Amer. College Cardiology, 65, 846–855. 
5. Rizwanul, F. I. M., Ong, H. C., Mahlia, T. M. I., Mofijur, M., Silitonga, A. S., Rahman, 
S. M., & Ahmad, A., (2020). State of the art of catalysts for biodiesel production. 
Frontiers in Energy Res., 8, 101. 
6. Bezborodov, A. M., & Zagustina, N. A., (2016). Enzymatic biocatalysis in chemical 
synthesis of pharmaceuticals. Applied Biochem. Microbiol., 52, 237–249. 
7. Gaurav, N., Sivasankari, S., Kiran, G. S., Ninawe, A., & Selvin, J., (2017). Utilization 
of bioresources for sustainable biofuels: A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Reviews, 73, 
205–214. 
8. Schrewe, M., Julsing, M. K., Buehler, B., & Schmid, A., (2013). Whole-cell biocatalysis 
for selective and productive C–O functional group introduction and modification. Chem. 
Society Rev., 42, 6346–6377. 
9. Garzón-Posse, F., Becerra-Figueroa, L., Hernández-Arias, J., & Gamba-Sánchez, D., 
(2018). Whole-cells as biocatalysts in organic transformations. Molecules, 23, 1265. 
10. Anteneh, Y. S., & Franco, C. M. M., (2019). Whole-cell actinobacteria as biocatalysts. 
Front. Microbiol., 10, 77. 
11. Lin, B., & Tao, Y., (2017). Whole-cell biocatalysts by design. Microbial Cell Factories, 
16, 1–12. 
12. Lee, J. W., Kim, H. U., Choi, S., Yi, J., & Lee, S. Y., (2011). Microbial production of 
building block chemicals and polymers. Current Opin. Biotech., 22, 758–767. 
13. Glick, B. R., & Patten, C. L., (2017). Molecular Biotechnology: 
 
Principles and 
Applications of Recombinant DNA  (Vol. 34). John Wiley & Sons. 
14. Chen, R. R., (2007). Permeability issues in whole-cell bioprocesses and cellular 
membrane engineering. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 74, 730–738. 
15. Kronenburga, N. A., & De Bont, J. A., (2001). Effects of detergents on specific activity 
and enantioselectivity of the epoxide hydrolase from Rhodotorula glutinis.  Enzyme and 
Microbial Technology, 28, 210–217. 
16.   Polakovič, M., Švitel, J., Bučko, M., Filip, J., Neděla, V., Ansorge-Schumacher, M. B., 
& Gemeiner, P., (2017). Progress in biocatalysis with immobilized viable whole-cells: 
Systems development, reaction engineering and applications. Biotechnology Letters, 39, 
667–683. 
17. Pfefferle, W., Möckel, B., Bathe, B., & Marx, A., (2003). Biotechnological manufacture 
of lysine. Microbial Production of L-amino Acids, 59–112. 
18. Bingjuan, L., Yuxia, L., Dongmei, B., Xin, Z., Huiying, Y., Jie, W., Gang, L. Y. L., 
Dongsheng, Z., & Huipeng, C., (2014). Whole-cell biotransformation systems for 

 
372 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
reduction of prochiral carbonyl compounds to chiral alcohol in Escherichia coli. 
Scientific Reports, 4, 6750. 
19. Tufvesson, P., Lima-Ramos, J., Nordblad, M., & Woodley, J. M., (2011). Guidelines 
and cost analysis for catalyst production in biocatalytic processes. Organic Process 
Research & Development, 15, 266–274. 
20. Gupta, M. M., Naqvi, N. S., & Singh, V. K., (2014). The state of fungal diversity in 
India: An analysis. Sydowia, 66, 265–288. 
21. Millán, A., Sala, N., T orres, M., & Canela-Garayoa, R., (2021). Biocatalytic 
transformation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural into 2, 5-di (hydroxymethyl) furan by a 
newly isolated Fusarium striatum strain. Catalysts, 11, 216. 
22. Ladkau, N., Schmid, A., & Bühler, B., (2014). The microbial cell—Functional unit for 
energy dependent multistep biocatalysis. Current Opin. Biotech, 30, 178–189. 
23. Heyland, J., Antweiler, N., Lutz, J., Heck, T., Geueke, B., Kohler, H. P. E., Blank, L. M., 
& Schmid, A., (2010). Simple enzymatic procedure for l-carnosine synthesis: Whole-
cell biocatalysis and efficient biocatalyst recycling. Microbial Biotech, 3, 74–83. 
24. Dong, H., Secundo, F., Xue, C., & Mao, X., (2017). Whole-cell biocatalytic synthesis 
of cinnamyl acetate with a novel esterase from the DNA library of Acinetobacter 
hemolyticus. J. Agric. Food Chemistry, 65, 2120–2128. 
25. Hwang, J. Y., Park, J., Seo, J. H., Cha, M., Cho, B. K., Kim, J., & Kim, B. G., (2009). 
Simultaneous synthesis of 2-phenylethanol and l-homophenylalanine using aromatic 
transaminase with yeast Ehrlich pathway. Biotech. Bioeng., 102, 1323–1329. 
 
26. Tyo, K. E., Kocharin, K., & Nielsen, J., (2010). Toward design-based engineering of 
industrial microbes. Current Opin. Microbiol., 13, 255–262. 
27. Gehring, C., Wessel, M., Schaffer, S., & Thum, O., (2016). The power of biocatalysis: 
A one-pot total synthesis of rhamnolipids from butane as the sole carbon and energy 
source. Chemistry Open, 5, 513–516. 
28. Chen, F., Tao, Y., Jin, C., Xu, Y., & Lin, B. X., (2015). Enhanced production of polysialic 
acid by metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli. Applied Microbiol. Biotech., 99, 
2603–2611. 
29. Lin, B. X., Qiao, Y., Shi, B., & Tao, Y., (2016). Polysialic acid biosynthesis and 
production in Escherichia coli: Current state and perspectives. Applied Microbiol. 
Biotechnology, 100, 1–8. 
30. Lin, B. X., Zhang, Z. J., Liu, W. F., Dong, Z. Y., & Tao, Y., (2013). Enhanced production 
of N-acetyl-D-neuraminic acid by multi-approach whole-cell biocatalyst. Applied 
Microbiol. Biotechn., 97, 4775–4784. 
31. Pitera, D. J., Paddon, C. J., Newman, J. D., & Keasling, J. D., (2007). Balancing a 
heterologous mevalonate pathway for improved isoprenoid production in Escherichia 
coli. Metabolic Eng., 9, 193–207. 
32. Ye, L., Zhang, C., Bi, C., Li, Q., & Zhang, X., (2016). Combinatory optimization of 
chromosomal integrated mevalonate  pathway for β-carotene production in Escherichia 
coli. Microbial Cell Factories, 15, 1–10. 
33. Han, L., Zhao, Y., Cui, S., & Liang, B., (2018). Redesigning of microbial cell surface 
and its application to whole-cell biocatalysis and biosensors. Applied Biochem. Biotech., 
185, 396–418. 
34. Fukuda, H., Hama, S., Tamalampudi, S., & Noda, H., (2008). Whole-cell biocatalysts 
for biodiesel fuel production. Trends in Biotechn., 26, 668–673. 

 
373 
State-of-the-Art of Microbial Whole-Cell Catalysts for Biofuel Production 
35. Xiao, M. A. N., Mathew, S., & Obbard, J. P., (2009). Biodiesel fuel production via 
transesterification of oils using lipase biocatalyst. GCB Bioenergy, 1, 115–125. 
36. Murai, T., Ueda, M., Kawaguchi, T., Arai, M., & Tanaka, A., (1998). Assimilation of 
cello oligosaccharides by a cell surface-engineered yeast expressing β-glucosidase 
and carboxymethyl cellulase from Aspergillus aculeatus.  Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology, 64, 4857–4861. 
37. Francisco, J. A., Stathopoulos, C., Warren, R. A. J., Kilburn, D. G., & Georgiou, G., 
(1993). Specific adhesion and hydrolysis of cellulose by intact Escherichia coli  
expressing surface anchored cellulase or cellulose binding domains. Bio/Technology, 
11, 491–495. 
38. Benemann, J. R., (1998). Process Analysis and Economics of Biophotolysis of Water. 
IEA  Technical Report from the IEA  Agreement on the Production and Utilization of 
Hydrogen (No. IEA/H2-10-TR2-98). ExCo Secretariat of the International Energy 
Agency Implementing Agreement on the Production and Utilization of Hydrogen, 
Golden, CO (US) Annex 10 (US). 
39. Ong, L. K., Kurniawan, A., Suwandi, A. C., Lin, C. X., Zhao, X. S., & Ismadji, S., 
(2013). Transesterification of leather tanning waste to biodiesel at supercritical 
condition: Kinetics and thermodynamics studies. J. Supercritical Fluids, 75, 11–20. 
40.  Gog, A., Roman, M., Toşa, M., Paizs, C., & Irimie, F. D., (2012). Biodiesel production 
using enzymatic transesterification–current state and perspectives. Renewable Energy, 
39, 10–16. 
41. Oda, M., Kaieda, M., Hama, S., Yamaji, H., Kondo, A., Izumoto, E., & Fukuda, H., 
(2005). Facilitatory effect of immobilized lipase-producing Rhizopus oryzae cells on 
acyl migration in biodiesel-fuel production. Biochemical Engineering J., 23, 45–51. 
42. Kaieda, M., Samukawa, T., Matsumoto, T., Ban, K., Kondo, A., Shimada, Y., Noda, H., 
et al., (1999). Biodiesel fuel production from plant oil catalyzed by Rhizopus oryzae  
lipase in a water-containing system without an organic solvent. J. Bioscience Bioeng, 
88, 627–631. 
43. Freedman, B., Butterfield, R. O., & Pryde, E. H., (1986). Transesterification kinetics of 
soybean oil 1. J. Am. Oil Chemists’ Society, 63, 1375–1380. 
44. Noureddini, H., & Zhu, D., (1997). Kinetics of transesterification of soybean oil. Journal 
of the Am. Oil Chemists’ Society, 74, 1457–1463. 
45. Marchetti, J. M., Miguel, V. U., & Errazu, A. F., (2007). Possible methods for biodiesel 
production. Renewable Sustainable Energy Reviews, 11, 1300–1311. 
46. Murugesan, A., Umarani, C., Subramanian, R., & Nedunchezhian, N., (2009). Bio-diesel 
as an alternative fuel for diesel engines—A review. Renewable and Sustainable Energy 
Reviews, 13, 653–662. 
47. Indumathi, R., & Raj, S. P., (2013). Biodiesel production from microbial whole-cell 
biocatalyst. Journal of Biodiversity and Environmental Sciences, 3, 94–101. 
48. Watanabe, Y., Shimada, Y., Sugihara, A., & Tominaga, Y., (2002). Conversion of 
degummed soybean oil to biodiesel fuel with immobilized Candida antarctica lipase. J. 
Molecular Catalysis B: Enzymatic, 17, 151–155. 
49. Yan, Y., Xu, L., & Dai, M., (2012). A  synergetic whole-cell biocatalyst for biodiesel 
production. RSC Advances, 2, 6170–6173. 
50. Ban, K., Kaieda, M., Matsumoto, T., Kondo, A., & Fukuda, H., (2001). Whole-cell 
biocatalyst for biodiesel fuel production utilizing Rhizopus oryzae cells immobilized 
within biomass support particles. Biochem. Eng. J., 8, 39–43. 

 
374 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
51.  Das, D., & Veziroǧlu, T. N., (2001). Hydrogen production by biological processes: A  
survey of literature. Inter. J. Hydrogen Energy, 26, 13–28. 
52. Tanisho, S., Kuromoto, M., & Kadokura, N., (1998). Effect of CO2 removal on hydrogen 
production by fermentation. Inter. J. Hydrogen Energy, 23, 559–563. 
53. Sarangi, P. K., & Nanda, S., (2020). Biohydrogen production through dark fermentation. 
Chem. Eng. Technol., 43, 601–612. 
54. Kottenhahn, P., Schuchmann, K., & Müller, V., (2018). Efficient whole-cell biocatalyst 
for formate-based hydrogen production. Biotech. Biofuels, 11, 1–9. 
55. Schwarz, F. M., & Müller, V., (2020). Whole-cell biocatalysis for hydrogen storage and 
syngas conversion to formate using a thermophilic acetogen. Biotech. Biofuels, 13, 1–11. 
56. Weber, C., Farwick, A., Benisch, F., Brat, D., Dietz, H., Subtil, T., & Boles, E., (2010). 
Trends and challenges in the microbial production of lignocellulosic bioalcohol fuels. 
Applied Microbiol. Biotech., 87(4), 1303–1315. 
57. Pauly, M., & Keegstra, K., (2008). Cell-wall carbohydrates and their modification as a 
resource for biofuels. The Plant J., 54, 559–568. 
58. Ryu, M., & Lee, E. Y., (2011). Saccharification of alginate by using exolytic oligoalginate 
lyase from marine bacterium Sphingomonas sp. MJ-3. J. Industrial and Engineering 
Chemistry, 17, 853–858. 
59. Galbe, M., & Zacchi, G., (2002). A review of the production of ethanol from softwood. 
Applied Microbiol. Biotech., 59, 618–628. 
60. Silveira, M. H. L., Morais, A. R. C., Da Costa, L. A. M., Olekszyszen, D. N., Bogel­
Łukasik, R., Andreaus, J., & Pereira, R. L., (2015). Current pretreatment technologies for 
the development of cellulosic ethanol and biorefineries. ChemSusChem., 8, 3366–3390. 
61. Tursi, A., (2019). A review on biomass: Importance, chemistry, classification, and 
conversion. Biofuel Research Journal, 6, 962–979. 
62. Taherzadeh, M. J., & Karimi, K., (2008). Pretreatment of lignocellulosic wastes to 
improve ethanol and biogas production: A review. International Journal of Molecular 
Sciences, 9, 1621–1651. 
63. Karimi, K., Emtiazi, G., & Taherzadeh, M. J., (2006). Ethanol production from dilute-
acid pretreated rice straw by simultaneous saccharification and fermentation with 
Mucor indicus, Rhizopus oryzae, and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Enz. Microbial Tech., 
40, 138–144. 
64. Fu, Y. Q., Xu, Q., Li, S., Chen, Y., & Huang, H., (2010). Strain improvement of Rhizopus 
oryzae for over-production of fumaric acid by reducing ethanol synthesis pathway. 
Korean J. Chemical Eng., 27, 183–186. 
65. Ji, J., Gao, T., Salama, E. S., El-Dalatony, M. M., Peng, L., Gong, Y., Liu, P., & Li, 
X., (2021). Using Aspergillus Niger whole-cell biocatalyst mycelial aerobic granular 
sludge to treat pharmaceutical wastewater containing β-lactam antibiotics. Chemical 
Engineering J., 412, 128665. 
66. Alves, A. M., De Moura, R. B., Carvalho, A. K., De Castro, H. F., & Andrade, G. 
S., (2019). Penicillium citrinum whole-cells catalyst for the treatment of lipid-rich 
wastewater. Biomass Bioener., 120, 433–438. 
67.  Ferdeș, M., Dincă, M. N., Moiceanu, G., Zăbavă, B. Ș., & Paraschiv, G., (2020). 
Microorganisms and enzymes used in the biological pretreatment of the substrate to 
enhance biogas production: A review. Sustainability, 12, 7205. 
68. Zverlov, V. V., Hiegl, W., Köck, D. E., Kellermann, J., Köllmeier, T., & Schwarz, W. 
H., (2010). Hydrolytic bacteria in mesophilic and thermophilic degradation of plant 
biomass. Eng. Life Sci., 10, 528–536. 

 
375 
State-of-the-Art of Microbial Whole-Cell Catalysts for Biofuel Production 
69. Parawira, W
 ., (2012). Enzyme research and applications in biotechnological 
intensification of biogas production. Critical Rev. Biotech., 32, 172–186. 
70.  Adams, J. M., Gallagher, J. A., & Donnison, I. S., (2009). Fermentation study on 
Saccharina latissima for bioethanol production considering variable pre-treatments. J. 
Applied Phycol., 21, 569–574. 
71. Fu, B., Conrad, R., & Blaser, M., (2018). Potential contribution of acetogenesis to 
anaerobic degradation in methanogenic rice field soils. Soil Biol. Biochem., 119, 1–10. 
72. Patnaik, R., Louie, S., Gavrilovic, V., Perry, K., Stemmer, W. P., Ryan, C. M., & Del 
Cardayré, S., (2002). Genome shuffling of Lactobacillus  for improved acid tolerance. 
Nature Biotech., 20, 707–712. 
73. Liu, Y., Zhang, R., Lian, Z., Wang, S., & Wright, A. T., (2014). Yeast cell surface display 
for lipase whole-cell catalyst and its applications. J. Mol. Catalysis B: Enzymatic., 106, 
17–25. 
74. Surendhiran, D., Vijay, M., & Sirajunnisa, A. R., (2014). Biodiesel production from 
marine microalga  Chlorella salina using whole-cell yeast immobilized on sugarcane 
bagasse. J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2, 1294–1300. 
75. Zafar, S., & Owais, M., (2006). Ethanol production from crude whey by Kluyveromyces 
marxianus. Biochemical Engineering J
 
., 27, 295–298. 


Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 12  
Microbial Fuel Cells: Whole-Cell System 
for MFC, Current Trends, and Future 
Prospects for the Green Energy 
ENOSH PHILLIPS,1,2 MEHAK BHARDWAJ,1 REECHA SAHU,2 and 
PIYUSH PARKHEY2 
1Department of Biotechnology, St. Aloysius College (Autonomous), 
Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh, India 
2Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University, Raipur,  
Chhattisgarh, India 
ABSTRACT 
Energy from times is defined as ability to do work. In present days we have 
developed technologies and principles to convert energy from one form to 
the another. Energy has its massive contribution in transportation, cooking, 
manufacturing, industries, and space projects. Conventional or non-renew­
able energy sources like coal, gas, and oil have been governing the economy. 
Apart from fulfilling the energy demands, they are responsible for emission 
of environment depleting agents that are continuously decreasing the quality 
of life. Renewable source of energy is promising in providing clean and 
green energy. Such energy system is gained from earth, wind, plant, and 
sun. Recently, biomass is seen as a vital source for global energy demands. 
Such energy is termed as bioenergy. A fuel cell consists of an external circuit 
connecting cathode and anode dipped in an electrolytic solution. The protons 
or oxide ions move between electrolyte and electrode whereas the electron 
moves towards external circuit to produce electrical power. Integration of 

 
 
378 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
living cell (preferably microbial whole-cell) as a biocatalyst in an anaerobic 
compartment with the ability of electron transfer led to the development of 
microbial fuel cell (MFC) which can produce green energy without carbon 
burden. MFC holds a promising future to meet the ever-increasing power 
needs. MFC have proven their efficiency and their candidature among the 
various alternative source of energy. This chapter covers current trends and 
future prospects in the field of MFC. 
12.1 INTRODUCTION 
Energy is required to complete any set of work. Techniques have been devel­
oped to convert energy from one form into another. This has laid the founda­
tion for modern civilization. The forms of energy include: (i) potential or 
stored energy; and (ii) kinetic or working energy. Energy, at present is mostly 
sourced from non-renewable form and a little dependency is on renewable 
form is arising [1]. Conventional or non-renewable energy sources like coal, 
gas, and oil has been governing the nation’s economy presently. Moreover, 
they are consumed at a rate faster than their formation [2]. Conventional 
energy sources have drawbacks like heat waste and low in efficiencies [3]. 
Looking at the issued mentioned above, renewable source of energy is 
encouraged under nation’s policy to cut down the carbon burden and nations 
dependency on fossil fuels. The technologies for harvesting solar, wind, and 
other alterative green energies is promising to fulfill energy nation’s demands. 
In USA, 10% of energy is obtained from renewable sources [4]. Presently 
the major challenge is to include the renewable energy in the main supply 
system, as global average of dependency on replenishable energy system 
is only 15% as reported. A major part of it is from the hydro power plants. 
Other sources have least contribution [5]. Recently, biomass is seen as a vital 
source for global energy demands. Such energy is termed as bioenergy. It is 
evident that such sources can mitigate the carbon footprint. The international 
energy agency has reported in 2019 that 70% of renewable energy came 
from bioenergy. Moreover in 2017, it is said that half of the energy consume 
(for purposes like electricity, transportation, and others) worldwide was 
produced from bioenergy. With growing energy demands, the percentage 
contribution of bioenergy is likely to increase [6]. The sources of biomass 
for bioenergy consumption are agricultural residues, energy crops, wastes, 
and forestry residues [7]. One such renewable source of energy is from fuel 
cells. They have zero emissions and therefore are ecofriendly. 

 
 
 
379 
Microbial Fuel Cells: Whole-Cell System for MFC, Current Trends 
12.1.1 FUEL CELLS 
Fuel cells are open thermodynamic system that carries out electrochemical 
reaction for electricity generation. They are a good alternative to conventional 
electricity generation methods as it can provide electricity at low cost in rural 
areas. Electricity is generated by reverse electrolysis between oxygen and 
hydrogen to form water. In the fuel cell, electricity is produced by immersion 
of cathode and anode in an electrolytic solution connected by an external 
circuit through which the ions move between electrodes and solution, thus 
generating electricity. There are eight different types of fuel cells [8]. A fuel 
cell is reported to have 40%–60% efficiency and can generate 2 MW of 
electrical energy [9]. 
FIGURE 12.1 A simple fuel cell showing the mechanism of how energy is generated 
between the two electrodes. 
Use of microorganism whole-cell as a biocatalyst in an anaerobic 
compartment for electricity production led to the development of microbial 
fuel cell (MFC). The concept of utilizing bacteria for electricity production 
given by Potter 1911 but acceleration took place only after 1999. In MFC 
there are two chambers – cathode and anode; separated by proton exchange 
membrane. Microbial cells are made available in anodic chamber where 
it catalyzes the breakdown of an organic substrate, releasing protons and 
electrons. Protons cross the proton exchange membrane and electrons passes 
through external circuit. Protons and electrons then react in cathode chamber 
reducing oxygen to water. Figure 12.2 shows the entire mechanism and set up 

 
 
 
380 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
of MFC [10]. There could be single chambered or double chambered MFCs. 
In double chambered MFC, cathode, and anode are in two different compart­
ments connected by PEM or salt bridge, whereas in single chambered MFC, 
there is only an anode chamber (as seen in Figure 12.3) and sidewalls act as 
porous cathode through which the proton diffuses [11]. 
FIGURE 12.2 A membrane is placed between the two electrodes in MFC. The anodic 
chamber carries out the degradation of organic matter sufficed by bacteria during which the 
electrons generated are carried to cathode by an eternal circuit. The protons move across the 
membrane and energy called bioelectricity is generated. H2O is generated during the process. 
This is also how double chambered MFC looks like. 
FIGURE 12.3 A single chambered MFC having anode chamber followed by PEM attached 
with cathode in the side wall. 

 
381 
Microbial Fuel Cells: Whole-Cell System for MFC, Current Trends 
12.1.2 DEVELOPMENT OF MICROBIAL FUEL CELL (MFC) 
As evident MFC use microbial whole-cells to generate electricity via interac­
tion between them and solid electron donor and acceptor. MFC characteriza­
tion is done in the same way as of the fuel cells as it is derived from fuel cells 
[12]. MFC has many types of configurations. One of the most traditional or 
common one is the H shaped chamber. Here two bottles are connected by a 
tube and separated by a cation exchanger membrane. The membrane may 
be an ultrex, nafion, or a salt bridge. The membrane is so designed which 
allows only protons to pass and inhibits the movement of substrate across 
the chambers and restricts movement of oxygen (electron acceptor) towards 
cathode. Such a system is used for research basis. Like power generation, 
microbial communities and other parameters [13]. 
Many types of substrates have been used to develop MFCs, such as 
wastewater from distillery, industry, farm, domestic, metal processing, food 
processing, paper recycling, and land fill leachate. These can be used as vital 
source of organic material for MFCs [14]. Microalgae, a photosynthetic and 
aquatic organism has recently attracted its use in MFC. It is a promising 
substrate in biofuel production as well. Microalgae can be used to eliminate 
nutrient and absorb CO2 produced at cathode. In a work reported by Powell et 
al. [55], used Saccharomyces cerevisiae in the anode chamber and at cathode 
Chlorella vulgaris. Results shows that the CO2 produced at cathode is used 
by algae to grow and also acted as final electron acceptor. It can be used as 
electron acceptor or donor or both simultaneously [15]. 
12.2 WHOLE-CELL AS A BIOCATALYST 
Environmental concerns have pushed us to the development of biobased 
products. Chemical synthesis or processes may be conventional from 
ages, but their usage have shown long lasting harmful effects. Therefore, 
biocatalyst or use of whole-cell is desired for many such processes. They 
are highly selective as suggested through many works. Mild working condi­
tion and high efficiency are useful for industries [16]. In whole-cell as a 
biocatalyst fungus, bacteria, algae, plants, and other are used as biocatalyst 
[17]. MFC is one such system that utilizes whole-cell for the production of 
energy. It is far seen as an alternative for electricity production. Not only for 
energy production, MFCs are looked like a tool for wastewater treatment 
while producing energy. MFC can be created using a pure culture. But such 

 
 
 
 
382 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
a system is limited by the fact that a single microorganism will be utilizing 
a restricted nutrient and hence much of the nutrient remain un-metabolized, 
which ultimately leads to lesser production. In view of this a mixed culture 
of microbes is recommended for complete usage of all nutrients present in 
the system and higher production of energy [18]. In MFC as evident, bacteria 
are kept in a separate chamber, kept apart from the electron acceptor. The 
bacterial metabolism plays an essential role in the flow of electron. Bacteria 
metabolizes organic matter in anaerobic condition and electrons generated 
during the process is carried to enzymes present in the inner membrane 
space. A synthetic electron carrier is used to carry the electron from inside 
of the cell to an external electrode. Use of chemical mediators are toxic to 
microbial life and hence pose a great challenge to the use of MFC. Certain 
bacteria may produce their own mediators [19]. 
So far only few electron mediators have been utilized for electron transfer 
between microbe and the electrode. It is beneficial, as microbes can utilize 
oxygen at cathode as electron acceptor while remaining in anaerobic condi­
tion. Electron mediators like AQDS (9,10-Anthraquinone-2, 6-disulfonic 
acid disodium salt), resazurin, humic acids, safranine O, and methylene blue 
thus suffice such a process. In a study over the effect of electron mediators on 
the electricity generation in MFC showed that resazurin has enhanced elec­
tric production. Also, it showed no involvement in differing the end product 
of fermentation thus suggesting as an effective mediator in MFC [20]. The 
concentration of electron mediators also plays a vital role in electricity 
generation. Studies have indicated that there is an optimum concentration of 
mediators required for maximum electricity production, above, and below 
which there is no net change in the value of electricity production [21]. 
12.3 APPLICATIONS OF MFCS 
1.  Bioelectricity: Fossil fuels though provide enormous amount of 
energy, but they are available in limited quantity as well as adds the 
carbon burden to environment upon combustion. Hence, alternative 
strategy has to be developed to provide energy unceasingly via green 
and carbon neutral process. Among the various alternative energy 
sources, MFCs have established its usage for paving the way of 
developing green energy. Electricity generated using biomass is 
called bioelectricity. Electricity generation from biomass not only 
confers energy generation but also helps in effective management of 

 
383 
Microbial Fuel Cells: Whole-Cell System for MFC, Current Trends 
biomass [22]. Many works have supported this fact, like in a work 
carried out by Li et al. [23] where they attempted to create bioelec
tricity while removing heavy mental from industrial sources. Here 
MFC was used to transform chromium into harmless form. Cr (IV) 
is bio-transformed to non-toxic form Cr (III) using electrigens in 
double chambered MFC. A considerable amount of Cr was removed 
while adequate amount of bioelectricity is created [23]. Plant MFC 
and constructed well MFC are tested as well. Constructed well MFC 
have aerobic and anaerobic zone where bioelectricity can be gener
ated by oxidation of contaminants present in the system [24]. 
2.   Biohydrogen Production: Anaerobic digestion (AD) has been 
utilized to degrade organic matter to produce biomethane which is 
known as biogas. It is C-neutral process for the conversion of waste 
biomass to energy. The spent feedstock can be used as fertilizer. This 
phenomenon can also be used for bio-hydrogen production. Hydrogen 
is used for production of huge amount of energy. The energy residing 
within hydrogen can be converted into electric energy by the media
tion of fuel cell. There are several reports about the production of 
biohydrogen and biomethane from waste food using MFC. In one 
such work Florio et al. [25], used left over food material as an organic 
matter substrate in MFC. Such a set produced 264 mV  of electricity 
as reported. The spent substrate from MFC produced about a signifi
cant amount of biohydrogen [25]. Production of hydrogen in MFC 
is achieved by maintaining anaerobic condition in cathode. MFC 
has recently been reported to be modified to perform electrolysis 
for enhanced hydrogen production. Similar phenomena occur here 
too, the hydrogen so produced during the process combines with 
electron and passes through the circuit and on application of an 
external voltage liberates hydrogen [26]. Some efforts are also made 
in coupling MFC with MEC (microbial electrolysis cell). MEC as 
evident is developed from MFC. Such a coupled system is favorable 
for higher hydrogen production. Since external voltage is required 
for liberation of hydrogen from the circuit in fuel cell. MFC provides 
the extra voltage whereas MEC produces hydrogen. Sun et al. [27] 
made such arrangements. Their work showed that when MFC-MEC 
coupled system increased the yield of hydrogen [27]. More efforts 
are made for the production biohydrogen in a cost-effective process. 
Solar assisted MFC is one in this kind. Here solar energy is coupled 
with MFC for the generation external voltage required to liberate 
­
­
­
­

 
384 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
hydrogen from the circuit. Photosynthetic bacteria are used in 
association with photoelectrodes and photo chemical cells [28]. It 
is suggested that solar assisted MFC generates more hydrogen than 
conventional MFC. However, more work is still due to fill the tech
nical gaps to make it into routine practice. Algae is most worked 
organism in this regard [29]. One of the limitations in hydrogen 
production by MFC is volumetric efficiency. In one of the works, 
by Tartakovsky and coworkers showed continuous flow MFC for 
biohydrogen production. A single chambered MFC is used for the 
purpose [30]. 
3.  Wastewater Treatment: It is a major matter of concern for all the 
parts of the world. Treatment of wastewater consumes enough energy 
that is equivalent to 3–4% of the total energy load. Wastewater 
contains about 26% of chemical energy which can be harvested. 
Rest 74% is thermal energy which is difficult to be harvested. Apart 
from this, wastewater treatment produces greenhouse gases (GHGs). 
MFC can be efficient strategy in treating wastewater and directly 
converting it to clean energy. It thus provides an eco-friendly conver
sion of sludge in wastewater to energy without any input of energy 
and resources. MFC has been reported to produce 1.43 kWh/m3 from 
sludge and 1.8 kWh/m3 from treated effluent. MFC act as a galvanic 
cell in wastewater treatment [31]. It is also suggested that MFC can 
be scaled up for more electricity production and treating wastewater 
for irrigation. The study shows it has more economical benefits. It 
indicates that the cost of electricity generated by treating wastewater 
in beverage industry in California is 15.5 cents per KWh [32]. 
The construction of MFC type is also a crucial attribute. Lower the cost 
of construction, less the cost of electricity generated. Jayshree et al. [33] 
attempted to reduce the cost of MFC construction and using it for treating 
wastewater. A mediator less and membrane less MFC is developed. Such 
attempts are made to reduce the cost of MFC so that its application areas can 
be increased. This MFC used for wastewater system having acetate as the 
sole carbon source and a consortium of microbes for AD. Airtight containers 
were used as reactor (cathode  and anode chamber). A  salt bridge was devel
oped to connect the two chambers which acted for transfer of protons and 
electrons. Copper wire is used for connecting the two electrodes to external 
voltage. This MFC is coupled with peroxicoagulation for decolorization of 
the treated water. Such a system generated 1.72 mA of current and removed 
­
­
­

 
385 
Microbial Fuel Cells: Whole-Cell System for MFC, Current Trends 
98% of dye. It is also found to be cost effective in treating wastewater along 
with it, generation of electricity is axillary benefit [33]. 
12.4 FUTURISTIC APPLICATION OF MFCS 
12.4.1 MFCS AS BIOSENSORS 
Devices that discern the qualities and the happenings in the environment and 
then turn the data in the form of signals are known as sensors [34]. On the 
other hand, a biosensor is a type of scientific equipment that in the presence 
of the specified analyte, examines the sample [35]. MFCs transform the 
chemical energy into electrical energy by microorganisms that serve as cata­
lysts [34]. The microorganisms present on the anode serve as bio-detectors 
whereas electrodes operate as transducers [36]. These microorganisms can 
detect a quick increase or decrease in the quantity of solute as a result respond 
with an increase or decrease in the resultant current flow. The connectivity 
between the outturn of the signal and modifications in the environment is the 
foundation of MFC-based biosensors [34]. These biosensors in the presence 
of the external electrical circuit work on an external resistor. It is influenced 
by mainly three factors: the extrinsic resistance, the anode potential, or the 
current magnitude [37]. 
This biosensing approach provides for enhanced wastewater control 
while also recovering energy in a synchronized manner. As a result, it is 
viewed as a possible answer to the issue of uncontrolled power exhaustion 
and the loss of resources in the treatment of wastewater [38]. Organic matter 
concentration present in the wastewater is the key indicator for the deduc­
tion of biological oxygen demand (BOD). MFCs are shown to have organic 
matter present in some content hence, to keep a check on the BOD they 
are utilized as biosensors. According to research performed on wastewater 
treatment, the pollutants and organic content of wastewater can dynamically 
affect the anodic microbial population of MFCs [39]. Hsieh & Chung [41] 
stated that the BOD levels in the effluents assessed by the MFC biosensor 
are under 240 mg L–1 [40]. 
Architectural variables, operational parameters, and living constituents, 
all influence the efficiency of MFC-based biosensor efficacy and power 
production. Environmental variables like hydrogen ion concentration, fuel 
consumption rate, temperature, nucleophile, conductivity, and an elec­
trophile are some of the most important aspects that determine the MFCs 
precision and accuracy. The reactor’s design, the matter, membrane, and 

 
 
386 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
electrode furthermore are the salient factors to consider, as they affect their 
value and functioning. A lot of advancement has been done on the biosensing 
technique, but it has its shortcomings the goal of the research is to build a 
small and dynamic MFC-based biosensor that has robust nature and speed 
that can monitor BOD [41]. 
12.4.2 BIOREMEDIATION 
The viable alternative strategy is bioremediation that uses microbial whole-
cell resources for pollutant degrading [42]. As stated earlier MFC consists 
of an anode and cathode. At the anode, the oxidation of nucleophiles takes 
place. The pollutants from the wastewater are oxidized and water and CO2 
are the end result of the conversion of the chemical oxygen demand (COD). 
At the cathode, reduction of oxidized substances takes place, being that the 
supplied electric potential should surpass the oxidized substances’ threshold. 
Hence, highly used in the purification of effluents, metals like Cr6+, V5+, 
biological compounds, xenobiotics, and inorganic compounds. 
O2 is necessary by anaerobic MFC which may result in electron wastage 
and the need for the energy required to complete the reaction also rises. As 
a result, for generating electricity as well as for bioremediation Anaerobic 
MFCs could be environmentally benign and a productive option. These 
can be used to manage different kinds of wastewaters. In an experiment 
conducted by Abbasi et al. [44], it was seen that the COD level (85–90%) 
and the voltage (890 mV) produced were shown to have a favorable connec­
tion [43, 44]. A study on the reduction of chromium with anaerobic sludge 
was conducted by Wang et al. [45] where it was observed that in 48 hrs. in 
incubation the whole Cr (VI) (100 mg/L) content was separated with utmost 
PD of 767.0 mW/m2. Same way nitrate and selenite can be separated out as 
both are toxic to plants, marine animals, and humans [45, 46]. 
12.4.3 MEDICAL FIELD 
The most important innovation of the healthcare industry is known to be 
MFCs. In these whole-cells function as a catalyst. In the 1960s MFCs were 
originally employed in implantable mechanical hearts which led to their use 
in implantable medical devices. An investigation conducted by Justin et al. 
indicated that the production of electricity in implanted biomedical equip­
ment can be done by human cells and fluids [47, 48]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
387 
Microbial Fuel Cells: Whole-Cell System for MFC, Current Trends 
12.4.4 PLANT-MFC 
The idea of plant-MFC is derived from sediment MFC where anode is 
embedded in sea floor and cathode floats on water. Cathode floats in oxygen 
rich environment. Now plant roots are a rich source of organic substrate. 
So, attaching cathode in root region and making bacteria available at anodic 
region can be used to generate energy. The advantage of P-MFC is that there 
is a continuous supply of organic material. Such a set up converts solar energy 
directly into electrical energy [49]. In an interesting work, Helder et al. [50] 
prepared P-MFC to check its efficiency at roof top that includes winter times 
when solar energy is least. The result shows about 0.77 mW m–2 to 9.29 mW 
m–2 average power generated during the entire run of the experiment. This 
supports a sustainable technology for power generation [50]. 
P-MFC can be utilized as a sustainable unit for the removal of heavy metal 
from water and soil. Habibul et al. [51] tried to use P-MFC for the removal of 
Cr (IV) and generate electricity. The work suggested that P-MFC is vital in 
removing Cr (IV) efficiently from soil and water. The results indicated removal 
of 99.9% of Cr (IV). The removal efficiency rate increased upon raising the 
concentration of heavy metal. Also, it is found that P-MFC is sustainable and 
stable over long-term usage even. Apart from Cr(IV), Cr(III) also removed. 
Most of the Cr(III) got precipitated as Cr(OH)3 and very less amount is found 
in P-MFC. This fuel cell worked in the absence of acetate suggesting that 
plants solely can avail carbohydrate for energy generation [51]. 
12.5 CHALLENGES 
Use of mediator less MFC gave a great boost to MFC technology. However, 
there are still many challenges evident of its coherent usage. High internal 
resistance is one of the major challenges as it restricts our ability to calculate 
the maximum output attainable from MFC. The power density of MFC is 
also pretty less than chemical fuel cell [52]. The biocatalyst used for power 
generation also requires through studies. Pure cultures have low energy 
generation whereas mixed culture takes longer time than pure culture for 
steady power generation. 
The substrate plays an essential role in MFC. It controls the growth 
of bacteria in pure culture and selects which bacteria will grow in case of 
mixed culture. Among various substrate glucose, butyrate, and acetate are 
widely used. Many other sources like wastewater, soil, and others have been 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
388 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
studied. But substrate concentration affects the power generation. Higher 
substrate concentration leads to feedback inhibition. Thus, decreasing power 
generation. Ideal pH is also not well established fact [53]. 
P-MFC also sees challenges like light intensity, carbon dioxide (CO2) 
concentration, the type of plant to be coupled with, soil microbe consortia, 
electrode material and its surface area, and others [54]. 
Looking at these challenges, we could say MFC has large area of 
research to be a promising source of energy and at the same time have varied 
applications. 
12.6 CONCLUSION 
MFC holds a promising future to meet the ever-increasing power need. 
MFC have proven their efficiency and their candidature among the various 
alternative source of energy. MFC are clean energy sources that utilizes 
the natural ability of microbes to digest the organic matter while releasing 
electron which can be used for bioelectricity generation. In the due process, 
the protons released can be made to produce biohydrogen and another vital 
energy source. Many works are carried out, to develop or use cost effec­
tive and efficient substrate for MFC. In working out so, MFC is seen to be 
used for wastewater treatment, as biosensor, medical chip and many others. 
Facing challenges always paves the way for much development eventually 
leading to better technology in the relevant field. MFC in future will become 
a primary source of energy with varied applications. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
biocatalyst 
• 
biohydrogen 
• 
bioremediation 
• 
biosensors 
• 
medical field 
• 
microbial fuel cell 
• 
P-MFC 
• 
wastewater treatment 

 
389 
Microbial Fuel Cells: Whole-Cell System for MFC, Current Trends 
REFERENCES 
1.  What Is Energy? Explained – U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) https:// 
www.eia.gov/energyexplained/what-is-energy/ (accessed on 20 July 2023). 
2. Kamran, M., & Fazal, M. R., (2021). Fundamentals of renewable energy systems. Renew. 
Energy Convers. Syst., 1–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-823538-6.00009-9. 
3. Dincer, I., & Bicer, Y ., (2020). Integration of conventional energy systems for 
multigeneration. Integr. Energy Syst. Multigeneration, 143–221. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
B978-0-12-809943-8.00004-2. 
4. Bull, S. R., (2001). Renewable energy today and tomorrow.  Proc. IEEE, 89(8), 
1216–1226. https://doi.org/10.1109/5.940290. 
5. Lund, H., (2007). Renewable energy strategies for sustainable development. Energy, 
32(6), 912–919. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENERGY.2006.10.017. 
6. Reid, W. V., Ali, M. K., Christopher, F. B., Correspondence, W. V., Reid, D., & Packard, 
L., (2020). The future of bioenergy. Glob. Chang. Biol., 26(1), 274–286. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/GCB.14883. 
7. Slade, R., Bauen, A., & Gross, R., (2014). Global bioenergy resources. Nature Clim 
Change, 4, 99–105. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2097. 
8. Mekhilef, S., Saidur, R., & Safari, A., (2012). Comparative study of different fuel cell 
technologies. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 16(1), 981–989. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
RSER.2011.09.020. 
9. Kirubakaran, A., Jain, S., & Nema, R. K., (2009). A review on fuel cell technologies and 
power electronic interface. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 13(9), 2430–2440. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.RSER.2009.04.004. 
10. Rahimnejad, M., Adhami, A., Darvari, S., Zirepour, A., & Oh, S. E., (2015). Microbial 
fuel cell as new technology for bioelectricity generation: A review. Alexandria Eng. J., 
54(3), 745–756. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.AEJ.2015.03.031. 
11.  Karmakar, S., Kundu, K., & Kundu, S., (2010). In: Vilas, M. A., (ed.), Design and 
Development of Microbial Fuel Cells. Badajoz, Spain: Formatex Research Center: 
Spain. 
12. He, Z., (2017). Development of microbial fuel cells needs to go beyond “power density.” 
ACS Energy Lett.,2(3), 700–702. https://doi.org/10.1021/ACSENERGYLETT.7B00041. 
13. Logan, B. E., Hamelers, B., Rozendal, R., Schröder, U., Keller, J., Freguia, S., Aelterman, 
P., et al., (2006). Microbial fuel cells: Methodology and technology. Environ. Sci. 
Technol., 40(17), 5181–5192. https://doi.org/10.1021/ES0605016. 
14.  Sonawane, J. M., Adeloju, S. B., & Ghosh, P. C., (2017). Landfill leachate: A promising 
substrate for microbial fuel cells. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 42(37), 23794–23798. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/J.IJHYDENE.2017.03.137. 
15. Baicha, Z., Salar-García, M. J., Ortiz-Martínez, V. M., Hernández-Fernández, F. J., De 
Los Ríos, A. P., Labjar, N., et al., (2016). A critical review on microalgae as an alternative 
source for bioenergy production: A promising low-cost substrate for microbial fuel cells. 
Fuel Process. Technol., 154, 104–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FUPROC.2016.08.017. 
16. Lin, B., & Tao, Y., (2017). Whole-cell biocatalysts by design. Microb. Cell Fact., 16(1), 
1–12. https://doi.org/10.1186/S12934-017-0724-7/FIGURES/2. 
17. Garzón-Posse, F., Becerra-Figueroa, L., Hernández-Arias, J., & Gamba-Sánchez, D., 
(2018). Whole-cells as biocatalysts in organic transformations. Mol. A J. Synth. Chem. 
Nat. Prod. Chem., 23(6). https://doi.org/10.3390/MOLECULES23061265. 

 
390 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
18. Hong, K. B., Seop, C. I., & Gadd, G. M., (2007). Challenges in microbial fuel cell 
development and operation. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 76, 485–494. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00253-007-1027-4. 
19. Liu, H., Ramnarayanan, R., & Logan, B. E., (2004). Production of electricity during 
wastewater treatment using a single chamber microbial fuel cell. Environ. Sci. Technol., 
38(7), 2281–2285. https://doi.org/10.1021/ES034923G. 
20. Sund, C. J., McMasters, S., Crittenden, S. R., Harrell, L. E., & Sumner, J. J., (2007). 
Effect of electron mediators on current generation and fermentation in a microbial 
fuel cell. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 76(3), 561–568. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
S00253-007-1038-1. 
21. Najafpour, G., (2011). Methylene blue as electron promoters in microbial fuel cell. Int. 
J. Hydrogen Energy, 36, 3335–3341. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.07.059. 
22. Obileke, K. C., Onyeaka, H., Meyer, E. L., & Nwokolo, N., (2021). Microbial fuel cells, a 
renewable energy technology for bio-electricity generation: A mini-review. Electrochem. 
Commun., 125, 107003. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ELECOM.2021.107003. 
23. Li, M., Zhou, S., Xu, Y., Liu, Z., Ma, F., Zhi, L., & Zhou, X., (2018). Simultaneous 
Cr(VI) reduction and bioelectricity generation in a dual chamber microbial fuel cell. 
Chem. Eng. J., 334, 1621–1629. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CEJ.2017.11.144. 
24. Song, H., Zhang, S., Long, X., Yang, X., Li, H., & Xiang, W., (2017). Optimization of 
bioelectricity generation in constructed wetland-coupled microbial fuel cell systems. 
Water, 9(3), 185. https://doi.org/10.3390/W9030185. 
25. Florio, C., Nastro, R. A., Flagiello, F., Minutillo, M., Pirozzi, D., Pasquale, V., Ausiello, 
A., et al., (2019). Biohydrogen production from solid phase-microbial fuel cell spent 
substrate: A preliminary study. J. Clean. Prod., 227, 506–511. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
JCLEPRO.2019.03.316. 
26. Saravanan, A., Karishma, S., Kumar, P. S., Yaashikaa, P. R., Jeevanantham, S., & 
Gayathri, B., (2020). Microbial electrolysis cells and microbial fuel cells for biohydrogen 
production: Current advances and emerging challenges. Biomass Convers. Biorefinery, 
2020, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/S13399-020-00973-X. 
27. Sun, M., Sheng, G. P., Mu, Z. X., Liu, X. W., Chen, Y. Z., Wang, H. L., & Yu, H. Q., 
(2009). Manipulating the hydrogen production from acetate in a microbial electrolysis 
cell–microbial fuel cell-coupled system. J. Power Sources, 191(2), 338–343. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.JPOWSOUR.2009.01.087. 
28. Wang, H., Qian, F., & Li, Y., (2014). Solar-assisted microbial fuel cells for bioelectricity 
and chemical fuel generation. Nano Energy, 8, 264–273. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
NANOEN.2014.06.004. 
29. Fischer, F., (2018). Photoelectrode, photovoltaic and photosynthetic microbial fuel cells. 
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 90, 16–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RSER.2018.03.053. 
30. Tartakovsky, B., Manuel, M. F., Neburchilov, V., Wang, H., & Guiot, S. R., (2008). 
Biocatalyzed hydrogen production in a continuous flow microbial fuel cell with a 
gas phase cathode. J. Power Sources, 182(1), 291–297. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
JPOWSOUR.2008.03.062. 
31. Gude, V. G., (2016). Wastewater treatment in microbial fuel cells – an overview. J. 
Clean. Prod., 122, 287–307. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2016.02.022. 
32. Abourached, C., English, M. J., & Liu, H., (2016). Wastewater treatment by microbial 
fuel cell (MFC) prior irrigation water reuse. J. Clean. Prod., 137, 144–149. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2016.07.048. 

 
391 
Microbial Fuel Cells: Whole-Cell System for MFC, Current Trends 
33. Jayashree, S., Ramesh, S. T., Lavanya, A., Gandhimathi, R., & Nidheesh, P. V ., 
(2019). Wastewater treatment by microbial fuel cell coupled with peroxicoagulation 
process. Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 21(10), 2033–2045. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
S10098-019-01759-0. 
34. Cui, Y., Lai, B., & Tang, X., (2019). Microbial fuel cell-based biosensors. Biosens., 9(3), 
92. https://doi.org/10.3390/BIOS9030092. 
35.  Nguyen, H. H., Lee, S. H., Lee, U. J., Fermin, C. D., & Kim, M., (2019). Immobilized 
enzymes in biosensor applications. Mater., 12(1), 121. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
MA12010121. 
36. Do, M. H., Ngo, H. H., Guo, W., Chang, S. W., Nguyen, D. D., Deng, L., Chen, Z., & 
Nguyen, T. V., (2020). Performance of mediator-less double chamber microbial fuel 
cell-based biosensor for measuring biological chemical oxygen. J. Environ. Manage., 
276, 111279. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JENVMAN.2020.111279. 
37. Stein, N. E., Hamelers, H. V. M., & Buisman, C. N. J., (2012). The effect of different 
control mechanisms on the sensitivity and recovery time of a microbial fuel cell-based 
biosensor. Sensors Actuators B Chem., 171, 172, 816–821. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
SNB.2012.05.076. 
38. Yi, Y., Xie, B., Zhao, T., Qian, Z., & Liu, H., (2020). The effect of anode 
hydrodynamics on the sensitivity of microbial fuel cell-based biosensors and the 
biological mechanism. Bioelectrochemistry, 132, 107351. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
BIOELECHEM.2019.107351. 
39. Xiao, N., Selvaganapathy, P. R., Wu, R., & Huang, J. J., (2020). Influence of wastewater 
microbial community on the performance of miniaturized microbial fuel cell biosensor. 
Bioresour. Technol., 302, 122777. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2020.122777. 
40.  Hsieh, M. C., & Chung, Y. C., (2014). Measurement of Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
from Different Wastewater Samples Using a Mediator-Less Microbial Fuel Cell 
Biosensor, 35(17), 2204–2211. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09593330.2014.898700; 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09593330.2014.898700. 
41. Do, M. H., Ngo, H. H., Guo, W., Chang, S. W., Nguyen, D. D., Liu, Y., Varjani, S., 
& Kumar, M., (2020). Microbial fuel cell-based biosensor for online monitoring 
wastewater quality: A critical review. Sci. Total Environ., 712, 135612. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.SCITOTENV.2019.135612. 
42. Bose, D., Mukherjee, A., & Mitra, G., (2020). Energy Recovery Prospects of Fuel Cell 
Technologies: Sustainability and Bioremediation. https://doi.org/10.1080/14484846.20 
20.1747152. 
43. Kumar, B., Agrawal, K., Bhardwaj, N., Chaturvedi, V., & Verma, P., (2018). 
Advances in concurrent bioelectricity generation and bioremediation through 
microbial fuel cells. Microb. Fuel Cell Technol. Bioelectr., 211–239. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-3-319-92904-0_11. 
44. Abbasi, U., Jin, W., Pervez, A., Bhatti, Z. A., Tariq, M., Shaheen, S., Iqbal, A., & 
Mahmood, Q., (2016). Anaerobic microbial fuel cell treating combined industrial 
wastewater: Correlation of electricity generation with pollutants. Bioresour. Technol., 
200, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2015.09.088. 
45. Wang, G., Huang, L., & Zhang, Y., (2008). Cathodic reduction of hexavalent chromium 
[Cr(VI)] coupled with electricity generation in microbial fuel cells. Biotechnol. Lett., 
30(11), 1959–1966. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10529-008-9792-4. 

 
392 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
46. Agrawal, K., Bhardwaj, N., Kumar, B., Chaturvedi, V., & Verma, P., (2019). Microbial 
fuel cell: A boon in bioremediation of wastes. Microb. Wastewater Treat., 175–194. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-816809-7.00009-9. 
47. Singh, R., Kaur, N., & Singh, M., (2021). Bio-compatible bio-fuel 
 
cells for 
medical devices. Mater. Today Proc., 44, 242–249. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
MATPR.2020.09.461. 
48. Amar, A. B., Kouki, A. B., & Cao, H., (2015). Power approaches for implantable 
medical devices. Sensors, 15(11), 28889–28914. https://doi.org/10.3390/S151128889. 
49. Deng, H., Chen, Z., & Zhao, F., (2012). Energy from plants and microorganisms: 
Progress in plant–microbial fuel cells. ChemSusChem, 5(6), 1006–1011. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/CSSC.201100257. 
50. Helder, M., Strik, D. P. B. T. B., Timmers, R. A., Raes, S. M. T., Hamelers, H. V. 
M., & Buisman, C. J. N., (2013). Resilience of roof-top plant-microbial fuel cells 
during Dutch winter. Biomass and Bioenergy, 51, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
BIOMBIOE.2012.10.011. 
51. Habibul, N., Hu, Y., Wang, Y. K., Chen, W., Yu, H. Q., & Sheng, G. P., (2016). 
Bioelectrochemical chromium(VI) removal in plant-microbial fuel cells. Environ. Sci. 
Technol., 50(7), 3882–3889. https://doi.org/10.1021/ACS.EST.5B06376/SUPPL_FILE/ 
ES5B06376_SI_001.PDF. 
52. Kim, B. H., Chang, I. S., & Gadd, G. M., (2007). Challenges in microbial fuel cell 
development and operation. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 76(3), 485–494. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/S00253-007-1027-4. 
53. Chandrasekhar, K., Kadier, A., Kumar, G., Nastro, R. A., & Jeevitha, V., (2018). Challenges 
in microbial fuel cell and future scope. Microb. Fuel Cell A Bioelectrochemical Syst. 
that Convert. Waste to Watts, 483–499. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-66793-5_25. 
54.  Maddalwar, S., Kumar, N. K., Kumar, M., & Singh, L., (2021). Plant microbial fuel 
cell: Opportunities, challenges, and prospects. Bioresour. Technol., 341. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2021.125772. 
55. Powell, E. E., & Hill, G. A., (2009). ‘Economic assessment of an integrated bioethanol– 
biodiesel–microbial fuel cell facility utilizing yeast and photosynthetic algae. 
Chemical Engineering Research and Design, 87(9), pp. 1340–1348. doi: 10.1016/j. 
cherd.2009.06.018. 

Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 13  
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels 
Production 
SILAMBARASAN TAMIL SELVAN,1 BALASUBRAMANIAN VELRAMAR,2 
ANANDAKUMAR NADARAJAN,3 DHANDAPANI RAMAMURTHY,4 and 
PRABHU MANICKAM NATARAJAN5 
1Department of Microbiology, School of Allied Health Sciences, 
Vinayaka Missions Research Foundation (Deemed to be University), 
Salem, Tamil Nadu, India 
2Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, India 
3Department of Education, The Gandhigarm Rural Institute, Gandhigram, 
Dindigul, Tamil Nadu, India 
4Department of Microbiology, School of Biosciences, School of 
Microbiology, Periyar University, Salem, Tamil Nadu, India 
5Department of Clinical Sciences, Center of Medical and Bio-Allied 
Health Sciences and Research, College of Dentistry, Ajman University, 
Ajman, UAE 
ABSTRACT 
The production of oleaginous microalgae biofuel is a potential replacement 
for traditional carbon fuels. Global pollution is rising due to the depletion 
of fossil fuel reserves, increasing costs, increasing competition, pollution 
due to over usage, and global climate change concerns. Among the most 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
394 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
promising alternatives are algae-based renewable energy. Microalgae have 
emerged as an attractive fuel source because several strains accumulate more 
lipid, including rapid biomass growth, and produce more photosynthetic 
productivity than their plant kingdom counterparts. Microalgae-derived 
biomass has received a lot of attention for generating a wider range of renew­
able energy. Microalgae have unique characteristics such as high biomass 
production, abundant fatty oils, and the ability to be cultivated without using 
arable land or environmental landforms. They also provide possibilities for 
mitigating the effects of climate change by permitting wastewater treat­
ment plants and CO2 capture. Microalgae are small renewable fuel habitats 
that store a wide range of biofuels. Despite these advantages, microalgae 
have a number of drawbacks, which include high lipid yield under limiting 
growth conditions and higher unemployment in strains with high lipid 
content. Biotechnological approaches have the potential to make significant 
strides in strain improvement for biofuel production on a large level. This 
chapter discussed various strategies for increasing lipid accumulation and 
efficiency, including regulating key enzymes involved through lipid produc­
tion, restricting competitive mechanisms, pyramiding genome, facilitating 
increased cell biomass under nutrient depletion as well as other environ­
mental stresses, and controlling upstream regulators of the target genes, 
including the transcriptionists. Biomass feedstock for thermochemical and 
biochemical conversion processes to produce a variety of sustainable and 
renewable biofuel production, which include biodiesel, bioethanol, biogas, 
and biohydrogen. The produced biofuels continuously from the biomass 
source can clearly lead to an increase in the energetic productivity of the 
microalgal biomass, improving the economical level of this algal biorefinery 
approach. 
13.1 INTRODUCTION 
The rapid growth of human population around the globe leads to the 
worldwide fuel energy demands keep on increasing each year due to the 
depletion of combustion of fossil fuels. Emissions of greenhouse gasses 
(GHG) by combustion of fossil fuels are likely to continue increasing 
as a result of global warming. A combination of population growth and 
advancement in technology adds up to more energy being consumed 
worldwide. Approximately 90% of world energy is derived from fossil 
fuels, and only 10% is generated from renewable sources. According to the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
395 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA), 71% of greenhouse gas 
emissions highly recorded in 2019. In addition to carbon dioxide (CO2) and 
methane, the major greenhouse gas CO2, might inhabit the atmosphere for 
trapping heat and resulting in global warming and avoid the need to expand 
fossil fuel dependence, the scientific community is focusing on alternative 
and renewable energy viz., biofuel, wind, solar energy, and hydropower 
resources. Sustainable, nontoxic, biodegradable, and renewable biofuels 
are accessible [1]. 
The feedstock for biofuel production has progressed from edible feed­
stock in 1st generations to lignocellulosic biomass and agricultural waste in 
the 2nd generation, microalgae as in 3rd generation, and genetically modified 
microalgae in the 4th generation. Microalgae are photosynthetic autotrophs 
that found in lakes, rivers, and marine environment [2]. As they use solar 
energy to convert water and CO2 into glucose, they are responsible for 
creating atmospheric oxygen. From prokaryotic single-celled cyanobacteria 
to more complex multicellular eukaryotic algae, the algae group is diverse [3, 
4]. Microalgae are unicellular microorganisms that live in both saltwater and 
freshwater. Because microalgal cells contain pigments such as chlorophylls, 
they are capable of undertaking photosynthesis instead of plants. Microalgae 
species have endless potential for use in several fields for the benefit of 
mankind. Microalgae have been identified as a potential resource for biofuels 
generation and major benefits viz.: (i) high lipid and biomass productivity; 
(ii) no competition for food production; (iii) microalgae highly environmental 
tolerance to stress conditions; (iv) higher amount of CO2 capture efficiency; 
and (v) high biorefinery capabilities. Microalgae may multiply their bulk 100 
times faster than terrestrial plants. Moreover, microalgae oil yields can reach 
5,000 gallons per acre, but traditional oil crops like palm, corn, and coconut 
can only reach 1,000 gallons. Microalgae composition varies by species and 
growing environments. Microalgae include 20–40% lipids, 0–20% carbohy­
drates, 30–50% proteins and 0–50% nucleic acids. Some microalgae species 
can collect up to 85% lipids. Microalgae without lignin and hemicellulose 
were more effective in producing ethanol [5, 6]. 
Microalgae have been produced bioethanol, biobutanol, biodiesel 
(biofuels), biochar (solid biofuels), green hydrocarbon, and biomethane 
(gaseous biofuels) [7]. Various microalgal strains with high biomass, lipids, 
and optimal growth conditions (carbon supply, nutrients, light intensity, etc.) 
have been obtained. The biodiesel from this promising feedstock needs a 
robust downstream processing (DSP) system. The lipid concentration of 

 
396 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
dried microalgae biomass was typically 20–50%, but with specific optimized 
growing technology the lipid content of microalgae was raised to 80% [8–10]. 
Microalgae-derived lipids have two mains uses: firstly, for biodiesel 
production and secondly as dietary supplements. Microalgae biodiesel is the 
green fuel of the future since it is carbon neutral and uses feedstock that does 
not compete with our present food supply. Microalgae cells contain complex 
carbohydrates such as cellulose, agarose, starch, and glycogen that can 
be used to yield bioethanol. Microalgae-derived bioethanol could be used 
directly in existing internal combustion engines without significant modifi­
cation. Also, bioethanol fuel’s high octane and oxygen content translate to 
better engine performance and lower emissions [11–13]. 
Microalgae are responsible for creating atmospheric oxygen by converting 
water and CO2 into glucose utilizing solar energy. From prokaryotic single-
celled cyanobacteria to more complex multicellular eukaryotic algae, the 
algal group is diversed [14–17]. Microalgae exhibit characteristics feature 
like plants, and it can perform photosynthesis utilizing sunlight, CO2, and 
water because they contain photosynthetic pigments such as chlorophylls in 
their cells. Microalgal species have endless potential for using it in several 
fields for the benefits of mankind. Microalgae have been identified as a 
potential resource for biofuels generation and major benefits viz.: (i) high 
biomass and lipid productivity; (ii) no rivalry for food production; (iii) high 
tolerance to environmental stress; (iv) high CO2 sequestration; and (v) high 
biorefinery capabilities. Microalgae may multiply into bulk biomass, 100 
times faster than terrestrial plants. Moreover, yield of oil from microalgae 
could reach up to 5,000 gallons per acre, but traditional oil crops like palm, 
corn, and coconut can only reach 1,000 gallons [18]. Microalgae composi­
tion varies by species and growing environments. Microalgae composed 
20–40% lipids, 0–20% carbs, 30–50% proteins, and 0–50% nucleic acids. 
Some microalgae species can collect up to 85% lipids. Microalgae without 
lignin and hemicellulose were more effective in producing ethanol [9, 16, 
17]. These include Scenedesmus obliquus, Chlorella vulgaris, Chlamydo-
monas reinhardtii, and Nannochloropsis oculata. Microalgae can create 
fermentative biofuels (bioethanol and biobutanol), solid biofuels (biochar), 
liquid biofuels (biodiesel and green hydrocarbon), and gaseous biofuels 
(biomethane) (hydrogen, methane). Aside from microalgae biofuels, micro-
algae protein and bioactive substances like antioxidants could be employed 
as helpful health supplements. High biomass and lipid productivity of 
microalgae can be attained by selecting or genetically modifying microalgae 
strains and optimizing the growth conditions (carbon supply, nutrients, light 

 
 
397 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
intensity, etc.). The appropriate DSP could be the possible way to get biodiesel 
from this promising feedstock [14, 19, 20]. The bioethanol obtained from 
the microalgae could be employed directly without altering the combustion 
engines, and it has been showed better engine performance and lower emis­
sions due to the presence of high octane and oxygen content [3, 21, 22]. This 
chapter is discussing the production of biofuel by utilizing the microalgal 
biomass and its significance and advantages. Also, this chapter is explaining 
how the microalgal cells are being considered as a machinery to produce 
biofuels. 
13.2 BIOFUELS 
Biofuels are synthesized from natural sources like plants, animal waste 
residues and algae. The biofuel does not produce carbon emissions to the 
environment compared to the combustion of petroleum or coal to supply our 
energy requirements. It has been helped to produce a positive energy balance 
by using modern technical equipment or highly optimized information, 
which can be better suited to developing algae biofuels [22, 23]. In addition, 
nutrients, and energy requirements are utilized for drying and dewatering. To 
advance with emphasis on future uncertainties, limited sources of primary 
data for bioprocess and scale up of algal biofuel research are required. 
The environmental effects of algal biofuel production are revealed to be 
the critical elements of system formulation and implementation measures 
for safe management of water and CO2 resources and the nutrient supply 
[20, 24]. The low cost of CO2, nutrients, and water resources can assist in 
reducing the cost of algal biofuel production by 50%. The net energy ratio 
can be applied to the production of algal biomass by presenting the idea of 
the total energy utilization for cultivation, harvesting, and drying by means 
of the energy content of dry biomass. The use of cultural systems, including 
race pond systems or photo-bioreactors (PBRs), can thus produce a positive 
energy balance in algae biofuel [25, 26]. The media is found in a clear set of 
tubes or plates in the PBR cultivation system, and microalgae broth circulates 
from a central reservoir. The electricity generation biofuel utility has now 
developed its capacity to deliver electricity using coal and nuclear power 
(non-renewable energy sources). These attempts can provide minor parts 
of this country’s electricity with fuel oil power [3, 21]. The manufactured 
biodiesel is used as an environmentally beneficial energy resource. Green 
energy is included within the engine design and 33% of electricity will be 

 
398 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
constantly produced as renewable energy by 2050. The firm has announced 
that more than environmental sustainability of biofuels in diverse biopro­
cesses and renewable resources in various sectors around the world [27, 28]. 
13.3 SOURCE OF BIOFUELS 
13.3.1 MICROALGAE 
Microalgae are single-cell photoautotrophic or photoheterotrophic microbes 
that capture CO2 and light energy for carbohydrate (primarily lipid) 
conversion. Photoautotrophic algae cells are like plants because they can 
grow similarly to conventional plants as using photosynthesis. However, 
compared with evolved plant system, microalgae have a simple structure 
for the photosynthesis. The large body surface volume is another advantage 
of microalgal cells. This advantage enables them to consume adequate 
resources for photosynthesis and generate oil about 30 times more than 
terrestrial plants like maize, soya, and canola. On the contrary, algal oil 
(lipid) production costs are significantly higher compared to conventional 
crop oils. In aquatic animals and plants, microalgae serve crucial roles. 
They also act as main source of oxygen and food source for aquatic species, 
including humans [29, 30]. Microalgae has been used as a major supply of 
oil, which can be transformed into transport fuel to compare in quantity and 
quality with petroleum diesel. Based on their pigmentation, proliferation, 
cell wall structures, and flagellation, microalgae can be classed. There are 
six algal phylae: cyanobacteria, green, red, and diatomaceous algae, Eustig­
matophytes, and Prymnesium. Microalgae are single-cell photoautotrophic 
(capable of synthesizing nutrition from inorganic materials that use light 
as an energy source) or photoheterotrophic (use light energy but cannot 
use CO2 as a carbon source). Photoautotrophic algal cells grow like plants 
through photosynthesis, during which algal cells collect and convert carbon 
and light into lipid-rich biomass. More than 3,000 algal strains have been 
found and exist mainly in aquatic habitats such as the sea, rivers, and oceans 
[32]. Microalgae are categorized into fresh water and marine algae, based 
on their habitat [33–35]. The lipid can be deposited in the cell of algae up to 
80% by weight depending on the strain, the content of the growing media, 
and conditions. The number of microalgae, habitat, and lipid content per 100 
g of dry algae. Microalgae require water rich in nutrition, CO2 and photonic 
growth energy as photosynthetic microorganisms. The two-phase process of 

 
 
399 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
macromolecule synthesis by microalgae is the conversion of energy, water, 
and CO2 to sugar such as lipids and triacylglycerols (TAGs) [34]. Lipids are 
proved to be the sustainability of biodiesel feedstock. Microalgae also traps 
carbon from CO2 in this process. One of the major obstacles to biodiesel 
microalgae cultivation is to identify an appropriate strain which grows 
quickly and can produce as much lipid as possible in its cultivation. Another 
key problem in algal culture is the creation of an affordable photobioreactor 
that mitigates the hazards of contamination and boosts rapid growth [35]. The 
high cost of oil extraction from microalgae is another barrier. The advantages 
of microalgal cultivation for biofuel production are as follows: 
•  Unproductive and unusable land can be utilized for the algal 
cultivation. 
•  They can grow in salt, and wastewater sources. 
•  They can reduce greenhouse gasses (GHG) emissions by reusing 
discarded CO2 sources. 
•  They can generate nontoxic, biodegradable biofuels and valuable 
co-products from a variety of feedstocks. 
Microalgal biomass is a mixture of a one-celled organism, nucleic acids, 
and proteins, making them one of the most suitable biofuels to replace 
traditional biomass (Figure 13.1). The percentage of chemicals varies by the 
strain of microalgae. It takes less than 24 hours for green algae biomass to 
double. Green algae can attain the lipid levels up to 50% of its biomass. The 
oil concentration of green algae may vary [36–38]. They can fix significant 
amounts of CO2 while contributing 40–50% of the oxygen in the atmosphere, 
supporting most of life on our planet. Globally, microalgae produce 1–4 cell 
doublings per day. Microalgae generate 0.2% of the world’s photosynthe­
sized biomass, but they contribute to over half of the global fixed organic 
carbon [39, 40]. 
Macroalgae often grow in deep water and are not seen as having the 
ability to significantly contribute to future liquid transportation fuel needs. 
Despite this, macroalgae production is expanding, and the EU and Japan 
are interested in using it to produce methane via anaerobic digestion (AD) 
and ethanol via saccharification and fermentation. The Cryptophyta, Chlo­
rophyta, and Chromophtya divisions contain most algae that produce more 
than 20% lipids. Rhodomonas salina (Chroomonas salina) is a cryptomonad 
that produces a lot of lipids. Green algae include unicellular forms and giant 
seaweed. Their cellulose cell walls and starch as an energy store (attributes 

 
 
 
400 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
of potential feedstocks for ethanol production). The chlorophyte Chlamydo-
monas reinhardtii is one of the few algae whose whole gene sequence is 
known example, C. reinhardtii can grow autotrophically on inorganic salts 
in the presence of light and CO2, but it can also grow heterotrophically in 
the absence of light and O2 [41]. Botryococcus braunii, Chlorella vulgaris, 
Neochloris oleoabundans and Nannochloris sp. are known to produce large 
quantities of lipids. The Chrysophyceae (golden-brown algae), Bacillari­
ophyceae (diatoms), Xanthophyceae (yellow-green algae), Eustigmatophy­
ceae, and Prymnesiophyceae are among them. There are several species of 
Ochromonas danica that produce large quantities of lipids. Cyanobacteria, 
or blue-green algae, are prokaryotic, meaning they lack nuclei and are part 
of the bacterial kingdom [33, 42]. Even though Nostoc commune has been 
shown to produce triacylglycerides, cyanobacteria rarely produce more than 
20% lipids of their cell weight. They could also accumulate large amounts of 
glycogen (up to 60% dry weight) as a carbon sink [43, 44]. 
FIGURE 13.1 Microalgal cell and biofuels mechanisms. 
Many microalgae species can be promoted to accumulate large amounts 
of lipids, increasing oil output. The usual lipid content ranges from 1 to 70%, 
while certain species can exceed 90% dry weight was observed the lipid and 
biomass productivity in several marine and freshwater microalgae species. 

 
 
401 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
Botryococcus braunii has been produced up to 75% oil by weight of dried 
biomass but have low productivity. In general, algae (Chlorella, Cryptheco-
dinium, Cylindrotheca) have oil levels of between 20% and 50%, but higher 
productivities can be achieved [45–47] (Table 13.1). 
TABLE 13.1 List of Microalgal Species and its Lipid Content Productivity 
Lipid Content (%
SL. No. 
Name of Microalgae Species 
References 
dry wt.) 
1. 
Chlorella minutissima 
2. 
Chlorella protothecoides 
3. 
Nitzschia sp. 
4. 
Schizochytrium sp. 
5. 
Zitzschia sp. 
6. 
Neochloris oleoabundans 
7. 
Hormidium sp. 
8. 
Dunaliella tertiolecta 
9. 
Nannochloropsis sp. 
10. 
Chlorella emersonii 
11. 
Nannochloris sp. 
12. 
Botryococcus braunii 
13. 
Pleurochrysis carterae 
14. 
Prymnesium parvum 
15. 
Chlorella sp. 
16. 
Ankistrodesmus sp. 
17. 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii 
18. 
Isochrysis sp. 
19. 
Nanochloris sp. 
20. 
Dunaliella primolecta 
21. 
Monallanthus salina 
22. 
Crypthecodinium cohnii 
23. 
Phaeodactylum tricornutum 
24. 
Cylindrotheca sp. 
25. 
Chlorella vulgaris 
26. 
Tetraselmis suecia 
27. 
Spirogyra sp. 
28. 
Scenedesmus obliquus 
29. 
Synechoccus sp. 
59.35 
57.96 
42–48 
48–79 
41–49 
34–56 
39.52 
36.85 
30–69 
29–33 
28–52 
26–81 
26–53 
26–35 
26–34 
25–40 
25.84 
24–32 
23–34 
23.89 
19.56 
18–54 
16–32 
14–35 
12–24 
12–25 
10–22 
10–15 
10.25 
[48–54] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
402 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
TABLE 13.1 (Continued) 
Lipid Content (%
SL. No. 
Name of Microalgae Species 
References 
dry wt.) 
30. 
Dunaliella bioculata 
8.75 
31. 
Tetraselmis maculata 
7.83 
32. 
Dunaliella salina 
6.42 
33. 
Porphyridium cruentum 
5–16 
34. 
Anabaena cylindrica 
4.5–7.2 
35. 
Spirulina maxima 
4–6 
36. 
Spirulina platensis 
3–8 
The fatty acid composition of different microalgae species is also important, 
as it might affect the biodiesel production. They include 12–22 carbon atoms 
of saturated and unsaturated fatty acids. Few freshwater microalgae species 
generated as C14:0, C16:0, C18:1, C18:2, and C18:3 fatty acids, according to 
a fatty acid composition studied. The relative intensities of the other fatty acid 
chains were observed as C16:4, C18:4, C22:6, C16:2, C16:3, C20:5. Condi­
tions of agriculture, dietary, and environmental factors can influence the fatty 
acid composition. For example, nitrogen deprivation and salt stress increased 
C18:1 and C20:5 accumulation in all treated species [55]. 
13.3.2 TYPES OF BIOFUELS 
Microalgae may be utilized to convert different forms of fuels which are both 
technological and cell dependent. Biodiesel may be extracted by a compa­
rable procedure to other vegetable oils from the lipid and oily portions of the 
algal biomass. Alternatively, or after extraction of lipid, the algae’s carbon 
content may be fermented into bioethanol or biobutanol. The combustion 
of algae can generate heat and electricity. In some precise conditions, some 
algae may create hydrogen (H2) gas [47]. 
13.3.2.1 BIODIESEL 
Biodiesel, made mostly from oil plants, especially food crops, has been a 
major concern for sustainability. Biodiesel is a non-sulfur fuel that may be 
used in today’s automobiles with little or no engine changes, reducing emis­
sions of particles, CO, hydrocarbons, and SOx. Compared to biodiesel from 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
403 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
soil-based crops, producing large amounts of biodiesel from microalgae is 
the most efficient alternative for sustainability. The micro-algal-biodiesel­
CO2 cycle is worth rejuvenating and increasing algal lipid content might 
support. Biodiesel is made up of fatty acid alkyl esters (FAAE) produced 
by transesterifying triglycerides with methanol or ethanol. Production 
of biodiesel from microalgae and food and non-food crops are similar. 
Production of biodiesel requires two steps: extraction and transesterifica­
tion. The solvent used to extract lipids and fatty acids from microalgae by 
using hexane, ethanol 96% with purification rates of up to 98%. Extraction 
methods include explorer press, ultrasonic, hexane solvent, Soxhlet, and 
supercritical fluid. The most typical extraction method uses hexane as a 
solvent to extract Soxhlet’s for 4 hours before distilling the oil from the 
extracts. Ultrasonic and/or microwave extraction is a new method that 
could significantly boost oil extraction over conventional methods. Storing 
the rigid algal cell wall could increase Soxhlet extraction yield from 4.8 
to 25.9% [45, 47]. Transesterification is the process of converting algal 
oil into esters, the final fuel type. This approach can use alkaline or acidic 
chemical catalysts, homogeneous or heterogeneous. Transesterification 
includes converting triglycerides to diglycerides, then monoglycerides, 
and finally esters (biodiesel) and glycerol (by-product). All the algal oil 
triglycerides mix with three methanol molecules to make biodiesel. Micro-
algae biodiesel production was carried out since it is readily available. The 
main hurdle has been noted that the high production costs of algal-based 
biodiesel due to the need for high-oil yielding algae strains and effective 
large-scale facilities (Figure 13.2). Aside from optimal biomass yields, 
the technology’s economics rely on government subsidies and future oil 
prices. Aside from biotech advancements and rising crude oil costs, algae 
biodiesel will outperform all other fuels [14, 56]. 
FIGURE 13.2 Mechanisms of biodiesel extraction. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
404 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
13.3.2.2 BIOETHANOL 
Bioethanol is usually prepared by fermenting sugars like sorghum, corn, 
and sugarcane after starch hydrolysis. Sugarcane ethanol is not cost viable, 
and maize ethanol will impair food production and supplies. This produces 
lignocellulosic bioethanol. Lignocellulosic feedstock includes aspen, woody 
sources, switch grass, agricultural wastes viz., corn stover, dairy, and cattle 
manures among others. The ratios of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin, 
efficient producing enzymes, and techniques to release fermentation sugars 
are all heavily concentrated. Because lignin is difficult to naturally breakdown, 
it must be pre-treated. Pretreatment, such as steam explosion, requires a lot of 
energy to break down the lignin and cellulose-rich cell wall [57, 58]. Due to 
the high cost, there have been no large-scale commercial ethanol plants. Micro-
algae can be used to make bioethanol as well as biodiesel, although research 
on microalgae bioethanol is limited. Carbohydrates can be fermented into 
bioethanol by microalgae (Figure 13.3). The final product, ethanol, is obtained 
after distillation. Compared to wood biomass, microalgae have certain advan­
tages for bioethanol synthesis [59]. Microalgal cell walls have low/no-lignin 
polysaccharides, which promote cell wall degradation to sugar. It can speed up 
bioethanol production because no chemical or enzyme pre-treatment is required. 
Extrusion and supercritical CO2 are still necessary to break down the cell wall, 
release carbohydrates, and finally transform them into sugar. Second, because 
microalgae have no roots, stalks, or leaves, their composition is mostly uniform 
and stable than wood biomass. Microalgae, which are used in the production 
of bioethanol, contain approximately 50% starch and glycogen. Microalgae 
can create both biodiesel and bioethanol. Super-critical CO2 can break down 
the cell wall of microalgae during lipid exhaust and therefore concurrently 
release ready carbohydrates for the synthesis of bioethanol. Several strains 
have been genetically modified to improve microalgal bioethanol produc­
tion. Adding additional genes to cyanobacterium produces solar ethanol and 
CO2. Microalgae bioethanol production still requires technology research and 
development, including genetic engineering of selected strains and innovative 
bioreactor designs. This future evolution hence deserves further attention [60]. 
FIGURE 13.3 Mechanisms of bioethanol extraction. 

 
 
405 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
13.3.2.3 BIOGAS 
AD is a proven method for treating all forms of waste and produced biogas. 
AD biogas production is mostly methane and CO2. AD of biomass can 
be obtained from: (i) terrestrial sources such as municipal solid waste, 
mechanical, and manual sorting, leaves, grass, wood, and weeds; and (ii) 
aquatic sources such as algae and marine grass. AD of waste biomass is a 
well-established and developed method. From 0.15 to 0.65 m3 of biogas per 
kilogram of dry material. The main disadvantages of land use are scarcity 
and competition with food crops [61, 62]. Also, microalgae or their wastes 
after lipid extraction can produce biogas as their lipid, carbohydrate, and 
protein content can approach 70% without lignin-based biomass. To make 
microalgae biodiesel more durable, 30% of the algae’s oil content was 
removed; algal residuals may provide at least 9,360 MJ of energy per metric 
ton. AD, biogas, and nutrients (N, P, and K) can be produced [63]. Species 
and pre-treatment affect the efficiency of biogas production about 0.50 L per 
ton of dry weight. The numerous microalgal species that produce biogas. 
Anaerobic digesters such as anaerobic sludge blade up flow (UASB), anaer­
obic filter (AF) or anaerobic membrane bioreactor (AnMBR) can produce 
biogas with minimum biomass dewatering requirements. Microalgae (Spiru-
lina platensis) can be entirely gasified to methane-rich gas using ruthenium 
catalysts, recovering 60–70% of the heating value of the microalgal biomass 
[64, 65]. Using an up flow AF to examine AD of two marine algae species: 
Macrocystis pyrifera, Antarctica, Durville. The removal and collection of 
toxic algal blossoms in lakes, ponds, rivers, reservoirs, and the sea might 
lessen possible concerns such as poisonous secondary metabolite formation. 
Despite this, microalgal production is still in its infancy, with heating digesters 
consuming more energy than producing algal biodiesel. The retention time 
necessary for significant digestibility is 20–30 days, raising costs for large 
businesses. Pre-treatments such as heat, or sonic treatments may help ease 
issues by reducing cell wall resistance and increasing reaction velocity and 
biodegradability. Increasing ratio of C/N also improves AD [62, 63]. 
13.3.2.4 BIOHYDROGEN 
Biohydrogen is a promising future clean biofuel since it may be used in a 
fuel cell without emitting pollutants such as SOx, NOx, etc. Steam reforming 
of fossil fuels like crude oil and coal produces hydrogen. Large-scale water 

 
 
 
 
 
406 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
electrolysis is also possible but consumes more energy than hydrogen can 
produce. Both chemical processes employ lot of energy to produce significant 
level of hydrogen [66]. Many bacteria, including purple non-sulfur bacteria, 
can utilize a variety of organic substrates (e.g., food waste, agricultural 
waste, and wastewater) and light to produce hydrogen. In a closed culture 
environment without oxygen, microalgae may directly use sunlight and 
water to generate biohydrogen. Scenedesmus obliquus, Playtmonas subcor-
diformis, Scenedesmus sp., and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii are examples of 
microalgae with high hydrogenase activity [67, 68]. Anaerobic conditions 
in the synthesis of biohydrogen can be achieved by producing microalgae 
for 2–3 days under sulfur deprivation (Figure 13.4). Rhodobacter capsulate 
and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii were grown using a photo-electrocatalytic­
enzymatic hybrid system under darkness to create efficient H2 [69]. The 
lack of a wide-ranging, sustainable manufacturing procedure to increase 
hydrogenase activity and efficient microalgae for biohydrogen synthesis are 
major obstacles. More research is required to improve working conditions, 
and genetic modification for maximizing the use of solar energy and hydrog­
enase enzyme activity. Practically microalgae hydrogen generation is still a 
way off, the progress done shows its ultimate potential [70, 71]. 
FIGURE 13.4 Mechanisms of biogas and biohydrogen production. 
13.3.2.5 OTHER TYPES OF BIOFUELS 
Microalgae can also be transformed into bio-butanol, bio-oil, syngas, or jet 
fuel by suitable conversion methods, including thermochemical, chemical, 
and biochemical conversion processes, except for biodiesel, bioethanol, 
biogas, and biohydrogen. Butanol can replace gasoline in most gasoline 
engines without modification, and when combined with gasoline, it can 

 
 
 
 
 
407 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
provide better corrosion resistance and performance than ethanol. The utiliza­
tion of pre-treated microalgae by Clostridium saccharoperbutylacetonicum 
bacterial xylanase and cellulase enzymes may convert it into biobutanol [70]. 
Bio-oil is synthetic fluid fuel which is extracted from an oxygen-free reactor 
by digesting biomass. Bio-oil can be used directly in motors or mixtures. A 
range of microalgae have shown the ability to produce bio-oil by microalgal 
pyrolysis or thermochemical liquefaction [39, 72]. Syngas is a gas mix 
that contains very low hydrocarbon concentrations and greater CO and H2 
concentrations created by oxygen-gasification processes [73]. The Fisher-
Tropsch synthesis technique allows syngas to be converted to diesel fuel by 
allowing an algal feedstock to be included in an existing thermochemical 
infrastructure. Attention has also been made to microalgae-derived jet fuel. 
Jet fuel blends (driven by a range of oil-rich feedstocks, including algae) 
have proven compatible with selected commercial jet test flights [60]. 
13.4 WHY MICROALGAE PREFERRED MACHINERY FOR 
PRODUCTION OF BIOFUELS? 
Global population growth drives up global fuel usage. Fossil fuels are 
depleting and will soon be exhausted due to their unsustainable and non­
renewable nature. Biofuels are becoming a viable alternative to fossil fuels. 
Some developed countries already produce biofuels commercially. Biofuels 
like biodiesel and bioethanol can be made from several biomass resources, 
including food crops, plant or fruit waste, woody plant parts, garbage, and 
algae. Biofuels are renewable and have a low impact on pollution and global 
warming. The main cause of global warming is CO2 from fossil fuel combus­
tion. Fossil fuels emit 29 gigatons of CO2 per year, totaling 35.3 billion tones. 
Biofuels, especially algae fuels, have 10–45% oxygen and very minimal 
sulfur emissions, whereas petroleum fuels have no sulfur-emitting oxygen. 
Biofuels are non-polluting, local, accessible, sustainable, and reliable. Micro-
algae fuels are non-toxic and have the potential to significantly reduce global 
CO2 [24, 27]. A kilogram of algal biomass can fix 1.83 kilograms of CO2, 
while some species use SOx and NOx to transport nutrients along with CO2. 
The selection and development of biomass is an important cost-controlled 
phase in the production of biofuels. The choice of biomass for biofuel 
production impacts greenhouse gas emissions, environmental, and economic 
sustainability [39]. The present focus is on microalgae as the most promising 
feedstock for producing bioenergy to balance the ever-increasing need for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
408 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
biofuels, food, and value-added chemicals. Asian, European, and American 
nations are already industrializing microalgal biomass-based biofuels. These 
microalgae have the potential to convert 9–10% of the solar power (average 
sunshine radiance) from photosynthetic organisms to produce biomass, 
yielding 77 g/m2/day or 280 tons/hectare/year [40]. This return is lower in 
both outdoor and indoor lager cultivation. Because absorbed active radiation 
is lost in photobioreactors, adequate culture shaking and mixing is required to 
achieve a uniform distribution of light energy across all cells and maximize 
light energy conversion into biomass [74, 75]. Microalgae feedstock is suit­
able for producing biofuels. Microalgae do not require soil or fresh water to 
grow, are not edible, do not affect human or animal food chains, and can be 
grown indefinitely. Microalgae cell walls lack lignocellulosic components to 
facilitate pre-treatment and reduce production costs [76, 77]. Microalgae can 
feed on industrial waste and produce less energy than the waste processing. 
Secondary biofuels use terrestrial plants as feedstock, particularly food 
crops. This is a major issue since food crop biofuels cannot be produced at 
the expense of feed or food crops [78, 79]. Furthermore, agricultural food 
requires large amounts of water, making its use as an alternative liquid fuel 
unsustainable and incomparable. For investors and consumers alike, algal 
fuel technology is still in its infancy and must be greatly improved. Most 
microalgae may produce bio-diesel due to their high lipid content (50–70%) 
and some even up to 80% (B. braunii). Microalgae can produce 58,700 L/ 
ha of algal oil and 1,21,104 L/ha of biodiesel. The high operational, mainte­
nance, harvesting, and conversion costs of algae biodiesel [39, 78, 80]. 
13.5 CONVERSION OF BIOFUELS METHODS 
13.5.1 EXTRACTION PROCESS 
Microalgae store energy in their cells through photosynthesis, converting 
CO2 and nutrients into microalgal biomass and released oxygen into the 
environment. Microalgal biomass comprises fat, protein, and glucose. 
Microalgae biomass contains lipids suitable for biofuel production. Algal 
biomass can be utilized directly or treated chemically, biochemically, or 
thermochemically to make biofuels [81]. Lipids from algal biomass are 
chemically converted to biodiesel. Biochemical transformations of carbo­
hydrate and total biomass into bioethanol and biogas include fermenta­
tion and AD. Hydrothermal liquefaction, pyrolysis, and algal biomass 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
409 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
gasification technologies convert organic microalgae components into 
liquid and gas biofuels. These energy sources can be used to make synthetic 
biofuels and bioactive and chemical substances. Lipids are major energy 
sources. Microalgae contain 2% to 75% lipids. Lipid extraction is critical in 
the generation of microalgal biofuels. As an intracellular metabolite, lipid 
elimination necessitates cell wall disruption. Extraction methods include 
physical, chemical, solvent, and enzymatic process. Recent research estab­
lished wet microalgal biomass lipid extraction strategies without harvesting 
or drying. The elimination of numerous stages lowers the production cost 
of microalgae biofuels [82]. 
13.5.2 PHYSICAL METHODS 
Physical methods are effective means of extraction. It is suitable for the 
extraction of microalgal lipids for most species. The risk of lipid products 
being contaminated is low and no solvent is sometimes needed during the 
extraction procedure. However, physical techniques of extraction demand 
additional energy and a cooling system, which might make them costlier to 
large-scale applications [82, 83]. The physical extraction methods widely 
applied in microalgal lipids include ultrasonics, bead battles, hydrothermal 
liquefactions, bead mills, expellers, and microwaves. An alternative form 
of physical extraction is the solvent-free extraction method, with various 
advantages, including simple and easy, has high final product pureness, non­
toxic lipid extraction efficiency and can be employed for both wet and dry 
microalgal biomass [84, 85]. 
13.5.3 CHEMICAL METHODS 
The technique known as chemical treatments uses chemicals (such as alkalis, 
acids, and surfactants) to establish chemical bonds on the microalgal cell 
walls. Due to the chemical connections, the permeability of the microalgal cell 
walls is increased and so the cell walls are disrupted. Chemical approaches 
in the extraction of microalgae are regarded as pretreatment methods. The 
chemical method is generally combined with solved methods for microalgal 
lipid extraction. To avoid negative consequences such as the deterioration or 
degeneration of targeted molecules, the chemicals to be employed should be 
carefully selected. 

 
 
410 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
13.5.4 SOLVENT-BASED EXTRACTION METHODS 
Solvent extraction of lipids from microalgal biomass is possible using 
a variety of organic solvents or a mixture of solvents. Chloroform is an 
extracting solvent used for this process. Folch, Bligh, and Dyer are well-
known methods for extracting lipids from homogenized cell suspensions. 
The Folch method uses a 2:1 v/v mixture of linked chloroform-methanol as 
a solvent. The next approach is like the Floch method except the solvent ratio 
is methanol 1:2 v/v chloroform instead of 2:1 v/v [86, 87]. Both methods 
recover a substantial amount of lipids in pilot and large-scale extraction tech­
niques. Based on both previous methods, updated methodologies are used to 
recover microalgal essential lipids. Environmental and health concerns limit 
commercial and industrial usage of solvent approaches for microalgal lipid 
recovery. Other non-toxic solvents used to remove lips from microalgal cells 
include hexane, ethanol, isopropanol, butanol, acetic acid esters, and methyl 
tert-butyl ether. The following principles govern solvent extraction: Using a 
single solvent allows for increasing mass transfer rate, solvent accessibility, 
and a lower immiscible solvent dielectric constant. Extraction is done at high 
temperatures and pressures. In a mixture of solvents, such as chloroform/ 
methanol, one should be more polar, allowing for cell wall rupture, and the 
other less polar, allowing lipid extraction. Due to the combination of chloro­
methanol, the extraction interaction between water and methanol is stronger 
than methanol/chloroform and greater than chloroform/lipid [86, 87]. 
13.5.6 ENZYMATIC 
Extraction of microalgal lipids requires cell wall breakdown. Enzymatic 
extraction is a potential approach for extracting microalgal lipids. This 
procedure is like solvent extraction; however, the enzyme is used instead of 
the solvent. In other words, by introducing enzymes that help break down 
cells, the intracellular lipids are easily released into extraction broth. A 
physical approach for microalgal cell wall disruption is not required [88–90]. 
13.6 CONVERSION OF BIOFUELS 
Technologies known as 3rd generation solutions for conversion of microalgal 
biomass include frequently transesterification, hydroprocessing, fermenta­
tion, gasification, and pyrolysis. Two groups of all process technologies 
are thermochemical conversion and biochemical conversion. The choice of 

 
 
411 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
conversion technology depends on raw materials and the targeted product. 
Some conversion processes, such as AD, may combine disruption and 
removal procedures for microalgal cells. 
13.6.1 TRANSESTERIFICATION 
Transesterification is a catalytic reaction which transforms lipids as a four-
stage coproduct into fatty esters of methyl esters and glycerol. The first stage 
is the preparation of the catalyst and the alcohol mixture. The second stage 
is the transesterification reaction between the catalyst/alcoholic blend and 
the fatty acid reaction (triglycerides). The ideal temperature range for trans­
esterification reactions is about 40–60°C and the reaction rate increases as 
the temperature increases [91, 92]. The third step is to remove glycerol from 
biodiesel, and fourth step involves adding water, in particular the glycerol 
that may remain in biodiesel, to both biodiesel and glycerol for purifica­
tion. For the creation of neutralized glycerol, the acid should be applied to 
glycerol. The transesterification procedure helps to recover the high number 
of fatty ester combination, but it requires a high level of alcohol to prevent 
the development of soap that is an undesired reaction. Instead of catalysts, 
enzymes (i.e., enzyme reaction) may be employed, but the lipases typically 
used in the enzyme reaction are expensive and consequently, high costs 
make the enzyme reaction less effective than the chemical processes and the 
reaction rate is low and the productivity is slow [93]. 
13.6.2 HYDROPROCESSING 
The wet microalgal biomass has around 75–98% of moisture, which via 
hydrothermal liquefaction processes can be converted into biocrude oil. 
This process is carried out under catalytic and high conditions (temperatures 
[200–500°C] and pressure [>20 bar]). The process by-products include the 
gas blend (CO2, H2, CH4, C2H4, C2H6, N2), the residual solids and the aqueous 
stage. The high content of nutrients can be recycled back to produce micro-
algae in these by-products. Effective method is the hydrothermal liquefaction 
technique, but its development and implementation are yet at an embryonic 
level. The equipment involved is complex and expensive, which can limit 
its wide use. For enhancement and commercial utilization, many extensive 
forms of study are required. In addition, the high nitrogen and oxygen content 
in biocrude algal oil is an issue for oil quality and is unstable if not improved. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
412 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
The nitrogen content increases with the converting temperature of 5% wt. of 
oil; the combustion of petroleum causes the nitrogen to convert to nitrogen 
oxides (NOx), which can react to smog and acid rain [94, 95]. 
13.6.3 FERMENTATION 
Bioethanol, a carbohydrate fermentation bioenergy product, is a microalgal 
biomass component. After fermentation, bioethanol is concentrated by distil­
lation, and then recovered from the fermentation broth. Gasification can also 
be used to produce bioethanol from algae. They are appropriate feedstock for 
the manufacture of algal bioethanol because they contain significant levels of 
carbon (more than 50% of the components of biomass) and carbohydrates. 
After fermentation, the solid leftovers can be fed to animals or used to boost 
energy recovery. Also, while bioethanol fermentation produces lots of CO2, 
the microalgae may completely recover from this by-product. The low energy 
requirements of fermentation and the ease of processing and running make 
bioethanol manufacturing more advantageous. However, compared to biodiesel 
production, it has received little attention. Recent research has proven the 
potential of microalgae bioproducts like biobutanol. Biobutanol is more potent 
and equivalent to gasoline than bioethanol. These innovative biofuels would 
increase the value of microalgae as fermentation feedstocks [96–98]. 
13.6.4 GASIFICATION 
Gasification is a thermochemical process for converting of microalgal 
biomass to biofuels. The mechanism of gasification creates major gasses as 
hydrogen, methane, and carbon monoxide. So far it is clear that gasifying 
microalgae to biofuels is indeed cheap because of the high-water content of 
the microalgal biomass is present. The catalytic gassing can quickly transform 
microalgal biomass into gasses. For example, supercritical water gasification 
is seen as a potential technology for the gasification of microalgal biomass 
because a dry feedstock is not needed. 
13.6.5 ANAEROBIC DIGESTION (AD) 
AD is a biological process that converts feedstocks into CH4 and CO2 
(absence of oxygen). AD includes hydrolysis, acidogenesis, acetogenesis, 

 
 
413 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
and methanogenesis. The addition of water during hydrolysis speeds up the 
breakdown of macromolecules into monomers and the release of hydrogen, 
either chemically or enzymatically. Some of the resulting monomers are 
volatile acids and alcohols. The third process converts the intermediate acid 
generation into acetic acid, CO2, and hydrogen (includers Syntrophobacter 
sp., Clostridium sp., Lactobacillus, and Actinomyces). During methanogen­
esis, preceding intermediate products are mostly converted to biomethane. 
In addition to handling large amounts of biomass residues, AD may also 
manage microalgal residues once high value compounds or other metabo­
lites have been recovered. After extracting valuable compounds like oil, 
algal biomass and microalgae are suitable input materials for AD. The rich 
nutrients, carbon, moisture, and absence of lignin in microalgal feedstocks 
make them suitable AD feedstocks for biogas production. AD produces 
biogas and biofertilizer from microalgae biomass, which is sustainable when 
paired with wastewater treatment [99, 100]. 
13.6.6 PYROLYSIS 
Pyrolysis mechanism are converted three of products: bio-oil, gas, and 
charcoal. By pyrolysis, algal biomass can be transformed to bio-oil. Under 
other words, pyrolysis happens in anaerobic setup at a high temperature of 
roughly 400–1,000°C and the temperature increases correspondingly with 
an increase in heating rate and a decreasing household time. The original 
small size without fibrous algal biomass makes it a superior feedstock 
for bio-oil production than other biomass sources, such as lignocellulose. 
Conditions such as pressure, temperature, and heating rate affect the charac­
teristics of primary end products in a pyrolytic process. The advantages of 
the pyrolysis process are evaluated in terms of environmentally favorable 
and environmentally friendly potential, including autonomous energy and 
chemical production from bioresources. Its practice is, however, hampered 
by the high cost of energy required. Furthermore, the low thermal stability 
and corrosion of bio-oil are the disadvantages of bio-oil based on pyrolysis. 
In some instances, the downstream processes (including harvesting, dewa­
tering, mining, and transformation) can be linked with the process cost 
reduction in a single phase. For example, culture broth can be transferred 
without harvesting and dewatering in the anaerobic digester or fermenter. 
The optimization of microalgal biofuels from cultivation to final products 
must be explored [101–103]. 

 
414 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
13.7 FUTURE PROSPECTIVE OF BIOFUELS IN INDIA 
Despite India’s slow biofuel research progress, the Indian biofuel industry 
is expected to boom as the transportation sector expands and the cost of 
petroleum products rises. In 2016, India’s ethanol market penetration hit a 
record high of 3.3% across the country. The US imported 400 million liters 
of ethanol in 2016, and that number is expected to rise to 600 million liters 
by 2018. Biodiesel/conventional diesel blends have yet to be introduced in 
India. Biodiesel (B100) needs a strong commercially viable plan to develop 
a long-term biodiesel sector. Both the private and public sectors are success­
fully converting lignocellulosic materials into advanced biofuels. Advanced 
biofuels are also being tested using municipal solid waste, microalgae, and 
photosynthetic organisms. Promoting biofuels in India is aimed at ensuring 
energy security. Central government policymakers-initiated India’s biofuel 
programs. The Indian biofuel policy emphasizes non-food ethanol and 
biodiesel. Non-edible oils and oil waste are to be used to make biodiesel. 
Fuel-wise, ethanol, and biodiesel are interchangeable. In 2001, India’s 
ethanol blending program (EBP). It was first regulated in nine states and 
four union territories in 2003, and then mandated in November 2006 across 
the country (save for a few North-eastern provinces and Jammu & Kashmir). 
To reduce India’s reliance on imported petroleum diesel, the government 
announced the National Biodiesel Mission (NBM) in April 2003 with the 
goal of encouraging Jatropha and Pongamia plantations for 20% diesel 
blends by 2012. In the US, 20 biodiesel plants produce between 140 and 
300 million liters of biodiesel each year. Many agronomic and economic 
reasons conspired to prevent NBM. Several existing biodiesel factories use 
UCO, other worthless oil fractions, animal fats, and inedible oils to help 
cover the gap. This achieved a 0.001% blend rate. Deregulation of fuel 
prices, bulk sales of biodiesel (B100) by approved dealers, and collabora­
tive partnerships between parastatal oil marketing companies (OMCs) and 
private manufacturers all drive growth in the biodiesel sector. The adoption 
of a biofuel procurement policy in 2006 was another key turning point in 
the local biofuel economy. Supply problems, volatile oil prices, and global 
food insecurity have all impeded India’s biofuel efforts. Inconsistency in 
policy has hampered biodiesel implementation owing to lack of land, use of 
non-native crops, yield, and market pricing [31, 104, 105]. 
In India, biodiesel, and regular diesel are not yet widely combined. 
Around 20 biodiesel facilities produce between 140 and 300 million liters 
of biodiesel per year. To sustain the effort, the NBM focused on developing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
415 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
algae cultivation in two phases: demonstration and expansion. This would 
yield enough biodiesel to meet the 20% requirement. Even while state 
governments guarantee farmers a minimum purchase price for algal-based 
biodiesel, the programs have not been as profitable as expected. Lack of 
seed processing infrastructure in India is another hindrance. In June 2015, 
the cabinet approved marketing rights for private biodiesel producers who 
passed quality standards set by the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(MoPNG). The plan allows private manufacturers to market B100 biodiesel 
under a B100 exemption (pure, unblended biodiesel). The new policy will 
also affect biodiesel’s price. To boost biofuels, the GoI is looking into bulk 
consumers including railways and defense using a 5% biodiesel blend [31, 
104, 105]. 
The Indian biofuel policy is top-down, with national governments setting 
targets, institutions, and laws for ethanol/biodiesel blends. State and local 
governments are also encouraged and supported. As well as the feasibility 
of attaining the NPB’s targets through the first-generation pathway, the 
following sections examine India’s biofuel policy. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
biodiesel 
• 
bioethanol 
• 
biofuels 
• 
biogas 
• 
cultivation 
• 
key enzymes 
• 
microalgae 
• 
pyrolysis 
REFERENCES 
1. Edenhofer, O., Pichs-Madruga, R. Y., Sokona, E., Farahani, S., Kadner, K., Seyboth, 
A., Adler, I., et al., (2014). IPCC climate change 2014: Mitigation of Climate 
Change Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA. 

 
416 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
2. Melis, A., & Happe, T., (2001). Hydrogen production. Green microalgae as a source of 
energy. Plant Physiol., 127(3), 740–748. 
3. Hossain, A., Salleh, A., Boyce, A., Chowdhury, P., & Naqiuddin, M., (2008). Biodiesel 
fuel production from microalgae as renewable energy. Am. J. Biochem. Biotechnol., 4, 
250–254. 
4. Atsumi, S., Higashide, W., & Liao, J. C., (2009). Direct photosynthetic recycling of 
carbon dioxide to isobutyraldehyde. Nat. Biotechnol., 27, 1177–1180. 
5. Bajhaiya, A. K., Moreira, J. Z., & Pittman, J. K., (2017). Transcriptional engineering of 
microalgae: Prospects for high-value chemicals. Trends Biotechnol., 35, 2. 
6. Ajjawi, I., Verruto, J., Aqui, M., Soriaga, L. B., Coppersmith, J., Kwok, K., Peach, L., 
et al., (2017). Lipid production in Nannochloropsis gaditana is doubled by decreasing 
expression of a single transcriptional regulator. Nat. Biotechnol., 35, 647–652. 
7. Spolaore, P., Joannis-Cassan, C., Duran, E., & Isambert, A., (2006). Commercial 
applications of microalgae. J. Biosci. Bioeng., 101(2), 87–96. 
8. Archana, T., & Anjana, P., (2012). Cyanobacterial hydrogen production: A step towards 
clean environment. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy., 37, 139–150. 
9. Ahmad, I., Sharma, A. K., Daniell, H., & Kumar, S., (2015). Altered lipid composition 
and enhanced lipid production in green microalga by introduction of Brassica  
diacylglycerol acyltransferase. Plant Biotechnol. J., 13(4), 540–550. 
10. Abbriano, R., Vardar, N., Yee, D., & Hildebrand, M., (2018). Manipulation of a glycolytic 
regulator alters growth and carbon partitioning in the marine diatom Thalassiosira 
pseudonana. Algal Res., 32, 250–258. 
11. Chisti, Y., (2007). Biodiesel from microalgae. Biotechnol. Adv., 25, 294–306. 
12. Searchinger, T., Heimlich, R., Houghton, R. A., Dong, F., Elobeid, A., Fabiosa, J., & 
Yu, T. H., (2008). Use of US croplands for biofuels increases greenhouse gases through 
emissions from land-use change. Sci., 319(5867), 1238–1240. 
13. Singh, J., & Gu, S., (2010). Commercialization potential of microalgae for biofuels 
production. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 14(9), 2596–2610. 
14. Behera, S., Singh, R., Arora, R., Sharma, N. K., Shukla, M., & Kumar, S., (2015). Scope 
of algae as third generation biofuels. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2, 90. 
15. Barry, A. N., Starkenburg, S. R., & Sayre, R. T., (2015). Strategies for optimizing algal 
biology for enhanced biomass production. Front. Energy Res., 3(1). 
16. Baek, K., Lee, Y., Nam, O., Park, S., Sim, S. J., & Jin, E., (2016). Introducing Dunaliella 
LIP promoter containing light-inducible motifs improves transgenic expression in 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Biotechnol. J., 11, 384–392. 
17. Banerjee, A., Banerjee, C., Negi, S., Chang, J. S., & Shukla, P., (2018). Improvements 
in algal lipid production: A systems biology and gene editing approach. Crit. Rev. 
Biotechnol., 38(3), 369–385. 
18. Stephens, E., Ross, I. L., Mussgnug, J. H., Wagner, L. D., Borowitzka, M. A., Posten, C., 
Kruse, O., & Hankamer, B., (2010). Future prospects of microalgal biofuel production 
systems. Trends Plant Sci., 15(10), 554–564. 
19. Bartley, M. L., Boeing, W. J., Dungan, B. N., Holguin, F. A., & Schaub, T., (2014). pH 
effects on growth and lipid accumulation of the biofuel microalgae Nannochloropsis 
salina and invading organisms. J. Appl. Phycol., 26, 1431. 
20. Chung, Y. S., Lee, J. W., & Chung, C. H., (2017). Molecular challenges in microalgae 
towards cost-effective production of quality biodiesel. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 74, 
139–144. 

 
417 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
21. Johnson, M., & Wen, Z., (2009). Production of biodiesel fuel from the microalga 
Schizochytrium limacinum by direct transesterification of algal biomass. Energy Fuels, 
23(10), 294–306. 
22. Miao, X. L., & Wu, Q., (2006). Biodiesel production from heterotrophic microalgal oil. 
Bioresour. Technol., 97(6), 841–846. 
23.  López, B. D., Prins, W., Ronsse, F., & Brilman, W., (2013). Hydrothermal liquefaction 
(HTL) of microalgae for biofuel production: State of the art review and future prospects. 
Biomass Bioenergy, 113–127. 
24. Ghasemi, Y., Rasoul-Amini, S., Naseri, A. T., Montazeri-Najafabady, N., & Mobasher, 
M. A., (2012). Microalgae biofuel potentials (review). Appl. Biochem. Microbiol., 48, 
126–144. 
25. Biller, P., & Ross, A. B., (2011). Potential yields and properties of oil from the 
hydrothermal liquefaction of microalgae with different biochemical content. Bioresour. 
Technol., 102, 215–225. 
26. Chen, X., Hu, G., & Liu, L., (2018). Hacking an algal transcription factor for lipid 
biosynthesis. Trends in Plant Sci., 23(3), 181–184. 
27. Cuellar-Bermudez, S. P., García-Perez, J. S., Rittmann, B. E., & Parra-Saldivar, R., 
(2015). Photosynthetic bioenergy utilizing CO2: An approach on flue gases utilization 
for third generation biofuels. J. Clean. Prod., 98, 53–65. 
28. Chu, W. L., (2017). Strategies to enhance production of microalgal biomass and lipids 
for biofuel feedstock. Eur. J. Phycol., 52(4), 419–437. 
29. Lewis, T., Nichols, P. D., & McMeekin, T. A., (2000). Evaluation of extraction methods 
for recovery of fatty acids from lipid-producing micro heterotrophs. J. Microbiol. 
Methods, 43(2), 107–116. 
30. Chen, B., Wan, C., Mehmood, M. A., Chang, J. S., Bai, F., & Zhao, X., (2016). 
Manipulating environmental stresses and stress tolerance of microalgae for enhanced 
production of lipids and value-added products: A review. Biores. Technol., 244, 
1198–1206. 
31. Patwari, S., & Jindal, P., (2020). Biofuels-Future Prospects and Benefits for India (No. 
2858). Easy Chair. 
32. Hoegh-Guldberg, O., Poloczanska, E. S., Skirving, W., & Dove, S., (2017). Coral reef 
ecosystems under climate change and ocean acidification. Front. Mar. Sci., 4, 158. 
33. Desikachary, T. V., (1959).  Cyanophyta, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, 
Monographs on Algae. New Delhi, India. 
34. Ohlrogge, J. B., & Jaworski, J. G., (1997). Regulation of fatty acid synthesis. Annu. Rev. 
Plant Biol., 48, 109–136. 
35. Demirbas, A., & Demirbas, M. F., (2011). Importance of algae oil as a source of 
biodiesel. Energy Convers. Manag., 52(1), 163–170. 
36. Wen, Z. Y., & Chen, F., (2003). Heterotrophic production of eicosapentaenoic acid by 
microalgae. Biotechnol. Adv., 21(4), 273–294. 
37. Ward, A. J., Lewis, D. M., & Green, B., (2014). Anaerobic digestion of algae biomass: 
A review. Algal Res. Biomass Biofuels. Bioprod., 5, 204–214. 
38. Xu, H., Miao, X., & Wu, Q., (2006). High quality biodiesel production from a microalga 
Chlorella protothecoides by heterotrophic growth in fermenters. J. Biotechnol., 126(4), 
499–507. 
39. Ranga, R. A., & Ravishankar, G. A., (2007). Influence of CO2 on growth and hydrocarbon 
production in Botryococcus braunii. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 17(3), 414–419. 

 
418 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
40. Thomas, K. M., Archana, T., & Bhaskar, M. V., (2015). A new novel solution to grow 
diatom algae in large natural water bodies and its impact on CO2 capture and nutrient 
removal. J. Algal Biomass Util., 6(2), 22–27. 
41. Subramanian, G., & Thajuddin, N., (1995). Ecobiology of marine cyanobacteria. Adv. 
Ecol. Environ. Sci
 
., 189–210. 
42. Premila, N., Nirmala, R., & Bharathan, S., (1990). A  preliminary report on the epiphytic 
and epiphyllous green algae from Nilgiris. Phykos: J. Phycol. Soc., 29, 159. 
43. Nair, N. B., Sobha, V., & Arunachalam, M., (1982). Algae from southern Kerala coast 
[India]. Short communication. Indian J. Mar
 
. Sci., 11(3), 266–269. 
44. Nair, N. B., Dharmaraj, K., Abdul, A. P. K., Arunachalam, M., Krishnakumar, K., & 
Balasubramanian, N. B., (1983). Nature of primary production in a tropical back water 
of South West Coast of India. Proc. Indian Natl. Sci. Acad., 49(6), 521–597. 
45. Prommuak, C., Pavasant, P., Quitain, 
 
A. T., Goto, M., & Shotipruk, A., (2012). 
Microalgal lipid extraction and evaluation of single-step biodiesel production. Eng. J., 
16(5), 157–166. 
46. Tanzi, C. D., Vian, M. A., & Chemat, F., (2013). New procedure for extraction of algal 
lipids from wet biomass: A green clean and scalable process. Bioresour. Technol., 134, 
271–275. 
47. Olkiewicz, M., Caporgno, M. P., Font, J., Legrand, J., Lepine, O., Plechkova, N. V., & 
Bengoa, C., (2015). A novel recovery process for lipids from microalgæ for biodiesel 
production using a hydrated phosphonium ionic liquid. Green Chem., 17(5), 2813–2824. 
48. Pribyl, P., Cepák, V., & Zachleder, V., (2012). Production of lipids in 10 strains of 
Chlorella and Parachlorella, and enhanced lipid productivity in Chlorella vulgaris. 
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 94, 549–561. 
49.  Xia, L., Ge, H., Zhou, X., Zhang, D., & Hu, C., (2013). Photoautotrophic outdoor 
two-stage cultivation for oleaginous microalgae Scenedesmus obtusus XJ-15. Bioresour. 
Technol., 144, 261–267. 
50. Alishah, A. H., Rafiei, N., Garcia-Granados, R., Alemzadeh, A., & Morones-Ramírez, J. 
R., (2019). Biomass and lipid induction strategies in microalgae for biofuel production 
and other applications. Microb. Cell Factories, 18(1), 1–17. 
51.  Shokravi, Z., Shokravi, H., Chyuan, O. H., Lau, W. J., Koloor, S. S. R., Petrů, M., 
& Ismail, A. F., (2020). Improving ‘lipid productivity’ in microalgae by bilateral 
enhancement of biomass and lipid contents: A review. Sustainability, 12(21), 9083. 
52. Chen, Z., Wang, L., Qiu, S., & Ge, S., (2018). Determination of microalgal lipid content 
and fatty acid for biofuel production. Biomed Res. Int., 10, 258–272. 
53. Hempel, N., Petrick, I., & Behrendt, F., (2012). Biomass productivity and productivity 
of fatty acids and amino acids of microalgae strains as key characteristics of suitability 
for biodiesel production. J. Appl. Phycol., 24(6), 1407–1418. 
54. Griffiths, M. J., & Harrison, S. T., (2009). Lipid productivity as a key characteristic for 
choosing algal species for biodiesel production. J. Appl. Phycol., 21(5), 493–507. 
55. Warabi, Y., Kusdiana, D., & Saka, S., (2004). Reactivity of triglycerides and fatty acids 
of rape-seed oil in supercritical alcohols. Bioresour. Technol., 91(3), 283–287. 
56. Mulbry, W., Kondrad, S., Buyer, J., & Luthria, D., (2009). Optimization of an oil 
extraction process for microalgae from the treatment of manure effluent. J. Am. Oil 
Chem. Soc., 86, 909–915. 

 
419 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
57. Mahre, H. K., Malde, M. K., Eilertsen, K. E., & Elvevoll, E. O., (2014). Characterization 
of protein, lipid and mineral contents in common Norwegian seaweeds and evaluation 
of their potential as food and feed. J. Sci. Food Agric., 94(15), 3281–3290. 
58. Jambo, S. A., Abdulla, R., Azhar, S. H. M., Marbawi, H., Gansau, J. A., & Ravindra, 
P., (2016). A review on third generation bioethanol feedstock. Renew. Sustain. Energy 
Rev., 65, 756–769. 
59. Ghadiryanfar, M., Rosentrater, K. A., Keyhani, A., & Omid, M., (2016). A review of 
macroalgae production, with potential applications in biofuels and bioenergy. Renew. 
Sustain. Energy Rev., 54, 473–481. 
60.  Kostas, E. T., White, D. A., & Cook, D. J., (2017). Development of a bio-refinery 
process for the production of specialty chemical, biofuel and bioactive compounds from 
Laminaria digitata. Algal Res., 28, 211–219. 
61.  Olguín, E. J., Castillo, O. S., Mendoza, A., Tapia, K., González-Portela, R. E., & 
Hernández-Landa, V. J., (2015). Dual purpose system that treats anaerobic effluents from 
pig waste and produce Neochloris oleoabundans as lipid rich biomass. N. Biotechnol., 
32(3), 387–395. 
62. Abou-Shanab, R. A., Ji, M. K., Kim, H. C., Paeng, K. J., & Jeon, B. H., (2013). 
Microalgal species growing on piggery wastewater as a valuable candidate for nutrient 
removal and biodiesel production. J. Environ. Manage., 115, 257–264. 
63. Wang, J., (2014). Decentralized biogas technology of anaerobic digestion and farm 
ecosystem: Opportunities and challenges. Front. Energy Res., 2, 10. 
64. Zhu, L. D., Hiltunen, E., Antila, E., Zhong, J. J., Yuan, Z. H., & Wang, Z. M., (2014). 
Microalgal biofuels: Flexible bioenergies for sustainable development. Renew. Sustain. 
Energy Rev., 30, 1035–1046. 
65. Klassen, V., Blifernez-Klassen, O., Wobbe, L., Schlüter, A., Kruse, O., & Mussgnug, 
J. H., (2016). Efficiency and biotechnological aspects of biogas production from 
microalgal substrates. J. Biotechnol., 234, 7–26. 
66. Kapdan, I. K., & Kargi, F., (2006). Bio-hydrogen production from waste materials. 
Enzyme Microb. Technol., 38, 569–582. 
67. Pandey, A., Pandey, A., Srivastava, P., & Pandey, A., (2007). Using reverse micelle as 
microreactor for hydrogen production by coupled system of Nostoc/P4  and Anabaena/ 
P4. W
 orld J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 23, 269–274. 
68. Oncel, S. S., (2013). Microalgae for a macroenergy world. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 
26, 241–264. 
69. Park, S., Lee, Y., Lee, J. H., & Jin, E., (2013). Expression of the high light-inducible 
Dunaliella LIP promoter in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Planta., 238, 1147–1156. 
70. Ramos-Suárez, J. L., & Carreras, N., (2014). Use of microalgae residues for biogas 
production. Chem. Eng. J., 242, 86–95. 
71. Ran, C. Q., Chen, Z. A., Zhang, W., Yu, X. J., & Jin, M. F., (2006). Characterization of 
photo-biological hydrogen production by several marine green microalgae. J. Wuhan 
Univ. Technol., 28(2), 258–263. 
72. Scragg, A., Illman, A., Carden, A., & Shales, S., (2002). Growth of microalgae with 
increased calorific values in a tubular bioreactor. Biomass Bioene., 23(1), 67–73. 
73. Zhao, J., Xie, D., Wang, S., Zhang, R., Wu, Z., Meng, H., Chen, L., et al., (2021). 
Hydrogen-rich syngas produced from co-gasification of municipal solid waste and 
wheat straw in an oxygen-enriched air fluidized bed. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy., 46(34), 
18051–18063. 

 
420 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
74. Ugwu, C. U., Aoyagi, H., & Uchiyama, H., (2008). Photobioreactors for mass cultivation 
of algae. Bioresour. Technol., 99, 4021–4028. 
75. Wen, X., Du, K., Wang, Z., Peng, X., Luo, L., Tao, H., Xu, Y., et al., (2016). Effective 
cultivation of microalgae for biofuel production: A pilot-scale evaluation of a novel 
oleaginous microalga Graesiella sp. WBG-1. Biotechnol. Biofuels., 9, 123. 
76. Moody, J. W., McGinty, C. M., & Quinn, J. C., (2014). Global evaluation of biofuel 
potential from microalgae. PNAS., 111, 8691–8696. 
77. Yoshida, M., Tanabe, Y., Yonezawa, N., & Watanabe, M. M., (2012). Energy innovation 
potential of oleaginous microalgae. Biofuels, 3, 761–781. 
78. Hillen, L. W., Pollard, G., Wake, L. V., & White, N., (1982). Hydrocracking of the oils of 
Botryococcus braunii to transport fuels. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 24, 193–205. 
79. Wijffels, R. H., & Barbosa, M. J., (2010). An outlook on microalgal biofuels. Sci., 329, 
796–799. 
80. Suzuki, R., Nishii, I., Okada, S., & Noguchi, T., (2018). 3D reconstruction of 
endoplasmic reticulum in a hydrocarbon-secreting green alga, Botryococcus braunii  
(Race B). Planta, 247(3), 663–677. 
81. Adam, F., Abert-Vian, M., Peltier, G., & Chemat, F., (2012). Solvent-free ultrasound-
assisted extraction of lipids from fresh microalgae cells: A green, clean and scalable 
process. Bioresour. Technol., 114, 457–465. 
82. Chinnasamy, S., Rao, P. H., Bhaskar, S., Rengasamy, R., & Singh, M., (2012). Algae: 
A novel biomass feedstock for biofuels. In: Arora, R., (ed.), Microbial Biotechnology: 
Energy and Environment (pp. 224–239). Wallingford: CAB International. 
83. Amarni, F., & Kadi, H., (2010). Kinetics study of microwave-assisted solvent extraction 
of oil from olive cake using hexane: Comparison with the conventional extraction. 
Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol., 11, 322–327. 
84. Boldor, D., Kanitkar, A., Terigar, B. G., Leonardi, C., Lima, M., & Breitenbeck, G. A., 
(2010). Microwave assisted extraction of biodiesel feedstock from the seeds of invasive 
Chinese tallow tree. Environ. Sci. Technol., 44, 4019–4025. 
85. Brujan, E. A., Nahen, K., Schmidt, P., & Vogel, A., (2001). Dynamics of laser induced 
cavitation bubbles near an elastic boundary. J. Fluid Mech., 433, 251–281. 
86. Bligh, E. G., & Dyer, W. J., (1959). A rapid method of total lipid extraction and 
purification. Can. J. Biochem. Physiol., 37, 911–917. 
87. Folch, J., Lees, M., & Sloane, S. G. H., (1957). A simple method for the isolation and 
purification of total lipids from animal tissues. J. Biol. Chem., 226, 497–509. 
88. Kumar, R., Madras, G., & Modak, J., (2004). Enzymatic synthesis of ethyl palmitate in 
supercritical carbon dioxide. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 43(7), 1568–1573. 
89. Szczesna, A. M., Kubiak, A., Antczak, T., & Bielecki, S., (2009). Enzymatic biodiesel 
synthesis—key factors affecting efficiency of the process. Renew. Energ., 34(5), 
1185–1194. 
90. Hama, S., Noda, H., & Kondo, A., (2018). How lipase technology contributes to 
evolution of biodiesel production using multiple feedstocks. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 
50, 57–64. 
91. Darnoko, D., & Cheryan, M., (2000). Kinetics of palm oil transesterification in a batch 
reactor. J. Am. Oil. Chem. Soc., 77(12), 1263–1267. 
92. Freedman, B., Butterfield, R. O., & Pryde, E. H., (1986). Transesterification kinetics of 
soybean oil J. Am. Oil. Chem. Soc., 63(10), 1375–1380. 

 
421 
Microalgal Cell: A Machinery for Biofuels Production 
93. Garcia, C. M., Teixeira, S., Marciniuk, L. L., & Schuchardt, U., (2008). Transesterification 
of soybean oil catalyzed by sulfated zirconia. Bioresour. Technol., 99(14), 6608–6613. 
94. Tian, C., Li, B., Liu, Z., Zhang, Y., & Lu, H., (2014). Hydrothermal liquefaction for 
algal biorefinery: A critical review. Renew. Sust. Energy. Rev., 38, 933–950. 
95. López, B. D., Prins, W., Ronsse, F., & Brilman, W., (2013). Hydrothermal liquefaction 
(HTL) of microalgae for biofuel production: State of the art review and future prospects. 
Biomass Bioene., 53, 113–127. 
96. Lai, Y. S., McCaw, A., Ontiveros-Valencia, A., Shi, Y., Parameswaran, P., & Rittmann, 
B. E., (2016). Multiple synergistic benefits of selective fermentation of Scenedesmus  
biomass for fuel recovery via wet-biomass extraction. Algal Res., 17, 253–260. 
97. Lai, Y. S., Parameswaran, P., Li, A., Aguinaga, A., & Rittmann, B. E., (2016). 
Selective fermentation of carbohydrate and protein fractions of Scenedesmus, and 
biohydrogenation of its lipid fraction for enhanced recovery of saturated fatty acids. 
Biotechnol. Bioeng., 113, 320–329. 
98. Carrieri, D., Momot, D., Brasg, I. A., Ananyev, G., Lenz, O., Bryant, D. A., & Dismukes, 
G. C., (2010). Boosting autofermentation rates and product yields with sodium stress 
cycling: Application to production of renewable fuels by cyanobacteria. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol., 76, 6455–6462. 
99. Ward, O. P., & Singh, A., (2005). Omega-3/6 fatty acids: Alternative sources of 
production. Process Biochem., 86, 3627–3652. 
100. Maneein, S., Milledge, J. J., Nielsen, B. V., & Harvey, P. J., (2018). A review of seaweed 
pre-treatment methods for enhanced biofuel production by anaerobic digestion or 
fermentation. Fermentation, 4, 100. 
101. Miao, X., & Wu, Q., (2004). High yield bio-oil production from fast pyrolysis by 
metabolic controlling of Chlorella protothecoides. J. Biotechnol., 110, 85–93. 
102. Azizi, K., Moraveji, M. K., & Najafabadi, H. A., (2018). A review on bio-fuel production 
from microalgal biomass by using pyrolysis method. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 82, 
3046–3059. 
103. Yang, C., Li, R., Zhang, B., Qiu, Q., Wang, B., Yang, H., Ding, Y., & Wang, C., (2019). 
Pyrolysis of microalgae: A critical review. Fuel Process. Technol., 186, 53–72. 
104. Kour, D., Rana, K. L., Yadav, N., Yadav, A. N., Rastegari, A. A., Singh, C., Negi, P., et 
al., (2019). Technologies for biofuel production: Current development, challenges, and 
future prospects. In: Prospects of Renewable Bioprocessing in Future Energy System  
(pp. 1–50). Springer, Cham. 
105. Ravindran, B., Kurade, M. B., Kabra, A. N., Jeon, B. H., & Gupta, S. K., (2017). Recent 
advances and future prospects of microalgal lipid biotechnology. In: Algal  Biofuels (pp. 
1–37). Springer, Cham. 


Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
 
 
CHAPTER 14  
Microalgal Cell System for Biofuel 
Production: Present Leads and Future 
Prospects 
RUSHITA LAL,1 ANJALI RANJAN,1 VIJAY JAGDISH UPADHYE2 and 
ANUPAMA SHRIVASTAVA,3 
1Department of Microbiology, Parul Institute of Applied Sciences, 
Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat, India 
2Center of Research for Development (CR4D), Parul Institute of Applied 
Sciences (PIAS), Parul University (DSIR-SIRO Recognized), PO Limda, 
Tal Waghodia, Vadodara, Gujarat, India 
Faculty of Life Health and Allied Sciences, Institute for Technology and 
Management (ITM), Vocational University, At and Po-Raval, 
Ta-Waghodia, Vadodara, Gujarat, India 
ABSTRACT 
Recently, there is an increased attention towards the production of biofuels 
from microalgae. In the generation of biofuels there are certain stages. The 
microalgae are focused on a complete analysis and has been implemented 
from the extraction, cultivation, and conversion to the end product. There 
occurs a new challenging barrier where in the execution of microalgae are 
as expected source in the energy market. Furthermore, for the production of 
the main product from microalgae, the type of pyrolysis had been explained. 
With concern to the global current issues, algal technology is a prospective as 
well as a corresponding technology that will provide sustainability. Though 
3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
424 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
microalgae are the best alternative, but it is not reached to the economically 
feasible stage as of now. This chapter focuses on the useful tool to identify, 
organize, and operate microalgae as a potential biofuel. 
14.1 INTRODUCTION 
To sustain the population’s growth and development, the renewable source 
of energy is important without harmful emissions like NOX (nitrogen oxide) 
and SOX (sulfur oxide) most importantly carbon emissions. In comparison 
with the geological process needed to generate fossil fuels, the biofuels are 
the form of renewable energy source could be generated within shorter cycle. 
This characteristic feature gives them two major advantages: scalability and 
consistency [1]. Research is initiated in recreating this type of liquid fuels 
from renewable sources and amazingly biomass is the only source that yields 
all three phases of fuel. 
This review highlights the diverse plants, crops, and seeds in the 
group of biofuels and classified as the generation of biofuels. The biofuel 
stages have set-up from 1st generation to 3rd generation which determines 
the future of energy utilization. The 1st generation (G1) biofuel is known 
for the capability of reducing carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions while they 
are condemned a lot for the usage of land and food shortage. The 2nd 
generation biofuel (G2 biofuel) constitutes the lignocellulosic biomass, 
oil, and animal waste. The 3rd generation (G3) mark the viability of algae 
out of the single celled organisms (SCO) as a magnificent alternative in 
fuel market. 
The chapter presents the positive aspects of these microbodies with 
progression about the methods required in growth and extraction of lipids 
from the oil rich species. Several techniques developed for the conversion of 
lipid or the whole-call mass of algae into fuels are also discussed [2]. 
14.2 GENERATION OF BIOFUELS 
From a chemical method the fuel which is obtained from biomass instead 
of a slow geological process is known as biofuels. U.S. Energy Information 
Administration (EIA) labels the fuel and the same is observed in most of the 
countries (Figure 14.1). The gaseous and liquid form of fuels are commonly 
derived from biomass are termed as biofuels and have high viability in trans­
portation sector. The different form of liquid biofuels is biodiesel, bio-alcohol, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
425 
Microalgal Cell System for Biofuel Production 
bio-oil. The mixture of alcohol and gasoline obtained from a saccharification 
reaction which is known as “Gasohol” is found to be efficient in reducing 
carbon emission. The gaseous biofuel which is rich in methane gas derived 
from biomass known as biogas [4]. For the delivery of alternative fuels three 
generations of biomass are under concern. 
FIGURE 14.1 Energy consumption by regions. 
14.2.1 1ST GENERATION BIOFUELS DERIVED FROM BIOMASS 
G1 biofuel includes both gaseous and liquid fuel. Vegetable oil, bio­
alcohol, bio-ethers, and biodiesel are examples of liquid biofuels. G1 
biofuels are derived from biomass such as edible sugar crops, specifi­
cally sugarcane, and oil-bearing seeds, animal fats, starch, rapeseed, 
sunflower, and palm oil, among others. Triglycerides are three units of 
fatty acid linked to an ester molecule, and depending on the method­
ology used, these triglycerides can be converted to biofuels. Anaerobic 
decomposition, fermentation, transesterification, and pyrolysis are the 
techniques used for generation of biofuels. G1 biofuels can be used 
without blending or by blending [9]. In spite of reduction of atmospheric 
pollution and Green House Gas emission (GHG); they hinder with social 
conflicts and food security. As a result, when ranking and evaluating 
specific generations with shareholder input, it raises concerns about the 
long-term viability of G1 fuels [12]. 

 
 
 
426 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
14.2.2 2ND GENERATION BIOFUEL (G2) 
Because they are derived from non-food biomass, G2 fuels or advanced 
fuels are an alternative to G1 fuels. G2 biomass is made up of by-products 
from woolen mills and the food processing industry that include inedible 
parts (for example, wheat, dry wood, and corn stalks). Animal waste used oil 
products from restaurants, and non-edible oil crops such as Jatropha, Jojoba, 
and sea mango are also viable biomass sources for next-generation biofuels. 
Gasification of dried biomass, saccharide fermentation, HTL (hydrothermal 
liquification) of vegetable oils, and BtL are the primary processes involved 
in G2 fuel generation (biomass to liquid). The lighter fuel bio-hydrogen is 
produced by gasifying dried biomass. These fuels are non-corrosive, eco­
friendly, and clean burning, and they do not contribute to deforestation [15]. 
Despite this, the output of G2 is still insufficient when compared to G1 
due to the infancy of technological advancement as well as infrastructure 
limitations. Furthermore, because this was a temporary choice, there was 
a lack of proper technique and a high content of saturated fatty acids in the 
G2 feedstock drives for biofuel production. The search for a renewable and 
clean fuel has led to the development of III generation biofuel (GG3) [18]. 
14.2.3 3RD GENERATION BIOFUEL (G3) 
Algae are the photosynthetic diverse group includes the single-celled micro-
algae to multi-celled species. As fuel biomass, microalga species acquired 
significance importance because of their ability of accumulating oil contents 
in the cell that could be transformed to biodiesel. The characteristic proper­
ties of algae that makes them spurious in context as fuel resource are: 
•   For the production of biomass unlike plant-based system, they don’t 
require large land area. 
•   The consume CO2 for the biomass generation hence helps in reducing 
GHG effects. 
•  Microalgae have the ability to grow and detoxify waste/effluent water 
and helps in bioremediation and wastewater treatment. 
•  Most importantly have high lipid content accumulation in the cells is 
found to be best suitable for fuel production [19]. 
In the mid-19th  century, the world’s first biodiesel plant was established 
from algal biomass; algae were marketed as a source of food and energy. 

 
427 
Microalgal Cell System for Biofuel Production 
During WWII, England, Japan, and Israel began large-scale cultivation 
of Chlorella algae to investigate the possibility of sustaining fossil fuel 
demands. The abundance of fossil fuels has redirected the idea of using algae 
in energy production to food commodities [20]. In recent years, there has 
been a lot of interest in algae as an alternative fuel, and they can significantly 
replace G1 and G2 biomass. The same method used to convert vegetable 
oil to biodiesel can be used to convert algal lipids to biodiesel. Bioethanol 
and biobutanol are produced from the carbohydrates of algae [21]. Spirulina 
platensis (8% lipids, 60% sugars), Chlorella spp. (19% lipids, 56% sugar), 
and Chlamydomonas reinhardtii are a few algae of interest in the context of 
biodiesel research (21% lipids, 48% sugars [22]. Currently, approximately 
10 countries are committed to producing biofuel from algae biomass. As 
shown in Figure 14.2, numerous techniques are used in the processing of 
microalgal biofuels. 
14.3 GROWTH, EXTRACTION, AND CONVERSION OF ALGAE 
From the algal biomass the biofuel synthesis begins through some steps 
which are discussed in subsections. 
14.3.1 CULTURING OF ALGAE 
Algae growth is very simple and inexpensive, requiring only adequate light, 
naturally available dissolved CO2, and nutrients [23]. Without contamina­
tion of other prokaryotic or eukaryotic organisms the unialgal growth and 
(bacteria free) axenic culture is challenging. Unlikely plants as their spirit 
are not consumed on the extension of their parts The algal growth rate is 
extremely high (doubling by 24 h). Classification is based on the growth 
features; there are two kinds of algal culture techniques are preferred: (a) 
batch culture; and (b) continuous flow culture. 
The primary physical parameters that influence algae growth are as 
follows: 
1.  pH: Around 8.2–8.7 and complement of CO2  into the medium 
enables the achievement optimum growth and need to be optimized 
specific pH conditions to type of algal species. 
2.  Illumination: It is dependent on the depth of the vessel in use as well 
as the density of the culture.  There are several ways to illuminate 

 
 
428 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
light in algae culture, such as photoperiod, light intensity, fluores
cent lamps-radiation is 380–500 nm and (red light) 600–700 nm is 
preferred for algal growth. 
3.  Temperature: Around 10–25°C is suitable for the algal cultivation 
and the temperature above 35°C is too lethal to algal growth. 
Majorly three types of culturing techniques are performed which are 
discussed in subsections. 
­
14.3.1.1 OPEN POND SYSTEM (OPS) 
It is the standard system for algal growth. Natural ponds (shallow ponds and 
shallow lagoons), mixed ponds, raceway pond system (RPS), and circular 
open ponds mixed with a center pivot mixer are all examples of OPS. OPS 
has limited heat transfer and mass due to a lack of agitation and low sunlight 
perforation. The RPS, on the other hand, is a low-cost mechanism made 
of concrete earth. RPS is a closed loop with a recirculation passage (0.3 m 
deep) and paddles. However, the system is sensitive to environmental varia­
tion and has a high risk of contamination due to the low rate of production. 
They are, however, simple to operate and maintain, making them ideal for 
large-scale applications. 
14.3.1.2 CLOSED LOOP CULTURING-PHOTOBIOREACTOR (PBR) 
The concept of a closed reactor system is constrained by extensive research 
on algae production. PBR is a viable substitute for OPS due to the high quality 
of algae and high productivity rate. Horizontal, bubble, Christmas, plate, 
foil, tubular, and pours type reactors have all been designed by researchers. 
Tubular photobioreactors are the most commonly used PBR (TPBR). This 
type is used in algae farming and consists of a biomass unit, tubular solar 
arrays, an exchange column to exchange gas, and a pump. The horizontal 
column TPBR (HTPBR) has recommended light access and a large surface 
area, whereas the vertical column TPBR (VTPBR) has good gas exchange. 
VTPBR has a low surface-to-volume ratio, whereas HTPBR has a low 
mass transfer, resulting in difficulty in CO2 elimination and uncontrolled 
heat generation [27]. In general, PBRs suffer from high capital costs that 
outweigh production due to their difficulty and absolute erection material 

 
 
 
 
 
429 
Microalgal Cell System for Biofuel Production 
[28]. Furthermore, it suffers from biofilm formation (fouling), improper CO2  
and O2 balance, and temperature control. 
14.3.1.3 HYBRID SYSTEM 
Because algae grow using CO2 and sunlight, the phototrophic system is 
thought to be cost effective. In a heterotrophic system, the source of energy 
is returned by a carbon-rich compound or bio-sugars such as dairy prod­
ucts, glucose, and waste food items. The approach of heterotrophic mode is 
decimated in accordance with energy constraints and costs. Screening out 
the two methods becomes a difficult task, necessitating the development 
of a hybrid cultivation [29]. The hybridization of both systems can achieve 
the goal of collaborating the effectiveness of OPS and PBR. The advanced 
version of algaculture is the two-stage hybrid cultivation system, in which 
the cell medium is transferred from OPS to RPS when the nutrients are found 
to be depleted. In this case, the possibility of contamination is low, and the 
separation of biomass from lipid accretion is feasible. The hybrid system is 
divided into two stages: 
1.  I‑Stage: PBRs are chosen at this stage to reduce contamination and 
lipid accumulation in the culture. The density of biomass can be 
increased using closed PBRs. 
2.  II‑Stage: At this point, the selection of OPS increases the economic 
affinity of the process, which aids in the cultivation of abundant 
carbohydrates and lipids in algae. 
14.3.2 THE INCREASE OF LIPID CONTENT BY ALTERNATIVE 
NITROGEN SUPPLY 
The decreased nitrogen environment in the culture, delays the algal growth. 
This could be explored for the enhancement of the lipid content which is the 
actual valuable component of microalgae in the context of biofuel. According 
to recent research, nitrogen supply at the start of culture growth and removal 
of same after significant dense biomass increases lipid production [30]. 
Nitrogen deficiency disrupts the cell and regulates the carbon flux toward 
lipid and carbohydrate production. Chlorella protothecoides and Nannochlo-
ropsis gaditana are two algae that produced good results in the conversion of 
carbon flux towards lipid source under nitrogen limited conditions. 

 
430 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
14.3.3 BRINE CONDITION 
This is the inverse of the nitrogen supply mechanism. Only the two-stage 
cultivation process produced better products than the single stage cultivation 
process. Moderately increasing salinity lowers metabolism and improves 
algal growth; this was observed in many algal cultures under low saline 
conditions. Reduced salinity improved carbohydrate and lipid production in 
algae. The Chlorophyceae species represent the effect of salinity on their 
growth in II stage cultivation [31]. 
14.3.3.1 HARVESTING OR DE-WATERING OF ALGAE 
The cultured microalgae must be dewatered in order to acquire the lipid 
characteristic. The dewatered algae appear to be a solid-liquid medium 
rather than a liquid that flows easily. Only 0.1% of dry matter is available 
in 1L of cultured media. The centrifugation and filtration processes are used 
to remove water from algae. Algae flocculation and membrane filtration are 
effective in drying [34]. The successful filtration methods applied for algal 
dewatering are Vacuum, deep-bed sand, pressure, cross flow, and magnetic 
filtration systems. 
14.3.3.2 LIPID EXTRACTION FROM ALGAE 
The algae’s cell wall is multi-layered and composed of cellulose and poly-
saccharides synthesized from silica acid. The cell wall contains fatty acids or 
lipids, and removing algal oil is referred to as lipid extraction. The extraction 
of lipids is also functional solvent the extraction of solvent using chloroform 
and methanol. For extraction, the mechanical methods are also could be 
implied and are of great interest. Mechanical cell breaking can be accom­
plished through bead beating, grinding, microwave, and ultrasound, among 
other methods. Because this method does not require any additional chemi­
cals, the subsequent extraction step becomes simpler. Typically, bead beating 
is used to disrupt cell walls and release lipids. Crushing dried algal biomass is 
similar to wheat milling in that it preserves the material’s maximum nutrient 
content. Recently, research has focused on solvent-free extraction. The super 
critical fluid technique (SCF) achieves the desired result by producing high-
quality, safe end products. The potency of this method in extracting specific 
components from a complex species is sufficient [15]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
431 
Microalgal Cell System for Biofuel Production 
14.3.4 RAW ALGAL OIL AS BIOFUELS 
Rudolph Diesel used groundnut oil to power his engine in the 19th century. 
The theory of using vegetable oil as engine fuel without any type of conver­
sion or clarification first appeared in Paris [18]. Although the use of raw oils 
in engines is technically impractical and causes a slew of issues in the long 
run because: 
• It causes clumping and plugging; 
• It has a low cetane value, is highly viscous, and has a low flash point; 
• It causes engine knocking; 
• It sublimates carbon on the piston. 
As a result, a suitable technique was proposed to convert vegetable oil 
into a sustainable biofuel with good fuel characteristics, and only such fuel 
can be used as a substitute for fossil fuels. This could be accomplished 
through transesterification. Engine performance was evaluated using unpro­
cessed raw algal oil in a digital software Diesel RK, which corresponded to a 
Yanmar Diesel engine [37]. Being the algal biomass is also rich in carbohy­
drate component, algae intern also could be used for the alcohol production 
which could be applied for the transesterification process. 
14.4 TECHNIQUES TO DEVELOP NEXT GENERATION FUELS LIKE 
ALCOHOLS 
The journey of producing biofuel is not a current work and may have been 
abandoned in the mid-18th century. By the late 19th century, a Brazilian 
had filed its first commercial patent. In comparison to conventional oil, 
algae yield an equal amount of oil that is supplied to crops, and this can be 
acknowledged for a better outlook of algae in biofuel generation (Figure 
14.2). 
14.5 FERMENTATION 
From vegetables, the ethanol is acquired by utilizing the biomass is evalu­
ated as the pure liquid fuel [39]. The conversion of biomass to ethanol is 
accomplished through a process known as fermentation. On a commercial 
scale, starch-containing materials like sugarcane are used to produce ethanol. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
432 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Because algal biomass contains 16–55% carbohydrate, it is a very valuable 
biomass suitable for fermentation. This method entails the following steps: 
•  Liquification: Starch solubilization. 
•  Hydrolysis: Conversion of soluble starch to glucose. 
•  Fermentation Step: Converting glucose/other sugars derived from 
fermentation into ethanol. 
This method entails crushing biomass, adding yeast or suitable microbial 
seed, and fermenting the mixture in fermentor. 
FIGURE 14.2 Steps and techniques required in the production of biofuels by using 
microalgae. 
14.5.1 FERMENTATION IN SYNTHESIS OF ALGAL BIOFUEL 
Each algae cell contains an abundance of resources for ethanol production via 
fermentation. The outer algal cell walls are made up of alginate and pectin, 
whereas the nucleus of green algae is made up of hemicellulose and pylose 
(with approximately 3,000 sugar units) and cellulose (polysaccharides) 
made up of 15,000 sugar molecules. Because various species of algae have 
potential carbohydrates content, they can be used as a constructive feed­
stock for bioethanol fermentation. Chlorella vulgaris and Chlamydomonas 

 
433 
Microalgal Cell System for Biofuel Production 
reinhardtii from algae have been found to have abundant carbohydrates suit­
able for bio-fermentation, and the approximate bioethics production by US 
renewable fuels standard is 36 gallons [41]. In algae, complex carbohydrates 
must be broken down to monomers before proceeding to the fermentation 
step, which is followed by fermenting with specific microorganisms such as 
yeast or bacteria at approximately 38°C [42]. Scenedesmus dimorphus is a 
suitable alga for producing ethanol from carbohydrates. Scientists were able 
to extract sugars from Scenedesmus spp. and convert them to bioethanol at 
a rate of up to 93% yield conversion. The use of fermenter microbes that 
conduct heterolactic fermentation, such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, has 
been found to produce more bioethanol [43]. 
This procedure takes a long time, ranging from several hours to several 
days. Bioethanol is a clean fuel; when burned, it produces fewer hydrocarbons 
and NOx, as well as less CO2 (carbon monoxide). It contains 35% oxygen 
and is an oxygenated fuel, which when burned produces aldehyde, which 
is the culprit in photochemical smog. Furthermore, the cost of producing 
enzymes makes it uneconomical. 
14.5.2 TRANSESTERIFICATION 
Transesterification is the reaction between 3 and 4 moles of alcohol and 
1 mole of a complex esters triglyceride molecule to produce ethyl/methyl 
esters, also known as biodiesel. This technique is frequently catalyzed by 
a combination of base (NaOH, KOH, sodium ethoxide, sodium methoxide, 
and K2CO3) and acid catalysts (such as sulfuric acid and sulfonic acid). The 
acid catalyzed process is harsher than the base catalyzed process. As a result, 
base catalyzed reactions are more commonly used in industry. The base cata­
lyst removes a proton from the alcohol, resulting in a stronger nucleophilic 
action, whereas the acid catalysts add H+ to the carbonyl group, resulting in a 
stronger electrophile. The alkyl substrate for the transesterification reaction 
is either ethanol or methanol. To overcome the drawbacks of homogeneous 
catalysts, heterogeneous catalysis is used to induce transesterification. 
14.5.2.1 BIODIESEL SYNTHESIS FROM ALGAL FATS BY 
TRANSESTERIFICATION PROCESS 
Algae provides market insight for future oil demand. With the various classes 
of catalysts in use, mixed oxide of nickel and molybdenum and porous 

 
434 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
catalyst H (silica alumina framework zeolites) prove to be accurate materials; 
in the presence of these catalysts, the biodiesel conversion achieved is close 
to 100% [45]. The lipids were extracted from microalgal strains that were 
under observation. In vitro lipid transfer within the cell wall was enabled by 
SrO2/CaO encroachment into the cells. Immobilized lipase on metal oxide 
nanoparticles has good thermal stability, parallels to good selectivity, and 
can also be easily separated. The biodiesel yield was as high as 90% when 
the enzyme concentration was 1% to 3.5% [45]. Bronsted acids also catalyze 
the transesterification process (such as H2SO4 and RSO3H). This reaction 
is very slow, but it yields a high yield. Both the acid and base catalyzed 
transesterification processes are inefficient because they use more methanol 
or ethanol and take longer. The use of biodiesel in engines is restricted, so it 
must be blended with petrol or diesel [50]. It also emits smoke as gums form 
on engines [51]. 
14.5.2.2 ALGAL BIODIESEL ENGINE PERFORMANCE 
The significance of these alternative fuels lies in their application in engine 
design. The use of algal biodiesel in a single cylinder engine at 1,500 rpm 
compares favorably to diesel fuel. Algal biodiesel mixed with traditional 
diesel fuel in a 20% ratio completely reduced hydrocarbon exhaust and 
was confirmed to be an excellent alternative for diesel engines [52]. The 
cetane value of biodiesel produced from N. cinta with a B7 and B10 blending 
pattern was high [30, 50, 51]. 
Hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL) of algae is a bio-crude production tech­
nology that can convert wet algae into water-insoluble bio-crude and other 
co-products. HTL converts all algae nutrients, including carbohydrates and 
proteins, in addition to lipids. Wet microalgae can be liquefied at tempera­
tures below 375°C and pressures of 25 MPa [55]. 
14.5.3 PYROLYSIS 
Pyrolysis is the direct thermal decomposition of biomass at high tempera­
tures (400–1,000°C) in the absence or limited supply of oxygen, and under 
suitable catalyst to produce solid (char and coke) and gaseous fuels (methane 
and higher gaseous hydrocarbons) or liquid (bio-oil) [21]. There are two 
types of pyrolysis popularly administered in case of algal biomass: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Microalgal Cell System for Biofuel Production 
435 
• Sluggish pyrolysis (low process temperature and longer time); and 
• Rapid pyrolysis (higher process temperature and shorter time). 
14.5.3.1 PYROLYSIS OF ALGAL BIOMASS FOR BIOFUEL PRODUCTION 
Algae aids in GHG requisition because the combustion of biomass emits 
CO2, which is absorbed by algae for growth and thus self-sustaining aids 
in the running of the CO2 cycle. In the pyrolysis of algal biomass, 44% 
of bio-oil was outlined from WWT algae [56]. Nannochloropsis gaditana 
macroalgal biomass yields bio-oil with the highest calorific value of 12.6 
MJ/Kg [53]. Most of the liquid product derived from the pyrolysis of algal 
biomass are decans and the gasses product limited to methane [57]. In flash 
pyrolysis of macroalgae, about 78% of biofuels was a favorable result [58]. 
As compared to fast pyrolysis, slow pyrolysis always results in low bio-oil 
production [59]. Higher-temperature pyrolysis is inefficient in terms of 
obtaining specific products [59]. 
The conditions of temperature during the pyrolysis play a crucial and 
results in quality of product at the end of the process. Moreover, the results 
differ with type of species and strains of algae from which the biomass is 
derived. By using another technique known as catalytic hydrocracking, 
high molecular weight compounds (biomass) are broken down to form 
low molecular weight compounds. At temperatures ranging from 200°C to 
450°C, suitable catalysts and H2 steam (1–10 MPa) were used [60]. Hydro­
genation and cracking are related in that hydrogenation generates heat for 
cracking (exothermic) and biomass cracking generates olefins by absorbing 
heat energy (endothermic) [61]. The extracted algal oil can be converted into 
useful fuels within a specified range of hydrocarbons, and this conversion 
was accomplished using both heterogeneous and homogeneous catalytic 
methods (Figure 14.3). 
FIGURE 14.3 Graphical view of biofuel production. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
436 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
In transesterification process the homogeneous catalyst is used for the 
cracking process, however using the acid-based catalysts affects the acidity 
of the medium will have enhanced chances of engine corrosion, is an inherent 
disadvantage. In this context, modest fuel production, catalytic cracking 
of algal oil, and catalytic cracking of vegetable oils are being intensively 
researched in order to produce fuel with no corrosive effect on engine. With 
microalgae, a zigzag channeled microporous catalyst (HZSM-5) produced a 
bio-oil yield of 52.7 wt.% (weight percent) [61]. Catalytic cracking of 100 
kg of algae by upgrading of oil performed in ASPEN plus (it’s a modeling 
tool used for monitoring process, optimization, and conceptual design) 
shown 95% efficiency with 41% kerosene yield. The combination of HTL 
of algae with HVGO (heavy vehicle gas oil) reduced the conversion rate 
while increasing catalyst coking. It is one of the mechanisms employed in 
the deactivation of a heterogeneous catalyst. This includes the economic 
stability of algal oil mixed with HVGO [62]. Aside from producing fuel for 
combustion engines, a few attempts have been made to produce aviation 
fuel from algal sources. Avgas or aviation fuels, a highly refined version of 
gasoline obtained by cracking alga in the presence of a Pt-Re catalyst at H2 
atmosphere (Figure 14.3) could also be suitable for conversion into aviation 
fuel. 
 Advantages: It is low-cost and inexpensive [63]. Fuels are of high 
demand and can be easily prepared by upgrading of oil [65]. It is also 
easy and convenient to store and transport. 
 Disadvantages: It has a low calorific value, is highly viscid, harsh, 
and does not have thermal stability [66]. It bears a resemblance to 
the reactant oil due to the predominance of oxygenated molecules 
[67–69]. 
14.6 FUTURE PROSPECTIVE 
As compared to other general biomass, the whole-cell derived microalgal 
biomass have the potential to yield large quantity of biofuel with better 
quality and with low emissions prospect. Interestingly, to develop the 
ethanol, butanol, and jet fuels, the algae is a good fortune for the society. 
In a closed loop systems in unfertile lands or in open ponds the algal bloom 
is obviously easy to grow. As the algal oil is nonedible, therefore it doesn’t 
dispute food security. The presence of a higher concentration of fatty acids/ 
lipids in algae allows for successful conversion into high-quality biofuel. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
437 
Microalgal Cell System for Biofuel Production 
The exposure for algal biofuel is tolerable, but it must accept a few of the 
drawbacks. 
14.7 CONCLUSIONS 
The use of conventional fossil fuels forces society to consider renew­
able and sustainable energy sources. With the urgent need for alternative 
fuels, biomass exploitation is the best option for producing biofuels. The 
sources used in the context of I and II generation biofuels are unviable 
and are blamed for social, economic, and food insecurity. Most countries 
have placed their faith in bio-III generation biofuel, which is made up 
of whole-algae and oil derived from algae after conversion processes. 
Although the concept of algae cultivation is simple, with high lipid 
content and harvesting, there are challenges in feedstock production that 
must be addressed. In the area of conversion of algae into perfect fuel, the 
challenges are really rigid need to be progressed for developing certain 
technologies to deal these. In addition, more exploration on identifying 
the novel species and strains for better quality biomass for the fuel produc­
tion need to be undertaken in mass level. A comprehensive study on the 
parameters for fuel compatibility is required, and also the engineering 
of engines to make suitable and sustainable use with algal biofuels also 
need to be considered. Nevertheless, replacing the fossil fuels with algal-
based biofuels, we have a long way to go for making algal biofuel as a 
commercially viable alternative. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
algal biodiesel 
• 
biofuels 
• 
cultivation 
• 
lipid extraction 
• 
microalgae 
• 
pyrolysis 
• 
transesterification 

 
438 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
REFERENCES 
1. Li, P., Sakuragi, K., & Makino, H., (2019). Extraction techniques in sustainable biofuel 
production: A concise review. Fuel Processing Technology, 193, 295–303. 
2.  Bórawski, P., Bełdycka-Bórawska, A., Yamasaki, E. J., Jankowski, K. J., Dubis, B., & 
Dunn, J. W., (2019). Development of renewable energy sources market and biofuels in 
the European Union. Journal of Cleaner Production, 228, 467–484. 
3. Curtin, J., McInerney, C., Gallachóir, B. Ó., Hickey, C., Deane, P., & Deeney, P., (2019). 
Quantifying stranding risk for fossil fuel assets and implications for renewable energy 
investment: A review of the literature. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 116, 
109402. 
4. Wang, T., & Lin, B., (2019). Fuel consumption in road transport: A comparative study of 
China and OECD countries. Journal of Cleaner Production, 206, 156–170. 
5. Fitzgerald, T., (2020). Crude oil, crude money: Aristotle Onassis, Saudi Arabia, and the 
CIA, by Thomas W. Lippman. The Energy Journal, 41(4), 308–310. 
6. Maamoun, N., (2019). The Kyoto protocol: Empirical evidence of a hidden success. 
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 95, 227–256. 
7. Pascoal, C. V. P., Oliveira, A. L. L., Figueiredo, D. D., & Assunção, J. C. C., (2020). 
Optimization and kinetic study of ultrasonic-mediated in situ transesterification for 
biodiesel production from the almonds of Syagrus cearensis. Renewable Energy, 147, 
1815–1824. 
8.  Miladinović, M. R., Zdujić, M. V., Veljović, D. N., Krstić, J. B., Banković-Ilić, I. B., 
Veljković, V. B., & Stamenković, O. S., (2020). Valorization of walnut shell ash as a 
catalyst for biodiesel production. Renewable Energy, 147, 1033–1043. 
9. Manigandan, S., Atabani, A. E., Ponnusamy, V. K., Pugazhendhi, A., Gunasekar, P., 
& Prakash, S., (2020). Effect of hydrogen and multiwall carbon nanotubes blends on 
combustion performance and emission of diesel engine using Taguchi approach. Fuel, 
276, 118120. 
10. Goga, G., Chauhan, B. S., Mahla, S. K., & Cho, H. M., (2019). Performance and 
emission characteristics of diesel engine fueled with rice bran biodiesel and n-butanol. 
Energy Reports, 5, 78–83. 
11. Sarno, M., & Ponticorvo, E., (2020). A new nanohybrid for electrocatalytic biodiesel 
production from waste Amalfi coast lemon seed oil. Fuel, 267, 117178. 
12. Lira, T. A. M., Santos, A. P., Moreti, T. C. F., Lopes, A., De Oliveira, M. C. J., Neves, 
M. C. T., Iamaguti, P. S., et al., (2019). Performance of agricultural tractor consuming 
diesel and biodiesel derived from babassu (‘Orbinya martiana’). Australian Journal of 
Crop Science, 13(7), 1037–1044. 
13. Arunkumar, M., Kannan, M., & Murali, G., (2019). Experimental studies on engine 
performance and emission characteristics using castor biodiesel as fuel in CI engine. 
Renewable Energy, 131, 737–744. 
14. Ganesan, R., Manigandan, S., Samuel, M. S., Shanmuganathan, R., Brindhadevi, K., 
Chi, N. T. L., Duc, P. A., & Pugazhendhi, A., (2020). A  review on prospective production 
of biofuel from microalgae. Biotechnology Reports, e00509. 
15. Lin, L., Cunshan, Z., Vittayapadung, S., Xiangqian, S., & Mingdong, D., (2011). 
Opportunities and challenges for biodiesel fuel. Applied Energy, 88(4), 1020–1031. 
16. Parente, E., (2007). Lipofuels: Biodiesel and Biokerosene. National Institute of Standards 
and Technology. 

 
439 
Microalgal Cell System for Biofuel Production 
17. Sani, Y. M., Daud, W. M. A. W., & Aziz, A. A., (2012). Biodiesel feedstock and 
production technologies: Successes, challenges and prospects. Biodiesel-Feedstocks, 
Production, and Applications, 10, 52790. 
18. Yi-Feng, C., & Wu, Q., (2011). Production of biodiesel from algal biomass: Current 
perspectives and future. Biofuels, 399–413. 
19. Mathimani, T., & Pugazhendhi, A., (2019). Utilization of algae for biofuel, bio-products 
and bio-remediation. Biocatalysis and Agricultural Biotechnology, 17, 326–330. 
20. Demirbas, A., & Demirbas, M. F., (2011). Importance of algae oil as a source of 
biodiesel. Energy Conversion and Management, 52(1), 163–170. 
21. Xu, L., Cheng, X., & Wang, Q., (2018). Enhanced lipid production in Chlamydomonas 
reinhardtii by co-culturing with Azotobacter chroococcum. Frontiers in Plant Science, 
9, 741. 
22. Sasaki, M., Takagi, A., Ota, S., Kawano, S., Sasaki, D., & Asayama, M., (2020). 
Coproduction of lipids and extracellular polysaccharides from the novel green alga 
Parachlorella sp. BX1. 5 depending on cultivation conditions. Biotechnology Reports, 
25, p.e00392. 
23. Rafiee, P., Ebrahimi, S., Hosseini, M., & Tong, Y. W., (2020). Characterization of soluble 
algal products (SAPs) after electrocoagulation of a mixed algal culture. Biotechnology 
Reports, 25, e00433. 
24. Galadima, A., & Muraza, O., (2014). Biodiesel production from algae by using 
heterogeneous catalysts: A critical review. Energy, 78, 72–83. 
25. Narala, R. R., Garg, S., Sharma, K. K., Thomas-Hall, S. R., Deme, M., Li, Y., & Schenk, 
P. M., (2016). Comparison of microalgae cultivation in photobioreactor, open raceway 
pond, and a two-stage hybrid system. Frontiers in Energy Research, 4, 29. 
26. Stephens, E., Ross, I. L., Mussgnug, J. H., Wagner, L. D., Borowitzka, M. A., Posten, C., 
Kruse, O., & Hankamer, B., (2010). Future prospects of microalgal biofuel production 
systems. Trends in Plant Science, 15(10), 554–564. 
27. Oncel, S. S., (2013). Microalgae for a macroenergy world. Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, 26, 241–264. 
28. Nagappan, S., Devendran, S., Tsai, P. C., Dahms, H. U., & Ponnusamy, V. K., (2019). 
Potential of two-stage cultivation in microalgae biofuel production. Fuel, 252, 339–349. 
29. Sun, X., Cao, Y., Xu, H., Liu, Y., Sun, J., Qiao, D., & Cao, Y., (2014). Effect of nitrogen-
starvation, light intensity and iron on triacylglyceride/carbohydrate production and fatty 
acid profile of Neochloris oleoabundans HK-129 by a two-stage process. Bioresource 
Technology, 155, 204–212. 
30. Benavente-Valdés, J. R., Aguilar, C., Contreras-Esquivel, J. C., Méndez-Zavala, A., & 
Montañez, J., (2016). Strategies to enhance the production of photosynthetic pigments 
and lipids in Chlorophycae species. Biotechnology Reports, 10, 117–125. 
31. Sharma, A., & Arya, S. K., (2017). Hydrogen from algal biomass: A review of production 
process. Biotechnology Reports, 15, 63–69. 
32. Kwan, T. A., & Zimmerman, J. B., (2019). Mono-and poly-unsaturated triacylglycerol 
fractionation from Chlorella sp. using supercritical carbon dioxide. Algal Research, 43, 
101644. 
33. Chen, C. L., Chang, J. S., & Lee, D. J., (2015). Dewatering and drying methods for 
microalgae. Drying Technology, 33(4), 443–454. 

 
440 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
34. Pandey, A., Pathak, V. V., Kothari, R., Black, P. N., & Tyagi, V. V., (2019). Experimental 
studies on zeta potential of flocculants for harvesting of algae. Journal of Environmental 
Management, 231, 562–569. 
35. Sani, Y. M., Daud, W. M. A. W., & Aziz, A. A., (2013). Solid acid-catalyzed biodiesel 
production from microalgal oil—The dual advantage. Journal of Environmental 
Chemical Engineering, 1(3), 113–121. 
36. Tsaousis, P., Wang, Y., Roskilly, A. P., & Caldwell, G. S., (2014). Algae to energy: 
Engine performance using raw algal oil. Energy Procedia, 61, 656–659. 
37. Lee, D. H., (2017). Evaluation the financial feasibility of biogas upgrading to biomethane, 
heat, CHP and AwR. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 42(45), 27718–27731. 
38. Ho, S. H., Huang, S. W., Chen, C. Y., Hasunuma, T., Kondo, A., & Chang, J. S., (2013). 
Bioethanol production using carbohydrate-rich microalgae biomass as feedstock. 
Bioresource Technology, 135, 191–198. 
39. Qari, H., Rehan, M., & Nizami, A. S., (2017). Key issues in microalgae biofuels: A short 
review. Energy Procedia, 142, 898–903. 
40. Fivga, A., Speranza, L. G., Branco, C. M., Ouadi, M., & Hornung, A., (2019). A review 
on the current state of the art for the production of advanced liquid biofuels. Aims 
Energy, 7(1), 46–76. 
41. Khan, M. I., Lee, M. G., Shin, J. H., & Kim, J. D., (2017). Pretreatment optimization 
of the biomass of Microcystis aeruginosa for efficient bioethanol production. AMB 
Express, 7(1), 1–9. 
42. McNeff, C. V., McNeff, L. C., Yan, B., Nowlan, D. T., Rasmussen, M., Gyberg, A. 
E., Krohn, B. J., et al., (2008). A continuous catalytic system for biodiesel production. 
Applied Catalysis A: General, 343(1, 2), 39–48. 
43. Borges, M. E., & Díaz, L., (2012). Recent developments on heterogeneous catalysts 
for biodiesel production by oil esterification and transesterification reactions: A review. 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 16(5), 2839–2849. 
44. Liu, X., Piao, X., Wang, Y., Zhu, S., & He, H., (2008). Calcium methoxide as a solid 
base catalyst for the transesterification of soybean oil to biodiesel with methanol. Fuel, 
87(7), 1076–1082. 
45. Yuzbasheva, E. Y., Gotovtsev, P. M., Mostova, E. B., Perkovskaya, N. I., Lomonosova, 
M. A., Butylin, V. V., Sineokii, S. P., & Vasilov, R. G., (2014). Biodiesel production via 
enzymatic catalysis. Applied Biochemistry and Microbiology, 50(8), 737–749. 
46. Thangaraj, B., Solomon, P. R., Muniyandi, B., Ranganathan, S., & Lin, L., (2019). 
Catalysis in biodiesel production—A review. Clean Energy, 3(1), 2–23. 
47. Kafuku, G., Lam, M. K., Kansedo, J., Lee, K. T., & Mbarawa, M., (2010). Croton 
megalocarpus oil: A feasible non-edible oil source for biodiesel production. Bioresource 
Technology, 101(18), 7000–7004. 
48. Yu, X. W., Xu, Y., & Xiao, R., (2016). Lipases from the genus Rhizopus: Characteristics, 
expression, protein engineering and application. Progress in Lipid Research, 64, 57–68. 
49. Raheman, H., & Ghadge, S. V., (2008). Performance of diesel engine with biodiesel at 
varying compression ratio and ignition timing. Fuel, 87(12), 2659–2666. 
50. Satputaley, S. S., Zodpe, D. B., & Deshpande, N. V., (2018). Performance, combustion 
and exhaust emissions analysis of a diesel engine fueled with algae oil and algae 
biodiesel. Materials Today: Proceedings, 5(11), 23022–23032. 
51. Naresh, V., & Prabhakar, S., (2018). Performance and emission characteristics of algae 
oil on VCR diesel engine. J. Chem. Pharm. Res., 10(4), 44–55. 

 
441 
Microalgal Cell System for Biofuel Production 
52.  Demirbaş, A., (2003). Biodiesel fuels from vegetable oils via catalytic and non-catalytic 
supercritical alcohol transesterifications and other methods: A survey. Energy Conversion 
and Management, 44(13), 2093–2109. 
53. Pourkarimi, S., Hallajisani, A., Alizadehdakhel, A., & Nouralishahi, A., (2019). Biofuel 
production through micro-and macroalgae pyrolysis–A review of pyrolysis methods and 
process parameters. Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis, 142, 104599. 
54. Vargas, E. S. F., & Monteggia, L. O., (2015). Pyrolysis of algal biomass obtained from 
high-rate algae ponds applied to wastewater treatment. Frontiers in Energy Research, 
3, 31. 
55. Adamczyk, M., & Sajdak, M., (2018). Pyrolysis behaviors of microalgae Nannochloropsis 
gaditana. W
 aste and Biomass Valorization, 9(11), 2221–2235. 
56. Trinh, T. N., Jensen, P. A., Sørensen, R. H., Dam-Johansen, K., & Hvilsted, S., (2012). 
Flash pyrolysis properties of algae and lignin residue. In: 20th European Biomass 
Conference and Exhibition (Vol. 966, p. 972). B. Krautkremer. JRC/IET. 
57. Li, Y., Zhou, W., Hu, B., Min, M., Chen, P., & Ruan, R. R., (2012). Effect of light 
intensity on algal biomass accumulation and biodiesel production for mixotrophic 
strains Chlorella kessleri and Chlorella protothecoide cultivated in highly concentrated 
municipal wastewater. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 109(9), 2222–2229. 
58.  Miao, X., Wu, Q., & Yang, C., (2004). Fast pyrolysis of microalgae to produce renewable 
fuels. Journal of Analytical and Applied Pyrolysis, 71(2), 855–863. 
59.  Hidalgo, J. M., Horaček, J., Matoušek, L., Vráblík, A., Tišler, Z., & Černý, R., (2018). 
Catalytic hydrocracking of vacuum residue and waste cooking oil mixtures. Monatshefte 
Für Chemie-Chemical Monthly, 149(6), 1167–1177. 
60. Thangalazhy-Gopakumar, S., Adhikari, S., Chattanathan, S. A., & Gupta, R. B., (2012). 
Catalytic pyrolysis of green algae for hydrocarbon production using H+ ZSM-5 catalyst. 
Bioresource Technology, 118, 150–157. 
61. Santillan-Jimenez, E., Pace, R., Morgan, T., Behnke, C., Sajkowski, D. J., Lappas, 
A., & Crocker, M., (2019). Co-processing of hydrothermal liquefaction algal bio-oil 
and petroleum feedstock to fuel-like hydrocarbons via fluid catalytic cracking. Fuel 
Processing Technology, 188, 164–171. 
62. Murata, K., Liu, Y., Watanabe, M. M., Inaba, M., & Takahara, I., (2014). Hydrocracking 
of algae oil into aviation fuel-range hydrocarbons using a Pt–Re catalyst. Energy & 
Fuels, 28(11), 6999–7006. 
63. Woolf, D., Lehmann, J., Joseph, S., Campbell, C., Christo, F. C., & Angenent, L. 
T., (2017). An open-source biomass pyrolysis reactor. Biofuels, Bioproducts and 
Biorefining, 11(6), 945–954. 
64. Mohammed, I. Y., Abakr, Y. A., & Mokaya, R., (2020). Catalytic upgrading of pyrolytic 
oil via in-situ hydrodeoxygenation. Waste and Biomass Valorization, 11(6), 2935–2947. 
65. Kumar, S., Roat, P., Hada, S., Chechani, B., Kumari, N., Ghodke, P., & Rawat, D. 
S., (2020). Catalytic approach for production of hydrocarbon rich bio-oil from a red 
seaweed species. In Biotechnology for Biofuels: A Sustainable Green Energy Solution  
(pp. 109–133). Springer, Singapore. 
66. Chen, X., Chen, Y., Yang, H., Wang, X., Che, Q., Chen, W., & Chen, H., (2019). Catalytic 
fast pyrolysis of biomass: Selective deoxygenation to balance the quality and yield of 
bio-oil. Bioresource Technology, 273, 153–158. 

 
442 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
67. Ganesan, R., Manigandan, S., Samuel, M. S., Shanmuganathan, R., Brindhadevi, K., 
Chi, N. T. L., Duc, P. A., & Pugazhendhi, A., (2020). A  review on prospective production 
of biofuel from microalgae. Biotechnology Reports, e00509. 
68. Ibarra-Gonzalez, P., & Rong, B. G., (2019). A review of the current state of biofuels 
production from lignocellulosic biomass using thermochemical conversion routes. 
Chinese Journal of Chemical Engineering, 27
 
(7), 1523–1535. 

Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 15  
Recent Advances in Algal Bio-Cathode 
Powered Microbial Fuel Cells 
NISHIT SAVLA1 and ANSHUL NIGAM2 
1Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Maharashtra, 
Mumbai, Maharashtra, India 
2Department of Biotechnology, Kanpur Institute of Technology, Kanpur, 
Uttar Pradesh, India 
ABSTRACT 
To attain sustainable development and facilitate a circular bioeconomy, the 
processing of biofuels and other value-added materials from wastewater is 
the need of hour. The integration of the algal whole-cell with microbial fuel 
cells (MFC) will not only enhance the generation of electricity, efficiency 
of wastewater treatment but would also aid in reducing carbon footprint by 
carbon fixation via photosynthesis. While this technology also generates 
valuable algal biomass that can be converted to fuel or may act as source of 
other utilities. Algae may contribute to the organic feedstock role of MFC 
and enable microbial growth by helping to produce energy from anodic 
bacteria by supplying photosynthetic oxygen as a cathode electron acceptor 
while aiding in removal of Nitrogen and Phosphorus from effluent water. 
In algal-microbial fuel cell (A-MFC), the algae provide many benefits, 
such as photosynthetic oxygenation for the recycling of energy, CO2 fixa­
tion, processing of wastewater, etc. However, A-MFC efficiency depends 
on many operating parameters which includes material of electrode; thus, 
researchers have made tremendous collective efforts to identify optimum 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
444 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
conditions to increase A-MFC performance. This review discusses recent 
advances in development of biocathodes used in MFC and A-MFC. 
15.1 INTRODUCTION 
Fossil fuels have been major source of energy around the globe for more than 
a century. The combustion of these fuels resulted in excessive CO2 emissions 
leading accumulation of carbon footprint thus responsible for global climate 
change. On a global scale carbon-neutral, sustainable energy sources must 
be developed to replace these fossil fuels to circumvent the carbon burden. 
A steady increase in CO2 concentration is observed over the decades [1]. The 
industrial emissions and fossil fuel usage has led to an increase of about 40% in 
the total atmospheric CO2 and about 78% rise in the greenhouse gases (GHGs) 
concentration from 1970 to 2010 [2]. This attributes to the additional warming 
of the planet. Thus, hunt for alternative energy resources with carbon neutral or 
negative prospect is gaining importance. The concept of bio-refinery has been 
brought forward and idea of conversion of renewable biomass to fuels, energy, 
and value-added chemicals in a circular economy model [3]. Energy crops and 
biomass wastes can reduce dependency on fossils fuel [4] and since they are 
‘carbon neutral,’ therefore can provide sustainable development. 
Bio-catalysis involves application of enzymes or whole organisms 
(bacteria, fungus, microalgae, and plants) as catalysts in chemical reactions 
and hence, distinguished by two terms “Enzyme Catalysis” or “Whole­
cell Bio-catalysis.” Both exhibits some features which are not common in 
chemosynthesis this includes high enantioselectivity and few reactions are 
not known in the later. Like selective hydroxylation of non-activated carbon 
atoms, which remains a difficult task for classical chemistry. Additionally, 
other advantages such as benign reaction conditions, low toxicity, recycling, 
and eco-friendly nature make bio-catalysis the ideal “green” technique. 
Moreover, whole-cells enable the synthesis with cofactor regeneration, 
with excellent regio- and stereoselectivity, and under moderate operating 
conditions. Hence the microbial fuel cell (MFC) is promising renew­
able technology that utilizes whole-cells for power generation. There are 
various modifications demonstrated for improving its efficiency one such 
modification consists of utilizing algal biomass as feedstock at the anode. 
Micro-algal biomass derived energy can replace energy derived from fossil 
fuel and suffice the enormous energy demand. The algal biofuel is the third-
generation biofuel, and it has no limitation as that of its predecessors the 

 
 
 
 
445 
Recent Advances in Algal Bio-Cathode Powered Microbial Fuel Cells 
second- and first-generation fuels. The micro-algae like Cyanobacteria fixes 
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) via photosynthesis and accumulate high 
content of lipid. Thus, act as feedstock for biofuel with minimal amount of 
nutritional support and water supply for growth. 
15.2 MICROBIAL FUEL CELL (MFC) 
MFCs are the systems which utilize the catalytic activities of microorganisms 
to directly convert the chemical energy of wastewater into electricity and can 
aid in power generation. Microorganisms donate electrons at the anode by 
oxidizing energy rich carbon compounds present in milieu during metabolism 
[5]. A typical fuel cell is described in Figure 15.1 [6]. The protons gener­
ated in one chamber move across ion exchange membrane and are reduced 
by the electrons diffusing from other electrode chamber making it power 
generating battery [7]. In presence of oxygen above system just generates 
water as waste product. MFCs are very efficient bio-electrochemical systems 
and can convert organic waste to energy [6]. MFCs can provide pure energy, 
and hence they are adopted as a sustainable technique of power generation 
and efficient waste treatment, to stem global environmental problems and 
the electricity crisis. MFCs are promising option for sustainable develop­
ment and can match growing power requirements. Thus, the MFC can serve 
as a preferred choice for power generation from wastewater given its low 
operational energy requirement. 
The use of MFC presents a vast number of industrial interests including 
reduction of operating costs, local exploitation of the energy produced, and 
reduction of greenhouse gas production. 
FIGURE 15.1 Schematic representation of typical microbial fuel cell (MFC). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
446 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
15.2.1 BRIEF HISTORY OF MFC 
Fuel cell was discovered by Sir William Groove in 1839; however no 
significant efforts are made immediately, and the technology been latent 
for a century. This principle was taken up again in 1935 by F. T. Bacon 
leading to the first 1 kW prototype which served as a reference in 1961 for 
the hydrogen/oxygen cell of the Apollo space mission. The production of 
electricity by the fermentation process was studied by Potter [8]. Besides, 
the discovery (in 1999) that the mediator was not a necessary component has 
greatly accelerated the MFC’s research prospects. In 1931, Barnet Cohen 
developed a half-battery system in a 35-unit configuration experiment and 
thus was able to generate more than 35 volts. In 1960, Karube et al. conducted 
research on the catalysts through which they proposed the current design of 
MFC [9]. About 10 years later Suzuki studied the functions of the MFC 
and then Bennetto [10], who worked on synthetic mediators. Investigations 
of Chaudhuri & Lovley [11], demonstrated that Rhodoferox ferrireducens 
cells needs mediator to act as MFC biocatalyst. These efforts resulted in the 
evolution of the MFC technology. 
15.3 COMPONENTS MICROBIAL FUEL CELL (MFC) 
15.3.1 ANODE 
The anode consists of aggregates of microbial whole-cells or biofilms 
made of layered microbial cells that produce electrons, protons, and other 
molecules from metabolism. The microbes used are basically of two types 
and are discussed in subsections. 
15.3.1.1 MEDIATOR-COUPLED MICROBIAL FUEL CELLS (MFCS) 
Mediators are low molecular weight, electroactive redox species that can 
facilitate the transmission of electrons between electrodes and microbial 
cells. Mediators are also catalysts for the redox activity of microbial 
enzymes and the electrical communication between cell surfaces of the 
electrodes [12]. There are non-fermentative bacteria that need mediators 
electrochemical to carry out the electronic transfer to the electrode. A 
mediator electrochemical is a molecule capable of oxidizing and reducing 
in successive cycles [11]. 

 
 
447 
Recent Advances in Algal Bio-Cathode Powered Microbial Fuel Cells 
15.3.1.2 MICROBIAL FUEL CELLS (MFCS) WITHOUT MEDIATOR 
Microbial agents that reduce Fe (III) show electrochemical activity since they 
possess cytochromes in their external membranes. Also, by using Shewanella 
putrefaciens, which are the reducers of Fe (III), it has been proven for the 
first time that these can act as a catalyst in a mediator-free MFC [13]. It has 
presently been identified that microbial agents reducing Fe (III), belonging 
to the class of Geobacteraceae, have the capacity to transfer electrons straight 
on electrodes. Nevertheless, for this type of fuel cell, metal-reducing bacteria 
are most commonly used [14]. 
15.3.2 CATHODE 
Cathodes can also be of two types, i.e., abiotic cathode and biotic or bio­
cathode. It has been observed that abiotic cathode is not very economical 
since they suffer from low power output when used for longer durations. In 
contrast, Bio-cathode is more sustainable and has several other advantages 
over traditional or abiotic cathodes and hence they are utilized in an MFC 
system. In a conventional cathode, metal catalyst such as platinum is used 
to reduce TEA (terminal electron acceptor) and other oxidants. Nonetheless, 
one of the major drawbacks is the possibility of oxidation or poisoning of 
these metal catalysts, hence restricting their application. This obstacle can 
be overwhelmed by ‘biocathode.’ Biocathodes utilize microbes as catalysts 
for reduction reaction in the cathodic chamber. Furthermore, an algal-based 
biocathode can also be used, as it does not need any separate external support 
for oxygen [5]. 
15.4 CONCEPT OF CIRCULAR BIO-ECONOMY IN MFC 
Microbial fuel systems for wastewater treatment can be considered as 
a model for circular bio-economy as they can be operated for producing 
chemicals simultaneously recovering energy while attaining the removal of 
different wastes dissolved in the water which is depicted in Figure 15.2 where 
the wastewater is treated while generating protons, electrons, and CO2 [15, 
16]. These protons and electrons produced during the treatment process can 
further be utilized for generation of electricity along with utility chemicals, 
making the systems more sustainable by integrating it with other renewable 
energy technologies like photovoltaic, tidal, solar thermal, etc. [17]. MECs 

 
 
 
448 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
(Microbial Electrochemical Cell) and MFCs are as futuristic waste to power 
generation technology as they can treat the wastewater simultaneously while 
degrading organic component present in it during power generation [18] 
producing CO2 as by-product which later can be utilized for the biomass 
production as depicted in Figure 15.3, a modification of MFC, i.e., micro­
bial carbon capture cell (MCC). Thus, these technologies are perceived as 
carbon-neutral technologies. 
15.5 MFC LIMITATIONS 
Though the MFC looks very promising in the prospective as renewable 
energy system; few operational limitations of MFC include incomplete 
substrate oxidation, electrode/membrane damage, variation in biocatalyst 
during the process, and TEA supply at different levels. These limitations are 
hindering the MFC to the reach economic feasibility and to reach produc­
tions scale. The most important task is to increase total MFC production for 
both half-cells. By optimizing the circuitry and varying the phase of avail­
able TEAs, it is possible to monitor the electrochemical activity of MFCs 
for power output and electron kinetics at the anode [19]. The current in the 
above circuit is based on proton movement through the membrane which 
is linked to TEA. To achieve higher power densities we need to resolve the 
constraint of low H+ mobility, an active TEA in the cathode compartment is 
needed, which drives the electrons for reduction [20]. TEAs such as oxygen 
(O2), nitrate, sulfate, iron, metals, and others are efficient electron acceptors. 
Biofilm on the anode has a strong potential for reduction during MFC opera­
tion to improve efficiency [21]. 
15.5.1 CATHODIC HALF LIMITATIONS 
To attain high MFC efficiency, more focus has recently been placed on 
cathodic limitations. In general, the cathodic reduction of oxygen to water 
drives the potential for producing bioelectricity by using H+ and e– collected 
from the anode chamber. The MFC cathodes are of two types, i.e., abiotic, 
and biotic cathodes [22]. Abiotic cathodes don’t involves living organisms 
while in biocathodes, it is vice versa, The living cells contribute to biotic 
cathode include bacteria, yeast, and algae [23]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
O
+
2 + 4H  + 4e– = 2H2O 
(1) 
 
O2 + 2 H+ + 4e– = H2O2  
(2) 
H2O2  formation  can degrade electrode material as well as MFC membranes 
but concomitantly it keeps them free from microbes due to its antimicrobial 
action [26]. In particular, using a metal catalyst may raise MFC operational 
costs and cause the catalyst to become inactive over time or in the presence 
of sulfur, bicarbonate, or phosphate during wastewater treatment [19]. 
The efficiency  of MFC depends on electrochemical reactions, charge 
transmission, resistance, and mass transfer [27]. The efficiency of MFC can 
be enhanced by optimizing the above [25, 30]. 
449 
Recent Advances in Algal Bio-Cathode Powered Microbial Fuel Cells 
Abiotic cathodes increase the cost of running MFC, owing to applica­
tion of synthetic material concomitantly elevating the cost and generating 
secondary pollution [21]. 
Cathodic half can be aerobic or anaerobic depending on the TEA. 
If it is aerobic, TEA is essentially oxygen and if anaerobic, pollutants 
like nitrates act as TEA [20]. Higher levels of dissolved oxygen [DO] 
improves cathode potential and power densities. As compared to other 
TEAs, most bacteria tend to transfer electrons to available O2 because it 
offers the best energy harvesting [24]. To maintain the optimum electron 
supply from microorganism, the cathode surface should be in contact 
with them and enough oxygen should be available to drive reduction 
reactions [25]. 
15.6 GENERAL INTRODUCTION AND ROLE OF ALGAE IN 
CATHODIC REACTION 
Berk and Canfield were the first to demonstrate that photosynthetic microbes 
can be applied to MFC [28]. Major advancement in biocathode research 
has been marked by overcoming bottlenecks in O2 reduction reaction rate 
in MFC cathodic compartments (Table 15.1) [29]. Algae (both micro- and 
macro) as a whole-cell has gotten a lot of praise because they are source for 
biofuels protein, biomass, biodiesel, pigments, etc. [30]. Further, enhancing 
the productivity of MFC and since photosynthesis is involved these MFC are 
termed as photosynthetic MFC (PMFC) [31]. 

 
 
450 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
TABLE 15.1 Various Patent in Respect to Biocathodes 
Patent No. 
Description 
References 
US20110039164A1 
A biofuel cell battery used to generate electricity. 
[32] 
The unit comprises a fuel manifold with a face and 
at least one cavity specifying a fuel reservoir, an 
inlet connected to the reservoir for the purpose of 
filling the reservoir with fuel fluid, and an outlet 
connected to the reservoir for the purpose of draining 
the reservoir of fuel fluid. The unit comprises an 
anode assembly comprising at least one bioanode 
positioned in contact with the fuel fluid in the fuel 
reservoir and a cathode assembly comprising at least 
one cathode positioned to allow fuel fluid to pass 
through the bioanode to the cathode. The package 
contains a controller that is attached to the anode 
that cathode assemblies and is used to regulate the 
electrical current production from the biofuel cell 
device. 
GB2486303A 
A biocathode consists of a metal oxide nanoparticle 
[33] 
and an adsorbed enzyme characterized by the 
electrode. Additionally, a method for fabricating 
such a biocathode is revealed, which involves 
the stage of enzyme adsorption on the electrode’s 
surface, which has been changed with metal oxide 
nanoparticles, through immersion in the enzyme 
solution. Additionally, a zinc-oxygen cell is revealed 
that consists of a zinc anode, an electrolyte, and such 
a biocathode. The electrode can be made of indium 
tin oxide (ITO) film-coated glass, thin fluorine tin 
oxide (FTO) film-coated glass, glassy carbon, or 
gold. Preferably, the metal oxide nanoparticles would 
be indium tin oxide nanoparticles, and the enzyme 
would be bilirubin oxidase. 
US20090305089A1 
Bioanodes, biocathodes, biological fuel cells and 
[34] 
an organelle immobilization material, containing an 
electron conductor, at least one organelle or cathode 
organelle anode. Cathode in conjunction with an 
oxidant yields water, which transfers electrons. 
The permeable immobilization material for both 
anode and cathode immobilize the organelle, thus 
immobilizing the fluid/or the oxidant. Also, the 
ability to stabilize the organelle has been shown in 
different ways. 

 
 
451 
Recent Advances in Algal Bio-Cathode Powered Microbial Fuel Cells 
TABLE 15.1 (Continued) 
Patent No. 
Description 
References 
US20200318142A1 
This invention covers methods and equipment for 
[35] 
collecting by-product oxygen from algae ponds 
and/or bioreactors to be used in oxygen-needing 
processes involving oxygen as a reactor such as 
syngas, hydrogen, or processes of power production 
which are optionally incorporated into the production 
of algal biofuel. Any of the approaches used in 
the innovation are the collection of oxygen from a 
biofuel operation; and the use of the oxygen obtained 
in a process that uses oxygen as an oxygen as a 
reactant. In certain embodiments, an innovation 
includes the following systems: an algal bioreactor 
producing biodiesel and oxygen, an oxygen 
transmission pipeline for the oxygen transmission 
through an oxygen processing unit that enables 
the oxygen to be used as a reactant in the oxygen 
processing unit, and the oxygen requiring processing 
unit. 
US20180001256A1 
Production methods and processes for clean-fuel 
[36] 
processing systems and can handle carbon dioxide 
emissions from sources through at least one reactor 
of processing, like a multitude of chemoautotrophic 
bacteria that converts carbon dioxide emissions 
into biomass that is then suitable as a biofuel, 
fertilizer, feedstock or the like for different items. 
Bacteria that decrease sulfide can be used to provide 
chemoautotrophic bacteria with compounds of sulfur. 
15.6.1 WORKING OF PMFC 
In many investigations algae has been reported as cathodic biocatalyst to 
maximize the performance of PMFCs. MFCs with algal biocathodes are an 
emerging technology that uses photosynthesis and anaerobic metabolism in 
the cathode and anode compartments. The algae in the cathode compartment 
uses carbon-di-oxide from the atmosphere in presence of sunlight, producing 
oxygen, which act as TEA. Thus, acting as replacement of conventional 
aeration methods and is deemed the more sustainable option in terms of both 
economics and the climate. Figure 15.2 depicts the total reaction mechanism 
that occurs in algal biocathodes. PMFC seems to be more multipurpose and 
efficient than their predecessors MFC as they can generate bioelectricity 

 
 
 
452 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
while treating wastewater along with useful algal biomass. Such design 
types make it easier to integrate with other processes over time [37]. 
FIGURE 15.2 Schematic representation of algal biocathode-based MFC. 
15.6.1.1 STANDALONE OPERATIONS OF PMFC 
The above heading illustrates that the PMFC discussed in this section are 
only directed on power generation. In dual-compartment MFC electrode 
are segregated by a membrane with cathodic compartment being occupied 
by oxygen generating algae. This arrangement has significant impact on 
the bioreactor’s overall performance as well as the costing [38]. Oxygen 
supplementation via algal photosynthesis is better than air sparging [39]. 
In an investigation, reversible anode and cathode, i.e., both anodic and 
cathodic electron transfer involved mixed culture comprising of microalgae. 
By varying the position of the bioelectrode, the MFC was able to generate 
continuous power and solve the pH membrane gradient issue [40]. Algal 
biocathodes are composed of either mixed culture or pure culture [41, 43]. 
Mediators were attempted to enhance the efficiency of algal cathodes, but 
they have negative impact on it perhaps due to decrease in illumination 
caused by them [44]. 

 
 
 
 
453 
Recent Advances in Algal Bio-Cathode Powered Microbial Fuel Cells 
15.6.1.2 ALGAL-BASED MFC INTEGRATIVE PROCESS 
Algae-assisted MFCs are more innovative than conventional MFCs, since 
they can capture CO2 while concomitantly treating wastewater and producing 
bioenergy. Consistent high-energy production demands continuous sparging 
of CO2 into the cathode compartment, but this is inefficient in the long 
run for PMFC (Table 15.2) since it consumes power. In advanced PMFC 
microalgae utilize CO2 through bacterial fermentation. Many investigators 
have integrated the process and have obtained encouraging results [45, 46]. 
The cathode biomass may be extracted for bio-diesel or as anode substrate 
to make it economically viable [47]. MCC’s application is still in its infancy 
due to insufficient testing, and further research is needed before the method 
can be commercialized. 
Other integrative concept include, usage of electroactive microorganism 
at anode compartment [48]. The additional progressive innovations included, 
integration of an transformed algal photo-bioreactor into the cathode 
compartment for enhancing oxygen supply and thus power production [49, 
51]. Figure 15.3 shows how algal biocathode-based MFC can be used to 
remove a variety of other bioproducts. Similar study has been conducted to 
include more cost-effective approaches to tertiary nutrient recovery treat­
ment procedures have been published [29]. 
TABLE 15.2 Various Algal Species Demonstrated to be Utilizing as Algal Cathode Catalyst 
for Enhancing Power Production 
SL. Algal Catalyst Reactor 
Electrode 
Power 
References 
No. 
Configuration 
Production 
(Chamber) 
1. 
Chlorella 
Dual 
Graphite rod (glassy) 
2.7 mW/m2 
[52] 
vulgaris 
Carbon felt – Pt(0.1 
187 mW/m2 
[46] 
mg/cm2) 
CFC –Pt(0.1 mg/cm2) 
2485.35 
[54] 
mW/m2 
2. 
Chlorella 
Dual 
CFB; CC – Pt(0.1 
5.6 W/m3 
[55] 
vulgaris 
mg/cm2) 
CFB; CC 
8.6 W/m3 
[47] 
3. 
Anabaena 
Dual 
Graphite 
100 W/m2 
[56] 
4. 
Chlorella sp. 
Dual 
CFC 
558 mW/m3 
[57] 
(ALMCC) 

 
 
 
 
 
454 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
TABLE 15.2 (Continued) 
SL. 
No. 
Algal Catalyst Reactor 
Configuration 
(Chamber) 
Electrode 
Power 
Production 
References 
5. 
Microalgae 
Dual 
CFB; CC – Pt 
0.63 W/m2 
[49] 
Plain carbon paper; 
CFB 
30 mW/m3 
[58] 
Graphite plates 
57 mW/m2 
[59] 
CFB and Carbon felt 
187 mW/m3 
[46] 
15.7 APPLICATIONS OF ALGAL BIOMASS 
The algal whole-cell biomass generated while operating the PMFC as a 
biocathode can later be used in various applications after its utilization in 
electricity generation. Some of these applications are highlighted in Figure 
15.3 and also described in the following sections. 
FIGURE 15.3 Schematic illustration depicting various by-products in algal biorefinery. 
Algae can acquire the nutrition required for their metabolism from the 
cathode compartment while enhancing the efficiency of wastewater treat­
ment [60]. Algal biomass formed during MFC operation can be used to 
make different biofuel substitutes, like biomethane, biohydrogen, bio-oil, 
bioethanol, bio-methanol, and biodiesel [59, 61, 62]. Algal dependent 

 
 
 
455 
Recent Advances in Algal Bio-Cathode Powered Microbial Fuel Cells 
biofilms and genetic modification can increase the production of biomass 
and the production of desirable compounds by controlling the cellular algal 
factories, respectively. This will contribute to greater technical advances in 
the processing of biofuels and value-added goods [63]. The algae cell has 
the potential to synthesize biomolecules which can be employed as dyes, 
medications, cosmetics, and preservatives, lipids, biodiesel, and other active 
metabolites, etc. [64]. Since the whole-cell are rich in C16 and C18 fatty 
acids necessary for biodiesel production, the biolipids extracted from the 
algal biomass have a lot of impact on bioenergy refinery [57]. The higher 
production of biomass in an MFC is directly proportional to the higher CO2 
fixing ability and lipid productivity. 
The algal biomass also finds application as feed material, biofertilizer, 
and other items of commercial value. It is possible to divert the CO2 emitted 
from the anaerobic digestion (AD), industrial process or through the anode 
compartment of the AMFC to the cathode compartment as the algae can bio­
sequester this CO2, thus lowering its level in atmosphere. This process makes 
overall system carbon neutral or may sometimes carbon negative process. 
Oil extracted from algal whole-cell biomass can act as raw material in other 
biological processes, such as AD. Therefore, by incorporating various other 
methods, this biorefinery idea proposed would serve as a feasible alterna­
tive for renewable energy generation and sewage remediation. Several other 
applications have been detailed in Table 15.3. 
TABLE 15.3 Various Patented Applications of Algal Biomass Utilized in MFC Reported 
in the Recent Years 
Patent No. 
Description 
References 
US20120322106A1 A procedure for the manufacture of hemicellulase and 
[65] 
cellulase for the manufacturing of biofuel cellulose 
materials. The process includes the transformation 
of algal feedstock into hemicellulase and cellulase, 
and then collection into an algal culture medium of 
hemicellulase and cellulases. This procedure can 
also include converting the algal feedstock into other 
recombinant products and/or refining it into biofuels. 
JP2017171539A 
A concrete production method has been developed 
[66] 
using algae biofuel, including a process for the supply 
of waste gas from the cement production plant to a 
fine algae cultivation tank and a cultivation of fine 
freshwater algae into a culture tank, a process for 
the separation of fine cultivated algae, and a culture 
medium for the acquisition of a hydro-algae product. 

 
 
 
456 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
TABLE 15.3 (Continued) 
Patent No. 
Description 
References 
US8153850B2 
The bio-conversion subsystem generates methane 
[67] 
and/or alcohol and residual biomass according to an 
incarnation. For the production of thermal energy 
and/or method gasses, a pyrolysis or gasification 
subsystem is required. Heat energy in the form of 
pyrolysis oil can be contained in thermal energy. A 
fuel subs system uses thermal energy and/or process 
gasses generated by a gasification or subsystem 
pyrolysis, to generate liquid hydrocarbon fuels from 
methane or alcohol. As biomass processing method 
combines biomass conversion residual goods and 
pyrolysis or gasification residual thermal energy, total 
efficiencies of the integrated biomass manufacturing 
system are significantly improved. 
US20140315265A1 An algae biofuel method may involve the cultivation 
[68] 
of an oil-producing algae, the extraction of algal oil 
and the conversion to biodiesel of algal oil. Algal 
oil can be extracted from the petroleum-producing 
algae through the use of at least one enzyme, such 
as cellulose or glycoprotein, a structured enzyme 
mechanism, as cellulose, virus, or mixture of those 
ingredients, to biologically break cell wall and oil 
vesicles of the oil producing algae. 
CN102815839A 
The innovation concerns a system and system for 
[69] 
energy regeneration with the specific goal of solving 
problems such as low carbon recovery rates, low 
carbon-di-oxide fixing rates and high microalgae 
lipid expense in the wastewater treatment phase, 
in particular a method and device for low-carbon 
emission energy regeneration by coupling waste 
gas and wastewater. The waste gas is filled into the 
reactor and microalgae cultivated and the cultured 
microalgae is collected through dehydration, the 
microalgae is dehydrated up to co-pressure and the 
process includes the treatment for high-pressure 
steam sterilization on the wastewater treated with 
primary treatment, and the treatment for wastewater 
throughout the reactor. A body, a liquid inlet pipe, 
liquid outlet pipe, a cover, an air inlet pipe, an air 
delivery system, an air outlet pipe, and a warm sensor 
are all used as the tools for the energy regeneration 
of low carbon-di-oxide by connecting the waste gas 
and the wastewater. In the area of low-carbon energy 
recovery, the invention is implemented by connection 
with waste gasses and wastewater. 

 
 
457 
Recent Advances in Algal Bio-Cathode Powered Microbial Fuel Cells 
TABLE 15.3 (Continued) 
Patent No. 
Description 
References 
US20100267122A1 Among other things, the disclosure covers mixed 
[53] 
algal communities which have a large proportion of 
wastewater in the carpet industries that can thrive 
and spread across culture media. Embodiments often 
cover methods for growing freshwater and marine 
algae mixed communities that include the majority 
of genera and organisms to provide biomass from 
which, through pyrolysis, lipid may be extracted 
or transformed into biodiesel. Algae derived lipid 
content may be processed to biodiesel or other 
agricultural materials. A combined stream of the 
carpet industry was found to be a strong medium of 
growth for microalgae and biodiesel processing, with 
10% to 15% of wastewater being processed. Native 
strains of algal inoculated from mixed species in 
conditions subjected to tap water have been insulated. 
The development of wastewater has been good both 
for freshwater and marine algae. Around 65% of algal 
oil generated in the carpet industry wastewater can 
be processed into biodiesel from an algal consortium 
cultivated in this industry. 
15.8 CONCLUSION 
An alternative solution for efficiently treating wastewater with simultaneous 
recycling of bioenergy and algal biomass is delivered through utilization 
of combined A-MFC systems. Running with this integrated framework, 
microorganisms play a key role, and thus a comprehensive interpretation of 
essential microbial reactions and metabolomics like algal photosynthesis and 
nutrient metabolism in accordance with the collaborative/competitive algae-
bacteria relationships can aid to facilitate various strategies for optimizing 
the efficiency of this system. In this combined algal-bacterial systems, 
algae assist in enhanced removal of nitrogen and phosphorus removal from 
wastewater effluent. However, we have to investigate more strategies for 
making this technology to an economically feasible level. To exemplify, the 
versatile metabolic functions of mixotrophic algae in wastewater remedia­
tion is needed to be explored. More interaction among biochemical engi­
neers, phycologists, and molecular biologist can make AMFC a successful 
technology in power generation. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
458 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
KEYWORDS 
• 
algae 
• 
algal biomass 
• 
A-MFC 
• 
biocathodes 
• 
bio-economy 
• 
cathodic reaction 
• 
MFC 
• 
wastewater 
REFERENCES 
1. US Department of Commerce, N. Global Monitoring Laboratory –  Carbon Cycle 
Greenhouse Gases. https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/global.html (accessed 
on 20 July 2023). 
2. Savla, N., Shinde, A., Sonawane, K., Mekuto, L., Chowdhary, P., & Pandit, S., (2020). 17 
– microbial hydrogen production: Fundamentals to application. In: Chowdhary, P., Raj, 
A., Verma, D., & Akhter, Y., (eds.), Microorganisms for Sustainable Environment and 
Health (pp. 343–365). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-819001-2.00017-6. 
3. Naik, S. N., Goud, V. V., Rout, P. K., & Dalai, A. K., (2010). Production of first- and 
second-generation biofuels: A comprehensive review. Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, 14(2), 578–597. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2009.10.003. 
4.  Ho, D. P., Ngo, H. H., & Guo, W., (2014). A mini review on renewable sources for biofuel. 
Bioresource Technology, 169, 742–749. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2014.07.022. 
5. Pandit, S., Savla, N., & Jung, S. P., (2020). 16 – recent advancements in scaling up 
microbial fuel cells. In: Abbassi, R., Yadav, A. K., Khan, F., & Garaniya, V., (eds.), 
Integrated Microbial Fuel Cells for Wastewater Treatment (pp. 349–368). Butterworth-
Heinemann. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-817493-7.00016-3. 
6. Zhang, Q., Hu, J., & Lee, D. J., (2016). Microbial fuel cells as pollutant treatment units: 
Research updates. Bioresource Technology, 217, 121–128. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2016.02.006. 
7. Jung, S. P., & Pandit, S., (2019). Chapter 3.1 – important factors influencing microbial 
fuel cell performance. In: Mohan, S. V., Varjani, S., & Pandey, A., (eds.), Microbial 
Electrochemical Technology; Biomass, Biofuels and Biochemicals (pp. 377–406). 
Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-444-64052-9.00015-7. 
8. Potter, M. C., & W
 aller, A. D., (1911). Electrical effects accompanying the 
decomposition of organic compounds. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. 
Series B, Containing Papers of a Biological Character, 84(571), 260–276. https://doi. 
org/10.1098/rspb.1911.0073. 

 
459 
Recent Advances in Algal Bio-Cathode Powered Microbial Fuel Cells 
9. Karube, I., Matsunaga, T., T suru, S., & Suzuki, S., (1976). Continous hydrogen 
production by immobilized whole-cells of Clostridium Butyricum. Biochimica 
et Biophysica Acta (BBA) – General Subjects, 444(2), 338–343. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/0304-4165(76)90376-7. 
10. Bennetto, H. P., (1991). Electricity generation by microorganisms. Biotechnology 
 
Education, 1(4), 163–168. 
11. Chaudhuri, S. K., & Lovley, D. R., (2003). Electricity generation by direct oxidation of 
glucose in mediatorless microbial fuel cells. Nature Biotechnology, 21(10), 1229–1232. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt867. 
12. Savla, N., Pandit, S., Khanna, N., Mathuriya, A. S., & Jung, S. P., (2020). Microbially 
powered electrochemical systems coupled with membrane-based technology for 
sustainable desalination and efficient wastewater treatment. Journal of Korean Society 
of Environmental Engineers, 42(7), 360–380. https://doi.org/2020.42.7.360. 
13. Savla, N., Anand, R., Pandit, S., & Prasad, R., (2020). Utilization of Nanomaterials as 
Anode Modifiers for Improving Microbial Fuel Cells Performance, 26. 
14. Zou, Y., Xiang, C., Yang, L., Sun, L. X., Xu, F., & Cao, Z., (2008). A mediatorless 
microbial fuel cell using polypyrrole coated carbon nanotubes composite as anode 
material. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 33(18), 4856–4862. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2008.06.061. 
15. Kadier, A., Simayi, Y., Abdeshahian, P., Azman, N. F., Chandrasekhar, K., & Kalil, M. S., 
(2016). A comprehensive review of microbial electrolysis cells (MEC) reactor designs 
and configurations for sustainable hydrogen gas production. Alexandria Engineering 
Journal, 55(1), 427–443. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2015.10.008. 
16. Santoro, C., Arbizzani, C., Erable, B., & Ieropoulos, I., (2017). Microbial fuel cells: 
From fundamentals to applications: A review. Journal of Power Sources, 356, 225–244. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2017.03.109. 
17. Ho Lam, C., Das, S., Erickson, N. C., Hyzer, C. D., Garedew, M., Anderson, J. E., 
Wallington, T. J., et al., (2017). Towards sustainable hydrocarbon fuels with biomass 
fast pyrolysis oil and electrocatalytic upgrading. Sustainable Energy & Fuels, 1(2), 
258–266. https://doi.org/10.1039/C6SE00080K. 
18. Logan, B. E., (2004). Peer reviewed: Extracting hydrogen and electricity from renewable 
resources. Environ. Sci. Technol., 38(9), 160A–167A. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
es040468s. 
19. Kakarla, R., Kim, J. R., Jeon, B. H., & Min, B., (2015). Enhanced performance of 
an air–cathode microbial fuel cell with oxygen supply from an externally connected 
algal bioreactor. Bioresource Technology, 195, 210–216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2015.06.062. 
20. Srikanth, S., & Venkata, M. S., (2012). Influence of terminal electron acceptor availability 
to the anodic oxidation on the electrogenic activity of microbial fuel cell (MFC). 
Bioresource Technology, 123, 480–487. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2012.07.049. 
21. Rahimnejad, M., Adhami, A., Darvari, S., Zirepour, A., & Oh, S. E., (2015). Microbial 
fuel cell as new technology for bioelectricity generation: A review. Alexandria 
Engineering Journal, 54(3), 745–756. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aej.2015.03.031. 
22.  Zhang, Y., Sun, J., Hu, Y., Li, S., & Xu, Q., (2012). Bio-cathode materials evaluation in 
microbial fuel cells: A comparison of graphite felt, carbon paper and stainless steel mesh 
materials. International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 37(22), 16935–16942. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2012.08.064. 

 
460 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
23. Freguia, S., Rabaey, K., Yuan, Z., & Keller, J., (2007). Non-catalyzed cathodic oxygen 
reduction at graphite granules in microbial fuel cells. Electrochimica Acta, 53(2), 
598–603. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2007.07.037. 
24. Clauwaert, P., Van, D. H. D., Boon, N., Verbeken, K., Verhaege, M., Rabaey, K., & 
Verstraete, W., (2007). Open air biocathode enables effective electricity generation with 
microbial fuel cells. Environ. Sci. Technol., 41(21), 7564–7569. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
es0709831. 
25. Rismani-Yazdi, H., Carver, S. M., Christy, A. D., & Tuovinen, O. H., (2008). Cathodic 
limitations in microbial fuel cells: An overview. Journal of Power Sources, 180(2), 
683–694. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2008.02.074. 
26. Logan, B. E., & Regan, J. M., (2006). Microbial fuel cells—Challenges and applications. 
Environ. Sci. Technol., 40(17), 5172–5180. https://doi.org/10.1021/es0627592. 
27. Mustakeem, (2015). Electrode materials for microbial fuel cells: Nanomaterial approach. 
Mater Renew Sustain Energy, 4(4), 22. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40243-015-0063-8. 
28. Nguyen, H. T. H., Kakarla, R., & Min, B., (2017). Algae cathode microbial fuel cells 
for electricity generation and nutrient removal from landfill leachate wastewater. 
International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 42(49), 29433–29442. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2017.10.011. 
29. Gajda, I., Greenman, J., Melhuish, C., & Ieropoulos, I., (2015). Self-sustainable 
electricity production from algae grown in a microbial fuel cell system. Biomass and 
Bioenergy, 82, 87–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biombioe.2015.05.017. 
30.  Spolaore, P., Joannis-Cassan, C., Duran, E., & Isambert, A., (2006). Commercial 
applications of microalgae. Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering, 101(2), 87–96. 
https://doi.org/10.1263/jbb.101.87. 
31. ElMekawy, A., Hegab, H. M., Vanbroekhoven, K., & Pant, D., (2014). Techno-productive 
potential of photosynthetic microbial fuel cells through different configurations. 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 39, 617–627. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2014.07.116. 
32. Akers, N. L., Nelson, S. A., Gellett, W. L., Trentmann, D., Whited, J., Zhu, Y., Le, D. B., 
et al., (2011). Bioanode and Biocathode Stack Assemblies. US20110039164A1. 
33. Rozniecka, E., Opallo, M., Jonsson-Niedziolka, M., Niedziolka-Jonsson, J., & Szot, K., 
(2012). Biocathode and Zinc-Oxygen Cell Including Said Biocathode. GB2486303A. 
34. Minteer, S. D., & Arechederra, R., (2009). Organelles in Bioanodes, Biocathodes, and 
Biofuel  Cells. US20090305089A1. 
35.  O’neal, E. J., Hanks, P. L., Skoulidas, A. I., Kovvali, A. S., & Feicht, S. E., (2020). 
Algal Biofuel Production as an Air Separation Unit for Syngas, Hydrogen, or Power 
Production. US20200318142A1. 
36. Jin, S., Fallgren, P., Morris, J. M., Bland, A. E., Richards, P., Newcomer, J. D., & 
Colberg, P., (2018). Systems and Methods for Biological Conversion of Carbon Dioxide 
Pollutants into Useful Products. US20180001256A1. 
37. Logan, B. E., (2008). Microbial Fuel Cells. John Wiley & Sons. 
38. Brennan, L., & Owende, P., (2010). Biofuels from microalgae—A review of 
technologies for production, processing, and extractions of biofuels and co-products. 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 14(2), 557–577. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2009.10.009. 
39. Rodrigo, M. A., Cañizares, P., García, H., Linares, J. J., & Lobato, J., (2009). Study 
of the acclimation stage and of the effect of the biodegradability on the performance 

 
461 
Recent Advances in Algal Bio-Cathode Powered Microbial Fuel Cells 
of a microbial fuel cell. Bioresource Technology, 100(20), 4704–4710. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2009.04.073. 
40. Raman, K., & Lan, J. C. W., (2012). Performance and kinetic study of photo microbial 
fuel cells (PMFCs) with different electrode distances. Applied Energy, 100, 100–105. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2012.03.011. 
41. Walter, X. A., Greenman, J., & Ieropoulos, I. A., (2013). Oxygenic phototrophic 
biofilms for improved cathode performance in microbial fuel cells. Algal Research, 
2(3), 183–187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.algal.2013.02.002. 
42. González, D. C. A., Cañizares, P., Rodrigo, M. A., Fernández, F. J., & Lobato, J., (2013). 
Microbial fuel cell with an algae-assisted cathode: A preliminary assessment. Journal of 
Power Sources, 242, 638–645. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2013.05.110. 
43. Powell, E. E., Mapiour, M. L., Evitts, R. W., & Hill, G. A., (2009). Growth kinetics of 
chlorella vulgaris and its use as a cathodic half-cell. Bioresource Technology, 100(1), 
269–274. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2008.05.032. 
44. Powell, E. E., & Hill, G. A., (2009). Economic assessment of an integrated bioethanol– 
biodiesel–microbial fuel cell facility utilizing yeast and photosynthetic algae. Chemical 
Engineering Research and Design, 87(9), 1340–1348. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cherd.2009.06.018. 
45. Wang, X., Feng, Y., Liu, J., Lee, H., Li, C., Li, N., & Ren, N., (2010). Sequestration 
of CO2 discharged from anode by algal cathode in microbial carbon capture cells 
(MCCs). Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 25(12), 2639–2643. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bios.2010.04.036. 
46. Ting, L., Liqun, R., Yong, Y., & Li, Z., (2015). Bioelectricity generation in a microbial 
fuel cell with a self-sustainable photocathode. The Scientific World Journal, 2015, p. 8. 
Article ID: 864568. 
47. Cui, Y., Rashid, N., Hu, N., Rehman, M. S. U., & Han, J. I., (2014). Electricity 
generation and microalgae cultivation in microbial fuel cell using microalgae-enriched 
anode and bio-cathode. Energy Conversion and Management, 79, 674–680. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.enconman.2013.12.032. 
48. Strik, D. P. B. T. B., Terlouw, H., Hamelers, H. V. M., & Buisman, C. J. N., (2008). 
Renewable sustainable biocatalyzed electricity production in a photosynthetic algal 
microbial fuel cell (PAMFC). Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 81(4), 659–668. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00253-008-1679-8. 
49. Kakarla, R., Kim, J. R., Jeon, B. H., & Min, B., (2015). Enhanced performance of 
an air–cathode microbial fuel cell with oxygen supply from an externally connected 
algal bioreactor. Bioresource Technology, 195, 210–216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2015.06.062. 
50. Hu, X., Liu, B., Zhou, J., Jin, R., Qiao, S., & Liu, G., (2015). CO2 fixation, lipid 
production, and power generation by a novel air-lift-type microbial carbon capture 
cell system. Environ. Sci. Technol., 49(17), 10710–10717. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
est.5b02211. 
51. Ranjbar, R., Inoue, R., Katsuda, T., Yamaji, H., & Katoh, S., (2008). High efficiency 
production of astaxanthin in an airlift photobioreactor. Journal of Bioscience and 
Bioengineering, 106(2), 204–207. https://doi.org/10.1263/jbb.106.204. 
52.  Powell, E. E., Mapiour, M. L., Evitts, R. W., & Hill, G. A., (2009). Growth kinetics of 
Chlorella vulgaris and its use as a cathodic half-cell. Bioresource Technology, 100(1), 
269–274. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2008.05.032. 

 
462 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
53. Chinnasamy, S., Bhatnagar, A., Hunt, R. W., Claxton, R., Marlowe, M., & Das, K. C., 
(2010). Microalgae Cultivation in a Wastewater Dominated by Carpet Mill Effluents for 
Biofuel Applications. US20100267122A1. 
54. Zhou, M., He, H., Jin, T., & Wang, H., (2012). Power generation enhancement in novel 
microbial carbon capture cells with immobilized Chlorella vulgaris. Journal of Power 
Sources, 214, 216–219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.04.043. 
55. Wang, X., Feng, Y., Liu, J., Lee, H., Li, C., Li, N., & Ren, N., (2010). Sequestration 
of CO2 discharged from anode by algal cathode in microbial carbon capture cells 
(MCCs). Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 25(12), 2639–2643. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
bios.2010.04.036. 
56. Pandit, S., Nayak, B. K., & Das, D., (2012). Microbial carbon capture cell using 
cyanobacteria for simultaneous power generation, carbon dioxide sequestration and 
wastewater treatment. Bioresource Technology, 107, 97–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2011.12.067. 
57. Hu, X., Zhou, J., & Liu, B., (2016). Effect of algal species and light intensity on the 
performance of an air-lift-type microbial carbon capture cell with an algae-assisted 
cathode. RSC Adv., 6(30), 25094–25100. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5RA26299B. 
58. Kakarla, R., & Min, B., (2014). Evaluation of microbial fuel cell operation using algae 
as an oxygen supplier: Carbon paper cathode vs. Carbon brush cathode. Bioprocess 
Biosyst. Eng., 37(12), 2453–2461. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00449-014-1223-4. 
59. Venkata, M. S., Srikanth, S., Chiranjeevi, P., Arora, S., & Chandra, R., (2014). Algal 
biocathode for in situ terminal electron acceptor (TEA) production: Synergetic 
association of bacteria–microalgae metabolism for the functioning of biofuel cell. 
Bioresource Technology, 166, 566–574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech.2014.05.081. 
60. Li, W. W., Yu, H. Q., & He, Z., (2014). Towards sustainable wastewater treatment by 
using microbial fuel cells-centered technologies. Energy & Environmental Science, 
7(3), 911–924. https://doi.org/10.1039/C3EE43106A. 
61. Nigam, A., & Sharma, A., (2020). Photo-bioreactors: Harnessing solar energy in 
biological way. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., India, Sect. B Biol. Sci., 90(4), 723–732. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s40011-019-01132-7. 
62. Divya, G., Ajeet, S., Ashwani, S., & Anshul, N. Processing of biofuels.  In: Biofuels 
Production (pp. 59–84). Wiley–Scrivener Publishing House, 1303 Chestnut Ave. Austin, 
TX 78702, ISBN: 978-1-1186-3450-9 (Book Chapter). 
63. Bansal, A., Shinde, O., & Sarkar, S., (2018). Industrial wastewater treatment using 
phycoremediation technologies and co-production of value-added products. J. 
Bioremediat Biodegrad, 9(1). https://doi.org/10.4172/2155-6199.1000428. 
64. Baicha, Z., Salar-García, M. J., Ortiz-Martínez, V. M., Hernández-Fernández, F. J., 
De Los Ríos, A. P., Labjar, N., et al., (2016). A critical review on microalgae as an 
alternative source for bioenergy production: A promising low-cost substrate for microbial 
fuel cells. Fuel Processing Technology, 154, 104–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fuproc.2016.08.017. 
65. Subhadra, B., (2012). Production of Cellulases and Hemicellulases in Algal Biofuel 
Feedstocks. US20120322106A1. 
66. Ikuko, W., (2017). Cement Production Method Using Algae Biofuel. Sumitomo Osaka 
Cement Corporation. 
67. Hall, K. R., Holtzapple, M. T., & Capareda, S. C., (2012). Integrated Biofuel Production 
System. US8153850B2. 

 
463 
Recent Advances in Algal Bio-Cathode Powered Microbial Fuel Cells 
68. Oyler, J. R., (2014). Process of Producing Oil from Algae Using Biological Rupturing. 
US20140315265A1. 
69. Method and Device for Low-Carbon Emission Energy Regeneration by Coupling Waste 
Gas and Wastewater, (2012). Current Assignee: Harbin Institute of Technology. 


Part IV  
Whole-Cell Biocatalysts for Environment  
Restoration  


Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 16  
Production of Biosurfactant by Microbes 
and Its Application in Biodegradation of 
Pollutants 
NALINI SONI,1 ANUSHRI KESHRI,1 SHILPA NAYAK,1 SAURABH GUPTA,1 
ABHIMANYU KUMAR JHA,2 and BALASUBRAMANIAN VELRAMAR1 
1Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, India 
2Department of Biotechnology, Sharda University, Greater Noida,  
Uttar Pradesh, India 
ABSTRACT 
Compounds possess surface activity produced by the biological system and 
attract the scientific community through their versatile properties and vast 
applications. Various studies have focused on the influence of the biodegra­
dation process through biosurfactants. Biosurfactants enhance the biodegra­
dation of pollutants from the soil and marine ecosystems. Thus, have been 
conducted to produce optimum and sustainable production of biosurfactants 
through microbes at the industrial level. The production of biosurfactants 
requires precursors to activate the metabolic pathways. Each biosurfactant­
producing microbes advance their efficiency to synthesize particular types 
such as lipopeptide, glycolipid, and phospholipid surfactants. Different 
classes of biosurfactants express their advances and various applications. 
Moreover, biosurfactants involve in the bioremediation of various pollut­
ants by enhancing the biodegradation process. This chapter describes the 
various metabolic pathways involved in the formation of different types of 

 
468 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
biosurfactants and their applications in the bioremediation of environmental 
pollutants from the ecosystem. 
16.1 INTRODUCTION 
Presently science and technology are focused on producing natural products 
(NP) alternatives to synthetic products due to worldwide industrialization 
deteriorating the ecological balance. This gives rise to the demand for eco­
safe manufacturing products, as well as for providing safer, ecofriendly, 
nontoxic, biodegradable products, such as biosurfactants. Biosurfactants are 
produced by microorganism during their metabolic process by using different 
substrates (carbohydrate and hydrocarbon) for the preparation of precursor 
molecules. Biosurfactant is an amphipathic molecule that reduces surface 
tension between two different phases (liquid/liquid, liquid/gas, or liquid/ 
solid interfaces) to make a mixture by increasing their solubility so that it is 
considered an excellent emulsifier. Biosurfactant is a green product because 
of its biocompatible and easy biodegradable nature, and it is considered as 
a sustainable product for the 21st century. Biosurfactants have excellent 
biodegradation capability to overcome the pollution problem, and they can 
utilize to reduce metal toxicity from the soil, hydrocarbon biodegradation 
as well as oil purification. In this chapter, we offer accumulated knowledge 
regarding types of biosurfactants, production, and utilization by different 
biodegradation processes. Studies in relation to biosurfactants were initiated 
in the 1960s, and the use of these compounds has been explored in recent 
times [1]. These amphipathic molecules consist of both hydrophilic and 
hydrophobic moieties that differently divider for liquid interfaces. It makes 
a relation between various degrees of polarity and hydrogen bridges, such as 
oil-water interfaces or air-water interfaces. The hydrocarbon chain is often 
soluble in oil, making apolar moiety, whereas the polar head is soluble in 
water makes ionic (cationic or anionic), non-ionic as well as amphoteric 
moiety [2], as shown in Figure 16.1. 
Now most of the currently using surfactants are synthetically produced 
from the petroleum base. However, this type of surfactant is generally 
considered as a non-eco-friendly as well as non-degradable in nature by 
microorganisms. Moreover, it is non-renewable in nature. In current years, 
due to these problems the scientific community is motived towards search 
of novel eco-friendly biosurfactants produced through microorganisms 
utilizing renewable biomass as feedstock, so it may become a wonderful 

 
 
469 
Production of Biosurfactant by Microbes 
alternative for existing synthetic surfactant products [3]. Biosurfactants have 
high demand for the various industrial purpose because of their excellent 
properties such low toxicity, high emulsification index, biodegradable in 
eco-friendly way, functional in broad pH value as well as active in wide 
temperatures. Due to its lower CMC, various useful products were derived 
from industrial waste and reusable in the form of valuable product [4]. This 
chapter accomplishes the quality of biosurfactants which can be considered 
it as a dynamic compound for the 21st century, with a brief description of 
concepts, properties, classification, metabolic pathway of production, and 
uses in the form of efficient enhancer for degradation of pollutants. 
FIGURE 16.1 Surfactant molecule contains water soluble polar head and hydrocarbon oil 
soluble non-polar tail. 
16.2 CLASSIFICATION OF BIOSURFACTANTS 
Biosurfactants are characterized either anionic or neutral, cationic. The 
cationic nature is selective and is due to presence of amine groups. The 
hydrophobic moiety has long-chain fatty acids and the hydrophilic moiety 
can be any of molecule which could be a carbohydrate or, cyclic peptide 
or, amino acid or, phosphate carboxyl acid or alcohol. The molar mass of 
biosurfactants generally ranges from 500 to 1,500 Da. Biosurfactants are 
generally categorized by their composition show in Figures 16.2 and 16.3. 

 
 
 
 
470 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
FIGURE 16.2 Classification of biosurfactants and their origin of production through 
microbes. 
FIGURE 16.3 Structure of few surfactants. 
Note: 
Glycolipid: 
azanium;[(2R,3S,4R,5R,6R)-4-hydroxy-6-(2-hydroxyethoxy)­
2-(hydroxymethyl)-5-[[(3R)-3-hydroxytetradecanoyl]amino]oxan-3-yl] 
hydrogen 
phosphate; Trehalolipid: alpha-D-gluco-hexopyranosyl 2-amino-2-deoxy-alpha-D-gluco­
hexopyranoside; 
Sophorolipid: 
(2S)-2-hexadecanoyloxy-3-[(2S,3R,4S,5R,6R)-3,4,5­
trihydroxy-6-(hydroxymethyl)oxan-2-yl]oxypropyl] (Z)-octadec-9-enoate; Di-Rhamnolipid: 
3-[3-[(2R,3R,4R,5R,6S)-3,4,5-trihydroxy-6-methyloxan-2-yl]oxydecanoyloxy]decanoic 
acid; 
Surfactin: 
3-[(3S,6R,9S,12S,15R,18S,21S,25R)-9-(carboxymethyl)-3,6,15,18­
tetrakis(2-methylpropyl)-25-(10-methylundecyl)-2,5,8,11,14,17,20,23-octaoxo-12-propan-2­
yl-1-oxa-4,7,10,13,16,19,22-heptazacyclopentacos-21-yl]propanoic acid. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
471 
Production of Biosurfactant by Microbes 
16.3 METABOLIC PATHWAYS OF BIOSURFACTANT PRODUCTION 
Biosurfactant is a unique secondary metabolite, production occur during cell 
metabolism. Polar moiety of a biosurfactant synthesized by using hydrophilic 
substrates, whereas non-polar or hydrocarbon moiety synthesized by using 
hydrophobic substrates [5, 6]. Biosurfactant are showing such a quality like 
high emulsification activity, foaming capacity, detergency, and high dispersal 
quality are desirable for different industrial purposes [7]. In the 21st century 
biosurfactant production is become one of the key technology and microbes 
are most promising organisms for the production of non-toxic, biocompat­
ible, and ecofriendly biosurfactant. 
16.4 SUBSTRATE SPECIFIC BIOSURFACTANT PRODUCING 
METABOLISM 
16.4.1 INTERMEDIATE METABOLISM FOR THE SYNTHESIS OF 
BIOSURFACTANT PRECURSORS BY USING CARBOHYDRATES AS 
SUBSTRATE 
Biosurfactant production depends on the different carbon sources 
included in medium as well as the pathway for the production of precur­
sors of biosurfactant. For example, if carbohydrate is the only carbon 
source employed in the culture medium for the production of glycolipid 
in that condition flow regulates in such a way that glycolytic pathway 
as well as lipogenic pathway suppressed during metabolic process [8]. 
Glucose or glycerol utilizes and produces intermediates like glucose 
6-phosphate for the glycolytic pathway. Glucose 6-phosphate is the key 
precursor, which make hydrophilic moiety of biosurfactants, whereas for 
the production of lipids, glucose is completely oxidized into pyruvate 
(via glycolytic pathway) then pyruvate convert into acetyl-CoA, here 
acetyl-CoA convert into malonyl-CoA then react with oxaloacetate and 
finally it produces fatty acid (lipids) [9]. Figure 16.4 illustrates the main 
reactions to produce biosurfactant precursors by different pathway inter­
relation. Phosphofructokinase, pyruvate kinase, isocitrate dehydrogenase 
are the key enzymes involved in the metabolic pathway to control carbon 
flow. 

 
 
 
 
472 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
16.4.2 INTERMEDIATE METABOLISM RELATED FOR THE SYNTHESIS 
OF BIOSURFACTANT PRECURSORS BY USING HYDROCARBONS AS 
SUBSTRATE 
Hydrocarbon also used as carbon source to produce biosurfactant. In this 
process lipolytic and gluconeogenesis pathway involves in the formation 
of fatty acid or sugars. Gluconeogenesis consists of the formation of sugar 
by initiation of β-oxidation for the synthesis acetyl-CoA or propionyl-CoA 
(in the case of odd chain fatty acids). During the beginning of the process 
of acetyl-CoA formation, the reaction involved for the synthesis of glucose 
6-phosphate to inverse the glycolysis, however pyruvate kinase and phos­
phofructokinase-1 shows irreversible reactions. Thus, it is a necessary steps 
to avoid those enzymes which inhibit the gluconeogenesis [10]. Figure 16.5 
illustrates the main reactions for the production of the hydrophilic moiety of 
glycolipids through glucose 6-phosphate (main precursor of polysaccharides 
and disaccharides). 
FIGURE 16.4 Interconnection of various metabolic pathways to produce biosurfactant by 
microbes from carbohydrate precursors. 
Biosurfactant synthesis occurs by different ways: (i) carbohydrate and 
lipid synthesis; (ii) synthesis depends on the length of carbon chain in the 
production medium when carbohydrate and lipid production is half of the 
complete synthesis; and (iii) synthesis of carbon and lipid halves. Therefore, 

 
 
 
473 
Production of Biosurfactant by Microbes 
n-alkane chain used as a carbon source for the biosurfactant production. The 
production of manosilerythritol lipid (MEL) by the yeast Candida antarctica 
by using n-alkanes as a carbon source but it has been observed that if species 
grown in the medium containing C10 to C18 carbon chain no biosurfactant 
production observed. But if Octadecane used as substrate containing C12 to 
C18 it showed high yield. In contract production was negligible with media 
containing n-alkanes with more than 19 carbons [11]. Isocitrate lyase, malate 
synthase, phosphoenolpyruvate, fructose-1 are the key enzyme involve in 
the reaction. 
FIGURE 16.5 Interconnection of various metabolic pathways to produce biosurfactant by 
microbes from hydrocarbon precursors. 
16.5 MECHANISM OF ENHANCING BIODEGRADATION PROCESS 
BY BIOSURFACTANT 
Biosurfactants are surface active molecules produced by microorganisms it 
contains effective emulsification activity [12]. Biosurfactants having excel­
lent property to convert hydrophobicity to hydrophilicity to allow microor­
ganisms to augment on hydrophobic substrates through the desorption and 
solubilization process. Biosurfactant also take part to the attachment as well 
as detachment of microbes on various surfaces and can play a beneficent 
role for the regulation of cell movement in the surface area. Biosurfactants 
contain hydrophobic and hydrophilic moiety to decrease interfacial surface 
tension between two phases for enhancement of solubility [13]. Biodegra­
dation process is becoming major concern due to presence of least soluble 

 
 
474 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
carbon-based. High-molecular weight compound is less soluble because of 
perseverance of higher molecular weight with hydrophobic nature make them 
less soluble in water, thus carbon source utilization become unfavorable for 
microorganisms resulting low degradation process. Biosurfactants can be 
able to increase the solubility of substrate manifold for the enhancement of 
degradation process. Biosurfactant form a monomer over the water surface 
to decrees the surface tension to facilitate solubility of substrate [5]. Figure 
16.6 shows an activity of a biosurfactant by micelle formation to increase 
solubility with CMC (critical micelle concentration). 
FIGURE 16.6 Surface tension value as a function of biosurfactant concentration [CMC 
represent critical micelle concentration]. 
Two modes are involved in biosurfactant reaction to increase biodegrad­
ability of substrate. First, enhancement of the solubility to emulsify the 
hydrophobic compounds, to facilitate microorganisms’ action and second, 
transfer, and mobilization of insoluble compounds toward microbial cells. 
Low molecular weight biosurfactant shows high mobilization and high 
molecular weight biosurfactant facilitate high emulsification activity [14]. 
The bioremediation could be achieved by the management of three impor­
tant parameters, i.e., microbial availability, pollutants accessibility, and 
satisfactory environmental factors. Microbial consortia and its rate-limiting 
kinetics is highly important to consider biodegradation efficiency [15]. To 

 
 
475 
Production of Biosurfactant by Microbes 
achieve a well-organized, effectual, and comprehensive biological degrada­
tion process, hydrocarbon solubilization with biosurfactant produced by 
degrading microorganisms itself during the bioremediation process offers 
the advantage of a sustainable distribution and cost-effective biosurfactants. 
Biosurfactant is highly demanding bioproduct utilized by various industries 
for multiple applications (Figure 16.7). 
FIGURE 16.7 Various industrial applications of biosurfactants. 
16.6 BIOSURFACTANT-BASED HYDROCARBON BIODEGRADATION 
Hydrocarbons are the hydrophobic organic compound which have less 
solubility in water so that it remains same in soil as a form of pollutant, 
because it converts into contaminant mass and show hazardous effect in the 
environments. It shows poor recovery while treating with the physical or 
chemical components [1]. Biosurfactant are amphipathic molecules which 
can convert pollutant hydrophobicity to hydrophilicity to make them easy 
for uptake by microorganism [16]. Biosurfactant reduce the surface tension 
of the hydrocarbon to increase the solubility (Figure 16.7). Mobilization, 
solubilization, and emulsification are the main mechanisms followed by the 
biosurfactant. Biosurfactant prepare micelles then mix with the hydrocarbon 
to convert them in an emulsion, which is known as emulsification method 

 
 
 
 
 
 
476 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
(Figure 16.8). High molecular weight biosurfactant are showing high emulsi­
fication activity against hydrocarbons. Various microorganisms are showing 
their capacity for producing specific biosurfactant. Gordonia sp. Strain BS 
29 grown on hydrocarbon produced glycolipid type biosurfactant which 
acts as emulsifier. The presence of n-alkane in the media of Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa produces rhamnolipids. Pseudomonas sp. LP1 strain reported 
for its biodegradability of oil and diesel by producing biosurfactant and it 
showed 92–95% degradation efficiency. Brevibacterium sp. PDM-3 strain 
tested for its phenanthrene degradability up to 93.92%. Aliphatic & aromatic 
hydrocarbon degraded by sophorolipid with 85–97% degradation capacity. 
Bacillus subtilis DM-04, Pseudomonas aeruginosa M and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa NM reported for their petroleum crude oil degradation capacity 
by producing biosurfactants [17]. There are various other biosurfactant has 
been reported for biodegradation activity of pollutants. 
FIGURE 16.8 Enhancement of hydrocarbon biodegradation by increasing solubility by 
biosurfactant. 
16.7 BIOSURFACTANT-ENHANCED PETROLEUM OIL 
BIOREMEDIATION 
One promising method to enhance the bioremediation of petroleum oil-polluted 
ecosystems is the application of effective biosurfactant agents produced by 
microbiome The biosurfactants may augment petroleum oil biological reme­
diation by means of increasing the bioavailability of substrates for various 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
477 
Production of Biosurfactant by Microbes 
microorganism’s attack. On the other hand, the biosurfactants also lead in 
interacting with microbial cell surface. This helps in lowering of the surface 
interfacial tension and allows the hydrophobic substances to combine easily 
with microorganisms. In any case, biosurfactants might encourage petroleum 
biodegrading bacterial strains by providing co-substrates and improve their 
capability to consume hydrophobic substances as their energy source. The 
efficiency of biosurfactants for enhancing biodegradation of contaminants 
necessitates a consideration of the biological availability of target pollutant. 
The proliferation, survival, and activities of the augmented microbial cultures 
(both biosurfactant-producing and contaminant biodegrading microbes) along 
with indigenous communities affect the degradation process. Another factor 
is also in understanding the concept of interaction amid biosurfactants with 
its producing bacterial strains, and the climatic conditions also determine the 
rate and efficiency of biological remediation of petro-hydrocarbons (Figure 
16.9). Addition of biosurfactant as reported by many researchers can stimu­
late some organisms, but some cases have adverse effect on the growth of 
some microorganisms. Suggested strategy suitable for effective bioremedia­
tion would be to stimulate biosurfactants produced by indigenous degrading 
population that found to be already present as well as adapted at the contami­
nated site. The effective microbiological approach in biological remediation 
of petroleum oil-contaminated soil is the application of biosurfactants product 
without essentially characterizing or purifying the surface-active components 
chemical structures. Biosurfactants contained in broth media (without cells) 
could be utilized straightforward or it may be diluted (if required) suitably to 
the polluted locations to enhance the biodegradation process [7]. 
FIGURE 16.9 Enhancement of petroleum oil bioremediation by increasing the bioavailability 
of substrates by biosurfactant. 

 
 
478 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
16.8 BIOSURFACTANT-BASED BIOREMEDIATION OF TOXIC 
HEAVY METALS 
The toxicity of heavy metals is considered as a major threat to the environ­
ment for its bioaccumulation over natural resources which causes severe 
health hazards [18]. Heavy metals have atomic no. >20 and used to have 
high density also due to which they became non-biodegradable in nature. For 
the removal or detoxification of the toxicants, bioremediation can be done 
with the use of biosurfactants. Biosurfactants are shown to have the ability 
can degrade heavy metals or another substrate like heavy metals by diffusing 
them into cells [19]. The binding of heavy metals and biosurfactants is 
possible through processes called complexation, solubilization, emulsifica­
tion, and mobilization [19, 20] on exchange, electrostatic interaction, and ion 
binding the metal ions are the ways to binds to the microbial surfactants and 
forms biosurfactant-metal complexes. Biosurfactant-metal complexation 
and accumulation of metals on microbial surfactants. Microbes are two 
mechanisms that are used for the desorption of heavy metals from the soil. 
Biosurfactant-metal complexation mechanism is a major one which 
works in accordance with Le Chatelier’s principle by which the desorption 
of metal is induced as there will be a decrease in the solution phase activity 
of the metal in the soil (Figure 16.10). The surfactants and heavy metal 
ions directly interact with each other and due to a decrease in the interfacial 
activity and surface tension, it gets adsorbed in the solid solution interface 
permitting bioaccumulation of metal ions. It helps in the elimination of heavy 
metals as well as permits the formation of micelles [21]. Mechanisms such as 
mobilization and solubilization both depend on CMC and micelle formation 
as it binds with the oppositely charged metal ions [22]. 
FIGURE 16.10 Desorption of heavy metals from the soil by the biosurfactants to make 
available to microbial absorption. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
479 
Production of Biosurfactant by Microbes 
16.9 FUTURE PERSPECTIVES AND CONCLUSION 
Biosurfactants attract researchers due to their eco-friendly, biocompat­
ible, biodegradable nature, having low toxicity, great surface activity, and 
extreme specificity, they can overcome the chemical surfactant market 
which can reduce the environmental pollution. Presently, biosurfactant is 
used to prepare emulsion because it makes interphase between two different 
phases. Biosurfactants contain two moieties, one is hydrophobic and the 
second one is hydrophilic, due to this kind of structural variation they can 
join with the pollutant and make them easy to remove from the surface. 
Still, biosurfactant production and research have been limited and chal­
lenging, it needs to concentrate more attention on different areas such as, the 
discovery of microorganisms that can produce biosurfactants with very low 
cost that could be commercially available for every industrial application to 
remove the different pollutant, to use cheap raw material (using cheap agro­
industrial substrates), focusing to increase biosurfactant specific properties 
to deal with different problems, good knowledge and adequate design of 
bioreactor system, decrease the expensive downstream processing (DSP) 
cost, to increase their market demand and high yield production and so on. 
By applying modern biotechnological techniques like bioengineering, using 
recombinant and genetically modified microorganisms (hyper-producing 
strains) enabled a 10–20-fold increase in biosurfactant yield and decreased 
cost production. In this chapter, we have already discussed the pollutant 
degradability of biosurfactants so that it would be a solution for the future to 
remove pollutants from the environment. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
biodegradability 
• 
bioremediation 
• 
biosurfactant 
• 
metabolic pathways 
• 
micelle formation 
• 
microbes 
• 
microorganisms 
• 
pollutant 

 
480 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
REFERENCES 
1.  Pacwa-Płociniczak, M., Płaza, G. A., Piotrowska-Seget, Z., & Cameotra, S. S., (2011). 
Environmental applications of biosurfactants: Recent advances. Int. J. Mol. Sci., 12(1), 
633–654. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms12010633. 
2. Mao, X., Jiang, R., Xiao, W., & Yu, J., (2015). Use of surfactants for the remediation of 
contaminated soils: A review. J. Hazard. Mater., 285, 419–435. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jhazmat.2014.12.009. 
3. Da Rosa, C. F. C., Freire, D. M. G., & Ferraz, H. C., (2015). Biosurfactant microfoam: 
Application in the removal of pollutants from soil. J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 3(1), 89–94. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jece.2014.12.008. 
4. Makkar, R. S., Cameotra, S. S., & Banat, I. M., (2011). Advances in utilization of 
renewable substrates for biosurfactant production. AMB Express, 1(1), 1–19. https://doi. 
org/10.1186/2191–0855–1-5. 
5. Desai, J. D., & Banat, I. M., (1997). Microbial production of surfactants and their 
commercial potential. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev., 61(1), 47–64. https://doi.org/10.1128/ 
mmbr.61.1.47-64.1997. 
6. Weber, L., Döge, C., Haufe, G., Hommel, R., & Kleber, H. P., (1992). Oxygenation of 
hexadecane in the biosynthesis of cyclic glycolipids in Torulopsis apicola.  Biocatal. 
Biotransformation, 5(4), 267–272. https://doi.org/10.3109/10242429209014872. 
7. Santos, D. K. F., Rufino, R. D., Luna, J. M., Santos, V. A., & Sarubbo, L. A., (2016). 
Biosurfactants: Multifunctional biomolecules of the 21st century. Int. J. Mol. Sci., 17(3), 
1–31. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms17030401. 
8. Haritash, A. K., & Kaushik, C. P., (2009). Biodegradation aspects of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAHs): A review. J. Hazard. Mater., 169 (1–3), 1–15. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2009.03.137. 
9. Hommel, R. K., & Huse, K., (1993). Regulation of sophorose lipid production by 
Candida (Torulopsis) Apicola. Biotechnol. Lett., 15(8), 853–858. 
10. Tokumoto, Y., Nomura, N., Uchiyama, H., Imura, T., Morita, T., Fukuoka, T., & 
Kitamoto, D., (2009). Structural characterization and surface-active properties of a 
succinoyl trehalose lipid produced by Rhodococcus Sp. SD-74. J. Oleo Sci., 58(2), 
97–102. https://doi.org/10.5650/jos.58.97. 
11. Kitamoto, D., Ikegami, T., Suzuki, G. T., Sasaki, A., Takeyama, Y. I., Idemoto, Y., 
Koura, N., & Yanagishita, H., (2001). Microbial conversion of n-alkanes into glycolipid 
biosurfactants, mannosylerythritol lipids, by pseudozyma (Candida antarctica). 
Biotechnol. Lett., 23(20), 1709–1714. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1012464717259. 
12. Version, D., (1999). University of Groningen Biosurfactant-Enhanced Soil Remediation 
Noordman, Wouter Herman. 
13. Vijayakumar, S., & Saravanan, V., (2015). Biosurfactants-types, sources and applications. 
Res. J. Microbiol., 10(5), 181–192. https://doi.org/10.3923/jm.2015.181.192. 
14. Bustamante, M., Durán, N., & Diez, M. C., (2012). Biosurfactants are useful tools 
for the bioremediation of contaminated soil: A review. J. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr., 12(4), 
667–687. https://doi.org/10.4067/s0718-95162012005000024. 
15. Cameotra, S. S., & Makkar, R. S., (2010). Biosurfactant-enhanced bioremediation of 
hydrophobic pollutants. Pure Appl. Chem., 82(1), 97–116. https://doi.org/10.1351/ 
PAC-CON-09-02-10. 

 
481 
Production of Biosurfactant by Microbes 
16. Mulligan, C., & Gibbs, B., (2004). Types, production and applications of biosurfactants. 
Proceedings-Indian National Science Academy Part B., (pp. 31–56). 
17. Mukherjee, S., Das, P., & 
 
Sen, R., (2006). towards commercial production of 
microbial surfactants. Trends Biotechnol., 24(11), 509–515. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
tibtech.2006.09.005. 
18. Mishra, S., Lin, Z., Pang, S., Zhang, Y., Bhatt, P., & Chen, S., (2021). Biosurfactant is a 
powerful tool for the bioremediation of heavy metals from contaminated soils. J. Hazard. 
Mater., 418 (February), 126253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.126253. 
19. Akbari, S., Abdurahman, N. H., Yunus, R. M., Fayaz, F., & Alara, O. R., (2018). 
Biosurfactants—A  new frontier for social and environmental safety: A  mini review. 
Biotechnol. Res. Innov., 2(1), 81–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biori.2018.09.001. 
20.  Mulligan, C. N., (2009). Recent advances in the environmental applications of 
biosurfactants. Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 14(5), 372–378. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cocis.2009.06.005. 
21. Olaniran, A. O., Balgobind, A., & Pillay, B., (2013). Bioavailability of heavy metals 
in soil: Impact on microbial biodegradation of organic compounds and possible 
improvement strategies. Int. J. Mol. Sci., 14(5), 10197–10228. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ijms140510197. 
22. Costa, S. G. V. A. O., Nitschke, M., Lépine, F., Déziel, E., & Contiero, J., (2010). 
Structure, properties and applications of rhamnolipids produced by pseudomonas 
aeruginosa L2-1 from cassava wastewater. Process Biochem., 45(9), 1511–1516. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.procbio.2010.05.033. 


Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 17  
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by 
Microbial Cells 
SAURABH GUPTA,1 NALINI SONI,1 ABHIMANYU KUMAR JHA,2 and 
BALASUBRAMANIAN VELRAMAR1 
1Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, India 
2Department of Biotechnology, Sharda University, Greater Noida,  
Uttar Pradesh, India 
ABSTRACT 
Plastic waste becomes one of the most growing concerns of the world due 
to its increasing consumption and its production basis on global demand. 
Around 15 million tons of plastic waste generated by India every year and 
only one-fourth of the solid waste materials of this consumption is being 
recycled due to a lack of awareness and consumer responsibility on the 
management of Solid waste generated. This leads to a burden on mother 
earth and polluting the ocean and affecting the marine ecosystem. Also, 
additionally, it affects terrestrial ecosystem due to the poor management and 
landfilling by ragpickers affecting the socio-economic conditions. By 2050, 
the world might have plastic in the ocean much more than fish, therefore, it 
is threatening the world’s environment, economy, and human health, which 
affects our society and livelihoods. Based on the latest global statistics, 
the most common plastic waste is either landfilled, recycled, or discarded 
multilayered plastic. Degradation of the manufactured plastic life cycle 

 
484 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
is in between 100 and 600 years, and they get fragmented in the various 
ecosystems into little particles called Nano/Micro-Plastics, which end by 
entering the human body through the food chain. The main challenges of 
plastic waste management into end with best-proposed solutions on the local 
and global, and most parts of the world having lack of laws that address 
on the awareness of plastic waste management. This chapter concerned on 
the plastic waste management and disposal in India especially on utilization 
of different types of plastics, wastage of plastics and handling of waste by 
municipal corporations throughout the country. 
17.1 INTRODUCTION 
The first time, in year 1970 Leo Baekeland had invented Bakelite, fully 
synthetic plastic first time, the molecules is not existing in the nature and 
this discovery of this plastic has changed socio-economic of the domestic 
and industrial usages [1]. As reported, wastes of plastics get dumped into the 
ecosystem globally as each year around 100 million tons and is cumulative at 
frightening rate. This plastic waste leading to affects the various marine and 
terrestrial ecosystems and respective organism are suffering from various 
health issues which leads to death [2]. Various plasticizers (e.g., phthalate) 
were added to the plastic to increase the tensile strength of the plastic. These 
chemicals added especially phthalates are endocrine disruptor and have 
carcinogenic potential are reported. These phthalates are reported as endo­
crine disruptor and also reported to have carcinogenic potential. So, to tackle 
the plastic waste management, various degradation methods like abiotic 
methods (thermooxidative degradation [3], and photodegradation) and biotic 
method (biodegradation) used to degrade plastic waste were also deliberated. 
Among all the methods, bioremediation is considered as the most efficient 
method. In the present chapter, tried to explain various methods of plastic 
waste management aimed by various research work carried out to degrade 
by using various microbial strains like algae, bacteria, and fungi [4]. The 
plastic waste biodegradation mechanism is described in this chapter ensued 
by plastic-degrading microbe’s list. 
Microbes involved in the plastic degradation, some potential bacteria 
which having the capability of degrading the plastic, have been detected 
in the stomachs of wax worms that have been fed plastic [5]. Time taking 
experiments to evaluate the deterioration of the polymer in question at lab and 
environmental condition especially temperature, pH, and culture conditions 

 
485 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
were analyzed to incubate the microbial isolates for plastic deterioration. 
Primarily weight loss, tensile strength loss analysis, deterioration level of 
modification of plastic surface using scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 
addition, and deletion of carbonyl bond in polymer using Fourier transform 
infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and CO2 generation were previously used to 
assess the level of biodegradation of various types of plastic due to the action 
of different microbes [4]. 
Plastic garbage has become one of the world’s most pressing challenges 
as a result of rising use and manufacturing based on worldwide demand. Due 
to a lack of awareness and consumer responsibility under the solid waste 
management (SWM) system, India generates approximately 15 million tons 
of plastic waste each year, with only one-fourth of this waste being recycled, 
putting a strain on ecosystems and polluting various ecosystems, such as the 
ocean, affecting the marine ecosystem [5]. 
It also has an impact on landfills and garbage collectors, as well as 
terrestrial ecosystems, particularly because of women’s poor socioeconomic 
status. The world’s oceans may contain significantly more plastic than fish 
by 2050. As a result, it poses a threat to the world’s environment, economy, 
and human health, as well as having an impact on our society and lifestyle. 
According to the most recent worldwide data, landfill, recycled, or discarded 
multi-layer plastic are the most prevalent plastic waste sources [6]. Plas­
tics have a 100–600-year life cycle, breaking down into minute particles 
known as nano/microplastics in diverse ecosystems and eventually reaching 
the human body through the food chain. In most regions of the world, the 
difficulty of plastic waste management results in the best solutions being 
suggested at the local and global levels and in most parts of the world there 
are no laws dealing with plastic waste management and its awareness. 
Plastic aggregation within the environment and environment, especially 
within the seas, is of expanding natural concerns. One of the major plastic 
squanders is manufactured polymers utilized in numerous applications 
counting materials and nourishment bundling [4]. Plastic is highly resistant 
to biodegradation process and thus, cause various environmental impacts 
associated with its accumulation, including hazardous effects on marine 
wildlife and dissemination of potentially invasive species to new environ­
ment. Currently, only three disposal methods are surveyed for the plastic 
waste management: landfills, incineration, and recycling. Every method has 
its advantages and disadvantages with drawbacks. Landfill and incineration 
both lead to the release of dangerous secondary pollutants into the envi­
ronment, and also large portion of land is required for doing this process. 

 
486 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Recycling addresses the environmental concerns of land fill; however, the 
process and state art of technologies are the constraint to do the efficient 
recycling subject to the polymer chemistry [7]. 
Plastic dumping is one of the most serious environmental problems today. 
Biodegradation is a feasible environmentally friendly solution for plastic 
waste disposal. Presently, there is no feasible protocol has been developed 
for the disposal of plastic by biodegrading on a viable scale; yet, researchers 
are still ongoing in the field, and it is expected that solving the plastic waste 
problem will simply be a matter of developing a viable process using the 
metabolic potential of microorganisms. This chapter is about plastic waste 
management and disposal in India, with a focus on the use of various types 
of plastics, plastic garbage, and waste handling by municipal corporations 
across the country. Can we imagine how the beneficial plastic in which your 
food items are packaged when being purchased becomes rubbish once you 
put it into your dustbin after utilizing the food material within in a matter 
of seconds? This is one of the ways we generate plastic garbage, which, 
according to interesting research undertaken by the University of California, 
Santa Barbara, and others, estimates that the globe created almost 8.3 billion 
metric tons of plastic between 1950 and 2015. Of the 6.3 billion metric tons, 
or almost a third. Only around 9% of the world’s 6.3 billion metric tons of 
plastic garbage has been recycled. Only 10% of the 9% that is recycled has 
been recycled more than once, while 12% of the garbage has been burnt. The 
rest, up to 79% of all plastic produced in the globe, ends up in landfills or 
in our seas and waterways. As can be seen from the statistics, industrialized 
nations such as the United States, Europe, and China create the most plastic 
garbage, but emerging and developing countries such as India are also exhib­
iting a large growth in the active contributor of plastic waste production. 
According to a CPCB research done in 2018–2019 [4, 8], India generates 
3,360,043 metric tons of plastic garbage each year (roughly 9,200 metric 
tons per day). Given that the country’s total municipal solid waste genera­
tion is 55–65 million metric tons, this means that plastic waste accounts for 
roughly 6% of total solid waste generated. The richest state, Goa, has the 
highest per capita plastic waste generation — 60 grams per capita per day, 
nearly double that of Delhi (37 grams per capita per day) and far above the 
national average of 8 grams per capita per day, which is also expected to rise. 
According to a survey issued by TERI (The Energy and Resource Institute), 
the oceans surrounding Mumbai, Kerala, and the Andaman and Nicobar 
Islands in Delhi are among the world’s most polluted. Furthermore, plastic 
debris has an impact on at least 267 species worldwide, including 86% of 

 
 
 
 
487 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
all sea turtle species, 44% of all seabird species, and 43% marine mammal 
species have found substantial quantities of toxic heavy metals like copper, 
cadmium, lead, and zinc analyzed from coastal ecosystems waste plastic. As 
a result of the massive build-up of rubbish in the Pacific Ocean, dubbed “The 
Great Pacific Garbage Patch (GPGP)” and measuring 2.5 times the size of 
nations like France, the world is now concerned about proper management. 
17.2 TYPE OF PLASTICS 
17.2.1 TYPES OF PLASTICS MATERIALS 
A plastic substance is defined as a mixture of polymers and additives that may 
be molded or molded into a useful product. This is done under temperatures 
and pressures that are reasonable. Plastics are characterized from rubbers 
and elastomers by having a high stiffness/modulus and a lack of reverse 
elasticity [9]. 
The thermoplastics and thermosetting plastics are the two main types of 
plastic (thermosets). Injection molding and extrusion resins, for example, 
thermoplastic items may be constantly softened, melted, and reshaped/ 
recycled. Thermoset goods, on the other hand, do not have this feature. 
Thermoplastics are unquestionably the more significant in terms of quantity. 
The word ‘homopolymer’ is used when the polymer in the plastic is made up 
of only one monomer. A ‘copolymer’ is defined as a polymer that is made up 
of two or more monomers. The resin identification code (RIC) system, which 
separated plastic resins into seven groups, was adopted by the Society of the 
Plastics Industry in 1988 (Figure 17.1). 
FIGURE 17.1 Basic types of synthetic plastics. 

 
488 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
17.2.2 THE DIFFERENT PLASTIC TYPES 
PET plastics [9] that having polymers of polyethylene (PE) terephthalate. 
The purpose of the PET uses in packaging of drink water and food stuffs 
for preventing oxygen entry to the food stuff to avoid contamination and 
spoiling of foods. High-density polyethylene (HDPE), is an incredible 
utilized as pipes using in agricultural, bags in grocery items carrying, waste 
recovering bins, equipment use up in playground, caps, and shampoo bottles, 
etc. It is significantly tougher and thicker than PET since it is formed of 
long unbranched polymer chains. It’s also quite robust and impact-resistant, 
and it can withstand temperatures of up to 120°C without degrading. HDPE 
is one of the easiest plastic polymers to recycle, thus it is accepted at most 
recycling sites throughout the world. PVC or polyvinyl chloride, is the third 
most extensively used synthetic plastic polymer in the world. There are two 
types of rigidity: rigid and flexible. PVC is widely utilized in the building 
and construction sector in its rigid form to make door and window profiles 
and pipes (drinking and wastewater). By mixing PVC with other large mate­
rials like containers, it may be made flexible and soft enough to be utilized in 
plumbing, wiring, and electrical wire insulation, and flooring. PVC is gradu­
ally replacing traditional building materials such as wood, metal, concrete, 
rubber, ceramics, and others in a variety of applications due to its diverse 
features such as lightness, durability, and ease of processability. Despite its 
many benefits and the plastic industry’s attempts to promote reusability, 
PVC is still scarcely recyclable and should be avoided if feasible. 
LDPE, unlike HDPE, is characterized by low-density molecules, resulting 
in a resin that is thinner and more flexible. It has the most basic structure 
of all the polymers, making it simple and inexpensive to manufacture. 
Plastic bags, six-pack rings, different containers, dispensing bottles, and 
most famously, plastic wraps are all made of this material, which is seldom 
recycled through curbside programs. The iconic plastic bags made of LDPE 
are used for a few seconds before being thrown. Polypropylene, or PP, is the 
second most extensively manufactured commodity plastic, and its market 
is expected to expand more in the next years [11]. It’s used in tupperware, 
automobile components, thermal vests, yogurt containers, and even dispos­
able diapers since it’s tough and durable and can endure high temperatures. 
PP is commonly used for live hinges because of its high fatigue resistance 
(the thin piece of plastic that allows a part of a product to fold or bend from 
1 to 180°). PS: The sixth form of plastic on the list is polystyrene, which 
can be solid or foamed. Because it is a low-cost resin per unit weight and 

 
 
489 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
easy to manufacture, it may be found in a wide range of products, including 
drinking cups, insulation, packaging materials, egg cartons, and disposable 
tableware. It’s probably better recognized by its brand name, Styrofoam, and 
it’s very combustible and hazardous since it may leach chemicals, hazardous 
substances, especially when heated (which occurs a lot because throwaway 
take-out containers are frequently microwaved to heat up the food inside). It 
is one of the worst sorts of plastic in terms of the environment: for starters, it 
is not biodegradable. Second, because to its low specific gravity, polystyrene 
foam floats on water and blows in the wind. It is not recognized as artificial 
by animals, and they may mistake it for food, posing a major health risk to 
birds and marine creatures who consume it. 
Polystyrene is also not accepted in curbside recycling systems, and it is 
not segregated and recycled when it is accepted. To summarize, it’s not a good 
idea. Other plastics include [12], If plastic cannot be classified into one of the 
six categories listed above, it will be placed in group number 7. Polycarbon­
ates (PCs) are the most well-known of this category of polymers, which are 
used to make robust and durable items. PCs are extensively utilized in the 
manufacture of lenses for sunglasses, sports, and safety goggles to provide 
eye protection. However, they may be found on mobile phones and more 
commonly, compact discs (CDs). The usage of these resins has been conten­
tious in recent years; the foundation of this debate is their leaching, which 
occurs at high levels., When high temperatures are reached, bisphenol A 
(BPA) is released, a substance that is included on the EPA’s list of potentially 
dangerous compounds. Furthermore, because BPA does not decompose in 
landfills, it will remain in the earth for a long time and eventually make its 
way into water bodies, leading to aquatic contamination. Furthermore, the 
number 7 plastic is nearly never recycled. 
17.3 SOURCES OF PLASTIC POLLUTION 
The only regular estimate of the quantity of plastic trash created in India is 
the annual report on implementation of the plastic waste rules (PWR), 2016, 
prepared by the CPCB [4, 7]. Plastic garbage was reported to have been 
created at a rate of 3,360,043 metric tons per year in 2018–2019 (Roughly 
9,200 metric tons per day). Given that total municipal solid trash creation is 
between 55 and 65 million metric tons, plastic garbage accounts for around 
6% of total solid waste created in the country. Plastic production is aided by 
wealth and opulence. Goa, India’s richest state, produces the most plastic 

 
 
 
 
 
490 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
garbage per capita – 60 grams per capita per day, over double that of Delhi (37 
grams per capita per day) and far more than the national average of 8 grams 
per capita per day. The Annual Report is based on information provided by 
state pollution control bodies. For the first time in 2018–2019, all states have 
submitted statistics — however the source of this data is unknown, as there 
is no Plastic waste: How much does India produce? 
India’s top seven contributor states to overall plastic garbage output — 
the country produced 3.3 million metric tons per year in 2018–2019. 
The following are the most prevalent causes of pollution in the environ­
ment: food wrappers and containers (31.14% of pollution in the environment, 
by unit count) conchitinarp/Getty Images Bottle and Container Caps account 
for 15.5%, Plastic Bags account for 11.18%, Straws, and Stirrers account 
for 8.13%, Beverage Bottles account for 7.27%, and Takeout Containers 
account for 6.27%. 
These sources can be further classified into primary sources as: 
1.  Municipal Sources: In India, the main collection and segregation 
is being done by municipal cooperation, and it has been stored at 
municipal cooperation places which includes residential, markets, 
commercial establishments, hotels, hospitals, etc. 
2.  Distribution and Industrial Sources: The next source is the indus­
trial waste which is generated by their process and the manufacturing 
reject which includes food and chemical industries, packaging films, 
etc. 
3.  Other Sources: This includes automotive, agricultural wastes, 
fishing and shipping, construction debris, etc., as well as secondary 
sources formed after the degradation and fragmentation of these 
primary sources into microplastics. 
From different sources of generation, the portion of plastic litter that 
does not reach landfills or recycling units will roam the earth surface and get 
trapped in the soil, it is carried by the wind till it reaches the rivers, and then 
the sea. Land-based sources dominate the entry of plastic garbage into the 
marine environment in densely inhabited areas. Ship-generated trash, on the 
other hand, is the most common type of marine debris observed on distant 
beaches. These plastic types have major applications in every part of human 
life including packaging, automotive, industrial machinery, medical devices, 
building construction, electrical, and electronics, consumer goods, optical 
media, etc. 

 
 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
491 
Can we think of how plastic made material is released into the envi­
ronment, which is a result of inappropriate waste management, improper 
human behavior, incidental pollution, etc., causing severe impacts on marine 
environment, birds, turtles, corals, land mammals as well as on Humans? 
There are incidents in which police free deer’s head from a bag of Doritos, 
Bear rescued after getting head stuck in a plastic jar, plastic waste from 
Sabarimala devotees kills wild elephants in Kerala Forest and many such 
incidents are being reported regularly. 
17.4 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS OF PLASTIC POLLUTION 
Plastic contamination in the ocean has a number of dangerous and envi­
ronmentally destructive consequences. Plastic trash is a direct hazard to 
wildlife, with several species having been reported as being harmed by 
it. For most animals, the major risks connected with plastic materials are 
entanglement in and ingestion of those items. Plastic waste entangles juve­
nile creatures, causing significant harm as the animal matures, as well as 
restricting mobility, preventing animals from adequately eating and in the 
case of mammals, breathing. Marine animals such as fur seals, filter feeders, 
marine birds, sea turtles, and sharks are just a few of the species that have 
been observed to be negatively impacted by plastic trash. Ingestion of plastic 
objects that are mistaken for food is especially dangerous for marine birds. 
Plastic consumed by these animals can cause decreased eating stimula­
tion, gastrointestinal obstruction, decreased release of stomach enzymes, and 
lower levels of steroid hormones, all of which can contribute to reproductive 
issues. 
Organic contaminants have been found in significant concentrations of 
plastic particles in the ocean. Toxic substances like organic pesticides like 
BPA, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), polybrominated diphenyl 
ethers (PBDEs), polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), and nonylphenol 
(NP), polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), is being routinely noticed in marine 
plastic waste. 
The existence of these compounds raises the dangers of wildlife ingesting 
plastic waste, and several of these chemicals can undergo considerable 
biomagnification, posing a direct threat to human health. Many health 
problems have been linked to and are associated with these toxic agents, 
including developmental impairment (neurological impairment, growth 
abnormalities, and hormonal imbalances), arthritis, breast cancer, diabetes, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
492 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
DNA hypomethylation, endocrine disruption, and neurobehavioral changes. 
Plastic litter also provides additional opportunity for potentially invasive and 
harmful creatures to migrate to new areas. Maritime trash can also be used 
by terrestrial organisms to get to new sites. Ants have been discovered riding 
trash thousands of kilometers from the Brazilian peninsula to San Sebastian 
Island, and even iguanas have been recorded riding flotsam to new Carib­
bean islands. 
17.4.1 LEVELS OF PLASTIC IN THE MARINE ENVIRONMENT 
Many attempts have been made to measure the extent of plastic pollution 
in marine habitats, with the great majority of them focusing on beach trash. 
This is most likely related to the fact that plastics float and as a result, tend to 
collect on beaches [13]. Plastic objects made up most of the rubbish washed 
ashore on the beaches surveyed in terms of quantities; frequently in all three 
quarters of the debris washed ashore is made of plastic. The maximum 
availability of plastic items and their available capacity to remain in the 
environment are too responsible for the high quantities of plastic waste in 
the environment. 
The North Pacific samples were collected from the ocean waters in sections 
of, plastic particles captured in purpose-built trawl nets were found to surpass 
zooplankton levels. Zooplankton exceeded plastic particles by around five to 
one in terms of quantity of particles; however, the collected of total plastic 
exceeded six times of zooplankton quantity. The same levels of plastic debris 
have been documented in another studies: floating total marine dumping, with 
naturally arising debris such as kelp, have been measured during a trip in the 
Atlantic Ocean, from as far south as the Southern Ocean to as far north as 
the high Arctic [14, 15]. Plastic was the most common kind of waste in most 
samplings, accounting for up to 92% of all objects recovered in one sample. 
A 22-year analysis of waste plastic in the Atlantic showed that 62% of all net 
tows contained particles of plastic wastes evaluated with >20,000 pieces of 
debris per square km. Plastic levels in the North Pacific subtropical gyre have 
been observed to exceed 3,35,000 plastic pieces km2, or 5.1 kg/km2. 
17.5 BIODEGRADATION 
When extensively used plastics are discharged into the environment, they 
often do not decompose rapidly. This is rather unexpected, given that one 

 
 
493 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
of the key reasons for many polymers’ popularity and extensive use is their 
outstanding stability and endurance. The biodegradation of PE was evalu­
ated after the PE pre-treated with UV; temperature and hydrolytic acids are 
the four methods by which plastics deteriorate in the environment. Photo-
degradation is the first step in the natural plastic degradation initiated, which 
continued by the thermal degradation. The UV radiation from the sun which 
create the free radicles in the polymer leads to the addition of oxygen in the 
PE. 
The plastic becomes brittle and breaks into smaller and smaller bits as 
a result, until the polymer chains reach a molecular weight low enough 
for microbes to consume [15]. The carbon in the polymer chains is either 
converted to carbon dioxide (CO2) or incorporated into biomolecules by these 
bacteria. However, the entire process is extremely sluggish, and plastic can 
take up to 50 years to entirely disintegrate. The process of photodegradative 
may be hampered due to low temperature and O2 availability in the saltwater 
and so, the rate of degradation of most polymers in the marine ecosystem is 
insignificant. 
With the increasing use of plastics in human lives and the increasing 
demand for plastic waste disposal capacity, the need for biodegradable 
plastics and biodegradation of plastic wastes [16] has become increasingly 
important in recent years, and degradation by microorganism or biodegrad­
able plastics has made this possible. Microorganisms [17] such as bacteria 
and fungus [18], deteriorate both polymers present in living system and 
synthetic polymers. 
First Report of Plastic Degradation, comparative degradation assay of 
lignin and paraffins was studied due to action of bacteria by growing bacteria 
on alkanes as sole carbon source with different types. They further reported 
that bacteria can deteriorate only polymers with molecular weight up to 
4,800 [19]. Later, reports of plastic degradation ability by the microbes were 
gradually increasing appreciably in the literature from different parts of the 
world. 
Types of plastic degradation (Photodegradation, Oxy photodegradation, 
Bioremediation) Plastic degradation is of three methods, photodegradation, 
oxyphotodegradation, and bioremediation [20]. UV or high-energy radiation 
needs for the photodegradation for degrading plastic. Its rate of initiation 
is very slow; once the plastic degradation initiated and it extends fast. This 
method is environmentally friendly, but it is very costly. The other method is 
oxy-photodegradation, and this method requires oxygen and heat (75–200°C, 
higher than ambient temperature is required). At high temperature various 

 
 
494 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
toxic gases gets released into the environment. This method is very fast 
but not an accepted method. Bioremediation is one of the best methods to 
degrade still now [21, 22], as it uses microorganism to degrade the plastic 
and is a highly accepted method. 
The biodegradation of polymers is divided into three stages: (i) microbe 
adhesion to the polymer’s surface; (ii) polymer usage as a carbon source; and 
(iii) polymer degradation. Microorganisms connect to polymer surfaces and 
breakdown them by secreting enzymes [22] to gain energy for development, 
and big polymers degrade into monomers and oligomers with low molecular 
weight molecules. Microorganisms utilize O2 as a final e– acceptor to degrade 
large organic molecules into simple ones, which is known as aerobic degra­
dation. CO2 and water are released from this reaction. 
Plastic (carbon) + O2 → CO2 + H2O + Residual of carbon 
And anaerobically in which oxygen is not necessary for the breakdown 
of compounds by the action of microorganisms and use CO2 as an electron 
acceptor, and utilize iron, manganese, nitrate, sulfate, and in place of oxygen 
to break down large organic compounds into smaller compounds. 
Carbon (plastic) → Methane + Carbon dioxide + Water + Carbon residual 
17.5.1 MICROBIAL DEGRADATION OF POLYMERS 
17.5.1.1 THE FUNCTIONS OF FUNGI AND BACTERIA IN PLASTIC 
DEGRADATION 
The biodegradation of plastic waste is activated by the enzymatic fraction­
ation of the polymeric chain into low MW molecules such as oligomers, 
dimers, and monomers, which happens by enzyme binding to the polymer 
and catalysis of its hydrolytic cleavage. The process is completed when 
these low MW molecules are mineralized into CO2 and H2O. Bacteria, fungi, 
and algae have all been discovered as polymer degrading microorganisms 
capable of degrading polymers such as PE and PU [23]. 
Fungi play an essential part in the biodegradation of polymeric materials. 
Fungal mycelia may penetrate a polymeric substance’s surface to go deeper 
into its bulk, allowing them to break down as much of the substrate as possible 
[24]. Furthermore, external enzymes (e.g., depolymerases) can be released 
by the fungal mycelia, which degrade the polymeric substrate into oligomers, 
dimers, and monomers, i.e., low MW pieces [19, 25–27]. These monomers 
are then taken up by fungi, which either ingest or mineralize them using their 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
495 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
internal enzyme machinery. The number of enzymes produced and released 
by fungus significantly outnumbers those produced and secreted by bacteria. 
The fungi contain an enzymatic system that excretes extracellular 
enzymes that may break down and mineralize lignin, such as laccase 
(Lac), lignin peroxidase (LiP), manganese peroxidase (MnP), and versatile 
peroxidase [19, 25, 26]. In terms of several physical characteristics, such 
as hydrophobicity, and chemical structure (i.e., the existence of ether link­
ages, non-phenolic aromatic rings, carbon skeleton, and so on), polymeric 
materials are comparable to lignin, which is oxidized during lignin break­
down [28]. 
Lignin-modifying enzymes (LMEs), such as MnP, can degrade some 
plastic polymers due to their physical and chemical similarities (e.g., PE, and 
PP). Bacterial strains can degrade plastic polymeric substances in polluted 
water or soil. Plastic biodegradation by specialized bacteria has been identi­
fied as a promising bioremediation strategy for degraded ecosystems in a 
number of studies. 
Bacterial strains such as Pseudomonas spp., Bacillus spp., and Strep-
tomyces spp. breakdown diverse plastic polymers with high efficiency, 
according to our literature study [29]. These findings also suggest that further 
study into the role of bacteria in plastic biodegradation is needed to determine 
the potential of different bacterial species as well as the efficacy of bacterial 
consortia in plastic biodegradation. In any event, the rates of plastic degrada­
tion by fungi are higher than those attained by bacteria strains. According to 
Amobonye et al. [30] bacteria are simpler to grow and break down polymeric 
materials than fungi, which require more stable conditions (Table 17.1). 
TABLE 17.1 State Wise Generation of Plastic Waste in India 
SL. No. 
States of India 
Percentage 
1. 
Maharashtra 
12% 
2. 
Tamil Nadu 
12% 
3. 
Gujarat 
11% 
4. 
West Bengal 
9% 
5. 
Uttar Pradesh 
7% 
6. 
Karnataka 
8% 
7. 
Delhi 
7% 
8. 
Remaining 28 states and Union Territories 
34% 
Source: Implementation report on plastic waste management, CPCB (2018). Adapted from 
Ref. [4]. 

 
496 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
1.  Biodeterioration: This which is a physical, chemical, and mechanical 
method that affects the surface of plastics and alters their physical, 
chemical, and mechanical characteristics; all chemical and structural 
changes are dependent on the structure and composition of polymers. 
2.  Bio‑Fragmentation: This which includes enzymatic activity on 
plastic polymers, is the next phase in biodeterioration. Oxygenases, 
which are usually found in bacteria, may split oxygen molecules in 
carbon chains, resulting in the formation of less damaging alcohol 
and peroxyl compounds. Furthermore, lipases, and esterases catalyze 
the transformation of carboxylic groups, while endopeptidases cata
lyze the transformation of amide groups. 
3.  Assimilation: Atoms are absorbed into microbial cells for full 
breakdown in this process. Secondary metabolites are moved outside 
of cells or transferred to other bacteria, which further degrade and 
utilize them. During metabolite breakdown, oxidized products such 
as CO2, N2, H2O, and CH4 are released [31]. Loss of weight, change 
in tensile strength, change in dimensions, change in chemical and 
physical characteristics, CO2 generation, bacterial activity in soil, 
and change in molecular weight distribution are all indicators of 
biodegradation. 
4.   Mineralization: Plastic polymers generated during the bio-fragmen
tation process pass past cell membranes and enter microbial cells. 
Large monomers are unable to enter cells and remain outside (Figure 
17.2). The tiny monomers that move around inside the cells are 
oxidized and utilized to create energy. Microorganisms utilize these 
polymers as a source of energy by secreting extracellular enzymes, 
whereas polymers that are huge in size and are not water soluble 
are not immediately carried into cells through their cell walls. These 
enzymes [21] involved in the process of degrade polymers extracel
luarly. Enzymes are involved in both intracellular and extracellular 
biodegradation of polymers. This energy is eventually used to 
produce biomass. 
The demand for biodegradable plastics and the biodegradation of plastic 
trash is becoming increasingly critical, since India produces around 9.46 
million tons of plastic garbage yearly, 40% of which goes uncollected 
and pollutes the environment. Furthermore, not all forms of plastic can be 
recycled, thus they end up in landfills. According to the study, about 66% of 
plastic trash was made up of mixed garbage, such as polybags, multilayer 
pouches used for packing food products, and other things made of HDPE/ 
­
­
­

 
 
 
497 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
LDPE or PP materials, supplied mostly from households and residential 
areas and unable to be recycled. The reality is that if recycling was truly 
widespread, the visible and discovered plastic debris in cities, seas, rivers, 
towns, and across the country should not have been a problem. As a result, 
despite the availability of various methods for the management of plastic 
waste, such as recycling and energy recovery, these methods have a high 
cost associated with the entire recycling process and are not suitable for 
use at low plastic concentrations in order to save living organisms. When it 
comes to plastics decomposition, microbial usage is increasingly regarded 
an environmentally beneficial alternative to traditional approaches. 
FIGURE 17.2 Process of biodegradation of plastics. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
498 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
17.5.1.2 ALGAL ROLE IN SYNTHETIC PLASTIC POLYMER 
DEGRADATION 
A few research on the ability of algae species to reduce white pollution have 
been published. The capacity of filamentous algae to colonize the surface 
of plastic wastes was seen as a result of the availability of environmental 
elements such as sunshine, nutrients, and water, all of which are essential 
for algal development [31]. Microalgae, in contrast to bacterial and fungal 
systems, which may be considered biological pollutant due to endotoxins 
and the need for a rich carbon source for growth, are a potential candidate 
because they do not contain endotoxins and do not require organic carbon 
sources under photoautotrophic conditions [21]. Furthermore, some bacte­
rial and fungal species employed for PETase synthesis, such as Ideonella 
sakaiensis and Pestalotiopsis microspore, could not modify well to marine 
conditions, where most debris of plastic accumulates [32]. Several non­
hazardous and non-toxic Bacillariophyceae, Chlorophyceae, and Cyanophy­
ceae algae species were discovered to colonize polythene surfaces and form 
algal biofilms in a variety of polluted aquatic bodies, including ponds, lakes, 
and wastewaters [33]. 
According to recent findings, the easily isolable and fast-growing 
cyanobacteria Phormidium lucidum and Oscillatoria subbrevis (freshwater 
non-toxic cyanobacteria) [34] may colonize PE surfaces and efficiently 
breakdown LDPE without any pre-treatment. In addition, Chen et al. [35] 
employed the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum as a microbial factory 
to create an engineered PETase that was active against both PET and the 
copolymer PETG (polyethylene terephthalate glycol). Furthermore, after 
algal colonization on PE [35] discovered that the surface deteriorated. 
The green alga Scenedesmus dimorphus, the diatom Navicula pupula, and 
the blue-green alga Anabaena spiroides all had degradation percentages 
of 3.74, 8.18, and 4.44%, respectively. Spirulina sp. was also shown to 
diminish the tensile strength of PET and PP by 0.9939 and 0.1977 MPa/ 
day, respectively. They discovered that the decreasing carbon in PET 
and PP was 48.61 and 36.7%, respectively, based on EDX examination. 
Furthermore, CO2 evolution revealed that PET degraded at a faster pace 
than PP [36]. 
Algae can connect to a plastic surface and begin the degradation process 
by producing exopolysaccharides and ligninolytic enzymes [37]. Extracel­
lular enzymes produced in the liquid media interact with macromolecules 
on the plastic surface, triggering the biodegradation process. Microalgae 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
499 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
may be genetically modified to become a microbial cell factory capable of 
producing and secreting polymer breakdown enzymes. For example, the 
green microalgae Chlamydomonas reinhardtii was genetically engineered 
to create PETase and then tested against PET. The surface degradation 
was confirmed by the formation of cavities and holes on the plastic 
surface [37]. Synthetic biology has been shown to be a viable method for 
producing an ecologically benign solution for biological PET breakdown 
employing microalgae in these experiments. However, additional research 
and analysis into the process and algae efficiency as plastic degraders is 
required. 
In recent years, the microalgae-based wastewater treatment method, 
which is one of the most promising technologies for enhanced wastewater 
treatment and nutrient recovery, has gotten a lot of attention [38]. Many 
studies have demonstrated the possibility of utilizing microalgae in waste­
water treatment as a supplement for tertiary wastewater treatment because 
of its high nutrient removal efficiencies in advanced treatment of urban, 
agricultural, and industrial wastewaters [37–39]. Urban, agricultural, and 
industrial activities create large volumes of wastewater containing exces­
sive nutrients, resulting in eutrophication in the aquatic environment [40]. 
Despite the fact that the original idea of using microalgae for wastewater 
treatment was to remove excess nutrients from secondary effluent and 
eliminate the risk of eutrophication in natural water bodies [40], it was 
also noted that the biomass production of microalgae in wastewater treat­
ment could bring significant additional value by using algal biomass as 
feedstock in biorefinery applications. Since a result, microalgae farmed 
on waste streams offers significant advantages over traditional culture 
and treatment techniques, as microalgae can reduce nutrient levels in 
wastewater to a very low level, allowing wastewater to fulfill increasingly 
demanding discharge and reuse criteria. Because many contaminants are 
digested by microalgae, wastewater may be treated at a lower cost. With 
inorganic carbon sources from wastewater treatment plants, microalgae 
can be converted into carbon-neutral fuel. Microalgae can survive on the 
water and nutrients in wastewater without or with little supplementation, 
hence microalgae-based wastewater treatment has the potential to lower 
the cost of production and greenhouse gas emissions associated with 
fossil-based fertilizers [41]. The gathered microalgae may also be turned 
into value-added products including biogas, biofuels, fertilizers, and 
animal feed [42]. 

 
 
 
 
500 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
17.5.1.3 DIFFERENT INSECT SPECIES AS EFFECTIVE PLASTIC 
BIODEGRADERS 
Several invertebrates, including superworms Zophobas atratus, the Indian 
meal moth Plodia interpunctella [42], the greater wax moth Galleria 
mellonella, the mealworm larvae Tenebrio molitor, the greater wax moth 
Galleria mellonella, mealworm larvae Tenebrio molitor, the lesser waxworm 
Achroia grisella, the land snail (Achatina fulica), and other invertebrates, 
have verified plastic polymer biodegradation. Furthermore, some social 
insects, such as termites, that live in colonies and are characterized by 
cooperative brood care, group integration, labor division, and generations 
overlapping within their colonies, and activity against plastic polymer degra­
dation is usually attributed to their intestinal microbial symbionts and poly­
ester and reported the ability of waxworms (larvae of P. interpunctella) to 
eat and digest PE films due to the presence of Bacillus sp. and Enterobacter 
asburiae in this worm’s gut. They investigated the genome of Bacillus sp. 
YP1 and indicated the presence of 182 genes responsible for the xenobiotics’ 
catabolic activity [43]. 
17.5.2 C\\C BACKBONE PLASTIC POLYMER DEGRADATION 
PE, PVC, PP, and PS are the four basic forms of synthetic plastic materials 
in the C\\C backbone group. The polymeric polymer’s structure renders it 
resistant to biodegradation. Furthermore, their brief existence in natural 
ecosystems (a few decades) is insufficient for nature to evolve new enzyme 
systems capable of degrading synthetic polymers. 
17.5.2.1 POLYETHYLENE (PE) MICROBIAL DEGRADATION 
Many microbial strains isolated from a variety of environments, including 
freshwater, landfills, marine water, mulch films, soil, and wastewater, and 
have revealed their capability to decompose PE. Streptomyces spp. (Strepto-
myces viridosporus T7A, Streptomyces badius 252, and Streptomyces setonii 
75Vi2), a lignocellulose-degrading bacteria, confirmed a decrease in MW and 
the capacity of fungal and bacterial strains (A. flavus, Mucor rouxii NRRL 
1835, and Streptomyces spp.) to breakdown PE has also been documented. 
The collected findings confirmed that a little weight loss had been achieved. 
After that, they isolated Penicillium simplicissimum and investigated its 

 
 
501 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
efficiency after 90 days, finding a reduction in MW based on the microbial 
growth phase and the functional groups into the PE polymer. They also 
looked into the efficiency of three different fungal species isolated from the 
soil (Aspergillus terreus, Aspergillus fumigatus, and Fusarium solani) and 
found that LDPE could be used as a carbon source by these strains [43]. 
Recently, a study related to the role of Bacillus cereus and Lysinibacillus 
fusiformis in the biodegradation of PE and discovered that L. fusiformis could 
reduce PE weight by up to 21.9% at 25°C and pH 3.5, isolated Aspergillus 
nidulans, Aspergillus insuetus, Aspergillus oryzae, and Pseudomonas putida. 
Plastic’s use in the current context has superior alternatives with the potential 
to increase human life quality in more sustainable ways, thanks to continual 
evolution. Biodegradation is one method of dealing with plastic waste, but 
there are a number of other achievements that can aid in the management and 
development of better plastic alternatives, such as: planning and development 
of infrastructure are necessary for effective waste reduction and management. 
Given the possibility of leaking into the environment, mass manufacturing 
of single-use plastic items and goods that shed plastic while in use, such 
as tires, textiles, and coatings, should be evaluated. Consumers must have 
options for avoiding plastic trash generation, as well as easy, local disposal 
options for the plastic garbage that remains. Waste that is disposed of locally 
must be collected on a regular basis. To handle the collection and disposal of 
municipal solid waste in properly planned and maintained landfills, public or 
private business is required. Waste management with inadequate facilities to 
handle it. Global plastic regulation, such as China’s National Sword Policy, 
the 2019 Basel Convention amendments, and a slew of circular economy 
mandates, requires OECD countries, including the United States, to chart 
a more disciplined course in producing plastic goods and dealing with the 
accumulation of their plastic waste. 
17.5.3 POTENTIAL PATHWAYS FORWARD 
Green Plastics that have properties like source renewability, Biodegrad­
ability/Composability after the end of life and environmentally friendly 
processing: 
1.  Green Plastics: These are widely publicized as a possible solution 
for concerns regarding the use of conventional petroleum-by-product 
generated plastics. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
502 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
2.  Bio‑based Plastic: These which includes the product having mate­
rial partly derived from biomass (plants). 
3.  Water Soluble Polymers like Polyvinyl Alcohol (PVOH): These 
generally be utilized in a range of film applications. 
4.  Ethylene Vinyl Alcohol (EVOH): These used as an oxygen barrier 
layer in multilayer film packaging. 
5.  Photo‑Biodegradable Plastics: These which are incorporated with 
light-sensitive chemical additives or copolymers for purpose of 
weakening the bonds of the polymer in the presence of ultraviolet 
radiation and uses photo sensitizers like diketones, ferrocene deriva­
tives and carbonyl-containing species. 
6.  Plastic Additives: Prodegradant concentrates (PDCs) which 
promote oxidation processes that break the plastic down into brittle, 
low-molecular-weight fragments in presence of microorganisms and 
they’re used to manufacture single-use plastics such as thin plastic 
shopping bags, Disposable diapers, Trash bags, Landfill covers, 
Food containers and there are many accomplishments by scientist 
like Edible food packaging made from milk proteins, Spanish 
company using Chicken feathers a traditional waste in the form of 
plastic, mushroom root, Bagasse (sugarcane), Palm leaf products, 
Corn starch, Wood pulp cellophane and other waste products from 
the decomposable sources is being used now for the product which 
have potential to be used instead of plastic in various fields of it 
applications. 
Along with these alternate options which accompany traditional plastic 
material, in present and future perspective, a lot more needs to be done. 
Improving the product as biologically derived and eco-friendly plastic which 
prepared from cellulose, polylactic acid (PLA), and starch, as base materials, 
or short-term use products. There is a huge demand to invigorate the use 
of biodegradable plastic, and especially in high-end large-scale applications 
that can absorb the full cost of this kind of plastic. This may assist in pushing 
out bioplastics from laboratories to products in markets as India already 
has a market for bioplastics with several manufacturing plants at Bengaluru 
and Chennai. Moreover, Resource recovery and Recycling always plays 
major role in the management of plastic waste and contributing to Circular 
Economy of the country. 
Many technologies of innovative booster are at the central part of this 
result highlighting, accelerating, and enhancing combined degradation of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
503 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
plastics to levels far more than those current attainable. This approach is The 
bio-innovation of a circular economy for plastics (BioICEP) consortium is a 
pan collaborative of European-Chinese established to decrease the problem 
of waste of plastic in the surrounding environment. Few countries have been 
elected to pointed out for different mixed polluted environments plastic, 
with specific collaborators chosen which have the expertise and services to 
perform the require technical innovations. 
A triple-action depolymerization process where plastic waste would be 
degraded by following three successive processes. 
Processes involving mechano-biochemical disintegration, including 
a novel unique sonic-green-chemical method for lowering the polymer 
molecular weight of the underlying polymer to make it biodegradable. 
Biocatalytic digestion, with enzymes improved using a variety of cutting-
edge approaches such as fast screening using a new fluorescence sensor and 
directed evolution. Microbial consortia are made up of best-in-class single 
microbial strains that work together to degrade mixed plastic waste streams 
efficiently. To allow a new plastic waste-based circular economy, the outputs 
of this degrading process will be employed as building blocks for new poly­
mers or other bioproducts. 
A circular economy for plastics will necessitate considerable adjust­
ments to the existing situation. Despite their flaws, plastics contribute 
significantly to global sustainability, notably in transportation, and there 
are no viable alternatives available for urgent worldwide deployment. As 
a result, plastics will continue to play a role in our lives for the foresee­
able future. Clearly, as a global civilization, we want to continue to reap 
the benefits of plastics while also halting the uncontrolled flow of rubbish 
into the environment. The EU Action Plan, the Global Plastic Action 
Partnership, and the Ellen McArthur Foundation, among others, have all 
established a similar circular economy path for the chemical industry: 
elimination, innovation, and circularity. 
17.5.3.1 ELIMINATION 
In the CPI viewpoint, removal will necessitate a remarkable decrease in the 
plastic productions. As reviewed previously, additives are making recycling 
difficult and reducing their quantity can decrease. Of course, diminishing 
the number of additives utilized will need agreement by consumers and 
producers in the same way. 

 
504 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
17.5.3.2 INNOVATION 
Technological advances in chemical reprocessing have the possibility to be 
transformative especially with polymer wastes. However, the science and 
technologies are evolving in this field and there are some information gaps, 
but chemical reprocessing is an area of study that can and should be estab­
lished and investigated. 
17.5.3.3 CIRCULARITY 
Design for circuitousness is a developing area that will need producers to 
reorganize how products are created. The fact at which the users is completed 
utilizing the product cannot be the come to end of the material’s life. Use 
again, reprocess, and remanufacturing standards must be executed during the 
product design and developmental phases. Single use must be the exception 
rather than the rule. 
For rational purposes in our entangled global economy, this roadmap will 
likely become compulsory for all manufacturers of plastic and their products. 
17.6 THE ROAD AHEAD 
In summary, the build-up of poorly managed plastic garbage will be slowed 
by a combination of international policy and consumer pressure for change. 
Change is accelerating on a global scale. Even though this is a major issue, 
the United States has maintained its status quo and has failed to implement 
national laws to adequately handle waste plastics. 
Of sure, there are obstacles, but there are also potential for creativity. If 
we are to avert a worldwide ecological calamity, the next 50 years of plastics 
manufacturing and usage must look quite different from the last 50. 
17.7 SUSTAINABLE PLASTIC WASTE MANAGEMENT SOLUTIONS 
Value-added products from plastic waste in order to manage the plastic waste 
disposal, some of the alternative options to develop value-added products 
from post-consumer plastic wastes are as follows. 
Products that have been recycled plastics have a lot of promise and have 
a big environmental impact. It contributes to the solution of the pre-existing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
505 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
plastic waste problem while also conserving oil resources (every ton of 
plastic trash recycled saves around 3.8 barrels of petroleum) [43]. Construc­
tion, furniture, gardening, shipping, soft toys, and other significant product 
sectors that use post-consumer plastics are just a few examples. Scientists 
at the National Chemical Laboratory in Pune have taken steps toward 
developing cloth from PET bottles that have been recycled. T-shirts, scarves, 
jeans, and cushions are all made from this fabric. In reality, the Indian cricket 
team’s uniform is manufactured from recycled PET bottles. The strength and 
utility of recycled plastics will be improved by combining them with fillers 
and additives. By combining recycled plastics with fly ash, fire-retardant 
composites with a wide range of uses may be created. Because it is difficult 
to separate individual plastics at the waste source, recycling commingled 
plastics and using non-halogenated fire-retardant additives will help to alle­
viate the problem of segregation while also resulting in value-added goods 
with acceptable strength and fire safety. 
Biodegradable goods Because of its plentiful resources, India has a 
significant potential for generating bioplastics. Bio-based plastics are 
familiar to roughly 63% of consumers in India, according to a DuPont poll 
[44]. According to Frost & Sullivan, the annual growth rate of the bioplastics 
market in 2015 is expected to be 44.8% [45]. In India, the bioplastics busi­
ness is constantly improving, and several firms have begun to investigate 
manufacturing. 
17.7.1 PLASTIC WASTE IN ROAD LAYING 
The need to improve the condition of roads and pavements is always present. 
Plastic garbage is being used for this purpose in a number of places across 
India. The type of modifier used in the road-laying process is determined by 
cost and performance expectations. The dry process and the wet process are 
the two basic techniques for modification. In the dry method, waste plastic 
is blended with aggregates before being added to bitumen, but in the wet 
process, bitumen, and plastic are combined simultaneously. 
For a long period, better results were seen with polymer-modified [45], 
which showed higher durability and improved fatigue resistance of roadways 
made mostly of PP and LDPE in bituminous concrete mixes. 
The protocol for the road-laying process is simple. Plastic waste is first 
segregated (except chlorinated/brominated plastic waste) and then shredded 
to a particular size (2–4 mm). The shredded plastic waste is then added to 

 
 
506 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
the aggregate and the bitumen is heated to 160°C to result in good binding. 
Jambulingam Street in Chennai was one of India’s first plastic roads built in 
2002. 
The MoU was signed between the KK Plastic Waste Management Ltd, 
Bengaluru, and Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike (BBMP) for make 
250 km road in Karnataka in the year 2003–2004. After the polymer roads 
made, it was examined that durable with fewer potholes and flaws of edge as 
reported by the CPCB, thus getting sustenance from inventers and legislators 
in India and adjacent countries. It was highly appreciated and supported by 
the Indian Center for Plastic in the Environment (ICPE) for using the plastic 
wastes to make tar roads. The National Rural Road Development Agency 
(NRDA) made roads about 7,500 km by using waste plastic in 2015–2016. 
In India still now more than 21,000 miles of road prepared by utilizing the 
waste plastics with 3.75 m width by using plastic wastes about one ton 
(10,00,000 carry bags). 
This helps to significantly reduce plastic waste management while also 
preserving petrochemical resources. Plastic co-processing Waste materials 
are used as an alternative fuel or raw material in industrial operations such as 
cement factories, which is known as co-processing. Plastic trash, separated 
non-recyclable MSW, and chosen hazardous garbage might be used as an 
alternative fuel and raw material, therefore eliminating the need for coal. 
Cement plants provide the best chance to strike a balance between resource 
efficiency and waste control. Coal and petroleum coke, for example, have 
long been employed as energy sources in the cement producing business. 
17.7.2 MODEL FOR AN EFFECTIVE DECENTRALIZED SOLID WASTE 
MANAGEMENT (SWM) 
A paradigm for regionalized management of waste with waste-treating 
methods, such as decomposing, RDF, and co-managing of RDF/waste plastic 
in cement ovens. Decision of plastic utilization is constantly increasing due 
to development in urban area and the increasing global demand. Even though 
the increasing rates of plastic manufacturing project absolutely for Indian 
industries and the market, unempirical approaches of waste management 
are leading undesirable environment causes. This demands for effective 
planning, amalgamation of “strategy for environment perception,” improve 
end use products and management of waste plastics with viable solutions 
and substitutes. Management strategies must develop by municipalities 

 
507 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
accordance the scientific recommendation for the prepare utilization of waste 
plastics and formulate the rules and regulations for manufactures to ensure 
as per the extended producers responsibility (EPR) planning and combined 
implementation. Moreover, India may take away its crucial from the best 
methods from across the world on the precise evaluating of carry bags and 
its importance in defining social changes. Though a plastics prohibition may 
purpose at limiting manufacture and usage, there is a requirement to notify 
the economics, pertinence, and accessibility of substitutes. Nevertheless, the 
utilization of use and throw plastics such as carry bags, cutlery, etc., may be 
minimized with an intention to lessen amounts of plastics end up in landfill. 
However solid waste including plastic waste managing comes under 
the responsibilities of urban local bodies (ULB), there is a necessity for 
confirming the economic feasibility of a provision that collects every day. 
New economical mechanisms may be conceived to improve user-fee/SWM 
fees collection to confirm improved profits flows for the ULBs. To incentivize 
reprocessing, advanced financial strategies may be formulated and executed 
to encourage citizens to reprocess and make certain maximum distraction of 
waste plastics. 
Utilization of plastics prepared by bio-based with degradable nature 
approach to maintain able substitutes to reduce synthetic plastic usage 
and waste minimization. The utilization of biodegradable plastic must be 
promoted in large-scale purposes, such as producing of mulch films for 
agriculture, wastewater treatment superabsorbent composites usage, and 
continuous discharge of pesticides. There is an additional requirement for 
the high production and marketing of these products through an acceleration 
of researchers and manufacturer collaboration. As bio-plastics is an evolving 
field, there is significant scope for investigation and innovation that could 
be assisted either through government/industry financing supporting or by 
both. Though reprocessing is the most appropriate strategies for tackling 
waste plastic as per the waste grading, the execution of the same is handled 
with challenges, such as a shortage of source separation and recovery. The 
households are the major generators as categorized in CIPET-CPCB report. 
17.8 THE WAY AHEAD 
Detailed planning of source waste quantified, and related physical character­
istics is important for the application of efficient management of waste plastic 
processes in cities. Design a management of waste plastic strategy and EPR 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
508 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
types will take the lead to effective end usage and improved manufacture. 
Furthermore, ULBs can also investigate reorganized waste management 
standards (community) to confirm enhanced performance as proposed to the 
SWM code of the 2016. Innovative funding mechanisms incentives grants 
to develop recycled and io-based plastic products and alternatives that can 
help accelerate research and innovation and awareness about the market. The 
management of waste plastic requires to be measured on a case-by-case basis 
varying on weather and geographical location. Choices and environmental 
waste plastic management need efficient participant commitment and facility 
building. The problem with the biodegradation of polymers lies in their own 
nature which prevents the polymer from breaking down into monomers. 
Indeed, microbial enzyme systems are useless for synthetic polymers 
that cannot be hydrolyzed. The presence and activity of polymer-degrading 
microorganisms varies with the prevailing environmental conditions. There­
fore, our evaluation recommendations can be listed as follows: 
•  The biodegradation process and related parameters require further 
studies to investigate the ability of other microorganisms to degrade 
macromolecular materials and to detect their enzymatic degradation 
systems. 
•  A microbial community could make plastic biodegradation more effi­
cient. In addition, molecular engineering techniques can provide the 
ability for microorganisms to the genetically engineered with specific 
functional genes integrated into their genomes. 
•  The use of molecular techniques is imperative when identifying the 
most efficient polymer-degrading microorganisms. With this in mind 
research should focus on the areas of proteomics and genomics. 
•  Algae biodegradation as an emerging recycling technique may be 
better than bacterial or fungal biodegradation because algal biodeg­
radation does not require specific pretreatment or a caron source 
abundant. 
•  We must emphasize the role of free radical-generating algae to enhance 
the biodegradation of various plastic polymers since their oxidative 
stress increases the polarity of the plastic polymer and facilitates the 
biodegradation process biodegradation. 
•  The special behavior of plasticizing insects should be considered for 
exploitation in industrial applications and provides a road platform 
for scientific research. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
509 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
•  The replacement of biochemically inert polymers with biodegradable 
polymers (bioplastics) is strongly encouraged. In this context the use 
of newly marketed polymers such as polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) 
or polylactides should be extended in industrial applications. 
•  The application of nanotechnology in the production of plastics can 
overcome the defects in the biodegradation of plastics and regulate 
the rate of biodegradation. 
•  It is not sustainable or suitable to eliminate all plastic from society, but 
potential alternatives can show the potency to displace conventional 
plastic products and reducing deflation plastic waste generation. The 
use of alternatives should be part of a broader strategy towards more 
sustainable production methods particularly for packaging and other 
single-use items including principles redesign reduce and facilitate 
recycling. 
•  It is necessary to balance the goal of reducing plastic packaging waste 
with reducing food waste and increasing the use of waste from the 
agriculture as a source of natural fibers and as raw materials for the 
production of film forming agents biological. 
•  Biofilm forming agents from biomass such as poly(lactic acid) 
polyhydroxylkanoate and thermoplastic starch have great potential 
especially for packaging and other single uses. 
Their advertising as a “greener” alternative is unreasonable without the 
efficient provision of industrial composting or anaerobic digestion (AD) 
facilities. 
17.9 CONCLUSION 
Plastics have been widely used due to their unique properties and are therefore 
considered as one of the most essential materials in our lives. However, the 
hazardous effects of plastic waste are directly proportional to their use and 
accumulation in the environment. Correspondingly the properties of plastic 
materials are considered a real challenge to microbial degradation or even 
microbial colonization of their surfaces. Many researchers have reported that 
the involvement of certain microorganisms and invertebrate species in the 
biodegradation of plastics has revealed their fundamental role in the biodeg­
radation of plastics. Our review has since emphasized the role and importance 
of pre-treatment (physical and/or chemical) as a first and often important 
step in the microbial degradation of plastic polymers. Furthermore, the mode 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
510 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
of action and mechanism of microbial degradation requires further studies 
to detect the efficient enzyme system corresponding to the polymer material 
being tested. Therefore, our review can help demonstrate an environmentally 
friendly bio-recycling technique to remediate the accumulation of plastic 
waste. Our investigation indicates that lignin-degrading microorganisms’ 
algae plastic-eating insects and other invertebrates may utilize for the future 
plastic biodegradation. Finally, an efficient eco-friendly inexpensive and 
socially acceptable plastic decomposition technique is not yet available and 
thus further research is needed to develop new technologies for decomposing 
plastic waste. Statement of competitive interest. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
circularity 
• 
microbial degradation 
• 
plastic biodegraders 
• 
plastic waste 
• 
polyethylene microbial degradation 
• 
polymer degradation 
• 
road laying 
• 
solid waste management 
REFERENCES 
1. Shahnawaz, M., Sangale, M. K., & Ade, A. B., (2019). Case studies and recent update 
of plastic waste degradation. Bioremediation Technol. Plast. Waste, 31–43. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/978-981-13-7492-0_4. 
2. Karingadayil, S. T., (2016). General introduction 1. From Darkn. to Light, 1–9. https:// 
doi.org/10.3726/978-3-653-00912-5/5. 
3. Rimer, A. L., Bechtold, D. O., Brown, S. L., Craig, R. K., Llp, B., Grover, S. B., Keith, 
E. F., et al., (2020). Natural Resources & Environment, 35
 
(2). 
4. CPCB, (2019). Annual Report for the year 2018–2019 on Implementation of Plastic 
Waste Management Rules (As per Rule ‘17(4)’ of PWM Rules, 2018). 
5. Proshad, R., Kormoker, T., Islam, M. S., Haque, M. A., Rahman, M. M., & Mithu, M. M. 
R., (2017). Toxic effects of plastic on human health and environment: A consequences 
of health risk assessment in Bangladesh. Int. J. Heal., 6(1), 1. https://doi.org/10.14419/ 
ijh.v6i1.8655. 

 
511 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
6. Rochman, C. M., Hoh, E., Hentschel, B. T., & Kaye, S., (2013). Classify plastic waste as 
hazardous (types of externalities caused by consumption of plastic bags). Environ. Sci. 
Technol., 47(3), 1646–1654. 
7. Koelmans, A. A., Besseling, E., Foekema, E., Kooi, M., Mintenig, S., Ossendorp, B. C., 
Redondo-Hasselerharm, P. E., et al., (2017). Risks of plastic debris: Unravelling fact, 
opinion, perception, and belief. Environ. Sci. Technol., 51(20), 11513–11519. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b02219. 
8. Derraik, J. G. B., (2002). The pollution of the marine environment by plastic 
debris: A review
 
. Mar. Pollut. Bull., 44(9), 842–852. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0025-326X(02)00220-5. 
9. Barnes, D. K. A., Galgani, F., Thompson, R. C., & Barlaz, M., (2009). Accumulation 
and fragmentation of plastic debris in global environments. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B 
Biol. Sci., 364 (1526), 1985–1998. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2008.0205. 
10. Kaiser, J., (2010). The dirt on ocean garbage patches. Science (80), 328(5985), 1506. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.328.5985.1506. 
11. Wilcox, C., Van, S. E., Hardesty, B. D., & Estes, J. A., (2015). Threat of plastic pollution 
to seabirds is global, pervasive, and increasing. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 112(38), 
11899–11904. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1502108112. 
12. Jambeck, J. R., Geyer, R., Wilcox, C., Siegler, T. R., Perryman, M., Andrady, A., 
Narayan, R., & Law, K. L., (2015). Entradas de residuos plásticos desde la tierra al 
océano. Ciencia, 347(6223), 768–771. 
13. Hahladakis, J. N., Velis, C. A., Weber, R., Iacovidou, E., & Purnell, P., (2018). An 
overview of chemical additives present in plastics: Migration, release, fate and 
environmental impact during their use, disposal and recycling. J. Hazard. Mater., 344, 
179–199. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2017.10.014. 
14. Achilias, D. S., Giannoulis, A., & Papageorgiou, G. Z., (2009). Recycling of polymers 
from plastic packaging materials using the dissolution-reprecipitation technique. Polym. 
Bull., 63(3), 449–465. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00289-009-0104-5. 
15. Achilias, D. S., Roupakias, C., Megalokonomos, P., Lappas, A. A., & Antonakou, 
V., (2007). Chemical recycling of plastic wastes made from polyethylene (LDPE 
and HDPE) and polypropylene (PP). J. Hazard. Mater., 149(3), 536–542. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2007.06.076. 
16. Reimonn, G., Lu, T., Gandhi, N., & Chen, W. T ., (2019). Review of microplastic 
pollution in the environment and emerging recycling solutions. J. Renew. Mater., 7(12), 
1251–1268. https://doi.org/10.32604/jrm.2019.08055. 
17. Peterson, A. A., Vogel, F., Lachance, R. P., Fröling, M., Antal, M. J., & Tester, J. W., 
(2008). Thermochemical biofuel production in hydrothermal media: A review of sub- 
and supercritical water technologies. Energy Environ. Sci., 1(1), 32–65. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/b810100k. 
18. Kraft, S., & Vogel, F., (2017). Estimation of binary diffusion coefficients in supercritical 
water: Mini review. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 56(16), 4847–4855. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acs.iecr.7b00382. 
19. Ali, S. S., Sun, J., Koutra, E., El-Zawawy, N., Elsamahy, T., & El-Shetehy, M., (2021). 
Construction of a novel cold-adapted oleaginous yeast consortium valued for textile 
azo dye wastewater processing and biorefinery. Fuel, 285(2020), 119050. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.119050. 

 
512 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
20. Savage, P. E., (2009). A perspective on catalysis in sub- and supercritical water. J. 
Supercrit. Fluids, 47(3), 407–414. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.supflu.2008.09.007. 
21. Chen, W. T., Jin, K., & Linda, W. N. H., (2019). Use of supercritical water for the 
liquefaction of polypropylene into oil. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 7(4), 3749–3758. 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b03841. 
22. Moriya, T., & Enomoto, H., (1999). Characteristics of polyethylene cracking in 
supercritical water compared to thermal cracking. Polym. Degrad. Stab., 65(3), 
373–386. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0141-3910(99)00026-9. 
23. Ali, S. S., Elsamahy, T., Koutra, E., Kornaros, M., El-Sheekh, M., Abdelkarim, E. A., Zhu, 
D., & Sun, J., (2021). Degradation of conventional plastic wastes in the environment: 
A review on current status of knowledge and future perspectives of disposal. Sci. Total 
Environ., 771, 144719. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.144719. 
24. Sánchez, C., (2020). Fungal potential for the degradation of petroleum-based polymers: 
An overview of macro- and microplastics biodegradation. Biotechnol. Adv., 40, 107501. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biotechadv.2019.107501. 
25. Ameen, F., Moslem, M., Hadi, S., & Al-Sabri, A. E., (2015). Biodegradation of low-density 
polyethylene (LDPE) by mangrove fungi from the red sea coast. Prog. Rubber, Plast. 
Recycl. Technol., 31(2), 125–144. https://doi.org/10.1177/147776061503100204. 
26. Ali, S. S., Mustafa, A. M., Kornaros, M., Manni, A., Sun, J., & Khalil, M. A., (2020). 
Construction of novel microbial consortia CS-5 and BC-4 valued for the degradation 
of catalpa sawdust and chlorophenols simultaneously with enhancing methane 
production. Bioresour. Technol., 301 (2019), 122720. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biortech.2019.122720. 
27. Ali, S. S., Elsamahy, T., Al-Tohamy, R., Zhu, D., Mahmoud, Y. A. G., Koutra, E., 
Metwally, M. A., et al., (2021). Plastic wastes biodegradation: Mechanisms, challenges 
and future prospects. Sci. Total Environ., 780, 146590. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
scitotenv.2021.146590. 
28. Al-Tohamy, R., Sun, J., Fareed, M. F., Kenawy, E. R., & Ali, S. S., (2020). Ecofriendly 
biodegradation of reactive black 5 by newly isolated Sterigmatomyces halophilus  
SSA1575, valued for textile azo dye wastewater processing and detoxification. Sci. 
Rep., 10(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-69304-4. 
29. Muhonja, C. N., Makonde, H., Magoma, G., & Imbuga, M., (2018). Biodegradability of 
polyethylene by bacteria and fungi from Dandora dumpsite Nairobi-Kenya. PLoS One, 
13(7), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0198446. 
30. Amobonye, A., Bhagwat, P., Singh, S., & Pillai, S., (2021). Plastic Biodegradation: 
Frontline Microbes and Their Enzymes (Vol. 759). Elsevier B.V. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2020.143536. 
31. Watanabe, M., Hirakoso, H., Sawamoto, S., Tadafumi, A., & Arai, K., (1998). 
Polyethylene conversion in supercritical water. J. Supercrit. Fluids, 13(1–3), 247–252. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-8446(98)00058-8. 
32. Jin, K., Vozka, P., Kilaz, G., Chen, W. T., & Wang, N. H. L., (2020). Conversion of 
polyethylene waste into clean fuels and waxes via hydrothermal processing (HTP). 
Fuel, 273, 117726. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fuel.2020.117726. 
33. Seshasayee, M. S., & Savage, P. E., (2020). Oil from plastic via hydrothermal 
liquefaction: Production and characterization. Appl. Energy, 278, 115673. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.115673. 

 
513 
Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes by Microbial Cells 
34.  Chen, W. T., Haque, M. A., Lu, T., Aierzhati, A., & Reimonn, G., (2020). A perspective 
on hydrothermal processing of sewage sludge. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Heal., 14, 
63–73. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.coesh.2020.02.008. 
35.  Zhang, C. C., & Zhang, F. S., (2020). Enhanced dehalogenation and coupled recovery of 
complex electronic display housing plastics by sub/supercritical CO2. J. Hazard. Mater., 
382(2019), 121140. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2019.121140. 
36. Oikawa, E., Linn, K. T., Endo, T., Oikawa, T., & Ishibashi, Y., (2003). Isolation of 
bacteria which could decompose styrene and polystyrene as carbon source was achieved 
to actualize the biological zero emission treatment of expanded polystyrene. Environ. 
Eng. Res., 40, 373–379. 
37. El-Shafei, H. A., Abd El-Nasser, N. H., Kansoh, A. L., & Ali, A. M., (1998). 
Biodegradation of disposable polyethylene by fungi and streptomyces species. Polym. 
Degrad. Stab., 62(2), 361–365. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0141-3910(98)00019-6. 
38. Engel, P., & Moran, N. A., (2013). The gut microbiota of insects – diversity 
in structure and function. FEMS Microbiol. Rev., 37(5), 699–735. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/1574-6976.12025. 
39. Esmaeili, A., Pourbabaee, A. A., Alikhani, H. A., Shabani, F., & Esmaeili, E., (2013). 
Biodegradation of low-density polyethylene (LDPE) by mixed culture of Lysinibacillus 
xylanilyticus and Aspergillus Niger in soil. PLoS One, 8(9). https://doi.org/10.1371/ 
journal.pone.0071720. 
40. Filip, Z., & Giessen, U., (1979). Polyurethane as the sole nutrient source for Aspergillus 
niger  and Cladosporium herbarum. European Journal of Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 7, 277–280. 
41. Fotopoulou, K. N., & Karapanagioti, H. K., (2019). Degradation of various plastics in the 
environment. Handb. Environ. Chem., 78, 71–92. https://doi.org/10.1007/698_2017_11. 
42. Garcia, J. M., & Robertson, M. L., (2017). The future of plastics recycling. Science 
(80-)., 358(6365), 870–872. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaq0324. 
43. Gaytán, I., Sánchez-Reyes, A., Burelo, M., Vargas-Suárez, M., Liachko, I., Press, M., 
Sullivan, S., et al., (2020). Degradation of recalcitrant polyurethane and xenobiotic 
additives by a selected landfill microbial community and its biodegradative potential 
revealed by proximity ligation-based metagenomic analysis. Front. Microbiol., 10. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2019.02986. 
44. Hakkarainen, K., Ilomäki, L., Lipponen, L., Muukkonen, H., Rahikainen, M., Tuominen, 
T., Lakkala, M., & Lehtinen, E., (2000). Students’ skills and practices of using ICT: 
Results of a national assessment in Finland. Comput. Educ., 34(2), 103–117. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S0360-1315(00)00007-5. 
45. Hong, Y., & Gu, J. D., (2009). Bacterial anaerobic respiration and electron transfer 
relevant to the biotransformation of pollutants. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad., 63(8), 
973–980. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibiod.2009.08.001. 


Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 18  
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using 
Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support: 
An Eco-Technological Approach 
SILAMBARASAN TAMIL SELVAN,1 BALASUBRAMANIAN VELRAMAR,2 
RAVI KUMAR CHANDRASEKARAN,3 DHANDAPANI RAMAMURTHY,4 and 
PRABHU MANICKAM NATARAJAN5 
1Department of Microbiology, School of Allied Health Sciences, 
Vinayaka Missions Research Foundation (Deemed to be University), 
Salem, Tamil Nadu, India 
2Department of Microbiology, School of Biosciences, School of 
Microbiology, Periyar University, Salem, Tamil Nadu, India 
3Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, India 
4Department of Physics, Thanthai Periyar EVR Government Polytechnic 
College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India 
5Department of Clinical Sciences, Center of Medical and Bio-Allied Health 
Sciences and Research, College of Dentistry, Ajman University, Ajman, 
UAE 
ABSTRACT 
The fact that carbon dioxide (CO2) is concerned to be a primary contributor 
to the greenhouse effects, and, consequently, global warming and rising 
CO2 emissions into the atmosphere are generating an ecological and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
516 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
anthropogenic crisis. Over 1 million small, medium, and large-scale 
industries worldwide, including the petrochemical, chemical, steel, rubber, 
polymer, and agrochemical industries. In a single year, 7 million tons of 
metric petroleum products are produced, as well as 10 million tons of 
rubber and 15 million tons of polymer. Around 1 million tons of CO2 flu 
gas and 5 million tons of untreated waste are also created. Presently, there 
are several physical and chemical treatment strategies accessible for the 
CO2 adsorption process, such as ion exchange, filtration, and adsorption 
methods. They are extremely expensive, and they harm the environment by 
releasing secondary toxins into the atmosphere. As an alternative, a low-
cost, environmentally acceptable microalgal bioabsorption technique is 
readily available. Microalgae, in addition to terrestrial plants, physical and 
chemical approaches, can reduce and absorb CO2 at a rate that is more than 
20 times more efficient than terrestrial plants. RuBisCO and Acetyl CoA 
carboxylase enzymes are involved in the primary process in algal cells for 
CO2 adsorption and utilization. Photosynthetic organisms turn atmospheric 
CO2 into energy, hence increasing the bioabsorption of CO2 and serving as 
an essential climate change approach. 
18.1 INTRODUCTION 
Since 1859, greenhouse gases (GHGs) like carbon dioxide (CO2) concentra­
tions were elevated in the earth environment and prime responsible for rising 
temperatures in the Earth’s atmosphere. The atmospheric CO2 level will rise 
from 290 ppm to 400 ppm, causing global warming. The United Kingdom was 
the largest CO2 emitter around the period of the French Revolution (1850) and 
its emissions were about six times and placed world’s second highest pres­
ently; with Belgium, the US, France, and Germany are the top five emitters. 
China, led by America, India, Japan, and Russia, was the world’s greatest 
emitter in 2019 [1]. In 2019, its pollution was 273 higher than in 1850, 
whereas the United States was the world’s second-largest issuer in both years 
[1]. Similar densities, increasing emissions over time, were imposed in other 
nations. However, the paths of civilization appear to be very different. Learn 
the visual history of these 160-year regional and worldwide CO2 pollution 
milestones [2, 3]. In 2019, per capita emissions also varied greatly among the 
top 10 CO2 emitters. Saudi Arabia and the US produced more than 16 million 
tons of GHGs compared to China and India, but they also increased their 
emissions by 6.7 and 1.5 million tons each year [1–3]. Asia was the world’s 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
517 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
largest national manufacturer in 1994. A significant part of the reason Asia 
eventually became the top CO2 emitter was China’s rapid economic expansion. 
Historically, Europe, and North America have contributed the most to global 
emissions at the end of 2019, Asia generated almost half the country’s CO2 
emissions. Asian-per-capita emissions were also much lower than in Western 
regions. CO2 pollution has shifted in developed and developing economies in 
the last 21st century [2, 3]. CO2 is significantly lower in atmospheric trace gas 
concentration than oxygen and nitrogen. This trace gas thus serves a critical 
function in protecting terrestrial life and controlling the planetary atmosphere 
through trapping. Approximately 95% of CO2 is stored in the atmosphere, 
as opposed to the oceans, atmosphere, and soil biomes. The atmosphere’s 
greater carbon concentration 90–100 Pg of carbon travels between the sea 
and the air surface. While these conversion rates indicate the amount of 
atmospheric carbon overall, the CO2 concentration stagnated at a density of 
280 ppm for at least 1,000 years before the industrial. The CO2 concentrations 
in the atmosphere are increased to post-industrial era, and keep increasing 
because of direct human actions such as deforestation and carbon burning. In 
the previous 150 years, CO2 levels have increased by 30% (280–370 ppm) in 
the atmosphere. Mostly CO2 accumulation is due to fossil fuels burning and 
other human activities. This accumulated atmospheric endogenous CO2 acts 
as a greenhouse gas, capturing long-wave (thermal) energy and responsible 
for the global working and climate change. The consumption of CO2 by the 
seafloor has little effect on the global thermal balance and air-water informa­
tion [4]. CO2 transmission is a component of the global climate platform’s 
understanding of the repercussions of future CO2 emissions. In the current 
situation, the ocean must remove CO2 from non-anthropogenic (human­
derived) CO2 released into the environment as a result of human activities 
[1]. CO2 emissions also responsible for the increased ozone layer damage 
through atmospheric interaction [1]. The increase in CO2 emissions from 
compounds including chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) between 1980 and 1990 
was 5.8% per decade, primarily responsible for depleting stratospheric ozone. 
The increase in coal combustion over the past decade was 1.4%, according 
to the measurements from TOMS and Dobson indicate an increase of 4.4% 
per decade. Increasing ozone depletion does not affect N2O emissions. Due to 
the increased CO2 emissions, stratospheric temperatures may fall, which may 
exacerbate ozone depletion [5, 6]. These interactions will accelerate ozone 
hole regeneration in the next few decades. In the next few decades, these 
interactions will accelerate the regeneration of the ozone hole. By reducing 
the stratospheric temperature, it would speed up ozone depletion by several 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
518 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
years without further ozone depletion, since polar stratospheric clusters can 
be produced in broad portions of the planet. The atmosphere is between the 
greenhouse effect and ozone depletion from the perspective of past and future 
human activity induced by CFCs, halons, CH4, N2O, NxO, CO2 and other 
sources of pollution [7, 8]. The troposphere is used to model conditions and 
assess stratospheric ozone damage. A thinner ozone layer allows more ultra­
violet radiation to penetrate the upper atmosphere, which is responsible for 
the decrease in CH4 lifespan as well as a 6% increase in atmospheric oxida­
tion on a global scale. This depicts the thermosphere and greenhouse effect 
changes in the ozone layer. Historically, however, fluctuations in atmospheric 
ozone levels and the expected future have been too minor to even have major 
compositional consequences. Changes in CO, NxO, and CH4 emissions could 
have a substantially bigger influence. Estimates of the mid-latitude ozone 
layer will be 1.9% below 1990 levels in 2020 [9]. This chapter is describing 
the source of CO2, importance of CO2 capturing, possible efficient ways 
for adsorption, mechanism of CO2 capturing and application of genetically 
engineering for adsorbing the CO2. The CO2 capture is considered an impor­
tant technology for reducing CO2 emissions and reducing global warming. 
Most CO2 capture technologies can prevent over 90% of CO2 output from 
stationary sources. Three main technological routes are available to capture 
CO2 from the environment: chemical, physical, and biological. Chemical and 
physical technologies use chemical-based solvents and highly expressive 
methods, respectively. The biological process captured and generated many 
secondary metabolites and by products viz., biofuels, polymers, bioactive 
compounds, pigments, and more. There are several biomolecules produced by 
the biological fixation of atmospheric CO2, which uses photosynthesis. There 
are six different photosynthetic pathways and some non-photosynthetic path­
ways to fix atmospheric CO2 discovered in bacteria, fungi, yeast, algae, and 
other species. Plants, algae, bacteria, fungi, yeast, and other microorganisms 
serve as natural CO2 filters. The cultivation of algae is becoming increasingly 
popular due to their ability to fix carbon and use CO2. These microalgae are 
the most efficient at using CO2 and fixing carbon compared to other microbes, 
and are widely used on a large scale farm. 
18.1.1 EFFECT ON ECOSYSTEM BY CO2 
The CO2 is naturally occupying up to 4% of total atmospheric gas mixture. 
It is an essential component carbon cycles where fixed to carbon base via 

 
 
 
519 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
photosynthetic activity, which results in the production of plant energy and 
food will enter in to food chain. The rise in CO2 levels in the atmosphere 
have detrimental effect on carbon cycle have climatic effect. Due to indus­
trialization and over exploration of hydrocarbon base for anthropogenic 
needs during the industrialization of the world has elevated the CO2 foot­
print [4]. The deforestation and urbanization also added the acceleration 
for the increasing CO2 emissions. The CO2 is responsible for misbalancing 
the total atmospheric gases percentage. The equilibrium between CO2 and 
other atmospheric gases, on the other hand, is getting more difficult. The 
significant change in a short period of time was the source of the CO2 
problem and contributes to the pollution of the environment with dangerous 
substances [10, 11]. Global warming would be another one CO2 influence 
from air and water pollution, as would be the case with global warming. 
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) conducted 
a study to determine the average temperature of the earth’s surface over the 
past century. CO2 is the most significant contributor, according to geologists 
[12]. The outcomes are extremely convoluted. Actual evidence, on the other 
hand, indicates that seawater levels are rising, resulting in the depletion of 
marine and seashore habitats. Acid build-up causes by the consumption of 
energy from hydrocarbon-fuel power plants, which combines with water 
vapor. Acid rain causes runoff and water to accumulate. Pollution’s adapt­
ability is a possible source of concern. CO2 emissions create health concerns 
by altering the composition of the atmosphere’s oxygen. When CO2 levels 
rise, breathing becomes more difficult. High CO2 levels in confined places 
can cause health problems such as migraines [13]. 
Every year, the Earth’s atmosphere and surface absorb more than 3,800 
zettajoules (1 zettajoule = 1,31,021 joules) of solar energy, and photo­
synthesis captures about 0.05% and converts it into biomass. Producing, 
degrading, and accumulating biomass are all essential elements of the global 
carbon cycle. When ecosystems are well-balanced, carbon is absorbed 
through photosynthesis, stored in the ground and in the ocean, and released 
out by biogeochemical processes. The industrial age came an increase in 
carbon emissions from fossil fuels and biomass, as well as a decrease in 
carbon absorption from deforestation and crop losses that caused turbulence 
in CO2 balance (in the 1850s). Today, fossil fuels account for the majority 
of world energy production, comprising more than 80% of global energy 
production. The burning of fossil fuels currently dominates world energy 
generation, accounting for more than 80% of total yearly worldwide power 
generation. Carbon emissions due to direct combustion of carbon contribute 

 
 
 
 
520 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
to atmospheric CO2 concentrations rising from 295 to 380 parts per million 
in the last century. This has led to global warming, climate change, and the 
extinction of numerous species. The most cost-effective solution for reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions associated with energy production is to generate 
electricity from carbon-neutral or low-carbon sources [14, 15]. 
18.2 SOURCES OF CO2 EMISSION 
18.2.1 THERMAL POWER PLANT 
The CO2 gas emissions from thermal power plants, global warming appears 
to have become a major source of concern around the world. The global 
temperatures are predicted to rise from 1.4 to 5.8°C by 2,100. The primary 
GHGs that contribute to the greenhouse climate change impacts are methane 
(CH4), CO2, nitrous oxide (N2O) and CFCs. The CO2 contributes 54%, CH4 
contributes 15%, N2O contributes 6%, and CFCs contribute 25% of the 
greenhouse gas emissions’ effects. CO2 is the most polluting pollutant and 
is responsible for most of the global warming [9, 12]. It also provides the 
greatest amount to total emissions. The use of coal in the power generation 
process has increased throughout the world. According to current estimates, 
coal combustion accounts for 98% of CO2 emissions, with the remaining 
30% to 40% of world CO2 emissions coming from other coal and oil combus­
tion sources. The coal-fired power plants generated the biggest amount of 
electricity and released the biggest amount of CO2. Coal-fired combustion is 
responsible for approximately 46% of world energy generation, according to 
official statistics. By 2025, coal combustion will account for nearly 41% of 
total global CO2 emissions, according to the International Energy Agency. A 
long-term ecosystem, increased use of coal to generate electricity (which is 
critical for the operation of a thermal power plant), and dangerous emissions 
of sulfur oxides (SOx), CO2, NOx, and other pollutants into the atmosphere 
are all necessary for the operation of a thermal power plant [11]. 
18.2.2 PETROCHEMICAL INDUSTRIES 
The refining of crude oil necessitates the use of energy and oil refineries are 
currently the second greatest emitters of GHGs after power plants, according 
to the International Energy Agency. The combustion of waste products from 
crude oil results in the release of CO2, which can be removed using solid acid 

 
 
 
 
521 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
catalysts. In a chemical reaction, the silicon dioxide alumina content, which 
has a high electronegative acidity, donates hydrogen ions (protons) and CO2 
[16]. The most significant sources of GHGs from petroleum refineries were 
static combustion processing systems (stem boilers, process furnaces, and 
structure heating systems). Catalysts, liquid coking units, delayed coking 
units, katalytic reform modules, coke calcining units, steam systems, 
pumping stations, leakage of machinery, cargo activity, flares, including 
desulfurization induced by environmental pollution from the petrochemical 
industry, are all examples of sources of pollution [17]. CO2 emissions from 
these activities and from the combustion of fossil fuels. It is possible that 
they observed an increase in CO2 emissions of more than 20% during the oil 
refining process across the whole oil refinery sector. That’s double the price 
of crude oil, or more than 2 million barrels of oil every day, which is twice 
the cost of crude oil. Carbon emissions from fossil fuels such as petroleum 
products, which contain important chemicals such as polyethylene (PE) and 
polyvinyl chloride (PVC), are estimated in the national greenhouse gas emis­
sions (GHG). Coal is used in the described process to convert the necessary 
chemicals, namely PE and PVC. The maximum IPCC storage fraction for 
naphtha was 75%, according to the IPCC. The Oil Refineries Sector ranks 
third among industrialized resources in terms of greenhouse gas (GHG) emis­
sions, behind only power plants, oil, and natural gas networks, and cement 
factories. The oil refining business is ranked second in terms of greenhouse 
gas emissions per factory and has an estimated ability to emitted 1.22 million 
metric tons of CO2 equivalent, which is second only to the power station 
sector [16–18]. 
18.2.3 POLYMER INDUSTRIES 
Plastics play an important role in today’s and tomorrow’s sustainable society. 
Food preservation, food waste reduction, becoming vital components of 
residential architecture and construction methods, enabling architectural 
design of a higher caliber, and efficient energy generation as an isolating 
material for cables are all benefits of using PE. Plastics provide a multitude 
of environmental alternatives, including the reduction and development of 
new greenhouse gas emissions in a variety of other industries. However, 
it is likely that understanding has increased during the previous few years 
[19]. The problem of polymeric goods aggregation in aquatic ecosystems 
has risen to the top of the global priority list, owing primarily to a recent 

 
 
 
522 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
study that concluded that, if current trends continue, our seas could contain 
many times more polymers than fish by 2050 [20]. Although plastics are 
currently dominated as a raw material by petroleum fractions, the underlying 
problem of infrastructure utilization during the manufacturing process has 
gone largely unnoticed in public discourse. Even though the Bakelite synthe­
sized polymer was introduced to the market almost at the beginning of the 
20th century, it was not until the development of modern petrochemicals that 
polymers or synthetic organic polymers became widely used in manufac­
turing. In 1950, the world’s total production was approximately 2 tons. This 
increased to approximately 15 tons in 1964, and it is now approximately 
335 tons. Industrial production plants were the third greatest source of CO2 
emissions in the United States in 2018. The demand for transferring raw 
resources, such as greenhouse gas emissions, from fossil fuels to biobased 
feedstocks has increased in recent years [21]. 
18.2.4 TRANSPORT 
The growing population of India and economic development have led to an 
increase in emissions from transportation. Emission levels and the impact 
of control policies implemented must be quantized at frequent intervals. 
Conviction over time is affected by the policies implemented. An age-specific 
emission analysis framework for the road transport industry with up-to-date 
traits corresponding to vehicle age was therefore developed in the present 
report. The results indicate an estimated fuel consumption of 90 (87–95) 
Mt. Total fuel emissions, including CO2, PM, and NOx, are estimated at 282 
Tg, 4,234 Gg, 171 Gg and 2,292 Gg for the reference year 2020. The study 
helps to develop the 2020 fleet inventory used as a benchmark to compare 
previous inventories of emissions, to evaluate control policies, to evaluate 
state-of-the-art vehicle emission emissions, and to identify substantial fleet 
emissions. The sensitivity analysis indicates that total emissions from various 
vehicle age mixes vary significantly [22]. 
According to 2018 statistics, the transportation sector was responsible 
for 25% of global fuel combustion (CO2) emissions. It is the fastest growing 
sector and a major contributor to global emissions of GHGs. It is the third 
most carbon emission sector in India and has contributed more than 90% of 
the total emissions of carbon by road transport within the transport sector. 
Emissions of greenhouse gas (GHG) were 70% CO2 and 30% non-CO2 
(methane, nitro-oxide, flu gas) in India. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
523 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
18.3 MANAGEMENT OF CO2 EMISSION 
Carbon capture is long back objective of global scientists in post-industrial 
era. The routes initiated utilizing physical or chemical process and devised 
technologies presently implemented by various established industries. The 
national policy made the stringent regulations to implement this to reduce 
the emissions. Though the methods developed looks promising, many new 
technologies are still developing for better efficiency. Other than traditional 
physical/chemical process; biological capture coming into light for its better 
efficiency and ease of adopting various microbial systems for the purpose. In 
this section, a brief discussion of these technologies is made. 
18.3.1 PHYSICAL PROCESS 
The many Asian countries are still dependent on coal power and cannot 
completely replace it with renewable energy systems due to the low cost 
and reliability. However, the International Energy Agency states that nuclear 
power and renewable energy will supply most of Asia’s electricity by 2050. 
Coal is likely to be used to generate power for the next few years, and CCS 
is considered an essential technology. CO2 is captured from flue gases from 
fossil-fuel powered plants in one place, using three physical methods [23, 
24]: 
i. 
Pre-combustion carbon capture; 
ii. Post-combustion carbon capture; and 
iii. Oxy-combustion carbon capture. 
18.3.1.1 PRE-COMBUSTION CO2 CAPTURE METHOD 
It produces CO2 and H2 by converting the fuel (coal, gas, biomass) into a 
combination of CO2 and H2 during the reforming or gasification process. 
Then, during process of water-to-gas shift, the CO2 will be emitted. Inte­
grated gasification combined cycles (IGCCs) use pre-combustion capture to 
remove CO2 during the gasification process. A gas turbine with pre-combus­
tion capture uses this method for power and heat generation. Hydrogen and 
CO2 are produced in the water-gas shift reactor after steam and oxygen are 
provided to the gasifier. The syngas is then sent to the cyclone separator, 
and the ash is removed before it is filtered in the cyclone separator and 

 
524  
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
the water-gas shift reactor. Gas needs to be desulfurized to remove sulfur, 
followed by CO2 separation, fueled by hydrogen, and then the hydrogen is 
used in a gas turbine. CO2 separation by pre-combustion is highly efficient 
due to the high content of CO2 in the fuel before combustion. Moreover, the 
technology is costly since a gasification unit must be installed, so the cost 
expenditure and energy consumption of pre-combustion carbon capture will 
be affected by both utility costs and the capture process, which means that an 
effective solution-based or absorbent-based pre-combustion carbon capture 
technology could capture over 90% of CO2 found in processed syngas, but 
will also reduce the plant’s efficiency as a result [25]. 
18.3.1.2 CO2 CAPTURE (PCCP) USING POST-COMBUSTION METHOD 
The CO2 is removed from flue gas during post-combustion CO2 capture 
(PCCP) after cleaning systems like desulfurization, denitrogenation, and 
dusting is complete. These methods are frequently considered by conven
tional power plants, but the cost is extremely high. The concentration of 
CO2  in flue gas is relatively low (13–25%), so the driving force for CO2  
is also low. Post-combustion technologies can be categorized according 
to the methods used to capture CO2 [26]. The popular methods of (PCCP) 
processes are as follows: 
i.  Absorption solvent-based methods; 
ii.  Adsorption–physical separation; 
iii.  Membrane separation; 
iv.  Calcium looping process (CLP) and chemical looping combustion 
(CLC); 
v.   Cryogenic method. 
­
18.3.1.3 OXY-COMBUSTION CO2 CAPTURE (OCCP) 
Oxy-combustion CO2 Capture (OCCP) is a combustion process taking 
place in an oxygen-rich atmosphere, where CO2 and water vapor dominate 
(nitrogen content is minimized), the separation of CO2 from the water vapor 
can be accomplished during the condensation process, where the conden­
sation temperature is higher than ambient conditions, but the partial pres­
sures are quite low. The oxygen used for combustion is generated by the 
air separation process, which produces oxygen with a purity of about 99%. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
525 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
The general scheme for the process using oxy-combustion is shown below. 
In oxy-combustion technologies, low-temperature, and high-temperature 
boilers can be used. A low-temperature boiler usually burns oxygen mixed 
with recirculated exhaust gases, resulting in flame temperatures like those 
of air-powered boilers. A high-temperature boiler can reach temperatures 
up to 2,400°C. OCCP is simplified compared to other technologies, oxy­
combustion can be applied easily to existing technologies. The weakness of 
oxy-combustion is that high temperatures require a high amount of material, 
which reduces efficiency (oxygen production is energy-intensive), and it is 
extremely expensive [27]. 
18.3.2 CHEMICAL PROCESS 
18.3.2.1 AMINE ABSORPTION/STRIPPING TECHNOLOGY 
An absorber and a stripper form a typical chemical absorption process. In 
the absorber and stripper, the temperature is generally between 40–60°C and 
120–140°C, respectively, as the CO2-rich absorbent flows into the stripper 
for thermal regeneration, following absorption, the CO2-lean absorbent is 
pumped back to the absorber for continuous recycling. The pressure at which 
CO2 is released from the strippers is around 1.0 bar; this pressure is for the 
PCCP goal of achieving 95% CO2 capture with a cost increase no greater 
than 35%, so improving absorbents, absorption operation, and thermal 
regeneration are critical [28]. 
18.3.2.2 IONIC LIQUID 
This fluid has been extensively employed in catalysis and synthesis since it 
possesses unique properties such as low vapor pressure, high polarity, and 
non-toxicity. When IL is used for CO2 capture, it is either and physical or 
chemical process. When IL is used for physical absorption, factors such as 
free volume, IL size, cation concentration, and anion concentration determine 
the CO2 solubility. Based upon Henry’s constants, our results indicate that 
anionic solubility of CO2 is more influenced by anions than cationic solu­
bility. However, cations have no noticeable effect because difluoroethane 
(DFE) is more soluble than hexafluorophosphate (PF6) and tetrafluorobo­
rate (BF4). Chemical absorption of IL is possible by selecting a structure 

 
526 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
containing amino-functional groups, since these ILs are synthesized with 
specified properties [29]. 
18.3.2.3 NON-AMINE-BASED SOLVENTS 
The amine group does not become integrated into the structure of the mole­
cule when using non-amine-based solvents. Sodium carbonate (Na2CO3) is 
an ideal substitute for amine-based solvents. This 30% p/p solution provides 
an environment that permits the CO2 to be absorbed as bicarbonate, and then 
sodium bicarbonate is formed. Despite its advantages in separating CO2 from 
flue gases, sodium carbonate absorbs CO2 at low absorption rates, leading to 
higher absorption column heights. Despite that, sodium carbonate has shown 
that it can absorb CO2 at low absorption rates, enabling use of amine-based 
solvents for CO2 absorption [30]. 
18.3.2.4 SOLVENT BLENDS 
The researchers are testing nano-sized solvent formulations and blends 
that combine fast-kinetic solvents like MEA with slow-kinetic ones like 
benzylamine (BZA), 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol (AMP) and MDEA. The 
first amine used in carbon capture was N-methyl diethanolamine (MDEA). 
Alternately, fast-solvents can be made faster by combining them with even 
faster solvents [31]. 
18.3.2.5 WATER-FREE SOLVENTS 
While it reduces corrosion along the CO2 chemical absorption plant and 
reduces viscosity, water also is used in the formulation of the solvents to 
increase the regeneration’s energy requirements. Consequently, new water-
free solvents like non-aqueous organic amine blends, aminosilicons, or 
amines with superbase are currently being developed [32]. 
18.3.2.6 AMINOSILICONES 
The chemical nature of this type of solvent allows it to have both physisorp­
tion and chemisorption properties, producing a potential improvement in 

 
 
 
527 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
the capture of CO2. Since the chemical combination of GAP-0 and GAP-1 
aminosilicones have a siloxane backbone with an amino group, their absorp­
tion capacity is greater than it would be if they had only a siloxane backbone. 
Cosolvents, therefore, are required to prevent solids from formation [33]. 
18.3.2.7 NON-AQUEOUS ORGANIC BLENDS 
The sterically hindered amines using organic compounds as solvents, 
including 2,2′-dimethylethyl-amino-ethanol (TBAE) and 2,2′-dimethyl­
ethyl-amino-2-propanol (TBAP), which are sterically hindered amines. 
The performance of this type of solvent is AMP that has been mixed with 
different alkanolamines (DEA, MDEA, MMEA, and DIPA) and by using 
organic solvents have been analyzed. The tests concluded that the absorption 
efficiency at equilibrium ranged from 73% to 96% [34]. 
18.3.3 DRAWBACKS OF PHYSICAL/CHEMICAL METHODS 
The technology has several disadvantages, including: (i) the CO2 loading 
capacity is low; (ii) high corrosion rate of equipment; (iii) high absorbent 
makeup rate caused by SO2, NO2, and O2 degradation of amine in flue 
gases; (iv) in high temperature absorbent regeneration, there is high energy 
consumption; and (v) size of the equipment is large. In addition, these 
methods are developed only to capture the CO2 while emitting from the 
industrial gas affluent. However, as the remedial purpose to capture the CO2 
from the environment. Unlike these methods biological CO2 capture can 
work much better with minimal financial input. 
18.3.4 BIOLOGICAL PROCESS 
Biologically, atmospheric CO2 can be sucked into biomass and energy by 
a variety of mechanisms, including photosynthetic as well as non-photo­
synthetic mechanisms. Apart from being able to capture CO2, microbes can 
also be used for biofixation, bioremediation of atmospheric CO2, the produc­
tion of numerous additives, no new mutation issues, the use of microbes 
in bioprocessing, no food shortage, and it consists of plant, algae, fungi, 
bacteria, and yeast [35]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
528 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
18.3.4.1 PLANT 
Photosynthesis is the process by which plants absorb atmospheric CO2, chloro­
phyll is the body’s factory for converting atmospheric CO2 into biomolecules 
with the sun’s energy. The dark reaction exploits energy molecules used in the 
light process, such as NADPH and ATP. A plant’s adaption to photosynthetic 
energy and the mechanism lowering its rate of photorespiration is classified as 
C3, C4, or CAM. In C4 plants, photorespiration is reduced by increased CO2 at 
RuBisCO activation site and oxygenase inhibitors, and CO2 is incorporated into 
the leaves’ mesophyll. Plants in the C3 family have a less efficient conversion 
process, which allows them to thrive in drier environments and during drought 
seasons simply by using the crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) pathway. In 
this context microbial whole-cell system acts as a flexible system for applica­
tions in a variety of sectors because of redundancy in fabrication [36]. 
18.3.4.2 BACTERIA WCB SYSTEM FOR CO2 CAPTURE 
In unicellular organisms, bacteria are composed of 19 groups under which 
they can be divided into: Cyanobacteria, Actinomycetes, Mycoplasma, 
Eubacteria, and Archaebacteria. Eubacteria and Archaebacteria are auto­
trophs, which fix CO2 for production of organic carbon [37]. As well as 
decomposing organic carbon materials and contributing to acid synthesis, 
anaerobic gram-negative bacteria are also important participants in the 
carbon cycle. The bio-fixation of CO2 is primarily carried out by a variety 
of species, among them Clostridium pasteurianum, Acetobacterium woodi, 
Clostridium autoethanogenum, Xanthobacter flavus, Acidithiobacillus 
ferrooxidans, Beta proteobacter and Oligotropha carboxidovorans. The 
Wood-Ljungdahl (WL) pathway, which utilizes a cellular thermodynamic 
pathway to convert atmospheric CO2 to acetyl-CoA in the organisms. A 
key aspect of CO2 fixation is the oxidation of carbon monoxide, which is 
carried out by carbon monoxide dehydrogenase and acetyl CoA synthetase. 
However, this pathway cannot survive atmospheric oxygen, and Clostridium 
thermoaceticum was the first example of this process [38]. 
18.3.4.3 ARCHAEA 
The archaea microbe is both unicellular and prokaryotic and survives under 
extreme environmental conditions such as pH changes, high temperature 

 
 
 
529 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
fluctuations and absence of oxygen. The archaea include three different kinds 
of organisms: halophiles (able to survive at higher salt levels), thermoacido­
philes, and methanogens. Acetoclastic methanogens and hydrogenotrophic 
methanogens are used for producing methane commercially [39]. Methano­
gens can convert CO2 into methane in an anaerobic environment using energy 
obtained from hydrogen. It includes methanogenic sludge organisms, such 
as Methanobacteriaceae, Methanospirrillaceae, and Methanosarcinanaceae 
species, as well as methanogens that have the potential to act as bioremedia­
tors in wastewater. In Cenarchaeum, Archaeoglobus, Metallosphaera, and 
Sulfolobus sp, acetyl-CoA, succinyl-CoA, and acetyl-CoA are used to fix 
atmospheric CO2. It is the enzyme Acetyl-CoA/Propionyl-CoA carboxylase 
that fixes atmospheric CO2 into biomolecular compounds. Owing to three 
acetyl-CoA molecules and one oxygen molecule forming succinyl-CoA, 
which undergoes three hydroxybutyrate cycles producing acetyl-CoA. Ther­
mophilic methanogens can produce methane that is used as a fuel in large 
scale industries [40]. 
18.3.4.4 CYANOBACTERIA 
Cyanobacteria are prokaryotic, blue-green phytoplankton that act as a 
link between bacteria and green plants. They are gram-negative, photoau­
totrophic, autotrophic bacteria that fix carbon with carboxysomes in their 
cytoplasm. In photoautotrophic and chemoautotrophic microorganisms, for 
example, bacteria, and cyanobacteria, CO2 concentration mechanisms, also 
called the carbon dioxide concentration mechanism (CCM), are responsible 
for carboxysomes. It is a metabolic process that forms carboxysomes within 
photoautotrophic and chemoautotrophic bacteria. 
18.3.4.5 ALGAE 
Photosynthetic algae are among the most efficient organisms for converting 
CO2 into biomass, and can be found in various sizes, from macroalgae to 
microalgae. They produce large quantities of lipids, which can be blended 
directly into biodiesel. Algae of the micro-size category include species such 
as yellow-colored algae, euglenoids, cyanobacteria, green, diatoms, blue, 
golden, red, and brown algae. Algae fix about 1.84 kilograms of CO2 using 
RuBisCO in the Calvin–Benson cycle by 1 kg of algae. As part of the Calvin 
Benson cycle, algae fix carbon by converting ribulose 1,5-bisphosphate 

 
 
 
 
530 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
(RuBP) into 3-phosphoglycerate via the RuBisCO enzyme with two mole­
cules yielded, two of which are utilized for algal metabolism; one enters 
the central metabolism and the other is used for cellular metabolism [41]. 
The adaptations of microalgae involve the carbon concentration mechanism 
(CCM), which allows the enzyme to fix more inorganic carbon by enhancing 
the CO2 concentration around the enzyme RuBisCO. Algae and cyanobac­
teria also show this adaptation, which occurs in a reaction in which CO2 
and bicarbonate transport occur by splitting RuBisCO. The following algal 
species including Cyclotella cryptica, Dunaliella, Chaetoceros muelleri, 
Chlorella, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Scenedesmus obliquus, Phaeodac-
tylum tricornutum, Navicula pellicusa, Chlorella sorokiniana, Chaetoceros, 
Haematococcus pluvialis, Neochloris oleoabundans, Chaetoceros gracilis, 
Scenedesmus spp., Navicula saprophila, and Botryococcus [42–44]. 
18.3.4.6 YEAST 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae is the yeast strain most commonly used for 
fermentation, which is a unicellular microbial organism utilized for the 
large-scale production of many products. Through microbial respiration, 
CO2 is released and oxygen is generated during fermentation. The mecha­
nism observed in yeast was a glyoxylate and Krebs cycle. In addition to 
sucrose, maltose, galactose, lactate, glycerol, ethanol, acetate, and oleate, 
yeast also uses carbon-based components, for example, through cytoplasmic 
kinase, carbon derived from glycerol is converted into glycerol-3-phosphate 
before being converted into dihydroacetone phosphate by an enzyme called 
glycerol-3-phosphate. 
18.4 PHOTOSYNTHESIS OF MICROALGAE 
Photosynthesis has evolved and influenced earth’s environment for 3.5 billion 
years, generating the substance for entire aerobic living organisms. Metabo­
lize CO2 into organic molecules with reversible reaction, light energy, plant 
species and photosynthetic microorganisms (particularly algae and phyto­
plankton) [42, 43]. Photosynthesis is a physicochemical process consisting of 
two major processes: Photosynthesis is a physicochemical process consisting 
of two major processes: (a) Reactions triggered by sunlight, which occur 
mostly when sunlight is present; and (b) the presence or absence of light 
can affect a light-dependent reaction. The first is catabolic, which involves 

 
 
 
 
 
 
531 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
the release of energy. In the second phase, physiologically stored. Proper 
cycling is necessary for carbon-fixing. Excess exposure to light and oxygen-
rich situations can hinder photography, reducing photosynthetic processes’ 
efficacy. Photo inhibition may release atmospheric CO2. The ability of algal 
biomass to capture CO2 from point sources is one of the advantages of algal 
biomass production. Cyanobacteria and eukaryotic algae use bicarbonate to 
transfer and store CO2. Bicarbonate is one of the most abundant chemicals in 
water. This transient carbon is introduced into the cells through bicarbonate 
carriers found in both the membrane and the envelopes of eukaryotic algae 
[45, 46]. 
Photorespiration lowers photosynthesis CO2 fixation effectiveness by 
20% to 30%. For reduce RuBisCO’s inhibitory activity of carbon-fixing 
oxygenation. Bicarbonate is actively transported inside algae cells at a rate 
exceeding air balance, thereby limiting photorespiration and enhancing 
intracellular concentrations [47]. Algae growth ponds are capable of 
capturing non-gaseous CO2 as bicarbonate as part of aquatic carbon capture 
and biomass production systems. In water and algae, bicarbonate is the 
predominant form of CO2 that possesses active bicarbonate transporters 
and can increase in bicarbonate. Then bicarbonate is dehydrated whether 
directly or by carbonic anhydrase, and Calvin-cycle activity absorbs the 
resultant CO2 as algal biomass [48]. The CO2 produced per gram is about 
1.6–2 gram. Algal ponds can harvest many industrial CO2 sources. However, 
different anthropogenic CO2 resources can vary in their CO2 levels as well as 
other polluting components, and these features, and even some temperature 
gradient and level of output, can influence the direction of pond CO2 propul­
sion systems [49]. 
Exhaust gas injections through algal ponds have demonstrated to enhance 
algal biomass yield up to twice, though at a significant energy cost. Typically, 
fossil fuels emit 10% to 20% of CO2, but also physiologically important 
nitrogen and sulfur oxides (NOx and SOx). Fortunately, the advantages of 
exhaust gases injections for algal growth could overcome the growth effects 
of high CO2 concentrations limiting photorespiration [42]. Scientific inves­
tigations studies have found simultaneous exhaust gases injection into pond 
increased biomass output by 30% relative to direct CO2 equivalent injection. 
Exhaust gases fertilizers influence in combustion products can be linked to 
added nutrients (sulfur and nitrate) [50]. The efficacy of algae collecting 
CO2 may vary by algal ecology, pond acidity, and climate. With ideal 
circumstances and two seconds of gas residence, CO2 captures efficiencies of 
80–99%. The typical gas-fired 200-MWh power plant will be equipped with 

 
 
 
532 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
an algae pond that will absorb 80% of the facility’s CO2 emissions during 
daylight hours, assuming 20 grams per day of biomass productivity. The 
80% of all-day CO2 emissions from a coal-fired power station would require 
a 7,000-acre pond and locating the ponds near points of emissions offers 
numerous energy-saving benefits [51, 52]. 
Hybrid power plant-algal pond systems can save CO2 transportation 
costs, create minimal excess heat from the winter pond power station, and 
give carbon utility credits. Establishing ponds among CO2 sources, however, 
may be challenging depending on the site’s land availability and climate 
compatibility. Moreover, extracting CO2 in the dark isn’t viable. Technolo­
gies for capturing, concentrating, storing, and moving CO2 from inlet to outlet 
(pond) should be developed as part of an integrated CO2 reduction plan. 
At very long (geological) periods, the largest impact on carbon emissions 
accumulation must be absorbed. An approach for mitigating CO2 from point 
sources is direct injection into geological forms. However, in geological 
formations long-term CO2 reserves are difficult. Massive CO2 quantities can 
be damaging to Earth’s surface. The conversion of CO2 into stable liquids or 
solids is a proposed low-carbon approach [53]. 
The technology is particularly appealing as solar energy yields biomass. 
A more critical component of sequester of organic carbon has been the 
idea to fertilize natural oceans to enhance phytoplankton development. 
Sea-fertilizing micronutrients (e.g., iron) which usually inhibit algal 
development can considerably boost algal growth and carbon uptake, but 
the effects of ocean-ecological fertilization are mostly unclear. Alternative 
options for open-ocean phytoplankton fertilization include controlled algal 
biomass development in closed ponds or controlled production processes 
for capturing CO2 and biomass. Two important ways to carbon sequestration 
was assumed: (i) continuous interment of total algal biomass in significant 
geological formations; and (ii) algal biomass fractions removed or processed. 
Total algal burial is the lowest tech technique. Direct microalgae biomass 
deposition has been the most energy-efficient carbon sequestration approach, 
as no dewatering is required after processing [54]. 
The disadvantage is it would deposit big inorganic fertilizers. High 
nitrogen and phosphorus are sustainable. Instead of excavating biomass, 
concealing the microalgae biomass’s neutral lipid or hydrocarbons compo­
nent. Neutral lipids or TAGs provide 60% of the algae’s total dry weight. 
Over 75% of average TAG weight is carbon, hence TAGs are rich sources 
of carbon stored in cells. In addition to TAGs, organic solvents can also 
be used to selectively remove hydrophobic compounds without harming 

 
 
 
 
 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
533 
algae, allowing them to produce biomass faster without having to replace 
their cellular machinery [55]. Triacylglycerols (TAGs) could be used to 
“freeze” existing carbon by storing them in geological formations with low 
energy collection and extraction. Significantly, they pose no potential risk of 
gaseous CO2 escape from geological formations. Inorganic nutrients (e.g., 
nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur) that are required for algal growth could 
be recycled instead of buried in TAGs because TAGs contain only carbon, 
hydrogen, and oxygen [56]. 
As a CO2 molecule that can be stored in soil for millions of years, biochar 
is a pyrolysis by-product created when catalysts are operated in anaerobic 
conditions, Pyrolysis results in gaseous molecules such as hydrogen, methane, 
and CO2, which can be combusted to speed the process. Biochar is made from 
carbon derived from algae and other organic materials. Although it contains 
inorganic components, it can be applied directly to soil for nutrient addition, 
resulting in lower energy costs, and a wider variety of possible uses. Up to 
55% of the algal biomass carbon can be refined into biochar through hydro­
thermal liquefaction, leading to a higher efficiency of carbon sequestration 
than algae oil extraction. In addition, hydrothermal processing consumes 
less energy than direct pyrolysis. Microalgae are common in all terrestrial 
and aquatic ecosystems, representing a diverse spectrum of species that can 
survive in a variety of environmental conditions. Over 50,000 species are 
thought to exist, yet only approximately 30,000 have been studied and evalu­
ated. The majority of microalgal species isolated from natural streams, lakes, 
or seas are artificially domesticated and preadapted to the conditions of their 
habitats. Numerous species of eukaryotic microalgae and cyanobacteria have 
been discovered in aquatic environments as fixers of inorganic carbon and 
CO2. In contrast to ambient air, which has a low CO2 concentration (around 
0.038% volume v/v), post-combustion flue gas typically has a high CO2 
concentration (about 4–14% volume v/v) and potentially harmful chemicals 
(SOx, NOx, and trace elements). Microalgae have to be able to withstand 
harsh flue gas conditions for this purpose. The genetic modification of some 
microalgal species allows them to develop and survive under harsh flue gas 
conditions [56–58]. 
Microalgal growth was affected by nutrient supply, light intensity, and 
temperature depending on the microalgal species as well as CO2 concen­
trations up to 70% or even 100%, aeration rates of 2 volumes per minute 
(v/m), and SO2 and NOx concentrations of 100 parts per million (ppm). The 
appropriate ranges or values for these factors to produce high CO2 fixation 
rates and biomass output for each microalgal species are regularly varied. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
534 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Botryococcus braunii, Chlorella vulgaris, Chlorella kessleri, Chlorella 
sp., Chlorocuccum littorale, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Scenedesmus 
obliquus, M. minutum, Tetraselmis sp., and Spirulina sp. are examples of 
general microalgal species [59]. Adaptable to high temperatures and high 
levels of CO2, NOx, and SOx. It implies that some chlorella and cyanobac­
teria species with relatively high temperature and CO2 tolerance could grow 
well and achieve high CO2 fixation (500–1,800 mg/L/d). Chlorella capture 
performance is superior to those of other species, including cyanophytes 
and chrysophytes. Its production rates ranged from 1,116 mg/L/d to 1,894 
mg/L/d. Nannochloropsis sp. grows on coal FGD flue gas better than pure 
CO2 Nannochloropsis sp. grows on coal FGD flue gas better than pure CO2 
Nannochloropsis sp. grows on coal FGD flue gas Nannochloropsis sp. grows 
on coal FGD flue gas Nannochloropsis sp. grows on coal F Seam biotic 
obtained an average growth rate of 20 g/m2/d in their tests, but claimed a 
long-term theoretical maximum of 25 g/m2/d. Anabaena sp. (1,450 mg/L/d), 
Chlorella vulgaris (6,240 mg/L/d), Aphanothece Nageli (5,435 mg/L), and 
Chlorella vulgaris (6,240 mg/L/d). Some species may remove sulfur dioxide, 
NOx, and volatile chemical substances in addition to CO2. Microalgal strains 
with this potential could be used for flue gas treatment. It should be noted 
that the performance of these microalgal strains may have been influenced 
by other factors, such as CO2 concentration, temperature, medium, light 
intensity, or design of photobioreactors. In order to establish CO2 mitigation 
solutions for each microalgae strain under specified culture and operation 
parameters, the literature on microalgae strain types was reviewed to assess 
how differences in these features can affect the strain’s ability to fix CO2 [60, 
61]. 
18.5 MECHANISM OF CO2 CAPTURE IN MICROALGAE 
The mechanisms of microalgal expansion contribute considerably to the 
improvement of water treatment experiments as well as the development of 
metabolism. The heterotrophic cultivation of microalgae provides time for 
the treatment of wastewater with carbon molecules, whereas the autotrophic 
culture of microalgae allows for the treatment of CO2. Microalgae, on the 
other hand, are also cultivated under natural conditions, with heterotro­
phic algae growing at night and autotrophic algae growing throughout the 
day. Some researchers have also attempted to mimic the carbon cycle by 
considering the availability of carbon sources, sunshine, and CO2 emissions. 

 
 
 
 
 
535 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
Long-term growth conditions that are particular to autotrophic, heterotro­
phic, and mixotrophic forms of metabolism do occur. Microalgae have a 
diverse range of metabolic pathways that are activated under a variety of 
growth conditions (Figure 18.1). Certain microalgae may switch between 
different development regimes depending on their environment, whilst 
other microalgae may use different processes at the same time as well. The 
presence of high concentrations of CO2 promotes the photosynthetic activity 
of microalgae, however this can hamper the use of the CO2 surface due to 
delayed photosynthesis. Aside from that, the lack of sunshine during the 
dark periods leads to the usage of CO2 substrates for industrial purposes. 
Microalgae have demonstrated distinct metabolic pathways in response to 
hypoxic or anoxic conditions in the aquatic habitat [42–44]. 
Photorespiration microalgae generated from ATP with equivalents ability 
to change CO2 into biomass and biocomposite are used in the production 
of biocomposite. While microalgae have simpler photosystems than plants, 
they have their own set of metabolic pathways that are distinct and intricate 
[62]. Green microalgae, which also include type I response complexes, 
guide the oxidative tricarboxylic acid (TCA) reduction cycle in the opposite 
direction of algae, which uses the autotrophic photosynthetic process of 
the Calvin-Benson Bassham cycle (CBB) to replace CO2 fixation. When 
it comes to photoautotrophic and chemoheterotrophic species, Glyceral­
dehyde-3-phophate (G3P) is a critical component of the metabolism. In 
chemoheterotrophic organisms, it serves as a critical substrate for a variety 
of catabolic pathways. Evolutionary CO2 sequestration not only tackles the 
issue of energy input, but it also produces biobased value goods that can be 
used in other applications. There, biological CO2 capture methods would 
be implemented using adaptable conceptual models, which would result in 
an increase in the amount of inadequate CO2 absorbent and the synthesis 
of highly active molecules [63, 64]. They have also built an adaptive CO2 
bioenergy discussion that combines the systems, delivers various extra 
benefits, and examines conservation throughout the economic and environ­
mental scope, among other aspects. Photosynthetic green algae have risen in 
importance as a source of energy for absorbing visible light energy and CO2 
to convert a variety of metabolic products such as lipids, carbohydrates, and 
pigments into other forms of energy. Both cellular respiration and oxygenic 
photosynthetic activity are present in photosynthesis process species that are 
involved in the most important CO2 storage routes [65]. 
When algae can absorb CO2 efficiently, they have a mitochondrial incli­
nation to collect inorganic carbon, which is catalyzed by carbonic anhydrase, 

 
 
 
536 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
which is a critical regulator in photoheterotrophic growth [66, 67]. Carbonic 
anhydrase response supplies RuBisCO oxygenase/carboxylase enzyme 
responsible for reduction process to transformed small sugar molecules of 
carbohydrate through CO2 entering the plastid through the carbonic anhydrase 
reaction. The production of light-energy NADH2 by the electron transport 
system on the surfaces of plastids and thylakoid membranes offers reduction 
ability and is required for the Calvin cycle throughout the glucose metabo­
lism in the stromal matrix. The metabolic plasticity and ability of algae to 
produce under a variety of nutritional conditions (autotrophic, heterotrophic, 
and mixotrophic) lead to the synthesis of a wide range of chemicals. Since 
this metabolic process is governed by harsh circumstances, it is susceptible 
to changes in operating parameters. While algae account for more than 70% 
of the total maximum photosynthetic activity on Earth, it may be necessary 
to improve natural respiration ability in harsh environments to maximize 
output [68]. 
The ability of light energy to create numerous chemical compounds as 
well as oxidation changes in photosynthesizing algae to regulate CO2 levels 
in the atmosphere are important factors in climate stabilization. Which 
fixed carbon is changed through substitute chemicals that may subsequently 
become fragment to give the cells through oxidative phosphorylation, energy 
reductions and carbon shells. As a natural phase of the cell cycle, starch, a 
carbohydrate molecule, is synthesized and destroyed within the dark and 
light phases [69]. However, starch is produced throughout the gametogen­
esis preparation process. The composition and abundance of the resource 
concentrate on these cells, as well as environmental conditions: constraints 
such as depletion of nutrients, alkalinity, temperature, and light could 
stimulate the build-up of fructose and TAG synthesis in algae because of the 
accumulation of enzymes. Although neutral fatty acids are retained at high 
levels in algal species and plant edible oil under normal conditions, glucose 
appears to be the major replacement component in algal species as well as 
in plants when exposed to environmental challenges and when producing 
plant edible oil [43]. Light capture leads to energy conversion and finally 
to energy reduction, which is why respiration is a well-regulated function 
(NADPH). The Calvin cycle, which is required for CO2 fixation, is supplied 
by NADPH and ATP, which act as cofactors. Although respiration is the 
primary energy source in the absence of intracellular carbon consumption, 
CO2 fixation provides the carbon molecules required for all cell production. 
The photosynthetic mechanisms become increasingly crucial to keep up with 
the metabolic downward reactions occurring within chloroplasts [66, 67]. 

 
537 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
Apart from plants, which feature both photosynthetic and non-photosyn­
thetic plastids, the micro-algal thylakoids maintain a maximally integrated 
and active activate atoms or molecules system, even when the environ­
ment is dark. The metabolic synthesis of microalgae may be dependent on 
a variety of reducing carbon sources, including endogenous chloroplast 
carbohydrate that accumulates throughout the light-dependent process or 
foreign metabolites such as acetate. It has been discovered that acetate can be 
incorporated into acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl CoA) through two alternative 
pathways: either a particular ATP synthesis with acetyl CoA synthase or a 
2-step acetate kinase (ACK) and phosphate acetyltransferase (PAT) reaction. 
During the night, the ATP acetate accumulation factors are in place within 
the intensity of the surrounding environment. In addition, in the presence 
of light, acetate absorption is predominantly dependent on the employment 
of synchronous photophosphorylation cyclic transfers between PS I and PS 
II, since PSII’s regulator, 3-OHDA, is absent (3,4-dichlorophhenyl). Photo-
assimilation of anoxic acetate into microalgae is reflected in Figure 18.1, 
as is the requirement for acetate photoheterotrophic growth in several other 
organisms, including the bacteria Chloromonas sp., Chlamydomonas sp., 
and Pyrobotrys stellate [66, 67]. 
The TCA cycle in the mitochondria converts one acetyl-CoA molecule 
into three NADH molecules, one FADH2 molecule, two ATP molecules, and 
two CO2 molecules per acetyl-CoA molecule. The oxidative phosphoryla­
tion of ATP results in the oxidation of NADH and FADH2 in the respira­
tory electron transport chain, which is then excreted. Carboxy kinase can 
convert oxaloacetate into phosphoenolpyruvate, and ATP is well-established 
as a cofactor in the synthesis of long-carbon significant molecules such as 
gluconeogenesis, which eventually leads to sugar. In dark anoxic circum­
stances, such metabolic pathways are utilized to store carbohydrate, which 
is then eaten by microalgae cells in the presence of acetate. Photosynthesis 
and the Calvin cycle are both responsible for carbohydrate production 
and the transfer of gluconeogenic enzyme stages. Phosphate decomposes 
during the night and in the absence of acetate, resulting in the production of 
ATP and NADH. Through the mechanism of oxidative ribose, the glucose 
6 Phosphate dehydrogenase can be converted to 6-phosphoglucolactone. 
This oxidative process of a ribose results in the production of two NADPH 
radicals and one CO2 group, as well as the formation of 6-phosphogluconate 
and eventually ribulose 5 phosphate. That basic metabolic activity converts 
ribulose-5 phosphate into fructose 6 phosphate and triosephosphate, in the 
exact opposite direction of the Calvin cycle. It is the first step in the Calvin 

 
 
538 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
cycle. A pentose-phosphate consumption process for carbon reduction, apart 
from efficient synthesis, with ribose 5 phosphate as an essential component 
for those other particles, except for the reduction of carbon [42–44]. 
The NADPH-production pathway, or potentially a phase coupling with 
Gluconeogenesis, which includes the generation of ATP, NAD(P)H, and 
CO2, could operate under a variety of different conditions. These interface 
routes are unquestionably functional, as they maintain a balance between the 
cell’s reaction to its energy requirements. It is possible that the pathway of 
pentose-phosphate will consider a different mechanism than either the upper 
half of the gluconeogenesis: phosphoglucose isomerase (glycolysis) may 
convert glucose 6 phosphate into fructose 6 phosphate or oxidize glucose 
6 phosphate dehydrogenase to 6-phosphoglucolactone in any circumstance. 
In micro-algal chloroplasts, the incidence of a previous (glycolysis) is seven 
times higher than that of the organisms. Higher amounts of NADPH and 
ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate have been shown to decrease the action of glucose 
6 phosphate-dehydrogenase. As a result, it is expected that NADPH’s unfa­
vorable effects on the pentose-phosphate pathway cycle will further drive 
glycolysis against pentose-phosphate in decreasing ATP-deficient circum­
stances such as anoxia and mitochondrial inhibitors [43]. 
FIGURE 18.1 Intracellular metabolism for CO2 capturing. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
539 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
18.5.1 KEY ENZYMES INVOLVED IN CO2 CAPTURE 
The use of photoautotrophic microalgae, particularly green microalgae, 
for CO2 bio-mitigation has recently attracted substantial public concern. 
The most common and widespread microalgal species observed in aquatic 
habitats are green microalgae. In addition, they are easy to photoautotrophi­
cally nurture indoors and outdoors so that they can reach a high cell density. 
Furthermore, many kinds of green microalgae are CO2 tolerant, meaning 
they can fix CO2 efficiently from several sources, while also being environ­
mentally friendly. The green microalgae produced can be used for a variety 
of purposes, such as making lipids, proteins, vitamins, and carotenoids (such 
as lutein and astaxanthin). These phenomena distinguish green microalgae as 
potential CO2 mitigation candidates in the context of a low-carbon economy, 
since they integrate the renewable photosynthetic CO2 fixation process 
with the controlled production of these value-added bioactive compounds. 
However, Green microalgae because of their intrinsically low photosynthetic 
capacities, are still in their early stages of development to satisfy practical 
demands for CO2 mitigation. Consequently, Green microalgae techniques 
are being sought to resolve this stumbling issue [44]. 
During chloroplast respiration, bicarbonate is converted to CO2 and 
subsequently oxidized by RuBisCO (ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase 
oxygenase), creating two molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate. These three 
carbon organic acids are transformed into sugars via a few processes, which 
are then utilized as feedstock in the production of starch and oil, respectively. 
RuBisCO, on the other hand, can compete with CO2 for carbon dioxide fixa­
tion. When the oxygenase reaction occurs, 3-phosphoglycerate and 2-phos­
phoglycolate are formed as products. After that, glycine, which is combined 
with another glycine molecule for the production of serine, releases CO2. 
A reduction is attributed to a loss of carbon (one carbon per two glycine 
molecules). When ribulose bisphosphate is unable to be restored by the 
Calvin cycle, it cannot be used by RuBisCO to fix carbon, which results in a 
lower photosynthesis efficiency [70]. 
The calvin cycle is the initial phase in the carbon fixation process, so 
finding a way to regulate it is crucial for considerably improving photosyn­
thetic CO2 fixation efficiency. The Calvin cycle is a phase of plant and algae 
metabolism that occurs continuously (Figure 18.1). The carboxylation 
cycle is made up of a series of enzymatic reactions that uses 11 enzymes to 
produce carbohydrate biosynthesis precursors. The three major steps of this 
cycle are carboxylation (carbon fixation), reduction, and regeneration [71]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
540 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
In this cycle, the CO2 acceptor molecule RuBP is carboxylated by ribulose 
1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO), and the catalytic 
property of carbon assimilation determines the rate of carbon assimila­
tion. The Calvin cycle is dependent upon the activity of this enzyme, and 
since it is vital to the process, many attempts have been made to enhance 
its photosynthetic capabilities. However, to our knowledge, only minor 
success has been reported so far, RuBisCO’s carboxylation capability, as 
well as RuBP’s regenerative ability, determine the photosynthetic CO2 
fixation capability. Among the non-regulated enzymes which have signifi­
cantly greater flux control coefficients for photosynthesis than the other 
Calvin cycle enzymes, according to earlier research in plants (maximum 
0.55, 0.75, and 1.0, respectively), are fructose 1,6-bisphosphate aldolase 
(aldolase), sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphatase (SBPase), and transketolase 
(TK) [72]. This shows that, unlike RuBisCO, they have significant control 
over photosynthetic carbon flux and can limit photosynthetic rate. As a 
result, genetic engineering might be used to boost photosynthetic ability 
by engineering these three enzymes. Recent efforts to convert plants 
and microalgae into similar microbes have been supported by studies 
expressing cyanobacterial fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase (FBP/SBPase) and 
SBPase. Increased photosynthetic capacity was observed in eukaryotic 
microalgae by overexpressing cyanobacterial FBP/SBPase or eukaryotic 
microalgal SBPase. In tobacco and cyanobacterium, aldolase activity was 
stimulated in the plastid by co-overexpressed aldolase and other Calvin 
cycle enzymes. A unique enzyme, dihydroxyacetone phosphate (DHAP) 
is converted reversibly to fructose 1,6-bisphosphate (FBP) and DHAP and 
erythrose 4-phosphate to sedoheptulose 1,7-bisphosphate (SDHPP), as part 
of the Calvin cycle. As it turns out, aldolase might have a vital role in the 
Calvin cycle’s carbon partitioning. Therefore, aldolase is unquestionably 
one of the most attractive candidates when it comes to increasing photo­
synthetic CO2 fixation through engineering [71, 72]. 
18.6 MICROALGAL CULTIVATION METHODS FOR CO2 CAPTURING 
TECHNOLOGY 
18.6.1 CULTIVATION OF OPEN PONDS 
An open tank of the round or raceway method are commonly used to 
grow microalgae and cyanobacteria in sunlight. Many advantages of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
541 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
an open tank over a closed one include being easier to construct, less 
complicated, and less expensive [73]. There are a few benefits to using 
the open-pond method (Figure 18.2), including its simplicity, ability to 
enhance efficiency, and cost savings compared with a closed system. 
However, there were some limitations, including low sunlight and inad­
equate procedures for combining. Even though algae can grow quickly 
and have adequate nutritional supplies, open ponds cannot serve as a 
home for organisms that cannot tolerate high salinities or pH levels above 
7.0. Algae can be grown in open ponds in certain contexts, such as lakes, 
ponds, lagoons, and artificial ponds (Figure 18.2). Microalgae are widely 
cultivated in open reservoirs, which allow better distribution of algae, 
water, and nutrients on a high ratio using paddle wheels, a close loop, 
and recirculation system. In algae cultivation, the algae can be grown 
over a wide area of water. An open pond’s excavation surface is typically 
composed of cement or polycarbonate. The pH range of the fluid and 
numerous other physical characteristics must be regulated for 90% of 
CO2 to be absorbed. It has been suggested that aquatic plankton is almost 
entirely elemental; whereas certain green algae, such as cyanobacteria, 
can acquire nitrogen from the atmosphere, some microalgae need liquid 
nitrogen, like ammonia or urea. Several paddlewheels have been estab­
lished to propagate algae biomass with sufficient mixing so that many 
linked ponds will be connected by a single paddlewheel [60, 73]: 
i.  Quick and easy installation; 
ii.  Minimizing energy consumption requires lower operating costs; 
iii.  The cultivation process is relatively cheap compared to other methods; 
iv.  A pond that is open is easier to clean and monitor than one that is 
enclosed; 
v.  In fact, it is suitable for land of all types including desert, farmland, 
and non-farmland, etc. 

 
 
 
 
 
542 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
FIGURE 18.2 Open pond cultivation method for CO2 capturing. 
18.6.2 CLOSED CULTIVATION METHOD: PHOTOBIOREACTORS 
A closed systems cultivation model, including photoautotroph, heterotroph, 
or mixotrophic activities, can minimize harvest cost by producing nearly 
three times the biomass of an open system, despite substantial improvements 
in PBR design and maintenance. Though PBRs have enormous potential for 
optimizing productivity, environmental effects, and strain selection, envi­
ronmental factors still account for about 90% of current biomass production. 
However, many closed PBR prototypes developed in laboratories, pilot scale 
settings, and elsewhere have successfully scaled up to an industrial scale. 
Close loop photoreactors are widely used for the cultivation of algae for 
biomass conversion and have another common structure, the tube model. 
Tube models play an important role in photosynthesis and respiration 
biomass cultivation. PBR tubes are thin walls, therefore sunlight falling on 
either or both tubes can instantly cover an entire tube with algae that grows 
faster than using steel, plastic, or fibrous materials. Tubes might be made 
from steel, plastic, or fibrous materials, and their sizes may vary depending 
on the company’s production capacity [61]. 
Nevertheless, the performance of microalgae cultivation could have been 
improved to reduce or even overcome the external costs for maintaining the 
sophisticated system. There are many reasons why the process is valuable: 
i. 
A higher level of productivity; 
ii. When arable land is considerably smaller; 
iii. It is easy to sterilize water; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
543 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
iv. It is advantageous to practice outdoor culture; 
v. A wide illumination field is acceptable. 
18.6.3 TUBULAR PHOTOBIOREACTORS 
A tube-shaped photobioreactor is made of synthetic polymers such as 
PVC, polycarbonate, or porous plastic. These polymers can be shaped 
horizontally, vertically, cylindrically, or angled, and may contain gasifi­
cation equipment that reduces the amount of oxygen produced during 
photosynthesis. A vertical PBR eliminates culture areas and disperses 
photosynthetic species in columns. Vertical reactors can enhance exposure 
to light, gas, and liquid interactions, and CO2 retention, thus increasing 
acculture efficiency. 
An algal tube bioreactor is made up of vertical or horizontal tubes 
immersed in liquid throughout the process. The addition of gas at the begin­
ning of a process is usually meant to help algae adopt, but it is almost always 
followed by a lack of gas at the opposite end. By adding gas and light, the 
current state of the art could be enhanced. The tube photo-bioreactor uses 
several large, symmetrically formed pipes (helic, flat) to optimize sunlight 
irradiation for microalgal growth. Gas bubbling and air leaking through one 
side of the tube essentially circulates liquid microalgal growth medium, 
which is then refluxed from the other end. The design, light regulation, mass 
exchanges and scale-up concerns showed that process should be completed 
with a certain amount of oxygen, and photosynthesis could be stimulated 
[61]. 
18.6.4 VERTICAL PHOTOBIOREACTORS 
In addition to being portable, low cost, aseptic, and often very attractive for 
large-scale culture, Vertical Photobioreactors, vertical columns, even with 
circumference, are being optimized to produce biomass and increase specific 
growth rates (Figure 18.3). Vertical columns could be portable, low-cost, 
aseptic, and often very attractive to large-scale culture. Vertical Photobio­
reactors, even vertical columns with circumference, have many attributes 
that are attractive to large-scale culture, including being portable, low-cost, 
aseptic, and often very attractive [3, 74]. 

 
 
 
544 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
FIGURE 18.3 Vertical tubular photobioreactors cultivation method for CO2 capturing. 
18.6.5 HORIZONTAL PHOTOBIOREACTORS 
Although they have a wide illumination region and a much greater utilization 
of sunlight, horizontally exposed tubular bioreactors are being developed to 
support mass microalgae cultivation (Figure 18.4). While this PBR model 
consumes oxygen, photo enhancement increases the volume of material 
obtained, and when used outside, the output will be even greater (Figure 
18.4). The enhanced technologies reduce the surface area, thereby absorbing 
more CO2, improving nutritional reflectivity, and increasing oxygen avail­
ability, resulting in high concentrations with low hydrostatic stress and high 
illumination, since a balanced approach to light can be regulated by the PBR 
[48]. 
FIGURE 18.4 Horizontal tubular photobioreactors cultivation method for CO2 capturing. 

 
 
545 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
18.6.6 FLAT PANEL PHOTOBIOREACTORS 
Microalgae biomass could be cultivated using flat-panel bioreactors in a 
light-efficient manner (Figure 18.5). These PBRs have a wide light field and 
high volume-to-area ratio allowing for optimum cell exposure and extreme 
temperature concentration. Limiting variables can be eliminated in both types 
while biomass concentration is sought (Figure 18.5). However, effective 
biomass productivity in each field is difficult to attain with flat-panel PBRs. 
Microalgae productivity is affected by flat panel angles, panel positions, and 
number of panels per unit of ground in this technique; their volume requires 
additional components, so PBR implementation tasks are needed. Flat panels 
can be seen horizontally, vertically or angled [56]. 
FIGURE 18.5 Flat panel tubular photobioreactors cultivation method for CO2 capturing. 
18.6.7 STIRRED PHOTO-BIOREACTORS (PBRS) 
Photo-bioreactors (PBRs) with structurally driven blurring aim at increasing 
the volume of CO2 absorbed by the growing media (Figure 18.6), but high 
fluid friction forces adversely affect the algal membrane, thus increasing 
light availability for photosynthetic processes and allowing for the quicker 
absorption of nutrients from CO2 [75, 76]. 
18.6.8 AIRLIFT PHOTO-BIOREACTORS (PBRS) 
These bioreactors, which are widely used for pollution treatment and culti­
vation, were not recognized as a viable alternative to standard PBRs until 

 
 
 
 
 
546 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
recently. This is because CO2 bubbles pass through only one section of the 
column, leaving behind liquids. The current analysis takes into consideration 
the steerer tube and the velocity of flow, which exists primarily at the bottom 
needle (Figure 18.7). It exhibits higher transport phenomena, effective 
mixing with small effective stresses, low power consumption, high scaling 
efficiency, quick, and easy to sterilize, relaxed, perfect for algae adsorption, 
decreased photo impairment. The potential advantages are therefore the 
limited lighting area and a smaller surface area with development. In recent 
years it has become obvious which carbon sequestration technologies are 
getting traction and are at the early stages of research and development for 
airlift photoreactors [45, 56, 76]. 
FIGURE 18.6 Stirred photo-bioreactors cultivation method for CO2 capturing. 
18.6.9 BUBBLE COLUMN PHOTO-BIOREACTORS (PBRS) 
In bubble column bioreactors, culture media are contained in vertical columns 
that are either circular or rectangular, and CO2 air bubbles travel through 
a sparred base structure. These models can get the largest gas volumes, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
547 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
which implies that they would be able to transfer the largest amount of mass 
(Figure 18.8). In comparison to several other flexible split-spark column 
bioreactors, a modified version would be a pore membrane reactor, which 
provides effective airflow, small fluctuations, and dimensional stability 
through the membrane. Added benefits are higher gas flow rates and lower 
energy costs [76]. 
FIGURE 18.7 Airlift photo-bioreactors cultivation method for CO2 capturing. 
FIGURE 18.8 Bubble column photo-bioreactors cultivation method for CO2 capturing. 

 
 
 
 
 
548 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
18.7 GENETIC ENGINEERING APPROACHES ON CO2 CAPTURING 
BY RUBISCO 
In the genetically modified method, CO2 fixation is effectively accomplished 
by yeast, E. coli bacteria, and macro- and microalgae. 
18.7.1 YEAST 
In addition to Saccharomyces cerevisiae, genetically modified few strains of 
yeast are used to investigate CO2 biofixation. Pichia pastoris is a methanotro­
phic yeast commonly used for the production of proteins and nucleic acids. 
Methanol is the substrate, and the pathway to produce proteins is xylulose­
5-phosphate. In this pathway, enzymes from Calvin Benson’s pathway are 
produced, including RuBisCO and PRK (phosphoribulokinase). As a result, 
the Calvin Benson pathway has been mutated to enable CO2 fixation, which 
creates biomass. The yeast plasmid successfully fixates CO2. Therefore, 
Pichia pastoris’s original chemoheterotrophic state has been modified into 
chemoorganoautotrophic [77, 78]. 
18.7.2 BACTERIA 
The genetically modified strain of E. coli is capable of biofixing CO2 as 
well as producing RuBisCO, which forms the enzymes for the Calvin 
Benson cycle, which results in a bypass pathway for CO2 fixation in the 
carbon metabolic pathway. After incorporating a recombinant metabolic flux 
plasmid into E. coli, CO2 fixation rates were improved by 13% compared 
to the central metabolism. After integrating the recombinant plasmid with 
carbonic anhydrase enzyme of the CCM mechanism, CO2 fixation rates 
were improved by 17%; CO2 is naturally fixated by autotrophic algae and 
cyanobacteria in amounts equal to those of E. coli [75]. 
18.7.3 ALGAE 
Genetic engineering has been conducted on a few autotrophic algal species 
to improve CO2 biofixation to enhance biomass production; some of the 
following species have been sequenced and others are being recombinantly 
altered to enhance biomass production. The genetic modified microalgal 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• 
acetyl CoA carboxylase 
• 
bioadsorption 
• 
CO2 capturing 
• 
cultivation 
• 
flat panel photobioreactors 
• 
microalgae 
• 
photobioreactors 
• 
photosynthesis 
• 
RuBisCO 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
549 
strains viz., Volvox carteri, Micromonas pusilla, Chlamydomonas rein-
hardtii, Aureococcus anophageferrens, Galdieria sulphuraria, Pseudo 
nitzschia, Botryococcus braunii, Phaeodactylum tricornutum, Micromonas 
pusilla, Chlorella vulgaris, Thalassiosira pseudonana, Dunaliella salina, 
Ostreococcus lucimarinus, Fragilariopsis cylindrus, Ostreococcus tauri, 
Cyanidioschyzon merolae, Thalassiosira rotula, and Porphyra purpurea 
[70, 73]. 
18.8 CONCLUSION 
It is essential that we consider biological carbon sequestration when tackling 
climate change. Among the various ways of fixing microalgal CO2, CO2 
has numerous advantages since it can be used to produce energy, which is 
significant for the economy. Microalgal CO2 is also considered a permanent 
sequestration method, leading us to conclude that it is a cost-effective and 
environmentally friendly alternative to conventional carbon sequestration 
techniques. 
KEYWORDS 
REFERENCES 
1. Ahmed, A. A. Q., Odelade, K. A., & Babalola, O. O., (2019). Microbial inoculants 
for improving carbon sequestration in agroecosystems to mitigate climate change. 
Handbook of Climate Change Resilience (pp. 1–21). Springer International Publishing: 
Cham, Switzerland. 

 
550 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
2. Ghadaksaz, H., & Saboohi, Y., (2020). Energy supply transformation pathways in Iran 
to reduce GHG emissions in line with the Paris agreement. Energy Strategy Rev., 32, 
100541. 
3. Aghaalipour, E., Akbulut, A., & Güllü, G., (2020). Carbon dioxide capture with 
microalgae species in continuous gas-supplied closed cultivation systems. Biochem. 
Eng. J., 163, 107741. 
4.  Abolhassani, M., Guais, A., Chaumet-Riffaud, P., Sasco, A., & Schwartz, L., (2009). 
Carbon dioxide inhalation causes pulmonary inflammation. Am. J. Physiol. Lung Cell. 
Mol. Physiol., 296, 657–665. 
5. Hänninen, O., Vardoulakis, S., Sarigiannis, D. A., Incecik, S., & Sokhi, R. S., (2011). 
Focus on exposure to air pollution and related health impacts. Air Qual. Atmos. Health., 
4, 159–160. 
6. Goeppert, A., Czaun, M., Surya, P. G. K., George, A., & Olah, M., (2012). Air as the 
renewable carbon source of the future: An overview of CO2 capture from the atmosphere. 
Ener. Environ. Sci., 5, 7833. 
7. Albuquerque, M. G. E., Martino, V., Pollet, E., Avérous, L., & Reis, M. A. M., (2011). 
Mixed culture polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) production from volatile fatty acid (VFA)- 
rich streams: Effect of substrate composition and feeding regime on PHA productivity, 
composition and properties. J. Biotechnol., 151, 66–76. 
8. Homs, N., Toyir, J., & De La Piscia, P. R., (2013). Catalytic processes for activation of 
CO2. In: Suib, S. L., (ed.), New and Future Developments in Catalysis: Activation of 
Carbon Dioxide (1st edn., pp. 1–23).  Elsevier, Amsterdam. 
9.  Kumar, S., Managi, S., & Jain, R. K., (2020). CO2 mitigation policy for Indian thermal 
power sector: Potential gains from emission trading. Energy Economics, 86, 104653. 
10. Yang, Q., Li, H., Wang, D., Zhang, X., Guo, X., Pu, S., Guo, R., & Chen, J., (2020). 
Utilization of chemical wastewater for CO2 emission reduction: Purified terephthalic 
acid (PTA) wastewater-mediated culture of microalgae for CO2  bio-capture. Appl. 
Energy, 276, 115502. 
11.  Zheng, J., (2020). Research on economic dispatching of thermal power units considering 
CO2 emission cost. In: IOP Conference Series: Environ. Earth Sci. (Vol. 514, No. 4, pp. 
042054). 
12.  Sun, Y., Wang, L., Xu, C., Maréchal, F., & Yang, Y., (2020). Enhancing the operational 
flexibility of thermal power plants by coupling high-temperature power-to-gas. Appl. 
Energy, 263, 114608. 
13.  Solarin, S. A., (2019). Convergence in CO2 emissions, carbon footprint and ecological 
footprint: Evidence from OECD countries. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Control Ser., 26, 
6167–6181. 
14.  Nandasiri, M. I., Jambovane, S. R., McGrail, B. P., Schaef, H. T., & Nune, S. K., (2016). 
Adsorption, separation, and catalytic properties of densified metalorganic frameworks. 
Coord. Chem. Rev., 311, 38–52. 
15.  Olajire, A. A., (2010). CO2 capture and separation technologies for end-of-pipe 
applications-—A review. Energy., 35, 2610–2628. 
16.  Takht, R. M., Sahebdelfar, S., & Tahriri, Z. F., (2011). Carbon dioxide sequestration in 
petrochemical industries with the aim of reduction in greenhouse gas emissions. Front. 
Chem. Sci. Eng., 5, 173–178. 
17.  Hua, B., Guild, C., & Suib, S. L., (2013). Thermal, electrochemical, and photochemical 
conversion of CO2 to fuels and value-added products. J. CO2 Util., 1, 18–27. 

 
551 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
18. Saygin, D., & Gielen, D., (2021). Zero-emission pathway for the global chemical and 
petrochemical sector. Energies, 14(13), 3772. 
19. Recio, J. M. B., Guerrero, P. J., Ageitos, M. G., & Narváez, R. P., (2005). Estimate of 
Energy Consumption and CO2 Emission Associated with the Production, use and Final 
Disposal of PVC, HDPE, PP, Ductile Iron and Concrete Pipes. Barcelona: Universitat 
Politécnica de Catalunya. 
20. Shen, M., Huang, W., Chen, M., Song, B., Zeng, G., & Zhang, Y., (2020). Micro plastic 
crisis: Un-ignorable contribution to global greenhouse gas emissions and climate 
change. J. Clean. Prod., 254, 120138. 
21. Horejs, C., (2020). Solutions to plastic pollution. Nat. Rev. Mater., 5, 641. 
22. Davis, S. J., Lewis, N. S., Shaner, M., Aggarwal, S., Arent, D., Azevedo, I. L., & Clack, 
C. T., (2018). Net-zero emissions energy systems. Science, 360, 6396. 
23. Camper, D., Bara, J. E., Gin, D. L., & Nobel, R. D., (2008). Room-temperature ionic 
liquid-amine solutions: Tunable solvents for efficient and reversible capture of CO2. Ind. 
Eng. Chem. Res., 47, 8496–8498. 
24. Zhang, F., Fang, C. G., Wu, Y. T., Wang, Y. T., Li, A. M., & Zhang, Z. B., (2010). 
Absorption of CO2 in the aqueous solutions of functionalized ionic liquids and MDEA. 
Chem. Eng. J., 160, 691–697. 
25. Basile, A., Gugliuzza, A., Iulianelli, A., & Morrone, P., (2011). Membrane technology 
for carbon dioxide (CO2) capture in power plants. In Advanced Membrane Science and 
Technology for Sustainable Energy and Environmental Applications (pp. 113–159). 
Woodhead Publishing. 
26. Gruenewald, M., & Radnjanski, A., (2016). Gas–liquid contactors in liquid absorbent-
based PCC. In: Absorption-Based Post-Combustion Capture of Carbon Dioxide (pp. 
341–363). Woodhead Publishing. 
27. Wang, C. H., Zhao, D., Tsutsumi, A., & You, S., (2017). Sustainable energy technologies 
for energy saving and carbon emission reduction. Appl. Energy, 194, 223–224. 
28. Ward, A. J., Feng, L., & Møller, H. B., (2021). Chemical absorption—Amine absorption/ 
stripping technology for biogas upgrading. In: Emerging Technologies and Biological 
Systems for Biogas Upgrading (pp. 29–55). Academic Press. 
29. Shukla, S. K., Khokarale, S. G., Bui, T. Q., & Mikkola, J. P. T., (2019). Ionic liquids: 
Potential materials for carbon dioxide capture and utilization. Front. Mater., 6, 42. 
30. Spigarelli, B. P., & Kawatra, S. K., (2013). Opportunities and challenges in carbon 
dioxide capture. J. CO2 Util., 1, 69–87. 
31. Tong, D., Maitland, G., & Trusler, M. F. P., (2013). Solubility of carbon dioxide in 
aqueous blends of 2-amino-2-methyl-1-propanol and piperazine. Chem. Eng. Sci., 101, 
851–864. 
32. Heldebrant, D. J., Koech, P. K., Glezakou, V. A., Rousseau, R., Malhotra, D., & Cantu, 
D. C., (2017). Water-lean solvents for post-combustion CO2 capture: Fundamentals, 
uncertainties, opportunities, and outlook. Chem. Rev., 117, 9594–9624. 
33. Perry, R. J., & Davis, J. L., (2012). CO2 capture using solutions of alkanolamines and 
aminosilicones. Energy and Fuels., 26(4), 2512–2517. 
34. Hong, S. Y., Lee, J. S., Cheong, M., & Kim, H. S., (2014). Isolation and structural 
characterization of bicarbonate and carbonate species formed during CO2 absorption/ 
desorption by a hindered alkanolamine. Energy Procedia, 63, 2190–2198. 

 
552 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
35. Mistry, A. N., Ganta, U., Chakrabarty, J., & Dutta, S., (2019). A review on biological 
systems for CO2 sequestration: Organisms and their pathways. Environ. Prog. Sustain. 
Energy, 38(1), 127–136. 
36.  Ghannoum, O., Evans, J. R., & Von, C. S., (2011). Nitrogen and water use efficiency of 
C4 plants. In: Raghavendra, A. S., & Sage, R. S., (eds.), C4 Photosynthesis and Related 
CO2 Concentrating Mechanisms (pp. 129–146). Springer, New York, NY. 
37.  Migliardini, F., De Luca, V., Carginale, V., Rossi, M., Corbo, P., Supuran, C. T., & 
Capasso, C., (2014). Biomimetic CO2 capture using a highly thermostable bacterial 
α-carbonic anhydrase immobilized  on a polyurethane foam. J. Enzyme Inhib. Med. 
Chem., 29(1), 146–150. 
38.  Liew, F., Henstra, A. M., Winzer, K., Köpke, M., Simpson, S. D., & Minton, N. P., 
(2016). Insights into CO2 fixation pathway of Clostridium autoethanogenum by targeted 
mutagenesis. MBio., 7, 00427–516. 
39.  Rittmann, S., Seifert, A., & Herwig, C., (2015). Essential prerequisites for successful 
bioprocess development of biological CH4 production from CO2 and H2. Cri. Rev. 
Biotechnol., 35, 141–151. 
40.  Mohd, Y. N. H., Maeda, T., Hu, A., Yu, C. P., & Wood, T. K., (2015). CO2 sequestration by 
methanogens in activated sludge for methane production. Appl. Energy., 142, 426–434. 
41. Ghorbani, A., Rahimpour, H. R., Ghasemi, Y., Zoughi, S., & Rahimpour, M. R., (2014). 
A review of carbon capture and sequestration in Iran: Microalgal biofixation potential in 
Iran. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev., 35, 73–100. 
42. Pires, J. C. M., Alvim-Ferraz, M. C. M., Martins, F. G., & Simões, M., (2012). Carbon 
dioxide capture from flue gases using microalgae: Engineering aspects and biorefinery 
concept. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev., 16, 3043–3053. 
43. Singh, U. B., & Ahluwalia, A., (2013). Microalgae: A promising tool for carbon 
sequestration. Miti. Adap. Strat. Global. Change., 18, 73–95. 
44. Brilman, W., Alba, L. G., & Veneman, R., (2013). Capturing atmospheric CO2 using 
supported amine sorbents for microalgae cultivation. Biomass. Bioener., 53, 39–47. 
45. Zhu, C., Zhai, X., Xi, Y., Wang, J., Kong, F., Zhao, Y., & Chi, Z., (2020). Efficient CO2  
capture from the air for high microalgal biomass production by a bicarbonate pool. J. 
CO2 Util., 37, 320–327. 
46.  Yao, B., (2011). A model and experimental study of phosphate uptake kinetics in algae: 
Considering surface adsorption and P-stress. J. Environ. Sci., 23, 189–198. 
47.  Stewart, C., & Hessami, M. A., (2005). A study of methods of carbon dioxide capture 
and sequestration the sustainability of a photosynthetic bioreactor approach. Energy 
Convers. Manage, 46(3), 403–420. 
48.  Putra, J. D., Rahman, A., Deendarlianto, N., Prihantini, N., & Nasruddin, B., (2020). 
The effect of modification photobioreactor bubble columns by using horizontal baffle 
on bubble velocity for microalgae. In: AIP Conference Proceedings (Vol. 2255, No. 1, 
p. 030053). AIP Publishing LLC. 
49.  Wei, L., Wang, Q., Xin, Y., Lu, Y., & Xu, J., (2017). Enhancing photosynthetic biomass 
productivity of industrial oleaginous microalgae by overexpression of RuBisCO 
activase. Algal Res., 27, 366–375. 
50.  Nouha, K., John, R. P., Yan, S., Tyagi, R., Surampalli, R. Y., & Zhang, T. C., (2015). 
Carbon capture and sequestration: Biological technologies. In: Carbon Capture and 
Storage: Physical, Chemical, and Biological Methods (pp. 65–111). Reston: American 
Society of Civil Engineers. 

 
553 
Phototrophic Carbon Capture Using Natural Microalgal Whole-Cell Support 
51.  Ores, J. D. C., Fernandes, S. S., & Kalil, S. J., (2016). Production of carbonic anhydrase 
by marine and freshwater microalgae. Biocatalysis., 34, 57–65. 
52.  Parker, L., Folger, P., & Stine, D. D., (2008). Capturing CO2 from Coal-Fired Power 
Plants: Challenges for a Comprehensive Strategy. CRS report for congress. 
53. Philander S. G., (2008), Encyclopedia 
 
of Global Warming and Climate Change  
(2nd edn.). SAGE Publications Inc., Princeton University, USA. http://dx.doi. 
org/10.4135/9781412963893. 
54. Ono, E., & Cuello, J. L., (2004). Design parameters of solar concentrating systems for 
CO2 mitigating algal photobioreactors. Energy, 29(9), 1651–1657. 
55.  Sánchez-Miron, A., Cerón-García, M. C., García-Camacho, F., Molina-Grima, E., & 
Chisti, Y., (2002). Growth and characterization of microalgal biomass produced in 
bubble column and airlift photobioreactors: Studies in fed-batch culture. Enz. Microbiol. 
Technol., 31(7), 1015–1023. 
56.  Reyna-Velarde, R., Cristiani-Urbina, E., Hernández-Melchor, D. J., Thalasso, F., & 
Cañizares-Villanueva, R. O., (2010). Hydrodynamic and mass transfer characterization 
of a flat-panel airlift photobioreactor with high light path. Chem. Eng. Process., 49(1), 
97–103. 
57.  Kuo, C. M., Lin, T. H., Yang, Y. C., Zhang, W. X., Lai, J. T., & Wu, H. T., (2017). Ability 
of an alkali-tolerant mutant strain of the microalga Chlorella sp. AT1 to capture carbon 
dioxide for increasing carbon dioxide utilization efficiency. Bioresour. Technol., 244, 
243–251. 
58.  Le Quéré, C., Raupach, M. R., Canadell, J. G., Marland, G., Bopp, L., Ciais, P., Conway, 
T. J., et al., (2009). Trends in the sources and sinks of carbon dioxide. Nature Geosci., 
2, 831–836. 
59.  Vuppaladadiyam, A. K., Yao, J. G., Florin, N., George, A., Wang, X., & Labeeuw, 
L., (2018). Impact of flue gas compounds on microalgae and mechanisms for carbon 
assimilation and utilization. Chem. Sus. Chem., 11, 334–355. 
60.  Li, S., Luo, S., & Guo, R., (2013). Efficiency of CO2 fixation by microalgae in a closed 
raceway pond. Bioresour. Technol., 136, 267–272. 
61. Ugwu, C. U., Aoyagi, H., & Uchiyama, H., (2008). Photobioreactors for mass cultivation 
of algae. Bioresour Technol., 99(10), 4021–4028. 
62. Wang, B., Li, Y., Wu, N., & Lan, C. Q., (2008). CO2  bio-mitigation using microalgae. 
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 79, 707–718. 
63.  Yang, B., Liu, J., Ma, X., Guo, B., Liu, B., & Wu, T., (2017). Genetic engineering of the 
Calvin cycle toward enhanced photosynthetic CO2 fixation in microalgae. Biotechnol. 
Biofuels., 10, 229. 
64.  Zhou, W., Wang, J., Chen, P., Ji, C., Kang, Q., & Lu, B., (2017). Bio-mitigation of 
carbon dioxide using microalgal systems: Advances and perspectives. Renew. Sustain. 
Energy Rev., 76, 1163–1175. 
65.  Kao, C. Y., Chen, T. Y., Chang, Y. B., Chiu, T. W., Lin, H. Y., & Chen, C. D., (2014). 
Utilization of carbon dioxide in industrial flue gases for the cultivation of microalga 
Chlorella sp. Bioresour. Technol., 166, 485–493. 
66.  Cheah, W. Y., Show, P. L., Chang, J. S., Ling, T. C., & Juan, J. C., (2015). Biosequestration 
of atmospheric CO2 and flue gas-containing CO2 by microalgae. Bioresour. Technol., 
184, 190–201. 

 
554 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
67. Claquin, P., Kromkamp, J. C., & Martin-Jezequel, V., (2004). Relationship between 
photosynthetic metabolism and cell cycle in a synchronized culture of the marine alga 
Cylindrotheca fusiformis (Bacillariophyceae). Eur. J. Phycol., 39, 33–41. 
68. Basu, S., (2015). Operational strategies for maximizing CO2 utilization efficiency by 
the novel microalga Scenedesmus obliquus SA1 cultivated in lab scale photobioreactor. 
Algal Res., 12, 249–257. 
69.  Broeren, M. L. M., Kuling, L., Worrell, E., & Shen, L., (2017). Environmental impact 
assessment of six starch plastics focusing on wastewater-derived starch and additives. 
Resour. Conserv. Recycl., 127, 246–255. 
70.  Singh, J., & Dhar, D. W., (2019). Overview of carbon capture technology: Microalgal 
biorefinery concept and state-of-the-art. Front. Mar. Sci., 6, 29. 
71.  Long, B. M., Förster, B., Pulsford, S. B., Price, G. D., & Badger, M. R., (2021). RuBisCO 
proton production can drive the elevation of CO2 within condensates and carboxysomes. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 118(18). 
72.  Laws, E. A., Terry, K. L., Wickman, J., & Chalup, M. S., (2004). A simple algal 
production system designed to utilize the flashing light effect. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 
25(10), 2319–2335. 
73.  Barati, B., Zeng, K., Baeyens, J., Wang, S., Addy, M., Gan, S. Y., & Abomohra, A. E. 
F., (2021). Recent progress in genetically modified microalgae for enhanced carbon 
dioxide sequestration. Biomass and Bioenergy, 145, 105927. 
74.  Carrieri, D., Ananyev, G., Brown, T., & Dismukes, G. C., (2007). In vivo bicarbonate 
requirement for water oxidation by photosystem II in the hypercarbonate-requiring 
cyanobacterium Arthrospira maxima. J. Inorg. Biochem., 101, 1865–1874. 
75.  Gong, J., & You, F., (2014). Global optimization for sustainable design and synthesis 
of algae processing network for CO2 mitigation and biofuel production using life cycle 
optimization. AIChE J., 60, 3195–3210. 
76.  Moumin, G., Ryssel, M., Zhao, L., Markewitz, P., Sattler, C., Robinius, M., & Stolten, 
D., (2020). CO2 emission reduction in the cement industry by using a solar calciner. 
Renew. Energy, 145, 1578–1596. 
77.  Helman, Y., Natale, F., Sherrell, R. M., LaVigne, M., Starovoytov, V., Gorbunov, M. 
Y., & Falkowski, P. G., (2008). Extracellular matrix production and calcium carbonate 
precipitation by coral cells in vitro. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 105(1), 54–58. 
78.  Blatti, J. L., Michaud, J., & Burkart, M. D., (2013). Engineering fatty acid biosynthesis 
in microalgae for sustainable biodiesel. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 17, 496–505. 

Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 19  
Role of Downstream Processing 
for Production and Purification of 
Fermentation-Based Products Produced 
via Whole-Cell Biotransformation 
MOHIT MISHRA,1 BHAIRAV PRASAD,2 ARUNIMA SUR KARKUN,1 
ARPITA SRIVASTAVA,1 ADITYA KATE,3 SHARDA DHADSE,3 and 
AKANKSHA CHOUBEY1 
1Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Amity University Chhattisgarh, Raipur, 
Chhattisgarh, India 
2Chandigarh College of Technology, Chandigarh Group of Colleges, 
Mohali, Punjab, India 
3Environmental Biotechnology and Genomics Division, NEERI, Nagpur, 
Maharashtra, India 
ABSTRACT 
In the current environmental crisis era, manufacturing significant biotechno­
logical products employing supportable biological techniques has become 
well-known. It appears to be undesirable in the case of industrial yield 
dependent on downstream processing (DSP) of bio-catalyst products, which 
leads to an increase in the DSP rate. When combined with a highly selec­
tive bio-catalyst-based technique, whole-cell bio-catalysis could represent a 
significant advantage over chemical processes. When compared to the highly 
selective bio-catalysis-based approach, which might affect the process and 

 
 
 
 
556 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
purification of industrial goods, the whole-cell system is more promising. 
The advancement of whole-cell bio-catalysis has increased its acceptance as 
a green process because the reaction is carried out via a biological approach. 
Industrial microbial products are widely employed due to their ease of use 
and the fact that they use renewable bioresources as feedstock. The DSP is 
vital to the economic sustainability of the product on the commercial plat­
form. The manufacturing, DSP, recovery, and purification procedures of the 
various products produced via whole-cell bio-catalysis and fermentation are 
discussed in this chapter. 
19.1 INTRODUCTION 
In bioprocess engineering, after the production of any biological products, 
the recovery of the valuable product is always a challenging task. In general, 
the extraction and purification of biological product is costly and ranges 
from 20–70% of the total manufacturing cost. Therefore, in bioprocess engi­
neering, the downstream processing (DSP) should be economical and viable 
to reduce production cost. The production cost of DSP is depending on the 
characteristics of the product as well as other parameters such as temperature, 
pH, and aseptic condition. It has already been reported that the production 
cost also depends on the site of the product, viz. whether extracellular or 
intracellular. The production cost is higher in intracellular while the cost is 
lower in extracellular. The production cost also depends on the choice of 
medium and fermentation type (solid state or submerged), types of catalyst, 
and whole-cell or immobilized cell fermentation [1]. DSP refers to the chain 
of operations required to seize biological materials such as microbial cells, 
tissue culture, or plant tissue and obtain from them a pure and homogenous 
protein product. The DSP is tedious and multistep processes that concen­
trate and derive a pure product initially trapped within a biological matrix 
with a huge and different group of unwanted molecule. By using their 
physical, chemical, and physicochemical properties, the useful one can be 
eluted from contaminants [2]. The DSP required a vast range of equipment 
systems varying in size and complexity [3]. Complexity and the generation 
of undesirable byproducts have caused an effect on purity and DSP cost [4]. 
Currently, the biocatalysis or biotransformation is widely used in biotech­
nology industries for the production of biopharmaceuticals, organic acids, 
amino acids, and ethanol, and other bio-active substances is progressively 
eye-catching due to their ability to bypass environmental issues [5]. On the 
other hand, the chemical and synthetic production method generates a lot 

 
 
 
 
 
 
557 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
of obnoxious pollutants contributing to environmental problems. Therefore, 
in dissimilarity with chemical activators, whole-cell biocatalysis offers 
certain excellent benefits. Whole-cell biocatalysis provides an organized and 
environment-friendly substitute to conventional chemical synthesis for the 
manufacturing of bulk and fine biochemicals [3]. In the past decades, various 
industries have adopted the biocatalysis principle to synthesize diverse prod­
ucts. The whole-cell-based approach includes mainly microalgae, bacteria, 
fungi, both yeast and mold also, and some plants directly or enzyme isolated 
from them that execute biocatalysis in the biotransformation process [6]. 
This biosynthetic plan provides high selectivity as well as the green process 
to produce the desired products. It also has other advantages like smooth 
reaction conditions, low toxicity, as well as the likelihood of recycling [7]. 
In addition, the synthesis of chemicals and products via biocatalysis gener­
ates bio-degradable waste, which makes it one of the most important tools 
to create the perfect “green technology.” Various products such as ethanol, 
alcohols, ketones, antibiotics, vitamins, and amino acids, which are metabo­
lites formed through whole-cell catalysis, have high demand in the commer­
cial sector and DSP makes a great deal in making them market viable [8]. 
Fungal species, mainly yeast and some bacterial species viz. Acetobacter, 
Citrobacter, Bacillus, Zymomonas, Gluconobacter, Lactobacillus, etc., are 
the major microbes used in the industrial fermentation process. Fermenters 
or bioreactors of several 1,000 liters are used in the fermentation process [9]. 
Biological products accumulated during whole-cell fermentation are gener­
ally accumulated in broth media in liquid form, fluids, non-refined extracts, 
etc., to proceed through the process of separation and purification steps to 
recover the product in the desired concentration [10]. The purification and 
recovery of the desired products is achieved via DSP. The crucial steps and 
condition of DSP is illustrated in Figure 19.1. 
19.2 ENZYMES 
Enzymes or biocatalyst are certain class of proteins that having catalytic 
activity participated in biological reactions and convert a substrate into 
product. For example, invertase produced by yeast an enzyme that hydrolyzed 
the common table sugar into fructose and glucose [11]. The utilization of 
this enzyme has been done since centuries for commercial practices such as 
fermenting sugars, patisserie, tannery, milk station, etc. Proteases are another 
enzyme is originated from bacteria used in brewing and baking [12]. A 
diverse group of microorganisms viz. Bacterial and fungal species especially 

 
 
 
 
558 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
yeast has been widely used for the production of microbial enzymes. Among 
many enzymes the utmost major enzymes produced on enormous scale in 
industries are protease, alpha-amylase, glucose isomerase and glucoamylase 
[1]. Some microbial enzymes exhibited significant biological activities are 
shown in Table 19.1. 
FIGURE 19.1 Schematic representation of generalized downstream process. 
TABLE 19.1 Enzymes Produced from Specific Microorganisms 
Enzyme Produced 
Microorganisms 
Proteases 
Amylases 
Bacillus Subtilis (Bacteria) 
Penicillinase 
Pectinases 
Aspergillus niger 
Catalase 
Aspergillus niger 
Molds 
Glucose oxidase 
Penicillium notatum 
Glucosidases 
Aspergillus flavus 
Lactase 
Saccharomyces fragilis 
Invertase 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae Yeast 

 
 
 
 
 
559 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
19.2.1 DOWNSTREAM PROCESSING (DSP) OF THE ENZYMES 
The fermentation mixture obtained after the fermentation process contain 
mixture of substances such as microorganisms, water, unutilized nutrients, 
other additives, by products and desired protein. Hence, an appropriate DSP 
technique is always necessary to harvest the desired product from the reac­
tion mixture. The recovery and purification of the enzyme from fermenta­
tion broth required a systematic and continuous order. It may vary based 
on the type of fermentation, such as solid state or submerged fermentation, 
but the essential principle is the same in both [13]. The DSP involves the 
removal of insoluble by physical method, cell separation, cell disruption/cell 
debris (intracellular), and purification of the target protein. The well-known 
biotechnological techniques in DSP are chiefly filtration, centrifugation, and 
precipitation [13]. 
19.2.2 FILTRATION 
Filtration is the most widely accepted techniques in DSP for the separation 
of biomass or cell residues from the fermentation mixture. It is the easiest 
method by applying gravitational pull the filtrate is obtained from the mother 
liquor. The rate of filtration is also influenced by many traits such as the shape 
and size of the microorganism, viscosity of the culture medium, presence of 
impurities or contaminants and obviously temperature of the medium. The 
size of the organism, presence of contaminants, viscosity of the medium, and 
temperature. Process of filtration is shown in Figure 19.2. 
FIGURE 19.2 Simple filtration. 
A number of filters such as absolute filters, membrane filter, depth filters, 
and rotary drum vacuum filters are widely used in DSP [14]. Depth filters 

 
 
560 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
are made up of filamentous matrix viz. asbestos, glass wool or filter papers. 
The insoluble particles trapped within the matrix and remaining supernatant 
liquid passes out. Filamentous fungi generally removed by this method [15]. 
On the other hand, absolute filters are whose pore size is generally smaller 
used for the removal of bacterial cells [14]. Rotary drum vacuum filters are 
commonly used for separation of the broth contain 10–40% solids by volume 
and particles size of 00.5–10 μm. Rotary drum vacuum filters have been 
effectively used for the filtration of yeast and mold. The apparatus is easy 
with low power eating and simple to operate. The filtration unit consists of a 
rotating drum partly deep in a reservoir of broth. As the drum rotates, it picks 
up the biomass which gets deposit as a slab on the drum shell. This filter slab 
can be removed without any difficulty [16]. 
19.2.3 CENTRIFUGATION 
The process of centrifugation is primarily based on the principle of density 
dissimilarity between the constituent part to be separated and its medium. 
Therefore, centrifugation is widely used for the separation of immiscible 
solid particles from liquid phase. Although centrifugation routinely used in 
laboratory are very common and easy but at the same time there are some 
limitations of this process in industrial scale. However, currently there are 
enormous development carried out in industrial centrifugation process in 
which a continuous feeding of mother liquor and the collection of clarified 
fluid done, at the same time the deposited solids removed intermittently. 
These unit operations are together based on the differences in density amid 
insoluble particles and the fluid present in the surrounding. Sedimentation 
banks on gravity, settling to attain solid-liquid separation accomplished in 
either rectangular or circular flow tanks [17]. For acquiring a solid concen­
trate and elucidated supernatant, centrifugation encompasses the mechanical 
application of a centrifugal force. There are numerous kinds of centrifuges 
for the isolation of enzymes. The centrifuges that are mainly utilized are 
multi-chamber centrifuge, tubular bowl centrifuge, disc bowl centrifuges, 
perforate bowl basket centrifuge and solid bowl scroll centrifuge [18]. The 
centrifugation process plays significant role in purification of protein and 
nucleoprotein (virus) from host cells and tissue. The modified basic centrifu­
gation with high revolution (> 65,000 rpm), i.e., principally employed for the 
separation of mitochondrial, nuclear fractions and disrupted cells or tissues 
[19] (Figure 19.3). 

 
 
 
561 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
FIGURE 19.3 Schematic representation of basket centrifugation. 
19.2.4 PRECIPITATION 
Precipitation is a process in which the large and flocculated molecules tend to 
precipitate by gravitational pull in a liquid medium. This technique is widely 
used in chemical industry for the concentration of some macromolecules 
like protein, nucleic acid and carbohydrates. The method has been also in 
practice for removal of unwanted by products or impurities such as nucleic 
acid, pigments, and salts, etc., several other molecules viz. organic solvents, 
neutral salt and high molecular weight polymers such as ionic and non-ionic 
are separated by modulating the temperature and pH of the medium. Apart 
from the conventional precipitation method some specific protein precipi­
tations methods such as ligand and affinity precipitation are also used in 
industry for higher yield [20]. 
19.2.4.1 NEUTRAL SALTS 
Neutral salts such as ammonium sulfate have been widely used in industry 
due to its high solubility, non-toxicity, economical, and easily availability. 
It increase the hydrophobic interactions between the protein molecules and 
hence precipitation. The rate of precipitation is greatly influenced by pH, 
temperature, and protein concentration in the medium [21]. 

 
562 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
19.2.4.2 ORGANIC SOLVENTS 
The organic solvents such as ethanol, ether, acetone, and propanol are 
commonly used for protein precipitation. These solvents reduce the dielectric 
constant of the medium and increase the electrostatic interaction between 
protein molecules that lead to precipitation. As we know the organic solvents 
denature protein, therefore the process of precipitation must be carried out 
below 0°C [22]. 
19.2.4.3 NON-IONIC POLYMERS 
Non-ionic polymers such as poly-ethylene glycol (PEG) can precipitate 
protein by reducing the water availability for protein salvation and precipi­
tate protein. The PEG has other advantages like it does not denature protein 
and also non-toxic to human being as well as to the environment [23]. 
19.2.4.4 IONIC POLYMERS 
Ionic polymers are charged polymers either anionic or cationic. Polyacrylic 
acid and polyethyleneimine are extensively used in industry. As they form 
complex with opposite charge protein that cause charge neutralization and 
precipitation [20]. 
19.3 BIO-ETHANOL 
Bio-ethanol or ethyl alcohol or grain alcohol (C2H5OH) is a possible replace­
ment of gasoline. Currently the production of bio-ethanol increased globally 
due to its high fuel capacity, low toxicity and environment friendly nature 
[24]. Bio-ethanol used for commercial purpose are mainly produced from 
edible feedstock such as sugarcane and corn which make it cost-effective 
[25]. The utilization of ethanol fuel for commercial purpose alarms global 
problem such as stability change in global climate, vulnerability to biodeg­
radation, environmental pollution, the national safety, and the farm economy 
[26]. The production cost of ethanol is greatly influenced by types of 
substrates used, its availability near the production plant and purification 
method [27]. Distillation being a strong separation technique used chiefly by 
industries for purification purpose of ethanol. Apart from distillation several 

 
 
563 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
other purification techniques viz. adsorption, gas stripping and ozonation are 
also employed for ethanol [28]. 
19.3.1 DOWNSTREAM PROCESS OF BIO-ETHANOL 
The ethanol recovery from the fermentation process is a complex process 
and needs close eye contact. Distillation and adsorption are two common 
method used for the recovery and purification of ethanol. In both the process 
for achieving purity assay minimum 99.9% by volume required to reduce the 
water content approximately 0.5% by volume. 
19.3.2 DISTILLATION 
Distillation is the most prevailing, prominent, and reliable industrial refine­
ment process for the recovery of ethanol [29]. The process of distillation 
is also influenced by the azeotropic nature of ethanol-water solution. The 
major technique use in the revival of pure ethanol from mother liquor 
includes adsorption distillation, azeotropic distillation, vacuum distillation, 
membrane distillation, diffusion distillation, extractive distillation and 
chemical dehydration [30]. For large scale production, extractive distillation 
is dominantly used. Currently, several green emerging distillation techniques 
such as salt distillation, ohmic assisted hydro-distillation, and pervaporation 
techniques gaining importance due to their less energy requirement over the 
other conventional distillation [33]. 
19.3.3 ADSORPTION 
Adsorption is a process in which a atom, ion, molecules of dissolved solid, 
liquid or gas adhere to a surface. The many biological and chemical entities 
can be concentrated by using these techniques in the industry. Convention­
ally, activated charcoal had a great applicability as adsorbent material and 
has been widely used in early days. Depending upon their physical and 
chemical properties, compounds are adsorbed on the surface of adsorbent 
[28]. The particles with larger size are adsorbed more quickly due to their 
low diffusivities. Compounds having similar polarity to the adsorbent surface 
bias to be more adsorbed. Adsorption is a pioneering method for ethanol 
recovery. In this method the fermentation broth is passed through a porous 

 
 
 
 
564 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
adsorbent. The pore size of the absorbent must be similar to the molecular 
size of ethanol for close proximity binding. Basically this process has two 
parts: the adsorptions followed by desorption to elude the pure and concen­
trated ethanol and regenerate the absorbent. In this process the fermentation 
broth is passes through a bed of packed adsorbent, in which the ethanol is 
recovered and adsorbent is recycled for next round [32–34]. The most widely 
used adsorbent for ethanol recovery is activated carbon. Some researchers 
compared two hydrophobic ZSM-5 type zeolite viz. HiSiv 3000 and CBW 
8014 with four activated carbon adsorbents viz. Filtrasorb 200, WV-B 1500, 
Nuchar RGC 40 and Sorbonorit B4) [35]. It was found that, activated carbon 
adsorbent WV-B 1500 has shown the utmost capacity to adsorb ethanol. 
Moreover, it also has higher ethanol adsorption efficiency than other two 
zeolites. Similarly, the adsorption capacity of MSC (molecular sieving 
carbon) was tested on pilot scale for ethanol production [36]. 
19.4 ORGANIC ACIDS 
Organic acids have been utilized naturally for food preservation, nutrition, 
and animal feeds fora long time. These compounds usually have low­
molecular-weight containing one or more carboxyl groups [37]. Production 
of organic acids is profitable due to their high applicability and mainly 
synthesize by chemical method and fermentation method [38]. Due to 
high production rate in microbial fermentation, the fermentation process is 
preferred over chemical method. The organic acid such as lactic acid (LA), 
acetic acid, succinic acid (SA), citric acid, etc., widely used in cosmetic and 
textile industries. Some organic acids also used as food preservatives, leav­
ening agents in dairy and bakery products [39]. Through biological process 
the genetic engineering of particular species is obtained for production of 
organic acids via fermentation. There is urgent need to find out an alternative 
to the costly process in industrial production of organic acids. Similar to the 
processes in the chemical route the important factor is recovery of finalized 
product. Furthermore efficient ways of handing the dilute broth has to be to 
an enabled mass production of organic compound with acidic characteristics 
via fermentation [40, 41]. A lot of studies have been carried out on recovery 
of organic acids from the broth [42]. Membrane separation, extraction, and 
distillation, precipitation, chromatography are mainly included in the defined 
processes [44]. The first step of DSP is often cell separation to separate cell 
debris, proteins, etc., from fermentation broths. 

 
 
 
565 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
19.4.1 SUCCINIC ACIDS (SAS) 
SA has potential to be an imperative C4 building chemical. It has been 
listed in the top 12 value-added chemicals by the US Department of Energy 
(DoE) [45]. SA has numerous utilization (e.g., synthesis of butyrolactone 
1,4-butanediol, tetrahydrofuran, maleic succimide, itaconic acid (IA), 
N-methyl pyrrolidone and 2-pyrrolidinone). Biological production of SA 
from abundant and accessible biomass has developed a world-wide curi­
osity [46]. To compete with the latest manufacturing process of acids, its 
mandatory to have cost-effective DSP with enhanced production strains and 
mechanism of fermentation. Several processes such as precipitation and 
liquid-liquid extraction have been researched for the recovery of SA [47]. 
19.4.1.1 DOWNSTREAM PROCESSING (DSP) OF SUCCINIC ACID (SA) 
Generally, the recovery of SA takes place via centrifugation and ultrafiltra­
tion. At lower pH (pH-2.0) the crystallization of SA could be easily achieved 
at 4°C. Although the purification of SA is mostly achieved by crystallization 
and ultrafiltration from fermentation broth, which can be integrated with 
other separation methods such as calcium precipitation and ion exchange 
adsorption to optimize the DSP [48]. 
19.4.1.2 CRYSTALLIZATION 
Crystallization is a well-known process used in the recovery level of amino 
acids and organic acids from fermentation broth. It is a well-known tech­
nique used for the purification of a various array of chemical compounds. 
Crystallization is a two-stage process in which firstly, the development of 
nuclei in a super-saturated solution takes place and secondly, crystal growth 
progress [49]. The crystal growth progresses simultaneously and could be 
controlled to the range in an independent manner. Industrial crystallizers 
can be batch or continuous courses with the attainment of super saturation 
through cooling or by elimination of solvent (evaporative crystallization) 
[50]. Basically, the pH value of the fermentation broth is controlled to less 
than 2.0, to crystallize SA at 4°C, while other byproducts industrial-based 
organic acids are miscible. By this single step method, the SA yield was 
70% with 90% purity. While the SA production yield and purity was 52% 

 
 
566 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
and 92% respectively with traditional calcium precipitation coupled with 
ion-exchange adsorption [50]. 
19.4.1.3 ULTRA-FILTRATION 
Ultra-filtration is similar to membrane filtration method that required a 
pressure or concentration gradient as driving force to elucidate the compo­
nents of mixture through a semi-permeable membrane [51]. It is unlike to 
reverse osmosis, micro-filtration, or nano-filtration, except for the size of the 
molecules it retains [52, 53]. The pressure utilized in ultra-filtration process 
ranges from 0.3 to 1 MPa. Similarly, four different types of ultra-filtration 
membranes namely (RC 10 kDa, PES 10 kDa, PES 30 kDa and PES 100 
kDa) investigated for the recovery and purification of SA from fermentation 
broth. The results displayed a 99.6% removal of microorganisms with protein 
removal were observed about 80.06% from using RC 10 kDa, 86.83% from 
using PES 10 kDa, 86.43% from using PES 30 kDa and 79.86% from using 
PES 100 kDa [54] (Figure 19.4). 
FIGURE 19.4 Ultrafiltration. 
19.4.2 LACTIC ACID (LA) 
Lactic acid (LA) is most important organic acid widely used in various 
sectors. It is produced by Lactobacillus species for multiple purposes 

 
567 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
ranging from medicines to food preservative. LA market has been boosted 
due to high demand for poly-lactic acid (PLA), a biodegradable plastic [55]. 
The production of LA involves multiple step process, starting from the 
pre-treatment of the specific feedstock, then going through the hydrolysis, 
fermentation, and finishing at the separation and purification in the end, 
so-called downstream [56]. Food waste, sugarcane, coffee pulp, molasses 
avocado seeds, acid whey, are some various alternative substrates to name a 
few reported efficient LA production [44]. 
19.4.2.1 DOWNSTREAM PROCESSING (DSP) OF LACTIC ACID (LA) 
Recently, the demand of LA significantly increased globally from 2019 to 
2025 [56] with a CAGR of 18.7%. Biological production, i.e., fermentation 
is the preferred method for producing LA due to its high yield and purity 
over chemical method. However, the recovery and purification of LA from 
fermentation media is always problematical and expensive. The most adopt­
able technique used in DSP for the recovery of LA using ion-exchange resins 
is by adsorption technique. Some other traditional methods such as chemical 
neutralization, liquid-liquid interaction, membrane filtration and distillation 
are also used for LA recovery. 
19.4.2.2 ION-EXCHANGE CHROMATOGRAPHY 
The molecular electric charge is the basis of separation; its effectiveness is 
remarkable at early downstream stages [57]. Divinely-styrene copolymer, 
crystalline cellulose or dextrin, molecules of acidic, basic, and neutral nature 
can be separated by this technique. Adsorption is well employed technique 
used for the recovery of LA in DSP [58]. Since, the adsorption plan utilizing 
ion-exchange was discovered to the most effective process for LA, its getting 
much interest from scientists all over the world. The exchange of ions 
between a liquid and a solid phase are involved in Ion exchange. Alterna­
tively, it is a mechanism of separating the ions from an aqueous solution and 
shuffling it with another ionic species that are linked at the solid phase via 
electrostatic interactions to result in electroneutrality [59]. The ion exchange 
mechanism results in two ionic flux forms, either into the ion exchange 
particles or in the opposite direction out of the ion exchange particles [60]. 
This mechanism required a low-cost and basic equipment but its generally 
applied to a low salt concentration [61]. It means the ways of neutralizing 

 
 
 
 
 
568 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
fermentation broth by excluding LA in-site, producing a low level of LA 
to the fermentation broth [62, 63]. Similar to silicate pellet adsorbent can 
separate LA and exclude more important components, more importantly 
protein [64]. To separate and purify the LA from fermentation broth, anion 
exchange resins are frequently used. As LA exists in the form of anionic 
lactate ions (C3H5O3
–), it requires to be bonded to a catatonic molecule for 
separation. Many commercial anion-exchange resins have been used before 
for the separation of LA from the fermentation broth, including Amberlite 
IRA67, IRA-96, IRA-92, IRA-400, Lewatit S3428, DOWEXXUS 40,196, 
and DOWEX-50) [65, 66] (Figure 19.5). 
FIGURE 19.5 (a) Cation exchanger: positively charged cations are retained by negatively 
charged functional group; and (b) anion exchanger: negatively charged anions are retained by 
positively charged functional group. 
19.4.3 ACETIC ACID 
Acetic acid is a chemical compound obtained from the manufacturing proce­
dure by the chemical synthesis [50]. Moreover, acetic acid as vinegar (A 
presence of 4% acetic acid as per standard) is produced mainly through the 
oxidation of ethanol by bacterial genera such as Acetobacter: 
1.  Vinegar is known for ages as a fermented product, which was initially 
obtained from the putrefaction of wine [51]. This is mostly used as 
a food preservative, medicinal agent, antibiotic, household cleaning 
agent, etc. Vinegar is depicted mostly by the double fermentation, i.e., 

 
 
 
569 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
an alcoholic fermentation of glucose is done generally by a desirable 
species of yeast like Saccharomyces cerevisiae and secondly by the 
fermentation of suitable species of Acetobacter from alcohol oxida
tion to obtain the acetic acid [52]. 
2.  As per the theory, the efficient yield obtained of the acetic acid on 
sugar by this route is 67%, i.e., two moles of acetic acid synthesized 
from every mole of sugar consumed [53]. Figure 19.6 represents a 
cell factory formed to manufacture several characteristics of products 
via fermentation and bioprocesses. 
­
FIGURE 19.6 A cell factory representation. 
Several kinds of vinegar which are produced by the commercial processes 
are included in subsections. 
19.4.3.1 TRICKLING BED REACTOR 
The circulating generator is utilized as a trickling large tank. It is mostly 
made up of wood, such as redwood [54]. Air is dispersed in the generator 
by numerous inlets spaced uniformly from each other. The mixture of water, 
acetic acid [Acids of carboxylic origin], and ethyl alcohol are pumped inside 
from collection reservoir up to the top of the tank via a cooler. Furthermore, 
the liquid drips via packing and settles down in the bottom reservoir [55]. 
The most important factor is that generator’s temperature is maintained at 
29°C at the top of the reservoir and similarly 35C at the down. From the 
reservoir, the vinegar is regularly taken out and substituted in order to have 
ethanol concentration in a range of 0.4 to 5% [56]. Lastly, if ethanol lowers 

 
 
570 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
down in the generator, then the bacterial strain will die ultimately leading to 
the inactivation of the generator. 
19.4.3.2 SUBMERGED CELL REACTOR 
A German-based company Heinrich Frings manufactured the aerator known 
as the Frings Acetatoris said to be submerged in cell reactor [56]. It is a 
constituent of a stainless-steel tank with the cooling coil internally, a high-
speed agitator, and a foam breaker. The method of air supply, possibly due 
to the high-velocity rotor that pulls air in from the room to the bottom of the 
tank is the most distinctive characteristic of this type of aerator. As ethanol 
starts falling to around 0.2% by volume, the finished product of about 25 
to 45% is recovered [57]. Fresh stock of the ethanol is fed into the tank to 
start the cycle again. The time of the cycle varies as per the percentage of 
the vinegar. About 35 hours and the rate of production can be multiplied to 
obtain 12% of vinegar. Moreover, there is a requirement of efficient refining 
equipment for vinegar filtration which is produced by the reactor as the mash 
has both the vinegar and bacterial species that produced it [58]. 
19.4.3.3 TOWER REACTOR 
This type of reactor is a relatively newly incorporated aeration system to 
produce food product like vinegar. It is built using polypropylene supported 
by fiberglass. A plastic punch plate covers the cross-section of the tower and 
holds up the liquid and completes the process of aeration [59]. It is more 
economical and satisfactory for producing the desirable vinegar than Fring’s 
aerator of the equivalent productive capacity. By filtration, mostly with the 
help of filter aids such as bentonite, vinegar purification is done [60]. After 
clearing, vinegar is processed for the packaging in the tight sealed bottled, 
pasteurizing at 65 to 69°C for around 35 minutes and then cooled to 22°C. 
Furthermore, by the reverse osmosis membrane method, vinegar can be 
concentrated along with the freezing method [61]. 
19.4.4 CITRIC ACID 
Citric acid is the most essential organic acid broadly used in soft drinks, wines, 
candies, cosmetics products, metal cleaning, detergent, as an antioxidant in 

 
 
 
571 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
fruits which are frozen and vegetables, etc. Around 70% of the total food 
acidulant market is dependent on Citric acid [62]. 
In 1893, Wehment first explained citric acid which is a product of mold 
fermentation. The commercial processes are based on the glucose were manu­
factured in 1919. Citric acid is produced by many organisms from carbon 
source [63]. Aspergillus Niger is a promising organism for manufacturing 
citric acid industrially. It is structured to note that one mole of carbon source 
yield one mole of citric acid which does not utilize oxygen. The overall reac­
tion describes the energy-producing process as it yields one mole of ATP and 
two moles of NADH2 per mole of citric acid resulting in minimum growth 
need during yield. Although most of the organisms produced citric acid from 
a carbon source, this feature makes fermentative manufacturing of citric acid 
the potential for the process of biological control [64]. The fermentation 
broth from various culture methods is considered similarly for regaining and 
refining the citric acid. For the last 20 years, industries of citric acid have 
tremendously seen shifts in ownership and growth as global yield of this 
organic acid at about 1 million tons a year [65]. 
There are several recovery methods used in the processing: Precipitation, 
Filtration, and extraction. Figure 19.7 depicts the recovery and purification 
process of commercial citric acid production. 
FIGURE 19.7 Flowchart for the recovery and purification of citric acid. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
572 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
19.4.5 ITACONIC ACIDS (IAS) 
It is also known as methylene SAwhich is structurally substituted methacrylic 
acid and an unsaturated dibasic acid. An acrylic resin having 5% IA that poten­
tially gives high-ranking features in bonding the printing inks on the surface 
of the printing material [66]. The elements of acrylic fibers of organic acids 
are used in detergents and food constituents, etc., serve the main application. 
At previous times, IA was synthesized from pyrolytic products of citric acid 
or with the help of conversion of aconitic acid. However, at present, it is now 
industrially produced with the direct fermentation of carbon sources. The 
microorganisms which are known as producers of the IAs are microbes such 
as Aspergillus terreus [67], of which the last-mentioned has the potential 
to manufacture the organic acid commercially with either the process of 
surface or submerged fermentation. The constituents have a sugar source, 
ammonium sulfate, corn steep liquor, and various mineral salts of potassium, 
magnesium, copper, calcium, etc. The compositions of copper and iron in 
the fermentation of citric acid are very critical. The parameters including the 
temperature at 39 to 42°C, 2–3 pH, continuous average aeration, dynamic 
agitation, etc., are essential for smooth proceedings of the fermentation for 3 
to 5 days. The maximum product yield is reported to be 189–200 g/L from a 
constituent containing around 30% sugar [68]. Therefore, the concentration 
of IA on carbon sources generally ranges from 55 to 75%. 
The IA recovery processing has the following several methods such as: 
• Acidification of Itaconic precipitates, if present; 
• Filtration to remove the mycelium and other suspended solids; 
• Activated carbon treatment; 
• Filtration to remove the carbon; 
• Evaporation and crystallization. 
There are further steps involved if an efficiently high-quality end product 
is needed such as carbon decolorization, ion exchange, and solvent extrac­
tion are performed. 
19.5 AMINO ACIDS 
These are the structural form of the proteins and their composition most 
proteins are made up of natural amino acids [69]. They are manufactured by 
fermentation as the L-enantiomer except for methionine which is produced 

 
 
 
 
573 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
from the racemic acid mixture chemically. Industrially, the potential common 
amino acids produced are the glutamate, lysine L-forms of glutamic acid 
arginine, phenylalanine, aspartic acid, isoleucine, tyrosine, cysteine, isoleu­
cine, leucine, histidine, threonine, tryptophan, citrulline, ornithine. Amino 
acid obtained from the biological processes differs such as fermentation, 
extraction from inherent natural origin and enzymatic method, etc. [70]. On 
other hand, amino acids which are synthesized from the purified proteins are 
derived either chemically or by enzymatic hydrolysis. Amino acid is also 
produced through industrial byproducts, plant or animal sources, organic, 
enzymatic, and microbiological processes. 
19.5.1 GLUTAMIC ACID 
It is also known as mono-sodium glutamate (MSG) which is a significant 
flavor intensifier for genuine and treated nutriment along with protecting the 
flavors and color of preserved foods [71]. Due to some pharmaceutical uses, 
Amino acid such as glutamic acid is also significant amino acid. Numerous 
glutamic acids are producing bacterial species as follows: 
• Corynebacterium glutamicum; 
• Brevibacterium flavum; 
• Brevibacteriumdivaricatum. 
Bacterial species like Corynebacterium glutamicum are highly utilized 
for manufacturing in companies among the above microorganisms [72]. 
Recently Kyowa Hakko Company has accomplished a genome map of this 
particular amino acid-producing organism and striving towards the improve­
ment of glutamic acid fermentation yield leading to creating the manufac­
turing system through pathway engineering. 
Various types of essential compounds such as carbon sources (glucose 
or molasses), a nitrogen source such as ammonium sulfate, soya urea, etc., 
mineral salts such as potassium, copper, iron, magnesium, etc. [73], and less 
than 5 micrograms of biotin are components of Fermentation medium. This 
is a major essential factor in the fermentation process. If the biotin content 
comes to be high then the organism would synthesize LA, therefore, the 
reaction involved in the process should be stable enough for the sub-optimal 
growth leading to the production of glutamic acid [12]. The recuperation 
of the glutamic acid after fermentation can be carried out by the addition 
of acid to pH 3.4, heating at 87°C, maintaining the sufficient process rate, 

 
 
574 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
and filtering the thicken solids from the fermented broth. The clarified broth 
is processed through the evaporation process leading to the crystallization 
to obtain high purity glutamic acid [10]. Moreover, there are several other 
processes such as membrane filtration or ion exchange techniques for the 
recovery process. 
19.5.2 LYSINE 
Lysine is an essential amino acid, and the greatest sources are animal proteins 
and other dairy products rich in proteins [11]. On the other hand, the low 
sources of lysine amino acids are corn, wheat, and rice. The fermentation 
process was possible due to the utilization of the mutant Corynebacterium 
glutamicum or Brevibacterium flavum. Molasses despite being the most 
common source of carbon was replaced with glucose due to increasing the 
efficiency and simplicity of the DSP [13]. An ample amount of biotin around 
30 g/l essentially be added to the sample to avert the evacuation of glutamic 
acid as, unlike molasses, glucose doesn’t fulfill the requirement of biotin 
naturally, hence, it is exogenously mixed in the medium. Figure 19.8 depicts 
the biosynthesis pathway of lysine from Corynebacterium glutamicum. The 
reaction can be represented as follows that is entangled in the formation of 
the lysine from the Sucrose source. 
C H O  + 2NH  + 5O  → C H O N  + 6CO  + 7H O
12
22
11
3
2
6
14
2
2
2
2
Synthesis of lysine is done through the fermented broth in which Ion-
exchange resins are most equipped. The crystallization process is carried out 
from the water by lysine which is isolated 98% lysine monohydrochloride 
[78]. It is the highly industrial form of lysine. The whole fermentation broth 
is evaporated to produce the lower grade of lysine and syrup is used as animal 
forage to boost nutrition supplements. 
19.6 ANTIBIOTICS 
Since the 1940s, novel, and efficient antibiotics have been in severe search 
all around the world. There are more than 10,000 antibiotics discovered from 
the microorganism sources [79]. There are around 59% of the antibiotics 
produced from fermentation and the remaining are produced by the combi­
nation of microbial synthesis and consequent alteration. 

 
 
 
575 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
FIGURE 19.8 Biosynthesis of lysine from glucose in Corynebacterium. 
19.6.1 PENICILLIN 
The novel mold from the strain of Penicillium notatum is observed and 
taken into consideration by Alexander Fleming was a very usual laboratory 
contaminant. Presently, the strain Penicillium chrysogenum was the potential 
producer of penicillin on the industrial scale [80]. The strain observed by 
Alexander Fleming has produced penicillin only by surface fermentation 
technique with very minimal production. The effective, enhanced cultures 
under submerged aerobic fermentation parameters results a drastic increase 
in productivity. Moreover, the continuous improvements have helped to 
improve the yield to around 20 to 30 g/l. To increase the efficiency of the 
penicillin biosynthesis, Phenylacetic acid or its derivatives are utilized in the 
fermentation broth [17]. The desired culture is circulated from the upstream 
to downstream process for further production, recovery, and purification. 
The broth is clarified to initiate the recovery process with the help of rotary 
vacuum filters. Due to the nature of penicillin, which is acidic, it is taken as 
solvent from the aqueous phase using a continuous counter-current extractor, 
for example, methyl isobutyl ketone at pH 2–2.5. Furthermore, the penicillin 
is taken out with an aqueous alkaline solution at pH 6–7, where recovery 
productivity is 90% which is critical for this step. Aqueous solution under­
goes the chilling, acidification, and extraction again with a solvent mostly 
chloroform or ether [18]. Finally, penicillin is extracted again into the water 
by the process of titration with a mixture of base depending on the salt (such 

 
 
576 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
as sodium or potassium) of penicillin is desired as the end product. A typical 
flow sheet of the entire DSP is shown in Figure 19.9. 
FIGURE 19.9 Recovering and partial purification of the penicillin G. 
19.7 BIOPHARMACEUTICALS 
Biopharmaceuticals are the compounds that are mainly proteins developed 
with the help of traditional small drugs by the application of Biotechnology. 
These are commercially manufactured through microbes such as bacteria or 
yeast by the fermentation including insulin, hepatitis B, various interferon, 
interleukin 2, etc. [19]. Table 19.2 significantly depicts the major products 

 
 
 
577 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
involved in the biopharmaceutical industry out of which some are developed 
with the cell culture of mammals. 
TABLE 19.2 Examples of the Biopharmaceutical Products with Potential Targets and 
Manufacturers 
Products 
Potential Targets 
Manufacturers 
Insulin 
Diabetes 
Eli Lily, Novo Nordisk 
Therapeutic antibodies 
Cancer 
Genentech, Amgen, etc. 
Human growth hormones 
Growth deficiency 
Genentech, Pharmacia, etc. 
Interferon alpha 
Hepatitis 
Roche 
Interferon beta 
Multiple sclerosis 
Biogen 
Factor VIII 
Hemophilia 
Bayer 
The recombinant DNA technology was used to commercialize the first 
human biopharma product that is Insulin. Its fermentation expression in E. 
coli, downstream processes such as purification, recovery, etc., interprets to 
be an example of large-scale production of the biopharma products [84]. 
Insulin is generally expressed as N-terminal extended pro-insulin using the 
top promoter due to its small size. The aerobic fermentation is carried with 
certain maintained parameters such as temperature at 37°C, neutral pH, 
etc. When the process of fermentation moves out of the natural repressor 
tryptophan, the trp operon is turned on [85]. There is a rapidly building up of 
chimeric protein inside the cells as insoluble inclusion bodies and this forma­
tion prevents proteolysis which aids product recovery. The fermentation of 
recombinant E. coli usually runs for about 18 to 24 hours [86]. In the end, a 
total of 20–30% of the total dry cell mass of inclusion bodies is accounted 
for. The purification from the inclusion bodies, the C-peptide detached from 
the pro-insulin with the help of trypsin and carboxypeptidase. Drug Devel­
opment is a quiet, measured, long, and costly process that requires standard 
funding of $0.8 billion, 13–15 years for findings, expansion, diagnosis, and 
testing from stage 1 to 3, and lastly FDA approval before the marketing of 
the developed drug. Keeping it in close observation, the microbial fermenta­
tion and biocatalysts may facilitate drastic and innovative methods for the 
potential drug candidates. Also, the computational drug designing approach 
will potentially give the leads to carry further for the development process 
and minimize the target time of the whole process [87]. Accurate purity, 
concentration, and dosage at the market requirement price and capacity can 
be achieved by reproducing the innovative method [88]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
578 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
19.8 CONCLUSION 
In this chapter, we tried to explain the application of Biocatalysis in the 
production and purification of industrially important biotechnological prod­
ucts such as enzymes, ethanol, organic acids, and antibiotics. We explored 
different applications of whole-cell biocatalysis in product recovery. 
Industrial biotechnology plays a very important role in separation strategies. 
So, a detailed understanding of cell growth and product optimization, and 
purification is necessary. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
antibiotics 
• 
biopharmaceuticals 
• 
downstream processing 
• 
fermentation 
• 
itaconic acids  
• 
organic acids  
• 
penicillin 
• 
whole-cell bio-catalysis 
REFERENCES 
1. Kumar, R., Dhurandhar, R., Chakrabortty, S., & Ghosh, A. K., (2022). Downstream 
process: Toward cost/energy effectiveness. In: Handbook of Biofuels (pp. 249–260). 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-822810-4.00012-9. 
2. Gottschalk, U., (2011). Overview of downstream processing in the biomanufacturing 
industry. In: Comprehensive Biotechnology (2nd edn., Vol. 3, pp. 669–682). https://doi. 
org/10.1016/B978-0-08-088504-9.00238-5. 
3. Johansson, M. I., Ostling, M., & Jagschie, G., (2018). Downstream processing 
equipment. In: Biopharmaceutical Processing (pp. 477–492). https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
B978-0-08-100623-8.00025-6. 
4. Du, Z., Shen, C. B., Huang, W., & Han, Y., (2022). Investigation on the impact of the 
induced shock wave on the hydrogen mixing augmentation in a supersonic crossflow: A  
numerical study. Fuel, 312, 122961. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FUEL.2021.122961. 
5. Desai, S. K., Bera, S., & Mondal, D., (2019). Multifaceted synthesis, properties and 
applications of polyurethanes and its composites. Cur. Org. Chem., 23(4), 361–389. 
https://doi.org/10.2174/1385272823666190315160000. 

 
579 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
6. Bell, E. L., Finnigan, W., France, S. P., Green, A. P., Hayes, M. A., Hepworth, L. J., 
Lovelock, S. L., et al., (2021). Nat. Rev. Meth. Prim., 1(1), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s43586-021-00044-z. 
7. Wang, Z., SundaraSekar, B., & Li, Z., (2021). Recent advances in artificial enzyme 
cascades for the production of value-added chemicals. Biores. Tech., 323, 124551. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2020.124551. 
8. Bhavya, G., Belorkar, S. A., Mythili, R., Geetha, N., Shetty, H. S., Udikeri, S. S., & 
Jogaiah, S., (2021). Remediation of emerging environmental pollutants:  A review based 
on advances in the uses of eco-friendly biofabricated nanomaterials. Chemosphere, 275, 
129975. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CHEMOSPHERE.2021.129975. 
9. Li, Y. H., & Gu, J. D., (2002). A more accurate definition of water characteristics in stone 
materials for an improved understanding and effective protection of cultural heritage 
from biodeterioration. Int. Biodet. Biodeg. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibiod.2021.105338. 
10. Hu, W., Zhang, J., Wu, Z., Loka, D. A., Zhao, W., Chen, B., Wang, Y., et al., (2022). 
Effects of single and combined exogenous application of abscisic acid and melatonin on 
cotton carbohydrate metabolism and yield under drought stress. Ind. Crops Prod., 176, 
114302. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.INDCROP.2021.114302. 
11. Kaushal, J., Singh, G., & Arya, S. K., (2022). Emerging trends and future prospective in 
enzyme technology. Value-Addition in Food Products and Processing Through Enzyme 
Technology, 491–503. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-89929-1.00036-6. 
12. Bretschneider, L., Heuschkel, I., Wegner, M., Lindmeyer, M., Buhler, K., Karande, 
R., & Buhler, B., (2021). Conversion of cyclohexane to 6-hydroxyhexanoic acid 
using recombinant Pseudomonas taiwanensis  in a stirred-tank bioreactor. Frontiers in 
Catalysis, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/FCTLS.2021.683248. 
13. Siddiqui, S. A., Pahmeyer, M. J., Assadpour, E., & Jafari, S. M., (2022). Extraction and 
purification of D-limonene from orange peel wastes: Recent advances. Indu. Cro. Prod., 
177, 114484. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.INDCROP.2021.114484. 
14. Smith, P. G., & John, S. S., (2005). “Vacuum filter.” Dictionary of Water and Waste 
Management (pp. 452–453). Boston: Elsevier. ISBN 0-7506-6525-4. 
15. Sparks, T., (2012). Solid-Liquid Filtration – A Users’ Guide to Minimizing Costs and 
Environmental Impact; Maximizing Quality and Productivity. Elsevier. 
16. Stickland, A. D., White, L. R., & Scales, P. J., (2011). Models of rotary vacuum drum 
and disc filters for flocculated suspensions. AIChE Journal, 57(4), 951–961. doi: 
10.1002/aic.12310. 
17. Salehi, E., Khajavian, M., Sahebjamee, N., Mahmoudi, M., Drioli, E., & Matsuura, T., 
(2022). Advances in nanocomposite and nanostructured chitosan membrane adsorbents 
for environmental remediation: A review. Desalination, 527, 115565. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.DESAL.2022.115565. 
18. Singh, D., & Bhattacharya, S., (2022). Natural bio functional lipids containing solid 
self-microemulsifying drug delivery system of canagliflozin for synergistic prevention 
of type 2 diabetes mellitus. J. Drug Deli. Sci. Tech., 103138. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
JDDST.2022.103138. 
19. Nascimento, F. R., Viktor De, P. B. B. J., Prado De, F. A. A., Braga, R. E. O. M. A., Pizziolo, 
V. R., Aparecida, D. S. A., Antônio De, O. M. T., et al., (2022). Dibenzoylmethane 
derivative inhibits melanoma cancer in vitro and in vivo through induction of intrinsic 
and extrinsic apoptotic pathways. Chemico-Biological Interactions, 351, 109734. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CBI.2021.109734. 

 
580 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
20. Golunski, S., Astolfi, V., Carniel, N., De Oliveira, D., Di Luccio, M., Mazutti, M. A., 
& Treichel, H., (2011). Ethanol precipitation and ultrafiltration of inulinases from 
Kluyveromyces marxianus. Separation and Purification Technology, 78(3), 261–265. 
21. Pang, H., Hou, S., Kaspari, S., & Mayewski, P. A., (2014). Influence of regional 
precipitation patterns on stable isotopes in ice cores from the central Himalayas. The 
Cryosphere, 8, 289–301. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-8-289-2014. 
22. Kwak, H., Hwang, D. W., Hwang, Y. K., & Chang, J., (2012). Recovery of alkyl 
lactate from ammonium lactate by an advanced precipitation process. Separation and 
Purification Technology, 93, 25–32. doi: 10.1016/j.seppur.2012.03.025. 
23. Seader, J. D., Henley, E. J., & Roper, D. K., (2011). Separation Process Principles. John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., United States of America. 
24. Dhande, D. Y., Choudhari, C. S., Gaikwad, D. P., Sinaga, N., & Dahe, K. B., (2022). 
Production of Spark Ignition Engine Performance with Bioethanol-Gasoline Mixes 
Using a Multilayer Perception Model. https://doi.org/10.1080/10916466.2022.20258 
32. 
25. Edeh, I., (2020). Bioethanol production: An overview. In: Inambao, F., (ed.), Bioethanol 
Technologies. doi: 10.5772/intechopen.94895. 
26. Gautam, R., Nayak, J. K., Daverey, A., & Ghosh, U. K., (2022). Emerging sustainable 
opportunities for waste to bioenergy: An overview. Waste-to-Energy Approaches 
towards Zero Waste, 1–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-85387-3.00001-X. 
27. Shi, Y., Yu, F., Wu, Y., Dai, L., Feng, Y., Chen, S., Wang, G., et al., (2022). Identification 
of a novel peptide that activates alcohol dehydrogenase from crucian carp swim bladder 
and how it protects against acute alcohol-induced liver injury in mice. J. Pharma. 
Biomed. Analy., 207, 114426. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JPBA.2021.114426. 
28. Anderson, A., Anbarasu, A., Pasupuleti, R. R., Sekar, M., Praveenkumar, T. R., & 
Aravind, K. J., (2022). Treatment of heavy metals containing wastewater using 
biodegradable adsorbents: A  review of mechanism and future trends. Chemosphere, 
133724. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CHEMOSPHERE.2022.133724. 
29. Shen, Y., Su, Z., Zhao, Q., Shan, R., Zhu, Z., Cui, P., & Wang, Y., (2022). Molecular 
simulation and optimization of extractive distillation for separation of dimethyl 
carbonate and methanol. Process Safety and Environmental Protection, 158, 181–188. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.PSEP.2021.11.055. 
30. Mizsey, N. E., Hancsok, J., Boldyryev, S., & Varbnov, P., (2015). Analysis of energy 
saving by combination of distillation and pervaporation for biofuel production. Chem. 
Eng. Process, 98, 86–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cep.2015. 10.010. 
31. Mathew, A., Sankarlal, S., Rajput, A., Sekar, K., & Sahoo, S. K., (2022). Biodegradable 
bio sourced epoxy thermosets, blends, and composites. Biodegradable Polymers, Blends 
and Composites, 431–464. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-823791-5.00020-X. 
32. Nagy, E., Mizsey, P., Hancsók, J., Boldyryev, S., & Varbanov, P., (2015). Analysis of 
energy saving by combination of distillation and pervaporation for biofuel production. 
Chem. Eng. Process. Process Intensif., 98, 86–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cep.2015. 
10.010. 
33. Azevedo, A. D., Fornasier, F., Szarblewski, M. D. S., Schneider, R. D. C. S., Hoeltz, 
M., & Souza, D. D., (2017). Life cycle assessment of bioethanol production from cattle 
manure. Journal of Cleaner Production, 162, 1021–1030. 

 
581 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
34. Fujita, H., Qian, Q., Fujii, T., Mochizuki, K., & Sakoda, A., (2011). Isolation of ethanol 
from its aqueous solution by liquid phase adsorption and gas phase desorption using 
molecular sieving carbon. Adsorption, 17, 869–879. 
35. Hashi, M., Tezel, F. H., & Thibault, J., (2010). Ethanol recovery from fermentation broth 
via carbon dioxide stripping and adsorption. Energy Fuels, 24, 4628–4637. 
36. Seo, D. J., Takenaka, A., Fujita, H., Mochidzuki, K., & Sakoda, A., (2018). Practical 
considerations for a simple ethanol concentration from a fermentation broth via a single 
adsorptive process using molecular-sieving carbon. Renew. Energy, 118, 257–264. 
37. Zago, E., Tillier, C., De Leener, G., Nandasiri, R., Delporte, C., Bernaerts, K. V., & 
Shavandi, A., (2022). Sustainable  production of low molecular weight phenolic 
compounds from belgian brewers’ spent grain. Bioresource Technology Reports, 17, 
100964. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BITEB.2022.100964. 
38. TadeuFuess, L., Zaiat, M., & Augusto, O. D. N. C., (2022). Can biogas-producing 
sugarcane biorefineries techno-economically outperform conventional ethanol 
production? Deciphering the way towards maximum profitability. Energy Conversion 
and Management, 254, 115206. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ENCONMAN.2022.115206. 
39. Mancini, E., Ramin, P., Styrbæck, P., Bjergholt, C., Soheil, M. S., Gernaey, K. V., 
Luo, J., & Pinelo, M., (2022). Separation of succinic acid from fermentation broth: 
Dielectric exclusion, Donnan effect and diffusion as the most influential mass transfer 
mechanisms. Separation and Purification Technology, 281, 119904. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.SEPPUR.2021.119904. 
40. Fadeev, A. G., & Meagher, M. M., (2001). Opportunities for ionic liquids in recovery of 
biofuels. Chem. Commun., 3, 295–296. https://doi.org/10.1039/b006102f. 
41. Huh, Y. S., Jun, Y. S., Hong, Y. K., Song, H., Lee, S. Y., & Hong, W. H., (2006). 
Effective purification of succinic acid from fermentation broth produced by Mannheimia 
succiniciproducens. Process Biochem., 41, 1461–1465. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
procbio.2006.01.020. 
42. Habova, V., Melzoch, K., Rychtera, M., & Sekavova, B., (2004). Electrodialysis as a 
useful technique for lactic acid separation from a model solution and a fermentation 
broth. Desalination, 162, 361–372. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0011-9164(04)00070-0. 
43. Ren, Y. P., Wang, J. J., Li, X. F., & Wang, X. H., (2012). Reactive extraction of short-
chain fatty acids from synthetic acidic fermentation broth of organic solid wastes and 
their stripping. J. Chem. Eng. Data, 57, 46–51. https://doi.org/10.1021/je2006456. 
44. Zhou, J., Bi, W. T., & Row, K. H., (2011). Purification of lactic acid from fermentation 
broth by spherical anion exchange polymer. J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 120, 2673–2677. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/app.33410. 
45. Jantama, K., (2022). Technology toward biochemicals precursors and bioplastic production. 
A-Z of Biorefinery, 265–341. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-819248-1.00017-8. 
46. Kumar, V., Yadav, S. K., Patel, A. K., Mishra, B. B., Ahluwalia, V., Thakur, L. K., & 
Kumar, J., (2022). Bioprocessing of agri-food processing residues into nutraceuticals 
and bioproducts. Cur. Dev. Biotech. Bioeng., 301–322. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
B978-0-12-823506-5.00010-2. 
47. Kurzrock, T., & Weuster-Botz, D., (2010). Recovery of succinic acid from fermentation 
broth. Biotechnol Lett., 32(3), 331–339.doi: 10.1007/s10529. 
48. Li, Q., DanWang, D., Wu, Y., Li, W., Zhang, Y., Xing, J., & Su, Z., (2010). One step 
recovery of succinic acid from fermentation broths by crystallization. Separation and 
Purification Technology, 72(3), 294–300. 

 
582 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
49. Prameela, S. E., Yi, P., Hollenweger, Y., Liu, B., Chen, J., Kecskes, L., Kochmann, 
D. M., et al., (2022). Strengthening magnesium by design: Integrating alloying and 
dynamic processing. Mechanics of Materials, 104203. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
MECHMAT.2021.104203. 
50. Mondal, M., Roy, S., & Mukhopadhyay, M., (2022). Process intensification of cooling 
crystallization of cholesterol from acetone solution using CO2 gas bubbles: Experiments 
and modeling. Chem. Eng. Processing. – Process Intensification, 172, 108794. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/J.CEP.2022.108794. 
51. Arola, K., Van, D. B. B., Manttari, M., & Kallioinen, M., (2019). Treatment options for 
nanofiltration and reverse osmosis concentrates from municipal wastewater treatment: 
A review. Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 49, 2049–2116. 
52.  Prochaska, K., Antczak, J., Regel-Rosocka, M., & Szczygiełda, M., (2018). Removal of 
succinic acid from fermentation broth by multistage process (membrane separation and 
reactive extraction). Sep. Purif. Technol., 192, 360–368. 
53. Bonnélye, V., Guey, L., & Del, C. J., (2008). UF/MF as RO pre-treatment: The real 
benefit. Desalination, 222, 59–65. 
54. Wang, C., Li, Q., Tang, H., Yan, D., Zhou, W., Xing, J., & Wan, Y., (2012). Membrane 
fouling mechanism in ultrafiltration of succinic acid fermentation broth. Bioresour. 
Technol., 116, 366–371. 
55. Song, L., Yang, D., Liu, R., Liu, S., Dai, L., & Dai, X., (2022). Microbial production 
of lactic acid from food waste: Latest advances, limits, and perspectives. Bioresor. 
Technol., 345, 126052. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2021.126052. 
56. Din, N. A. S., Joe, L. S., Maskat, M. Y., Mutalib, S. A., & Zaini, N. A. M., (2021). Lactic 
acid separation and recovery from fermentation broth by ion-exchange resin: A review. 
Bioresour. Bioprocess., 8, 31. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40643-021-00384-4. 
57. Aydogan, O., Bayraktar, E., & Mehmetoglu, U., (2011). Aqueous two-phase extraction 
of lactic acid: Optimization by response surface methodology. Sep. Sci. Technol., 46(7), 
1164–1171. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 01496 395. 2010.550270. 
58. Nagase, K., Kitazawa, S., Kogure, T., Yamada, S., Katayama, K., & Kanazawa, H., 
(2022). Viral vector purification with thermoresponsive-anionic mixed polymer brush 
modified beads-packed column. Separation and Purification Technology, 286, 120445. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SEPPUR.2022.120445. 
59. Zhang, M., Sun, B., Wei, S. K., & Zhang, X., (2022). Molecular dynamics study on 
electric field-facilitated separation of H2O/O2 through nanoporous graphene oxide 
membrane. Journal of Molecular Liquids, 351, 118634. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
MOLLIQ.2022.118634. 
60. Kammerer, J., Carle, R., & Kammerer, D. R., (2010). Adsorption and ion exchange: 
Basic principles and their application in food processing. J. Agric. Food Chem., 59(1), 
22–42. 
61. Kumar, A., Thakur, A., & Panesar, P. S., (2019). Lactic acid and its separation and 
purification techniques: A review. Reviews in Environmental Science Bio/Technology, 
1–31. 
62. Wang, C., Li, Q., Wang, D., & Xing, J., (2014). Improving the lactic acid production of 
Actinobacillus succinogenes by using a novel fermentation and separation integration 
system. Process Biochem., 49(8), 1245–1250. 
63. Boonmee, M., Cotano, O., Amnuaypanich, S., & Grisadanurak, N., (2016). Improved 
lactic acid production by in situ removal of lactic acid during fermentation and a 

 
583 
Role of Downstream Processing for Production and Purification 
proposed scheme for its recovery. Arab J. Sci. Eng., 41(6), 2067–2075. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1007/ s13369- 015- 1824-5. 
64. Aljundi, I. H., Belovich, J. M., & Talu, O., (2005). Adsorption of lactic acid from 
fermentation broth and aqueous solutions on zeolite molecular sieves. Chem. Eng. Sci., 
60(18), 5004–5009. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ces. 2005. 04. 034. 
65. Tong, W. Y., Fu, X. Y., Lee, S. M., Yu, J., Liu, J. W., Wei, D. Z., & Koo, Y. M., (2004). 
Purification of L(+)-lactic acid from fermentation broth with paper sludge as a cellulosic 
feedstock using weak anion exchanger amberlite IRA-92. Biochem. Eng. J., 18(2), 
89–96. 
66. Quintero, J., Acosta, A., Mejia, C., Rios, R., & Torres, A. M., (2012). Purification of 
lactic acid obtained from a fermentative process of cassava syrup using ion exchange 
resins. Revista Facultad de Ingenieria Universidad de Antioquia, 65, 139–151. 
67. Desai, S. K., Bera, S., & Mondal, D., (2019). Multifaceted synthesis, properties and 
applications of polyurethanes and its composites. Current Organic Chemistry, 23(4), 
361–389. https://doi.org/10.2174/1385272823666190315160000. 
68. Du, Z. B., Shen, C. B., Huang, W., & Han, Y., (2022). Investigation on the impact of the 
induced shock wave on the hydrogen mixing augmentation in a supersonic crossflow: A  
numerical study. Fuel, 312, 122961. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.FUEL.2021.122961. 
69. Aljabali, A. A. A., Obeid, M. A., Awadeen, S. A., Migdadi, E. M., Barhoum, A., 
Al Zoubi, M. S., Kumar, C. D., et al., (2022). Nature bioinspired, and engineered 
nanomaterials. Fundamentals of Bionanomaterials, 31–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
B978-0-12-824147-9.00002-9. 
70. Bell, E. L., Finnigan, W., France, S. P., Green, A. P., Hayes, M. A., Hepworth, L. J., 
Lovelock, S. L., et al., (2021). Biocatalysis. Nature Reviews Methods Primers, 1(1), 
1–21. https://doi.org/10.1038/s43586-021-00044-z. 
71. Wang, Z., SundaraSekar, B., & Li, Z., (2021). Recent advances in artificial enzyme 
cascades for the production of value-added chemicals. Bioresource Technology, 323, 
124551. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2020.124551. 
72. Bhavya, G., Belorkar, S. A., Mythili, R., Geetha, N., Shetty, H. S., Udikeri, S. S., & 
Jogaiah, S., (2021). Remediation of emerging environmental pollutants:  A review based 
on advances in the uses of eco-friendly biofabricated nanomaterials. Chemosphere, 275, 
129975. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CHEMOSPHERE.2021.129975. 
73. Liu, Y. F., Liu, Z. L., Ye, Y. L., Zhou, L., Liu, J. F., Yang, S. Z., Gu, J. D., & Mu, B. Z., 
(2021). Aminirod propionatiphilus Gen. Nov., Sp. Nov., an isolated secondary fermenter 
in methanogenic hydrocarbon-degrading communities. International Biodeterioration 
& Biodegradation, 165, 105323. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IBIOD.2021.105323. 
74. Klement, T ., & Büchs, J., (2013). Itaconic acid – a biotechnological process 
in change. Bioresource Technology, 135, 422–431. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
BIORTECH.2012.11.141. 
75. Wen, Z., Liao, W., & Chen, S., (2004). Hydrolysis of animal manure lignocellulosics 
for reducing sugar production. Bioresource Technology, 91(1), 31–39. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S0960-8524(03)00166-4. 
76. Damodaran, S., Parkin, K. L., & Kirk, L., (2017). Amino  Acids, Peptides, and Proteins, 
235–356. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781315372914-6. 
77. De Jesus, S. S., & Maciel, F. R., (2022). Are ionic liquids eco-friendly? Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, 157, 112039. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RSER.2021.112039. 

 
584 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
78. Desmond, P., Huisman, K. T., Sanawar, H., Farhat, N. M., Traber, J., Fridjonsson, E. O., 
Johns, M. L., et al., (2022). Controlling the hydraulic resistance of membrane biofilms 
by engineering biofilm physical structure. Water Research, 210, 118031. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.WATRES.2021.118031. 
79. Roychoudhury, A., & Das, N., (2022). Sewage sludge treatment and involvement of 
microbes. Sustainable Management and Utilization of Sewage Sludge,  165–181. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-85226-9_8. 
80. Singh, A., Pal, D. B., Mohammad, A., Alhazmi, A., Haque, S., Yoon, T., Srivastava, N., 
& Gupta, V. K., (2022). Biological remediation technologies for dyes and heavy metals 
in wastewater treatment: New insight. Bioresource Technology, 343, 126154. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2021.126154. 
81. Wijayasekara, K. N., & Wansapala, J., (2021). Comparison of a flavor enhancer 
made with locally available ingredients against commercially available mono sodium 
glutamate. International  Journal of Gastronomy and Food Science, 23, 100286. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/J.IJGFS.2020.100286. 
82. Thakur, S., Chaudhary, J., Singh, P., Alsanie, W. F., Grammatikos, S. A., & Thakur, 
V. K., (2022). Synthesis of bio-based monomers and polymers using microbes 
for a sustainable  bioeconomy. Bioresource Technology, 344, 126156. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2021.126156. 
83. Siddharth, T., Sridhar, P., Vanilla, V., & Tyagi, R. D., (2021). Environmental applications 
of microbial extracellular polymeric substance (EPS): A review. Journal of Environmental 
Management, 287, 112307. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JENVMAN.2021.112307. 
84. Butts, M., & Chu, N., (2022). Utilizing a baculovirus/insect cell expression system and 
expressed protein ligation (EPL) for protein semisynthesis. Current Protocols, 2(1), 
e348. https://doi.org/10.1002/CPZ1.348. 
85. Li, H., Wang, T., Su, C., Wu, J., & Van, D. M. P., (2022). Effect of ionic strength on 
the sequential adsorption of whey proteins and low methoxy pectin on a hydrophobic 
surface: A qcm-d study. Food Hydrocolloids, 122, 107074. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
FOODHYD.2021.107074. 
86. Singh, N., & Bose, K., (2022). Introduction to recombinant protein purification. 
Textbook on Cloning, Expression, and Purification of Recombinant Proteins, 115–140. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-16-4987-5_5. 
87. Audia, B., Fedele, C., Tone, C. M., Cipparrone, G., Priimagi, A., Fedele, C., & Priimagi, 
A., (2022). Surface stability of azobenzene-based thin films in aqueous environment: 
Light-controllable underwater blistering. Advanced Materials Interfaces, 2102125. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ADMI.202102125. 
88. Dhande, D. Y., Choudhari, C. S., Gaikwad, D. P., Sinaga, N., & Dahe, K. B., (2022). 
Prediction of Spark Ignition Engine Performance with Bioethanol-Gasoline Mixes 
Using a Multilayer Perception Model. https://doi.org/10.1080/10916466.2022.20258 
32. 

Whole-Cell Biocatalysis: Next-Generation Technology for Green Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals, Chemicals, 
and Biofuels. Sudheer D. V. N. Pamidimarri, Sushma Chauhan, & Balasubramanian Velramar (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 20  
Microbial Cell Systems for 
Polyhydroxyalkanoate Production and Its 
Diverse Applications 
NIDHI KUNJAR,1 PRIYANKA SINGH,2 VIJAY JAGDISH UPADHYE3 and 
ANUPAMA SHRIVASTAVA,4 
1Department of Microbiology, Parul Institute of Applied Sciences, 
Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat, India 
2The Novo Nordisk Foundation, Center for Biosustainability, 
Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark 
4Center of Research for Development (CR4D), Parul Institute of Applied 
Sciences (PIAS), Parul University (DSIR-SIRO Recognized), PO Limda, 
Tal Waghodia, Vadodara, Gujarat, India 
3Faculty of Life Health and Allied Sciences, Institute for Technology and 
Management (ITM), Vocational University, At and Po-Raval, 
Ta-Waghodia, Vadodara, Gujarat, India 
ABSTRACT 
Bioplastics are bio-based polymers that are deduced from biomass. Bioplas­
tics are eco-friendly, biodegradable, or compostable, largely compatible, 
and more importantly, renewable sources synthesized from biomass 
(sugarcane, sludge, and bacteria). By 2020, bioplastics could account for 
20% of all plastics requests. The sugars from shops are converted into 
plastics via various processing mechanisms, resulting in bioplastics. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
586 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
Other countries use sugar beets, wheat, or potatoes (which contain a good 
quantum of bounce). Popularly, there are two types of bioplastics produced 
in larger amounts, polylactide acid (PLA) and polyhydroxyalkanoates 
(PHA). Bioplastics can reduce our dependence on fossil fuels. Plastics 
are part of our day-to-day lives, used in disposable catering, tableware, 
biomedical, electronics, shopping bags, packaging, sports, toys, and orna­
mental products. Bioplastics could be a good alternative to synthetic bones 
and save the global plastic burden. This chapter discusses the production 
of bioplastics using renewable biomass and its commercial significance as 
well as its applications. 
20.1 INTRODUCTION 
Plastics derived from petrochemicals have become a burden and remain in 
the environment for an extended period due to their low biodegradability 
rate [1]. An ecology of plastic relies upon its molecular mass, substantial 
forms, unformed bits, and crystallinity. The short-chain polymer with 
lower complexity is more susceptible to biodegradation by the action of 
microorganisms [2, 3]. There are some biopolyesters that have proven to 
be fully biodegradable, like PHA, which could be synthesized biologically 
by microorganisms [4]. PHA could be a good alternative for replacing non­
degradable synthetic plastics so that reduces the synthetic plastic burden 
on the globe. We are evolving towards eco-friendly and bio-derived poly­
mers like polylactic acid (PLA) and cellulose acetate (CA) [5–8]. In recent 
times, numerous microorganisms have been grown to accumulate similar 
biopolymers. The ability of these microbial cells to produce extracellular 
polymers like polyhydroxy butyrate (PHB) at a rapid rate suggests that 
borrowing these whole-cell systems to substantiate and replace synthetic 
polymers soon [9]. Microalgae also play a major part in the conformation 
of bioplastics production [10]. Microalgae are easily cultivated in waste­
water and have several benefits compared to bacteria [11]. Their dimen­
sions and extreme protein constitution admit them to being converted into 
plastic appliances without any advanced treatment, making measurable 
products that are further environmentally friendly and help to eliminate 
waste products from the ecosystem [12]. Under the name of development, 
society has upgraded numerous raw tools and different products with an 
organic background manufactured by living organisms. There are similar 
products called biopolymers that contain advanced molecular weight 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
587 
Microbial Cell Systems for Polyhydroxyalkanoate Production 
classified based on which type of monomeric unit is used and the kind of 
structure formed [13]. In this chapter, notable attention is given to natural 
polyester like PHAs constructed from hydroxy alkanoic acids that are 
deduced by bacterial whole-cells via utilization of renewable biomass [14]. 
Plastic, particularly since the 1940s, has received prior attention due to its 
important friendly properties such as continuity, variability, intoxication, 
and mechanical robustness, all of which can replace products such as paper 
and glass used in packaging. As a result, plastic has now found a suitable 
place in our society and has also become a part of our daily lives [15]. Data 
on plastic, collected, and reported in 2015 by countries, showed that the 
periodic manufacture exceeded 300 million tons [16]. Indeed, 34 million 
pieces of plastics are left behind all over the world, with some of them 
ending up in landfills [17]. As compared to synthetic polymers, biobased 
polymers contain the peak manufacturing value of their corresponding suit­
able synthetic polymer. Hence, the use of bioplastics is getting an expen­
sive and auspicious cover to replace synthetic polymers [18]. Although 
ways have been upgraded in recent times for recovering plastic waste, as 
the world’s population increases, the demand for plastic also increases, so 
eventually the quantum of plastic waste will also increase and cause severe 
damage to ecosystem [19]. 
When the term bioplastic is used, it describes two different types of it. 
One is biodegradable plastic, and another is a plastic derived from renewable 
sources [20]. There are some biodegradable plastics like polysaccharides, 
collagen, polyglycolate (PGA), PHAs (Figure 20.1), and polyvinyl alcohol 
(PVA) [21–24]. As the yield of biopolymers increases, the cost of the product 
could be significantly reduced. Hence, soon, sustainably, it could replace 
non-biodegradable and renewable polymers. The cost incurred in the product 
is always the factor of concern in the profitable scale for any product. Produc­
tion of the product via utilizing waste biomass could be a way of producing 
it [25]. Plastic films are widely used in the food industry, and they are the 
most important irreplaceable condition in the current demand environment, 
with developed countries bearing an important share of the global plastic 
burden. Taking the environment of developing countries into account, they 
use the smallest plastics, e.g., India uses 9.7 kg/person/time as compared to 
other advanced countries, like the US, which has 109 kg/individual/time and 
in Europe, it’s 65 kg/individual/time [26]. Plastic use has increased exponen­
tially as a result of modernization, particularly in the diligence sectors such 
as food, packaging, and so on [27]. 

 
 
 
 
 
588 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
FIGURE 20.1 General structure of PHA.  
Source: Reprinted from Ref. [95]. Copyright © 2013 Anupama Shrivastav et al. https://  
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/  
20.2 ABOUT PHAS 
PHAs are the polyesters of R-hydroxy alkanoic acid [28]. The chemical 
composition of PHA is stimulated by the type of bacteria and their growth 
conditions and relative molecular mass [29, 30]. But the cost is much higher 
than the petroleum-based plastics in current times. The approximate price of 
PHB is about 15–30 US dollars per kg [31], because of which soon, PHA 
polymer is gaining increased attention (Table 20.1). Originally, the French 
scientist Lemoigne [32] found PHA and poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) (PHB) in 
Bacillus megaterium in 1926. Lemoigne [32] described how these bacteria 
could assemble an intracellular homopolymer composed of 3-hydroxybu­
tyric acids linked by ester bonds between the 3-hydroxyl group (-OH) and 
the carboxylic group (R-COOH) of the monomer. Currently, 300 different 
bacterial species have been reported to accumulate PHAs intracellularly 
[33, 34]. Prior to the development of chromatography methods, PHAs were 
recognized within bacterial cells using staining methods such as Sudan Black 
and Nile Blue A [35]. Frequently, the assembly of PHA and PHB is gener­
ally characterized by an insufficiency in non-carbonaceous nutrients like 
nitrogen. PHB is produced by more than 90 species of eubacteria and archaea, 
gram-positive as well as gram-negative bacteria have been determined from 
aerobic and anaerobic niches which are able to produce PHA [33, 34]. PHAs 
are accumulated within gram-positive as well as gram-negative bacteria as 
a storage material. These polymers contain thermoplastic properties, which 
attract researchers as well as industries toward PHA [28, 36]. PHB is the 
most common PHA and was originally reported in 1983 with a longer side 
chain [37]. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
589 
Microbial Cell Systems for Polyhydroxyalkanoate Production 
TABLE 20.1 Developing Significance of PHA in Medical Science 
Application Type 
Outcome 
Injury administration 
Surgery, skin replacements, surgical reticulation, swabs. 
Cardiovascular system 
Heart valves, cardiovascular fabric, vascular implantation. 
Orthopaedic 
Skeletal Scaffolds for collagen engineering, bone implantation, 
inner fixation apparatus (e.g., screws). 
Drug delivery 
Anticancer treatment with micro- and nanospheres. 
Genitourinary system 
Stents for urinary tract. 
Dental 
In the case of periodontitis, a barrier substance can be used to 
guide tissue regrowth. 
Technology-supported 
Contrast agents. 
tomography and 
ultrasonography. 
Source: Adapted from Ref. [94] 
20.3 TYPES AND PROPERTIES OF PHA 
Presently, PHAs are concerned into three classes: short-chain length PHA 
(sclPHA, carbon numbers of monomers ranging from C3 to C5), medium-
chain length PHA (mclPHA, C6–C14), and long-chain length PHA (lclPHA 
> C14). Based on the monomer units present, PHAs can classified as 
homopolymers or heteropolymers. Homopolymers have a single repeating 
monomer unit like P (3HB), P (3HHx), and P (3HO), whereas heteropoly­
mers contain more than one type of monomer unit like P (3HB-co-3HV) and 
P (3HHx-co-3HO) [38]. The properties of PHAs vary as per their types. 
20.3.1 SCL-PHAS 
This type of PHAs is considered to be brittle in nature. They have an elevated 
melting point and crystallinity, except for P(4HB). For example, P(3HV) as 
well as P(3HB) produced by Cupriavidus necator. They warrant the superior 
mechanical parcels needed for biomedical and packaging film operations 
[39, 42]. 
20.3.2 MCL-PHAS 
In contrast to the SCL-PHA, they are immensely elastomeric in nature, with 
a low melting point and crystallinity, as well as a lower tensile strength value. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
590 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
For example, Pseudomonas mendocina, produces poly(3-hydroxyoctanoate) 
[40]. 
20.3.3 LCL-PHAS 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, produces poly(3-hydroxypentadecanoate) [41]. 
The distance of the side chain as well as the category of substituent available 
connect the PHA properties extensively [42]. These biopolymers, like tradi­
tional polymers, have drawbacks that limit their growth. Overcome these 
constraints, PHAs are reshaped to improve their properties for operations in 
colorful fields [43]. 
20.4 MICROBIAL POLYHYDROXYALKANOATE PRODUCTION 
There are two types of PHA-producing microorganisms. One group 
produces PHA while growing in civilization medium, during growth, while 
another produces PHA while growing in nutrient-limited conditions. Group 
1 organisms include Alcaligenes latus and recombinant E. coli, while Group 
2 organisms include Bacillus cereus and Methylobacterium organophilum 
[44]. The Bacillus species is one of the most extensively researched organ­
isms for PHA production. There are advantages to using these bacteria for 
PHA production, one of which is the lack of endotoxins or lipopolysac­
charide (LPS) inside their external membrane. As a result, PHAs produced 
by these bacteria are extensively researched for a variety of biomedical 
applications. Other than this, Bacillus spp. contain enzymes like amylase and 
proteinase that allow them to use affordable carbon roots like agrarian waste 
that turn into the PHA product, an affordable one [45]. In 1983, Findlay 
& White reported the product of P(3HB) by B. megaterium. Bacillus spp. 
IPCB-403 and B. cereus SPV are two more Bacillus spp., an important PHA 
producers. Bacillus spp. Are also known to synthesize copolymers such as 
P(3HB-co-3HV) and P(3HB-co-3HHx) [46, 47]. Valappil et al. [48] reported 
the production of PHAs by B. cereus. SPV when grown on media with a 
variety of carbon sources. They discovered that when B. cereus SPV grown 
on odd-chain fatty acids like propionate and heptanoate, it produced P(3HB­
co-3HV); however, when grown on fatty acids like hexanoate and decanoate, 
it produced P(3HB). Cupriavidus necator is another organism that has 
extensively studied for PHA production. They are related to the assembly 
of P(3HB) and are known to use a wide variety of carbon sources, including 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
591 
Microbial Cell Systems for Polyhydroxyalkanoate Production 
sugars and plant oils [49]. According to the literature, a genetically modified 
mutant of C. necator using glucose as a carbon substrate could produce 80% 
(wt/wt) of P(3HB). The authors were able to obtain poly(hydroxybutyrate­
co-hydroxy valerate) in PHA product media by adding propionic acid on 
a regular basis alongside glucose [50]. Alcaligenes latus has the ability 
to produce PHAs and can break down various types of carbon feedstock. 
They are associated with the assembly of P(3HB) [51]. Pseudomonas spp. 
commonly used for MCL-PHA assembly, e.g., Pseudomonas nitroreducens, 
Pseudomonas alkaligenus, and Pseudomonas citronellolis. 
Both P. fluorescens and P. mendocina require the ability to use both sugars 
and fatty acids. It is well known that they polymerize various MCL-PHA 
monomer units, resulting in the formation of a variety of PHA copolymers with 
varying physical properties [53]. These Pseudomonas spp. can also use sweet 
hydrocarbons like phenyl heptanoic acid to produce P(3HHp-co-3HPV) [54]. 
Screening of thermophilic PHA producers from nature accomplished using 
techniques such as colony or cell staining, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), 
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and a gas chromatograph-flame 
ionization sensor (GC-FID). Staining and PCR are the front-line detection 
methods for PHAproducers due to benefits such as ease of sample medication, 
low cost, and quick analysis time. In staining methodologies, luminescence 
microscopy or optic microscopy are frequently used, which can directly 
added to cell cultures, solid media plates, or bacterial cells fixed on slides 
and give the cells a colored appearance [86]. FTIR uses to recognize scl-PHA 
and mcl-PHA. The most widely used methods for PHA structural analysis are 
infrared (IR), Raman spectroscopy, and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
spectroscopy. In the event of a discrepancy, NMR identifies the monomeric 
components, distinguishes between PHA composites and heteropolymers, 
and determines the functional groups [87, 88]. 
20.5 DEGRADATION OF PHA 
The biodegradability of PHA makes it one of the most desirable properties. 
Degradation of PHAs occurs both extracellularly and intracellularly. 
20.5.1 EXTRACELLULAR DEGRADATION 
PHAs are metabolized in the natural environment by PHA-degrading 
enzymes, also known as e-PHA depolymerases. Bacteria and fungi excrete 

 
 
 
592 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
these enzymes extracellularly. These microorganisms get their carbon and 
energy from solubilized PHAs. PHA depolymerase can produce by a variety 
of microorganisms, some of them include Pseudomonas lemoignei [55], 
Ralstonia pickettii T1, and C. acidovorans. 
20.5.2 INTRACELLULAR DEGRADATION 
PHAs only solubilize in this system by intracellular depolymerases, also 
known as “i-depolymerases.” These enzymes secrete by the organism that 
produces PHA. PHA’s physical form is important in distinguishing extracel­
lular and intracellular declination. PHAs exists as an amorphous molecule 
within bacteria, whereas PHAs are present in semicrystalline form in the 
natural form [56]. A study conducted to investigate the degradation of 
P(3HB) and P(3HB) copolymers in natural waters. There was no discernible 
change in the molecular weight of the samples, indicating that polymers 
have limited surface growth. Nonetheless, the mechanical strength of the 
P(3HB) polymeric samples decreased significantly. According to existing 
data, PHAs degrade via a process known as surface erosion, which allows for 
controlled degradation. This increases the effectiveness of PHAs in medicine 
delivery and tissue techniques and approaches [57]. In other studies, P(3HB) 
and P(3HB) both copolymer fibers incubated in media for 180 days. The 
tensile strength of the fibrils did not change noticeably. The results show 
that the degradation rate in P(3HB) polymeric fibers is much faster than in 
homopolymer P(3HB) fibers, which are more crystalline [58]. 
20.6 OPERATIONS OF PHA 
20.6.1 MEDICAL OPERATIONS 
20.6.1.1 TISSUE ENGINEERING 
Tissue engineering uses a trinity of factors, including stages, cells, and 
growth factors, to create regenerative cures in vitro, which can also use to 
improve function in failing organs and injured tissues. Stages in tissue engi­
neering are the building blocks of the entire recreative strategy, and it goes 
without saying that the mechanical properties of the scaffold material play an 
important role in regulating the nature of its operations. Since 1997, the field 
of tissue engineering has expanded to include material science, engineering, 

 
593 
Microbial Cell Systems for Polyhydroxyalkanoate Production 
biophysics, surgical science, biotechnology, and other disciplines. The five 
ultimate conditions that a scaffold for tissue engineering must meet are 
biocompatibility, the ability to maintain cell adhesion, conduct, and organize 
cell attachment, porosity that allows tissue in-growth, and finally, the ability 
to degrade into non-toxic products [62]. The use of PHAs in tissue engi­
neering has been summarized in succeeding sections. 
20.6.1.2 BONE TISSUE ENGINEERING 
P(3HB) has shown to promote the growth of mouse fibroblasts, osteocytes, 
chondrocytes [61, 63, 64]. Nonetheless, due to the stability and crystalline 
nature of P(3HB), it has used in the production of scaffolds for bone tissue 
engineering [65]. In a study conducted by Montezari et al. [66] scaffolds 
made of nano-bio-glass carpeted with P(3HB) demonstrated preferential 
mechanical properties and bioactivity when compared to those made of nano­
bio-glass alone. Rathbone et al. [67] investigated the compatibility of seven 
SCL- and MCL-PHAs for use in ligament and tendon tissue engineering and 
identified P(3HB) and P(3HB-co-3HV) as good starting points for tissue 
engineering operations [68]. 
20.6.1.3 HEART VALVE TISSUE ENGINEERING 
PHAs have also investigated for use in cardiovascular restoration in the past, 
most notably in the form of tri-leaflet heart valves and vascular transplants. 
A perforated tri-leaflet valve made of P(3HO) planted with vascular cells 
from an ovine carotid roadway in a study by Sodian et al. Cells could attach 
to the valve face, and the valve could train to open and close in a pulsatile 
glide bioreactor. These engineered tissue heart valve used in an in vivo study 
in a lamb model for 120 days and demonstrated minimal regurgitation and 
thrombus formation [69]. 
20.6.1.4 NERVE TISSUE ENGINEERING 
Aside from PHAs’ high bio-polymer base, another appealing feature that 
makes them suitable for whimsy tissue engineering operations is their 
biodegradation by surface erosion. In this way, they relieve conventional 
synthetic polymers such as poly(L-lactic acid) (PLLA) and polyglycolic acid 

 
 
594 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
(PGA), which suffer autocatalytic volume erosion, resulting in the formation 
of acidic monomers that can cause vulnerable responses [70]. Although the 
level of development was not as significant as with a homologous nerve 
graft, the study demonstrated that P(3HB) nerve guide conduits could enable 
continuous nerve growth [71]. In a subsequent study, the authors functional­
ized the P(3HB)/P(3HB-co-3HV) nanofibers with ECM motifs that mimic 
naturally occurring motifs for nerve recreation and observed that the bio­
functionalized fibers inspired a greater in vitro response cell when compared 
to the unfunctionalized fibers [72]. 
20.6.1.5 CONTROLLED MEDICINE DELIVERY 
The most widely used medicine delivery systems include micro- and 
nanoscale patches containing active medicines. Aside from allowing contin­
uous medicine release, the aspect rate and small volumes of these medicine 
delivery systems allow for simple operation via subcutaneous, intravenous, 
and intramuscular boosters and oral consumption [73]. Microspheres made 
of biodegradable polymers such as PLLA and PLGA have long used as drug 
carriers. Nonetheless, their comparable erosion properties do not provide 
complete control over the release of the medicine. PHAs, on the other hand, 
degrade through surface erosion, allowing the rate of release of the encap­
sulated medicine to modulate by the rate of polymer erosion. The medicine 
delivery eventuality of P(3HB) and P(3HB-co3HV) has been most generally 
investigated amongst the PHAs [74, 75]. 
20.7 COMMERCIAL SIGNIFICANCE 
20.7.1 SOLID-STATE DENITRIFICATION SYSTEMS 
Biological denitrification of waste and sludge involves the removal of 
inorganic nitrogen through a series of reactions conducted by denitrifying 
bacterial species. A series of metabolic reactions converts dissolved nitrate 
to nitrogen gas, thereby removing nitrogen from the wastewater. Small 
amounts of organic composites, such as methanol or acetate, are traditionally 
added to effluent. Furthermore, the degradation products of PHAs pose no 
risk of accelerating the toxin or lowering the effluent standard. The rates 
of nitrogen removal while employing P(3HB) and P(3HB-co-3HV) as 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
595 
Microbial Cell Systems for Polyhydroxyalkanoate Production 
solid-state denitrification substrates are studied and it had been found that 
both P(3HB) and P(3HB-co-3HV) could demonstrate high rates of nitrogen 
removal [77, 78]. 
20.7.2 BIOFUELS/BIOFUEL SUPPLEMENTS 
Over the last few decades, efforts have been made to produce biofuels on a 
large and profitable scale. Biofuels such as biodiesel, biochar, bioethanol, 
and methanol have gained popularity. PHAs are accumulated by bacteria and 
used as carbon and energy reserves [79]. 
20.7.3 CHEMICAL PRECURSORS 
PHAs are a promising source of chiral R-hydroxycarboxylic acid monomers 
[80]. Catalysing the depolymerization of PHAs biosynthesized by bacterial 
species could also result in several enantiomerically pure R-HA monomers. 
Seebach et al. [81] reported the chemical degradation of P(3HB-co-3HV) to 
yield R-3-hydroxybutyric (R-3HB) acid and R-3-hydroxyvaleric acid (R-3HV). 
20.7.4 OIL ABSORBENT 
Sudesh et al. [82] reported oil absorbing properties of PHA films in 2007. 
The oil-absorbing performance of the three PHAs in the study was found to 
be comparable to that of the controls used, poly(propylene) and a factory 
fiber-grounded film. The perforated nature of the PHA film formed by 
solvent casting was attributed to this. Furthermore, PHA films can retain 
their oil-absorbing properties even after being washed with a soap solution, 
indicating the possibility for reuse. This brings PHAs in a profitable position 
to be used as oil-absorbing operations such as cosmetic facial oil blotters, 
films to detect oil remnants from fried food, as well as absorption of oil 
remnants from effluent or waste. 
20.7.5 DYE ABSORBENT FIBERS 
The hydrophobic nature of PHAs could use to function as an adsorbent 
for colorants in textile effluent. It was discovered that simple solvent 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
596 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
cast P(3HB) films could remove approximately 38% of the colors from 
cloth waste through adsorption. When the surface area of the available 
polymer is increased by fabricating a nanofibrous electro spun film, the 
commensurable adsorption of the color from waste increases from 38% 
to 80% [83]. 
20.7.6 FOOD PACKAGING 
The carbon intensity associated with landfill waste and non-biodegradable 
plastic disposal has prompted a worldwide push to incorporate biodegradable 
and compostable biopolymers into common use, particularly in the packaging 
industry. As biodegradable packaging material, thermoplastic polymers such 
as PLA, polycaprolactone (PCL), and PHAs have plant-friendly properties 
[84] micro- and nanoscale particles than have active drugs encapsulated 
within them. In addition to enabling constant drug to liberate, the aspect ratio 
and small volumes of these drug delivery systems allow easy management 
via subcutaneous, intravenous, and intramuscular booster as well as oral 
consumption [73]. PHAs degrade via surface erosion which allows the rate 
of release of the encapsulated drug to be modulated by the rate of erosion. In 
addition to their favorable surface erosion and biocompatibility, PHAs also 
possess the potential to be functionalized with bioactive molecules such as 
peptides. This may add an additional dimension to PHA-based drug delivery 
systems by way of selective targeting, and additional specificity towards the 
tissues being treated [72]. 
20.8 PHA IS MANUFACTURED IN AN ADDITIVE MANNER 
20.8.1 DIRECT INK WRITING (DIW) 
The computer-aided design (CAD) model’s final shape is first cut into 
layers with a height proportional to the nozzle diameter, which is done 
layer by layer. The ink for PHA biomedical devices is usually made by 
dissolving the biopolymer in a solvent; although, it is also feasible to 
print directly on the biopolymer pellets using a high-temperature print 
head, making use of the material’s thermoplastic qualities. Depending on 
whether the material was heated or not, the last step of chilling or drying 
happens after printing. 

 
597 
Microbial Cell Systems for Polyhydroxyalkanoate Production 
20.8.2 FUSED DEPOSITION MODELING (FDM) 
It is the most prevalent additive manufacturing (AM) technology due to 
its simplicity and design freedom. It’s a layer-by-layer liquefy technique 
involving heating a continuous string of a thermoplastic substance over its 
glass changeover point, then depositioning the still-hot extruded material 
to ensure adhesion with the bottom layer has already kept cool and fixed. 
The outcome is a totally hardened construction whose final design accu­
racy is ensured by computer control of both the printing platform and the 
extruder head of the 3D printer [87]. Despite the fact that FDM is the most 
widely utilized 3D printing process for a variety of purposes and polymeric 
substances, its use in PHA biomedical systems is still rather confined [88, 
89]. 
20.8.3 SELECTIVE LASER SINTERING (SLS) 
Another AM process is SLS, which was the first to be looked into for the 
production of PHA-based biomedical equipment [90]. A high-power laser 
beam is used to locally sinter the biopolymeric powder bed in this method. 
This process is repeated layer by layer to create a 3D construction that was 
before architecture, which is created by CAD software and sent to the 3D 
printer. Pore regions of the printed scaffolds are often reduced compared to 
the earlier designs due to an inadequate specification of the sintering process. 
The powder layer thickness (PLT) and scan spacing (SS) have a significant 
impact on this effect [91]. 
20.8.4 COMPUTER AIDED WET-SPINNING (CAWS) 
It is a computer-controlled version of wet-spinning. Wet-spinning is the 
process of extruding a PHA solution from a syringe into a coagulation bath 
(e.g., ethanol), where it precipitates and hardens due to non-solvent driven 
phase separation [92]. The computerized control of syringe movements 
layer by layer, altering the ultimate shape of the 3D-printed item, is a unique 
feature of this technology. With a fiber diameter of around 100 ± 20 µm 
[54, 93] and porosity of more than 80%, this technology allows us to create 
structures with high resolution [24, 93]. 

 
598 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
20.9 APPLICATIONS AS IMPLANT MATERIALS IN MEDICINE 
20.9.1 PHA IMPLANT TYPES THAT ARE UNIQUE 
20.9.1.1 3D PRINTING 
Using 3D printing technology, 3D PHB porous cubes were successfully 
created. The generated cubes had a form and size that was extremely 
similar to the virtual model. PHB composite implants, unlike clinically 
utilized PLGA, PGA, and PLA materials, retain a steady local pH during the 
breakdown, making them well-tolerated by cells and the immune system. 
Personalized 3D printed implants may be made with PHB composites. 
In patients with clefts, pre-existing cone-beam computed tomography 
(CT) images were successfully used to 3D print custom-built scaffolds 
constructed of tricalcium phosphate-PHB (TCP-PHB) that were tailored 
to the specific geometry of the alveolar bone. Human mesenchymal stem 
cells (MSCs) were planted onto the scaffolds using commercially available 
cells (hMSCs). It was possible to demonstrate that the scaffold-seeded cells 
had successfully differentiated into osteogenic cells. P3HB or P3HB/HA 3D 
implants enhance reconstructive osteogenesis and have strong osteoplastic 
characteristics. Their decomposition in vivo is gradual and coincides with the 
formation of new bone tissue, allowing for proper reparative osteogenesis. 
In the culture of MSCs extracted from bone marrow and adipose tissue, the 
capacity of porous 3D implants P(3HB) to encourage attachment and allow 
proliferation and directed differentiation of MSCs was investigated. P(3HB) 
shows high promise as an osteoplastic material for reconstructive osteogen­
esis, according to the findings. 
20.9.1.2 LITHOGRAPHY 
PHBHHx arrays of microstructures for hosting and cultivating cells in 
a local microenvironment in controllable forms were created using soft 
lithographic processes such as micromolding and hot embossing. PHBHHx 
microstructures of various configurations, including circles and rectangles, 
were created using silicon masters with high-aspect-ratio microfeatures 
produced using KOH and DRIE anisotropic etching. Microstructures made 
of PHBHHx that imitate the cellular milieu make it easier to explore the links 
between microstructures and cell activities. 

 
 
599 
Microbial Cell Systems for Polyhydroxyalkanoate Production 
20.9.1.3 NANOFIBERS 
PHA polymer-based 3D-nanofiber matrices were created to simulate the 
genuine extracellular matrix (ECM) milieu for cell growth. They have typical 
fiber sizes of 50–500 nm, which are extremely close to collagen, the most 
important ECM component. When compared to PLA nanofiber matrices, the 
mechanical characteristics of PHB/PHBHHx and PHB/P3HB4HB nanofiber 
matrices were greatly enhanced. The growth of the human keratinocyte cell 
line HaCat on nanofiber PHA matrices outperformed that of PHA matrices 
made using the traditional solution casting approach. None of the fibrous 
scaffolds made by electrospinning PHAs exhibited any negative impacts on 
NIH 3T3 mouse fibroblast cell adhesion, growth, or survival, and they were 
all determined to be appropriate for tissue engineering applications. 
20.9.1.4 INJECTABLE 
As an injectable implant, PHBHHx dissolved in non-harmful organic 
solvents such as N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP), dimethylacetamide (DMAQ), 
1,4-dioxane (DIOX), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and 1,4-butanolide 
(BL) produces a film surrounding the injection site of an animal. PHBHHx 
injectable implant might be used as a tissue adhesion prevention film during 
surgical procedures [18]. 
20.10 CONCLUSION 
This review provides a brief overview of microorganism cell systems for 
bioplastic products and their applications in various fields. Because of their 
biodegradable, biocompatible, and natural properties, PHA biopolymers 
have gained much attention. These biopolymer properties can be improved 
through structural changes or inheritable engineering. Many different micro­
organisms have been used to modify the polymer and its properties. This 
review summarizes well-established application, such as medical operations 
and commercial applications. PHA applications include wastewater sludge 
treatment and replacement of conventional plastics, as well as protecting 
the environment from dangerous chemicals. Applications can be changed 
and improved based on the conditions in an industry or anywhere else. Cell 
system products can be improved further, and new, less expensive revision 
strategies can be advocated to reduce the cost of their product as well as 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
600 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
the poor properties of PHAs. These modified biopolymers reduce carbon 
dioxide (CO2) emissions during the manufacturing process and degrade to 
organic matter after disposal. Their degradation process is not harmful to the 
environment. They contain enormous implicit values in a variety of fields 
such as medicine, farming, cosmetics, drugstores, and so on. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
computer aided wet-spinning 
• 
contribution of biodegradable microorganisms 
• 
direct ink writing 
• 
dye absorbent fibers 
• 
lithography 
• 
PHA production 
• 
reservoir of bioplastics 
• 
various applications of bioplastics 
REFERENCES 
1. DiGregorio, B. E., (2009). Biobased performance bioplastic: Mirel. Chemistry 
 
& 
Biology, 16(1), 1, 2. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2009.01.001. 
2.  Eubeler, J. P., Bernhard, M., & Knepper, T. P., (2010). Environmental biodegradation 
of synthetic polymers II. Biodegradation of different polymer groups. TrAC Trends in 
Analytical Chemistry, 29, 84–100. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trac.2009.09.005. 
3. Auras, R., Harte, B., & Selke, S., (2004). An overview of polylactides as packaging 
materials. Macromolecular Bioscience, 4(9), 835–864. 
4. Liu, B., Jiang, L., & Zhang, J., (2010). Development of soy protein/poly (lactic acid) 
bioplastics. Macromol. Biosci., 4, 8358864. In: Society of Plastic Engineers (Ed.). 
Global Plastics Environmental Conference. 
5. Mostafa, N. A., Farag, A. A., Abo-dief, H. M., & Tayeb, A. M., (2014). Production 
of biodegradable plastic from agricultural wastes. Arab. J. Chem., 4–11. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.arabjc.2015.04.008. 
6. Privas, E., Leroux, F., & Navard, P., (2013). Preparation and properties of blends 
composed of lignosulfonated layered double hydroxide/pasticized starch thermoplastics. 
Carbohydr. Polym., 96, 91–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2013.03.042. 
7. Tokiwa, Y., & Calabia, B. P., (2004). Degradation of microbial polyesters. Biotechnol. 
Lett., 26, 1181–1189. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:BILE.0000036599.15302.e5. 
8. Rahman, A., & Miller, C. D., (2017). Microalgae as a source of bioplastics. Algal Green 
Chemistry: Recent Progress in Biotechnology. Elsevier B.V. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
B978-0-444-63784-0.00006-0. 

 
601 
Microbial Cell Systems for Polyhydroxyalkanoate Production 
9. Abdel-Raouf, N., Al-Homaidan, A. A., & Ibraheem, I. B. M., (2012). Microalgae and 
wastewater treatment. Saudi  J. Biol. Sci.m 19, 257–275. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
sjbs.2012.04.005. 
10. Zeller, M. A., Hunt, R., Jones, A., & Sharma, S., (2013). Bioplastics and their 
thermoplastic blends from Spirulina and Chlorella microalgae. J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 
130, 3263–3275. https://doi.org/10.1002/app.39559. 
11. Yadav, P., Yadav, H., Shah, V. G., Shah, G., & Dhaka, G., (2015). Biomedical 
biopolymers, their origin and evolution in biomedical sciences: A  systematic review. J. 
Clin. Diagn. Res., 9, 21–25. http://dx.doi.org/10.7860/JCDR/2015/13907.6565. 
12. Garavand, F., Rouhi, M., Razavi, S. H., Cacciotti, I., & Mohammadi, R., (2017). 
Improving the integrity of natural biopolymer films used in food packaging by 
crosslinking approach: A review, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 104, 687–707. http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2017.06.093. 
13. Rhim, J. W., Park, H. M., & Ha, C. S., (2013). Bio-nanocomposites for food 
packaging applications, Prog. Polym. Sci., 38, 1629–1652. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. 
progpolymsci.2013.05.008. 
14. Mekonnen, T., Mussone, P., Khalil,  H., & Bressler, D., (2013). Progress in bio-based 
plastics and plasticizing modifications. J. Mater. Chem. A, 1, 13379. http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1039/c3ta12555f. 
15. Pathak, S., Sneha, C., & Mathew, B. B., (2014). Bioplastics: Its timeline-based scenario 
& challenges. J. Polym. Biopolym. Phys. Chem., 2, 84–90. http://dx.doi.org/10.12691/ 
jpbpc-2-4-5. 
16. Varsha, Y . M., & Savitha, R., (2011). Overview on polyhydroxyalkanoates: 
A promising biopol. J.  Microb. Biochem. Technol., 3, 99–105. http://dx.doi. 
org/10.4172/1948-5948.1000059. 
17. Emadian, S. M., Onay, T. T., & Demirel, B., (2017). Biodegradation of bioplastics 
in natural environments. Waste Manag., 59, 526–536. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. 
wasman.2016.10.006. 
18. Zhang, J., Shishatskaya, E. I., Volova, T. G., Da Silva, L. F., & Chen, G. Q., (2018). 
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHA) for therapeutic applications. Materials Science and 
Engineering: C, 86, 144–150. 
19. Cioica, N., Cona, C., Nagy, M., Fodorean, G., Bucuresti, I., Cluj-napoca, F., Voievod, V., 
& Napoca, C., (2008). Plastics made from renewable sources potential and perspectives 
for the environment and agriculture of the third Millenium. Bull. Univ. Agric. Sci. Vet. 
Med., 65, 23–28. 
20. Flieger, M., Kantorova, M., Prell, A., Rezanka, T., & Votruba, J., (2003). Biodegradable 
plastics from renewable sources. Rev. Folia Microbiol., 48, 27–44,http://dx.doi. 
org/10.1007/BF02931273. 
21. Jamshidian, M., Tehrany, E. A., Imran, M., & Jacquot, M., (2010). Poly-lactic acid: 
Production, applications, nanocomposites, and release studies. Compr. Rev. Food Sci. 
Food Saf., 9, 552–571. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1541-4337.2010.00126.x. 
22. Ojumu, T. V., Yu, J., & Solomon, B. O., (2004) Production of polyhydroxyalkanoates, a 
bacterial biodegradable polymer. Afr. J. Biotechnol., 3, 18–24. http://dx.doi.org/10.5897/ 
AJB2004.000-2004. 
23. Kim, B. S., (2000). Production of poly-3-hydroxybutyrate from inexpensive 
 
substrates. Enzyme Microb. Technol., 27, 774–777. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0141-0229(00)00299-4. 

 
602 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
24. Mota, C., Wang, S. Y., Puppi, D., Gazzarri, M., Migone, C., Chiellini, F., Chen, G. Q., 
& Chiellini, E., (2017). Additive manufacturing of poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyrate-co-(R)­
3-hydroxyhexanoate] scaffolds for engineered bone development. J. Tissue Eng. Regen. 
Med., 11, 175–186. 
25. Avella, M., Bonadies, E., Martusscelli, E., & Rimedio, R., (2001). European 
current standardization for plastic packaging recoverable through composting and 
biodegradation. Polymer Testing, 20, 517–521. 
26. Khanna, S., & Srivastava, 
 
A. K., (2005). Recent advances in microbial 
polyhydroxyalkanoates. Process Biochemistry, 40, 607–619. 
27. Byrom, D., (1987). Polymer synthesis by microorganisms: Technology and economies. 
Trends Biotechnol., 5
 
, 246–250. 
28. Lee, S. Y., (1996). Bacterial polyhydroxyalkanoates. Biotechnol. Bioeng., 49, 1–14. 
29. Witholt, B., & Kessler
 
, B., (1999). Perspectives of medium chain length 
poly(hydroxyalkanoates), a versatile set of bacterial bioplastics. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 
10, 279–285. 
30. Lemoigne, M., (1926) Produits de deshydration et de polymerisation de l’acide 
b-oxybutyric. Bull. Soc. Chem. Biol., 8, 770–782. 
31. Steinbuchel, A., (1991). In: Polyh
 
ydroxyalkanoic Acids (pp. 123–213). Macmillan 
Publishers. 
32. Findlay, R. H., & White, D. C., (1983) Polymeric beta-hydroxyalkanoates from 
environmental samples and Bacillus megaterium. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 45, 71–78. 
33. Leong, Y. K., Show, P. L., Ooi, C. W., Ling, T. C., & Lan, J. C. W., (2014). Current 
trends in polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) biosynthesis: Insights from the recombinant 
Escherichia coli. Journal of Biotechnology, 180, 52e65. 
34. Hazer, B., & Steinbuchel, A., (2007). Increased diversification of polyhydroxyalkanoates 
by modification reactions for industrial and medical applications. Applied Microbiology 
and Biotechnology, 74, 1–12. 
35. De Smet, M. J., Eggink, G., Witholt, B., Kingma, J., & Wynberg, H., (1983). 
Characterization of intracellular inclusions formed by Pseudomonas oleovorans during 
growth on octane. J. Bacteriol., 154
 
, 870–878. 
36. Asrar, J., Valentin, H. E., Berger, P. A., Tran, M., Padgette, S. R., & Garbow, J. R., 
(2002). Biosynthesis and properties of poly (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3 hydroxyhexanoate) 
polymers. Biomacromolecules, 3, 1006e1012. 
37. Li, Z., Yang, J., & Loh, X. J., (2016). Polyhydroxyalkanoates: Opening doors for a 
sustainable future. NPG Asia, 8, 1–20. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/am.2016.48. 
38. Noruma, C. T., Tanakan, T., Gan, Z., Kuwabara, K., Abe, H., Takase, K., Taguchi, K., 
& Doi, Y., (2004). Effective enhancement of short-chain-length-medium-chain-length 
polyhydroxyalkanoate copolymer production by coexpression of genetically engineered 
3- ketoacyl-acyl-carrier-protein synthase III (fabH) and polyhydroxyalkanoate synthesis 
genes. Biomacromolecules, 5, 1457–1464. doi: https://doi.org/10.1021/bm049959v. 
39. Keskin, G., Kizil, G., Bechelany, M., Pochat-Bohatier, C., & Oner, M., (2017). 
Potential of polyhydroxyalkanoatee (PHA) family as a substitute of petroleum-based 
polymers for packaging applications and solutions brought by their composites to 
form barrier materials. Pure Appl. Chem., 89, 1841–1848. doi: https://doi.org/10.1515/ 
pac-2017-0401. 
40. Martin, D. P., & Williams, S. F., (2003). Medical applications of poly-4-hydroxybutyrate: 
A  strong flexible absorbable biomaterial. Biochemical Engineering Journal, 16, 97e105. 

 
603 
Microbial Cell Systems for Polyhydroxyalkanoate Production 
41. Sharma, V., Sehgal, R., & Gupta, R., (2020). Polyhydroxyalkanoate(PHA): Properties and 
their modifications. Polymer, 123161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymer.2020.123161. 
42. Lee, S. Y., (1996). Bacterial polyhydroxyalkanoates. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 
49, 1e14. 
43. Law, J. H., & Slepecky, R. A., (1961). Assay of poly-b-hydroxybutyric acid. Journal of  
Bacteriology, 82(1), 33–36. 
44. Findlay, R. H., & White, D. C., (1983). Polymeric beta-hydroxyalkanoates from 
environmental samples and Bacillus megaterium. Applied and Environmental 
Microbiology 45, 71–78. 
45. Tajima, K., Igari, T., Nishimura, D., Nakamura, M., Satoh, Y., & Munekata, M., (2003). 
Isolation and characterization of Bacillus sp. INT005 polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) 
from gas field soil. Journal of Bioscience and Bioengineering, 95, 77–81. 
46. Valappil, S. P., Misra, S. K., Boccaccini, A. R., Keshavarz, T., Buckw, C., & Roy, I., 
(2007). Largescale production and efficient recovery of PHB with desirable material 
properties, from the newly characterized Bacillus cereus SPV. Journal of Biotechnology, 
132(3), 251–258. 
47. Ryu, H. W., Hahn, S. K., Chang, Y. K., & Chang, H. N., (1997). Production of poly(3- 
hydroxybutyrate) by high cell density fed-batch culture of Alcaligenes eutrophus  with 
phospate limitation. Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 55, 28–32. 
48. Anderson, A. J., & Dawes, E. A., (1990). Occurrence, metabolism, metabolic role, 
and industrial uses of bacterial polyhydroxyalkanoates. Microbiological Reviews, 54, 
450–472. 
49. Wang, F., & Lee, S. Y., (1997). Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) production with high 
productivity and high polymer content by a fed-batch culture of Alcaligenes latus under 
nitrogen limitation. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 63, 3703–3706. 
50. Diard, S., Carlier, J. P., Ageron, E., Grimont, P. A., Langlois, V., Guerin, P., & Bouvet, 
O. M., (2002). Accumulation of poly (3-hydroxybutyrate) from octanoate in different 
Pseudomonas belonging to the rRNA homology group I. Systematic and Applied 
Microbiology, 25(2), 183–188. 
51.  Kim Do, Y., Kim, H. W., Chung, M. G., & Rhee, Y. H., (2007). Biosynthesis, modification, 
and biodegradation of bacterial medium-chain-length polyhydroxyalkanoates. Journal 
of Microbiology, 45, 87–97. 
52.  Ward, P. G., & O’Connor, K. E., (2005). Bacterial synthesis of polyhydroxyalkanoates 
containing aromatic and aliphatic monomers by Pseudomonas putida CA-3. 
International  Journal of Biological Macromolecules, 35, 127–133. 
53. Jendrossek, D., & Handrick, R., (2002). Microbial degradation of polyhydroxyalkanoates. 
Annual Review of Microbiology, 56(1), 403–432. 
54. Puppi, D., Morelli, A., & Chiellini, F., (2017). Additive manufacturing of poly(3­
hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate)/poly(εcaprolactone) blend scaffolds for 
tissue engineering. Bioengineering, 4, 49. [CrossRef]. 
55. Mergaert, J., Wouters, A., Swings, J., & Anderson, C., (1995). In situ biodegradation 
of poly (3-hydroxybutyrate) and poly (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) in 
natural waters. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 41(13), 154–159. 
56. Shishatskaya, E. I., Volova, T. G., Gordeev, S. A., & Puzyr, A. P., (2005). Degradation 
of P  (3HB) and P  (3HB-co-3HV) in biological media. Journal of Biomaterials Science, 
Polymer Edition, 16(5), 643–657. 

 
604 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
57. Keshavarz, T., & Roy, I., (2010). Polyhydroxyalkanoates: Bioplastics with a green 
agenda. Current Opinion in Microbiology, 13(3), 321–326. 
58. Lomas, A. J., Webb, W. R., Han, J., Chen, G., Sun, X., Zhang, Z., El Haj, A. J., & 
Forsyth, N. R., (2013). Poly (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyhexanoate)/collagen 
hybrid scaffolds for tissue engineering applications. Tissue Engineering Part C: 
Methods, 19(8), 577–585. 
59. Volova, T., Goncharov, D., Sukovatyi, A., Shabanov, A., Nikolaeva, E., & Shishatskaya, 
E., (2014). Electrospinning of polyhydroxyalkanoate fibrous scaffolds: Effects on 
electrospinning parameters on structure and properties. Journal of Biomaterials Science, 
Polymer Edition, 25(4), 370–393. 
60. Williams, S. F., Martin, D. P., Horowitz, D. M., & Peoples, O. P., (1999). PHA applications: 
Addressing the price performance issue: I. Tissue engineering. International Journal of 
Biological Macromolecules, 25(1–3), 111–121. 
61.  Castellano, D., Blanes, M., Marco, B., Cerrada, I., Ruiz-Saurí, A., Pelacho, B., Ara~na, 
M., et al., (2014). A comparison of electrospun polymers reveals poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) 
fiber as a superior scaffold for cardiac repair. Stem Cells and Development, 23(13), 
1479–1490. 
62. Gerhardt, L., & Boccaccini, A. R., (2010). Bioactive glass and glass-ceramic scaffolds 
for bone tissue engineering. Materials, 3(7), 3867. 
63. Francis, L., Meng, D., Knowles, J. C., Roy, I., & Boccaccini, A. R., (2010). Multi­
functional P(3HB) microsphere/45S5 bioglass®-based composite scaffolds for bone 
tissue engineering. Acta Biomaterialia, 6(7), 2773–2786. 
64. Montazeri, M., Karbasi, S., Foroughi, M., Monshi, A., & Ebrahimi-Kahrizsangi, R., 
(2015). Evaluation of mechanical property and bioactivity of nano-bioglass 45S5 
scaffold coated with poly-3-hydroxybutyrate. Journal of Materials Science: Materials 
in Medicine, 26(2), 1–11. 
65. Rathbone, S., Furrer, P., L€ubben, J., Zinn, M., & Cartmell, S., (2010). Biocompatibility 
of polyhydroxyalkanoate as a potential material for ligament and tendon scaffold 
material. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part A, 93A(4), 1391–1403. 
66. You, M., Peng, G., Li, J., Ma, P., Wang, Z., Shu, W., Peng, S., & Chen, G., (2011). 
Chondrogenic differentiation of human bone marrow mesenchymal  stem cells on 
polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) scaffolds coated with PHA granule binding protein PhaP  
fused with RGD peptide. Biomaterials, 32(9), 2305–2313. 
67. Sodian, R., Hoerstrup, S. P., Sperling, J. S., Daebritz, S. H., Martin, D. P., Schoen, F. 
J., Vacanti, J. P., & Mayer, Jr. J. E., (2000). Tissue engineering of heart valves: In vitro  
experiences. The Annals of Thoracic Surgery, 70(1), 140–144. 
68. Williams, S. F., Martin, D. P., Horowitz, D. M., & Peoples, O. P., (1999). PHA applications: 
Addressing the price performance issue: I. Tissue engineering. International Journal of 
Biological Macromolecules, 25(1e3), 111–121. 
69. Young, R. C., Terenghi, G., & Wiberg, M., (2002). Poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB): A  
resorbable conduit for long-gap repair in peripheral nerves. British Journal of Plastic 
Surgery 55(3), 235–240. 
70. Masaeli, E., Wieringa, P. A., Morshed, M., Nasr-Esfahani, M., Sadri, S., Van, B. C. 
A., & Moroni, L., (2014). Peptide functionalized polyhydroxyalkanoate nanofibrous 
scaffolds enhance Schwann cells activity. Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology and 
Medicine, 10(7), 1559–1569. 

 
605 
Microbial Cell Systems for Polyhydroxyalkanoate Production 
71. Langer, R. S., & Peppas, N. A., (1981). Present and future applications of biomaterials 
in controlled drug delivery systems. Biomaterials, 2(4), 201–214. 
72.  Gursel, I., Yagmurlu, F., Korkusuz, F., & Hasirci, V., (2002). In vitro antibiotic release from 
poly (3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) rods. Journal of Microencapsulation, 
19(2), 153–164. 
73.  Sendil, D., G€ursel, I., Wise, D. L., & Hasırcı, V., (1999). Antibiotic release from 
biodegradable P(3HBV) microparticles. Journal of Controlled Release, 59(2), 207–217. 
74.  Hiraishi, A., & Khan, S. T., (2003). Application of polyhydroxyalkanoates for 
denitrification in water and wastewater treatment. Applied Microbiology and 
Biotechnology, 61(2), 103–109. 
75. Khan, S. T., Horiba, Y., Yamamoto, M., & Hiraishi, A., (2002). Members of the 
family Comamonadaceae as primary poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate)­
degrading denitrifiers in activated sludge as revealed by a polyphasic approach. Applied 
and Environmental Microbiology, 68(7), 3206–3214. 
76. Mergaert, J., Boley, A., Cnockaert, M. C., M€uller, W., & Swings, J., (2001). Identity 
and potential functions of heterotrophic bacterial isolates from a continuous-upflow 
fixed-bed reactor for denitrification of drinking water with bacterial polyester as source 
of carbon and electron donor. Systematic and Applied Microbiology, 24(2), 303–310. 
77. De Roo, G., Kellerhals, M. B., Ren, Q., Witholt, B., & Kessler, B., (2002). Production 
of chiral R-3-hydroxyalkanoic acids and R-3-hydroxyalkanoic acid methylesters 
via hydrolytic degradation of polyhydroxyalkanoate synthesised by pseudomonads. 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 77(6), 717–722. 
78. Ren, Q., Ruth, K., Th€ony-Meyer, L., & Zinn, M., (2010). Enatiomerically pure 
hydroxycarboxylic acids: Current approaches and future perspectives. Applied 
Microbiology and Biotechnology, 87(1), 41–52. 
79. Seebach, D., Beck, A. K., Breitschuh, R., & Job, K., (2003). Direct degradation of the 
biopolymer poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyric acid] to (R)-3-hydroxybutanoic acid and its 
methyl ester. In: Organic Syntheses
 
 (Vol. 71, pp. 39–47). John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
80. Sudesh, K., Loo, C., Goh, L., Iwata, T., & Maeda, M., (2007). The oil-absorbing property 
of polyhydroxyalkanoate films and its practical application: A refreshing new outlook 
for an old degrading material. Macromolecular Bioscience, 7(11), 1199–1205. 
81. Sridewi, N., Lee, Y., & Sudesh, K., (2011). Simultaneous adsorption and photocatalytic 
degradation of malachite green using electrospun P(3HB)-TiO2 nanocomposite fibers 
and films. International Journal of Photoenergy, 1–10. Article ID 597854. 
82. Rhim, J., Park, H., & Ha, C., (2013). Bio-nanocomposites for food packaging 
applications. Progress in Polymer Science, 38(10e11), 1629–1652. 
83. Reddy, M. M., Vivekanandhan, S., Misra, M., Bhatia, S. K., & Mohanty, A. K., (2013). 
Biobased plastics and bionanocomposites: Current status and future opportunities. 
Progress in Polymer Science, 38(10e11), 1653–1689. 
84. Higuchi-Takeuchi, M., Morisaki, K., & Numata, K., (2016). A screening method for the 
isolation of polyhydroxyalkanoate-producing purple non-sulfur photosynthetic bacteria 
from natural seawater. Front. Microbiol., 7, 1509. 
85. Tan, G. Y. A., Chen, C. L., Li, L., Ge, L., Wang, L., Razaad, I. M. N., Li, Y., et al., 
(2014b). Start a research on biopolymer polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA): A review. 
Polymers, 6(3), 706–754. 

 
606 
Whole-Cell Biocatalysis 
86. Choonut, A., Prasertsan, P., Klomklao, S., & Sangkharak, K., (2020b). Study on 
mcl-PHA production by novel thermotolerant gram-positive isolate. J. Polym. Environ., 
28, 2410–2421. 
87. Vyavahare, S., Teraiya, S., Panghal, D., & Kumar, S., (2020). Fused deposition modeling: 
A review. Rapid Prototyp. J., 26, 176–201. 
88.  Gonzalez, A. J., Rydz, J., Musioł, M., Sikorska, W., Sobota, M., Włodarczyk, J., 
Adamus, G., Janeczek, H., Kwiecien, I., Hercog, A., et al., (2018). A comparative study 
of three-dimensional printing directions: The degradation and toxicological profile of a 
PLA/PHA blend. Polym. Degrad. Stab., 152, 191–207. 
89. Wu, C. S., & Liao, H. T., (2017). Interface design of environmentally friendly carbon 
nanotube-filled polyester composites: Fabrication, characterization, functionality and 
application. Express Polym. Lett., 11, 187–198. 
90. Mazzoli, A., (2013). Selective laser sintering in biomedical engineering.  Med. Biol. Eng. 
Comput., 51, 245–256. 
91. Pereira, T. F., Silva, M. A. C., Oliveira, M. F., Maia, I. A., Silva, J. V. L., Costa, M. F., 
& Thiré, R. M. S. M., (2012). Effect of process parameters on the properties of selective 
laser sintered poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) scaffolds for bone tissue engineering. Virtual 
Phys. Prototyp., 7, 275–285. 
92. Puppi, D., & Chiellini, F., (2021). Computer-aided wet-spinning. In: Rainer, A., & 
Moroni, L., (eds.), Computer-Aided Tissue Engineering: Methods and Protocols (pp. 
101–110). Springer: New York, NY, USA. ISBN 978-1-0716-0611-7. 
93. Puppi, D., Braccini, S., Ranaudo, A., & Chiellini, F., (2020). Poly(3-hydroxybutyrate­
co-3-hydroxyexanoate) scaffolds with tunable macro and microstructural features by 
additive manufacturing. J. Biotechnol., 308, 96–107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]. 
94. Zinn, M., Witholt, B. and Egli, T., 2001. Occurrence, synthesis and medical application 
of bacterial polyhydroxyalkanoate. Advanced drug delivery reviews, 53(1), pp.5–21. 
95. Shrivastav, A., Kim, H.Y. and 
 
Kim, Y.R., 2013. Advances in the applications of 
polyhydroxyalkanoate nanoparticles for novel drug delivery system. BioMed research 
international, 2013. 

 
Index  
α 
α-acetolactate 
decarboxylase (ALDC), 83  
synthase (ALS), 83  
α-amylase, 91, 211, 212 
α-dioxygenase (αDOX), 316 
α-glucosidase, 211, 212 
α-helix, 23, 49 
β 
β-alanine, 74, 79, 80, 95 
β-glucosidase, 285, 321 
β-oxidation, 89, 314, 315, 325, 472 
2 
2,3-Butanediol (2,3-BDO), 82, 98 
2-methyl-D-erythritol-4-phosphate (MEP), 
99, 317 
2-phenylethanol (2-PE), 98 
3 
3-dehydroshikimate, 89, 98 
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzymeA 
(HMG-CoA), 100 
A 
Abiotic, 338, 340, 447, 448, 484 
Absorbance-activated droplet sorter 
(AADS), 40 
Abyssomicin monomers, 234 
Acetate, 16, 59, 75, 79, 84, 85, 128, 
131–133, 135, 139, 157, 212, 272–276, 
281, 294, 322, 338, 339, 340, 344, 345, 
347, 348, 362, 366, 384, 387, 530, 537, 
586, 594 
kinase (ACK), 59, 537 
modulation, 59 
pathway, 59 
utilizing methanogenic communities, 274 
Acetic acid, 290, 348, 568 
Acetoacetyl-ACP, 315 
Acetoclastic 
methanogenesis, 275, 277 
methanogens, 274, 275 
Acetogenesis, 272, 280, 290, 340, 368, 369, 
412 
Acetogenic sporomusaovata, 339 
Acetogenins, 203 
Acetogens, 272–274, 276, 280, 290, 339, 
346, 368 
Acetoin reductase, 83 
Acetolactate decarboxylase, 83 
Acetone, 102, 184, 322, 562 
Acetyl, 16, 18, 59, 80, 89, 231, 281, 312, 
314, 315, 318, 327, 346, 365, 471, 472, 
516, 528, 529, 537, 549 
phosphate, 59 
Acid 
catalyst, 283, 433 
rain, 125, 412 
tolerance, 79, 87, 289 
Acidogenesis, 280, 290, 291, 368, 412 
Acrylic 
acid, 74, 76 
polymer, 286 
Actinobacillus succinogenes, 84, 128 
Actinobacteria, 93, 222–225, 227, 229, 235, 
236, 250–252 
Actinomicrobial, 223, 252 
Actinomycete, 222–224, 226, 227, 230–235, 
240–247, 249–253, 319, 528 
Actinorhodin, 249, 250 
Activated sludge, 290, 291, 340, 343 
Active 
CAS-crRNA complex, 52 
pharmaceutical ingredients (API), 94, 145 
Acute leukemia, 235 
Acyl 
acceptor, 312–314, 369 
ACP, 315, 316 
CoA synthetase, 314, 316 
surugamide, 251 

 
 
608 
Index 
Adaptation, 51, 52, 248, 345, 346, 530 
Adaptive 
evolution, 85 
immune system, 51 
immunization, 52 
laboratory evolution (ALE), 75, 144, 155, 
185 
Additive, 5, 72, 80, 127, 176, 180, 192, 283, 
487, 502, 503, 505, 527, 559 
manufacturing (AM), 190 
Adenosine tri-phosphate (ATP), 126, 128, 
131, 187, 323, 528, 535–538, 571 
Adequate, 177, 192, 284, 295, 383, 398, 
408, 427, 479, 541 
Adhesion, 12, 494, 593, 597, 599 
Adhesives, 72, 74, 149 
Adipic, 73, 83 
acid (AA), 73, 83, 88, 89, 127, 145, 146, 
158 
Adoption, 34, 55, 124, 414 
Advent, 11, 16, 37, 56, 81, 85, 358, 359, 362 
Adverse, 123, 134, 477 
Aeration 
levels, 76 
rate, 76, 137, 533 
Aerobic, 76, 81, 131, 132, 135, 140, 142, 
147, 175, 224, 291, 368, 383, 449, 494, 
530, 575, 577, 588 
activated sludge, 291 
conditions, 76, 81, 135, 140 
Affinity, 128, 193, 235, 429, 561 
Agar, 201, 203–205 
Agglutination proteins, 12 
Agitation speed, 137, 154 
Agrochemicals, 94 
Agro-industries, 157 
Agronomic, 414 
Aids, 11, 55, 313, 429, 435, 570, 577 
Air-lift reactor (ALR), 153 
Albino rats, 210, 212, 213 
Alcohol, 5, 6, 11, 18, 72, 73, 89, 95, 98, 99, 
175, 272, 273, 294, 310–313, 316, 317, 
319–322, 324, 325, 340, 368, 362, 365, 
367, 411, 413, 424, 425, 431, 433, 456, 
469, 496, 557, 562, 569 
dehydrogenase, 18, 322 
production, 11, 294, 321, 431 
Aldehyde, 76, 95, 98, 316 
decarbonylase (AD), 272, 274, 277, 290, 
292, 295, 316, 368, 383, 384, 399, 405, 
408, 411–413, 455, 509 
deformylases, 315 
deformylating oxygenase (ADO), 316 
dehydrogenase (aldH), 74 
reductases (AHR), 81, 315, 316 
Algae, 126, 144, 181, 200, 201, 213, 271, 
277, 279, 317, 367, 381, 394–403, 405, 
407, 408, 411, 412, 415, 424, 426–437, 
443, 445, 448, 451, 452, 455–458, 484, 
494, 498, 499, 508, 510, 518, 527, 
529–536, 539, 541–543, 546, 548 
biomass, 399, 427, 541 
flocculation, 430 
fuels, 407 
preform photosynthesis, 200 
Algal 
biodiesel, 405, 434, 437 
biomass, 291, 310, 397, 402, 407, 408, 
413, 426, 427, 430–432, 434, 435, 443, 
444, 452, 455, 457, 458, 499, 531–533 
biorefinery approach, 394 
cells, 398, 516 
culture techniques, 427 
growth rate, 427 
species, 200, 427, 530, 536, 548 
technology, 423 
Alginate, 146, 201, 202, 294, 432 
Algorithms, 25, 41, 185 
Aliphatic aromatic co-polyesters, 179 
Alkali, 80 
catalyzed transesterification, 312 
Alkaline 
conditions, 277, 312 
pH, 291 
pretreatment, 282 
Alkaloid, 199, 202, 223, 233, 241, 242 
compounds, 231 
Alkane, 89, 181, 311, 312, 315–317, 473, 
493 
monooxygenase (AlkBGT), 89, 359 
Allied market research, 124 
Allyl alcohol, 74 
Alpha 
ketoglutarate, 126 
ketoglutaric acid, 135 

 
Index 
609 
Alternative 
fuel, 425, 427, 434, 437, 506 
inexpensive substrate, 146 
methods, 3, 86 
source, 213, 378, 388 
Amber acid, 127 
Ambergris, 101 
Ambient, 7, 12, 72, 355, 366, 493, 524, 533 
temperatures, 7, 12, 366 
Ambrein, 101, 102 
Ambrox, 101 
Amenities, 145 
Amicetin group antibiotics, 227 
Amidst, 224 
Amino acid, 6, 23, 24, 40, 43, 47, 49, 57, 
85, 91, 94, 95, 98, 100, 126, 128, 133, 
145, 147, 148, 156, 174–176, 179, 190, 
192, 200, 202, 272, 290, 368, 469, 556, 
557, 565, 572–574 
Aminobutyric acid (ABA), 95, 147 
Aminopentanedioic acid, 147 
Aminotransferase, 80, 98, 362 
Ammonia, 103, 274, 276, 541 
lyase, 103 
Ammonium 
fumarate, 146 
sulfate, 148, 561, 572, 573 
Amorpha, 19, 104 
Amorphadiene synthase (ADS), 103, 104, 
563 
Ample, 8, 224, 574 
Amycomicin (AMY), 247 
Amylase, 12, 211, 212, 321, 558, 590 
Amylolytic enzymes, 321 
Anaerobic, 76, 79, 81, 84, 128, 131, 134, 
142, 176, 273–275, 278, 280–282, 285, 
287, 290, 291, 293, 295, 328, 339, 343, 
347, 368, 378, 379, 382, 383, 386, 399, 
405, 413, 449, 451, 455, 509, 528, 529, 
533, 588 
activated sludge, 291 
bacteria cultures, 291 
conditions, 406 
decomposition, 425 
digestate, 287 
digester, 273–275, 290, 413 
food chain, 274 
synthesis, 81 
Analytical 
separation, 250 
techniques, 35 
tools, 174, 250 
Anaplerotic reaction, 153 
Ancillary genes, 51 
Angumycinones, 226 
Annotated genome sequence, 37 
Anode, 338, 377, 379–381, 384–387, 
444–446, 448, 450–453, 455 
Anodic, 338, 340, 343, 379, 380, 385, 387, 
443, 452 
chamber, 338, 340, 343, 379, 380 
Anonymously, 60 
Anthacimycin, 231 
Anthracene, 234, 241 
Anthrax antibiotic, 231 
Anti-AIDS drugs, 94 
Antibacterial, 136, 201, 202, 204, 205, 227, 
228, 232 
activity, 204, 228, 232 
agent, 136 
efficacy, 205 
Anti-biofilm, 232, 233 
Antibiotic, 11, 94, 175, 191, 192, 223–225, 
249, 250, 368, 557, 574, 578 
activity, 177 
Anti-cancer, 213, 222, 223, 235, 236, 589 
activity, 209, 210 
agent, 199, 214 
Anticoagulant, 199, 209, 213 
Antidiabetic, 199, 201, 209, 211–214 
activity, 211, 212 
potential, 211 
Anti-foulants, 213 
Antifouling, 201, 242 
Anti-freezing, 80 
Antifungal, 201, 202, 205, 222, 223, 226, 
227, 251 
activity, 205, 226, 229, 251 
efficiency, 205 
peptides (AFPs), 227 
potential, 227 
Anti-H1N1 virus activity, 234 
Anti-infective compounds, 241 
Anti-inflammatory, 149, 177, 201, 202, 210, 
211 
activity, 211 
effect, 210 

 
610 
Index 
potential, 210 
property, 211 
Antilarvicidal drug, 242 
Antileukemic chemotherapeutic agent, 235 
Antimalarial 
activity, 241 
drug, 19, 103 
potential, 241 
Anti-metabolites, 177 
Antimicrobial, 202–204, 209, 213, 222, 224, 
225, 227, 231, 290, 449 
action, 231 
activity, 204, 225 
efficacy, 203, 204 
metabolites, 227 
Antimitotic activities, 201 
Anti-MRSA, 232, 233, 248 
Antimycin, 233 
Anti-neoplastic, 201 
Antioxidant, 199, 201, 202, 207, 208, 213, 
214, 233, 235, 239, 240, 252, 396, 570 
efficacy, 208 
potential, 207, 208, 239 
Antiplasmodial 
activities, 241 
potential, 241 
Anti-proliferative activity, 210 
Anti-saprolegnia parasitica activity, 241 
Antisense RNA (asRNA), 59 
systems, 59 
templates, 59 
Antitumor, 202, 209, 223, 235, 236 
activity, 149 
Antiviral, 201, 202, 206, 214, 222, 223, 233, 
234, 252 
activity, 206, 214, 233, 234, 252 
efficacy, 206 
property, 206, 234 
skeleton compounds, 233 
Aquatic 
environments, 200, 533 
habitats, 398, 539 
Aqueous 
environment, 5 
extract, 213 
Arabidopsis, 37, 87, 319 
Arabinofuranosidases, 285 
Arabinose, 81, 323 
Archaea, 24, 51, 99, 227, 271, 274, 275, 
317, 528, 529, 588 
Arginine, 90, 91, 147, 573 
decarboxylase (ADC), 90 
deficiency, 91 
Aromatic, 72 
alcohol, 98 
aldehydes, 98 
Array, 4, 52, 126, 132, 362, 565 
Artemisinic acid, 103, 104 
Artemisinin, 73, 103, 104, 107 
precursor, 104 
Arthritis, 201, 491 
Artificial 
cells, 192 
gems, 149 
intelligence and machine learning (AI and 
ML), 184 
microbial consortium, 88 
neural network, 144 
pathways, 16, 362 
RBS, 22 
small yeast promoter, 189 
sweeteners, 141 
synthetic pathway, 89 
Aspartame, 145, 176 
Aspartase, 145, 146 
Aspartate, 126, 362 
Aspartic acid, 124, 145, 146, 149, 573 
Aspergillus, 22, 79, 133, 143, 149, 230, 285, 
293, 321, 368, 501, 558, 571, 572 
oryzae, 22, 501 
Assay, 181, 204, 205, 208, 210, 212, 239, 
493, 563 
Assessment, 38, 58, 59, 158, 347 
Assortment, 222, 223, 226 
Asymmetric bio-reduction, 99 
Auroramycin, 248 
Autoimmune diseases, 201 
AutoKEGGRec, 37 
Automated computational pipeline, 37 
Automatic 
detection, 244 
genomic, 244 
Automobiles, 92, 402 
Autotransporter protein, 12, 315 
Autotrophic 
bacteria, 176 
carbon fixation rate, 346 
Auxotrophy, 90, 131 
Axillary, 5, 385 

 
611 
Index 
B 
Bacillus 
cereus, 80, 227, 501, 590 
subtilis, 12, 13, 16, 18, 74, 83, 92, 95, 98, 
142, 143, 190, 203, 204, 227–229, 319, 
321, 324, 325, 476 
Bacterial 
bio-films, 190 
cell, 55, 189, 560, 588, 591 
factories, 60 
membranes, 293 
colonies, 190 
domain, 224 
fermentation, 133, 179, 453 
isolates, 147 
pathogens, 226 
proteins, 190 
species, 76, 147, 316, 346, 495, 557, 570, 
573, 588, 594, 595 
strain, 74, 128, 143, 190, 204, 477, 500, 570 
Bacteriophage, 55 
Barrier, 73, 359, 363, 369, 399, 423, 502, 589 
BD dehydrogenase (BDH), 83 
Benhamycin, 225 
Benzaldehyde, 98 
Benzene, 88 
Benzoxazole antibiotic labeled caboxa­
mycin, 225 
Beverage 
industry, 141, 384 
waste, 290 
Bicarbonate, 339, 345, 449, 526, 530, 531, 
539 
Big-data analysis, 43 
Binding sites, 50 
Bioactive 
antiplasmodial compound, 241 
component, 203, 214 
compound, 205–207, 210, 213, 223, 225, 
233, 241, 250, 251, 518, 539 
landfills, 275 
metabolites, 204, 213, 222, 226, 232 
molecule, 200–202, 205, 206, 209–213, 596 
secondary metabolite, 204, 206 
substances, 396 
Bio-based 
catalysis, 34 
platform chemicals, 124 
Biobutanol, 18, 318, 395, 396, 402, 407, 
412, 427 
production, 18 
Biocatalysis, 4, 5, 7–14, 16–21, 23, 26, 
34, 35, 61, 72, 73, 95, 104, 222, 223, 
226, 253, 269, 310, 312, 316, 321, 322, 
357–360–363, 444, 555–557, 578 
Bio-catalytic 
molecules, 4 
processes, 5, 6, 362 
Biochar, 395, 396, 533, 595 
Biochemical, 13, 14, 33, 38, 61, 85, 128, 
147, 272, 280, 310, 314, 328, 336, 344, 
394, 406, 410, 457, 503 
constitution, 13, 14, 85 
conversion, 394, 406, 410 
insights, 104 
transformations, 408 
Biochemistry, 11, 174, 252 
Biochip, 181 
Biocidal, 200 
Biocompatible scaffold, 192 
Bio-components, 213 
Bioconversion, 12, 14, 16, 17, 21, 75, 79, 
91–93, 98–101, 283, 284, 312, 313, 325, 
362 
Biodegradable, 74, 136, 178, 179, 290, 356, 
395, 399, 468, 469, 478, 479, 489, 493, 
496, 502, 503, 507, 509, 567, 585–587, 
594, 596, 599, 600 
polymers, 74, 136, 179, 290, 509, 594 
Biodiesel, 11, 17, 22, 82, 295, 310, 
312–315, 317, 328, 356, 359, 364, 365, 
369, 394–397, 399, 402–408, 411, 412, 
414, 415, 424–427, 433, 434, 449, 451, 
454–457, 529, 595 
production, 11, 22, 312–315, 359, 364, 
365, 369, 396, 402, 403, 412, 455 
research, 427 
Biodiversity, 223, 226 
Bioelectricity, 181, 382 
Bioelectrochemical, 335–338, 344, 346 
cells (BEC), 181 
system, 335, 336 
Bioenergy, 181, 270, 289, 349, 377, 378, 
407, 412, 453, 455, 457, 535 
Bioengineering tools, 173, 193, 370 

 
612 
Index 
Bioethanol, 201, 213, 283, 284, 293–295, 
318, 320–322, 356, 364, 367, 369, 
394–397, 402, 404, 406–408, 412, 415, 
427, 432, 433, 454, 595 
fermentation, 412, 432 
production, 201, 213, 321, 364, 367, 404 
Biofilm, 12, 84, 191, 232, 233, 242, 340, 
345, 346, 429, 446, 455, 498 
activity, 232 
immobilization, 12 
Biofuel, 3, 24, 25, 33, 61, 71, 123, 173, 174, 
181, 199, 221, 269–271, 292, 293, 295, 
309–312, 315–322, 324, 325, 328, 329, 
335, 344, 348, 355–360, 363–366, 369, 
370, 377, 381, 393–400, 405, 407–409, 
414, 415, 423–427, 429, 431, 432, 
435–437, 443–445, 449–451, 454–456, 
467, 483, 499, 515, 518, 555, 585, 595 
application, 292, 319 
production, 24, 270, 292, 293, 322, 328, 
344, 355–357, 359, 363, 364, 369, 370, 
381, 394, 395, 397, 399, 407, 408, 426, 
435 
Biogas, 272, 273, 276, 280, 292, 293, 367, 
368, 370, 383, 394, 405, 406, 408, 413, 
415, 425, 499 
Biohydrogen, 270, 277, 278, 383, 384, 388, 
394, 405, 406, 454 
production, 383 
Bioinformatics, 40, 126, 184, 244, 252, 362 
tools, 40, 252 
Bio-ink, 191, 192 
Biological 
activities, 222, 223, 558  
agent, 277  
cell, 6, 73  
factories, 189  
conversion method, 136  
entity, 15  
environment, 5  
hydrogen, 182  
occurrence, 88  
operations, 243  
origin, 311, 356  
parameters, 186  
pathways, 74  
problem, 11  
production, 82, 83, 88, 136, 175  
reactions, 25, 358, 557  
renewable resources, 290  
route, 74, 277, 290  
sources, 222  
synthesis, 290, 326  
Biomass, 73, 74, 86, 125, 137, 140, 146, 
154, 181, 185, 186, 269–273, 277, 280, 
284, 285, 290, 292, 295, 343, 356, 361, 
363, 368, 377, 378, 382, 383, 394–396, 
398–400, 403–405, 407, 408, 412, 
413, 424–429, 431, 432, 434–437, 444, 
448, 449, 451, 453–457, 468, 496, 499, 
502, 509, 519, 523, 527, 529, 531–533, 
535, 542, 543, 545, 548, 559, 560, 565, 
585–587 
conversion processes, 271 
sources, 413, 426 
Biomedical 
application, 208, 590 
field, 149, 199, 213 
Biomethane, 295, 383, 395, 396, 413, 454 
Biomolecule, 57, 73, 99, 147, 173, 175, 179, 
181, 192, 193, 199, 202, 212, 290, 310, 
368, 455, 493, 518, 528 
Bio-oil, 406, 407, 413, 425, 434–436, 454 
Biopharmaceuticals, 556, 578 
Bioplastic, 127, 213, 502, 505, 509, 
585–587, 599, 600 
Biopolymers, 178, 179, 270, 286, 586, 587, 
590, 596, 599, 600 
Bio-printing, 191–193 
Bioprocess, 155, 182, 184, 188, 348, 397, 
556 
Bioreactor, 174, 192, 312, 451, 544–547, 
557 
Biorefinery, 125, 295, 348, 444 
aspects, 157 
Bioremediation, 191, 213, 386, 388, 426, 
467, 468, 474–479, 484, 493–495, 527 
Biosensor, 174, 190, 251, 385, 386, 388 
Biosynthesis, 17, 38, 57, 82, 89, 90, 93, 
98–103, 141, 149, 156, 178, 213, 222, 
223, 242, 244, 247, 248, 250, 311, 312, 
314, 315–317, 362, 363, 539, 574, 575 
Biosynthetic 
approach, 148 
exposure, 182 
gene clusters (BGC), 238, 242, 244, 245 

 
613 
Index 
pathway, 19, 74, 86, 92, 94, 98, 99, 103, 
104, 153, 362 
pipelines, 244 
potential, 222, 243, 244 
routes, 81, 83 
Biotechnological, 80–82, 189, 190, 222, 
226, 269, 328, 358, 479, 555, 559, 578 
applications, 80, 190 
approaches, 81, 269, 328 
protein production, 189 
Biotechnology, 13, 55, 136, 174, 189, 269, 
328, 359, 556, 578, 593 
Biotherapeutic, 199, 201–203, 212–214 
Biotic, 247, 338, 447, 448, 484, 534 
Biotin, 190, 573, 574 
Biotransform, 12, 35, 81, 85, 90, 327 
Biotransformation, 5, 11, 13, 14, 16, 17, 21, 
26, 34, 35, 46, 84, 89, 93–95, 98–100, 
242, 269, 321, 358, 361, 362, 555–557 
Biotransformed, 18 
glucose, 85 
Bisabolene production, 22, 320 
Blue 
green algae, 400 
light, 22 
Breast cancer cell lines, 210 
Broad 
array, 225 
clinical usage, 145 
range, 73, 278 
spectrum, 201, 202, 225, 232, 241, 275 
antilarvicidal activity, 241 
Bromoethanesulfonic acid (BESA), 
335–337, 339, 344–346, 348, 349 
Brown 
algae, 202, 210, 400, 529 
seaweed, 201, 206, 210, 211 
Budding potential, 235, 247 
Building block, 74, 80, 84, 94, 104, 127, 
145, 176, 289, 503, 592 
Bulk chemical, 84, 294 
Butanediol, 83, 127, 565 
dehydrogenase (bdhA), 83 
Butanol, 38, 181, 239, 270, 322, 324, 325, 
329, 339, 346, 406, 410, 436 
Butenolide, 234, 241 
Butyric acid, 147, 276, 278, 290, 291, 294 
Bypassing, 9, 43, 72 
C 
Cadaverine, 25, 60, 91, 92 
fermentation, 91 
production, 25, 91, 92 
utilizing, 91 
Cadmium, 213, 487 
Cancer 
cell, 231, 236, 237, 239 
lines, 225, 236–239 
multiplication, 86 
chemotherapy, 85 
diseases, 201 
risk, 235 
therapeutics, 240 
therapy, 235 
Capnophilic, 128, 131 
Carbon 
aldaric acid, 85 
dicarboxylic acid, 127, 136 
flux, 25, 80, 85, 133, 142, 429, 540 
footprint, 34, 93, 336, 378, 443, 444 
free fuels, 310, 329 
metabolism, 126, 185 
molecules, 80, 534, 536 
neutral, 325, 326, 356, 382, 396, 444, 
455, 448, 499, 520 
number, 83, 317, 589 
rich 
molecules, 181 
substrate, 133 
sources, 81, 84, 128, 132, 141, 143, 147, 
154, 314, 320, 322, 471, 498, 499, 520, 
534, 537, 572, 573, 590 
substrate, 13, 88, 92, 93, 99, 131, 154, 
311, 324, 327, 591 
Carboxyl, 74, 149, 469, 564 
group, 149, 564 
Carboxylase, 80, 132, 135, 139, 143, 
314–516, 529, 536, 539, 540, 549 
Carboxylic acid 
reductase (CAR), 98, 316 
transporter, 139 
Carcinogenic 
aflatoxins, 143 
progression, 235 
Cardiovascular, 201, 589, 593 
Carrageenan, 201, 202, 208, 209 

 
614 
Index 
Cas 
endonucleases, 24 
enzyme, 53 
Cascade, 9, 11, 12, 16, 19, 21, 23, 33, 44, 
58, 155, 322, 355, 358, 361–363 
Cassava 
bagasse, 288 
powder, 83 
Catalysis, 1, 3–6, 9, 10, 15, 17, 19, 20, 22, 
34, 35, 38, 39, 44, 72, 73, 146, 311, 312, 
326, 345, 359, 360, 362, 365, 368, 369, 
370, 433, 444, 494, 525, 557 
field, 6 
function, 35 
Catalyst, 4–, 8, 11, 14, 18, 19, 23, 26, 33, 
34, 71, 72, 77, 80, 81, 84, 90, 94, 96, 
98, 103, 104, 146, 174, 309, 311–313, 
324, 327, 328, 337, 339, 343, 345, 349, 
355–361, 364–370, 385, 386, 405, 411, 
433–436, 444, 447, 449, 521, 533, 555, 
556 
Catalytic, 5, 7–9, 20, 35, 39, 43, 44, 47, 73, 
104, 140, 293, 295, 355, 358, 360, 361, 
370, 411, 412, 435, 436, 445, 540, 557 
activity, 20, 104, 293, 557 
capacity, 47 
cell cascade, 43 
factory, 44 
function, 39, 360 
industry, 8 
platform, 5, 35 
process, 7, 73, 361 
purpose, 8 
reaction, 73, 411 
system, 9, 370 
Cathode, 338, 339, 340, 345–347, 349, 377, 
379–384, 386, 387, 443, 447–455 
Cathodic 
chamber, 338, 339, 340, 343, 447 
whole-cell, 339 
Cell 
biocatalyst, 17, 82, 316 
biocatalytic bio-transformation, 94, 104 
biomass, 346, 394 
cycle, 11, 536 
density, 56, 287, 539 
development, 346 
division, 175 
dynamically, 190 
engineering, 57 
envelope, 12, 274, 359 
factories, 128, 174, 175, 179, 186, 192 
factory 
concept, 189 
microorganism, 193 
free 
biocatalysis, 73 
biocatalyst, 73 
biocatalyst, 73 
system, 73 
systems, 326 
growth, 56, 76, 90, 157, 176, 278, 348, 
361, 363, 578, 599 
phase, 56 
imaging, 190 
inhibition, 209, 210 
laden structure, 192 
lines, 209, 210, 236–240 
lysis, 73, 360 
mass, 186, 187, 577 
membrane reactor, 146 
perfusion, 192 
physiology, 59 
production, 76, 536 
proliferation, 90 
surface, 12, 19, 313, 322, 364, 446 
display, 19, 313 
immobilization, 12 
system, 9, 18, 37, 73, 599 
tends, 15 
wall, 12, 13, 178, 201, 361, 398, 399, 
403–405, 408–410, 430, 432, 434, 456, 
496 
proteins, 12 
Cellobiose, 93, 323 
Cellophane, 179, 502 
Cellular 
amino acid, 133 
burden, 59 
carbon flux, 59 
catalysts, 50, 56, 324 
chassis, 14, 17, 84, 107, 321 
compartments, 12 
complexities, 26 
dynamics, 11 
energy, 19 

 
Index 
615 
envelopes, 12 
expression, 54 
feasibility, 24 
flux, 37, 56, 327 
function, 187 
gene, 60 
growth, 11, 25, 61 
phase, 11 
health, 14, 19, 45, 323 
homeostasis, 327 
host, 93 
manipulations, 322 
metabolic balance, 323 
metabolism, 4, 37, 56, 175, 249, 369, 530 
modifications, 13 
optimization, 14 
pathways, 24, 38, 322 
physiological conditions, 7 
polymetric matrix, 191 
proteins, 9 
spatial, 14 
structures, 12 
survival, 19 
system, 10–12, 14, 16, 20, 21, 24, 26, 33, 
45, 53, 61, 72, 83, 88, 92, 178, 311, 
313 
toxicity, 21, 98, 100 
wall, 3 
Cellulase 
activity, 281 
enzymes, 285, 293, 407 
producer, 155 
Cellulolytic 
bacteria, 273 
fungus, 285 
hydrolysate enzymes, 285 
Cellulose, 143, 155, 178, 179, 201, 270, 
272, 273, 285, 288, 293, 321, 322, 324, 
325, 367, 396, 399, 404, 430, 432, 455, 
456, 502, 567, 586 
Central 
carbon metabolism, 126 
catabolic pathway, 320, 324 
reservoir, 397 
structure, 12 
Chassis, 10, 13–15, 20, 26, 33, 35, 38, 48, 
61, 84, 92, 94, 95, 103, 246, 309, 320, 323 
optimization, 10, 94, 323 
Chemical, 3, 33, 69, 71, 72, 123, 173, 199, 
221, 269, 309, 335, 355, 377, 393, 423, 
443, 467, 483, 515, 555, 585 
catalysis, 4–6, 8, 9, 25, 26, 72, 73, 80 
catalyst, 5, 8, 21, 72, 82, 84, 312, 358, 
403 
catalytic processes, 12, 26 
compounds, 124, 175, 536, 565 
diversity, 247 
entities, 4, 563 
hydrolysis, 295 
inducers, 21 
industry, 34, 71, 72, 84, 490, 503, 561 
moieties, 124 
oxidation, 86 
oxygen demand (COD), 343, 386 
precursors, 104 
processes, 107, 406, 411, 555 
properties, 4, 202, 292, 563 
reaction, 3, 6, 72, 444, 521 
route, 175, 277, 290, 564 
scaffolds, 226 
structure of IA, 149 
substances, 6, 409, 534 
substrate, 73 
synthesis, 74, 82–84, 88–90, 95, 102, 128, 
136, 141, 147, 157, 178, 286, 557, 568 
transformation, 4 
treatments, 409 
Chemotherapy, 235 
Chimeric 
guide RNA, 24 
nucleases, 23, 33, 48 
promoter, 189 
Chiral 
centers, 94 
chemicals, 17 
products, 10 
Chirality, 81, 94 
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, 100, 318, 327, 
396, 400, 406, 427, 499, 530, 534, 549 
Chloramphenicol, 224 
Chlorinated 
3-phenylpropanoic acid, 225 
antibiotics, 225 
bisindole pyrroles, 232 
Chloroform, 204, 205, 410, 430, 575 
Chlorophyceae, 200, 430, 498 

 
616 
Index 
Chromosome, 55, 240, 248 
Chronic 
coughs, 200 
diseases, 235 
Circumvent, 12, 19, 21, 23, 26, 51, 55, 83, 
89, 104, 313, 314, 319, 444 
Cis-aconitase decarboxylase (CAD), 153 
Cis-aconitate, 126, 149, 153 
Cis-acting, 57, 59, 76 
Cis-muconic acid (ccMA), 89 
Cited, 52, 54, 95 
Citric acid, 79, 84, 126, 136, 141, 175, 176, 
564, 571, 572 
Clean 
fuel, 277, 365, 426, 433 
manner, 86 
Cleavage, 48, 54, 494 
Cleaves, 23, 48, 53 
Clinical 
human pathogens, 204 
isolates, 38 
pathogens, 203–205, 225, 231, 232 
Cloning 
protocols, 50 
strategies, 22 
Clostridia, 278, 324, 327, 328 
Clostridium, 24, 80–82, 89, 93, 182, 273, 
274, 276, 280, 281, 285, 290, 291, 294, 
314, 318, 321, 322, 324, 326, 327, 340, 
345, 366, 368, 407, 413, 528 
thermosaccharolyticum, 81, 281 
Clustered regularly, 23, 48, 51, 182, 247 
interspaced short 
palindrome region-Cas (CRISPR-Cas) 
system, 48 
palindromic repeats, 248 
interspersed short 
palindromic repeats (CRISPR), 23, 24, 
26, 48, 51–54, 61, 134, 139, 155, 
156, 182, 247–249, 253 
Cluster, 51, 244, 246, 249, 518 
situated regulators (CSRs), 251 
Co-combined maneuvering, 247 
Co-cultivation, 247, 252 
Co-culture 
fermentation, 80, 133 
techniques, 289 
Codon, 19, 22, 24, 40, 44, 47, 157, 189, 
319, 320 
bias, 22 
coordination, 22 
optimization, 19, 22, 319 
strategy, 22 
optimized xylanase gene, 22 
synonymous, 22 
Coenzyme, 75, 76, 79, 314, 537 
Colon 
cancer cell, 209, 238 
lines, 210, 240 
carcinoma, 209, 236 
Combinatorial libraries, 22, 49 
Commercial 
applications, 11, 270, 599 
scale, 128, 131, 295, 431 
Commercialized biofuels, 181 
Commodity chemicals, 13, 123 
Comparison, 9, 181, 212, 213, 287, 348, 
360, 364, 424, 431, 547 
Complementary, 53, 60 
strands, 53 
Complex 
binds, 54 
genes, 188 
molecular frameworks, 177 
multisubunit, 52 
physiological pathways, 179 
sugars, 126 
task, 33 
Complexity, 13, 37, 124, 154, 312, 319, 364, 
556, 586 
Compound annual growth rate (CAGR), 124 
Comprehend, 11, 60 
Computational 
algorithms, 61 
analysis, 184 
biology, 10, 36, 193 
methods, 60 
models, 185 
portfolio, 35 
techniques, 185 
tools, 21, 25, 37, 355 
Computed tomography (CT), 192, 598 
Computer 
aided wet-spinning, 600 
system, 185 

 
617 
Index 
Concurrent saccharification, 321 
Confectionaries, 5, 201 
Confronting perplexity, 226 
Consolidated bioprocessing (CBP), 88, 284, 
285 
Consortia, 271, 280–282, 285, 292–294, 
388, 474, 495, 503 
Consortium, 155, 272, 273, 279, 384, 457, 503 
Constituents, 175, 326, 364, 385, 572 
Construction, 18, 35, 37, 58, 174, 190, 361, 
384, 488, 490, 521, 597 
Consume, 19, 273, 280, 288, 289, 378, 398, 
426, 477, 489, 493 
Conventional, 86, 181, 310, 361, 377, 378 
electricity generation methods, 379 
energy sources, 378 
fuel, 181, 310 
production, 80 
succinate production, 84 
synthesis, 86 
Copious 
halometabolites, 225 
supplier, 222, 223 
Copper nanoparticles (CuNP), 294 
Core 
activity, 40 
apprehension, 233 
catalytic molecules, 44 
cell mandatory, 176 
constituents, 53 
objective, 43 
Corn 
stover biomass, 288 
syrup, 148 
Corynebacterium, 11, 74, 80, 89, 93, 100, 
143, 145, 147, 176, 190, 204, 359, 
573–575 
glutamicum, 11, 25, 74, 81, 83, 84, 
89–91, 93, 100, 103, 143, 147, 148, 
156, 176, 177, 190, 359, 573, 574 
Cosmetic, 5, 80, 82, 98, 127, 290, 455, 570, 
600 
formulations, 201 
industry, 101, 147, 283 
Cost 
effective, 80, 81, 84, 86, 135, 137, 146, 
154, 284, 355, 356, 363, 383, 453, 475, 
520, 549, 562, 565 
efficient 
catalysts, 72 
downstream processes, 136 
strategy, 95 
substrates, 81 
incurred, 34, 41, 42, 587 
inefficient downstream process, 137 
intensive, 9, 25, 41, 56, 72, 82, 94, 190, 
313, 326 
Co-substrates, 19, 87, 477 
Co-supplementation, 87, 131 
Criteria, 13, 39, 40, 182, 224, 499 
bottleneck, 40 
sequence, 52 
technologies, 34 
Crude, 34, 73, 135, 143, 210, 403, 405, 434, 
476, 520, 521 
Cryptic, 223, 242–249, 252 
secondary metabolite, 242, 248 
analysis, 244 
Cultivation, 76, 79, 247, 397, 399, 413, 415, 
423, 428, 429, 430, 437, 455, 456, 518, 
534, 541, 542, 544–547, 549 
Cultural 
morphology, 137 
rheology, 137 
systems, 397 
Curated, 5, 36, 54, 58 
Cyanobacteria, 14, 80, 320, 325, 326, 395, 
396, 398, 400, 445, 498, 528, 529, 531, 
533, 540, 541, 548 
Cysteine, 94, 190, 573 
biosynthetic pathway, 94 
Cytochrome, 104, 317, 346 
Cytoplasmic 
aconitase, 156 
thioesterases, 316 
Cytotoxic, 201, 210, 236, 239, 240, 292 
consequence, 240 
regimens, 240 
D 
Dark fermentation, 278, 279, 280, 326, 366 
Databases, 37, 85, 244 
De novo, 43, 174, 184 
design, 42, 43 
Decade, 5, 7, 10, 11, 23, 39, 44, 48, 51, 56, 
57, 71, 125, 136, 137, 177, 187, 189, 199, 

 
618 
Index 
223, 277, 310, 325, 336, 359, 364, 444, 
500, 517, 557, 595 
Declining phase, 11, 187 
Deforestation, 426, 517, 519 
Degradation, 43, 53, 55, 60, 75, 89, 91, 98, 
271, 273, 280, 281, 284, 288, 292, 312, 
314, 315, 321, 361, 367, 380, 404, 456, 
469, 474–477, 484, 490, 493, 495, 498, 
499, 502, 508, 509, 510, 527, 563, 592, 
594, 595, 600 
Dehydrogenase, 19, 89, 92, 128, 156, 278, 
294, 324, 367, 471, 528, 537, 538 
De-novo, 14, 16, 18, 19, 22, 75, 80, 82, 89, 
95, 98–100, 103 
synthesis, 16, 18, 19, 89, 99, 103 
Deoxyribose-5-phosphate aldolase (DERA), 
82 
Department of Energy (DoE), 74, 124, 565 
Dependency, 74, 84, 132, 157, 309, 310, 
338, 378, 444 
Dephosphorylate inositol-3-phosphate, 86 
Design, 4, 8, 11, 16, 24, 33, 43, 48, 61, 72, 
226, 356–358, 361, 362, 577 
data, 190 
optimization, 35 
tools, 184 
Desired 
metabolic flux engineering, 60 
novel reactions, 5 
phenotype, 40 
reaction, 34, 35 
Despite, 56, 86, 125, 132, 139, 157, 222, 
233, 242, 246, 248, 278, 369, 394, 399, 
405, 414, 426, 488, 499, 503, 526, 597 
Detergents, 127, 191, 359, 363, 572 
Deterioration, 356, 409, 484, 485 
Detoxification, 43, 145, 478 
Devoid, 8, 19, 76, 310, 361 
Dextrin, 148, 567 
Diabetes, 201, 491 
Diabetic, 211, 212 
Diamines, 73, 107 
Dicarboxylic 
acids (DCAs), 83, 107 
transporter gene, 140 
Diene, 19, 104 
Dihydroartemisinic acid (DHAA), 103 
Diketopiperazines, 223, 231 
Dimethylallyl diphosphate (DMAPP), 99, 
318 
Diol, 14, 73, 80–82, 107 
production, 80, 81, 83 
Dione, 234, 239, 241 
Dioxygenase, 89, 156 
Dipeptidyl peptidase-IV, 212 
Directed evolution, 39–41, 87, 503 
Disaccharides, 182, 201, 472 
Disc diffusion method, 205, 206 
Display, 12, 13, 248, 309, 310, 315, 321, 
364, 368, 369 
Disposal, 20, 281, 358, 484–486, 493, 501, 
504, 596, 600 
Distinct 
enzymes, 22 
species, 47 
waves, 10 
Diverse, 8, 11, 44, 45, 48, 52, 57, 58, 95, 
127, 149, 177, 179, 224, 232, 242, 274, 
279, 280, 324, 346, 395, 398, 424, 426, 
485, 488, 495, 533, 535, 557 
binding abilities, 58 
population, 224 
Diversified, 99, 226, 252 
Divert, 56, 59, 455 
DNA, 20–24, 39, 45, 48–52, 54, 55, 145, 
224, 240, 248, 359, 492, 577 
assembly, 22 
based tools, 21 
binding domain, 23, 24, 48, 49 
editing tool, 51 
endonuclease, 24 
fragment, 55, 240 
integration, 54 
interacting, 23 
overlapping fragments, 22 
recognition, 49 
recognizing modules, 48 
segment, 52, 55 
shuffling, 39 
strand, 49 
synthesis, 23 
target, 48, 50 
technologies, 20 
Documentation, 35, 227 
Domain, 23, 24, 38, 48–50, 315 
Domestic, 4, 343, 381, 484 

 
Index 
619 
Dominant 
activity, 234 
cytotoxicity, 231 
Donate, 19, 445 
Double strand 
breaks (DSBs), 23, 53 
cleavage, 24 
Downstream, 5, 13, 17, 34, 46, 50, 57, 59, 
83, 85, 140, 287, 288, 312, 319, 358, 361, 
395, 413, 479, 555, 556, 558, 567, 575, 
577, 578 
processing (DSP), 5, 13, 57, 83, 140, 287, 
288, 312, 358, 395, 413, 479, 555, 556, 
558, 575, 577, 578 
Drawbacks, 8, 21, 23, 49, 55, 59, 73, 74, 86, 
313, 327, 360, 378, 394, 433, 437, 447, 
485, 590 
Dried biomass, 401, 426 
Drug 
additives, 242, 250 
delivery, 202, 596 
discovery, 222, 223, 226, 233, 242, 247, 
252 
resistance, 240 
targeting, 37 
Dry 
biomass, 397 
cell weight, 188 
microalgal biomass, 409 
Dynamic, 10, 22, 49, 52, 54, 149, 185, 186, 
224, 226, 252, 386, 469, 572 
control, 22 
metabolic simulation model, 149 
model, 185 
module, 49, 54 
E 
Eco-friendly, 72, 73, 86, 102, 125, 136, 277, 
310, 356, 384, 444, 468, 469, 479, 502, 
510, 585, 586 
Ecological 
burden, 10 
threat, 125 
Ecologically, 224, 310, 316, 499 
Economic 
burden, 3, 99, 233, 328 
sustainability, 137, 407, 556 
Economically, 14, 34, 56, 84, 103, 104, 175, 
181, 193, 280, 283, 310, 316, 325, 340, 
346, 349, 358, 424, 453, 457 
Ecosystem, 213, 224, 476, 484, 485, 487, 
495, 500, 519, 521, 533 
urged, 181 
Edible 
fats, 313 
species, 199 
Effector 
modules, 50, 51 
nuclease complex, 50 
proteins, 23, 49, 51 
Efficacy, 12, 202, 203, 205, 209, 210, 212, 
213, 238, 240, 367, 385, 495, 531 
Ehrlich pathway, 18, 98 
Elaborated, 10, 12, 13, 33, 52, 53, 85, 93, 
310, 328 
Electrical energy, 181, 325, 340, 379, 385, 
387 
Electricity generation, 343, 379, 382, 397, 
454 
Electrochemical, 86, 140, 325, 336, 
344–346, 379, 445–449 
cell, 344 
detection, 181 
methods, 86, 325 
oxidation, 86 
Electrolyte, 343, 377, 450 
Electrolytic solution, 377, 379 
Electron, 19, 182, 293, 322, 326, 327, 338, 
340, 366, 379, 380, 382, 384, 445–450 
acceptor, 76, 126, 381, 382, 443, 447, 448 
donor, 293, 327, 381 
ferredoxin (Fd), 328 
transport chain, 79, 126, 537 
Electronics, 292, 490, 586 
Elongation, 213, 312, 315, 346 
Emerged, 72, 325, 394 
Emerging 
applications, 213 
principle, 247 
Eminent source, 126, 199, 201, 213 
Emission, 189, 270, 377, 425, 456, 522 
Enantiomeric, 94, 95 
precursors, 95 
Enantioselectivity, 21, 355, 444 
Endeavor, 222, 223 

 
620 
Index 
Endogenous, 15, 16, 19, 92, 95, 98, 100, 
101, 103, 175, 188, 314, 315, 320, 321, 
327, 517, 537 
alcohol dehydrogenase, 98 
pathway, 15, 92, 101 
precursor, 100 
Endogenously, 17, 314 
Endoglucanases, 285, 321 
Enediyne metabolite, 235 
Energy 
consumption, 336, 425 
crops, 356, 378 
Information Administration (EIA), 424 
intensive, 4 
purposes, 4, 80 
requirements, 4, 126, 128, 157, 397, 412, 
526, 538 
security, 74, 414 
technologies, 336 
Engineered 
aromatic amino acid, 98 
microbial 
cell, 193 
metabolism, 179 
organism, 182 
Enhancement, 21, 38, 56, 133, 148, 247, 
288, 411, 429, 473, 474, 544 
Enriched knowledge, 33, 104 
Entner-Doudoroff pathway (EDP), 319 
Environmental 
alteration, 251 
burden, 7, 8 
conditions, 72, 182, 508, 528, 533, 536 
contaminants, 44 
deterioration, 6, 92 
friendly system, 9 
issues, 6, 270, 355, 556 
oxidants, 190 
perspective, 6 
perturbation, 25 
policies, 6 
pollution, 213, 479, 521, 562 
toll, 107 
turbulence, 34, 312 
Enzymatic, 176, 284, 356, 358, 367, 410 
activity, 3, 14, 294, 368, 496 
catalysis, 7, 187 
degradation, 356, 358 
hydrolysis, 273, 284, 573 
process, 409 
reactions, 4, 5, 310, 356, 539 
Enzyme 
cascade, 14, 35 
core activity, 40 
engineering, 5, 124 
FAP, 181 
inhibition, 247 
kinetics, 10 
molecule, 8 
nitrogenase, 279 
purification, 34, 73, 360 
reaction, 411 
re-usage, 73 
structure, 20 
Era, 35, 193, 242, 251, 517, 523, 555 
Escalating records, 227, 246 
Escherichia coli (E. coli), 11, 13, 37, 
74, 128, 176, 181, 182, 184, 189, 203, 
227–229, 231, 285, 362 
Ester, 46, 74, 95, 311, 312, 364, 403, 410, 
433 
molecule, 425 
Esterification, 17, 313, 365 
Ethanol, 16, 38, 82, 85, 99, 128, 132, 
137, 139, 204, 205, 213, 270, 271, 281, 
283–286, 288, 289, 294, 309, 310, 
312–314, 321–324, 327–329, 339, 340, 
346, 367, 370, 395, 396, 399, 400, 403, 
404, 407, 410, 414, 415, 431–434, 436, 
527, 530, 556, 557, 562–564, 568–570, 
578, 597 
blending program (EBP), 414 
production, 16, 139, 314, 321–323, 339, 
367, 400, 432, 564 
Ethyl acetate, 205, 212, 241 
Ethylene, 6, 73, 92, 93, 283, 562 
glycol, 73, 92, 93, 562 
hydration, 283 
oxide, 92 
Eugenol, 18, 98 
Eukaryotes, 11, 51, 52, 99, 317 
Eukaryotic, 13, 21, 23, 24, 38, 48, 85, 93, 
321, 328, 395, 396, 427, 531, 533, 540 
cellular systems, 13 
chassis, 24 
genes, 48 

 
 
 
621 
Index 
model, 12 
promoters, 21 
Execution, 34, 48, 56, 359, 423, 507 
Exploration, 92, 157, 192, 233, 252, 369, 
437, 519 
External 
circuit, 338, 377, 379 
data, 38 
stimuli, 192 
Extracellular, 12, 20, 139, 273, 285, 364, 
495, 496, 556, 586, 592, 599 
biotransformations, 20 
cellulases, 273 
enzymes, 12, 364, 495, 496 
F 
Facultative, 84, 128, 131, 132, 322, 326, 
345 
bacteria, 84 
Far-flung array, 226 
Farnesyl 
diphosphate (FDP), 101, 319 
pyrophosphate, 103 
Fatty acid (FA), 18, 24, 89, 103, 104, 126, 
181, 182, 184, 199, 200, 203, 270, 272, 
274, 310–312, 314–316, 329, 340, 364, 
365, 368, 402, 403, 411, 425, 426, 430, 
436, 455, 469, 471, 472, 536, 590, 591 
alcohol, 181, 315, 316 
aldehyde, 95, 315–317 
synthesis, 315 
alkyl esters (FAAE), 312, 403 
ester, 411 
ethyl esters (FAEE), 312 
methyl esters (FAME), 312 
synthase, 24, 312 
Fed-batch 
bioreactor, 76, 144, 157 
culture, 287 
fermentation process, 139 
mode, 87, 155 
Ferment, 12, 131, 91, 133, 288, 321 
Fermentable sugars, 281, 286, 321 
Fermentation, 5, 11, 13, 18, 26, 34, 81, 83, 
84, 89, 91, 94, 100, 125, 126, 133–136, 
139, 141–144, 146–148, 153–155, 157, 
158, 175–177, 180, 181, 213, 234, 241, 
246, 247, 269, 270, 272, 273, 278–288, 
290, 291, 295, 320–322, 324, 358, 
366–368, 382, 399, 404, 408, 410, 412, 
425, 431–433, 446, 530, 555–557, 559, 
563–569, 571–578 
Fermentative 
bacteria, 273, 279, 290, 326, 366, 446 
biofuels, 396 
hydrogen production, 326 
Fertilizer, 72, 145, 201, 272, 383, 451, 499, 
531, 532 
synergist, 145 
Ferulic acid, 18, 98, 180 
Fibers, 92, 200, 509, 572, 592, 594, 600 
Filamentous, 98, 139, 143, 153, 154, 156, 
224, 498, 560 
fungi, 98, 139, 143, 154, 156 
fungus, 79 
Fine chemicals, 5, 17, 96 
Flavonoids, 200, 202, 212 
Flavor enhancer, 136, 141 
Flexible 
genome, 157 
peptides, 88 
Floch method, 410 
Flux, 14–16, 19, 25, 37, 38, 83–85, 87, 91–93, 
99, 101, 103, 104, 133, 139, 315, 319, 320, 
322, 323, 361, 363, 429, 540, 567 
balance analysis, 25, 37, 38 
management, 14 
Fluxomics data, 38 
Foam, 88, 148, 471, 489, 570 
FokI, 24, 49, 50 
FolDX, 41, 42 
Food 
acidulant, 136, 571 
commodities, 427 
crisis, 313 
sweeteners, 136 
Formate dehydrogenase (fdh), 83 
Fossil 
debris, 125 
fuel, 92, 123, 125, 174, 181, 270, 310, 
312, 326, 335, 336, 338, 356, 365, 378, 
382, 393–395, 405, 407, 424, 427, 431, 
437, 444, 517, 519, 521, 522, 531, 586 
Fragrance, 17, 95, 99, 101 
Free 
fatty acids (FFA), 316, 364 
radical, 235, 240, 508 

 
622 
Index 
Fucoidan, 201, 202, 207, 210, 211 
Fucoxanthin, 200, 202, 210 
Fuel, 3, 5, 53, 57, 100, 174, 181, 270, 277, 
309, 310, 317, 319, 320, 323, 328, 336, 
338, 340, 344, 346, 347, 356, 366, 394, 
402, 403, 407, 424–426, 433–437, 444, 
445, 456 
cells, 182, 377–379, 381, 443, 450 
driven economies, 309 
engines, 292 
generation, 426 
resource, 310, 426 
Fumarate, 126, 128, 133, 136, 140, 146, 322 
production, 136, 140 
reductase (frd), 133 
Fumaric, 83, 124, 126, 136, 139, 175, 176 
acid (FA), 124, 126, 136, 176 
Fungal 
host, 134 
infections, 227 
morphology, 137, 155 
pathogens, 205 
pretreatment, 273 
strains, 137, 153 
Fungales, 223, 235 
Fungi, 34, 99, 126, 128, 133, 134, 136, 137, 
139–141, 149, 229, 247, 271, 273, 285, 
312–314, 317, 355, 357, 364, 484, 494, 
495, 518, 527, 557, 560, 591 
Fungus, 273, 313, 381, 444, 493, 495 
Fusion 
expression, 88 
tags, 87 
Future 
applications, 10, 26, 92, 93, 100, 103, 
309, 311, 312, 328 
endeavors, 11 
energy consumptions, 328 
perspective, 337, 356, 357, 502 
Futuristic 
platform, 54 
technology, 10 
G 
Gamma 
amino butyraldehyde dehydrogenase, 90 
butyrolactones, 224 
Garner, 124 
Gaseous 
biofuels, 395, 396 
phase, 181 
Gasification, 325, 407, 409, 410, 412, 426, 
456, 523, 524, 543 
Gasoline, 283, 406, 412, 425, 436, 562 
Gastrointestinal, 202, 491 
Gene 
alteration, 182 
cluster, 153, 154, 226, 233, 244, 245, 248, 
250–253 
disruption, 55 
editing, 23, 61, 248 
encoding, 75 
expression, 22, 56–59, 75, 79, 131, 174, 
184, 188, 249, 250 
insertion, 55 
integration, 182 
modification, 174, 182, 190 
ORFs, 38 
regulation, 56, 249 
source, 47 
Generally regarded as safe (GRAS), 13 
Genes, 16–19, 21, 22, 38, 39, 45, 47, 51, 
53–57, 59, 60, 74–76, 80, 81, 85–87, 
89–92, 94, 100, 128, 131, 134, 135, 139, 
153–156, 184, 188, 242, 243, 246, 289, 
314, 322, 324, 359, 362, 404, 500, 508 
Genetic, 13, 20, 23, 33, 38, 50, 51, 56, 59, 
61, 79, 85, 104, 128, 131, 132, 134, 139, 
142, 144, 156, 157, 174, 182, 223, 224, 
226, 245, 246, 248–252, 270, 286, 289, 
310, 314, 320, 324, 328, 358, 366, 404, 
406, 455, 533, 540, 548, 564 
engineering tools, 142 
integrity, 182 
manipulation, 33, 56, 128, 142, 156, 226, 
245, 248, 249, 251 
potential, 223 
tools, 20, 61, 79, 128, 131, 132, 134, 139, 
157 
Genome, 11, 23–26, 33, 35, 37, 38, 48–56, 
59, 75, 85, 126, 131, 132, 134, 135, 144, 
157, 174, 184, 185, 222, 223, 244, 248, 
250–252, 369, 394, 500, 573 
annotation, 33 
data, 38 
depth measurement, 184 

 
623 
Index 
editing, 23, 24, 26, 33, 48–54, 134, 248, 250 
information, 25, 126, 144 
integration, 54–56 
manipulation, 55, 59 
miming, 244 
scale models (GSM), 11, 35, 37, 85, 184 
sequencing, 131, 157, 223, 252 
targeting studies, 53 
versatility, 222 
Genomic, 10, 21, 189, 242, 362, 508 
functional analysis, 184 
loci, 24 
miming, 226, 244 
mining, 244, 252 
sequence annotation information, 36 
structure, 54 
techniques, 174 
tools, 48, 252 
Genus, 24, 79, 156 
Geological process, 356, 424 
Geranyl diphosphate (GPP), 100 
Gibson assembly, 22, 50, 248 
Global 
aspartic acid, 145 
atmospheric temperature, 335 
bio-based platform chemical, 124 
climate, 393, 444, 517, 562 
fuel demand, 356 
market, 124, 141, 321 
pollution, 393 
public health, 252 
regulatory protein, 79 
screening, 60 
warming, 125, 336, 394, 395, 407, 515, 
516, 518, 519, 520 
Glucaric acid (GA), 73, 83, 85 
Glucoamylase, 321, 558 
Gluconic acid, 133, 176, 293 
Glucose, 16, 19, 81–83, 85–89, 91, 93, 98, 
100, 131, 132, 134–137, 139, 141–144, 
147, 148, 154–156, 179, 182, 212, 272, 
273, 278, 281, 286, 288, 289, 323, 
324, 366, 387, 395, 396, 408, 429, 432, 
471, 472, 536–538, 557, 558, 569, 571, 
573–575, 591 
6-phosphate, 86, 471, 472 
compounds, 86 
dehydrogenase (gdh), 83 
myo-inositol, 87 
Glucuronidase (GUS), 250 
Glutamate, 126, 147–149, 573 
dehydrogenase (GDH), 147 
production, 147–149 
Glutamic, 124, 145, 149, 176, 573, 574 
acid, 124, 147, 150, 176, 573, 574 
Glycerol, 74–76, 79, 81, 82, 89–100, 135, 
139, 141, 143, 144, 154, 155, 202, 312, 
315, 325, 364, 365, 403, 411, 471, 530 
dehydratase, 75, 76 
inactivation, 75 
reactivase (GdrAB), 75 
dehydrogenase (gldA), 81 
facilitator (glpF), 75 
kinase (glpK), 75 
uptake rate, 155 
Glycogen, 396, 400, 404 
Glycolaldehyde, 92, 93 
Glycolipids, 202, 472 
Glycolysis, 132, 175, 286, 318, 366, 472, 
538 
Glycolytic, 185, 281, 471 
Glyoxylate, 84, 85, 132–135, 141, 142, 530 
cycle, 132, 133, 135 
pathway, 134, 135, 141, 142 
shunt, 84, 85 
Golden gate, 22, 50 
assembly, 50, 54 
Gram-negative, 128, 131, 142, 528, 529, 
588 
Gram-positive 
bacteria, 228, 231 
filamentous, 224 
Granules, 179, 345 
Green 
catalysis, 9 
chemicals, 125 
chemistry, 72 
energy, 125, 377, 378, 382, 397 
house gas emission (GHG), 425 
technology, 25, 26, 557 
Greener, 6, 11, 34, 72, 80, 309, 312, 328, 
509 
catalytic processes, 6 
practices, 34 
processes, 72 
technology, 11, 72 

 
624 
Index 
Greenhouse gases (GHGs), 3, 189, 270, 
309, 384, 394, 399, 444, 516 
Groove, 23, 49 
Growth 
factors, 126, 592 
substrate, 11 
Guide RNA (gRNA), 53 
H 
Halogen, 225 
Halogenated 
compounds, 199 
marinopyrrole compound, 231 
Harboring, 8, 9, 11, 14, 33, 44, 46, 54, 75, 
83, 104 
cre-lox system, 54 
Harbors, 52, 53 
Harness, 20, 53, 81, 322 
Harnessed, 42, 45, 48, 53, 56, 321 
Harsh 
environment, 3, 536 
production processes, 72 
reaction, 8 
Harvesting, 4, 326, 378, 397, 408, 409, 413, 
437, 449 
energy, 326 
Hazards, 399, 478 
Health 
concerns, 230, 410, 519 
supplements, 396 
sustainability, 252 
Helix, 49 
Hemicellulose, 270, 273, 285, 288, 321, 
367, 395, 396, 404, 432 
Hemicellulosic biomass, 281 
Herpes, 206, 225 
simplex virus (HSV), 200, 206 
Heterologous, 16–19, 21, 22, 38, 44, 47, 83, 
88, 89, 91–93, 100–102, 104, 245, 246, 
252, 315, 319, 320, 323, 328, 362 
biotransformation, 17 
enzymes, 19 
expression, 16–18, 21, 23, 38, 44, 83, 89, 
91–93, 100, 101, 104, 245, 246, 252, 
315, 319, 320, 323 
gene expression, 22 
regeneration systems, 19 
traits, 233 
Heterologously, 14, 17, 19, 23, 47, 76, 79, 
81, 90, 95, 98, 100, 103, 314, 317 
Heteropolymers, 149, 589, 591 
Heterotrophs, 224, 279 
Hexane, 205, 210, 403, 410 
Hexoses, 14, 320, 367 
Hierarchical-beneficial regulatory targeting 
(h-BeReTa), 184 
High 
glycolytic flux, 79 
metabolic flux, 155 
operating costs, 74, 295 
performing strains, 183 
resolution protein crystal structure, 40 
specificity, 73 
temperature, 80, 84, 191, 275, 280, 336, 
348, 410, 413, 434, 488, 489, 493, 525, 
527, 528, 534 
throughput 
elicitor screens (HiTES), 251 
screening (HTS), 40, 183, 251 
value 
added compounds, 74 
chemicals, 86 
Highly 
multifarious models, 185 
unsaturated fatty acids, 200 
viscous, 431 
Hinder, 59, 347, 348, 364, 425, 531 
Hindrance, 40, 415 
Homo sapiens, 37 
Homofermentative microorganism, 288 
Homolactic pathway, 286 
Homology, 53 
comparison, 41 
directed repair (HDR), 23 
Host, 12, 16, 21, 35, 38, 44–47, 59, 74, 75, 
79, 81–84, 87, 126, 128, 134, 135, 137, 
139, 140, 143, 147–149, 153, 179, 190, 
233, 245, 362, 560 
cell, 44–46, 59, 83, 560 
metabolism, 35 
organism, 126, 179, 190 
Huge 
pecuniary disappointment, 241 
quantities, 174, 179 
Human 
breast adenocarcinoma, 210 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), 200 

 
Index 
625 
Hybrid, 231 
pathways, 18 
promoters, 45 
Hydrocarbon, 72, 181, 315, 316, 326, 338, 
365, 395, 396, 402, 407, 433–435, 456, 
468, 469, 471, 473, 475–477, 491, 519, 
532, 591 
augments, 365 
Hydrogen, 14, 318, 325–327, 338, 365, 383, 
523 
cyanide, 5 
production, 25, 326–328, 366, 370, 383, 
384 
Hydrogenase, 19, 25, 326–328, 366 
activity, 326, 406 
Hydrogenated, 90, 319 
Hydrogenation, 89, 319, 435 
Hydrogenotrophic, 275 
methanogens, 274–276, 282, 529 
Hydrolysate, 128, 131, 137, 209, 273 
Hydrolysis, 155, 177, 271–273, 288, 290, 
291, 321, 322, 365, 367, 368, 404, 412, 
413, 432, 567 
Hydrolytic, 272, 273, 280, 290, 493, 494 
Hydrothermal liquefaction, 409 
processes & technique, 411 
Hydroxy 
functionalized carboxylic acid, 74 
nitrile lyase, 5 
Hydroxyl 
butyryl-ACP, 315 
group, 74, 588 
radical scavenging activity, 207 
Hydroxylation, 92, 444 
Hydroxypenta, 233, 241 
Hydroxypropionic acid, 124 
Hypothetical reaction, 6 
I 
Ideal, 14, 15, 46, 55, 56, 93, 141, 226, 311, 
312, 320, 411, 428, 444, 526, 531 
cell system, 15 
strain, 14 
Immobilization, 12, 73, 84, 321, 450 
Immobilized, 9, 73, 75, 137, 145, 146, 148, 
287, 293, 355, 356, 360, 365, 369, 556 
cells, 75, 148 
enzymes, 355, 356 
mixed cultures, 148 
state, 73 
thermostable aspartase, 146 
Immune 
booster, 222 
function, 145 
system, 51, 598 
Implement, 9, 136, 148, 348, 504, 523 
Imply, 7, 42, 53, 147 
Impose, 6, 45, 157 
Impurities, 73, 156, 559, 561 
Inclusion, 38, 72, 145, 175, 577 
Incremental Truncation for the Creation of 
HYbrid enzymes (ITCHY), 40 
Incubation, 213, 340, 386 
Indicator organism, 181 
Individual 
extraneous traits, 55 
microorganisms, 280 
Indoles, 203, 236 
Induce, 23, 247, 433 
Industrial 
applications, 5, 13, 18, 23, 24, 26, 81, 82, 
85, 94, 98, 99, 104, 319, 324, 325, 327, 
348, 475, 508, 509 
biotechnology, 175, 187 
chemicals, 73, 123, 125–127, 157, 174 
level, 6, 39, 72, 328, 467 
manufacturing sector, 6, 8 
production, 3, 4, 76, 85, 92, 95, 103, 174, 
190, 522, 564 
revolution, 3 
strains, 92 
synthetic biological system, 183 
Industrialization, 4, 123, 310, 468, 519 
Inedible parts, 367, 426 
Inevitable, 7, 56, 125, 132 
Infancy stage, 252, 310 
Infectious brucellosis disease virus (IBDV), 
234 
Influential 
agent, 231 
carbon, 148 
Influenza virus A, 206, 233, 234 
Inherent 
capacity, 80, 320 
quality, 85, 321 
system, 5 

 
626 
Index 
Inhibit, 86, 133, 240, 360, 472, 532 
Inhibition zone, 204, 205 
Inhibitor, 55, 178, 235, 345 
Inhibitory 
activity, 212, 227, 232, 234, 531 
concentration, 210 
effect, 211, 212, 231 
Initial 
efforts, 39, 59 
programming, 53 
strategies, 21 
work, 10 
Innate, 73, 149, 319, 320 
Inoculum, 137, 154, 279, 280, 291, 339, 358 
Inorganic 
catalyst, 6 
heterogenous catalysts, 313 
materials, 398 
Inositol 
3-phosphate, 86 
biosynthesis pathway, 86 
monophosphatase, 86 
In-silico, 16, 26, 33, 35, 37, 41, 244 
In-situ acetate sorption, 348 
Intact cells, 146, 326 
Integrated 
prophage, 46 
separation, 348 
Integration (Int), 55 
Inter, 38, 39, 54, 86, 187, 240, 364, 370, 
427, 430, 510, 567 
Interference, 21, 51, 52, 142, 248, 369 
Interleukin, 211, 576 
Intermediate, 17, 21, 72, 80, 86, 87, 99, 126, 
127, 153, 273, 316, 325, 471 
lysine degradation pathway, 91 
metabolite, 74, 84 
production, 17 
International Energy Agency Envisions, 277 
Internet of things (IoT), 193 
Interspaced, 23, 51, 247 
Interspecies, 22, 223, 247 
Intertidal, 200 
Intracellular, 12, 13, 134, 141, 142, 148, 
313, 321, 409, 410, 496, 531, 536, 556, 
559, 588, 592 
In-vitro, 39, 57, 58, 174, 205–212, 241, 248, 
252, 592–594, 598 
Isobutanol, 22, 286 
Isocitrate, 85, 156, 471 
Isolate, 35, 144, 204, 225, 237, 240, 485 
enzymes, 21, 313, 357, 362, 364, 365 
free enzymes, 355 
Isolation, 8, 136, 226, 250, 370, 560 
Isopentenyl diphosphate (IPP), 99, 318 
Isoprenoid, 19, 104, 235, 317, 319, 320 
Isopropylthio-β-galactoside (IPTG), 21 
Itaconate, 126, 149, 153, 155 
Itaconic acid (IA), 79, 124, 175, 565, 578 
Iterative saturation mutagenesis (ISM), 39 
J 
Jatropha, 154, 315, 414, 426 
Jerusalem artichoke tubers, 288 
Jojoba, 426 
K 
Kappa, 201, 207 
Ketones, 73, 76, 95, 359, 557 
Kinetic, 42, 187, 188, 293, 448, 474 
analysis, 144 
Klebsiella, 13, 74, 76, 80, 82, 203, 204, 229, 
325 
pneumonia, 16, 75, 74, 76, 82, 83, 203, 
204, 229, 325 
Kozak sequence & variants, 189 
L 
Laboratory 
conditions, 13, 46, 204, 205 
level, 46 
Laborious, 9, 55, 56, 72, 125, 190 
Lab-scale production, 287 
Lack, 14, 128, 134, 139, 200, 400, 406, 408, 
414, 426, 428, 483, 484, 485, 487, 535, 
543, 590 
Lactate, 16, 74, 76, 81, 131, 132, 139, 281, 
286, 322, 327, 530, 568 
dehydrogenase (LDH), 139, 286, 322 
Lactic acid (LA), 148, 175, 270, 286, 564, 
566 
bacteria (LAB), 286 
Lactobacillus 
acidophilus, 13 
brevis, 83, 325 

 
627 
Index 
reuteri, 74, 79 
Lactococcus, 180, 287, 289 
Lactone, 95, 103 
Lactose, 45, 93, 286, 287, 289 
Lag phase, 187, 293 
Laid, 33, 86, 104, 378 
Lambda, 55, 201, 206, 207 
carrageenan (λ-CGN), 206, 207 
red recombinase system, 55 
Laminaran, 201, 211 
L-aminoacylase (LAA), 94 
Large-scale 
applications, 93, 409, 428, 502 
cultivation, 427 
extraction techniques, 410 
Laser beam, 190, 597 
L-asparate 
aminotransferase (AspC), 146 
decarboxylase (PanD), 146 
L-aspartic acid, 145, 146 
Latter, 42, 44, 46, 84, 99, 318, 324, 326 
Lead, 19, 47, 49, 123, 213, 222, 223, 246, 
288, 339, 394, 477, 485, 487, 508, 536, 
562 
Least, 60, 95, 140, 148, 378, 387, 405, 450, 
451, 456, 473, 486, 517 
L-homophenylalanine (l-HPA), 94 
Ligand, 57, 58, 87, 561 
Light-dependent 
autotrophic systems, 327 
expression regulons, 22 
Lighter fuel bio-hydrogen, 426 
Light-regulated transcriptional control 
systems, 22 
Lignin, 89, 270, 273, 285, 367, 395, 396, 
404, 405, 413, 493, 495, 510 
Lignocellulose, 88, 270, 271, 283, 285, 321, 
413, 500 
Lignocellulosic, 270, 271, 284, 294, 356, 
367, 404 
biomass, 88, 133, 156, 270, 271, 284, 
285, 288, 320, 356–358, 395, 424 
components, 408 
hydrolysates, 282 
material, 273, 284, 414 
sugar, 91 
waste, 343 
Limonene synthase (LimS/LS), 100, 319, 320 
Linear, 37, 55, 201 
backbones, 201 
DNA, 55 
programming, 37 
Lipase, 10–13, 17, 22, 312, 313, 315, 359, 
362, 364, 365, 368, 369, 411, 434, 496 
Lipid, 175, 191, 201, 270, 313, 356, 364, 
395, 396, 399, 400, 403, 408–411, 424, 
427, 429, 430, 434, 436, 455, 471, 529, 
532, 535, 539 
characteristic, 430 
constitute, 191 
content, 394, 396, 398, 400, 403, 408, 
426, 429, 437, 457 
extraction, 405, 409, 410, 430, 437 
generation, 346 
groups, 202 
source, 429 
Liquid 
biofuels, 396, 424, 425 
fuel, 408, 424, 425, 431 
hydrocarbons, 181 
Living cells, 6, 7, 176, 191, 192, 357, 448 
Localization, 12, 14, 15, 310, 314, 316 
Low 
abundance, 47 
cell density, 76 
cetane value, 431 
cost, 12, 13, 25, 72, 100, 136, 182, 285, 
321, 325, 428, 436, 488, 543, 567 
renewable resources, 25 
substrate, 12, 13, 72, 321 
technologies, 285 
efficiency, 23 
electrode potentials, 344 
environmental impact, 242 
flash point, 431 
sludge generation, 272 
titer value, 79 
volumetric productivity, 146, 282 
water activity, 145 
Lower 
cell densities, 282 
cholesterol levels, 86 
immiscible solvent dielectric constant, 
410 
L-phe bio-transformation, 99 
L-phenylalanine (L-Phe), 98, 362 

 
628 
Index 
L-phenylglycine (L-PHG), 94 
Lucrative, 35 
L-valine, 38, 190 
Lycopene, 38, 184 
Lysine, 91, 92, 148, 177, 359, 573–575 
decarboxylase (LDC), 91  
flux, 91  
production ability, 91  
Lysosymal activity, 148 
M 
Machine learning (ML), 43 
Macroalgae, 199, 200, 213, 399, 435, 529 
Macro-environment, 3, 14, 17 
Macrolides, 223 
Macromolecules, 126, 413, 498, 561 
Madeira archipelago ocean sediments acti­
nomycetes, 242 
Magnetic 
filtration systems, 430 
resonance image, 192 
Malate, 126, 128, 136, 139, 141–144, 146, 
155, 473 
Dehydrogenase (mdh), 136 
isomerase, 146 
precursor, 139 
production, 142–144 
Maleic 
acid, 136 
anhydride, 84, 127, 136 
Malic, 79, 83, 124, 126, 132, 145, 175 
acid (MA), 79, 124, 126, 140, 175 
Malonyl 
acyl protein (malonyl-ACP), 315 
CoA, 74, 80, 103, 312, 471 
transacylases, 315 
Mammalian cells, 53, 86 
Mangrove, 233, 234, 240 
forest, 234 
soil, 233, 240 
Manipulation, 13, 83, 140, 314 
Man–rogosa–sharpe (MRS), 287 
Marine 
actinomycete, 240 
bioresources, 202 
brown seaweed, 212, 213 
chlorophyte, 234 
ecosystem, 200, 467, 483, 485, 493 
environment, 200, 250, 395, 490, 491 
inhabiting, 234 
natural products, 199 
seaweed, 201–203, 205–207, 213 
sediments, 232–234 
Mass 
spectroscopy tools, 35 
transfer, 12, 73, 146, 153, 313, 322, 360, 
369, 410, 428, 449 
Material fabrication & production, 191 
Mathematical modeling, 185, 186, 193, 347 
Matrix, 12, 73, 192, 367, 536, 556, 560, 599 
Maturation, 52, 192 
Mechanical 
demands, 192  
forces, 192  
properties, 192, 592, 593  
stiffness, 191  
Mechanism, 4, 39, 48, 49, 54, 59, 86, 177, 
189, 233, 235, 247, 252, 280, 345, 346, 
348, 379, 394, 400, 412, 428, 430, 436, 
456, 475, 478, 484, 507, 508, 510, 518, 
527–530, 534, 536–538, 548, 565, 567, 
585 
Mechanistic models, 184, 185 
Medical 
applications, 191 
field, 250, 388 
Medicinal 
applications, 85 
creams, 199 
Medium chain 
dicarboxylic acid, 89 
fatty acid, 24, 89, 181, 339 
Membrane, 12, 146, 338, 340, 346–348, 
359, 363, 369, 379–382, 384, 385, 405, 
430, 445, 448, 452, 531, 545, 547, 559, 
563, 566, 567, 570, 574, 590 
electrolysis, 347, 348 
proteins, 12 
reactor, 146, 346, 547 
separation, 347 
Mentha spicata, 100, 319 
Mesophilic, 17, 224, 272, 275, 276, 282, 
368 
Metabolic 
activity, 185, 294, 537 
adjustment, 25 

 
Index 
629 
burden, 21, 45, 54 
capabilities, 38 
engineering, 10, 18, 19, 24, 25, 37, 38, 
44, 48, 50, 53, 54, 56, 58–61, 80, 81, 
85, 86, 88, 90, 92–94, 99, 100, 104, 
124, 126, 132, 133, 136, 137, 139, 142, 
144, 153, 155, 157, 158, 179, 183, 188, 
190, 289, 310, 311, 316, 320, 324, 327, 
328, 355 
enzyme function, 37 
fabrication, 35 
flux, 37, 38, 56, 59, 60, 79, 131, 139, 142, 
153, 156, 319, 548 
analysis (MFA), 79, 131 
genes, 188 
management, 59 
models, 25 
networks, 25, 72, 252 
pathway, 25, 57, 73, 84, 101, 127, 136, 
139, 140, 147, 149, 174, 181, 188, 193, 
226, 244, 270, 272, 280, 281, 288, 348, 
360, 366–368, 467, 469, 471–473, 479, 
535, 537, 548 
potential, 247, 486 
precursor molecules, 179 
products, 38, 174, 179, 181, 190, 535 
reactions, 6, 36, 38, 594 
rearrangement, 84 
reconstitution mode, 38 
regulatory promoters, 46 
rewiring, 157 
stoichiometry data, 36 
stress, 56 
tools, 13, 95, 324 
Metabolically 
active nucleoside substances, 227 
engineered, 14, 25, 81, 85, 87, 90, 93, 98, 
100, 103, 180, 286, 319, 325 
engineering, 91, 316, 327 
Metabolism, 16, 80, 131, 134, 175, 177, 
181, 185, 207, 222, 281, 327, 337, 344, 
382, 430, 445, 446, 451, 454, 457, 471, 
528, 530, 534–536, 538, 539, 548 
Metabolomics, 37, 38, 457 
Metagenomics, 23, 38 
Metal 
catalysts, 86, 447 
chelating activities, 240 
chelation, 240 
ions, 86, 156, 478 
oxide nanoparticles, 292, 434, 450 
Methane, 85, 270, 272, 274, 275, 277, 280, 
283, 289, 293, 294, 339, 340, 345, 369, 
395, 396, 399, 405, 412, 425, 434, 435, 
456, 520, 522, 529, 533 
Methanogenesis, 272, 274–277, 368, 369, 
413 
Methanogenic 
activity, 280, 345 
archaeal community, 274 
bacteria, 274, 276, 339 
cultures, 340 
pathways, 275 
substrates, 274 
Methanogens, 272, 274–276, 280, 339, 340, 
345, 529 
inhibitors, 280 
Methanol, 143, 157, 204–206, 212, 294, 
312–314, 403, 410, 430, 433, 434, 454, 
594, 595 
Methanolic extract, 204, 212, 233 
Methicillin-resistant, 205, 229, 231, 232 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), 231, 232 
Methionine, 190, 572 
Methodology, 55, 425 
Methyl 
esters, 313, 365, 411, 433 
group, 99, 149, 275 
pyrrolidinone, 127 
violgen, 340 
Methylglyoxal 
pathway, 81 
synthase (mgsA), 81 
Methylotrophic 
bacterium, 157 
methanogenesis, 275 
Mevalonate (MVA), 99, 317 
Microaerobic conditions, 76, 134 
Microalgae, 14, 34, 200, 270, 315, 325–327, 
355, 357, 381, 394–400, 402–409, 
412–415, 423, 424, 426, 429, 430, 432, 
434, 436, 437, 444, 452–454, 456, 457, 
498, 499, 516, 518, 529, 530, 532–535, 
537, 539–542, 544, 545, 548, 549, 557, 
586 
biofuels, 396, 409 

 
630 
Index 
biomass, 270, 396, 413, 532 
protein, 396 
strains, 396 
Microalgal 
biofuels, 409, 413, 427 
biomass, 394, 397, 399, 405, 408–412, 436 
cells, 395, 397, 398, 410, 411 
essential lipids, 410 
lipid, 409, 410 
photobioreactors, 347 
Microbes, 80, 91, 99, 124, 140, 158, 182, 
187, 222, 247, 273, 284, 285, 292, 293, 
314, 315, 326, 338, 344–346, 357, 366, 
382, 384, 388, 433, 446, 447, 449, 467, 
470–473, 477, 479, 485, 493, 518, 527, 
540, 557, 572, 576 
Microbial 
agent, 273, 447 
carbon capture cell (MCC), 335, 336, 
349, 448 
cell, 18, 35, 135, 174–176, 179–182, 
184–189, 192, 193, 279, 326, 358, 360, 
362–364, 368, 446, 474, 477, 496, 499, 
556, 586 
factory, 135, 174, 179, 180, 184, 189, 
190, 192, 193, 499 
mass, 181, 186, 188 
chassis, 11, 310 
colonies, 184 
colonization models, 184 
communities, 272, 275, 277, 381 
consortia, 269–271, 283, 285, 290–295 
consumption, 273 
culture, 185, 189, 270, 349, 477 
electrolysis cells (MECs), 182, 383 
electrosynthesis (MES), 335, 336, 338 
enzymes, 181, 224, 446, 558 
fermentation, 136, 141, 147, 176, 284, 
286, 564, 577 
fuel cells (MFCs), 182, 337, 378, 379, 
388, 443–445 
genes, 184 
genome, 174 
growth, 187, 188, 294, 443, 501 
hydrogen fuel cell, 326 
industrial production, 184 
kinetics, 185, 187 
load, 186 
metabolic concepts, 184 
metabolism, 95, 175, 294 
metabolites, 126, 223 
natural consortia, 8 
origin, 177 
platform, 86, 146 
production, 98, 123, 126, 128, 174, 186, 
193, 319 
products, 175, 556 
screening, 8, 193 
secondary metabolites detection, 244 
sources, 35, 86, 141 
species, 275, 292 
strains, 182, 183, 484, 500, 503 
substrates, 181 
synthesis, 73, 86, 124, 574 
system, 175, 523 
whole-cell, 102, 174, 185, 359, 360–370, 
378, 381, 446, 528 
Micrococcus luteus, 18, 203, 204, 228, 232 
Mimic, 11, 39, 534, 594 
Minimal 
bactericidal concentration (MBC), 204 
fungicidal concentration (MFC), 205 
inhibitory concentration (MIC), 204 
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 
(MoPNG), 415 
Minuscule level, 75, 86 
Mitigate, 93, 349, 369, 378 
Mitigation, 85, 294, 338, 343, 534, 539 
Mitochondria, 135, 153, 537 
Mitochondrial, 149, 153, 155, 156, 233, 
535, 538, 560 
transporter, 153, 155 
tricarboxylic transporter (MTT), 149 
Mixed culture, 270, 277, 279, 287, 288, 291, 
294, 295, 339, 346, 382, 387, 452 
Model organisms, 13, 25, 37, 134, 310 
Modularity, 49, 51, 53 
Moiety, 226, 310, 365, 468, 469, 471–473 
Molecular, 5, 8, 10, 14, 20, 22, 23, 42, 45, 48, 
50, 51, 58, 173, 174, 182, 189, 193, 250, 
252, 281, 320, 322, 328, 355, 359, 435, 
446, 457, 474, 476, 493, 494, 496, 502, 
503, 508, 561, 564, 567, 586, 588, 592 
biology, 10, 14, 48, 174, 355 
dynamic simulations, 42 
machinery, 182 

 
631 
Index 
techniques, 193, 508 
tools, 5, 20, 50, 51, 58, 320 
Monad 
constant, 187 
equation, 188 
function, 186 
Mono-ethylene glycol (MEG), 92 
Monomer, 72, 82, 89, 149, 178, 318, 413, 
433, 474, 487, 494, 496, 508, 588, 589, 
591, 594, 595 
Monoterpenes, 317, 319, 320 
Morphology, 139, 143, 153–155, 192 
Multidrug 
resistance, 231, 233 
resistant (MDR), 204, 230 
Multienzyme, 12, 285 
Multi-omics 
analysis, 79 
approach, 174, 185 
Multiple 
automated genome engineering, 185 
biosynthetic pathways, 88 
catalytic sites, 17 
central metabolic genes, 60 
domains, 24 
factors, 26 
genes, 22, 139, 323 
proteins, 45, 46 
reactions, 5, 17 
step cascades, 17 
Municipal solid waste, 140, 368, 405, 414, 
486, 501 
Mutagenesis, 21, 40, 145, 188, 190, 251 
Mutation, 41, 75, 153, 249, 527 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex 
(MTBC), 51 
Myo inositol (MI), 86 
1-phosphate (MIP), 87 
oxygenase (MIOX), 86 
N 
N-acetyl-homophenylalanine (NAc-HPA), 94 
N-acylamino acid racemase (NAAAR), 94 
Nano-droplets, 292 
Nano-fibers, 292 
Nano-magnets, 292 
Nanoparticles, 292–295, 450 
Nanotechnology, 270, 292, 293, 295, 509 
Native 
host, 8, 245, 325 
metabolic pathway, 11, 18 
metabolism, 16, 18, 21 
pathway, 17, 19, 100 
Natural 
abundancy, 312, 317 
compounds, 242, 253 
potential, 20 
products (NPs), 175, 222 
riboflavin, 180 
Neryl diphosphate synthase 1 (NDPS1), 100 
Neurodegenerative diseases, 235 
Neuronal cell, 235 
Neurotransmitter, 147 
Neutral, 6, 34, 202, 206, 224, 277, 291, 383, 
444, 469, 532, 536, 561, 567, 577 
agenda, 6 
dye method, 206 
lipids, 202 
Neutralize, 207 
Newcastle disease virus (NDV), 234 
Next generation 
DNA sequencing (NGS), 250 
sequencing, 174, 184, 253 
Niches, 224, 588 
Nitrate, 76, 148, 386, 448, 494, 531, 594 
Nitric oxide (NO), 208 
Nitrilase, 13, 75 
Nitrogen 
oxides (NOx), 412, 424 
sources, 79, 147, 148 
Nodal, 15, 16, 83, 327 
Noncoding, 56, 59 
Non-conventional, 16, 84, 133, 356, 361 
Non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), 23, 53 
Non-native producer, 83, 84, 156, 157, 324, 
325 
Non-renewable, 3, 10, 71, 89, 136, 270, 
309, 320, 326, 377, 378, 397, 468 
Non-ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS), 
235, 242, 244, 245 
Non-specific nucleases, 23, 48 
Non-sulfur bacteria, 281, 406 
Non-synthetic media, 287 
Novel 
compounds, 234, 250 
enzymes, 16, 23, 193 

 
632 
Index 
molecules, 16, 226 
strategies, 26, 86, 369 
technology, 40, 338 
therapeutic agents, 222 
Nuclease, 48, 50–52 
domain, 49, 53 
Nucleic acid, 57, 126, 175, 178, 179, 187, 
191, 395, 396, 399, 548, 561 
Nucleophiles, 94, 386 
Nucleotide, 48, 49, 52, 59, 140, 179 
Nutraceuticals, 180, 200 
O 
O-acetylserine sulfhydrylase (OASS), 94 
Obligate anaerobes, 279, 322, 326 
Obstacles, 399, 406, 504 
Ocimene, 319 
Ocular, 201 
Off-target hits, 23, 49 
Oil marketing companies (OMCs), 414 
Oleaginous microalgae biofuel, 393 
Oleate hydratase, 18 
Olefins, 72, 317, 435 
Oleic, 46, 314 
O-methyltransferase, 98 
Omics, 11, 21, 23, 35, 37, 85, 184, 226, 358 
Omics, 244 
based technology, 21 
data, 11, 37, 358 
technology, 226 
One strain many compounds (OSMAC), 
224, 247 
Operon, 45, 76, 79, 190, 577 
Opportunistic pathogenic bacteria, 131 
Optamer sequence, 57 
Optgene, 25 
Optimal 
growth, 131, 132, 395, 573 
micro, 3 
productions, 23 
productivity, 13 
synthesis, 86 
system, 25 
titers, 15 
turnover frequency, 21 
Optimization, 18, 20, 22, 35, 50, 58, 75, 84, 
90, 91, 93, 100, 104, 126, 127, 137, 144, 
147, 154, 155, 157, 320, 322, 346, 347, 
362, 413, 436, 578 
Optimized codon sequence DNA, 47 
Optimum 
alginate concentration, 148 
production, 14, 88, 100, 310, 322 
temperature, 275 
Optknock, 25 
Optogenetics, 22, 327 
Organic 
acid, 5, 76, 79, 136, 137, 148, 174, 175, 
179, 272, 279, 286, 295, 539, 556, 
564–566, 570–572, 578 
compounds, 149, 155, 175, 230, 358, 494, 
527 
matter, 291, 294, 326, 343, 348, 349, 380, 
382, 383, 385, 388, 600 
solvents, 359, 410, 527, 532, 561, 562, 
599 
substrates, 272, 278–281, 337, 406 
Ori, 44, 45, 55 
Ornithine, 90, 91, 573 
decarboxylase (ODC), 90 
pool, 90, 91 
Orphan, 242 
Orthologs, 54 
Osmotic pressure, 283 
Osmotolerant yeast, 145 
Owing, 5, 51, 126, 224, 321, 529 
Oxalic acid, 83, 133 
Oxaloacetate, 126, 128, 136, 471, 537 
Oxidation, 72, 75, 79, 86, 89, 93, 104, 135, 
155, 339, 340, 345, 359, 366, 383, 386, 
447, 448, 502, 528, 536, 537, 568, 569 
Oxidative 
redox balance, 37 
stress, 190, 235, 508 
TCA, 132, 134, 141 
Oxidize, 272, 276, 538 
Oxidoreductases, 11, 17 
Oxobutyrate, 338, 339 
P 
Palindromic repeats, 23, 51, 247 
Panel, 226, 228, 545, 549 
Paradigm shift, 240, 244 
Parallel, 21, 34, 38, 155, 226, 328 

 
 
 
 
633 
Index 
Parameters, 137, 147, 154, 155, 186, 187, 
272, 291, 335, 346, 349, 381, 385, 427, 
437, 443, 474, 508, 534, 536, 556, 572, 
575, 577 
Patchoulol, 100, 101 
Pathogenic, 13, 76, 83, 181 
Pathogens, 226–228 
Pathway analysis, 35, 37 
P-coumaric acid, 103, 190 
Pellet, 137, 154, 568 
Penicillin, 178, 231, 575, 576, 578 
Penicillium, 143, 144 
simplicissimum, 18, 500 
Pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), 185, 286, 
319, 367 
Pentose sugar, 25, 281, 285, 289 
Peptide, 94, 148, 178, 223, 233, 242, 
244–246, 290, 364, 469, 577, 596 
Persuasive, 225, 227 
Perturbations, 16, 38, 43 
Petrochemical, 72, 73, 84, 125, 136, 141, 
189, 290, 506, 516, 521, 522, 586 
Petroleum, 4, 72, 74, 80, 124, 179, 290, 309, 
310, 320, 398, 407, 414, 456, 468, 476, 
477, 501, 505, 506, 516, 521, 522, 588 
Phaeophyceae, 200, 201 
Phage, 54, 55, 60 
Pharmaceutical, 3, 5, 7, 9, 17, 33, 34, 71, 
72, 83, 84, 94, 98, 102, 107, 123, 127, 
136, 141, 145, 147, 157, 173–177, 180, 
181, 192, 199, 202, 221–223, 226, 233, 
242, 249, 252, 269, 292, 309, 335, 343, 
355, 368, 377, 393, 423, 443, 467, 483, 
515, 555, 573, 585 
industry, 5, 17, 368 
sector, 136, 141, 174, 176 
Phenolic groups, 199, 202 
Phenotype, 16, 25, 37, 40, 190 
Phenotypic changes, 39, 54 
Phenylacetaldehyde, 98, 362 
Phenylalanine, 98, 99, 103, 145, 573 
Phlorotannins, 199, 202, 205 
Phosphate 
dehydrogenase, 19, 75, 538 
inducible porin (PhoE), 12 
Phosphofructokinase, 93, 472 
Phospholipids, 202, 364 
Phosphotransferase system (PTS), 185 
Photobioreactors (PBRs), 397, 408, 428, 
534, 544, 545, 549 
Photochemical, 336, 433 
Photofermentation, 279, 281 
Photoheterotrophic, 398, 536, 537 
Photosynthesis, 4, 344, 395, 396, 398, 408, 
443, 445, 449, 451, 452, 457, 518, 519, 
531, 535, 539, 540, 542, 543, 549 
Photosystem-II (PSII), 327, 328, 535 
Phylum, 274, 275, 290 
Physiological 
conditions, 10, 13, 21, 328 
traits, 224, 249 
Physiology, 11, 35, 59, 60, 174 
Pichia pastoris, 13, 22, 88, 313, 317, 365, 
548 
Pigments, 127, 199, 200, 202, 364, 395, 
396, 449, 518, 535, 561 
Pioneering, 61, 563 
Plant pathogen, 24, 49, 227 
Plasmid, 17, 20, 21, 44, 45, 47, 53–55, 60, 
248, 362, 548 
vectors, 17, 44, 45 
Plasmodium falciparum, 240, 241 
Plastic packaging, 74, 509 
Plastic waste, 483–486, 489, 491–495, 497, 
498, 501–507, 509, 510, 587 
Plastid, 317, 536, 540 
Platform, 6, 7, 34, 35, 37, 41, 43, 45, 57, 72, 
74, 80, 123–127, 136, 140, 149, 156–158, 
179, 190, 193, 235, 252, 361, 508, 517, 
556, 597 
chemicals, 6, 7, 34, 45, 57, 80, 123–127, 
136, 140, 149, 157, 158, 179 
Plethora, 10, 21, 25, 33, 38, 51, 72, 104, 223 
Polar, 76, 249, 410, 468, 469, 471, 518 
Polyester, 82, 136, 500, 587 
Polyethyleneimine, 79, 562 
Polyketide, 223, 231, 235, 242 
nonribosomal peptides, 235 
synthase (PKS), 233, 244, 245 
Polymer degradation, 494, 500, 510 
Polymerase, 46, 56, 57, 591 
Polymerization, 72, 80 
Polymers, 5, 6, 72, 74, 82, 86, 88, 149, 
174, 179, 201, 273, 321, 485, 487–489, 
493–496, 500, 503, 508, 509, 518, 522, 
543, 561, 562, 585–588, 590, 592, 593, 596 

 
 
 
634 
Index 
Polysaccharide, 182, 191, 199, 201, 206–214, 
223, 284, 404, 430, 432, 472, 587 
Polyvinyl alcohol, 79, 587 
Poly-γ-glutamate (PGA), 12 
Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV), 234 
Portable, 58, 543 
Precise, 48, 53, 55, 57, 60, 157, 402, 507 
Precursor, 11, 14–16, 18, 19, 21, 52, 74, 82, 
88, 89, 90, 92, 94, 95, 98–103, 126, 127, 
145, 147, 286, 318, 319, 346, 468, 471, 472 
pool, 90, 319 
supply, 19, 101 
Predict, 16, 25, 37, 38, 174 
Predominant, 200, 275, 286, 291, 531 
Preponderance, 224, 245 
Prerequisite, 13, 140, 157 
Pre-treated biomass, 125, 133 
Pretreatment, 157, 284, 285, 348, 409, 508 
Process cost, 86, 312, 413 
Product accumulation, 76, 131, 137, 140, 
288, 347 
Production 
capacity, 193, 542 
phase, 81, 100, 358 
Profound, 53, 147 
Prokaryotes, 51, 52 
Prokaryotic, 13, 21, 38, 84, 223, 224, 248, 
314, 328, 395, 396, 400, 427, 528, 529 
Prominent, 47, 48, 98, 128, 132, 182, 200, 
222, 290, 367, 369, 370, 563 
Promiscuous, 54, 61, 81, 85, 95, 98, 328 
Promoter, 19, 21, 22, 44–46, 53, 55, 90, 91, 
135, 249, 250, 313, 577 
Propanediol, 16, 38, 82, 346 
Propanediol (PDO), 75 
Propionic, 175, 176, 276, 290, 291, 294, 591 
Protease, 39, 94, 558 
Proteasome inhibitor, 235, 240 
Protein 
concentration, 187, 561 
engineering, 10, 21, 40–43, 85, 323, 359 
expression, 22, 45, 59 
molecules, 178, 561, 562 
structure, 43, 356, 361 
Proteomic, 10, 21, 37, 38, 189, 193, 362, 508 
Proton, 326, 338, 339, 340, 345, 377, 
379–381, 384, 388, 433, 445–448, 521 
exchange member (PEM), 338 
Protospacer adjacent motif (PAM), 24, 52 
Pseudomonas 
denitrificans, 74, 76 
putida, 13, 17, 88, 89, 315, 359, 501 
Psychrophile-based simple bioCatalyst 
(PSCat), 146 
Purified enzyme, 3, 9, 34, 73, 359, 360, 363 
Purine, 140, 189 
Pursued, 3, 6, 72, 90, 311 
Putative 
myo-inositol oxygenase (ppMIOX), 88 
oxidoreductase (PDOR), 79 
Putrescine, 89–91 
aminotransferase (patA), 90 
utilization pathway (Puu), 90 
Pyrolysis, 325, 407, 408, 410, 413, 415, 
423, 425, 434, 435, 437, 456, 457, 533 
Pyruvate, 16, 18, 80, 83, 85, 131, 136, 139, 
142, 143, 190, 278, 286, 318, 319, 322, 
324, 327, 328, 367, 471, 472 
carboxylase (pyc), 136 
dehydrogenase complex-deficient 
(PDHC), 190 
ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFOR), 278, 
327 
Pyruvic acid, 281, 286 
Q 
Quadratic mathematical expressions, 37 
Quantum-mechanic simulations, 42 
Quinones, 233 
R 
Racemic mixture, 80, 94, 95 
Raceway pond system (RPS), 428 
Random 
mutagenesis, 41, 126 
mutations, 39, 41 
Rapid, 19, 22, 55, 58, 75, 125, 126, 139, 181, 
246, 251, 320, 343, 394, 399, 517, 586 
Rare actinomycetes, 224, 226, 252 
Raspberry ketone (RK), 102 
Rational 
design, 25, 35, 40, 41, 49, 53, 61, 355, 359 
protein engineering, 33 
selection, 41 
tuning, 22 

 
Index 
635 
Raw materials, 11, 72, 80, 136, 157, 189, 
309, 348, 411, 509 
Reactant, 73, 436, 451 
Reaction 
conditions, 8, 9, 84, 137, 140, 355, 444, 
557 
mechanism, 40, 451 
mixture, 34, 559 
Readily oxidized, 19, 190 
Recombinant, 20, 39, 46, 47, 75, 79, 86, 88, 
126, 134, 142, 314, 323, 359, 362, 455, 
479, 548, 577, 590 
Red 
algae, 201, 204, 206, 207, 210 
seaweed, 201, 210, 211, 213 
Redox imbalance, 16, 322, 327 
Reductase, 89, 98, 100, 102, 104, 133, 315, 
316, 320, 322, 366 
Reductases, 81, 83, 89, 92, 312, 315, 316 
Refinery sector, 34, 521 
Regenerative, 202, 540, 592 
Regulatory noncoding RNAs (rnRNAs), 56 
Rely, 57, 252, 326, 403 
Renewable 
bioresources, 200, 556 
energy, 100, 181, 270, 272, 294, 310, 335, 
336, 338, 378, 394, 395, 398, 424, 447, 
448, 455, 523 
resources, 74, 88, 92, 193, 277, 290, 328, 
398 
Repeat variable di-residue (RVD), 24, 49 
Replacement, 40, 73, 88, 125, 393, 451, 
509, 536, 599 
Replication, 44, 55, 234 
Repressor, 132, 251, 577 
Resins, 74, 92, 136, 149, 348, 487, 489, 
567, 568, 574 
Respiration, 4, 530, 535, 536, 539, 542 
Response surface methodology (RSM), 144 
Retains, 53, 566 
Retrosynthetic pathway, 11, 362 
Reusability, 12, 75, 348, 488 
Rhodophyceae, 200, 204 
Ribavirin, 233, 234 
Ribosomal, 57, 189, 244, 245, 249 
Ribosome, 22, 60, 91, 178 
binding sites (RBS), 22, 57, 91, 188, 189 
recruitment, 60 
Riboswitch, 57–59, 61 
Robust, 8, 21, 33, 51, 56, 59, 61, 92, 135, 
157, 174, 193, 233, 249, 274, 313, 320, 
324, 326, 327, 345, 349, 386, 395, 488, 
489 
Robustness, 45, 132, 369, 587 
Rod shape, 131, 292 
Rosetta, 41, 42 
Routes, 74, 141, 518, 523, 535, 538 
S 
Saccharification, 284, 321, 367, 399, 425 
Saccharomyces, 11–13, 37, 38, 55, 80, 87, 
99, 144, 175, 182, 188, 189, 246, 251, 
313, 321, 362, 367, 381, 433, 530, 548, 
558, 569 
cerevisiae, 11–13, 37, 38, 55, 87, 144, 
175, 182, 188, 246, 251, 321, 362, 367, 
381, 433, 530, 548, 558, 569 
Salinosporamide, 240, 235, 236 
Salmonella, 80, 226 
Scaffold, 87, 592, 593, 598 
Scarcity, 16, 19, 327, 405 
Scientific community, 5, 395, 467, 468 
Scope, 8, 13, 16, 18, 23, 51, 54, 295, 356, 
507, 535 
Screening, 429, 591 
Seaweed, 199–205, 207–209, 211–214, 399 
Secondary metabolite, 175, 177–179, 187, 
202, 204, 209–211, 222–224, 242, 244, 
246, 249, 317, 496, 518 
biosynthetic gene clusters (SM-BGC), 
223, 242 
genes (SMGs), 242 
clusters (SMGCs), 242 
Secretion, 143, 361 
Segment, 24, 40, 60, 175, 248 
Segregation capacity, 44, 45 
Sensor module, 57, 58 
Separated hydrolysis and fermentation 
(SHF), 88, 284 
Sequence, 24, 39, 48, 52, 59, 87, 131, 135, 
184, 189, 232, 248, 400 
saturation mutagenesis (SeSaM), 39 
Sequential reduction, 89, 315 
Serine, 93, 539 
Sesquiterpene, 100, 101, 103, 317, 319 

 
636 
Index 
Severe acute respiratory syndrome corona-
virus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), 206 
Sewage sludge, 280, 290 
Sexually transmitted disease (STD), 200 
Shine dalgarno (SD), 57, 59, 189 
Shunt, 84, 85 
Shuttle, 128, 338, 343 
Silent secondary metabolite biosynthetic 
gene clusters (SM-BGC), 222 
Silver nanoparticles, 292, 293 
Simultaneous saccharification and fermenta­
tion (SSF), 88, 284 
Single 
celled organisms (SCO), 9, 87, 140, 320, 
424 
enzyme, 14, 17, 19, 363 
guide RNA (sgRNA), 53 
Site directed mutagenesis, 41, 53 
Sludge, 280, 290, 291, 368, 384, 386, 405, 
529, 585, 594, 599 
Smog, 125, 412, 433 
Solar energy, 4, 344, 383, 387, 395, 396, 
406, 519, 532 
Solid 
biofuels, 395, 396 
waste management, 485, 510 
Sorghum, 213, 404 
Spatial, 12, 22, 316 
Specialized metabolites (SM), 222 
Species, 22, 24, 47, 51, 57, 133, 137, 139, 
147, 148, 210, 230, 245, 250, 286, 287, 
290, 321, 322, 340, 345, 346, 366, 395, 
396, 398, 400, 402, 405, 407, 409, 424, 
426, 430, 432, 435, 437, 446, 457, 473, 
485–487, 491, 498, 501, 502, 509, 518, 
520, 528, 529, 530, 533–536, 539, 543, 
548, 557, 564, 566, 567, 569, 573, 588, 
590 
Specific growth rate (μ), 148, 187, 543 
Spectra, 18, 310 
Spectrum, 13, 18, 222, 232, 233, 242, 327, 
328, 358, 367, 368, 370, 533 
Spontaneous, 4, 345 
Squalene, 101, 104 
Stability, 9, 21, 39, 40, 42, 45, 55, 86, 92, 
146, 272, 285, 292, 293, 295, 321, 349, 
360, 362, 368, 369, 370, 413, 434, 436, 
493, 547, 562, 593 
Staphylococcus aureus, 12, 203, 204, 
227–229, 231, 232 
Stationary phase, 47, 56, 187 
Steep liquor, 141, 144, 572 
Stereo, 34, 81, 358 
Sterilization, 285, 456 
Stirred tank reactor (STR), 153 
Stochastic models, 184 
Stoichiometric 
analysis, 25 
maximum, 134 
yield, 289 
Stomatitis virus, 234 
Strain, 89, 139, 141, 142, 246, 476 
development, 16, 23, 182, 183 
engineering, 127, 139, 140, 148, 149, 158 
morphology, 137 
Strategy, 8–12, 17, 22, 40–42, 44, 59, 84, 
85, 88, 91, 95, 100, 101, 103, 133, 142, 
223, 224, 243, 248, 249, 251, 283, 285, 
316, 319, 326, 347, 348, 382, 384, 386, 
477, 495, 506, 507, 509, 592 
Streptcytosine, 227 
Streptococcus, 52, 91, 180, 203, 273, 286 
Streptomyces 
antibiotic regulatory proteins (SARPs), 
251 
fungus interaction zones (SEIZs), 247 
Streptomycin, 224, 249, 250 
Streptothricin (ST), 224 
Strict anaerobic, 128, 131 
Suboptimal, 14, 17 
Subsections, 15, 21, 147, 427, 428, 446, 569 
Substrate, 5, 13–16, 19, 34, 84, 93, 98, 149, 
179, 193, 242, 269, 274, 280, 285–287, 
289, 313, 320, 321, 324–326, 347, 356, 
358, 366, 381, 468, 471, 473, 476, 477, 
479, 535, 562, 567, 595 
concentration, 185, 187, 287, 362, 388 
range, 20, 25, 285, 314 
utilization, 179, 271, 292–295, 322 
Succinate, 16, 84, 85, 126, 127, 131–135, 
139, 141, 142, 155, 157, 322 
dehydrogenase, 85, 135 
production, 84, 132–135 
Succinic, 38, 73, 83, 124, 126, 176, 564 
acid (SA), 38, 73, 124, 126, 176, 564 
Succinyl-CoA, 89, 529 

 
637 
Index 
Sucrose, 80, 87, 179, 530 
Sugar 
beet, 179, 586 
substrates, 81, 99, 286, 321, 327 
Sulfated 
polygalactans, 211, 212 
polysaccharide, 200, 201, 206–211 
Sulfur oxide (SOX), 424 
Sulfuric acid, 6, 433 
Super critical fluid technique (SCF), 430 
Supernatant, 79, 560 
Superoxide radical scavenging, 207, 240 
Surfactant, 86, 409, 467–470, 478, 479 
Surfeit, 355, 357 
Surpass, 3, 277, 386, 492 
Surplus, 34, 283 
Sustainable, 3, 10, 47, 72, 73, 80, 89, 92, 
104, 123, 125, 141, 146, 179, 189, 190, 
222, 272, 283, 290, 314, 316, 325, 328, 
340, 349, 356, 358, 370, 387, 394, 406, 
407, 413, 431, 437, 443–445, 447, 451, 
467, 468, 475, 501, 509, 521, 532 
energy, 125, 437, 444 
nano, 190 
Sustenance, 4, 328, 506 
Symbiotic, 274, 276, 287 
Synechococcus elongatus, 11, 81, 316, 325 
Synergistic effect, 148, 280, 287 
Syngas, 93, 270, 325, 366, 406, 407, 451, 
523, 524 
Synthesis 
bioorganic molecules, 179 
inorganic nanoparticles, 201 
multiple glycosylated antibiotics, 232 
Synthetic 
biology, 23, 37, 44, 48, 57, 60, 83, 86, 88, 
124, 126, 136, 157, 183, 188, 222, 223, 
226, 242, 243, 249, 251–253, 310, 355 
cassette architecture, 75 
compounds, 95, 179 
enzyme cascades, 5 
fungi-bacteria consortium, 285 
gene technology, 22 
intermediates, 20 
macromolecular structures, 79 
materials, 86 
media, 287, 446 
pathway, 18, 22, 35, 92 
promoter library (SPL), 249 
rubber, 72, 82 
scaffolds, 87 
Synthon, 18, 99 
Syntrophic acetate 
oxidation (SAO), 274 
oxidizing bacteria (SAOB), 274 
System 
biology, 10, 16, 18, 25, 36, 37, 58, 61, 80, 
88, 92, 93, 124, 157, 179, 184, 189, 
193, 324, 328 
engineering, 8, 35, 37, 48, 59, 60 
protocols, 35 
technologies, 8 
manipulations, 56 
T 
Tackle, 336, 340, 369, 370, 484 
Tandem, 24, 49 
Target, 8, 9, 14–16, 19, 24, 34, 35, 37–41, 
44–56, 59–61, 73, 87, 95, 99, 132, 145, 
177, 193, 233, 235, 243, 394, 415, 477, 
559, 577 
binding, 24, 52, 177 
cleavage, 51, 52 
DNA, 50, 52, 54 
enzyme, 9, 39, 40, 44 
gene, 38, 47, 53, 56, 60, 87, 394 
metabolite, 15, 16 
product, 14–16, 34, 35, 44, 56, 59, 60, 99 
protein, 40, 41, 44–47, 559 
recognition, 49, 52 
sequence, 24, 48, 49, 52, 53 
site, 24, 52, 55 
specificity, 49, 53 
transformation reaction, 8, 35 
Technical, 3, 20, 35, 51, 124, 173, 189, 270, 
384, 397, 455, 503 
Technological advancements, 20, 35, 328, 
362 
Technology, 4, 6, 16, 26, 50, 53–55, 60, 107, 
174, 191, 193, 249, 253, 270, 271, 283, 
310, 328, 347, 349, 355, 356, 358, 359, 
387, 388, 394, 396, 403, 404, 408, 411, 
412, 423, 434, 443, 444, 446, 448, 451, 
457, 468, 471, 518, 523, 524, 527, 532, 
577, 597, 598 

 
638 
Index 
Tedious, 8, 9, 11, 25, 37, 40, 95, 102, 103, 
128, 364, 556 
job, 8, 364 
Tend, 19, 126, 176, 449, 492, 561 
Tensile strength, 213, 484, 485, 496, 498, 
589, 592 
Terpenes, 73, 99, 107, 202, 203, 242, 319 
Terpenoid, 38, 95, 99, 103, 104, 199, 200, 
202, 223, 231, 233, 310, 319, 320 
Terrestrial, 225, 395, 396, 398, 405, 408, 
483–485, 492, 516, 517, 533 
Tetrahydrofuran, 127, 565 
Theoretical yield, 133, 134, 136, 324, 327 
Therapeutics, 18, 222, 223, 226, 231–233, 
235, 249, 251, 252 
Thermal energy, 181, 384, 456 
Thermo-chemical, 325, 408 
conversion, 410 
Thermodynamic, 134 
changes, 25 
principles, 8 
system, 379 
Thermophiles, 17, 282, 339 
Thermophilic 
bacteria, 143, 368 
conditions, 275, 276, 282 
environmental conditions, 272 
enzymes, 17 
temperature, 275 
Thioesterase, 314, 316 
Three-dimensional (3D), 190, 192 
bio-printing, 191 
design data, 190 
printing, 174, 191, 193, 597, 598 
protein structure data, 38 
structures, 41, 192 
Threonine, 38, 91, 95, 325, 573 
Tissue, 145, 177, 179, 191, 212, 556, 560, 
589, 592, 593, 596, 598, 599 
engineering, 191, 592, 593, 599 
Titer, 16, 75, 76, 79, 80, 87, 90, 91, 101, 
131–135, 139, 140, 142–144, 146, 147, 
149, 154–157, 316, 319 
Titers, 18, 23, 59, 84, 87, 88, 90, 91, 319, 
320 
Tolerance, 75, 134, 135, 280, 282, 289, 325, 
359, 365, 369, 395, 396, 534 
Tolerant strain, 75, 322 
Total 
antioxidant, 208, 240 
solids (TS), 272 
Toxic, 5, 8, 10, 34, 100, 213, 292, 293, 314, 
356, 360, 382, 383, 386, 405, 407, 471, 
487, 491, 494, 498, 562, 593 
byproducts, 8, 34 
environmental sustenance, 34 
metals, 213 
Toyocamycin (TM), 249 
Tractability, 51, 55, 320 
Traditional chemical synthetic processes, 84 
Trans-activating crRNA (TracrRNA), 52 
Transcription factors, 48, 190 
Transcriptional, 21, 53, 54, 56, 76, 91, 155, 
184, 249 
control, 21, 53, 91 
regulatory network (TRN), 184 
Transcriptomics, 37, 38 
Transesterification, 141, 312, 364, 365, 403, 
410, 411, 425, 431, 433, 434, 436, 437 
Transformation, 4, 8, 9, 34, 35, 56, 99, 124, 
189, 245, 246, 248, 367, 413, 455, 496 
Translation, 22, 44, 47, 48, 57, 59, 60, 184, 
188, 189 
Transposon, 55, 60 
Triacylglycerides, 400 
Triacylglycerols (TAGs), 312, 399 
Tricarboxylic acid (TCA), 124, 126, 158, 
175, 535 
Triglycerides, 17, 364, 365, 403, 411, 425 
Triumphant, 346 
Truncated, 100, 135, 314, 319 
Trypsin, 148, 577 
Tyrosine, 60, 103, 184, 573 
U 
Ulvan, 201, 202, 208 
Undesired reaction, 34, 411 
Unique, 4, 10, 11, 19, 102, 177, 180, 222, 
224, 226, 233, 241, 246, 248, 252, 394, 
471, 503, 509, 525, 540, 597 
filamentous morphology, 224 
scaffolds, 252 
substances, 4 
Universal precursors, 99, 103, 319 
Upstream, 24, 45, 50, 57, 313, 349, 358, 
365, 394, 575 
Urged, 80, 103 

 
Index 
639 
Uronate dehydrogenase (udh), 86 
Ustilagic acid, 154 
Utilizing 
microbial whole-cell, 336 
microorganisms, 277 
penta, 182 
V 
Vacuum, 430 
Valinomycin, 241 
Value-added chemicals, 11, 100, 145, 295, 
344, 408, 444, 565 
Vancomycin, 224, 231 
resistant Enterococcus (VRE), 231 
Vanillin, 18, 98, 102, 180 
Vascular system, 200 
Vast range, 83, 93, 556 
Vectors, 33, 44–46, 128 
Versatile, 43, 55, 58, 74, 127, 128, 132, 286, 
360, 457, 467, 495 
plasmids, 55 
solutions, 43 
Viable 
microbial cell, 187 
opportunity, 233, 244 
Viral, 223 
disease controls, 235 
drug discoveries, 235 
elements, 54 
origin, 21 
promoter, 21, 45, 46, 54 
Viscosity, 148, 153, 526, 559 
Vitamins, 57, 192, 200, 539, 557 
Volatile 
halogenated hydrocarbons, 203 
hydrocarbons, 181 
solids (VS), 272 
Volume ratio, 292, 293, 295, 428 
W 
Wailupemycin, 234 
Waste material, 348, 356–358, 483 
Wastewater treatment, 287, 340, 343, 381, 
384, 385, 388, 394, 413, 426, 443, 447, 
449, 454, 456, 499, 507 
Wave, 10, 20, 21, 35, 517 
Well-documented biosynthetic factories, 
222, 223 
White spot syndrome virus (WSSV), 234 
Whole-cell, 4, 9, 12, 18, 25, 26, 33, 53, 54, 
81, 92, 95, 321, 328, 337, 355, 357, 386, 
444, 587 
biocatalysis (WCB), 3, 5, 9, 33, 34, 54, 
61, 71–73, 123, 126, 173, 199, 221, 
223, 269, 309, 335, 355, 358–361, 363, 
370, 377, 393, 423, 443, 467, 483, 515, 
555–578, 585 
biocatalyst, 4, 11, 13–18, 26, 33, 36, 55, 
72, 73, 75, 82, 83, 92, 101, 103, 107, 
124, 125, 128, 139, 145, 157, 158, 242, 
243, 252, 281, 321, 326–328, 355, 356, 
358, 359, 361, 364, 365, 366 
biocatalytic cascades, 356, 357 
catalysts, 16, 20, 74, 95, 104, 327, 355, 
356, 358, 360, 364, 369 
factories, 174, 322 
Wide 
applications, 18, 84, 88, 310 
spectrum, 76, 86, 128, 224, 367 
variety, 74, 274, 285, 346, 348, 590 
Withstand, 8, 182, 283, 488, 533 
Wood-ljungdahl (WL), 273, 346, 528 
X 
Xanthomonas, 24, 49 
Xiamycin, 234 
Xylanases, 22, 285, 321, 367 
Xylose, 21, 81, 91–93, 140, 156, 182, 281, 
288, 289, 322, 323 
Xylosidases, 285 
Y 
Yarrowia lipolytica, 24, 99, 100 
Yeast, 14, 88, 98, 99, 136, 140, 142, 156, 
230, 293, 313, 314, 319, 321, 558 
genes, 188 
genome, 80 
Yields, 37, 59, 60, 84, 88, 146, 278–282, 
313, 336, 361, 365, 395, 403, 424, 434, 
435, 450, 532, 571 
Z 
Zinc finger, 23, 24, 49, 61, 153 
acts, 48 
domain, 23, 48 

 
640 
Index 
modules, 24 
nucleases (ZFNs), 23, 48, 61 
Zizaene, 101 
Zonation, 200 
Zymomonas mobilis, 11, 314 

