ELDEST 
Book Two of Inheritance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHRISTOPHER PAOLINI

 
2
 
 
 
 
 
As always, this book is for my family. 
And also to my incredible fans. You made this adventure possible. 
 
Sé onr sverdar sitja hvass! 

 
3
Synopsis of Eragon, 
Book One of Inheritance 
 
 
 Eragon—a fifteen-year-old farmboy—is shocked when a polished blue 
stone appears before him in the range of mountains known as the Spine. 
Eragon takes the stone to the farm where he lives with his uncle, Gar-
row, and his cousin, Roran. Garrow and his late wife, Marian, have raised 
Eragon. Nothing is known of his father; his mother, Selena, was Garrow’s 
sister and has not been seen since Eragon’s birth. 
 
 Later, the stone cracks open and a baby dragon emerges. When Eragon 
touches her, a silvery mark appears on his palm, and an irrevocable bond 
is forged between their minds, making Eragon one of the legendary 
Dragon Riders. 
 
 The Dragon Riders were created thousands of years earlier in the af-
termath of the elves’ great war with the dragons, in order to ensure that 
hostilities would never again afflict their two races. The Riders became 
peacekeepers, educators, healers, natural philosophers, and the greatest of 
spellweavers—since being joined with a dragon makes one a magician. 
Under their guidance and protection, the land enjoyed a golden age. 
 
 When humans arrived in Alagaësia, they too were added to this elite 
order. After many years of peace, the monstrous and warlike Urgals killed 
the dragon of a young human Rider named Galbatorix. Driven mad by 
the loss and by his elders’ refusal to provide him with another dragon, 
Galbatorix set out to topple the Riders. 
 
 He stole another dragon—whom he named Shruikan and forced to 
serve him through certain black spells—and gathered around himself a 
group of thirteen traitors: the Forsworn. With the help of those cruel dis-
ciples, Galbatorix threw down the Riders; killed their leader, Vrael; and 
declared himself king over Alagaësia. In this, Galbatorix was only partly 
successful, for the elves and dwarves remain autonomous in their secret 
haunts, and some humans have established an independent country, 
Surda, in the south of Alagaësia. A stalemate has existed between these 
factions for twenty years, preceded by eighty years of open conflict 
brought about by the destruction of the Riders. 
 
 It is into this fragile political situation, then, that Eragon is thrust. He 
fears he is in mortal danger—it is common knowledge that Galbatorix 
killed every Rider who would not swear loyalty to him—and so Eragon 
hides the dragon from his family as he raises her. During this time, Eragon 

 
4
names the creature Saphira, after a dragon mentioned by the village story-
teller, Brom. Soon Roran leaves the farm for a job that will allow him to 
earn enough money to marry Katrina, the butcher’s daughter. 
 
 When Saphira stands taller than Eragon, two menacing, beetle-like 
strangers called the Ra’zac arrive in Carvahall, searching for the stone that 
was her egg. Frightened, Saphira kidnaps Eragon and flies into the Spine. 
Eragon manages to convince her to turn back, but by then his home has 
been obliterated by the Ra’zac. Eragon finds Garrow in the wreckage, tor-
tured and badly wounded. 
 
 Garrow dies soon afterward, and Eragon vows to track down and kill 
the Ra’zac. Eragon is accosted by Brom, who knows of Saphira’s existence 
and asks to accompany Eragon for reasons of his own. After Eragon 
agrees, Brom gives him the sword Zar’roc, which was once a Rider’s 
blade, though he refuses to say how he acquired it. 
 
 Eragon learns much from Brom during their travels, including how to 
fight with swords and use magic. Eventually, they lose the Ra’zac’s trail 
and visit the city of Teirm, where Brom believes his old friend Jeod can 
help locate their lair. 
 
 In Teirm, the eccentric herbalist Angela tells Eragon’s fortune, predict-
ing mighty powers struggling to control his destiny; an epic romance with 
one of noble birth; the fact that he will one day leave Alagaësia, never to 
return; and a betrayal from within his family. Her companion, the were-
cat Solembum, also gives him some words of advice. Then Eragon, Brom, 
and Saphira depart for Dras-Leona, where they hope to find the Ra’zac. 
 
 Brom finally reveals that he is an agent of the Varden—a rebel group 
dedicated to overthrowing Galbatorix—and that he had been hiding in 
Eragon’s village, waiting for a new Dragon Rider to appear. Brom also ex-
plains that twenty years ago, he and Jeod stole Saphira’s egg from Galba-
torix. In the process, Brom killed Morzan, first and last of the Forsworn. 
Only two other dragon eggs still exist, both of which remain in Galba-
torix’s possession. 
 
 Near Dras-Leona, the Ra’zac waylay Eragon and his companions, and 
Brom is mortally wounded while protecting Eragon. The Ra’zac are 
driven away by a mysterious young man named Murtagh, who says he’s 
been tracking the Ra’zac. Brom dies the following night. With his last 
breath, he confesses that he was once a Rider and his slain dragon was 
also named Saphira. Eragon buries Brom in a tomb of sandstone, which 
Saphira transmutes into pure diamond. 

 
5
 
 Without Brom, Eragon and Saphira decide to join the Varden. By ill 
chance, Eragon is captured at the city of Gil’ead and brought to the Shade 
Durza, Galbatorix’s right-hand man. With Murtagh’s help, Eragon escapes 
from prison, bringing along with him the unconscious elf Arya, another 
captive. By this point, Eragon and Murtagh have become great friends. 
 
 With her mind, Arya tells Eragon that she has been ferrying Saphira’s 
egg between the elves and the Varden, in the hopes that it might hatch 
for one of their children. However, during her last trip, she was am-
bushed by Durza and forced to send the egg elsewhere with magic, 
which is how it came to Eragon. Now Arya is seriously wounded and re-
quires the Varden’s medical help. Using mental images, she shows Eragon 
how to find the rebels. An epic chase ensues. Eragon and his friends trav-
erse almost four hundred miles in eight days. They are pursued by a con-
tingent of Urgals, who trap them in the towering Beor Mountains. 
Murtagh, who had not wanted to go to the Varden, is forced to tell Er-
agon that he is the son of Morzan. 
 
 Murtagh, however, has denounced his father’s deeds and fled Galba-
torix’s patronage to seek his own destiny. He shows Eragon a great scar 
across his back, inflicted when Morzan threw his sword, Zar’roc, at him 
when he was just a child. Thus, Eragon learns his sword once belonged to 
Murtagh’s father, he who betrayed the Riders to Galbatorix and slaugh-
tered many of his former comrades. 
 
 Just before they are overwhelmed by the Urgals, Eragon and his friends 
are rescued by the Varden, who seem to appear out of the very stone. It 
turns out that the rebels are based in Farthen Dûr, a hollow mountain ten 
miles high and ten miles across. It is also home to the dwarves’ capital, 
Tronjheim. Once inside, Eragon is taken to Ajihad, leader of the Varden, 
while Murtagh is imprisoned because of his parentage. Ajihad explains 
many things to Eragon, including that the Varden, elves, and dwarves had 
agreed that when a new Rider appeared, he or she would initially be 
trained by Brom and then sent to the elves to complete the instruction. 
Eragon must now decide whether to follow this course. 
 
 Eragon meets with the dwarf king, Hrothgar, and Ajihad’s daughter, 
Nasuada; is tested by the Twins, two bald and rather nasty magicians 
who serve Ajihad; spars with Arya once she has recovered; and again en-
counters Angela and Solembum, who have joined the Varden. Eragon 
and Saphira also bless one of the Varden’s orphan babies. 
 
 Eragon’s stay is disrupted by news of an Urgal army approaching 

 
6
through the dwarves’ tunnels. In the battle that follows, Eragon is sepa-
rated from Saphira and forced to fight Durza alone. Far stronger than any 
human, Durza easily defeats Eragon, slashing open his back from shoulder 
to hip. At that moment, Saphira and Arya break the roof of the cham-
ber—a sixty-foot-wide star sapphire—distracting Durza long enough for 
Eragon to stab him through the heart. Freed from Durza’s spells, the Ur-
gals are driven back into the tunnels. 
 
 While Eragon lies unconscious after the battle, he is telepathically con-
tacted by a being who identifies himself as Togira Ikonoka—the Cripple 
Who Is Whole. He offers answers to all of Eragon’s questions and urges 
Eragon to seek him in Ellesméra, where the elves live. 
 
 When Eragon wakes, he finds that, despite Angela’s best efforts, he has 
been left with a huge scar similar to Murtagh’s. Dismayed, he also realizes 
that he only slew Durza through sheer luck and that he desperately needs 
more training. 
 
 And at the end of Book One, Eragon decides that, yes, he will find this 
Togira Ikonoka and learn from him. For gray-eyed Destiny now weaves 
apace, the first resounding note of war echoes across the land, and the 
time fast approaches when Eragon shall have to step forth and confront 
his one, true enemy: King Galbatorix. 
  

 
7
A TWIN DISASTER 
 
 
 The songs of the dead are the lamentations of the living. 
 
 So thought Eragon as he stepped over a twisted and hacked Urgal, lis-
tening to the keening of women who removed loved ones from the 
blood-muddied ground of Farthen Dûr. Behind him Saphira delicately 
skirted the corpse, her glittering blue scales the only color in the gloom 
that filled the hollow mountain. 
 
 It was three days since the Varden and dwarves had fought the Urgals 
for possession of Tronjheim, the mile-high, conical city nestled in the 
center of Farthen Dûr, but the battlefield was still strewn with carnage. 
The sheer number of bodies had stymied their attempts to bury the dead. 
In the distance, a mountainous fire glowed sullenly by Farthen Dûr’s wall 
where the Urgals were being burned. No burial or honored resting place 
for them. 
 
 Since waking to find his wound healed by Angela, Eragon had tried 
three times to assist in the recovery effort. On each occasion he had been 
racked by terrible pains that seemed to explode from his spine. The heal-
ers gave him various potions to drink. Arya and Angela said that he was 
perfectly sound. Nevertheless, he hurt. Nor could Saphira help, only 
share his pain as it rebounded across their mental link. 
 
 Eragon ran a hand over his face and looked up at the stars showing 
through Farthen Dûr’s distant top, which were smudged with sooty 
smoke from the pyre. Three days. Three days since he had killed Durza; 
three days since people began calling him Shadeslayer; three days since 
the remnants of the sorcerer’s consciousness had ravaged his mind and he 
had been saved by the mysterious Togira Ikonoka, the Cripple Who Is 
Whole. He had told no one about that vision but Saphira. Fighting Durza 
and the dark spirits that controlled him had transformed Eragon; although 
for better or for worse he was still unsure. He felt fragile, as if a sudden 
shock would shatter his reconstructed body and consciousness. 
 
 And now he had come to the site of the combat, driven by a morbid 
desire to see its aftermath. Upon arriving, he found nothing but the un-
comfortable presence of death and decay, not the glory that heroic songs 
had led him to expect. 
 
 Before his uncle, Garrow, was slain by the Ra’zac months earlier, the 
brutality that Eragon had witnessed between the humans, dwarves, and 

 
8
Urgals would have destroyed him. Now it numbed him. He had realized, 
with Saphira’s help, that the only way to stay rational amid such pain was 
to do things. Beyond that, he no longer believed that life possessed inher-
ent meaning—not after seeing men torn apart by the Kull, a race of giant 
Urgals, and the ground a bed of thrashing limbs and the dirt so wet with 
blood it soaked through the soles of his boots. If any honor existed in 
war, he concluded, it was in fighting to protect others from harm. 
 
 He bent and plucked a tooth, a molar, from the dirt. Bouncing it on his 
palm, he and Saphira slowly made a circuit through the trampled plain. 
They stopped at its edge when they noticed Jörmundur—Ajihad’s second 
in command in the Varden—hurrying toward them from Tronjheim. 
When he came near, Jörmundur bowed, a gesture Eragon knew he would 
never have made just days before. 
 
 “I’m glad I found you in time, Eragon.” He clutched a parchment note 
in one hand. “Ajihad is returning, and he wants you to be there when he 
arrives. The others are already waiting for him by Tronjheim’s west gate. 
We’ll have to hurry to get there in time.” 
 
 Eragon nodded and headed toward the gate, keeping a hand on Saphira. 
Ajihad had been gone most of the three days, hunting down Urgals who 
had managed to escape into the dwarf tunnels that honeycombed the 
stone beneath the Beor Mountains. The one time Eragon had seen him 
between expeditions, Ajihad was in a rage over discovering that his 
daughter, Nasuada, had disobeyed his orders to leave with the other 
women and children before the battle. Instead, she had secretly fought 
among the Varden’s archers. 
 
 Murtagh and the Twins had accompanied Ajihad: the Twins because it 
was dangerous work and the Varden’s leader needed the protection of 
their magical skills, and Murtagh because he was eager to continue prov-
ing that he bore the Varden no ill will. It surprised Eragon how much 
people’s attitudes toward Murtagh had changed, considering that 
Murtagh’s father was the Dragon Rider Morzan, who had betrayed the 
Riders to Galbatorix. Even though Murtagh despised his father and was 
loyal to Eragon, the Varden had not trusted him. But now, no one was 
willing to waste energy on a petty hate when so much work remained. 
Eragon missed talking with Murtagh and looked forward to discussing all 
that had happened, once he returned. 
 
 As Eragon and Saphira rounded Tronjheim, a small group became visi-
ble in the pool of lantern light before the timber gate. Among them were 
Orik—the dwarf shifting impatiently on his stout legs—and Arya. The 

 
9
white bandage around her upper arm gleamed in the darkness, reflecting 
a faint highlight onto the bottom of her hair. Eragon felt a strange thrill, 
as he always did when he saw the elf. She looked at him and Saphira, 
green eyes flashing, then continued watching for Ajihad. 
 
 By breaking Isidar Mithrim—the great star sapphire that was sixty feet 
across and carved in the shape of a rose—Arya had allowed Eragon to kill 
Durza and so win the battle. Still, the dwarves were furious with her for 
destroying their most prized treasure. They refused to move the sap-
phire’s remains, leaving them in a massive circle inside Tronjheim’s cen-
tral chamber. Eragon had walked through the splintered wreckage and 
shared the dwarves’ sorrow for all the lost beauty. 
 
 He and Saphira stopped by Orik and looked out at the empty land that 
surrounded Tronjheim, extending to Farthen Dûr’s base five miles away 
in each direction. “Where will Ajihad come from?” asked Eragon. 
 
 Orik pointed at a cluster of lanterns staked around a large tunnel open-
ing a couple of miles away. “He should be here soon.” 
 
 Eragon waited patiently with the others, answering comments directed 
at him but preferring to speak with Saphira in the peace of his mind. The 
quiet that filled Farthen Dûr suited him. 
 
 Half an hour passed before motion flickered in the distant tunnel. A 
group of ten men climbed out onto the ground, then turned and helped 
up as many dwarves. One of the men—Eragon assumed it was Ajihad—
raised a hand, and the warriors assembled behind him in two straight 
lines. At a signal, the formation marched proudly toward Tronjheim. 
 
 Before they went more than five yards, the tunnel behind them 
swarmed with a flurry of activity as more figures jumped out. Eragon 
squinted, unable to see clearly from so far away. 
 
 Those are Urgals! exclaimed Saphira, her body tensing like a drawn 
bowstring. 
 
 Eragon did not question her. “Urgals!” he cried, and leaped onto Saphira, 
berating himself for leaving his sword, Zar’roc, in his room. No one had 
expected an attack now that the Urgal army had been driven away. 
 
 His wound twinged as Saphira lifted her azure wings, then drove them 
down and jumped forward, gaining speed and altitude each second. Be-
low them, Arya ran toward the tunnel, nearly keeping apace with 

 
10
Saphira. Orik trailed her with several men, while Jörmundur sprinted 
back toward the barracks. 
 
 Eragon was forced to watch helplessly as the Urgals fell on the rear of 
Ajihad’s warriors; he could not work magic over such a distance. The 
monsters had the advantage of surprise and quickly cut down four men, 
forcing the rest of the warriors, men and dwarves alike, to cluster around 
Ajihad in an attempt to protect him. Swords and axes clashed as the 
groups pressed together. Light flashed from one of the Twins, and an Ur-
gal fell, clutching the stump of his severed arm. 
 
 For a minute, it seemed the defenders would be able to resist the Ur-
gals, but then a swirl of motion disturbed the air, like a faint band of mist 
wrapping itself around the combatants. When it cleared, only four warri-
ors were standing: Ajihad, the Twins, and Murtagh. The Urgals converged 
on them, blocking Eragon’s view as he stared with rising horror and fear. 
 
 No! No! No! 
 
 Before Saphira could reach the fight, the knot of Urgals streamed back 
to the tunnel and scrambled underground, leaving only prone forms be-
hind. 
 
 The moment Saphira touched down, Eragon vaulted off, then faltered, 
overcome by grief and anger. I can’t do this. It reminded him too much of 
when he had returned to the farm to find his uncle Garrow dying. Fight-
ing back his dread with every step, he began to search for survivors. 
 
 The site was eerily similar to the battlefield he had inspected earlier, 
except that here the blood was fresh. 
 
 In the center of the massacre lay Ajihad, his breastplate rent with nu-
merous gashes, surrounded by five Urgals he had slain. His breath still 
came in ragged gasps. Eragon knelt by him and lowered his face so his 
tears would not land on the leader’s ruined chest. No one could heal such 
wounds. Running up to them, Arya paused and stopped, her face trans-
formed with sorrow when she saw that Ajihad could not be saved. 
 
 “Eragon.” The name slipped from Ajihad’s lips—no more than a whis-
per. 
 
 “Yes, I am here.” 
 
 “Listen to me, Eragon.... I have one last command for you.” Eragon 

 
11
leaned closer to catch the dying man’s words. “You must promise me 
something: promise that you... won’t let the Varden fall into chaos. They 
are the only hope for resisting the Empire.... They must be kept strong. 
You must promise me.” 
 
 “I promise.” 
 
 “Then peace be with you, Eragon Shadeslayer....” With his last breath, 
Ajihad closed his eyes, setting his noble face in repose, and died. 
 
 Eragon bowed his head. He had trouble breathing past the lump in his 
throat, which was so hard it hurt. Arya blessed Ajihad in a ripple of the 
ancient language, then said in her musical voice, “Alas, his death will 
cause much strife. He is right, you must do all you can to avert a struggle 
for power. I will assist where possible.” 
 
 Unwilling to speak, Eragon gazed at the rest of the bodies. He would 
have given anything to be elsewhere. Saphira nosed one of the Urgals and 
said, This should not have happened. It is an evil doing, and all the worse 
for coming when we should be safe and victorious. She examined another 
body, then swung her head around. Where are the Twins and Murtagh? 
They’re not among the dead. 
 
 Eragon scanned the corpses. You’re right! Elation surged within him as 
he hurried to the tunnel’s mouth. There pools of thickening blood filled 
the hollows in the worn marble steps like a series of black mirrors, glossy 
and oval, as if several torn bodies had been dragged down them. The Ur-
gals must have taken them! But why? They don’t keep prisoners or hostages. 
Despair instantly returned. It doesn’t matter. We can’t pursue them without 
reinforcements; you wouldn’t even fit through the opening. 
 
 They may still be alive. Would you abandon them? 
 
 What do you expect me to do? The dwarf tunnels are an endless maze! I 
would only get lost. And I couldn’t catch Urgals on foot, though Arya might 
be able to. 
 
 Then ask her to. 
 
 Arya! Eragon hesitated, torn between his desire for action and his loath-
ing to put her in danger. Still, if any one person in the Varden could han-
dle the Urgals, it was she. With a groan, he explained what they had 
found. 
 

 
12
 Arya’s slanted eyebrows met in a frown. “It makes no sense.” 
 
 “Will you pursue them?” 
 
 She stared at him for a heavy moment. “Wiol ono.” For you. Then she 
bounded forward, sword flashing in her hand as she dove into the earth’s 
belly. 
 
 Burning with frustration, Eragon settled cross-legged by Ajihad, keeping 
watch over the body. He could barely assimilate the fact that Ajihad was 
dead and Murtagh missing. Murtagh. Son of one of the Forsworn—the 
thirteen Riders who had helped Galbatorix destroy their order and anoint 
himself king of Alagaësia—and Eragon’s friend. At times Eragon had 
wished Murtagh gone, but now that he had been forcibly removed, the 
loss left an unexpected void. He sat motionless as Orik approached with 
the men. 
 
 When Orik saw Ajihad, he stamped his feet and swore in Dwarvish, 
swinging his ax into the body of an Urgal. The men only stood in shock. 
Rubbing a pinch of dirt between his callused hands, the dwarf growled, 
“Ah, now a hornet’s nest has broken; we’ll have no peace among the 
Varden after this. Barzûln, but this makes things complicated. Were you 
in time to hear his last words?” 
 
 Eragon glanced at Saphira. “They must wait for the right person before 
I’ll repeat them.” 
 
 “I see. And where’d be Arya?” 
 
 Eragon pointed. 
 
 Orik swore again, then shook his head and sat on his heels. 
 
 Jörmundur soon arrived with twelve ranks of six warriors each. He mo-
tioned for them to wait outside the radius of bodies while he proceeded 
onward alone. He bent and touched Ajihad on the shoulder. “How can 
fate be this cruel, my old friend? I would have been here sooner if not for 
the size of this cursed mountain, and then you might have been saved. 
Instead, we are wounded at the height of our triumph.” 
 
 Eragon softly told him about Arya and the disappearance of the Twins 
and Murtagh. 
 
 “She should not have gone,” said Jörmundur, straightening, “but we can 

 
13
do naught about it now. Guards will be posted here, but it will be at least 
an hour before dwarf guides can be found for another expedition into the 
tunnels.” 
 
 “I’d be willing to lead it,” offered Orik. 
 
 Jörmundur looked back at Tronjheim, his gaze distant. “No, Hrothgar 
will need you now; someone else will have to go. I’m sorry, Eragon, but 
everyone important must stay here until Ajihad’s successor is chosen. 
Arya will have to fend for herself.... We could not overtake her anyway.” 
 
 Eragon nodded, accepting the inevitable. 
 
 Jörmundur swept his gaze around before saying so all could hear, “Aji-
had has died a warrior’s death! Look, he slew five Urgals where a lesser 
man might have been overwhelmed by one. We will give him every 
honor and hope his spirit pleases the gods. Bear him and our companions 
back to Tronjheim on your shields... and do not be ashamed to let your 
tears be seen, for this is a day of sorrow that all will remember. May we 
soon have the privilege of sheathing our blades in the monsters who have 
slain our leader!” 
 
 As one, the warriors knelt, baring their heads in homage to Ajihad. 
Then they stood and reverently lifted him on their shields so he lay be-
tween their shoulders. Already many of the Varden wept, tears flowing 
into beards, yet they did not disgrace their duty and allow Ajihad to fall. 
With solemn steps, they marched back to Tronjheim, Saphira and Eragon 
in the middle of the procession. 
 
 
 
 

 
14
THE COUNCIL OF ELDERS 
 
 
 Eragon roused himself and rolled to the edge of the bed, looking about 
the room, which was suffused with the dim glow of a shuttered lantern. 
He sat and watched Saphira sleep. Her muscled sides expanded and con-
tracted as the great bellows of her lungs forced air through her scaled 
nostrils. Eragon thought of the raging inferno that she could now sum-
mon at will and send roaring out of her maw. It was an awesome sight 
when flames hot enough to melt metal rushed past her tongue and ivory 
teeth without harming them. Since she first breathed fire during his fight 
with Durza—while plunging toward them from the top of Tronjheim—
Saphira had been insufferably proud of her new talent. She was con-
stantly releasing little jets of flame, and she took every opportunity to 
light objects ablaze. 
 
 Because Isidar Mithrim was shattered, Eragon and Saphira had been un-
able to remain in the dragonhold above it. The dwarves had given them 
quarters in an old guardroom on Tronjheim’s bottom level. It was a large 
room, but with a low ceiling and dark walls. 
 
 Anguish gripped Eragon as he remembered the events of the previous 
day. Tears filled his eyes, spilling over, and he caught one on his hand. 
They had heard nothing from Arya until late that evening, when she 
emerged from the tunnel, weary and footsore. Despite her best efforts—
and all her magic—the Urgals had escaped her. “I found these,” she said. 
Then she revealed one of the Twins’ purple robes, torn and bloodied, and 
Murtagh’s tunic and both his leather gauntlets. “They were strewn along 
the edge of a black chasm, the bottom of which no tunnel reaches. The 
Urgals must have stolen their armor and weapons and thrown the bodies 
into the pit. I scryed both Murtagh and the Twins, and saw naught but 
the shadows of the abyss.” Her eyes met Eragon’s. “I’m sorry; they are 
gone.” 
 
 Now, in the confines of his mind, Eragon mourned Murtagh. It was a 
dreadful, creeping feeling of loss and horror made worse by the fact that 
he had grown ever more familiar with it in past months. 
 
 As he stared at the tear in his hand—a small, glistening dome—he de-
cided to scry the three men himself. He knew it was a desperate and fu-
tile prospect, but he had to try in order to convince himself that Murtagh 
was really gone. Even so, he was uncertain if he wanted to succeed where 
Arya had failed, if it would make him feel any better to catch a glimpse 
of Murtagh lying broken at the base of a cliff deep below Farthen Dûr. 

 
15
 
 He whispered, “Draumr kópa.” Darkness enveloped the liquid, turning 
it into a small dot of night on his silver palm. Movement flickered 
through it, like the swish of a bird across a clouded moon... then nothing. 
 
 Another tear joined the first. 
 
 Eragon took a deep breath, leaned back, and let calm settle over him. 
Since recovering from Durza’s wound, he had realized—humbling as it 
was—that he had prevailed only through sheer luck. If I ever face another 
Shade, or the Ra’zac, or Galbatorix, I must be stronger if I expect to win. 
Brom could have taught me more, I know he could have. But without him, I 
have but one choice: the elves. 
 
 Saphira’s breathing quickened, and she opened her eyes, yawning ex-
pansively. Good morning, little one. 
 
 Is it? He looked down and leaned on his hands, compressing the mat-
tress. It’s terrible... Murtagh and Ajihad... Why didn’t sentries in the tun-
nels warn us of the Urgals? They shouldn’t have been able to trail Ajihad’s 
group without being noticed.... Arya was right, it doesn’t make sense. 
 
 We may never know the truth, said Saphira gently. She stood, wings 
brushing the ceiling. You need to eat, then we must discover what the 
Varden are planning. We can’t waste time; a new leader could be chosen 
within hours. 
 
 Eragon agreed, thinking of how they had left everyone yesterday: Orik 
rushing off to give King Hrothgar the tidings, Jörmundur taking Ajihad’s 
body to a place where it would rest until the funeral, and Arya, who 
stood alone and watched the goings-on. 
 
 Eragon rose and strapped on Zar’roc and his bow, then bent and lifted 
Snowfire’s saddle. A line of pain sheared through his torso, driving him to 
the floor, where he writhed, scrabbling at his back. It felt like he was be-
ing sawed in half. Saphira growled as the ripping sensation reached her. 
She tried to soothe him with her own mind but was unable to alleviate 
his suffering. Her tail instinctually lifted, as if to fight. 
 
 It took minutes before the fit subsided and the last throb faded away, 
leaving Eragon gasping. Sweat drenched his face, making his hair stick and 
his eyes sting. He reached back and gingerly fingered the top of his scar. It 
was hot and inflamed and sensitive to touch. Saphira lowered her nose 
and touched him on the arm. Oh, little one.... 

 
16
 
 It was worse this time, he said, staggering upright. She let him lean 
against her as he wiped off the sweat with a rag, then he tentatively 
stepped toward the door. 
 
 Are you strong enough to go? 
 
 We have to. We’re obliged as dragon and Rider to make a public choice 
regarding the next head of the Varden, and perhaps even influence the selec-
tion. I won’t ignore the strength of our position; we now wield great authority 
within the Varden. At least the Twins aren’t here to grab the position for 
themselves. That’s the only good in the situation. 
 
 Very well, but Durza should suffer a thousand years of torture for what he 
did to you. 
 
 He grunted. Just stay close to me. 
 
 Together they made their way through Tronjheim, toward the nearest 
kitchen. In the corridors and hallways, people stopped and bowed to 
them, murmuring “Argetlam” or “Shadeslayer.” Even dwarves made the 
motions, though not as often. Eragon was struck by the somber, haunted 
expressions of the humans and the dark clothing they wore to display 
their sadness. Many women were dressed entirely in black, lace veils cov-
ering their faces. 
 
 In the kitchen, Eragon brought a stone platter of food to a low table. 
Saphira watched him carefully in case he should have another attack. 
Several people tried to approach him, but she lifted a lip and growled, 
sending them scurrying away. Eragon picked at his food and pretended to 
ignore the disturbances. Finally, trying to divert his thoughts from 
Murtagh, he asked, Who do you think has the means to take control of the 
Varden now that Ajihad and the Twins are gone? 
 
 She hesitated. It’s possible you could, if Ajihad’s last words were inter-
preted as a blessing to secure the leadership. Almost no one would oppose 
you. However, that does not seem a wise path to take. I see only trouble in 
that direction. 
 
 I agree. Besides, Arya wouldn’t approve, and she could be a dangerous 
enemy. Elves can’t lie in the ancient language, but they have no such inhibi-
tion in ours—she could deny that Ajihad ever uttered those words if it 
served her purposes. No, I don’t want the position.... What about Jörmun-
dur? 

 
17
 
 Ajihad called him his right-hand man. Unfortunately, we know little 
about him or the Varden’s other leaders. Such a short time has passed since 
we came here. We will have to make our judgment on our feelings and im-
pressions, without the benefit of history. 
 
 Eragon pushed his fish around a lump of mashed tubers. Don’t forget 
Hrothgar and the dwarf clans; they won’t be quiet in this. Except for Arya, 
the elves have no say in the succession—a decision will be made before 
word of this even reaches them. But the dwarves can’t be—won’t be—
ignored. Hrothgar favors the Varden, but if enough clans oppose him, he 
might be maneuvered into backing someone unsuited for the command. 
 
 And who might that be? 
 
 A person easily manipulated. He closed his eyes and leaned back. It 
could be anyone in Farthen Dûr, anyone at all. 
 
 For a long while, they both considered the issues facing them. Then 
Saphira said, Eragon, there is someone here to see you. I can’t scare him 
away. 
 
 Eh? He cracked his eyes open, squinting as they adjusted to the light. A 
pale-looking youth stood by the table. The boy eyed Saphira like he was 
afraid she would try to eat him. “What is it?” asked Eragon, not unkindly. 
 
 The boy started, flustered, then bowed. “You have been summoned, 
Argetlam, to speak before the Council of Elders.” 
 
 “Who are they?” 
 
 The question confused the boy even more. “The—the council is... are... 
people we—that is, the Varden—choose to speak on our behalf to Aji-
had. They were his trusted advisers, and now they wish to see you. It is a 
great honor!” He finished with a quick smile. 
 
 “Are you to lead me to them?” 
 
 “Yes, I am.” 
 
 Saphira looked at Eragon questioningly. He shrugged and left the un-
eaten food, motioning for the boy to show the way. As they walked, the 
boy admired Zar’roc with bright eyes, then looked down shyly. 
 

 
18
 “What are you called?” asked Eragon. 
 
 “Jarsha, sir.” 
 
 “That’s a good name. You carried your message well; you should be 
proud.” Jarsha beamed and bounced forward. 
 
 They reached a convex stone door, which Jarsha pushed open. The 
room inside was circular, with a sky blue dome decorated with constella-
tions. A round marble table, inlaid with the crest of Dûrgrimst Ingei-
tum—an upright hammer ringed by twelve stars—stood in the center of 
the chamber. Seated there were Jörmundur and two other men, one tall 
and one broad; a woman with pinched lips, close-set eyes, and elaborately 
painted cheeks; and a second woman with an immense pile of gray hair 
above a matronly face, belied by a dagger hilt peeking out of the vast hills 
of her bodice. 
 
 “You may go,” said Jörmundur to Jarsha, who quickly bowed and left. 
 
 Conscious that he was being watched, Eragon surveyed the room, then 
seated himself in the middle of a swath of empty chairs, so that the 
council members were forced to turn in their seats in order to look at 
him. Saphira hunkered directly behind him; he could feel her hot breath 
on the top of his head. 
 
 Jörmundur got halfway up to make a slight bow, then reseated himself. 
“Thank you for coming, Eragon, even though you have suffered your own 
loss. This is Umérth,” the tall man; “Falberd,” the broad one; “and Sabrae 
and Elessari,” the two women. 
 
 Eragon inclined his head, then asked, “And what of the Twins, were 
they part of this council?” 
 
 Sabrae shook her head sharply and tapped a long fingernail on the table. 
“They had naught to do with us. They were slime—worse than slime—
leeches that worked only for their own benefit. They had no desire to 
serve the Varden. Thus, they had no place in this council.” Eragon could 
smell her perfume all the way on the other side of the table; it was thick 
and oily, like a rotting flower. He hid a smile at the thought. 
 
 “Enough. We’re not here to discuss the Twins,” said Jörmundur. “We 
face a crisis that must be dealt with quickly and effectively. If we don’t 
choose Ajihad’s successor, someone else will. Hrothgar has already con-
tacted us to convey his condolences. While he was more than courteous, 

 
19
he is sure to be forming his own plans even as we speak. We must also 
consider Du Vrangr Gata, the magic users. Most of them are loyal to the 
Varden, but it’s difficult to predict their actions even in the best of times. 
They might decide to oppose our authority for their own advantage. That 
is why we need your assistance, Eragon, to provide the legitimacy re-
quired by whoever is to take Ajihad’s place.” 
 
 Falberd heaved himself up, planting his meaty hands on the table. “The 
five of us have already decided whom to support. There is no doubt 
among us that it is the right person. But,” he raised a thick finger, “before 
we reveal who it is, you must give us your word of honor that whether 
you agree or disagree with us, nothing of our discussion will leave this 
room.” 
 
 Why would they want that? Eragon asked Saphira. 
 
 I don’t know, she said, snorting. It might be a trap.... It’s a gamble you’ll 
have to take. Remember, though, they haven’t asked me to pledge anything. 
I can always tell Arya what they say, if needed. Silly of them, forgetting 
that I’m as intelligent as any human. 
 
 Pleased with the thought, Eragon said, “Very well, you have my word. 
Now, who do you want to lead the Varden?” 
 
 “Nasuada.” 
 
 Surprised, Eragon dropped his gaze, thinking quickly. He had not con-
sidered Nasuada for the succession because of her youth—she was just a 
few years older than Eragon. No real reason existed, of course, for her not 
to lead, but why would the Council of Elders want her to? How would 
they benefit? He remembered Brom’s advice and tried to examine the 
issue from every angle, knowing that he had to decide swiftly. 
 
 Nasuada has steel in her, observed Saphira. She would be like her father. 
 
 Maybe, but what’s their reason for picking her? 
 
 To gain time, Eragon asked, “Why not you, Jörmundur? Ajihad called 
you his right-hand man. Doesn’t that mean you should take his place now 
that he’s gone?” 
 
 A current of unease ran through the council: Sabrae sat even straighter, 
hands clasped before her; Umérth and Falberd glanced at each other 
darkly, while Elessari just smiled, the dagger hilt jiggling on her chest. 

 
20
 
 “Because,” said Jörmundur, selecting his words with care, “Ajihad was 
speaking of military matters then, nothing more. Also, I am a member of 
this council, which only has power because we support one another. It 
would be foolish and dangerous for one of us to raise himself above the 
rest.” The council relaxed as he finished, and Elessari patted Jörmundur 
on the forearm. 
 
 Ha! exclaimed Saphira. He probably would have taken power if it were 
possible to force the others to back him. Just look how they eye him. He’s 
like a wolf in their midst. 
 
 A wolf in a pack of jackals, perhaps. 
 
 “Does Nasuada have enough experience?” inquired Eragon. 
 
 Elessari pressed herself against the table’s edge as she leaned forward. “I 
had already been here for seven years when Ajihad joined the Varden. 
I’ve watched Nasuada grow up from a darling girl to the woman she is. A 
trifle light-headed occasionally, but a good figure to lead the Varden. The 
people will love her. Now I,” she patted herself affectionately on the 
bosom, “and my friends will be here to guide her through these troubled 
times. She will never be without someone to show her the way. Inexpe-
rience should be no barrier to her taking her rightful position.” 
 
 Understanding flooded Eragon. They want a puppet! 
 
 “Ajihad’s funeral will be held in two days,” broke in Umérth. “Directly 
afterward, we plan to appoint Nasuada as our new leader. We have yet 
to ask her, but she will surely agree. We want you to be present at the 
appointing—no one, not even Hrothgar, can complain about it then—
and to swear fealty to the Varden. That will give back the confidence 
Ajihad’s death has stolen from the people, and prevent anyone from try-
ing to splinter this organization.” 
 
 Fealty! 
 
 Saphira quickly touched Eragon’s mind. Notice, they don’t want you to 
swear to Nasuada—just to the Varden. 
 
 Yes, and they want to be the ones to appoint Nasuada, which would indi-
cate that the council is more powerful than she. They could have asked 
Arya or us to appoint her, but that would mean acknowledging whoever did 
it as above everyone in the Varden. This way, they assert their superiority 

 
21
over Nasuada, gain control over us through fealty, and also get the benefit 
of having a Rider endorse Nasuada in public. 
 
 “What happens,” he asked, “if I decide not to accept your offer?” 
 
 “Offer?” Falberd asked, seeming puzzled. “Why, nothing, of course. 
Only it would be a terrible slight if you’re not present when Nasuada is 
chosen. If the hero of the battle of Farthen Dûr ignores her, what can she 
think but that a Rider has spited her and found the Varden unworthy to 
serve? Who could bear such a shame?” 
 
 The message could have been no clearer. Eragon clenched Zar’roc’s 
pommel under the table, yearning to scream that it was unnecessary to 
force him to support the Varden, that he would have done it anyway. 
Now, however, he instinctively wanted to rebel, to elude the shackles 
they were trying to place on him. “Since Riders are so highly thought of, I 
could decide that my efforts would be best spent guiding the Varden 
myself.” 
 
 The mood in the room hardened. “That would be unwise,” stated Sa-
brae. 
 
 Eragon combed his mind for a way to escape the situation. With Ajihad 
gone, said Saphira, it may be impossible to remain independent of every 
group, as he wanted us to. We cannot anger the Varden, and if this council 
is to control it once Nasuada is in place, then we must appease them. Re-
member, they act as much out of self-preservation as we do. 
 
 But what will they want us to do once we are in their grasp? Will they re-
spect the Varden’s pact with the elves and send us to Ellesméra for training, 
or command otherwise? Jörmundur strikes me as an honorable man, but the 
rest of the council? I can’t tell. 
 
 Saphira brushed the top of his head with her jaw. Agree to be at this 
ceremony with Nasuada; that much I think we must do. As for swearing fe-
alty, see if you can avoid acquiescing. Perhaps something will occur between 
now and then that will change our position... Arya may have a solution. 
 
 Without warning, Eragon nodded and said, “As you wish; I shall attend 
Nasuada’s appointment.” 
 
 Jörmundur looked relieved. “Good, good. Then we have only one more 
matter to deal with before you go: Nasuada’s acceptance. There’s no rea-
son to delay, with all of us here. I’ll send for her immediately. And Arya 

 
22
too—we need the elves’ approval before making this decision public. It 
shouldn’t be difficult to procure; Arya cannot go against our council and 
you, Eragon. She will have to agree with our judgment.” 
 
 “Wait,” commanded Elessari, a steely glint in her eyes. “Your word, 
though, Rider. Will you give it in fealty at the ceremony?” 
 
 “Yes, you must do that,” agreed Falberd. “The Varden would be dis-
graced if we couldn’t provide you every protection.” 
 
 A nice way to put it! 
 
 It was worth a try, said Saphira. I fear you have no choice now. 
 
 They wouldn’t dare harm us if I refused. 
 
 No, but they could cause us no end of grief. It is not for my own sake that 
I say accept, but for yours. Many dangers exist that I cannot protect you 
from, Eragon. With Galbatorix set against us, you need allies, not enemies, 
around you. We cannot afford to contend with both the Empire and the 
Varden. 
 
 Finally, “I’ll give it.” All around the table were signs of relaxation—even 
a poorly concealed sigh from Umérth. They’re afraid of us! 
 
 As well they should be, sniped Saphira. 
 
 Jörmundur called for Jarsha, and with a few words sent the boy scam-
pering off for Nasuada and Arya. While he was gone, the conversation 
fell into an uncomfortable silence. Eragon ignored the council, focusing 
instead on working a way out of his dilemma. None sprang to mind. 
 
 When the door opened again, everyone turned expectantly. First came 
Nasuada, chin held high and eyes steady. Her embroidered gown was the 
deepest shade of black, deeper even than her skin, broken only by a slash 
of royal purple that stretched from shoulder to hip. Behind her was Arya, 
her stride as lithe and smooth as a cat’s, and an openly awestruck Jarsha. 
 
 The boy was dismissed, then Jörmundur helped Nasuada into a seat. 
Eragon hastened to do the same for Arya, but she ignored the proffered 
chair and stood at a distance from the table. Saphira, he said, let her know 
all that’s happened. I have a feeling the council won’t inform her that 
they’ve compelled me to give the Varden my loyalty. 
 

 
23
 “Arya,” acknowledged Jörmundur with a nod, then concentrated on 
Nasuada. “Nasuada, Daughter of Ajihad, the Council of Elders wishes to 
formally extend its deepest condolences for the loss you, more than any-
one else, have suffered....” In a lower voice, he added, “You have our per-
sonal sympathies as well. We all know what it is like to have a family 
member killed by the Empire.” 
 
 “Thank you,” murmured Nasuada, lowering her almond eyes. She sat, 
shy and demure, and with an air of vulnerability that made Eragon want 
to comfort her. Her demeanor was tragically different from that of the 
energetic young woman who had visited him and Saphira in the dragon-
hold before the battle. 
 
 “Although this is your time of mourning, a quandary exists that you 
must resolve. This council cannot lead the Varden. And someone must 
replace your father after the funeral. We ask that you receive the posi-
tion. As his heir, it is rightfully yours—the Varden expect it of you.” 
 
 Nasuada bowed her head with shining eyes. Grief was plain in her 
voice when she said, “I never thought I would be called upon to take my 
father’s place so young. Yet... if you insist it is my duty... I will embrace 
the office.” 
 
 
 
 

 
24
TRUTH AMONG FRIENDS 
 
 
 The Council of Elders beamed with triumph, pleased that Nasuada had 
done what they wanted. “We do insist,” said Jörmundur, “for your own 
good and the good of the Varden.” The rest of the elders added their ex-
pressions of support, which Nasuada accepted with sad smiles. Sabrae 
threw an angry glance at Eragon when he did not join in. 
 
 Throughout the exchange, Eragon watched Arya for any reaction to ei-
ther his news or the council’s announcement. Neither revelation caused 
her inscrutable expression to change. However, Saphira told him, She 
wishes to talk with us afterward. 
 
 Before Eragon could reply, Falberd turned to Arya. “Will the elves find 
this agreeable?” 
 
 She stared at Falberd until the man fidgeted under her piercing gaze, 
then lifted an eyebrow. “I cannot speak for my queen, but I find nothing 
objectionable to it. Nasuada has my blessing.” 
 
 How could she find it otherwise, knowing what we’ve told her? thought 
Eragon bitterly. We’re all backed into corners. 
 
 Arya’s remark obviously pleased the council. Nasuada thanked her and 
asked Jörmundur, “Is there anything else that must be discussed? For I am 
weary.” 
 
 Jörmundur shook his head. “We will make all the arrangements. I 
promise you won’t be troubled until the funeral.” 
 
 “Again, thank you. Would you leave me now? I need time to consider 
how best to honor my father and serve the Varden. You have given me 
much to ponder.” Nasuada splayed her delicate fingers on the dark cloth 
on her lap. 
 
 Umérth looked like he was going to protest at the council being dis-
missed, but Falberd waved a hand, silencing him. “Of course, whatever 
will give you peace. If you need help, we are ready and willing to serve.” 
Gesturing for the rest of them to follow, he swept past Arya to the door. 
 
 “Eragon, will you please stay?” 
 
 Startled, Eragon lowered himself back into his chair, ignoring alert looks 

 
25
from the councilors. Falberd lingered by the door, suddenly reluctant to 
depart, then slowly went out. Arya was the last to go. Before she closed 
the door, she looked at Eragon, her eyes revealing worry and apprehen-
sion that had been concealed before. 
 
 Nasuada sat partially turned away from Eragon and Saphira. “So we 
meet again, Rider. You haven’t greeted me. Have I offended you?” 
 
 “No, Nasuada; I was reluctant to speak for fear of being rude or foolish. 
Current circumstances are unkind to hasty statements.” Paranoia that 
they might be eavesdropped on gripped him. Reaching through the bar-
rier in his mind, he delved into the magic and intoned: “Atra nosu waíse 
vardo fra eld hórnya.... There, now we may speak without being over-
heard by man, dwarf, or elf.” 
 
 Nasuada’s posture softened. “Thank you, Eragon. You don’t know what 
a gift that is.” Her words were stronger and more self-assured than before. 
 
 Behind Eragon’s chair, Saphira stirred, then carefully made her way 
around the table to stand before Nasuada. She lowered her great head un-
til one sapphire eye met Nasuada’s black ones. The dragon stared at her 
for a full minute before snorting softly and straightening. Tell her, said 
Saphira, that I grieve for her and her loss. Also that her strength must be-
come the Varden’s when she assumes Ajihad’s mantle. They will need a 
sure guide. 
 
 Eragon repeated the words, adding, “Ajihad was a great man—his name 
will always be remembered.... There is something I must tell you. Before 
Ajihad died, he charged me, commanded me, to keep the Varden from 
falling into chaos. Those were his last words. Arya heard them as well. 
 
 “I was going to keep what he said a secret because of the implications, 
but you have a right to know. I’m not sure what Ajihad meant, nor ex-
actly what he wanted, but I am certain of this: I will always defend the 
Varden with my powers. I wanted you to understand that, and that I’ve 
no desire to usurp the Varden’s leadership.” 
 
 Nasuada laughed brittlely. “But that leadership isn’t to be me, is it?” Her 
reserve had vanished, leaving behind only composure and determination. 
“I know why you were here before me and what the council is trying to 
do. Do you think that in the years I served my father, we never planned 
for this eventuality? I expected the council to do exactly what it did. 
And now everything is in place for me to take command of the Varden.” 
 

 
26
 “You have no intention of letting them rule you,” said Eragon with 
wonder. 
 
 “No. Continue to keep Ajihad’s instruction secret. It would be unwise 
to bandy it about, as people might take it to mean that he wanted you to 
succeed him, and that would undermine my authority and destabilize the 
Varden. He said what he thought he had to in order to protect the 
Varden. I would have done the same. My father...” She faltered briefly. 
“My father’s work will not go unfinished, even if it takes me to the grave. 
That is what I want you, as a Rider, to understand. All of Ajihad’s plans, 
all his strategies and goals, they are mine now. I will not fail him by being 
weak. The Empire will be brought down, Galbatorix will be dethroned, 
and the rightful government will be raised.” 
 
 By the time she finished, a tear ran down her cheek. Eragon stared, ap-
preciating how difficult her position was and recognizing a depth of char-
acter he had not perceived before. “And what of me, Nasuada? What 
shall I do in the Varden?” 
 
 She looked directly into his eyes. “You can do whatever you want. The 
council members are fools if they think to control you. You are a hero to 
the Varden and the dwarves, and even the elves will hail your victory 
over Durza when they hear of it. If you go against the council or me, we 
will be forced to yield, for the people will support you wholeheartedly. 
Right now, you are the most powerful person in the Varden. However, if 
you accept my leadership, I will continue the path laid down by Ajihad: 
you will go with Arya to the elves, be instructed there, then return to the 
Varden.” 
 
 Why is she so honest with us? wondered Eragon. If she’s right, could we 
have refused the council’s demands? 
 
 Saphira took a moment to answer. Either way, it’s too late. You have al-
ready agreed to their requests. I think Nasuada is honest because your spell 
lets her be, and also because she hopes to win our loyalty from the elders. 
 
 An idea suddenly came to Eragon, but before sharing it, he asked, Can 
we trust her to hold to what she’s said? This is very important. 
 
 Yes, said Saphira. She spoke with her heart. 
 
 Then Eragon shared his proposal with Saphira. She consented, so he 
drew Zar’roc and walked to Nasuada. He saw a flash of fear as he ap-
proached; her gaze darted toward the door, and she slipped a hand into a 

 
27
fold in her dress and grasped something. Eragon stopped before her, then 
knelt, Zar’roc flat in his hands. 
 
 “Nasuada, Saphira and I have been here for only a short while. But in 
that time we came to respect Ajihad, and now, in turn, you. You fought 
under Farthen Dûr when others fled, including the two women of the 
council, and have treated us openly instead of with deception. Therefore, 
I offer you my blade... and my fealty as a Rider.” 
 
 Eragon uttered the pronouncement with a sense of finality, knowing he 
would never have mouthed it before the battle. Seeing so many men fall 
and die around him had altered his perspective. Resisting the Empire was 
no longer something he did for himself, but for the Varden and all the 
people still trapped under Galbatorix’s rule. However long it would take, 
he had dedicated himself to that task. For the time being, the best thing 
he could do was serve. 
 
 Still, he and Saphira were taking a terrible risk in pledging themselves 
to Nasuada. The council could not object because all Eragon had said was 
that he would swear fealty, but not to whom. Even so, he and Saphira 
had no guarantee that Nasuada would make a good leader. It’s better to be 
sworn to an honest fool than to a lying scholar, decided Eragon. 
 
 Surprise flitted across Nasuada’s face. She grasped Zar’roc’s hilt and 
lifted it—staring at its crimson blade—then placed the tip on Eragon’s 
head. “I do accept your fealty with honor, Rider, as you accept all the re-
sponsibilities accompanying the station. Rise as my vassal and take your 
sword.” 
 
 Eragon did as he was bidden. He said, “Now I can tell you openly as my 
master, the council made me agree to swear to the Varden once you 
were appointed. This was the only way Saphira and I could circumvent 
them.” 
 
 Nasuada laughed with genuine delight. “Ah, I see you have already 
learned how to play our game. Very well, as my newest and only vassal, 
will you agree to give your fealty to me again—in public, when the coun-
cil expects your vow?” 
 
 “Of course.” 
 
 “Good, that will take care of the council. Now, until then, leave me. I 
have much planning to do, and I must prepare for the funeral.... Remem-
ber, Eragon, the bond we have just created is equally binding; I am as re-

 
28
sponsible for your actions as you are required to serve me. Do not dis-
honor me.” 
 
 “Nor you I.” 
 
 Nasuada paused, then gazed into his eyes and added in a gentler tone: 
“You have my condolences, Eragon. I realize that others beside myself 
have cause for sorrow; while I have lost my father, you have also lost a 
friend. I liked Murtagh a great deal and it saddens me that he is gone.... 
Goodbye, Eragon.” 
 
 Eragon nodded, a bitter taste in his mouth, and left the room with 
Saphira. The hallway outside was empty along its gray length. Eragon put 
his hands on his hips, tilted back his head, and exhaled. The day had 
barely begun, yet he was already exhausted by all the emotions that had 
flooded through him. 
 
 Saphira nosed him and said, This way. Without further explanation, 
she headed down the right side of the tunnel. Her polished claws clicked 
on the hard floor. 
 
 Eragon frowned, but followed her. Where are we going? No answer. 
Saphira, please. She just flicked her tail. Resigned to wait, he said instead, 
Things have certainly changed for us. I never know what to expect from one 
day to the next—except sorrow and bloodshed. 
 
 All is not bad, she reproached. We have won a great victory. It should be 
celebrated, not mourned. 
 
 It doesn’t help, having to deal with this other nonsense. 
 
 She snorted angrily. A thin line of fire shot from her nostrils, singeing 
Eragon’s shoulder. He jumped back with a yelp, biting back a string of 
curses. Oops, said Saphira, shaking her head to clear the smoke. 
 
 Oops! You nearly roasted my side! 
 
 I didn’t expect it to happen. I keep forgetting that fire will come out if I’m 
not careful. Imagine that every time you raised your arm, lightning struck 
the ground. It would be easy to make a careless motion and destroy some-
thing unintentionally. 
 
 You’re right.... Sorry I growled at you. 
 

 
29
 Her bony eyelid clicked as she winked at him. No matter. The point I 
was trying to make is that even Nasuada can’t force you to do anything. 
 
 But I gave my word as a Rider! 
 
 Maybe so, but if I must break it to keep you safe, or to do the right thing, I 
will not hesitate. It is a burden I could easily carry. Because I’m joined to 
you, my honor is inherent in your pledge, but as an individual, I’m not 
bound by it. If I must, I will kidnap you. Any disobedience then would be 
no fault of your own. 
 
 It should never come to that. If we have to use such tricks to do what’s 
right, then Nasuada and the Varden will have lost all integrity. 
 
 Saphira stopped. They stood before the carved archway of Tronjheim’s 
library. The vast, silent room seemed empty, though the ranks of back-
to-back bookshelves interspersed with columns could conceal many peo-
ple. Lanterns poured soft light across the scroll-covered walls, illuminat-
ing the reading alcoves along their bases. 
 
 Weaving through the shelves, Saphira led him to one alcove, where 
Arya sat. Eragon paused as he studied her. She seemed more agitated than 
he had ever seen her, though it manifested itself only in the tension of her 
movements. Unlike before, she wore her sword with the graceful cross-
guard. One hand rested on the hilt. 
 
 Eragon sat at the opposite side of the marble table. Saphira positioned 
herself between them, where neither could escape her gaze. 
 
 “What have you done?” asked Arya with unexpected hostility. 
 
 “How so?” 
 
 She lifted her chin. “What have you promised the Varden? What have 
you done? ” 
 
 The last part even reached Eragon mentally. He realized just how close 
the elf was to losing control. A bit of fear touched him. “We only did 
what we had to. I’m ignorant of elves’ customs, so if our actions upset 
you, I apologize. There’s no cause to be angry.” 
 
 “Fool! You know nothing about me. I have spent seven decades repre-
senting my queen here—fifteen years of which I bore Saphira’s egg be-
tween the Varden and the elves. In all that time, I struggled to ensure the 

 
30
Varden had wise, strong leaders who could resist Galbatorix and respect 
our wishes. Brom helped me by forging the agreement concerning the 
new Rider—you. Ajihad was committed to your remaining independent 
so that the balance of power would not be upset. Now I see you siding 
with the Council of Elders, willingly or not, to control Nasuada! You 
have overturned a lifetime of work! What have you done? ” 
 
 Dismayed, Eragon dropped all pretenses. With short, clear words, he 
explained why he had agreed to the council’s demands and how he and 
Saphira had attempted to undermine them. 
 
 When he finished, Arya stated, “So.” 
 
 “So.” Seventy years. Though he knew elves’ lives were extraordinarily 
long, he had never suspected that Arya was that old, and older, for she 
appeared to be a woman in her early twenties. The only sign of age on 
her unlined face was her emerald eyes—deep, knowing, and most often 
solemn. 
 
 Arya leaned back, studying him. “Your position is not what I would 
wish, but better than I had hoped. I was impolite; Saphira... and you... 
understand more than I thought. Your compromise will be accepted by 
the elves, though you must never forget your debt to us for Saphira. 
There would be no Riders without our efforts.” 
 
 “The debt is burned into my blood and my palm,” said Eragon. In the si-
lence that followed, he cast about for a new topic, eager to prolong their 
conversation and perhaps learn more about her. “You have been gone for 
such a long time; do you miss Ellesméra? Or did you live elsewhere?” 
 
 “Ellesméra was, and always shall be, my home,” she said, looking be-
yond him. “I have not lived in my family’s house since I left for the 
Varden, when the walls and windows were draped with spring’s first 
flowers. The times I’ve returned were only fleeting stays, vanishing flecks 
of memory by our measurement.” 
 
 He noticed, once again, that she smelled like crushed pine needles. It 
was a faint, spicy odor that opened his senses and refreshed his mind. “It 
must be hard to live among all these dwarves and humans without any of 
your kind.” 
 
 She cocked her head. “You speak of humans as if you weren’t one.” 
 
 “Perhaps...,” he hesitated, “perhaps I am something else—a mixture of 

 
31
two races. Saphira lives inside me as much as I live in her. We share feel-
ings, senses, thoughts, even to the point where we are more one mind 
than two.” Saphira dipped her head in agreement, nearly bumping the ta-
ble with her snout. 
 
 “That is how it should be,” said Arya. “A pact more ancient and power-
ful than you can imagine links you. You won’t truly understand what it 
means to be a Rider until your training is completed. But that must wait 
until after the funeral. In the meantime, may the stars watch over you.” 
 
 With that she departed, slipping into the library’s shadowed depths. Er-
agon blinked. Is it me, or is everyone on edge today? Like Arya—one mo-
ment she’s angry, the next she’s giving me a blessing! 
 
 No one will be comfortable until things return to normal. 
 
 Define normal. 
 
 

 
32
RORAN 
 
 
 Roran trudged up the hill. 
 
 He stopped and squinted at the sun through his shaggy hair. Five hours 
till sunset. I won’t be able to stay long. With a sigh, he continued along the 
row of elm trees, each of which stood in a pool of uncut grass. 
 
 This was his first visit to the farm since he, Horst, and six other men 
from Carvahall had removed everything worth salvaging from the de-
stroyed house and burned barn. It had been nearly five months before he 
could consider returning. 
 
 Once on the hilltop, Roran halted and crossed his arms. Before him lay 
the remains of his childhood home. A corner of the house still stood—
crumbling and charred—but the rest had been flattened and was already 
covered with grass and weeds. Nothing could be seen of the barn. The 
few acres they had managed to cultivate each year were now filled with 
dandelions, wild mustard, and more grass. Here and there, stray beets or 
turnips had survived, but that was all. Just beyond the farm, a thick belt 
of trees obscured the Anora River. 
 
 Roran clenched a fist, jaw muscles knotting painfully as he fought back 
a combination of rage and grief. He stayed rooted to the spot for many 
long minutes, trembling whenever a pleasant memory rushed through 
him. This place had been his entire life and more. It had been his past... 
and his future. His father, Garrow, once said, “The land is a special thing. 
Care for it, and it’ll care for you. Not many things will do that.” Roran 
had intended to do exactly that up until the moment his world was rup-
tured by a quiet message from Baldor. 
 
 With a groan, he spun away and stalked back toward the road. The 
shock of that moment still resonated within him. Having everyone he 
loved torn away in an instant was a soul-changing event from which he 
would never recover. It had seeped into every aspect of his behavior and 
outlook. 
 
 It also forced Roran to think more than ever before. It was as if bands 
had been cinched around his mind, and those bands had snapped, allow-
ing him to ponder ideas that were previously unimaginable. Such as the 
fact that he might not become a farmer, or that justice—the greatest 
standby in songs and legends—had little hold in reality. At times these 
thoughts filled his consciousness to the point where he could barely rise 

 
33
in the morning, feeling bloated with their heaviness. 
 
 Turning on the road, he headed north through Palancar Valley, back to 
Carvahall. The notched mountains on either side were laden with snow, 
despite the spring greenery that had crept over the valley floor in past 
weeks. Overhead, a single gray cloud drifted toward the peaks. 
 
 Roran ran a hand across his chin, feeling the stubble. Eragon caused all 
this—him and his blasted curiosity—by bringing that stone out of the Spine. 
It had taken Roran weeks to reach that conclusion. He had listened to 
everyone’s accounts. Several times he had Gertrude, the town healer, 
read aloud the letter Brom had left him. And there was no other explana-
tion. Whatever that stone was, it must have attracted the strangers. For that 
alone, he blamed Garrow’s death on Eragon, though not in anger; he 
knew that Eragon had intended no harm. No, what roused his fury was 
that Eragon had left Garrow unburied and fled Palancar Valley, abandon-
ing his responsibilities to gallop off with the old storyteller on some hare-
brained journey. How could Eragon have so little regard for those left be-
hind? Did he run because he felt guilty? Afraid? Did Brom mislead him 
with wild tales of adventure? And why would Eragon listen to such things at 
a time like that?... I don’t even know if he’s dead or alive right now. 
 
 Roran scowled and rolled his shoulders, trying to clear his mind. Brom’s 
letter... Bah! He had never heard a more ridiculous collection of insinua-
tions and ominous hints. The only thing it made clear was to avoid the 
strangers, which was common sense to begin with. The old man was 
crazy, he decided. 
 
 A flicker of movement caused Roran to turn, and he saw twelve deer—
including a young buck with velvet horns—trotting back into the trees. 
He made sure to note their location so he could find them tomorrow. He 
was proud that he could hunt well enough to support himself in Horst’s 
house, though he had never been as skilled as Eragon. 
 
 As he walked, he continued to order his thoughts. After Garrow’s 
death, Roran had abandoned his job at Dempton’s mill in Therinsford and 
returned to Carvahall. Horst had agreed to house him and, in the follow-
ing months, had provided him with work in the forge. Grief had delayed 
Roran’s decisions about the future until two days ago, when he finally 
settled upon a course of action. 
 
 He wanted to marry Katrina, the butcher’s daughter. The reason he 
went to Therinsford in the first place was to earn money to ensure a 
smooth beginning to their life together. But now, without a farm, a home, 

 
34
or means to support her, Roran could not in good conscience ask for 
Katrina’s hand. His pride would not allow it. Nor did Roran think Sloan, 
her father, would tolerate a suitor with such poor prospects. Even under 
the best of circumstances, Roran had expected to have a hard time con-
vincing Sloan to give up Katrina; the two of them had never been 
friendly. And it was impossible for Roran to wed Katrina without her fa-
ther’s consent, not unless they wished to divide her family, anger the vil-
lage by defying tradition, and, most likely, start a blood feud with Sloan. 
 
 Considering the situation, it seemed to Roran that the only option 
available to him was to rebuild his farm, even if he had to raise the house 
and barn himself. It would be hard, starting from nothing, but once his 
position was secured, he could approach Sloan with his head held high. 
Next spring is the soonest we might talk, thought Roran, grimacing. 
 
 He knew Katrina would wait—for a time, at least. 
 
 He continued at a steady pace until evening, when the village came 
into view. Within the small huddle of buildings, wash hung on lines 
strung from window to window. Men filed back toward the houses from 
surrounding fields thick with winter wheat. Behind Carvahall, the half-
mile-high Igualda Falls gleamed in the sunset as it tumbled down the 
Spine into the Anora. The sight warmed Roran because it was so ordi-
nary. Nothing was more comforting than having everything where it 
should be. 
 
 Leaving the road, he made his way up the rise to where Horst’s house 
sat with a view of the Spine. The door was already open. Roran tromped 
inside, following the sounds of conversation into the kitchen. 
 
 Horst was there, leaning on the rough table pushed into one corner of 
the room, his arms bare to the elbow. Next to him was his wife, Elain, 
who was nearly five months pregnant and smiling with quiet content-
ment. Their sons, Albriech and Baldor, faced them. 
 
 As Roran entered, Albriech said, “... and I still hadn’t left the forge yet! 
Thane swears he saw me, but I was on the other side of town.” 
 
 “What’s going on?” asked Roran, slipping off his pack. 
 
 Elain exchanged a glance with Horst. “Here, let me get you something 
to eat.” She set bread and a bowl of cold stew before him. Then she 
looked him in the eye, as if searching for a particular expression. “How 
was it?” 

 
35
 
 Roran shrugged. “All of the wood is either burnt or rotting—nothing 
worth using. The well is still intact, and that’s something to be grateful 
for, I suppose. I’ll have to cut timber for the house as soon as possible if 
I’m going to have a roof over my head by planting season. Now tell me, 
what’s happened?” 
 
 “Ha!” exclaimed Horst. “There’s been quite a row, there has. Thane is 
missing a scythe and he thinks Albriech took it.” 
 
 “He probably dropped it in the grass and forgot where he left it,” 
snorted Albriech. 
 
 “Probably,” agreed Horst, smiling. 
 
 Roran bit into the bread. “It doesn’t make much sense, accusing you. If 
you needed a scythe, you could just forge one.” 
 
 “I know,” said Albriech, dropping into a chair, “but instead of looking 
for his, he starts grousing that he saw someone leaving his field and that it 
looked a bit like me... and since no one else looks like me, I must have 
stolen the scythe.” 
 
 It was true that no one looked like him. Albriech had inherited both 
his father’s size and Elain’s honey-blond hair, which made him an oddity 
in Carvahall, where brown was the predominant hair color. In contrast, 
Baldor was both thinner and dark-haired. 
 
 “I’m sure it’ll turn up,” said Baldor quietly. “Try not to get too angry 
over it in the meantime.” 
 
 “Easy for you to say.” 
 
 As Roran finished the last of the bread and started on the stew, he 
asked Horst, “Do you need me for anything tomorrow?” 
 
 “Not especially. I’ll just be working on Quimby’s wagon. The blasted 
frame still won’t sit square.” 
 
 Roran nodded, pleased. “Good. Then I’ll take the day and go hunting. 
There are a few deer farther down the valley that don’t look too scrawny. 
Their ribs weren’t showing, at least.” 
 
 Baldor suddenly brightened. “Do you want some company?” 

 
36
 
 “Sure. We can leave at dawn.” 
 
 
 
 When he finished eating, Roran scrubbed his face and hands clean, then 
wandered outside to clear his head. Stretching leisurely, he strolled to-
ward the center of town. 
 
 Halfway there, the chatter of excited voices outside the Seven Sheaves 
caught his attention. He turned, curious, and made his way to the tavern, 
where an odd sight met him. Sitting on the porch was a middle-aged man 
draped in a patchwork leather coat. Beside him was a pack festooned 
with the steel jaws of the trappers’ trade. Several dozen villagers listened 
as he gestured expansively and said, “So when I arrived at Therinsford, I 
went to this man, Neil. Good, honest man; I help in his fields during the 
spring and summer.” 
 
 Roran nodded. Trappers spent the winter squirreled away in the moun-
tains, returning in the spring to sell their skins to tanners like Gedric and 
then to take up work, usually as farmhands. Since Carvahall was the 
northernmost village in the Spine, many trappers passed through it, 
which was one of the reasons Carvahall had its own tavern, blacksmith, 
and tanner. 
 
 “After a few steins of ale—to lubricate my speaking, you understand, 
after a ’alf year with nary a word uttered, except perhaps for blaspheming 
the world and all beyond when losing a bear-biter—I come to Neil, the 
froth still fresh on my beard, and start exchanging gossip. As our transac-
tion proceeds, I ask him all gregarious-like, what news of the Empire or 
the king—may he rot with gangrene and trench mouth. Was anyone born 
or died or banished that I should know of? And then guess what? Neil 
leaned forward, going all serious ’bout the mouth, and said that word is 
going around, there is, from Dras-Leona and Gil’ead of strange happen-
ings here, there, and everywhere in Alagaësia. The Urgals have fair disap-
peared from civilized lands, and good riddance, but not one man can tell 
why or where. ’Alf the trade in the Empire has dried up as a result of 
raids and attacks and, from what I heard, it isn’t the work of mere brig-
ands, for the attacks are too widespread, too calculated. No goods are sto-
len, only burned or soiled. But that’s not the end of it, oh no, not by the 
tip of your blessed grandmother’s whiskers.” 
 
 The trapper shook his head and took a sip from his wineskin before 
continuing: “There be mutterings of a Shade haunting the northern terri-

 
37
tories. He’s been seen along the edge of Du Weldenvarden and near 
Gil’ead. They say his teeth are filed to points, his eyes are as red as wine, 
and his hair is as red as the blood he drinks. Worse, something seems to 
have gotten our fine, mad monarch’s dander up, so it has. Five days past, 
a juggler from the south stopped in Therinsford on his lonesome way to 
Ceunon, and he said that troops have been moving and gathering, though 
for what was beyond him.” He shrugged. “As my pap taught me when I 
was a suckling babe, where there’s smoke, there’s fire. Perhaps it’s the 
Varden. They’ve caused old Iron Bones enough pain in the arse over the 
years. Or perhaps Galbatorix finally decided he’s had enough of tolerating 
Surda. At least he knows where to find it, unlike those rebels. He’ll crush 
Surda like a bear crushes an ant, he will.” 
 
 Roran blinked as a babble of questions exploded around the trapper. 
He was inclined to doubt the report of a Shade—it sounded too much 
like a story a drunk woodsman might invent—but the rest of it all 
sounded bad enough to be true. Surda... Little information reached Car-
vahall about that distant country, but Roran at least knew that, although 
Surda and the Empire were ostensibly at peace, Surdans lived in constant 
fear that their more powerful neighbor to the north would invade them. 
For that reason, it was said that Orrin, their king, supported the Varden. 
 
 If the trapper was right about Galbatorix, then it could mean ugly war 
crouched in the future, accompanied by the hardships of increased taxes 
and forced conscription. I would rather live in an age devoid of momentous 
events. Upheaval makes already difficult lives, such as ours, nigh impossi-
ble. 
 
 “What’s more, there have even been tales of...” Here the trapper paused 
and, with a knowing expression, tapped the side of his nose with his fore-
finger. “Tales of a new Rider in Alagaësia.” He laughed then, a big, hearty 
laugh, slapping his belly as he rocked back on the porch. 
 
 Roran laughed as well. Stories of Riders appeared every few years. They 
had excited his interest the first two or three times, but he soon learned 
not to trust such accounts, for they all came to naught. The rumors were 
nothing more than wishful thinking on the part of those who longed for a 
brighter future. 
 
 He was about to head off when he noticed Katrina standing by the cor-
ner of the tavern, garbed in a long russet dress decorated with green rib-
bon. She gazed at him with the same intensity with which he gazed at 
her. Going over, he touched her on the shoulder and, together, they 
slipped away. 

 
38
 
 They walked to the edge of Carvahall, where they stood looking at the 
stars. The heavens were brilliant, shimmering with thousands of celestial 
fires. And arching above them, from north to south, was the glorious 
pearly band that streamed from horizon to horizon, like diamond dust 
tossed from a pitcher. 
 
 Without looking at him, Katrina rested her head on Roran’s shoulder 
and asked, “How was your day?” 
 
 “I returned home.” He felt her stiffen against him. 
 
 “What was it like?” 
 
 “Terrible.” His voice caught and he fell silent, holding her tightly. The 
scent of her copper hair on his cheek was like an elixir of wine and spice 
and perfume. It seeped deep inside him, warm and comforting. “The 
house, the barn, the fields, they’re all being overrun.... I wouldn’t have 
found them if I didn’t know where to look.” 
 
 She finally turned to face him, stars flashing in her eyes, sorrow on her 
face. “Oh, Roran.” She kissed him, lips brushing his for a brief moment. 
“You have endured so much loss, and yet your strength has never failed 
you. Will you return to your farm now?” 
 
 “Aye. Farming is all I know.” 
 
 “And what shall become of me?” 
 
 He hesitated. From the moment he began to court her, an unspoken as-
sumption that they would marry had existed between them. There had 
been no need to discuss his intentions; they were as plain as the day was 
long, and so her question unsettled him. It also felt improper to address 
the issue in such an open manner when he was not ready to tender an of-
fer. It was his place to make the overtures—first to Sloan and then to 
Katrina—not hers. Still, he had to deal with her concern now that it had 
been expressed. “Katrina... I cannot approach your father as I had planned. 
He would laugh at me, and rightly so. We have to wait. Once I have a 
place for us to live and I’ve collected my first harvest, then he will listen 
to me.” 
 
 She faced the sky once more and whispered something so faint, he 
could not make it out. “What?” 
 

 
39
 “I said, are you afraid of him?” 
 
 “Of course not! I—” 
 
 “Then you must get his permission, tomorrow, and set the engagement. 
Make him understand that, though you have nothing now, you will give 
me a good home and be a son-in-law he can be proud of. There’s no rea-
son we should waste our years living apart when we feel like this.” 
 
 “I can’t do that,” he said with a note of despair, willing her to under-
stand. “I can’t provide for you, I can’t—” 
 
 “Don’t you understand ?” She stepped away, her voice strained with ur-
gency. “I love you, Roran, and I want to be with you, but Father has other 
plans for me. There are far more eligible men than you, and the longer 
you delay, the more he presses me to consent to a match of which he ap-
proves. He fears I will become an old maid, and I fear that too. I have 
only so much time or choice in Carvahall.... If I must take another, I will.” 
Tears glistened in her eyes as she gave him a searching glance, waiting for 
his response, then gathered up her dress and rushed back to the houses. 
 
 Roran stood there, motionless with shock. Her absence was as acute for 
him as losing the farm—the world suddenly gone cold and unfriendly. It 
was as if part of himself had been torn away. 
 
 It was hours before he could return to Horst’s and slip into bed. 
 
 
 
 

 
40
THE HUNTED HUNTERS 
 
 
 Dirt crunched under Roran’s boots as he led the way down the valley, 
which was cool and pale in the early hours of the overcast morning. Bal-
dor followed close behind, both of them carrying strung bows. Neither 
spoke as they studied their surroundings for signs of the deer. 
 
 “There,” said Baldor in a low voice, pointing at a set of tracks leading 
toward a bramble on the edge of the Anora. 
 
 Roran nodded and started after the spoor. It looked about a day old, so 
he risked speaking. “Could I have your advice, Baldor? You seem to have 
a good understanding of people.” 
 
 “Of course. What is it?” 
 
 For a long time, the pad of their feet was the only noise. “Sloan wants 
to marry off Katrina, and not to me. Every day that passes increases the 
chance he will arrange a union to his liking.” 
 
 “What does Katrina say of this?” 
 
 Roran shrugged. “He is her father. She cannot continue to defy his will 
when no one she does want has stepped forward to claim her.” 
 
 “That is, you.” 
 
 “Aye.” 
 
 “And that’s why you were up so early.” It was no question. 
 
 In fact, Roran had been too worried to sleep at all. He had spent the 
entire night thinking about Katrina, trying to find a solution to their pre-
dicament. “I can’t bear to lose her. But I don’t think Sloan will give us his 
blessing, what with my position and all.” 
 
 “No, I don’t think he would,” agreed Baldor. He glanced at Roran out of 
the corner of his eye. “What is it you want my advice on, though?” 
 
 A snort of laughter escaped Roran. “How can I convince Sloan other-
wise? How can I resolve this dilemma without starting a blood feud?” He 
threw his hands up. “What should I do?” 
 

 
41
 “Have you no ideas?” 
 
 “I do, but not of a sort I find pleasing. It occurred to me that Katrina 
and I could simply announce we were engaged—not that we are yet—
and hang the consequences. That would force Sloan to accept our be-
trothal.” 
 
 A frown creased Baldor’s brow. He said carefully, “Maybe, but it would 
also create a slew of bad feelings throughout Carvahall. Few would ap-
prove of your actions. Nor would it be wise to force Katrina to choose 
between you or her family; she might resent you for it in years to come.” 
 
 “I know, but what alternative do I have?” 
 
 “Before you take such a drastic step, I recommend you try to win Sloan 
over as an ally. There’s a chance you might succeed, after all, if it’s made 
clear to him that no one else will want to marry an angry Katrina. Espe-
cially when you’re around to cuckold the husband.” Roran grimaced and 
kept his gaze on the ground. Baldor laughed. “If you fail, well then, you 
can proceed with confidence, knowing that you have indeed exhausted 
all other routes. And people will be less likely to spit upon you for break-
ing tradition and more likely to say Sloan’s bullheaded ways brought it 
upon himself.” 
 
 “Neither course is easy.” 
 
 “You knew that to begin with.” Baldor grew somber again. “No doubt 
there’ll be harsh words if you challenge Sloan, but things will settle down 
in the end—perhaps not comfortably, but at least bearably. Aside from 
Sloan, the only people you’ll really offend are prudes like Quimby, 
though how Quimby can brew such a hale drink yet be so starched and 
bitter himself is beyond me.” 
 
 Roran nodded, understanding. Grudges could simmer for years in Car-
vahall. “I’m glad we could talk. It’s been...” He faltered, thinking of all the 
discussions he and Eragon used to share. They had been, as Eragon once 
said, brothers in all but blood. It had been deeply comforting to know 
that someone existed who would listen to him, no matter the time or 
circumstances. And to know that person would always help him, no mat-
ter the cost. 
 
 The absence of such a bond left Roran feeling empty. 
 
 Baldor did not press him to finish his sentence, but instead stopped to 

 
42
drink from his waterskin. Roran continued for a few yards, then halted as 
a scent intruded on his thoughts. 
 
 It was the heavy odor of seared meat and charred pine boughs. Who 
would be here besides us? Breathing deeply, he turned in a circle, trying to 
determine the source of the fire. A slight gust brushed past him from far-
ther down the road, carrying a hot, smoky wave. The aroma of food was 
intense enough to make his mouth water. 
 
 He beckoned to Baldor, who hurried to his side. “Smell that?” 
 
 Baldor nodded. Together they returned to the road and followed it 
south. About a hundred feet away, it bent around a copse of cotton-
woods and curved out of view. As they approached the turn, the rise and 
fall of voices reached them, muffled by the thick layer of morning fog 
over the valley. 
 
 At the copse’s fringe, Roran slowed to a stop. It was foolish to surprise 
people when they too might be out hunting. Still, something bothered 
him. Perhaps it was the number of voices; the group seemed bigger than 
any family in the valley. Without thinking, he stepped off the road and 
slipped behind the underbrush lining the copse. 
 
 “What are you doing?” whispered Baldor. 
 
 Roran put a finger to his lips, then crept along, parallel to the road, 
keeping his footsteps as quiet as possible. As they rounded the bend, he 
froze. 
 
 On the grass by the road was a camp of soldiers. Thirty helmets 
gleamed in a shaft of morning light as their owners devoured fowl and 
stew cooked over several fires. The men were mud splattered and travel 
stained, but Galbatorix’s symbol was still visible on their red tunics, a 
twisting flame outlined in gold thread. Underneath the tunics, they wore 
leather brigandines—heavy with riveted squares of steel—mail shirts, and 
then padded gambesons. Most of the soldiers bore broadswords, though 
half a dozen were archers and another half-dozen carried wicked-looking 
halberds. 
 
 And hunched in their midst were two twisted black forms that Roran 
recognized from the numerous descriptions the villagers provided upon 
his return from Therinsford: the strangers who had destroyed his farm. 
His blood chilled. They’re servants of the Empire! He began to step for-
ward, fingers already reaching for an arrow, when Baldor grabbed his jer-

 
43
kin and dragged him to the ground. 
 
 “Don’t. You’ll get us both killed.” 
 
 Roran glared at him, then snarled. “That’s... they’re the bastards...” He 
stopped, noticing that his hands were shaking. “They’ve returned!” 
 
 “Roran,” whispered Baldor intently, “you can’t do anything. Look, they 
work for the king. Even if you managed to escape, you’d be an outlaw 
everywhere, and you’d bring disaster on Carvahall.” 
 
 “What do they want? What can they want?” The king. Why did Galba-
torix countenance my father’s torture? 
 
 “If they didn’t get what they needed from Garrow, and Eragon fled 
with Brom, then they must want you.” Baldor paused, letting the words 
sink in. “We have to get back and warn everyone. Then you have to hide. 
The strangers are the only ones with horses. We can get there first if we 
run.” 
 
 Roran stared through the brush at the oblivious soldiers. His heart 
pounded fiercely for revenge, clamoring to attack and fight, to see those 
two agents of misfortune pierced with arrows and brought to their own 
justice. It mattered not that he would die as long as he could wash clean 
his pain and sorrow in one fell moment. All he had to do was break 
cover. The rest would take care of itself. 
 
 Just one small step. 
 
 With a choked sob, he clenched his fist and dropped his head. I can’t 
leave Katrina. He remained rigid—eyes squeezed shut—then with ago-
nizing slowness dragged himself back. “Home then.” 
 
 Without waiting for Baldor’s reaction, Roran slipped through the trees 
as fast as he dared. Once the camp was out of sight, he broke out onto 
the road and ran down the dirt track, channeling his frustration, anger, 
and even fear into speed. 
 
 Baldor scrambled behind him, gaining on the open stretches. Roran 
slowed to a comfortable trot and waited for him to draw level before 
saying, “You spread the word. I’ll talk with Horst.” Baldor nodded, and 
they pushed on. 
 
 After two miles, they stopped to drink and rest briefly. When their 

 
44
panting subsided, they continued through the low hills preceding Carva-
hall. The rolling ground slowed them considerably, but even so, the vil-
lage soon burst into view. 
 
 Roran immediately broke for the forge, leaving Baldor to make his way 
to the center of town. As he pounded past the houses, Roran wildly con-
sidered schemes to evade or kill the strangers without incurring the 
wrath of the Empire. 
 
 He burst into the forge to catch Horst tapping a peg into the side of 
Quimby’s wagon, singing: 
 
 
... hey O! 
 
 And a ringing and a dinging 
 
 Rang from old iron! Wily old iron. 
 
 With a beat and a bang on the bones of the land, 
 
 I conquered wily old iron! 
 
 
 Horst stopped his mallet in midblow when he saw Roran. “What’s the 
matter, lad? Is Baldor hurt?” 
 
 Roran shook his head and leaned over, gasping for air. In short bursts, 
he reiterated all they had seen and its possible implications, most impor-
tantly that it was now clear the strangers were agents of the Empire. 
 
 Horst fingered his beard. “You have to leave Carvahall. Fetch some 
food from the house, then take my mare—Ivor’s pulling stumps with 
her—and ride into the foothills. Once we know what the soldiers want, 
I’ll send Albriech or Baldor with word.” 
 
 “What will you say if they ask for me?” 
 
 “That you’re out hunting and we don’t know when you’ll return. It’s 
true enough, and I doubt they’ll chance blundering around in the trees for 
fear of missing you. Assuming it’s you they’re really after.” 
 
 Roran nodded, then turned and ran to Horst’s house. Inside, he grabbed 
the mare’s tack and bags from the wall, quickly tied turnips, beets, jerky, 

 
45
and a loaf of bread in a knot of blankets, snatched up a tin pot, and 
dashed out, pausing only long enough to explain the situation to Elain. 
 
 The supplies were an awkward bundle in his arms as he jogged east 
from Carvahall to Ivor’s farm. Ivor himself stood behind the farmhouse, 
flicking the mare with a willow wand as she strained to tear the hairy 
roots of an elm tree from the ground. 
 
 “Come on now!” shouted the farmer. “Put your back into it!” The horse 
shuddered with effort, her bit lathered, then with a final surge tilted the 
stump on its side so the roots reached toward the sky like a cluster of 
gnarled fingers. Ivor stopped her exertion with a twitch of the reins and 
patted her good-naturedly. “All right.... There we go.” 
 
 Roran hailed him from a distance and, when they were close, pointed 
to the horse. “I need to borrow her.” He gave his reasons. 
 
 Ivor swore and began unhitching the mare, grumbling, “Always the 
moment I get a bit of work done, that’s when the interruption comes. 
Never before.” He crossed his arms and frowned as Roran cinched the 
saddle, intent on his work. 
 
 When he was ready, Roran swung onto the horse, bow in hand. “I am 
sorry for the trouble, but it can’t be helped.” 
 
 “Well, don’t worry about it. Just make sure you aren’t caught.” 
 
 “I’ll do that.” 
 
 As he set heels to the mare’s sides, Roran heard Ivor call, “And don’t be 
hiding up my creek!” 
 
 Roran grinned and shook his head, bending low over the horse’s neck. 
He soon reached the foothills of the Spine and worked his way up to the 
mountains that formed the north end of Palancar Valley. From there he 
climbed to a point on the mountainside where he could observe Carva-
hall without being seen. Then he picketed his steed and settled down to 
wait. 
 
 Roran shivered, eyeing the dark pines. He disliked being this close to 
the Spine. Hardly anyone from Carvahall dared set foot in the mountain 
range, and those who did often failed to return. 
 
 Before long Roran saw the soldiers march up the road in a double line, 

 
46
two ominous black figures at their head. They were stopped at the edge 
of Carvahall by a ragged group of men, some of them with picks in hand. 
The two sides spoke, then simply faced each other, like growling dogs 
waiting to see who would strike first. After a long moment, the men of 
Carvahall moved aside and let the intruders pass. 
 
 What happens now? wondered Roran, rocking back on his heels. 
 
   
 
 By evening the soldiers had set up camp in a field adjacent to the vil-
lage. Their tents formed a low gray block that flickered with weird shad-
ows as sentries patrolled the perimeter. In the center of the block, a large 
fire sent billows of smoke into the air. 
 
 Roran had made his own camp, and now he simply watched and 
thought. He always assumed that when the strangers destroyed his home, 
they got what they wanted, which was the stone Eragon brought from 
the Spine. They must not have found it, he decided. Perhaps Eragon man-
aged to escape with the stone.... Perhaps he felt that he had to leave in order 
to protect it. He frowned. That would go a long way toward explaining 
why Eragon fled, but it still seemed far-fetched to Roran. Whatever the 
reason, that stone must be a fantastic treasure for the king to send so many 
men to retrieve it. I can’t understand what would make it so valuable. 
Maybe it’s magic. 
 
 He breathed deeply of the cool air, listening to the hoot of an owl. A 
flicker of movement caught his attention. Glancing down the mountain, 
he saw a man approaching in the forest below. Roran ducked behind a 
boulder, bow drawn. He waited until he was sure it was Albriech, then 
whistled softly. 
 
 Albriech soon arrived at the boulder. On his back was an overfull pack, 
which he dropped to the ground with a grunt. “I thought I’d never find 
you.” 
 
 “I’m surprised you did.” 
 
 “Can’t say I enjoyed wandering through the forest after sundown. I kept 
expecting to walk into a bear, or worse. The Spine isn’t a fit place for 
men, if you ask me.” 
 
 Roran looked back out at Carvahall. “So why are they here?” 
 

 
47
 “To take you into custody. They’re willing to wait as long as they have 
to for you to return from ‘hunting.’ ” 
 
 Roran sat with a hard thump, his gut clenched with cold anticipation. 
“Did they give a reason? Did they mention the stone?” 
 
 Albriech shook his head. “All they would say is that it’s the king’s busi-
ness. The whole day they’ve been asking questions about you and Er-
agon—it’s all they’re interested in.” He hesitated. “I’d stay, but they’ll no-
tice if I am missing tomorrow. I brought plenty of food and blankets, plus 
some of Gertrude’s salves in case you injure yourself. You should be fine 
up here.” 
 
 Summoning his energy, Roran smiled. “Thanks for the help.” 
 
 “Anyone would do it,” said Albriech with an embarrassed shrug. He 
started to leave, then tossed over his shoulder, “By the way, the two 
strangers... they’re called the Ra’zac.” 
 
 
 
 

 
48
SAPHIRA’S PROMISE 
 
 
 The morning after meeting with the Council of Elders, Eragon was 
cleaning and oiling Saphira’s saddle—careful not to overexert himself—
when Orik came to visit. The dwarf waited until Eragon finished with a 
strap, then asked, “Are you better today?” 
 
 “A little.” 
 
 “Good, we all need our strength. I came partly to see to your health and 
also because Hrothgar wishes to speak with you, if you are free.” 
 
 Eragon gave the dwarf a wry smile. “I’m always free for him. He must 
know that.” 
 
 Orik laughed. “Ah, but it’s polite to ask nicely.” As Eragon put down 
the saddle, Saphira uncoiled from her padded corner and greeted Orik 
with a friendly growl. “Morning to you as well,” he said with a bow. 
 
 Orik led them through one of Tronjheim’s four main corridors, toward 
its central chamber and the two mirroring staircases that curved under-
ground to the dwarf king’s throne room. Before they reached the cham-
ber, however, he turned down a small flight of stairs. It took Eragon a 
moment to realize that Orik had taken a side passageway to avoid seeing 
the wreckage of Isidar Mithrim. 
 
 They came to a stop before the granite doors engraved with a seven-
pointed crown. Seven armored dwarves on each side of the entrance 
pounded the floor simultaneously with the hafts of their mattocks. With 
the echoing thud of wood on stone, the doors swung inward. 
 
 Eragon nodded to Orik, then entered the dim room with Saphira. They 
advanced toward the distant throne, passing the rigid statues, hírna, of 
past dwarf kings. At the foot of the heavy black throne, Eragon bowed. 
The dwarf king inclined his silver-maned head in return, the rubies 
wrought into his golden helm glowing dully in the light like flecks of hot 
iron. Volund, the war hammer, lay across his mail-sheathed legs. 
 
 Hrothgar spoke: “Shadeslayer, welcome to my hall. You have done 
much since last we met. And, so it seems, I have been proved wrong 
about Zar’roc. Morzan’s blade will be welcome in Tronjheim so long as 
you bear it.” 
 

 
49
 “Thank you,” said Eragon, rising. 
 
 “Also,” rumbled the dwarf, “we wish you to keep the armor you wore 
in the battle of Farthen Dûr. Even now our most skilled smiths are re-
pairing it. The dragon armor is being treated likewise, and when it is re-
stored, Saphira may use it as long as she wishes, or until she outgrows it. 
This is the least we can do to show our gratitude. If it weren’t for the war 
with Galbatorix, there would be feasts and celebrations in your name... 
but those must wait until a more appropriate time.” 
 
 Voicing both his and Saphira’s sentiment, Eragon said, “You are gener-
ous beyond all expectations. We will cherish such noble gifts.” 
 
 Clearly pleased, Hrothgar nevertheless scowled, bringing his snarled 
eyebrows together. “We cannot linger on pleasantries, though. I am be-
sieged by the clans with demands that I do one thing or another about 
Ajihad’s successor. When the Council of Elders proclaimed yesterday that 
they would support Nasuada, it created an uproar the likes of which I 
haven’t seen since I ascended to the throne. The chiefs had to decide 
whether to accept Nasuada or look for another candidate. Most have 
concluded that Nasuada should lead the Varden, but I wish to know 
where you stand on this, Eragon, before I lend my word to either side. 
The worst thing a king can do is look foolish.” 
 
 How much can we tell him? Eragon asked Saphira, thinking quickly. 
 
 He’s always treated us fairly, but we can’t know what he may have prom-
ised other people. We’d best be cautious until Nasuada actually takes 
power. 
 
 Very well. 
 
 “Saphira and I have agreed to help her. We won’t oppose her ascension. 
And”—Eragon wondered if he was going too far—“I plead that you do 
the same; the Varden can’t afford to fight among themselves. They need 
unity.” 
 
 “Oeí,” said Hrothgar, leaning back, “you speak with new authority. 
Your suggestion is a good one, but it will cost a question: Do you think 
Nasuada will be a wise leader, or are there other motives in choosing 
her?” 
 
 It’s a test, warned Saphira. He wants to know why we’ve backed her. 
 

 
50
 Eragon felt his lips twitch in a half-smile. “I think her wise and canny 
beyond her years. She will be good for the Varden.” 
 
 “And that is why you support her?” 
 
 “Yes.” 
 
 Hrothgar nodded, dipping his long, snowy beard. “That relieves me. 
There has been too little concern lately with what is right and good, and 
more about what will bring individual power. It is hard to watch such 
idiocy and not be angry.” 
 
 An uncomfortable silence fell between them, stifling in the long throne 
room. To break it, Eragon asked, “What will be done with the dragon-
hold? Will a new floor be laid down?” 
 
 For the first time, the king’s eyes grew mournful, deepening the sur-
rounding lines that splayed like spokes on a wagon wheel. It was the 
closest Eragon had ever seen a dwarf come to weeping. “Much talk is 
needed before that step can be taken. It was a terrible deed, what Saphira 
and Arya did. Maybe necessary, but terrible. Ah, it might have been bet-
ter if the Urgals had overrun us before Isidar Mithrim was ever broken. 
The heart of Tronjheim has been shattered, and so has ours.” Hrothgar 
placed his fist over his breast, then slowly unclenched his hand and 
reached down to grasp Volund’s leather-wrapped handle. 
 
 Saphira touched Eragon’s mind. He sensed several emotions in her, but 
what surprised him the most was her remorse and guilt. She truly regret-
ted the Star Rose’s demise, despite the fact that it had been required. Lit-
tle one, she said, help me. I need to speak with Hrothgar. Ask him: Do the 
dwarves have the ability to reconstruct Isidar Mithrim out of the shards? 
 
 As he repeated the words, Hrothgar muttered something in his own 
language, then said, “The skill we have, but what of it? The task would 
take months or years, and the end result would be a ruined mockery of 
the beauty that once graced Tronjheim! It is an abomination I will not 
sanction.” 
 
 Saphira continued to stare unblinkingly at the king. Now tell him: If Isi-
dar Mithrim were put together again, with not one piece missing, I believe I 
could make it whole once more. 
 
 Eragon gaped at her, forgetting Hrothgar in his astonishment. Saphira! 
The energy that would require! You told me yourself that you can’t use 

 
51
magic at will, so what makes you sure you can do this? 
 
 I can do it if the need is great enough. It will be my gift to the dwarves. 
Remember Brom’s tomb; let that wash your doubt away. And close your 
mouth—it’s unbecoming and the king is watching. 
 
 When Eragon conveyed Saphira’s offer, Hrothgar straightened with an 
exclamation. “Is it possible? Not even the elves might attempt such a 
feat.” 
 
 “She is confident in her abilities.” 
 
 “Then we will rebuild Isidar Mithrim, no matter if it takes a hundred 
years. We will assemble a frame for the gem and set each piece into its 
original place. Not a single chip will be forgotten. Even if we must break 
the larger pieces to move them, it will be done with all our skill in work-
ing stone, so that no dust or flecks are lost. You will come then, when we 
are finished, and heal the Star Rose.” 
 
 “We will come,” agreed Eragon, bowing. 
 
 Hrothgar smiled, and it was like the cracking of a granite wall. “Such 
joy you have given me, Saphira. I feel once more a reason to rule and live. 
If you do this, dwarves everywhere will honor your name for uncounted 
generations. Go now with my blessings while I spread the tidings among 
the clans. And do not feel bound to wait upon my announcement, for no 
dwarf should be denied this news; convey it to all whom you meet. May 
the halls echo with the jubilation of our race.” 
 
 With one more bow, Eragon and Saphira departed, leaving the dwarf 
king still smiling on his throne. Out of the hall, Eragon told Orik what 
had transpired. The dwarf immediately bent and kissed the floor before 
Saphira. He rose with a grin and clasped Eragon’s arm, saying, “A wonder 
indeed. You have given us exactly the hope we needed to combat recent 
events. There will be drinking tonight, I wager!” 
 
 “And tomorrow is the funeral.” 
 
 Orik sobered for a moment. “Tomorrow, yes. But until then we shall 
not let unhappy thoughts disturb us! Come!” 
 
 Taking Eragon’s hand, the dwarf pulled him through Tronjheim to a 
great feast hall where many dwarves sat at stone tables. Orik leaped onto 
one, scattering dishes across the floor, and in a booming voice proclaimed 

 
52
the news of Isidar Mithrim. Eragon was nearly deafened by the cheers 
and shouts that followed. Each of the dwarves insisted on coming to 
Saphira and kissing the floor as Orik had. When that was finished, they 
abandoned their food and filled their stone tankards with beer and mead. 
 
 Eragon joined the revelry with an abandon that surprised him. It helped 
to ease the melancholy gathered in his heart. However, he did try to resist 
complete debauchery, for he was conscious of the duties that awaited 
them the following day and he wanted to have a clear head. 
 
 Even Saphira took a sip of mead, and finding that she liked it, the 
dwarves rolled out a whole barrel for her. Delicately lowering her mighty 
jaws through the cask’s open end, she drained it with three long draughts, 
then tilted her head toward the ceiling and belched a giant tongue of 
flame. It took several minutes for Eragon to convince the dwarves that it 
was safe to approach her again, but once he did, they brought her another 
barrel—overriding the cook’s protests—and watched with amazement as 
she emptied it as well. 
 
 As Saphira became increasingly inebriated, her emotions and thoughts 
washed through Eragon with more and more force. It became difficult for 
him to rely upon the input of his own senses: her vision began to slip 
over his own, blurring movement and changing colors. Even the odors he 
smelled shifted at times, becoming sharper, more pungent. 
 
 The dwarves began to sing together. Weaving as she stood, Saphira 
hummed along, punctuating each line with a roar. Eragon opened his 
mouth to join in and was shocked when, instead of words, out came the 
snarling rasp of a dragon’s voice. That, he thought, shaking his head, is go-
ing too far.... Or am I just drunk? He decided it did not matter and pro-
ceeded to sing boisterously, dragon’s voice or not. 
 
 Dwarves continued to stream into the hall as word of Isidar Mithrim 
spread. Hundreds soon packed the tables, with a thick ring around Eragon 
and Saphira. Orik called in musicians who arranged themselves in a cor-
ner, where they pulled slipcovers of green velvet off their instruments. 
Soon harps, lutes, and silver flutes floated their gilded melodies over the 
throng. 
 
 Many hours passed before the noise and excitement began to calm. 
When it did, Orik once more climbed onto the table. He stood there, legs 
spread wide for balance, tankard in hand, iron-bound cap awry, and cried, 
“Hear, hear! At last we have celebrated as is proper. The Urgals are gone, 
the Shade is dead, and we have won!” The dwarves all pounded their ta-

 
53
bles in approval. It was a good speech—short and to the point. But Orik 
was not finished. “To Eragon and Saphira!” he roared, lifting the tankard. 
This too was well received. 
 
 Eragon stood and bowed, which brought more cheers. Beside him, 
Saphira reared and swung a foreleg across her chest, attempting to dupli-
cate his move. She tottered, and the dwarves, realizing their danger, 
scrambled away from her. They were barely in time. With a loud 
whoosh, Saphira fell backward, landing flat on a banquet table. 
 
 Pain shot through Eragon’s back and he collapsed insensate by her tail. 
 
 
 
 

 
54
REQUIEM 
 
 
 “Wake, Knurlhiem! You cannot sleep now. We are needed at the 
gate—they won’t start without us.” 
 
 Eragon forced his eyes open, conscious of an aching head and sore body. 
He was lying on a cold stone table. “What?” He grimaced at the sick taste 
on his tongue. 
 
 Orik tugged on his brown beard. “Ajihad’s procession. We must be pre-
sent for it!” 
 
 “No, what did you call me?” They were still in the banquet hall, but it 
was empty except for him, Orik, and Saphira, who lay on her side be-
tween two tables. She stirred and lifted her head, looking around with 
bleary eyes. 
 
 “Stonehead! I called you Stonehead because I’ve been trying to wake 
you for almost an hour.” 
 
 Eragon pushed himself upright and slid off the table. Flashes of memory 
from the night before jumped through his mind. Saphira, how are you? he 
asked, stumbling to her. 
 
 She swiveled her head, running her crimson tongue in and out over her 
teeth, like a cat that ate something unpleasant. Whole... I think. My left 
wing feels a bit strange; I think it’s the one I landed on. And my head is 
filled with a thousand hot arrows. 
 
 “Was anyone hurt when she fell?” asked Eragon, concerned. 
 
 A hearty chuckle exploded from the dwarf’s thick chest. “Only those 
who dropped off their seats from laughing so hard. A dragon getting 
drunk and bowing at that! I’m sure lays will be sung about it for decades.” 
Saphira shuffled her wings and looked away primly. “We thought it best 
to leave you here, since we couldn’t move you, Saphira. It upset the head 
cook terribly—he feared you would drink more of his best stock than the 
four barrels you already did.” 
 
 And you chastised me once for drinking! If I consumed four barrels, it 
would kill me! 
 
 That’s why you’re not a dragon. 

 
55
 
 Orik thrust a bundle of clothes into Eragon’s arms. “Here, put these on. 
They are more appropriate for a funeral than your own attire. But hurry, 
we have little time.” Eragon struggled into the items—a billowy white 
shirt with ties at the cuffs, a red vest decorated with gold braiding and 
embroidery, dark pants, shiny black boots that clacked on the floor, and a 
swirling cape that fastened under his throat with a studded brooch. In 
place of the usual plain leather band, Zar’roc was fastened to an ornate 
belt. 
 
 Eragon splashed his face with water and tried to arrange his hair neatly. 
Then Orik rushed him and Saphira out of the hall and toward Tron-
jheim’s south gate. “We must start from there,” he explained, moving 
with surprising speed on his stocky legs, “because that is where the pro-
cession with Ajihad’s body stopped three days ago. His journey to the 
grave cannot be interrupted, or else his spirit will find no rest.” 
 
 An odd custom, remarked Saphira. 
 
 Eragon agreed, noting a slight unsteadiness in her gait. In Carvahall, 
people were usually buried on their farm, or if they lived in the village, in 
a small graveyard. The only rituals that accompanied the process were 
lines recited from certain ballads and a death feast held afterward for rela-
tives and friends. Can you make it through the whole funeral? he asked as 
Saphira staggered again. 
 
 She grimaced briefly. That and Nasuada’s appointment, but then I’ll 
need to sleep. A pox on all mead! 
 
 Returning to his conversation with Orik, Eragon asked, “Where will 
Ajihad be buried?” 
 
 Orik slowed and glanced at Eragon with caution. “That has been a mat-
ter of contention among the clans. When a dwarf dies, we believe he 
must be sealed in stone or else he will never join his ancestors.... It is 
complex and I cannot say more to an outsider... but we go to great 
lengths to assure such a burial. Shame falls on a family or clan if they al-
low any of their own to lie in a lesser element. 
 
 “Under Farthen Dûr exists a chamber that is the home of all knurlan, 
all dwarves, who have died here. It is there Ajihad will be taken. He can-
not be entombed with us, as he is human, but a hallowed alcove has been 
set aside for him. There the Varden may visit him without disturbing our 
sacred grottos, and Ajihad will receive the respect he is due.” 

 
56
 
 “Your king has done much for the Varden,” commented Eragon. 
 
 “Some think too much.” 
 
   
 
 Before the thick gate—drawn up on its hidden chains to reveal faint 
daylight drifting into Farthen Dûr—they found a carefully arranged col-
umn. Ajihad lay at the front, cold and pale on a white marble bier borne 
by six men in black armor. Upon his head was a helm strewn with pre-
cious stones. His hands were clasped beneath his collarbone, over the 
ivory hilt of his bare sword, which extended from underneath the shield 
covering his chest and legs. Silver mail, like circlets of moonbeams, 
weighed down his limbs and fell onto the bier. 
 
 Close behind the body stood Nasuada—grave, sable-cloaked, and strong 
in stature, though tears adorned her countenance. To the side was Hroth-
gar in dark robes; then Arya; the Council of Elders, all with suitably re-
morseful expressions; and finally a stream of mourners that extended a 
mile from Tronjheim. 
 
 Every door and archway of the four-story-high hall that led to the cen-
tral chamber of Tronjheim, half a mile away, was thrown open and 
crowded with humans and dwarves alike. Between the gray bands of 
faces, the long tapestries swayed as they were brushed with hundreds of 
sighs and whispers when Saphira and Eragon came into view. 
 
 Jörmundur beckoned for them to join him. Trying not to disturb the 
formation, Eragon and Saphira picked through the column to the space 
by his side, earning a disapproving glare from Sabrae. Orik went to stand 
behind Hrothgar. 
 
 Together they waited, though for what, Eragon knew not. 
 
 All the lanterns were shuttered halfway so that a cool twilight suffused 
the air, lending an ethereal feel to the event. No one seemed to move or 
breathe: for a brief moment, Eragon fancied that they were all statues 
frozen for eternity. A single plume of incense drifted from the bier, wind-
ing toward the hazy ceiling as it spread the scent of cedar and juniper. It 
was the only motion in the hall, a whiplash line undulating sinuously 
from side to side. 
 
 Deep in Tronjheim, a drum gonged. Boom. The sonorous bass note 

 
57
resonated through their bones, vibrating the city-mountain and causing it 
to echo like a great stone bell. 
 
 They stepped forward. 
 
 Boom. On the second note, another, lower drum melded with the first, 
each beat rolling inexorably through the hall. The force of the sound 
propelled them along at a majestic pace. It gave each step significance, a 
purpose and gravity suited to the occasion. No thought could exist in the 
throbbing that surrounded them, only an upwelling of emotion that the 
drums expertly beguiled, summoning tears and bittersweet joy at the 
same time. 
 
 Boom. 
 
 When the tunnel ended, Ajihad’s bearers paused between the onyx pil-
lars before gliding into the central chamber. There Eragon saw the 
dwarves grow even more solemn upon beholding Isidar Mithrim. 
 
 Boom. 
 
 They walked through a crystal graveyard. A circle of towering shards 
lay in the center of the great chamber, surrounding the inlaid hammer 
and pentacles. Many pieces were larger than Saphira. The rays of the star 
sapphire still shimmered in the fragments, and on some, petals of the 
carved rose were visible. 
 
 Boom. 
 
 The bearers continued forward, between the countless razor edges. 
Then the procession turned and descended broad flights of stairs to the 
tunnels below. Through many caverns they marched, passing stone huts 
where dwarven children clutched their mothers and stared with wide 
eyes. 
 
 Boom. 
 
 And with that final crescendo, they halted under ribbed stalactites that 
branched over a great catacomb lined with alcoves. In each alcove lay a 
tomb carved with a name and clan crest. Thousands—hundreds of thou-
sands—were buried here. The only light came from sparsely placed red 
lanterns, pale in the shadows. 
 
 After a moment, the bearers strode to a small room annexed to the 

 
58
main chamber. In the center, on a raised platform, was a great crypt open 
to waiting darkness. On the top was carved in runes: 
 
 
 May all, Knurlan, Humans, and Elves, 
 
 Remember 
 
 This Man. 
 
 For he was Noble, Strong, and Wise. 
 
 
 Gûntera Arûna 
 
 
 When the mourners were gathered around, Ajihad was lowered into 
the crypt, and those who had known him personally were allowed to ap-
proach. Eragon and Saphira were fifth in line, behind Arya. As they as-
cended the marble steps to view the body, Eragon was gripped by an 
overwhelming sense of sorrow, his anguish compounded by the fact that 
he considered this as much Murtagh’s funeral as Ajihad’s. 
 
 Stopping alongside the tomb, Eragon gazed down at Ajihad. He ap-
peared far more calm and tranquil than he ever did in life, as if death had 
recognized his greatness and honored him by removing all traces of his 
worldly cares. Eragon had known Ajihad only a short while, but in that 
time he had come to respect him both as a person and for what he repre-
sented: freedom from tyranny. Also, Ajihad was the first person to grant 
safe haven to Eragon and Saphira since they left Palancar Valley. 
 
 Stricken, Eragon tried to think of the greatest praise he could give. In 
the end, he whispered past the lump in his throat, “You will be remem-
bered, Ajihad. I swear it. Rest easy knowing that Nasuada shall continue 
your work and the Empire will be overthrown because of what you ac-
complished.” Conscious of Saphira’s touch on his arm, Eragon stepped off 
the platform with her and allowed Jörmundur to take his place. 
 
 When at last everyone had paid their respects, Nasuada bowed over 
Ajihad and touched her father’s hand, holding it with gentle urgency. Ut-
tering a pained groan, she began to sing in a strange, wailing language, fill-
ing the cavern with her lamentations. 
 
 Then came twelve dwarves, who slid a marble slab over Ajihad’s up-

 
59
turned face. And he was no more. 
 
 
 
 

 
60
FEALTY 
 
 
 Eragon yawned and covered his mouth as people filed into the under-
ground amphitheater. The spacious arena echoed with a babble of voices 
discussing the funeral that had just concluded. 
 
 Eragon sat on the lowest tier, level with the podium. With him were 
Orik, Arya, Hrothgar, Nasuada, and the Council of Elders. Saphira stood 
on the row of stairs that cut upward through the tiers. Leaning over, Orik 
said, “Ever since Korgan, each of our kings has been chosen here. It’s fit-
ting that the Varden should do likewise.” 
 
 It’s yet to be seen, thought Eragon, if this transfer of power will remain 
peaceful. He rubbed an eye, brushing away fresh tears; the funeral cere-
mony had left him shaken. 
 
 Lathered over the remnants of his grief, anxiety now twisted his gut. 
He worried about his own role in the upcoming events. Even if all went 
well, he and Saphira were about to make potent enemies. His hand 
dropped to Zar’roc and tightened on the pommel. 
 
 It took several minutes for the amphitheater to fill. Then Jörmundur 
stepped up to the podium. “People of the Varden, we last stood here fif-
teen years ago, at Deynor’s death. His successor, Ajihad, did more to op-
pose the Empire and Galbatorix than any before. He won countless bat-
tles against superior forces. He nearly killed Durza, putting a scratch on 
the Shade’s blade. And greatest of all, he welcomed Rider Eragon and 
Saphira into Tronjheim. However, a new leader must be chosen, one 
who will win us even more glory.” 
 
 Someone high above shouted, “Shadeslayer!” 
 
 Eragon tried not to react—he was pleased to see that Jörmundur did 
not even blink. He said, “Perhaps in years to come, but he has other du-
ties and responsibilities now. No, the Council of Elders has thought long 
on this: we need one who understands our needs and wants, one who has 
lived and suffered alongside us. One who refused to flee, even when bat-
tle was imminent.” 
 
 At that moment, Eragon sensed comprehension rush through the lis-
teners. The name came as a whisper from a thousand throats and was ut-
tered by Jörmundur himself: “Nasuada.” With a bow, Jörmundur stepped 
aside. 

 
61
 
 Next was Arya. She surveyed the waiting audience, then said, “The 
elves honor Ajihad tonight.... And on behalf of Queen Islanzadí, I recog-
nize Nasuada’s ascension and offer her the same support and friendship 
we extended to her father. May the stars watch over her.” 
 
 Hrothgar took the podium and stated gruffly, “I too support Nasuada, 
as do the clans.” He moved aside. 
 
 Then it was Eragon’s turn. Standing before the crowd, with all eyes 
upon him and Saphira, he said, “We support Nasuada as well.” Saphira 
growled in affirmation. 
 
 Pledges spoken, the Council of Elders lined themselves on either side of 
the podium, Jörmundur at their head. Bearing herself proudly, Nasuada 
approached and knelt before him, her dress splayed in raven billows. 
Raising his voice, Jörmundur said, “By the right of inheritance and succes-
sion, we have chosen Nasuada. By merit of her father’s achievements and 
the blessings of her peers, we have chosen Nasuada. I now ask you: Have 
we chosen well?” 
 
 The roar was overwhelming. “Yes!” 
 
 Jörmundur nodded. “Then by the power granted to this council, we 
pass the privileges and responsibilities accorded to Ajihad to his only de-
scendant, Nasuada.” He gently placed a circlet of silver on Nasuada’s 
brow. Taking her hand, he lifted her upright and pronounced, “I give you 
our new leader!” 
 
 For ten minutes, the Varden and dwarves cheered, thundering their 
approbation until the hall rang with the clamor. Once their cries sub-
sided, Sabrae motioned to Eragon, whispering, “Now is the time to fulfill 
your promise.” 
 
 At that moment, all noise seemed to cease for Eragon. His nervousness 
disappeared too, swallowed in the tide of the moment. Steeling himself 
with a breath, he and Saphira started toward Jörmundur and Nasuada, 
each step an eternity. As they walked, he stared at Sabrae, Elessari, 
Umérth, and Falberd—noting their half-smiles, smugness, and on Sabrae’s 
part, outright disdain. Behind the council members stood Arya. She nod-
ded in support. 
 
 We are about to change history, said Saphira. 
 

 
62
 We’re throwing ourselves off a cliff without knowing how deep the water 
below is. 
 
 Ah, but what a glorious flight! 
 
 With a brief look at Nasuada’s serene face, Eragon bowed and kneeled. 
Slipping Zar’roc from its sheath, he placed the sword flat on his palms, 
then lifted it, as if to proffer it to Jörmundur. For a moment, the sword 
hovered between Jörmundur and Nasuada, teetering on the wire edge of 
two different destinies. Eragon felt his breath catch—such a simple 
choice to balance a life on. And more than a life—a dragon, a king, an 
Empire! 
 
 Then his breath rushed in, filling his lungs with time once again, and he 
swung to face Nasuada. “Out of deep respect... and appreciation of the 
difficulties facing you... I, Eragon, first Rider of the Varden, Shadeslayer 
and Argetlam, give you my blade and my fealty, Nasuada.” 
 
 The Varden and dwarves stared, dumbstruck. In that same instant, the 
Council of Elders flashed from triumphant gloating to enraged impo-
tence. Their glares burned with the strength and venom of those be-
trayed. Even Elessari let outrage burst through her pleasant demeanor. 
Only Jörmundur—after a brief jolt of surprise—seemed to accept the 
announcement with equanimity. 
 
 Nasuada smiled and grasped Zar’roc, placing the sword’s tip on Eragon’s 
forehead, just as before. “I am honored that you choose to serve me, 
Rider Eragon. I accept, as you accept all the responsibilities accompany-
ing the station. Rise as my vassal and take your sword.” 
 
 Eragon did so, then stepped back with Saphira. With shouts of ap-
proval, the crowd rose to their feet, the dwarves stamping in rhythm 
with their hobnail boots while human warriors banged swords across 
shields. 
 
 Turning to the podium, Nasuada gripped it on either side and looked 
up at all the people in the amphitheater. She beamed at them, pure joy 
shining from her face. “People of the Varden!” 
 
 Silence. 
 
 “As my father did before me, I give my life to you and our cause. I will 
never cease fighting until the Urgals are vanquished, Galbatorix is dead, 
and Alagaësia is free once more!” 

 
63
 
 More cheering and applause. 
 
 “Therefore, I say to you, now is the time to prepare. Here in Farthen 
Dûr—after endless skirmishes—we won our greatest battle. It is our turn 
to strike back. Galbatorix is weak after losing so many forces, and there 
will never again be such an opportunity. 
 
 “Therefore, I say again, now is the time to prepare so that we may once 
more stand victorious!” 
 
   
 
 After more speeches by various personages—including a still-glowering 
Falberd—the amphitheater began to empty. As Eragon stood to leave, 
Orik grasped his arm, stopping him. The dwarf was wide-eyed. “Eragon, 
did you plan all that beforehand?” 
 
 Eragon briefly considered the wisdom of telling him, then nodded. 
“Yes.” 
 
 Orik exhaled, shaking his head. “That was a bold stroke, it was. You’ve 
given Nasuada a strong position to begin with. It was dangerous, though, 
if the reactions of the Council of Elders are anything to judge by. Did 
Arya approve of this?” 
 
 “She agreed it was necessary.” 
 
 The dwarf studied him thoughtfully. “I’m sure it was. You just altered 
the balance of power, Eragon. No one will underestimate you again be-
cause of it.... Beware the rotten stone. You have earned some powerful 
enemies today.” He slapped Eragon on the side and continued past. 
 
 Saphira watched him go, then said, We should prepare to leave Farthen 
Dûr. The council will be thirsty for revenge. The sooner we’re out of their 
reach, the better. 
 
 
 
 

 
64
A SORCERESS, A SNAKE, AND A SCROLL 
 
 
 That evening, as Eragon returned to his quarters from bathing, he was 
surprised to find a tall woman waiting for him in the hall. She had dark 
hair, startling blue eyes, and a wry mouth. Wound around her wrist was a 
gold bracelet shaped like a hissing snake. Eragon hoped that she wasn’t 
there to ask him for advice, like so many of the Varden. 
 
 “Argetlam.” She curtsied gracefully. 
 
 He inclined his head in return. “Can I help you?” 
 
 “I hope so. I’m Trianna, sorceress of Du Vrangr Gata.” 
 
 “Really? A sorceress?” he asked, intrigued. 
 
 “And battle mage and spy and anything else the Varden deem neces-
sary. There aren’t enough magic users, so we each end up with a half-
dozen tasks.” She smiled, displaying even, white teeth. “That’s why I came 
today. We would be honored to have you take charge of our group. 
You’re the only one who can replace the Twins.” 
 
 Almost without realizing it, he smiled back. She was so friendly and 
charming, he hated to say no. “I’m afraid I can’t; Saphira and I are leaving 
Tronjheim soon. Besides, I’d have to consult with Nasuada first anyway.” 
And I don’t want to be entangled in any more politics... especially not where 
the Twins used to lead. 
 
 Trianna bit her lip. “I’m sorry to hear that.” She moved a step closer. 
“Perhaps we can spend some time together before you have to go. I could 
show you how to summon and control spirits.... It would be educational 
for both of us.” 
 
 Eragon felt a hot flush warm his face. “I appreciate the offer, but I’m 
really too busy at the moment.” 
 
 A spark of anger flared within Trianna’s eyes, then vanished so quickly, 
he wondered whether he had seen it at all. She sighed delicately. “I un-
derstand.” 
 
 She sounded so disappointed—and looked so forlorn—Eragon felt 
guilty for rebuffing her. It can’t hurt to talk with her for a few minutes, he 
told himself. “I’m curious; how did you learn magic?” 

 
65
 
 Trianna brightened. “My mother was a healer in Surda. She had a bit of 
power and was able to instruct me in the old ways. Of course, I’m no-
where near as powerful as a Rider. None of Du Vrangr Gata could have 
defeated Durza alone, like you did. That was a heroic deed.” 
 
 Embarrassed, Eragon scuffed his boots against the ground. “I wouldn’t 
have survived if not for Arya.” 
 
 “You are too modest, Argetlam,” she admonished. “It was you who 
struck the final blow. You should be proud of your accomplishment. It’s 
a feat worthy of Vrael himself.” She leaned toward him. His heart quick-
ened as he smelled her perfume, which was rich and musky, with a hint 
of an exotic spice. “Have you heard the songs composed about you? The 
Varden sing them every night around their fires. They say you’ve come to 
take the throne from Galbatorix!” 
 
 “No,” said Eragon, quick and sharp. That was one rumor he would not 
tolerate. “They might, but I don’t. Whatever my fate may be, I don’t as-
pire to rule.” 
 
 “And it’s wise of you not to. What is a king, after all, but a man impris-
oned by his duties? That would be a poor reward indeed for the last free 
Rider and his dragon. No, for you the ability to go and do what you will 
and, by extension, to shape the future of Alagaësia.” She paused. “Do you 
have any family left in the Empire?” 
 
 What?“ Only a cousin.” 
 
 “Then you’re not betrothed?” 
 
 The question caught him off guard. He had never been asked that be-
fore. “No, I’m not betrothed.” 
 
 “Surely there must be someone you care about.” She came another step 
closer, and her ribboned sleeve brushed his arm. 
 
 “I wasn’t close to anyone in Carvahall,” he faltered, “and I’ve been trav-
eling since then.” 
 
 Trianna drew back slightly, then lifted her wrist so the serpent bracelet 
was at eye level. “Do you like him?” she inquired. Eragon blinked and 
nodded, though it was actually rather disconcerting. “I call him Lorga. 
He’s my familiar and protector.” Bending forward, she blew upon the 

 
66
bracelet, then murmured, “Sé orúm thornessa hávr sharjalví lífs.” 
 
 With a dry rustle, the snake stirred to life. Eragon watched, fascinated, 
as the creature writhed around Trianna’s pale arm, then lifted itself and 
fixed its whirling ruby eyes upon him, wire tongue whipping in and out. 
Its eyes seemed to expand until they were each as large as Eragon’s fist. 
He felt as if he were tumbling into their fiery depths; he could not look 
away no matter how hard he tried. 
 
 Then at a short command, the serpent stiffened and resumed its former 
position. With a tired sigh, Trianna leaned against the wall. “Not many 
people understand what we magic users do. But I wanted you to know 
that there are others like you, and we will help if we can.” 
 
 Impulsively, Eragon put his hand on hers. He had never attempted to 
approach a woman this way before, but instinct urged him onward, dar-
ing him to take the chance. It was frightening, exhilarating. “If you want, 
we could go and eat. There’s a kitchen not far from here.” 
 
 She slipped her other hand over his, fingers smooth and cool, so differ-
ent from the rough grips he was accustomed to. “I’d like that. Shall we—” 
Trianna stumbled forward as the door burst open behind her. The sor-
ceress whirled around, only to yelp as she found herself face to face with 
Saphira. 
 
 Saphira remained motionless, except for one lip that slowly lifted to 
reveal a line of jagged teeth. Then she growled. It was a marvelous 
growl—richly layered with scorn and menace—that rose and fell through 
the hall for more than a minute. Listening to it was like enduring a blis-
tering, hackle-raising tirade. 
 
 Eragon glared at her the whole time. 
 
 When it was over, Trianna was clenching her dress with both fists, 
twisting the fabric. Her face was white and scared. She quickly curtsied 
to Saphira, then, with a barely controlled motion, turned and fled. Acting 
as if nothing had happened, Saphira lifted a leg and licked a claw. It was 
nearly impossible to get the door open, she sniffed. 
 
 Eragon could not contain himself any longer. Why did you do that? he 
exploded. You had no reason to interfere! 
 
 You needed my help, she continued, unperturbed. 
 

 
67
 If I’d needed your help, I would have called! 
 
 Don’t yell at me, she snapped, letting her jaws click together. He could 
sense her emotions boiling with as much turmoil as his. I’ll not have you 
run around with a slattern who cares more for Eragon as Rider than you as 
a person. 
 
 She wasn’t a slattern, roared Eragon. He pounded the wall in frustra-
tion. I’m a man now, Saphira, not a hermit. You can’t expect me to ignore... 
ignore women just because of who I am. And it’s certainly not your decision 
to make. At the very least, I might have enjoyed a conversation with her, 
anything other than the tragedies we’ve dealt with lately. You’re in my head 
enough to know how I feel. Why couldn’t you leave me alone? Where was 
the harm? 
 
 You don’t understand. She refused to meet his eyes. 
 
 Don’t understand! Will you prevent me from ever having a wife and chil-
dren? What of a family? 
 
 Eragon. She finally fixed one great eye on him. We are intimately 
linked. 
 
 Obviously! 
 
 And if you pursue a relationship, with or without my blessing, and be-
come... attached... to someone, my feelings will become engaged as well. 
You should know that. Therefore—and I warn you only once—be careful 
who you choose, because it will involve both of us. 
 
 He briefly considered her words. Our bond works both ways, however. If 
you hate someone, I will be influenced likewise.... I understand your con-
cern. So you weren’t just jealous? 
 
 She licked the claw once more. Perhaps a little. 
 
 Eragon was the one who growled this time. He brushed past her into 
the room, grabbed Zar’roc, then stalked away, belting on the sword. 
 
 He wandered through Tronjheim for hours, avoiding contact with eve-
ryone. What had occurred pained him, though he could not deny the 
truth of Saphira’s words. Of all the matters they shared, this was the most 
delicate and the one they agreed upon least. That night—for the first 
time since he was captured at Gil’ead—he slept away from Saphira, in 

 
68
one of the dwarves’ barracks. 
 
 Eragon returned to their quarters the following morning. By unspoken 
consent, he and Saphira avoided discussing what had transpired; further 
argument was pointless when neither party was willing to yield ground. 
Besides, they were both so relieved to be reunited, they did not want to 
risk endangering their friendship again. 
 
 They were eating lunch—Saphira tearing at a bloody haunch—when 
Jarsha trotted up. Like before, he stared wide-eyed at Saphira, following 
her movements as she nibbled off the end of a leg bone. “Yes?” asked Er-
agon, wiping his chin and wondering if the Council of Elders had sent for 
them. He had heard nothing from them since the funeral. 
 
 Jarsha turned away from Saphira long enough to say, “Nasuada would 
like to see you, sir. She’s waiting in her father’s study.” 
 
 Sir! Eragon almost laughed. Only a little while ago, he would have been 
calling people sir, not the other way around. He glanced at Saphira. “Are 
you done, or should we wait a few minutes?” 
 
 Rolling her eyes, she fit the rest of the meat into her mouth and split 
the bone with a loud crack. I’m done. 
 
 “All right,” said Eragon, standing, “you can go, Jarsha. We know the 
way.” 
 
 It took almost half an hour to reach the study because of the city-
mountain’s size. As during Ajihad’s rule, the door was guarded, but in-
stead of two men, an entire squad of battle-hardened warriors now stood 
before it, alert for the slightest hint of danger. They would clearly sacri-
fice themselves to protect their new leader from ambush or attack. 
Though the men could not have failed to recognize Eragon and Saphira, 
they barred the way while Nasuada was alerted of her visitors. Only then 
were the two allowed to enter. 
 
 Eragon immediately noticed a change: a vase of flowers in the study. 
The small purple blossoms were unobtrusive, but they suffused the air 
with a warm fragrance that—for Eragon—evoked summers of fresh-
picked raspberries and scythed fields turning bronze under the sun. He 
inhaled, appreciating the skill with which Nasuada had asserted her indi-
viduality without obliterating Ajihad’s memory. 
 
 She sat behind the broad desk, still cloaked in the black of mourning. 

 
69
As Eragon seated himself, Saphira beside him, she said, “Eragon.” It was a 
simple statement, neither friendly nor hostile. She turned away briefly, 
then focused on him, her gaze steely and intent. “I have spent the last few 
days reviewing the Varden’s affairs, such as they are. It was a dismal exer-
cise. We are poor, overextended, and low on supplies, and few recruits 
are joining us from the Empire. I mean to change that. 
 
 “The dwarves cannot support us much longer, as it’s been a lean year 
for farming and they’ve suffered losses of their own. Considering this, I 
have decided to move the Varden to Surda. It’s a difficult proposition, 
but one I believe necessary to keep us safe. Once in Surda, we will finally 
be close enough to engage the Empire directly.” 
 
 Even Saphira stirred with surprise. The work that would involve! said Er-
agon. It could take months to get everyone’s belongings to Surda, not to men-
tion all the people. And they’d probably be attacked along the way. “I 
thought King Orrin didn’t dare openly oppose Galbatorix,” he protested. 
 
 Nasuada smiled grimly. “His stance has changed since we defeated the 
Urgals. He will shelter and feed us and fight by our side. Many Varden 
are already in Surda, mainly women and children who couldn’t or 
wouldn’t fight. They will also support us, else I will strip our name from 
them.” 
 
 “How,” asked Eragon, “did you communicate with King Orrin so 
quickly?” 
 
 “The dwarves use a system of mirrors and lanterns to relay messages 
through their tunnels. They can send a dispatch from here to the western 
edge of the Beor Mountains in less than a day. Couriers then transport it 
to Aberon, capital of Surda. Fast as it is, that method is still too slow 
when Galbatorix can surprise us with an Urgal army and give us less than 
a day’s notice. I intend to arrange something far more expedient between 
Du Vrangr Gata and Hrothgar’s magicians before we go.” 
 
 Opening the desk drawer, Nasuada removed a thick scroll. “The 
Varden will depart Farthen Dûr within the month. Hrothgar has agreed 
to provide us with safe passage through the tunnels. Moreover, he sent a 
force to Orthíad to remove the last vestiges of Urgals and seal the tunnels 
so no one can invade the dwarves by that route again. As this may not be 
enough to guarantee the Varden’s survival, I have a favor to ask of you.” 
 
 Eragon nodded. He had expected a request or order. That was the only 
reason for her to have summoned them. “I am yours to command.” 

 
70
 
 “Perhaps.” Her eyes flicked to Saphira for a second. “In any case, this is 
not a command, and I want you to think carefully before replying. To 
help rally support for the Varden, I wish to spread word throughout the 
Empire that a new Rider—named Eragon Shadeslayer—and his dragon, 
Saphira, have joined our cause. I would like your permission before doing 
so, however.” 
 
 It’s too dangerous, objected Saphira. 
 
 Word of our presence here will reach the Empire anyway, pointed out Er-
agon. The Varden will want to brag about their victory and Durza’s death. 
Since it’ll happen with or without our approval, we should agree to help. 
 
 She snorted softly. I’m worried about Galbatorix. Until now we haven’t 
made it public where our sympathies lie. 
 
 Our actions have been clear enough. 
 
 Yes, but even when Durza fought you in Tronjheim, he wasn’t trying to 
kill you. If we become outspoken in our opposition to the Empire, Galbatorix 
won’t be so lenient again. Who knows what forces or plots he may have kept 
in abeyance while he tried to gain hold of us? As long as we remain am-
biguous, he won’t know what to do. 
 
 The time for ambiguity has passed, asserted Eragon. We fought the Ur-
gals, killed Durza, and I have sworn fealty to the leader of the Varden. No 
ambiguity exists. No, with your permission, I will agree to her proposal. 
 
 She was silent for a long while, then dipped her head. As you wish. 
 
 He put a hand on her side before returning his attention to Nasuada 
and saying, “Do what you see fit. If this is how we can best assist the 
Varden, so be it.” 
 
 “Thank you. I know it is a lot to ask. Now, as we discussed before the 
funeral, I expect you to travel to Ellesméra and complete your training.” 
 
 “With Arya?” 
 
 “Of course. The elves have refused contact with both humans and 
dwarves ever since she was captured. Arya is the only being who can 
convince them to emerge from seclusion.” 
 

 
71
 “Couldn’t she use magic to tell them of her rescue?” 
 
 “Unfortunately not. When the elves retreated into Du Weldenvarden 
after the fall of the Riders, they placed wards around the forest that pre-
vent any thought, item, or being from entering it through arcane means, 
though not from exiting it, if I understood Arya’s explanation. Thus, Arya 
must physically visit Du Weldenvarden before Queen Islanzadí will 
know that she is alive, that you and Saphira exist, and of the numerous 
events that have befallen the Varden these past months.” Nasuada 
handed him the scroll. It was stamped with a wax sigil. “This is a missive 
for Queen Islanzadí, telling her about the Varden’s situation and my own 
plans. Guard it with your life; it would cause a great deal of harm in the 
wrong hands. I hope that after all that’s happened, Islanzadí will feel 
kindly enough toward us to reinitiate diplomatic ties. Her assistance 
could mean the difference between victory and defeat. Arya knows this 
and has agreed to press our case, but I wanted you aware of the situation 
too, so you could take advantage of any opportunities that might arise.” 
 
 Eragon tucked the scroll into his jerkin. “When will we leave?” 
 
 “Tomorrow morning... unless you have something already planned?” 
 
 “No.” 
 
 “Good.” She clasped her hands. “You should know, one other person 
will be traveling with you.” He looked at her quizzically. “King Hrothgar 
insisted that in the interest of fairness there should be a dwarf representa-
tive present at your training, since it affects their race as well. So he’s 
sending Orik along.” 
 
 Eragon’s first reaction was irritation. Saphira could have flown Arya and 
him to Du Weldenvarden, thereby eliminating weeks of unnecessary 
travel. Three passengers, however, were too many to fit on Saphira’s 
shoulders. Orik’s presence would confine them to the ground. 
 
 Upon further reflection, Eragon acknowledged the wisdom of Hroth-
gar’s request. It was important for Eragon and Saphira to maintain a sem-
blance of equality in their dealings with the different races. He smiled. 
“Ah, well, it’ll slow us down, but I suppose we have to placate Hrothgar. 
To tell the truth, I’m glad Orik is coming. Crossing Alagaësia with only 
Arya was a rather daunting prospect. She’s...” 
 
 Nasuada smiled too. “She’s different.” 
 

 
72
 “Aye.” He grew serious again. “Do you really mean to attack the Em-
pire? You said yourself that the Varden are weak. It doesn’t seem like the 
wisest course. If we wait—” 
 
 “If we wait,” she said sternly, “Galbatorix will only get stronger. This is 
the first time since Morzan was slain that we have even the slightest op-
portunity of catching him unprepared. He had no reason to suspect we 
could defeat the Urgals—which we did thanks to you—so he won’t have 
readied the Empire for invasion.” 
 
 Invasion! exclaimed Saphira. And how does she plan to kill Galbatorix 
when he flies out to obliterate their army with magic? 
 
 Nasuada shook her head in response when Eragon restated the objec-
tion. “From what we know of him, he won’t fight until Urû’baen itself is 
threatened. It doesn’t matter to Galbatorix if we destroy half the Empire, 
so long as we come to him, not the other way around. Why should he 
bother anyway? If we do manage to reach him, our troops will be bat-
tered and depleted, making it all the easier for him to destroy us.” 
 
 “You still haven’t answered Saphira,” protested Eragon. 
 
 “That’s because I can’t yet. This will be a long campaign. By its end you 
might be powerful enough to defeat Galbatorix, or the elves may have 
joined us... and their spellcasters are the strongest in Alagaësia. No matter 
what happens, we cannot afford to delay. Now is the time to gamble and 
dare what no one thinks we can accomplish. The Varden have lived in 
the shadows for too long—we must either challenge Galbatorix or sub-
mit and pass away.” 
 
 The scope of what Nasuada was suggesting disturbed Eragon. So many 
risks and unknown dangers were involved, it was almost absurd to con-
sider such a venture. However, it was not his place to make the decision, 
and he accepted that. Nor would he dispute it further. We have to trust in 
her judgment now. 
 
 “But what of you, Nasuada? Will you be safe while we’re gone? I must 
think of my vow. It’s become my responsibility to ensure that you won’t 
have your own funeral soon.” 
 
 Her jaw tightened as she gestured at the door and the warriors beyond. 
“You needn’t fear, I am well defended.” She looked down. “I will admit... 
one reason for going to Surda is that Orrin knows me of old and will offer 
his protection. I cannot tarry here with you and Arya gone and the Coun-

 
73
cil of Elders still with power. They won’t accept me as their leader until I 
prove beyond doubt that the Varden are under my control, not theirs.” 
 
 Then she seemed to draw on some inner strength, squaring her shoul-
ders and lifting her chin so she was distant and aloof. “Go now, Eragon. 
Ready your horse, gather supplies, and be at the north gate by dawn.” 
 
 He bowed low, respecting her return to formality, then left with 
Saphira. 
 
   
 
 After dinner, Eragon and Saphira flew together. They sailed high above 
Tronjheim, where crenulated icicles hung from the sides of Farthen Dûr, 
forming a great white band around them. Though it was still hours until 
night, it was already nearly dark within the mountain. 
 
 Eragon threw back his head, savoring the air on his face. He missed the 
wind—wind that would rush through the grass and stir the clouds until 
everything was tousled and fresh. Wind that would bring rain and storms 
and lash the trees so they bent. For that matter, I miss trees as well, he 
thought. Farthen Dûr is an incredible place, but it’s as empty of plants and 
animals as Ajihad’s tomb. 
 
 Saphira agreed. The dwarves seem to think that gems take the place of 
flowers. She was silent as the light continued to fade. When it was too 
dark for Eragon to see comfortably, she said, It’s late. We should return. 
 
 All right. 
 
 She drifted toward the ground in great, lazy spirals, drawing nearer to 
Tronjheim—which glowed like a beacon in the center of Farthen Dûr. 
They were still far from the city-mountain when she swung her head, 
saying, Look. 
 
 He followed her gaze, but all he could see was the gray, featureless 
plain below them. What? 
 
 Instead of answering, she tilted her wings and glided to their left, slip-
ping down to one of the four roads that radiated from Tronjheim along 
the cardinal compass points. As they landed, he noticed a patch of white 
on a small hill nearby. The patch wavered strangely in the dusk, like a 
floating candle, then resolved into Angela, who was wearing a pale wool 
tunic. 

 
74
 
 The witch carried a wicker basket nearly four feet across and filled 
with a wild assortment of mushrooms, most of which Eragon did not 
recognize. As she approached, he gestured at them and said, “You’ve been 
gathering toadstools?” 
 
 “Hello,” laughed Angela, putting her load down. “Oh no, toadstool is far 
too general a term. And anyway, they really ought to be called frogstools, 
not toadstools.” She spread them with her hand. “This one is sulphur tuft, 
and this is an inkcap, and here’s navelcap, and dwarf shield, russet tough-
shank, blood ring, and that is a spotted deceiver. Delightful, isn’t it!” She 
pointed to each in turn, ending on a mushroom with pink, lavender, and 
yellow splashed in rivulets across its cap. 
 
 “And that one?” he asked, indicating a mushroom with a lightning-blue 
stem, molten-orange gills, and a glossy black two-tiered cap. 
 
 She looked at it fondly. “Fricai Andlát, as the elves might say. The stalk 
is instant death, while the cap can cure most poisons. It’s what Tunivor’s 
Nectar is extracted from. Fricai Andlát only grows in caves in Du Wel-
denvarden and Farthen Dûr, and it would die out here if the dwarves 
started carting their dung elsewhere.” 
 
 Eragon looked back at the hill and realized that was exactly what it 
was, a dung heap. 
 
 “Hello, Saphira,” said Angela, reaching past him to pat Saphira on the 
nose. Saphira blinked and looked pleased, tail twitching. At the same 
time, Solembum padded into sight, his mouth clamped firmly around a 
limp rat. Without so much as a flick of his whiskers, the werecat settled 
on the ground and began to nibble on the rodent, studiously ignoring the 
three of them. 
 
 “So,” said Angela, tucking back a curl of her enormous hair, “off to 
Ellesméra?” Eragon nodded. He did not bother asking how she had found 
out; she always seemed to know what was going on. When he remained 
silent, she scowled. “Well, don’t act so morose. It’s not as if it’s your exe-
cution!” 
 
 “I know.” 
 
 “Then smile, because if it’s not your execution, you should be happy! 
You’re as flaccid as Solembum’s rat. Flaccid. What a wonderful word, 
don’t you think?” 

 
75
 
 That wrung a grin out of him, and Saphira chortled with amusement 
deep in her throat. “I’m not sure it’s quite as wonderful as you think, but 
yes, I understand your point.” 
 
 “I’m glad you understand. Understanding is good.” With arched eye-
brows, she hooked a fingernail underneath a mushroom and flipped it 
over, inspecting its gills as she said, “It’s fortuitous we met tonight, as you 
are about to leave and I... I will accompany the Varden to Surda. As I 
told you before, I like to be where things are happening, and that’s the 
place.” 
 
 Eragon grinned even more. “Well then, that must mean we’ll have a 
safe journey, else you’d be with us.” 
 
 Angela shrugged, then said seriously, “Be careful in Du Weldenvarden. 
Just because elves do not display their emotions doesn’t mean they aren’t 
subject to rage and passion like the rest of us mortals. What can make 
them so deadly, though, is how they conceal it, sometimes for years.” 
 
 “You’ve been there?” 
 
 “Once upon a time.” 
 
 After a pause, he asked, “What do you think of Nasuada’s plans?” 
 
 “Mmm... she’s doomed! You’re doomed! They’re all doomed!” She 
cackled, doubling over, then straightened abruptly. “Notice I didn’t spec-
ify what kind of doom, so no matter what happens, I predicted it. How 
very wise of me.” She lifted the basket again, setting it on one hip. “I sup-
pose I won’t see you for a while, so farewell, best of luck, avoid roasted 
cabbage, don’t eat earwax, and look on the bright side of life!” And with a 
cheery wink, she strolled off, leaving Eragon blinking and nonplussed. 
 
 After an appropriate pause, Solembum picked up his dinner and fol-
lowed, ever so dignified. 
 
 
 

 
76
HROTHGAR’S GIFT 
 
 
 Dawn was a half hour away when Eragon and Saphira arrived at Tron-
jheim’s north gate. The gate was raised just enough to let Saphira pass, so 
they hurried underneath it, then waited in the recessed area beyond, 
where red jasper pillars loomed above and carved beasts snarled between 
the bloody piers. Past those, at the very edge of Tronjheim, sat two 
thirty-foot-high gold griffins. Identical pairs guarded each of the city-
mountain’s gates. No one was in sight. 
 
 Eragon held Snowfire’s reins. The stallion was brushed, reshoed, and 
saddled, his saddlebags bulging with goods. He pawed the floor impa-
tiently; Eragon had not ridden him for over a week. 
 
 Before long Orik ambled up, bearing a large pack on his back and a 
bundle in his arms. “No horse?” asked Eragon, somewhat surprised. Are 
we supposed to walk all the way to Du Weldenvarden? 
 
 Orik grunted. “We’ll be stopping at Tarnag, just north of here. From 
there we take rafts along the Az Ragni to Hedarth, an outpost for trading 
with the elves. We won’t need steeds before Hedarth, so I’ll use my own 
feet till then.” 
 
 He set the bundle down with a clang, then unwrapped it, revealing Er-
agon’s armor. The shield had been repainted—so the oak tree stood 
clearly in the center—and all the dings and scrapes removed. Beneath it 
was the long mail shirt, burnished and oiled until the steel gleamed bril-
liantly. No sign existed of where it had been rent when Durza cut Er-
agon’s back. The coif, gloves, bracers, greaves, and helmet were likewise 
repaired. 
 
 “Our greatest smiths worked on these,” said Orik, “as well as your ar-
mor, Saphira. However, since we can’t take dragon armor with us, it was 
given to the Varden, who will guard it against our return.” 
 
 Please thank him for me, said Saphira. 
 
 Eragon obliged, then laced on the greaves and bracers, storing the other 
items in his bags. Last of all, he reached for his helm, only to find Orik 
holding it. The dwarf rolled the piece between his hands, then said, “Do 
not be so quick to don this, Eragon. There is a choice you must make 
first.” 
 

 
77
 “What choice is that?” 
 
 Raising the helmet, Orik uncovered its polished brow, which, Eragon 
now saw, had been altered: etched in the steel were the hammer and 
stars of Hrothgar and Orik’s clan, the Ingeitum. Orik scowled, looking 
both pleased and troubled, and said in a formal voice, “Mine king, Hroth-
gar, desires that I present this helm as a symbol of the friendship he bears 
for you. And with it Hrothgar extends an offer to adopt you as one of 
Dûrgrimst Ingeitum, as a member of his own family.” 
 
 Eragon stared at the helm, amazed that Hrothgar would make such a 
gesture. Does this mean I’d be subjected to his rule?... If I continue to accrue 
loyalties and allegiances at this pace, I’ll be incapacitated before long—
unable to do anything without breaking some oath! 
 
 You don’t have to put it on, pointed out Saphira. 
 
 And risk insulting Hrothgar? Once again, we’re trapped. 
 
 It may be intended as a gift, though, another sign of otho, not a trap. I 
would guess he’s thanking us for my offer to repair Isidar Mithrim. 
 
 That had not occurred to Eragon, for he had been too busy trying to 
figure out how the dwarf king might gain advantage over them. True. But 
I think it’s also an attempt to correct the imbalance of power created when I 
swore fealty to Nasuada. The dwarves couldn’t have been pleased with that 
turn of events. He looked back at Orik, who was waiting anxiously. “How 
often has this been done?” 
 
 “For a human? Never. Hrothgar argued with the Ingeitum families for a 
day and a night before they agreed to accept you. If you consent to bear 
our crest, you will have full rights as clan member. You may attend our 
councils and give voice on every issue. And,” he grew very somber, “if 
you so wish, you will have the right to be buried with our dead.” 
 
 For the first time, the enormity of Hrothgar’s action struck Eragon. The 
dwarves could offer no higher honor. With a swift motion, he took the 
helm from Orik and pressed it down upon his head. “I am privileged to 
join Dûrgrimst Ingeitum.” 
 
 Orik nodded with approval and said, “Then take this Knurlnien, this 
Heart of Stone, and cup it between your hands—yes, like so. You must 
steel yourself now and prick open a vein to wet the stone. A few drops 
will suffice.... To finish, repeat after me: Os il dom qirânû carn dûr thar-

 
78
gen, zeitmen, oen grimst vor formv edaris rak skilfz. Narho is belgond...” 
It was a lengthy recitation and all the longer because Orik stopped to 
translate every few sentences. Afterward, Eragon healed his wrist with a 
quick spell. 
 
 “Whatever else the clans may say about this business,” observed Orik, 
“you have behaved with integrity and respect. They cannot ignore that.” 
He grinned. “We are of the same clan now, eh? You are my foster 
brother! Under more normal circumstances, Hrothgar would have pre-
sented your helm himself and we would have held a lengthy ceremony to 
commemorate your induction into Dûrgrimst Ingeitum, but events move 
too swiftly for us to tarry. Fear not that you are being slighted, though! 
Your adoption shall be celebrated with the proper rituals when you and 
Saphira next return to Farthen Dûr. You shall feast and dance and have 
many pieces of paper to sign in order to formalize your new position.” 
 
 “I look forward to the day,” said Eragon. He was still preoccupied with 
sifting through the numerous possible ramifications of belonging to Dûr-
grimst Ingeitum. 
 
 Sitting against a pillar, Orik shrugged off his pack and drew his ax, 
which he proceeded to twirl between his palms. After several minutes, 
he leaned forward, glaring back into Tronjheim. “Barzûl knurlar! Where 
are they? Arya said she would be right here. Ha! Elves’ only concept of 
time is late and even later.” 
 
 “Have you dealt with them much?” asked Eragon, crouching. Saphira 
watched with interest. 
 
 The dwarf laughed suddenly. “Eta. Only Arya, and then sporadically be-
cause she traveled so often. In seven decades, I’ve learned but one thing 
about her: You can’t rush an elf. Trying is like hammering a file—it might 
break, but it’ll never bend.” 
 
 “Aren’t dwarves the same?” 
 
 “Ah, but stone will shift, given enough time.” Orik sighed and shook his 
head. “Of all the races, elves change the least, which is one reason I’m re-
luctant to go.” 
 
 “But we’ll get to meet Queen Islanzadí and see Ellesméra and who 
knows what else? When was the last time a dwarf was invited into Du 
Weldenvarden?” 
 

 
79
 Orik frowned at him. “Scenery means nothing. Urgent tasks remain in 
Tronjheim and our other cities, yet I must tramp across Alagaësia to ex-
change pleasantries and sit and grow fat as you are tutored. It could take 
years!” 
 
 Years!... Still, if that’s what is required to defeat Shades and the Ra’zac, 
I’ll do it. 
 
 Saphira touched his mind: I doubt Nasuada will let us stay in Ellesméra 
for more than a few months. With what she told us, we’ll be needed fairly 
soon. 
 
 “At last!” said Orik, pushing himself upright. 
 
 Approaching were Nasuada—slippers flashing beneath her dress, like 
mice darting from a hole—Jörmundur, and Arya, who bore a pack like 
Orik’s. She wore the same black leather outfit Eragon had first seen her 
in, as well as her sword. 
 
 At that moment, it struck Eragon that Arya and Nasuada might not 
approve of him joining the Ingeitum. Guilt and trepidation shot through 
him as he realized that it had been his duty to consult Nasuada first. And 
Arya! He cringed, remembering how angry she had been after his first 
meeting with the Council of Elders. 
 
 Thus, when Nasuada stopped before him, he averted his eyes, ashamed. 
But she only said, “You accepted.” Her voice was gentle, restrained. 
 
 He nodded, still looking down. 
 
 “I wondered if you would. Now once again, all three races have a hold 
on you. The dwarves can claim your allegiance as a member of Dûrgrimst 
Ingeitum, the elves will train and shape you—and their influence may be 
the strongest, for you and Saphira are bound by their magic—and you 
have sworn fealty to me, a human.... Perhaps it is best that we share your 
loyalty.” She met his surprise with an odd smile, then pressed a small bag 
of coins into his palm and stepped away. 
 
 Jörmundur extended a hand, which Eragon shook, feeling a bit dazed. 
“Have a good trip, Eragon. Guard yourself well.” 
 
 “Come,” said Arya, gliding past them into the darkness of Farthen Dûr. 
“It is time to leave. Aiedail has set, and we have far to go.” 
 

 
80
 “Aye,” Orik agreed. He pulled out a red lantern from the side of his 
pack. 
 
 Nasuada looked them over once more. “Very well. Eragon and Saphira, 
you have the Varden’s blessings, as well as mine. May your journey be 
safe. Remember, you carry the weight of our hopes and expectations, so 
acquit yourselves honorably.” 
 
 “We will do our best,” promised Eragon. 
 
 Gripping Snowfire’s reins firmly, he started after Arya, who was already 
several yards away. Orik followed, then Saphira. As Saphira passed 
Nasuada, Eragon saw her pause and lightly lick Nasuada on the cheek. 
Then she lengthened her stride, catching up with him. 
 
 As they continued north along the road, the gate behind them shrank 
smaller and smaller until it was reduced to a pinprick of light—with two 
lonely silhouettes where Nasuada and Jörmundur remained watching. 
 
 When they finally reached Farthen Dûr’s base, they found a pair of gi-
gantic doors—thirty feet tall—open and waiting. Three dwarf guards 
bowed and moved away from the aperture. Through the doors was a 
tunnel of matching proportions, lined with columns and lanterns for the 
first fifty feet. After that it was as empty and silent as a mausoleum. 
 
 It looked exactly like Farthen Dûr’s western entrance, but Eragon knew 
that this tunnel was different. Instead of burrowing through the mile-
thick base to emerge outside, it proceeded underneath mountain after 
mountain, all the way to the dwarf city Tarnag. 
 
 “Here is our path,” said Orik, lifting the lantern. 
 
 He and Arya crossed over the threshold, but Eragon held back, sud-
denly uncertain. While he did not fear the dark, neither did he welcome 
being surrounded by eternal night until they arrived at Tarnag. And once 
he entered the barren tunnel, he would again be hurling himself into the 
unknown, abandoning the few things he had grown accustomed to 
among the Varden in exchange for an uncertain destiny. 
 
 What is it? asked Saphira. 
 
 Nothing. 
 
 He took a breath, then strode forward, allowing the mountain to swal-

 
81
low him in its depths.
 
 
 
 
 

 
82
HAMMER AND TONGS 
 
 
 Three days after the Ra’zac’s arrival, Roran found himself pacing uncon-
trollably along the edge of his camp in the Spine. He had heard nothing 
since Albriech’s visit, nor was it possible to glean information by observ-
ing Carvahall. He glared at the distant tents where the soldiers slept, then 
continued pacing. 
 
 At midday Roran had a small, dry lunch. Wiping his mouth with the 
back of his hand, he wondered, How long are the Ra’zac willing to wait? If 
it was a test of patience, he was determined to win. 
 
 To pass the time, he practiced his archery on a rotting log, stopping 
only when an arrow shattered on a rock embedded in the trunk. After 
that nothing else remained to do, except to resume striding back and 
forth along the bare track that stretched from a boulder to where he 
slept. 
 
 He was still pacing when footsteps sounded in the forest below. Grab-
bing his bow, Roran hid and waited. Relief rushed through him when 
Baldor’s face bobbed into view. Roran waved him over. 
 
 As they sat, Roran asked, “Why hasn’t anyone come?” 
 
 “We couldn’t,” said Baldor, wiping sweat off his brow. “The soldiers 
have been watching us too closely. This was the first opportunity we had 
to get away. I can’t stay long either.” He turned his face toward the peak 
above them and shuddered. “You’re braver than I, staying here. Have you 
had any trouble with wolves, bears, mountain cats?” 
 
 “No, no, I’m fine. Did the soldiers say anything new?” 
 
 “One of them bragged to Morn last night that their squad was hand-
picked for this mission.” Roran frowned. “They haven’t been too quiet.... 
At least two or three of them get drunk each night. A group of them tore 
up Morn’s common room the first day.” 
 
 “Did they pay for the damage?” 
 
 “’Course not.” 
 
 Roran shifted, staring down at the village. “I still have trouble believing 
that the Empire would go to these lengths to capture me. What could I 

 
83
give them? What do they think I can give them?” 
 
 Baldor followed his gaze. “The Ra’zac questioned Katrina today. Some-
one mentioned that the two of you are close, and the Ra’zac were curious 
if she knew where you’d gone.” 
 
 Roran refocused on Baldor’s open face. “Is she all right?” 
 
 “It would take more than those two to scare her,” reassured Baldor. His 
next sentence was cautious and probing. “Perhaps you should consider 
turning yourself in.” 
 
 “I’d sooner hang myself and them with me!” Roran started up and 
stalked over his usual route, still tapping his leg. “How can you say that, 
knowing how they tortured my father?” 
 
 Catching his arm, Baldor said, “What happens if you remain in hiding 
and the soldiers don’t give up and leave? They’ll assume we lied to help 
you escape. The Empire doesn’t forgive traitors.” 
 
 Roran shrugged off Baldor. He spun around, tapping his leg, then 
abruptly sat. If don’t show myself, the Ra’zac will blame the people at 
hand. If I attempt to lead the Ra’zac away... Roran was not a skilled 
enough woodsman to evade thirty men and the Ra’zac. Eragon could do it, 
but not me. Still, unless the situation changed, it might be the only choice 
available to him. 
 
 He looked at Baldor. “I don’t want anyone to be hurt on my behalf. I’ll 
wait for now, and if the Ra’zac grow impatient and threaten someone... 
Well then, I’ll think of something else to do.” 
 
 “It’s a nasty situation all around,” offered Baldor. 
 
 “One I intend to survive.” 
 
 Baldor departed soon afterward, leaving Roran alone with his thoughts 
on his endless path. He covered mile after mile, grinding a rut into the 
earth under the weight of his ruminations. When chill dusk arrived, he 
removed his boots—for fear of wearing them out—and proceeded to pad 
barefoot. 
 
 Just as the waxing moon rose and subsumed the night shadows in 
beams of marble light, Roran noticed a disturbance in Carvahall. Scores of 
lanterns bobbed through the darkened village, winking in and out as they 

 
84
floated behind houses. The yellow specks clustered in the center of Car-
vahall, like a cloud of fireflies, then streamed haphazardly toward the 
edge of town, where they were met by a hard line of torches from the 
soldiers’ camp. 
 
 For two hours, Roran watched the opposing sides face each other—the 
agitated lanterns milling helplessly against the stolid torches. Finally, the 
lambent groups dispersed and filtered back into the tents and houses. 
 
 When nothing else of interest occurred, Roran untied his bedroll and 
slipped under the blankets. 
 
   
 
 Throughout the next day, Carvahall was consumed with unusual activ-
ity. Figures strode between houses and even, Roran was surprised to see, 
rode out into Palancar Valley toward various farms. At noon he saw two 
men enter the soldiers’ camp and disappear into the Ra’zac’s tent for al-
most an hour. 
 
 So involved was he with the proceedings, Roran barely moved the en-
tire day. 
 
 He was in the middle of dinner when, as he had hoped, Baldor reap-
peared. “Hungry?” asked Roran, gesturing. 
 
 Baldor shook his head and sat with an air of exhaustion. Dark lines un-
der his eyes made his skin look thin and bruised. “Quimby’s dead.” 
 
 Roran’s bowl clattered as it struck the ground. He cursed, wiping cold 
stew off his leg, then asked, “How?” 
 
 “A couple of soldiers started bothering Tara last night.” Tara was 
Morn’s wife. “She didn’t really mind, except the men got in a fight over 
who she was supposed to serve next. Quimby was there—checking a 
cask Morn said had turned—and he tried to break them up.” Roran nod-
ded. That was Quimby, always interfering to make sure others behaved 
properly. “Only thing is, a soldier threw a pitcher and hit him on the 
temple. Killed him instantly.” 
 
 Roran stared at the ground with his hands on his hips, struggling to re-
gain control over his ragged breathing. He felt as if Baldor had knocked 
the wind out of him. It doesn’t seem possible.... Quimby, gone? The farmer 
and part-time brewer was as much a part of the landscape as the moun-

 
85
tains surrounding Carvahall, an unquestioned presence that shaped the 
fabric of the village. “Will the men be punished?” 
 
 Baldor held up his hand. “Right after Quimby died, the Ra’zac stole his 
body from the tavern and hauled it out to their tents. We tried to get it 
back last night, but they wouldn’t talk with us.” 
 
 “I saw.” 
 
 Baldor grunted, rubbing his face. “Dad and Loring met with the Ra’zac 
today and managed to convince them to release the body. The soldiers, 
however, won’t face any consequences.” He paused. “I was about to leave 
when Quimby was handed over. You know what his wife got? Bones.” 
 
 “Bones!” 
 
 “Every one of them was nibbled clean—you could see the bite marks—
and most had been cracked open for the marrow.” 
 
 Disgust gripped Roran, as well as profound horror for Quimby’s fate. It 
was well known that a person’s spirit could never rest until his body was 
given a proper burial. Revolted by the desecration, he asked, “What, who, 
ate him then?” 
 
 “The soldiers were just as appalled. It must have been the Ra’zac.” 
 
 “Why? To what end?” 
 
 “I don’t think,” said Baldor, “that the Ra’zac are human. You’ve never 
seen them up close, but their breath is foul, and they always cover their 
faces with black scarves. Their backs are humped and twisted, and they 
speak to each other with clicks. Even their men seem to fear them.” 
 
 “If they aren’t human, then what kind of creatures can they be?” de-
manded Roran. “They’re not Urgals.” 
 
 “Who knows?” 
 
 Fear now joined Roran’s revulsion—fear of the supernatural. He saw it 
echoed on Baldor’s face as the young man clasped his hands. For all the 
stories of Galbatorix’s misdeeds, it was still a shock to have the king’s evil 
roosted among their homes. A sense of history settled on Roran as he re-
alized he was involved with forces he had previously been acquainted 
with only through songs and stories. “Something should be done,” he 

 
86
muttered. 
 
   
 
 The air grew warmer through the night, until by afternoon Palancar 
Valley shimmered and sweltered with the unexpected spring heat. Car-
vahall looked peaceful under the bald blue sky, yet Roran could feel the 
sour resentment that clenched its inhabitants with malicious intensity. 
The calm was like a sheet stretched taut in the wind. 
 
 Despite the aura of expectation, the day proved to be utterly boring; 
Roran spent most of his time brushing Horst’s mare. At last he lay to 
sleep, looking up past the towering pines at the haze of stars that adorned 
the night sky. They seemed so close, it felt as if he hurtled among them, 
falling toward the blackest void. 
 
   
 
 The moon was setting when Roran woke, his throat raw from smoke. 
He coughed and rolled upright, blinking as his eyes burned and watered. 
The noxious fumes made it difficult to breathe. 
 
 Roran grabbed his blankets and saddled the frightened mare, then 
spurred her farther up the mountain, hoping to find clear air. It quickly 
became apparent that the smoke was ascending with him, so he turned 
and cut sideways through the forest. 
 
 After several minutes spent maneuvering in the dark, they finally broke 
free and rode onto a ledge swept clean by a breeze. Purging his lungs with 
long breaths, Roran scanned the valley for the fire. He spotted it in an in-
stant. 
 
 Carvahall’s hay barn glowed white in a cyclone of flames, transforming 
its precious contents into a fountain of amber motes. Roran trembled as 
he watched the destruction of the town’s feed. He wanted to scream and 
run through the forest to help with the bucket brigade, yet he could not 
force himself to abandon his own safety. 
 
 Now a molten spark landed on Delwin’s house. Within seconds, the 
thatched roof exploded in a wave of fire. 
 
 Roran cursed and tore his hair, tears streaming down his face. This was 
why mishandling fire was a hanging offense in Carvahall. Was it an acci-
dent? Was it the soldiers? Are the Ra’zac punishing the villagers for shield-

 
87
ing me?... Am I somehow responsible for this? 
 
 Fisk’s house joined the conflagration next. Aghast, Roran could only 
avert his face, hating himself for his cowardice. 
 
   
 
 By dawn all the fires had been extinguished or burned out on their 
own. Only sheer luck and a calm night saved the rest of Carvahall from 
being consumed. 
 
 Roran waited until he was sure of the outcome, then retreated to his 
old camp and threw himself down to rest. From morning through eve-
ning, he was oblivious to the world, except through the lens of his trou-
bled dreams. 
 
 Upon his return to awareness, Roran simply waited for the visitor he 
was sure would appear. This time it was Albriech. He arrived at dusk 
with a grim, worn expression. “Come with me,” he said. 
 
 Roran tensed. “Why?” Have they decided to give me up? If he was the 
cause of the fire, he could understand the villagers wanting him gone. He 
might even agree it was necessary. It was unreasonable to expect every-
one in Carvahall to sacrifice themselves for him. Still, that did not mean 
he would allow them to just hand him over to the Ra’zac. After what the 
two monsters had done to Quimby, Roran would fight to the death to 
avoid being their prisoner. 
 
 “Because,” said Albriech, clenching his jaw muscles, “it was the soldiers 
who started the fire. Morn banned them from the Seven Sheaves, but 
they still got drunk on their own beer. One of them dropped a torch 
against the hay barn on his way to bed.” 
 
 “Was anyone hurt?” asked Roran. 
 
 “A few burns. Gertrude was able to handle them. We tried to negotiate 
with the Ra’zac. They spat on our requests that the Empire replace our 
losses and the guilty face justice. They even refused to confine the sol-
diers to the tents.” 
 
 “So why should I return?” 
 
 Albriech chuckled hollowly. “For hammer and tongs. We need your 
help to...remove the Ra’zac.” 

 
88
 
 “You would do that for me?” 
 
 “We’re not risking ourselves for your sake alone. This concerns the en-
tire village now. At least come talk to Father and the others and hear 
their thoughts... I’d think you would be glad to get out of these cursed 
mountains.” 
 
 Roran considered Albriech’s proposition long and hard before deciding 
to accompany him. It’s this or run for it, and I can always run later. He 
fetched the mare, tied his bags to the saddle, then followed Albriech to-
ward the valley floor. 
 
 Their progress slowed as they neared Carvahall, using trees and brush 
for cover. Slipping behind a rain barrel, Albriech checked to see if the 
streets were clear, then signaled to Roran. Together they crept from 
shadow to shade, constantly on guard for the Empire’s servants. At 
Horst’s forge, Albriech opened one of the double doors just far enough 
for Roran and the mare to quietly enter. 
 
 Inside, the workshop was lit by a single candle, which cast a trembling 
glow over the ring of faces that hovered about it in the surrounding 
darkness. Horst was there—his thick beard protruded like a shelf into the 
light—flanked by the hard visages of Delwin, Gedric, and then Loring. 
The rest of the group was composed of younger men: Baldor, Loring’s 
three sons, Parr, and Quimby’s boy, Nolfavrell, who was only thirteen. 
 
 They all turned to look as Roran entered the assembly. Horst said, “Ah, 
you made it. You escaped misfortune while in the Spine?” 
 
 “I was lucky.” 
 
 “Then we can proceed.” 
 
 “With what, exactly?” Roran hitched the mare to an anvil as he spoke. 
 
 Loring answered, the shoemaker’s parchment face a mass of contorting 
lines and grooves. “We have attempted reason with these Ra’zac... these 
invaders. ” He stopped, his thin frame racked with an unpleasant, metal-
lic wheeze deep in his chest. “They have refused reason. They have en-
dangered us all with no sign of remorse or contrition. ” He made a noise in 
his throat, then said with pronounced deliberation, “They... must... go. 
Such creatures—” 
 

 
89
 “No,” said Roran. “Not creatures. Desecrators.” 
 
 The faces scowled and bobbed in agreement. Delwin picked up the 
thread of conversation: “The point is, everyone’s life is at stake. If that fire 
had spread any farther, dozens of people would have been killed and 
those who escaped would have lost everything they own. As a result, 
we’ve agreed to drive the Ra’zac away from Carvahall. Will you join us?” 
 
 Roran hesitated. “What if they return or send for reinforcements? We 
can’t defeat the entire Empire.” 
 
 “No,” said Horst, grave and solemn, “but neither can we stand silent and 
allow the soldiers to kill us and to destroy our property. A man can en-
dure only so much abuse before he must strike back.” 
 
 Loring laughed, throwing back his head so the flame gilded the stumps 
of his teeth. “First we fortify,” he whispered with glee, “then we fight. 
We’ll make them regret they ever clapped their festering eyes on Carva-
hall! Ha ha!” 
 
 
 
 

 
90
RETALIATION 
 
 
 After Roran agreed to their plan, Horst began distributing shovels, 
pitchforks, flails—anything that could be used to beat the soldiers and 
the Ra’zac away. 
 
 Roran hefted a pick, then set it aside. Though he had never cared for 
Brom’s stories, one of them, the “Song of Gerand,” resonated with him 
whenever he heard it. It told of Gerand, the greatest warrior of his time, 
who relinquished his sword for a wife and farm. He found no peace, 
however, as a jealous lord initiated a blood feud against Gerand’s family, 
which forced Gerand to kill once more. Yet he did not fight with his 
blade, but with a simple hammer. 
 
 Going to the wall, Roran removed a medium-sized hammer with a long 
handle and a rounded blade on one side of the head. He tossed it from 
hand to hand, then went to Horst and asked, “May I have this?” 
 
 Horst eyed the tool and Roran. “Use it wisely.” Then he said to the rest 
of the group, “Listen. We want to scare, not kill. Break a few bones if you 
want, but don’t get carried away. And whatever you do, don’t stand and 
fight. No matter how brave or heroic you feel, remember that they are 
trained soldiers.” 
 
 When everyone was equipped, they left the forge and wound their way 
through Carvahall to the edge of the Ra’zac’s camp. The soldiers had al-
ready gone to bed, except for four sentries who patrolled the perimeter 
of the gray tents. The Ra’zac’s two horses were picketed by a smoldering 
fire. 
 
 Horst quietly issued orders, sending Albriech and Delwin to ambush 
two of the sentries, and Parr and Roran to ambush the other two. 
 
 Roran held his breath as he stalked the oblivious soldier. His heart be-
gan to shudder as energy spiked through his limbs. He hid behind the 
corner of a house, quivering, and waited for Horst’s signal. Wait. 
 
 Wait. 
 
 With a roar, Horst burst from hiding, leading the charge into the tents. 
Roran darted forward and swung his hammer, catching the sentry on the 
shoulder with a grisly crunch. 
 

 
91
 The man howled and dropped his halberd. He staggered as Roran 
struck his ribs and back. Roran raised the hammer again and the man re-
treated, screaming for help. 
 
 Roran ran after him, shouting incoherently. He knocked in the side of a 
wool tent, trampling whatever was inside, then smashed the top of a 
helmet he saw emerging from another tent. The metal rang like a bell. 
Roran barely noticed as Loring danced past—the old man cackled and 
hooted in the night as he jabbed the soldiers with a pitchfork. Every-
where was a confusion of struggling bodies. 
 
 Whirling around, Roran saw a soldier attempting to string his bow. He 
rushed forward and hit the back of the bow with his steel mallet, break-
ing the wood in two. The soldier fled. 
 
 The Ra’zac scrambled free of their tent with terrible screeches, swords 
in hand. Before they could attack, Baldor untethered the horses and sent 
them galloping toward the two scarecrow figures. The Ra’zac separated, 
then regrouped, only to be swept away as the soldiers’ morale broke and 
they ran. 
 
 Then it was over. 
 
 Roran panted in the silence, his hand cramped around the hammer’s 
handle. After a moment, he picked his way through the crumpled 
mounds of tents and blankets to Horst. The smith was grinning under his 
beard. “That’s the best brawl I’ve had in years.” 
 
 Behind them, Carvahall jumped to life as people tried to discover the 
source of the commotion. Roran watched lamps flare up behind shut-
tered windows, then turned as he heard soft sobbing. 
 
 The boy, Nolfavrell, was kneeling by the body of a soldier, methodi-
cally stabbing him in the chest as tears slid down his chin. Gedric and Al-
briech hurried over and pulled Nolfavrell away from the corpse. 
 
 “He shouldn’t have come,” said Roran. 
 
 Horst shrugged. “It was his right.” 
 
 All the same, killing one of the Ra’zac’s men will only make it harder to 
rid ourselves of the desecrators.“ We should barricade the road and be-
tween the houses so they won’t catch us by surprise.” Studying the men 
for any injuries, Roran saw that Delwin had received a long cut on his 

 
92
forearm, which the farmer bandaged with a strip torn from his ruined 
shirt. 
 
 With a few shouts, Horst organized their group. He dispatched Al-
briech and Baldor to retrieve Quimby’s wagon from the forge and had 
Loring’s sons and Parr scour Carvahall for items that could be used to se-
cure the village. 
 
 Even as he spoke, people congregated on the edge of the field, staring at 
what was left of the Ra’zac’s camp and the dead soldier. “What hap-
pened?” cried Fisk. 
 
 Loring scuttled forward and stared the carpenter in the eye. “What 
happened? I’ll tell you what happened. We routed the dung-beardlings... 
caught them with their boots off and whipped them like dogs!” 
 
 “I am glad.” The strong voice came from Birgit, an auburn-haired 
woman who clasped Nolfavrell against her bosom, ignoring the blood 
smeared across his face. “They deserve to die like cowards for my hus-
band’s death.” 
 
 The villagers murmured in agreement, but then Thane spoke: “Have 
you gone mad, Horst? Even if you frightened off the Ra’zac and their sol-
diers, Galbatorix will just send more men. The Empire will never give up 
until they get Roran.” 
 
 “We should hand him over,” snarled Sloan. 
 
 Horst raised his hands. “I agree; no one is worth more than all of Carva-
hall. But if we surrender Roran, do you really think Galbatorix will let us 
escape punishment for our resistance? In his eyes, we’re no better than 
the Varden.” 
 
 “Then why did you attack?” demanded Thane. “Who gave you the au-
thority to make this decision? You’ve doomed us all!” 
 
 This time Birgit answered. “Would you let them kill your wife?” She 
pressed her hands on either side of her son’s face, then showed Thane her 
bloody palms, like an accusation. “Would you let them burn us?... Where 
is your manhood, loam breaker?” 
 
 He lowered his gaze, unable to face her stark expression. 
 
 “They burned my farm,” said Roran, “devoured Quimby, and nearly de-

 
93
stroyed Carvahall. Such crimes cannot go unpunished. Are we frightened 
rabbits to cower down and accept our fate? No! We have a right to de-
fend ourselves.” He stopped as Albriech and Baldor trudged up the street, 
dragging the wagon. “We can debate later. Now we have to prepare. 
Who will help us?” 
 
 Forty or more men volunteered. Together they set about the difficult 
task of making Carvahall impenetrable. Roran worked incessantly, nailing 
fence slats between houses, piling barrels full of rocks for makeshift 
walls, and dragging logs across the main road, which they blocked with 
two wagons tipped on their sides. 
 
 As Roran hurried from one chore to another, Katrina waylaid him in an 
alley. She hugged him, then said, “I’m glad you’re back, and that you’re 
safe.” 
 
 He kissed her lightly. “Katrina... I have to speak with you as soon as 
we’re finished.” She smiled uncertainly, but with a spark of hope. “You 
were right; it was foolish of me to delay. Every moment we spend to-
gether is precious, and I have no desire to squander what time we have 
when a whim of fate could tear us apart.” 
 
   
 
 Roran was tossing water on the thatching of Kiselt’s house—so it could 
not catch fire—when Parr shouted, “Ra’zac!” 
 
 Dropping the bucket, Roran ran to the wagons, where he had left his 
hammer. As he grabbed the weapon, he saw a single Ra’zac sitting on a 
horse far down the road, almost out of bowshot. The creature was illu-
minated by a torch in its left hand, while its right was drawn back, as if to 
throw something. 
 
 Roran laughed. “Is he going to toss rocks at us? He’s too far away to 
even hit—” He was cut off as the Ra’zac whipped down its arm and a 
glass vial arched across the distance between them and shattered against 
the wagon to his right. An instant later, a fireball launched the wagon 
into the air while a fist of burning air flung Roran against a wall. 
 
 Dazed, he fell to his hands and knees, gasping for breath. Through the 
roaring in his ears came the tattoo of galloping horses. He forced himself 
upright and faced the sound, only to dive aside as the Ra’zac raced into 
Carvahall through the burning gap in the wagons. 
 

 
94
 The Ra’zac reined in their steeds, blades flashing as they hacked at the 
people strewn around them. Roran saw three men die, then Horst and 
Loring reached the Ra’zac and began pressing them back with pitchforks. 
Before the villagers could rally, soldiers poured through the breach, kill-
ing indiscriminately in the darkness. 
 
 Roran knew they had to be stopped, else Carvahall would be taken. He 
jumped at a soldier, catching him by surprise, and hit him in the face 
with the hammer’s blade. The soldier crumpled without a sound. As the 
man’s compatriots rushed toward him, Roran wrestled the corpse’s shield 
off his limp arm. He barely managed to get it free in time to block the 
first strike. 
 
 Backstepping toward the Ra’zac, Roran parried a sword thrust, then 
swung his hammer up under the man’s chin, sending him to the ground. 
“To me!” shouted Roran. “Defend your homes!” He sidestepped a jab as 
five men attempted to encircle him. “To me!” 
 
 Baldor answered his call first, then Albriech. A few seconds later, Lor-
ing’s sons joined him, followed by a score of others. From the side streets, 
women and children pelted the soldiers with rocks. “Stay together,” or-
dered Roran, standing his ground. “There are more of us.” 
 
 The soldiers halted as the line of villagers before them continued to 
thicken. With more than a hundred men at his back, Roran slowly ad-
vanced. 
 
 “Attack, you foolsss,” screamed a Ra’zac, dodging Loring’s pitchfork. 
 
 A single arrow whizzed toward Roran. He caught it on his shield and 
laughed. The Ra’zac were level with the soldiers now, hissing with frus-
tration. They glared at the villagers from under their inky cowls. Sud-
denly Roran felt himself become lethargic and powerless to move; it was 
hard to even think. Fatigue seemed to chain his arms and legs in place. 
 
 Then from farther in Carvahall, Roran heard a raw shout from Birgit. A 
second later, a rock hurtled over his head and bored toward the lead 
Ra’zac, who twitched with supernatural speed to avoid the missile. The 
distraction, slight though it was, freed Roran’s mind from the soporific 
influence. Was that magic? he wondered. 
 
 He dropped the shield, grasped his hammer with both hands, and raised 
it far above his head—just like Horst did when spreading metal. Roran 
went up on tiptoe, his entire body bowed backward, then whipped his 

 
95
arms down with a huh! The hammer cartwheeled through the air and 
bounced off the Ra’zac’s shield, leaving a formidable dent. 
 
 The two attacks were enough to disrupt the last of the Ra’zac’s strange 
power. They clicked rapidly to each other as the villagers roared and 
marched forward, then the Ra’zac yanked on their reins, wheeling 
around. 
 
 “Retreat,” they growled, riding past the soldiers. The crimson-clad war-
riors sullenly backed out of Carvahall, stabbing at anyone who came too 
close. Only when they were a good distance from the burning wagons did 
they dare turn their backs. 
 
 Roran sighed and retrieved his hammer, feeling the bruises on his side 
and back where he had hit the wall. He bowed his head as he saw that 
the explosion had killed Parr. Nine other men had died. Already wives 
and mothers rent the night with their wails of grief. 
 
 How could this happen here? 
 
 “Everyone, come!” called Baldor. 
 
 Roran blinked and stumbled to the middle of the road, where Baldor 
stood. A Ra’zac sat beetle-like on a horse only twenty yards away. The 
creature crooked a finger at Roran and said, “You... you sssmell like your 
cousin. We never forget a sssmell.” 
 
 “What do you want?” he shouted. “Why are you here?” 
 
 The 
Ra’zac 
chuckled 
in 
a 
horrible, 
insectile 
way. 
“We 
want...information. ” It glanced over its shoulder, where its companions 
had disappeared, then cried, “Release Roran and you ssshall be sold as 
ssslaves. Protect him, and we will eat you all. We ssshall have your an-
swer when next we come. Be sssure it is the right one.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
96
AZ SWELDN RAK ANHÛIN 
 
 
 Light burst into the tunnel as the doors dragged open. Eragon winced, 
his eyes sorely unaccustomed to daylight after so long underground. Be-
side him, Saphira hissed and arched her neck to get a better view of their 
surroundings. 
 
 It had taken them two days to traverse the subterranean passage from 
Farthen Dûr, though it felt longer to Eragon, due to the never-ending 
dusk that surrounded them and the silence it had imposed upon their 
group. In all, he could recall only a handful of words being exchanged 
during their journey. 
 
 Eragon had hoped to learn more about Arya while they traveled to-
gether, but the only information he had gleaned came simply as a result 
of observation. He had not supped with her before and was startled to 
see that she brought her own food and ate no meat. When he asked her 
why, she said, “You will never again consume an animal’s flesh after you 
have been trained, or if you do, it will be only on the rarest of occasions.” 
 
 “Why should I give up meat?” he scoffed. 
 
 “I cannot explain with words, but you will understand once we reach 
Ellesméra.” 
 
 All that was forgotten now as he hurried to the threshold, eager to see 
their destination. He found himself standing on a granite outcropping, 
more than a hundred feet above a purple-hued lake, brilliant under the 
eastern sun. Like Kóstha-mérna, the water reached from mountain to 
mountain, filling the valley’s end. From the lake’s far side, the Az Ragni 
flowed north, winding between the peaks until—in the far distance—it 
rushed out onto the eastern plains. 
 
 To his right, the mountains were bare, save for a few trails, but to his 
left... to his left was the dwarf city Tarnag. Here the dwarves had re-
worked the seemingly immutable Beors into a series of terraces. The 
lower terraces were mainly farms—dark curves of land waiting to be 
planted—dotted with squat halls, which as best he could tell were built 
entirely of stone. Above those empty levels rose tier upon tier of inter-
locking buildings until they culminated in a giant dome of gold and 
white. It was as if the entire city was nothing more than a line of steps 
leading to the dome. The cupola glistened like polished moonstone, a 
milky bead floating atop a pyramid of gray slate. 

 
97
 
 Orik anticipated Eragon’s question, saying, “That is Celbedeil, the great-
est temple of dwarfdom and home of Dûrgrimst Quan—the Quan clan—
who act as servants and messengers to the gods.” 
 
 Do they rule Tarnag? asked Saphira. Eragon repeated the query. 
 
 “Nay,” said Arya, stepping past them. “Though the Quan are strong, 
they are small in numbers, despite their power over the afterlife... and 
gold. It is the Ragni Hefthyn—the River Guard—who control Tarnag. 
We will stay with their clan chief, Ûndin, while here.” 
 
 As they followed the elf off the outcropping and through the gnarled 
forest that blanketed the mountain, Orik whispered to Eragon, “Mind her 
not. She has been arguing with the Quan for many a year. Every time she 
visits Tarnag and speaks with a priest, it produces a quarrel fierce enough 
to scare a Kull.” 
 
 “Arya?” 
 
 Orik nodded grimly. “I know little of it, but I’ve heard she disagrees 
strongly with much that the Quan practice. It seems that elves do not 
hold with ‘muttering into the air for help.’ ” 
 
 Eragon stared at Arya’s back as they descended, wondering if Orik’s 
words were true, and if so, what Arya herself believed. He took a deep 
breath, pushing the matter from his mind. It felt wonderful to be back in 
the open, where he could smell the moss and ferns and trees of the forest, 
where the sun was warm on his face and bees and other insects swarmed 
pleasantly. 
 
 The path took them down to the edge of the lake before rising back 
toward Tarnag and its open gates. “How have you hidden Tarnag from 
Galbatorix?” asked Eragon. “Farthen Dûr I understand, but this... I’ve 
never seen anything like it.” 
 
 Orik laughed softly. “Hide it? That would be impossible. No, after the 
Riders fell, we were forced to abandon all our cities aboveground and re-
treat into our tunnels in order to escape Galbatorix and the Forsworn. 
They would often fly through the Beors, killing anyone who they en-
countered.” 
 
 “I thought that dwarves always lived underground.” 
 

 
98
 Orik’s thick eyebrows met in a frown. “Why should we? We may have 
an affinity for stone, but we like the open air as much as elves or humans. 
However, it has only been in the last decade and a half, ever since Mor-
zan died, that we have dared return to Tarnag and other of our ancient 
dwellings. Galbatorix may be unnaturally powerful, but even he would 
not attack an entire city alone. Of course, he and his dragon could cause 
us no end of trouble if they wanted, but these days they rarely leave 
Urû’baen, even for short trips. Nor could Galbatorix bring an army here 
without first defeating Buragh or Farthen Dûr.” 
 
 Which he nearly did, commented Saphira. 
 
 Cresting a small mound, Eragon jolted with surprise as an animal 
crashed through the underbrush and onto the path. The scraggly creature 
looked like a mountain goat from the Spine, except that it was a third 
larger and had giant ribbed horns that curled around its cheeks, making 
an Urgal’s seem no bigger than a swallow nest. Odder still was the saddle 
lashed across the goat’s back and the dwarf seated firmly on it, aiming a 
half-drawn bow into the air. 
 
 “Hert dûrgrimst? Fild rastn?” shouted the strange dwarf. 
 
 “Orik Thrifkz menthiv oen Hrethcarach Eragon rak Dûrgrimst Ingei-
tum,” answered Orik. “Wharn, az vanyali-carharûg Arya. Né oc Ûndinz 
grimstbelardn.” The goat stared warily at Saphira. Eragon noted how 
bright and intelligent its eyes were, though its face was rather droll with 
its frosty beard and somber expression. It reminded him of Hrothgar, and 
he almost laughed, thinking how very dwarfish the animal was. 
 
 “Azt jok jordn rast,” came the reply. 
 
 With no discernible command on the dwarf’s part, the goat leaped 
forward, covering such an extraordinary distance it seemed to take flight 
for a moment. Then rider and steed vanished between the trees. 
 
 “What was that?” asked Eragon, amazed. 
 
 Orik resumed walking. “A Feldûnost, one of the five animals unique to 
these mountains. A clan is named after each one. However, Dûrgrimst 
Feldûnost is perhaps the bravest and most revered of the clans.” 
 
 “Why so?” 
 
 “We depend upon Feldûnost for milk, wool, and meat. Without their 

 
99
sustenance, we could not live in the Beors. When Galbatorix and his trai-
torous Riders were terrorizing us, it was Dûrgrimst Feldûnost who risked 
themselves—and still do—to tend the herds and fields. As such, we are 
all in their debt.” 
 
 “Do all dwarves ride Feldûnost?” He stumbled slightly over the unusual 
word. 
 
 “Only in the mountains. Feldûnost are hardy and sure-footed, but they 
are better suited for cliffs than open plains.” 
 
 Saphira nudged Eragon with her nose, causing Snowfire to shy away. 
Now those would be good hunting, better than any I had in the Spine or 
hence! If I have time in Tarnag— 
 
 No, he said. We can’t afford to offend the dwarves. 
 
 She snorted, irritated. I could ask permission first. 
 
 Now the path that had concealed them for so long under dark boughs 
entered the great clearing that surrounded Tarnag. Groups of observers 
had already begun to gather in the fields when seven Feldûnost with jew-
eled harnesses bounded out from the city. Their riders bore lances tipped 
with pennants that snapped like whips in the air. Reining in his strange 
beast, the lead dwarf said, “Thou art well-come to this city of Tarnag. By 
otho of Ûndin and Gannel, I, Thorv, son of Brokk, offer in peace the 
shelter of our halls.” His accent grumbled and rasped with a rough burr 
quite unlike Orik’s. 
 
 “And by Hrothgar’s otho, we of the Ingeitum accept your hospitality,” 
responded Orik. 
 
 “As do I, in Islanzadí’s stead,” added Arya. 
 
 Appearing satisfied, Thorv motioned to his fellow riders, who spurred 
their Feldûnost into formation around the four of them. With a flourish, 
the dwarves rode off, guiding them to Tarnag and through the city gates. 
 
 The outer wall was forty feet thick and formed a shadowed tunnel to 
the first of the many farms that belted Tarnag. Five more tiers—each of 
which was defended by a fortified gate—carried them past the fields and 
into the city proper. 
 
 In contrast to Tarnag’s thickly built ramparts, the buildings within, 

 
100
though of stone, were shaped with such cunning as to give the impres-
sion of grace and lightness. Strong, bold carvings, usually of animals, 
adorned the houses and shops. But even more striking was the stone it-
self: vibrant hues, from bright scarlet to the subtlest of greens, glazed the 
rock in translucent layers. 
 
 And hung throughout the city were the dwarves’ flameless lanterns, 
their multicolored sparks harbingers of the Beors’ long dusk and night. 
 
 Unlike Tronjheim, Tarnag had been constructed in proportion to the 
dwarves, with no concession for human, elf, or dragon visitors. At the 
most, doorways were five feet high, and they were often only four and a 
half. Eragon was of middling height, but now he felt like a giant trans-
ported onto a puppet stage. 
 
 The streets were wide and crammed. Dwarves of various clans hurried 
about their business or stood haggling in and around shops. Many were 
garbed in strange, exotic costumes, such as a block of fierce black-haired 
dwarves who wore silver helmets forged in the likeness of wolf heads. 
 
 Eragon stared at the dwarf women the most, as he had only caught 
brief glimpses of them while in Tronjheim. They were broader than the 
men, and their faces were heavyset, yet their eyes sparkled and their hair 
was lustrous and their hands were gentle on their diminutive children. 
They eschewed frippery, except for small, intricate brooches of iron and 
stone. 
 
 At the Feldûnost’s piercing footsteps, the dwarves turned to look at the 
new arrivals. They did not cheer as Eragon had expected, but rather 
bowed and murmured, “Shadeslayer.” As they saw the hammer and stars 
upon Eragon’s helm, admiration was replaced by shock and, in many 
cases, outrage. A number of the angrier dwarves contracted around the 
Feldûnost, glaring between the animals at Eragon and shouting impreca-
tions. 
 
 The back of Eragon’s neck prickled. It seems that adopting me wasn’t the 
most popular decision Hrothgar could make. 
 
 Aye, agreed Saphira. He may have strengthened his hold on you, but at 
the cost of alienating many of the dwarves.... We’d better get out of sight be-
fore blood is shed. 
 
 Thorv and the other guards rode forward as if the crowd was nonexis-
tent, clearing the way through seven additional tiers until only a single 

 
101
gate separated them from the mass of Celbedeil. Then Thorv turned left, 
toward a great hall pressed against the side of the mountain and pro-
tected in fore by a barbican with two machicolated towers. 
 
 As they neared the hall, a group of armed dwarves streamed out from 
between the houses and formed a thick line, blocking the street. Long 
purple veils covered their faces and draped over their shoulders, like mail 
coifs. 
 
 The guards immediately reined in their Feldûnost, faces hard. “What is 
it?” Eragon asked Orik, but the dwarf only shook his head and strode 
forward, a hand on his ax. 
 
 “Etzil nithgech!” cried a veiled dwarf, raising a fist. “Formv Hrethca-
rach... formv Jurgencarmeitder nos eta goroth bahst Tarnag, dûr encesti 
rak kythn! Jok is warrev az barzûlegûr dûr dûrgrimst, Az Sweldn rak An-
hûin, môgh tor rak Jurgenvren? Né ûdim etal os rast knurlag. Knurlag 
ana...” For a long minute, he continued to rant with growing spleen. 
 
 “Vrron!” barked Thorv, cutting him off, then the two dwarves began 
arguing. Despite the harsh exchange, Eragon saw that Thorv seemed to 
respect the other dwarf. 
 
 Eragon shifted to the side—trying to get a better view past Thorv’s 
Feldûnost—and the veiled dwarf abruptly fell silent, jabbing at Eragon’s 
helm with an expression of horror. 
 
 “Knurlag qana qirânû Dûrgrimst Ingeitum!” he screamed. “Qarzûl ana 
Hrothgar oen volfild—” 
 
 “Jok is frekk dûrgrimstvren?” interrupted Orik quietly, drawing his ax. 
Worried, Eragon glanced at Arya, but she was too intent on the confron-
tation to notice him. He surreptitiously slid his hand down and around 
Zar’roc’s wire-wrapped hilt. 
 
 The strange dwarf stared hard at Orik, then removed an iron ring from 
his pocket, plucked three hairs from his beard, twined them around the 
ring, and threw it onto the street with an impervious clink, spitting after 
it. Without a word, the purple-shrouded dwarves filed away. 
 
 Thorv, Orik, and the other warriors flinched as the ring bounced across 
the granite pavement. Even Arya seemed taken aback. Two of the 
younger dwarves blanched and reached for their blades, then dropped 
their hands as Thorv barked, “Eta!” 

 
102
 
 Their reactions unsettled Eragon far more than the raucous exchange 
had. As Orik strode forward alone and deposited the ring in a pouch, Er-
agon asked, “What does it mean?” 
 
 “It means,” said Thorv, “that you have enemies.” 
 
 They hurried through the barbican to a wide courtyard arrayed with 
three banquet tables, decorated with lanterns and banners. Before the ta-
bles stood a group of dwarves, foremost among them a gray-bearded 
dwarf swathed in wolfskin. He spread his arms, saying, “Welcome to 
Tarnag, home of Dûrgrimst Ragni Hefthyn. We have heard much praise 
of you, Eragon Shadeslayer. I am Ûndin, son of Derûnd and clan chief.” 
 
 Another dwarf stepped forward. He had the shoulders and chest of a 
warrior, topped with hooded black eyes that never left Eragon’s face. 
“And I, Gannel, son of Orm Blood-ax and clan chief of Dûrgrimst Quan.” 
 
 “It is an honor to be your guests,” said Eragon, inclining his head. He felt 
Saphira’s irritation at being ignored. Patience, he murmured, forcing a 
smile. 
 
 She snorted. 
 
 The clan chiefs greeted Arya and Orik in turn, but their hospitality was 
lost on Orik, whose only response was to extend his hand, the iron ring 
on his palm. 
 
 Ûndin’s eyes widened, and he gingerly lifted the ring, pinching it be-
tween his thumb and forefinger as if it were a venomous snake. “Who 
gave this to you?” 
 
 “It was Az Sweldn rak Anhûin. And not to me, but to Eragon.” 
 
 As alarm spread across their faces, Eragon’s earlier apprehension re-
turned. He had seen lone dwarves face an entire group of Kull without 
shirking. The ring must symbolize something dreadful indeed if it could 
undermine their courage. 
 
 Ûndin frowned as he listened to the muttering of his advisers, then said, 
“We must consult on this issue. Shadeslayer, a feast is prepared in your 
honor. If you would allow my servants to guide you to your quarters, you 
can refresh yourself, and then we might begin.” 
 

 
103
 “Of course.” Eragon handed Snowfire’s reins to a waiting dwarf and fol-
lowed a guide into the hall. As he passed through the doorway, he 
glanced back and saw Arya and Orik bustling away with the clan chiefs, 
their heads pressed close together. I won’t be long, he promised Saphira. 
 
 After crouching through dwarf-sized corridors, he was relieved that the 
room assigned to him was spacious enough to stand freely. The servant 
bowed and said, “I will return when Grimstborith Ûndin is ready.” 
 
 Once the dwarf was gone, Eragon paused and took a deep breath, grate-
ful for the silence. The encounter with the veiled dwarves hovered in his 
mind, making it difficult for him to relax. At least we won’t be in Tarnag 
long. That should prevent them from hindering us. 
 
 Peeling off his gloves, Eragon went to a marble basin set on the floor 
next to the low bed. He put his hands in the water, then jerked them out 
with an involuntary yelp. The water was almost boiling. It must be a 
dwarf custom, he realized. He waited until it cooled a bit, then doused his 
face and neck, rubbing them clean as steam swirled off his skin. 
 
 Rejuvenated, he stripped out of his breeches and tunic and outfitted 
himself in the clothes he had worn to Ajihad’s funeral. He touched 
Zar’roc, but decided it would only insult Ûndin’s table and instead belted 
on his hunting knife. 
 
 Then, from his pack, he took the scroll Nasuada had charged him with 
delivering to Islanzadí and weighed it in his hand, wondering where to 
hide it. The missive was too important to leave out in the open, where it 
could be read or stolen. Unable to think of a better place, he slipped the 
scroll up his sleeve. It’ll be safe there unless I get into a fight, in which case 
I’ll have bigger problems to worry about. 
 
   
 
 When at last the servant returned for Eragon, it was only an hour or so 
past noon, but the sun had already vanished behind the looming moun-
tains, plunging Tarnag into dusk. Exiting the hall, Eragon was struck by 
the city’s transformation. With the premature advent of night, the 
dwarves’ lanterns revealed their true strength, flooding the streets with 
pure, unwavering light that made the entire valley glow. 
 
 Ûndin and the other dwarves were gathered in the courtyard, along 
with Saphira, who had situated herself at the head of a table. No one ap-
peared interested in disputing her choice. 

 
104
 
 Has anything happened? asked Eragon, hurrying toward her. 
 
 Ûndin summoned extra warriors, then had the gates barred. 
 
 Does he expect an attack? 
 
 At the very least, he’s concerned about the possibility. 
 
 “Eragon, please join me,” said Ûndin, gesturing at the chair to his right. 
The clan chief seated himself as Eragon did, and the rest of the company 
hurriedly followed suit. 
 
 Eragon was happy when Orik ended up beside him with Arya directly 
across the table, although both looked grim. Before he could ask Orik 
about the ring, Ûndin slapped the table and roared, “Ignh az voth!” 
 
 Servants streamed out of the hall, bearing platters of beaten gold piled 
high with meats, pies, and fruit. They divided into three columns—one 
for each table—and deposited the dishes with a flourish. 
 
 Before them were soups and stews filled with various tubers, roasted 
venison, long hot loaves of sourdough bread, and rows of honeycakes 
dripped with raspberry preserve. In a bed of greens lay filleted trout gar-
nished with parsley, and on the side, pickled eel stared forlornly at an urn 
of cheese, as if hoping to somehow escape back into a river. A swan sat 
on each table, surrounded by a flock of stuffed partridges, geese, and 
ducks. 
 
 Mushrooms were everywhere: broiled in juicy strips, placed atop a 
bird’s head like a bonnet, or carved in the shape of castles amid moats of 
gravy. An incredible variety was on display, from puffy white mushrooms 
the size of Eragon’s fist, to ones he could have mistaken for gnarled bark, 
to delicate toadstools sliced neatly in half to showcase their blue flesh. 
 
 Then the centerpiece of the feast was revealed: a gigantic roasted boar, 
glistening with sauce. At least Eragon thought it was a boar, for the car-
cass was as large as Snowfire and took six dwarves to carry. The tusks 
were longer than his forearms, the snout as wide as his head. And the 
smell, it overwhelmed all others in pungent waves that made his eyes 
water from their strength. 
 
 “Nagra,” whispered Orik. “Giant boar. Ûndin truly honors you tonight, 
Eragon. Only the bravest dwarves dare hunt Nagran, and it is only served 

 
105
to those who have great valor. Also, I think he makes a gesture that he 
will support you over Dûrgrimst Nagra.” 
 
 Eragon leaned toward him so no one else could hear. “Then this is an-
other animal native to the Beors? What are the rest?” 
 
 “Forest wolves big enough to prey on a Nagra and nimble enough to 
catch Feldûnost. Cave bears, which we call Urzhadn and the elves call 
Beorn and for which they dubbed these peaks, though we do not call 
them such ourselves. The mountains’ name is a secret that we share with 
no race. And—” 
 
 “Smer voth,” commanded Ûndin, smiling at his guests. The servants 
immediately drew small curved knives and cut portions of the Nagra, 
which they set on everyone’s plates—except for Arya’s— including a 
weighty piece for Saphira. Ûndin smiled again, took a dagger, and sliced 
off a bit of his meat. 
 
 Eragon reached for his own knife, but Orik grabbed his arm. “Wait.” 
 
 Ûndin chewed slowly, rolling his eyes and nodding in an exaggerated 
fashion, then swallowed and proclaimed, “Ilf gauhnith!” 
 
 “Now,” said Orik, turning to the meal as conversation erupted along the 
tables. 
 
 Eragon had never tasted anything like the boar. It was juicy, soft, and 
oddly spicy—as if the meat had been soaked in honey and cider—which 
was enhanced by the mint used to flavor the pork. I wonder how they 
managed to cook something so large. 
 
 Very slowly, commented Saphira, nibbling on her Nagra. 
 
 Between bites, Orik explained, “It is custom, from days when poisoning 
was rampant among clans, for the host to taste the food first and declare 
it safe for his guests.” 
 
 During the banquet, Eragon divided his time between sampling the 
multitude of dishes and conversing with Orik, Arya, and dwarves farther 
down the table. In that manner, the hours hastened by, for the feast was 
so large, it was late afternoon before the last course had been served, the 
last bite consumed, and the last chalice drained. As servants removed the 
tableware, Ûndin turned to Eragon and said, “The meal pleased you, yes?” 
 

 
106
 “It was delicious.” 
 
 Ûndin nodded. “I’m glad you enjoyed it. I had the tables moved outside 
yesterday so the dragon might dine with us.” He remained intently fo-
cused on Eragon all the while he spoke. 
 
 Eragon went cold inside. Intentionally or not, Ûndin had treated 
Saphira as no more than a beast. Eragon had intended to ask about the 
veiled dwarves in private, but now—out of a desire to unsettle Ûndin—
he said, “Saphira and I thank you.” Then, “Sir, why was the ring thrown at 
us?” 
 
 A painful silence crept over the courtyard. Out of the corner of his eye, 
Eragon saw Orik wince. Arya, however, smiled as if she understood what 
he was doing. 
 
 Ûndin put down his dagger, scowling thickly. “The knurlagn you met 
are of a tragic clan. Before the Riders’ fall, they were among the oldest, 
richest families of our kingdom. Their doom was sealed, though, by two 
mistakes: they lived on the western edge of the Beor Mountains, and they 
volunteered their greatest warriors in Vrael’s service.” 
 
 Anger broke through his voice with sharp cracks. “Galbatorix and his 
ever-cursed Forsworn slaughtered them in your city of Urû’baen. Then 
they flew on us, killing many. Of that clan, only Grimstcarvlorss Anhûin 
and her guards survived. Anhûin soon died of grief, and her men took the 
name Az Sweldn rak Anhûin, The Tears of Anhûin, covering their faces 
to remind themselves of their loss and their desire for revenge.” 
 
 Eragon’s cheeks stung with shame as he fought to keep his face expres-
sionless. “So,” said Ûndin, glowering at a pastry, “they rebuilt the clan over 
the decades, waiting and hunting for recompense. And now you come, 
bearing Hrothgar’s mark. It is the ultimate insult to them, no matter your 
service in Farthen Dûr. Thus the ring, the ultimate challenge. It means 
Dûrgrimst Az Sweldn rak Anhûin will oppose you with all their re-
sources, in every matter, big or small. They have set themselves against 
you utterly, declared themselves blood enemies.” 
 
 “Do they mean me bodily harm?” asked Eragon stiffly. 
 
 Ûndin’s gaze faltered for a moment as he cast a look at Gannel, then he 
shook his head and uttered a gruff laugh that was, perhaps, louder than 
the occasion warranted. “No, Shadeslayer! Not even they would dare hurt 
a guest. It is forbidden. They only want you gone, gone, gone.” Yet Eragon 

 
107
still wondered. Then Ûndin said, “Please, let us talk no more of these un-
pleasant matters. Gannel and I have offered our food and mead in friend-
ship; is that not what matters?” The priest murmured in concordance. 
 
 “It is appreciated,” Eragon finally relented. 
 
 Saphira looked at him with solemn eyes and said, They are afraid, Er-
agon. Afraid and resentful because they have been forced to accept a Rider’s 
assistance. 
 
 Aye. They may fight with us, but they don’t fight for us. 
 
 
 
 

 
108
CELBEDEIL 
 
 
 The dawnless morning found Eragon in Ûndin’s main hall, listening as 
the clan chief spoke to Orik in Dwarvish. Ûndin broke off as Eragon ap-
proached, then said, “Ah, Shadeslayer. You slept well?” 
 
 “Yes.” 
 
 “Good.” He gestured at Orik. “We have been considering your depar-
ture. I had hoped you’d be able to spend some time with us. But under 
the circumstances, it seems best if you resume your journey early tomor-
row morning, when few are in the streets who might trouble you. Sup-
plies and transportation are being readied even as I speak. It was Hroth-
gar’s orders that guards should accompany you as far as Ceris. I have in-
creased their numbers from three to seven.” 
 
 “And in the meantime?” 
 
 Ûndin shrugged his fur-bound shoulders. “I had intended to show you 
the wonders of Tarnag, but it would be foolish now for you to wander 
mine city. However, Grimstborith Gannel has invited you to Celbedeil 
for the day. Accept if you wish. You’ll be safe with him.” The clan chief 
seemed to have forgotten his earlier assertion that Az Sweldn rak Anhûin 
would not harm a guest. 
 
 “Thank you, I might at that.” As Eragon left the hall, he pulled Orik 
aside and asked, “How serious is this feud, really? I need to know the 
truth.” 
 
 Orik answered with obvious reluctance: “In the past, it was not un-
common for blood feuds to endure for generations. Entire families were 
driven extinct because of them. It was rash of Az Sweldn rak Anhûin to 
invoke the old ways; such a thing has not been done since the last of the 
clan wars.... Until they rescind their oath, you must guard against their 
treachery, whether it be for a year or a century. I’m sorry that your 
friendship with Hrothgar has brought this upon you, Eragon. But you are 
not alone. Dûrgrimst Ingeitum stands with you in this.” 
 
   
 
 Once outside, Eragon hurried to Saphira, who had spent the night 
coiled in the courtyard. Do you mind if I visit Celbedeil? 
 

 
109
 Go if you must. But take Zar’roc. He followed her advice, also tucking 
Nasuada’s scroll into his tunic. 
 
 When Eragon approached the gates to the hall’s enclosure, five dwarves 
pushed the rough-hewn timbers aside, then closed in around him, hands 
on their axes and swords as they inspected the street. The guards re-
mained as Eragon retraced yesterday’s path to the barred entrance of Tar-
nag’s foremost tier. 
 
 Eragon shivered. The city seemed unnaturally empty. Doors were 
closed, windows were shuttered, and the few pedestrians in evidence 
averted their faces and turned down alleys to avoid walking past him. 
They’re scared to be seen near me, he realized. Perhaps because they know 
Az Sweldn rak Anhûin will retaliate against anyone who helps me. Eager to 
escape the open street, Eragon raised his hand to knock, but before he 
could, one door grated outward, and a black-robed dwarf beckoned from 
within. Tightening his sword belt, Eragon entered, leaving his guards out-
side. 
 
 His first impression was of color. A burning-green sward splayed 
around the pillared mass of Celbedeil, like a mantle dropped over the 
symmetrical hill that upheld the temple. Ivy strangled the building’s an-
cient walls in foot after foot of hairy ropes, dew still glittering on the 
pointed leaves. And curving above all but the mountains was the great 
white cupola ribbed with chiseled gold. 
 
 His next impression was of smell. Flowers and incense mixed their per-
fumes into an aroma so ethereal, Eragon felt as if he could live on the 
scent alone. 
 
 Last was sound, for despite clumps of priests strolling along mosaic 
pathways and spacious grounds, the only noise Eragon could discern was 
the soft thump of a rook flying overhead. 
 
 The dwarf beckoned again and strode down the main avenue toward 
Celbedeil. As they passed under its eaves, Eragon could only marvel at 
the wealth and craftsmanship displayed around him. The walls were 
spotted with gems of every color and cut—though all flawless—and red 
gold had been hammered into the veins lacing the stone ceilings, walls, 
and floor. Pearls and silver provided accents. Occasionally, they passed a 
screen partition carved entirely of jade. 
 
 The temple was devoid of cloth decorations. In their absence, the 
dwarves had carved a profusion of statues, many depicting monsters and 

 
110
deities locked in epic battles. 
 
 After climbing several floors, they passed through a copper door waxy 
with verdigris and embossed with intricate, patterned knots into a bare 
room floored with wood. Armor hung thickly on the walls, along with 
racks of staff-swords identical to the one Angela had fought with in Far-
then Dûr. 
 
 Gannel was there, sparring with three younger dwarves. The clan 
chief’s robe was rucked up over his thighs so he could move freely, his 
face a fierce scowl as the wood shaft spun in his hands, unsharpened 
blades darting like riled hornets. 
 
 Two dwarves lunged at Gannel, only to be stymied in a clatter of wood 
and metal as he spun past them, rapping their knees and heads and send-
ing them to the floor. Eragon grinned as he watched Gannel disarm his 
last opponent in a brilliant flurry of blows. 
 
 At last the clan chief noticed Eragon and dismissed the other dwarves. 
As Gannel set his weapon on a rack, Eragon said, “Are all Quan so profi-
cient with the blade? It seems an odd skill for priests.” 
 
 Gannel faced him. “We must be able to defend ourselves, no? Many 
enemies stalk this land.” 
 
 Eragon nodded. “Those are unique swords. I’ve never seen their like, 
except for one an herbalist used in the battle of Farthen Dûr.” 
 
 The dwarf sucked in his breath, then let it hiss out between his teeth. 
“Angela.” His expression soured. “She won her staff from a priest in a 
game of riddles. It was a nasty trick, as we are the only ones allowed to 
use hûthvírn. She and Arya...” He shrugged and went to a small table, 
where he filled two mugs with ale. Handing one to Eragon, he said, “I in-
vited you here today at Hrothgar’s request. He told me that if you ac-
cepted his offer to become Ingeitum, I was to acquaint you with dwarf 
traditions.” 
 
 Eragon sipped the ale and kept silent, eyeing how Gannel’s thick brow 
caught the light, shadows dripping down his cheeks from the bony ridge. 
 
 The clan chief continued: “Never before has an outsider been taught 
our secret beliefs, nor may you speak of them to human or elf. Yet with-
out this knowledge, you cannot uphold what it means to be knurla. You 
are Ingeitum now: our blood, our flesh, our honor. You understand?” 

 
111
 
 “I do.” 
 
 “Come.” Keeping his ale in hand, Gannel took Eragon from the sparring 
room and conveyed him through five grand corridors, stopping in the 
archway to a dim chamber hazy with incense. Facing them, the squat 
outline of a statue swelled ponderously from floor to ceiling, a faint light 
cast across the brooding dwarf face hacked with uncharacteristic crude-
ness from brown granite. 
 
 “Who is he?” asked Eragon, intimidated. 
 
 “Gûntera, King of the Gods. He is a warrior and a scholar, though fickle 
in his moods, so we burn offerings to assure his affection at the solstices, 
before sowing, and at deaths and births.” Gannel twisted his hand in a 
strange gesture and bowed to the statue. “It is to him we pray before bat-
tles, for he molded this land from the bones of a giant and gives the 
world its order. All realms are Gûntera’s.” 
 
 Then Gannel instructed Eragon how to properly venerate the god, ex-
plaining the signs and words that were used for homage. He elucidated 
the meaning of the incense—how it symbolized life and happiness—and 
spent long minutes recounting legends about Gûntera, how the god was 
born fully formed to a she-wolf at the dawn of stars, how he had battled 
monsters and giants to win a place for his kin in Alagaësia, and how he 
had taken Kílf, the goddess of rivers and the sea, as his mate. 
 
 Next they went to Kílf’s statue, which was carved with exquisite deli-
cacy out of pale blue stone. Her hair flew back in liquid ripples, rolling 
down her neck and framing merry amethyst eyes. In her hands, she 
cupped a water lily and a chunk of porous red rock that Eragon did not 
recognize. 
 
 “What is that?” he asked, pointing. 
 
 “Coral taken from deep within the sea that borders the Beors.” 
 
 “Coral?” 
 
 Gannel took a draught of ale, then said, “Our divers found it while 
searching for pearls. It seems that, in brine, certain stones grow like 
plants.” 
 
 Eragon stared with wonder. He had never thought of pebbles or boul-

 
112
ders as alive, yet here was proof that all they needed was water and salt 
to flourish. It finally explained how rocks had continued to appear in 
their fields in Palancar Valley, even after the soil had been combed clean 
each spring. They grew! 
 
 They proceeded to Urûr, master of the air and heavens, and his brother 
Morgothal, god of fire. At the carmine statue of Morgothal, the priest 
told how the brothers loved each other so much, neither could exist in-
dependently. Thus, Morgothal’s burning palace in the sky during the day, 
and the sparks from his forge that appeared overhead every night. And 
also thus, how Urûr constantly fed his sibling so he would not die. 
 
 Only two more gods were left after that: Sindri—mother of the earth—
and Helzvog. 
 
 Helzvog’s statue was different from the rest. The nude god was bowed 
in half over a dwarf-sized lump of gray flint, caressing it with the tip of 
his forefinger. The muscles of his back bunched and knotted with inhu-
man strain, yet his expression was incredibly tender, as if a newborn child 
lay before him. 
 
 Gannel’s voice dropped to a low rasp: “Gûntera may be King of the 
Gods, but it is Helzvog who holds our hearts. It was he who felt that the 
land should be peopled after the giants were vanquished. The other gods 
disagreed, but Helzvog ignored them and, in secret, formed the first 
dwarf from the roots of a mountain. 
 
 “When his deed was discovered, jealousy swept the gods and Gûntera 
created elves to control Alagaësia for himself. Then Sindri brought forth 
humans from the soil, and Urûr and Morgothal combined their knowl-
edge and released dragons into the land. Only Kílf restrained herself. So 
the first races entered this world.” 
 
 Eragon absorbed Gannel’s words, accepting the clan chief’s sincerity but 
unable to quell a simple question: How does he know? Eragon sensed that 
it would be an awkward query, however, and merely nodded as he lis-
tened. 
 
 “This,” said Gannel, finishing the last of his ale, “leads to our most im-
portant rite, which I know Orik has discussed with you.... All dwarves 
must be buried in stone, else our spirits will never join Helzvog in his 
hall. We are not of earth, air, or fire, but of stone. And as Ingeitum, it is 
your responsibility to assure a proper resting place for any dwarf who 
may die in your company. If you fail—in the absence of injury or ene-

 
113
mies—Hrothgar will exile you, and no dwarf will acknowledge your 
presence until after your death.” He straightened his shoulders, staring 
hard at Eragon. “You have much more to learn, yet uphold the customs I 
outlined today and you will do well.” 
 
 “I won’t forget,” said Eragon. 
 
 Satisfied, Gannel led him away from the statues and up a winding stair-
case. As they climbed, the clan chief dipped a hand into his robe and 
withdrew a simple necklace, a chain threaded through the pommel of a 
miniature silver hammer. He gave it to Eragon. 
 
 “This is another favor Hrothgar asked of me,” Gannel explained. “He 
worries that Galbatorix may have gleaned an image of you from the 
minds of Durza, the Ra’zac, or any number of soldiers who saw you 
throughout the Empire.” 
 
 “Why should I fear that?” 
 
 “Because then Galbatorix could scry you. Perhaps he already has.” 
 
 A shiver of apprehension wormed down Eragon’s side, like an icy 
snake. I should have thought of that, he berated himself. 
 
 “The necklace will prevent anyone from scrying you or your dragon, as 
long as you wear it. I placed the spell myself, so it should hold before 
even the strongest mind. But be forewarned, when activated, the neck-
lace will draw upon your strength until you either take it off or the dan-
ger has passed.” 
 
 “What if I’m asleep? Could the necklace consume all my energy before 
I was aware of it?” 
 
 “Nay. It will wake you.” 
 
 Eragon rolled the hammer between his fingers. It was difficult to avert 
another’s spells, least of all Galbatorix’s. If Gannel is so accomplished, 
what other enchantments might be hidden in his gift? He noticed a line of 
runes cut along the hammer’s haft. They spelled Astim Hefthyn. The 
stairs ended as he asked, “Why do dwarves write with the same runes as 
humans?” 
 
 For the first time since they met, Gannel laughed, his voice booming 
through the temple as his large shoulders shook. “It is the other way 

 
114
around; humans write with our runes. When your ancestors landed in 
Alagaësia, they were as illiterate as rabbits. However, they soon adopted 
our alphabet and matched it to this language. Some of your words even 
come from us, like father, which was originally farthen. ” 
 
 “So then Farthen Dûr means... ?” Eragon slipped the necklace over his 
head and tucked it under his tunic. 
 
 “Our Father.” 
 
 Stopping at a door, Gannel ushered Eragon through to a curved gallery 
located directly below the cupola. The passageway banded Celbedeil, 
providing a view through the open archways of the mountains behind 
Tarnag, as well as the terraced city far below. 
 
 Eragon barely glanced at the landscape, for the gallery’s inner wall was 
covered with a single continuous painting, a gigantic narrative band that 
began with a depiction of the dwarves’ creation under Helzvog’s hand. 
The figures and objects stood in relief from the surface, giving the pano-
rama a feeling of hyperrealism with its saturated, glowing colors and 
minute detail. 
 
 Captivated, Eragon asked, “How was this made?” 
 
 “Each scene is carved out of small plates of marble, which are fired 
with enamel, then fitted into a single piece.” 
 
 “Wouldn’t it be easier to use regular paint?” 
 
 “It would,” said Gannel, “but not if we wanted it to endure centuries—
millennia—without change. Enamel never fades or loses its brilliancy, 
unlike oil paint. This first section was carved only a decade after the dis-
covery of Farthen Dûr, well before elves set foot on Alagaësia.” 
 
 The priest took Eragon by the arm and guided him along the tableau. 
Each step carried them through uncounted years of history. 
 
 Eragon saw how the dwarves were once nomads on a seemingly endless 
plain, until the land grew so hot and desolate they were forced to migrate 
south to the Beor Mountains. That was how the Hadarac Desert was 
formed, he realized, amazed. 
 
 As they proceeded down the mural, heading toward the back of Cel-
bedeil, Eragon witnessed everything from the domestication of Feldûnost 

 
115
to the carving of Isidar Mithrim, the first meeting between dwarves and 
elves, and the coronation of each new dwarf king. Dragons frequently ap-
peared, burning and slaughtering. Eragon had difficulty restraining com-
ment during those sections. 
 
 His steps slowed as the painting shifted to the event he had hoped to 
find: the war between elves and dragons. Here the dwarves had devoted a 
vast amount of space to the destruction wreaked upon Alagaësia by the 
two races. Eragon shuddered with horror at the sight of elves and dragons 
killing each other. The battles continued for yards, each image more 
bloody than the last, until the darkness lifted and a young elf was shown 
kneeling on the edge of a cliff, holding a white dragon egg. 
 
 “Is that... ?” whispered Eragon. 
 
 “Aye, it’s Eragon, the First Rider. It’s a good likeness too, as he agreed to 
sit for our artisans.” 
 
 Drawn forward by his fascination, Eragon studied the face of his name-
sake. I always imagined him older. The elf had angled eyes that peered 
down a hooked nose and narrow chin, giving him a fierce appearance. It 
was an alien face, completely different from his own... and yet the set of 
his shoulders, high and tense, reminded Eragon of how he had felt upon 
finding Saphira’s egg. We’re not so different, you and I, he thought, touch-
ing the cool enamel. And once my ears match yours, we shall truly be 
brothers through time.... I wonder, would you approve of my actions? He 
knew they had made at least one identical choice; they had both kept the 
egg. 
 
 He heard a door open and close and turned to see Arya approaching 
from the far end of the gallery. She scanned the wall with the same blank 
expression Eragon had seen her use when confronting the Council of Eld-
ers. Whatever her specific emotions, he sensed that she found the situa-
tion distasteful. 
 
 Arya inclined her head. “Grimstborith.” 
 
 “Arya.” 
 
 “You have been educating Eragon in your mythology?” 
 
 Gannel smiled flatly. “One should always understand the faith of the 
society that one belongs to.” 
 

 
116
 “Yet comprehension does not imply belief.” She fingered the pillar of an 
archway. “Nor does it mean that those who purvey such beliefs do so for 
more than... material gain.” 
 
 “You would deny the sacrifices my clan makes to bring comfort to our 
brethren?” 
 
 “I deny nothing, only ask what good might be accomplished if your 
wealth were spread among the needy, the starving, the homeless, or even 
to buy supplies for the Varden. Instead, you’ve piled it into a monument 
to your own wishful thinking.” 
 
 “Enough!” The dwarf clenched his fists, his face mottled. “Without us, 
the crops would wither in drought. Rivers and lakes would flood. Our 
flocks would give birth to one-eyed beasts. The very heavens would shat-
ter under the gods’ rage!” Arya smiled. “Only our prayers and service pre-
vent that from happening. If not for Helzvog, where—” 
 
 Eragon soon lost track of the argument. He did not understand Arya’s 
vague criticisms of Dûrgrimst Quan, but he gathered from Gannel’s re-
sponses that, in some indirect way, she had implied that the dwarf gods 
did not exist, questioned the mental capacity of every dwarf who entered 
a temple, and pointed out what she took to be flaws in their reasoning—
all in a pleasant and polite voice. 
 
 After a few minutes, Arya raised her hand, stopping Gannel, and said, 
“That is the difference between us, Grimstborith. You devote yourself to 
that which you believe to be true but cannot prove. There, we must 
agree to disagree.” She turned to Eragon then. “Az Sweldn rak Anhûin has 
inflamed Tarnag’s citizens against you. Ûndin believes, as do I, that it 
would be best for you to remain behind his walls until we leave.” 
 
 Eragon hesitated. He wanted to see more of Celbedeil, but if there was 
to be trouble, then his place was by Saphira’s side. He bowed to Gannel 
and begged to be excused. “You need not apologize, Shadeslayer,” said the 
clan chief. He glared at Arya. “Do what you must, and may the blessings 
of Gûntera be upon you.” 
 
 Together Eragon and Arya departed the temple and, surrounded by a 
dozen warriors, trotted through the city. As they did, Eragon heard 
shouts from an angry mob on a lower tier. A stone skipped over a nearby 
roof. The motion drew his eye to a dark plume of smoke rising from the 
city’s edge. 
 

 
117
 Once in the hall, Eragon hurried to his room. There he slipped on his 
mail hauberk; strapped the greaves to his shins and the bracers to his 
forearms; jammed the leather cap, coif, and then helm over his head; and 
grabbed his shield. Scooping up his pack and saddlebags, he ran back to 
the courtyard, where he sat against Saphira’s right foreleg. 
 
 Tarnag is like an overturned anthill, she observed. 
 
 Let’s hope we don’t get bitten. 
 
 Arya joined them before long, as did a group of fifty heavily armed 
dwarves who settled in the middle of the courtyard. The dwarves waited 
impassively, talking in low grunts as they eyed the barred gate and the 
mountain that rose up behind them. 
 
 “They fear,” said Arya, seating herself by Eragon, “that the crowds may 
prevent us from reaching the rafts.” 
 
 “Saphira can always fly us out.” 
 
 “Snowfire as well? And Ûndin’s guards? No, if we are stopped, we shall 
have to wait until the dwarves’ outrage subsides.” She studied the darken-
ing sky. “It’s unfortunate that you managed to offend so many dwarves, 
but perhaps inevitable. The clans have ever been contentious; what 
pleases one infuriates another.” 
 
 He fingered the edge of his mail. “I wish now I hadn’t accepted Hroth-
gar’s offer.” 
 
 “Ah, yes. As with Nasuada, I think you made the only viable choice. 
You are not to blame. The fault, if any, lies with Hrothgar for making the 
offer in the first place. He must have been well aware of the repercus-
sions.” 
 
 Silence reigned for several minutes. A half-dozen dwarves marched 
around the courtyard, stretching their legs. Finally, Eragon asked, “Do you 
have any family in Du Weldenvarden?” 
 
 It was a long time before Arya answered. “None that I’m close to.” 
 
 “Why... why is that?” 
 
 She hesitated again. “They disliked my choice to become the Queen’s 
envoy and ambassador; it seemed inappropriate. When I ignored their ob-

 
118
jections and still had the yawë tattooed on my shoulder—which indicates 
that I have devoted myself to the greater good of our race, as is the case 
with your ring from Brom—my family refused to see me again.” 
 
 “But that was over seventy years ago,” he protested. 
 
 Arya looked away, concealing her face behind a veil of hair. Eragon 
tried to imagine what it must have been like for her—ostracized from 
her family and sent to live among two completely different races. No 
wonder she’s so withdrawn, he realized. “Are there any other elves outside 
of Du Weldenvarden?” 
 
 Still keeping her face covered, she said, “Three of us were sent forth 
from Ellesméra. Fäolin and Glenwing always traveled with me when we 
transported Saphira’s egg between Du Weldenvarden and Tronjheim. 
Only I survived Durza’s ambush.” 
 
 “What were they like?” 
 
 “Proud warriors. Glenwing loved speaking to birds with his mind. He 
would stand in the forest surrounded by a flock of songbirds and listen to 
their music for hours. Afterward, he might sing us the prettiest melodies.” 
 
 “And Fäolin?” This time Arya refused to answer, though her hands 
tightened on her bow. Undaunted, Eragon cast around for another sub-
ject. “Why do you dislike Gannel so much?” 
 
 She faced him suddenly and touched his cheek with soft fingers. Eragon 
flinched with surprise. “That,” she said, “is a discussion for another time.” 
Then she stood and calmly relocated herself across the courtyard. 
 
 Confused, Eragon stared at her back. I don’t understand, he said, leaning 
against Saphira’s belly. She snorted, amused, then curled her neck and tail 
around him and promptly fell asleep. 
 
 As the valley darkened, Eragon struggled to stay alert. He pulled out 
Gannel’s necklace and examined it several times with magic, but found 
only the priest’s guarding spell. Giving up, he replaced the necklace under 
his tunic, pulled his shield over him, and settled down to wait through 
the night. 
 
   
 
 At the first hint of light in the sky overhead—though the valley itself 

 
119
was still in shadow and would remain so until almost midday—Eragon 
roused Saphira. The dwarves were already up, busy muffling their weap-
ons so they could creep through Tarnag with utter secrecy. Ûndin even 
had Eragon tie rags around Saphira’s claws and Snowfire’s hooves. 
 
 When all was ready, Ûndin and his warriors assembled in a large block 
around Eragon, Saphira, and Arya. The gates were carefully opened—no 
sound came from the oiled hinges—and then they set out for the lake. 
 
 Tarnag seemed deserted, the vacant streets lined with houses where its 
inhabitants lay oblivious and dreaming. The few dwarves they encoun-
tered gazed at them silently, then padded away like ghosts in the twilight. 
 
 At the gate to each tier, a guard waved them through without com-
ment. They soon left the buildings and found themselves crossing the 
barren fields at Tarnag’s base. Beyond those, they reached the stone quay 
that edged the still, gray water. 
 
 Waiting for them were two wide rafts tied alongside a pier. Three 
dwarves squatted on the first raft, four on the second. They stood as 
Ûndin came into view. 
 
 Eragon helped the dwarves hobble and blindfold Snowfire, then coax 
the reluctant horse onto the second raft, where he was forced to his 
knees and tied down. Meanwhile, Saphira slipped off the pier into the 
lake. Only her head remained above the surface as she paddled through 
the water. 
 
 Ûndin grasped Eragon’s arm. “Here is where we part. You have my best 
men; they will protect you until you reach Du Weldenvarden.” Eragon 
tried to thank him, but Ûndin shook his head. “No, it is not a matter for 
gratitude. It is my duty. I am only shamed that your stay was darkened by 
the hatred of Az Sweldn rak Anhûin.” 
 
 Eragon bowed, then boarded the first raft with Orik and Arya. The 
mooring ropes were unknotted, and the dwarves pushed away from 
shore with long poles. As dawn approached, the two rafts drifted toward 
the mouth of the Az Ragni, Saphira swimming between them. 
 

 
120
DIAMONDS IN THE NIGHT 
 
 
 The Empire has violated my home. 
 
 So thought Roran as he listened to the anguished moans of the men in-
jured during the previous night’s battle with the Ra’zac and soldiers. Ro-
ran shuddered with fear and rage until his whole body was consumed 
with feverish chills that left his cheeks burning and his breath short. And 
he was sad, so very sad... as if the Ra’zac’s deeds had destroyed the inno-
cence of his childhood haunts. 
 
 Leaving the healer, Gertrude, tending to the wounded, Roran contin-
ued toward Horst’s house, noting the makeshift barriers that filled the 
gaps between buildings: the boards, the barrels, the piles of rocks, and the 
splintered frames of the two wagons destroyed by the Ra’zac’s explosives. 
It all seemed pitifully fragile. 
 
 The few people who moved through Carvahall were glassy-eyed with 
shock, grief, and exhaustion. Roran was tired too, more than he could 
ever remember being. He had not slept since the night before last, and his 
arms and back ached from the fighting. 
 
 He entered Horst’s house and saw Elain standing by the open doorway 
to the dining room, listening to the steady burn of conversation that 
emanated from within. She beckoned him over. 
 
 After they had foiled the Ra’zac’s counterattack, the prominent mem-
bers of Carvahall had sequestered themselves in an attempt to decide 
what action the village should take and if Horst and his allies should be 
punished for initiating the hostilities. The group had been in deliberation 
most of the morning. 
 
 Roran peeked into the room. Seated around the long table were Birgit, 
Loring, Sloan, Gedric, Delwin, Fisk, Morn, and a number of others. Horst 
presided at the head of the table. 
 
 “... and I say that it was stupid and reckless!” exclaimed Kiselt, propping 
himself upright on his bony elbows. “You had no cause to endanger—” 
 
 Morn waved a hand. “We’ve been over this before. Whether what has 
been done should have been done is beside the point. I happen to agree 
with it—Quimby was my friend as much as anyone’s, and I shudder to 
think what those monsters would do with Roran—but... but what I want 

 
121
to know is how we can escape this predicament.” 
 
 “Easy, kill the soldiers,” barked Sloan. 
 
 “And then what? More men will follow until we drown in a sea of 
crimson tunics. Even if we surrender Roran, it’ll do no good; you heard 
what the Ra’zac said—they’ll kill us if we protect Roran and enslave us if 
we don’t. You may feel differently, but, as for myself, I would rather die 
than spend my life as a slave.” Morn shook his head, his mouth set in a 
flat grim line. “We cannot survive.” 
 
 Fisk leaned forward. “We could leave.” 
 
 “There’s nowhere to go,” retorted Kiselt. “We’re backed against the 
Spine, the soldiers have blocked the road, and beyond them is the rest of 
the Empire.” 
 
 “It’s all your fault,” cried Thane, stabbing a shaking finger at Horst. 
“They will torch our houses and murder our children because of you. 
You!” 
 
 Horst stood so quickly, his chair toppled over backward. “Where is 
your honor, man? Will you let them eat us without fighting back?” 
 
 “Yes, if it means suicide otherwise.” Thane glared around the table, then 
stormed out past Roran. His face was contorted by pure, unadulterated 
fear. 
 
 Gedric spotted Roran then and waved him in. “Come, come, we’ve 
been waiting for you.” 
 
 Roran clasped his hands in the small of his back as scores of hard eyes 
inspected him. “How can I help?” 
 
 “I think,” said Gedric, “we’ve all agreed that it would accomplish noth-
ing to give you to the Empire at this point. Whether we would if that 
wasn’t the case is neither here nor there. The only thing we can do is 
prepare for another attack. Horst will make spearheads—and other 
weapons if he has time—and Fisk has agreed to construct shields. Fortu-
nately, his carpentry shop didn’t burn. And someone needs to oversee our 
defenses. We would like it to be you. You’ll have plenty of assistance.” 
 
 Roran nodded. “I’ll do my best.” 
 

 
122
 Beside Morn, Tara stood, towering over her husband. She was a large 
woman, with gray-streaked black hair and strong hands that were just as 
capable of twisting off a chicken’s head as separating a pair of brawlers. 
She said, “Make sure you do, Roran, else we’ll have more funerals.” Then 
she turned to Horst. “Before we go any further, there are men to bury. 
And there are children who should be sent to safety, maybe to Cawley’s 
farm on Nost Creek. You should go as well, Elain.” 
 
 “I won’t leave Horst,” said Elain calmly. 
 
 Tara bristled. “This is no place for a woman five months pregnant. 
You’ll lose the child running around like you have.” 
 
 “It would do me far more harm to worry in ignorance than remain here. 
I have borne my sons; I will stay, as I know you and every other wife in 
Carvahall will.” 
 
 Horst came around the table and, with a tender expression, took Elain’s 
hand. “Nor would I have you anywhere but at my side. The children 
should go, though. Cawley will care for them well, but we must make 
sure that the route to his farm is clear.” 
 
 “Not only that,” rasped Loring, “none of us, not one blasted man jack 
can have a thing to do with the families down the valley, ’side from Caw-
ley, of course. They can’t help us, and we don’t want those desecrators to 
trouble ’em.” 
 
 Everyone agreed that he was right, then the meeting ended and the at-
tendees dispersed throughout Carvahall. Before long, however, they re-
congregated—along with most of the village—in the small cemetery be-
hind Gertrude’s house. Ten white-swathed corpses were arranged beside 
their graves, a sprig of hemlock on each of their cold chests and a silver 
amulet around each of their necks. 
 
 Gertrude stood forth and recited the men’s names: “Parr, Wyglif, Ged, 
Bardrick, Farold, Hale, Garner, Kelby, Melkolf, and Albem.” She placed 
black pebbles over their eyes, then raised her arms, lifted her face to the 
sky, and began the quavering death lay. Tears seeped from the corners of 
her closed eyes as her voice rose and fell with the immemorial phrases, 
sighing and moaning with the village’s sorrow. She sang of the earth and 
the night and of humanity’s ageless sorrow from which none escape. 
 
 After the last mournful note faded into silence, family members praised 
the feats and traits of those they had lost. Then the bodies were buried. 

 
123
 
 As Roran listened, his gaze lit upon the anonymous mound where the 
three soldiers had been interred. One killed by Nolfavrell, and two by me. 
He could still feel the visceral shock of muscle and bone giving... crunch-
ing... pulping under his hammer. His bile rose and he had to struggle not 
to be sick in full view of the village. I am the one who destroyed them. Ro-
ran had never expected or wanted to kill, and yet he had taken more 
lives than anyone else in Carvahall. It felt as if his brow was marked with 
blood. 
 
 He left as soon as possible—not even stopping to speak with Katrina—
and climbed to a point where he could survey Carvahall and consider 
how best to protect it. Unfortunately, the houses were too far apart to 
form a defensive perimeter by just fortifying the spaces between build-
ings. Nor did Roran think it would be a good idea to have soldiers fight-
ing up against the walls of people’s houses and trampling their gardens. 
The Anora River guards our western flank, he thought, but as for the rest of 
Carvahall, we couldn’t even keep a child out of it.... What can we build in 
a few hours that will be a strong enough barrier? 
 
 He jogged into the middle of the village and shouted, “I need everyone 
who is free to help cut down trees!” After a minute, men began to trickle 
out of the houses and through the streets. “Come on, more! We all have 
to help!” Roran waited as the group around him continued to grow. 
 
 One of Loring’s sons, Darmmen, shouldered to his side. “What’s your 
plan?” 
 
 Roran raised his voice so they could all hear. “We need a wall around 
Carvahall; the thicker the better. I figure if we get some big trees, lay 
them on their sides, and sharpen the branches, the Ra’zac will have a 
pretty hard time getting over them.” 
 
 “How many trees do you think it’ll take?” asked Orval. 
 
 Roran hesitated, trying to gauge Carvahall’s circumference. “At least 
fifty. Maybe sixty to do it properly.” The men swore and began to argue. 
“Wait!” Roran counted the number of people in the crowd. He arrived at 
forty-eight. “If you each fell a tree in the next hour, we’ll be almost done. 
Can you do that?” 
 
 “What do you take us for?” retorted Orval. “The last time I took an 
hour on a tree, I was ten!” 
 

 
124
 Darmmen spoke up: “What about brambles? We could drape them 
over the trees. I don’t know anyone who can climb through a knot of 
thorny vines.” 
 
 Roran grinned. “That’s a great idea. Also, those of you with sons, have 
them harness your horses so we can drag the trees back.” The men agreed 
and scattered through Carvahall to gather axes and saws for the job. Ro-
ran stopped Darmmen and said, “Make sure that the trees have branches 
all along the trunk or else they won’t work.” 
 
 “Where will you be?” asked Darmmen. 
 
 “Working on another line of defense.” Roran left him then and ran to 
Quimby’s house, where he found Birgit busy boarding up the windows. 
 
 “Yes?” she said, looking at him. 
 
 He quickly explained his plan with the trees. “I want to dig a trench in-
side the ring of trees, to slow down anyone who gets through. We could 
even put pointed stakes in the bottom of it and—” 
 
 “What is your point, Roran?” 
 
 “I’d like you to organize every woman and child, and everyone else you 
can, to dig. It’s too much for me to handle by myself, and we don’t have 
long....” Roran looked her straight in the eyes. “Please.” 
 
 Birgit frowned. “Why ask me?” 
 
 “Because, like me, you hate the Ra’zac, and I know you will do every-
thing possible to stop them.” 
 
 “Aye,” whispered Birgit, then clapped her hands briskly. “Very well, as 
you wish. But I will never forget, Roran Garrowsson, that it was you and 
your family who brought about my husband’s doom.” She strode away 
before Roran could respond. 
 
 He accepted her animosity with equanimity; it was to be expected, 
considering her loss. He was only lucky she had not started a blood feud. 
Then he shook himself and ran to where the main road entered Carva-
hall. It was the weakest spot in the village and had to be doubly pro-
tected. The Ra’zac can’t be allowed to just blast their way in again. 
 
 Roran recruited Baldor, and together they began excavating a ditch 

 
125
across the road. “I’ll have to go soon,” warned Baldor between strokes of 
his pickax. “Dad needs me in the forge.” 
 
 Roran grunted an acknowledgment without looking up. As he worked, 
his mind once again filled with memories of the soldiers: how they had 
looked as he struck them, and the feeling, the horrible feeling of smashing 
a body as if it were a rotten stump. He paused, nauseated, and noted the 
commotion throughout Carvahall as people readied themselves for the 
next assault. 
 
 After Baldor left, Roran completed the thigh-deep ditch himself, then 
went to Fisk’s workshop. With the carpenter’s permission, he had five 
logs from the stockpile of seasoned wood pulled by horses back to the 
main road. There Roran tipped the logs on end into the trench so that 
they formed an impenetrable barrier into Carvahall. 
 
 As he tamped down the earth around the logs, Darmmen trotted up. 
“We got the trees. They’re just being put into place now.” Roran accom-
panied him to Carvahall’s northern edge, where twelve men wrestled 
four lush green pines into alignment while a team of draft horses under 
the whip of a young boy returned to the foothills. “Most of us are helping 
to retrieve the trees. The others got inspired; they seemed determined to 
chop down the rest of the forest when I left.” 
 
 “Good, we can use the extra timber.” 
 
 Darmmen pointed to a pile of dense brambles that sat on the edge of 
Kiselt’s fields. “I cut those along the Anora. Use them however you want. 
I’m going to find more.” 
 
 Roran clapped him on the arm, then turned toward the eastern side of 
Carvahall, where a long, curved line of women, children, and men la-
bored in the dirt. He went to them and found Birgit issuing orders like a 
general and distributing water among the diggers. The trench was already 
five feet wide and two feet deep. When Birgit paused for breath, he said, 
“I’m impressed.” 
 
 She brushed back a lock of hair without looking at him. “We plowed 
the ground to begin with. It made things easier.” 
 
 “Do you have a shovel I can use?” he asked. Birgit pointed to a mound 
of tools at the other end of the trench. As Roran walked toward it, he 
spied the copper gleam of Katrina’s hair in the midst of the bobbing 
backs. Beside her, Sloan hacked at the soft loam with a furious, obsessive 

 
126
energy, as if he were attempting to tear open the earth’s skin, to peel 
back its clay hide and expose the muscle beneath. His eyes were wild, 
and his teeth were bared in a knotted grimace, despite the flecks of dirt 
and filth that spotted his lips. 
 
 Roran shuddered at Sloan’s expression and hurried past, averting his 
face so as to avoid meeting his bloodshot gaze. He grabbed a shovel and 
immediately plunged it into the soil, doing his best to forget his worries 
in the heat of physical exertion. 
 
   
 
 The day progressed in a continuous rush of activity, without breaks for 
meals or rest. The trench grew longer and deeper, until it cupped two-
thirds of the village and reached the banks of the Anora River. All the 
loose dirt was piled on the inside edge of the trench in an attempt to 
prevent anyone from jumping over it... and to make it difficult to climb 
out. 
 
 The wall of trees was finished in early afternoon. Roran stopped digging 
then to help sharpen the innumerable branches—which were overlapped 
and interlocked as much as possible—and affix the nets of brambles. Oc-
casionally, they had to pull out a tree so farmers like Ivor could drive 
their livestock into the safety of Carvahall. 
 
 By evening the fortifications were stronger and more extensive than 
Roran had dared hope, though they still required several more hours of 
work to complete to his satisfaction. 
 
 He sat on the ground, gnawing a hunk of sourdough bread and staring 
at the stars through a haze of exhaustion. A hand dropped on his shoul-
der, and he looked up to see Albriech. “Here.” Albriech extended a rough 
shield—made of sawed boards pegged together—and a six-foot-long 
spear. Roran accepted them gratefully, then Albriech proceeded onward, 
distributing spears and shields to whomever he encountered. 
 
 Roran dragged himself upright, got his hammer from Horst’s house, and 
thus armed, went to the entrance to the main road, where Baldor and 
two others kept watch. “Wake me when you need to rest,” Roran said, 
then lay on the soft grass underneath the eaves of a nearby house. He ar-
ranged his weapons so he could find them in the dark and closed his eyes 
in eager anticipation. 
 
 “Roran.” 

 
127
 
 The whisper came from by his right ear. “Katrina?” He struggled into a 
sitting position, blinking as she unshuttered a lantern so a key of light 
struck his thigh. “What are you doing here?” 
 
 “I wanted to see you.” Her eyes, large and mysterious against her pale 
face, pooled with the night’s shadows. She took his arm and led him to a 
deserted porch far out of earshot of Baldor and the other guards. There 
she placed her hands on his cheeks and softly kissed him, but he was too 
tired and troubled to respond to her affection. She drew away and stud-
ied him. “What is wrong, Roran?” 
 
 A bark of humorless laughter escaped him. “What’s wrong? The world 
is wrong; it’s as askew as a picture frame knocked on its side.” He 
jammed his fist against his gut. “And I am wrong. Every time I allow my-
self to relax, I see the soldiers bleeding under my hammer. Men I killed, 
Katrina. And their eyes... their eyes ! They knew they were about to die 
and that they could nothing do about it.” He trembled in the darkness. 
“They knew... I knew... and I still had to do it. It couldn’t—” Words failed 
him as he felt hot tears roll down his cheeks. 
 
 Katrina cradled his head as Roran cried from the shock of the past few 
days. He wept for Garrow and Eragon; he wept for Parr, Quimby, and 
the other dead; he wept for himself; and he wept for the fate of Carva-
hall. He sobbed until his emotions ebbed and left him as dry and hollow 
as an old barley husk. 
 
 Forcing himself to take a long breath, Roran looked at Katrina and no-
ticed her own tears. He brushed them away with his thumb, like dia-
monds in the night. “Katrina... my love.” He said it again, tasting the 
words: “My love. I have naught to give you but my love. Still... I must ask. 
Will you marry me?” 
 
 In the dim lantern light, he saw pure joy and wonder leap across her 
face. Then she hesitated and troubled doubt appeared. It was wrong for 
him to ask, or for her to accept, without Sloan’s permission. But Roran no 
longer cared; he had to know now if he and Katrina would spend their 
lives together. 
 
 Then, softly: “Yes, Roran, I will.” 
 
 
 
 

 
128
UNDER A DARKLING SKY 
 
 
 That night it rained. 
 
 Layer upon layer of pregnant clouds blanketed Palancar Valley, clinging 
to the mountains with tenacious arms and filling the air with heavy, cold 
mist. From inside, Roran watched as cords of gray water pelted the trees 
with their frothing leaves, muddied the trench around Carvahall, and 
scrabbled with blunt fingers against the thatched roofs and eaves as the 
clouds disgorged their load. Everything was streaked, blurred, and hidden 
behind the torrent’s inexorable streamers. 
 
 By midmorning the storm had abated, although a continuous drizzle 
still percolated through the mist. It quickly soaked Roran’s hair and 
clothes when he took his watch at the barricade to the main road. He 
squatted by the upright logs, shook his cloak, then pulled the hood far-
ther over his face and tried to ignore the cold. 
 
 Despite the weather, Roran soared and exulted with his joy at Katrina’s 
acceptance. They were engaged! In his mind, it was as if a missing piece 
of the world had dropped into place, as if he had been granted the confi-
dence of an invulnerable warrior. What did the soldiers matter, or the 
Ra’zac, or the Empire itself, before love such as theirs? They were noth-
ing but tinder to the blaze. 
 
 For all his new bliss, however, his mind was entirely focused on what 
had become the most important conundrum of his existence: how to as-
sure that Katrina would survive Galbatorix’s wrath. He had thought of 
nothing else since waking. The best thing would be for Katrina to go to 
Cawley’s, he decided, staring down the hazy road, but she would never 
agree to leave... unless Sloan told her to. I might be able to convince him; 
I’m sure he wants her out of danger as much as I do. 
 
 As he considered ways to approach the butcher, the clouds thickened 
again and the rain renewed its assault on the village, arching down in 
stinging waves. Around Roran, the puddles jumped to life as pellets of 
water drummed their surfaces, bouncing back up like startled grasshop-
pers. 
 
 When Roran grew hungry, he passed his watch to Larne—Loring’s 
youngest son—and went to find lunch, darting from the shelter of one 
eave to another. As he rounded a corner, he was surprised to see Albriech 
on the house’s porch, arguing violently with a group of men. 

 
129
 
 Ridley shouted, “... you’re blind—follow the cottonwoods and they’ll 
never see! You took the addle-brain’s route.” 
 
 “Try it if you want,” retorted Albriech. 
 
 “I will!” 
 
 “Then you can tell me how you like the taste of arrows.” 
 
 “Maybe,” said Thane, “we aren’t as clubfooted as you are.” 
 
 Albriech turned on him with a snarl. “Your words are as thick as your 
wits. I’m not stupid enough to risk my family on the cover of a few 
leaves that I’ve never seen before.” Thane’s eyes bulged and his face 
turned a deep mottled crimson. “What?” taunted Albriech. “Have you no 
tongue?” 
 
 Thane roared and struck Albriech on the cheek with his fist. Albriech 
laughed. “Your arm is as weak as a woman’s.” Then he grabbed Thane’s 
shoulder and threw him off the porch and into the mud, where he lay on 
his side, stunned. 
 
 Holding his spear like a staff, Roran jumped beside Albriech, prevent-
ing Ridley and the others from laying hands on him. “No more,” growled 
Roran, furious. “We have other enemies. An assembly can be called and 
arbitrators will decide whether compensation is due to either Albriech or 
Thane. But until then, we can’t fight ourselves.” 
 
 “Easy for you to say,” spat Ridley. “You have no wife or children.” Then 
he helped Thane to his feet and departed with the group of men. 
 
 Roran stared hard at Albriech and the purple bruise that was spreading 
beneath his right eye. “What started it?” he asked. 
 
 “I—” Albriech stopped with a grimace and felt his jaw. “I went scouting 
with Darmmen. The Ra’zac have posted soldiers on several hills. They 
can see across the Anora and up and down the valley. One or two of us 
might, might, be able to creep past them without notice, but we’ll never 
get the children to Cawley without killing the soldiers, and then we 
might as well tell the Ra’zac where we’re going.” 
 
 Dread clutched at Roran, flooding like poison through his heart and 
veins. What can I do? Sick with a sense of impending doom, he put an 

 
130
arm around Albriech’s shoulders. “Come on; Gertrude should have a look 
at you.” 
 
 “No,” said Albriech, shrugging him off. “She has more pressing cases 
than me.” He took a preparatory breath—as if he were about to dive into 
a lake—and lumbered off through the downpour in the direction of the 
forge. 
 
 Roran watched him go, then shook his head and went inside. He found 
Elain sitting on the floor with a row of children, sharpening a pile of 
spearheads with files and whetstones. Roran gestured to Elain. Once they 
were in another room, he told her what had just occurred. 
 
 Elain swore harshly—startling him, for he had never heard her use such 
language—then asked, “Is there cause for Thane to declare a feud?” 
 
 “Possibly,” admitted Roran. “They both insulted each other, but Al-
briech’s oaths were the strongest.... However, Thane did strike first. You 
could declare a feud yourself.” 
 
 “Nonsense,” asserted Elain, wrapping a shawl around her shoulders. 
“This is a dispute for arbitrators to resolve. If we must pay a fine, so be it, 
as long as bloodshed is avoided.” She headed out the front door, a finished 
spear in hand. 
 
 Troubled, Roran located bread and meat in the kitchen, then helped 
the children sharpen spearheads. Once Felda, one of the mothers, arrived, 
Roran left the children in her care and slogged back through Carvahall to 
the main road. 
 
 As he squatted in the mud, a shaft of sunlight burst underneath the 
clouds and illuminated the folds of rain so each drop flashed with crystal-
line fire. Roran stared, awestruck, ignoring the water streaming down his 
face. The rift in the clouds widened until a shelf of massive thunderheads 
hung over the western three-quarters of Palancar Valley, facing a strip of 
pure blue sky. Because of the billowy roof above and the angle of the 
sun, the rain-drenched landscape was lit brilliantly on one side and 
painted with rich shadows on the other, giving the fields, bushes, trees, 
river, and mountains the most extraordinary colors. It was as if the entire 
world had been transformed into a sculpture of burnished metal. 
 
 Just then, movement caught Roran’s eye, and he looked down to see a 
soldier standing on the road, his mail shining like ice. The man gaped 
with amazement at Carvahall’s new fortifications, then turned and fled 

 
131
back into the golden mist. 
 
 “Soldiers!” shouted Roran, jolting to his feet. He wished that he had his 
bow, but he had left it inside to protect it from the elements. His only 
comfort was that the soldiers would have an even harder time keeping 
their weapons dry. 
 
 Men and women ran from their houses, gathered along the trench, and 
peered out through the wall of overlapping pines. The long branches 
wept beads of moisture, translucent cabochons that reflected the rows of 
anxious eyes. 
 
 Roran found himself standing beside Sloan. The butcher held one of 
Fisk’s makeshift shields in his left hand, and in his right a cleaver curved 
like a half-moon. His belt was festooned with at least a dozen knives, all 
of them large and honed to a razor edge. He and Roran exchanged brisk 
nods, then refocused on where the soldier had disappeared. 
 
 Less than a minute later, the disembodied voice of a Ra’zac slithered 
out of the mist: “By continuing to defend Carvahall, you proclaim your 
choice and ssseal your doom. You ssshall die!” 
 
 Loring responded: “Show your maggot-riddled faces if you dare, you 
lily-livered, bandy-legged, snake-eyed wretches ! We’ll crack your skulls 
open and fatten our hogs on your blood!” 
 
 A dark shape floated toward them, followed by the dull thump of a 
spear embedding itself in a door an inch from Gedric’s left arm. 
 
 “Take cover!” shouted Horst from the middle of the line. Roran knelt 
behind his shield and peered through a hairline gap between two of the 
boards. He was just in time, for a half-dozen spears hurtled over the wall 
of trees and buried themselves among the cowering villagers. 
 
 From somewhere in the mist came an agonized scream. 
 
 Roran’s heart jumped with a painful flutter. He panted for breath, 
though he had not moved, and his hands were slick with sweat. He heard 
the faint sound of shattering glass on the northern edge of Carvahall... 
then the bellow of an explosion and crashing timbers. 
 
 Spinning around, he and Sloan sped through Carvahall, where they 
found a team of six soldiers dragging away the splintered remains of sev-
eral trees. Beyond them, pale and wraithlike in the glittering shards of 

 
132
rain, sat the Ra’zac on their black horses. Without slowing, Roran fell 
upon the first man, jabbing his spear. His first and second stabs were de-
flected by an upraised arm, then Roran caught the soldier on the hip, and 
when he stumbled, in his throat. 
 
 Sloan howled like an enraged beast, threw his cleaver, and split one of 
the men’s helms, crushing his skull. Two soldiers charged him with 
drawn swords. Sloan sidestepped, laughing now, and blocked their attacks 
with his shield. One soldier swung so hard, his blade stuck in the shield’s 
rim. Sloan yanked him closer and gored him through the eye with a carv-
ing knife from his belt. Drawing a second cleaver, the butcher circled his 
other opponent with a maniacal grin. “Shall I gut and hamstring you?” he 
demanded, almost prancing with a terrible, bloody glee. 
 
 Roran lost his spear to the next two men he faced. He barely managed 
to drag out his hammer in time to stop a sword from shearing off his leg. 
The soldier who had torn the spear from Roran’s grip now cast the 
weapon at him, aiming for his breast. Roran dropped his hammer, caught 
the shaft in midair—which astounded him as much as the soldiers—spun 
it around, and drove the spear through the armor and ribs of the man 
who had launched it. Left weaponless, Roran was forced to retreat before 
the remaining soldier. He stumbled over a corpse, cutting his calf on a 
sword as he fell, and rolled to avoid a two-handed blow from the soldier, 
scrabbling frantically in the ankle-deep mud for something, anything he 
could use for a weapon. A hilt bruised his fingers, and he ripped it from 
the muck and slashed at the soldier’s sword hand, severing his thumb. 
 
 The man stared dumbly at the glistening stump, then said, “This is what 
comes from not shielding myself.” 
 
 “Aye,” agreed Roran, and beheaded him. 
 
 The last soldier panicked and fled toward the impassive specters of the 
Ra’zac while Sloan bombarded him with a stream of insults and foul 
names. When the soldier finally pierced the shining curtain of rain, Roran 
watched with a thrill of horror as the two black figures bent down from 
their steeds on either side of the man and gripped the nape of his neck 
with twisted hands. The cruel fingers tightened, and the man shrieked 
desperately and convulsed, then went limp. The Ra’zac placed the corpse 
behind one of their saddles before turning their horses and riding away. 
 
 Roran shuddered and looked at Sloan, who was cleaning his blades. 
“You fought well.” He had never suspected that the butcher contained 
such ferocity. 

 
133
 
 Sloan said in a low voice, “They’ll never get Katrina. Never, even if I 
must skin the lot of them, or fight a thousand Urgals and the king to 
boot. I’d tear the sky itself down and let the Empire drown in its own 
blood before she suffers so much as a scratch.” He clamped his mouth 
shut then, jammed the last of his knives into his belt, and began dragging 
the three broken trees back into position. 
 
 While he did, Roran rolled the dead soldiers through the trampled 
mud, away from the fortifications. Now I have killed five. At the comple-
tion of his labor, he straightened and glanced around, puzzled, for all he 
heard was silence and the hissing rain. Why has no one come to help us? 
 
 Wondering what else might have occurred, he returned with Sloan to 
the scene of the first attack. Two soldiers hung lifelessly on the slick 
branches of the tree wall, but that was not what held their attention. 
Horst and the other villagers knelt in a circle around a small body. Roran 
caught his breath. It was Elmund, son of Delwin. The ten-year-old boy 
had been struck in his side by a spear. His parents sat in the mud beside 
him, their faces as blank as stone. 
 
 Something has to be done, thought Roran, dropping to his knees and 
leaning against his spear. Few children survived their first five or six years. 
But to lose your firstborn son now, when everything indicated that he 
should grow tall and strong to take his father’s place in Carvahall—it was 
enough to crush you. Katrina... the children... they all have to be protected. 
 
 But where?... Where?... Where?... Where! 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
134
DOWN THE RUSHING MERE-WASH 
 
 
 On the first day from Tarnag, Eragon made an effort to learn the names 
of Ûndin’s guards. They were Ama, Tríhga, Hedin, Ekksvar, Shrrgnien—
which Eragon found unpronounceable, though he was told it meant 
Wolfheart—Dûthmér, and Thorv. 
 
 Each raft had a small cabin in the center. Eragon preferred to spend his 
time seated on the edge of the logs, watching the Beor Mountains scroll 
by. Kingfishers and jackdaws flitted along the clear river, while blue her-
ons stood stiltlike on the marshy bank, which was planked with splotches 
of light that fell through the boughs of hazel, beech, and willow. Occa-
sionally, a bullfrog would croak from a bed of ferns. 
 
 When Orik settled beside him, Eragon said, “It’s beautiful.” 
 
 “That it is.” The dwarf quietly lit his pipe, then leaned back and puffed. 
 
 Eragon listened to the creak of wood and rope as Tríhga steered the raft 
with the long paddle at the aft. “Orik, can you tell me why Brom joined 
the Varden? I know so little about him. For most of my life, he was just 
the town storyteller.” 
 
 “He never joined the Varden; he helped found it.” Orik paused to tap 
some ashes into the water. “After Galbatorix became king, Brom was the 
only Rider still alive, outside of the Forsworn.” 
 
 “But he wasn’t a Rider, not then. His dragon was killed in the fighting at 
Doru Araeba.” 
 
 “Well, a Rider by training. Brom was the first to organize the friends 
and allies of the Riders who had been forced into exile. It was he who 
convinced Hrothgar to allow the Varden to live in Farthen Dûr, and he 
who obtained the elves’ assistance.” 
 
 They were silent for a while. “Why did Brom relinquish the leader-
ship?” asked Eragon. 
 
 Orik smiled wryly. “Perhaps he never wanted it. It was before Hrothgar 
adopted me, so I saw little of Brom in Tronjheim.... He was always off 
fighting the Forsworn or engaged in one plot or another.” 
 
 “Your parents are dead?” 

 
135
 
 “Aye. The pox took them when I was young, and Hrothgar was kind 
enough to welcome me into his hall and, since he has no children of his 
own, to make me his heir.” 
 
 Eragon thought of his helm, marked with the Ingeitum symbol. Hroth-
gar has been kind to me as well. 
 
 When the afternoon twilight arrived, the dwarves hung a round lantern 
at each corner of the rafts. The lanterns were red, which Eragon remem-
bered was to preserve night vision. He stood by Arya and studied the lan-
terns’ pure, motionless depths. “Do you know how these are made?” he 
asked. 
 
 “It was a spell we gave the dwarves long ago. They use it with great 
skill.” 
 
 Eragon reached up and scratched his chin and cheeks, feeling the 
patches of stubble that had begun to appear. “Could you teach me more 
magic while we travel?” 
 
 She looked at him, her balance perfect on the undulating logs. “It is not 
my place. A teacher is waiting for you.” 
 
 “Then tell me this, at least,” he said. “What does the name of my sword 
mean?” 
 
 Arya’s voice was very soft. “Misery is your sword. And so it was until 
you wielded it.” 
 
 Eragon stared with aversion at Zar’roc. The more he learned about his 
weapon, the more malevolent it seemed, as if the blade could cause mis-
fortune of its own free will. Not only did Morzan kill Riders with it, but 
Zar’roc’s very name is evil. If Brom had not given it to him, and if not for 
the fact that Zar’roc never dulled and could not be broken, Eragon would 
have thrown it into the river at that very moment. 
 
 Before it grew any darker, Eragon swam out to Saphira. They flew to-
gether for the first time since leaving Tronjheim and soared high above 
the Az Ragni, where the air was thin and the water below was only a 
purple streak. 
 
 Without the saddle, Eragon gripped Saphira tightly with his knees, feel-
ing her hard scales rub the scars from their first flight. 

 
136
 
 As Saphira tilted to the left, rising on an updraft, he saw three brown 
specks launch themselves from the mountainside below and ascend rap-
idly. At first Eragon took them to be falcons, but as they neared, he real-
ized that the animals were almost twenty feet long, with attenuated tails 
and leathery wings. In fact, they looked like dragons, though their bodies 
were smaller, thinner, and more serpentine than Saphira’s. Nor did their 
scales glitter, but were dappled green and brown. 
 
 Excited, Eragon pointed them out to Saphira. Could they be dragons? he 
asked. 
 
 I don’t know. She floated in place, inspecting the newcomers as they 
spiraled around them. The creatures seemed puzzled by Saphira. They 
darted toward her, only to hiss and swoop overhead at the last moment. 
 
 Eragon grinned and reached out with his mind, trying to touch their 
thoughts. As he did, the three recoiled and shrieked, opening their maws 
like hungry snakes. Their piercing keen was mental as well as physical. It 
tore through Eragon with a savage strength, seeking to incapacitate him. 
Saphira felt it too. Continuing the racking cry, the creatures attacked 
with razor claws. 
 
 Hold on, warned Saphira. She folded her left wing and spun halfway 
around, avoiding two of the animals, then flapped quickly, rising above 
the other. At the same time, Eragon worked furiously to block the shriek. 
The instant his mind was clear, he reached for the magic. Don’t kill them, 
said Saphira. I want the experience. 
 
 Though the creatures were more agile than Saphira, she had the advan-
tage of bulk and strength. One of the creatures dove at her. She flipped 
upside down—falling backward—and kicked the animal in the chest. 
 
 The shriek dropped in intensity as her injured foe retreated. 
 
 Saphira flared her wings, looping right side up so she faced the other 
two as they converged on her. She arched her neck, Eragon heard a deep 
rumble between her ribs, and then a jet of flame roared from her jaws. A 
molten-blue halo engulfed Saphira’s head, flashing through her gemlike 
scales until she sparkled gloriously and seemed to be lit from within. 
 
 The two dragon-beasts squawked in dismay and veered to either side. 
The mental assault ceased as they sped away, sinking back toward the 
mountainside. 

 
137
 
 You almost threw me off, said Eragon, loosening his cramped arms from 
around her neck. 
 
 She looked at him smugly. Almost, but not quite. 
 
 That’s true, he laughed. 
 
 Flushed with the thrill of victory, they returned to the rafts. As Saphira 
landed amid two great fins of water, Orik shouted, “Are you hurt?” 
 
 “No,” called Eragon. The icy water whirled around his legs as Saphira 
swam to the side of the raft. “Were they another race unique to the 
Beors?” 
 
 Orik pulled him onto the raft. “We call them Fanghur. They’re not as 
intelligent as dragons and they can’t breathe fire, but they are still formi-
dable foes.” 
 
 “So we discovered.” Eragon massaged his temples in an attempt to alle-
viate the headache the Fanghur’s attack had brought on. “Saphira was 
more than a match for them, however.” 
 
 Of course, she said. 
 
 “It’s how they hunt,” explained Orik. “They use their minds to immobi-
lize their prey while they kill it.” 
 
 Saphira flicked water at Eragon with her tail. It’s a good idea. Maybe I’ll 
try it next time I go hunting. 
 
 He nodded. It could come in handy in a fight too. 
 
 Arya came to the edge of the raft. “I’m glad you did not kill them. 
Fanghur are rare enough that those three would have been sorely missed.” 
 
 “They still manage to eat enough of our herds,” growled Thorv from in-
side the cabin. The dwarf marched out to Eragon, champing irritably un-
der the twisted knots of his beard. “Do not fly anymore while in these 
Beor Mountains, Shadeslayer. It is difficult enough to keep you unharmed 
without you and thine dragon fighting wind-vipers.” 
 
 “We’ll stay on the ground until we reach the plains,” promised Eragon. 
 

 
138
 “Good.” 
 
 When they stopped for the night, the dwarves moored the rafts to as-
pen trees along the mouth of a small stream. Ama started a fire while Er-
agon helped Ekksvar pull Snowfire onto land. They picketed the stallion 
on a strip of grass. 
 
 Thorv oversaw the erection of six large tents. Hedin gathered firewood 
to last until morning, and Dûthmér carried supplies off the second raft 
and began making dinner. Arya took up watch on the edge of camp, 
where she was soon joined by Ekksvar, Ama, and Tríhga when they fin-
ished their tasks. 
 
 When Eragon realized he had nothing to do, he squatted by the fire 
with Orik and Shrrgnien. As Shrrgnien pulled off his gloves and held his 
scarred hands over the flames, Eragon noticed that a polished steel stud—
perhaps a quarter of an inch long—protruded from each of the dwarf’s 
knuckles, except for on his thumbs. 
 
 “What are those?” he asked. 
 
 Shrrgnien looked at Orik and laughed. “These are mine Ascûdgamln... 
mine ‘fists of steel.’ ” Without standing, he twisted and punched the bole 
of an aspen, leaving four symmetrical holes in the bark. Shrrgnien laughed 
again. “They are good for hitting things, eh?” 
 
 Eragon’s curiosity and envy were aroused. “How are they made? I mean, 
how are the spikes attached to your hands?” 
 
 Shrrgnien hesitated, trying to find the right words. “A healer puts you 
in a deep sleep, so you feel no pain. Then a hole is—is drilled, yes?—is 
drilled down through the joints...” He broke off and spoke quickly to 
Orik in the dwarf language. 
 
 “A metal socket is embedded in each hole,” explained Orik. “Magic is 
used to seal it in place, and when the warrior has fully recovered, various-
sized spikes can be threaded into the sockets.” 
 
 “Yes, see,” said Shrrgnien, grinning. He gripped the stud above his left 
index finger, carefully twisted it free of his knuckle, and then handed it 
to Eragon. 
 
 Eragon smiled as he rolled the sharp lump around his palm. “I wouldn’t 
mind having ‘fists of steel’ myself.” He returned the stud to Shrrgnien. 

 
139
 
 “It’s a dangerous operation,” warned Orik. “Few knurlan get 
Ascûdgamln because you can easily lose the use of your hands if the drill 
goes too deep.” He raised his fist and showed it to Eragon. “Our bones are 
thicker than yours. It might not work for a human.” 
 
 “I’ll remember that.” Still, Eragon could not help but imagine what it 
would be like to fight with Ascûdgamln, to be able to strike anything he 
wanted with impunity, including armored Urgals. He loved the idea. 
 
   
 
 After eating, Eragon retired to his tent. The fire provided enough light 
that he could see the silhouette of Saphira nestled alongside the tent, like 
a figure cut from black paper and pasted against the canvas wall. 
 
 Eragon sat with the blankets pulled over his legs and stared at his lap, 
drowsy but unwilling to sleep quite yet. Unbidden, his mind turned to 
thoughts of home. He wondered how Roran, Horst, and everyone else 
from Carvahall was doing, and if the weather in Palancar Valley was 
warm enough for the farmers to start planting their crops. Longing and 
sadness suddenly gripped Eragon. 
 
 He removed a wood bowl from his pack and, taking his waterskin, 
filled it to the brim with liquid. Then he focused on an image of Roran 
and whispered, “Draumr kópa.” 
 
 As always, the water went black before brightening to reveal the object 
being scryed. Eragon saw Roran sitting alone in a candlelit bedroom he 
recognized from Horst’s house. Roran must have given up his job in Ther-
insford, realized Eragon. His cousin leaned on his knees and clasped his 
hands, staring at the far wall with an expression that Eragon knew meant 
Roran was grappling with some difficult problem. Still, Roran seemed 
well enough, if a bit drawn, which comforted Eragon. After a minute, he 
released the magic, ending the spell and clearing the surface of the water. 
 
 Reassured, Eragon emptied the bowl, then lay down, pulling the blan-
kets up to his chin. He closed his eyes and sank into the warm dusk that 
separates consciousness and sleep, where reality bends and sways to the 
wind of thought, and where creativity blossoms in its freedom from 
boundaries and all things are possible. 
 
 Slumber soon took him. Most of his rest was uneventful, but right be-
fore he woke, the usual night phantasms were replaced with a vision as 

 
140
clear and vibrant as any waking experience. 
 
 He saw a tortured sky, black and crimson with smoke. Crows and eagles 
swirled high above flights of arrows that arched from one side to another of 
a great battle. A man sprawled in the clotted mud with a dented helm and 
bloody mail—his face concealed behind an upthrown arm. 
 
 An armored hand entered Eragon’s view. The gauntlet was so near it blot-
ted out half the world with polished steel. Like an inexorable machine, the 
thumb and last three fingers curled into a fist, leaving the trunk of the index 
finger to point at the downed man with all the authority of fate itself. 
 
   
 
 The vision still filled Eragon’s mind when he crawled out of the tent. 
He found Saphira some distance from the camp, gnawing on a furry 
lump. When he told her what he had seen, she paused in midbite, then 
jerked her neck and swallowed a strip of meat. 
 
 The last time this occurred, she said, it proved to be a true prediction of 
events elsewhere. Do you think a battle is in progress in Alagaësia? 
 
 He kicked a loose branch. I’m not sure.... Brom said you could only scry 
people, places, and things that you had already seen. Yet I’ve never seen 
this place. Nor had I seen Arya when I first dreamt about her in Teirm. 
 
 Perhaps Togira Ikonoka will be able to explain it. 
 
 As they prepared to leave, the dwarves seemed much more relaxed 
now that they were a good distance from Tarnag. When they started pol-
ing down the Az Ragni, Ekksvar—who was steering Snowfire’s raft—
began chanting in his rough bass: 
 
 
 Down the rushing mere-wash 
 
 Of Kílf’s welling blood, 
 
 We ride the twisting timbers, 
 
 For hearth, clan, and honor. 
 
 
 Under the ernes’ sky-vat, 

 
141
 
 Through the ice-wolves’ forest bowls, 
 
 We ride the gory wood, 
 
 For iron, gold, and diamond. 
 
 
 Let hand-ringer and bearded gaper fill my grip 
 
 And battle-leaf guard my stone 
 
 As I leave the halls of my fathers 
 
 For the empty land beyond. 
 
 
 The other dwarves joined Ekksvar, slipping into Dwarvish as they con-
tinued on to other verses. The low throb of their voices accompanied Er-
agon as he carefully made his way to the head of the raft, where Arya sat 
cross-legged. 
 
 “I had a... vision during my sleep,” said Eragon. Arya looked at him with 
interest, and he recounted the images he had seen. “If it’s scrying, then—” 
 
 “It’s not scrying,” said Arya. She spoke with deliberate slowness, as if to 
prevent any misunderstanding. “I thought for a long time about how you 
saw me imprisoned in Gil’ead, and I believe that as I lay unconscious, my 
spirit was searching for help, wherever I might find it.” 
 
 “But why me?” 
 
 Arya nodded toward where Saphira undulated through the water. “I 
grew accustomed to Saphira’s presence during the fifteen years I guarded 
her egg. I was reaching out for anything that felt familiar when I touched 
your dreams.” 
 
 “Are you really strong enough to contact someone in Teirm from 
Gil’ead? Especially if you were drugged.” 
 
 A ghost of a smile touched Arya’s lips. “I could stand on the very gates 
of Vroengard and still speak with you as clearly as I am now.” She 
paused. “If you did not scry me in Teirm, then you could not have scryed 
this new dream. It must be a premonition. They have been known to oc-

 
142
cur throughout the sentient races, but especially among magic users.” 
 
 Eragon clutched the netting around a bundle of supplies as the raft 
lurched. “If what I saw will come to pass, then how can we change any-
thing that happens? Do our choices matter? What if I threw myself off 
the raft right now and drowned?” 
 
 “But you won’t.” Arya dipped her left forefinger in the river and stared 
at the single drop that clung to her skin, like a quivering lens. “Once, long 
ago, the elf Maerzadí had a premonition that he would accidentally kill 
his son in battle. Rather than live to see it happen, he committed suicide, 
saving his son, and at the same time proving that the future isn’t set. 
Short of killing yourself, however, you can do little to change your des-
tiny, since you don’t know what choices will lead you to the particular 
point of time that you saw.” She flipped her hand and the drop splattered 
against the log between them. “We know that it’s possible to retrieve in-
formation from the future—fortunetellers can often sense the paths a 
person’s life may take—but we’ve been unable to refine the process to 
the point where you can choose what, where, or when you want to see.” 
 
 Eragon found the entire concept of funneling knowledge through time 
profoundly disturbing. It raised too many questions about the nature of 
reality. Whether fate and destiny really exist, the only thing I can do is en-
joy the present and live as honorably as possible. Yet he could not help 
asking, “What’s to stop me, though, from scrying one of my memories? 
I’ve seen everything in them... so I should be able to view them with 
magic.” 
 
 Arya’s gaze darted to meet his. “If you value your life, never attempt it. 
Many years ago, several of our spellweavers devoted themselves to de-
feating time’s enigmas. When they tried to summon up the past, they 
only succeeded in creating a blurred image on their mirror before the 
spell consumed their energy and killed them. We made no more experi-
ments on the subject. It is argued that the spell would work if more ma-
gicians participated, but no one is willing to accept the risk and the the-
ory remains unproven. Even if one could scry the past, it would be of 
limited use. And to scry the future, one would have to know exactly 
what was going to happen and where and when, which defeats the pur-
pose. 
 
 “It’s a mystery, then, how people can have premonitions while sleeping, 
how they can do something unconsciously that has defeated our greatest 
sages. Premonitions may be linked to the very nature and fabric of 
magic... or they may function in a similar way to the dragons’ ancestral 

 
143
memories. We don’t know. Many avenues of magic have yet to be ex-
plored.” She stood in a single fluid movement. “Take care not to lose 
yourself among them.” 
 
 
 
 

 
144
DRIFTING 
 
 
 The valley widened throughout the morning as the rafts swept toward 
a bright gap between two mountains. They reached the opening at mid-
day and found themselves looking out of shadow upon a sunny prairie 
that faded into the north. 
 
 Then the current pushed them beyond the frosted crags and the walls 
of the world dropped away to reveal a gigantic sky and flat horizon. Al-
most immediately, the air grew warmer. The Az Ragni curved to the 
east, edging the foothills of the mountain range on one side and the plains 
on the other. 
 
 The amount of open space seemed to unsettle the dwarves. They mut-
tered among themselves and glanced longingly at the cavernous rift be-
hind them. 
 
 Eragon found the sunlight invigorating. It was hard to ever really feel 
awake when three-quarters of the day was spent in twilight. Behind his 
raft, Saphira launched herself out of the water and flew up over the prai-
rie until she dwindled to a winking speck in the azure dome above. 
 
 What do you see? he asked. 
 
 I see vast herds of gazelles to the north and east. To the west, the Hadarac 
Desert. That is all. 
 
 No one else? No Urgals, slavers, or nomads? 
 
 We are alone. 
 
   
 
 That evening, Thorv chose a small cove for their camp. While Dûth-
mér fixed dinner, Eragon cleared a space beside his tent, then drew 
Zar’roc and settled into the ready stance Brom had taught him when they 
first sparred. Eragon knew he was at a disadvantage compared to the 
elves, and he had no intention of arriving in Ellesméra out of practice. 
 
 With excruciating slowness, he looped Zar’roc over his head and 
brought it back down with both hands, as if to cleave an enemy’s helm. 
He held the pose for a second. Keeping his motion under complete con-
trol, he pivoted to the right—twisting Zar’roc’s point to parry an imagi-

 
145
nary blow—then stopped with rigid arms. 
 
 Out of the corner of his eye, Eragon noticed Orik, Arya, and Thorv 
watching. He ignored them and focused only on the ruby blade in his 
hands; he held it as if it were a snake that could writhe out of his grip and 
bite his arm. 
 
 Turning again, he commenced a series of forms, flowing from one to 
another with disciplined ease as he gradually increased his speed. In his 
mind, he was no longer in the shadowy cove, but surrounded by a knot 
of ferocious Urgals and Kull. He ducked and slashed, parried, riposted, 
jumped to the side, and stabbed in a whirl of activity. He fought with 
mindless energy, as he had in Farthen Dûr, with no thought for the safety 
of his own flesh, dashing and tearing aside his imagined enemies. 
 
 He spun Zar’roc around—in an attempt to flip the hilt from one palm 
to another—then dropped the sword as a jagged line of pain bisected his 
back. He staggered and fell. Above him, he could hear Arya and the 
dwarves babbling, but all he saw was a constellation of sparkling red 
haze, like a bloody veil dropped over the world. No sensation existed 
other than pain. It blotted out thought and reason, leaving only a feral 
animal that screamed for release. 
 
   
 
 When Eragon recovered enough to notice his whereabouts, he found 
that he had been placed inside his tent and wrapped tightly with blan-
kets. Arya sat beside him, while Saphira’s head stuck through the en-
trance flaps. 
 
 Was I out long? asked Eragon. 
 
 A while. You slept a little at the end. I tried to draw you from your body 
into mine and shield you from the pain, but I could do little with you un-
conscious. 
 
 Eragon nodded and closed his eyes. His entire body throbbed. Taking a 
deep breath, he looked up at Arya and quietly asked, “How can I train?... 
How can I fight, or use magic?... I am a broken vessel.” His face felt heavy 
with age as he spoke. 
 
 She answered just as softly: “You can sit and watch. You can listen. You 
can read. And you can learn.” 
 

 
146
 Despite her words, he heard a hitch of uncertainty, even fear, in her 
voice. He rolled onto his side to avoid meeting her eyes. It shamed him to 
appear so helpless before her. “How did the Shade do this to me?” 
 
 “I have no answers, Eragon. I am neither the wisest nor the strongest elf. 
We all do our best, and you cannot be blamed for it. Perhaps time will 
heal your wound.” Arya pressed her fingers to his brow and murmured, 
“Sé mor’ranr ono finna,” then left the tent. 
 
 Eragon sat and winced as his cramped back muscles stretched. He 
stared at his hands without seeing them. I wonder if Murtagh’s scar ever 
pained him like mine does. 
 
 I don’t know, said Saphira. 
 
 A dead silence followed. Then: I’m afraid. 
 
 Why? 
 
 Because...He hesitated. Because nothing I do will prevent another attack. 
I don’t know when or where it will happen, but I do know that it’s inevita-
ble. So I wait, and every moment I fear that if I lift something too heavy or 
stretch in the wrong way, the pain will return. My own body has become the 
enemy. 
 
 Saphira hummed deep in her throat. I have no answers either. Life is 
both pain and pleasure. If this is the price you must pay for the hours you 
enjoy, is it too much? 
 
 Yes, he snapped. He pulled off the blankets and shoved past her, stum-
bling into the center of the camp, where Arya and the dwarves sat 
around a fire. “Is there food left?” asked Eragon. 
 
 Dûthmér wordlessly filled a bowl and handed it to him. With a defer-
ential expression, Thorv asked, “Are you better now, Shadeslayer?” He 
and the other dwarves seemed awed by what they had seen. 
 
 “I’m fine.” 
 
 “You bear a heavy burden, Shadeslayer.” 
 
 Eragon scowled and abruptly walked to the edge of the tents, where he 
seated himself in darkness. He could sense Saphira nearby, but she left 
him in peace. He swore under his breath and jabbed Dûthmér’s stew 

 
147
with dull anger. 
 
 Just as he took a bite, Orik said from beside him, “You should not treat 
them so.” 
 
 Eragon glared at Orik’s shadowed face. “What?” 
 
 “Thorv and his men were sent to protect you and Saphira. They will die 
for you if need be, and trust their sacred burial to you. You should re-
member that.” 
 
 Eragon bit back a sharp retort and gazed at the black surface of the 
river—always moving, never stopping—in an attempt to calm his mind. 
“You’re right. I let my temper get away from me.” 
 
 Orik’s teeth gleamed in the night as he smiled. “It’s a lesson that every 
commander must learn. I had it beaten into me by Hrothgar after I threw 
my boot at a dwarf who left his halberd where someone could step on 
it.” 
 
 “Did you hit him?” 
 
 “I broke his nose,” chuckled Orik. 
 
 Despite himself, Eragon laughed as well. “I’ll remember not to do that.” 
He held the bowl with both hands to keep them warm. 
 
 Eragon heard the jangle of metal as Orik extracted something from a 
pouch. “Here,” said the dwarf, dropping a knot of intertwined gold rings 
on Eragon’s palm. “It’s a puzzle we use to test cleverness and dexterity. 
There are eight bands. If you arrange them properly, they form a single 
ring. I’ve found it useful for distracting myself when I’m troubled.” 
 
 “Thank you,” murmured Eragon, already entranced by the complexity 
of the gleaming nest. 
 
 “You can keep it if you can put it together.” 
 
 When he returned to his tent, Eragon lay on his stomach and inspected 
the rings in the dim firelight that seeped past the entrance flaps. Four 
bands looped through four bands. Each was smooth on the bottom half 
and an asymmetrical wriggling mass on the top, where it would weave 
through the other pieces. 
 

 
148
 As Eragon experimented with various configurations, he quickly be-
came frustrated by a simple fact: it seemed impossible to get the two sets 
of bands parallel so they would lie flat together. 
 
 Absorbed by the challenge, he forgot the terror he had just endured. 
 
   
 
 Eragon woke right before dawn. Scrubbing the sleep from his eyes, he 
exited the tent and stretched. His breath turned white in the brisk morn-
ing air. He nodded to Shrrgnien, who was keeping guard by the fire, then 
strolled to the edge of the river and washed his face, blinking from the 
shock of the cold water. 
 
 He located Saphira with a flick of his mind, belted on Zar’roc, and 
headed toward her through the beech trees that lined the Az Ragni. Be-
fore long Eragon’s hands and face were slick with dew from a tangled 
wall of chokecherry bushes that obstructed his way. With an effort, he 
pushed through the net of branches and escaped onto the silent plains. A 
round hill rose before him. On its crest—like two ancient statues—stood 
Saphira and Arya. They faced east, where a molten glow crept into the 
sky and burnished the prairie amber. 
 
 As the clear light struck the two figures, Eragon was reminded of how 
Saphira had watched the sunrise from his bedpost only a few hours after 
she hatched. She was like a hawk or falcon with her hard, sparkling eyes 
under their bony ridges, the fierce arch of her neck, and the lean strength 
etched into every line of her body. She was a huntress, and endowed with 
all the savage beauty that the term implied. Arya’s angled features and 
panther grace perfectly matched the dragon beside her. No discrepancy 
existed between their demeanors as they stood bathed in dawn’s first 
rays. 
 
 A tingle of awe and joy shuddered along Eragon’s spine. This was where 
he belonged, as a Rider. Of all the things in Alagaësia, he had been lucky 
enough to be joined with this. The wonder of it brought tears to his eyes 
and a smile of wild exultation that dispelled all his doubts and fears in a 
surge of pure emotion. 
 
 Still smiling, he mounted the hill and took his place by Saphira as they 
surveyed the new day. 
 
 Arya looked at him. Eragon met her gaze, and something lurched 
within him. He flushed without knowing why, feeling a sudden connec-

 
149
tion with her, a sense that she understood him better than anyone other 
than Saphira. His reaction confused him, for no one had affected him in 
that manner before. 
 
   
 
 Throughout the rest of the day, all Eragon had to do was think back on 
that moment to make himself smile and set his insides churning with a 
mixture of odd sensations he could not identify. He spent most of his 
time seated against the raft’s cabin, working on Orik’s ring and watching 
the changing landscape. 
 
 Around midday they passed the mouth of a valley, and another river 
melded into the Az Ragni, doubling its size and speed until the shores 
were over a mile apart. It was all the dwarves could do to keep the rafts 
from being tossed like flotsam before the inexorable current and to avoid 
smashing into the trees that occasionally floated by. 
 
 A mile after the rivers joined, the Az Ragni turned north and flowed 
past a lonely cloud-wreathed peak that stood separate from the main 
body of the Beor range, like a gigantic watchtower built to keep vigil 
over the plains. 
 
 The dwarves bowed to the peak when they saw it, and Orik told Er-
agon, “There is Moldûn the Proud. He is the last true mountain we shall 
see on this journey.” 
 
 When the rafts were moored for the evening, Eragon saw Orik unwrap 
a long black box inlaid with mother-of-pearl, rubies, and curved lines of 
silver. Orik flicked a clasp, then raised the lid to reveal an unstrung bow 
nestled in red velvet. The bow’s reflexed limbs were ebony, which 
formed the background for intricate patterns of vines, flowers, animals, 
and runes, all executed in the finest gold. It was such a luxurious weapon, 
Eragon wondered how anyone dared use it. 
 
 Orik strung the bow—it was nearly as tall as he was, but still no bigger 
than a child’s bow by Eragon’s standards—put the box away, and said, 
“I’m going to find some fresh meat. I’ll be back in an hour.” With that he 
disappeared into the brush. Thorv grunted disapprovingly, but made no 
move to stop him. 
 
 True to his word, Orik returned with a brace of long-necked geese. “I 
found a flock of them perched in a tree,” he said, tossing the birds to 
Dûthmér. 

 
150
 
 As Orik retrieved the bejeweled case, Eragon asked, “What kind of 
wood is your bow made of?” 
 
 “Wood?” Orik laughed, shaking his head. “You can’t make a bow this 
short out of wood and cast an arrow more than twenty yards; it breaks, 
or follows the string after a few shots. No, this is an Urgal horn bow!” 
 
 Eragon eyed him suspiciously, sure that the dwarf was trying to fool 
him. “Horn isn’t flexible or springy enough to make a bow.” 
 
 “Ah,” chortled Orik, “that’s because you have to know how to treat it 
right. We first learned to do it with Feldûnost horns, but it works just as 
well with an Urgal’s. It’s done by cutting the horn in half lengthwise, then 
trimming the outside coil until it’s the right thickness. The strip is boiled 
flat and sanded into the final shape before being fixed to the belly of an 
ash stave with glue made from fish scales and the skin from the roof of 
trout’s mouths. Then the back of the stave is covered with multiple lay-
ers of sinew; they give the bow its snap. The last step is decoration. The 
entire process can take almost a decade.” 
 
 “I’ve never heard of a bow built like that before,” said Eragon. It made 
his own weapon seem no more than a crudely hacked branch. “How far 
does it shoot?” 
 
 “See for yourself,” said Orik. He let Eragon take the bow, which he held 
gingerly, for fear of scuffing its finish. Orik removed an arrow from his 
quiver and handed it to him. “You’ll owe me an arrow, though.” 
 
 Eragon fit shaft to string, aimed over the Az Ragni, and pulled back. 
The bow’s draw length was less than two feet, but he was surprised to 
find that its weight far exceeded that of his own bow; he was barely 
strong enough to hold the string. He released the arrow and it vanished 
with a twang, only to reappear far above the river. Eragon watched with 
amazement as the arrow landed in a spray of water halfway across the Az 
Ragni. 
 
 He immediately reached through the barrier in his mind so that the 
magic’s power suffused him and said, “Gath sem oro un lam iet.” After a 
few seconds, the arrow darted back through the air to land on his out-
stretched palm. “And there,” he said, “is the arrow I owe you.” 
 
 Orik clapped his fist to his chest and then embraced the arrow and 
bow with obvious delight. “Wonderful! Now I still have an even two 

 
151
dozen. Otherwise, I would have had to wait until Hedarth to replenish 
my stock.” He deftly unstrung the bow and stored it away, wrapping the 
case in soft rags to protect it. 
 
 Eragon saw Arya watching. He asked her, “Do elves use horn bows as 
well? You’re so strong, a wood bow would shatter if it was made heavy 
enough for you.” 
 
 “We sing our bows from trees that do not grow.” And then she walked 
away. 
 
   
 
 For days, they drifted through fields of spring grass while the Beor 
Mountains faded into a hazy white wall behind them. The banks were 
often covered with vast herds of gazelles and small red deer that watched 
them with liquid eyes. 
 
 Now that the Fanghur were no longer a threat, Eragon flew almost con-
stantly with Saphira. It was their first opportunity since before Gil’ead to 
spend so much time together in the air, and they took full advantage of it. 
Also, Eragon welcomed the chance to escape the cramped deck of the 
raft, where he felt awkward and unsettled with Arya so near. 
 
 
 
 

 
152
ARYA SVIT-KONA 
 
 
 Eragon and his company followed the Az Ragni until it joined the Edda 
River, which then drifted into the unknown east. At the juncture be-
tween the rivers, they visited the dwarves’ trading outpost, Hedarth, and 
exchanged their rafts for donkeys. Dwarves never used horses on account 
of their size. 
 
 Arya refused the steed offered to her, saying, “I will not return to the 
land of my ancestors on the back of a donkey.” 
 
 Thorv frowned. “How will you keep pace with us?” 
 
 “I will run.” And run she did, outstripping Snowfire and the donkeys, 
only to sit waiting for them at the next hill or copse. Despite her exer-
tions, she displayed no sign of weariness when they stopped for the night, 
nor any inclination to utter more than a few words between breakfast 
and supper. With every step, she seemed to grow tenser. 
 
   
 
 From Hedarth, they trekked north, going up the Edda River toward its 
point of origin at Eldor Lake. 
 
 Du Weldenvarden came into view within three days. The forest first 
appeared as a hazy ridge on the horizon, then quickly expanded into an 
emerald sea of ancient oaks, beeches, and maples. From Saphira’s back, 
Eragon saw that the woods reached unbroken to the horizon both north 
and west, and he knew they extended far beyond that, stretching the en-
tire length of Alagaësia. 
 
 To him, the shadows underneath the trees’ arching boughs seemed 
mysterious and enticing, as well as dangerous, for there lived the elves. 
Hidden somewhere in the dappled heart of Du Weldenvarden lay Elles-
méra—where he would complete his training—as well as Osilon, and 
other elven cities few outsiders had visited since the fall of the Riders. 
The forest was a perilous place for mortals, Eragon felt, certain to be rid-
dled with strange magic and stranger creatures. 
 
 It’s like another world, he observed. A pair of butterflies spiraled around 
each other as they rose from the dark interior of the forest. 
 
 I hope, said Saphira, there will be room for me within the trees on whatever 

 
153
path the elves use. I cannot fly the whole time. 
 
 I’m sure they found ways to accommodate dragons during the time of the 
Riders. 
 
 Mmm. 
 
 That night, just as Eragon was about to seek his blankets, Arya ap-
peared by his shoulder, like a spirit materializing out of the air. Her 
stealth made him jump; he could never understand how she moved so 
quietly. Before he could ask what she wanted, her mind touched his and 
she said, Follow me as silently as you can. 
 
 The contact surprised him as much as the request. They had shared 
thoughts during the flight to Farthen Dûr—it had been the only way Er-
agon could speak to her through her self-induced coma—but since Arya’s 
recovery, he had made no attempt to touch her mind again. It was a pro-
foundly personal experience. Whenever he reached out to another per-
son’s consciousness, it felt as if a facet of his bare soul rubbed against 
theirs. It seemed boorish and rude to initiate something so private with-
out an invitation, as well as a betrayal of Arya’s trust, slender as it was. 
Also, Eragon was afraid that such a link would reveal his new and con-
fused feelings for Arya, and he had no desire to be ridiculed for them. 
 
 He accompanied her as she slipped out from the ring of tents, carefully 
evaded Tríhga, who had taken the first watch, and passed beyond the 
dwarves’ hearing. Within him, Saphira kept a close watch on his progress, 
ready to leap to his side if need be. 
 
 Arya squatted on a moss-eaten log and wrapped her arms around her 
knees without looking at him. “There are things you must know before 
we reach Ceris and Ellesméra so that you do not shame yourself or me 
through your ignorance.” 
 
 “Such as?” He crouched opposite her, curious. 
 
 Arya hesitated. “During my years as Islanzadí’s ambassador, it was my 
observation that humans and dwarves are quite similar. You share many 
of the same beliefs and passions. More than one human has lived com-
fortably among the dwarves because he or she can understand their cul-
ture, as they understand yours. You both love, lust, hate, fight, and create 
in much the same manner. Your friendship with Orik and your accep-
tance into Dûrgrimst Ingeitum are examples of this.” Eragon nodded, al-
though their differences seemed greater to him than that. “Elves, though, 

 
154
are not like other races.” 
 
 “You speak as though you weren’t one,” he said, echoing her words 
from Farthen Dûr. 
 
 “I have lived with the Varden for enough years to become accustomed 
to their traditions,” replied Arya in a brittle tone. 
 
 “Ah... So then do you mean to say that elves don’t have the same emo-
tions as dwarves and humans? I find that hard to believe. All living things 
have the same basic needs and desires.” 
 
 “That is not what I mean to say!” Eragon recoiled, then frowned and 
studied her. It was unusual for her to be so brusque. Arya closed her eyes 
and placed her fingers on her temples, taking a long breath. “Because 
elves live for so many years, we consider courtesy to be the highest social 
virtue. You cannot afford to give offense when a grudge can be held for 
decades or centuries. Courtesy is the only way to prevent such hostility 
from accumulating. It doesn’t always succeed, but we adhere to our ritu-
als rigorously, for they protect us from extremes. Nor are elves fecund, so 
it is vital that we avoid conflict among ourselves. If we shared the same 
rate of crime as you or the dwarves, we would soon be extinct. 
 
 “There is a proper way to greet the sentinels in Ceris, certain patterns 
and forms that you must observe when presented to Queen Islanzadí, 
and a hundred different manners in which to greet those around you, if 
it’s not better to just remain quiet.” 
 
 “With all your customs,” Eragon risked saying, “it seems as though 
you’ve only made it easier to offend people.” 
 
 A smile flickered across her lips. “Perhaps. You know as well as I that 
you will be judged by the highest standards. If you make a mistake, the 
elves will think you did it on purpose. And only harm will come if they 
discover that it was born of ignorance. Far better to be thought rude and 
capable than rude and incapable, else you risk being manipulated like 
The Serpent in a match of Runes. Our politics move in cycles that are 
both subtle and lengthy. What you see or hear of an elf one day may only 
be a slight move in a strategy that reaches back millennia, and may have 
no bearing on how that elf will behave tomorrow. It is a game that we all 
play but few control, a game that you are about to enter. 
 
 “Now perhaps you realize why I say elves are not like other races. The 
dwarves are also long-lived, yet they are more prolific than us and do not 

 
155
share our restraint or our taste for intrigue. And humans...” She let her 
voice fade into a tactful silence. 
 
 “Humans,” said Eragon, “do the best they can with what they are given.” 
 
 “Even so.” 
 
 “Why don’t you tell Orik all this as well? He’ll be staying in Ellesméra, 
same as me.” 
 
 An edge crept into Arya’s voice. “He is already somewhat familiar with 
our etiquette. However, as a Rider, you would do well to appear better 
educated than him.” 
 
 Eragon accepted her rebuke without protest. “What must I learn?” 
 
 So Arya began to tutor him and, through him, Saphira in the niceties of 
elven society. First she explained that when one elf meets another, they 
stop and touch their first two fingers to their lips to indicate that “we 
shall not distort the truth during our conversation.” This is followed by 
the phrase “Atra esterní ono thelduin” to which one replies “Atra du 
evarínya ono varda.” 
 
 “And,” said Arya, “if you are being especially formal, a third response is 
made: ‘Un atra mor’ranr lífa unin hjarta onr,’ which means, ‘And may 
peace live in your heart.’ These lines were adopted from a blessing that 
was made by a dragon when our pact with them was finalized. It goes: 
 
 
 Atra esterní ono thelduin, 
 
 Mor’ranr lífa unin hjarta onr, 
 
 Un du evarínya ono varda. 
 
 
 “Or: ‘May good fortune rule over you, peace live in your heart, and the 
stars watch over you.’” 
 
 “How do you know who is supposed to speak first?” 
 
 “If you greet someone with greater status than yourself or if you wish 
to honor a subordinate, then speak first. If you greet someone with less 
status than yourself, speak last. But if you are uncertain of your position, 

 
156
give your counterpart a chance to speak, and if they are silent, speak first. 
Such is the rule.” 
 
 Does it apply to me as well? asked Saphira. 
 
 Arya plucked a dry leaf from the ground and crumpled it between her 
fingers. Behind her, the camp faded into shadow as the dwarves banked 
the fire, dampening the flames with a layer of dirt so that the coals and 
embers would survive until morning. “As a dragon, none are higher than 
you in our culture. Not even the queen would claim authority over you. 
You may do and say as you wish. We do not expect dragons to be bound 
by our laws.” 
 
 Next she showed Eragon how to twist his right hand and place it over 
his sternum in a curious gesture. “This,” she said, “you will use when you 
meet Islanzadí. By it you indicate that you offer her your loyalty and obe-
dience.” 
 
 “Is it binding, like my oath of fealty to Nasuada?” 
 
 “No, only a courtesy, and a small one at that.” 
 
 Eragon struggled to remember the sundry modes of address that Arya 
instructed them in. The salutations varied from man to woman, adults to 
children, boys to girls, as well as by rank and prestige. It was a daunting 
list, but one that Eragon knew he had to memorize perfectly. 
 
 When he had absorbed all he could, Arya stood and dusted her hands. 
“So long as you do not forget, you’ll do well enough.” She turned to leave. 
 
 “Wait,” said Eragon. He reached out to stop her, then snatched back his 
hand before she noticed his presumption. She looked over her shoulder 
with a query in her dark eyes, and his stomach clenched as he tried to 
find a way to voice his thoughts. Despite his best efforts, he ended up 
just saying, “Are you well, Arya?... You’ve seemed distracted and out of 
sorts ever since we left Hedarth.” 
 
 As Arya’s face hardened into a blank mask, he winced inwardly, know-
ing that he had chosen the wrong approach, although he could not 
fathom why the question should offend her. 
 
 “When we are in Du Weldenvarden,” she informed him, “I expect that 
you will not speak to me in such a familiar way, unless you wish to cause 
affront.” She stalked away. 

 
157
 
 Run after her! exclaimed Saphira. 
 
 What? 
 
 We can’t afford to have her angry with you. Go apologize. 
 
 His pride rebelled. No! It’s her fault, not mine. 
 
 Go apologize, Eragon, or I’ll fill your tent with carrion. It was no idle 
threat. 
 
 How? 
 
 Saphira thought for a second, then told him what to do. Without argu-
ing, he jumped to his feet and darted in front of Arya, forcing her to stop. 
She regarded him with a haughty expression. 
 
 He touched his fingers to his lips and said, “Arya Svit-kona,” using the 
honorific he had just learned for a woman of great wisdom. “I spoke 
badly, and for that I cry your pardon. Saphira and I were concerned for 
your welfare. After all you’ve done for us, it seemed the least we could 
do was offer our help in return, if you need it.” 
 
 Finally, Arya relented and said, “Your concern is appreciated. And I too 
spoke badly.” She looked down. In the dark, the outline of her limbs and 
torso was painfully rigid. “You ask what troubles me, Eragon? Do you 
truly wish to know? Then I will tell you.” Her voice was as soft as this-
tledown floating on the wind. “I am afraid.” 
 
 Dumbfounded, Eragon made no response, and she stepped past, leaving 
him alone in the night. 
 
 
 
 

 
158
CERIS 
 
 
 On the morning of the fourth day, when Eragon rode alongside 
Shrrgnien, the dwarf said, “So tell me, do men really have ten toes, as is 
said? For truly I have never traveled beyond our borders before.” 
 
 “Of course we have ten toes!” said Eragon, astonished. He shifted in 
Snowfire’s saddle, lifted his foot, removed his right boot and sock, and 
wiggled his toes under Shrrgnien’s amazed eyes. “Don’t you?” 
 
 Shrrgnien shook his head. “Nay, we have seven on each foot. It is how 
Helzvog made us. Five is too few and six is the wrong number, but 
seven... seven is just right.” He glanced at Eragon’s foot again, then spurred 
his donkey ahead and began speaking animatedly to Ama and Hedin, who 
eventually handed him several silver coins. 
 
 I think, said Eragon as he pulled the boot back on, that I was just the 
source of a bet. For some reason, Saphira found that immensely amusing. 
 
   
 
 As dusk fell and the full moon rose, the Edda River drew ever closer to 
the fringe of Du Weldenvarden. They rode down a narrow trail through 
tangled dogwood and rosebushes in full bloom, which filled the evening 
air with the flowers’ warm scent. 
 
 Eager anticipation swelled within Eragon as he gazed into the dark for-
est, knowing they had already entered the elves’ domain and were close 
to Ceris. He leaned forward in Snowfire’s saddle, the reins pulled tight 
between his hands. Saphira’s excitement was as great as his own; she 
ranged overhead, flicking her tail back and forth with impatience. 
 
 Eragon felt as if they had wandered into a dream. It doesn’t seem real, 
he said. 
 
 Aye. Here the legends of old still bestride the earth. 
 
 At last they came upon a small meadow set between the river and for-
est. “Stop here,” said Arya in a low voice. She walked forward until she 
stood alone in the midst of the lush grass, then cried in the ancient lan-
guage, “Come forth, my brethren! You have nothing to fear. ’Tis I, Arya 
of Ellesméra. My companions are friends and allies; they mean us no 
harm.” She added other words as well, ones alien to Eragon. 

 
159
 
 For several minutes, the only sound was the river rushing behind them, 
until from underneath the still leaves came a line of Elvish, so quick and 
fleeting that Eragon missed the meaning. Arya responded: “I do.” 
 
 With a rustle, two elves stood on the edge of the forest and two ran 
lightly out on the boughs of a gnarled oak. Those on the ground bore long 
spears with white blades, while the others held bows. All were garbed in 
tunics the color of moss and bark underneath flowing cloaks clasped at 
the shoulder with ivory brooches. One had tresses as black as Arya’s. 
Three had hair like starlight. 
 
 The elves dropped from the trees and embraced Arya, laughing in their 
clear, pure voices. They joined hands and danced in a circle around her 
like children, singing merrily as they spun through the grass. 
 
 Eragon watched in amazement. Arya had never given him reason to 
suspect that elves liked to—or even could —laugh. It was a wondrous 
sound, like flutes and harps trilling with delight at their own music. He 
wished that he could listen to it forever. 
 
 Then Saphira drifted over the river and settled beside Eragon. At her 
approach, the elves cried out in alarm and aimed their weapons toward 
her. Arya spoke quickly in soothing tones, motioning first at Saphira, then 
at Eragon. When she paused for breath, Eragon drew back the glove on 
his right hand, tilted his palm so that the gedwëy ignasia caught the 
moonlight, and said, as he once had to Arya so long ago, “Eka fricai un 
Shur’tugal.” I am a Rider and friend. Remembering his lesson from yester-
day, he touched his lips, adding, “Atra esterní ono thelduin.” 
 
 The elves lowered their weapons as their angled faces lit up with radi-
ant joy. They pressed their forefingers to their lips and bowed to Saphira 
and him, murmuring their reply in the ancient language. 
 
 Then they rose, pointed at the dwarves, and laughed as if at a hidden 
joke. Drifting back into the forest, they waved their hands and called, 
“Come, come!” 
 
 Eragon followed Arya with Saphira and the dwarves, who were grum-
bling among themselves. As they passed between the trees, the canopy 
overhead plunged them into velvet darkness, except where fragments of 
moonlight gleamed through chinks in the shell of overlapping leaves. Er-
agon could hear the elves whispering and laughing all around, though he 
could not see them. Occasionally, they would call directions when he or 

 
160
the dwarves blundered. 
 
 Ahead, a fire glowed through the trees, sending shadows racing like 
sprites across the leafy ground. As Eragon entered the radius of light, he 
saw three small huts clustered together around the base of a large oak. 
High in the tree was a roofed platform where a watchman could observe 
the river and forest. A pole had been lashed between two of the huts: 
from it hung bundles of drying plants. 
 
 The four elves vanished into the huts, then returned with their arms 
piled high with fruits and vegetables—but no meat—and began prepar-
ing a meal for their guests. They hummed as they worked, flitting from 
one tune to another as the fancy took them. When Orik asked their 
names, the dark-haired elf pointed to himself and said, “I am Lifaen of 
House Rílvenar. And my companions are Edurna, Celdin, and Narí.” 
 
 Eragon sat beside Saphira, happy for an opportunity to rest and to 
watch the elves. Though all four were male, their faces resembled Arya’s, 
with delicate lips, thin noses, and large slanted eyes that shone under 
their brows. The rest of their bodies matched, with narrow shoulders and 
slender arms and legs. Each was more fair and noble than any human Er-
agon had seen, albeit in a rarefied, exotic manner. 
 
 Who ever thought I would get to visit the elves’ homeland? Eragon asked 
himself. He grinned and leaned against the corner of a hut, drowsy with 
the fire’s warmth. Above him, Saphira’s dancing blue eyes tracked the 
elves with unwavering precision. 
 
 More magic is in this race, she finally remarked, than either humans or 
dwarves. They do not feel as if they come from the earth or the stone, but 
rather from another realm, half in, half out, like reflections seen through wa-
ter. 
 
 They certainly are graceful, he said. The elves moved like dancers, their 
every action smooth and lithe. 
 
 Brom had told Eragon that it was rude for someone to speak with their 
mind to a Rider’s dragon without permission, and the elves adhered to 
that custom, voicing aloud their comments to Saphira, who would then 
answer the elves directly. Saphira usually refrained from touching the 
thoughts of humans and dwarves and allowed Eragon to relay her words, 
since few members of those races had the training to guard their minds if 
they wished for privacy. It also seemed an imposition to use such an in-
timate form of contact for casual exchanges. The elves had no such inhi-

 
161
bitions, though; they welcomed Saphira into their minds, reveling in her 
presence. 
 
 At last the food was ready and served on carved plates that felt like 
dense bone, although wood grain wandered through the flowers and 
vines decorating the rim. Eragon was also supplied with a flagon of 
gooseberry wine—made of the same unusual material—with a sculpted 
dragon wrapped around its stem. 
 
 As they ate, Lifaen produced a set of reed pipes and began to play a 
flowing melody, his fingers running along the various holes. Soon the tall-
est silver-haired elf, Narí, raised his voice and sang: 
 
 
 O! 
 
 
 The day is done; the stars are bright; 
 
 The leaves are still; the moon is white! 
 
 Laugh at woe and laugh at foe, 
 
 Menoa’s scion now is safe this night! 
 
 
 A forest child we lost to strife; 
 
 A sylvan daughter caught by life! 
 
 Freed of fear and freed of flame, 
 
 She tore a Rider from the shadows rife! 
 
 
 Again the dragons rise on wing, 
 
 And we avenge their suffering! 
 
 Strong of blade and strong of arm, 
 
 The time is ripe for us to kill a king! 
 
 

 
162
 O! 
 
 
 The wind is soft; the river deep; 
 
 The trees are tall; the birds do sleep! 
 
 Laugh at woe and laugh at foe, 
 
 The hour has arrived for joy to reap! 
 
 
 When Narí finished, Eragon released his pent-up breath. He had never 
heard such a voice before; it felt as if the elf had revealed his essence, his 
very soul. “That was beautiful, Narí-vodhr.” 
 
 “A rough composition, Argetlam,” demurred Narí. “But I thank you, 
nevertheless.” 
 
 Thorv grunted. “Very pretty, Master Elf. However, there are matters 
more serious than reciting verse that we must attend to. Are we to ac-
company Eragon farther?” 
 
 “No,” said Arya quickly, drawing looks from the other elves. “You may 
return home in the morning. We will assure that Eragon reaches Elles-
méra.” 
 
 Thorv dipped his head. “Then our task is complete.” 
 
   
 
 As Eragon lay on the bedding the elves had arranged for him, he 
strained his ears to catch Arya’s speech, which drifted from one of the 
huts. Though she used many unfamiliar words in the ancient language, he 
deduced that she was explaining to their hosts how she had lost Saphira’s 
egg and the events since. A long silence followed after she stopped, then 
an elf said, “It is good that you have returned, Arya Dröttningu. Islanzadí 
was sorely wounded by grief when you were captured and the egg was 
stolen, and by Urgals no less! She was—and is—sick at heart.” 
 
 “Hush, Edurna... hush,” chided another. “Dvergar are small, but they 
have sharp ears, and I am sure these will report to Hrothgar.” 
 
 Then their voices dropped and Eragon could discern no more from the 

 
163
murmur of voices, which melded into the whisper of leaves as he drifted 
to sleep, the elf’s song repeating endlessly through his dreams. 
 
   
 
 The scent of flowers was heavy in the air when Eragon woke to behold 
a sun-drenched Du Weldenvarden. Above him arched a mottled panoply 
of drifting leaves, supported by the thick trunks that buried themselves 
in the dry, bare ground. Only moss, lichen, and a few low shrubs survived 
in the pervasive green shade. The scarcity of underbrush made it possible 
to see for great distances between the knotted pillars and to walk about 
freely beneath the dappled ceiling. 
 
 Rolling to his feet, Eragon found Thorv and his guards packed and 
ready to leave. Orik’s donkey was tied behind Ekksvar’s steed. Eragon ap-
proached Thorv and said, “Thank you, all of you, for protecting me and 
Saphira. Please convey our gratitude to Ûndin.” 
 
 Thorv pressed his fist to his chest. “I will carry your words.” He hesi-
tated and looked back at the huts. “Elves are a queer race, full of light and 
dark. In the morning, they drink with you; in the evening, they stab you. 
Keep thine back to a wall, Shadeslayer. Capricious, they are.” 
 
 “I will remember that.” 
 
 “Mmm.” Thorv gestured toward the river. “They plan to travel up Eldor 
Lake in boats. What will you do with thine horse? We could return him 
to Tarnag with us, and from there, to Tronjheim.” 
 
 “Boats!” cried Eragon with dismay. He had always planned to bring 
Snowfire to Ellesméra. It was convenient to have a horse whenever 
Saphira was away, or in places too confined for her bulk. He fingered the 
sparse bristles along his jaw. “That is a kind offer. Will you make sure 
Snowfire is well cared for? I couldn’t bear it if anything were to happen 
to him.” 
 
 “On mine honor,” pledged Thorv, “you will return to find him fat and 
sleek.” 
 
 Eragon fetched Snowfire and transferred the stallion, his saddle, and his 
grooming supplies into Thorv’s care. He bade each of the warriors fare-
well, then he, Saphira, and Orik watched the dwarves ride back along the 
trail they had arrived on. 
 

 
164
 Returning to the huts, Eragon and the remainder of his party followed 
the elves to a thicket on the edge of the Edda River. There, docked on 
either side of a boulder, were two white canoes with vines carved along 
their sides. 
 
 Eragon boarded the nearest boat and stowed his pack beneath his feet. 
He was amazed by how light the craft was; he could have lifted it with a 
single hand. Even more astounding, the hulls appeared to be composed of 
birch-bark panels melded into a seamless whole. Curious, he touched the 
side. The bark was hard and taut, like stretched parchment, and cool 
from its contact with the water. He rapped it with a knuckle. The fi-
brous shell reverberated like a muted drum. 
 
 “Are all your boats made this way?” he asked. 
 
 “All except the very largest,” answered Narí, seating himself at the 
prow of Eragon’s vessel. “For those, we sing the finest cedar and oak into 
shape.” 
 
 Before Eragon could ask what he meant, Orik joined their canoe while 
Arya and Lifaen appropriated the second one. Arya turned to Edurna and 
Celdin—who stood on the bank—and said, “Guard this way so that none 
may follow us, and tell no one of our presence. The queen must be the 
first to know. I will send reinforcements as soon as we reach Sílthrim.” 
 
 “Arya Dröttningu.” 
 
 “May the stars watch over you!” she answered. 
 
 Bending forward, Narí and Lifaen drew spiked poles ten feet long from 
inside the boats and began propelling the vessels upstream. Saphira slid 
into the water behind them and clawed her way along the riverbed until 
they were level. When Eragon looked at her, she winked lazily, then 
submerged, forcing the river to swell into a mound over her jagged back. 
The elves laughed as she did so and made many compliments about her 
size and strength. 
 
 After an hour, they reached Eldor Lake, which was rough with small, 
jagged waves. Birds and flies swarmed by a wall of trees edging the west-
ern shore, while the eastern shore sloped up into the plains. On that side 
meandered hundreds of deer. 
 
 Once they escaped the river’s current, Narí and Lifaen stowed their 
poles, then distributed leaf-bladed paddles. Orik and Arya already knew 

 
165
how to steer a boat, but Narí had to explain the process to Eragon. “We 
turn toward whichever side you paddle on,” said the elf. “So if I paddle on 
the right and Orik paddles on the left, then you must paddle first on one 
side, then the other, else we will drift off course.” In the daylight, Narí’s 
hair shimmered like the finest wire, each strand a fiery line. 
 
 Eragon soon mastered the ability, and as the motion became habitual, 
his mind was freed to daydream. Thus, he floated up the cool lake, lost in 
the fantastic worlds hidden behind his eyes. When he paused to rest his 
arms, he once again pulled Orik’s puzzle ring from his belt and struggled 
to arrange the obstinate gold bands into the correct pattern. 
 
 Narí noticed what he was doing. “May I see that ring?” 
 
 Eragon passed it to the elf, who turned his back. For a few moments, 
Eragon and Orik maneuvered the canoe alone as Narí picked at the en-
twined bands. Then, with a pleased exclamation, Narí raised his hand, 
and the completed ring flashed on his middle finger. “A delightful riddle,” 
said Narí. He slipped off the ring and shook it, so that it was in its origi-
nal state when he returned it to Eragon. 
 
 “How did you solve it?” demanded Eragon, dismayed and envious that 
Narí had been able to master the puzzle so easily. “Wait... Don’t tell me. I 
want to figure it out on my own.” 
 
 “Of course,” said Narí, smiling. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
166
WOUNDS OF THE PAST 
 
 
 For three and a half days, the citizens of Carvahall discussed the latest 
attack, the tragedy of young Elmund’s death, and what could possibly be 
done to escape their thrice-blasted situation. The debate raged with bit-
ter fury through every room of every home. In the space of a word, 
friends turned against friends, husbands against wives, children against 
parents, only to reconcile moments later in their frantic attempt to dis-
cover a means of survival. 
 
 Some said that since Carvahall was doomed anyway, they might as well 
kill the Ra’zac and remaining soldiers so as to at least have their venge-
ance. Others said that if Carvahall really was doomed, then the only logi-
cal course was to surrender and trust themselves to the king’s mercy, 
even if it did mean torture and death for Roran and enslavement for eve-
ryone else. And still others sided with neither opinion, but rather de-
scended into a sullen black anger directed at everyone who had brought 
about this calamity. Many did their best to hide their panic in the depths 
of a tankard. 
 
 The Ra’zac themselves had apparently realized that with eleven soldiers 
dead they no longer had a large enough force to attack Carvahall, and 
thus had retreated farther down the road, where they were content to 
post sentinels across Palancar Valley and wait. “Wait for flea-bitten 
troops from Ceunon or Gil’ead, if you ask me,” Loring said at one meet-
ing. Roran listened to that and more, kept his own council, and silently 
judged the various schemes. They all seemed dangerously risky. 
 
 Roran still had not told Sloan that he and Katrina were engaged. He 
knew it was foolish to wait, but he feared how the butcher would react 
when he learned that Roran and Katrina had flouted tradition and, in do-
ing so, undermined Sloan’s authority. Besides, there was plenty of work to 
divert Roran’s attention; he convinced himself that strengthening the for-
tifications around Carvahall was his most important task at the moment. 
 
 Getting people to help was easier than Roran anticipated. After the last 
fight, the villagers were more apt to listen and to obey him—that is, 
those who did not blame him for causing their predicament. He was 
mystified by his new authority, until he realized that it was the result of 
the awe, respect, and perhaps even fear his kills had elicited. They called 
him Stronghammer. Roran Stronghammer. 
 
 The name pleased him. 

 
167
 
 As night engulfed the valley, Roran leaned against a corner of Horst’s 
dining room, his eyes closed. Conversation flowed from the men and 
women seated around the candlelit table. Kiselt was in the middle of ex-
plaining the state of Carvahall’s supplies. “We won’t starve,” he con-
cluded, “but if we can’t tend to our fields and our flocks soon, we might 
as well cut our own throats before next winter. It would be a kinder 
fate.” 
 
 Horst scowled. “Dog tripe!” 
 
 “Dog tripe or not,” said Gertrude, “I doubt we’ll have a chance to find 
out. We outnumbered the soldiers ten to one when they arrived. They 
lost eleven men; we lost twelve, and I’m caring for another nine 
wounded. What happens, Horst, when they outnumber us ten to one?” 
 
 “We will give the bards a reason to remember our names,” retorted the 
smith. Gertrude shook her head sadly. 
 
 Loring banged a fist on the table. “And I say it’s our turn to strike, be-
fore we are outnumbered. All we need are a few men, shields, and spears, 
and we can wipe out their infestation. It could be done tonight!” 
 
 Roran shifted restlessly. He had heard all this before, and like before, 
Loring’s proposal ignited an argument that consumed the group. After an 
hour, the debate still showed no sign of being resolved, nor had any new 
ideas been presented, except for Thane’s suggestion that Gedric should 
go tan his own hide, which nearly resulted in a fistfight. 
 
 Finally, when the conversation lulled, Roran limped to the table as 
quickly as his injured calf would allow. “I have something to say.” For him 
it was the equivalent of stepping on a long thorn and then yanking it out 
without stopping to consider the pain; it had to be done, and the faster 
the better. 
 
 All eyes—hard, soft, angry, kind, indifferent, and curious—turned to 
him, and Roran took a deep breath. “Indecision will kill us just as surely 
as a sword or an arrow.” Orval rolled his eyes, but the rest still listened. “I 
don’t know if we should attack or flee—” 
 
 “Where?” snorted Kiselt. 
 
 “—but I do know one thing: our children, our mothers, and our infirm 
must be protected from danger. The Ra’zac have barred us from Cawley 

 
168
and the other farms down the valley. So what? We know this land better 
than any in Alagaësia, and there is a place... there is a place where our 
loved ones will be safe: the Spine.” 
 
 Roran winced as a barrage of outraged voices assaulted him. Sloan was 
the loudest, shouting, “I’ll be hanged before I set foot in those cursed 
mountains!” 
 
 “Roran,” said Horst, overriding the commotion. “You of all people 
should know that the Spine is too dangerous—it’s where Eragon found 
the stone that brought the Ra’zac! The mountains are cold, and filled 
with wolves, bears, and other monsters. Why even mention them?” 
 
 To keep Katrina safe! Roran wanted to scream. Instead, he said, “Be-
cause no matter how many soldiers the Ra’zac summon, they will never 
dare enter the Spine. Not after Galbatorix lost half his army in it.” 
 
 “That was a long time ago,” said Morn doubtfully. 
 
 Roran jumped on his statement. “And the stories have grown all the 
more frightening in the telling! A trail already exists to the top of Igualda 
Falls. All we have to do is send the children and others up there. They’ll 
only be on the fringe of the mountains, but they’ll still be safe. If Carva-
hall is taken, they can wait until the soldiers leave, then find refuge in 
Therinsford.” 
 
 “It is too dangerous,” growled Sloan. The butcher gripped the edge of 
the table so hard that the tips of his fingers turned white. “The cold, the 
beasts. No sane man would send his family among those.” 
 
 “But...” Roran faltered, put off-balance by Sloan’s response. Though he 
knew the butcher hated the Spine more than most—because his wife 
had plummeted to her death from the cliffs beside Igualda Falls—he had 
hoped that Sloan’s rabid desire to protect Katrina would be strong 
enough to overcome his aversion. Roran now understood he would have 
to win over Sloan just like everyone else. Adopting a placating tone, Ro-
ran said, “It’s not that bad. The snow is already melting off the peaks. It’s 
no colder in the Spine than it was down here a few months ago. And I 
doubt that wolves or bears would bother such a large group.” 
 
 Sloan grimaced, twisting his lips up over his teeth, and shook his head. 
“You will find nothing but death in the Spine.” 
 
 The others seemed to agree, which only strengthened Roran’s determi-

 
169
nation, for he was convinced that Katrina would die unless he could sway 
them. He scanned the long oval of faces, searching for a sympathetic ex-
pression. “Delwin, I know it’s cruel of me to say it, but if Elmund hadn’t 
been in Carvahall, he would still be alive. Surely you must agree that this 
is the right thing to do! You have an opportunity to save other parents 
from your suffering.” 
 
 No one responded. “And Birgit!” Roran dragged himself toward her, 
clutching the backs of chairs to keep himself from falling. “Do you want 
Nolfavrell to share his father’s fate? He has to leave. Can’t you see, that is 
the only way he’ll be safe....” Though Roran did his best to fight it, he 
could feel tears flood his eyes. “It’s for the children!” he shouted angrily. 
 
 The room was silent as Roran stared at the wood beneath his hands, 
struggling to control himself. Delwin was the first to stir. “I will never 
leave Carvahall so long as my son’s killers remain here. However,” he 
paused, then continued with painful slowness, “I cannot deny the truth of 
your words; the children must be protected.” 
 
 “As I said from the beginning,” declared Tara. 
 
 Then Baldor spoke: “Roran is right. We can’t allow ourselves to be 
blinded by fear. Most of us have climbed to the top of the falls at one 
time or another. It’s safe enough.” 
 
 “I too,” Birgit finally added, “must agree.” 
 
 Horst nodded. “I would rather not do it, but considering the circum-
stances.... I don’t think we have any other choice.” After a minute, the 
various men and women began to reluctantly acquiesce to the proposal. 
 
 “Nonsense!” exploded Sloan. He stood and stabbed an accusing finger at 
Roran. “How will they get enough food to wait for weeks on end? They 
can’t carry it. How will they stay warm? If they light fires, they’ll be seen! 
How, how, how? If they don’t starve, they’ll freeze. If they don’t freeze, 
they’ll be eaten. If they’re not eaten... Who knows? They may fall!” 
 
 Roran spread his hands. “If we all help, they will have plenty of food. 
Fire won’t be a problem if they move farther back into the forest, which 
they must anyway, since there isn’t room to camp right by the falls.” 
 
 “Excuses! Justifications!” 
 
 “What would you have us do, Sloan?” asked Morn, eyeing him with cu-

 
170
riosity. 
 
 Sloan laughed bitterly. “Not this.” 
 
 “Then what?” 
 
 “It doesn’t matter. Only this is the wrong choice.” 
 
 “You don’t have to participate,” pointed out Horst. 
 
 “Nor will I,” said the butcher. “Proceed if you want, but neither I nor 
my blood shall enter the Spine while I still have marrow in my bones.” 
He grabbed his cap and left with a venomous glare at Roran, who re-
turned the scowl in kind. 
 
 As Roran saw it, Sloan was endangering Katrina through his own pig-
headed stubbornness. If he can’t bring himself to accept the Spine as a 
place of refuge, decided Roran, then he’s become my enemy and I have to 
take matters into my own hands. 
 
 Horst leaned forward on his elbows and interlaced his thick fingers. 
“So... If we are going to use Roran’s plan, what preparations will be 
needed?” The group exchanged wary glances, then gradually began to dis-
cuss the topic. 
 
 Roran waited until he was convinced that he had achieved his goal be-
fore slipping out of the dining room. Loping through the dusky village, he 
searched for Sloan along the inner perimeter of the tree wall. Eventually, 
he spotted the butcher hunched underneath a torch, his shield clasped 
around his knees. Roran spun around on one foot and ran to Sloan’s shop, 
where he hurried to the kitchen in the back. 
 
 Katrina paused in the middle of setting their table and stared at him 
with amazement. “Roran! Why are you here? Did you tell Father?” 
 
 “No.” He came forward and took her arm, savoring the touch. Just be-
ing in the same room with her filled him with joy. “I have a great favor to 
ask of you. It’s been decided to send the children and a few others into 
the Spine above Igualda Falls.” Katrina gasped. “I want you to accompany 
them.” 
 
 With a shocked expression, Katrina pulled free of his grasp and turned 
to the open fireplace, where she hugged herself and stared at the bed of 
throbbing embers. For a long time, she said nothing. Then: “Father for-

 
171
bade me to go near the falls after Mother died. Albem’s farm is the clos-
est I’ve been to the Spine in over ten years.” She shivered, and her voice 
grew accusing. “How can you suggest that I abandon both you and my 
father? This is my home as much as yours. And why should I leave when 
Elain, Tara, and Birgit will remain?” 
 
 “Katrina, please.” He tentatively put his hands on her shoulders. “The 
Ra’zac are here for me, and I would not have you harmed because of that. 
As long as you’re in danger, I can’t concentrate on what has to be done: 
defending Carvahall.” 
 
 “Who would respect me for fleeing like a coward?” She lifted her chin. 
“I would be ashamed to stand before the women of Carvahall and call 
myself your wife.” 
 
 “Coward? There is no cowardice in guarding and protecting the chil-
dren in the Spine. If anything, it requires greater courage to enter the 
mountains than to stay.” 
 
 “What horror is this?” whispered Katrina. She twisted in his arms, eyes 
shining and mouth set firmly. “The man who would be my husband no 
longer wants me by his side.” 
 
 He shook his head. “That’s not true. I—” 
 
 “It is true! What if you are killed while I’m gone?” 
 
 “Don’t say—” 
 
 “No! Carvahall has little hope of survival, and if we must die, I would 
rather die together than huddle in the Spine without life or heart. Let 
those with children tend to their own. As will I.” A tear rolled down her 
cheek. 
 
 Gratitude and wonder surged through Roran at the strength of her de-
votion. He looked deep into her eyes. “It is for that love that I would 
have you go. I know how you feel. I know that this is the hardest sacri-
fice either of us could make, and I ask it of you now.” 
 
 Katrina shuddered, her entire body rigid, her white hands clenched 
around her muslin sash. “If I do this,” she said with a shaking voice, “you 
must promise me, here and now, that you will never make such a request 
again. You must promise that even if we faced Galbatorix himself and 
only one of us could escape, you would not ask me to leave.” 

 
172
 
 Roran looked at her helplessly. “I can’t.” 
 
 “Then how can you expect me to do what you won’t!” she cried. “That 
is my price, and neither gold nor jewels nor pretty words can replace 
your oath. If you don’t care enough for me to make your own sacrifice, 
Roran Stronghammer, then be gone and I never wish to see your face 
again!” 
 
 I cannot lose her. Though it pained him almost beyond endurance, he 
bowed his head and said, “You have my word.” 
 
 Katrina nodded and sank into a chair—her back stiff and upright—and 
blotted her tears on the cuff of her sleeve. In a quiet voice, she said, “Fa-
ther will hate me for going.” 
 
 “How will you tell him?” 
 
 “I won’t,” she said defiantly. “He would never let me enter the Spine, 
but he has to realize that this is my decision. Anyway, he won’t dare pur-
sue me into the mountains; he fears them more than death itself.” 
 
 “He may fear losing you even more.” 
 
 “We shall see. If—when—the time comes to return, I expect you to 
have already spoken to him about our engagement. That should give him 
enough time to reconcile himself to the fact.” 
 
 Roran found himself nodding in agreement, all the while thinking that 
they would be lucky if events worked out so well. 
 
 
 
 

 
173
WOUNDS OF THE PRESENT 
 
 
 When dawn arrived, Roran woke and lay staring at the whitewashed 
ceiling while he listened to the slow rasp of his own breathing. After a 
minute, he rolled off the bed, dressed, and proceeded to the kitchen, 
where he procured a chunk of bread, smeared it with soft cheese, then 
stepped out onto the front porch to eat and admire the sunrise. 
 
 His tranquility was soon disrupted when a herd of unruly children 
dashed through the garden of a nearby house, shrieking with delight at 
their game of Catch-the-Cat, followed by a number of adults intent on 
snaring their respective charges. Roran watched the cacophonous parade 
vanish around a corner, then placed the last of the bread in his mouth 
and returned to the kitchen, which had filled with the rest of the house-
hold. 
 
 Elain greeted him. “Good morning, Roran.” She pushed open the win-
dow shutters and gazed up at the sky. “It looks like it may rain again.” 
 
 “The more the better,” asserted Horst. “It’ll help keep us hidden while 
we climb Narnmor Mountain.” 
 
 “Us?” inquired Roran. He sat at the table beside Albriech, who was 
rubbing the sleep from his eyes. 
 
 Horst nodded. “Sloan was right about the food and supplies; we have to 
help carry them up the falls, or else there won’t be enough.” 
 
 “Will there still be men to defend Carvahall?” 
 
 “Of course, of course.” 
 
 
 
 
 Once they all had breakfast, Roran helped Baldor and Albriech wrap 
spare food, blankets, and supplies into three large bundles that they slung 
across their shoulders and hauled to the north end of the village. Roran’s 
calf pained him, but not unbearably. Along the way, they met the three 
brothers Darmmen, Larne, and Hamund, who were similarly burdened. 
 
 Just inside the trench that circumnavigated the houses, Roran and his 
companions found a large gathering of children, parents, and grandparents 

 
174
all busy organizing for the expedition. Several families had volunteered 
their donkeys to carry goods and the younger children; the animals were 
picketed in an impatient, braying line that added to the overall confusion. 
 
 Roran set his bundle on the ground and scanned the group. He saw 
Svart—Ivor’s uncle and, at nearly sixty, the oldest man in Carvahall—
seated on a bale of clothes, teasing a baby with the tip of his long white 
beard; Nolfavrell, who was guarded over by Birgit; Felda, Nolla, Calitha, 
and a number of other mothers with worried expressions; and a great 
many reluctant people, both men and women. Roran also saw Katrina 
among the crowd. She glanced up from a knot she was tying on a pack 
and smiled at him, then returned to her task. 
 
 Since no one seemed to be in charge, Roran did his best to sort out the 
chaos by overseeing the arranging and packaging of the various supplies. 
He discovered a shortage of waterskins, but when he asked for more, he 
ended up with thirteen too many. Delays such as those consumed the 
early-morning hours. 
 
 In the middle of discussing with Loring the possible need for extra 
shoes, Roran stopped as he noticed Sloan standing at the entrance to an 
alleyway. 
 
 The butcher surveyed the mass of activity before him. Contempt cut 
into the lines along his downturned mouth. His sneer hardened into en-
raged incredulity as he spotted Katrina, who had shouldered her pack, 
removing any possibility that she was there only to help. A vein throbbed 
down the middle of Sloan’s forehead. 
 
 Roran hurried toward Katrina, but Sloan reached her first. He grabbed 
the top of the pack and shook it violently, shouting, “Who made you do 
this?” Katrina said something about the children and tried to pull free, 
but Sloan yanked at the pack—twisting her arms as the straps slid off her 
shoulders—and threw it on the ground so that the contents scattered. 
Still shouting, Sloan grabbed Katrina’s arm and began to drag her away. 
She dug in her heels and fought, her copper hair swirling over her face 
like a dust storm. 
 
 Furious, Roran threw himself at Sloan and tore him from Katrina, shov-
ing the butcher in the chest so that he stumbled backward several yards. 
“Stop! I’m the one who wanted her to go.” 
 
 Sloan glared at Roran and snarled, “You have no right!” 
 

 
175
 “I have every right.” Roran looked at the ring of spectators who had 
gathered around and then declared so that all could hear: “Katrina and I 
are engaged to be married, and I would not have my future wife treated 
so!” For the first time that day, the villagers fell completely silent; even 
the donkeys were quiet. 
 
 Surprise and a deep, inconsolable pain sprang onto Sloan’s vulnerable 
face, along with the glimmer of tears. For a moment, Roran felt sympathy 
for him, then a series of contortions distorted Sloan’s visage, each more 
extreme than the last, until his skin turned beet red. He cursed and said, 
“You two-faced coward! How could you look me in the eye and speak to 
me like an honest man while, at the same time, courting my daughter 
without permission? I dealt with you in good faith, and here I find you 
plundering my house while my back is turned.” 
 
 “I had hoped to do this properly,” said Roran, “but events have con-
spired against me. It was never my intention to cause you grief. Even 
though this hasn’t gone the way either of us wanted, I still want your 
blessing, if you are willing.” 
 
 “I would rather have a maggot-riddled pig for a son than you! You have 
no farm. You have no family. And you will have naught to do with my 
daughter!” The butcher cursed again. “And she’ll have naught to do with 
the Spine!” 
 
 Sloan reached for Katrina, but Roran blocked the way, his face as hard 
as his clenched fists. Only a handsbreadth apart, they stared directly at 
each other, trembling from the strength of their emotions. Sloan’s red-
rimmed eyes shone with manic intensity. 
 
 “Katrina, come here,” Sloan commanded. 
 
 Roran withdrew from Sloan—so that the three of them formed a trian-
gle—and looked at Katrina. Tears streamed down her face as she glanced 
between him and her father. She stepped forward, hesitated, then with a 
long, anguished cry, tore at her hair in a frenzy of indecision. 
 
 “Katrina!” exclaimed Sloan with a burr of fear. 
 
 “Katrina,” murmured Roran. 
 
 At the sound of his voice, Katrina’s tears ceased and she stood straight 
and tall with a calm expression. She said, “I’m sorry, Father, but I have 
decided to marry Roran,” and stepped to his side. 

 
176
 
 Sloan turned bone white. He bit his lip so hard that a bead of ruby 
blood appeared. “You can’t leave me! You’re my daughter!” He lunged at 
her with crooked hands. In that instant, Roran bellowed and struck the 
butcher with all his strength, knocking him sprawling in the dirt before 
the entire village. 
 
 Sloan rose slowly, his face and neck flushed with humiliation. When he 
saw Katrina again, the butcher seemed to crumple inward, losing height 
and stature until Roran felt as if he were looking at a specter of the origi-
nal man. In a low whisper, he said, “It is always so; those closest to the 
heart cause the most pain. Thou will have no dowry from me, snake, nor 
your mother’s inheritance.” Weeping bitterly, Sloan turned and fled to-
ward his shop. 
 
 Katrina leaned against Roran, and he put an arm around her. Together 
they clung to each other as people crowded against them offering condo-
lences, advice, congratulations, and disapproval. Despite the commotion, 
Roran was aware of nothing but the woman whom he held, and who 
held him. 
 
 Just then, Elain bustled up as fast as her pregnancy would allow. “Oh, 
you poor dear!” she cried, and embraced Katrina, drawing her from Ro-
ran’s arms. “Is it true you are engaged?” Katrina nodded and smiled, then 
erupted into hysterical tears against Elain’s shoulder. “There now, there 
now.” Elain cradled Katrina gently, petting her and trying to soothe her, 
but without avail—every time Roran thought she was about to recover, 
Katrina began to cry with renewed intensity. Finally, Elain peered over 
Katrina’s quaking shoulder and said, “I’m taking her back to the house.” 
 
 “I’ll come.” 
 
 “No, you won’t,” retorted Elain. “She needs time to calm down, and you 
have work to do. Do you want my advice?” Roran nodded dumbly. “Stay 
away until evening. I guarantee that she will be as right as rain by then. 
She can join the others tomorrow.” Without waiting for his response, 
Elain escorted the sobbing Katrina away from the wall of sharpened trees. 
 
 Roran stood with his hands hanging limply by his sides, feeling dazed 
and helpless. What have we done? He regretted that he had not revealed 
their engagement to Sloan sooner. He regretted that he and Sloan could 
not work together to shield Katrina from the Empire. And he regretted 
that Katrina had been forced to relinquish her only family for him. He 
was now doubly responsible for her welfare. They had no choice but to 

 
177
get married. I’ve made a terrible mess of this. He sighed and clenched his 
fist, wincing as his bruised knuckles stretched. 
 
 “How are you?” asked Baldor, coming alongside him. 
 
 Roran forced a smile. “It didn’t turn out quite how I hoped. Sloan’s be-
yond reason when it comes to the Spine.” 
 
 “And Katrina.” 
 
 “That too. I—” Roran fell silent as Loring stopped before them. 
 
 “That was a blasted fool thing to do!” growled the shoemaker, wrinkling 
his nose. Then he stuck out his chin, grinned, and bared his stumps of 
teeth. “But I ’ope you and the girl have the best of luck.” He shook his 
head. “Heh, you’re going to need it, Stronghammer!” 
 
 “We’re all going to need it,” snapped Thane as he walked past. 
 
 Loring waved a hand. “Bah, sourpuss. Listen, Roran; I’ve lived in Carva-
hall for many, many years, and in my experience, it’s better that this hap-
pened now, instead of when we’re all warm and cozy.” 
 
 Baldor nodded, but Roran asked, “Why so?” 
 
 “Isn’t it obvious? Normally, you and Katrina would be the meat of gos-
sip for the next nine months.” Loring put a finger on the side of his nose. 
“Ah, but this way, you’ll soon be forgotten amid everything else that’s go-
ing on, and then the two of you might even have some peace.” 
 
 Roran frowned. “I’d rather be talked about than have those desecrators 
camped on the road.” 
 
 “So would we all. Still, it’s something to be grateful for, and we all need 
something to be grateful for—’specially once you’re married!” Loring 
cackled and pointed at Roran. “Your face just turned purple, boy!” 
 
 Roran grunted and set about gathering Katrina’s possessions off the 
ground. As he did, he was interrupted by comments from whoever hap-
pened to be nearby, none of which helped to settle his nerves. “Rotgut,” 
he muttered to himself after a particularly invidious remark. 
 
   
 

 
178
 Although the expedition into the Spine was delayed by the unusual 
scene the villagers had just witnessed, it was only slightly after midmorn-
ing when the caravan of people and donkeys began to ascend the bare 
trail scratched into the side of Narnmor Mountain to the crest of the 
Igualda Falls. It was a steep climb and had to be taken slowly, on account 
of the children and the size of the burdens everyone carried. 
 
 Roran spent most of his time caught behind Calitha—Thane’s wife—
and her five children. He did not mind, as it gave him an opportunity to 
indulge his injured calf and to consider recent events at length. He was 
disturbed by his confrontation with Sloan. At least, he consoled himself, 
Katrina won’t remain in Carvahall much longer. For Roran was convinced, 
in his heart of hearts, that the village would soon be defeated. It was a 
sobering, yet unavoidable, realization. 
 
 He paused to rest three-quarters of the way up the mountain and 
leaned against a tree as he admired the elevated view of Palancar Valley. 
He tried to spot the Ra’zac’s camp—which he knew was just to the left 
of the Anora River and the road south—but was unable to discern even a 
wisp of smoke. 
 
   
 
 Roran heard the roar of the Igualda Falls long before they came into 
sight. The falls appeared for all the world like a great snowy mane that 
billowed and drifted off Narnmor’s craggy head to the valley floor a half 
mile below. The massive stream curved in several directions as it fell, the 
result of different layers of wind. 
 
 Past the slate ledge where the Anora River became airborne, down a 
glen filled with thimbleberries, and then finally into a large clearing 
guarded on one side by a pile of boulders, Roran found that those at the 
head of the procession had already begun setting up camp. The forest 
rang with the children’s shouts and cries. 
 
 Removing his pack, Roran untied an ax from the top, then set about 
clearing the underbrush from the site along with several other men. 
When they finished, they began chopping down enough trees to encircle 
the camp. The aroma of pine sap filled the air. Roran worked quickly, the 
wood chips flying in unison with his rhythmic swings. 
 
 By the time the fortifications were complete, the camp had already 
been erected with seventeen wool tents, four small cookfires, and glum 
expressions from people and donkeys alike. No one wanted to leave, and 

 
179
no one wanted to stay. 
 
 Roran surveyed the assortment of boys and old men clutching spears, 
and thought, Too much experience and too little. The grandfathers know 
how to deal with bears and the like, but will the grandsons have the 
strength to actually do it? Then he noticed the hard glint in the women’s 
eyes and realized that while they might hold a babe or be busy tending a 
scraped arm, their own shields and spears were never far from reach. Ro-
ran smiled. Perhaps... perhaps we still have hope. 
 
 He saw Nolfavrell sitting alone on a log—staring back toward Palancar 
Valley—and joined the boy, who looked at him seriously. “Are you leav-
ing soon?” asked Nolfavrell. Roran nodded, impressed by his poise and 
determination. “You will do your best, won’t you, to kill the Ra’zac and 
avenge my father? I would do it, except that Mama says I must guard my 
brothers and sisters.” 
 
 “I’ll bring you their heads myself, if I can,” promised Roran. 
 
 The boy’s chin trembled. “That is good!” 
 
 “Nolfavrell...” Roran paused as he searched for the right words. “You are 
the only one here, besides me, who has killed a man. It doesn’t mean that 
we are better or worse than anyone else, but it means that I can trust you 
to fight well if you are attacked. When Katrina comes here tomorrow, 
will you make sure that she’s well protected?” 
 
 Nolfavrell’s chest swelled with pride. “I’ll guard her wherever she goes!” 
Then he looked regretful. “That is... when I don’t have to look after—” 
 
 Roran understood. “Oh, your family comes first. But maybe Katrina can 
stay in the tent with your brothers and sisters.” 
 
 “Yes,” said Nolfavrell slowly. “Yes, I think that would work. You can 
rely on me.” 
 
 “Thank you.” Roran clapped him on the shoulder. He could have asked 
an older and more capable person, but the adults were too busy with 
their own responsibilities to defend Katrina as he hoped. Nolfavrell, 
however, would have the opportunity and inclination to assure that she 
remained safe. He can hold my place while we are apart. Roran stood as 
Birgit approached. 
 
 Eyeing him flatly, she said, “Come, it is time.” Then she hugged her son 

 
180
and continued toward the falls with Roran and the other villagers who 
were returning to Carvahall. Behind them, everyone in the small camp 
clustered against the felled trees and stared forlornly out through their 
wooden bars. 
 
 
 
 

 
181
HIS ENEMY’S FACE 
 
 
 As Roran proceeded about his work throughout the rest of the day, he 
felt Carvahall’s emptiness deep inside. It was as if part of himself had 
been extracted and hidden in the Spine. And with the children gone, the 
village now felt like an armed camp. The change seemed to have made 
everyone grim and grave. 
 
 When the sun finally sank into the waiting teeth of the Spine, Roran 
climbed the hill to Horst’s house. He stopped before the front door and 
placed a hand on the knob, but remained there, unable to enter. Why 
does this frighten me as much as fighting? 
 
 In the end, he forsook the front door entirely and went to the side of 
the house, where he slipped into the kitchen and, to his dismay, saw 
Elain knitting on one side of the table, speaking to Katrina, who was op-
posite her. They both turned toward him, and Roran blurted, “Are... are 
you all right?” 
 
 Katrina came to his side. “I’m fine.” She smiled softly. “It just was a ter-
rible shock when Father... when...” She ducked her head for a moment. 
“Elain has been wonderfully kind to me. She agreed to lend me Baldor’s 
room for the night.” 
 
 “I’m glad you are better,” said Roran. He hugged her, trying to convey 
all of his love and adoration through that simple touch. 
 
 Elain wrapped up her knitting. “Come now. The sun has set, and it’s 
time you were off to bed, Katrina.” 
 
 Roran reluctantly let go of Katrina, who kissed him on the cheek and 
said, “I’ll see you in the morning.” 
 
 He started to follow her out, but stopped when Elain said with a 
barbed tone, “Roran.” Her delicate face was hard and stern. 
 
 “Yes?” 
 
 Elain waited until they heard the creak of stairs that indicated Katrina 
was out of earshot. “I hope that you meant every promise you gave that 
girl, because if you didn’t, I’ll call an assembly and have you exiled within 
a week.” 
 

 
182
 Roran was dumbfounded. “Of course I meant them. I love her.” 
 
 “Katrina just surrendered everything she owned or cared about for you.” 
Elain stared up at him with unwavering eyes. “I’ve seen men who throw 
their affection at young maids, like grain tossed at chickens. The maids 
sigh and weep and believe that they are special, yet for the man, it’s only 
a trifling amusement. You have always been honorable, Roran, but one’s 
loins can turn even the most sensible person into a prancing booby or a 
sly, wicked fox. Are you one? For Katrina requires neither a fool, a trick-
ster, nor even love; what she requires above all else is a man who will 
provide for her. If you abandon her, she will be the meanest person in 
Carvahall, forced to live off her friends, our first and only beggar. By the 
blood in my veins, I won’t let that happen.” 
 
 “Nor would I,” protested Roran. “I would have to be heartless, or worse, 
to do so.” 
 
 Elain jerked her chin. “Exactly. Don’t forget that you intend to marry a 
woman who has lost both her dowry and her mother’s inheritance. Do 
you understand what it means for Katrina to lose her inheritance? She has 
no silver, no linens, no lace, nor any of the things needed for a well-run 
home. Such items are all we own, passed from mother to daughter since 
the day we first settled Alagaësia. They determine our worth. A woman 
without her inheritance is like... is like—” 
 
 “Is like a man without a farm or a trade,” said Roran. 
 
 “Just so. It was cruel of Sloan to deny Katrina her inheritance, but that 
can’t be helped now. Both you and she have no money or resources. Life 
is difficult enough without that added hardship. You’ll be starting from 
nothing and with nothing. Does the prospect frighten you or seem un-
bearable? So I ask you once again—and don’t lie or the two of you will 
regret it for the rest of your lives—will you care for her without grudge 
or resentment?” 
 
 “Yes.” 
 
 Elain sighed and filled two earthen cups with cider from a jug hanging 
among the rafters. She handed one to Roran as she seated herself back at 
the table. “Then I suggest that you devote yourself to replacing Katrina’s 
home and inheritance so that she and any daughters you may have can 
stand without shame among the wives of Carvahall.” 
 
 Roran sipped the cool cider. “If we live that long.” 

 
183
 
 “Aye.” She brushed back a strand of her blond hair and shook her head. 
“You’ve chosen a hard path, Roran.” 
 
 “I had to make sure that Katrina would leave Carvahall.” 
 
 Elain lifted an eyebrow. “So that was it. Well, I won’t argue about it, 
but why on earth didn’t you speak to Sloan about your engagement be-
fore this morning? When Horst asked my father, he gave our family 
twelve sheep, a sow, and eight pairs of wrought-iron candlesticks before 
he even knew if my parents would agree. That’s how it should be done. 
Surely you could have thought of a better strategy than striking your fa-
ther-in-law-to-be.” 
 
 A painful laugh escaped Roran. “I could have, but it never seemed the 
right time with all the attacks.” 
 
 “The Ra’zac haven’t attacked for almost six days now.” 
 
 He scowled. “No, but... it was... Oh, I don’t know!” He banged his fist 
on the table with frustration. 
 
 Elain put down her cup and wrapped her tiny hands around his. “If you 
can mend this rift between you and Sloan now, before years of resent-
ment accumulate, your life with Katrina will be much, much easier. To-
morrow morning you should go to his house and beg his forgiveness.” 
 
 “I won’t beg! Not to him.” 
 
 “Roran, listen to me. It’s worth a month of begging to have peace in 
your family. I know from experience; strife does naught but make you 
miserable.” 
 
 “Sloan hates the Spine. He’ll have nothing to do with me.” 
 
 “You have to try, though,” said Elain earnestly. “Even if he spurns your 
apology, at least you can’t be blamed for not making the effort. If you 
love Katrina, then swallow your pride and do what’s right for her. Don’t 
make her suffer for your mistake.” She finished her cider, used a tin hat to 
snuff the candles, and left Roran sitting alone in the dark. 
 
 Several minutes elapsed before Roran could bring himself to stir. He 
stretched out an arm and traced along the counter’s edge until he felt the 
doorway, then proceeded upstairs, all the while running the tips of his 

 
184
fingers over the carved walls to keep his balance. In his room, he disrobed 
and threw himself lengthwise on the bed. 
 
 Wrapping his arms around his wool-stuffed pillow, Roran listened to 
the faint sounds that drifted through the house at night: the scrabble of a 
mouse in the attic and its intermittent squeaks, the groan of wood beams 
cooling in the night, the whisper and caress of wind at the lintel of his 
window, and... and the rustle of slippers in the hall outside his room. 
 
 He watched as the latch above the doorknob was pulled free of its 
hook, then the door inched forward with a rasp of protest. It paused. A 
dark form slipped inside, the door closed, and Roran felt a curtain of hair 
brush his face along with lips like rose petals. He sighed. 
 
 Katrina. 
 
   
 
 A thunderclap tore Roran from sleep. 
 
 Light flared on his face as he struggled to regain awareness, like a diver 
desperate to reach the surface. He opened his eyes and saw a jagged hole 
blasted through his door. Six soldiers rushed through the yawning cleft, 
followed by the two Ra’zac, who seemed to fill the room with their 
ghastly presence. A sword was pressed against Roran’s neck. Beside him, 
Katrina screamed and pulled the blankets around her. 
 
 “Up,” ordered the Ra’zac. Roran cautiously got to his feet. His heart felt 
like it was about to explode in his chest. “Tie his handsss and bring him.” 
 
 As a soldier approached Roran with rope, Katrina screamed again and 
jumped on the men, biting and clawing furiously. Her sharp nails fur-
rowed their faces, drawing streams of blood that blinded the cursing sol-
diers. 
 
 Roran dropped to one knee and grabbed his hammer from the floor, 
then planted his feet, swinging the hammer over his head and roaring like 
a bear. The soldiers threw themselves at him in an attempt to subdue 
him through sheer numbers, but to no avail: Katrina was in danger, and 
he was invincible. Shields crumpled beneath his blows, brigandines and 
mail split under his merciless weapon, and helmets caved in. Two men 
were wounded, and three fell to rise no more. 
 
 The clang and clamor had roused the household; Roran dimly heard 

 
185
Horst and his sons shouting in the hall. The Ra’zac hissed to one another, 
then scuttled forward and grasped Katrina with inhuman strength, lifting 
her off the floor as they fled the room. 
 
 “Roran!” she shrieked. 
 
 Summoning his energy, Roran bowled past the two remaining men. He 
stumbled into the hall and saw the Ra’zac climbing out a window. Roran 
dashed toward them and struck at the last Ra’zac, just as it was about to 
descend below the windowsill. Jerking upward, the Ra’zac caught Roran’s 
wrist in midair and chittered with delight, blowing its fetid breath onto 
his face. “Yesss! You are the one we want!” 
 
 Roran tried to twist free, but the Ra’zac did not budge. With his free 
hand, Roran buffeted the creature’s head and shoulders—which were as 
hard as iron. Desperate and enraged, he seized the edge of the Ra’zac’s 
hood and wrenched it back, exposing its features. 
 
 A hideous, tortured face screamed at him. The skin was shiny black, 
like a beetle carapace. The head was bald. Each lidless eye was the size of 
his fist and gleamed like an orb of polished hematite; no iris or pupil ex-
isted. In place of a nose, mouth, and chin, a thick beak hooked to a sharp 
point that clacked over a barbed purple tongue. 
 
 Roran yelled and jammed his heels against the sides of the window 
frame, struggling to free himself from the monstrosity, but the Ra’zac in-
exorably drew him out of the house. He could see Katrina on the ground, 
still screaming and fighting. 
 
 Just as Roran’s knees buckled, Horst appeared by his side and wrapped 
a knotted arm around his chest, locking him in place. “Someone get a 
spear!” shouted the smith. He snarled, veins bulging on his neck from the 
strain of holding Roran. “It’ll take more than this demon spawn to best 
us!” 
 
 The Ra’zac gave a final yank, then, when it failed to dislodge Roran, 
cocked its head and said, “You areoursss !” It lunged forward with blind-
ing speed, and Roran howled as he felt the Ra’zac’s beak close on his right 
shoulder, snipping through the front of the muscle. His wrist cracked at 
the same time. With a malicious cackle, the Ra’zac released him and fell 
backward into the night. 
 
 Horst and Roran sprawled against each other in the hallway. “They 
have Katrina,” groaned Roran. His vision flickered and went black around 

 
186
the edges as he pushed himself upright on his left arm—his right hung 
useless. Albriech and Baldor emerged from his room, splattered with 
gore. Only corpses remained behind them. Now I have killed eight. Roran 
retrieved his hammer and staggered down the hall, finding his way 
blocked by Elain in her white sleeping shift. 
 
 She looked at him with wide eyes, then took his arm and pushed him 
down onto a wood chest set against the wall. “You have to see Gertrude.” 
 
 “But—” 
 
 “You’ll pass out if this bleeding isn’t stopped.” 
 
 He looked down at his right side; it was drenched in crimson. “We have 
to rescue Katrina before”—he clenched his teeth as the pain surged—
“before they do anything to her.” 
 
 “He’s right; we can’t wait,” said Horst, looming over them. “Bind him up 
as best you can, then we’ll go.” Elain pursed her lips and hurried to the 
linen closet. She returned with several rags, which she wrapped tightly 
around Roran’s torn shoulder and his fractured wrist. Meanwhile, Al-
briech and Baldor scavenged armor and swords from the soldiers. Horst 
contented himself with just a spear. 
 
 Elain put her hands on Horst’s chest and said, “Be careful.” She looked 
at her sons. “All of you.” 
 
 “We’ll be fine, Mother,” promised Albriech. She forced a smile and 
kissed them on the cheek. 
 
 They left the house and ran to the edge of Carvahall, where they found 
that the wall of trees had been pulled open and the watchman, Byrd, 
slain. Baldor knelt and examined the body, then said with a choked voice, 
“He was stabbed from behind.” Roran barely heard him through the 
pounding in his ears. Dizzy, he leaned against a house and panted for 
breath. 
 
 “Ho! Who goes?” 
 
 From their stations along Carvahall’s perimeter, the other watchmen 
congregated around their murdered compatriot, forming a huddle of 
shuttered lanterns. In hushed tones, Horst described the attack and 
Katrina’s plight. “Who will help us?” he asked. After a quick discussion, 
five men agreed to accompany them; the rest would remain to guard the 

 
187
breach in the wall and rouse the villagers. 
 
 Pushing himself off the house, Roran trotted to the head of the group as 
it slipped through the fields and down the valley toward the Ra’zac’s 
camp. Every step was agony, yet it did not matter; nothing mattered ex-
cept Katrina. He stumbled once and Horst wordlessly caught him. 
 
 Half a mile from Carvahall, Ivor spotted a sentry on a hillock, which 
compelled them to make a wide detour. A few hundred yards beyond, 
the ruddy glow of torches became visible. Roran raised his good arm to 
slow their advance, then began to dodge and crawl through the tangled 
grass, startling a jackrabbit. The men followed Roran’s lead as he worked 
his way to the edge of a grove of cattails, where he stopped and parted 
the curtain of stalks to observe the thirteen remaining soldiers. 
 
 Where is she? 
 
 In contrast to when they had first arrived, the soldiers appeared sullen 
and haggard, their weapons nicked and their armor dented. Most of them 
wore bandages that were rusty with splotches of dried blood. The men 
were clumped together, facing the two Ra’zac—both of whom were now 
hooded—across a low fire. 
 
 One man was shouting: “... over half of us killed by a bunch of inbred, 
cockle-brained woodrats that can’t tell a pike from a poleax or find the 
point of a sword even if it’s lodged in their gut, because you don’t have 
half the sense my banner boy does! I don’t care if Galbatorix himself licks 
your boots clean, we won’t do a thing until we have a new commander.” 
The men nodded. “One who’s human. ” 
 
 “Really?” demanded the Ra’zac softly. 
 
 “We’ve had enough taking orders from hunchbacks like you, with all 
your clicking and teapot whistling—makes us sick! And I don’t know 
what you did with Sardson, but if you stay another night, we’ll put steel 
in you and find out if you bleed like us. You can leave the girl, though, 
she’ll be—” 
 
 The man did not get a chance to continue, for the largest Ra’zac 
jumped across the fire and landed on his shoulders, like a giant crow. 
Screaming, the soldier collapsed under the weight. He tried to draw his 
sword, but the Ra’zac pecked twice at his neck with its hidden beak, and 
he was still. 
 

 
188
 “We have to fight that ?” muttered Ivor behind Roran. 
 
 The soldiers remained frozen with shock as the two Ra’zac lapped from 
the neck of the corpse. When the black creatures rose, they rubbed their 
knobby hands together, as if they were washing, and said, “Yesss. We will 
go. Stay if you wisssh; reinforsssements are only daysss away.” The Ra’zac 
threw back their heads and began to shriek at the sky, the wail becoming 
increasingly shrill until it passed from hearing. 
 
 Roran looked up as well. At first he saw nothing, but then a nameless 
terror gripped him as two barbed shadows appeared high over the Spine, 
eclipsing the stars. They advanced quickly, growing larger and larger until 
they obscured half the sky with their ominous presence. A foul wind 
rushed across the land, bringing with it a sulfurous miasma that made Ro-
ran cough and gag. 
 
 The soldiers were likewise afflicted; their curses echoed as they pressed 
sleeves and scarves over their noses. 
 
 Above them, the shadows paused and then began to drift downward, 
enclosing the camp in a dome of menacing darkness. The sickly torches 
flickered and threatened to extinguish themselves, yet they still provided 
sufficient light to reveal the two beasts descending among the tents. 
 
 Their bodies were naked and hairless—like newborn mice—with 
leathery gray skin pulled tight across their corded chests and bellies. In 
form they resembled starved dogs, except that their hind legs bulged 
with enough muscle to crush a boulder. A narrow crest extended from 
the back of each of their attenuated heads, opposite a long, straight, eb-
ony beak made for spearing prey, and cold, bulbous eyes identical to the 
Ra’zac’s. From their shoulders and backs sprang huge wings that made the 
air moan under their weight. 
 
 Flinging themselves to the ground, the soldiers cowered and hid their 
faces from the monsters. A terrible, alien intelligence emanated from the 
creatures, bespeaking a race far older and far more powerful than hu-
mans. Roran was suddenly afraid that his mission might fail. Behind him, 
Horst whispered to the men, urging them to hold their ground and re-
main hidden, else they would be slain. 
 
 The Ra’zac bowed to the beasts, then slipped into a tent and returned 
carrying Katrina—who was bound with ropes—and leading Sloan. The 
butcher walked freely. 
 

 
189
 Roran stared, unable to comprehend how Sloan had been captured. His 
house isn’t anywhere near Horst’s. Then it struck him. “He betrayed us,” 
said Roran with wonder. His fist slowly tightened on his hammer as the 
true horror of the situation exploded within him.” He killed Byrd and he 
betrayed us!” Tears of rage streamed down his face. 
 
 “Roran,” murmured Horst, crouching beside him. “We can’t attack now; 
they’d slaughter us. Roran... do you hear me?” 
 
 He heard but a whisper in the distance as he watched the smaller 
Ra’zac jump onto one beast above the shoulders, then catch Katrina as 
the other Ra’zac tossed her up. Sloan seemed upset and frightened now. 
He began arguing with the Ra’zac, shaking his head and pointing at the 
ground. Finally, the Ra’zac struck him across the mouth, knocking him 
unconscious. Mounting the second beast, with the butcher slung over its 
shoulder, the largest Ra’zac declared, “We will return once it isss sssafe 
again. Kill the boy, and your livesss are forfeit.” Then the steeds flexed 
their massive thighs and leaped into the sky, once again shadows upon 
the field of stars. 
 
 No words or emotions were left to Roran. He was utterly destroyed. 
All that remained was to kill the soldiers. He stood and raised his ham-
mer in preparation to charge, but as he stepped forward, his head 
throbbed in unison with his wounded shoulder, the ground vanished in a 
burst of light, and he toppled into oblivion. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
190
ARROW TO THE HEART 
 
 
 Every day since leaving the outpost of Ceris was a hazy dream of warm 
afternoons spent paddling up Eldor Lake and then the Gaena River. All 
around them, water gurgled through the tunnel of verdant pines that 
wound ever deeper into Du Weldenvarden. 
 
 Eragon found traveling with the elves delightful. Narí and Lifaen were 
perpetually smiling, laughing, and singing songs, especially when Saphira 
was around. They rarely looked elsewhere or spoke of another subject 
but her in her presence. 
 
 However, the elves were not human, no matter the similarity of ap-
pearance. They moved too quickly, too fluidly, for creatures born of sim-
ple flesh and blood. And when they spoke, they often used roundabout 
expressions and aphorisms that left Eragon more confused than when 
they began. In between their bursts of merriment, Lifaen and Narí would 
remain silent for hours, observing their surroundings with a glow of 
peaceful rapture on their faces. If Eragon or Orik attempted to talk with 
them during their contemplation, they would receive only a word or two 
in response. 
 
 It made Eragon appreciate how direct and forthright Arya was by com-
parison. In fact, she seemed uneasy around Lifaen and Narí, as if she were 
no longer sure how to behave with her own kind. 
 
 From the prow of the canoe, Lifaen looked over his shoulder and said, 
“Tell me, Eragon-finiarel.... What do your people sing about in these dark 
days? I remember the epics and lays I heard in Ilirea—sagas of your proud 
kings and earls—but it was long, long ago and the memories are like 
withered flowers in my mind. What new works have your people cre-
ated?” Eragon frowned as he tried to recall the names of stories Brom had 
recited. When Lifaen heard them, he shook his head sorrowfully and said, 
“So much has been lost. No court ballads survive, and, if you speak truly, 
nor does most of your history or art, except for fanciful tales Galbatorix 
has allowed to thrive.” 
 
 “Brom once told us about the fall of the Riders,” said Eragon defen-
sively. An image of a deer bounding over rotting logs flashed behind his 
eyes from Saphira, who was off hunting. 
 
 “Ah, a brave man.” For a minute, Lifaen paddled silently. “We too sing 
about the Fall... but rarely. Most of us were alive when Vrael entered the 

 
191
void, and we still grieve for our burned cities—the red lilies of Éwayëna, 
the crystals of Luthivíra—and for our slain families. Time cannot dull the 
pain of those wounds, not if a thousand thousand years pass and the sun 
itself dies, leaving the world to float in eternal night.” 
 
 Orik grunted in the back. “As it is with the dwarves. Remember, elf, 
we lost an entire clan to Galbatorix.” 
 
 “And we lost our king, Evandar.” 
 
 “I never heard that,” said Eragon, surprised. 
 
 Lifaen nodded as he guided them around a submerged rock. “Few have. 
Brom could have told you about it; he was there when the fatal blow was 
struck. Before Vrael’s death, the elves faced Galbatorix on the plains of 
Ilirea in our final attempt to defeat him. There Evandar—” 
 
 “Where is Ilirea?” asked Eragon. 
 
 “It’s Urû’baen, boy,” said Orik. “Used to be an elf city.” 
 
 Unperturbed by the interruption, Lifaen continued: “As you say, Ilirea 
was one of our cities. We abandoned it during our war with the dragons, 
and then, centuries later, humans adopted it as their capital after King 
Palancar was exiled.” 
 
 Eragon said, “King Palancar? Who was he? Is that how Palancar Valley 
got its name?” 
 
 This time the elf turned and looked at him with amusement. “You 
have as many questions as leaves on a tree, Argetlam.” 
 
 “Brom was of the same opinion.” 
 
 Lifaen smiled, then paused, as if to gather his thoughts. “When your an-
cestors arrived in Alagaësia eight hundred years ago, they roamed far 
across it, seeking a suitable place to live. Eventually, they settled in Palan-
car Valley—though it was not called such then—as it was one of the few 
defendable locations that we or the dwarves had not claimed. There your 
king, Palancar, began to build a mighty state. 
 
 “In an attempt to expand his borders, he declared war against us, 
though we had offered no provocation. Three times he attacked, and 
three times we prevailed. Our strength frightened Palancar’s nobles and 

 
192
they pled with their liege for peace. He ignored their counsel. Then the 
lords approached us with a treaty, which we signed without the king’s 
knowledge. 
 
 “With our help, Palancar was usurped and banished, but he, his family, 
and their vassals refused to leave the valley. Since we had no wish to 
murder them, we constructed the tower of Ristvak’baen so the Riders 
could watch over Palancar and ensure he would never again rise to power 
or attack anyone else in Alagaësia. 
 
 “Before long Palancar was killed by a son who did not wish to wait for 
nature to take its course. Thereafter, family politics consisted of assassina-
tion, betrayal, and other depravities, reducing Palancar’s house to a 
shadow of its former grandeur. However, his descendants never left, and 
the blood of kings still runs in Therinsford and Carvahall.” 
 
 “I see,” said Eragon. 
 
 Lifaen lifted one dark eyebrow. “Do you? It has more significance than 
you may think. It was this event that convinced Anurin—Vrael’s prede-
cessor as head Rider—to allow humans to become Riders, in order to 
prevent similar disputes.” 
 
 Orik emitted a bark of laughter. “That must have caused some argu-
ment.” 
 
 “It was an unpopular decision,” admitted Lifaen. “Even now some ques-
tion the wisdom of it. It caused such a disagreement between Anurin and 
Queen Dellanir that Anurin seceded from our government and estab-
lished the Riders on Vroengard as an independent entity.” 
 
 “But if the Riders were separated from your government, then how 
could they keep the peace, as they were supposed to?” asked Eragon. 
 
 “They couldn’t,” said Lifaen. “Not until Queen Dellanir saw the wisdom 
of having the Riders free of any lord or king and restored their access to 
Du Weldenvarden. Still, it never pleased her that any authority could su-
persede her own.” 
 
 Eragon frowned. “Wasn’t that the whole point, though?” 
 
 “Yes... and no. The Riders were supposed to guard against the failings of 
the different governments and races, yet who watched the watchers? It 
was that very problem that caused the Fall. No one existed who could 

 
193
descry the flaws within the Riders’ own system, for they were above 
scrutiny, and thus, they perished.” 
 
 Eragon stroked the water—first on one side and then the other—while 
he considered Lifaen’s words. His paddle fluttered in his hands as it cut 
diagonally across the current. “Who succeeded Dellanir as king or queen?” 
 
 “Evandar did. He took the knotted throne five hundred years ago—
when Dellanir abdicated in order to study the mysteries of magic—and 
held it until his death. Now his mate, Islanzadí, rules us.” 
 
 “That’s—” Eragon stopped with his mouth open. He was going to say 
impossible, but then realized how ridiculous the statement would sound. 
Instead, he asked, “Are elves immortal?” 
 
 In a soft voice, Lifaen said, “Once we were like you, bright, fleeting, and 
as ephemeral as the morning dew. Now our lives stretch endlessly 
through the dusty years. Aye, we are immortal, although we are still vul-
nerable to injuries of the flesh.” 
 
 “You became immortal? How?” The elf refused to elaborate, though Er-
agon pressed him for details. Finally, Eragon asked, “How old is Arya?” 
 
 Lifaen turned his glittering eyes on him, probing Eragon with discon-
certing acuteness. “Arya? What is your interest in her?” 
 
 “I...” Eragon faltered, suddenly unsure of his intentions. His attraction to 
Arya was complicated by the fact that she was an elf, and that her age, 
whatever it might be, was so much greater than his own. She must view 
me as a child. “I don’t know,” he said honestly. “But she saved both my 
life and Saphira’s, and I’m curious to know more about her.” 
 
 “I feel ashamed,” said Lifaen, pronouncing each word carefully, “for ask-
ing such a question. Among our kind, it is rude to pry into one’s affairs.... 
Only, I must say, and I believe that Orik agrees with me, that you would 
do well to guard your heart, Argetlam. Now is not the time to lose it, nor 
would it be well placed in this instance.” 
 
 “Aye,” grunted Orik. 
 
 Heat suffused Eragon as blood rushed to his face, like hot tallow melt-
ing through him. Before he could utter a retort, Saphira entered his mind 
and said, And now is the time to guard your tongue. They mean well. Don’t 
insult them. 

 
194
 
 He took a deep breath and tried to let his embarrassment drain away. 
Do you agree with them? 
 
 I believe, Eragon, that you are full of love and that you are looking for one 
who will reciprocate your affection. No shame exists in that. 
 
 He struggled to digest her words, then finally said, Will you be back 
soon? 
 
 I’m on my way now. 
 
 Returning his attention to his surroundings, Eragon found that both the 
elf and the dwarf were watching him. “I understand your concern... and 
I’d still like my question answered.” 
 
 Lifaen hesitated briefly. “Arya is quite young. She was born a year be-
fore the destruction of the Riders.” 
 
 A hundred! Though he had expected such a figure, Eragon was still 
shocked. He concealed it behind a blank face, thinking, She could have 
great-grandchildren older than me! He brooded on the subject for several 
minutes and then, to distract himself, said, “You mentioned that humans 
discovered Alagaësia eight hundred years ago. Yet Brom said that we ar-
rived three centuries after the Riders were formed, which was thousands 
of years ago.” 
 
 “Two thousand, seven hundred, and four years, by our reckoning,” de-
clared Orik. “Brom was right, if you consider a single ship with twenty 
warriors the ‘arrival’ of humans in Alagaësia. They landed in the south, 
where Surda is now. We met while they were exploring and exchanged 
gifts, but then they departed and we didn’t see another human for almost 
two millennia, or until King Palancar arrived with a fleet in tow. The 
humans had completely forgotten us by then, except for vague stories 
about hairy men-of-the-mountains that preyed on children in the night. 
Bah!” 
 
 “Do you know where Palancar came from?” asked Eragon. 
 
 Orik frowned and gnawed the tip of his mustache, then shook his head. 
“Our histories only say that his homeland was far to the south, beyond 
the Beors, and that his exodus was the result of war and famine.” 
 
 Excited by an idea, Eragon blurted, “So there might be countries else-

 
195
where that could help us against Galbatorix.” 
 
 “Possibly,” said Orik. “But they would be difficult to find, even on 
dragonback, and I doubt that you’d speak the same language. Who would 
want to help us, though? The Varden have little to offer another country, 
and it’s hard enough to get an army from Farthen Dûr to Urû’baen, much 
less bring forces from hundreds, if not thousands, of miles away.” 
 
 “We could not spare you anyway,” said Lifaen to Eragon. 
 
 “I still—” Eragon broke off as Saphira soared over the river, followed by 
a furious crowd of sparrows and blackbirds intent on driving her away 
from their nests. At the same time, a chorus of squeaks and chatters burst 
from the armies of squirrels hidden among the branches. 
 
 Lifaen beamed and cried, “Isn’t she glorious? See how her scales catch 
the light! No treasure in the world can match this sight.” Similar exclama-
tions floated across the river from Narí. 
 
 “Bloody unbearable, that’s what it is,” muttered Orik into his beard. Er-
agon hid a smile, though he agreed with the dwarf. The elves never 
seemed to tire of praising Saphira. 
 
 Nothing’s wrong with a few compliments, said Saphira. She landed with a 
gigantic splash and submerged her head to escape a diving sparrow. 
 
 Of course not, said Eragon. 
 
 Saphira eyed him from underwater. Was that sarcasm? 
 
 He chuckled and let it pass. Glancing at the other boat, Eragon watched 
Arya paddle, her back perfectly straight, her face inscrutable as she 
floated through webs of mottled light beneath the mossy trees. She 
seemed so dark and somber, it made him want to comfort her. “Lifaen,” 
he asked softly so that Orik would not hear, “why is Arya so... unhappy? 
You and—” 
 
 Lifaen’s shoulders stiffened underneath his russet tunic and he whis-
pered, so low that Eragon could barely hear, “We are honored to serve 
Arya Dröttningu. She has suffered more than you can imagine for our 
people. We celebrate out of joy for what she has achieved with Saphira, 
and we weep in our dreams for her sacrifice... and her loss. Her sorrows 
are her own, though, and I cannot reveal them without her permission.” 
 

 
196
   
 
 As Eragon sat by their nightly campfire, petting a swatch of moss that 
felt like rabbit fur, he heard a commotion deeper in the forest. Exchang-
ing glances with Saphira and Orik, he crept toward the sound, drawing 
Zar’roc. 
 
 Eragon stopped at the lip of a small ravine and looked across to the 
other side, where a gyrfalcon with a broken wing thrashed in a bed of 
snowberries. The raptor froze when it saw him, then opened its beak and 
uttered a piercing screech. 
 
 What a terrible fate, to be unable to fly, said Saphira. 
 
 When Arya arrived, she eyed the gyrfalcon, then strung her bow and, 
with unerring aim, shot it through the breast. At first Eragon thought that 
she had done it for food, but she made no move to retrieve either the 
bird or her arrow. 
 
 “Why?” he asked. 
 
 With a hard expression, Arya unstrung her bow. “It was too injured for 
me to heal and would have died tonight or tomorrow. Such is the nature 
of things. I saved it hours of suffering.” 
 
 Saphira lowered her head and touched Arya on the shoulder with her 
snout, then returned to their camp, her tail scraping bark off the trees. As 
Eragon started to follow, he felt Orik tug his sleeve and bent down to 
hear the dwarf say in an undertone, “Never ask an elf for help; they might 
decide that you’re better off dead, eh?” 
 
 
 
 

 
197
THE DAGSHELGR INVOCATION 
 
 
 Though he was tired from the previous day, Eragon forced himself to 
rise before dawn in an attempt to catch one of the elves asleep. It had 
become a game with him to discover when the elves got up—or if they 
slept at all—as he had yet to see any of them with their eyes closed. To-
day was no exception. 
 
 “Good morning,” said Narí and Lifaen from above him. Eragon craned 
back his head and saw that they each stood on the bough of a pine tree, 
over fifty feet in the air. Jumping from branch to branch with feline 
grace, the elves dropped to the ground alongside him. 
 
 “We have been keeping watch,” explained Lifaen. 
 
 “For what?” 
 
 Arya stepped around a tree and said, “For my fears. Du Weldenvarden 
has many mysteries and dangers, especially for a Rider. We have lived 
here for thousands of years, and old spells still linger in unexpected 
places; magic permeates the air, the water, and the earth. In places it has 
affected the animals. Sometimes strange creatures are found roaming the 
forest, and not all of them friendly.” 
 
 “Are they—” Eragon stopped as his gedwëy ignasia tingled. The silver 
hammer on the necklace Gannel had given him grew hot on his chest, 
and he felt the amulet’s spell draw upon his strength. 
 
 Someone was trying to scry him. 
 
 Is it Galbatorix? he wondered, frightened. He clutched the necklace 
and pulled it out of his tunic, ready to yank it off should he become too 
weak. From the other side of the camp, Saphira rushed to his side, bol-
stering him with her own reserves of energy. 
 
 A moment later, the heat leached out of the hammer, leaving it cold 
against Eragon’s skin. He bounced it on his palm, then tucked it back un-
der his clothes, whereupon Saphira said, Our enemies are searching for us. 
 
 Enemies? Could not it be someone in Du Vrangr Gata? 
 
 I think Hrothgar would have told Nasuada that he ordered Gannel to en-
chant you this necklace.... She might have even come up with the idea in the 

 
198
first place. 
 
 Arya frowned when Eragon explained what had occurred. “This makes 
it all the more important we reach Ellesméra quickly so your training can 
resume. Events in Alagaësia move apace, and I fear you won’t have ade-
quate time for your studies.” 
 
 Eragon wanted to discuss it further, but lost the opportunity in the 
rush to leave camp. Once the canoes were loaded and the fire tamped 
out, they continued to forge up the Gaena River. 
 
 They had only been on the water for an hour when Eragon noticed that 
the river was growing wider and deeper. A few minutes later, they came 
upon a waterfall that filled Du Weldenvarden with its throbbing rumble. 
The cataract was about a hundred feet tall, and streamed down a stone 
face with an overhang that made it impossible to climb. “How do we get 
past that?” He could already feel cool spray on his face. 
 
 Lifaen pointed at the left shore, some distance from the falls, where a 
trail had been worn up the steep ridge. “We have to portage our canoes 
and supplies for half a league before the river clears.” 
 
 The five of them untied the bundles wedged between the seats of the 
canoes and divided the supplies into piles that they stuffed into their 
packs. “Ugh,” said Eragon, hefting his load. It was twice as heavy as what 
he usually carried when traveling on foot. 
 
 I could fly it upstream for you... all of it, offered Saphira, crawling onto 
the muddy bank and shaking herself dry. 
 
 When Eragon repeated her suggestion, Lifaen looked horrified. “We 
would never dream of using a dragon as a beast of burden. It would dis-
honor you, Saphira—and Eragon as Shur’tugal—and it would shame our 
hospitality.” 
 
 Saphira snorted, and a plume of flame erupted from her nostrils, vapor-
izing the surface of the river and creating a cloud of steam. This is non-
sense. Reaching past Eragon with one scaly leg, she hooked her talons 
through the packs’ shoulder straps, then took off over their heads. Catch 
me if you can! 
 
 A peal of clear laughter broke the silence, like the trill of a mocking-
bird. Amazed, Eragon turned and looked at Arya. It was the first time he 
had ever heard her laugh; he loved the sound. She smiled at Lifaen. “You 

 
199
have much to learn if you presume to tell a dragon what she may or may 
not do.” 
 
 “But the dishonor—” 
 
 “It is no dishonor if Saphira does it of her free will,” asserted Arya. 
“Now, let us go before we waste any more time.” 
 
 Hoping that the strain would not trigger the pain in his back, Eragon 
picked up his canoe with Lifaen and fit it over his shoulders. He was 
forced to rely on the elf to guide him along the trail, as he could only see 
the ground beneath his feet. 
 
 An hour later, they had topped the ridge and hiked beyond the danger-
ous white water to where the Gaena River was once again calm and 
glassy. Waiting for them was Saphira, who was busy catching fish in the 
shallows, jabbing her triangular head into the water like a heron. 
 
 Arya called her over and said to both her and Eragon, “Beyond the next 
curve lies Ardwen Lake and, upon its western shore, Sílthrim, one of our 
greatest cities. Past that, a vast expanse of forest still separates us from 
Ellesméra. We will encounter many elves close to Sílthrim. However, I 
don’t want either of you to be seen until we speak with Queen Islanzadí.” 
 
 Why? asked Saphira, echoing Eragon’s thoughts. 
 
 In her musical accent, Arya answered: “Your presence represents a 
great and terrible change for our kingdom, and such shifts are dangerous 
unless handled with care. The queen must be the first to meet with you. 
Only she has the authority and wisdom to oversee this transition.” 
 
 “You speak highly of her,” commented Eragon. 
 
 At his words, Narí and Lifaen stopped and watched Arya with guarded 
eyes. Her face went blank, then she drew herself up proudly. “She has led 
us well.... Eragon, I know you carry a hooded cape from Tronjheim. Until 
we are free of possible observers, will you wear it and keep your head 
covered so that none can see your rounded ears and know that you are 
human?” He nodded. “And, Saphira, you must hide during the day and 
catch up with us at night. Ajihad told me that is what you did in the 
Empire.” 
 
 And I hated every moment of it, she growled. 
 

 
200
 “It’s only for today and tomorrow. After that we will be far enough 
away from Sílthrim that we won’t have to worry about encountering 
anyone of consequence,” promised Arya. 
 
 Saphira turned her azure eyes on Eragon. When we escaped the Empire, I 
swore that I would always stay close enough to protect you. Every time I 
leave, bad things happen: Yazuac, Daret, Dras-Leona, the slavers. 
 
 Not in Teirm. 
 
 You know what I mean! I’m especially loath to leave since you can’t de-
fend yourself with your crippled back. 
 
 I trust that Arya and the others will keep me safe. Don’t you? 
 
 Saphira hesitated. I trust Arya. She twisted away and padded up the 
riverbank, sat for a minute, then returned. Very well. She broadcast her 
acceptance to Arya, adding, But I won’t wait any longer than tomorrow 
night, even if you’re in the middle of Sílthrim at the time. 
 
 “I understand,” said Arya. “You will still have to be careful when flying 
after dark, as elves can see clearly on all but the blackest nights. If you are 
sighted by chance, you could be attacked by magic.” 
 
 Wonderful, commented Saphira. 
 
 While Orik and the elves repacked the boats, Eragon and Saphira ex-
plored the dim forest, searching for a suitable hiding place. They settled 
on a dry hollow rimmed by crumbling rocks and blanketed with a bed of 
pine needles that were pleasantly soft underfoot. Saphira curled up on 
the ground and nodded her head. Go now. I will be fine. 
 
 Eragon hugged her neck—careful to avoid her sharp spines—and then 
reluctantly departed, glancing backward. At the river, he donned his cape 
before they resumed their journey. 
 
 The air was motionless when Ardwen Lake came into view, and as a 
result, the vast mantle of water was smooth and flat, a perfect mirror for 
the trees and clouds. The illusion was so flawless, Eragon felt as if he 
were looking through a window at another world and that if they contin-
ued forward, the canoes would fall endlessly into the reflected sky. He 
shivered at the thought. 
 
 In the hazy distance, numerous white birch-bark boats darted like wa-

 
201
ter striders along both shores, propelled to incredible speeds by the elves’ 
strength. Eragon ducked his head and tugged on the edge of his hood to 
ensure that it covered his face. 
 
 His link with Saphira grew ever more tenuous the farther apart they 
became, until only a wisp of thought connected them. By evening he 
could no longer feel her presence, even if he strained his mind to its lim-
its. All of a sudden, Du Weldenvarden seemed much more lonely and 
desolate. 
 
 As the gloom deepened, a cluster of white lights—placed at every con-
ceivable height among the trees—sprang into existence a mile ahead. The 
sparks glowed with the silver radiance of the full moon, eerie and myste-
rious in the night. 
 
 “There lies Sílthrim,” said Lifaen. 
 
 With a faint splash, a dark boat passed them from the opposite direc-
tion, accompanied by a murmur of “Kvetha Fricai” from the elf steering. 
 
 Arya brought her canoe alongside Eragon’s. “We will stop here tonight.” 
 
 They made camp a ways from Ardwen Lake, where the ground was 
dry enough to sleep on. The ferocious droves of mosquitoes forced Arya 
to cast a protective spell so that they could eat dinner in relative comfort. 
 
 Afterward, the five of them sat around the fire, staring at the gold 
flames. Eragon leaned his head against a tree and watched a meteor streak 
across the sky. His eyelids were about to sink shut when a woman’s voice 
drifted through the woods from Sílthrim, a faint susurration that brushed 
the inside of his ear like a down feather. He frowned and straightened, 
trying to better hear the tenuous whisper. 
 
 Like a thread of smoke that thickens as a newborn fire blazes to life, so 
the voice rose in strength until the forest sighed with a teasing, twisting 
melody that leaped and fell with wild abandon. More voices joined the 
unearthly song, embroidering the original theme with a hundred varia-
tions. The air itself seemed to shimmer with the fabric of the tempestu-
ous music. 
 
 The fey strains sent jolts of elation and fear down Eragon’s spine; they 
clouded his senses, drawing him into the velvet night. Seduced by the 
haunting notes, he jumped to his feet, ready to dash through the forest 
until he found the source of the voices, ready to dance among the trees 

 
202
and moss, anything so that he could join the elves’ revels. But before he 
could move, Arya caught his arm and yanked him around to face her. 
 
 “Eragon! Clear your mind!” He struggled in a futile attempt to break 
her grip. “Eyddr eyreya onr!” Empty your ears! Everything fell silent then, 
as if he had gone deaf. He stopped fighting and looked around, wondering 
what had just occurred. On the other side of the fire, Lifaen and Narí 
wrestled noiselessly with Orik. 
 
 Eragon watched Arya’s mouth move as she spoke, then sound returned 
to the world with a pop, though he could no longer hear the music. 
“What... ?” he asked, dazed. 
 
 “Gerr’off me,” growled Orik. Lifaen and Narí lifted their hands and 
backed away. 
 
 “Your pardon, Orik-vodhr,” said Lifaen. 
 
 Arya gazed toward Sílthrim. “I miscounted the days; I didn’t want to be 
anywhere near a city during Dagshelgr. Our saturnalias, our celebrations, 
are perilous for mortals. We sing in the ancient language, and the lyrics 
weave spells of passion and longing that are difficult to resist, even for 
us.” 
 
 Narí stirred restlessly. “We should be at a grove.” 
 
 “We should,” agreed Arya, “but we will do our duty and wait.” 
 
 Shaken, Eragon sat closer to the fire, wishing for Saphira; he was sure 
she could have protected his mind from the music’s influence. “What is 
the point of Dagshelgr?” he asked. 
 
 Arya joined him on the ground, crossing her long legs. “It is to keep the 
forest healthy and fertile. Every spring we sing for the trees, we sing for 
the plants, and we sing for the animals. Without us, Du Weldenvarden 
would be half its size.” As if to emphasize her point, birds, deer, squir-
rels—red and gray—striped badgers, foxes, rabbits, wolves, frogs, toads, 
tortoises, and every other nearby animal forsook their hiding and began to 
rush madly about with a cacophony of yelps and cries. “They are search-
ing for mates,” explained Arya. “All across Du Weldenvarden, in each of 
our cities, elves are singing this song. The more who participate, the 
stronger the spell, and the greater Du Weldenvarden will be this year.” 
 
 Eragon snatched back his hand as a trio of hedgehogs trundled past his 

 
203
thigh. The entire forest yammered with noise. I’ve stepped into fairyland, 
he thought, hugging himself. 
 
 Orik came around the fire and raised his voice above the clamor: “By 
my beard and my ax, I’ll not be controlled against my will by magic. If it 
happens again, Arya, I swear on Helzvog’s stone girdle that I’ll return to 
Farthen Dûr and you will have the wrath of Dûrgrimst Ingeitum to deal 
with.” 
 
 “It was not my intention for you to experience Dagshelgr,” said Arya. “I 
apologize for my mistake. However, though I am shielding you from this 
spell, you cannot escape magic in Du Weldenvarden; it permeates every-
thing.” 
 
 “So long as it doesn’t befoul my mind.” Orik shook his head and fin-
gered the haft of his ax while eyeing the shadowy beasts that lumbered in 
the gloom beyond the pool of firelight. 
 
 
 No one slept that night. Eragon and Orik remained awake because of 
the frightful din and the animals that kept crashing by their tents, the 
elves because they still listened to the song. Lifaen and Narí took to pac-
ing in endless circles, while Arya stared toward Sílthrim with a hungry 
expression, her tawny skin drawn thin and taut over her cheekbones. 
 
 Four hours into the riot of sound and motion, Saphira dove out of the 
sky, her eyes sparkling with a queer aspect. She shivered and arched her 
neck, panting between her open jaws. The forest, she said, is alive. And I 
am alive. My blood burns like never before. It burns as yours burns when 
you think of Arya. I... understand! 
 
 Eragon put his hand on her shoulder, feeling the tremors that racked 
her frame; her sides vibrated as she hummed along with the music. She 
gripped the ground with her ivory claws, her muscles coiled and clenched 
in a supreme effort to remain motionless. The tip of her tail twitched like 
she was about to pounce. 
 
 Arya stood and joined Eragon on the opposite side of Saphira. The elf 
also put a hand on Saphira’s shoulder, and the three of them faced the 
darkness, united into a living chain. 
 
   
 
 When dawn broke, the first thing Eragon noticed was that all the trees 

 
204
now had buds of bright green needles at the ends of their branches. He 
bent and examined the snowberries at his feet and found that every 
plant, large or small, had acquired new growth during the night. The for-
est vibrated with the ripeness of its colors; everything was lush and fresh 
and clean. The air smelled like it had just rained. 
 
 Saphira shook herself beside Eragon and said, The fever has passed; I am 
myself again. Such things I felt... It was as if the world were being born 
anew and I was helping to create it with the fire in my limbs. 
 
 How are you? On the inside, I mean. 
 
 I will need some time to understand what I experienced. 
 
 Since the music had ceased, Arya removed her spell from Eragon and 
Orik. She said, “Lifaen. Narí. Go to Sílthrim and get horses for the five of 
us. We cannot walk all the way from here to Ellesméra. Also, alert Cap-
tain Damítha that Ceris requires reinforcements.” 
 
 Narí bowed. “And what shall we say when she asks why we have de-
serted our post?” 
 
 “Tell her that that which she once hoped for—and feared—has oc-
curred; the wyrm has bitten its own tail. She will understand.” 
 
 The two elves departed for Sílthrim after the boats were emptied of 
supplies. Three hours later, Eragon heard a stick snap and looked up to 
see them returning through the forest on proud white stallions, leading 
four other identical horses. The magnificent beasts moved among the 
trees with uncanny stealth, their coats shimmering in the emerald twi-
light. None of them wore saddles or harnesses. 
 
 “Blöthr, blöthr,” murmured Lifaen, and his steed halted, pawing the 
ground with its dark hooves. 
 
 “Are all your horses as noble as these?” asked Eragon. He cautiously ap-
proached one, amazed by its beauty. The animals were only a few inches 
taller than ponies, which made it easy for them to navigate among the 
closely placed trunks. They did not seem frightened by Saphira. 
 
 “Not all,” laughed Narí, tossing his silver hair, “but most. We have bred 
them for many centuries.” 
 
 “How am I supposed to ride?” 

 
205
 
 Arya said, “An elf horse responds instantly to commands in the ancient 
language; tell it where you wish to go and it will take you. However, do 
not mistreat them with blows or harsh words, for they are not our slaves, 
but our friends and partners. They bear you only so long as they consent 
to; it is a great privilege to ride one. I was only able to save Saphira’s egg 
from Durza because our horses sensed that something was amiss and 
stopped us from riding into his ambush.... They won’t let you fall unless 
you deliberately throw yourself off, and they are skilled in choosing the 
safest, quickest path through treacherous ground. The dwarves’ Feldûnost 
are like that.” 
 
 “Right you are,” grunted Orik. “A Feldûnost can run you up a cliff and 
down without a single bruise. But how can we carry food and whatnot 
without saddles? I won’t ride while wearing a full pack.” 
 
 Lifaen tossed a pile of leather bags at Orik’s feet and indicated the sixth 
horse. “Nor will you have to.” 
 
 It took half an hour to arrange their supplies in the bags and heap them 
into a lumpy mound on the horse’s back. Afterward, Narí told Eragon 
and Orik the words they could use to direct the horses: “Gánga framto go 
forward,blöthr to stop, hlaupa if needs you must run, and gánga aptr to 
go back. You can give more precise instructions if you know more of the 
ancient language.” He led Eragon to a horse and said, “This is Folkvír. 
Hold out your hand.” 
 
 Eragon did, and the stallion snorted, flaring his nostrils. Folkvír sniffed 
Eragon’s palm, then touched it with his muzzle and allowed Eragon to 
stroke his thick neck. “Good,” said Narí, appearing satisfied. The elf had 
Orik do the same with the next horse. 
 
 As Eragon mounted Folkvír, Saphira drew closer. He looked up at her, 
noting how troubled she still seemed from the night. One more day, he 
said. 
 
 Eragon...She paused. I thought of something while I was under the influ-
ence of the elves’ spell, something that I have always considered of little 
consequence, but now looms within me like a mountain of black dread: 
Every creature, no matter how pure or monstrous, has a mate of their own 
kind. Yet I have none. She shuddered and closed her eyes. In this regard, I 
am alone. 
 
 Her statements reminded Eragon that she was barely more than eight 

 
206
months old. On most occasions, her youth did not show—due to the in-
fluence of her hereditary instincts and memories—but, in this arena, she 
was even more inexperienced than he was with his feeble stabs at ro-
mance in Carvahall and Tronjheim. Pity welled inside Eragon, but he 
suppressed it before it could seep across their mental link. Saphira would 
have only contempt for the emotion: it could neither solve her problem 
nor make her feel better. Instead, he said, Galbatorix still has two dragon 
eggs. During our first audience with Hrothgar, you mentioned that you 
would like to rescue them. If we can— 
 
 Saphira snorted bitterly. It could take years, and even if we did retrieve 
the eggs, I have no guarantee that they would hatch, nor that they would be 
male, nor that we would be fit mates. Fate has abandoned my race to ex-
tinction. She lashed her tail with frustration, breaking a sapling in two. 
She seemed perilously close to tears. 
 
 What can I say? he asked, disturbed by her distress. You can’t give up 
hope. You still have a chance to find a mate, but you have to be patient. 
Even if Galbatorix’s eggs don’t work, dragons must exist elsewhere in the 
world, just like humans, elves, and Urgals do. The moment we are free of 
our obligations, I’ll help you search for them. All right? 
 
 All right, she sniffed. She craned back her head and released a puff of 
white smoke that dispersed among the branches overhead. I should know 
better than to let my emotions get the best of me. 
 
 Nonsense. You would have to be made of stone not to feel this way. It’s 
perfectly normal.... But promise you won’t dwell on it while you’re alone. 
 
 She fixed one giant sapphire eye on him. I won’t. He turned warm in-
side as he felt her gratitude for his reassurances and companionship. Lean-
ing out from Folkvír, he put a hand on her rough cheek and held it there 
for a moment. Go on, little one, she murmured. I will see you later. 
 
 Eragon hated to leave her in such a state. He reluctantly entered the 
forest with Orik and the elves, heading west toward the heart of Du 
Weldenvarden. After an hour spent pondering Saphira’s plight, he men-
tioned it to Arya. 
 
 Faint lines creased Arya’s forehead as she frowned. “It is one of Galba-
torix’s greatest crimes. I do not know if a solution exists, but we can 
hope. We must hope.” 
 
 
 

 
207
THE PINEWOOD CITY 
 
 
 Eragon had been in Du Weldenvarden for so long that he had begun to 
long for clearings, fields, or even a mountain, instead of the endless tree 
trunks and meager underbrush. His flights with Saphira provided no res-
pite as they only revealed hills of prickly green that rolled unbroken into 
the distance like a verdant sea. 
 
 Oftentimes, the branches were so thick overhead, it was impossible to 
tell from what direction the sun rose and set. That, combined with the 
repetitive scenery, made Eragon hopelessly lost, no matter how many 
times Arya or Lifaen troubled to show him the points of the compass. If 
not for the elves, he knew that he could wander in Du Weldenvarden for 
the rest of his life without ever finding his way free. 
 
 When it rained, the clouds and the forest canopy plunged them into 
profound darkness, as if they were entombed deep underground. The fal-
ling water would collect on the black pine needles above, then trickle 
through and pour a hundred feet or more down onto their heads, like a 
thousand little waterfalls. At such times, Arya would summon a glowing 
orb of green magic that floated over her right hand and provided the only 
light in the cavernous forest. They would stop and huddle underneath a 
tree until the storm abated, but even then water cached in the myriad 
branches would, at the slightest provocation, shower them with droplets 
for hours afterward. 
 
 As they rode deeper into the heart of Du Weldenvarden, the trees 
grew thicker and taller, as well as farther apart to accommodate the in-
creased span of their branches. The trunks—bare brown shafts that tow-
ered up into the overarching ribbed ceiling, which was smudged and ob-
scured by shadow—were over two hundred feet tall, higher than any tree 
in the Spine or the Beors. Eragon paced out the girth of one tree and 
measured it at seventy feet. 
 
 He mentioned this to Arya, and she nodded, saying, “It means that we 
are near Ellesméra.” She reached out and rested her hand lightly on the 
gnarled root beside her, as if touching, with consummate delicacy, the 
shoulder of a friend or lover. “These trees are among the oldest living 
creatures in Alagaësia. Elves have loved them since first we saw Du Wel-
denvarden, and we have done everything within our power to help them 
flourish.” A faint blade of light pierced the dusty emerald branches over-
head and limned her arm and face with liquid gold, dazzlingly bright 
against the murky background. “We have traveled far together, Eragon, 

 
208
but now you are about to enter my world. Tread softly, for the earth and 
air are heavy with memories and naught is as it seems.... Do not fly with 
Saphira today, as we have already triggered certain wards that protect 
Ellesméra. It would be unwise to stray from the path.” 
 
 Eragon bowed his head and retreated to Saphira, who lay curled on a 
bed of moss, amusing herself by releasing plumes of smoke from her nos-
trils and watching them roil out of sight. Without preamble, she said, 
There is plenty of room for me on the ground now. I will have no difficulty. 
 
 Good. He mounted Folkvír and followed Orik and the elves farther 
into the empty, silent forest. Saphira crawled beside him. She and the 
white horses gleamed in the somber half light. 
 
 Eragon paused, overcome by the solemn beauty of his surroundings. 
Everything had a feeling of wintry age, as if nothing had changed under 
the thatched needles for a thousand years and nothing ever would; time 
itself seemed to have fallen into a slumber from which it would never 
wake. 
 
 In late afternoon, the gloom lifted to reveal an elf standing before them, 
sheathed in a brilliant ray of light that slanted down from the ceiling. He 
was garbed in flowing robes, with a circlet of silver upon his brow. His 
face was old, noble, and serene. 
 
 “Eragon,” murmured Arya. “Show him your palm and your ring.” 
 
 Baring his right hand, Eragon raised it so that first Brom’s ring and then 
the gedwëy ignasia was visible. The elf smiled, closed his eyes, and spread 
his arms in a gesture of welcome. He held the posture. 
 
 “The way is clear,” said Arya. At a soft command, her steed moved 
forward. They rode around the elf—like water parting at the base of a 
weathered boulder—and when they had all passed, he straightened, 
clasped his hands, and vanished as the light that illuminated him ceased 
to exist. 
 
 Who is he? asked Saphira. 
 
 Arya said, “He is Gilderien the Wise, Prince of House Miolandra, 
wielder of the White Flame of Vándil, and guardian of Ellesméra since 
the days of Du Fyrn Skulblaka, our war with the dragons. None may en-
ter the city unless he permits it.” 
 

 
209
 A quarter of a mile beyond, the forest thinned and breaks appeared 
within the canopy, allowing planks of mottled sunlight to bar the way. 
Then they passed underneath two burled trees that leaned against each 
other and stopped at the edge of an empty glade. 
 
 The ground was strewn with dense patches of flowers. From pink roses 
to bluebells and lilies, spring’s fleeting treasure was heaped about like 
piles of rubies, sapphires, and opals. Their intoxicating aromas attracted 
hordes of bumblebees. To the right, a stream chuckled behind a row of 
bushes, while a pair of squirrels chased each other around a rock. 
 
 At first it looked to Eragon like a place where deer might bed for the 
night. But as he continued to stare, he began to pick out paths hidden 
among the brush and trees; soft warm light where normally there would 
be auburn shadows; an odd pattern in the shapes of the twigs and 
branches and flowers, so subtle that it nearly escaped detection—clues 
that what he saw was not entirely natural. He blinked, and his vision 
suddenly shifted as if a lens had been placed over his eyes, resolving eve-
rything into recognizable shapes. Those were paths, aye. And those were 
flowers, aye. But what he had taken to be clusters of lumpy, twisted trees 
were in fact graceful buildings that grew directly out of the pines. 
 
 One tree bulged at the base to form a two-story house before sinking 
its roots into the loam. Both stories were hexagonal, although the upper 
level was half as small as the first, which gave the house a tiered appear-
ance. The roofs and walls were made of webbed sheets of wood draped 
over six thick ridges. Moss and yellow lichen bearded the eaves and hung 
over jeweled windows set into each side. The front door was a mysteri-
ous black silhouette recessed under an archway wrought with symbols. 
 
 Another house was nestled between three pines, which were joined to 
it through a series of curved branches. Reinforced by those flying but-
tresses, the house rose five levels, light and airy. Beside it sat a bower 
woven out of willow and dogwood and hung with flameless lanterns dis-
guised as galls. 
 
 Each unique building enhanced and complemented its surroundings, 
blending seamlessly with the rest of the forest until it was impossible to 
tell where artifice ended and nature resumed. The two were in perfect 
balance. Instead of mastering their environment, the elves had chosen to 
accept the world as it was and adapt themselves to it. 
 
 The inhabitants of Ellesméra eventually revealed themselves as a flicker 
of movement at the fringe of Eragon’s sight, no more than needles stirring 

 
210
in the breeze. Then he caught glimpses of hands, a pale face, a sandaled 
foot, an upraised arm. One by one, the wary elves stepped into view, 
their almond eyes fixed upon Saphira, Arya, and Eragon. 
 
 The women wore their hair unbound. It rippled down their backs in 
waves of silver and sable braided with fresh blossoms, like a garden wa-
terfall. They all possessed a delicate, ethereal beauty that belied their un-
breakable strength; to Eragon, they seemed flawless. The men were just 
as striking, with high cheekbones, finely sculpted noses, and heavy eye-
lids. Both sexes were garbed in rustic tunics of green and brown, fringed 
with dusky colors of orange, russet, and gold. 
 
 The Fair Folk indeed, thought Eragon. He touched his lips in greeting. 
 
 As one, the elves bowed from the waist. Then they smiled and laughed 
with unrestrained happiness. From within their midst, a woman sang: 
 
 
 Gala O Wyrda brunhvitr, 
 
 Abr Berundal vandr-fódhr, 
 
 Burthro laufsblädar ekar undir, 
 
 Eom kona dauthleikr... 
 
 
 Eragon clapped his hands over his ears, fearing that the melody was a 
spell like the one he had heard at Sílthrim, but Arya shook her head and 
lifted his hands. “It is not magic.” Then she spoke to her horse, saying, 
“Gánga.” The stallion nickered and trotted away. “Release your steeds as 
well. We have no further need of them and they deserve to rest in our 
stables.” 
 
 The song waxed stronger as Arya proceeded along a cobblestone path 
set with bits of green tourmaline, which looped among the hollyhocks 
and the houses and the trees before finally crossing a stream. The elves 
danced around their party as they walked, flitting here and there as the 
fancy struck them, laughing, and occasionally leaping up onto a branch to 
run over their heads. They praised Saphira with names like “Longclaws” 
and “Daughter of Air and Fire” and “Strong One.” 
 
 Eragon smiled, delighted and enchanted. I could live here, he thought 
with a sense of peace. Tucked away in Du Weldenvarden, as much out-

 
211
doors as in, safe from the rest of the world... Yes, he liked Ellesméra very 
much indeed, more than any of the dwarf cities. He pointed to a dwelling 
situated within a pine tree and asked Arya, “How is that done? 
 
 “We sing to the forest in the old tongue and give it our strength to 
grow in the shape that we desire. All our buildings and tools are made in 
that manner.” 
 
 The path ended at a net of roots that formed steps, like bare pools of 
earth. They climbed to a door embedded within a wall of saplings. Er-
agon’s heart quickened as the door swung open, seemingly of its own ac-
cord, and revealed a hall of trees. Hundreds of branches melded together 
to form the honeycombed ceiling. Below, twelve chairs were arrayed 
along each wall. 
 
 In them reposed four-and-twenty elf lords and ladies. 
 
 Wise and handsome were they, with smooth faces unmarked by age 
and keen eyes that gleamed with excitement. They leaned forward, grip-
ping the arms of their chairs, and stared at Eragon’s group with open 
wonder and hope. Unlike the other elves, they had swords belted at their 
waists—hilts studded with beryls and garnets—and circlets that adorned 
their brows. 
 
 And at the head of the assembly stood a white pavilion that sheltered a 
throne of knotted roots. Queen Islanzadí sat upon it. She was as beautiful 
as an autumn sunset, proud and imperious, with two dark eyebrows 
slanted like upraised wings, lips as bright and red as holly berries, and 
midnight hair bound under a diamond diadem. Her tunic was crimson. 
Round her hips hung a girdle of braided gold. And clasped at the hollow 
of her neck was a velvet cloak that fell to the ground in languid folds. De-
spite her imposing countenance, the queen seemed fragile, as if she con-
cealed a great pain. 
 
 By her left hand was a curved rod with a chased crosspiece. A brilliant-
white raven perched on it, shuffling impatiently from foot to foot. He 
cocked his head and surveyed Eragon with uncanny intelligence, then 
gave a long, low croak and shrieked, “Wyrda!” Eragon shivered from the 
force of that single cracked word. 
 
 The door closed behind the six of them as they entered the hall and 
approached the queen. Arya knelt on the moss-covered ground and 
bowed first, then Eragon, Orik, Lifaen, and Narí. Even Saphira, who had 
never bowed to anyone, not even Ajihad or Hrothgar, lowered her head. 

 
212
 
 Islanzadí stood and descended from the throne, her cloak trailing be-
hind her. She stopped before Arya, placed trembling hands on her shoul-
ders, and said in a rich vibrato, “Rise.” Arya did, and the queen scrutinized 
her face with increasing intensity, until it seemed as if she were trying to 
decipher an obscure text. 
 
 At last Islanzadí cried out and embraced Arya, saying, “O my daughter, 
I have wronged you!” 
 
 
 
 

 
213
QUEEN ISLANZADÍ 
 
 
 Eragon knelt before the queen of the elves and her councilors in a fan-
tastic room made from the boles of living trees in a near-mythic land, and 
the only thing that filled his mind was shock. Arya is a princess! It was 
fitting in a way—she had always possessed an air of command—but he 
bitterly regretted the fact, for it placed another barrier between them 
when he would have torn them all away. The knowledge filled his mouth 
with the taste of ashes. He remembered Angela’s prophecy that he would 
love one of noble birth... and her warning that she could not see if it 
would end for good or for ill. 
 
 He could feel Saphira’s own surprise, then her amusement. She said, It 
appears that we have been traveling in the presence of royalty without know-
ing it. 
 
 Why didn’t she tell us? 
 
 Perhaps it would have placed her in greater danger. 
 
 “Islanzadí Dröttning,” said Arya formally. 
 
 The queen withdrew as if she had been stung and then repeated in the 
ancient language, “O my daughter, I have wronged you.” She covered her 
face. “Ever since you disappeared, I’ve barely slept or eaten. I was haunted 
by your fate, and feared that I would never see you again. Banning you 
from my presence was the greatest mistake I have ever made.... Can you 
forgive me?” 
 
 The gathered elves stirred with amazement. 
 
 Arya’s response was long in coming, but at last she said, “For seventy 
years, I have lived and loved, fought and killed without ever speaking to 
you, my mother. Our lives are long, but even so, that is no small span.” 
 
 Islanzadí drew herself upright, lifting her chin. A tremor ran her length. 
“I cannot undo the past, Arya, no matter how much I might desire to.” 
 
 “And I cannot forget what I endured.” 
 
 “Nor should you.” Islanzadí clasped her daughter’s hands. “Arya, I love 
you. You are my only family. Go if you must, but unless you wish to re-
nounce me, I would be reconciled with you.” 

 
214
 
 For a terrible moment, it seemed as if Arya would not answer, or 
worse, would reject the offer. Eragon saw her hesitate and quickly look at 
her audience. Then she lowered her eyes and said, “No, Mother. I could 
not leave.” Islanzadí smiled uncertainly and embraced her daughter again. 
This time Arya returned the gesture, and smiles broke out among the as-
sembled elves. 
 
 The white raven hopped on his stand, cackling, “And on the door was 
graven evermore, what now became the family lore, Let us never do but to 
adore! ” 
 
 “Hush, Blagden,” said Islanzadí to the raven. “Keep your doggerel to 
yourself.” Breaking free, the queen turned to Eragon and Saphira. “You 
must excuse me for being discourteous and ignoring you, our most im-
portant guests.” 
 
 Eragon touched his lips and then twisted his right hand over his ster-
num, as Arya had taught him. “Islanzadí Dröttning. Atra esterní ono 
thelduin.” He had no doubt that he was supposed to speak first. 
 
 Islanzadí’s dark eyes widened. “Atra du evarínya ono varda.” 
 
 “Un atra mor’ranr lífa unin hjarta onr,” replied Eragon, completing the 
ritual. He could tell that the elves were caught off guard by his knowl-
edge of their customs. In his mind, he listened as Saphira repeated his 
greeting to the queen. 
 
 When she finished, Islanzadí asked, “Dragon, what is your name?” 
 
 Saphira. 
 
 A flash of recognition appeared in the queen’s expression, but she made 
no comment on it. “Welcome to Ellesméra, Saphira. And yours, Rider?” 
 
 “Eragon Shadeslayer, Your Majesty.” This time an audible stir rippled 
among the elves seated behind them; even Islanzadí appeared startled. 
 
 “You carry a powerful name,” she said softly, “one that we rarely be-
stow upon our children.... Welcome to Ellesméra, Eragon Shadeslayer. 
We have waited long for you.” She moved on to Orik, greeted him, then 
returned to her throne and draped her velvet cloak over her arm. “I as-
sume by your presence here, Eragon, so soon after Saphira’s egg was cap-
tured, and by the ring on your hand and the sword on your hip, that 

 
215
Brom is dead and that your training with him was incomplete. I wish to 
hear your full story, including how Brom fell and how you came to meet 
my daughter, or how she met you, as it may be. Then I will hear of your 
mission here, dwarf, and of your adventures, Arya, since your ambush in 
Du Weldenvarden.” 
 
 Eragon had narrated his experiences before, so he had no trouble reiter-
ating them now for the queen. The few occasions where his memory fal-
tered, Saphira was able to provide an accurate description of events. In 
several places, he simply left the telling to her. When they finished, Er-
agon retrieved Nasuada’s scroll from his pack and presented it to Islan-
zadí. 
 
 She took the roll of parchment, broke the red wax seal, and, upon 
completing the missive, sighed and briefly closed her eyes. “I see now the 
true depth of my folly. My grief would have ended so much sooner if I 
had not withdrawn our warriors and ignored Ajihad’s messengers after 
learning that Arya had been ambushed. I should have never blamed the 
Varden for her death. For one so old, I am still far too foolish....” 
 
 A long silence followed, as no one dared to agree or disagree. Summon-
ing his courage, Eragon said, “Since Arya has returned alive, will you agree 
to help the Varden, like before? Nasuada cannot succeed otherwise, and I 
am pledged to her cause.” 
 
 “My quarrel with the Varden is as dust in the wind,” said Islanzadí. 
“Fear not; we will assist them as we once did, and more, because of you 
and their victory over the Urgals.” She leaned forward on one arm. “Will 
you give me Brom’s ring, Eragon?” Without hesitation, he pulled it off his 
finger and offered it to the queen, who plucked it from his palm with her 
slim fingers. “You should not have worn this, Eragon, as it was not meant 
for you. However, because of the aid you have rendered the Varden and 
my family, I now name you Elf Friend and bestow this ring, Aren, upon 
you, so that all elves, wherever you go, will know that you are to be 
trusted and helped.” 
 
 Eragon thanked her and returned the ring to his finger, acutely aware of 
the queen’s gaze, which remained upon him with disturbing perception, 
studying and analyzing. He felt as if she knew everything that he might 
say or do. She said, “Such tidings as yours, we have not heard the like of 
in Du Weldenvarden for many a year. We are accustomed to a slower 
way of life here than the rest of Alagaësia, and it troubles me that so 
much could occur so swiftly without word of it reaching my ear.” 
 

 
216
 “And what of my training?” Eragon snatched a furtive glance at the 
seated elves, wondering if any of them could be Togira Ikonoka, the be-
ing who had reached into his mind and freed him of Durza’s foul influ-
ence after the battle in Farthen Dûr—and who had also encouraged Er-
agon to travel to Ellesméra. 
 
 “It will begin in the fullness of time. Yet I fear that instructing you is 
futile so long as your infirmity persists. Unless you can overcome the 
Shade’s magic, you will be reduced to no more than a figurehead. You 
may still be useful, but only as a shadow of the hope that we have nur-
tured for over a century.” Islanzadí spoke without reproach, yet her 
words struck Eragon like hammer blows. He knew that she was right. 
“Your situation is not your fault, and it pains me to voice such things, but 
you must understand the gravity of your disability.... I am sorry.” 
 
 Then Islanzadí addressed Orik: “It has been long since one of your race 
entered our halls, dwarf. Eragon-finiarel has explained your presence, but 
do you have aught to add?” 
 
 “Only royal greetings from my king, Hrothgar, and a plea, now un-
needed, for you to resume contact with the Varden. Beyond that, I am 
here to see that the pact that Brom forged between you and the humans 
is honored.” 
 
 “We keep our promises whether we utter them in this language or in 
the ancient language. I accept Hrothgar’s greetings and return them in 
kind.” Finally, as Eragon was sure she had longed to do since they first ar-
rived, Islanzadí looked at Arya and asked, “Now, daughter, what befell 
you?” 
 
 Arya began to speak in a slow monotone, first of her capture and then 
of her long imprisonment and torture in Gil’ead. Saphira and Eragon had 
deliberately avoided the details of her abuse, but Arya herself seemed to 
have no difficulty recounting what she had been subjected to. Her emo-
tionless descriptions roused the same rage within Eragon as when he first 
saw her wounds. The elves remained completely silent throughout Arya’s 
tale, although they gripped their swords and their faces hardened into ra-
zor lines of cold anger. A single tear rolled down Islanzadí’s cheek. 
 
 Afterward, a lithe elf lord paced along the mossy sward between the 
chairs. “I know that I speak for us all, Arya Dröttningu, when I say that 
my heart burns with sorrow for your ordeal. It is a crime beyond apology, 
mitigation, or reparation, and Galbatorix must be punished for it. Also, 
we are in your debt for keeping the locations of our cities hidden from 

 
217
the Shade. Few of us could have withstood him for so long.” 
 
 “Thank you, Däthedr-vor.” 
 
 Now Islanzadí spoke, and her voice rang like a bell among the trees. 
“Enough. Our guests wait tired on their feet, and we have spoken of evil 
things for far too long. I will not have this occasion marred by lingering 
on past injuries.” A glorious smile brightened her expression. “My daugh-
ter has returned, a dragon and her Rider have appeared, and I will see us 
celebrate in the proper fashion!” She stood, tall and magnificent in her 
crimson tunic, and clapped her hands. At the sound, the chairs and pavil-
ion were showered with hundreds of lilies and roses that appeared 
twenty feet above their heads and drifted down like colorful snowflakes, 
suffusing the air with their heady fragrance. 
 
 She didn’t use the ancient language, observed Eragon. 
 
 He noticed that, while everyone was occupied by the flowers, Islanzadí 
touched Arya gently on the shoulder and murmured, almost too softly to 
hear, “You never would have suffered so if you had taken my counsel. I 
was right to oppose your decision to accept the yawë.” 
 
 “It was my decision to make.” 
 
 The queen paused, then nodded and extended her arm. “Blagden.” With 
a flutter of wings, the raven flew from his perch and landed on her left 
shoulder. The entire assembly bowed as Islanzadí proceeded to the end of 
the hall and threw open the door to the hundreds of elves outside, 
whereupon she made a brief declaration in the ancient language that Er-
agon did not understand. The elves burst into cheers and began to rush 
about. 
 
 “What did she say?” whispered Eragon to Narí. 
 
 Narí smiled. “To break open our finest casks and light the cook-fires, 
for tonight shall be a night of feast and song. Come!” He grabbed Eragon’s 
hand and pulled him after the queen as she threaded her way between 
the shaggy pines and through banks of cool ferns. During their time in-
doors, the sun had dropped low in the sky, drenching the forest with an 
amber light that clung to the trees and plants like a layer of glistering oil. 
 
 You do realize, don’t you, said Saphira, that the king Lifaen mentioned, 
Evandar, must be Arya’s father? 
 

 
218
 Eragon almost stumbled. You’re right.... And that means he was killed 
by either Galbatorix or the Forsworn. 
 
 Circles within circles. 
 
 They stopped on the crest of a small hill, where a team of elves had set 
out a long trestle table and chairs. All around them, the forest hummed 
with activity. As evening approached, the cheery glow of fires appeared 
scattered throughout Ellesméra, including a bonfire near the table. 
 
 Someone handed Eragon a goblet made of the same odd wood that he 
had noticed in Ceris. He drank the cup’s clear liqueur and gasped as it 
blazed down his throat. It tasted like mulled cider mixed with mead. The 
potion made the tips of his fingers and ears tingle and gave him a marvel-
ous sense of clarity. “What is this?” he asked Narí. 
 
 Narí laughed. “Faelnirv? We distill it from crushed elderberries and 
spun moonbeams. If he needs must, a strong man can travel for three 
days on naught else.” 
 
 Saphira, you have to taste this. She sniffed the goblet, then opened her 
mouth and allowed him to pour the rest of the faelnirv down her throat. 
Her eyes widened and her tail twitched. 
 
 Now that’s a treat! Is there more? 
 
 Before Eragon could reply, Orik stomped over to them. “Daughter to 
the queen,” he grumbled, shaking his head. “I wish that I could tell 
Hrothgar and Nasuada. They’d want to know.” 
 
 Islanzadí seated herself in a high-backed chair and clapped her hands 
once again. From within the city came a quartet of elves bearing musical 
instruments. Two had harps of cherrywood, the third a set of reed pipes, 
and the fourth nothing but her voice, which she immediately put to use 
with a playful song that danced about their ears. 
 
 Eragon caught only every third word or so, but what he did understand 
made him grin. It was the story of a stag who could not drink at a pond 
because a magpie kept harassing him. 
 
 As Eragon listened, his gaze wandered and alighted upon a small girl 
prowling behind the queen. When he looked again, he saw that her 
shaggy hair was not silver, like many of the elves, but bleached white 
with age, and that her face was creased and lined like a dry, withered ap-

 
219
ple. She was no elf, nor dwarf, nor—Eragon felt—even human. She 
smiled at him, and he glimpsed rows of sharp teeth. 
 
 When the singer finished, and the pipes and lutes filled the silence, Er-
agon found himself approached by scores of elves who wished to meet 
him and—more importantly, he sensed—Saphira. 
 
 The elves presented themselves by bowing softly and touching their 
lips with their first and middle fingers, to which Eragon responded in 
kind, along with endless repetitions of their greeting in the ancient lan-
guage. They plied Eragon with polite questions about his exploits, but 
they reserved the bulk of their conversation for Saphira. 
 
 At first Eragon was content to let Saphira talk, since this was the first 
place where anyone was interested in having a discussion just with her. 
But he soon grew annoyed at being ignored; he had become used to hav-
ing people listen when he spoke. He grinned ruefully, dismayed that he 
had come to rely on people’s attention so much since he had joined the 
Varden, and forced himself to relax and enjoy the celebration. 
 
 Before long the scent of food permeated the glade and elves appeared 
carrying platters piled with delicacies. Aside from loaves of warm bread 
and stacks of small, round honeycakes, the dishes were made entirely of 
fruit, vegetables, and berries. The berries predominated; they were in 
everything from blueberry soup to raspberry sauce to thimbleberry jelly. 
A bowl of sliced apples dripped with syrup and sprinkled with wild 
strawberries sat beside a mushroom pie stuffed with spinach, thyme, and 
currants. 
 
 No meat was to be found, not even fish or fowl, which still puzzled Er-
agon. In Carvahall and elsewhere in the Empire, meat was a symbol of 
status and luxury. The more gold you had, the more often you could af-
ford steak and veal. Even the minor nobility ate meat with every meal. 
To do otherwise would indicate a deficit in their coffers. And yet the 
elves did not subscribe to this philosophy, despite their obvious wealth 
and the ease with which they could hunt with magic. 
 
 The elves rushed to the table with an enthusiasm that surprised Eragon. 
Soon all were seated: Islanzadí at the head of the table with Blagden, the 
raven; Däthedr to her left; Arya and Eragon by her right hand; Orik across 
from them; and then all the rest of the elves, including Narí and Lifaen. 
No chair was at the far end of the table, only a huge carved plate for 
Saphira. 
 

 
220
 As the meal progressed, everything dissolved around Eragon into a blur 
of talk and mirth. He was so caught up in the festivities, he lost track of 
time, aware of only the laughter and the foreign words swirling over his 
head and the warm glow left in his stomach by the faelnirv. The elusive 
harp music sighed and whispered at the edges of his hearing and sent 
shivers of excitement down his side. Occasionally, he found himself dis-
tracted by the lazy slit-eyed stare of the woman-child, which she kept 
focused on him with single-minded intensity, even when eating. 
 
 During a lull in the conversation, Eragon turned toward Arya, who had 
uttered no more than a dozen words. He said nothing, only looked and 
wondered who she really was. 
 
 Arya stirred. “Not even Ajihad knew.” 
 
 “What?” 
 
 “Outside of Du Weldenvarden, I told no one of my identity. Brom was 
aware of it—he first met me here—but he kept it a secret at my request.” 
 
 Eragon wondered if she was explaining to him out of a sense of duty or 
because she felt guilty for deceiving him and Saphira. “Brom once said 
that what elves didn’t say was often more important that what they did.” 
 
 “He understood us well.” 
 
 “Why, though? Did it matter if anyone knew?” 
 
 This time Arya hesitated. “When I left Ellesméra, I had no desire to be 
reminded of my position. Nor did it seem relevant to my task with the 
Varden and dwarves. It had nothing to do with who I became... with 
who I am.” She glanced at the queen. 
 
 “You could have told Saphira and me.” 
 
 Arya seemed to bridle at the reproach in his voice. “I had no reason to 
suspect that my standing with Islanzadí had improved, and telling you 
that would have changed nothing. My thoughts are my own, Eragon.” He 
flushed at her implied meaning: Why should she— who was a diplomat, 
a princess, an elf, and older than both his father and grandfather, whoever 
they were—confide in him, a sixteen-year-old human? 
 
 “At least,” he muttered, “you made up with your mother.” 
 

 
221
 She smiled oddly. “Did I have a choice?” 
 
 At that moment, Blagden jumped from Islanzadí’s shoulder and strut-
ted down the middle of the table, bobbing his head left and right in a 
mocking bow. He stopped before Saphira, uttered a hoarse cough, and 
then croaked: 
 
 
 Dragons, like wagons, 
 
 Have tongues. 
 
 Dragons, like flagons, 
 
 Have necks. 
 
 But while two hold beer, 
 
 The other eats deer! 
 
 
 The elves froze with mortified expressions while they waited for 
Saphira’s reaction. After a long silence, Saphira looked up from her 
quince pie and released a puff of smoke that enveloped Blagden. And lit-
tle birds too, she said, projecting her thoughts so that everyone could hear. 
The elves finally laughed as Blagden staggered back, cawing indignantly 
and flapping his wings to clear the air. 
 
 “I must apologize for Blagden’s wretched verses,” said Islanzadí. “He has 
ever had a saucy tongue, despite our attempts to tame it.” 
 
 Apology accepted, said Saphira calmly, and returned to her pie. 
 
 “Where does he come from?” Eragon asked, eager to return to more 
cordial footing with Arya but also genuinely curious. 
 
 “Blagden,” said Arya, “once saved my father’s life. Evandar was fighting 
an Urgal when he stumbled and lost his sword. Before the Urgal could 
strike, a raven flew at him and pecked out his eyes. No one knows why 
the bird did it, but the distraction allowed Evandar to regain his balance 
and so win the battle. My father was always generous, so he thanked the 
raven by blessing him with spells for intelligence and long life. However, 
the magic had two effects that he did not foresee: Blagden lost all color in 
his feathers and he gained the ability to predict certain events.” 

 
222
 
 “He can see into the future?” asked Eragon, startled. 
 
 “See? No. But perhaps he can sense what is to come. In any case, he al-
ways speaks in riddles, most of which are a fair bit of nonsense. Just re-
member that if Blagden ever comes to you and tells you something that is 
not a joke or a pun, you would do well to heed his words.” 
 
 Once the meal had concluded, Islanzadí stood—causing a flurry of ac-
tivity as everyone hastened to do likewise—and said, “It is late, I am tired, 
and I would return to my bower. Accompany me, Saphira and Eragon, 
and I will show you where you may sleep tonight.” The queen motioned 
with one hand to Arya, then left the table. Arya followed. 
 
 As Eragon stepped around the table with Saphira, he paused by the 
woman-child, caught by her feral eyes. All the elements of her appear-
ance, from her eyes to her shaggy hair to her white fangs, triggered Er-
agon’s memory. “You’re a werecat, aren’t you?” She blinked once and 
then bared her teeth in a dangerous smile. “I met one of your kin, Solem-
bum, in Teirm and in Farthen Dûr.” 
 
 Her grin widened. “Aye. A good one he is. Humans bore me, but he 
finds it amusing to travel with the witch Angela.” Then her gaze switched 
to Saphira and she uttered a throaty half-growl, half-purr of appreciation. 
 
 What is your name? asked Saphira. 
 
 “Names be powerful things in the heart of Du Weldenvarden, dragon, 
yes they are. However... among the elves, I am known as The Watcher 
and as Quickpaw and as The Dream Dancer, but you may know me as 
Maud.” She tossed her mane of stiff white bangs. “You’d better catch up 
with the queen, younglings; she does not take lightly to fools or laggards.” 
 
 “It was a pleasure meeting you, Maud,” said Eragon. He bowed, and 
Saphira inclined her head. Eragon glanced at Orik, wondering where the 
dwarf would be taken, and then pursued Islanzadí. 
 
 They overtook the queen just as she reached the base of a tree. The 
trunk was ridged by a delicate staircase that spiraled up to a series of 
globular rooms cupped and suspended in the tree’s crown by a spray of 
branches. 
 
 Islanzadí lifted an elegant hand and pointed at the eyrie. “You needs 
must fly there, Saphira. Our stairs were not grown with dragons in mind.” 

 
223
Then she spoke to Eragon: “This is where the leader of the Dragon Riders 
would dwell while in Ellesméra. I give it to you now, for you are the 
rightful heir to that title.... It is your inheritance.” Before Eragon could 
thank her, the queen swept past and departed with Arya, who held his 
gaze for a long moment before vanishing deeper into the city. 
 
 Shall we see what accommodations they’ve provided us with? asked 
Saphira. She jumped into the air and sailed around the tree in a tight cir-
cle, balancing on one wing tip, perpendicular to the ground. 
 
 As Eragon took the first step, he saw that Islanzadí had spoken true; 
the stairs were one with the tree. The bark beneath his feet was smooth 
and flat from the many elves who had traversed it, but it was still part of 
the trunk, as were the twisting cobweb banisters by his side and the 
curved railing that slid under his right hand. 
 
 Because the stairs had been designed with the elves’ strength in mind, 
they were steeper than Eragon was used to, and his calves and thighs soon 
began to burn. He was breathing so hard when he reached the top—after 
climbing through a trapdoor in the floor of one of the rooms—he had to 
put his hands on his knees and bend over to pant. Once recovered, he 
straightened and examined his surroundings. 
 
 He stood in a circular vestibule with a pedestal in the center, out of 
which spiraled a sculpture of two pale hands and forearms that twined 
around each other without touching. Three screen doors led from the 
vestibule—one to an austere dining room that might hold ten people at 
the most, one to a closet with an empty hollow in the floor that Eragon 
could think of no discernible use for, and the last to a bedroom overlook-
ing, and open to, the wide expanse of Du Weldenvarden. 
 
 Taking a lantern from its hook in the ceiling, Eragon entered the bed-
room, creating a host of shadows that jumped and swirled like madcap 
dancers. A teardrop gap large enough for a dragon pierced the outer wall. 
Inside the room was a bed, situated so that he could watch the sky and 
the moon while lying on his back; a fireplace made of gray wood that felt 
as hard and cold as steel when he touched it, as if the timber had been 
compressed to unsurpassed density; and a huge low-rimmed bowl set in 
the floor and lined with soft blankets where Saphira could sleep. 
 
 Even as he watched, she swooped down and landed on the edge of the 
opening, her scales twinkling like a constellation of blue stars. Behind her, 
the last rays of the sun streaked across the forest, painting the various 
ridges and hills with a hazy amber that made the needles glow like hot 

 
224
iron and chased the shadows back toward the violet horizon. From their 
height, the city appeared as a series of gaps in the voluminous canopy, is-
lands of calm in a restless ocean. Ellesméra’s true scope was now revealed; 
it extended for several miles to the west and to the north. 
 
 I respect the Riders even more if this is how Vrael normally lived, said Er-
agon. It’s much simpler than I expected. The entire structure rocked 
slightly in response to a breath of wind. 
 
 Saphira sniffed her blankets. We have yet to see Vroengard, she cau-
tioned, although he sensed that she agreed with him. 
 
 As Eragon closed the screen to the bedroom, he saw something in the 
corner that he had missed during his first inspection: a spiral staircase that 
wound up a dark wood chimney. Thrusting the lantern before him, he 
cautiously ascended, one step at a time. After about twenty feet, he 
emerged in a study furnished with a writing desk—stocked with quills, 
ink, and paper, but no parchment—and another padded roost for a 
dragon to curl up on. The far wall also had an opening to fly through. 
 
 Saphira, come see this. 
 
 How? she asked. 
 
 Through the outside. Eragon winced as layers of bark splintered and 
cracked under Saphira’s claws while she crawled out of the bedroom and 
up the side of the compound to the study. Satisfied? he asked when she 
arrived. Saphira raked him with her sapphire eyes, then proceeded to 
scrutinize the walls and furniture. 
 
 I wonder, she said, how you are supposed to stay warm when the rooms 
are open to the elements? 
 
 I don’t know. Eragon examined the walls on either side of the breach, 
running his hands over abstract patterns that had been coaxed from the 
tree by the elves’ songs. He stopped when he felt a vertical ridge embed-
ded in the bark. He tugged on it, and a diaphanous membrane unspooled 
from within the wall. Pulling it across the portal, he found a second 
groove to hold the hem of the cloth. As soon as it was fastened, the air 
thickened and became noticeably hotter. There’s your answer, he said. He 
released the cloth and it lashed back and forth as it rewound itself. 
 
 When they returned to the bedroom, Eragon unpacked while Saphira 
coiled upon her dais. He carefully arranged his shield, bracers, greaves, 

 
225
coif, and helm, then stripped off his tunic and removed his shirt of 
leather-backed mail. He sat bare-chested on the bed and studied the oiled 
links, struck by their similarity to Saphira’s scales. 
 
 We made it, he said, bemused. 
 
 A long journey... but yes, we made it. We’re lucky that misfortune did not 
strike upon the road. 
 
 He nodded. Now we’ll find out if it was worth it. Sometimes I wonder if 
our time would have been better spent helping the Varden. 
 
 Eragon! You know that we need further instruction. Brom would have 
wanted it. Besides, Ellesméra and Islanzadí were certainly worth coming all 
this way to see. 
 
 Maybe. Finally, he asked, What do you make of all this? 
 
 Saphira parted her jaws slightly to show her teeth. I don’t know. The 
elves keep more secrets than even Brom, and they can do things with magic 
that I never thought possible. I have no idea what methods they use to grow 
their trees into such shapes, nor how Islanzadí summoned those flowers. It is 
beyond my ken. 
 
 Eragon was relieved that he was not the only one who felt over-
whelmed. And Arya? 
 
 What about her? 
 
 You know, who she really is. 
 
 She hasn’t changed, only your perception of her. Saphira chuckled deep 
in her throat, where it sounded like stones grinding against each other, 
and rested her head on her two front feet. 
 
 The stars were bright in the sky now, and the soft hoots of owls drifted 
through Ellesméra. All the world was calm and silent as it slumbered 
away the liquid night. 
 
 Eragon clambered underneath his downy sheets and reached to shutter 
the lantern, then stopped, his hand an inch from the latch. Here he was 
in the elves’ capital, over a hundred feet in the air, lying in what used to 
be Vrael’s bed. 
 

 
226
 The thought was too much for him. 
 
 Rolling upright, he grabbed the lantern with one hand, Zar’roc with the 
other, and surprised Saphira by crawling onto her dais and snuggling 
against her warm side. She hummed and dropped a velvet wing over him 
as he extinguished the light and closed his eyes. 
 
 Together they slept long and deep in Ellesméra. 
 
 
 
 

 
227
OUT OF THE PAST 
 
 
 Eragon woke at dawn well rested. He tapped Saphira’s ribs, and she 
lifted her wing. Running his hands through his hair, he walked to the 
room’s precipice and leaned against one side, bark rough against his 
shoulder. Below, the forest sparkled like a field of diamonds as each tree 
reflected the morning light with a thousand thousand drops of dew. 
 
 He jumped with surprise as Saphira dove past him, twisting like an au-
ger toward the canopy before she pulled up and circled through the sky, 
roaring with joy. Morning, little one. He smiled, happy that she was 
happy. 
 
 He opened the screen to their bedroom, where he found two trays of 
food—mostly fruit—that had been placed by the lintel during the night. 
By the trays was a bundle of clothes with a paper note pinned to it. Er-
agon had difficulty deciphering the flowing script, since he had not read 
for over a month and had forgotten some of the letters, but at last he un-
derstood that it said: 
 
 
 Greetings, Saphira Bjartskular and Eragon Shadeslayer. 
 
 I, Bellaen of House Miolandra, do humble myself and apologize to you, 
Saphira, for this unsatisfactory meal. Elves do not hunt, and no meat is to 
be had in Ellesméra, nor in any of our cities. If you wish, you can do as 
the dragons of old were wont, and catch what you may in Du Welden-
varden. We only ask that you leave your kills in the forest so that our air 
and water remain untainted by blood. 
 
 Eragon, these clothes are for you. They were woven by Niduen of Is-
lanzadí’s house and are her gift to you. 
 
 
 May good fortune rule over you, 
 
 Peace live in your heart, 
 
 And the stars watch over you. 
 
 
 Bellaen du Hljödhr 
 

 
228
 
 When Eragon told Saphira the message, she said, It does not matter; I 
won’t need to eat for a while after yesterday’s meal. However, she did snap 
up a few seed cakes. Just so that I don’t appear rude, she explained. 
 
 After Eragon finished breakfast, he hauled the bundle of clothes onto 
his bed and carefully unfolded them, finding two full-length tunics of rus-
set trimmed with thimbleberry green, a set of creamy leggings to wrap 
his calves in, and three pairs of socks so soft, they felt like liquid when he 
pulled them through his hands. The quality of the fabric shamed the 
weaving of the women of Carvahall as well as the dwarf clothes he wore 
now. 
 
 Eragon was grateful for the new raiment. His own tunic and breeches 
were sadly travel-worn from their weeks exposed to the rain and sun 
since Farthen Dûr. Stripping, he donned one of the luxurious tunics, sa-
voring its downy texture. 
 
 He had just laced on his boots when someone knocked on the screen to 
the bedroom. “Come in,” he said, reaching for Zar’roc. 
 
 Orik poked his head inside, then cautiously entered, testing the floor 
with his feet. He eyed the ceiling. “Give me a cave any day instead of a 
bird’s nest like this. How fared your night, Eragon? Saphira?” 
 
 “Well enough. And yours?” said Eragon. 
 
 “I slept like a rock.” The dwarf chuckled at his own jest, then his chin 
sank into his beard and he fingered the head of his ax. “I see you’ve eaten, 
so I’ll ask you to accompany me. Arya, the queen, and a host of other 
elves await you at the base of the tree.” He fixed Eragon with a testy 
gaze. “Something is going on that they haven’t told us about. I’m not sure 
what they want from you, but it’s important. Islanzadí’s as tense as a cor-
nered wolf... I thought I’d warn you beforehand.” 
 
 Eragon thanked him, then the two of them descended by way of the 
stairs, while Saphira glided to earth. They were met on the ground by Is-
lanzadí arrayed in a mantle of ruffled swan feathers, which were like win-
ter snow heaped upon a cardinal’s breast. She greeted them and said, “Fol-
low me.” 
 
 Her wending course took the group to the edge of Ellesméra, where 
the buildings were few and the paths were faint from disuse. At the base 
of a wooded knoll, Islanzadí stopped and said in a terrible voice, “Before 

 
229
we go any farther, the three of you must swear in the ancient language 
that you will never speak to outsiders of what you are about to see, not 
without permission from me, my daughter, or whoever may succeed us 
to the throne.” 
 
 “Why should I gag myself?” demanded Orik. 
 
 Why indeed ?asked Saphira. Do you not trust us? 
 
 “It is not a matter of trust, but of safety. We must protect this knowl-
edge at all costs—it’s our greatest advantage over Galbatorix—and if you 
are bound by the ancient language, you will never willingly reveal our se-
cret. You came to supervise Eragon’s training, Orik-vodhr. Unless you 
give me your word, you may as well return to Farthen Dûr.” 
 
 At last Orik said, “I believe that you mean no harm to dwarves or to 
the Varden, else I would never agree. And I hold you to the honor of 
your hall and clan that this isn’t a ploy to deceive us. Tell me what to 
say.” 
 
 While the queen tutored Orik in the correct pronunciation of the de-
sired phrase, Eragon asked Saphira, Should I do it? 
 
 Do we have a choice? Eragon remembered that Arya had asked the 
same question yesterday, and he began to have an inkling of what she had 
meant: the queen left no room to maneuver. 
 
 When Orik finished, Islanzadí looked expectantly at Eragon. He hesi-
tated, then delivered the oath, as did Saphira. “Thank you,” said Islanzadí. 
“Now we may proceed.” 
 
 At the top of the knoll, the trees were replaced by a bed of red clover 
that ran several yards to the edge of a stone cliff. The cliff extended a 
league in either direction and dropped a thousand feet to the forest be-
low, which pooled outward until it merged with the sky. It felt as if they 
stood on the edge of the world, staring across an endless expanse of for-
est. 
 
 I know this place, realized Eragon, remembering his vision of Togira Ik-
onoka. 
 
 Thud. The air shivered from the strength of the concussion. Thud. An-
other dull blow made Eragon’s teeth chatter. Thud. He jammed his fin-
gers in his ears, trying to protect them from the painful spikes in pres-

 
230
sure. The elves stood motionless. Thud. The clover bent under a sudden 
gust of wind. 
 
 Thud. From below the edge of the cliff rose a huge gold dragon with a 
Rider on its back. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
231
CONVICTION 
 
 
 Roran glared at Horst. 
 
 They were in Baldor’s room. Roran was propped upright in bed, listen-
ing as the smith said, “What did you expect me to do? We couldn’t at-
tack once you fainted. Besides, the men were in no state to fight. Can’t 
blame them either. I nearly bit off my tongue when I saw those mon-
sters.” Horst shook his wild mane of hair. “We’ve been dragged into one 
of the old tales, Roran, and I don’t like it one bit.” Roran retained his 
stony expression. “Look, you can kill the soldiers if you want, but you 
have to get your strength back first. You’ll have plenty of volunteers; 
people trust you in battle, especially after you defeated the soldiers here 
last night.” When Roran remained silent, Horst sighed, patted him on his 
good shoulder, and left the room, closing the door behind him. 
 
 Roran did not even blink. So far in his life, he had only truly cared 
about three things: his family, his home in Palancar Valley, and Katrina. 
His family had been annihilated last year. His farm had been smashed and 
burned, though the land remained, which was all that really mattered. 
 
 But now Katrina was gone. 
 
 A choked sob escaped past the iron lump in his throat. He was faced 
with a quandary that tore at his very essence: the only way to rescue 
Katrina would be to somehow pursue the Ra’zac and leave Palancar Val-
ley, yet he could not abandon Carvahall to the soldiers. Nor could he for-
get Katrina. 
 
 My heart or my home, he thought bitterly. They were worthless with-
out each other. If he killed the soldiers it would only prevent the 
Ra’zac—and perhaps Katrina—from returning. Anyway, the slaughter 
would be pointless if reinforcements were nearby, for their arrival would 
surely signal Carvahall’s demise. 
 
 Roran clenched his teeth as a fresh burst of pain emanated from his 
bound shoulder. He closed his eyes. I hope Sloan gets eaten like Quimby. 
No fate could be too terrible for that traitor. Roran cursed him with the 
blackest oaths he knew. 
 
 Even if I were free to leave Carvahall, how could I find the Ra’zac? Who 
would know where they live? Who would dare inform on Galbatorix’s ser-
vants? Despair rolled over him as he wrestled with the problem. He 

 
232
imagined himself in one of the great cities of the Empire, searching aim-
lessly among dirty buildings and hordes of strangers for a hint, a glimpse, 
a taste of his love. 
 
 It was hopeless. 
 
 A river of tears followed as he doubled over, groaning from the 
strength of his agony and fear. He rocked back and forth, blind to any-
thing but the desolation of the world. 
 
   
 
 An endless amount of time reduced Roran’s sobs to weak gasps of pro-
test. He wiped his eyes and forced himself to take a long, shuddering 
breath. He winced. His lungs felt like they were filled with shards of 
glass. 
 
 I have to think, he told himself. 
 
 He leaned against the wall and—through the sheer strength of his 
will—began to gradually subdue each of his unruly emotions, wrestling 
them into submission to the one thing that could save him from insanity: 
reason. His neck and shoulders trembled from the violence of his efforts. 
 
 Once he regained control, Roran carefully arranged his thoughts, like a 
master craftsman organizing his tools into precise rows. There must be a 
solution hidden amid my knowledge, if only I’m creative enough. 
 
 He could not track the Ra’zac through the air. That much was clear. 
Someone would have to tell him where to find them, and of all the peo-
ple he could ask, the Varden probably knew the most. However, they 
would be just as hard to find as the desecrators, and he could not waste 
time searching for them. Although... A small voice in his head reminded 
him of the rumors he had heard from trappers and traders that Surda se-
cretly supported the Varden. 
 
 Surda. The country lay at the bottom of the Empire, or so Roran had 
been told, as he had never seen a map of Alagaësia. Under ideal condi-
tions, it would take several weeks to reach on horse, longer if he had to 
evade soldiers. Of course, the swiftest mode of transportation would be 
to sail south along the coast, but that would mean having to travel all the 
way to the Toark River and then to Teirm to find a ship. It would take 
far too long. And he still might be apprehended by soldiers. 
 

 
233
 “If, could, would, might, ” he muttered, repeatedly clenching his left 
hand. North of Teirm, the only port he knew of was Narda, but to reach 
it, he would have to cross the entire width of the Spine—a feat unheard 
of, even for the trappers. 
 
 Roran swore quietly. The conjecture was pointless. I should be trying to 
save Carvahall, not desert it. The problem was, he had already deter-
mined that the village and all who remained in it were doomed. Tears 
gathered at the corners of his eyes again. All who remain... 
 
 What... what if everyone in Carvahall accompanied me to Narda and 
then to Surda? He would achieve both his desires simultaneously. 
 
 The audacity of the idea stunned him. 
 
 It was heresy, blasphemy, to think that he could convince the farmers 
to abandon their fields and the merchants their shops... and yet... and yet 
what was the alternative but slavery or death? The Varden were the only 
group that would harbor fugitives of the Empire, and Roran was sure that 
the rebels would be delighted to have a village’s worth of recruits, espe-
cially ones who had proved themselves in battle. Also, by bringing the 
villagers to them, he would earn the Varden’s confidence, so that they 
would trust him with the location of the Ra’zac. Maybe they can explain 
why Galbatorix is so desperate to capture me. 
 
 If the plan were to succeed, though, it would have to be implemented 
before the new troops reached Carvahall, which left only a few days—if 
that—to arrange the departure of some three hundred people. The logis-
tics were frightening to consider. 
 
 Roran knew that mere reason could not persuade anyone to leave; it 
would require messianic zeal to stir people’s emotions, to make them feel 
in the depths of their hearts the need to relinquish the trappings of their 
identities and lives. Nor would it be enough to simply instill fear—for he 
knew that fear often made those in peril fight harder. Rather, he had to 
instill a sense of purpose and destiny, to make the villagers believe, as he 
did, that joining the Varden and resisting Galbatorix’s tyranny was the 
noblest action in the world. 
 
 It required passion that could not be intimidated by hardship, deterred 
by suffering, or quenched by death. 
 
 In his mind, Roran saw Katrina standing before him, pale and ghostly 
with solemn amber eyes. He remembered the heat of her skin, the 

 
234
mulled scent of her hair, and what it felt like to be with her under the 
cover of darkness. Then in a long line behind her appeared his family, 
friends, and everyone he had known in Carvahall, both dead and alive. If 
not for Eragon... and me... the Ra’zac would have never come here. I must 
rescue the village from the Empire as surely as I must rescue Katrina from 
those desecrators. 
 
 Drawing upon the strength of his vision, Roran rose from bed, causing 
his maimed shoulder to burn and sting. He staggered and leaned against a 
wall. Will I ever regain the use of my right arm ? He waited for the pain to 
subside. When it did not, he bared his teeth, shoved himself upright, and 
marched from the room. 
 
 Elain was folding towels in the hallway. She cried out with amazement. 
“Roran! What are you—” 
 
 “Come,” he growled, lurching past. 
 
 With a worried expression, Baldor stepped out of a doorway. “Roran, 
you shouldn’t be walking around. You lost too much blood. I’ll help—” 
 
 “Come.” 
 
 Roran heard them follow as he descended the curved stairs toward the 
entrance of the house, where Horst and Albriech stood talking. They 
looked up with astonishment. 
 
 “Come.” 
 
 He ignored the babble of questions, opened the front door, and stepped 
into the evening’s faded light. Above, an imposing plume of clouds was 
laced with gold and purple. 
 
 Leading the small group, Roran stomped to the edge of Carvahall—
repeating his monosyllabic message whenever he passed a man or 
woman—pulled a torch mounted on a pole from the grasping mud, 
wheeled about, and retraced his path to the center of town. There he 
stabbed the pole between his feet, then raised his left arm and roared, 
“COME!” 
 
 The village rang with his voice. He continued the summons as people 
drifted from the houses and shadowed alleyways and began to gather 
around him. Many were curious, others sympathetic, some awed, and 
some angry. Again and again, Roran’s chant echoed in the valley. Loring 

 
235
arrived with his sons in tow. From the opposite direction came Birgit, 
Delwin, and Fisk with his wife, Isold. Morn and Tara left the tavern to-
gether and joined the crush of spectators. 
 
 When most of Carvahall stood before him, Roran fell silent, tightening 
his left fist until his fingernails cut into his palm. Katrina. Raising his 
hand, he opened it and showed everyone the crimson tears that dripped 
down his arm. “This,” he said, “is my pain. Look well, for it will be yours 
unless we defeat the curse wanton fate has set upon us. Your friends and 
family will be bound in chains, destined for slavery in foreign lands, or 
slain before your eyes, hewn open by soldiers’ merciless blades. Galba-
torix will sow our land with salt so that it lies forever fallow. This I have 
seen. This I know.” He paced like a caged wolf, glowering and swinging 
his head. He had their attention. Now he had to stoke them into a frenzy 
to match his own. 
 
 “My father was killed by the desecrators. My cousin has fled. My farm 
was razed. And my bride-to-be was kidnapped by her own father, who 
murdered Byrd and betrayed us all! Quimby eaten, the hay barn burned 
along with Fisk’s and Delwin’s houses. Parr, Wyglif, Ged, Bardrick, Far-
old, Hale, Garner, Kelby, Melkolf, Albem, and Elmund: all slain. Many of 
you have been injured, like me, so that you can no longer support your 
family. Isn’t it enough that we toil every day of our lives to eke a living 
from the earth, subjected to the whims of nature? Isn’t it enough that we 
are forced to pay Galbatorix’s iron taxes, without also having to endure 
these senseless torments?” Roran laughed maniacally, howling at the sky 
and hearing the madness in his own voice. No one stirred in the crowd. 
 
 “I know now the true nature of the Empire and of Galbatorix; they are 
evil. Galbatorix is an unnatural blight on the world. He destroyed the 
Riders and the greatest peace and prosperity we ever had. His servants 
are foul demons birthed in some ancient pit. But is Galbatorix content to 
grind us beneath his heel? No! He seeks to poison all of Alagaësia, to suf-
focate us with his cloak of misery. Our children and their descendants 
shall live in the shadow of his darkness until the end of time, reduced to 
slaves, worms, vermin for him to torture at his pleasure. Unless...” 
 
 Roran stared into the villagers’ wide eyes, conscious of his control over 
them. No one had ever dared say what he was about to. He let his voice 
rasp low in his throat: “Unless we have the courage to resist evil. 
 
 “We’ve fought the soldiers and the Ra’zac, but it means nothing if we 
die alone and forgotten—or are carted away as chattel. We cannot stay 
here, and I won’t allow Galbatorix to obliterate everything that’s worth 

 
236
living for. I would rather have my eyes plucked out and my hands 
chopped off than see him triumph! I choose to fight! I choose to step 
from my grave and let my enemies bury themselves in it! 
 
 “I choose to leave Carvahall. 
 
 “I will cross the Spine and take a ship from Narda down to Surda, 
where I will join the Varden, who have struggled for decades to free us 
of this oppression.” The villagers looked shocked at the idea. “But I do not 
wish to go alone. Come with me. Come with me and seize this chance to 
forge a better life for yourselves. Throw off the shackles that bind you 
here.” Roran pointed at his listeners, moving his finger from one target to 
the next. “A hundred years from now, what names shall drop from the 
bards’ lips? Horst... Birgit... Kiselt... Thane; they will recite our sagas. They 
will sing “The Epic of Carvahall,” for we were the only village brave 
enough to defy the Empire.” 
 
 Tears of pride flooded Roran’s eyes. “What could be more noble than 
cleansing Galbatorix’s stain from Alagaësia? No more would we live in 
fear of having our farms destroyed, or being killed and eaten. The grain 
we harvest would be ours to keep, save for any extra that we might send 
as a gift to the rightful king. The rivers and streams would run thick with 
gold. We would be safe and happy and fat! 
 
 “It is our destiny.” 
 
 Roran held his hand before his face and slowly closed his fingers over 
the bleeding wounds. He stood hunched over his injured arm—crucified 
by the scores of gazes—and waited for a response to his speech. None 
came. At last he realized that they wanted him to continue; they wanted 
to hear more about the cause and the future he had portrayed. 
 
 Katrina. 
 
 Then as darkness gathered around the radius of his torch, Roran drew 
himself upright and resumed speaking. He hid nothing, only labored to 
make them understand his thoughts and feelings, so they too could share 
the sense of purpose that drove him. “Our age is at an end. We must step 
forward and cast our lot with the Varden if we and our children are to 
live free.” He spoke with rage and honeyed tones in equal amount, but 
always with a fervid conviction that kept his audience entranced. 
 
 When his store of images was exhausted, Roran looked into the faces of 
his friends and neighbors and said, “I march in two days. Accompany me 

 
237
if you wish, but I go regardless.” He bowed his head and stepped out of 
the light. 
 
 Overhead, the waning moon glowed behind a lens of clouds. A slight 
breeze wafted through Carvahall. An iron weather vane creaked on a 
roof as it swung in the direction of the current. 
 
 From within the crowd, Birgit picked her way into the light, clutching 
the folds of her dress to avoid tripping. With a subdued expression, she 
adjusted her shawl. “Today we saw an...” She stopped, shook her head, 
and laughed in an embarrassed way. “I find it hard to speak after Roran. I 
don’t like his plan, but I believe that it’s necessary, although for a differ-
ent reason: I would hunt down the Ra’zac and avenge my husband’s 
death. I will go with him. And I will take my children.” She too stepped 
away from the torch. 
 
 A silent minute passed, then Delwin and his wife, Lenna, advanced 
with their arms around each other. Lenna looked at Birgit and said, “I un-
derstand your need, Sister. We want our vengeance as well, but more 
than that, we want the rest of our children to be safe. For that reason, we 
too will go.” Several women whose husbands had been slain came for-
ward and agreed with her. 
 
 The villagers murmured among themselves, then fell silent and mo-
tionless. No one else seemed willing to address the subject; it was too 
momentous. Roran understood. He was still trying to digest the implica-
tions himself. 
 
 Finally, Horst strode to the torch and stared with a drawn face into the 
flame. “It’s no good talking any more.... We need time to think. Every 
man must decide for himself. Tomorrow... tomorrow will be another day. 
Perhaps things will be clearer then.” He shook his head and lifted the 
torch, then inverted it and extinguished it against the ground, leaving 
everyone to find their way home in the moonlight. 
 
 Roran joined Albriech and Baldor, who walked behind their parents at 
a discreet distance, giving them privacy to talk. Neither of the brothers 
would look at Roran. Unsettled by their lack of expression, Roran asked, 
“Do you think anyone else will go? Was I good enough?” 
 
 Albriech emitted a bark of laughter. “Good enough!” 
 
 “Roran,” said Baldor in an odd voice, “you could have convinced an Ur-
gal to become a farmer tonight.” 

 
238
 
 “No!” 
 
 “When you finished, I was ready to grab my spear and dash into the 
Spine after you. I wouldn’t have been alone either. The question isn’t 
who will leave, it’s who won’t. What you said... I’ve never heard anything 
like it before.” 
 
 Roran frowned. His goal had been to persuade people to accept his 
plan, not to get them to follow him personally. If that’s what it takes, he 
thought with a shrug. Still, the prospect had caught him unawares. At an 
earlier time, it would have disturbed him, but now he was just thankful 
for anything that could help him to rescue Katrina and save the villagers. 
 
 Baldor leaned toward his brother. “Father would lose most of his tools.” 
Albriech nodded solemnly. 
 
 Roran knew that smiths made whatever implement was required by 
the task at hand, and that these custom tools formed a legacy that was 
bequeathed from father to son, or from master to journeyman. One 
measure of a smith’s wealth and skill was the number of tools he owned. 
For Horst to surrender his would be...Would be no harder than what any-
one else has to do, thought Roran. He only regretted that it would entail 
depriving Albriech and Baldor of their rightful inheritance. 
 
 When they reached the house, Roran retreated to Baldor’s room and lay 
in bed. Through the walls, he could still hear the faint sound of Horst and 
Elain talking. He fell asleep imagining similar discussions taking place 
throughout Carvahall, deciding his—and their—fate. 
 
 
 
 

 
239
REPERCUSSIONS 
 
 
 The morning after his speech, Roran looked out his window and saw 
twelve men leaving Carvahall, heading toward Igualda Falls. He yawned 
and limped downstairs to the kitchen. 
 
 Horst sat alone at the table, twisting a mug of ale in his hands. “Morn-
ing,” he said. 
 
 Roran grunted, tore a heel of bread off the loaf on the counter, then 
seated himself at the opposite end of the table. As he ate, he noted 
Horst’s bloodshot eyes and unkempt beard. Roran guessed that the smith 
had been awake the entire night. “Do you know why a group is going 
up—” 
 
 “Have to talk with their families,” said Horst abruptly. “They’ve been 
running into the Spine since dawn.” He put the mug down with a crack. 
“You have no idea what you did, Roran, by asking us to leave. The whole 
village is in turmoil. You backed us into a corner with only one way out: 
your way. Some people hate you for it. Of course a fair number of them 
already hated you for bringing this upon us.” 
 
 The bread in Roran’s mouth tasted like sawdust as resentment flared 
inside him. Eragon was the one who brought back the stone, not me. “And 
the others?” 
 
 Horst sipped his ale and grimaced. “The others adore you. I never 
thought I would see the day when Garrow’s son would stir my heart 
with words, but you did it, boy, you did it.” He swung a gnarled hand 
over his head. “All this? I built it for Elain and my sons. It took me seven 
years to finish! See that beam over the door right there? I broke three 
toes getting that into place. And you know what? I’m going to give it up 
because of what you said last night.” 
 
 Roran remained silent; it was what he wanted. Leaving Carvahall was 
the right thing to do, and since he had committed himself to that course, 
he saw no reason to torment himself with guilt and regret. The decision is 
made. I will accept the outcome without complaint, no matter how dire, for 
this is our only escape from the Empire. 
 
 “But,” said Horst, and leaned forward on one elbow, his black eyes 
burning beneath his brow, “just you remember that if reality falls short of 
the airy dreams you conjured, there’ll be debts to pay. Give people a 

 
240
hope and then take it away, and they’ll destroy you.” 
 
 The prospect was of no concern to Roran. If we make it to Surda, we 
will be greeted as heroes by the rebels. If we don’t, our deaths will fulfill all 
debts. When it was clear that the smith had finished, Roran asked, 
“Where is Elain?” 
 
 Horst scowled at the change of topic. “Out back.” He stood and 
straightened his tunic over his heavy shoulders. “I have to go clear out the 
smithy and decide what tools I’m going to take. I’ll hide or destroy the 
rest. The Empire won’t benefit from my work.” 
 
 “I’ll help.” Roran pushed back his chair. 
 
 “No,” said Horst roughly. “This is a task I can only do with Albriech and 
Baldor. That forge has been my entire life, and theirs.... You wouldn’t be 
much help with that arm of yours anyway. Stay here. Elain can use you.” 
 
 After the smith left, Roran opened the side door and found Elain talk-
ing with Gertrude by the large pile of firewood Horst maintained year-
round. The healer went up to Roran and put a hand on his forehead. “Ah, 
I was afraid that you might have a fever after yesterday’s excitement. 
Your family heals at the most extraordinary rate. I could barely believe 
my eyes when Eragon started walking about after having his legs skinned 
and spending two days in bed.” Roran stiffened at the mention of his 
cousin, but she did not seem to notice. “Let’s see how your shoulder is 
doing, shall we?” 
 
 Roran bowed his neck so that Gertrude could reach behind him and 
untie the knot to the wool sling. When it was undone, he carefully low-
ered his right forearm—which was immobilized in a splint—until his 
arm was straight. Gertrude slid her fingers under the poultice packed on 
his wound and peeled it off. 
 
 “Oh my,” she said. 
 
 A thick, rancid smell clogged the air. Roran clenched his teeth as his 
gorge rose, then looked down. The skin under the poultice had turned 
white and spongy, like a giant birthmark of maggot flesh. The bite itself 
had been stitched up while he was unconscious, so all he saw was a jag-
ged pink line caked with blood on the front of his shoulder. Swelling and 
inflammation had forced the twisted catgut threads to cut deep into his 
flesh, while beads of clear liquid oozed from the wound. 
 

 
241
 Gertrude clucked her tongue as she inspected him, then refastened the 
bandages and looked Roran in the eye. “You’re doing well enough, but 
the tissue may become diseased. I can’t tell yet. If it does, we’ll have to 
cauterize your shoulder.” 
 
 Roran nodded. “Will my arm work once it heals?” 
 
 “As long as the muscle knits together properly. It also depends on how 
you want to use it. You—” 
 
 “Will I be able to fight?” 
 
 “If you want to fight,” said Gertrude slowly, “I suggest that you learn to 
use your left hand.” She patted his cheek, then hurried back toward her 
hut. 
 
 My arm. Roran stared at his bound limb as if it no longer belonged to 
him. Until that moment, he had not realized how closely his sense of 
identity was linked to the condition of his body. Injuring his flesh caused 
injury to his psyche, as well as the other way around. Roran was proud of 
his body, and seeing it mutilated sent a jolt of panic through him, espe-
cially since the damage was permanent. Even if he regained the use of his 
arm, he would always bear a thick scar as a memento of his injury. 
 
 Taking his hand, Elain led Roran back into the house, where she crum-
bled mint into a kettle, then set it on the stove to boil. “You really love 
her, don’t you?” 
 
 “What?” He looked at her, startled. 
 
 Elain rested a hand on her belly. “Katrina.” She smiled. “I’m not blind. I 
know what you’ve done for her, and I’m proud of you. Not every man 
would go as far.” 
 
 “It won’t matter, if I can’t free her.” 
 
 The kettle began to whistle stridently. “You will, I’m sure of it—one 
way or another.” Elain poured the tea. “We had better start preparing for 
the trip. I’m going to sort through the kitchen first. While I do, can you 
go upstairs and bring me all the clothes, bedding, and anything else you 
think might be useful?” 
 
 “Where should I put it?” asked Roran. 
 

 
242
 “The dining room will be fine.” 
 
   
 
 Since the mountains were too steep—and the forest too dense—for 
wagons, Roran realized that their supplies were limited to however much 
they could carry themselves, as well as what they could pile onto Horst’s 
two horses, although one of those had to be left partially unburdened so 
that Elain could ride whenever the trail proved too strenuous for her 
pregnancy. 
 
 Compounding the issue was the fact that some families in Carvahall did 
not have enough steeds for both provisions and the young, old, and infirm 
who would be unable to keep pace on foot. Everyone would have to 
share resources. The question, though, was with whom? They still did 
not know who else was going, besides Birgit and Delwin. 
 
 Thus, when Elain finished packing the items she deemed essential—
mainly food and shelter—she sent Roran to find out if anyone needed ex-
tra storage space and, if not, if she could borrow some in turn, for there 
were plenty of nonessential items she wanted to bring but would other-
wise abandon. 
 
 Despite the people hurrying through the streets, Carvahall was heavy 
with a forced stillness, an unnatural calm that belied the feverish activity 
hidden within the houses. Almost everyone was silent and walked with 
downturned faces, engrossed in their own thoughts. 
 
 When Roran arrived at Orval’s house, he had to pound on the knocker 
for almost a minute before the farmer answered the door. “Oh, it’s you, 
Stronghammer.” Orval stepped out on the porch. “Sorry for the wait, but 
I was busy. How can I help you?” He tapped a long black pipe against his 
palm, then began to roll it nervously between his fingers. Inside the 
house, Roran heard chairs being shoved across the floor and pots and pans 
banging together. 
 
 Roran quickly explained Elain’s offer and request. Orval squinted up at 
the sky. “I reckon I’ve got enough room for my own stuff. Ask around, an’ 
if you still need space, I have a pair of oxen that could hold a bit more.” 
 
 “So you are going?” 
 
 Orval shifted uncomfortably. “Well, I wouldn’t say that. We’re just... 
getting ready in case of another attack.” 

 
243
 
 “Ah.” Puzzled, Roran trudged on to Kiselt’s house. He soon discovered 
that no one was willing to reveal whether they had decided to leave—
even when evidence of their preparations was in plain sight. 
 
 And they all treated Roran with a deference that he found unsettling. It 
manifested itself in small gestures: offers of condolences for his misfor-
tune, respectful silence whenever he spoke, and murmurs of assent when 
he made a statement. It was as if his deeds had inflated his stature and in-
timidated the people he had known since childhood, distancing him from 
them. 
 
 I am branded, thought Roran, limping through the mud. He stopped at 
the edge of a puddle and bent to examine his reflection, curious if he 
could discern what made him so different. 
 
 He saw a man in ragged, blood-stained clothes, with a humped back 
and a crooked arm tied across his chest. His neck and cheeks were scum-
bled with an impending beard, while his hair was matted into snarled 
ropes that writhed in a halo around his head. Most frightening of all, 
though, were his eyes, which had sunk deep into the sockets, giving him 
a haunted appearance. From within those two morbid caverns, his gaze 
boiled like molten steel, full of loss, rage, and an obsessive craving. 
 
 A lopsided smile crept across Roran’s face, rendering his visage even 
more shocking. He liked how he looked. It matched his feelings. Now he 
understood how he had managed to influence the villagers. He bared his 
teeth. I can use this image. I can use it to destroy the Ra’zac. 
 
 Lifting his head, he slouched up the street, pleased with himself. Just 
then, Thane approached him and grasped his left forearm in a hearty grip. 
“Stronghammer! You don’t know how glad I am to see you.” 
 
 “You are?” Roran wondered if the whole world had been turned inside 
out during the night. 
 
 Thane nodded vigorously. “Ever since we attacked the soldiers, every-
thing has seemed hopeless to me. It pains me to admit it, but so it was. 
My heart pounded all the time, like I was about to fall down a well; my 
hands shook; and I felt dreadfully ill. I thought someone had poisoned 
me! It was worse than death. But what you said yesterday healed me in-
stantly and let me see purpose and meaning in the world again! I... I can’t 
even explain the horror you saved me from. I am in your debt. If you 
need or want anything, just ask and I’ll help.” 

 
244
 
 Moved, Roran gripped the farmer’s forearm in return and said, “Thank 
you, Thane. Thank you.” Thane bowed his head, tears in his eyes, then 
released Roran and left him standing alone in the middle of the street. 
 
 What have I done? 
 
 
 
 

 
245
EXODUS 
 
 
 Awall of thick, smoky air engulfed Roran as he entered the Seven 
Sheaves, Morn’s tavern. He stopped beneath the Urgal horns pegged over 
the door and let his eyes adjust to the dim interior. “Hello?” he called. 
 
 The door to the back rooms banged open as Tara plowed forward, 
trailed by Morn. They both glared sullenly at Roran. Tara planted her 
meaty fists on her hips and demanded, “What do you want here?” 
 
 Roran stared at her for a moment, trying to determine the source of her 
animosity. “Have you decided whether to accompany me into the Spine?” 
 
 “That’s none of your business,” snapped Tara. 
 
 Oh yes, it is. He restrained himself, though, and instead said, “Whatever 
your intentions are, if you were to go, Elain would like to know if you 
have room in your bags for a few more items, or if you need extra room 
yourself. She has—” 
 
 “Extra room!” burst out Morn. He waved at the wall behind the bar, 
which was lined with oak casks. “I have, packed in straw, twelve barrels 
of the clearest winter ale, which have been kept at the perfect tempera-
ture for the past five months. They were Quimby’s last batch! What am I 
supposed to do with them? Or my hogsheads of lager and stout? If I leave 
them, the soldiers will dispose of it in a week, or they’ll spike the barrels 
and pour the beer into the ground, where the only creatures who’ll enjoy 
it will be grubs and worms. Oh!” Morn sat and wrung his hands, shaking 
his head. “Twelve years of work! Ever since Father died I ran the tavern 
the same way he did, day in and day out. And then you and Eragon had 
to cause this trouble. It...” He stopped, breathing with difficulty, and 
wiped his mashed face with the edge of his sleeve. 
 
 “There, there now,” said Tara. She put her arm around Morn and 
jabbed a finger at Roran. “Who gave you leave to stir up Carvahall with 
your fancy words? If we go, how will my poor husband make a living? 
He can’t take his trade with him like Horst or Gedric. He can’t squat in 
an empty field and farm it like you! Impossible! Everyone will go and we 
will starve. Or we will go and we will still starve. You have ruined us!” 
 
 Roran looked from her flushed, angry face to Morn’s distraught one, 
then turned and opened the door. He paused on the threshold and said in 
a low voice, “I have always counted you among my friends. I would not 

 
246
have you killed by the Empire.” Stepping outside, he pulled his vest tight 
around himself and paced away from the tavern, ruminating the whole 
way. 
 
 At Fisk’s well, he stopped for a drink and found himself joined by 
Birgit. She watched him struggle to turn the crank with only one hand, 
then took it from him and brought up the water bucket, which she 
passed to him without drinking. He sipped the cool liquid, then said, “I’m 
glad that you are coming.” He handed the bucket back. 
 
 Birgit eyed him. “I recognize the force that drives you, Roran, for it 
propels me as well; we both wish to find the Ra’zac. Once we do, 
though, I will have my compensation from you for Quimby’s death. 
Never forget that.” She pushed the full bucket back into the well and let 
it fall unchecked, the crank spinning wildly. A second later, the well ech-
oed with a hollow splash. 
 
 Roran smiled as he watched her walk away. He was more pleased than 
upset by her declaration; he knew that even if everyone else in Carvahall 
were to forsake the cause or die, Birgit would still help him to hunt the 
Ra’zac. Afterward, though—if an afterward existed—he would have to 
pay her price or kill her. That was the only way to resolve such matters. 
 
   
 
 By evening Horst and his sons had returned to the house, bearing two 
small bundles wrapped in oilcloth. “Is that all?” asked Elain. Horst nodded 
curtly, lay the bundles on the kitchen table, and unwrapped them to ex-
pose four hammers, three tongs, a clamp, a medium-sized bellows, and a 
three-pound anvil. 
 
 As the five of them sat to dinner, Albriech and Baldor discussed the 
various people they had seen making covert preparations. Roran listened 
intently, trying to keep track of who had lent donkeys to whom, who 
showed no signs of departing, and who might need help to leave. 
 
 “The biggest problem,” said Baldor, “is food. We can only carry so 
much, and it’ll be difficult to hunt enough in the Spine to feed two or 
three hundred people.” 
 
 “Mmm.” Horst shook his finger, his mouth full of beans, then swal-
lowed. “No, hunting won’t work. We have to bring our flocks with us. 
Combined, we own enough sheep and goats to feed the lot of us for a 
month or more.” 

 
247
 
 Roran raised his knife. “Wolves.” 
 
 “I’m more worried about keeping the animals from wandering off into 
the forest,” replied Horst. “Herding them will be a chore.” 
 
   
 
 Roran spent the following day assisting whomever he could, saying lit-
tle, and generally allowing people to see him working for the good of the 
village. Late that night, he tumbled into bed exhausted but hopeful. 
 
 The advent of dawn pierced Roran’s dreams and woke him with a 
sense of momentous expectation. He stood and tiptoed downstairs, then 
went outside and stared at the misty mountains, absorbed by the morn-
ing’s silence. His breath formed a white plume in the air, but he felt 
warm, for his heart throbbed with fear and eagerness. 
 
 After a subdued breakfast, Horst brought the horses to the front of the 
house, where Roran helped Albriech and Baldor load them with saddle-
bags and other bundles of supplies. Next Roran took up his own pack, 
hissing as the leather shoulder strap pressed down on his injury. 
 
 Horst closed the door to the house. He lingered for a moment with his 
fingers on the steel doorknob, then took Elain’s hand and said, “Let’s go.” 
 
 As they walked through Carvahall, Roran saw somber families gather-
ing by their houses with their piles of possessions and yammering live-
stock. He saw sheep and dogs with bags tied on their backs, teary-eyed 
children on donkeys, and makeshift sledges hitched to horses with crates 
of fluttering chickens hung on each side. He saw the fruits of his success, 
and he knew not whether to laugh or to cry. 
 
 They stopped at Carvahall’s north end and waited to see who would 
join them. A minute passed, then Birgit approached from the side, ac-
companied by Nolfavrell and his younger siblings. Birgit greeted Horst 
and Elain and stationed herself nearby. 
 
 Ridley and his family arrived outside the wall of trees, driving over a 
hundred sheep from the east side of Palancar Valley. “I figured that it 
would be better to keep them out of Carvahall,” shouted Ridley over the 
animals. 
 
 “Good thinking!” replied Horst. 

 
248
 
 Next came Delwin, Lenna, and their five children; Orval and his family; 
Loring with his sons; Calitha and Thane—who gave Roran a large smile; 
and then Kiselt’s clan. Those women who had been recently widowed, 
like Nolla, clustered around Birgit. Before the sun had cleared the moun-
tain peaks, most of the village had assembled along the wall. But not all. 
 
 Morn, Tara, and several others had yet to show themselves, and when 
Ivor arrived, it was without any supplies. “You’re staying,” observed Ro-
ran. He sidestepped a knot of testy goats that Gertrude was attempting to 
restrain. 
 
 “Aye,” said Ivor, drawing out the word into a weary admission. He 
shivered, crossed his bony arms for warmth, and faced the rising sun, lift-
ing his head so as to catch the transparent rays. “Svart refused to leave. 
Heh! It was like carving against the grain to get him into the Spine in the 
first place. Someone has to look after him, an’ I don’t have any children, 
so...” He shrugged. “Doubt I could give up the farm anyway.” 
 
 “What will you do when the soldiers arrive?” 
 
 “Give them a fight that they’ll remember.” 
 
 Roran laughed hoarsely and clapped Ivor on the arm, doing his best to 
ignore the unspoken fate that they both knew awaited anyone who re-
mained. 
 
 A thin, middle-aged man, Ethlbert, marched to the edge of the congre-
gation and shouted, “You’re all fools!” With an ominous rustle, people 
turned to look at their accuser. “I’ve held my peace through this madness, 
but I’ll not follow a nattering lunatic! If you weren’t blinded by his 
words, you’d see that he’s leading you to destruction! Well, I won’t go! I’ll 
take my chances sneaking past the soldiers and finding refuge in Therins-
ford. They’re our own people at least, not the barbarians you’ll find in 
Surda.” He spat on the ground, then spun on his heel and stomped away. 
 
 Afraid that Ethlbert might convince others to defect, Roran scanned 
the crowd and was relieved to see nothing more than restless muttering. 
Still, he did not want to dawdle and give people a chance to change their 
minds. He asked Horst under his breath, “How long should we wait?” 
 
 “Albriech, you and Baldor run around as fast as you can and check if 
anyone else is coming. Otherwise, we’ll leave.” The brothers dashed off in 
opposite directions. 

 
249
 
 Half an hour later, Baldor returned with Fisk, Isold, and their borrowed 
horse. Leaving her husband, Isold hurried toward Horst, shooing her 
hands at anyone who got in her way, oblivious to the fact that most of 
her hair had escaped imprisonment in its bun and stuck out in odd tufts. 
She stopped, wheezing for breath. “I am sorry we’re so late, but Fisk had 
trouble closing up the shop. He couldn’t pick which planers or chisels to 
bring.” She laughed in a shrill tone, almost hysterical. “It was like watch-
ing a cat surrounded by mice trying to decide which one to chase. First 
this one, then that one.” 
 
 A wry smile tugged at Horst’s lips. “I understand perfectly.” 
 
 Roran strained for a glimpse of Albriech, but to no avail. He gritted his 
teeth. “Where is he?” 
 
 Horst tapped his shoulder. “Right over there, I do believe.” 
 
 Albriech advanced between the houses with three beer casks tied to his 
back and an aggrieved look that was comic enough to make Baldor and 
several others laugh. On either side of Albriech walked Morn and Tara, 
who staggered under the weight of their enormous packs, as did the don-
key and two goats that they towed behind them. To Roran’s astonish-
ment, the animals were burdened with even more casks. 
 
 “They won’t last a mile,” said Roran, growing angry at the couple’s fool-
ishness. “And they don’t have enough food. Do they expect us to feed 
them or—” 
 
 With a chuckle, Horst cut him off. “I wouldn’t worry about the food. 
Morn’s beer will be good for morale, and that’s worth more than a few 
extra meals. You’ll see.” 
 
 As soon as Albriech had freed himself of the casks, Roran asked him 
and his brother, “Is that everyone?” When they answered in the affirma-
tive, Roran swore and struck his thigh with a clenched fist. Excluding 
Ivor, three families were determined to remain in Palancar Valley: Ethl-
bert’s, Parr’s, and Knute’s. I can’t force them to come. He sighed. “All right. 
There’s no sense in waiting longer.” 
 
 Excitement rippled through the villagers; the moment had finally ar-
rived. Horst and five other men pulled open the wall of trees, then laid 
planks across the trench so that the people and animals could walk over. 
 

 
250
 Horst gestured. “I think that you should go first, Roran.” 
 
 “Wait!” Fisk ran up and, with evident pride, handed Roran a blackened 
six-foot-long staff of hawthorn wood with a knot of polished roots at the 
top, and a blued-steel ferrule that tapered into a blunt spike at the base. 
“I made it last night,” said the carpenter. “I thought that you might have 
need of it.” 
 
 Roran ran his left hand over the wood, marveling at its smoothness. “I 
couldn’t have asked for anything better. Your skill is masterful.... Thank 
you.” Fisk grinned and backed away. 
 
 Conscious of the fact that the entire crowd was watching, Roran faced 
the mountains and the Igualda Falls. His shoulder throbbed beneath the 
leather strap. Behind him lay his father’s bones and everything he had 
known in life. Before him the jagged peaks piled high into the pale sky 
and blocked his way and his will. But he would not be denied. And he 
would not look back. 
 
 Katrina. 
 
 Lifting his chin, Roran strode forward. His staff knocked against the 
hard planks as he crossed the trench and passed out of Carvahall, leading 
the villagers into the wilderness. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
251
ON THE CRAGS OF TEL’NAEÍR 
 
 
 Thud. 
 
 Bright as a flaming sun, the dragon hung before Eragon and everyone 
clustered along the Crags of Tel’naeír, buffeting them with gusts from its 
mighty wings. The dragon’s body appeared to be on fire as the brilliant 
dawn illuminated its golden scales and sprayed the ground and trees with 
dazzling chips of light. It was far larger than Saphira, large enough to be 
several hundred years old, and proportionally thicker in its neck, limbs, 
and tail. Upon its back sat the Rider, robes startling white against the bril-
liance of the scales. 
 
 Eragon fell to his knees, his face upturned. I’m not alone.... Awe and re-
lief coursed through him. No more would he have to bear the responsi-
bility of the Varden and of Galbatorix by himself. Here was one of the 
guardians of old resurrected from the depths of time to guide him, a liv-
ing symbol, and a testament to the legends he had been raised with. Here 
was his master. Here was a legend! 
 
 As the dragon turned to land, Eragon gasped; the creature’s left foreleg 
had been severed by a terrible blow, leaving a helpless white stump in 
place of the once mighty limb. Tears filled his eyes. 
 
 A whirlwind of dry twigs and leaves enveloped the hilltop as the 
dragon settled on the sweet clover and folded its wings. The Rider care-
fully descended from his steed along the dragon’s intact front right leg, 
then approached Eragon, his hands clasped before him. He was an elf 
with silver hair, old beyond measure, though the only sign of age was the 
expression of great compassion and sadness upon his face. 
 
 “Osthato Chetowä,” said Eragon. “The Mourning Sage... As you asked, I 
have come.” With a jolt, he remembered his manners and touched his 
lips. “Atra esterní ono thelduin.” 
 
 The Rider smiled. He took Eragon by the shoulders and lifted him up-
right, staring at him with such kindness that Eragon could look at nothing 
else; he was consumed by the endless depths within the elf’s eyes. 
“Oromis is my proper name, Eragon Shadeslayer.” 
 
 “You knew,” whispered Islanzadí with a hurt expression that quickly 
transformed into a storm of rage. “You knew of Eragon’s existence and 
yet you did not tell me? Why have you betrayed me, Shur’tugal?” 

 
252
 
 Oromis released Eragon from his gaze and transferred it onto the queen. 
“I kept my peace because it was uncertain if Eragon or Arya would live 
long enough to come here; I had no wish to give you a fragile hope that 
might have been torn away at any moment.” 
 
 Islanzadí spun about, her cape of swan feathers billowing like wings. 
“You had no right to withhold such information from me! I could have 
sent warriors to protect Arya, Eragon, and Saphira in Farthen Dûr and to 
escort them safely here.” 
 
 Oromis smiled sadly. “I hid nothing from you, Islanzadí, but what you 
had already chosen not to see. If you had scryed the land, as is your duty, 
you would have discerned the source of the chaos that has swept Ala-
gaësia and learned the truth of Arya and Eragon. That you might forget 
the Varden and the dwarves in your grief is understandable, but Brom? 
Vinr Älfakyn? The last of the Elf Friends? You have been blind to the 
world, Islanzadí, and lax upon your throne. I could not risk driving you 
further away by subjecting you to another loss.” 
 
 Islanzadí’s anger drained away, leaving her face pale and her shoulders 
slumped. “I am diminished,” she whispered. 
 
 A cloud of hot, moist air pressed against Eragon as the gold dragon bent 
to examine him with eyes that glittered and sparked. We are well met, 
Eragon Shadeslayer. I am Glaedr. His voice—for it was unmistakably 
male—rumbled and shook through Eragon’s mind, like the growl of a 
mountain avalanche. 
 
 All Eragon could do was touch his lips and say, “I am honored.” 
 
 Then Glaedr brought his attention to bear on Saphira. She remained 
perfectly still, her neck arched stiffly as Glaedr sniffed her cheek and 
along the line of her wing. Eragon saw Saphira’s clenched leg muscles 
flutter with an involuntary tremor. You smell of humans, said Glaedr, and 
all you know of your own race is what your instincts have taught you, but 
you have the heart of a true dragon. 
 
 During this silent exchange, Orik presented himself to Oromis. “Truly, 
this is beyond anything that I dared hope or expect. You are a pleasant 
surprise in these dark times, Rider.” He clapped his fist over his heart. “If 
it is not too presumptuous, I would ask a boon on behalf of my king and 
my clan, as was the custom between our people.” 
 

 
253
 Oromis nodded. “And I will grant it if it is within my power.” 
 
 “Then tell me: Why have you remained hidden for all these years? You 
were sorely needed, Argetlam.” 
 
 “Ah,” said Oromis. “Many sorrows exist in this world, and one of the 
greatest is being unable to help those in pain. I could not risk leaving this 
sanctuary, for if I had died before one of Galbatorix’s eggs had hatched, 
then there would have been no one to pass on our secrets to the new 
Rider, and it would have been even harder to defeat Galbatorix.” 
 
 “That was your reason?” spat Orik. “Those are the words of a coward! 
The eggs might have never hatched.” 
 
 Everyone went deathly quiet, except for a faint growl that emanated 
from between Glaedr’s teeth. “If you were not my guest here,” said Islan-
zadí, “I would strike you down myself for that insult.” 
 
 Oromis spread his hands. “Nay, I am not offended. It is an apt reaction. 
Understand, Orik, that Glaedr and I cannot fight. Glaedr has his disabil-
ity, and I,” he touched the side of his head, “I am also maimed. The For-
sworn broke something within me when I was their captive, and while I 
can still teach and learn, I can no longer control magic, except for the 
smallest of spells. The power escapes me, no matter how much I struggle. 
I would be worse than useless in battle, I would be a weakness and a li-
ability, one who could easily be captured and used against you. So I re-
moved myself from Galbatorix’s influence for the good of the many, even 
though I yearned to openly oppose him.” 
 
 “The Cripple Who Is Whole,” murmured Eragon. 
 
 “Forgive me,” said Orik. He appeared stricken. 
 
 “It is of no consequence.” Oromis placed a hand on Eragon’s shoulder. 
“Islanzadí Dröttning, by your leave?” 
 
 “Go,” she said wearily. “Go and be done with you.” 
 
 Glaedr crouched low to the ground, and Oromis nimbly climbed up his 
leg and into the saddle on his back. “Come, Eragon and Saphira. We have 
much to talk about.” The gold dragon leaped off the cliff and circled 
overhead, rising on an updraft. 
 
 Eragon and Orik solemnly clasped arms. “Bring honor to your clan,” said 

 
254
the dwarf. 
 
 As Eragon mounted Saphira, he felt as if he were about to embark on a 
long journey and that he should say farewell to those who remained be-
hind. Instead, he just looked at Arya and smiled, letting his wonder and 
joy show. She half frowned, appearing troubled, but then he was gone, 
swept into the sky by the eagerness of Saphira’s flight. 
 
 Together the two dragons followed the white cliff northward for sev-
eral miles, accompanied only by the sound of their wings. Saphira flew 
abreast of Glaedr. Her enthusiasm boiled over into Eragon’s mind, 
heightening his own emotions. 
 
 They landed in another clearing situated on the edge of the cliff, just 
before the wall of exposed stone crumbled back into the earth. A bare 
path led from the precipice to the doorstep of a low hut grown between 
the trunks of four trees, one of which straddled a stream that emerged 
from the moody depths of the forest. Glaedr would not fit inside; the hut 
could have easily sat between his ribs. 
 
 “Welcome to my home,” said Oromis as he alighted on the ground with 
uncommon ease. “I live here, on the brink of the Crags of Tel’naeír, be-
cause it provides me the opportunity to think and study in peace. My 
mind works better away from Ellesméra and the distractions of other 
people.” 
 
 He disappeared inside the hut, then returned with two stools and flag-
ons of clear, cold water for both himself and Eragon. Eragon sipped his 
drink and admired the spacious view of Du Weldenvarden in an attempt 
to conceal his awe and nervousness while he waited for the elf to speak. 
I’m in the presence of another Rider! Beside him, Saphira crouched with 
her eyes fixed on Glaedr, slowly kneading the dirt between her claws. 
 
 The gap in their conversation stretched longer and longer. Ten minutes 
passed... half an hour... then an hour. It reached the point where Eragon 
began to measure the elapsed time by the sun’s progress. At first his mind 
buzzed with questions and thoughts, but those eventually subsided into 
calm acceptance. He enjoyed just observing the day. 
 
 Only then did Oromis say, “You have learned the value of patience 
well. That is good.” 
 
 It took Eragon a moment to find his voice. “You can’t stalk a deer if 
you are in a hurry.” 

 
255
 
 Oromis lowered his flagon. “True enough. Let me see your hands. I find 
that they tell me much about a person.” Eragon removed his gloves and 
allowed the elf to grip his wrists with thin, dry fingers. He examined Er-
agon’s calluses, then said, “Correct me if I am wrong. You have wielded a 
scythe and plow more often than a sword, though you are accustomed to 
a bow.” 
 
 “Aye.” 
 
 “And you have done little writing or drawing, maybe none at all.” 
 
 “Brom taught me my letters in Teirm.” 
 
 “Mmm. Beyond your choice of tools, it seems obvious that you tend to 
be reckless and disregard your own safety.” 
 
 “What makes you say that, Oromis-elda?” asked Eragon, using the most 
respectful and formal honorific that he could think of. 
 
 “Not elda, ” corrected Oromis. “You may call me master in this tongue 
and ebrithil in the ancient language, nothing else. You will extend the 
same courtesy to Glaedr. We are your teachers; you are our students; and 
you will act with proper respect and deference.” Oromis spoke gently, 
but with the authority of one who expects absolute obedience. 
 
 “Yes, Master Oromis.” 
 
 “As will you, Saphira.” 
 
 Eragon could sense how hard it was for Saphira to unbend her pride 
enough to say, Yes, Master. 
 
 Oromis nodded. “Now. Anyone with such a collection of scars has ei-
ther been hopelessly unfortunate, fights like a berserker, or deliberately 
pursues danger. Do you fight like a berserker?” 
 
 “No.” 
 
 “Nor do you seem unfortunate; quite the opposite. That leaves only 
one explanation. Unless you think differently?” 
 
 Eragon cast his mind over his experiences at home and on the road, in 
an attempt to categorize his behavior. “I would say, rather, that once I 

 
256
dedicate myself to a certain project or path, I see it through, no matter 
the cost... especially if someone I love is in danger.” His gaze flicked to-
ward Saphira. 
 
 “And do you undertake challenging projects?” 
 
 “I like to be challenged.” 
 
 “So you feel the need to pit yourself against adversity in order to test 
your abilities.” 
 
 “I enjoy overcoming challenges, but I’ve faced enough hardship to know 
that it’s foolish to make things more difficult than they are. It’s all I can 
do to survive as it is.” 
 
 “Yet you chose to follow the Ra’zac when it would have been easier to 
remain in Palancar Valley. And you came here.” 
 
 “It was the right thing to do... Master.” 
 
 For several minutes, no one spoke. Eragon tried to guess what the elf 
was thinking, but could glean no information from his masklike visage. 
Finally, Oromis stirred. “Were you, perchance, given a trinket of some 
kind in Tarnag, Eragon? A piece of jewelry, armor, or even a coin?” 
 
 “Aye.” Eragon reached inside of his tunic and fished out the necklace 
with the tiny silver hammer. “Gannel made this for me on Hrothgar’s or-
ders, to prevent anyone from scrying Saphira or me. They were afraid 
that Galbatorix might have discovered what I look like.... How did you 
know?” 
 
 “Because,” said Oromis, “I could no longer sense you.” 
 
 “Someone tried to scry me by Sílthrim about a week ago. Was that 
you?” 
 
 Oromis shook his head. “After I first scryed you with Arya, I had no 
need to use such crude methods to find you. I could reach out and touch 
your mind with mine, as I did when you were injured in Farthen Dûr.” 
Lifting the amulet, he murmured several lines in the ancient language, 
then released it. “It contains no other spells I can detect. Keep it with you 
at all times; it is a valuable gift.” He pressed the tips of his long fingers to-
gether, his nails as round and bright as fish scales, and stared between the 
arches they formed toward the white horizon. “Why are you here, Er-

 
257
agon?” 
 
 “To complete my training.” 
 
 “And what do you think that process entails?” 
 
 Eragon shifted uncomfortably. “Learning more about magic and fight-
ing. Brom wasn’t able to finish teaching me everything that he knew.” 
 
 “Magic, swordsmanship, and other such skills are useless unless you 
know how and when to apply them. This I will teach you. However, as 
Galbatorix has demonstrated, power without moral direction is the most 
dangerous force in the world. My main task, then, is to help you, Eragon 
and Saphira, to understand what principles guide you, so that you do not 
make the right choices for the wrong reasons. You must learn more 
about yourself, who you are and what you are capable of doing. That is 
why you are here.” 
 
 When do we begin? asked Saphira. 
 
 Oromis began to answer when he stiffened and dropped his flagon. His 
face went crimson and his fingers tightened into hooked claws that 
dragged at his robe like cockleburs. The change was frightening and in-
stantaneous. Before Eragon could do more than flinch, the elf had relaxed 
again, although his entire body now bespoke weariness. 
 
 Concerned, Eragon dared to ask, “Are you well?” 
 
 A trace of amusement lifted the corner of Oromis’s mouth. “Less so 
than I might wish. We elves fancy ourselves immortal, but not even we 
can escape certain maladies of the flesh, which are beyond our knowl-
edge of magic to do more than delay. No, do not worry... it isn’t conta-
gious, but neither can I rid myself of it.” He sighed. “I have spent decades 
binding myself with hundreds of small, weak spells that, layered one 
upon another, duplicate the effect of enchantments that are now beyond 
my reach. I bound myself with them so that I might live long enough to 
witness the birth of the last dragons and to foster the Riders’ resurrection 
from the ruin of our mistakes.” 
 
 “How long until...” 
 
 Oromis lifted a sharp eyebrow. “How long until I die? We have time, 
but precious little for you or me, especially if the Varden decide to call 
upon your help. As a result—to answer your question, Saphira—we will 

 
258
begin your instruction immediately, and we will train faster than any 
Rider ever has or ever will, for I must condense decades of knowledge 
into months and weeks.” 
 
 “You do know,” said Eragon, struggling against the embarrassment and 
shame that made his cheeks burn, “about my... my own infirmity. ” He 
ground out the last word, hating the sound of it. “I am as crippled as you 
are.” 
 
 Sympathy tempered Oromis’s gaze, though his voice was firm. “Eragon, 
you are only a cripple if you consider yourself one. I understand how you 
feel, but you must remain optimistic, for a negative outlook is more of a 
handicap than any physical injury. I speak from personal experience. Pity-
ing yourself serves neither you nor Saphira. I and the other spellweavers 
will study your malady to see if we might devise a way to alleviate it, but 
in the meantime, your training will proceed as if nothing were amiss.” 
 
 Eragon’s gut clenched and he tasted bile as he considered the implica-
tions. Surely Oromis wouldn’t make me endure that torment again! “The 
pain is unbearable,” he said frantically. “It would kill me. I—” 
 
 “No, Eragon. It will not kill you. That much I know about your curse. 
However, we both have our duty; you to the Varden, and I to you. We 
cannot shirk it for the sake of mere pain. Far too much is at risk, and we 
can ill afford to fail.” All Eragon could do was shake his head as panic 
threatened to overwhelm him. He tried to deny Oromis’s words, but 
their truth was inescapable. “Eragon. You must accept this burden freely. 
Have you no one or nothing that you are willing to sacrifice yourself for?” 
 
 His first thought was of Saphira, but he was not doing this for her. Nor 
for Nasuada. Nor even for Arya. What drove him, then? When he had 
pledged fealty to Nasuada, he had done so for the good of Roran and the 
other people trapped within the Empire. But did they mean enough to 
him to put himself through such anguish? Yes, he decided. Yes, they do, 
because I am the only one who has a chance to help them, and because I 
won’t be free of Galbatorix’s shadow until they are as well. And because 
this is my only purpose in life. What else would I do? He shuddered as he 
mouthed the ghastly phrase, “I accept on behalf of those I fight for: the 
people of Alagaësia—of all races—who have suffered from Galbatorix’s 
brutality. No matter the pain, I swear that I will study harder than any 
student you’ve had before.” 
 
 Oromis nodded gravely. “I ask for nothing less.” He looked at Glaedr for 
a moment, then said, “Stand and remove your tunic. Let me see what you 

 
259
are made of.” 
 
 Wait, said Saphira. Was Brom aware of your existence here, Master? Er-
agon paused, struck by the possibility. 
 
 “Of course,” said Oromis. “He was my pupil as a boy in Ilirea. I am glad 
that you gave him a proper burial, for he had a hard life and few enough 
ever showed him kindness. I hope that he found peace before he entered 
the void.” 
 
 Eragon slowly frowned. “Did you know Morzan as well?” 
 
 “He was my apprentice before Brom.” 
 
 “And Galbatorix?” 
 
 “I was one of the Elders who denied him another dragon after his first 
was killed, but no, I never had the misfortune to teach him. He made 
sure to personally hunt down and kill each of his mentors.” 
 
 Eragon wanted to inquire further, but he knew that it would be better 
to wait, so he stood and unlaced the top of his tunic. It seems, he said to 
Saphira, that we will never learn all of Brom’s secrets. He shivered as he 
pulled off the tunic in the cool air, then squared his shoulders and lifted 
his chest. 
 
 Oromis circled him, stopping with an astonished exclamation as he saw 
the scar that crossed Eragon’s back. “Did not Arya or one of the Varden’s 
healers offer to remove this weal? You should not have to carry it.” 
 
 “Arya did offer, but...” Eragon stopped, unable to articulate his feelings. 
Finally, he just said, “It’s part of me now, just as Murtagh’s scar is part of 
him.” 
 
 “Murtagh’s scar?” 
 
 “Murtagh bore a similar mark. It was inflicted when his father, Morzan, 
threw Zar’roc at him while he was only a child.” 
 
 Oromis stared at him seriously for a long time before he nodded and 
moved on. “You have a fair amount of muscle, and you are not as lop-
sided as most swordsmen. Are you ambidextrous?” 
 
 “Not really, but I had to teach myself to fight with my left hand after I 

 
260
broke my wrist by Teirm.” 
 
 “Good. That will save some time. Clasp your hands behind your back 
and lift them as high as possible.” Eragon did as he was told, but the pos-
ture hurt his shoulders and he could barely make his hands meet. “Now 
bend forward while keeping your knees straight. Try to touch the 
ground.” This was even harder for Eragon; he ended up bowed like a 
hunchback, with his arms hanging uselessly by his head while his ham-
strings twinged and burned. His fingers were still nine or ten inches from 
the ground. “At least you can stretch without hurting yourself. I had not 
hoped for so much. You can perform a number of exercises for flexibility 
without overexerting. Yes.” 
 
 Then Oromis addressed Saphira: “I would know your capabilities as 
well, dragon.” He gave her a number of complex poses that had her con-
tort every foot of her sinuous length in fantastic ways, culminating in a 
series of aerial acrobatics the likes of which Eragon had never seen before. 
Only a few things exceeded her ability, such as executing a backward 
loop while corkscrewing through the air. 
 
 When she landed, it was Glaedr who said, I fear that we coddled the 
Riders. If our hatchlings had been forced to care for themselves in the 
wild—as you were, and so our ancestors were—then perhaps they would 
have possessed your skill. 
 
 “No,” said Oromis, “even if Saphira had been raised on Vroengard using 
the established methods, she would still be an extraordinary flier. I’ve 
rarely seen a dragon so naturally suited to the sky.” Saphira blinked, then 
shuffled her wings and busied herself cleaning one of her claws in a man-
ner that hid her head from view. “You have room to improve, as do we 
all, but little, very little.” The elf reseated himself, his back perfectly 
straight. 
 
 For the next five hours, by Eragon’s reckoning, Oromis delved into 
every aspect of his and Saphira’s knowledge, from botany to woodwork-
ing to metallurgy and medicine, although he mainly concentrated on their 
grasp of history and the ancient language. The interrogation comforted 
Eragon, as it reminded him of how Brom used to quiz him during their 
long treks to Teirm and Dras-Leona. 
 
 When they broke for lunch, Oromis invited Eragon into his house, 
leaving the two dragons alone. The elf’s quarters were barren except for 
those few essentials necessary for food, hygiene, and the pursuit of an in-
tellectual life. Two entire walls were dotted with cubbyholes that held 

 
261
hundreds of scrolls. Next to the table hung a golden sheath—the same 
color as Glaedr’s scales—and a matching sword with a blade the color of 
iridescent bronze. 
 
 On the inner pane of the door, set within the heart of the wood, was a 
flat panel one span high and two wide. It depicted a beautiful, towering 
city built against an escarpment and caught in the ruddy light of a rising 
harvest moon. The pitted lunar face was bisected by the horizon and ap-
peared to sit on the ground like a maculated dome as large as a mountain. 
The picture was so clear and perfectly detailed, Eragon at first took it to 
be a magical window; it was only when he saw that the image was indeed 
static that he could accept it as a piece of art. 
 
 “Where is this?” he asked. 
 
 Oromis’s slanted features tightened for an instant. “You would do well 
to memorize that landscape, Eragon, for there lies the heart of your mis-
ery. You see what was once our city of Ilirea. It was burned and aban-
doned during Du Fyrn Skulblaka and became the capital of the Broddring 
Kingdom and now is the black city of Urû’baen. I made that fairth on the 
night that I and others were forced to flee our home before Galbatorix 
arrived.” 
 
 “You painted this... fairth?” 
 
 “No, no such thing. A fairth is an image fixed by magic upon a square 
of polished slate that is prepared beforehand with layers of pigments. The 
landscape upon that door is exactly how Ilirea presented itself to me at 
the moment I uttered my spell.” 
 
 “And,” said Eragon, unable to stop the flow of questions, “what was the 
Broddring Kingdom?” 
 
 Oromis’s eyes widened with dismay. “You don’t know?” Eragon shook 
his head. “How can you not? Considering your circumstances and the fear 
that Galbatorix wields among your people, I might understand that you 
were raised in darkness, ignorant of your heritage. But I cannot credit 
Brom with being so lax with your instruction as to neglect subjects that 
even the youngest elf or dwarf knows. The children of your Varden 
could tell me more about the past.” 
 
 “Brom was more concerned with keeping me alive than teaching me 
about people who are already dead,” retorted Eragon. 
 

 
262
 This drew silence from Oromis. Finally, he said, “Forgive me. I did not 
mean to impugn Brom’s judgment, only I am impatient beyond reason; 
we have so little time, and each new thing you must learn reduces that 
which you can master during your tenure here.” He opened a series of 
cupboards hidden within the curved wall and removed bread rolls and 
bowls of fruit, which he rowed out on the table. He paused for a mo-
ment over the food with his eyes closed before beginning to eat. “The 
Broddring Kingdom was the human’s country before the Riders fell. After 
Galbatorix killed Vrael, he flew on Ilirea with the Forsworn and deposed 
King Angrenost, taking his throne and titles for his own. The Broddring 
Kingdom then formed the core of Galbatorix’s conquests. He added Vro-
engard and other lands to the east and south to his holdings, creating the 
empire you are familiar with. Technically, the Broddring Kingdom still 
exists, though, at this point, I doubt that it is much more than a name on 
royal decrees.” 
 
 Afraid to pester the elf with further inquiries, Eragon concentrated on 
his food. His face must have betrayed him, though, because Oromis said, 
“You remind me of Brom when I chose him as my apprentice. He was 
younger than you, only ten, but his curiosity was just as great. I doubt I 
heard aught from him for a year but how, what, when, and, above all else, 
why. Do not be shy to ask what lies in your heart.” 
 
 “I want to know so much,” whispered Eragon. “Who are you? Where 
do you come from?... Where did Brom come from? What was Morzan 
like? How, what, when, why ? And I want to know everything about 
Vroengard and the Riders. Maybe then my own path will be clearer.” 
 
 Silence fell between them as Oromis meticulously disassembled a 
blackberry, prying out one plump segment at a time. When the last cor-
puscle vanished between his port-red lips, he rubbed his hands flat to-
gether—“polishing his palms,” as Garrow used to say—and said, “Know 
this about me, then: I was born some centuries past in our city of Lu-
thivíra, which stood in the woods by Lake Tüdosten. At the age of 
twenty, like all elf children, I was presented to the eggs that the dragons 
had given the Riders, and Glaedr hatched for me. We were trained as 
Riders, and for near a century, we traveled the world over, doing Vrael’s 
will. Eventually, the day arrived when it was deemed appropriate for us 
to retire and pass on our experience to the next generation, so we took a 
position in Ilirea and taught new Riders, one or two at a time, until Gal-
batorix destroyed us.” 
 
 “And Brom?” 
 

 
263
 “Brom came from a family of illuminators in Kuasta. His mother was 
Nelda and his father Holcomb. Kuasta is so isolated by the Spine from 
the rest of Alagaësia, it has become a peculiar place, full of strange cus-
toms and superstitions. When he was still new to Ilirea, Brom would 
knock on a door frame three times before entering or leaving a room. 
The human students teased him about it until he abandoned the practice 
along with some of his other habits. 
 
 “Morzan was my greatest failure. Brom idolized him. He never left his 
side, never contradicted him, and never believed that he could best Mor-
zan in any venture. Morzan, I’m ashamed to admit—for it was within my 
power to stop—was aware of this and took advantage of Brom’s devotion 
in a hundred different ways. He grew so proud and cruel that I consid-
ered separating him from Brom. But before I could, Morzan helped Gal-
batorix to steal a dragon hatchling, Shruikan, to replace the one Galba-
torix had lost, killing the dragon’s original Rider in the process. Morzan 
and Galbatorix then fled together, sealing our doom. 
 
 “You cannot begin to fathom the effect Morzan’s betrayal had on Brom 
until you understand the depth of Brom’s affection for him. And when 
Galbatorix at last revealed himself and the Forsworn killed Brom’s 
dragon, Brom focused all of his anger and pain on the one who he felt 
was responsible for the destruction of his world: Morzan.” 
 
 Oromis paused, his face grave. “Do you know why losing your dragon, 
or vice versa, usually kills the survivor?” 
 
 “I can imagine,” said Eragon. He quailed at the thought. 
 
 “The pain is shock enough—although it isn’t always a factor—but what 
really causes the damage is feeling part of your mind, part of your iden-
tity, die. When it happened to Brom, I fear that he went mad for a time. 
After I was captured and escaped, I brought him to Ellesméra for safety, 
but he refused to stay, instead marching with our army to the plains of 
Ilirea, where King Evandar was slain. 
 
 “The confusion then was indescribable. Galbatorix was busy consolidat-
ing his power, the dwarves were in retreat, the southwest was a mass of 
war as the humans rebelled and fought to create Surda, and we had just 
lost our king. Driven by his desire for vengeance, Brom sought to use the 
turmoil to his advantage. He gathered together many of those who had 
been exiled, freed some who had been imprisoned, and with them he 
formed the Varden. He led them for a few years, then surrendered the 
position to another so that he was free to pursue his true passion, which 

 
264
was Morzan’s downfall. Brom personally killed three of the Forsworn, in-
cluding Morzan, and he was responsible for the deaths of five others. He 
was rarely happy during his life, but he was a good Rider and a good man, 
and I am honored to have known him.” 
 
 “I never heard his name mentioned in connection to the Forsworn’s 
deaths,” objected Eragon. 
 
 “Galbatorix did not want to publicize the fact that any still existed who 
could defeat his servants. Much of his power resides in the appearance of 
invulnerability.” 
 
 Once again, Eragon was forced to revise his conception of Brom, from 
the village storyteller that Eragon had first taken him to be, to the warrior 
and magician he had traveled with, to the Rider he was at last revealed as, 
and now firebrand, revolutionary leader, and assassin. It was hard to rec-
oncile all of those roles. I feel as if I barely knew him. I wish that we had 
had a chance to talk about all of this at least once. “He was a good man,” 
agreed Eragon. 
 
 He looked out one of the round windows that faced the edge of the 
cliff and allowed the afternoon warmth to suffuse the room. He watched 
Saphira, noting how she acted with Glaedr, seeming both shy and coy. 
One moment she would twist around to examine some feature of the 
clearing, the next she would shuffle her wings and make small advances 
on the larger dragon, weaving her head from side to side, the tip of her 
tail twitching as if she were about to pounce on a deer. She reminded Er-
agon of a kitten trying to bait an old tomcat into playing with her, only 
Glaedr remained impassive throughout her machinations. 
 
 Saphira, he said. She responded with a distracted flicker of her 
thoughts, barely acknowledging him. Saphira, answer me. 
 
 What? 
 
 I know you’re excited, but don’t make a fool of yourself. 
 
 You’ve made a fool of yourself plenty of times, she snapped. 
 
 Her reply was so unexpected, it stunned him. It was the sort of casually 
cruel remark that humans often make, but that he had never thought to 
hear from her. He finally managed to say, That doesn’t make it any better. 
She grunted and closed her mind to his, although he could still feel the 
thread of her emotions connecting them. 

 
265
 
 Eragon returned to himself to find Oromis’s gray eyes heavy upon him. 
The elf’s gaze was so perceptive, Eragon was sure that Oromis under-
stood what had transpired. Eragon forced a smile and motioned toward 
Saphira. “Even though we’re linked, I can never predict what she’s going 
to do. The more I learn about her, the more I realize how different we 
are.” 
 
 Then Oromis made his first statement that Eragon thought was truly 
wise: “Those whom we love are often the most alien to us.” The elf 
paused. “She is very young, as are you. It took Glaedr and I decades be-
fore we fully understood each other. A Rider’s bond with his dragon is 
like any relationship—that is, a work in progress. Do you trust her?” 
 
 “With my life.” 
 
 “And does she trust you?” 
 
 “Yes.” 
 
 “Then humor her. You were brought up as an orphan. She was brought 
up to believe that she was the last sane individual of her entire race. And 
now she has been proved wrong. Don’t be surprised if it takes some 
months before she stops pestering Glaedr and returns her attention to 
you.” 
 
 Eragon rolled a blueberry between his thumb and forefinger; his appe-
tite had vanished. “Why don’t elves eat meat?” 
 
 “Why should we?” Oromis held up a strawberry and rotated it so that 
the light reflected off its dimpled skin and illuminated the tiny hairs that 
bearded the fruit. “Everything that we need or want we sing from the 
plants, including our food. It would be barbaric to make animals suffer 
that we might have additional courses on the table.... Our choice will 
make greater sense to you before long.” 
 
 Eragon frowned. He had always eaten meat and did not look forward to 
living solely on fruit and vegetables while in Ellesméra. “Don’t you miss 
the taste?” 
 
 “You cannot miss that which you have never had.” 
 
 “What about Glaedr, though? He can’t live off grass.” 
 

 
266
 “No, but neither does he needlessly inflict pain. We each do the best 
we can with what we are given. You cannot help who or what you are 
born as.” 
 
 “And Islanzadí? Her cape was made of swan feathers.” 
 
 “Loose feathers gathered over the course of many years. No birds were 
killed to make her garment.” 
 
 They finished the meal, and Eragon helped Oromis to scour the dishes 
clean with sand. As the elf stacked them in the cupboard, he asked, “Did 
you bathe this morning?” The question startled Eragon, but he answered 
that no, he had not. “Please do so tomorrow then, and every day follow-
ing.” 
 
 “Every day! The water’s too cold for that. I’ll catch the ague.” 
 
 Oromis eyed him oddly. “Then make it warmer.” 
 
 Now it was Eragon’s turn to look askance. “I’m not strong enough to 
heat an entire stream with magic,” he protested. 
 
 The house echoed as Oromis laughed. Outside, Glaedr swung his head 
toward the window and inspected the elf, then returned to his earlier po-
sition. “I assume that you explored your quarters last night.” Eragon nod-
ded. “And you saw a small room with a depression in the floor?” 
 
 “I thought that it might be for washing clothes or linens.” 
 
 “It is for washing you. Two nozzles are concealed in the side of the wall 
above the hollow. Open them and you can bathe in water of any tem-
perature. Also,” he gestured at Eragon’s chin, “while you are my student, I 
expect you to keep yourself clean-shaven until you can grow a full 
beard—if you so choose—and not look like a tree with half its leaves 
blown off. Elves do not shave, but I will have a razor and mirror found 
and sent to you.” 
 
 Wincing at the blow to his pride, Eragon agreed. They returned out-
side, whereupon Oromis looked at Glaedr and the dragon said, We have 
decided upon a curriculum for Saphira and you. 
 
 The elf said, “You will start—” 
 
 —an hour after sunrise tomorrow, in the time of the Red Lily. Return here 

 
267
then. 
 
 “And bring the saddle that Brom made for you, Saphira,” continued 
Oromis. “Do what you wish in the meantime; Ellesméra holds many 
wonders for a foreigner, if you care to see them.” 
 
 “I’ll keep that in mind,” said Eragon, bowing his head. “Before I go, Mas-
ter, I want to thank you for helping me in Tronjheim after I killed Durza. 
I doubt that I would have survived without your assistance. I am in your 
debt.” 
 
 We are both in your debt, added Saphira. 
 
 Oromis smiled slightly and inclined his head. 
 
 
 
 

 
268
THE SECRET LIVES OF ANTS 
 
 
 The moment that Oromis and Glaedr were out of sight, Saphira said, 
Eragon, another dragon! Can you believe it? 
 
 He patted her shoulder. It’s wonderful. High above Du Weldenvarden, 
the only sign of habitation in the forest was an occasional ghostly plume 
of smoke that rose from the crown of a tree and soon faded into clear air. 
 
 I never expected to encounter another dragon, except for Shruikan. Maybe 
rescue the eggs from Galbatorix, yes, but that was the extent of my hopes. 
And now this! She wriggled underneath him with joy. Glaedr is incredible, 
isn’t he? He’s so old and strong and his scales are so bright. He must be two, 
no, three times bigger than me. Did you see his claws? They... 
 
 She continued on in that manner for several minutes, waxing eloquent 
about Glaedr’s attributes. But stronger than her words were the emotions 
Eragon sensed roiling within her: eagerness and enthusiasm, twined over 
what he could only identify as a longing adoration. 
 
 Eragon tried to tell Saphira what he had learned from Oromis—since 
he knew that she had not paid attention—but he found it impossible to 
change the subject of conversation. He sat silently on her back, the world 
an emerald ocean below, and felt himself the loneliest man in existence. 
 
 Back at their quarters, Eragon decided against any sightseeing; he was 
far too tired from the day’s events and the weeks of traveling. And 
Saphira was more than content to sit on her bed and chatter about 
Glaedr while he examined the mysteries of the elves’ wash closet. 
 
   
 
 Morning came, and with it a package wrapped in onionskin paper con-
taining the razor and mirror that Oromis had promised. The blade was of 
elvish make, so it needed no sharpening or stropping. Grimacing, Eragon 
first bathed in steaming hot water, then held up the mirror and con-
fronted his visage. 
 
 I look older. Older and worn. Not only that, but his features had be-
come far more angled, giving him an ascetic, hawklike appearance. He 
was no elf, but neither would anyone take him to be a purebred human 
if they inspected him closely. Pulling back his hair, he bared his ears, 
which now tapered to slight points, more evidence of how his bond with 

 
269
Saphira had changed him. He touched one ear, letting his fingers wander 
over the unfamiliar shape. 
 
 It was difficult for him to accept the transformation of his flesh. Even 
though he had known it would occur—and occasionally welcomed the 
prospect as the last confirmation that he was a Rider—the reality of it 
filled him with confusion. He resented the fact that he had no say in how 
his body was being altered, yet at the same time he was curious where 
the process would take him. Also, he was aware that he was still in the 
midst of his own, human adolescence, and its attendant realm of myster-
ies and difficulties. 
 
 When will I finally know who and what I am? 
 
 He placed the edge of the razor against his cheek, as he had seen Gar-
row do, and dragged it across his skin. The hairs came free, but they were 
cut long and ragged. He altered the angle of the blade and tried again 
with a bit more success. 
 
 When he reached his chin, though, the razor slipped in his hand and 
cut him from the corner of his mouth to the underside of his jaw. He 
howled and dropped the razor, clapping his hand over the incision, which 
poured blood down his neck. Spitting the words past bared teeth, he said, 
“Waíse heill.” The pain quickly receded as magic knitted his flesh back 
together, though his heart still pounded from the shock. 
 
 Eragon! cried Saphira. She forced her head and shoulders into the vesti-
bule and nosed open the door to the closet, flaring her nostrils at the 
scent of blood. 
 
 I’ll live, he assured her. 
 
 She eyed the sanguine water. Be more careful. I’d rather you were as 
ragged as a molting deer than have you decapitate yourself for the sake of a 
close shave. 
 
 So would I. Go on, I’m fine. 
 
 Saphira grunted and reluctantly withdrew. 
 
 Eragon sat, glaring at the razor. Finally, he muttered, “Forget this.” 
Composing himself, he reviewed his store of words from the ancient lan-
guage, selected those that he needed, and then allowed his invented spell 
to roll off his tongue. A faint stream of black powder fell from his face as 

 
270
his stubble crumbled into dust, leaving his cheeks perfectly smooth. 
 
 Satisfied, Eragon went and saddled Saphira, who immediately took to 
the air, aiming their course toward the Crags of Tel’naeír. They landed 
before the hut and were met by Oromis and Glaedr. 
 
 Oromis examined Saphira’s saddle. He traced each strap with his fin-
gers, pausing on the stitching and buckles, and then pronounced it pass-
able handiwork considering how and when it had been constructed. 
“Brom was always clever with his hands. Use this saddle when you must 
travel with great speed. But when comfort is allowed—” He stepped into 
his hut for a moment and reappeared carrying a thick, molded saddle 
decorated with gilt designs along the seat and leg pieces. “—use this. It 
was crafted in Vroengard and imbued with many spells so that it will 
never fail you in time of need.” 
 
 Eragon staggered under the weight of the saddle as he received it from 
Oromis. It had the same general shape as Brom’s, with a row of buckles—
intended to immobilize his legs—hanging from each side. The deep seat 
was sculpted out of the leather in such a way that he could fly for hours 
with ease, both sitting upright and lying flat against Saphira’s neck. Also, 
the straps encircling Saphira’s chest were rigged with slips and knots so 
that they could extend to accommodate years of growth. A series of 
broad ties on either side of the head of the saddle caught Eragon’s atten-
tion. He asked their purpose. 
 
 Glaedr rumbled, Those secure your wrists and arms so that you are not 
killed like a rat shaken to death when Saphira performs a complex maneu-
ver. 
 
 Oromis helped Eragon relieve Saphira of her current saddle. “Saphira, 
you will go with Glaedr today, and I will work with Eragon here.” 
 
 As you wish, she said, and crowed with excitement. Heaving his golden 
bulk off the ground, Glaedr soared off to the north, Saphira close behind. 
 
 Oromis did not give Eragon long to ponder Saphira’s departure; the elf 
marched him to a square of hard-packed dirt beneath a willow tree at the 
far side of the clearing. Standing opposite him in the square, Oromis said, 
“What I am about to show you is called the Rimgar, or the Dance of 
Snake and Crane. It is a series of poses that we developed to prepare our 
warriors for combat, although all elves use it now to maintain their 
health and fitness. The Rimgar consists of four levels, each more difficult 
than the last. We will start with the first.” 

 
271
 
 Apprehension for the coming ordeal sickened Eragon to the point 
where he could barely move. He clenched his fists and hunched his 
shoulders, his scar tugging at the skin of his back as he glared between his 
feet. 
 
 “Relax,” advised Oromis. Eragon jerked open his hands and let them 
hang limply at the end of his rigid arms. “I asked you to relax, Eragon. 
You can’t do the Rimgar if you are as stiff as a piece of rawhide.” 
 
 “Yes, Master.” Eragon grimaced and reluctantly loosened his muscles 
and joints, although a knot of tension remained coiled in his belly. 
 
 “Place your feet together and your arms at your sides. Look straight 
ahead. Now take a deep breath and lift your arms over your head so that 
your palms meet.... Yes, like that. Exhale and bend down as far as you 
can, put your palms on the ground, take another breath... and jump back. 
Good. Breathe in and bend up, looking toward the sky... and exhale, lift-
ing your hips until you form a triangle. Breathe in through the back of 
your throat... and out. In... and out. In...” 
 
 To Eragon’s utter relief, the stances proved gentle enough to hold with-
out igniting the pain in his back, yet challenging enough that sweat 
beaded his forehead and he panted for breath. He found himself grinning 
with joy at his reprieve. His wariness evaporated and he flowed through 
the postures—most of which far exceeded his flexibility—with more en-
ergy and confidence than he had possessed since before the battle in Far-
then Dûr. Maybe I’ve healed! 
 
 Oromis performed the Rimgar with him, displaying a level of strength 
and flexibility that astounded Eragon, especially for one so old. The elf 
could touch his forehead to his toes. Throughout the exercise, Oromis 
remained impeccably composed, as if he were doing no more than stroll-
ing down a garden path. His instruction was calmer and more patient 
than Brom’s, yet completely unyielding. No deviation was allowed from 
the correct path. 
 
 “Let us wash the sweat from our limbs,” said Oromis when they fin-
ished. 
 
 Going to the stream by the house, they quickly disrobed. Eragon sur-
reptitiously watched the elf, curious as to what he looked like without 
his clothes. Oromis was very thin, yet his muscles were perfectly defined, 
etched under his skin with the hard lines of a woodcut. No hair grew 

 
272
upon his chest or legs, not even around his groin. His body seemed al-
most freakish to Eragon, compared to the men he was used to seeing in 
Carvahall—although it had a certain refined elegance to it, like that of a 
wildcat. 
 
 When they were clean, Oromis took Eragon deep into Du Welden-
varden to a hollow where the dark trees leaned inward, obscuring the sky 
behind branches and veils of snarled lichen. Their feet sank into the moss 
above their ankles. All was silent about them. 
 
 Pointing to a white stump with a flat, polished top three yards across 
that rested in the center of the hollow, Oromis said, “Sit here.” Eragon did 
as he was told. “Cross your legs and close your eyes.” The world went 
dark around him. From his right, he heard Oromis whisper, “Open your 
mind, Eragon. Open your mind and listen to the world around you, to the 
thoughts of every being in this glade, from the ants in the trees to the 
worms in the ground. Listen until you can hear them all and you under-
stand their purpose and nature. Listen, and when you hear no more, 
come tell me what you have learned.” 
 
 Then the forest was quiet. 
 
 Unsure if Oromis had left, Eragon tentatively lowered the barriers 
around his mind and reached out with his consciousness, like he did 
when trying to contact Saphira at a great distance. Initially only a void 
surrounded him, but then pricks of light and warmth began to appear in 
the darkness, strengthening until he sat in the midst of a galaxy of swirl-
ing constellations, each bright point representing a life. Whenever he had 
contacted other beings with his mind, like Cadoc, Snowfire, or Solem-
bum, the focus had always been on the one he wanted to communicate 
with. But this... this was as if he had been standing deaf in the midst of a 
crowd and now he could hear the rivers of conversation whirling around 
him. 
 
 He felt suddenly vulnerable; he was completely exposed to the world. 
Anyone or anything that might want to leap into his mind and control 
him could now do so. He tensed unconsciously, withdrawing back into 
himself, and his awareness of the hollow vanished. Remembering one of 
Oromis’s lessons, Eragon slowed his breathing and monitored the sweep 
of his lungs until he had relaxed enough to reopen his mind. 
 
 Of all the lives he could sense, the majority were, by far, insects. Their 
sheer number astounded him. Tens of thousands dwelled in a square foot 
of moss, teeming millions throughout the rest of the small hollow, and 

 
273
uncounted masses beyond. Their abundance actually frightened Eragon. 
He had always known that humans were scarce and beleaguered in Ala-
gaësia, but he had never imagined that they were so outnumbered by 
even beetles. 
 
 Since they were one of the few insects that he was familiar with, and 
Oromis had mentioned them, Eragon concentrated his attention on the 
columns of red ants marching across the ground and up the stems of a 
wild rosebush. What he gleaned from them were not so much 
thoughts—their brains were too primitive—but urges: the urge to find 
food and avoid injury, the urge to defend one’s territory, the urge to 
mate. By examining the ants’ instincts, he could begin to puzzle out their 
behavior. 
 
 It fascinated him to discover that—except for the few individuals ex-
ploring outside the borders of their province—the ants knew exactly 
where they were going. He was unable to ascertain what mechanism 
guided them, but they followed clearly defined paths from their nest to 
food and back. Their source of food was another surprise. As he had ex-
pected, the ants killed and scavenged other insects, but most of their ef-
forts were directed toward the cultivation of... of something that dotted 
the rosebush. Whatever the life-form was, it was barely large enough for 
him to sense. He focused all of his strength on it in an attempt to identify 
it and satisfy his curiosity. 
 
 The answer was so simple, he laughed out loud when he compre-
hended it: aphids. The ants were acting as shepherds for aphids, driving 
and protecting them, as well as extracting sustenance from them by mas-
saging the aphids’ bellies with the tips of their antennae. Eragon could 
hardly believe it, but the longer he watched, the more he became con-
vinced that he was correct. 
 
 He traced the ants underground into their complex matrix of warrens 
and studied how they cared for a certain member of their species that 
was several times bigger than a normal ant. However, he was unable to 
determine the insect’s purpose; all he could see were servants swarming 
around it, rotating it, and removing the specks of matter it produced at 
regular intervals. 
 
 After a time, Eragon decided that he had gleaned all the information 
from the ants that he could—unless he was willing to sit there for the 
rest of the day—and was about to return to his body when a squirrel 
jumped into the glade. Its appearance was like a blast of light to him, at-
tuned as he was to the insects. Stunned, he was overwhelmed by a rush 

 
274
of sensations and feelings from the animal. He smelled the forest with its 
nose, felt the bark give under his hooked claws and the air swish through 
his upraised plume of a tail. Compared to an ant, the squirrel burned 
with energy and possessed unquestionable intelligence. 
 
 Then it leaped to another branch and faded from his awareness. 
 
 The forest seemed much darker and quieter than before when Eragon 
opened his eyes. He took a deep breath and looked about, appreciating 
for the first time how much life existed in the world. Unfolding his 
cramped legs, he walked over to the rosebush. 
 
 He bent down and examined the branches and twigs. Sure enough, 
aphids and their crimson guardians clung to them. And near the base of 
the plant was the mound of pine needles that marked the entrance to the 
ants’ lair. It was strange to see with his own eyes; none of it betrayed the 
numerous and subtle interactions that he was now aware of. 
 
 Engrossed in his thoughts, Eragon returned to the clearing, wondering 
what he might be crushing under his feet with every step. When he 
emerged from under the trees’ shelter, he was startled by how far the sun 
had fallen. I must have been sitting there for at least three hours. 
 
 He found Oromis in his hut, writing with a goose-feather quill. The elf 
finished his line, then wiped the nib of the quill clean, stoppered his ink, 
and asked, “And what did you hear, Eragon?” 
 
 Eragon was eager to share. As he described his experience, he heard his 
voice rise with enthusiasm over the details of the ants’ society. He re-
counted everything that he could recall, down to the minutest and most 
inconsequential observation, proud of the information that he had gath-
ered. 
 
 When he finished, Oromis raised an eyebrow. “Is that all?” 
 
 “I...” Dismay gripped Eragon as he understood that he had somehow 
missed the point of the exercise. “Yes, Ebrithil.” 
 
 “And what about the other organisms in the earth and the air? Can you 
tell me what they were doing while your ants tended their droves?” 
 
 “No, Ebrithil.” 
 
 “Therein lies your mistake. You must become aware of all things 

 
275
equally and not blinker yourself in order to concentrate on a particular 
subject. This is an essential lesson, and until you master it, you will medi-
tate on the stump for an hour each day.” 
 
 “How will I know when I have mastered it?” 
 
 “When you can watch one and know all.” 
 
 Oromis motioned for Eragon to join him at the table, then set a fresh 
sheet of paper before him, along with a quill and a bottle of ink. “So far 
you have made do with an incomplete knowledge of the ancient lan-
guage. Not that any of us knows all the words in the language, but you 
must be familiar with its grammar and structure so that you do not kill 
yourself through an incorrectly placed verb or similar mistake. I do not 
expect you to speak our language like an elf—that would take a life-
time—but I do expect you to achieve unconscious competence. That is, 
you must be able to use it without thinking. 
 
 “In addition, you must learn to read and write the ancient language. Not 
only will this help you to memorize words, it is an essential skill if you 
need to compose an especially long spell and you don’t trust your mem-
ory, or if you find such a spell recorded and you want to use it. 
 
 “Every race has evolved their own system of writing the ancient lan-
guage. The dwarves use their runic alphabet, as do humans. They are only 
makeshift techniques, though, and are incapable of expressing the lan-
guage’s true subtleties as well as our Liduen Kvaedhí, the Poetic Script. 
The Liduen Kvaedhí was designed to be as elegant, beautiful, and precise 
as possible. It is composed of forty-two different shapes that represent 
various sounds. These shapes can be combined in a nearly infinite range 
of glyphs that represent both individual words and entire phrases. The 
symbol on your ring is one such glyph. The symbol on Zar’roc is an-
other.... Let us start: What are the basic vowel sounds of the ancient lan-
guage?” 
 
 “What?” 
 
 Eragon’s ignorance of the underpinnings of the ancient language quickly 
became apparent. When he had traveled with Brom, the old storyteller 
had concentrated on having Eragon memorize lists of words that he 
might need to survive, as well as perfecting his pronunciation. In those 
two areas, he excelled, but he could not even explain the difference be-
tween a definite and indefinite article. If the gaps in his education frus-
trated Oromis, the elf did not betray it through word or action, but la-

 
276
bored persistently to mend them. 
 
 At a certain point during the lesson, Eragon commented, “I’ve never 
needed very many words in my spells; Brom said it was a gift that I could 
do so much with just brisingr. I think the most I ever said in the ancient 
language was when I spoke to Arya in her mind and when I blessed an 
orphan in Farthen Dûr.” 
 
 “You blessed a child in the ancient language?” asked Oromis, suddenly 
alert. “Do you remember how you worded this blessing?” 
 
 “Aye.” 
 
 “Recite it for me.” Eragon did so, and a look of pure horror engulfed 
Oromis. He exclaimed, “You used skölir ! Are you sure? Wasn’t it sköliro 
?” 
 
 Eragon frowned. “No, skölir. Why shouldn’t I have used it? Skölir means 
shielded. ‘... and may you be shielded from misfortune.’ It was a good 
blessing.” 
 
 “That was no blessing, but a curse.” Oromis was more agitated than Er-
agon had ever seen him. “The suffix o forms the past tense of verbs end-
ing with r and i. Sköliro means shielded, but skölir means shield. What 
you said was ‘May luck and happiness follow you and may you be a 
shield from misfortune.’ Instead of protecting this child from the vagaries 
of fate, you condemned her to be a sacrifice for others, to absorb their 
misery and suffering so that they might live in peace.” 
 
 No, no! It can’t be! Eragon recoiled from the possibility. “The effect a 
spell has isn’t only determined by the word’s sense, but also by your in-
tent, and I didn’t intend to harm—” 
 
 “You cannot gainsay a word’s inherent nature. Twist it, yes. Guide it, 
yes. But not contravene its definition to imply the very opposite.” Oromis 
pressed his fingers together and stared at the table, his lips reduced to a 
flat white line. “I will trust that you did not mean harm, else I would re-
fuse to teach you further. If you were honest and your heart was pure, 
then this blessing may cause less evil than I fear, though it will still be the 
nucleus of more pain than either of us could wish.” 
 
 Violent trembling overtook Eragon as he realized what he had done to 
the child’s life. “It may not undo my mistake,” he said, “but perhaps it will 
alleviate it; Saphira marked the girl on the brow, just like she marked my 

 
277
palm with the gedwëy ignasia.” 
 
 For the first time in his life, Eragon witnessed an elf dumbstruck. 
Oromis’s gray eyes widened, his mouth opened, and he clutched the arms 
of his chair until the wood groaned with protest. “One who bears the sign 
of the Riders, and yet is not a Rider,” he murmured. “In all my years, I 
have never met anyone such as the two of you. Every decision you make 
seems to have an impact far beyond what anyone could anticipate. You 
change the world with your whims.” 
 
 “Is that good or bad?” 
 
 “Neither, it just is. Where is the babe now?” 
 
 It took a moment for Eragon to compose his thoughts. “With the 
Varden, either in Farthen Dûr or Surda. Do you think that Saphira’s mark 
will help her?” 
 
 “I know not,” said Oromis. “No precedent exists to draw upon for wis-
dom.” 
 
 “There must be ways to remove the blessing, to negate a spell.” Eragon 
was almost pleading. 
 
 “There are. But for them to be most effective, you should be the one to 
apply them, and you cannot be spared here. Even under the best of cir-
cumstances, remnants of your magic will haunt this girl evermore. Such is 
the power of the ancient language.” He paused. “I see that you understand 
the gravity of the situation, so I will say this only once: you bear full re-
sponsibility for this girl’s doom, and, because of the wrong you did her, it 
is incumbent upon you to help her if ever the opportunity should arise. 
By the Riders’ law, she is your shame as surely as if you had begotten her 
out of wedlock, a disgrace among humans, if I remember correctly.” 
 
 “Aye,” whispered Eragon. “I understand.” I understand that I forced a de-
fenseless baby to pursue a certain destiny without ever giving her a choice in 
the matter. Can someone be truly good if they never have the opportunity to 
act badly? I made her a slave. He also knew that if he had been bound in 
that manner without permission, he would hate his jailer with every fiber 
of his being. 
 
 “Then we will speak of this no more.” 
 
 “Yes, Ebrithil.” 

 
278
 
   
 
 Eragon was still subdued, even depressed, by the end of the day. He 
barely looked up when they went outside to meet Saphira and Glaedr 
upon their return. The trees shook from the fury of the gale that the two 
dragons created with their wings. Saphira seemed proud of herself; she 
arched her neck and pranced toward Eragon, opening her chops in a lu-
pine grin. 
 
 A stone cracked under Glaedr’s weight as the ancient dragon turned a 
giant eye—as large as a dinner platter—on Eragon and asked, What are 
the rules three to spotting downdrafts, and the rules five for escaping them? 
 
 Startled out of his reverie, Eragon could only blink dumbly. “I don’t 
know.” 
 
 Then Oromis confronted Saphira and asked, “What creatures do ants 
farm, and how do they extract food from them?” 
 
 I wouldn’t know, declared Saphira. She sounded affronted. 
 
 A gleam of anger leaped into Oromis’s eyes and he crossed his arms, 
though his expression remained calm. “After all the two of you have 
done together, I would think that you had learned the most basic lesson 
of being Shur’tugal: Share everything with your partner. Would you cut 
off your right arm? Would you fly with only one wing? Never. Then why 
would you ignore the bond that links you? By doing so, you reject your 
greatest gift and your advantage over any single opponent. Nor should 
you just talk to each other with your minds, but rather mingle your con-
sciousnesses until you act and think as one. I expect both of you to know 
what either one of you is taught.” 
 
 “What about our privacy?” objected Eragon. 
 
 Privacy? said Glaedr. Keep your thoughts to thyself when you leave here, 
if it pleases you, but while we tutor you, you have no privacy. 
 
 Eragon looked at Saphira, feeling even worse than before. She avoided 
his gaze, then stamped a foot and faced him directly. What? 
 
 They’re right. We have been negligent. 
 
 It’s not my fault. 

 
279
 
 I didn’t say that it was. She had guessed his opinion, though. He re-
sented the attention she lavished on Glaedr and how it drew her away 
from him. We’ll do better, won’t we? 
 
 Of course! she snapped. 
 
 She declined to offer Oromis and Glaedr an apology, though, leaving 
the task to Eragon. “We won’t disappoint you again.” 
 
 “See that you don’t. You will be tested tomorrow on what the other 
learned.” Oromis revealed a round wood bauble nestled in the middle of 
his palm. “So long as you take care to wind it regularly, this device will 
wake you at the proper time each morning. Return here as soon as you 
have bathed and eaten.” 
 
 The bauble was surprisingly heavy when Eragon took it. The size of a 
walnut, it had been carved with deep whorls around a knob wrought in 
the likeness of a moss-rose blossom. He turned the knob experimentally 
and heard three clicks as a hidden ratchet advanced. “Thank you,” he said. 
 
 
 
 

 
280
UNDER THE MENOA TREE 
 
 
 After Eragon and Saphira had said their farewells, they flew back to 
their tree house with Saphira’s new saddle dangling between her front 
claws. Without acknowledging the fact, they gradually opened their 
minds and allowed their connection to widen and deepen, though neither 
of them consciously reached for the other. Eragon’s tumultuous emotions 
must have been strong enough for Saphira to sense anyway, though, for 
she asked, What happened, then? 
 
 A throbbing pain built up behind his eyes as he explained the terrible 
crime he had committed in Farthen Dûr. Saphira was as appalled by it as 
he was. He said, Your gift may help that girl, but what I did is inexcusable 
and will only hurt her. 
 
 The blame isn’t all yours. I share your knowledge of the ancient language, 
and I didn’t spot the error any more than you did. When Eragon remained 
silent, she added, At least your back didn’t cause any trouble today. Be 
grateful for that. 
 
 He grunted, unwilling to be tempted out of his black mood. And what 
did you learn this fine day? 
 
 How to identify and avoid dangerous weather patterns. She paused, ap-
parently ready to share the memories with him, but he was too busy 
worrying about his distorted blessing to inquire further. Nor could he 
bear the thought of being so intimate right then. When he did not pursue 
the matter, Saphira withdrew into a taciturn silence. 
 
 Back in their bedroom, he found a tray of food by the screen door, as 
he had the previous night. Carrying the tray to his bed—which had been 
remade with fresh linens—he settled down to eat, cursing the lack of 
meat. Already sore from the Rimgar, he propped himself up with pillows 
and was about to take his first bite when there came a gentle rapping at 
the opening to his chamber. “Enter,” he growled. He took a drink of wa-
ter. 
 
 Eragon nearly choked as Arya stepped through the doorway. She had 
abandoned the leather clothes she usually wore in favor of a soft green 
tunic cinched at the waist with a girdle adorned with moonstones. She 
had also removed her customary headband, allowing her hair to tumble 
around her face and over her shoulders. The biggest change, however, 
was not so much in her dress but her bearing; the brittle tension that had 

 
281
permeated her demeanor ever since Eragon first met her was now gone. 
 
 She seemed to have finally relaxed. 
 
 He scrambled to his feet, noticing that her own were bare. “Arya! Why 
are you here?” 
 
 Touching her first two fingers to her lips, she said, “Do you plan on 
spending another evening inside?” 
 
 “I—” 
 
 “You have been in Ellesméra for three days now, and yet you have seen 
nothing of our city. I know that you always wished to explore it. Set 
aside your weariness this once and accompany me.” Gliding toward him, 
she took Zar’roc from where it lay by his side and beckoned to him. 
 
 He rose from the bed and followed her into the vestibule, where they 
descended through the trapdoor and down the precipitous staircase that 
wound around the rough tree trunk. Overhead, the gathering clouds 
glowed with the sun’s last rays before it was extinguished behind the 
edge of the world. 
 
 A piece of bark fell on Eragon’s head and he looked up to see Saphira 
leaning out of their bedroom, gripping the wood with her claws. Without 
opening her wings, she sprang into the air and dropped the hundred or so 
feet to the ground, landing in a thunderous cloud of dirt. I’m coming. 
 
 “Of course,” said Arya, as if she expected nothing less. Eragon scowled; 
he had wanted to be alone with her, but he knew better than to com-
plain. 
 
 They walked under the trees, where dusk already extended its tendrils 
from inside hollow logs, dark crevices in boulders, and the underside of 
knobby eaves. Here and there, a gemlike lantern twinkled within the side 
of a tree or at the end of a branch, casting gentle pools of light on either 
side of the path. 
 
 Elves worked on various projects in and around the lanterns’ radius, 
solitary except for a few, rare couples. Several elves sat high in the trees, 
playing mellifluous tunes on their reed pipes, while others stared at the 
sky with peaceful expressions—neither awake nor asleep. One elf sat 
cross-legged before a pottery wheel that whirled round and round with a 
steady rhythm while a delicate urn took form beneath his hands. The 

 
282
werecat, Maud, crouched beside him in the shadows, watching his pro-
gress. Her eyes flared silver as she looked at Eragon and Saphira. The elf 
followed her gaze and nodded to them without halting his work. 
 
 Through the trees, Eragon glimpsed an elf—man or woman, he could 
not tell—squatting on a rock in the middle of a stream, muttering a spell 
over the orb of glass clutched in its hands. He twisted his neck in an at-
tempt to get an unobstructed view, but the spectacle had already van-
ished into the dark. 
 
 “What,” asked Eragon, keeping his voice low so as to not disturb any-
one, “do most elves do for a living or profession?” 
 
 Arya answered just as quietly. “Our strength with magic grants us as 
much leisure as we desire. We neither hunt nor farm, and, as a result, we 
spend our days working to master our interests, whatever they might be. 
Very little exists that we must strive for.” 
 
 Through a tunnel of dogwood draped with creepers, they entered the 
enclosed atrium of a house grown out of a ring of trees. An open-walled 
hut occupied the center of the atrium, which sheltered a forge and an as-
sortment of tools that Eragon knew even Horst would covet. 
 
 An elf woman held a pair of small tongs in a nest of molten coals, 
working bellows with her right hand. With uncanny speed, she pulled 
the tongs from the fire—revealing a ring of white-hot steel clamped in 
the pincers’ jaws—looped the ring through the edge of an incomplete 
mail corselet hung over the anvil, grasped a hammer, and welded shut the 
open ends of the ring with a blow and a burst of sparks. 
 
 Only then did Arya approach. “Atra esterní ono thelduin.” 
 
 The elf faced them, her neck and cheek lit from underneath by the 
coals’ bloody light. Like taut wires embedded in her skin, her face was 
scribed with a delicate pattern of lines—the greatest display of age Er-
agon had seen in an elf. She gave no response to Arya, which he knew 
was offensive and discourteous, especially since the queen’s daughter had 
honored her by speaking first. 
 
 “Rhunön-elda, I have brought you the newest Rider, Eragon Shade-
slayer.” 
 
 “I heard you were dead,” said Rhunön to Arya. Rhunön’s voice guttered 
and rasped unlike any other elf’s. It reminded Eragon of the old men of 

 
283
Carvahall who sat on the porches outside their houses, smoking pipes and 
telling stories. 
 
 Arya smiled. “When did you last leave your house, Rhunön?” 
 
 “You should know. It was that Midsummer’s Feast you forced me to at-
tend.” 
 
 “That was three years ago.” 
 
 “Was it?” Rhunön frowned as she banked the coals and covered them 
with a grated lid. “Well, what of it? I find company trying. A gaggle of 
meaningless chatter that...” She glared at Arya. “Why are we speaking this 
foul language? I suppose you want me to forge a sword for him? You 
know I swore to never create instruments of death again, not after that 
traitor of a Rider and the destruction he wreaked with my blade.” 
 
 “Eragon already has a sword,” said Arya. She raised her arm and pre-
sented Zar’roc to the smith. 
 
 Rhunön took Zar’roc with a look of wonder. She caressed the wine-red 
sheath, lingered on the black symbol etched into it, rubbed a bit of dirt 
from the hilt, then wrapped her fingers around the handle and drew the 
sword with all the authority of a warrior. She sighted down each of 
Zar’roc’s edges and flexed the blade between her hands until Eragon 
feared it might break. Then, in a single movement, Rhunön swung 
Zar’roc over her head and brought it down upon the tongs on her anvil, 
riving them in half with a resounding ring. 
 
 “Zar’roc,” said Rhunön. “I remember thee.” She cradled the weapon like 
a mother would her firstborn. “As perfect as the day you were finished.” 
Turning her back, she looked up at the knotted branches while she 
traced the curves of the pommel. “My entire life I spent hammering these 
swords out of ore. Then he came and destroyed them. Centuries of effort 
obliterated in an instant. So far as I knew, only four examples of my art 
still existed. His sword, Oromis’s, and two others guarded by families 
who managed to rescue them from the Wyrdfell.” 
 
 Wyrdfell? Eragon dared ask Arya with his mind. 
 
 Another name for the Forsworn. 
 
 Rhunön turned on Eragon. “Now Zar’roc has returned to me. Of all my 
creations, this I least expected to hold again, save for his. How came you 

 
284
to possess Morzan’s sword?” 
 
 “It was given to me by Brom.” 
 
 “Brom?” She hefted Zar’roc. “Brom... I remember Brom. He begged me 
to replace the sword he had lost. Truly, I wished to help him, but I had 
already taken my oath. My refusal angered him beyond reason. Oromis 
had to knock him unconscious before he would leave.” 
 
 Eragon seized on the information with interest. “Your handiwork has 
served me well, Rhunön-elda. I would be long dead were it not for 
Zar’roc. I killed the Shade Durza with it.” 
 
 “Did you now? Then some good has come of it.” Sheathing Zar’roc, 
Rhunön returned it to him, though not without reluctance, then looked 
past him to Saphira. “Ah. Well met, Skulblaka.” 
 
 Well met, Rhunön-elda. 
 
 Without bothering to ask permission, Rhunön went up to Saphira’s 
shoulder and tapped a scale with one of her blunt fingernails, twisting her 
head from side to side in an attempt to peer into the translucent pebble. 
“Good color. Not like those brown dragons, all muddy and dark. Properly 
speaking, a Rider’s sword should match the hue of his dragon, and this 
blue would have made a gorgeous blade....” The thought seemed to drain 
the energy from her. She returned to the anvil and stared at the wrecked 
tongs, as if the will to replace them had deserted her. 
 
 Eragon felt that it would be wrong to end the conversation on such a 
depressing note, but he could not think of a tactful way to change the 
subject. The glimmering corselet caught his attention and, as he studied 
it, he was astonished to see that every ring was welded shut. Because the 
tiny links cooled so quickly, they usually had to be welded before being 
attached to the main piece of mail, which meant that the finest mail—
such as Eragon’s hauberk—was composed of links that were alternately 
welded and riveted closed. Unless, it seemed, the smith possessed an elf’s 
speed and precision. 
 
 Eragon said, “I’ve never seen the equal of your mail, not even among 
the dwarves. How do you have the patience to weld every link? Why 
don’t you just use magic and save yourself the work?” 
 
 He hardly expected the burst of passion that animated Rhunön. She 
tossed her short-cropped hair and said, “And rob myself of all pleasure in 

 
285
this task? Aye, every other elf and I could use magic to satisfy our de-
sires—and some do—but then what meaning is there in life? How would 
you fill your time? Tell me.” 
 
 “I don’t know,” he confessed. 
 
 “By pursuing that which you love the most. When you can have any-
thing you want by uttering a few words, the goal matters not, only the 
journey to it. A lesson for you. You’ll face the same dilemma one day, if 
you live long enough.... Now begone! I am weary of this talk.” With that 
Rhunön plucked the lid off the forge, retrieved a new pair of tongs, and 
immersed a ring in the coals while she worked the bellows with single-
minded intensity. 
 
 “Rhunön-elda,” said Arya, “remember, I will return for you on the eve 
of the Agaetí Blödhren.” A grunt was her only reply. 
 
 The rhythmic peal of steel on steel, as lonely as the cry of a death bird 
in the night, accompanied them back through the dogwood tunnel and 
onto the path. Behind them, Rhunön was no more than a black figure 
bowed over the sullen glow of her forge. 
 
 “She made all the Riders’ swords?” asked Eragon. “Every last one?” 
 
 “That and more. She’s the greatest smith who has ever lived. I thought 
that you should meet her, for her sake and yours.” 
 
 “Thank you.” 
 
 Is she always so brusque? asked Saphira. 
 
 Arya laughed. “Always. For her, nothing matters except her craft, and 
she’s famously impatient with anything—or anyone—that interferes with 
it. Her eccentricities are well tolerated, though, because of her incredible 
skill and accomplishments.” 
 
 While she spoke, Eragon tried to work out the meaning of Agaetí 
Blödhren. He was fairly sure that blödh stood for blood and, as a result, 
that blödhren was blood-oath, but he had never heard of agaetí. 
 
 “Celebration,” explained Arya when he asked. “We hold the Blood-oath 
Celebration once every century to honor our pact with the dragons. Both 
of you are fortunate to be here now, for it is nigh upon us....” Her slanted 
eyebrows met as she frowned. “Fate has indeed arranged a most auspi-

 
286
cious coincidence.” 
 
 She surprised Eragon by leading them deeper into Du Weldenvarden, 
down paths tangled with nettles and currant bushes, until the lights 
around them vanished and they entered the restless wilderness. In the 
darkness, Eragon had to rely on Saphira’s keen night vision so as to not 
lose his way. The craggy trees increased in width, crowding closer and 
closer together and threatening to form an impenetrable barrier. Just 
when it appeared that they could go no farther, the forest ended and they 
entered a clearing washed with moonlight from the bright sickle low in 
the eastern sky. 
 
 A lone pine tree stood in the middle of the clearing. No taller than the 
rest of its brethren, it was thicker than a hundred regular trees combined; 
in comparison, they looked as puny as windblown saplings. A blanket of 
roots radiated from the tree’s massive trunk, covering the ground with 
bark-sheathed veins that made it seem as if the entire forest flowed out 
from the tree, as if it were the heart of Du Weldenvarden itself. The tree 
presided over the woods like a benevolent matriarch, protecting its in-
habitants under the shelter of her branches. 
 
 “Behold the Menoa tree,” whispered Arya. “We observe the Agaetí 
Blödhren in her shade.” 
 
 A cold tingle crawled down Eragon’s side as he recognized the name. 
After Angela told his fortune in Teirm, Solembum had come up to him 
and said, When the time comes and you need a weapon, look under the roots 
of the Menoa tree. Then, when all seems lost and your power is insufficient, 
go to the rock of Kuthian and speak your name to open the Vault of Souls. 
Eragon could not imagine what kind of weapon might be buried under 
the tree, nor how he would go about finding it. 
 
 Do you see anything? he asked Saphira. 
 
 No, but then I doubt that Solembum’s words will make sense until our 
need is clear. 
 
 Eragon told Arya about both parts of the werecat’s counsel, although—
as he had with Ajihad and Islanzadí—he kept Angela’s prophecy a secret 
because of its personal nature, and because he feared that it might lead 
Arya to guess his attraction to her. 
 
 When he finished, Arya said, “Werecats rarely offer help, and when 
they do, it’s not to be ignored. So far as I know, no weapon is hidden 

 
287
here, not even in song or legend. As for the Rock of Kuthian... the name 
echoes in my head like a voice from a half-forgotten dream, familiar yet 
strange. I’ve heard it before, though I cannot recall where.” 
 
 As they approached the Menoa tree, Eragon’s attention was caught by 
the multitude of ants crawling over the roots. Faint black smudges were 
all he could see of the insects, but Oromis’s assignment had sensitized 
him to the currents of life around him, and he could feel the ants’ primi-
tive consciousness with his mind. He lowered his defenses and allowed 
his awareness to flood outward, lightly touching Saphira and Arya and 
then expanding beyond them to see what else lived in the clearing. 
 
 With unexpected suddenness, he encountered an immense entity, a 
sentient being of such a colossal nature, he could not grasp the limits of 
its psyche. Even Oromis’s vast intellect, which Eragon had been in con-
tact with in Farthen Dûr, was dwarfed in comparison to this presence. 
The very air seemed to thrum with the energy and strength that ema-
nated from...the tree? 
 
 The source was unmistakable. 
 
 Deliberate and inexorable, the tree’s thoughts moved at a measured 
pace as slow as the creep of ice over granite. It took no notice of Eragon 
nor, he was sure, of any single individual. It was entirely concerned with 
the affairs of things that grow and flourish in the bright sunlight, with the 
dogbane and the lily, the evening primrose and the silky foxglove and the 
yellow mustard tall beside the crabapple with its purple blossoms. 
 
 “It’s awake!” exclaimed Eragon, shocked into speaking. “I mean... it’s in-
telligent.” He knew that Saphira felt it too; she cocked her head toward 
the Menoa tree, as if listening, then flew to one of its branches, which 
were as thick as the road from Carvahall to Therinsford. There she 
perched with her tail hanging free, waving the tip of it back and forth, 
ever so gracefully. It was such an odd sight, a dragon in a tree, that Eragon 
almost laughed. 
 
 “Of course she’s awake,” said Arya. Her voice was low and mellow in 
the night air. “Shall I tell you the story of the Menoa tree?” 
 
 “I’d like that.” 
 
 A flash of white streaked across the sky, like a banished specter, and re-
solved itself beside Saphira in the form of Blagden. The raven’s narrow 
shoulders and crooked neck gave him the appearance of a miser basking 

 
288
in the radiance of a pile of gold. The raven lifted his pallid head and ut-
tered his ominous cry,“ Wyrda!” 
 
 “This is what happened. Once there lived a woman, Linnëa, in the years 
of spice and wine before our war with the dragons and before we became 
as immortal as any beings still composed of vulnerable flesh can be. Lin-
nëa had grown old without the comfort of a mate or children, nor did she 
feel the need to seek them out, preferring to occupy herself with the art 
of singing to plants, of which she was a master. That is, she did until a 
young man came to her door and beguiled her with words of love. His 
affections woke a part of Linnëa that she had never suspected existed, a 
craving to experience the things that she had unknowingly sacrificed. The 
offer of a second chance was too great an opportunity for her to ignore. 
She deserted her work and devoted herself to the young man and, for a 
time, they were happy. 
 
 “But the young man was young, and he began to long for a mate closer 
to his own age. His eye fell upon a young woman, and he wooed and won 
her. And for a time, they too were happy. 
 
 “When Linnëa discovered that she had been spurned, scorned, and 
abandoned, she went mad with grief. The young man had done the worst 
possible thing; he had given her a taste of the fullness of life, then torn it 
away with no more thought than a rooster flitting from one hen to the 
next. She found him with the woman and, in her fury, she stabbed him 
to death. 
 
 “Linnëa knew that what she had done was evil. She also knew that even 
if she was exonerated of the murder, she could not return to her previous 
existence. Life had lost all joy for her. So she went to the oldest tree in 
Du Weldenvarden, pressed herself against it, and sang herself into the 
tree, abandoning all allegiance to her own race. For three days and three 
nights she sang, and when she finished, she had become one with her be-
loved plants. And through all the millennia since has she kept watch over 
the forest.... Thus was the Menoa tree created.” 
 
 At the conclusion of her tale, Arya and Eragon sat side by side on the 
crest of a huge root, twelve feet off the ground. Eragon bounced his heels 
against the tree and wondered if Arya had intended the story as a warning 
to him or if it was merely an innocent piece of history. 
 
 His doubt hardened into certainty when she asked, “Do you think that 
the young man was to blame for the tragedy?” 
 

 
289
 “I think,” he said, knowing that a clumsy reply could turn her against 
him, “that what he did was cruel... and that Linnëa overreacted. They 
were both at fault.” 
 
 Arya stared at him until he was forced to avert his gaze. “They weren’t 
suited for each other.” 
 
 Eragon began to deny it but then stopped himself. She was right. And 
she had maneuvered him so that he had to say it out loud, so that he had 
to say it to her. “Perhaps,” he admitted. 
 
 Silence accumulated between them like sand piling into a wall that nei-
ther of them was willing to breach. The high-pitched hum of cicadas 
echoed from the edge of the clearing. At last he said, “Being home seems 
to agree with you.” 
 
 “It does.” With unconscious ease, she leaned over and picked up a thin 
branch that had fallen from the Menoa tree and began to weave the 
clumps of needles into a small basket. 
 
 Hot blood rushed to Eragon’s face as he watched her. He hoped that 
the moon was not bright enough to reveal that his cheeks had turned 
mottled red. “Where... where do you live? Do you and Islanzadí have a 
palace or castle... ?” 
 
 “We live in Tialdarí Hall, our family’s ancestral buildings, in the west-
ern part of Ellesméra. I would enjoy showing our home to you.” 
 
 “Ah.” A practical question suddenly intruded in Eragon’s muddled 
thoughts, driving away his embarrassment. “Arya, do you have any sib-
lings?” She shook her head. “Then you are the sole heir to the elven 
throne?” 
 
 “Of course. Why do you ask?” She sounded bemused by his curiosity. 
 
 “I don’t understand why you were allowed to become an ambassador to 
the Varden and dwarves, as well as ferry Saphira’s egg from here to Tron-
jheim. It’s too dangerous an errand for a princess, much less the queen-in-
waiting.” 
 
 “You mean it’s too dangerous for a human woman. I told you before 
that I am not one of your helpless females. What you fail to realize is that 
we view our monarchs differently than you or the dwarves. To us, a king 
or queen’s highest responsibility is to serve their people however and 

 
290
wherever possible. If that means forfeiting our lives in the process, we 
welcome the opportunity to prove our devotion to—as the dwarves 
say—hearth, hall, and honor. If I had died in the course of my duty, then 
a replacement successor would have been chosen from among our vari-
ous Houses. Even now I would not be required to become queen if I 
found the prospect distasteful. We do not choose leaders who are unwill-
ing to devote themselves wholeheartedly to their obligation.” She hesi-
tated, then hugged her knees against her chest and propped her chin on 
them. “I had many years to perfect those arguments with my mother.” 
For a minute, the wheet-wheet of the cicadas went undisturbed in the 
clearing. Then she asked, “How go your studies with Oromis?” 
 
 Eragon grunted as his foul temper returned on a wave of unpleasant 
memories, souring his pleasure at being with Arya. All he wanted to do 
was crawl into bed, go to sleep, and forget the day. “Oromis-elda,” he 
said, working each word around his mouth before letting it escape, “is 
quite thorough.” 
 
 He winced as she gripped his upper arm with bruising strength. “What 
has gone amiss?” 
 
 He tried to shrug her hand off. “Nothing.” 
 
 “I’ve traveled with you long enough to know when you’re happy, an-
gry... or in pain. Did something happen between you and Oromis? If so, 
you have to tell me so that it can be rectified as soon as possible. Or was 
it your back? We could—” 
 
 “It’s not my training!” Despite his pique, Eragon noticed that she 
seemed genuinely concerned, which pleased him. “Ask Saphira. She can 
tell you.” 
 
 “I want to hear it from you,” she said quietly. 
 
 The muscles in Eragon’s jaw spasmed as he clenched his teeth. In a low 
voice, no more than a whisper, he first described how he had failed at his 
meditation in the glade, then the incident that poisoned his heart like a 
viper coiled in his chest: his blessing. 
 
 Arya released his arm and clutched at the root of the Menoa tree, as if 
to steady herself. “Barzûl.” The dwarf curse alarmed him; he had never 
heard her use profanity before, and this one was particularly apt, for it 
meant ill fate. “I knew of your act in Farthen Dûr, for sure, but I never 
thought... I never suspected that such a thing could occur. I cry your par-

 
291
don, Eragon, for forcing you to leave your rooms tonight. I did not com-
prehend your discomfort. You must want to be alone.” 
 
 “No,” he said. “No, I appreciate the company and the things you’ve 
shown me.” He smiled at her, and after a moment, she smiled back. To-
gether they sat small and still at the base of the ancient tree and watched 
the moon arch high over the peaceful forest before it hid behind the 
gathering clouds. “I only wonder what will become of the child.” 
 
 High above their heads, Blagden ruffled his bone-white feathers and 
shrieked, “Wyrda!” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
292
A MAZE OF OPPOSITION 
 
 
 Nasuada crossed her arms without bothering to conceal her impatience 
as she examined the two men before her. 
 
 The one on the right had a neck so thick, it forced his head to jut for-
ward at nearly right angles to his shoulders, giving him a stubborn, dim-
witted appearance. This was intensified by his heavy brow with its two 
cliffs of matted hair—almost long enough to pull over his eyes—and bul-
bous lips that remained puckered into a pink mushroom, even when he 
spoke. She knew better than to put stock in his repulsive looks, though. 
No matter its rough housing, his tongue was as clever as a jester’s. 
 
 The only identifying feature of the second man was his pale skin, which 
refused to darken under Surda’s relentless sun, even though the Varden 
had been in Aberon, the capital, for some weeks now. From his coloring, 
Nasuada guessed he had been born in the northern reaches of the Empire. 
He held a knit wool cap that he wrung into a hard rope between his 
hands. 
 
 “You,” she said, pointing at him. “How many of your chickens did he 
kill again?” 
 
 “Thirteen, Ma’am.” 
 
 Nasuada returned her attention to the ugly man. “An unlucky number, 
by all accounts, Master Gamble. And so it has proved for you. You are 
guilty of both theft and destroying someone else’s property without of-
fering proper recompense.” 
 
 “I never denied it.” 
 
 “I only wonder how you ate thirteen chickens in four days. Are you 
ever full, Master Gamble?” 
 
 He gave her a jocular grin and scratched the side of his face. The rasp of 
his untrimmed fingernails over his stubble annoyed her, and it was only 
with an effort of will that she kept from asking him to stop. “Well, not to 
be disrespectful, Ma’am, but filling my stomach wouldn’t be a problem if 
you fed us properly, what with all the work we do. I’m a large man, an’ I 
need a bit o’ meat in my belly after half a day breaking rocks with a mat-
tock. I did my best to resist temptation, I did. But three weeks of short 
rations and watching these farmers drive around fat livestock they 

 
293
wouldn’t share even if a body were starving... Well, I’ll admit, it broke 
me. I’m not a strong man when it comes to food. I like it hot and I like 
plenty of it. An’ I don’t fancy I’m the only one willing to help himself.” 
 
 And that’s the heart of the problem, reflected Nasuada. The Varden 
could not afford to feed its members, not even with Surda’s king, Orrin, 
helping. Orrin had opened his treasury to them, but he had refused to 
behave as Galbatorix was wont to do when moving his army across the 
Empire, which was to appropriate supplies from his countrymen without 
paying for them. A noble sentiment, but one that only makes my task 
harder. Still, she knew that acts like those were what separated her, 
Orrin, Hrothgar, and Islanzadí from Galbatorix’s despotism. It would be so 
easy to cross that divide without noticing it. 
 
 “I understand your reasons, Master Gamble. However, although the 
Varden aren’t a country and we answer to no one’s authority but our 
own, that does not give you or anyone else leave to ignore the rule of law 
as laid down by my predecessors or as it’s observed here in Surda. There-
fore, I order you to pay a copper for each chicken you stole.” 
 
 Gamble surprised her by acceding without protest. “As you wish, 
Ma’am,” he said. 
 
 “That’s it?” exclaimed the pale man. He wrung his cap even tighter. 
“That’s no fair price. If I sold them in any market, they’d—” 
 
 She could not contain herself any longer. “Yes! You’d get more. But I 
happen to know that Master Gamble cannot afford to give you the 
chickens’ full price, as I’m the one who provides his salary! As I do yours. 
You forget that if I decided to acquire your poultry for the good of the 
Varden, you’d get no more than a copper a chicken and be lucky at that. 
Am I understood?” 
 
 “He can’t—” 
 
 “Am I understood?” 
 
 After a moment, the pale man subsided and muttered, “Yes, Ma’am.” 
 
 “Very well. You’re both dismissed.” With an expression of sardonic 
admiration, Gamble touched his brow and bowed to Nasuada before 
backing out of the stone room with his sullen opponent. “You too,” she 
said to the guards on either side of the door. 
 

 
294
 As soon as they were gone, she slumped in her chair with an exhausted 
sigh and reached for her fan, batting it over her face in a futile attempt to 
dissipate the pinpricks of sweat that accumulated on her forehead. The 
constant heat drained her strength and made even the smallest task ardu-
ous. 
 
 She suspected she would feel tired even if it were winter. Familiar as 
she was with the innermost secrets of the Varden, it still had taken more 
work than she expected to transport the entire organization from Farthen 
Dûr, through the Beor Mountains, and deliver them to Surda and 
Aberon. She shuddered, remembering long, uncomfortable days spent in 
the saddle. Planning and executing their departure had been exceedingly 
difficult, as was integrating the Varden into their new surroundings while 
simultaneously preparing for an attack on the Empire. I don’t have enough 
time each day to solve all these problems, she lamented. 
 
 Finally, she dropped the fan and rang the bellpull, summoning her 
handmaid, Farica. The banner hanging to the right of the cherrywood 
desk rippled as the door hidden behind it opened. Farica slipped out to 
stand with downcast eyes by Nasuada’s elbow. 
 
 “Are there any more?” asked Nasuada. 
 
 “No, Ma’am.” 
 
 She tried not to let her relief show. Once a week, she held an open 
court to resolve the Varden’s various disputes. Anyone who felt that they 
had been wronged could seek an audience with her and ask for her judg-
ment. She could not imagine a more difficult and thankless chore. As her 
father had often said after negotiating with Hrothgar, “A good compro-
mise leaves everyone angry.” And so it seemed. 
 
 Returning her attention to the matter at hand, she told Farica, “I want 
that Gamble reassigned. Give him a job where his talent with words will 
be of some use. Quartermaster, perhaps, just so long as it’s a job where 
he’ll get full rations. I don’t want to see him before me for stealing again.” 
 
 Farica nodded and went to the desk, where she recorded Nasuada’s in-
structions on a parchment scroll. That skill alone made her invaluable. 
Farica asked, “Where can I find him?” 
 
 “One of the work gangs in the quarry.” 
 
 “Yes, Ma’am. Oh, while you were occupied, King Orrin asked that you 

 
295
join him in his laboratory.” 
 
 “What has he done in there now, blind himself?” Nasuada washed her 
wrists and neck with lavender water, then checked her hair in the mirror 
of polished silver that Orrin had given her and tugged on her overgown 
until the sleeves were straight. 
 
 Satisfied with her appearance, she swept out of her chambers with 
Farica in tow. The sun was so bright today that no torches were needed 
to illuminate the inside of Borromeo Castle, nor could their added 
warmth have been tolerated. Shafts of light fell through the crossletted 
arrow slits and glowed upon the inner wall of the corridor, striping the 
air with bars of golden dust at regular intervals. Nasuada looked out one 
embrasure toward the barbican, where thirty or so of Orrin’s orange-clad 
cavalry soldiers were setting forth on another of their ceaseless rounds of 
patrols in the countryside surrounding Aberon. 
 
 Not that they could do much good if Galbatorix decided to attack us him-
self, she thought bitterly. Their only protection against that was Galba-
torix’s pride and, she hoped, his fear of Eragon. All leaders were aware of 
the risk of usurpation, but usurpers themselves were doubly afraid of the 
threat that a single determined individual could pose. Nasuada knew that 
she was playing an exceedingly dangerous game with the most powerful 
madman in Alagaësia. If she misjudged how far she could push him, she 
and the rest of the Varden would be destroyed, along with any hope of 
ending Galbatorix’s reign. 
 
 The clean smell of the castle reminded her of the times she had stayed 
there as a child, back when Orrin’s father, King Larkin, still ruled. She 
never saw much of Orrin then. He was five years older than her and al-
ready occupied with his duties as a prince. Nowadays, though, she often 
felt as if she were the elder one. 
 
 At the door to Orrin’s laboratory, she had to stop and wait for his 
bodyguards, who were always posted outside, to announce her presence 
to the king. Soon Orrin’s voice boomed out into the stairwell: “Lady 
Nasuada! I’m so glad you came. I have something to show you.” 
 
 Mentally bracing herself, she entered the laboratory with Farica. A 
maze of tables laden with a fantastic array of alembics, beakers, and re-
torts confronted them, like a glass thicket waiting to snag their dresses on 
any one of its myriad fragile branches. The heavy odor of metallic vapors 
made Nasuada’s eyes water. Lifting their hems off the floor, she and 
Farica wended their way in single file toward the back of the room, past 

 
296
hourglasses and scales, arcane tomes bound with black iron, dwarven as-
trolabes, and piles of phosphorescent crystal prisms that produced fitful 
blue flashes. 
 
 They met Orrin by a marble-topped bench, where he stirred a crucible 
of quicksilver with a glass tube that was closed at one end, open at the 
other, and must have measured at least three feet in length, although it 
was only a quarter of an inch thick. 
 
 “Sire,” said Nasuada. As befitted one of equal rank to the king, she re-
mained upright while Farica curtsied. “You seem to have recovered from 
the explosion last week.” 
 
 Orrin grimaced good-naturedly. “I learned that it’s not wise to combine 
phosphorus and water in an enclosed space. The result can be quite vio-
lent.” 
 
 “Has all of your hearing returned?” 
 
 “Not entirely, but...” Grinning like a boy with his first dagger, he lit a 
taper with the coals from a brazier, which she could not fathom how he 
endured in the stifling weather, carried the flaming brand back to the 
bench, and used it to start a pipe packed with cardus weed. 
 
 “I didn’t know that you smoked.” 
 
 “I don’t really,” he confessed, “except that I found that since my ear-
drum hasn’t completely sealed up yet, I can do this....” Drawing on the 
pipe, he puffed out his cheeks until a tendril of smoke issued from his 
left ear, like a snake leaving its den, and coiled up the side of his head. It 
was so unexpected, Nasuada burst out laughing, and after a moment, 
Orrin joined her, releasing a plume of smoke from his mouth. “It’s the 
most peculiar sensation,” he confided. “Tickles like crazy on the way out.” 
 
 Growing serious again, Nasuada asked, “Was there something else that 
you wished to discuss with me, Sire?” 
 
 He snapped his fingers. “Of course.” Dipping his long glass tube in the 
crucible, he filled it with quicksilver, then capped the open end with one 
finger and showed the whole thing to her. “Would you agree that the 
only thing in this tube is quicksilver?” 
 
 “I would.” Is this why he wanted to see me? 
 

 
297
 “And what about now?” With a quick movement, he inverted the tube 
and planted the open end inside the crucible, removing his finger. Instead 
of all pouring out, as Nasuada expected, the quicksilver in the tube 
dropped about halfway, then stopped and held its position. Orrin pointed 
to the empty section above the suspended metal. He asked, “What occu-
pies that space?” 
 
 “It must be air,” asserted Nasuada. 
 
 Orrin grinned and shook his head. “If that were true, how would the air 
bypass the quicksilver or diffuse through the glass? No routes are avail-
able by which the atmosphere can gain admission.” He gestured at Farica. 
“What’s your opinion, maid?” 
 
 Farica stared at the tube, then shrugged and said, “It can’t be nothing, 
Sire.” 
 
 “Ah, but that’s exactly what I think it is: nothing. I believe that I’ve 
solved one of the oldest conundrums of natural philosophy by creating 
and proving the existence of a vacuum! It completely invalidates Va-
cher’s theories and means that Ládin was actually a genius. Blasted elves 
always seem to be right.” 
 
 Nasuada struggled to remain cordial as she asked, “What purpose does 
it serve, though?” 
 
 “Purpose?” Orrin looked at her with genuine astonishment. “None, of 
course. At least not that I can think of. However, this will help us to un-
derstand the mechanics of our world, how and why things happen. It’s a 
wondrous discovery. Who knows what else it might lead to?” While he 
spoke, he emptied the tube and carefully placed it in a velvet-padded 
box that held similar delicate instruments. “The prospect that truly ex-
cites me, though, is of using magic to ferret out nature’s secrets. Why, 
just yesterday, with a single spell, Trianna helped me to discover two en-
tirely new gases. Imagine what could be learned if magic were systemati-
cally applied to the disciplines of natural philosophy. I’m considering 
learning magic myself, if I have the talent for it, and if I can convince 
some magic users to divulge their knowledge. It’s a pity that your Dragon 
Rider, Eragon, didn’t accompany you here; I’m sure that he could help 
me.” 
 
 Looking at Farica, Nasuada said, “Wait for me outside.” The woman 
curtsied and then departed. Once Nasuada heard the door to the labora-
tory close, she said, “Orrin. Have you taken leave of your senses?” 

 
298
 
 “Whatever do you mean?” 
 
 “While you spend your time locked in here conducting experiments 
that no one understands—endangering your well-being in the process—
your country totters on the brink of war. A myriad issues await your de-
cision, and you stand here blowing smoke and playing with quicksilver?” 
 
 His face hardened. “I am quite aware of my duties, Nasuada. You may 
lead the Varden, but I’m still king of Surda, and you would do well to re-
call that before you speak so disrespectfully. Need I remind you that your 
sanctuary here depends on my continued goodwill?” 
 
 She knew it was an idle threat; many of the Surdan people had relatives 
in the Varden, and vice versa. They were too closely linked for either of 
them to abandon the other. No, the real reason that Orrin had taken of-
fense was the question of authority. Since it was nigh impossible to keep 
large groups of armed warriors at the ready over extended periods of 
time—as Nasuada had learned, feeding that many inactive people was a 
logistical nightmare—the Varden had begun taking jobs, starting farms, 
and otherwise assimilating into their host country. Where will that leave 
me eventually? As the leader of a nonexistent army? A general or councilor 
under Orrin? Her position was precarious. If she moved too quickly or 
with too much initiative, Orrin would perceive it as a threat and turn 
against her, especially now that she was cloaked in the glamour of the 
Varden’s victory in Farthen Dûr. But if she waited too long, they would 
lose their chance to exploit Galbatorix’s momentary weakness. Her only 
advantage over the maze of opposition was her command of the one 
element that had instigated this act of the play: Eragon and Saphira. 
 
 She said, “I don’t seek to undermine your command, Orrin. That was 
never my intention, and I apologize if it appeared that way.” He bowed 
his neck with a stiff bob. Unsure of how to continue, she leaned on her 
fingertips against the lip of the bench. “It’s only... so many things must be 
done. I work night and day—I keep a tablet beside my bed for notes—
and yet I never catch up; I feel as if we are always balanced on the brink 
of disaster.” 
 
 Orrin picked up a pestle stained black from use and rolled it between 
his palms with a steady, hypnotic rhythm. “Before you came here... No, 
that’s not right. Before your Rider materialized fully formed from the 
ethers like Moratensis from his fountain, I expected to live my life as my 
father and grandfather before me. That is, opposing Galbatorix in secret. 
You must excuse me if it takes a while to accustom myself to this new 

 
299
reality.” 
 
 It was as much contrition as she could expect in return. “I understand.” 
 
 He stopped the pestle in its path for a brief moment. “You are newly 
come to your power, whereas I have held mine for a number of years. If I 
may be arrogant enough to offer advice, I’ve found that it’s essential for 
my sanity to allocate a certain portion of the day for my own interests.” 
 
 “I couldn’t do that,” objected Nasuada. “Every moment I waste might 
be the moment of effort that’s needed to defeat Galbatorix.” 
 
 The pestle paused again. “You do the Varden a disservice if you insist 
on overworking yourself. No one can function properly without occa-
sional peace and quiet. They don’t have to be long breaks, just five or ten 
minutes. You could even practice your archery, and then you would still 
serve your goals, albeit in a different manner.... That’s why I had this labo-
ratory constructed in the first place. That’s why I blow smoke and play 
with quicksilver, as you put it—so that I don’t scream with frustration 
throughout the rest of the day.” 
 
 Despite her reluctance to surrender her view of Orrin as a feckless lay-
about, Nasuada could not help but acknowledge the validity of his argu-
ment. “I will keep your recommendation in mind.” 
 
 Some of his former levity returned as he smiled. “That’s all I ask.” 
 
 Walking to the window, she pushed the shutters farther open and 
gazed down upon Aberon, with its cries of quick-fingered merchants 
hawking their wares to unsuspecting customers, the clotted yellow dust 
blowing from the western road as a caravan approached the city gates, 
the air that shimmered over clay tile roofs and carried the scent of cardus 
weed and incense from the marble temples, and the fields that sur-
rounded Aberon like the outstretched petals of a flower. 
 
 Without turning around, she asked, “Have you received copies of our 
latest reports from the Empire?” 
 
 “I have.” He joined her at the window. 
 
 “What’s your opinion of them? 
 
 “That they’re too meager and incomplete to extract any meaningful 
conclusions.” 

 
300
 
 “They’re the best we have, though. Give me your suspicions and your 
hunches. Extrapolate from the known facts like you would if this were 
one of your experiments.” She smiled to herself. “I promise that I won’t 
attach meaning to what you say.” 
 
 She had to wait for his reply, and when it came, it was with the dolor-
ous weight of a doomsday prophecy. “Increased taxes, emptied garrisons, 
horses and oxen confiscated throughout the Empire... It seems that Gal-
batorix gathers his forces in preparation to confront us, though I cannot 
tell whether he means to do it in offense or defense.” Revolving shadows 
cooled their faces as a cloud of starlings whirled across the sun. “The 
question that weighs upon my mind now is, how long will it take him to 
mobilize? For that will determine the course of our strategies.” 
 
 “Weeks. Months. Years. I cannot predict his actions.” 
 
 He nodded. “Have your agents continued to spread tidings of Eragon?” 
 
 “It has become increasingly dangerous, but yes. My hope is that if we 
inundate cities like Dras-Leona with rumors of Eragon’s prowess, when 
we actually reach the city and they see him, they will join us of their own 
accord and we can avoid a siege.” 
 
 “War is rarely so easy.” 
 
 She let the comment pass uncontested. “And how fares the mobiliza-
tion of your own army? The Varden, as always, are ready to fight.” 
 
 Orrin spread his hands in a placating gesture. “It’s difficult to rouse a na-
tion, Nasuada. There are nobles who I must convince to back me, armor 
and weapons to be constructed, supplies to be gathered....” 
 
 “And in the meantime, how do I feed my people? We need more land 
than you allotted us—” 
 
 “Well, I know it,” he said. 
 
 “—and we’ll only get it by invading the Empire, unless you fancy mak-
ing the Varden a permanent addition to Surda. If so, you’ll have to find 
homes for the thousands of people I brought from Farthen Dûr, which 
won’t please your existing citizens. Whatever your choice, choose 
quickly, because I fear that if you continue to procrastinate, the Varden 
will disintegrate into an uncontrollable horde.” She tried not to make it 

 
301
sound like a threat. 
 
 Nevertheless, Orrin obviously did not appreciate the insinuation. His 
upper lip curled and he said, “Your father never let his men get out of 
hand. I trust you won’t either, if you expect to remain leader of the 
Varden. As for our preparations, there’s a limit to what we can do in so 
short a time; you’ll just have to wait until we are ready.” 
 
 She gripped the windowsill until veins stood out on her wrists and her 
fingernails sank into the crevices between the stones, yet she allowed 
none of her anger to color her voice: “In that case, will you lend the 
Varden more gold for food?” 
 
 “No. I’ve given you all the money I can spare.” 
 
 “How will we eat, then?” 
 
 “I would suggest that you raise the funds yourself.” 
 
 Furious, she gave him her widest, brightest smile—holding it long 
enough to make him shift with unease—and then curtsied as deeply as a 
servant, never letting her demented grimace waver. “Farewell then, Sire. I 
hope that the rest of your day is as enjoyable as our conversation was.” 
 
 Orrin muttered an unintelligible response as she swept back to the 
laboratory’s entrance. In her anger, Nasuada caught her right sleeve on a 
jade bottle and knocked it over, cracking the stone and releasing a flood 
of yellow liquid that splattered her sleeve and soaked her skirt. She 
flicked her wrist in annoyance without stopping. 
 
 Farica rejoined her in the stairwell, and together they traversed the 
warren of passageways to Nasuada’s chambers. 
 
 
 
 

 
302
HANGING BY A THREAD 
 
 
 Throwing open the doors to her rooms, Nasuada strode to her desk, 
then dropped into a chair, blind to her surroundings. Her spine was so 
rigid that her shoulders did not touch the back. She felt frozen by the in-
soluble quandary the Varden faced. The rise and fall of her chest slowed 
until it was imperceptible. I have failed, was all she could think. 
 
 “Ma’am, your sleeve!” 
 
 Jolted from her reverie, Nasuada looked down to find Farica beating at 
her right arm with a cleaning rag. A wisp of smoke rose from the em-
broidered sleeve. Alarmed, Nasuada pushed herself out of the chair and 
twisted her arm, trying to find the cause of the smoke. Her sleeve and 
skirt were disintegrating into chalky cobwebs that emitted acrid fumes. 
 
 “Get me out of this,” she said. 
 
 She held her contaminated arm away from her body and forced herself 
to remain still as Farica unlaced her overgown. The handmaid’s fingers 
scrabbled against Nasuada’s back with frantic haste, fumbling with the 
knots, and then finally loosening the wool shell that encased Nasuada’s 
torso. As soon as the overgown sagged, Nasuada yanked her arms out of 
the sleeves and clawed her way free of the robe. 
 
 Panting, she stood by the desk, clad only in her slippers and linen che-
mise. To her relief, the expensive chainsil had escaped harm, although it 
had acquired a foul reek. 
 
 “Did it burn you?” asked Farica. Nasuada shook her head, not trusting 
her tongue to respond. Farica nudged the overgown with the tip of her 
shoe. “What evil is this?” 
 
 “One of Orrin’s foul concoctions,” croaked Nasuada. “I spilled it in his 
laboratory.” Calming herself with long breaths, she examined the ruined 
gown with dismay. It had been woven by the dwarf women of Dûrgrimst 
Ingeitum as a gift for her last birthday and was one of the finest pieces in 
her wardrobe. She had nothing to replace it, nor could she justify com-
missioning a new dress, considering the Varden’s financial difficulties. 
Somehow I will have to make do without. 
 
 Farica shook her head. “It’s a shame to lose such a pretty dress.” She 
went round the desk to a sewing basket and returned with a pair of 

 
303
etched scissors. “We might as well save as much of the cloth as we can. 
I’ll cut off the ruined parts and have them burned.” 
 
 Nasuada scowled and paced the length of the room, seething with an-
ger at her own clumsiness and at having another problem added to her 
already overwhelming list of worries. “What am I going to wear to court 
now?” she demanded. 
 
 The scissors bit into the soft wool with brisk authority. “Mayhap your 
linen dress.” 
 
 “It’s too casual to appear in before Orrin and his nobles.” 
 
 “Give me a chance with it, Ma’am. I’m sure that I can alter it so it’s ser-
viceable. By the time I’m done, it’ll look twice as grand as this one ever 
did.” 
 
 “No, no. It won’t work. They’ll just laugh at me. It’s hard enough to 
command their respect when I’m dressed properly, much less if I’m 
wearing patched gowns that advertise our poverty.” 
 
 The older woman fixed Nasuada with a stern gaze. “It will work, so 
long as you don’t apologize for your appearance. Not only that, I guaran-
tee that the other ladies will be so taken with your new fashion that 
they’ll imitate you. Just you wait and see.” Going to the door, she cracked 
it open and handed the damaged fabric to one of the guards outside. 
“Your mistress wants this burned. Do it in secret and breathe not a word 
of this to another soul or you’ll have me to answer to.” The guard saluted. 
 
 Nasuada could not help smiling. “How would I function without you, 
Farica?” 
 
 “Quite well, I should think.” 
 
 After donning her green hunting frock—which, with its light skirt, 
provided some respite from the day’s heat—Nasuada decided that even 
though she was ill disposed toward Orrin, she would take his advice and 
break with her regular schedule to do nothing more important than help 
Farica rip out stitches from the overgown. She found the repetitive task 
an excellent way to focus her thoughts. While she pulled on the threads, 
she discussed the Varden’s predicament with Farica, in the hope that she 
might perceive a solution that had escaped Nasuada. 
 
 In the end, Farica’s only assistance was to observe, “Seems most matters 

 
304
in this world have their root in gold. If we had enough of it, we could 
buy Galbatorix right off his black throne... might not even have to fight 
his men.” 
 
 Did I really expect that someone else would do my job for me? Nasuada 
asked herself. I led us into this blind and I have to lead us out. 
 
 Intending to cut open a seam, she extended her arm and snagged the tip 
of her knife on a fringe of bobbin lace, slicing it in half. She stared at the 
ragged wound in the lace, at the frayed ends of the parchment-colored 
strands that wriggled across the overgown like so many contorted worms, 
stared and felt a hysterical laugh claw at her throat even as a tear formed 
in her eye. Could her luck be any worse? 
 
 The bobbin lace was the most valuable part of the dress. Even though 
lace required skill to make, its rarity and expense were mainly due to its 
central ingredient: vast, copious, mind-numbing, and deadening amounts 
of time. It took so long to produce that if you attempted to create a lace 
veil by yourself, your progress would be measured not in weeks but in 
months. Ounce for ounce, lace was worth more than gold or silver. 
 
 She ran her fingers over the band of threads, pausing on the rift that she 
had created. It’s not as if lace takes that much energy, just time. She hated 
making it herself. Energy... energy... At that moment, a series of images 
flashed through her mind: Orrin talking about using magic for research; 
Trianna, the woman who had helmed Du Vrangr Gata since the Twins’ 
deaths; looking up at one of the Varden’s healers while he explained the 
principles of magic to Nasuada when she was only five or six years old. 
The disparate experiences formed a chain of reasoning that was so outra-
geous and unlikely, it finally released the laugh imprisoned in her throat. 
 
 Farica gave her an odd look and waited for an explanation. Standing, 
Nasuada tumbled half the overgown off her lap and onto the floor. 
“Fetch me Trianna this instant,” she said. “I don’t care what she’s doing; 
bring her here.” 
 
 The skin around Farica’s eyes tightened, but she curtsied and said, “As 
you wish, Ma’am.” She departed through the hidden servants’ door. 
 
 “Thank you,” Nasuada whispered in the empty room. 
 
 She understood her maid’s reluctance; she too felt uncomfortable 
whenever she had to interact with magic users. Indeed, she only trusted 
Eragon because he was a Rider—although that was no proof of virtue, as 

 
305
Galbatorix had shown—and because of his oath of fealty, which Nasuada 
knew he would never break. It scared her to consider magicians’ and sor-
cerers’ powers. The thought that a seemingly ordinary person could kill 
with a word; invade your mind if he or she wished; cheat, lie, and steal 
without being caught; and otherwise defy society with near impunity... 
 
 Her heart quickened. 
 
 How did you enforce the law when a certain segment of the popula-
tion possessed special powers? At its most basic level, the Varden’s war 
against the Empire was nothing more than an attempt to bring to justice 
a man who had abused his magical abilities and to prevent him from 
committing further crimes. All this pain and destruction because no one 
had the strength to defeat Galbatorix. He won’t even die after a normal 
span of years! 
 
 Although she disliked magic, she knew that it would play a crucial role 
in removing Galbatorix and that she could not afford to alienate its prac-
titioners until victory was assured. Once that occurred, she intended to 
resolve the problem that they presented. 
 
 A brazen knock on her chamber door disturbed her thoughts. Fixing a 
pleasant smile on her face and guarding her mind as she had been trained, 
Nasuada said, “Enter!” It was important that she appear polite after sum-
moning Trianna in such a rude manner. 
 
 The door thrust open and the brunette sorceress strode into the room, 
her tousled locks piled high above her head with obvious haste. She 
looked as if she had just been roused from bed. Bowing in the dwarven 
fashion, she said, “You asked for me, Lady?” 
 
 “I did.” Relaxing into a chair, Nasuada let her gaze slowly drift up and 
down Trianna. The sorceress lifted her chin under Nasuada’s examina-
tion. “I need to know: What is the most important rule of magic?” 
 
 Trianna frowned. “That whatever you do with magic requires the same 
amount of energy as it would to do otherwise.” 
 
 “And what you can do is only limited by your ingenuity and by your 
knowledge of the ancient language?” 
 
 “Other strictures apply, but in general, yes. Lady, why do you ask? 
These are basic principles of magic that, while not commonly bandied 
about, I am sure you are familiar with.” 

 
306
 
 “I am. I wished to ensure that I understood them properly.” Without 
moving from her chair, Nasuada reached down and lifted the overgown 
so that Trianna could see the mutilated lace. “So then, within those lim-
its, you should be able to devise a spell that will allow you to manufac-
ture lace with magic.” 
 
 A condescending sneer distorted the sorceress’s dark lips. “Du Vrangr 
Gata has more important duties than repairing your clothes, Lady. Our 
art is not so common as to be employed for mere whims. I’m sure that 
you will find your seamstresses and tailors more than capable of fulfilling 
your request. Now, if you will excuse me, I—” 
 
 “Be quiet, woman,” said Nasuada in a flat voice. Astonishment muted 
Trianna in midsentence. “I see that I must teach Du Vrangr Gata the 
same lesson that I taught the Council of Elders: I may be young, but I am 
no child to be patronized. I ask about lace because if you can manufac-
ture it quickly and easily with magic, then we can support the Varden by 
selling inexpensive bobbin and needle lace throughout the Empire. Gal-
batorix’s own people will provide the funds we need to survive.” 
 
 “But that’s ridiculous,” protested Trianna. Even Farica looked skeptical. 
“You can’t pay for a war with lace. ” 
 
 Nasuada raised an eyebrow. “Why not? Women who otherwise could 
never afford to own lace will leap at the chance to buy ours. Every 
farmer’s wife who longs to appear richer than she is will want it. Even 
wealthy merchants and nobles will give us their gold because our lace 
will be finer than any thrown or stitched by human hands. We’ll garner a 
fortune to rival the dwarves’. That is, if you are skilled enough in magic 
to do what I want.” 
 
 Trianna tossed her hair. “You doubt my abilities?” 
 
 “Can it be done!” 
 
 Trianna hesitated, then took the overgown from Nasuada and studied 
the lace strip for a long while. At last she said, “It should be possible, but 
I’ll have to conduct some tests before I know for certain.” 
 
 “Do so immediately. From now on, this is your most important assign-
ment. And find an experienced lace maker to advise you on the patterns.” 
 
 “Yes, Lady Nasuada.” 

 
307
 
 Nasuada allowed her voice to soften. “Good. I also want you to select 
the brightest members of Du Vrangr Gata and work with them to invent 
other magical techniques that will help the Varden. That’s your responsi-
bility, not mine.” 
 
 “Yes, Lady Nasuada.” 
 
 “Now you are excused. Report back to me tomorrow morning.” 
 
 “Yes, Lady Nasuada.” 
 
 Satisfied, Nasuada watched the sorceress depart, then closed her eyes 
and allowed herself to enjoy a moment of pride for what she had accom-
plished. She knew that no man, not even her father, would have thought 
of her solution. “This is my contribution to the Varden,” she told herself, 
wishing that Ajihad could witness it. Louder, she asked, “Did I surprise 
you, Farica?” 
 
 “You always do, Ma’am.” 
 
 
 
 

 
308
ELVA 
 
 
 “Ma’am?... You’re needed, Ma’am.” 
 
 “What?” Reluctant to move, Nasuada opened her eyes and saw Jör-
mundur enter the room. The wiry veteran pulled off his helm, tucked it 
in the crook of his right arm, and made his way to her with his left hand 
planted on the pommel of his sword. 
 
 The links of his hauberk clinked as he bowed. “My Lady.” 
 
 “Welcome, Jörmundur. How is your son today?” She was pleased that 
he had come. Of all the members of the Council of Elders, he had ac-
cepted her leadership the most easily, serving her with the same dogged 
loyalty and determination as he had Ajihad. If all my warriors were like 
him, no one could stop us. 
 
 “His cough has subsided.” 
 
 “I’m glad to hear it. Now, what brings you?” 
 
 Lines appeared on Jörmundur’s forehead. He ran his free hand over his 
hair, which was tied back in a ponytail, then caught himself and pushed 
his hand back down to his side. “Magic, of the strangest kind.” 
 
 “Oh?” 
 
 “Do you remember the babe that Eragon blessed?” 
 
 “Aye.” Nasuada had seen her only once, but she was well aware of the 
exaggerated tales about the child that circulated among the Varden, as 
well as the Varden’s hopes for what the girl might achieve once she grew 
up. Nasuada was more pragmatic about the subject. Whatever the infant 
became, it would not be for many years, by which time the battle with 
Galbatorix would already be won or lost. 
 
 “I’ve been asked to take you to her.” 
 
 “Asked? By whom? And why?” 
 
 “A boy on the practice field told me that you should visit the child. 
Said that you would find it interesting. He refused to give me his name, 
but he looked like what that witch’s werecat is supposed to turn into, so 

 
309
I thought... Well, I thought you should know.” Jörmundur looked embar-
rassed. “I asked my men questions about the girl, and I heard things... that 
she’s different. ” 
 
 “In what way?” 
 
 He shrugged. “Enough to believe that you should do what the werecat 
says.” 
 
 Nasuada frowned. She knew from the old stories that ignoring a were-
cat was the height of folly and often led to one’s doom. However, his 
companion—Angela the herbalist—was another magic user that Nasuada 
did not entirely trust; she was too independent and unpredictable. 
“Magic,” she said, making it a curse. 
 
 “Magic,” agreed Jörmundur, though he used it as a word of awe and 
fear. 
 
 “Very well, let us go visit this child. Is she within the castle?” 
 
 “Orrin gave her and her caretaker rooms on the west side of the keep.” 
 
 “Take me to her.” 
 
 Gathering up her skirts, Nasuada ordered Farica to postpone the rest of 
the day’s appointments, then left the chambers. Behind her, she heard 
Jörmundur snap his fingers as he directed four guards to take up positions 
around her. A moment later, he joined her side, pointing out their course. 
 
 The heat within Borromeo Castle had increased to the point where 
they felt as if they were trapped within a giant bread oven. The air 
shimmered like liquid glass along the windowsills. 
 
 Though she was uncomfortable, Nasuada knew that she dealt with the 
heat better than most people because of her swarthy skin. The ones who 
had the hardest time enduring the high temperatures were men like Jör-
mundur and her guards, who had to wear their armor all day long, even if 
they were stationed out under the lidless gaze of the sun. 
 
 Nasuada kept close watch on the five men as sweat gathered on their 
exposed skin and their breathing became ever more ragged. Since they 
had arrived in Aberon, a number of the Varden had fainted from heat-
stroke—two of whom died an hour or two later—and she had no inten-
tion of losing more of her subjects by driving them beyond their physical 

 
310
limits. 
 
 When she deemed they needed to rest, she bade them to stop—
overriding their objections—and get drinks of water from a servant. “I 
can’t have you toppling like ninepins.” 
 
 They had to break twice more before they reached their destination, a 
nondescript door recessed in the inner wall of the corridor. The floor 
around it was littered with gifts. 
 
 Jörmundur knocked, and a quavering voice from inside asked, “Who is 
it?” 
 
 “Lady Nasuada, come to see the child,” he said. 
 
 “Be you of true heart and steadfast resolve?” 
 
 This time Nasuada answered, “My heart is pure and my resolve is as 
iron.” 
 
 “Cross the threshold, then, and be welcome.” 
 
 The door swung open to an entryway lit by a single red dwarf lantern. 
No one was at the door. Proceeding inward, Nasuada saw that the walls 
and ceiling were swathed with layers of dark fabric, giving the place the 
appearance of a cave or lair. To her surprise, the air was quite cold, al-
most chilly, like a brisk autumn night. Apprehension sank its poisonous 
claws into her belly. Magic. 
 
 A black mesh curtain blocked her way. Brushing it aside, she found 
herself in what was once a sitting room. The furniture had been removed, 
except for a line of chairs pushed against the shrouded walls. A cluster of 
faint dwarf lanterns were hung in a dimple of the sagging fabric overhead, 
casting weird multicolored shadows in every direction. 
 
 A bent crone watched her from the depths of one corner, bracketed by 
Angela the herbalist and the werecat, who stood with his hackles raised. 
In the center of the room knelt a pale girl that Nasuada took to be three 
or four years old. The girl picked at a platter of food on her lap. No one 
spoke. 
 
 Confused, Nasuada asked, “Where is the baby?” 
 
 The girl looked up. 

 
311
 
 Nasuada gasped as she saw the dragon mark bright upon the child’s 
brow and as she peered deep into her violet eyes. The girl quirked her 
lips with a terrible, knowing smile. “I am Elva.” 
 
 Nasuada recoiled without thinking, clutching at the dagger she kept 
strapped to her left forearm. It was an adult’s voice and filled with an 
adult’s experience and cynicism. It sounded profane coming from the 
mouth of a child. 
 
 “Don’t run,” said Elva. “I’m your friend.” She put the platter aside; it was 
empty now. To the crone, she said, “More food.” The old woman hurried 
from the room. Then Elva patted the floor beside her. “Please, sit. I have 
been waiting for you ever since I learned to talk.” 
 
 Keeping her grip on her dagger, Nasuada lowered herself to the stones. 
“When was that?” 
 
 “Last week.” Elva folded her hands in her lap. She fixed her ghastly eyes 
on Nasuada, pinning her in place through the unnatural strength of her 
gaze. Nasuada felt as if a violet lance had pierced her skull and was twist-
ing inside her mind, tearing apart her thoughts and memories. She fought 
the desire to scream. 
 
 Leaning forward, Elva reached out and cupped Nasuada’s cheek with 
one soft hand. “You know, Ajihad could not have led the Varden better 
than you have. You chose the correct path. Your name will be praised for 
centuries for having the courage and foresight to move the Varden to 
Surda and attack the Empire when everyone else thought it was insane to 
do so.” 
 
 Nasuada gaped at the girl, stunned. Like a key matched to a lock, Elva’s 
words perfectly addressed Nasuada’s primal fears, the doubts that kept 
her awake at night, sweating in the darkness. An involuntary surge of 
emotion rushed through her, bolstering her with a sense of confidence 
and peace that she had not possessed since before Ajihad’s death. Tears of 
relief burst from her eyes and rolled down her face. It was as if Elva had 
known exactly what to say in order to comfort her. 
 
 Nasuada loathed her for it. 
 
 Her euphoria warred against her distaste for how this moment of 
weakness had been induced and by whom. Nor did she trust the girl’s 
motivation. 

 
312
 
 “What are you?” she demanded. 
 
 “I am what Eragon made me.” 
 
 “He blessed you.” 
 
 The dreadful, ancient eyes were obscured for a moment as Elva 
blinked. “He did not understand his actions. Since Eragon ensorcelled me, 
whenever I see a person, I sense all the hurts that beset him and are 
about to beset him. When I was smaller, I could do nothing about it. So I 
grew bigger.” 
 
 “Why would—” 
 
 “The magic in my blood drives me to protect people from pain... no 
matter the injury to myself or whether I want to help or not.” Her smile 
acquired a bitter twist. “It costs me dearly if I resist the urge.” 
 
 As Nasuada digested the implications, she realized that Elva’s unsettling 
aspect was a by-product of the suffering that she had been exposed to. 
Nasuada shivered at the thought of what the girl had endured. It must 
have torn her apart to have this compulsion and yet be unable to act on it. 
Against her better judgment, she began to feel a measure of sympathy for 
Elva. 
 
 “Why have you told me this?” 
 
 “I thought that you should know who and what I am.” Elva paused, and 
the fire in her gaze strengthened. “And that I will fight for you however I 
can. Use me as you would an assassin—in hiding, in the dark, and with-
out mercy.” She laughed with a high, chilling voice. “You wonder why; I 
see you do. Because unless this war ends, and sooner rather than later, it 
will drive me insane. I find it hard enough to deal with the agonies of 
everyday life without also having to confront the atrocities of battle. Use 
me to end it and I’ll ensure that your life is as happy as any human has 
had the privilege to experience.” 
 
 At that moment, the crone scurried back into the room, bowed to 
Elva, and handed her a new platter of food. It was a physical relief to 
Nasuada as Elva looked down and attacked a leg of mutton, cramming 
the meat into her mouth with both hands. She ate with the ravenous in-
tensity of a gorging wolf, displaying a complete lack of decorum. With 
her violet eyes hidden and her dragon mark covered by black bangs, she 

 
313
once again appeared to be nothing more than an innocent child. 
 
 Nasuada waited until it became apparent that Elva had said all she was 
going to. Then—at a gesture from Angela—she accompanied the herbal-
ist through a side door, leaving the pale girl sitting alone in the center of 
the dark, cloth-bound room, like a dire fetus nestled in its womb, waiting 
for the right moment to emerge. 
 
 Angela made sure that the door was closed and whispered, “All she 
does is eat and eat. We can’t sate her appetite with the current rations. 
Can you—” 
 
 “She’ll be fed. You needn’t worry about it.” Nasuada rubbed her arms, 
trying to eradicate the memory of those awful, horrible eyes.... 
 
 “Thank you.” 
 
 “Has this ever happened to anyone else?” 
 
 Angela shook her head until her curly hair bounced on her shoulders. 
“Not in the entire history of magic. I tried to cast her future, but it’s a 
hopeless quagmire—lovely word, quagmire —because her life interacts 
with so many others.” 
 
 “Is she dangerous?” 
 
 “We’re all dangerous.” 
 
 “You know what I mean.” 
 
 Angela shrugged. “She’s more dangerous than some and less than others. 
The one she’s most likely to kill, though, is herself. If she meets someone 
who’s about to be hurt and Eragon’s spell catches her unawares, then 
she’ll take the doomed person’s place. That’s why she stays inside most of 
the time.” 
 
 “How far in advance can she foretell events?” 
 
 “Two or three hours at the most.” 
 
 Leaning against the wall, Nasuada considered the newest complication 
in her life. Elva could be a potent weapon if she were applied correctly. 
Through her, I can discern my opponents’ troubles and weaknesses, as well 
as what will please them and make them amenable to my wishes. In an 

 
314
emergency, the girl could also act as an infallible guard if one of the 
Varden, like Eragon or Saphira, had to be protected. 
 
 She can’t be left unsupervised. I need someone to watch her. Someone who 
understands magic and is comfortable enough with their own identity to re-
sist Elva’s influence... and who I can trust to be reliable and honest. She 
immediately discounted Trianna. 
 
 Nasuada looked at Angela. Though she was wary of the herbalist, she 
knew that Angela had helped the Varden with matters of the utmost 
delicacy and importance—like healing Eragon—and had asked for noth-
ing in return. Nasuada could think of no one else who had the time, in-
clination, and expertise to look after Elva. 
 
 “I realize,” said Nasuada, “that this is presumptuous of me, as you aren’t 
under my command and I know little of your life or duties, but I have a 
favor to ask of you.” 
 
 “Proceed.” Angela waved a hand. 
 
 Nasuada faltered, disconcerted, then forged ahead. “Would you be will-
ing to keep an eye on Elva for me? I need—” 
 
 “Of course! And I’ll keep two eyes on her, if I can spare them. I relish 
the opportunity to study her.” 
 
 “You’ll have to report to me,” warned Nasuada. 
 
 “The poison dart hidden in the raisin tart. Ah, well, I suppose I can 
manage.” 
 
 “I have your word, then?” 
 
 “You have my word.” 
 
 Relieved, Nasuada groaned and sank into a nearby chair. “Oh, what a 
mess. What a quagmire. As Eragon’s liegelord, I’m responsible for his 
deeds, but I never imagined that he would do anything as dreadful as this. 
It’s a blight on my honor as much as his.” 
 
 A ripple of sharp pops filled the room as Angela cracked her knuckles. 
“Yes. I intend to speak to him about it once he returns from Ellesméra.” 
 
 Her expression was so fierce, it alarmed Nasuada. “Well, don’t hurt 

 
315
him. We need him.” 
 
 “I won’t... permanently.” 
 
 
 
 

 
316
RESURGENCE 
 
 
 A blast of ravening wind tore Eragon from his sleep. 
 
 Blankets flapped over him as a tempest clawed at his room, hurling his 
possessions into the air and knocking the lanterns against the walls. Out-
side, the sky was black with thunderheads. 
 
 Saphira watched as Eragon staggered upright and fought to keep his 
balance as the tree swayed like a ship at sea. He lowered his head against 
the gale and made his way around the room, clutching at the wall until 
he reached the teardrop portal through which the storm howled. 
 
 Eragon looked past the heaving floor to the ground below. It appeared 
to rock back and forth. He swallowed and tried to ignore the churning in 
his stomach. 
 
 By touch he found the edge of the cloth membrane that could be 
pulled out of the wood to cover the opening. He prepared to launch 
himself from one side of the gap to the next. If he slipped, nothing would 
stop him from falling onto the roots of the tree. 
 
 Wait, said Saphira. 
 
 She backed off the low pedestal where she slept and laid her tail along-
side him so that he could use it as a handrail. 
 
 Holding the cloth with just his right hand, which took all his strength, 
Eragon used the line of spikes on Saphira’s tail to pull himself across the 
portal. As soon as he reached the far side, he grabbed the cloth with both 
hands and pressed its edge into the groove that locked it in place. 
 
 The room went silent. 
 
 The membrane bulged inward under the force of the angry elements 
but showed no sign of giving. Eragon poked it with his finger. The fabric 
was as taut as a drum. 
 
 It’s amazing what the elves can do, he said. 
 
 Saphira cocked her head, then lifted it so that her head was flat against 
the ceiling while she listened. You’d better close up the study; it’s being 
wrecked. 

 
317
 
 As he headed toward the stairs, the tree jolted and his leg buckled, 
sending him down hard on one knee. 
 
 “Blast it,” he growled. 
 
 The study was a whirlwind of paper and quills, darting about as if they 
had a mind of their own. He dove into the flurry with his arms wrapped 
around his head. It felt like he was being pelted with stones when the 
tips of the quills struck him. 
 
 Eragon struggled to close the upper portal without Saphira’s help. The 
moment he did, pain—endless, mind-numbing pain— ripped open his 
back. 
 
 He screamed once and went hoarse from the strength of his cry. His vi-
sion flashed with red and yellow, then faded to black as he toppled to his 
side. Below, he heard Saphira howl with frustration; the staircase was too 
small and, outside, the wind was too ferocious for her to reach him. His 
connection with her receded. He surrendered to the waiting darkness as a 
release from his agony. 
 
   
 
 A sour taste filled Eragon’s mouth when he woke. He did not know 
how long he had been lying on the floor, but the muscles in his arms and 
legs were knotted from being curled into a tight ball. The storm still as-
sailed the tree, accompanied by a thudding rain that matched the pound-
ing in his head. 
 
 Saphira... ? 
 
 I’m here. Can you come down? 
 
 I’ll try. 
 
 He was too weak to stand on the pitching floor, so he crawled to the 
stairs and slid down one at a time, wincing with each impact. Halfway 
down, he encountered Saphira, who had jammed her head and neck as 
far up the stairs as she could, gouging the wood in her frenzy. 
 
 Little one. She flicked out her tongue and caught him on the hand with 
its rough tip. He smiled. Then she arched her neck and tried to pull back, 
but to no avail. 

 
318
 
 What’s wrong? 
 
 I’m stuck. 
 
 You’re...He could not help it; he laughed even though it hurt. The 
situation was too absurd. 
 
 She snarled and heaved her entire body, shaking the tree with her ef-
forts and knocking him over. Then she collapsed, panting. Well, don’t just 
sit there grinning like an idiot fox. Help me! 
 
 Fighting the urge to giggle, he put his foot on her nose and pushed as 
hard as he dared while Saphira twisted and squirmed in an attempt to 
free herself. 
 
 It took more than ten minutes before she succeeded. Only then did Er-
agon see the full extent of the damage to the stairwell. He groaned. Her 
scales had cut through the bark and obliterated the delicate patterns 
grown out from the wood. 
 
 Oops, said Saphira. 
 
 At least you did it, not me.The elves might forgive you. They’d sing dwarf 
love ballads night and day if you asked them to. 
 
 He joined Saphira on her dais and huddled against the flat scales of her 
belly, listening as the storm roared about them. The wide membrane be-
came translucent whenever lightning pulsed in jagged shards of light. 
 
 What time do you think it is? 
 
 Several hours before we must meet Oromis. Go on, sleep and recover. I 
will keep guard. 
 
 He did just that, despite the tree’s churning. 
 
 
 
 

 
319
WHY DO YOU FIGHT? 
 
 
 Oromis’s timepiece buzzed like a giant hornet, blaring in Eragon’s ears 
until he retrieved the bauble and wound the mechanism. 
 
 His bashed knee had turned purple, he was sore both from his attack 
and the elves’ Dance of Snake and Crane, and he could do no more than 
croak with his ragged throat. The worst injury, though, was his sense of 
foreboding that this would not be the last time Durza’s wound would 
trouble him. The prospect sickened him, draining his strength and will. 
 
 So many weeks passed between attacks, he said, I began to hope that 
maybe, just maybe, I was healed.... I suppose sheer luck is the only reason I 
was spared that long. 
 
 Extending her neck, Saphira nuzzled him on the arm. You know you 
aren’t alone, little one. I’ll do everything I can to help. He responded with 
a weak smile. Then she licked his face and added, You should get ready to 
leave. 
 
 I know. He stared at the floor, unwilling to move, then dragged himself 
to the wash closet, where he scrubbed himself clean and used magic to 
shave. 
 
 He was in the middle of drying himself when he felt a presence touch 
his mind. Without pausing to think, Eragon began to fortify his mind, 
concentrating on an image of his big toe to the exclusion of all else. Then 
he heard Oromis say, Admirable, but unnecessary. Bring Zar’roc with you 
today. The presence vanished. 
 
 Eragon released a shaky breath. I need to be more alert, he told Saphira. I 
would have been at his mercy if he were an enemy. 
 
 Not with me around. 
 
 When his ablutions were complete, Eragon unhooked the membrane 
from the wall and mounted Saphira, cradling Zar’roc in the crook of his 
arm. 
 
 Saphira took flight with a rush of air, angling toward the Crags of 
Tel’naeír. From their high vantage point, they could see the damage that 
the storm had wreaked on Du Weldenvarden. No trees had fallen in 
Ellesméra, but farther away, where the elves’ magic was weaker, numer-

 
320
ous pines had been knocked over. The remaining wind made the crossed 
branches and trees rub together, producing a brittle chorus of creaks and 
groans. Clouds of golden pollen, as thick as dust, streamed out from the 
trees and flowers. 
 
 While they flew, Eragon and Saphira exchanged memories of their 
separate lessons from the day before. He told her what he had learned 
about ants and the ancient language, and she told him about downdrafts 
and other dangerous weather patterns and how to avoid them. 
 
 Thus, when they landed and Oromis interrogated Eragon about 
Saphira’s lessons and Glaedr interrogated Saphira about Eragon’s, they 
were able to answer every question. 
 
 “Very good, Eragon-vodhr.” 
 
 Aye. Well played, Bjartskular, added Glaedr to Saphira. 
 
 As before, Saphira was sent off with Glaedr while Eragon remained on 
the cliffs, although this time he and Saphira were careful to maintain 
their link so as to absorb each other’s instruction. 
 
 As the dragons departed, Oromis observed, “Your voice is rougher to-
day, Eragon. Are you sick?” 
 
 “My back hurt again this morning.” 
 
 “Ah. You have my sympathy.” He motioned with one finger. “Wait 
here.” 
 
 Eragon watched as Oromis strode into his hut and then reappeared, 
looking fierce and warlike with his silver mane rippling in the wind and 
his bronze sword in hand. “Today,” he said, “we shall forgo the Rimgar 
and instead cross our two blades, Naegling and Zar’roc. Draw thy sword 
and guard its edge as your first master taught you.” 
 
 Eragon wanted nothing more than to refuse. However, he had no inten-
tion of breaking his vow or letting his resolve waver in front of Oromis. 
He swallowed his trepidation. This is what it means to be a Rider, he 
thought. 
 
 Drawing upon his reserves, he located the nub deep within his mind 
that connected him to the wild flow of magic. He delved into it, and the 
energy suffused him. “Gëuloth du knífr,” he said, and a winking blue star 

 
321
popped into existence between his thumb and forefinger, jumping from 
one to the next as he ran it down Zar’roc’s perilous length. 
 
 The instant their swords met, Eragon knew that he was as out-matched 
by Oromis as by Durza and Arya. Eragon was an exemplary human 
swordsman, but he could not compete with warriors whose blood ran 
thick with magic. His arm was too weak and his reflexes too slow. Still, 
that did not stop him from trying to win. He fought to the limits of his 
abilities, even if, in the end, it was a futile prospect. 
 
 Oromis tested him in every conceivable manner, forcing Eragon to util-
ize his entire arsenal of blows, counterblows, and underhand tricks. It was 
all for naught. He could not touch the elf. As a last resort, he tried alter-
ing his style of fighting, which could unsettle even the most hardened 
veteran. All it got him was a welt on his thigh. 
 
 “Move your feet faster,” cried Oromis. “He who stands like a pillar dies 
in battle. He who bends like a reed is triumphant!” 
 
 The elf was glorious in action, a perfect blend of control and untamed 
violence. He pounced like a cat, struck like a heron, and bobbed and 
wove with the grace of a weasel. 
 
 They had been sparring for almost twenty minutes when Oromis fal-
tered, his narrow features clamped in a brief grimace. Eragon recognized 
the symptoms of Oromis’s mysterious illness and lashed out with Zar’roc. 
It was a low thing to do, but Eragon was so frustrated, he was willing to 
take advantage of any opening, no matter how unfair, just to have the sat-
isfaction of marking Oromis at least once. 
 
 Zar’roc never reached its target. As Eragon twisted, he overextended 
and strained his back. 
 
 The pain was upon him without warning. 
 
 The last thing he heard was Saphira shouting, Eragon! 
 
   
 
 Despite the intensity of the fit, Eragon remained conscious throughout 
his ordeal. Not that he was aware of his surroundings, only the fire that 
burned in his flesh and prolonged each second into an eternity. The worst 
part was that he could do nothing to end his suffering but wait... and 
wait... 

 
322
 
   
 
 Eragon lay panting in the cold mud. He blinked as his vision came into 
focus and he saw Oromis sitting on a stool next to him. Pushing himself 
onto his knees, Eragon surveyed his new tunic with a mixture of regret 
and disgust. The fine russet cloth was caked with dirt from his convul-
sions on the ground. Muck filled his hair as well. 
 
 He could sense Saphira in his mind, radiating concern as she waited for 
him to notice her. How can you continue like this? she fretted. It’ll destroy 
you. 
 
 Her misgivings undermined Eragon’s remaining fortitude. Saphira had 
never before expressed doubt that he would prevail, not at Dras-Leona, 
Gil’ead, or Farthen Dûr, nor with any of the dangers they had encoun-
tered. Her confidence had given him courage. Without it he was truly 
afraid. 
 
 You should concentrate on your lesson, he said. 
 
 I should concentrate on you. 
 
 Leave me alone! He snapped at her like a wounded animal that wants 
to nurse its injuries in silence and in dark. She fell silent, leaving just 
enough of their connection intact so that he was vaguely aware of Glaedr 
teaching her about fireweed, which she could chew to help her digestion. 
 
 Eragon combed the mud from his hair with his fingers, then spat out a 
globule of blood. “Bit my tongue.” 
 
 Oromis nodded as if it were to be expected. “Do you require healing?” 
 
 “No.” 
 
 “Very well. Tend to your sword, then bathe and go to the stump in the 
glade and listen to the thoughts of the forest. Listen, and when you hear 
no more, come tell me what you have learned.” 
 
 “Yes, Master.” 
 
 As he sat on the stump, Eragon found that his turbulent thoughts and 
emotions prevented him from mustering the concentration to open his 
mind and sense the creatures in the hollow. Nor was he interested in do-

 
323
ing so. 
 
 Still, the peaceful quality of his surroundings gradually ameliorated his 
resentment, confusion, and stubborn anger. It did not make him happy, 
but it did bring him a certain fatalistic acceptance. This is my lot in life, 
and I’d better get used to it because it’s not about to improve in the foresee-
able future. 
 
 After a quarter of an hour, his faculties had regained their usual acuity, 
so he resumed studying the colony of red ants that he had discovered the 
day before. He also tried to be aware of everything else that was happen-
ing in the glade, as Oromis had instructed. 
 
 Eragon met with limited success. If he relaxed and allowed himself to 
absorb input from all the consciousnesses nearby, thousands of images 
and feelings rushed into his head, piling on top of one another in quick 
flashes of sound and color, touch and smell, pain and pleasure. The 
amount of information was overwhelming. Out of pure habit, his mind 
would snatch one subject or another from the torrent, excluding all the 
rest before he noticed his lapse and wrenched himself back into a state of 
passive receptivity. The cycle repeated itself every few seconds. 
 
 Despite that, he was able to improve his understanding of the ants’ 
world. He got his first clue as to their genders when he deduced that the 
huge ant in the heart of their underground lair was laying eggs, one every 
minute or so, which made it—her—a female. And when he accompanied 
a group of the red ants up the stem of their rosebush, he got a vivid 
demonstration of the kind of enemies they faced: something darted out 
from underneath a leaf and killed one of the ants he was bound to. It was 
hard for him to guess exactly what the creature was, since the ants only 
saw fragments of it and, in any case, they placed more emphasis on smell 
than vision. If they had been people, he would have said that they were 
attacked by a terrifying monster the size of a dragon, which had jaws as 
powerful as the spiked portcullis at Teirm and could move with whip-
lash speed. 
 
 The ants ringed in the monster like grooms working to capture a run-
away horse. They darted at it with a total lack of fear, nipping at its 
knobbed legs and withdrawing an instant before they were caught in the 
monster’s iron pincers. More and more ants joined the throng. They 
worked together to overpower the intruder, never faltering, even when 
two were caught and killed and when several of their brethren fell off the 
stem to the ground below. 
 

 
324
 It was a desperate battle, with neither side willing to give quarter. Only 
escape or victory would save the combatants from a horrible death. Er-
agon followed the fray with breathless anticipation, awed by the ants’ 
bravery and how they continued to fight in spite of injuries that would 
incapacitate a human. Their feats were heroic enough to be sung about 
by bards throughout the land. 
 
 Eragon was so engrossed by the contest that when the ants finally pre-
vailed, he loosed an elated cry so loud, it roused the birds from their 
roosts among the trees. 
 
 Out of curiosity, he returned his attention to his own body, then 
walked to the rosebush to view the dead monster for himself. What he 
saw was an ordinary brown spider with its legs curled into a fist being 
transported by the ants down to their nest for food. 
 
 Amazing. 
 
 He started to leave, but then realized that once again he had neglected 
to keep watch over the myriad other insects and animals in the glade. He 
closed his eyes and whirled through the minds of several dozen beings, 
doing his best to memorize as many interesting details as he could. It was 
a poor substitute for prolonged observation, but he was hungry and he 
had already exhausted his assigned hour. 
 
 When Eragon rejoined Oromis in his hut, the elf asked, “How went it?” 
 
 “Master, I could listen night and day for the next twenty years and still 
not know everything that goes on in the forest.” 
 
 Oromis raised an eyebrow. “You have made progress.” After Eragon de-
scribed what he had witnessed, Oromis said, “But still not enough, I fear. 
You must work harder, Eragon. I know you can. You are intelligent and 
persistent, and you have the potential to be a great Rider. As difficult as 
it is, you have to learn to put aside your troubles and concentrate entirely 
on the task at hand. Find peace within yourself and let your actions flow 
from there.” 
 
 “I’m doing my best.” 
 
 “No, this isn’t your best. We shall recognize your best when it appears.” 
He paused thoughtfully. “Perhaps it would help if you had a fellow stu-
dent to compete with. Then we might see your best.... I will think on the 
matter.” 

 
325
 
 From his cupboards, Oromis produced a loaf of freshly baked bread, a 
wood jar of hazelnut butter—which the elves used in place of actual but-
ter—and a pair of bowls that he ladled full of a vegetable stew that had 
been simmering in a pot hung over a bed of coals in the corner fireplace. 
 
 Eragon looked at the stew with distaste; he was sick of the elves’ fare. 
He longed for meat, fish, or fowl, something hearty that he could sink his 
teeth into, not this endless parade of plants. “Master,” he asked to distract 
himself, “why do you have me meditate? Is it so that I will understand 
the doings of the animals and insects, or is there more to it than that?” 
 
 “Can you think of no other motive?” Oromis sighed when Eragon shook 
his head. “Always it is thus with my new students, and especially with 
the human ones; the mind is the last muscle they train or use, and the 
one that they regard the least. Ask them about swordplay and they can 
list every blow from a duel a month old, but ask them to solve a problem 
or make a coherent statement and... well, I would be lucky to get more 
than a blank stare in return. You are still new to the world of gramarye—
as magic is properly called—but you must begin to consider its full im-
plications.” 
 
 “How so?” 
 
 “Imagine for a moment that you are Galbatorix, with all of his vast re-
sources at your command. The Varden have destroyed your Urgal army 
with the help of a rival Dragon Rider, who you know was educated—at 
least in part—by one of your most dangerous and implacable foes, Brom. 
You are also aware that your enemies are massing in Surda for a possible 
invasion. Given that, what would be the easiest way to deal with these 
various threats, short of flying into battle yourself?” 
 
 Eragon stirred his stew to cool it while he examined the issue. “It seems 
to me,” he said slowly, “that the easiest thing would be to train a corps of 
magicians—they wouldn’t even have to be that powerful—force them to 
swear loyalty to me in the ancient language, then have them infiltrate 
Surda to sabotage the Varden’s efforts, poison wells, and assassinate 
Nasuada, King Orrin, and other key members of the resistance.” 
 
 “And why hasn’t Galbatorix done this yet?” 
 
 “Because until now, Surda was of negligible interest to him, and be-
cause the Varden have dwelled in Farthen Dûr for decades, where they 
were able to examine every newcomer’s mind for duplicity, which they 

 
326
can’t do in Surda since its border and population are so large.” 
 
 “Those are my very conclusions,” said Oromis. “Unless Galbatorix for-
sakes his lair in Urû’baen, the greatest danger you’re likely to encounter 
during the Varden’s campaign will come from fellow magicians. You 
know as well as I how difficult it is to guard against magic, especially if 
your opponent has sworn in the ancient language to kill you, no matter 
the cost. Instead of attempting to first conquer your mind, such a foe will 
simply cast a spell to obliterate you, even though—in the instant before 
you are destroyed—you will still be free to retaliate. However, you can-
not fell your murderer if you don’t know who or where he is.” 
 
 “So sometimes you don’t have to bother taking control of your oppo-
nent’s mind?” 
 
 “Sometimes, but it’s a risk to avoid.” Oromis paused to consume a few 
spoonfuls of stew. “Now, to address the heart of this issue, how do you 
defend yourself against anonymous enemies who can contravene any 
physical precautions and slay with a muttered word?” 
 
 “I don’t see how, unless...” Eragon hesitated, then smiled. “Unless I was 
aware of the consciousnesses of all the people around me. Then I could 
sense if they meant me harm.” 
 
 Oromis appeared pleased by his answer. “Even so, Eragon-finiarel. And 
that’s the answer to your question. Your meditations condition your 
mind to find and exploit flaws in your enemies’ mental armor, no matter 
how small.” 
 
 “But won’t another magic user know if I touch their mind?” 
 
 “Aye, they will know, but most people won’t. And as for the magicians, 
they will know, they will be afraid, and they will shield their minds from 
you out of their fear, and you will know them because of it.” 
 
 “Isn’t it dangerous to leave your consciousness unguarded? If you’re at-
tacked mentally, you could easily be overwhelmed.” 
 
 “It’s less dangerous than being blind to the world.” 
 
 Eragon nodded. He tapped his spoon against his bowl in a measured 
meter of time, engrossed in his thoughts, then said, “It feels wrong.” 
 
 “Oh? Explain yourself.” 

 
327
 
 “What about people’s privacy? Brom taught me to never intrude in 
someone’s mind unless it was absolutely necessary.... I guess I’m uncom-
fortable with the idea of prying into people’s secrets... secrets that they 
have every right to keep to themselves.” He cocked his head. “Why didn’t 
Brom tell me about this if it’s so important? Why didn’t he train me in it 
himself?” 
 
 “Brom told you,” said Oromis, “what was appropriate to tell you under 
the circumstances. Dipping into the pool of minds can prove addictive to 
those with a malicious personality or a taste for power. It was not taught 
to prospective Riders—though we had them meditate as you do 
throughout their training—until we were convinced that they were ma-
ture enough to resist temptation. 
 
 “It is an invasion of privacy, and you will learn many things from it that 
you never wanted to. However, this is for your own good and the good of 
the Varden. I can say from experience, and from watching other Riders 
experience the same, that this, above all else, will help you to understand 
what drives people. And understanding begets empathy and compassion, 
even for the meanest beggar in the meanest city of Alagaësia.” 
 
 They were quiet for a while, eating, then Oromis asked, “Can you tell 
me, What is the most important mental tool a person can possess?” 
 
 It was a serious question, and Eragon considered it for a reasonable span 
before he ventured to say, “Determination.” 
 
 Oromis tore the loaf in half with his long white fingers. “I can under-
stand why you arrived at that conclusion—determination has served you 
well in your adventures—but no. I meant the tool most necessary to 
choose the best course of action in any given situation. Determination is 
as common among men who are dull and foolish as it is among those 
who are brilliant intellects. So, no, determination cannot be what we’re 
looking for.” 
 
 This time Eragon treated the question as he would a riddle, counting 
the number of words, whispering them out loud to establish whether 
they rhymed, and otherwise examining them for hidden meaning. The 
problem was, he was no more than a mediocre riddler and had never 
placed very high in Carvahall’s annual riddle contest. He thought too lit-
erally to work out the answers to riddles that he had not heard before, a 
legacy of Garrow’s practical upbringing. 
 

 
328
 “Wisdom,” he finally said. “Wisdom is the most important tool for a 
person to possess.” 
 
 “A fair guess, but, again, no. The answer is logic. Or, to put it another 
way, the ability to reason analytically. Applied properly, it can overcome 
any lack of wisdom, which one only gains through age and experience.” 
 
 Eragon frowned. “Yes, but isn’t having a good heart more important 
than logic? Pure logic can lead you to conclusions that are ethically 
wrong, whereas if you are moral and righteous, that will ensure that you 
don’t act shamefully.” 
 
 A razor-thin smile curled Oromis’s lips. “You confuse the issue. All I 
wanted to know was the most useful tool a person can have, regardless of 
whether that person is good or evil. I agree that it’s important to be of a 
virtuous nature, but I would also contend that if you had to choose be-
tween giving a man a noble disposition or teaching him to think clearly, 
you’d do better to teach him to think clearly. Too many problems in this 
world are caused by men with noble dispositions and clouded minds. 
 
 “History provides us with numerous examples of people who were 
convinced that they were doing the right thing and committed terrible 
crimes because of it. Keep in mind, Eragon, that no one thinks of himself 
as a villain, and few make decisions they think are wrong. A person may 
dislike his choice, but he will stand by it because, even in the worst cir-
cumstances, he believes that it was the best option available to him at 
the time. 
 
 “On its own, being a decent person is no guarantee that you will act 
well, which brings us back to the one protection we have against dema-
gogues, tricksters, and the madness of crowds, and our surest guide 
through the uncertain shoals of life: clear and reasoned thinking. Logic 
will never fail you, unless you’re unaware of—or deliberately ignore—the 
consequences of your deeds.” 
 
 “If elves are so logical,” said Eragon, “then you must all agree on what to 
do.” 
 
 “Hardly,” averred Oromis. “Like every race, we adhere to a wide range 
of tenets, and, as a result, we often arrive at differing conclusions, even in 
identical situations. Conclusions, I might add, that make logical sense 
from each person’s point of view. And although I wish it were otherwise, 
not all elves have trained their minds properly.” 
 

 
329
 “How do you intend to teach me this logic?” 
 
 Oromis’s smile broadened. “By the oldest and most effective method: 
debating. I will ask you a question, then you will answer and defend your 
position.” He waited while Eragon refilled his bowl with stew. “For ex-
ample, why do you fight the Empire?” 
 
 The sudden change of topic caught Eragon off guard. He had a feeling 
that Oromis had just reached the subject that he had been driving toward 
all along. “As I said before, to help those who suffer from Galbatorix’s 
rule and, to a lesser extent, for personal vengeance.” 
 
 “Then you fight for humanitarian reasons?” 
 
 “What do you mean?” 
 
 “That you fight to help the people who Galbatorix has harmed and to 
stop him from hurting any more.” 
 
 “Exactly,” said Eragon. 
 
 “Ah, but answer me this, my young Rider: Won’t your war with Galba-
torix cause more pain than it will ever prevent? The majority of people 
in the Empire live normal, productive lives untouched by their king’s 
madness. How can you justify invading their land, destroying their homes, 
and killing their sons and daughters?” 
 
 Eragon gaped, stunned that Oromis could ask such a question—
Galbatorix was evil —and stunned because no easy reply presented itself. 
He knew that he was in the right, but how could he prove it? “Don’t you 
believe that Galbatorix should be overthrown?” 
 
 “That is not the question.” 
 
 “You must believe it, though,” persisted Eragon. “Look what he did to 
the Riders.” 
 
 Dunking his bread in his stew, Oromis resumed eating, letting Eragon 
fume in silence. When he finished, Oromis folded his hands in his lap and 
asked, “Have I upset you?” 
 
 “Yes, you have.” 
 
 “I see. Well then, continue to ponder the matter until you find an an-

 
330
swer. I expect it to be a convincing one.” 
 
 
 
 

 
331
BLACK MORNING GLORY 
 
 
 They cleared the table and took the dishes outside, where they cleaned 
them with sand. Oromis crumbled what remained of the bread around 
his house for the birds to eat, then they returned inside. 
 
 Oromis brought out pens and ink for Eragon, and they resumed his 
education of the Liduen Kvaedhí, the written form of the ancient lan-
guage, which was so much more elegant than the humans’ or dwarves’ 
runes. Eragon lost himself in the arcane glyphs, happy to have a task that 
required nothing more strenuous than rote memorization. 
 
 After hours spent bent over the paper sheets, Oromis waved a hand 
and said, “Enough. We will continue this tomorrow.” Eragon leaned back 
and rolled his shoulders while Oromis selected five scrolls from their 
nooks in the wall. “Two of these are in the ancient language, three are in 
your native tongue. They will help you to master both alphabets, as well 
as give you valuable information that would be tedious for me to vocal-
ize.” 
 
 “Vocalize?” 
 
 With unerring accuracy, Oromis’s hand darted out and plucked a mas-
sive sixth scroll from the wall, which he added to the pyramid in Eragon’s 
arms. “This is a dictionary. I doubt you can, but try to read it all.” 
 
 When the elf opened the door for him to leave, Eragon said, “Master?” 
 
 “Yes, Eragon?” 
 
 “When will we start working with magic?” 
 
 Oromis leaned on one arm against the doorway, caving in on himself as 
if he no longer possessed the will to remain upright. Then he sighed and 
said, “You must trust me to guide your training, Eragon. Still, I suppose it 
would be foolish of me to delay any longer. Come, leave the scrolls on 
the table, and let us go explore the mysteries of gramarye.” 
 
 On the greensward before the hut, Oromis stood looking out over the 
Crags of Tel’naeír, his back to Eragon, his feet shoulder width apart, and 
his hands clasped in the small of his back. Without turning around, he 
asked, “What is magic?” 
 

 
332
 “The manipulation of energy through the use of the ancient language.” 
 
 There was a pause before Oromis responded. “Technically, you are cor-
rect, and many spellcasters never understand more than that. However, 
your description fails to capture the essence of magic. Magic is the art of 
thinking, not strength or language—you already know that a limited vo-
cabulary is no obstacle to using magic. As with everything else you must 
master, magic relies on having a disciplined intellect. 
 
 “Brom bypassed the normal training regimen and ignored the subtleties 
of gramarye to ensure that you had the skills you needed to remain alive. 
I too must distort the regimen in order to focus on the skills that you will 
likely require in the coming battles. However, whereas Brom taught you 
the crude mechanics of magic, I will teach you its finer applications, the 
secrets that were reserved for the wisest of the Riders: how you can kill 
with no more energy than moving your finger, the method by which you 
can instantaneously transport an item from one point to another, a spell 
that will allow you to identify poisons in your food and drink, a variation 
on scrying that allows you to hear as well as to see, how you can draw 
energy from your surroundings and thus preserve your own strength, and 
how you can maximize your strength in every possible way. 
 
 “These techniques are so potent and dangerous, they were never shared 
with novice Riders such as yourself, but circumstances demand that I di-
vulge them and trust that you won’t abuse them.” Raising his right arm to 
his side, his hand a hooked claw, Oromis proclaimed, “Adurna!” 
 
 Eragon watched as a sphere of water coalesced from the brook by the 
hut and floated through the air until it hovered between Oromis’s out-
stretched fingers. 
 
 The brook was dark and brown under the branches of the forest, but 
the sphere, removed from it, was as colorless as glass. Flecks of moss, dirt, 
and other bits of detritus floated inside the orb. 
 
 Still gazing toward the horizon, Oromis said, “Catch.” He tossed the 
sphere back over his shoulder toward Eragon. 
 
 Eragon tried to grab the ball, but as soon as it touched his skin, the wa-
ter lost cohesion and splashed across his chest. 
 
 “Catch it with magic,” said Oromis. Again, he cried, “Adurna!” and a 
sphere of water gathered itself from the surface of the brook and leaped 
into his hand like a trained hawk obeying its master. 

 
333
 
 This time Oromis threw the ball without warning. Eragon was pre-
pared, though, and said, “Reisa du adurna,” even as he reached for the ball. 
It slowed to a halt a hairsbreadth from the skin of his palm. 
 
 “An awkward word choice,” said Oromis, “but workable, nevertheless.” 
 
 Eragon grinned and whispered, “Thrysta.” 
 
 The ball reversed its course and sped toward the base of Oromis’s silver 
head. However, the sphere did not land where Eragon had intended, but 
rather shot past the elf, whipped around, and flew back at Eragon with 
increased velocity. 
 
 The water remained as hard and solid as polished marble when it 
struck Eragon, producing a dull thunk as it collided with his skull. The 
blow knocked him sprawling on the turf, where he lay stunned, blinking 
as pulsing lights swam across the sky. 
 
 “Yes,” said Oromis. “A better word might be letta or kodthr. ” He finally 
turned to look at Eragon and raised an eyebrow with apparent surprise. 
“Whatever are you doing? Get up. We can’t lay about all day.” 
 
 “Yes, Master,” groaned Eragon. 
 
 When Eragon got back on his feet, Oromis had him manipulate the wa-
ter in various ways—shaping it into complex knots, changing the color of 
light that it absorbed or reflected, and freezing it in certain prescribed se-
quences—none of which proved difficult for him. 
 
 The exercises continued for so long that Eragon’s initial interest faded 
and was replaced by impatience and puzzlement. He was chary of of-
fending Oromis, but he saw no point to what the elf was doing; it was as 
if Oromis were avoiding any spells that would require him to use more 
than a minimal amount of strength. I’ve already demonstrated the extent of 
my skills. Why does he persist in reviewing these fundamentals? He said, 
“Master, I know all of this. Can we not move on?” 
 
 The muscles in Oromis’s neck hardened, and his shoulders were like 
chiseled granite for all they moved; even the elf’s breathing halted before 
he said, “Will you never learn respect, Eragon-vodhr? So be it!” Then he 
uttered four words from the ancient language in a voice so deep that 
their meaning escaped Eragon. 
 

 
334
 Eragon yelped as he felt each of his legs enveloped by pressure up to 
the knee, squeezing and constricting his calves in such a way that made it 
impossible for him to walk. His thighs and upper body were free to 
move, but other than that, it was as if he had been cast in lime mortar. 
 
 “Free yourself,” said Oromis. 
 
 Here now was a challenge that Eragon had never dealt with before: 
how to counter someone else’s spells. He could sever his invisible bonds 
using one of two different methods. The most effective would be if he 
knew how Oromis had immobilized him—whether by affecting his body 
directly or using an external source—for then he could redirect the ele-
ment or force to disperse Oromis’s power. Or he could use a generic, 
vague spell to block whatever Oromis was doing. The downside to the 
tactic was that it would lead to a direct contest of strength between 
them. It had to happen sometime, thought Eragon. He entertained no hope 
of prevailing against an elf. 
 
 Assembling the required phrase, he said, “Losna kalfya iet.” Release my 
calves. 
 
 The surge of energy that deserted Eragon was greater than he had an-
ticipated; he went from being moderately tired from the day’s pains and 
exertions to feeling as if he had hiked over rough terrain since morn. 
Then the pressure vanished from his legs, causing him to stagger as he re-
gained his balance. 
 
 Oromis shook his head. “Foolish,” he said, “very foolish. If I had com-
mitted more to maintaining my spell, that would have killed you. Never 
use absolutes.” 
 
 “Absolutes?” 
 
 “Never word your spells so that only two outcomes are possible: suc-
cess or death. If an enemy had trapped your legs and if he were stronger 
than you, then you would have expended all of your energy trying to 
break his spell. You would have died with no chance to abort the at-
tempt once you realized that it was futile.” 
 
 “How do I avoid that?” asked Eragon. 
 
 “It’s safer to make the spell a process that you can terminate at your dis-
cretion. Instead of saying release my calves, which is an absolute, you 
could say reduce the magic imprisoning my calves. A bit wordy, but you 

 
335
could then decide how much you wanted your opponent’s spell de-
creased and if it were safe to remove it entirely. We will try again.” 
 
 The pressure returned to Eragon’s legs as soon as Oromis mouthed his 
inaudible invocation. Eragon was so tired, he doubted that he could pro-
vide much opposition. Nevertheless, he reached for the magic. 
 
 Before the ancient language left Eragon’s mouth, he became aware of a 
curious sensation as the weight constraining his legs lessened at a steady 
rate. It tickled and felt like he was being pulled out of a mire of cold, 
slick mud. He glanced at Oromis and saw the elf’s face scribed by passion, 
as if he clung to something precious that he could not bear to lose. A 
vein throbbed at one of Oromis’s temples. 
 
 When Eragon’s arcane fetters ceased to exist, Oromis recoiled as if he 
had been pricked by a wasp and stood with his gaze fixed on his two 
hands, his thin chest heaving. For perhaps a minute, he remained thus, 
then he drew himself upright and walked to the very edge of the Crags of 
Tel’naeír, a lone figure outlined against the pale sky. 
 
 Regret and sorrow welled in Eragon—the same emotions that had 
gripped him when he first saw Glaedr’s mutilated foreleg. He cursed 
himself for being so arrogant with Oromis, so oblivious to his infirmities, 
and for not placing more confidence in the elf’s judgment. I’m not the only 
one who must deal with past injuries. Eragon had not fully comprehended 
what it meant when Oromis said that all but the slightest magic escaped 
his grasp. Now he appreciated the depths of Oromis’s situation and the 
pain that it must cause him, especially for one of his race, who was born 
and bred with magic. 
 
 Eragon went to Oromis, knelt, and bowed in the fashion of the 
dwarves, pressing his bruised forehead against the ground. “Ebrithil, I beg 
your pardon.” 
 
 The elf gave no indication that he had heard. 
 
 The two of them lingered in their respective positions while the sun 
declined before them, the birds sang their evening songs, and the air grew 
cool and moist. From the north came the faint offbeat thumps of Saphira 
and Glaedr’s wing strokes as they returned for the day. 
 
 In a low, distant voice, Oromis said, “We will begin anew tomorrow, 
with this and other subjects.” From his profile, Eragon could tell that 
Oromis had regained his customary expression of impassive reserve. “Is 

 
336
that agreeable to you?” 
 
 “Yes, Master,” said Eragon, grateful for the question. 
 
 “I think it best if, from now on, you endeavor to speak only in the an-
cient language. We have little time at our disposal, and this is the fastest 
way for you to learn.” 
 
 “Even when I talk to Saphira?” 
 
 “Even then.” 
 
 Adopting the elven tongue, Eragon vowed, “Then I will work cease-
lessly until I not only think, but dream, in your language.” 
 
 “If you achieve that,” said Oromis, replying in kind, “our venture may 
yet succeed.” He paused. “Instead of flying directly here in the morning, 
you will accompany the elf I send to guide you. He will take you to 
where those of Ellesméra practice swordplay. Stay for an hour, then con-
tinue on as normal.” 
 
 “Won’t you teach me yourself?” asked Eragon, feeling slighted. 
 
 “I have naught to teach. You are as good a swordsman as ever I have 
met. I know no more of fighting than you, and that which I possess and 
you do not, I cannot give you. All that remains for you is to preserve your 
current level of skill.” 
 
 “Why can’t I do that with you... Master?” 
 
 “Because I do not appreciate beginning the day with alarum and con-
flict.” He looked at Eragon, then relented and added, “And because it will 
be good for you to become acquainted with others who live here. I am 
not representative of my race. But enough of that. Look, they approach.” 
 
 The two dragons glided across the flat disk of the sun. First came 
Glaedr with a roar of wind, blotting out the sky with his massive bulk 
before he settled on the grass and folded his golden wings, then Saphira, 
as quick and agile as a sparrow beside an eagle. 
 
 As they had that morning, Oromis and Glaedr asked a number of ques-
tions to ensure that Eragon and Saphira had paid attention to each other’s 
lessons. They had not always, but by cooperating and sharing information 
between themselves, they were able to answer all of the questions. Their 

 
337
only stumbling block was the foreign language they were required to 
communicate in. 
 
 Better, rumbled Glaedr afterward. Much better. He bent his gaze toward 
Eragon. You and I will have to train together soon. 
 
 “Of course, Skulblaka.” 
 
 The old dragon snorted and crawled alongside Oromis, half hopping 
with his front leg to compensate for his missing limb. Darting forward, 
Saphira nipped at the end of Glaedr’s tail, tossing it into the air with a 
flip of her head, like she would to break the neck of a deer. She recoiled 
as Glaedr twisted round and snapped at her neck, exposing his enormous 
fangs. 
 
 Eragon winced and, too late, covered his ears to protect them from 
Glaedr’s roar. The speed and intensity of Glaedr’s response suggested to 
Eragon that this was not the first time Saphira had annoyed him through-
out the day. Instead of remorse, Eragon detected an excited playfulness in 
her—like a child with a new toy—and a near-blind devotion to the other 
dragon. 
 
 “Contain yourself, Saphira!” said Oromis. Saphira pranced backward 
and settled on her haunches, though nothing in her demeanor expressed 
contrition. Eragon muttered a feeble excuse, and Oromis waved a hand 
and said, “Begone, both of you.” 
 
 Without arguing, Eragon scrambled onto Saphira. He had to urge her to 
take flight, and once she did, she insisted on circling over the clearing 
three times before he got her to angle toward Ellesméra. 
 
 What possessed you to bite him? he demanded. He thought he knew, but 
he wanted her to confirm it. 
 
 I was only playing. 
 
 It was the truth, since they spoke in the ancient language, yet he sus-
pected that it was but a piece of a larger truth. Yes, and at what game? 
She tensed underneath him. You forget your duty. By... He searched for 
the right word. Unable to find it, he reverted to his native speech, By pro-
voking Glaedr, you distract him, Oromis, and me—and hinder what we 
must accomplish. You’ve never been so thoughtless before. 
 
 Do not presume to be my conscience. 

 
338
 
 He laughed then, heedless for a moment of where he sat among the 
clouds, rolling to his side until he almost dropped from the peak of her 
shoulders. Oh, rich irony that, after the times you’ve told me what to do. I 
am your conscience, Saphira, as much as you are mine. You’ve had good 
reason to chastise and warn me in the past, and now I must do the same for 
you: stop pestering Glaedr with your attentions. 
 
 She remained silent. 
 
 Saphira? 
 
 I hear you. 
 
 I hope so. 
 
 After a minute of peaceful flying, she said, Two seizures in one day. 
How are you now? 
 
 Sore and ill. He grimaced. Some of it’s from the Rimgar and sparring, but 
mostly it’s the aftereffects of the pain. It’s like a poison, weakening my mus-
cles and clouding my mind. I just hope that I can remain sane long enough 
to reach the end of this training. Afterward, though... I don’t know what I’ll 
do. I certainly can’t fight for the Varden like this. 
 
 Don’t think about it, she counseled. You can do nothing about your con-
dition, and you’ll only make yourself feel worse. Live in the present, remem-
ber the past, and fear not the future, for it doesn’t exist and never shall. 
There is only now. 
 
 He patted her shoulder and smiled with resigned gratitude. To their 
right, a goshawk rode a warm air current while it patrolled the broken 
forest for signs of furred or feathered quarry. Eragon watched it, ponder-
ing the question that Oromis had given him: How could he justify fight-
ing the Empire when it would cause so much grief and agony? 
 
 I have an answer, said Saphira. 
 
 What is it? 
 
 That Galbatorix has...She hesitated, then said, No, I won’t tell you. You 
should figure this out for yourself. 
 
 Saphira! Be reasonable. 

 
339
 
 I am. If you don’t know why what we do is the right thing, you might as 
well surrender to Galbatorix for all the good you’ll do. No matter how elo-
quent his pleas, he could extract nothing more from her, for she blocked 
him from that part of her mind. 
 
   
 
 Back in their eyrie, Eragon ate a light supper and was just about to 
open one of Oromis’s scrolls when a knock on the screen door disturbed 
his quiet. 
 
 “Enter,” he said, hoping that Arya had returned to see him. 
 
 She had. 
 
 Arya greeted Eragon and Saphira, then said, “I thought that you might 
appreciate an opportunity to visit Tialdarí Hall and the adjacent gardens, 
since you expressed interest in them yesterday. That is, if you aren’t too 
tired.” She wore a flowing red kirtle trimmed and decorated with intri-
cate designs wrought in black thread. The color scheme echoed the 
queen’s robes and emphasized the strong resemblance between mother 
and daughter. 
 
 Eragon pushed aside the scrolls. “I’d be delighted to see them.” 
 
 He means we’d be delighted, added Saphira. 
 
 Arya looked surprised when both of them spoke in the ancient lan-
guage, so Eragon explained Oromis’s command. “An excellent idea,” said 
Arya, joining them in the same language. “And it is more appropriate to 
speak thus while you stay here.” 
 
 When all three of them had descended from the tree, Arya directed 
them westward toward an unfamiliar quadrant of Ellesméra. They en-
countered many elves on the path, all of whom stopped to bow to 
Saphira. 
 
 Eragon noticed once again that no elf children were to be seen. He 
mentioned this to Arya, and she said, “Aye, we have few children. Only 
two are in Ellesméra at the present, Dusan and Alanna. We treasure chil-
dren above all else because they are so rare. To have a child is the greatest 
honor and responsibility that can be bestowed upon any living being.” 
 

 
340
 At last they arrived at a ribbed lancet arch—grown between two 
trees—which served as the entrance for a wide compound. Still in the 
ancient language, Arya chanted, “Root of tree, fruit of vine, let me pass by 
this blood of mine.” 
 
 The two archway doors trembled, then swung outward, releasing five 
monarch butterflies that fluttered toward the dusky sky. Through the 
archway lay a vast flower garden arranged to look as pristine and natural 
as a wild meadow. The one element that betrayed artifice was the sheer 
variety of plants; many of the species were blooming out of season, or 
came from hotter or colder climates and would never have flourished 
without the elves’ magic. The scene was lit with the gemlike flameless 
lanterns, augmented by constellations of swirling fireflies. 
 
 To Saphira, Arya said, “Mind your tail, that it does not sweep across the 
beds.” 
 
 Advancing, they crossed the garden and pressed deep into a line of scat-
tered trees. Before Eragon quite knew where he was, the trees became 
more numerous and then thickened into a wall. He found himself stand-
ing on the threshold of a burnished wood hall without ever being con-
scious of having gone inside. 
 
 The hall was warm and homey—a place of peace, reflection, and com-
fort. Its shape was determined by the tree trunks, which on the inside of 
the hall had been stripped of their bark, polished, and rubbed with oil 
until the wood gleamed like amber. Regular gaps between the trunks 
acted as windows. The scent of crushed pine needles perfumed the air. A 
number of elves occupied the hall, reading, writing, and, in one dark cor-
ner, playing a set of reed pipes. They all paused and inclined their heads 
to acknowledge Saphira’s presence. 
 
 “Here you would stay,” said Arya, “were you not Rider and dragon.” 
 
 “It’s magnificent,” replied Eragon. 
 
 Arya guided him and Saphira everywhere in the compound that was 
accessible to dragons. Each new room was a surprise; no two were alike, 
and each chamber found different ways to incorporate the forest in its 
construction. In one room, a silver brook trickled down the gnarled wall 
and flowed across the floor on a vein of pebbles and back out under the 
sky. In another, creepers blanketed the entire room, except for the floor, 
in a leafy green pelt adorned with trumpet-shaped flowers with the most 
delicate pink and white colors. Arya called it the Lianí Vine. 

 
341
 
 They saw many great works of art, from fairths and paintings to sculp-
tures and radiant mosaics of stained glass—all based on the curved shapes 
of plants and animals. 
 
 Islanzadí met with them for a short time in an open pavilion joined to 
two other buildings by covered pathways. She inquired about the pro-
gress of Eragon’s training and the state of his back, both of which he de-
scribed with brief, polite phrases. This seemed to satisfy the queen, who 
exchanged a few words with Saphira and then departed. 
 
 In the end, they returned to the garden. Eragon walked beside Arya—
Saphira trailing behind—entranced by the sound of her voice as she told 
him about the different varieties of flowers, where they originated, how 
they were maintained, and, in many instances, how they had been altered 
with magic. She also pointed out the flowers that only opened their pet-
als during the night, like a white datura. 
 
 “Which one is your favorite?” he asked. 
 
 Arya smiled and escorted him to a tree on the edge of the garden, by a 
pond lined with rushes. Around the tree’s lowest branch coiled a morning 
glory with three velvety black blossoms that were clenched shut. 
 
 Blowing on them, Arya whispered, “Open.” 
 
 The petals rustled as they unfurled, fanning their inky robes to expose 
the hoard of nectar in their centers. A starburst of royal blue filled the 
flowers’ throats, diffusing into the sable corolla like the vestiges of day 
into night. 
 
 “Is it not the most perfect and lovely flower?” asked Arya. 
 
 Eragon gazed at her, exquisitely aware of how close they were, and said, 
“Yes... it is.” Before his courage deserted him, he added, “As are you.” 
 
 Eragon! exclaimed Saphira. 
 
 Arya fixed her eyes upon him, studying him until he was forced to look 
away. When he dared face her again, he was mortified to see her wearing 
a faint smile, as if amused by his reaction. “You are too kind,” she mur-
mured. Reaching up, she touched the rim of a blossom and glanced from 
it to him. “Fäolin created this especially for me one summer solstice, long 
ago.” 

 
342
 
 He shuffled his feet and responded with a few unintelligible words, 
hurt and offended that she did not take his compliment more seriously. 
He wished he could turn invisible, and even considered trying to cast a 
spell that would allow him to do just that. 
 
 In the end, he drew himself upright and said, “Please excuse us, Arya 
Svit-kona, but it is late, and we must return to our tree.” 
 
 Her smile deepened. “Of course, Eragon. I understand.” She accompa-
nied them to the main archway, opened the doors for them, and said, 
“Good night, Saphira. Good night, Eragon.” 
 
 Good night, replied Saphira. 
 
 Despite his embarrassment, Eragon could not help asking, “Will we see 
you tomorrow?” 
 
 Arya tilted her head. “I think I shall be busy tomorrow.” Then the doors 
closed, cutting off his view of her as she returned to the main compound. 
 
 Crouching low on the path, Saphira nudged Eragon in the side. Stop 
daydreaming and get on my back. Climbing up her left foreleg, he took 
his usual place, then clutched the neck spike in front of him as Saphira 
rose to her full height. After a few steps: How can you criticize my behav-
ior with Glaedr and then go and do something like that? What were you 
thinking? 
 
 You know how I feel about her, he grumbled. 
 
 Pah! If you are my conscience and I am yours, then it’s my duty to tell 
you when you’re acting like a deluded popinjay. You’re not using logic, like 
Oromis keeps telling us to. What do you really expect to happen between 
you and Arya? She’s a princess! 
 
 And I’m a Rider. 
 
 She’s an elf; you’re a human! 
 
 I look more like an elf every day. 
 
 Eragon, she’s over a hundred years old! 
 
 I’ll live as long as her or any elf. 

 
343
 
 Ah, but you haven’t yet, and that’s the problem. You can’t overcome such 
a vast difference. She’s a grown woman with a century of experience, while 
you’re— 
 
 What? What am I? he snarled. A child? Is that what you mean? 
 
 No, not a child. Not after what you have seen and done since we were 
joined. But you are young, even by the reckoning of your short-lived race—
much less by that of the dwarves, dragons, and elves. 
 
 As are you. 
 
 His retort silenced her for a minute. Then: I’m just trying to protect you, 
Eragon. That’s all. I want you to be happy, and I’m afraid you won’t be if 
you insist on pursuing Arya. 
 
   
 
 The two of them were about to retire when they heard the trapdoor in 
the vestibule bang open and the jingle of mail as someone climbed inside. 
Zar’roc in hand, Eragon threw back the screen door, ready to confront the 
intruder. 
 
 His hand dropped as he saw Orik on the floor. The dwarf took a hearty 
draught from the bottle he wielded in his left hand, then squinted at Er-
agon. “Bricks and bones, where be you? Ah, there you shtand. I wondered 
where you were. Couldn’t find you, so I thought that given this fine do-
lorous night, I might go find you... and here you are! What shall we talk 
about, you and I, now that we’re together in this delectable bird’s nest?” 
 
 Taking hold of the dwarf’s free arm, Eragon pulled him upright, sur-
prised, as he always was, by how dense Orik was, like a miniature boul-
der. When Eragon removed his support, Orik swayed from one side to 
the other, achieving such precarious angles that he threatened to topple 
at the slightest provocation. 
 
 “Come on in,” said Eragon in his own language. He closed the trapdoor. 
“You’ll catch cold out here.” 
 
 Orik blinked his round, deep-set eyes at Eragon. “I’ve not sheen you 
round my leafy exile, no I haven’t. You’ve abandoned me to the company 
of elves... and misherable, dull company they are, yesh indeed.” 
 

 
344
 A touch of guilt made Eragon disguise himself with an awkward smile. 
He had forgotten the dwarf amid the goings-on. “I’m sorry I haven’t vis-
ited you, Orik, but my studies have kept me busy. Here, give me your 
cloak.” As he helped the dwarf out of his brown mantle, he asked, “What 
are you drinking?” 
 
 “Faelnirv,” declared Orik. “A mosht wonderful, ticklish potion. The 
besht and greatest of the elves’ tricksty inventions; it gives you the gift of 
loquacion. Words float from your tongue like shoals of flapping min-
nows, like flocks of breathlessh hummingbirds, like rivers of writhing 
shnakes.” He paused, apparently taken by the unique magnificence of his 
similes. As Eragon ushered him into the bedroom, Orik saluted Saphira 
with his bottle and said, “Greetings, O Irontooth. May your shcales shine 
as bright as the coals of Morgothal’s forge.” 
 
 Greetings, Orik, said Saphira, laying her head on the rim of her bed. 
What has put you in this state? It is not like you. Eragon repeated her 
question. 
 
 “What has put me in mine shtate?” repeated Orik. He dropped into the 
chair that Eragon provided—his feet dangling several inches above the 
ground—and began to shake his head. “Red cap, green cap, elves here and 
elves there. I drown in elvesh and their thrice-damned courtesy. Bloodless 
they be. Taciturn they are. Yesh sir, no shir, three bagsh full, sir, yet nary 
a pip more can I extract.” He looked at Eragon with a mournful expres-
sion. “What am I to do while you meander through your instruction? Am 
I to sit and twiddle mine thumbs while I turn to shtone and join the 
shpirits of mine anshestors? Tell me, O sagacious Rider.” 
 
 Have you no skills or hobbies that you might occupy yourself with? asked 
Saphira. 
 
 “Aye,” said Orik. “I’m a fair enough smith by any who’d care to judge. 
But why should I craft bright armsh and armor for those who treasure 
them not? I’m usheless here. As usheless as a three-legged Feldûnost.” 
 
 Eragon extended a hand toward the bottle. “May I?” Orik glanced be-
tween him and the bottle, then grimaced and gave it up. The faelnirv was 
cold as ice as it ran down Eragon’s throat, stinging and smarting. He 
blinked as his eyes watered. After he indulged in a second quaff, he 
passed the bottle back to Orik, who seemed disappointed by how little 
of the concoction remained. 
 
 “And what mischief,” asked Orik, “have you two managed to ferret out 

 
345
of Oromis and yon bucolic woods?” 
 
 The dwarf alternately chuckled and groaned as Eragon described his 
training, his misplaced blessing in Farthen Dûr, the Menoa tree, his back, 
and all else that had filled the past few days. Eragon ended with the topic 
that was dearest to him at the moment: Arya. Emboldened by the li-
queur, he confessed his affection for her and described how she had dis-
missed his advance. 
 
 Wagging a finger, Orik said, “The rock beneath you is flawed, Eragon. 
Don’t tempt fate. Arya...” He stopped, then growled and took another 
gulp of faelnirv. “Ah, it’s too late for thish. Who am I to say what is wis-
dom and what isn’t?” 
 
 Saphira had closed her eyes a while ago. Without opening them, she 
asked, Are you married, Orik? The question surprised Eragon; he had 
never stopped to wonder about Orik’s personal life. 
 
 “Eta,” said Orik. “Although I’m promished to fair Hvedra, daughter of 
Thorgerd One-eye and Himinglada. We were to be wed thish spring, un-
til the Urgals attacked and Hrothgar sent me on this accursed trip.” 
 
 “Is she of Dûrgrimst Ingeitum?” asked Eragon. 
 
 “Of coursh!” roared Orik, pounding his fist on the side of the chair. 
“Thinkest thou I would marry outside my clan? She’s the granddaughter 
of mine aunt Vardrûn, Hrothgar’s coushin twice removed, with white, 
round calves as smooth as satin, cheeks as red as apples, and the pretti-
esht dwarf maid who ever did exist.” 
 
 Undoubtedly, said Saphira. 
 
 “I’m sure it won’t be long before you see her again,” said Eragon. 
 
 “Hmph.” Orik squinted at Eragon. “Do you believe in giants? Tall giants, 
shtrong giants, thick and bearded giants with fingers like spadeses?” 
 
 “I’ve never seen nor heard of them,” said Eragon, “except in stories. If 
they do exist, it’s not in Alagaësia.” 
 
 “Ah, but they do! They do!” exclaimed Orik, waving the bottle about 
his head. “Tell me, O Rider, if a fearshome giant were to meet you on the 
garden path, what might he call you, if not dinner?” 
 

 
346
 “Eragon, I would presume.” 
 
 “No, no. He’d call you a dwarf, for dwarf you’d be to him.” Orik guf-
fawed and nudged Eragon in the ribs with his hard elbow. “See you now? 
Humans and elvesh are the giants. The land’s full of them, here, there, 
and everywhere, stomping about with their big feet and casting us in 
endless shadowses.” He continued laughing, rocking back in his chair until 
it tipped over and he fell to the floor with a solid thump. 
 
 Helping him upright, Eragon said, “I think you’d better stay here for the 
night. You’re in no condition to go down those stairs in the dark.” 
 
 Orik agreed with cheery indifference. He allowed Eragon to remove his 
mail and bundle him onto one side of the bed. Afterward, Eragon sighed, 
covered the lights, and lay on his side of the mattress. 
 
 He fell asleep hearing the dwarf mutter, “... Hvedra... Hvedra... 
Hvedra...” 
 
 
 
 

 
347
THE NATURE OF EVIL 
 
 
 Bright morning arrived all too soon. 
 
 Jolted to awareness by the buzz of the vibrating timepiece, Eragon 
grabbed his hunting knife and sprang out of bed, expecting an attack. He 
gasped as his body shrieked with protest from the abuse of the past two 
days. 
 
 Blinking away tears, Eragon rewound the timepiece. Orik was gone; the 
dwarf must have slipped away in the wee hours of the morning. With a 
groan, Eragon hobbled to the wash closet for his daily ablutions, like an 
old man afflicted by rheumatism. 
 
 He and Saphira waited by the tree for ten minutes before they were 
met by a solemn, black-haired elf. The elf bowed, touched two fingers to 
his lips—which Eragon mirrored—and then preempted Eragon by saying, 
“May good fortune rule over you.” 
 
 “And may the stars watch over you,” replied Eragon. “Did Oromis send 
you?” 
 
 The elf ignored him and said to Saphira, “Well met, dragon. I am Vanir 
of House Haldthin.” Eragon scowled with annoyance. 
 
 Well met, Vanir. 
 
 Only then did the elf address Eragon: “I will show you where you may 
practice with your blade.” He strode away, not waiting for Eragon to 
catch up. 
 
 The sparring yard was dotted with elves of both sexes fighting in pairs 
and groups. Their extraordinary physical gifts resulted in flurries of blows 
so quick and fast, they sounded like bursts of hail striking an iron bell. 
Under the trees that fringed the yard, individual elves performed the 
Rimgar with more grace and flexibility than Eragon thought he would 
ever achieve. 
 
 After everyone on the field stopped and bowed to Saphira, Vanir un-
sheathed his narrow blade. “If you will guard your sword, Silver Hand, we 
can begin.” 
 
 Eragon eyed the inhuman swordsmanship of the other elves with trepi-

 
348
dation. Why do I have to do this? he asked. I’ll just be humiliated. 
 
 You’ll be fine, said Saphira, yet he could sense her concern for him. 
 
 Right. 
 
 As he prepared Zar’roc, Eragon’s hands trembled with dread. Instead of 
throwing himself into the fray, he fought Vanir from a distance, dodging, 
sidestepping, and doing everything possible to avoid triggering another fit. 
Despite Eragon’s evasions, Vanir touched him four times in rapid succes-
sion—once each on his ribs, shin, and both shoulders. 
 
 Vanir’s initial expression of stoic impassivity soon devolved into open 
contempt. Dancing forward, he slid his blade up Zar’roc’s length while at 
the same time twirling Zar’roc in a circle, wrenching Eragon’s wrist. Er-
agon allowed Zar’roc to fly out of his hand rather than resist the elf’s su-
perior strength. 
 
 Vanir dropped his sword onto Eragon’s neck and said, “Dead.” Shrug-
ging off the sword, Eragon trudged over to retrieve Zar’roc. “Dead,” said 
Vanir. “How do you expect to defeat Galbatorix like this? I expected 
better, even from a weakling human.” 
 
 “Then why don’t you fight Galbatorix yourself instead of hiding in Du 
Weldenvarden?” 
 
 Vanir stiffened with outrage. “Because,” he said, cool and haughty, “I’m 
not a Rider. And if I were, I would not be such a coward as you.” 
 
 No one moved or spoke on the field. 
 
 His back to Vanir, Eragon leaned on Zar’roc and craned his neck to-
ward the sky, snarling to himself. He knows nothing. This is just one more 
test to overcome. 
 
 “Coward, I say. Your blood is as thin as the rest of your race’s. I think 
that Saphira was confused by Galbatorix’s wiles and made the wrong 
choice of Rider.” The spectating elves gasped at Vanir’s words and mut-
tered among themselves with open disapproval for his atrocious breach 
of etiquette. 
 
 Eragon ground his teeth. He could stand insults to himself, but not to 
Saphira. She was already moving when his pent-up frustration, fear, and 
pain burst within him and he whirled around, the tip of Zar’roc whistling 

 
349
through the air. 
 
 The blow would have killed Vanir had he not blocked it at the last 
second. He looked surprised by the ferocity of the attack. Holding noth-
ing in reserve, Eragon drove Vanir to the center of the field, jabbing and 
slashing like a madman—determined to hurt the elf however he could. 
He nicked Vanir on the hip with enough force to draw blood, even with 
Zar’roc’s blunted edge. 
 
 At that instant, Eragon’s back ruptured in an explosion of agony so in-
tense, he experienced it with all five senses: as a deafening, crashing wa-
terfall of sound; a metallic taste that coated his tongue; an acrid, eye-
watering stench in his nostrils, redolent of vinegar; pulsing colors; and, 
above all, the feeling that Durza had just laid open his back. 
 
 He could see Vanir standing over him with a derisive sneer. It occurred 
to Eragon that Vanir was very young. 
 
   
 
 After the seizure, Eragon wiped the blood from his mouth with his 
hand and showed it to Vanir, asking, “Thin enough?” Vanir did not deign 
to respond, but rather sheathed his sword and walked away. 
 
 “Where are you going?” demanded Eragon. “We have unfinished busi-
ness, you and I.” 
 
 “You are in no fit condition to spar,” scoffed the elf. 
 
 “Try me.” Eragon might be inferior to the elves, but he refused to give 
them the satisfaction of fulfilling their low expectations of him. He 
would earn their respect through sheer persistence, if nothing else. 
 
 He insisted on completing Oromis’s assigned hour, after which Saphira 
marched up to Vanir and touched him on the chest with the point of 
one of her ivory talons. Dead, she said. Vanir paled. The other elves 
edged away from him. 
 
 Once they were in the air, Saphira said, Oromis was right. 
 
 About what? 
 
 You give more of yourself when you have an opponent. 
 

 
350
   
 
 At Oromis’s hut, the day resumed its usual pattern: Saphira accompa-
nied Glaedr for her instruction while Eragon remained with Oromis. 
 
 Eragon was horrified when he discovered that Oromis expected him to 
do the Rimgar in addition to his earlier exercises. It took all of his courage 
to obey. His apprehension proved groundless, though, for the Dance of 
Snake and Crane was too gentle to injure him. 
 
 That, coupled with his meditation in the secluded glade, provided Er-
agon with his first opportunity since the previous day to order his 
thoughts and consider the question that Oromis had posed him. 
 
 While he did, he observed his red ants invade a smaller, rival anthill, 
overrunning the inhabitants and stealing their resources. By the end of the 
massacre, only a handful of the rival ants were left alive, alone and pur-
poseless in the vast and hostile pine-needle barrens. 
 
 Like the dragons in Alagaësia, thought Eragon. His connection to the 
ants vanished as he considered the dragons’ unhappy fate. Bit by bit, an 
answer to his problem revealed itself to him, an answer that he could live 
with and believe in. 
 
 He finished his meditations and returned to the hut. This time Oromis 
seemed reasonably satisfied with what Eragon had accomplished. 
 
 As Oromis served the midday meal, Eragon said, “I know why fighting 
Galbatorix is worth it, though thousands of people may die.” 
 
 “Oh?” Oromis seated himself. “Do tell me.” 
 
 “Because Galbatorix has already caused more suffering over the past 
hundred years than we ever could in a single generation. And unlike a 
normal tyrant, we cannot wait for him to die. He could rule for centuries 
or millennia—persecuting and tormenting people the entire time—unless 
we stop him. If he became strong enough, he would march on the 
dwarves and you here in Du Weldenvarden and kill or enslave both races. 
And...,” Eragon rubbed the heel of his palm against the edge of the table, 
“... because rescuing the two eggs from Galbatorix is the only way to save 
the dragons.” 
 
 The strident warble of Oromis’s teakettle intruded, escalating in vol-
ume until Eragon’s ears rang. Standing, Oromis hooked the kettle off the 

 
351
cookfire and poured the water for blueberry tea. The creases around his 
eyes softened. “Now,” he said, “you understand.” 
 
 “I understand, but I take no pleasure in it.” 
 
 “Nor should you. But now we can be confident that you won’t shrink 
from the path when you are confronted by the injustices and atrocities 
that the Varden will inevitably commit. We cannot afford to have you 
consumed by doubts when your strength and focus are most needed.” 
Oromis steepled his fingers and gazed into the dark mirror of his tea, con-
templating whatever he saw in its tenebrous reflection. “Do you believe 
that Galbatorix is evil?” 
 
 “Of course!” 
 
 “Do you believe that he considers himself evil?” 
 
 “No, I doubt it.” 
 
 Oromis tapped his forefingers against each other. “Then you must also 
believe that Durza was evil?” 
 
 The fragmented memories Eragon had gleaned from Durza when they 
fought in Tronjheim returned to him now, reminding him how the young 
Shade—Carsaib, then—had been enslaved by the wraiths he had sum-
moned to avenge the death of his mentor, Haeg. “He wasn’t evil himself, 
but the spirits that controlled him were.” 
 
 “And what of the Urgals?” asked Oromis, sipping his tea. “Are they 
evil?” 
 
 Eragon’s knuckles whitened as he gripped his spoon. “When I think of 
death, I see an Urgal’s face. They’re worse than beasts. The things they 
have done...” He shook his head, unable to continue. 
 
 “Eragon, what kind of opinion would you form of humans if all you 
knew of them were the actions of your warriors on the field of battle?” 
 
 “That’s not...” He took a deep breath. “It’s different. Urgals deserve to be 
wiped out, every last one of them.” 
 
 “Even their females and children? The ones who haven’t harmed you 
and likely never will? The innocents? Would you kill them and condemn 
an entire race to the void?” 

 
352
 
 “They wouldn’t spare us, given the chance.” 
 
 “Eragon!” exclaimed Oromis in biting tones. “I never want to hear you 
use that excuse again, that because someone else has done—or would 
do—something means that you should too. It’s lazy, repugnant, and in-
dicative of an inferior mind. Am I clear?” 
 
 “Yes, Master.” 
 
 The elf raised his mug to his lips and drank, his bright eyes fixed on Er-
agon the entire time. “What do you actually know of Urgals?” 
 
 “I know their strengths, weaknesses, and how to kill them. It’s all I need 
to know.” 
 
 “Why do they hate and fight humans, though? What about their history 
and legends, or the way in which they live?” 
 
 “Does it matter?” 
 
 Oromis sighed. “Just remember,” he said gently, “that at a certain point, 
your enemies may have to become your allies. Such is the nature of life.” 
 
 Eragon resisted the urge to argue. He swirled his own tea in its mug, ac-
celerating the liquid into a black whirlpool with a white lens of foam at 
the bottom of the vortex. “Is that why Galbatorix enlisted the Urgals?” 
 
 “That is not an example I would have chosen, but yes.” 
 
 “It seems strange that he befriended them. After all, they were the ones 
who killed his dragon. Look what he did to us, the Riders, and we 
weren’t even responsible for his loss.” 
 
 “Ah,” said Oromis, “mad Galbatorix may be, but he’s still as cunning as 
a fox. I guess that he intended to use the Urgals to destroy the Varden 
and the dwarves—and others, if he had triumphed in Farthen Dûr—
thereby removing two of his enemies while simultaneously weakening 
the Urgals so that he could dispose of them at his leisure.” 
 
   
 
 Study of the ancient language devoured the afternoon, whereupon they 
took up the practice of magic. Much of Oromis’s lectures concerned the 

 
353
proper way in which to control various forms of energy, such as light, 
heat, electricity, and even gravity. He explained that since these forces 
consumed strength faster than any other type of spell, it was safer to find 
them already in existence in nature and then shape them with gramarye, 
instead of trying to create them from nothing. 
 
 Abandoning the subject, Oromis asked, “How would you kill with 
magic?” 
 
 “I’ve done it many ways,” said Eragon. “I’ve hunted with a pebble—
moving and aiming it with magic—as well as using the word jierda to 
break Urgals’ legs and necks. Once, with thrysta, I stopped a man’s heart.” 
 
 “There are more efficient methods,” revealed Oromis. “What does it 
take to kill a man, Eragon? A sword through the chest? A broken neck? 
The loss of blood? All it takes is for a single artery in the brain to be 
pinched off, or for certain nerves to be severed. With the right spell, you 
could obliterate an army.” 
 
 “I should have thought of that in Farthen Dûr,” said Eragon, disgusted 
with himself. Not just Farthen Dûr either, but also when the Kull chased us 
from the Hadarac Desert. “Again, why didn’t Brom teach me this?” 
 
 “Because he did not expect you to face an army for months or years to 
come; it is not a tool given to untested Riders.” 
 
 “If it’s so easy to kill people, though, what’s the point of us or Galba-
torix raising an army?” 
 
 “To be succinct, tactics. Magicians are vulnerable to physical attack 
when they are embroiled in their mental struggles. Therefore, they need 
warriors to protect them. And the warriors must be shielded, at least in 
part, from magical attacks, else they would be slain within minutes. 
These limitations mean that when armies confront one another, their 
magicians are scattered throughout the bulk of their forces, close to the 
edge but not so close as to be in danger. The magicians on both sides 
open their minds and attempt to sense if anyone is using or is about to 
use magic. Since their enemies might be beyond their mental reach, ma-
gicians also erect wards around themselves and their warriors to stop or 
lessen long-range attacks, such as a pebble sent flying toward their head 
from a mile away.” 
 
 “Surely one man can’t defend an entire army,” said Eragon. 
 

 
354
 “Not alone, but with enough magicians, you can provide a reasonable 
amount of protection. The greatest danger in this sort of conflict is that a 
clever magician may think of a unique attack that can bypass your wards 
without tripping them. That itself could be enough to decide a battle. 
 
 “Also,” said Oromis, “you must keep in mind that the ability to use 
magic is exceedingly rare among the races. We elves are no exception, 
although we have a greater allotment of spellweavers than most, as a re-
sult of oaths we bound ourselves with centuries ago. The majority of 
those blessed with magic have little or no appreciable talent; they strug-
gle to heal even so much as a bruise.” 
 
 Eragon nodded. He had encountered magicians like that in the Varden. 
“But it still takes the same amount of energy to accomplish a task.” 
 
 “Energy, yes, but lesser magicians find it harder than you or I do to feel 
the flow of magic and immerse themselves in it. Few magicians are strong 
enough to pose a threat to an entire army. And those who are usually 
spend the bulk of their time during battles evading, tracking, or fighting 
their opposites, which is fortunate from the standpoint of ordinary war-
riors, else they would all soon be killed.” 
 
 Troubled, Eragon said, “The Varden don’t have many magicians.” 
 
 “That is one reason why you are so important.” 
 
 A moment passed as Eragon reflected on what Oromis had told him. 
“These wards, do they only drain energy from you when they are acti-
vated?” 
 
 “Aye.” 
 
 “Then, given enough time, you could acquire countless layers of wards. 
You could make yourself...” He struggled with the ancient language as he 
attempted to express himself. “... untouchable?... impregnable?... impreg-
nable to any assault, magical or physical.” 
 
 “Wards,” said Oromis, “rely upon the strength of your body. If that 
strength is exceeded, you die. No matter how many wards you have, you 
will only be able to block attacks so long as your body can sustain the 
output of energy.” 
 
 “And Galbatorix’s strength has been increasing each year.... How is that 
possible?” 

 
355
 
 It was a rhetorical question, yet when Oromis remained silent, his al-
mond eyes fixed on a trio of swallows pirouetting overhead, Eragon real-
ized that the elf was considering how best to answer him. The birds 
chased each other for several minutes. When they flitted from view, 
Oromis said, “It is not appropriate to have this discussion at the present.” 
 
 “Then you know?” exclaimed Eragon, astonished. 
 
 “I do. But that information must wait until later in your training. You 
are not ready for it.” Oromis looked at Eragon, as if expecting him to ob-
ject. 
 
 Eragon bowed. “As you wish, Master.” He could never prize the infor-
mation out of Oromis until the elf was willing to share it, so why try? 
Still, he wondered what could be so dangerous that Oromis dared not tell 
him, and why the elves had kept it secret from the Varden. Another 
thought presented itself to him, and he said, “If battles with magicians are 
conducted like you said, then why did Ajihad let me fight without wards 
in Farthen Dûr? I didn’t even know that I needed to keep my mind open 
for enemies. And why didn’t Arya kill most or all of the Urgals? No ma-
gicians were there to oppose her except for Durza, and he couldn’t have 
defended his troops when he was underground.” 
 
 “Did not Ajihad have Arya or one of Du Vrangr Gata set defenses 
around you?” demanded Oromis. 
 
 “No, Master.” 
 
 “And you fought thus?” 
 
 “Yes, Master.” 
 
 Oromis’s eyes unfocused, withdrawing into himself as he stood mo-
tionless on the greensward. He spoke without warning: “I have consulted 
Arya, and she says that the Twins of the Varden were ordered to assess 
your abilities. They told Ajihad you were competent in all magic, includ-
ing wards. Neither Ajihad nor Arya doubted their judgment on that mat-
ter.” 
 
 “Those smooth-tongued, bald-pated, tick-infested, treacherous dogs,” 
swore Eragon. “They tried to get me killed!” Reverting to his own lan-
guage, he indulged in several more pungent oaths. 
 

 
356
 “Do not befoul the air,” said Oromis mildly. “It ill becomes you.... In any 
case, I suspect the Twins allowed you into battle unprotected not so you 
would be killed, but so that Durza could capture you.” 
 
 “What?” 
 
 “By your own account, Ajihad suspected that the Varden had been be-
trayed when Galbatorix began persecuting their allies in the Empire with 
near-perfect accuracy. The Twins were privy to the identities of the 
Varden’s collaborators. Also, the Twins lured you to the heart of Tron-
jheim, thereby separating you from Saphira and placing you within 
Durza’s reach. That they were traitors is the logical explanation.” 
 
 “If they were traitors,” said Eragon, “it doesn’t matter now; they’re long 
dead.” 
 
 Oromis inclined his head. “Even so. Arya said that the Urgals did have 
magicians in Farthen Dûr and that she fought many of them. None of 
them attacked you?” 
 
 “No, Master.” 
 
 “More evidence that you and Saphira were left for Durza to capture 
and take to Galbatorix. The trap was well laid.” 
 
 Over the next hour, Oromis taught Eragon twelve methods to kill, 
none of which took more energy than lifting an ink-laden pen. As he fin-
ished memorizing the last one, a thought struck Eragon that caused him 
to grin. “The Ra’zac won’t stand a chance the next time they cross my 
path.” 
 
 “You must still be wary of them,” cautioned Oromis. 
 
 “Why? Three words and they’ll be dead.” 
 
 “What do ospreys eat?” 
 
 Eragon blinked. “Fish, of course.” 
 
 “And if a fish were slightly faster and more intelligent than its brethren, 
would it be able to escape a hunting osprey?” 
 
 “I doubt it,” said Eragon. “At least not for very long.” 
 

 
357
 “Just as ospreys are designed to be the best possible hunters of fish, 
wolves are designed to be the best hunters of deer and other large game, 
and every animal is gifted to best suit its purpose. So too are the Ra’zac 
designed to prey upon humans. They are the monsters in the dark, the 
dripping nightmares that haunt your race.” 
 
 The back of Eragon’s neck prickled with horror. “What manner of crea-
tures are they?” 
 
 “Neither elf; man; dwarf; dragon; furred, finned, or feathered beast; rep-
tile; insect; nor any other category of animal.” 
 
 Eragon forced a laugh. “Are they plants, then?” 
 
 “Nor that either. They reproduce by laying eggs, like dragons. When 
they hatch, the young—or pupae—grow black exoskeletons that mimic 
the human form. It’s a grotesque imitation, but convincing enough to let 
the Ra’zac approach their victims without undo alarm. All areas where 
humans are weak, the Ra’zac are strong. They can see on a cloudy night, 
track a scent like a bloodhound, jump higher, and move faster. However, 
bright light pains them and they have a morbid fear of deep water, for 
they cannot swim. Their greatest weapon is their evil breath, which fogs 
the minds of humans—incapacitating many—though it is less potent on 
dwarves, and elves are immune altogether.” 
 
 Eragon shivered as he remembered his first sight of the Ra’zac in Car-
vahall and how he had been unable to flee once they noticed him. “It felt 
like a dream where I wanted to run but I couldn’t move, no matter how 
hard I tried.” 
 
 “As good a description as any,” said Oromis. “Though the Ra’zac cannot 
use magic, they are not to be underestimated. If they know that you hunt 
them, they will not reveal themselves but keep to the shadows, where 
they are strong, and plot to ambush you as they did by Dras-Leona. Even 
Brom’s experience could not protect him from them. Never grow over-
confident, Eragon. Never grow arrogant, for then you will be careless and 
your enemies will exploit your weakness.” 
 
 “Yes, Master.” 
 
 Oromis fixed Eragon with a steady gaze. “The Ra’zac remain pupae for 
twenty years while they mature. On the first full moon of their twentieth 
year, they shed their exoskeletons, spread their wings, and emerge as 
adults ready to hunt all creatures, not just humans.” 

 
358
 
 “Then the Ra’zac’s mounts, the ones they fly on, are really...” 
 
 “Aye, their parents.” 
 
 
 
 

 
359
IMAGE OF PERFECTION 
 
 
 At last I understand the nature of my enemies, thought Eragon. He had 
feared the Ra’zac ever since they first appeared in Carvahall, not only be-
cause of their villainous deeds but because he knew so little about the 
creatures. In his ignorance, he credited the Ra’zac with more powers than 
they actually possessed and regarded them with an almost superstitious 
dread. Nightmares indeed. But now that Oromis’s explanation had 
stripped away the Ra’zac’s aura of mystery, they no longer seemed quite 
so formidable. The fact that they were vulnerable to light and water 
strengthened Eragon’s conviction that when next they met, he would de-
stroy the monsters that had killed Garrow and Brom. 
 
 “Are their parents called Ra’zac as well?” he asked. 
 
 Oromis shook his head. “Lethrblaka, we named them. And whereas 
their offspring are narrow-minded, if cunning, Lethrblaka have all the in-
telligence of a dragon. A cruel, vicious, and twisted dragon.” 
 
 “Where do they come from?” 
 
 “From whatever land your ancestors abandoned. Their depredations 
may have been what forced King Palancar to emigrate. When we, the 
Riders, became aware of the Ra’zac’s foul presence in Alagaësia, we did 
our best to eradicate them, as we would leaf blight. Unfortunately, we 
were only partially successful. Two Lethrblaka escaped, and they along 
with their pupae are the ones who have caused you so much grief. After 
he killed Vrael, Galbatorix sought them out and bargained for their ser-
vices in return for his protection and a guaranteed amount of their favor-
ite food. That is why Galbatorix allows them to live by Dras-Leona, one 
of the Empire’s largest cities.” 
 
 Eragon’s jaw tightened. “They have much to answer for.” And they will, 
if I have my way. 
 
 “That they do,” Oromis agreed. Returning to the hut, he stepped 
through the black shadow of the doorway, then reappeared carrying a 
half-dozen slate tablets about a half-foot wide and a foot high. He pre-
sented one to Eragon. “Let us abandon such unpleasant topics for a time. I 
thought you might enjoy learning how to make a fairth. It is an excellent 
device for focusing your thoughts. The slate is impregnated with enough 
ink to cover it with any combination of colors. All you need do is con-
centrate upon the image that you wish to capture and then say, ‘Let that 

 
360
which I see in my mind’s eye be replicated on the surface of this tablet.’ ” 
As Eragon examined the clay-smooth slate, Oromis gestured at the clear-
ing. “Look about you, Eragon, and find something worth preserving.” 
 
 The first objects that Eragon noticed seemed too obvious, too banal to 
him: a yellow lily by his feet, Oromis’s overgrown hut, the white stream, 
and the landscape itself. None were unique. None would give an observer 
an insight into the subject of the fairth or he who had created it. Things 
that change and are lost, that is what’s worth preserving, he thought. His 
eye alighted upon the pale green nubs of spring growth at the tip of a 
tree’s branches and then the deep, narrow wound that seamed the trunk 
where a storm had broken a bough, tearing off a rope of bark with it. 
Translucent orbs of sap encrusted the seam, catching and refracting the 
light. 
 
 Eragon positioned himself alongside the trunk so that the rotund galls 
of the tree’s congealed blood bulged out in silhouette and were framed by 
a cluster of shiny new needles. Then he fixed the scene in his mind as 
best he could and uttered the spell. 
 
 The surface of the gray tablet brightened as splashes of color bloomed 
across it, blending and mixing to produce the proper array of hues. When 
the pigments at last stopped moving, Eragon found himself looking at a 
strange copy of what he had wanted to reproduce. The sap and needles 
were rendered with vibrant, razor-sharp detail, while all else was slurred 
and bleary, as if seen through half-opened eyes. It was far removed from 
the universal clarity of Oromis’s fairth of Ilirea. 
 
 At a sign from Oromis, Eragon handed the tablet to him. The elf stud-
ied it for a minute, then said, “You have an unusual way of thinking, Er-
agon-finiarel. Most humans have difficulty achieving the proper concen-
tration to create a recognizable image. You, on the other hand, seem to 
observe nearly everything about whatever interests you. It’s a narrow fo-
cus, though. You have the same problem here that you do with your 
meditation. You must relax, broaden your field of vision, and allow your-
self to absorb everything around you without judging what is important 
or not.” Setting aside the picture, Oromis took a second, blank tablet 
from the grass and gave it to Eragon. “Try again with what I—” 
 
 “Hail, Rider!” 
 
 Startled, Eragon turned and saw Orik and Arya emerge side by side 
from the forest. The dwarf raised his arm in greeting. His beard was 
freshly trimmed and braided, his hair was pulled back into a neat pony-

 
361
tail, and he wore a new tunic—courtesy of the elves—that was red and 
brown and embroidered with gold thread. His appearance gave no indica-
tion of his condition the previous night. 
 
 Eragon, Oromis, and Arya exchanged the traditional greeting, then, 
abandoning the ancient language, Oromis asked, “To what may I attribute 
this visit? You are both welcome to my hut, but as you can see, I am in 
the midst of working with Eragon, and that is of paramount importance.” 
 
 “I apologize for disturbing you, Oromis-elda,” said Arya, “but—” 
 
 “The fault is mine,” said Orik. He glanced at Eragon before continuing: 
“I was sent here by Hrothgar to ensure that Eragon receives the instruc-
tion he is due. I have no doubt that he is, but I am obliged to see his 
training with my own eyes so that when I return to Tronjheim, I may 
give my king a true account of events.” 
 
 Oromis said, “That which I teach Eragon is not to be shared with any-
one else. The secrets of the Riders are for him alone.” 
 
 “And I understand that. However, we live in uncertain times; the stone 
that once was fixed and solid is now unstable. We must adapt to survive. 
So much depends on Eragon, we dwarves have a right to verify that his 
training proceeds as promised. Do you believe our request is an unrea-
sonable one?” 
 
 “Well spoken, Master Dwarf,” said Oromis. He tapped his fingers to-
gether, inscrutable as always. “May I assume, then, that this is a matter of 
duty for you?” 
 
 “Duty and honor.” 
 
 “And neither will allow you to yield on this point?” 
 
 “I fear not, Oromis-elda,” said Orik. 
 
 “Very well. You may stay and watch for the duration of this lesson. 
Will that satisfy you?” 
 
 Orik frowned. “Are you near the end of the lesson?” 
 
 “We have just begun.” 
 
 “Then yes, I will be satisfied. For the moment, at least.” 

 
362
 
 While they spoke, Eragon tried to catch Arya’s eye, but she kept her at-
tention centered on Oromis. 
 
 “... Eragon!” 
 
 He blinked, jolted out of his reverie. “Yes, Master?” 
 
 “Don’t wander, Eragon. I want you to make another fairth. Keep your 
mind open, like I told you before.” 
 
 “Yes, Master.” Eragon hefted the tablet, his hands slightly damp at the 
thought of having Orik and Arya there to judge his performance. He 
wanted to do well in order to prove that Oromis was a good teacher. 
Even so, he could not concentrate on the pine needles and sap; Arya 
tugged at him like a lodestone, drawing his attention back to her when-
ever he thought of something else. 
 
 At last he realized that it was futile for him to resist the attraction. He 
composed an image of her in his head—which took but a heartbeat, since 
he knew her features better than his own—and voiced the spell in the 
ancient language, pouring all of his adoration, love, and fear of her into 
the currents of fey magic. 
 
 The result left him speechless. 
 
 The fairth depicted Arya’s head and shoulders against a dark, indistinct 
background. She was bathed in firelight on her right side and gazed out at 
the viewer with knowing eyes, appearing not just as she was but as he 
thought of her: mysterious, exotic, and the most beautiful woman he had 
ever seen. It was a flawed, imperfect picture, but it possessed such inten-
sity and passion that it evoked a visceral response from Eragon. Is this 
how I really see her? Whoever this woman was, she was so wise, so pow-
erful, and so hypnotic, she could consume any lesser man. 
 
 From a great distance, he heard Saphira whisper, Be careful.... 
 
 “What have you wrought, Eragon?” demanded Oromis. 
 
 “I... I don’t know.” Eragon hesitated as Oromis extended his hand for 
the fairth, reluctant to let the others examine his work, especially Arya. 
After a long, terrifying pause, Eragon pried his fingers off the tablet and 
released it to Oromis. 
 

 
363
 The elf’s expression grew stern as he looked at the fairth, then back at 
Eragon, who quailed under the weight of his stare. Without a word, 
Oromis handed the tablet to Arya. 
 
 Her hair obscured her face as she bowed over the tablet, but Eragon 
saw cords and veins ridge her hands as she clenched the slate. It shook in 
her grip. 
 
 “Well, what is it?” asked Orik. 
 
 Raising the fairth over her head, Arya hurled it against the ground, shat-
tering the picture into a thousand pieces. Then she drew herself upright 
and, with great dignity, walked past Eragon, across the clearing, and into 
the tangled depths of Du Weldenvarden. 
 
 Orik picked up one of the fragments of slate. It was blank. The image 
had vanished when the tablet broke. He tugged his beard. “In all the dec-
ades I’ve known her, Arya has never lost her temper like that. Never. 
What did you do, Eragon?” 
 
 Dazed, Eragon said, “A portrait of her.” 
 
 Orik frowned, obviously puzzled. “A portrait? Why would that—” 
 
 “I think it would be best if you left now,” said Oromis. “The lesson is 
over, in any case. Come back tomorrow or the day after if you want a 
better idea of Eragon’s progress.” 
 
 The dwarf squinted at Eragon, then nodded and brushed the dirt from 
his palms. “Yes, I believe I’ll do that. Thank you for your time, Oromis-
elda. I appreciate it.” As he headed back toward Ellesméra, he said over 
his shoulder to Eragon, “I’ll be in the common room of Tialdarí Hall, if 
you want to talk.” 
 
 When Orik was gone, Oromis lifted the hem of his tunic, knelt, and 
began to gather up the remains of the tablet. Eragon watched him, unable 
to move. 
 
 “Why?” he asked in the ancient language. 
 
 “Perhaps,” said Oromis, “Arya was frightened by you.” 
 
 “Frightened? She never gets frightened.” Even as he said it, Eragon knew 
that it was not true. She just concealed her fear better than most. Drop-

 
364
ping to one knee, he took a piece of the fairth and pressed it into 
Oromis’s palm. “Why would I frighten her?” he asked. “Please, tell me.” 
 
 Oromis stood and walked to the edge of the stream, where he scattered 
the fragments of slate over the bank, letting the gray flakes trickle 
through his fingers. “Fairths only show what you want them to. It’s possi-
ble to lie with them, to create a false image, but to do so requires more 
skill than you yet have. Arya knows this. She also knows, then, that your 
fairth was an accurate representation of your feelings for her.” 
 
 “But why would that frighten her?” 
 
 Oromis smiled sadly. “Because it revealed the depth of your infatua-
tion.” He pressed his fingertips together, forming a series of arches. “Let 
us analyze the situation, Eragon. While you are old enough to be consid-
ered a man among your people, in our eyes, you are no more than a 
child.” Eragon frowned, hearing echoes of Saphira’s words from the pre-
vious night. “Normally, I would not compare a human’s age to an elf’s, 
but since you share our longevity, you must also be judged by our stan-
dards. 
 
 “And you are a Rider. We rely upon you to help us defeat Galbatorix; 
it could be disastrous for everyone in Alagaësia if you are distracted from 
your studies. 
 
 “Now then,” said Oromis, “how should Arya have responded to your 
fairth? It’s clear that you see her in a romantic light, yet—while I have no 
doubt Arya is fond of you—a union between the two of you is impossi-
ble due to your own youth, culture, race, and responsibilities. Your inter-
est has placed Arya in an uncomfortable position. She dare not confront 
you, for fear of disrupting your training. But, as the queen’s daughter, she 
cannot ignore you and risk offending a Rider—especially one upon which 
so much depends.... Even if you were a fit match, Arya would refrain 
from encouraging you so that you could devote all of your energy to the 
task at hand. She would sacrifice her happiness for the greater good.” 
Oromis’s voice thickened: “You must understand, Eragon, that slaying 
Galbatorix is more important than any one person. Nothing else matters.” 
He paused, his gaze gentle, then added, “Given the circumstances, is it so 
strange Arya was frightened that your feelings for her could endanger 
everything we have worked for?” 
 
 Eragon shook his head. He was ashamed that his behavior had caused 
Arya distress, and dismayed by how reckless and juvenile he had been. I 
could have avoided this entire mess if I’d just kept better control of myself. 

 
365
 
 Touching him on the shoulder, Oromis guided him back inside the hut. 
“Think not that I am devoid of sympathy, Eragon. Everyone experiences 
ardor like yours at one point or another during their lives. It’s part of 
growing up. I also know how hard it is for you to deny yourself the usual 
comforts of life, but it’s necessary if we are to prevail.” 
 
 “Yes, Master.” 
 
 They sat at the kitchen table, and Oromis began to lay out writing ma-
terials for Eragon to practice the Liduen Kvaedhí. “It would be unreason-
able of me to expect you to forget your fascination with Arya, but I do 
expect you to prevent it from interfering with my instruction again. Can 
you promise me that?” 
 
 “Yes, Master. I promise.” 
 
 “And Arya? What would be the honorable thing to do about her pre-
dicament?” 
 
 Eragon hesitated. “I don’t want to lose her friendship.” 
 
 “No.” 
 
 “Therefore... I will go to her, I will apologize, and I will reassure her 
that I never intend to cause her such hardship again.” It was difficult for 
him to say, but once he did, he felt a sense of relief, as if acknowledging 
his mistake cleansed him of it. 
 
 Oromis appeared pleased. “By that alone, you prove that you have ma-
tured.” 
 
 The sheets of paper were smooth underneath Eragon’s hands as he 
pressed them flat against the tabletop. He stared at the blank white ex-
panse for a moment, then dipped a quill in ink and began to transcribe a 
column of glyphs. Each barbed line was like a streak of night against the 
paper, an abyss into which he could lose himself and try to forget his 
confused feelings. 
 
 

 
366
THE OBLITERATOR 
 
 
 The following morn, Eragon went looking for Arya in order to apolo-
gize. He searched for over an hour without success. It seemed as if she 
had vanished among the many hidden nooks within Ellesméra. He caught 
a glimpse of her once as he paused by the entrance to Tialdarí Hall and 
called out to her, but she slipped away before he could reach her side. 
She’s avoiding me, he finally realized. 
 
 As the days rolled by, Eragon embraced Oromis’s training with a zeal 
that the elder Rider praised, devoting himself to his studies in order to 
distract himself from thoughts of Arya. 
 
 Night and day, Eragon strove to master his lessons. He memorized the 
words of making, binding, and summoning; learned the true names of 
plants and animals; and studied the perils of transmutation, how to call 
upon the wind and the sea, and the myriad skills needed to understand 
the forces of the world. At spells that dealt with the great energies—such 
as light, heat, and magnetism—he excelled, for he possessed the talent to 
judge nigh exactly how much strength a task required and whether it 
would exceed that of his body. 
 
 Occasionally, Orik would come and watch, standing without comment 
by the edge of the clearing while Oromis tutored Eragon, or while Eragon 
struggled alone with a particularly difficult spell. 
 
 Oromis set many challenges before him. He had Eragon cook meals 
with magic, in order to teach him finer control of his gramarye; Eragon’s 
first attempts resulted in a blackened mess. The elf showed Eragon how 
to detect and neutralize poisons of every sort and, from then on, Eragon 
had to inspect his food for the different venoms Oromis was liable to slip 
into it. More than once Eragon went hungry when he could not find the 
poison or was unable to counteract it. Twice he became so sick, Oromis 
had to heal him. And Oromis had Eragon cast multiple spells simultane-
ously, which required tremendous concentration to keep the spells di-
rected at their intended targets and prevent them from shifting among 
the items Eragon wanted to affect. 
 
 Oromis devoted long hours to the craft of imbuing matter with energy, 
either to be released at a later time or to give an object certain attributes. 
He said, “This is how Rhunön charmed the Riders’ swords so they never 
break or dull; how we sing plants into growing as we desire; how a trap 
might be set in a box, only to be triggered when the box is opened; how 

 
367
we and the dwarves make the Erisdar, our lanterns; and how you may 
heal one who is injured, to name but a few uses. These are the most po-
tent of spells, for they can lie dormant for a thousand years or more and 
are difficult to perceive or avert. They permeate much of Alagaësia, 
shaping the land and the destiny of those who live here.” 
 
 Eragon asked, “You could use this technique to alter your body, 
couldn’t you? Or is that too dangerous?” 
 
 Oromis’s lips quirked in a faint smile. “Alas, you have stumbled upon 
elves’ greatest weakness: our vanity. We love beauty in all its forms, and 
we seek to represent that ideal in our appearance. That is why we are 
known as the Fair Folk. Every elf looks exactly as he or she wishes to. 
When elves learn the spells for growing and molding living things, they 
often choose to modify their appearance to better reflect their personali-
ties. A few elves have gone beyond mere aesthetic changes and altered 
their anatomy to adapt to various environments, as you will see during 
the Blood-oath Celebration. Oftentimes, they are more animal than elf. 
 
 “However, transferring power to a living creature is different from 
transferring power to an inanimate object. Very few materials are suit-
able for storing energy; most either allow it to dissipate or become so 
charged with force that when you touch the object, a bolt of lightning 
drives through you. The best materials we have found for this purpose 
are gemstones. Quartz, agates, and other lesser stones are not as efficient 
as, say, a diamond, but any gem will suffice. That is why Riders’ swords 
always have a jewel set in their pommels. It is also why your dwarf neck-
lace—which is entirely metal—must sap your strength to fuel its spell, 
since it can hold no energy of its own.” 
 
 When not with Oromis, Eragon supplemented his education by reading 
the many scrolls the elf gave him, a habit he soon became addicted to. 
Eragon’s rearing—limited as it was by Garrow’s scant tutelage—had ex-
posed him only to the knowledge needed to run a farm. The information 
he discovered on the miles of paper flooded into him like rain on parched 
desert, sating a previously unknown thirst. He devoured texts on geogra-
phy, biology, anatomy, philosophy, and mathematics, as well as memoirs, 
biographies, and histories. More important than mere facts was his intro-
duction to alternative ways of thinking. They challenged his beliefs and 
forced him to reexamine his assumptions about everything from the 
rights of an individual within society to what caused the sun to move 
across the sky. 
 
 He noticed that a number of scrolls concerned Urgals and their culture. 

 
368
Eragon read them and made no mention of it, nor did Oromis broach the 
topic. 
 
 From his studies, Eragon learned much about the elves, a subject that 
he avidly pursued, hoping that it would help him to better understand 
Arya. To his surprise, he discovered that the elves did not practice mar-
riage, but rather took mates for however long they wanted, whether it be 
for a day or a century. Children were rare, and having a child was consid-
ered by the elves to be the ultimate vow of love. 
 
 Eragon also learned that since their two races had first met, only a 
handful of elf-human couples had existed: mainly human Riders who 
found appropriate mates among the elves. However, as best he could tell 
from the cryptic records, most such relationships ended in tragedy, either 
because the lovers were unable to relate to one another or because the 
humans aged and died while the elves escaped the ravages of time. 
 
 In addition to nonfiction, Oromis presented Eragon with copies of the 
elves’ greatest songs, poems, and epics, which captured Eragon’s imagina-
tion, for the only stories he was familiar with were the ones Brom had 
recited in Carvahall. He savored the epics as he might a well-cooked 
meal, lingering over The Deed of Gëda or The Lay of Umhodan so as to 
prolong his enjoyment of the tales. 
 
 Saphira’s own training proceeded apace. Linked as he was to her mind, 
Eragon got to watch as Glaedr put her through an exercise regimen every 
bit as strenuous as his. She practiced hovering in the air while lifting 
boulders, as well as sprints, dives, and other acrobatics. To increase her 
endurance, Glaedr had her breathe fire for hours upon a natural stone pil-
lar in an attempt to melt it. At first Saphira could only maintain the 
flames for a few minutes at a time, but before long the blistering torch 
roared from her maw for over a half hour uninterrupted, heating the pil-
lar white-hot. Eragon was also privy to the dragon lore Glaedr imparted 
to Saphira, details about the dragons’ lives and history that comple-
mented her instinctual knowledge. Much of it was incomprehensible to 
Eragon, and he suspected that Saphira concealed even more from him, 
secrets of her race that dragons shared with no one but themselves. One 
thing he did glean, and that Saphira treasured, was the name of her sire, 
Iormúngr, and her dam, Vervada, which meant Storm-cleaver in the old 
speech. While Iormúngr had been bound to a Rider, Vervada was a wild 
dragon who had laid many eggs but entrusted only one to the Riders: 
Saphira. Both dragons perished in the Fall. 
 
 Some days Eragon and Saphira would fly with Oromis and Glaedr, 

 
369
practicing aerial combat or visiting crumbling ruins hidden within Du 
Weldenvarden. Other days they would reverse the usual order of things, 
and Eragon would accompany Glaedr while Saphira remained on the 
Crags of Tel’naeír with Oromis. 
 
 Each morning Eragon sparred with Vanir, which, without exception, 
ignited one or more of Eragon’s seizures. To make matters worse, the elf 
continued to treat Eragon with haughty condescension. He delivered 
oblique slights that, on the surface, never exceeded the bounds of polite-
ness, and he refused to be drawn to anger no matter how Eragon needled 
him. Eragon hated him and his cool, mannered bearing. It seemed as if 
Vanir was insulting him with every movement. And Vanir’s compan-
ions—who, as best Eragon could tell, were of a younger generation of 
elves—shared his veiled distaste for Eragon, though they never displayed 
aught but respect for Saphira. 
 
 Their rivalry came to a head when, after defeating Eragon six times in a 
row, Vanir lowered his sword and said, “Dead yet again, Shadeslayer. 
How repetitive. Do you wish to continue?” His tone indicated that he 
thought it would be pointless. 
 
 “Aye,” grunted Eragon. He had already suffered an episode with his 
back and was in no mood to bandy words. 
 
 Still, when Vanir said, “Tell me, as I am curious: How did you kill 
Durza when you are so slow? I cannot fathom how you managed it,” Er-
agon felt compelled to reply: “I caught him by surprise.” 
 
 “Forgive me; I should have guessed trickery was involved.” 
 
 Eragon fought the impulse to grind his teeth. “If I were an elf or you a 
human, you would not be able to match my blade.” 
 
 “Perhaps,” said Vanir. He assumed his ready position and, within the 
span of three seconds and two blows, disarmed Eragon. “But I think not. 
You should not boast to a better swordsman, else he may decide to pun-
ish your temerity.” 
 
 Eragon’s temper broke then, and he reached deep within himself and 
into the torrent of magic. He released the pent-up energy with one of the 
twelve minor words of binding, crying “Malthinae!” to chain Vanir’s legs 
and arms in place and hold his jaw shut so that he could not utter a coun-
terspell. The elf’s eyes bulged with outrage. 
 

 
370
 Eragon said, “And you should not boast to one who is more skilled in 
magic than you.” 
 
 Vanir’s dark eyebrows met. 
 
 Without warning or a whisper of a sound, an invisible force clouted Er-
agon on the chest and threw him ten yards across the grass, where he 
landed upon his side, driving the wind from his lungs. The impact dis-
rupted Eragon’s control of the magic and freed Vanir. 
 
 How did he do that? 
 
 Advancing upon him, Vanir said, “Your ignorance betrays you, human. 
You do not know whereof you speak. To think that you were chosen to 
succeed Vrael, that you were given his quarters, that you have had the 
honor to serve the Mourning Sage...” He shook his head. “It sickens me 
that such gifts are bestowed upon one so unworthy. You do not even un-
derstand what magic is or how it works.” 
 
 Eragon’s anger resurged like a crimson tide. “What,” he said, “have I ever 
done to wrong you? Why do you despise me so? Would you prefer it if 
no Rider existed to oppose Galbatorix?” 
 
 “My opinions are of little consequence.” 
 
 “I agree, but I would hear them.” 
 
 “Listening, as Nuala wrote in Convocations, is the path to wisdom only 
when the result of a conscious decision and not a void of perception.” 
 
 “Straighten your tongue, Vanir, and give me an honest answer!” 
 
 Vanir smiled coldly. “As you command, O Rider.” Drawing near so that 
only Eragon could hear his soft voice, the elf said, “For eighty years after 
the fall of the Riders, we held no hope of victory. We survived by hiding 
ourselves through deceit and magic, which is but a temporary measure, 
for eventually Galbatorix will be strong enough to march upon us and 
sweep aside our defenses. Then, long after we had resigned ourselves to 
our fate, Brom and Jeod rescued Saphira’s egg, and once again a chance 
existed to defeat the foul usurper. Imagine our joy and celebration. We 
knew that in order to withstand Galbatorix, the new Rider had to be 
more powerful than any of his predecessors, more powerful than even 
Vrael. Yet how was our patience rewarded? With another human like 
Galbatorix. Worse... a cripple. You doomed us all, Eragon, the instant you 

 
371
touched Saphira’s egg. Do not expect us to welcome your presence.” 
Vanir touched his lips with his first and second finger, then sidestepped 
Eragon and walked off the sparring field, leaving Eragon rooted in place. 
 
 He’s right, thought Eragon. I’m ill suited for this task. Any of these elves, 
even Vanir, would make a better Rider than me. 
 
 Emanating outrage, Saphira broadened the contact between them. Do 
you think so little of my judgment, Eragon? You forget that when I was in 
my egg, Arya exposed me to each and every one of these elves—as well as 
many of the Varden’s children—and that I rejected them all. I wouldn’t 
have chosen someone to be my Rider unless they could help your race, mine, 
and the elves, for the three of us share an intertwined fate. You were the 
right person, at the right place, at the right time. Never forget that. 
 
 If ever that were true, he said, it was before Durza injured me. Now I see 
naught but darkness and evil in our future. I won’t give up, but I despair 
that we may not prevail. Perhaps our task is not to overthrow Galbatorix 
but to prepare the way for the next Rider chosen by the remaining eggs. 
 
 At the Crags of Tel’naeír, Eragon found Oromis at the table in his hut, 
painting a landscape with black ink along the bottom edge of a scroll he 
had finished writing. 
 
 Eragon bowed and knelt. “Master.” 
 
 Fifteen minutes elapsed before Oromis finished limning the tufts of 
needles on a gnarled juniper tree, laid aside his ink, cleaned his sable 
brush with water from a clay pot, and then addressed Eragon, saying, 
“Why have you come so early?” 
 
 “I apologize for disturbing you, but Vanir abandoned our contest part-
way through and I did not know what to do with myself.” 
 
 “Why did Vanir leave, Eragon-vodhr?” 
 
 Oromis folded his hands in his lap while Eragon described the encoun-
ter, ending with: “I should not have lost control, but I did, and I looked all 
the more foolish because of it. I have failed you, Master.” 
 
 “You have,” agreed Oromis. “Vanir may have goaded you, but that was 
no reason to respond in kind. You must keep a better hold over your 
emotions, Eragon. It could cost you your life if you allow your temper to 
sway your judgment during battle. Also, such childish displays do nothing 

 
372
but vindicate those elves who are opposed to you. Our machinations are 
subtle and allow little room for such errors.” 
 
 “I am sorry, Master. It won’t happen again.” 
 
 As Oromis seemed content to wait in his chair until the time when 
they normally performed the Rimgar, Eragon seized the opportunity to 
ask, “How could Vanir have worked magic without speaking?” 
 
 “Did he? Perhaps another elf decided to assist him.” 
 
 Eragon shook his head. “During my first day in Ellesméra, I also saw Is-
lanzadí summon a downpour of flowers by clapping her hands, nothing 
more. And Vanir said that I didn’t understand how magic works. What 
did he mean?” 
 
 “Once again,” said Oromis, resigned, “you grasp at knowledge that you 
are not prepared for. Yet, because of our circumstances, I cannot deny it 
to you. Only know this: that which you ask for was not taught to Rid-
ers—and is not taught to our magicians—until they had, and have, mas-
tered every other aspect of magic, for this is the secret to the true nature 
of magic and the ancient language. Those who know it may acquire great 
power, yes, but at a terrible risk.” He paused for a moment. “How is the 
ancient language bound to magic, Eragon-vodhr?” 
 
 “The words of the ancient language can release the energy stored within 
your body and thus activate a spell.” 
 
 “Ah. Then you mean that certain sounds, certain vibrations in the air, 
somehow tap into this energy? Sounds that might be produced at random 
by any creature or thing?” 
 
 “Yes, Master.” 
 
 “Does not that seem absurd?” 
 
 Confused, Eragon said, “It doesn’t matter if it seems absurd, Master; it 
just is. Should I think it absurd that the moon wanes and waxes, or that 
the seasons turn, or that birds fly south in the winter?” 
 
 “Of course not. But how could mere sound do so much? Can particular 
patterns of pitch and volume really trigger reactions that allow us to ma-
nipulate energy?” 
 

 
373
 “But they do.” 
 
 “Sound has no control over magic. Saying a word or phrase in this lan-
guage is not what’s important, it’s thinking them in this language.” With a 
flick of his wrist, a golden flame appeared over Oromis’s palm, then dis-
appeared. “However, unless the need is dire, we still utter our spells out 
loud to prevent stray thoughts from disrupting them, which is a danger to 
even the most experienced magic user.” 
 
 The implications staggered Eragon. He thought back to when he almost 
drowned under the waterfall of the lake Kóstha-mérna and how he had 
been unable to access magic because of the water surrounding him. If I 
had known this then, I could have saved myself, he thought. “Master,” he 
said, “if sound does not affect magic, why, then, do thoughts?” 
 
 Now Oromis smiled. “Why indeed? I must point out that we ourselves 
are not the source of magic. Magic can exist on its own, independent of 
any spell, such as the werelights in the bogs by Aroughs, the dream well 
in Mani’s Caves in the Beor Mountains, and the floating crystal on Eoam. 
Wild magic such as this is treacherous, unpredictable, and often stronger 
than any we can cast. 
 
 “Eons ago, all magic was thus. To use it required nothing but the ability 
to sense magic with your mind—which every magician must possess—
and the desire and strength to use it. Without the structure of the ancient 
language, magicians could not govern their talent and, as a result, loosed 
many evils upon the land, killing thousands. Over time they discovered 
that stating their intentions in their language helped them to order their 
thoughts and avoid costly errors. But it was no foolproof method. Even-
tually, an accident occurred so horrific that it almost destroyed every liv-
ing being in the world. We know of the event from fragments of manu-
scripts that survived the era, but who or what cast the fatal spell is hid-
den from us. The manuscripts say that, afterward, a race called the Grey 
Folk—not elves, for we were young then—gathered their resources and 
wrought an enchantment, perhaps the greatest that was or ever shall be. 
Together the Grey Folk changed the nature of magic itself. They made it 
so that their language, the ancient language, could control what a spell 
does... could actually limit the magic so that if you said burn that door and 
by chance looked at me and thought of me, the magic would still burn 
the door, not me. And they gave the ancient language its two unique 
traits, the ability to prevent those who speak it from lying and the ability 
to describe the true nature of things. How they did this remains a mys-
tery. 
 

 
374
 “The manuscripts differ on what happened to the Grey Folk when they 
completed their work, but it seems that the enchantment drained them 
of their power and left them but a shadow of themselves. They faded 
away, choosing to live in their cities until the stones crumbled to dust or 
to take mates among the younger races and so pass into darkness.” 
 
 “Then,” said Eragon, “it is still possible to use magic without the ancient 
language?” 
 
 “How do you think Saphira breathes fire? And, by your own account, 
she used no word when she turned Brom’s tomb to diamond nor when 
she blessed the child in Farthen Dûr. Dragons’ minds are different from 
ours; they need no protection from magic. They cannot use it con-
sciously, aside from their fire, but when the gift touches them, their 
strength is unparalleled.... You look troubled, Eragon. Why?” 
 
 Eragon stared down at his hands. “What does this mean for me, Mas-
ter?” 
 
 “It means that you will continue to study the ancient language, for you 
can accomplish much with it that would be too complex or too danger-
ous otherwise. It means that if you are captured and gagged, you can still 
call upon magic to free yourself, as Vanir did. It means that if you are 
captured and drugged and cannot recall the ancient language, yes, even 
then, you may cast a spell, though only in the gravest circumstances. And 
it means that if you would cast a spell for that which has no name in the 
ancient language, you can.” He paused. “But beware the temptation to use 
these powers. Even the wisest among us hesitate to trifle with them for 
fear of death or worse.” 
 
   
 
 The next morning, and every morning thereafter so long as he stayed in 
Ellesméra, Eragon dueled with Vanir, but he never lost his temper again, 
no matter what the elf did or said. 
 
 Nor did Eragon feel like devoting energy to their rivalry. His back 
pained him more and more frequently, driving him to the limits of his 
endurance. The debilitating attacks sensitized him; actions that previously 
had caused him no trouble could now leave him writhing on the ground. 
Even the Rimgar began to trigger the seizures as he advanced to more 
strenuous poses. It was not uncommon for him to suffer three or four 
such episodes in one day. 
 

 
375
 Eragon’s face grew haggard. He walked with a shuffle, his movements 
slow and careful as he tried to preserve his strength. It became hard for 
him to think clearly or to pay attention to Oromis’s lessons, and gaps be-
gan to appear in his memory that he could not account for. In his spare 
time, he took up Orik’s puzzle ring again, preferring to concentrate upon 
the baffling interlocked rings rather than his condition. When she was 
with him, Saphira insisted that he ride upon her back and did everything 
that she could to make him comfortable and to save him effort. 
 
 One morning, as he clung to a spike on her neck, Eragon said, I have a 
new name for pain. 
 
 What’s that? 
 
 The Obliterator. Because when you’re in pain, nothing else can exist. Not 
thought. Not emotion. Only the drive to escape the pain. When it’s strong 
enough, the Obliterator strips us of everything that makes us who we are, 
until we’re reduced to creatures less than animals, creatures with a single 
desire and goal: escape. 
 
 A good name, then. 
 
 I’m falling apart, Saphira, like an old horse that’s plowed too many fields. 
Keep hold of me with your mind, or I may drift apart and forget who I am. 
 
 I will never let go of you. 
 
 Soon afterward, Eragon fell victim to three bouts of agony while fight-
ing Vanir and then two more during the Rimgar. As he uncurled from 
the clenched ball he had rolled into, Oromis said, “Again, Eragon. You 
must perfect your balance.” 
 
 Eragon shook his head and growled in an undertone, “No.” He crossed 
his arms to hide his tremors. 
 
 “What?” 
 
 “No.” 
 
 “Get up, Eragon, and try again.” 
 
 “No! Do the pose yourself; I won’t.” 
 
 Oromis knelt beside Eragon and placed a cool hand on his cheek. Hold-

 
376
ing it there, he gazed at Eragon with such kindness, Eragon understood 
the depth of the elf’s compassion for him, and that, if it were possible, 
Oromis would willingly assume Eragon’s pain to relieve his suffering. 
“Don’t abandon hope,” said Oromis. “Never that.” A measure of strength 
seemed to flow from him to Eragon. “We are the Riders. We stand be-
tween the light and the dark, and keep the balance between the two. Ig-
norance, fear, hate: these are our enemies. Deny them with all your 
might, Eragon, or we will surely fail.” He stood and extended a hand to-
ward Eragon. “Now rise, Shadeslayer, and prove you can conquer the in-
stincts of your flesh!” 
 
 Eragon took a deep breath and pushed himself upright on one arm, 
wincing from the effort. He got his feet underneath himself, paused for a 
moment, then straightened to his full height and looked Oromis in the 
eye. 
 
 The elf nodded with approval. 
 
 Eragon remained silent until they finished the Rimgar and went to 
bathe in the stream, whereupon he said, “Master.” 
 
 “Yes, Eragon?” 
 
 “Why must I endure this torture? You could use magic to give me the 
skills I need, to shape my body as you do the trees and plants.” 
 
 “I could, but if I did, you would not understand how you got the body 
you had, your own abilities, nor how to maintain them. No shortcuts ex-
ist for the path you walk, Eragon.” 
 
 Cold water rushed over the length of Eragon’s body as he lowered him-
self into the stream. He ducked his head under the surface, holding a rock 
so that he would not float away, and lay stretched out along the stream-
bed, feeling like an arrow flying through the water. 
 
 
 
 

 
377
NARDA 
 
 
 Roran leaned on one knee and scratched his new beard as he looked 
down at Narda. 
 
 The small town was dark and compact, like a crust of rye bread 
tamped into a crevasse along the coast. Beyond it, the wine-red sea glim-
mered with the last rays of the dying sunset. The water fascinated him; it 
was utterly different from the landscape he was accustomed to. 
 
 We made it. 
 
 Leaving the promontory, Roran walked back to his makeshift tent, en-
joying deep breaths of the salty air. They had camped high in the foothills 
of the Spine in order to avoid detection by anyone who might alert the 
Empire as to their whereabouts. 
 
 As he strode among the clumps of villagers huddled beneath the trees, 
Roran surveyed their condition with sorrow and anger. The trek from 
Palancar Valley had left people sick, battered, and exhausted; their faces 
gaunt from lack of food; their clothes tattered. Most everyone wore rags 
tied around their hands to ward off frostbite during the frigid mountain 
nights. Weeks of carrying heavy packs had bowed once-proud shoulders. 
The worst sight was the children: thin and unnaturally still. 
 
 They deserve better, thought Roran. I’d be in the clutches of the Ra’zac 
right now if they hadn’t protected me. 
 
 Numerous people approached Roran, most of whom wanted nothing 
more than a touch on the shoulder or a word of comfort. Some offered 
him bits of food, which he refused or, when they insisted, gave to some-
one else. Those who remained at a distance watched with round, pale 
eyes. He knew what they said about him, that he was mad, that spirits 
possessed him, that not even the Ra’zac could defeat him in battle. 
 
 Crossing the Spine had been even harder than Roran expected. The 
only paths in the forest were game trails, which were too narrow, steep, 
and meandering for their group. As a result, the villagers were often 
forced to chop their way through the trees and underbrush, a painstaking 
task that everyone despised, not least because it made it easy for the Em-
pire to track them. The one advantage to the situation was that the exer-
cise restored Roran’s injured shoulder to its previous level of strength, al-
though he still had trouble lifting his arm at certain angles. 

 
378
 
 Other hardships took their toll. A sudden storm trapped them on a 
bare pass high above the timberline. Three people froze in the snow: 
Hida, Brenna, and Nesbit, all of whom were quite old. That night was the 
first time Roran was convinced that the entire village would die because 
they had followed him. Soon after, a boy broke his arm in a fall, and then 
Southwell drowned in a glacier stream. Wolves and bears preyed upon 
their livestock on a regular basis, ignoring the watchfires that the villagers 
lit once they were concealed from Palancar Valley and Galbatorix’s hated 
soldiers. Hunger clung to them like a relentless parasite, gnawing at their 
bellies, devouring their strength, and sapping their will to continue. 
 
 And yet they survived, displaying the same obstinacy and fortitude that 
kept their ancestors in Palancar Valley despite famine, war, and pesti-
lence. The people of Carvahall might take an age and a half to reach a de-
cision, but once they did, nothing could deter them from their course. 
 
 Now that they had reached Narda, a sense of hope and accomplish-
ment permeated the camp. No one knew what would happen next, but 
the fact that they had gotten so far gave them confidence. 
 
 We won’t be safe until we leave the Empire, thought Roran. And it’s up to 
me to ensure that we aren’t caught. I’ve become responsible for everyone 
here.... A responsibility that he had embraced wholeheartedly because it 
allowed him to both protect the villagers from Galbatorix and pursue his 
goal of rescuing Katrina. It’s been so long since she was captured. How can 
she still be alive? He shuddered and pushed the thoughts away. True 
madness awaited him if he allowed himself to brood over Katrina’s fate. 
 
   
 
 At dawn Roran, Horst, Baldor, Loring’s three sons, and Gertrude set out 
for Narda. They descended from the foothills to the town’s main road, 
careful to stay hidden until they emerged onto the lane. Here in the low-
lands, the air seemed thick to Roran; it felt as if he were trying to breathe 
underwater. 
 
 Roran gripped the hammer at his belt as they approached Narda’s gate. 
Two soldiers guarded the opening. They examined Roran’s group with 
hard eyes, lingering on their ragged clothes, then lowered their poleaxes 
and barred the entrance. 
 
 “Where’d you be from?” asked the man on the right. He could not have 
been older than twenty-five, but his hair was already pure white. 

 
379
 
 Swelling his chest, Horst crossed his arms and said, “Roundabouts 
Teirm, if it please you.” 
 
 “What brings you here?” 
 
 “Trade. We were sent by shopkeepers who want to buy goods directly 
from Narda, instead of through the usual merchants.” 
 
 “That so, eh? What goods?” 
 
 When Horst faltered, Gertrude said, “Herbs and medicine on my part. 
The plants I’ve received from here have either been too old or moldy and 
spoiled. I have to procure a fresh supply.” 
 
 “And my brothers and I,” said Darmmen, “came to bargain with your 
cobblers. Shoes made in the northern style are fashionable in Dras-Leona 
and Urû’baen.” He grimaced. “At least they were when we set out.” 
 
 Horst nodded with renewed confidence. “Aye. And I’m here to collect 
a shipment of ironwork for my master.” 
 
 “So you say. What about that one? What does he do?” asked the soldier, 
motioning toward Roran with his ax. 
 
 “Pottery,” said Roran. 
 
 “Pottery?” 
 
 “Pottery.” 
 
 “Why the hammer, then?” 
 
 “How do you think the glaze on a bottle or jar gets cracked? It doesn’t 
happen by itself, you know. You have to hit it.” Roran returned the 
white-haired man’s stare of disbelief with a blank expression, daring him 
to challenge the statement. 
 
 The soldier grunted and ran his gaze over them again. “Be as that may, 
you don’t look like tradesmen to me. Starved alley cats is more like it.” 
 
 “We had difficulty on the road,” said Gertrude. 
 
 “That I’d believe. If you came from Teirm, where be your horses?” 

 
380
 
 “We left them at our camp,” supplied Hamund. He pointed south, op-
posite where the rest of the villagers were actually hidden. 
 
 “Don’t have the coin to stay in town, eh?” With a scornful chuckle, the 
soldier raised his ax and gestured for his companion to do likewise. “All 
right, you can pass, but don’t cause trouble or you’ll be off to the stocks 
or worse.” 
 
 Once through the gate, Horst pulled Roran to the side of the street and 
growled in his ear, “That was a fool thing to do, making up something as 
ridiculous as that. Cracking the glaze! Do you want a fight? We can’t—” 
He stopped as Gertrude plucked at his sleeve. 
 
 “Look,” murmured the healer. 
 
 To the left of the entrance stood a six-foot-wide message board with a 
narrow shingle roof to protect the yellowing parchment underneath. Half 
the board was devoted to official notices and proclamations. On the 
other half hung a block of posters displaying sketches of various crimi-
nals. Foremost among them was a drawing of Roran without a beard. 
 
 Startled, Roran glanced around to make sure that no one in the street 
was close enough to compare his face to the illustration, then devoted his 
attention to the poster. He had expected the Empire to pursue them, but 
it was still a shock to encounter proof of it. Galbatorix must be expending 
an enormous amount of resources trying to catch us. When they were in 
the Spine, it was easy to forget that the outside world existed. I bet post-
ers of me are nailed up throughout the Empire. He grinned, glad that he had 
stopped shaving and that he and the others had agreed to use false names 
while in Narda. 
 
 A reward was inked at the bottom of the poster. Garrow never taught 
Roran and Eragon to read, but he did teach them their figures because, as 
he said, “You have to know how much you own, what it’s worth, and 
what you’re paid for it so you don’t get rooked by some two-faced 
knave.” Thus, Roran could see that the Empire had offered ten thousand 
crowns for him, enough to live in comfort for several decades. In a per-
verse way, the size of the reward pleased him, giving him a sense of im-
portance. 
 
 Then his gaze drifted to the next poster in line. 
 
 It was Eragon. 

 
381
 
 Roran’s gut clenched as if he had been struck, and for a few seconds he 
forgot to breathe. 
 
 He’s alive! 
 
 After his initial relief subsided, Roran felt his old anger about Eragon’s 
role in Garrow’s death and the destruction of their farm take its place, 
accompanied by a burning desire to know why the Empire was hunting 
Eragon. It must have something to do with that blue stone and the Ra’zac’s 
first visit to Carvahall. Once again, Roran wondered what kind of fiend-
ish machinations he and the rest of Carvahall had become entangled in. 
 
 Instead of a reward, Eragon’s poster bore two lines of runes. “What 
crime is he accused of?” Roran asked Gertrude. 
 
 The skin around Gertrude’s eyes wrinkled as she squinted at the board. 
“Treason, the both of you. It says Galbatorix will bestow an earldom on 
whoever captures Eragon, but that those who try should take care be-
cause he’s extremely dangerous.” 
 
 Roran blinked with astonishment. Eragon? It seemed inconceivable un-
til Roran considered how he himself had changed in the past few weeks. 
The same blood runs in our veins. Who knows, Eragon may have accom-
plished as much or more than I have since he left. 
 
 In a low voice, Baldor said, “If killing Galbatorix’s men and defying the 
Ra’zac only earns you ten thousand crowns—large as that is—what 
makes you worth an earldom?” 
 
 “Buggering the king himself,” suggested Larne. 
 
 “That’s enough of that,” said Horst. “Guard your tongue better, Baldor, 
or we’ll end up in irons. And, Roran, don’t draw attention to yourself 
again. With a reward like that, people are bound to be watching strangers 
for anyone who matches your description.” Running a hand through his 
hair, Horst pulled up his belt and said, “Right. We all have jobs to do. Re-
turn here at noon to report on your progress.” 
 
 With that their party split into three. Darmmen, Larne, and Hamund 
set out together to purchase food for the villagers, both to meet present 
needs and to sustain them through the next stage of their journey. 
Gertrude—as she had told the guard—went to replenish her stock of 
herbs, unguents, and tinctures. And Roran, Horst, and Baldor headed 

 
382
down the sloping streets to the docks, where they hoped to charter a ship 
that could transport the villagers to Surda or, at the very least, Teirm. 
 
 When they reached the weathered boardwalk that covered the beach, 
Roran halted and stared out at the ocean, which was gray from low 
clouds and dotted with whitecaps from erratic wind. He had never imag-
ined that the horizon could be so perfectly flat. The hollow boom of wa-
ter knocking against the piles beneath his feet made it feel as if he stood 
upon the surface of a huge drum. The odor of fish—fresh, gutted, and 
rotting—overwhelmed every other smell. 
 
 Glancing from Roran to Baldor, who was likewise entranced, Horst 
said, “Quite a sight, isn’t it?” 
 
 “Aye,” said Roran. 
 
 “Makes you feel rather small, doesn’t it?” 
 
 “Aye,” said Baldor. 
 
 Horst nodded. “I remember when I first saw the ocean, it had a similar 
effect on me.” 
 
 “When was that?” asked Roran. In addition to the flocks of seagulls 
whirling over the cove, he noticed an odd type of bird perched upon the 
piers. The animal had an ungainly body with a striped beak that it kept 
tucked against its breast like a pompous old man, a white head and neck, 
and a sooty torso. One of the birds lifted its beak, revealing a leathery 
pouch underneath. 
 
 “Bartram, the smith who came before me,” said Horst, “died when I was 
fifteen, a year before the end of my apprenticeship. I had to find a smith 
who was willing to finish another man’s work, so I traveled to Ceunon, 
which is built along the North Sea. There I met Kelton, a vile old man 
but good at what he did. He agreed to teach me.” Horst laughed. “By the 
time we were done, I wasn’t sure if I should thank him or curse him.” 
 
 “Thank him, I should think,” said Baldor. “You never would have mar-
ried Mother otherwise.” 
 
 Roran scowled as he studied the waterfront. “There aren’t many ships,” 
he observed. Two craft were berthed at the south end of the port and a 
third at the opposite side with nothing but fishing boats and dinghies in 
between. Of the southern pair, one had a broken mast. Roran had no ex-

 
383
perience with ships but, to him, none of the vessels appeared large 
enough to carry almost three hundred passengers. 
 
 Going from one ship to the next, Roran, Horst, and Baldor soon discov-
ered that they were all otherwise engaged. It would take a month or 
more to repair the ship with the broken mast. The vessel beside it, the 
Waverunner, was rigged with leather sails and was about to venture north 
to the treacherous islands where the Seithr plant grew. And the Alba-
tross, the last ship, had just arrived from distant Feinster and was getting 
its seams recaulked before departing with its cargo of wool. 
 
 A dockworker laughed at Horst’s questions. “You’re too late and too 
early at the same time. Most of the spring ships came and left two, three 
weeks ago. An’ another month, the nor’westers will start gusting, an’ then 
the seal and walrus hunters will return and we’ll get ships from Teirm 
and the rest of the Empire to take the hides, meat, and oil. Then you 
might have a chance of hiring a captain with an empty hold. Meanwhile, 
we don’t see much more traffic than this.” 
 
 Desperate, Roran asked, “Is there no other way to get goods from here 
to Teirm? It doesn’t have to be fast or comfortable.” 
 
 “Well,” said the man, hefting the box on his shoulder, “if it doesn’t have 
to be fast an’ you’re only going to Teirm, then you might try Clovis over 
there.” He pointed to a line of sheds that floated between two piers 
where boats could be stored. “He owns some barges that he ships grain 
on in the fall. The rest of the year, Clovis fishes for a living, like most 
everybody in Narda.” Then he frowned. “What kind of goods do you 
have? The sheep have already been shorn, an’ no crops are in as of yet.” 
 
 “This and that,” said Horst. He tossed the man a copper. 
 
 The dockworker pocketed it with a wink and a nudge. “Right you are, 
sir. This an’ that. I know a dodge when I see one. But no need to fear old 
Ulric; mum’s th’ word, it is. Be seeing you, then, sir.” He strolled off, 
whistling. 
 
 As it turned out, Clovis was absent from the docks. After getting direc-
tions, it took them a half hour to walk to his house on the other side of 
Narda, where they found Clovis planting iris bulbs along the path to his 
front door. He was a stout man with sunburned cheeks and a salt-and-
pepper beard. An additional hour passed before they could convince the 
mariner that they really were interested in his barges, despite the season, 
and then troop back to the sheds, which he unlocked to reveal three 

 
384
identical barges, the Merrybell, Edeline, and Red Boar. 
 
 Each barge was seventy-five feet long, twenty feet wide, and painted 
rust red. They had open holds that could be covered with tarpaulins, a 
mast that could be erected in the center for a single square sail, and a 
block of above-decks cabins at the rear—or aft, as Clovis called it—of 
the craft. 
 
 “Their draft be deeper than that of an inland scow,” explained Clovis, 
“so you needn’t fear them capsizing in rough weather, though you’d do 
well to avoid being caught in a real tempest. These barges aren’t meant 
for the open sea. They’re meant to stay within sight of land. And now be 
the worst time to launch them. By my honor, we’ve had nothing but 
thunderstorms every afternoon for a month.” 
 
 “Do you have crews for all three?” asked Roran. 
 
 “Well now... see, there’s a problem. Most of the men I employ left 
weeks ago to hunt seals, as they’re wont to do. Since I need them only 
after the harvest, they’re free to come and go as they please for the rest of 
the year.... I’m sure you fine gentlemen understand my position.” Clovis 
tried to smile, then glanced between Roran, Horst, and Baldor as if uncer-
tain whom to address. 
 
 Roran walked the length of the Edeline, examining it for damage. The 
barge looked old, but the wood was sound and the paint was fresh. “If we 
replace the missing men in your crews, how much would it cost to go to 
Teirm with all three barges?” 
 
 “That depends,” said Clovis. “The sailors earn fifteen coppers per day, 
plus as much good food as they can eat and a dram of whisky besides. 
What your men earn be your own business. I won’t put them on my pay-
roll. Normally, we also hire guards for each barge, but they’re—” 
 
 “They’re off hunting, yes,” said Roran. “We’ll provide guards as well.” 
 
 The knob in Clovis’s tanned throat jumped as he swallowed. “That’d be 
more than reasonable... so it would. In addition to the crew’s wages, I 
charge a fee of two hundred crowns, plus recompense for any damage to 
the barges on account of your men, plus—as both owner and captain—
twelve percent of the total profit from sale of the cargo.” 
 
 “Our trip will have no profit.” 
 

 
385
 That, more than anything, seemed to unnerve Clovis. He rubbed the 
dimple in his chin with his left thumb, began to talk twice, stopped, then 
finally said, “If that be the case, another four hundred crowns upon com-
pletion of the voyage. What—if I may make so bold as to inquire—do 
you wish to transport?” 
 
 We frighten him, thought Roran. “Livestock.” 
 
 “Be it sheep, cattle, horses, goats, oxen... ?” 
 
 “Our herds contain an assortment of animals.” 
 
 “And why do you want to take them to Teirm?” 
 
 “We have our reasons.” Roran almost smiled at Clovis’s confusion. 
“Would you consider sailing past Teirm?” 
 
 “No! Teirm’s my limit, it is. I don’t know the waters beyond, nor would 
I want to be gone any longer from my wife and daughter.” 
 
 “When could you be ready?” 
 
 Clovis hesitated and executed two little steps. “Mayhap five or six days. 
No... no, you’d better make it a week; I have affairs that I must attend to 
before departing.” 
 
 “We’d pay an additional ten crowns to leave day after tomorrow.” 
 
 “I don’t—” 
 
 “Twelve crowns.” 
 
 “Day after tomorrow it is,” vowed Clovis. “One way or another, I’ll be 
ready by then.” 
 
 Trailing his hand along the barge’s gunwale, Roran nodded without 
looking back at Clovis and said, “May I have a minute alone to confer 
with my associates?” 
 
 “As you wish, sir. I’ll just go for a turn about the docks until you’re 
done.” Clovis hurried to the door. Just as he exited the shed, he asked, 
“I’m sorry, but what’d be your name again? I fear I missed it earlier, an’ 
my memory can be something dreadful.” 
 

 
386
 “Stronghammer. My name is Stronghammer.” 
 
 “Ah, of course. A good name, that.” 
 
 When the door closed, Horst and Baldor converged on Roran. Baldor 
said, “We can’t afford to hire him.” 
 
 “We can’t afford not to,” replied Roran. “We don’t have the gold to buy 
the barges, nor do I fancy teaching myself to handle them when every-
one’s lives depend on it. It’ll be faster and safer to pay for a crew.” 
 
 “It’s still too expensive,” said Horst. 
 
 Roran drummed his fingers against the gunwale. “We can pay Clovis’s 
initial fee of two hundred crowns. Once we reach Teirm, though, I sug-
gest that we either steal the barges using the skills we learn during the 
trip or incapacitate Clovis and his men until we can escape through other 
means. That way, we avoid paying the extra four hundred crowns, as 
well as the sailors’ wages.” 
 
 “I don’t like cheating a man out of honest work,” said Horst. “It goes 
against my fiber.” 
 
 “I don’t like it either, but can you think of an alternative?” 
 
 “How would you get everyone onto the barges?” 
 
 “Have them meet Clovis a league or so down the coast, out of sight of 
Narda.” 
 
 Horst sighed. “Very well, we’ll do it, but it leaves a bad taste in my 
mouth. Call Clovis back in, Baldor, and we’ll seal this pact.” 
 
   
 
 That evening, the villagers gathered around a small banked fire in order 
to hear what had transpired in Narda. From where he knelt on the 
ground, Roran stared at the pulsing coals while he listened to Gertrude 
and the three brothers describe their separate adventures. The news 
about Roran’s and Eragon’s posters caused murmurs of unease among the 
audience. 
 
 When Darmmen finished, Horst took his place and, with short, brisk 
sentences, related the lack of proper ships in Narda, how the dockworker 

 
387
recommended Clovis, and the deal that was brokered thereafter. How-
ever, the moment Horst mentioned the word barges, the villagers’ cries of 
ire and discontent blotted out his voice. 
 
 Marching to the forefront of the group, Loring raised his arms for atten-
tion. “Barges?” said the cobbler. “Barges? We don’t want no stinking 
barges!” He spat by his foot as people clamored with agreement. 
 
 “Everyone, be quiet!” said Delwin. “We’ll be heard if we keep this up.” 
When the crackling fire was the loudest noise, he continued at a slower 
pace: “I agree with Loring. Barges are unacceptable. They’re slow and vul-
nerable. And we’d be crammed together with a complete lack of privacy 
and no shelter to speak of for who knows how long. Horst, Elain is six 
months pregnant. You can’t expect her and others who are sick and in-
firm to sit under the blazing sun for weeks on end.” 
 
 “We can lash tarpaulins over the holds,” replied Horst. “It’s not much, 
but it’ll shield us from the sun and the rain.” 
 
 Birgit’s voice cut through the crowd’s low babble: “I have another con-
cern.” People moved aside as she walked to the fire. “What with the two 
hundred crowns Clovis is due and the money Darmmen and his brothers 
spent, we’ve used up most of our coin. Unlike those in cities, our wealth 
lies not in gold but in animals and property. Our property is gone and 
few animals are left. Even if we turn pirate and steal these barges, how 
can we buy supplies at Teirm or passage farther south?” 
 
 “The important thing,” rumbled Horst, “is to get to Teirm in the first 
place. Once we’re there, then we can worry about what to do next.... It’s 
possible that we may have to resort to more drastic measures.” 
 
 Loring’s bony face crumpled into a mass of wrinkles. “Drastic? What do 
you mean, drastic? We’ve already done drastic. This whole venture is 
drastic. I don’t care what you say; I won’t use those confounded barges, 
not after what we’ve gone through in the Spine. Barges are for grain and 
animals. What we want is a ship with cabins and bunks where we can 
sleep in comfort. Why not wait another week or so and see if a ship ar-
rives that we can bargain passage on? Where’s the harm in that, eh? Or 
why not—” He continued to rail for over fifteen minutes, amassing a 
mountain of objections before ceding to Thane and Ridley, who built 
upon his arguments. 
 
 The conversation halted as Roran unfolded his legs and rose to his full 
height, silencing the villagers through his presence. They waited, breath-

 
388
less, hoping for another of his visionary speeches. 
 
 “It’s this or walk,” he said. 
 
 Then he went to bed. 
 
 
 
 

 
389
THE HAMMER FALLS 
 
  
The moon floated high among the stars when Roran left the makeshift 
tent he shared with Baldor, padded to the edge of the camp, and replaced 
Albriech on watch. 
 
 “Nothing to report,” whispered Albriech, then slipped off. 
 
 Roran strung his bow and planted three goose-feather arrows upright in 
the loam, within easy reach, then wrapped himself in a blanket and 
curled against the rockface to his left. His position afforded him a good 
view down and across the dark foothills. 
 
 As was his habit, Roran divided the landscape into quadrants, examin-
ing each one for a full minute, always alert for the flash of movement or 
the hint of light that might betray the approach of enemies. His mind 
soon began to wander, drifting from subject to subject with the hazy 
logic of dreams, distracting him from his task. He bit the inside of his 
cheek to force himself to concentrate. Staying awake was difficult in such 
mild weather.... 
 
 Roran was just glad that he had escaped drawing lots for the two 
watches preceding dawn, because they gave you no opportunity to catch 
up on lost sleep afterward and you felt tired for the rest of the day. 
 
 A breath of wind ghosted past him, tickling his ear and making the skin 
on the back of his neck prickle with an apprehension of evil. The intru-
sive touch frightened Roran, obliterating everything but the conviction 
that he and the rest of the villagers were in mortal danger. He quaked as 
if with the ague, his heart pounded, and he had to struggle to resist the 
urge to break cover and flee. 
 
 What’s wrong with me? It required an effort for him to even nock an ar-
row. 
 
 To the east, a shadow detached itself from the horizon. Visible only as 
a void among the stars, it drifted like a torn veil across the sky until it 
covered the moon, where it remained, hovering. Illuminated from be-
hind, Roran could see the translucent wings of one of the Ra’zac’s 
mounts. 
 
 The black creature opened its beak and uttered a long, piercing shriek. 
Roran grimaced with pain at the cry’s pitch and frequency. It stabbed at 

 
390
his eardrums, turned his blood to ice, and replaced hope and joy with de-
spair. The ululation woke the entire forest. Birds and beasts for miles 
around exploded into a yammering chorus of panic, including, to Roran’s 
alarm, what remained of the villagers’ herds. 
 
 Staggering from tree to tree, Roran returned to the camp, whispering, 
“The Ra’zac are here. Be quiet and stay where you are,” to everyone he 
encountered. He saw the other sentries moving among the frightened vil-
lagers, spreading the same message. 
 
 Fisk emerged from his tent with a spear in hand and roared, “Are we 
under attack? What’s set off those blasted—” Roran tackled the carpenter 
to silence him, uttering a muffled bellow as he landed on his right shoul-
der and pained his old injury. 
 
 “Ra’zac,” Roran groaned to Fisk. 
 
 Fisk went still and in an undertone asked, “What should I do?” 
 
 “Help me to calm the animals.” 
 
 Together they picked their way through the camp to the adjacent 
meadow where the goats, sheep, donkeys, and horses were bedded. The 
farmers who owned the bulk of the herds slept with their charges and 
were already awake and working to soothe the beasts. Roran thanked his 
paranoia that he had insisted on having the animals scattered along the 
edge of the meadow, where the trees and brush helped to camouflage 
them from unfriendly eyes. 
 
 As he tried to pacify a clump of sheep, Roran glanced up at the terrible 
black shadow that still obscured the moon, like a giant bat. To his horror, 
it began to move toward their hiding place. If that creature screams again, 
we’re doomed. 
 
 By the time the Ra’zac circled overhead, most of the animals had qui-
eted, except for one donkey, who insisted upon loosing a grating hee-haw. 
Without hesitation, Roran dropped to one knee, fit arrow to string, and 
shot the ass between the ribs. His aim was true, and the animal dropped 
without a sound. 
 
 He was too late, though; the braying had already alerted the Ra’zac. The 
monster swung its head in the direction of the clearing and descended 
toward it with outstretched claws, preceded by its fetid stench. 
 

 
391
 Now the time has come to see if we can slay a nightmare, thought Roran. 
Fisk, who was crouched beside him in the grass, hefted his spear, prepar-
ing to hurl it once the brute was in range. 
 
 Just as Roran drew his bow—in an attempt to begin and end the battle 
with a well-placed shaft—he was distracted by a commotion in the for-
est. 
 
 A mass of deer burst through the underbrush and stampeded across the 
meadow, ignoring villagers and livestock alike in their frantic desire to 
escape the Ra’zac. For almost a minute, the deer bounded past Roran, 
mincing the loam with their sharp hooves and catching the moonlight 
with their white-rimmed eyes. They came so close, he heard the soft 
gasps of their labored breathing. 
 
 The multitude of deer must have hidden the villagers because, after 
one last circuit over the meadow, the winged monster turned to the 
south and glided farther down the Spine, melding into the night. 
 
 Roran and his companions remained frozen in place, like hunted rab-
bits, afraid that the Ra’zac’s departure might be a ruse to flush them into 
the open or that the creature’s twin might be close behind. They waited 
for hours, tense and anxious, barely moving except to string a bow. 
 
 When the moon was about to set, the Ra’zac’s bone-chilling shriek 
echoed far in the distance... then nothing. 
 
 
 
 
 We were lucky, decided Roran when he woke the next morning. And 
we can’t count on luck to save us the next time. 
 
 After the Ra’zac’s appearance, none of the villagers objected to travel-
ing by barge. On the contrary, they were so eager to be off, many of them 
asked Roran if it was possible to set sail that day instead of the next. 
 
 “I wish we could,” he said, “but too much has to be done.” 
 
 Forgoing breakfast, he, Horst, and a group of other men hiked into 
Narda. Roran knew that he risked being recognized by accompanying 
them, but their mission was too important for him to neglect. Besides, he 
was confident that his current appearance was different enough from his 
portrait on the Empire’s poster that no one would equate one with the 

 
392
other. 
 
 They had no difficulty gaining entrance, as a different set of soldiers 
guarded the town gate, whereupon they went to the docks and delivered 
the two hundred crowns to Clovis, who was busy overseeing a gang of 
men as they readied the barges for sea. 
 
 “Thank’ee, Stronghammer,” he said, tying the bag of coins to his belt. 
“There be nothing like yellow gold to brighten a man’s day.” He led them 
to a worktable and unrolled a chart of the waters surrounding Narda, 
complete with notations on the strength of various currents; locations of 
rocks, sandbars, and other hazards; and decades’ worth of sounding meas-
urements. Drawing a line with his finger from Narda to a small cove di-
rectly south of it, Clovis said, “Here’s where we’ll meet your livestock. 
The tides are gentle this time o’ year, but we still don’t want to fight 
them an’ no bones about it, so we’ll have to be on our way directly after 
the high tide.” 
 
 “High tide?” said Roran. “Wouldn’t it be easier to wait until low tide 
and let it carry us out?” 
 
 Clovis tapped his nose with a twinkle in his eye. “Aye, it would, an’ so 
I’ve begun many a cruise. What I don’t want, though, is to be slung up on 
the beach, loading your animals, when the tide comes a-rushing back in 
and pushes us farther inland. There be no danger of that this way, but 
we’ll have to move smart so as we’re not left high an’ dry when the wa-
ters recede. Assuming we do, the sea’ll work for us, eh?” 
 
 Roran nodded. He trusted Clovis’s experience. “And how many men 
will you need to fill out your crews?” 
 
 “Well, I managed to dig up seven lads—strong, true, an’ good seamen 
all—who have agreed to this venture, odd as it is. Mind you, most of the 
boys were at the bottom of their tankards when I cornered them last 
night, drinking off the pay from their last voyage, but they’ll be sober as 
spinsters come morn; that I promise you. Seeing as seven were all I could 
find, I’d like four more.” 
 
 “Four it is,” said Roran. “My men don’t know much about sailing, but 
they’re able-bodied and willing to learn.” 
 
 Clovis grunted. “I usually take on a brace of new lads each trip anyway. 
So long as they follow orders, they’ll do fine; otherwise, they’ll get a be-
laying pin upsides the head, mark my words. As for guards, I’d like to 

 
393
have nine—three per boat. An’ they’d better not be as green as your sail-
ors, or I won’t budge from the dock, not for all the whisky in the world.” 
 
 Roran allowed himself a grim smile. “Every man who rides with me has 
proved himself in battle many times over.” 
 
 “An’ they all answer to you, eh, young Stronghammer?” said Clovis. He 
scratched his chin, eyeing Gedric, Delwin, and the others who were new 
to Narda. “How many are with you?” 
 
 “Enough.” 
 
 “Enough, you say. I wonder.” He waved a hand. “Never you mind me; 
my tongue runs a league before my own common sense, or so my father 
used to tell me. My first mate, Torson, is at the chandler’s now, oversee-
ing the purchase of goods and equipment. I understand you have feed for 
your livestock?” 
 
 “Among other things.” 
 
 “Then you’d best fetch them. We can load them into the holds once 
the masts are up.” 
 
 Throughout the rest of the morning and afternoon, Roran and the vil-
lagers with him labored to ferry the supplies—which Loring’s sons had 
procured—from the warehouse where it was stored into the sheds with 
the barges. 
 
 As Roran trudged across the gangplank to the Edeline and lowered his 
bag of flour to the sailor waiting in the hold, Clovis observed, “Most of 
this t’aint feed, Stronghammer.” 
 
 “No,” said Roran. “But it’s needed.” He was pleased that Clovis had the 
sense not to inquire further. 
 
 When the last item had been stored away, Clovis beckoned to Roran. 
“You might as well go. Me and the boys will handle the rest. Just you 
remember to be at the docks three hours after dawn with every man jack 
you promised me, or we’ll lose the tide.” 
 
 “We’ll be there.” 
 
   
 

 
394
 Back in the foothills, Roran helped Elain and the others prepare for de-
parture. It did not take long, as they were accustomed to breaking camp 
each morning. Then he picked twelve men to accompany him to Narda 
the next day. They were all good fighters, but he asked the best, like 
Horst and Delwin, to remain with the rest of the villagers in case soldiers 
found them or the Ra’zac returned. 
 
 Once night fell, the two groups parted. Roran crouched on a boulder 
and watched Horst lead the column of people down through the foothills 
toward the cove where they would wait for the barges. 
 
 Orval came up beside him and crossed his arms. “Do you think they’ll 
be safe, Stronghammer?” Anxiety ran through his voice like a taut bow-
string. 
 
 Though he too was worried, Roran said, “I do. I’d bet you a barrel of ci-
der that they’ll still be asleep when we put ashore tomorrow. You can 
have the pleasure of waking up Nolla. How does that sound?” Orval 
smiled at the mention of his wife and nodded, appearing reassured. 
 
 I hope I’m right. Roran remained on the boulder, hunched like a bleak 
gargoyle, until the dark line of villagers vanished from his sight. 
 
 
 
 
 They woke an hour before sunrise, when the sky had just begun to 
brighten with pale green and the damp night air numbed their fingers. 
Roran splashed his face with water and then outfitted himself with his 
bow and quiver, his ever-present hammer, one of Fisk’s shields, and one 
of Horst’s spears. The others did likewise, with the addition of swords 
obtained during the skirmishes in Carvahall. 
 
 Running as fast as they dared down the hummocky hills, the thirteen 
men soon arrived at the road to Narda and, shortly after that, the town’s 
main gate. To Roran’s dismay, the same two soldiers who had troubled 
them earlier stood guard by the entrance. As before, the soldiers lowered 
their poleaxes to block the way. 
 
 “There be quite a bit more of you this time,” observed the white-haired 
man. “And not all the same ones either. Except for you.” He focused on 
Roran. “I suppose you expect me to believe that the spear and shield be 
for pottery as well?” 
 

 
395
 “No. We’ve been hired by Clovis to protect his barges from attack on 
the way to Teirm.” 
 
 “You? Mercenaries?” The soldiers burst out laughing. “You said you 
were tradesmen.” 
 
 “This pays better.” 
 
 The white-haired man scowled. “You lie. I tried my hand at being a 
gentleman of fortune once. I spent more nights hungry than not. How 
large be your company of tradesmen anyway? Seven yesterday and twelve 
today—thirteen counting you. It seems too large for an expedition from a 
bunch of shopkeepers.” His eyes narrowed as he scrutinized Roran’s face. 
“You look familiar. What’d be your name, eh?” 
 
 “Stronghammer.” 
 
 “It wouldn’t happen to be Roran, would—” 
 
 Roran jabbed forward with his spear, catching the white-haired soldier 
in the throat. Scarlet blood fountained. Releasing the spear, Roran drew 
his hammer and twisted round as he blocked the second soldier’s poleax 
with his shield. Swinging his hammer up and around, Roran crushed the 
man’s helm. 
 
 He stood panting between the two corpses. Now I have killed ten. 
 
 Orval and the other men stared at Roran with shock. Unable to bear 
their gazes, Roran turned his back on them and gestured at the culvert 
that ran beneath the road. “Hide the bodies before anyone sees,” he or-
dered, brusque and harsh. As they hurried to obey, he examined the 
parapet on top of the wall for sentries. Fortunately, no one was visible 
there or in the street through the gate. He bent and pulled his spear free, 
wiping the blade clean on a tuft of grass. 
 
 “Done,” said Mandel, clambering out of the ditch. Despite his beard, the 
young man appeared pale. 
 
 Roran nodded and, steeling himself, faced his band. “Listen. We will 
walk to the docks at a quick but reasonable pace. We will not run. When 
the alarm is sounded—and someone may have heard the clash just 
now—act surprised and interested but not afraid. Whatever you do, give 
people no reason to suspect us. The lives of your families and friends de-
pend on it. If we are attacked, your only duty is to see the barges 

 
396
launched. Nothing else matters. Am I clear?” 
 
 “Aye, Stronghammer,” they answered. 
 
 “Then follow me.” 
 
 As he strode through Narda, Roran felt so tense, he feared he might 
snap and explode into a thousand pieces. What have I made of myself? he 
wondered. He glanced from man to woman, child to man, man to dog in 
an effort to identify potential enemies. Everything around him appeared 
unnaturally bright and filled with detail; it seemed as if he could see the 
individual threads in people’s clothing. 
 
 They reached the docks without incident, whereupon Clovis said, “You 
be early, Stronghammer. I like that in a man. It’ll give us the opportunity 
to put things nice an’ shipshape before we head out.” 
 
 “Can we leave now?” asked Roran. 
 
 “You should know better’n that. Have to wait till the tide’s finished 
coming in, so we do.” Clovis paused then, taking his first good look at the 
thirteen of them, and said, “Why, what’d be the matter, Stronghammer? 
The lot of you look as if you saw the ghost of old Galbatorix himself.” 
 
 “Nothing a few hours of sea air won’t cure,” said Roran. In his current 
state, he could not smile, but he did let his features assume a more pleas-
ant expression in order to reassure the captain. 
 
 With a whistle, Clovis summoned two sailors from the boats. Both 
men were tanned the color of hazelnuts. “This’d be Torson, my first 
mate,” said Clovis, indicating the man to his right. Torson’s bare shoulder 
was decorated with a coiled tattoo of a flying dragon. “He’ll be skipper of 
the Merrybell. And this black dog is Flint. He’s in command of the Ede-
line. While you are on board, their word is law, as is mine on the Red 
Boar. You’ll answer to them and me, not Stronghammer.... Well, give me 
a proper aye, aye if you heard me.” 
 
 “Aye, aye,” said the men. 
 
 “Now, which of you be my hands and which be my men-at-arms? For 
the life of me, I can’t tell you apart.” 
 
 Ignoring Clovis’s admonishment that he was their commander, not Ro-
ran, the villagers looked at Roran to see if they should obey. He nodded 

 
397
his approval, and they divided into two factions, which Clovis proceeded 
to partition into even smaller groups as he assigned a certain number of 
villagers to each barge. 
 
 For the next half hour, Roran worked alongside the sailors to finish 
preparing the Red Boar for departure, ears open for the first hint of alarm. 
We’re going to be captured or killed if we stay much longer, he thought, 
checking the height of the water against the piers. He mopped sweat 
from his brow. 
 
 Roran started as Clovis gripped his forearm. 
 
 Before he could stop himself, Roran pulled his hammer halfway out of 
his belt. The thick air clogged his throat. 
 
 Clovis raised an eyebrow at his reaction. “I’ve been watching you, 
Stronghammer, and I’d be interested to know how you won such loyalty 
from your men. I’ve served with more captains than I care to recall, an’ 
not one commanded the level of obedience you do without raising his 
pipes.” 
 
 Roran could not help it; he laughed. “I’ll tell you how I did it; I saved 
them from slavery and from being eaten.” 
 
 Clovis’s eyebrows rose almost to his hairline. “Did you now? There’s a 
story I’d like to hear.” 
 
 “No, you wouldn’t.” 
 
 After a minute, Clovis said, “No, maybe I wouldn’t at that.” He glanced 
overboard. “Why, I’ll be hanged. I do believe we can be on our way. Ah, 
and here’s my little Galina, punctual as ever.” 
 
 The burly man sprang onto the gangplank and, from there, onto the 
docks, where he embraced a dark-haired girl of perhaps thirteen and a 
woman who Roran guessed was her mother. Clovis ruffled the girl’s hair 
and said, “Now, you’ll be good while I’m gone, won’t you, Galina?” 
 
 “Yes, Father.” 
 
 As he watched Clovis bid his family farewell, Roran thought of the two 
soldiers dead by the gate. They might have had families as well. Wives and 
children who loved them and a home they returned to each day... He tasted 
bile and had to wrench his thoughts back to the pier to avoid being sick. 

 
398
 
 On the barges, the men appeared anxious. Afraid that they might lose 
their nerve, Roran made a show of walking about the deck, stretching, 
and doing whatever he could to seem relaxed. At last Clovis jumped 
back onto the Red Boar and cried, “Cast off, me lads! It’s the briny deep 
for us.” 
 
 In short order, the gangplanks were pulled aboard, the mooring ropes 
untied, and the sails raised on the three barges. The air rang with shouted 
orders and chants of heave-ho as the sailors pulled on ropes. 
 
 Behind them, Galina and her mother remained watching as the barges 
drew away, still and silent, hooded and grave. 
 
 “We’re lucky, Stronghammer,” said Clovis, clapping him on the shoul-
der. “We’ve a bit o’ wind to push us along today. We may not have to 
row in order to reach the cove before the tide changes, eh!” 
 
 When the Red Boar was in the middle of Narda’s bay and still ten min-
utes from the freedom of the open sea, that which Roran dreaded oc-
curred: the sound of bells and trumpets floated across the water from 
among the stone buildings. 
 
 “What’s that?” he asked. 
 
 “I don’t rightly know,” said Clovis. He frowned as he stared at the town, 
his hands planted on his hips. “It could be a fire, but no smoke is in the 
air. Maybe some Urgals were discovered in the area....” Concern grew 
upon his face. “Did you perchance spy anyone on the road this morning?” 
 
 Roran shook his head, not trusting himself to speak. 
 
 Flint drew alongside them and shouted from the deck of the Edeline, 
“Should we turn back, sir?” Roran gripped the gunwale so hard that he 
drove splinters under his nails, ready to intercede but afraid to appear too 
anxious. 
 
 Tearing his gaze from Narda, Clovis bellowed in return, “No. We’d 
miss the tide then.” 
 
 “Aye, aye, sir! But I’d give a day’s pay to find out what caused that 
clamor.” 
 
 “So would I,” muttered Clovis. 

 
399
 
 As the houses and buildings shrank behind them, Roran crouched at 
the rear port of the barge, wrapped his arms around his knees, and leaned 
against the cabins. He looked at the sky, struck by its depth, clarity, and 
color, then into the Red Boar ’s roiling green wake, where ribbons of sea-
weed fluttered. The pitch of the barge lulled him like the rock of a cra-
dle. What a beautiful day it is, he thought, grateful he was there to ob-
serve it. 
 
 After they escaped the cove—to his relief—Roran climbed the ladder 
to the poop deck behind the cabins, where Clovis stood with his hand on 
the tiller, guiding their course. The captain said, “Ah, there’s something 
exhilarating about the first day of a voyage, before you realize how bad 
the food is an’ start longing for home.” 
 
 Mindful of his need to learn what he could about the barge, Roran 
asked Clovis the names and functions of various objects on board, at 
which point he was treated to an enthusiastic lecture on the workings of 
barges, ships, and the art of sailing in general. 
 
 Two hours later, Clovis pointed at a narrow peninsula that lay before 
them. “The cove be on the far side of that.” Roran straightened off the 
railing and craned his neck, eager to confirm that the villagers were safe. 
 
 As the Red Boar rounded the rocky spit of land, a white beach was re-
vealed at the apex of the cove, upon which were assembled the refugees 
from Palancar Valley. The crowd cheered and waved as the barges 
emerged from behind the rocks. 
 
 Roran relaxed. 
 
 Beside him, Clovis uttered a dreadful oath. “I knew something were 
amiss the moment I clapped eyes upon you, Stronghammer. Livestock 
indeed. Bah! You played me like a fool, you did.” 
 
 “You wrong me,” replied Roran. “I did not lie; this is my flock and I am 
their shepherd. Is it not within my right to call them ‘livestock’ if I 
want?” 
 
 “Call them what you will, I didn’t agree to haul people to Teirm. Why 
you didn’t tell me the true nature of your cargo, I might wonder, an’ the 
only answer on the horizon is that whatever venture you’re engaged in 
means trouble... trouble for you an’ trouble for me. I should toss the lot 
of you overboard an’ return to Narda.” 

 
400
 
 “But you won’t,” said Roran, deadly quiet. 
 
 “Oh? An’ why not?” 
 
 “Because I need these barges, Clovis, and I’ll do anything to keep them. 
Anything. Honor our bargain and you’ll have a peaceful trip and you’ll get 
to see Galina again. If not...” The threat sounded worse than it was; Roran 
had no intention of killing Clovis, though if he had to, he would abandon 
him somewhere along the coast. 
 
 Clovis’s face reddened, but he surprised Roran by grunting and saying, 
“Fair enough, Stronghammer.” Pleased with himself, Roran returned his 
attention to the beach. 
 
 Behind him, he heard a snick. 
 
 Acting on instinct, Roran recoiled, crouching, twisting, and covering his 
head with his shield. His arm vibrated as a belaying pin broke across the 
shield. He lowered the shield and gazed at a dismayed Clovis, who re-
treated across the deck. 
 
 Roran shook his head, never taking his eyes off his opponent. “You 
can’t defeat me, Clovis. I’ll ask you again: Will you honor our bargain? If 
you don’t, I’ll put you ashore, commandeer the barges, and press your 
crew into service. I don’t want to ruin your livelihood, but I will if you 
force me.... Come now. This can be a normal, uneventful voyage if you 
choose to help us. Remember, you’ve already been paid.” 
 
 Drawing himself up with great dignity, Clovis said, “If I agree, then you 
must do me the courtesy of explaining why this ruse were necessary, an’ 
why these people are here an’ where they’re from. No matter how much 
gold you offer me, I won’t assist an undertaking that contradicts my prin-
ciples; no, I won’t. Are you bandits? Or do you serve the blasted king?” 
 
 “The knowledge may place you in greater danger.” 
 
 “I insist.” 
 
 “Have you heard of Carvahall in Palancar Valley?” asked Roran. 
 
 Clovis waved a hand. “Once or twice. What of it?” 
 
 “You see it now on the beach. Galbatorix’s soldiers attacked us without 

 
401
provocation. We fought back and, when our position became untenable, 
we crossed the Spine and followed the coast to Narda. Galbatorix has 
promised that every man, woman, and child from Carvahall will be killed 
or enslaved. Reaching Surda is our only hope of survival.” Roran left out 
mention of the Ra’zac; he did not want to frighten Clovis too badly. 
 
 The weathered seaman had gone gray. “Are you still pursued?” 
 
 “Aye, but the Empire has yet to discover us.” 
 
 “An’ are you why the alarm was sounded?” 
 
 Very softly, Roran said, “I killed two soldiers who recognized me.” The 
revelation startled Clovis: his eyes widened, he stepped back, and the 
muscles in his forearms rippled as he clenched his fists. “Make your 
choice, Clovis; the shore draws near.” 
 
 He knew he had won when the captain’s shoulders drooped and the 
bravado faded from his bearing. “Ah, the plague take you, Stronghammer. 
I’m no friend of the king; I’ll get you to Teirm. But then I want nothing 
more to do with you.” 
 
 “Will you give me your word that you won’t attempt to slip away in 
the night or any similar deception?” 
 
 “Aye. You have it.” 
 
 Sand and rocks grated across the bottom of the Red Boar ’s hull as the 
barge drove itself up onto the beach, followed on either side by its two 
companions. The relentless, rhythmic surge of water dashing itself against 
the land sounded like the breathing of a gigantic monster. Once the sails 
were furled and the gangplanks extended, Torson and Flint both strode 
over to the Red Boar and accosted Clovis, demanding to know what was 
going on. 
 
 “There’s been a change of plans,” said Clovis. 
 
 Roran left him to explain the situation—skirting the exact reasons why 
the villagers left Palancar Valley—and jumped onto the sand, whereupon 
he set out to find Horst among the milling knots of people. When he 
spotted the smith, Roran pulled him aside and told him about the deaths 
in Narda. “If it’s discovered that I left with Clovis, they may send soldiers 
on horses after us. We have to get everyone onto the barges as fast as 
possible.” 

 
402
 
 Horst met his eye for a long minute. “You’ve become a hard man, Ro-
ran, harder than I’ll ever be.” 
 
 “I’ve had to.” 
 
 “Mind that you don’t forget who you are.” 
 
   
 
 Roran spent the next three hours moving and packing the villagers’ be-
longings in the Red Boar until Clovis expressed his satisfaction. The bun-
dles had to be secured so that they would not shift unexpectedly and in-
jure someone, as well as distributed so that the barge rode level in the 
water, which was no easy task as the bundles were of irregular size and 
density. Then the animals were coaxed on board much to their displeas-
ure—and immobilized by tethers lashed to iron rings in the hold. 
 
 Last of all came the people, who, like the rest of the cargo, had to be 
organized into a symmetrical pattern within the barge to keep from cap-
sizing it. Clovis, Torson, and Flint each ended up standing at the fore of 
their barges, shouting directions to the mass of villagers below. 
 
 What now? thought Roran as he heard an argument break out on the 
beach. Pushing his way to the source of the disturbance, he saw Calitha 
kneeling beside her stepfather, Wayland, trying to calm the old man. 
 
 “No! I won’t go on that beast ! You can’t make me,” cried Wayland. He 
thrashed his withered arms and beat his heels in an attempt to free him-
self from Calitha’s embrace. Spittle flew from his lips. “Let me go, I say. 
Let me go!” 
 
 Wincing from his blows, Calitha said, “He’s been unreasonable ever 
since we made camp last night.” 
 
 It would have been better for all concerned if he had died in the Spine, 
what with the trouble he’s caused, thought Roran. He joined Calitha, and 
together they managed to soothe Wayland so that he no longer screamed 
and hit. As a reward for his good behavior, Calitha gave him a piece of 
jerky, which occupied his entire attention. While Wayland concentrated 
on gumming the meat, she and Roran were able to guide him onto the 
Edeline and get him settled in a deserted corner where he would not be a 
nuisance. 
 

 
403
 “Move your backsides, you lubbers,” shouted Clovis. “The tide’s about 
to turn. Hop to, hop to.” 
 
 After a final flurry of activity, the gangplanks were withdrawn, leaving 
a cluster of twenty men standing on the beach before each barge. The 
three groups gathered around the prows and prepared to push them back 
into the water. 
 
 Roran led the effort on the Red Boar. Chanting in unison, he and his 
men strained against the weight of the huge barge, the gray sand giving 
beneath their feet, the timbers and cables creaking, and the smell of 
sweat in the air. For a moment, their efforts seemed to be in vain, then 
the Red Boar lurched and slid back a foot. 
 
 “Again!” shouted Roran. Foot by foot, they advanced into the sea, until 
the frigid water surged about their waists. A breaker crashed over Roran, 
filling his mouth with seawater, which he spat out vigorously, disgusted 
by the taste of salt; it was far more intense than he expected. 
 
 When the barge lifted free of the seabed, Roran swam alongside the 
Red Boar and pulled himself up with one of the ropes draped over the 
gunwale. Meanwhile, the sailors deployed long poles that they used to 
propel the Red Boar into ever deeper water, as did the crews of the Mer-
rybell and Edeline. 
 
 The instant they were a reasonable distance from shore, Clovis ordered 
the poles stowed away and oars broken out, with which the sailors aimed 
the Red Boar’s prow toward the cove’s entrance. They hoisted the sail, 
aligned it to catch the light wind, and, at the vanguard of the trio of 
barges, set forth for Teirm upon the uncertain expanse of the bounding 
main. 
 

 
404
THE BEGINNING OF WISDOM 
 
 
 The days Eragon spent in Ellesméra blended together without distinc-
tion; time seemed to have no hold in the pinewood city. The season aged 
not, even as the afternoons and evenings lengthened, barring the forest 
with rich shadows. Flowers of all months bloomed at the urging of the 
elves’ magic, nourished by the enchantments spun through the air. 
 
 Eragon came to love Ellesméra with its beauty and its quiet, the grace-
ful buildings that flowed out of the trees, the haunting songs that echoed 
at twilight, the works of art hidden within the mysterious dwellings, and 
the introspection of the elves themselves, which they mixed with out-
bursts of merriment. 
 
 The wild animals of Du Weldenvarden had no fear of hunters. Often 
Eragon would look from his eyrie to see an elf petting a stag or a gray fox 
or murmuring to a shy bear that trundled along the edge of a clearing, re-
luctant to expose himself. Some animals had no recognizable form. They 
appeared at night, moving and grunting in the bushes and fleeing if Er-
agon dared approach. Once he glimpsed a creature like a furred snake and 
once a white-robed woman whose body wavered and disappeared to re-
veal a grinning she-wolf in her place. 
 
 Eragon and Saphira continued to explore Ellesméra when they had the 
chance. They went alone or with Orik, for Arya no longer accompanied 
them, nor had Eragon spoken to her since she broke his fairth. He saw 
her now and then, flitting between the trees, but whenever he ap-
proached—intending to apologize—she withdrew, leaving him alone 
among the ancient pines. At last Eragon realized that he had to take the 
initiative if he were to ever have a chance of mending his relationship 
with her. So one evening, he picked a bouquet from the flowers along the 
path by his tree and hobbled to Tialdarí Hall, where he asked directions 
to Arya’s quarters from an elf in the common room. 
 
 The screen door was open when he reached her chambers. No one an-
swered when he knocked. He stepped inside, listening for approaching 
footsteps as he glanced around the spacious vine-covered living room, 
which opened to a small bedroom on one side and a study on the other. 
Two fairths decorated the walls: a portrait of a stern, proud elf with sil-
ver hair, who Eragon guessed was King Evandar, and that of a younger 
male elf whom he did not recognize. 
 
 Eragon wandered through the apartment, looking but not touching, sa-

 
405
voring his glimpse into Arya’s life, gleaning what he could about her in-
terests and hobbies. By her bed, he saw a glass sphere with a preserved 
blossom of the black morning glory embedded within it; on her desk, 
neat rows of scrolls with titles like Osilon: Harvest Report and Activity 
Noted by Gil’ead Watchtower; on the sill of an open bay window, three 
miniature trees grown in the shape of glyphs from the ancient language, 
the glyphs for peace, strength, and wisdom ; and by the trees, a scrap of 
paper with an unfinished poem, covered with crossed-out words and 
scribbled marks. It read: 
 
 
 Under the moon, the bright white moon, 
 
 Lies a pool, a flat silver pool, 
 
 Among the brakes and brambles, 
 
 And black-heart pines. 
 
 
 Falls a stone, a living stone, 
 
 Cracks the moon, the bright white moon, 
 
 Among the brakes and brambles, 
 
 And black-heart pines. 
 
 
 Shards of light, swords of light, 
 
 Ripple ’cross the pool, 
 
 The quiet mere, the still tarn, 
 
 The lonely lake there. 
 
 
 In the night, the dark and heavy night, 
 
 Flutter shadows, confused shadows, 
 
 Where once... 
 

 
406
 
 Going to the small table by the entrance, Eragon laid his bouquet upon 
it and turned to leave. He froze as he saw Arya standing in the doorway. 
She looked startled by his presence, then concealed her emotions behind 
an impassive expression. 
 
 They stared at each other in silence. 
 
 He lifted the bouquet, half offering it to her. “I don’t know how to 
make a blossom for you, like Fäolin did, but these are honest flowers and 
the best I could find.” 
 
 “I cannot accept them, Eragon.” 
 
 “They’re not... they’re not that sort of gift.” He paused. “It’s no excuse, 
but I didn’t realize beforehand that my fairth would put you in such a 
difficult situation. For that, I’m sorry, and I cry your pardon.... I was just 
trying to make a fairth, not cause trouble. I understand the importance of 
my studies, Arya, and you needn’t fear I will neglect them in order to 
moon after you.” He swayed and leaned against the wall, too dizzy to re-
main on his feet without support. “That’s all.” 
 
 She regarded him for a long moment, then slowly reached out and took 
the bouquet, which she held beneath her nose. Her eyes never left his. 
“They are honest flowers,” she conceded. Her gaze flickered down to his 
feet and back up again. “Have you been ill?” 
 
 “No. My back.” 
 
 “I had heard, but I did not think...” 
 
 He pushed himself away from the wall. “I should go.” 
 
 “Wait.” Arya hesitated, then guided him to the bay window, where he 
sat on the padded bench that curved from the wall. Removing two gob-
lets from a cupboard, Arya crumbled dried nettle leaves into them, then 
filled the goblets with water and—saying “Boil”—heated the water for 
tea. 
 
 She gave a goblet to Eragon, who held it with both hands so the 
warmth seeped into him. He glanced out the window to the ground 
twenty feet below, where elves walked among the royal gardens, talking 
and singing, and fireflies floated through the dusky air. 
 

 
407
 “I wish...,” said Eragon, “I wish it could always be like this. It’s so perfect 
and quiet.” 
 
 Arya stirred her tea. “How fares Saphira?” 
 
 “The same. And you?” 
 
 “I have been preparing to return to the Varden.” 
 
 Alarm shot through him. “When?” 
 
 “After the Blood-oath Celebration. I have tarried here far too long as it 
is, but I have been loath to leave and Islanzadí wished me to stay. Also... I 
have never attended a Blood-oath Celebration and it is the most impor-
tant of our observances.” She considered him over the rim of her goblet. 
“Is there nothing Oromis can do for you?” 
 
 Eragon forced a weary shrug. “He tried everything he knows.” 
 
 They sipped their tea and watched the groups and couples meander 
along the garden paths. “Your studies go well, though?” she asked. 
 
 “They do.” In the lull that followed, Eragon picked up the scrap of pa-
per from between the trees and examined her stanzas, as if reading them 
for the first time. “Do you often write poetry?” 
 
 Arya extended her hand for the paper and, when he gave it to her, 
rolled it into a tube so that the words were no longer visible. “It is cus-
tom that everyone who attends the Blood-oath Celebration should bring 
a poem, a song, or some other piece of art that they have made and share 
it with those assembled. I have but begun to work on mine.” 
 
 “I think it’s quite good.” 
 
 “If you had read much poetry—” 
 
 “I have.” 
 
 Arya paused, then dipped her head and said, “Forgive me. You are not 
the person I first met in Gil’ead.” 
 
 “No. I...” He stopped and twisted the goblet between his hands while 
he searched for the right words. “Arya... you’ll be leaving soon enough. I 
would count it a shame if this is the last I see of you between now and 

 
408
then. Could we not meet occasionally, as we did before, and you could 
show Saphira and me more of Ellesméra?” 
 
 “It would not be wise,” she said in a gentle but firm voice. 
 
 He looked up at her. “Must the price of my indiscretion be our friend-
ship? I cannot help how I feel toward you, but I would rather suffer an-
other wound from Durza than allow my foolishness to destroy the com-
panionship that existed between us. I value it too highly.” 
 
 Lifting her goblet, Arya finished the last of her tea before responding. 
“Our friendship shall endure, Eragon. As for us spending time together...” 
Her lips curved with a hint of a smile. “Perhaps. However, we shall have 
to wait and see what the future brings, for I am busy and can promise 
nothing.” 
 
 He knew her words were the closest thing to a conciliation he was 
likely to receive, and he was grateful for them. “Of course, Arya Svit-
kona,” he said, and bowed his head. 
 
 They exchanged a few more pleasantries, but it was clear that Arya had 
gone as far as she was willing to go that day, so Eragon returned to 
Saphira, his hope restored by what he had accomplished. Now it’s up to 
fate to decide the outcome, he thought as he settled before Oromis’s latest 
scroll. 
 
   
 
 Reaching into the pouch at his belt, Eragon withdrew a soapstone con-
tainer of nalgask—beeswax melted with hazelnut oil—and smeared it 
over his lips to protect them against the cold wind that scoured his face. 
He closed the pouch, then wrapped his arms around Saphira’s neck and 
buried his face in the crook of his elbow to reduce the glare from the 
wimpled clouds beneath them. The tireless beat of Saphira’s wings domi-
nated his hearing, higher and faster than that of Glaedr’s, whom she fol-
lowed. 
 
 They flew southwest from dawn until early afternoon, often pausing 
for enthusiastic sparring bouts between Saphira and Glaedr, during which 
Eragon had to strap his arms onto the saddle to prevent himself from be-
ing thrown off by the stomach-turning acrobatics. He then would free 
himself by pulling on slipknots with his teeth. 
 
 The trip ended at a cluster of four mountains that towered over the 

 
409
forest, the first mountains Eragon had seen in Du Weldenvarden. White-
capped and windswept, they pierced the veil of clouds and bared their 
crevassed brows to the beating sun, which was heatless at such altitude. 
 
 They look so small compared to the Beors, said Saphira. 
 
 As had become his habit during weeks of meditation, Eragon extended 
his mind in every direction, touching upon the consciousnesses around 
him in search of any who might mean him harm. He felt a marmot warm 
in her burrow, ravens, nuthatches, and hawks, numerous squirrels run-
ning among the trees, and, farther down the mountain, rock snakes undu-
lating through the brush in search of the mice that were their prey, as 
well as the hordes of ubiquitous insects. 
 
 When Glaedr descended to a bare ridge on the first mountain, Saphira 
had to wait until he folded his massive wings before there was enough 
room for her to land. The field of boulder-strewn talus they alighted 
upon was brilliant yellow from a coating of hard, crenulated lichen. 
Above them loomed a sheer black cliff. It acted as buttress and dam for a 
cornice of blue ice that groaned and split under the wind, loosing jagged 
slabs that shattered on the granite below. 
 
 This peak is known as Fionula, said Glaedr. And her brothers are 
Ethrundr, Merogoven, and Griminsmal. Each has its own tale, which I shall 
recount on the flight back. But for now, I shall address the purpose of this 
trip, namely the nature of the bond forged between dragons and elves and, 
later, humans. You both know something of it—and I have hinted at its full 
implications to Saphira—but the time has come to learn the solemn and pro-
found meaning of your partnership so that you may uphold it when Oromis 
and I are no more. 
 
 “Master?” asked Eragon, wrapping his cloak around himself to stay 
warm. 
 
 Yes, Eragon. 
 
 “Why is Oromis not here with us?” 
 
 Because, rumbled Glaedr, it is my duty—as was always the duty of an 
elder dragon in centuries past—to ensure that the newest generation of Rid-
ers understands the true importance of the station they have assumed. And 
because Oromis is not as well as he appears. 
 
 The rocks cracked with muffled reports as Glaedr coiled up, nestling 

 
410
himself among the scree and placing his majestic head upon the ground 
lengthwise to Eragon and Saphira. He examined them with one gold eye 
as large as a polished roundshield and twice as brilliant. A gray smudge of 
smoke drifted from his nostrils and was blown to tatters by the wind. 
Parts of what I am about to reveal were common knowledge among the 
elves, Riders, and learned humans, but much of it was known only to the 
leader of the Riders, a mere handful of elves, the humans’ current potentate, 
and, of course, the dragons. 
 
 Listen now, my hatchlings. When peace was made between dragons and 
elves at the end of our war, the Riders were created to ensure that such con-
flict would never again arise between our two races. Queen Tarmunora of 
the elves and the dragon who had been selected to represent us, whose 
name—he paused and conveyed a series of impressions to Eragon: long 
tooth, white tooth, chipped tooth; fights won, fights lost; countless eaten 
Shrrg and Nagra; seven-and-twenty eggs sired and nineteen offspring 
grown to maturity—cannot be expressed in any language, decided that a 
common treaty would not suffice. Signed paper means nothing to a dragon. 
Our blood runs hot and thick and, given enough time, it was inevitable that 
we would clash with the elves again, as we had with the dwarves over the 
millennia. But unlike with the dwarves, neither we nor the elves could af-
ford another war. We were both too powerful, and we would have destroyed 
each other. The one way to prevent that and to forge a meaningful accord 
was to link our two races with magic. 
 
 Eragon shivered, and with a touch of amusement, Glaedr said, Saphira, 
if you are wise, you will heat one of these rocks with the fire from your belly 
so that your Rider does not freeze. 
 
 Thereupon Saphira arched her neck, and a jet of blue flame emanated 
from between her serrated fangs and splashed against the scree, blacken-
ing the lichen, which released a bitter smell as it burned. The air grew so 
hot that Eragon was forced to turn away. He felt the insects underneath 
the rocks being crisped in the inferno. After a minute, Saphira clapped 
shut her jaws, leaving a circle of stones five feet across glowing cherry 
red. 
 
 Thank you, Eragon said to her. He hunched by the edge of the scorched 
rocks and warmed his hands over them. 
 
 Remember, Saphira, to use your tongue to direct the stream, admonished 
Glaedr. Now... it took nine years for the elves’ wisest magicians to devise the 
needed spell. When they had, they and the dragons gathered together at 
Ilirea. The elves provided the structure of the enchantment, the dragons pro-

 
411
vided the strength, and together they melded the souls of elves and dragons. 
 
 The joining changed us. We dragons gained the use of language and other 
trappings of civilization, while the elves shared in our longevity, since before 
that moment, their lives were as short as humans’. In the end, the elves were 
the most affected. Our magic, dragons’ magic—which permeates every fiber 
of our being—was transmitted to the elves and, in time, gave them their 
much-vaunted strength and grace. Humans have never been influenced as 
strongly, since you were added to the spell after its completion and it has not 
had as much time to work upon you as with the elves. Still—and here 
Glaedr’s eye gleamed—it has already gentled your race from the rough 
barbarians who first landed in Alagaësia, though you have begun to regress 
since the Fall. 
 
 “Were dwarves ever part of this spell?” asked Eragon. 
 
 No, and that is why there has never been a dwarf Rider. They do not care 
for dragons, nor we for them, and they found the idea of being joined with 
us repellent. Perhaps it is fortunate that they did not enter into our pact, for 
they have escaped the decline of humans and elves. 
 
 Decline, Master? queried Saphira in what Eragon would have sworn 
was a teasing tone of voice. 
 
 Aye, decline. If one or another of our three races suffer, so do they all. By 
killing dragons, Galbatorix harmed his own race as well as the elves. The 
two of you have not seen this, for you are new to Ellesméra, but the elves are 
on the wane; their power is not what it once was. And humans have lost 
much of their culture and been consumed by chaos and corruption. Only by 
righting the imbalance between our three races shall order return to the 
world. 
 
 The old dragon kneaded the scree with his talons, crumbling it into 
gravel so that he was more comfortable. Layered within the enchantment 
Queen Tarmunora oversaw was the mechanism that allows a hatchling to 
be linked with his or her Rider. When a dragon decides to give an egg to the 
Riders, certain words are said over the egg—which I shall teach you later—
that prevent the dragon inside from hatching until it is brought into contact 
with the person with whom it decides to bond. As dragons can remain in 
their eggs indefinitely, time is of no concern, nor is the infant harmed. You 
yourself are an example of this, Saphira. 
 
 The bond that forms between a Rider and dragon is but an enhanced ver-
sion of the bond that already exists between our races. The human or elf be-

 
412
comes stronger and fairer, while some of the dragon’s fiercer traits are tem-
pered by a more reasoned outlook.... I see a thought biting at your tongue, 
Eragon. What is it? 
 
 “It’s just...” He hesitated. “I have a hard time imagining you or Saphira 
being any fiercer. Not,” he added anxiously, “that that’s a bad thing.” 
 
 The ground shook as if with an avalanche as Glaedr chuckled, rolling 
his great big staring eye behind its horny lid and back again. If ever you 
met an unbonded dragon, you would not say so. A dragon alone answers to 
no one and no thing, takes whatever pleases it, and bears no thought of 
kindness for aught but its kith and kin. Fierce and proud were the wild 
dragons, even arrogant.... The females were so formidable, it was accounted 
a great accomplishment among the Riders’ dragons to mate with one. 
 
 The lack of this bond is why Galbatorix’s partnership with Shruikan, his 
second dragon, is such a perverted union. Shruikan did not choose Galba-
torix as his partner; he was twisted by certain black magics into serving 
Galbatorix’s madness. Galbatorix has constructed a depraved imitation of 
the relationship that you, Eragon, and you, Saphira, possess and that he lost 
when the Urgals murdered his original dragon. 
 
 Glaedr paused and looked between the two of them. His eye was all 
that moved. That which links you exceeds any simple connection between 
minds. Your very souls, your identities—call it what you will—have been 
welded on a primal level. His eye flicked to Eragon. Do you believe that a 
person’s soul is separate from his body? 
 
 “I don’t know,” said Eragon. “Saphira once took me out of my body and 
let me see the world through her eyes.... It seemed like I was no longer 
connected to my body. And if the wraiths that a sorcerer calls upon can 
exist, then maybe our consciousness is independent of flesh as well.” 
 
 Extending the needle-sharp tip of his foreclaw, Glaedr flipped over a 
rock to expose a woodrat cowering in its nest. He snapped up the rat 
with a flash of his red tongue; Eragon winced as he felt the animal’s life 
extinguished. 
 
 When the flesh is destroyed, so is the soul, said Glaedr. 
 
 “But an animal isn’t a person,” protested Eragon. 
 
 After your meditations, do you truly believe that any of us are so different 
from a woodrat? That we are gifted with a miraculous quality that other 

 
413
creatures do not enjoy and that somehow preserves our beings after death? 
 
 “No,” muttered Eragon. 
 
 I thought not. Because we are so closely joined, when a dragon or Rider is 
injured, they must harden their hearts and sever the connection between 
them in order to protect each other from unnecessary suffering, even insan-
ity. And since the soul cannot be torn from the flesh, you must resist the 
temptation to try to take your partner’s soul into your own body and shelter 
it there, as that will result in both your deaths. Even if it were possible, it 
would be an abomination to have multiple consciousnesses in one body. 
 
 “How terrible,” said Eragon, “to die alone, separate even from the one 
who is closest to you.” 
 
 Everyone dies alone, Eragon. Whether you are a king on a battlefield or a 
lowly peasant lying in bed among your family, no one can accompany you 
into the void.... Now I will have you practice separating your conscious-
nesses. Start by... 
 
   
 
 Eragon stared at the tray of dinner left in the anteroom of the tree 
house. He cataloged the contents: bread with hazelnut butter, berries, 
beans, a bowl of leafy greens, two hard-boiled eggs—which, in accor-
dance with the elves’ beliefs, were unfertilized—and a stoppered jug of 
fresh spring water. He knew that each dish was prepared with the ut-
most care, that the elves lavished all of their culinary skill upon his meals, 
and that not even Islanzadí ate better than him. 
 
 He could not bear the sight of the tray. 
 
 I want meat, he growled, stomping back into the bedroom. Saphira 
looked up at him from her dais. I’d even settle for fish or fowl, anything 
besides this never-ending stream of vegetables. They don’t fill up my stom-
ach. I’m not a horse; why should I be fed like one? 
 
 Saphira unfolded her legs, walked to the edge of the teardrop gap over-
looking Ellesméra, and said, I have needed to eat these past few days. 
Would you like to join me? You can cook as much meat as you like and the 
elves will never know. 
 
 That I would, he said, brightening. Should I get the saddle? 
 

 
414
 We won’t go that far. 
 
 Eragon fetched his supply of salt, herbs, and other seasonings from his 
bags and then, careful not to overexert himself, climbed into the gap be-
tween the spikes along Saphira’s spine. 
 
 Launching herself off the ground, Saphira let an updraft waft her high 
above the city, whereupon she glided off the column of warm air, slip-
ping down and sideways as she followed a braided stream through Du 
Weldenvarden to a pond some miles thence. She landed and hunched 
low to the ground, making it easier for Eragon to dismount. 
 
 She said, There are rabbits in the grass by the edge of the water. See if you 
can catch them. In the meantime, I go to hunt deer. 
 
 What, you don’t want to share your own prey? 
 
 No, I don’t, she replied grumpily. Though I will if those oversized mice 
elude you. 
 
 He grinned as she took off, then faced the tangled clumps of grass and 
cow parsnip that surrounded the pond and set about procuring his din-
ner. 
 
 Less than a minute later, Eragon collected a brace of dead rabbits from 
their nest. It had taken him but an instant to locate the rabbits with his 
mind and then kill them with one of the twelve death words. What he 
had learned from Oromis had drained the challenge and excitement from 
the chase. I didn’t even have to stalk them, he thought, remembering the 
years he had spent honing his tracking abilities. He grimaced with sour 
amusement. I can finally bag any game I want and it seems meaningless to 
me. At least when I hunted with a pebble with Brom, it was still a chal-
lenge, but this... this is slaughter. 
 
 The warning of the sword-shaper Rhunön returned to him then: 
“When you can have anything you want by uttering a few words, the goal 
matters not, only the journey to it.” 
 
 I should have paid more attention to her, realized Eragon. 
 
 With practiced movements, he drew his old hunting knife, skinned and 
gutted the rabbits, and then—putting aside the hearts, lungs, kidneys, and 
livers—buried the viscera so that the scent would not attract scavengers. 
Next he dug a pit, filled it with wood, and lit a small blaze with magic, 

 
415
since he had not thought to bring his flint and steel. He tended the fire 
until he had a bed of coals. Cutting a wand of dogwood, he stripped the 
bark and seared the wood over the coals to burn off the bitter sap, then 
spitted the carcasses on the wand and suspended them between two 
forked branches pounded into the ground. For the organs, he placed a flat 
stone upon a section of the coals and greased it with fat for a makeshift 
frying pan. 
 
 Saphira found him crouched by the fire, slowly turning the wand to 
cook the meat evenly. She landed with a limp deer hanging from her jaws 
and the remains of a second deer clutched in her talons. Measuring her 
length out in the fragrant grass, she proceeded to gorge upon her prey, 
eating the entire deer, including the hide. Bones cracked between her ra-
zor teeth, like branches snapping in a gale. 
 
 When the rabbits were ready, Eragon waved them in the air to cool 
them, then stared at the glistening, golden meat, the smell of which he 
found almost unbearably enticing. 
 
 As he opened his mouth to take the first bite, his thoughts turned un-
bidden to his meditations. He remembered his excursions into the minds 
of birds and squirrels and mice, how full of energy they felt and how vig-
orously they fought for the right to exist in the face of danger. And if this 
life is all they have... 
 
 Gripped by revulsion, Eragon thrust the meat away, as appalled by the 
fact that he had killed the rabbits as if he had murdered two people. His 
stomach churned and threatened to make him purge himself. 
 
 Saphira paused in her feast to eye him with concern. 
 
 Taking a long breath, Eragon pressed his fists against his knees in an at-
tempt to master himself and understand why he was so strongly affected. 
His entire life he had eaten meat, fish, and fowl. He enjoyed it. And yet it 
now made him physically ill to consider dining upon the rabbits. He 
looked at Saphira. I can’t do it, he said. 
 
 It is the way of the world that everything eats everything else. Why do you 
resist the order of things? 
 
 He pondered her question. He did not condemn those who did partake 
of flesh—he knew that it was the only means of survival for many a poor 
farmer. But he could no longer do so himself unless faced with starvation. 
Having been inside of a rabbit and having felt what a rabbit feels... eating 

 
416
one would be akin to eating himself. Because we can better ourselves, he 
answered Saphira. Should we give in to our impulses to hurt or kill any who 
anger us, to take whatever we want from those who are weaker, and, in gen-
eral, to disregard the feelings of others? We are made imperfect and must 
guard against our flaws lest they destroy us. He gestured at the rabbits. As 
Oromis said, why should we cause unnecessary suffering? 
 
 Would you deny all of your desires, then? 
 
 I would deny those that are destructive. 
 
 You are adamant on this? 
 
 Aye. 
 
 In that case, said Saphira, advancing upon him, these will make a fine 
dessert. In a blink, she gulped down the rabbits and then licked clean the 
stone with the organs, abrading the slate with the barbs on her tongue. I, 
at least, cannot live on plants alone—that is food for prey, not a dragon. I 
refuse to be ashamed about how I must sustain myself. Everything has its 
place in the world. Even a rabbit knows that. 
 
 I’m not trying to make you feel guilty, he said, patting her on the leg. 
This is a personal decision. I won’t force my choice upon anyone. 
 
 Very wise, she said with a touch of sarcasm. 
 

 
417
BROKEN EGG AND SCATTERED NEST 
 
 
 “Concentrate, Eragon,” said Oromis, though not unkindly. 
 
 Eragon blinked and rubbed his eyes in an attempt to focus on the 
glyphs that decorated the curling parchment paper before him. “Sorry, 
Master.” Weariness dragged upon him like lead weights tied to his limbs. 
He squinted at the curved and spiked glyphs, raised his goose-feather 
quill, and began to copy them again. 
 
 Through the window behind Oromis, the green shelf on top of the 
Crags of Tel’naeír was streaked with shadows from the descending sun. 
Beyond, feathery clouds banded the sky. 
 
 Eragon’s hand jerked as a line of pain shot up his leg, and he broke the 
nib of the quill and sprayed ink across the paper, ruining it. Across from 
him, Oromis also started, clutching his right arm. 
 
 Saphira! cried Eragon. He reached for her with his mind and, to his be-
wilderment, was deflected by impenetrable barriers that she had erected 
around herself. He could barely feel her. It was as if he were trying to 
grasp an orb of polished granite coated with oil. She kept slipping away 
from him. 
 
 He looked at Oromis. “Something’s happened to them, hasn’t it?” 
 
 “I know not. Glaedr returns, but he refuses to talk to me.” Taking his 
blade, Naegling, from the wall, Oromis strode outside and stood upon the 
edge of the crags, head uplifted as he waited for the gold dragon to ap-
pear. 
 
 Eragon joined him, thinking of everything—probable and improb-
able—that might have befallen Saphira. The two dragons had left at 
noon, flying north to a place called the Stone of Broken Eggs, where the 
wild dragons had nested in ages past. It was an easy trip. It couldn’t be Ur-
gals; the elves don’t allow them into Du Weldenvarden, he told himself. 
 
 At last Glaedr came into view high above as a winking speck among 
the darkening clouds. As he descended to land, Eragon saw a wound on 
the back of the dragon’s right foreleg, a tear in his lapped scales as wide as 
Eragon’s hand. Scarlet blood laced the grooves between the surrounding 
scales. 
 

 
418
 The moment Glaedr touched the ground, Oromis rushed toward him, 
only to stop when the dragon growled at him. Hopping on his injured leg, 
Glaedr crawled to the edge of the forest, where he curled up beneath the 
outstretched boughs, his back to Eragon, and set about licking clean his 
wound. 
 
 Oromis went and knelt in the clover by Glaedr, keeping his distance 
with calm patience. It was obvious that he would wait as long as need be. 
Eragon fidgeted as the minutes elapsed. Finally, by some unspoken signal, 
Glaedr allowed Oromis to draw near and inspect his leg. Magic glowed 
from Oromis’s gedwëy ignasia as he placed his hand over the rent in 
Glaedr’s scales. 
 
 “How is he?” asked Eragon when Oromis withdrew. 
 
 “It looks a fearsome wound, but it is no more than a scratch for one so 
large as Glaedr.” 
 
 “What about Saphira, though? I still can’t contact her.” 
 
 “You must go to her,” said Oromis. “She is hurt, in more ways than one. 
Glaedr said little of what transpired, but I have guessed much, and you 
would do well to hurry.” 
 
 Eragon glanced about for any means of transportation and groaned with 
anguish when he confirmed that none existed. “How can I reach her? It’s 
too far to run, there’s no trail, and I can’t—” 
 
 “Calm thyself, Eragon. What was the name of the steed who bore you 
hence from Sílthrim?” 
 
 It took Eragon a moment to recall. “Folkvír.” 
 
 “Then summon him with your skill at gramarye. Name him and your 
need in this, the most powerful of languages, and he will come to your 
assistance.” 
 
 Letting the magic suffuse his voice, Eragon cried out for Folkvír, send-
ing his plea echoing over the forested hills toward Ellesméra with all the 
urgency he could muster. 
 
 Oromis nodded, satisfied. “Well done.” 
 
 Twelve minutes later, Folkvír emerged like a silver ghost from the dark 

 
419
shadows among the trees, tossing his mane and snorting with excitement. 
The stallion’s sides heaved from the speed of his journey. 
 
 Throwing a leg over the small elven horse, Eragon said, “I’ll return as 
soon as I can.” 
 
 “Do what you must,” said Oromis. 
 
 Then Eragon touched his heels to Folkvír’s ribs and shouted, “Run, 
Folkvír! Run!” The horse leaped forward and bounded into Du Welden-
varden, threading his way with incredible dexterity between the gnarled 
pines. Eragon guided him toward Saphira with images from his mind. 
 
 Lacking a trail through the underbrush, a horse like Snowfire would 
have taken three or four hours to reach the Stone of Broken Eggs. Folkvír 
managed the trip in a bit over an hour. 
 
 At the base of the basalt monolith—which ascended from the forest 
floor like a mottled green pillar and stood a good hundred feet higher 
than the trees—Eragon murmured, “Halt,” then slid to the ground. He 
looked at the distant top of the Stone of Broken Eggs. Saphira was up 
there. 
 
 He walked around the perimeter, searching for a means to achieve the 
pinnacle, but in vain, for the weathered formation was impregnable. It 
possessed no fissures, crevices, or other faults near enough to the ground 
that he could use to climb its sides. 
 
 This might hurt, he thought. 
 
 “Stay here,” he told Folkvír. The horse looked at him with intelligent 
eyes. “Graze if you want, but stay here, okay?” Folkvír nickered and, with 
his velvet muzzle, nudged Eragon’s arm. “Yes, good boy. You’ve done 
well.” 
 
 Fixing his gaze on the crest of the monolith, Eragon gathered his 
strength, then said in the ancient language, “Up!” 
 
 He realized later that if he had not been accustomed to flying with 
Saphira, the experience might have proved unsettling enough to cause 
him to lose control of the spell and plunge to his death. The ground 
dropped away beneath his feet at a swift clip, while the tree trunks nar-
rowed as he floated toward the underside of the canopy and the fading 
evening sky beyond. Branches clung like grasping fingers to his face and 

 
420
shoulders as he pushed through into the open. Unlike during one of 
Saphira’s dives, he retained his sense of weight, as if he still stood upon 
the loam below. 
 
 Rising above the edge of the Stone of Broken Eggs, Eragon moved him-
self forward and released his grip on the magic, alighting upon a mossy 
patch. He sagged with exhaustion and waited to see if the exertion would 
pain his back, then sighed with relief when it did not. 
 
 The top of the monolith was composed of jagged towers divided by 
deep and wide gullies where naught but a few scattered wildflowers 
grew. Black caves dotted the towers, some natural, others clawed out of 
the basalt by talons as thick as Eragon’s leg. Their floors were blanketed 
with a deep layer of lichen-ridden bones, remnants of the dragons’ an-
cient kills. Birds now nested where dragons once had—hawks and falcons 
and eagles, who watched him from their perches, ready to attack if he 
should threaten their eggs. 
 
 Eragon picked his way across the forbidding landscape, careful not to 
twist an ankle on the loose flakes of stone or to get too close to the occa-
sional rifts that split the column. If he fell down one, it would send him 
tumbling out into empty space. Several times he had to climb over high 
ridges, and twice more he had to lift himself with magic. 
 
 Evidence of the dragons’ habitation was visible everywhere, from deep 
scratches in the basalt to puddles of melted rock to a number of dull, 
colorless scales caught in nooks, along with other detritus. He even 
stepped upon a sharp object that, when he bent to examine it, proved to 
be a fragment of a green dragon egg. 
 
 On the eastern face of the monolith stood the tallest tower, in the cen-
ter of which, like a black pit turned on its side, was the largest cave. It 
was there that Eragon finally beheld Saphira, curled in a hollow against 
the far wall, her back to the opening. Tremors ran her length. The walls 
of the cave bore fresh scorch marks, and the piles of brittle bones were 
scattered about as if from a fight. 
 
 “Saphira,” said Eragon, speaking out loud since her mind was closed to 
him. 
 
 Her head whipped up, and she stared at him as if he were a stranger, 
her pupils contracting to thin black slits as her eyes adjusted to the light 
from the setting sun behind him. She snarled once, like a feral dog, and 
then twisted away. As she did, she lifted her left wing and exposed a 

 
421
long, ragged gash along her upper thigh. His heart caught at the sight. 
 
 Eragon knew that she would not let him approach, so he did as Oromis 
had with Glaedr; he knelt among the crushed bones and waited. He 
waited without word or motion until his legs were numb and his hands 
were stiff with cold. Yet he did not resent the discomfort. He paid the 
price gladly if it meant he could help Saphira. 
 
 After a time, she said, I have been a fool. 
 
 We are all fools sometimes. 
 
 That makes it no easier when it is your turn to play dunce. 
 
 I suppose not. 
 
 I have always known what to do. When Garrow died, I knew it was the 
right thing to pursue the Ra’zac. When Brom died, I knew that we should go 
to Gil’ead and thence to the Varden. And when Ajihad died, I knew that 
you should pledge yourself to Nasuada. The path has always been clear to 
me. Except now. In this issue alone, I am lost. 
 
 What is it, Saphira? 
 
 Instead of answering, she turned the subject and said, Do you know why 
this is called the Stone of Broken Eggs? 
 
 No. 
 
 Because during the war between dragons and elves, the elves tracked us to 
this location and killed us while we slept. They tore apart our nests, then 
shattered our eggs with their magic. That day, it rained blood in the forest 
below. No dragon has lived here since. 
 
 Eragon remained silent. That was not why he was here. He would wait 
until she could bring herself to address the situation at hand. 
 
 Say something! demanded Saphira. 
 
 Will you let me heal your leg? 
 
 Leave well enough alone. 
 
 Then I shall remain as mute as a statue and sit here until I turn to dust, 

 
422
for I have the patience of a dragon from you. 
 
 When they came, her words were halting, bitter, and self-mocking: It 
shames me to admit it. When we first came here and I saw Glaedr, I felt 
such joy that another member of my race survived besides Shruikan. I had 
never even seen another dragon before, except in Brom’s memories. And I 
thought... I thought that Glaedr would be as pleased by my existence as I 
was by his. 
 
 But he was. 
 
 You don’t understand. I thought that he would be the mate I never ex-
pected to have and that together we could rebuild our race. She snorted, 
and a burst of flame escaped her nostrils. I was mistaken. He does not 
want me. 
 
 Eragon chose his response with care to avoid offending her and to pro-
vide a modicum of comfort. That’s because he knows you are destined for 
someone else: one of the two remaining eggs. Nor would it be proper for him 
to mate with you when he is your mentor. 
 
 Or perhaps he does not find me comely enough. 
 
 Saphira, no dragon is ugly, and you are the fairest of dragons. 
 
 I am a fool, she said. But she raised her left wing and kept it in the air as 
permission for him to tend to her injury. 
 
 Eragon limped to Saphira’s side, where he examined the crimson 
wound, glad that Oromis had given him so many scrolls on anatomy to 
read. The blow—by claw or tooth, he was not sure—had torn the quad-
riceps muscle beneath Saphira’s hide, but not so much as to bare the 
bone. Merely closing the surface of the wound, as Eragon had done so 
many times, would not be enough. The muscle had to be knitted back 
together. 
 
 The spell Eragon used was long and complex, and even he did not un-
derstand all its parts, for he had memorized it from an ancient text that 
offered little explanation beyond the statement that, given no bones were 
broken and the internal organs were whole, “this charm will heal any ail-
ment of violent origins, excepting that of grim death.” Once he uttered it, 
Eragon watched with fascination as Saphira’s muscle writhed beneath his 
hand—veins, nerves, and fibers weaving together—and became whole 
once more. The wound was big enough that, in his weakened state, he 

 
423
dared not heal it with just the energy from his body, so he drew upon 
Saphira’s strength as well. 
 
 It itches, said Saphira when he finished. 
 
 Eragon sighed and leaned his back against the rough basalt, looking at 
the sunset through his eyelashes. I fear that you will have to carry me off 
this rock. I’m too tired to move. 
 
 With a dry rustle, she twisted in place and laid her head on the bones 
beside him. I have treated you poorly ever since we came to Ellesméra. I ig-
nored your advice when I should have listened. You warned me about 
Glaedr, but I was too proud to see the truth in your words.... I have failed to 
be a good companion for you, betrayed what it means to be a dragon, and 
tarnished the honor of the Riders. 
 
 No, never that, he said vehemently. Saphira, you haven’t failed your 
duty. You may have made a mistake, but it was an honest one, and one 
that anyone might have committed in your position. 
 
 That does not excuse my behavior toward you. 
 
 He tried to meet her eye, but she avoided his gaze until he touched her 
upon the neck and said, Saphira, family members forgive one another, even 
if they don’t always understand why someone acts in a certain way.... You 
are as much my family as Roran—more. Nothing you can do will ever 
change that. Nothing. When she did not respond, he reached behind her 
jaw and tickled the patch of leathery skin below one of her ears. Do you 
hear me, eh? Nothing! 
 
 She coughed low in her throat with reluctant amusement, then arched 
her neck and lifted her head to escape his dancing fingers. How can I face 
Glaedr again? He was in a terrible rage.... The entire stone shook with the 
force of his anger. 
 
 At least you held your own when he attacked you. 
 
 It was the other way around. 
 
 Caught by surprise, Eragon raised his eyebrows. Well, in any case, the 
only thing to do is to apologize. 
 
 Apologize! 
 

 
424
 Aye. Go tell him that you are sorry, that this won’t happen again, and 
that you want to continue your training with him. I’m sure he will be sym-
pathetic if you give him the chance. 
 
 Very well, she said in a low voice. 
 
 You’ll feel better once you do. He grinned. I know from experience. 
 
 She grunted and padded to the edge of the cave, where she crouched 
and surveyed the rolling forest. We should go. Soon it will be dark. Grit-
ting his teeth, he forced himself upright—every movement costing him 
effort—and climbed onto her back, taking twice the time he usually did. 
Eragon?... Thank you for coming. I know what you risked with your back. 
 
 He patted her on the shoulder. Are we one again? 
 
 We are one. 
 
 
 
 

 
425
THE GIFT OF DRAGONS 
 
 
 The days leading up to the Agaetí Blödhren were the best and worst of 
times for Eragon. His back troubled him more than ever, battering down 
his health and endurance and destroying his calm of mind; he lived in 
constant fear of triggering an episode. Yet, in contrast, he and Saphira had 
never been so close. They lived as much in each other’s minds as in their 
own. And every now and then Arya would visit the tree house and walk 
through Ellesméra with Eragon and Saphira. She never came alone, 
though, always bringing either Orik or Maud the werecat. 
 
 Over the course of their wanderings, Arya introduced Eragon and 
Saphira to elves of distinction: great warriors, poets, and artists. She took 
them to concerts held under the thatched pines. And she showed them 
many hidden wonders of Ellesméra. 
 
 Eragon seized every opportunity to talk with her. He told her about his 
upbringing in Palancar Valley, about Roran, Garrow, and his aunt Marian, 
stories of Sloan, Ethlbert, and the other villagers, and his love of the 
mountains surrounding Carvahall and the flaming sheets of light that 
adorned the winter sky at night. He told her about the time a vixen fell 
into Gedric’s tanning vats and had to be fished out with a net. He told 
her about the joy he found in planting a crop, weeding and nurturing it, 
and watching the tender green shoots grow under his care—a joy that he 
knew she, of all people, could appreciate. 
 
 In turn, Eragon gleaned occasional insights into her own life. He heard 
mentions of her childhood, her friends and family, and her experiences 
among the Varden, which she spoke about most freely, describing raids 
and battles she participated in, treaties she helped to negotiate, her dis-
putes with the dwarves, and the momentous events she witnessed during 
her tenure as ambassador. 
 
 Between her and Saphira, a measure of peace entered Eragon’s heart, 
but it was a precarious balance that the slightest influence might disrupt. 
Time itself was an enemy, for Arya was destined to leave Du Welden-
varden after the Agaetí Blödhren. Thus, Eragon treasured his moments 
with her and dreaded the arrival of the forthcoming celebration. 
 
 The entire city bustled with activity as the elves prepared for the 
Agaetí Blödhren. Eragon had never seen them so excited before. They 
decorated the forest with colored bunting and lanterns, especially around 
the Menoa tree, while the tree itself was adorned with a lantern upon the 

 
426
tip of each branch, where they hung like glowing teardrops. Even the 
plants, Eragon noticed, took on a festive appearance with a collection of 
bright new flowers. He often heard the elves singing to them late at night. 
 
 Each day hundreds of elves arrived in Ellesméra from their cities scat-
tered throughout the woods, for no elf would willingly miss the centen-
nial observance of their treaty with the dragons. Eragon guessed that 
many of them also came to meet Saphira. It seems as if I do nothing but 
repeat their greeting, he thought. The elves who were absent because of 
their responsibilities would hold their own festivities simultaneously and 
would participate in the ceremonies at Ellesméra by scrying through en-
chanted mirrors that displayed the likeness of those watching, so that no 
one felt as if they were being spied upon. 
 
 A week before the Agaetí Blödhren, when Eragon and Saphira were 
about to return to their quarters from the Crags of Tel’naeír, Oromis said, 
“You should both think about what you can bring to the Blood-oath 
Celebration. Unless your creations require magic to make or to function, 
I suggest that you avoid using gramarye. No one will respect your work if 
it’s the product of a spell and not of your own hands. I also suggest you 
each make a separate piece. That too is custom.” 
 
 In the air, Eragon asked Saphira, Do you have any ideas? 
 
 I might have one. But if you don’t mind, I’d like to see if it works before I 
tell you. He caught part of an image from her of a bare knuckle of stone 
protruding from the forest floor before she concealed it from him. 
 
 He grinned. Won’t you give me a hint? 
 
 Fire. Lots of fire. 
 
 Back in their tree house, Eragon cataloged his skills and thought, I know 
more about farming than anything else, but I don’t see how I can turn that 
to my advantage. Nor can I hope to compete with the elves with magic or 
match their accomplishments with the crafts I am familiar with. Their tal-
ent exceeds that of the finest artisans in the Empire. 
 
 But you possess one quality that no one else does, said Saphira. 
 
 Oh? 
 
 Your identity. Your history, deeds, and situation. Use those to shape your 
creation and you will produce something unique. Whatever you make, base 

 
427
it upon that which is most important to you. Only then will it have depth 
and meaning, and only then will it resonate with others. 
 
 He looked at her with surprise. I never realized that you knew so much 
about art. 
 
 I don’t, she said. You forget I spent an afternoon watching Oromis paint 
his scrolls while you flew with Glaedr. Oromis discussed the topic quite a 
bit. 
 
 Ah, yes. I had forgotten. 
 
 After Saphira left to pursue her project, Eragon paced along the edge of 
the open portal in the bedroom, pondering what she had said. What’s im-
portant to me? he asked himself. Saphira and Arya, of course, and being a 
good Rider, but what can I say about those subjects that isn’t blindingly ob-
vious? I appreciate beauty in nature, but, again, the elves have already ex-
pressed everything possible on that topic. Ellesméra itself is a monument to 
their devotion. He turned his gaze inward and scrutinized himself to de-
termine what struck the deepest, darkest chords within him. What 
stirred him with enough passion—of either love or hate—that he burned 
to share it with others? 
 
 Three things presented themselves to him: his injury at the hands of 
Durza, his fear of one day fighting Galbatorix, and the elves’ epics that so 
engrossed him. 
 
 A rush of excitement flared within Eragon as a story combining those 
elements took form in his mind. Light on his feet, he ran up the twisting 
stairs—two at a time—to the study, where he sat before the writing 
desk, dipped quill in ink, and held it trembling over a pale sheet of paper. 
 
 The nib rasped as he made the first stroke: 
 
 
 In the kingdom by the sea, 
 
 In the mountains mantled blue... 
 
 
 The words flowed from his pen seemingly of their own accord. He felt 
as if he were not inventing his tale, but merely acting as a conduit to 
transport it fully formed into the world. Having never composed a work 
of his own before, Eragon was gripped by the thrill of discovery that ac-

 
428
companies new ventures—especially since, previously, he had not sus-
pected that he might enjoy being a bard. 
 
 He labored in a frenzy, not stopping for bread or drink, his tunic 
sleeves rolled past his elbows to protect them from the ink flicked from 
his quill by the wild force of his writing. So intense was his concentra-
tion, he heard nothing but the beat of his poem, saw nothing but the 
empty paper, and thought of nothing but the phrases etched in lines of 
fire behind his eyes. 
 
 An hour and a half later, he dropped the quill from his cramped hand, 
pushed his chair away from the desk, and stood. Fourteen pages lay be-
fore him. It was the most he had ever written at one time. Eragon knew 
that his poem could not match those of the elves’ and dwarves’ great au-
thors, but he hoped it was honest enough that the elves would not laugh 
at his effort. 
 
 He recited the poem to Saphira when she returned. Afterward, she 
said, Ah, Eragon, you have changed much since we left Palancar Valley. 
You would not recognize the untested boy who first set out for vengeance, I 
think. That Eragon could not have written a lay after the style of the elves. I 
look forward to seeing who you become in the next fifty or a hundred years. 
 
 He smiled. If I live that long. 
 
   
 
 “Rough but true,” was what Oromis said when Eragon read him the 
poem. 
 
 “Then you like it?” 
 
 “’Tis a good portrait of your mental state at the present and an engaging 
read, but no masterpiece. Did you expect it to be?” 
 
 “I suppose not.” 
 
 “However, I am surprised that you can give voice to it in this tongue. 
No barrier exists to writing fiction in the ancient language. The difficulty 
arises when one attempts to speak it, for that would require you to tell 
untruths, which the magic will not allow.” 
 
 “I can say it,” replied Eragon, “because I believe it’s true.” 
 

 
429
 “And that gives your writing far more power.... I am impressed, Eragon-
finiarel. Your poem will be a worthy addition to the Blood-oath Celebra-
tion.” Raising a finger, Oromis reached within his robe and gave Eragon a 
scroll tied shut with ribbon. “Inscribed on that paper are nine wards I 
want you to place about yourself and the dwarf Orik. As you discovered 
at Sílthrim, our festivities are potent and not for those with constitutions 
weaker than ours. Unprotected, you risk losing yourself in the web of our 
magic. I have seen it happen. Even with these precautions, you must take 
care you are not swayed by fancies wafted on the breeze. Be on your 
guard, for during this time, we elves are apt to go mad—wonderfully, 
gloriously mad, but mad all the same.” 
 
 
 
 
 On the eve of the Agaetí Blödhren—which was to last three days—
Eragon, Saphira, and Orik accompanied Arya to the Menoa tree, where a 
host of elves were assembled, their black and silver hair flickering in the 
lamplight. Islanzadí stood upon a raised root at the base of the trunk, as 
tall, pale, and fair as a birch tree. Blagden roosted on the queen’s left 
shoulder, while Maud, the werecat, lurked behind her. Glaedr was there, 
as well as Oromis garbed in red and black, and other elves Eragon recog-
nized, such as Lifaen and Narí and, to his distaste, Vanir. Overhead, the 
stars glittered in the velvet sky. 
 
 “Wait here,” said Arya. She slipped through the crowd and returned 
leading Rhunön. The smith blinked like an owl at her surroundings. Er-
agon greeted her, and she nodded to him and Saphira. “Well met, Bright 
scales and Shadeslayer.” Then she spied Orik and addressed him in Dwar-
vish, to which Orik replied with enthusiasm, obviously delighted to con-
verse with someone in the rough speech of his native land. 
 
 “What did she say?” asked Eragon, bending down. 
 
 “She invited me to her home to view her work and discuss metal work-
ing.” Awe crossed Orik’s face. “Eragon, she first learned her craft from 
Fûthark himself, one of the legendary grimstborithn of Dûrgrimst Ingei-
tum! What I would give to have met him.” 
 
 Together they waited until the stroke of midnight, when Islanzadí 
raised her bare left arm so that it pointed toward the new moon like a 
marble spear. A soft white orb gathered itself above her palm from the 
light emitted by the lanterns that dotted the Menoa tree. Then Islanzadí 
walked along the root to the massive trunk and placed the orb in a hol-

 
430
low in the bark, where it remained, pulsing. 
 
 Eragon turned to Arya. “Is it begun?” 
 
 “It is begun!” She laughed. “And it will end when the werelight expends 
itself.” 
 
 The elves divided themselves into informal camps throughout the for-
est and clearing that encircled the Menoa tree. Seemingly out of nowhere, 
they produced tables laden high with fantastic dishes, which from their 
unearthly appearance were as much the result of the spellweavers’ 
handiwork as the cooks’. 
 
 Then the elves began to sing in their clear, flutelike voices. They sang 
many songs, yet each was but part of a larger melody that wove an en-
chantment over the dreamy night, heightening senses, removing inhibi-
tions, and burnishing the revels with fey magic. Their verses concerned 
heroic deeds and quests by ship and horse to forgotten lands and the sor-
row of lost beauty. The throbbing music enveloped Eragon, and he felt a 
wild abandon take hold of him, a desire to run free of his life and dance 
through elven glades forever more. Beside him, Saphira hummed along 
with the tune, her glazed eyes lidded halfway. 
 
 What transpired afterward, Eragon was never able to adequately recall. 
It was as if he had a fever and faded in and out of consciousness. He 
could remember certain incidents with vivid clarity—bright, pungent 
flashes filled with merriment—but it was beyond him to reconstruct the 
order in which they occurred. He lost track of whether it was day or 
night, for no matter the time, dusk seemed to pervade the forest. Nor 
could he ever say if he had slumbered, or needed sleep, during the cele-
bration.... 
 
   
 
 He remembered spinning in circles while holding the hands of an elf-
maid with cherry lips, the taste of honey on his tongue and the smell of 
juniper in the air.... 
 
   
 
 He remembered elves perched on the outstretched branches of the 
Menoa tree, like a flock of starlings. They strummed golden harps and 
called riddles to Glaedr below and, now and then, pointed a finger at the 
sky, whereupon a burst of colored embers would appear in various 

 
431
shapes before fading away.... 
 
   
 
 He remembered sitting in a dell, propped against Saphira, and watching 
the same elf-maid sway before a rapt audience while she sang: 
 
 
 Away, away, you shall fly away, 
 
 O’er the peaks and vales 
 
 To the lands beyond. 
 
 Away, away, you shall fly away, 
 
 And never return to me. 
 
 
 Gone! Gone you shall be from me, 
 
 And I will never see you again. 
 
 Gone! Gone you shall be from me, 
 
 Though I wait for you evermore. 
 
 
 He remembered endless poems, some mournful, others joyful—most 
both. He heard Arya’s poem in full and thought it fine indeed, and Islan-
zadí’s, which was longer but of equal merit. All the elves gathered to lis-
ten to those two works.... 
 
   
 
 He remembered the wonders the elves had made for the celebration, 
many of which he would have deemed impossible beforehand, even with 
the assistance of magic. Puzzles and toys, art and weapons, and items 
whose function escaped him. One elf had charmed a glass ball so that 
every few seconds a different flower bloomed within its heart. Another 
elf had spent decades traveling Du Weldenvarden and memorizing the 
sounds of the elements, the most beautiful of which he now played from 
the throats of a hundred white lilies. 
 

 
432
 Rhunön contributed a shield that would not break, a pair of gloves 
woven from steel thread that allowed the wearer to handle molten lead 
and other such items without harm, and a delicate sculpture of a wren in 
flight chiseled from a solid block of metal and painted with such skill 
that the bird seemed alive. 
 
 A tiered wood pyramid eight inches high and constructed of fifty-eight 
interlocking pieces was Orik’s offering, much to the elves’ delight, who 
insisted upon disassembling and reassembling the pyramid as often as he 
would allow. “Master Longbeard,” they called him, and said, “Clever fin-
gers mean a clever mind.”... 
 
 He remembered Oromis pulling him aside, away from the music, and 
asking the elf, “What’s wrong?” 
 
 “You need to clear your mind.” Oromis guided him to a fallen log and 
had him sit. “Stay here for a few minutes. You will feel better.” 
 
 “I’m fine. I don’t need to rest,” protested Eragon. 
 
 “You are in no position to judge yourself right now. Stay here until you 
can list the spells of changing, great and minor, and then you may rejoin 
us. Promise me this.”... 
 
   
 
 He remembered creatures dark and strange, drifting in from the depths 
of the forest. The majority were animals who had been altered by the ac-
cumulated spells in Du Weldenvarden and were now drawn to the 
Agaetí Blödhren as a starving man is drawn to food. They seemed to find 
nourishment in the presence of the elves’ magic. Most dared reveal them-
selves only as pairs of glowing eyes on the outskirts of the lantern light. 
One animal that did expose itself was the she-wolf—in the form of a 
white-robed woman—that Eragon had encountered before. She lurked 
behind a dogwood bush, dagger teeth bared in an amused grin, her yellow 
eyes darting from point to point. 
 
 But not all the creatures were animals. Some few were elves who had 
altered their original forms for functionality or in pursuit of a different 
ideal of beauty. An elf covered in brindled fur leaped over Eragon and 
continued to gambol about, as often on all fours as on his feet. His head 
was narrow and elongated with ears like a cat, his arms hung to his knees, 
and his long-fingered hands had rough pads on the palm. 
 

 
433
 Later, two identical elf women presented themselves to Saphira. They 
moved with languid grace and, when they touched their hands to their 
lips in the traditional greeting, Eragon saw that their fingers were joined 
by translucent webbing. “We have come far,” they whispered. As they 
spoke, three rows of gills pulsed on each side of their slender necks, ex-
posing pink flesh underneath. Their skin glistened as if with oil. Their 
lank hair hung past their narrow shoulders. 
 
 He met an elf armored in imbricated scales like a dragon, with a bony 
crest upon his head, a line of spikes that ran down his back, and two pal-
lid flames that ever flickered in the pits of his flared nostrils. 
 
 And he met others who were not so recognizable: elves whose outlines 
wavered as if seen through water; elves who, when motionless, were in-
distinguishable from trees; tall elves with eyes of black, even where the 
whites should have been, who possessed an awful beauty that frightened 
Eragon and, when they chanced to touch something, passed through it 
like shadows. 
 
 The ultimate example of this phenomenon was the Menoa tree, which 
was once the elf Linnëa. The tree seemed to quicken with life at the ac-
tivity in the clearing. Its branches stirred, though no breeze touched 
them, at times the creaks of its trunk could be heard to match the flow 
of music, and an air of gentle benevolence emanated from the tree and 
lay upon those in the vicinity.... 
 
   
 
 And he remembered two attacks from his back, screaming and groan-
ing in the shadows while the mad elves continued their revels around 
him and only Saphira came to guard over him.... 
 
   
 
 On the third day of the Agaetí Blödhren, or so Eragon later learned, he 
delivered his verses to the elves. He stood and said, “I am no smith, nor 
skilled at carving or weaving or pottery or painting or any of the arts. Nor 
can I rival your accomplishments with spells. Thus, all that remains to 
me are my own experiences, which I have attempted to interpret 
through the lens of a story, though I am also no bard.” Then, in the man-
ner that Brom had performed lays in Carvahall, Eragon chanted: 
 
 
 In the kingdom by the sea, 

 
434
 
 In the mountains mantled blue, 
 
 On frigid winter’s final day 
 
 Was born a man with but one task: 
 
 
 To kill the foe in Durza, 
 
 In the land of shadows. 
 
 
 Nurtured by the kind and wise 
 
 Under oaks as old as time, 
 
 He ran with deer and wrestled bears, 
 
 And from his elders learned the skills, 
 
 
 To kill the foe in Durza, 
 
 In the land of shadows. 
 
 
 Taught to spy the thief in black 
 
 When he grabs the weak and strong; 
 
 To block his blows and fight the fiend 
 
 With rag and rock and plant and bone; 
 
 
 And kill the foe in Durza, 
 
 In the land of shadows. 
 
 
 Quick as thought, the years did turn, 
 
 ’Til the man had come of age, 

 
435
 
 His body burned with fevered rage, 
 
 While youth’s impatience seared his veins. 
 
 
 Then he met a maiden fair, 
 
 Who was tall and strong and wise, 
 
 Her brow adorned with Gëda’s Light, 
 
 Which shone upon her trailing gown. 
 
 
 In her eyes of midnight blue, 
 
 In those enigmatic pools, 
 
 Appeared to him a future bright, 
 
 Together, where they would not have 
 
 
 To fear the foe in Durza, 
 
 In the land of shadows. 
 
 
 So Eragon told of how the man voyaged to the land of Durza, where he 
found and fought the foe, despite the cold terror within his heart. Yet 
though at last he triumphed, the man withheld the fatal blow, for now 
that he had defeated his enemy, he did not fear the doom of mortals. He 
did not need to kill the foe in Durza. Then the man sheathed his sword 
and returned home and wed his love on summer’s eve. With her, he 
spent his many days content until his beard was long and white. But: 
 
 
 In the dark before the dawn, 
 
 In the room where slept the man, 
 
 The foe, he crept and loomed above 
 

 
436
 His mighty rival now so weak. 
 
 
 From his pillow did the man 
 
 Raise his head and gaze upon 
 
 The cold and empty face of Death, 
 
 The king of everlasting night. 
 
 
 Calm acceptance filled the man’s 
 
 Aged heart; for long ago, 
 
 He’d lost all fear of Death’s embrace, 
 
 The last embrace a man will know. 
 
 
 Gentle as a morning breeze, 
 
 Bent the foe and from the man 
 
 His glowing, pulsing spirit took, 
 
 And thence in peace they went to dwell, 
 
 Forevermore in Durza, 
 
 In the land of shadows. 
 
 
 Eragon fell quiet and, conscious of the eyes upon him, ducked his head 
and quickly found his seat. He felt embarrassed that he had revealed so 
much of himself. 
 
 The elf lord, Däthedr, said, “You underestimate yourself, Shadeslayer. It 
seems that you have discovered a new talent.” 
 
 Islanzadí raised one pale hand. “Your work shall be added to the great 
library in Tialdarí Hall, Eragon-finiarel, so that all who wish can appreci-
ate it. Though your poem is allegory, I believe that it has helped many of 

 
437
us to better understand the hardships you have faced since Saphira’s egg 
appeared to you, for which we are, in no small way, responsible. You 
must read it to us again so we may think upon this further.” 
 
 Pleased, Eragon bowed his head and did as she commanded. Afterward 
was time for Saphira to present her work to the elves. She flew off into 
the night and returned with a black stone thrice the size of a large man 
clutched in her talons. Landing on her hind legs, she placed the stone up-
right in the middle of the bare greensward, in full view of everyone. The 
glossy rock had been melted and somehow molded into intricate curves 
that wound about each other, like frozen waves. The striated tongues of 
rock twisted in such convoluted patterns that the eye had difficulty fol-
lowing a single piece from base to tip, but rather flitted from one coil to 
the next. 
 
 As it was his first time seeing the sculpture, Eragon gazed at it with as 
much interest as the elves. How did you make this? 
 
 Saphira’s eyes twinkled with amusement. By licking the molten rock. 
Then she bent and breathed fire long upon the stone, bathing it in a 
golden pillar that ascended toward the stars and clawed at them with lu-
cent fingers. When Saphira closed her jaws, the paper-thin edges of the 
sculpture glowed cherry red, while small flames flickered in the dark hol-
lows and recesses throughout the rock. The flowing strands of rock 
seemed to move under the hypnotic light. 
 
 The elves exclaimed with wonder, clapping their hands and dancing 
about the piece. An elf cried, “Well wrought, Brightscales!” 
 
 It’s beautiful, said Eragon. 
 
 Saphira touched him on the arm with her nose. Thank you, little one. 
 
 Then Glaedr brought out his offering: a slab of red oak that he had 
carved with the point of one talon into a likeness of Ellesméra as seen 
from high above. And Oromis revealed his contribution: the completed 
scroll that Eragon had often watched him illustrate during their lessons. 
Along the top half of the scroll marched columns of glyphs—a copy of 
“The Lay of Vestarí the Mariner”—while along the bottom half ran a 
panorama of a fantastic landscape, rendered with breathtaking artistry, 
detail, and skill. 
 
 Arya took Eragon’s hand then and drew him through the forest and 
toward the Menoa tree, where she said, “Look how the werelight dims. 

 
438
We have but a few hours left to us before dawn arrives and we must re-
turn to the world of cold reason.” 
 
 Around the tree, the host of elves gathered, their faces bright with ea-
ger anticipation. With great dignity, Islanzadí emerged from within their 
midst and walked along a root as wide as a pathway until it angled up-
ward and doubled back on itself. She stood upon the gnarled shelf over-
looking the slender, waiting elves. “As is our custom, and as was agreed 
upon at the end of The Dragon War by Queen Tarmunora, the first Er-
agon, and the white dragon who represented his race—he whose name 
cannot be uttered in this or any language—when they bound the fates of 
elves and dragons together, we have met to honor our blood-oath with 
song and dance and the fruits of our labor. Last this celebration occurred, 
many long years ago, our situation was desperate indeed. It has improved 
somewhat since, the result of our efforts, the dwarves’, and the Varden’s, 
though Alagaësia still lies under the black shadow of the Wyrdfell and 
we must still live with our shame of how we have failed the dragons. 
 
 “Of the Riders of eld, only Oromis and Glaedr remain. Brom and many 
others entered the void this past century. However, new hope has been 
granted to us in the form of Eragon and Saphira, and it is only right and 
proper that they should be here now, as we reaffirm the oath between 
our races three.” 
 
 At the queen’s signal, the elves cleared a wide expanse at the base of 
the Menoa tree. Around the perimeter, they staked a ring of lanterns 
mounted upon carved poles, while musicians with flutes, harps, and 
drums assembled along the ridge of one long root. Guided by Arya to the 
edge of the circle, Eragon found himself seated between her and Oromis, 
while Saphira and Glaedr crouched on either side of them like gem-
studded bluffs. 
 
 To Eragon and Saphira, Oromis said, “Watch you carefully, for this is of 
great importance to your heritage as Riders.” 
 
 When all the elves were settled, two elf-maids walked to the center of 
the space in the host and stood with their backs to each other. They were 
exceedingly beautiful and identical in every respect, except for their hair: 
one had tresses as black as a forgotten pool, while the other’s hair 
gleamed like burnished silver wire. 
 
 “The Caretakers, Iduna and Nëya,” whispered Oromis. 
 
 From Islanzadí’s shoulder, Blagden shrieked, “Wyrda!” 

 
439
 
 Moving in unison, the two elves raised their hands to the brooches at 
their throats, unclasped them, and allowed their white robes to fall away. 
Though they wore no garments, the women were clad in an iridescent 
tattoo of a dragon. The tattoo began with the dragon’s tail wrapped 
around the left ankle of Iduna, continued up her leg and thigh, over her 
torso, and then across Nëya’s back, ending with the dragon’s head on 
Nëya’s chest. Every scale on the dragon was inked a different color; the 
vibrant hues gave the tattoo the appearance of a rainbow. 
 
 The elf-maids twined their hands and arms together so that the dragon 
appeared to be a continuous whole, rippling from one body to the next 
without interruption. Then they each lifted a bare foot and brought it 
down on the packed ground with a soft thump. 
 
 And again: thump. 
 
 On the third thump, the musicians struck their drums in rhythm. A 
thump later, the harpists plucked the strings of their gilt instruments, and 
a moment after that, those elves with flutes joined the throbbing melody. 
 
 Slowly at first, but with gathering speed, Iduna and Nëya began to 
dance, marking time with the stamp of their feet on the dirt and undulat-
ing so that it was not they who seemed to move but the dragon upon 
them. Round and round they went, and the dragon flew endless circles 
across their skin. 
 
 Then the twins added their voices to the music, building upon the 
pounding beat with their fierce cries, their lyrics verses of a spell so com-
plex that its meaning escaped Eragon. Like the rising wind that precedes 
a storm, the elves accompanied the incantation, singing with one tongue 
and one mind and one intent. Eragon did not know the words but found 
himself mouthing them along with the elves, swept along by the inexo-
rable cadence. He heard Saphira and Glaedr hum in concordance, a deep 
pulse so strong that it vibrated within his bones and made his skin tingle 
and the air shimmer. 
 
 Faster and faster spun Iduna and Nëya until their feet were a dusty blur 
and their hair fanned about them and they glistened with a film of sweat. 
The elf-maids accelerated to an inhuman speed and the music climaxed 
in a frenzy of chanted phrases. Then a flare of light ran the length of the 
dragon tattoo, from head to tail, and the dragon stirred. At first Eragon 
thought his eyes had deceived him, until the creature blinked, raised his 
wings, and clenched his talons. 

 
440
 
 A burst of flame erupted from the dragon’s maw and he lunged for-
ward and pulled himself free of the elves’ skin, climbing into the air, 
where he hovered, flapping his wings. The tip of his tail remained con-
nected to the twins below, like a glowing umbilical cord. The giant beast 
strained toward the black moon and loosed an untamed roar of ages past, 
then turned and surveyed the assembled elves. 
 
 As the dragon’s baleful eye fell upon him, Eragon knew that the crea-
ture was no mere apparition but a conscious being bound and sustained 
by magic. Saphira and Glaedr’s humming grew ever louder until it 
blocked all other sound from Eragon’s ears. Above, the specter of their 
race looped down over the elves, brushing them with an insubstantial 
wing. It came to a stop before Eragon, engulfing him in an endless, whirl-
ing gaze. Bidden by some instinct, Eragon raised his right hand, his palm 
tingling. 
 
 In his mind echoed a voice of fire: Our gift so you may do what you 
must. 
 
 The dragon bent his neck and, with his snout, touched the heart of Er-
agon’s gedwëy ignasia. A spark jumped between them, and Eragon went 
rigid as incandescent heat poured through his body, consuming his in-
sides. His vision flashed red and black, and the scar on his back burned as 
if branded. Fleeing to safety, he fell deep within himself, where darkness 
grasped him and he had not the strength to resist it. 
 
 Last, he again heard the voice of fire say, Our gift to you. 
 
 
 
 

 
441
IN A STARRY GLADE 
 
 
 Eragon was alone when he woke. 
 
 He opened his eyes to stare at the carved ceiling in the tree house he 
and Saphira shared. Outside, night still reigned and the sounds of the 
elves’ revels drifted from the glittering city below. 
 
 Before he noticed more than that, Saphira leaped into his mind, radiat-
ing concern and anxiety. An image passed to him of her standing beside 
Islanzadí at the Menoa tree, then she asked, How are you? 
 
 I feel... good. Better than I’ve felt in a long time. How long have I— 
 
 Only an hour. I would have stayed with you, but they needed Oromis, 
Glaedr, and me to complete the ceremony. You should have seen the elves’ 
reaction when you fainted. Nothing like this has occurred before. 
 
 Did you cause this, Saphira? 
 
 It was not my work alone, nor Glaedr’s. The memories of our race, which 
were given form and substance by the elves’ magic, anointed you with what 
skill we dragons possess, for you are our best hope to avoid extinction. 
 
 I don’t understand. 
 
 Look in a mirror, she suggested. Then rest and recover and I shall rejoin 
you at dawn. 
 
 She left, and Eragon got to his feet and stretched, amazed by the sense 
of well-being that pervaded him. Going to the wash closet, he retrieved 
the mirror he used for shaving and brought it into the light of a nearby 
lantern. 
 
 Eragon froze with surprise. 
 
 It was as if the numerous physical changes that, over time, alter the ap-
pearance of a human Rider—and which Eragon had already begun to ex-
perience since bonding with Saphira—had been completed while he was 
unconscious. His face was now as smooth and angled as an elf’s, with ears 
tapered like theirs and eyes slanted like theirs, and his skin was as pale as 
alabaster and seemed to emit a faint glow, as if with the sheen of magic. I 
look like a princeling. Eragon had never before applied the term to a man, 

 
442
least of all himself, but the only word that described him now was beau-
tiful. Yet he was not entirely an elf. His jaw was stronger, his brow 
thicker, his face broader. He was fairer than any human and more rugged 
than any elf. 
 
 With trembling fingers, Eragon reached around the nape of his neck in 
search of his scar. 
 
 He felt nothing. 
 
 Eragon tore off his tunic and twisted in front of the mirror to examine 
his back. It was as smooth as it had been before the battle of Farthen 
Dûr. Tears sprang to Eragon’s eyes as he slid his hand over the place 
where Durza had maimed him. He knew that his back would never 
trouble him again. 
 
 Not only was the savage blight he had elected to keep gone, but every 
other scar and blemish had vanished from his body, leaving him as un-
marked as a newborn babe. Eragon traced a line upon his wrist where he 
had cut himself while sharpening Garrow’s scythe. No evidence of the 
wound remained. The blotchy scars on the insides of his thighs, remnants 
from his first flight with Saphira, had also disappeared. For a moment, he 
missed them as a record of his life, but his regret was short-lived as he re-
alized that the damage from every injury he had ever suffered, no matter 
how small, had been repaired. 
 
 I have become what I was meant to be, he thought, and took a deep 
breath of the intoxicating air. 
 
 He dropped the mirror on the bed and garbed himself in his finest 
clothes: a crimson tunic stitched with gold thread; a belt studded with 
white jade; warm, felted leggings; a pair of the cloth boots favored by the 
elves; and upon his forearms, leather vambraces the dwarves had given 
him. 
 
 Descending from the tree, Eragon wandered the shadows of Ellesméra 
and observed the elves carousing in the fever of the night. None of them 
recognized him, though they greeted him as one of their own and invited 
him to share in their saturnalias. 
 
 Eragon floated in a state of heightened awareness, his senses thrumming 
with the multitude of new sights, sounds, smells, and feelings that as-
sailed him. He could see in darkness that would have blinded him before. 
He could touch a leaf and, by touch alone, count the individual hairs that 

 
443
grew upon it. He could identify the odors wafting about him as well as a 
wolf or a dragon. And he could hear the patter of mice in the underbrush 
and the noise a flake of bark makes as it falls to earth; the beating of his 
heart was as a drum to him. 
 
 His aimless path led him past the Menoa tree, where he paused to 
watch Saphira among the festivities, though he did not reveal himself to 
those in the glade. 
 
 Where go you, little one? she asked. 
 
 He saw Arya rise from her mother’s side, make her way through the 
gathered elves, and then, like a forest sprite, glide underneath the trees 
beyond. I walk between the candle and the dark, he replied, and followed 
Arya. 
 
 Eragon tracked Arya by her delicate scent of crushed pine needles, by 
the feathery touch of her foot upon the ground, and by the disturbance 
of her wake in the air. He found her standing alone on the edge of a 
clearing, poised like a wild creature as she watched the constellations 
turn in the sky above. 
 
 As Eragon emerged in the open, Arya looked at him, and he felt as if 
she saw him for the first time. Her eyes widened, and she whispered, “Is 
that you, Eragon?” 
 
 “Aye.” 
 
 “What have they done to you?” 
 
 “I know not.” 
 
 He went to her, and together they wandered the dense woods, which 
echoed with fragments of music and voices from the festivities. Changed 
as he was, Eragon was acutely conscious of Arya’s presence, of the whis-
per of her clothes over her skin, of the soft, pale exposure of her neck, 
and of her eyelashes, which were coated with a layer of oil that made 
them glisten and curl like black petals wet with rain. 
 
 They stopped on the bank of a narrow stream so clear, it was invisible 
in the faint light. The only thing that betrayed its presence was the 
throaty gurgle of water pouring over rocks. Around them, the thick pines 
formed a cave with their branches, hiding Eragon and Arya from the 
world and muffling the cool, still air. The hollow seemed ageless, as if it 

 
444
were removed from the world and protected by some magic against the 
withering breath of time. 
 
 In that secret place, Eragon felt suddenly close to Arya, and all his pas-
sion for her sprang to the fore of his mind. He was so intoxicated with 
the strength and vitality coursing through his veins—as well as the un-
tamed magic that filled the forest—he ignored caution and said, “How 
tall the trees, how bright the stars... and how beautiful you are, O Arya 
Svit-kona.” Under normal circumstances, he would have considered his 
deed the height of folly, but in that fey, madcap night, it seemed per-
fectly sane. 
 
 She stiffened. “Eragon...” 
 
 He ignored her warning. “Arya, I’ll do anything to win your hand. I 
would follow you to the ends of the earth. I would build a palace for you 
with nothing but my bare hands. I would—” 
 
 “Will you stop pursuing me? Can you promise me that?” When he 
hesitated, she stepped closer and said, low and gentle, “Eragon, this can-
not be. You are young and I am old, and that shall never change.” 
 
 “Do you feel nothing for me?” 
 
 “My feelings for you,” she said, “are those of a friend and nothing more. 
I am grateful to you for rescuing me from Gil’ead, and I find your com-
pany pleasant. That is all.... Relinquish this quest of yours—it will only 
bring you heartache—and find someone your own age to spend the long 
years with.” 
 
 His eyes brimmed with tears. “How can you be so cruel?” 
 
 “I am not cruel, but kind. You and I are not meant for each other.” 
 
 In desperation, he suggested, “You could give me your memories, and 
then I would have the same amount of experience and knowledge as 
you.” 
 
 “It would be an abomination.” Arya lifted her chin, her face grave and 
solemn and brushed with silver from the glimmering stars. A hint of steel 
entered her voice: “Hear me well, Eragon. This cannot, nor ever shall be. 
And until you master yourself, our friendship must cease to exist, for 
your emotions do nothing but distract us from our duty.” She bowed to 
him. “Goodbye, Eragon Shadeslayer.” Then she strode past and vanished 

 
445
into Du Weldenvarden. 
 
 Now the tears spilled down Eragon’s cheeks and dropped to the moss 
below, where they lay unabsorbed, like pearls strewn across a blanket of 
emerald velvet. Numb, Eragon sat upon a rotting log and buried his face 
in his hands, weeping that his affection for Arya was doomed to remain 
unrequited, and weeping that he had driven her further away. 
 
 Within moments, Saphira joined him. Oh, little one. She nuzzled him. 
Why did you have to inflict this upon yourself? You knew what would hap-
pen if you tried to woo Arya again. 
 
 I couldn’t stop myself. He wrapped his arms around his belly and rocked 
back and forth on the log, reduced to hiccuping sobs by the strength of 
his misery. Putting one warm wing over him, Saphira drew him close to 
her side, like a mother falcon with her offspring. He curled up against her 
and remained huddled there as night passed into day and the Agaetí 
Blödhren came to an end. 
 
 

 
446
LANDFALL 
 
 
 Roran stood upon the poop deck of the Red Boar, his arms crossed over 
his chest and his feet planted wide apart to steady himself on the rolling 
barge. The salty wind ruffled his hair and tugged at his thick beard and 
tickled the hairs on his bare forearms. 
 
 Beside him, Clovis manned the tiller. The weathered sailor pointed to-
ward the coastline at a seagull-covered rock silhouetted on the crest of a 
rolling hill that extended into the ocean. “Teirm be right on the far side 
of that peak.” 
 
 Roran squinted into the afternoon sun, which reflected off the ocean in 
a blindingly bright band. “We’ll stop here for now, then.” 
 
 “You don’t want to go on into the city yet?” 
 
 “Not all of us at once. Call over Torson and Flint and have them run 
the barges up on that shore. It looks like a good place to camp.” 
 
 Clovis grimaced. “Arrgh. I was hoping t’ get a hot meal tonight.” Roran 
understood; the fresh food from Narda had long since been eaten, leaving 
them with naught but salt pork, salted herring, salted cabbage, sea bis-
cuits the villagers had made from their purchased flour, pickled vegeta-
bles, and the occasional fresh meat when the villagers slaughtered one of 
their few remaining animals or managed to catch game when they landed. 
 
 Clovis’s rough voice echoed over the water as he shouted to the skip-
pers of the other two barges. When they drew near, he ordered them to 
pull ashore, much to their vociferous displeasure. They and the other 
sailors had counted on reaching Teirm that day and lavishing their pay on 
the city’s delights. 
 
 After the barges were beached, Roran walked among the villagers and 
helped them by pitching tents here and there, unloading equipment, 
fetching water from a nearby stream, and otherwise lending his assistance 
until everyone was settled. He paused to give Morn and Tara a word of 
encouragement, for they appeared despondent, and received a guarded 
response in turn. The tavern owner and his wife had been aloof to him 
ever since they left Palancar Valley. On the whole, the villagers were in 
better condition than when they arrived at Narda due to the rest they 
had garnered on the barges, but constant worry and exposure to the harsh 
elements had prevented them from recuperating as well as Roran hoped. 

 
447
 
 “Stronghammer, will you sup at our tent tonight?” asked Thane, coming 
up to Roran. 
 
 Roran declined with as much grace as he could and turned to find him-
self confronted by Felda, whose husband, Byrd, had been murdered by 
Sloan. She bobbed a quick curtsy, then said, “May I speak with you, Ro-
ran Garrowsson?” 
 
 He smiled at her. “Always, Felda. You know that.” 
 
 “Thank you.” With a furtive expression, she fingered the tassels that 
edged her shawl and glanced toward her tent. “I would ask a favor of you. 
It’s about Mandel—” Roran nodded; he had chosen her eldest son to ac-
company him into Narda on that fateful trip when he killed the two 
guards. Mandel had performed admirably then, as well as in the weeks 
since while he crewed the Edeline and learned what he could about pilot-
ing the barges. “He’s become quite friendly with the sailors on our barge 
and he’s started playing dice with those lawless men. Not for money—we 
have none—but for small things. Things we need.” 
 
 “Have you asked him to stop?” 
 
 Felda twisted the tassels. “I fear that, since his father died, he no longer 
respects me as he once did. He has grown wild and willful.” 
 
 We have all grown wild, thought Roran. “And what would you have me 
do about it?” he asked gently. 
 
 “You have ever dealt generously with Mandel. He admires you. If you 
talk with him, he will listen.” 
 
 Roran considered the request, then said, “Very well, I will do what I 
can.” Felda sagged with relief. “Tell me, though, what has he lost at dice?” 
 
 “Food mostly.” Felda hesitated and then added, “But I know he once 
risked my grandmother’s bracelet for a rabbit those men snared.” 
 
 Roran frowned. “Put your heart at ease, Felda. I will tend to the matter 
as soon as I can.” 
 
 “Thank you.” Felda curtsied again, then slipped away between the 
makeshift tents, leaving Roran to mull over what she had said. 
 

 
448
 Roran absently scratched his beard as he walked. The problem with 
Mandel and the sailors was a problem that cut both ways; Roran had no-
ticed that during the trip from Narda, one of Torson’s men, Frewin, had 
become close to Odele—a young friend of Katrina. They could cause 
trouble when we leave Clovis. 
 
 Taking care not to attract undue attention, Roran went through the 
camp and gathered the villagers he trusted the most and had them ac-
company him to Horst’s tent, where he said, “The five we agreed upon 
will leave now, before it gets much later. Horst will take my place while 
I’m gone. Remember that your most important task is to ensure Clovis 
doesn’t leave with the barges or damage them in any way. They may be 
our only means to reach Surda.” 
 
 “That, and make sure we aren’t discovered,” commented Orval. 
 
 “Exactly. If none of us have returned by nightfall day after tomorrow, 
assume we were captured. Take the barges and set sail for Surda, but 
don’t stop in Kuasta to buy provisions; the Empire will probably be lying 
in wait there. You’ll have to find food elsewhere.” 
 
 While his companions readied themselves, Roran went to Clovis’s 
cabin on the Red Boar. “Just the five of you be going?” demanded Clovis 
after Roran explained their plan. 
 
 “That’s right.” Roran let his iron gaze bore into Clovis until the man 
fidgeted with unease. “And when I get back, I expect you, these barges, 
and every one of your men to still be here.” 
 
 “You dare impugn my honor after how I’ve kept our bargain?” 
 
 “I impugn nothing, only tell you what I expect. Too much is at stake. If 
you commit treachery now, you condemn our entire village to death.” 
 
 “That I know,” muttered Clovis, avoiding his eyes. 
 
 “My people will defend themselves during my absence. So long as 
breath remains in their lungs, they’ll not be taken, tricked, or abandoned. 
And if misfortune were to befall them, I’d avenge them even if I had to 
walk a thousand leagues and fight Galbatorix himself. Heed my words, 
Master Clovis, for I speak the truth.” 
 
 “We’re not so fond of the Empire as you seem to believe,” protested 
Clovis. “I wouldn’t do them a favor more than the next man.” 

 
449
 
 Roran smiled with grim amusement. “Men will do anything to protect 
their families and homes.” 
 
 As Roran lifted the door latch, Clovis asked, “And what will you do 
once you reach Surda?” 
 
 “We will—” 
 
 “Not we: you. What will you do? I’ve watched you, Roran. I’ve listened 
to you. An’ you seem a good enough sort, even if I don’t care for how you 
dealt with me. But I cannot fit it in my head, you dropping that hammer 
of yours and taking up the plow again, just because you’ve arrived in 
Surda.” 
 
 Roran gripped the latch until his knuckles turned white. “When I have 
delivered the village to Surda,” he said in a voice as empty as a blackened 
desert, “then I shall go hunting.” 
 
 “Ah. After that redheaded lass of yours? I heard some talk of that, but I 
didn’t put—” 
 
 The door slammed behind Roran as he left the cabin. He let his anger 
burn hot and fast for a moment—enjoying the freedom of the emotion—
before he began to subdue his unruly passions. He marched to Felda’s 
tent, where Mandel was throwing a hunting knife at a stump. 
 
 Felda’s right; someone has to talk some sense into him.“ You’re wasting 
your time,” said Roran. 
 
 Mandel whirled around with surprise. “Why do you say that?” 
 
 “In a real fight, you’re more likely to put out your own eye than injure 
your enemy. If you don’t know the exact distance between you and your 
target...” Roran shrugged. “You might as well throw rocks.” 
 
 He watched with detached interest as the younger man bristled with 
pride. “Gunnar told me about a man he knew in Cithrí who could hit a 
flying crow with his knife eight times out of ten.” 
 
 “And the other two times you get killed. It’s usually a bad idea to throw 
away your weapon in battle.” Roran waved a hand, forestalling Mandel’s 
objections. “Get your kit together and meet me on the hill past the 
stream in fifteen minutes. I’ve decided you should come with us to 

 
450
Teirm.” 
 
 “Yes, sir!” With an enthusiastic grin, Mandel dove into the tent and be-
gan packing. 
 
 As Roran left, he encountered Felda, her youngest daughter balanced 
on one hip. Felda glanced between him and Mandel’s activity in the tent, 
and her expression tightened. “Keep him safe, Stronghammer.” She set 
her daughter on the ground and then bustled about, helping to gather the 
items Mandel would need. 
 
 Roran was the first to arrive at the designated hill. He squatted on a 
white boulder and watched the sea while he readied himself for the task 
ahead. When Loring, Gertrude, Birgit, and Nolfavrell, Birgit’s son, arrived, 
Roran jumped off the boulder and said, “We have to wait for Mandel; 
he’ll be joining us.” 
 
 “What for?” demanded Loring. 
 
 Birgit frowned as well. “I thought we agreed no one else should accom-
pany us. Especially not Mandel, since he was seen in Narda. It’s dangerous 
enough having you and Gertrude along, and Mandel only increases the 
odds that someone will recognize us.” 
 
 “I’ll risk it.” Roran met each of their eyes in turn. “He needs to come.” In 
the end, they listened to him, and, with Mandel, the six of them headed 
south, toward Teirm. 
 
 
 
 

 
451
TEIRM 
 
 
 In that area, the coastline was composed of low, rolling hills verdant 
with lush grass and occasional briars, willows, and poplars. The soft, 
muddy ground gave under their feet and made walking difficult. To their 
right lay the glittering sea. To their left ran the purple outline of the 
Spine. The ranks of snowcapped mountains were laced with clouds and 
mist. 
 
 As Roran’s company wended past the properties surrounding Teirm—
some freehold farms, others massive estates—they made every effort to 
go undetected. When they encountered the road that connected Narda to 
Teirm, they darted across it and continued farther east, toward the 
mountains, for several more miles before turning south again. Once they 
were confident they had circumnavigated the city, they angled back to-
ward the ocean until they found the southern road in. 
 
 During his time on the Red Boar, it had occurred to Roran that officials 
in Narda might have deduced that whoever killed the two guards was 
among the men who left upon Clovis’s barges. If so, messengers would 
have warned Teirm’s soldiers to watch for anyone matching the villagers’ 
descriptions. And if the Ra’zac had visited Narda, then the soldiers would 
also know that they were looking not just for a handful of murderers but 
Roran Stronghammer and the refugees from Carvahall. Teirm could be 
one huge trap. Yet they could not bypass the city, for the villagers needed 
supplies and a new mode of transportation. 
 
 Roran had decided that their best precaution against capture was to 
send no one into Teirm who had been seen in Narda, except for 
Gertrude and himself—Gertrude because only she understood the ingre-
dients for her medicines, and Roran because, though he was the most 
likely to be recognized, he trusted no one else to do what was required. 
He knew he possessed the will to act when others hesitated, like the 
time he slew the guards. The rest of the group was chosen to minimize 
suspicion. Loring was old but a tough fighter and an excellent liar. Birgit 
had proven herself canny and strong, and her son, Nolfavrell, had already 
killed a soldier in combat, despite his tender age. Hopefully, they would 
appear as nothing more than an extended family traveling together. That 
is, if Mandel doesn’t throw the scheme awry, thought Roran. 
 
 It was also Roran’s idea to enter Teirm from the south, and thus make 
it seem even more unlikely that they had come from Narda. 
 

 
452
 Evening was nigh when Teirm came into view, white and ghostly in the 
gloaming. Roran stopped to inspect what lay before them. The walled 
city stood alone upon the edge of a large bay, self-contained and impreg-
nable to any conceivable attack. Torches glowed between the merlons on 
the battlements, where soldiers with bows patrolled their endless circuits. 
Above the walls rose a citadel, and then a faceted lighthouse, which 
swept its hazy beam across the dark waters. 
 
 “It’s so big,” said Nolfavrell. 
 
 Loring bobbed his head without taking his eyes off Teirm. “Aye, that it 
is.” 
 
 Roran’s attention was caught by a ship moored at one of the stone piers 
jutting from the city. The three-masted vessel was larger than any he had 
seen in Narda, with a high forecastle, two banks of oarlocks, and twelve 
powerful ballistae mounted along each side of the deck for shooting jave-
lins. The magnificent craft appeared equally suited for either commerce 
or war. Even more importantly, Roran thought that it might—might—be 
able to hold the entire village. 
 
 “That’s what we need,” he said, pointing. 
 
 Birgit uttered a sour grunt. “We’d have to sell ourselves into slavery to 
afford passage on that monster.” 
 
 Clovis had warned them that Teirm’s portcullis closed at sunset, so 
they quickened their pace to avoid spending the night in the countryside. 
As they neared the pale walls, the road filled with a double stream of 
people hurrying to and from Teirm. 
 
 Roran had not anticipated so much traffic, but he soon realized that it 
could help shield his party from unwanted attention. Beckoning to 
Mandel, Roran said, “Drop back a ways and follow someone else through 
the gate, so the guards don’t think you’re with us. We’ll wait for you on 
the other side. If they ask, you’ve come here seeking employment as a 
seaman.” 
 
 “Yes, sir.” 
 
 As Mandel fell behind, Roran hunched one shoulder, allowed a limp to 
creep into his walk, and began to rehearse the story Loring had concocted 
to explain their presence at Teirm. He stepped off the road and ducked 
his head as a man drove a pair of lumbering oxen past, grateful for the 

 
453
shadows that concealed his features. 
 
 The gate loomed ahead, washed in uncertain orange from the torches 
placed in sconces on each side of the entrance. Underneath stood a pair 
of soldiers with Galbatorix’s twisting flame stitched onto the front of 
their crimson tunics. Neither of the armed men so much as glanced at 
Roran and his companions as they shuffled underneath the spiked port-
cullis and through the short tunnel beyond. 
 
 Roran squared his shoulders and felt some of his tension ease. He and 
the others clustered by the corner of a house, where Loring murmured, 
“So far, so good.” 
 
 When Mandel rejoined them, they set out to find an inexpensive hostel 
where they could let a room. As they walked, Roran studied the layout of 
the city with its fortified houses—which grew progressively higher to-
ward the citadel—and the gridlike arrangement of streets. Those north to 
south radiated from the citadel like a starburst, while those east to west 
curved gently across and formed a spiderweb pattern, creating numerous 
places where barriers could be erected and soldiers stationed. 
 
 If Carvahall had been built like this, he thought, no one could have de-
feated us but the king himself. 
 
 By dusk they had acquired lodging at the Green Chestnut, an exceed-
ingly vile tavern with atrocious ale and flea-infested beds. Its sole advan-
tage was that it cost next to nothing. They went to sleep without dinner 
to save their precious coin, and huddled together to prevent their purses 
from being filched by one of the tavern’s other guests. 
 
   
 
 The next day, Roran and his companions left the Green Chestnut be-
fore dawn to search for provisions and transportation. 
 
 Gertrude said, “I have heard tell of a remarkable herbalist, Angela by 
name, who lives here and is supposed to work the most amazing cures, 
perhaps even a touch of magic. I would go see her, for if anyone has what 
I seek, it would be she.” 
 
 “You shouldn’t go alone,” said Roran. He looked at Mandel. “Accom-
pany Gertrude, help her with her purchases, and do your best to protect 
her if you are attacked. Your nerve may be tested at times, but do noth-
ing to cause alarm, unless you would betray your friends and family.” 

 
454
 
 Mandel touched his forelock and nodded his obedience. He and 
Gertrude departed at right angles down a cross street, while Roran and 
the rest resumed their hunt. 
 
 Roran had the patience of a stalking predator, but even he began to 
thrum with restlessness when morning and afternoon slipped by and they 
still had not found a ship to carry them to Surda. He learned that the 
three-masted ship, the Dragon Wing, was newly built and about to be 
launched on her maiden voyage; that they had no chance of hiring it from 
the Blackmoor Shipping Company unless they could pay a roomful of the 
dwarves’ red gold; and indeed, that the villagers lacked the coin to engage 
even the meanest vessel. Nor would taking Clovis’s barges solve their 
problems, because it still left unanswered the question of what they 
would eat on their trek. 
 
 “It would be hard,” said Birgit, “very hard, to steal goods from this place, 
what with all the soldiers and how close together the houses are and the 
watchmen at the gate. If we tried to cart that much stuff out of Teirm, 
they’d want to know what we were doing.” 
 
 Roran nodded. That too. 
 
 Roran had suggested to Horst that if the villagers were forced to flee 
Teirm with naught but their remaining supplies, they could raid for their 
food. However, Roran knew that such an act would mean they had be-
come as monstrous as those he hated. He had no stomach for it. It was 
one thing to fight and kill those who served Galbatorix—or even to steal 
Clovis’s barges, since Clovis had other means of supporting himself—but 
it was quite another to take provisions from innocent farmers who strug-
gled to survive as much as the villagers had in Palancar Valley. That 
would be murder. 
 
 Those hard facts weighed upon Roran like stones. Their venture had 
always been tenuous at best, sustained in equal parts by fear, desperation, 
optimism, and last-minute improvisation. Now he feared that he had 
driven the villagers into the den of their enemies and bound them in 
place with a chain forged of their own poverty. I could escape alone and 
continue my search for Katrina, but what victory would that be if I left my 
village to be enslaved by the Empire? Whatever our fate in Teirm, I will 
stand firm with those who trusted me enough to forsake their homes upon my 
word. 
 
 To relieve their hunger, they stopped at a bakery and bought a loaf of 

 
455
fresh rye bread, as well as a small pot of honey to slather it with. While 
he paid for the items, Loring mentioned to the baker’s assistant that they 
were in the market for ships, equipment, and food. 
 
 At a tap on his shoulder, Roran turned. A man with coarse black hair 
and a thick slab of belly said, “Pardon me for overhearing your parley 
with the young master, but if it’s ships and such you be after, and at a fair 
price, then I should guess you’d want to attend the auction.” 
 
 “What auction is this?” asked Roran. 
 
 “Ah, it’s a sad story, it is, but all too common nowadays. One of our 
merchants, Jeod—Jeod Longshanks, as we call him out of hearing—has 
had the most abominable run of bad luck. In less than a year, he lost four 
of his ships, an’ when he tried to send his goods over land, the caravan 
was ambushed and destroyed by some thieving outlaws. His investors 
forced him to declare bankruptcy, and now they’re going to sell his prop-
erty to recoup their losses. I don’t know ’bout food, but you’d be sure to 
find most everything else you’re looking to buy at the auction.” 
 
 A faint ember of hope kindled in Roran’s breast. “When will the auc-
tion be held?” 
 
 “Why, it’s posted on every message board throughout the city. Day af-
ter tomorrow, to be sure.” 
 
 That explained to Roran why they had not learned of the auction be-
fore; they had done their best to avoid the message boards, on the off 
chance that someone would recognize Roran from the portrait on his re-
ward poster. 
 
 “Thank you much,” he said to the man. “You may have saved us a great 
deal of trouble.” 
 
 “My pleasure, so it is.” 
 
 Once Roran and his companions filed out of the shop, they huddled to-
gether on the edge of the street. He said, “Do you think we should look 
into this?” 
 
 “It’s all we have to look into,” growled Loring. 
 
 “Birgit?” 
 

 
456
 “You needn’t ask me; it’s obvious. We cannot wait until the day after 
tomorrow, though.” 
 
 “No. I say we meet with this Jeod and see if we can strike a bargain 
with him before the auction opens. Are we agreed?” 
 
 They were, and so they set out for Jeod’s house, armed with directions 
from a passerby. The house—or rather, mansion—was set on the west 
side of Teirm, close to the citadel, among scores of other opulent build-
ings embellished with fine scrollwork, wrought-iron gates, statues, and 
gushing fountains. Roran could scarcely comprehend such riches; it 
amazed him how different the lives of these people were from his own. 
 
 Roran knocked on the front door to Jeod’s mansion, which stood next 
to an abandoned shop. After a moment, the door was pulled open by a 
plump butler garnished with overly shiny teeth. He eyed the four strang-
ers upon his doorstep with disapproval, then flashed his glazed smile and 
asked, “How may I help you, sirs and madam?” 
 
 “We would talk with Jeod, if he is free.” 
 
 “Have you an appointment?” 
 
 Roran thought the butler knew perfectly well that they did not. “Our 
stay in Teirm is too brief for us to arrange a proper meeting.” 
 
 “Ah, well, then I regret to say that your time would have been better 
spent elsewhere. My master has many matters to tend. He cannot devote 
himself to every group of ragged tramps that bangs on his door, asking for 
handouts,” said the butler. He exposed even more of his glassy teeth and 
began to withdraw inside. 
 
 “Wait!” cried Roran. “It’s not handouts we want; we have a business 
proposition for Jeod.” 
 
 The butler lifted one eyebrow. “Is that so?” 
 
 “Aye, it is. Please ask him if he will hear us. We’ve traveled more 
leagues than you’d care to know, and it’s imperative we see Jeod today.” 
 
 “May I inquire as to the nature of your proposition?” 
 
 “It’s confidential.” 
 

 
457
 “Very well, sir,” said the butler. “I will convey your offer, but I warn 
you that Jeod is occupied at the moment, and I doubt he will wish to 
bother himself. By what name shall I announce you, sir?” 
 
 “You may call me Stronghammer.” The butler’s mouth twitched as if 
amused by the name, then slipped behind the door and closed it. 
 
 “If his head were any larger, ’e couldn’t fit in the privy,” muttered Lor-
ing out the side of his mouth. Nolfavrell uttered a bark of laughter at the 
insult. 
 
 Birgit said, “Let’s hope the servant doesn’t imitate the master.” 
 
 A minute later, the door reopened and the butler announced, with a 
rather brittle expression, “Jeod has agreed to meet you in the study.” He 
moved to the side and gestured with one arm for them to proceed. “This 
way.” After they trooped into the sumptuous entryway, the butler swept 
past them and down a polished wood hallway to one door among many, 
which he opened and ushered them through. 
 
 
 
 

 
458
JEOD LONGSHANKS 
 
 
 If Roran had known how to read, he might have been more impressed 
by the treasure trove of books that lined the study walls. As it was, he 
reserved his attention for the tall man with graying hair who stood be-
hind an oval writing desk. The man—who Roran assumed was Jeod—
looked about as tired as Roran felt. His face was lined, careworn, and sad, 
and when he turned toward them, a nasty scar gleamed white from his 
scalp to his left temple. To Roran, it bespoke steel in the man. Long and 
buried, perhaps, but steel nevertheless. 
 
 “Do sit,” said Jeod. “I won’t stand on ceremony in my own house.” He 
watched them with curious eyes as they settled in the soft leather arm-
chairs. “May I offer you pastries and a glass of apricot brandy? I cannot 
talk for long, but I see you’ve been on the road for many a week, and I 
well remember how dusty my throat was after such journeys.” 
 
 Loring grinned. “Aye. A touch of brandy would be welcome indeed. 
You’re most generous, sir.” 
 
 “Only a glass of milk for my boy,” said Birgit. 
 
 “Of course, madam.” Jeod rang for the butler, delivered his instructions, 
then leaned back in his chair. “I am at a disadvantage. I believe you have 
my name, but I don’t have yours.” 
 
 “Stronghammer, at your service,” said Roran. 
 
 “Mardra, at your service,” said Birgit. 
 
 “Kell, at your service,” said Nolfavrell. 
 
 “And I’d be Wally, at your service,” finished Loring. 
 
 “And I at yours,” responded Jeod. “Now, Rolf mentioned that you 
wished to do business with me. It’s only fair that you know I’m in no po-
sition to buy or sell goods, nor have I gold for investing, nor proud ships 
to carry wool and food, gems and spices across the restless sea. What, 
then, can I do for you?” 
 
 Roran rested his elbows on his knees, then knitted his fingers together 
and stared between them as he marshaled his thoughts. A slip of the 
tongue could kill us here, he reminded himself. “To put it simply, sir, we 

 
459
represent a certain group of people who—for various reasons—must 
purchase a large amount of supplies with very little money. We know 
that your belongings will be auctioned off day after tomorrow to repay 
your debts, and we would like to offer a bid now on those items we 
need. We would have waited until the auction, but circumstances press 
us and we cannot tarry another two days. If we are to strike a bargain, it 
must be tonight or tomorrow, no later.” 
 
 “What manner of supplies do you need?” asked Jeod. 
 
 “Food and whatever else is required to outfit a ship or other vessel for a 
long voyage at sea.” 
 
 A spark of interest gleamed in Jeod’s weary face. “Do you have a certain 
ship in mind? For I know every craft that’s plied these waters in the last 
twenty years.” 
 
 “We’ve yet to decide.” 
 
 Jeod accepted that without question. “I understand now why you 
thought to come to me, but I fear you labor under a misapprehension.” 
He spread his gray hands, indicating the room. “Everything you see here 
no longer belongs to me, but to my creditors. I have no authority to sell 
my possessions, and if I did so without permission, I would likely be im-
prisoned for cheating my creditors out of the money I owe them.” 
 
 He paused as Rolf backed into the study, carrying a large silver tray 
dotted with pastries, cut-crystal goblets, a glass of milk, and a decanter of 
brandy. The butler placed the tray on a padded footstool and then pro-
ceeded to serve the refreshments. Roran took his goblet and sipped the 
mellow brandy, wondering how soon courtesy would allow the four of 
them to excuse themselves and resume their quest. 
 
 When Rolf left the room, Jeod drained his goblet with a single draught, 
then said, “I may be of no use to you, but I do know a number of people 
in my profession who might...might... be able to help. If you can give me a 
bit more detail about what you want to buy, then I’d have a better idea 
of who to recommend.” 
 
 Roran saw no harm in that, so he began to recite a list of items the vil-
lagers had to have, things they might need, and things they wanted but 
would never be able to afford unless fortune smiled greatly upon them. 
Now and then Birgit or Loring mentioned something Roran had forgot-
ten—like lamp oil—and Jeod would glance at them for a moment before 

 
460
returning his hooded gaze to Roran, where it remained with growing in-
tensity. Jeod’s interest concerned Roran; it was as if the merchant knew, 
or suspected, what he was hiding. 
 
 “It seems to me,” said Jeod at the completion of Roran’s inventory, “that 
this would be enough provisions to transport several hundred people to 
Feinster or Aroughs... or beyond. Admittedly, I’ve been rather occupied 
for the past few weeks, but I’ve heard of no such host in this area, nor 
can I imagine where one might have come from.” 
 
 His face blank, Roran met Jeod’s stare and said nothing. On the inside, 
he seethed with self-contempt for allowing Jeod to amass enough infor-
mation to reach that conclusion. 
 
 Jeod shrugged. “Well, be as it may, that’s your own concern. I’d suggest 
that you see Galton on Market Street about your food and old Hamill by 
the docks for all else. They’re both honest men and will treat you true 
and fair.” Reaching over, he plucked a pastry from the tray, took a bite, 
and then, when he finished chewing, asked Nolfavrell, “So, young Kell, 
have you enjoyed your stay in Teirm?” 
 
 “Yes, sir,” said Nolfavrell, and grinned. “I’ve never seen anything quite so 
large, sir.” 
 
 “Is that so?” 
 
 “Yes, sir. I—” 
 
 Feeling that they were in dangerous territory, Roran interrupted: “I’m 
curious, sir, as to the nature of the shop next to your house. It seems odd 
to have such a humble store among all these grand buildings.” 
 
 For the first time, a smile, if only a small one, brightened Jeod’s expres-
sion, erasing years from his appearance. “Well, it was owned by a woman 
who was a bit odd herself: Angela the herbalist, one of the best healers 
I’ve ever met. She tended that store for twenty-some years and then, only 
a few months ago, up and sold it and left for parts unknown.” He sighed. 
“It’s a pity, for she made an interesting neighbor.” 
 
 “That’s who Gertrude wanted to meet, isn’t it?” asked Nolfavrell, and 
looked up at his mother. 
 
 Roran suppressed a snarl and flashed a warning glance strong enough to 
make Nolfavrell quail in his chair. The name would mean nothing to 

 
461
Jeod, but unless Nolfavrell guarded his tongue better, he was liable to 
blurt out something far more damaging. Time to go, thought Roran. He 
put down his goblet. 
 
 It was then that he saw the name did mean something to Jeod. The 
merchant’s eyes widened with surprise, and he gripped the arms of his 
chair until the tips of his fingers turned bone white. “It can’t be!” Jeod fo-
cused on Roran, studying his face as if trying to see past the beard, and 
then breathed, “Roran... Roran Garrowsson.” 
 
 
 
 

 
462
AN UNEXPECTED ALLY 
 
 
 Roran had already pulled his hammer from his belt and was halfway 
out of the chair when he heard his father’s name. It was the only thing 
that kept him from leaping across the room and knocking Jeod uncon-
scious. How does he know who Garrow is? Beside him, Loring and Birgit 
jumped to their feet, drawing knives from within their sleeves, and even 
Nolfavrell readied himself to fight with a dagger in hand. 
 
 “It is Roran, isn’t it?” Jeod asked quietly. He showed no alarm at their 
weapons. 
 
 “How did you guess?” 
 
 “Because Brom brought Eragon here, and you look like your cousin. 
When I saw your poster with Eragon’s, I realized that the Empire must 
have tried to capture you and that you had escaped. Although,” Jeod’s 
gaze drifted to the other three, “in all my imaginings, I never suspected 
that you took the rest of Carvahall with you.” 
 
 Stunned, Roran dropped back into his chair and placed the hammer 
across his knees, ready for use. “Eragon was here?” 
 
 “Aye. And Saphira too.” 
 
 “Saphira?” 
 
 Again, surprise crossed Jeod’s face. “You don’t know, then?” 
 
 “Know what?” 
 
 Jeod considered him for a long minute. “I think the time has come to 
drop our pretenses, Roran Garrowsson, and talk openly and without de-
ception. I can answer many of the questions you must have—such as 
why the Empire is pursuing you—but in return, I need to know the rea-
son you came to Teirm... the real reason.” 
 
 “An’ why should we trust you, Longshanks?” demanded Loring. “You 
could be working for Galbatorix, you could.” 
 
 “I was Brom’s friend for over twenty years, before he was a storyteller 
in Carvahall,” said Jeod, “and I did my best to help him and Eragon when 
they were under my roof. But since neither of them are here to vouch for 

 
463
me, I place my life in your hands, to do with as you wish. I could shout 
for help, but I won’t. Nor will I fight you. All I ask is that you tell me 
your story and hear my own. Then you can decide for yourself what 
course of action is proper. You’re in no immediate danger, so what harm 
is there in talking?” 
 
 Birgit caught Roran’s eye with a flick of her chin. “He could just be try-
ing to save his hide.” 
 
 “Maybe,” replied Roran, “but we have to find out whatever it is he 
knows.” Hooking an arm underneath his chair, he dragged it across the 
room, placed the back of the chair against the door, and then sat in it, so 
that no one could burst in and catch them unawares. He jabbed his 
hammer at Jeod. “All right. You want to talk? Then let us talk, you and 
I.” 
 
 “It would be best if you go first.” 
 
 “If I do, and we’re not satisfied by your answers afterward, we’ll have to 
kill you,” warned Roran. 
 
 Jeod folded his arms. “So be it.” 
 
 Despite himself, Roran was impressed by the merchant’s fortitude; Jeod 
appeared unconcerned by his fate, if a bit grim about the mouth. “So be 
it,” Roran echoed. 
 
 Roran had relived the events since the Ra’zac’s arrival in Carvahall often 
enough, but never before had he described them in detail to another per-
son. As he did, it struck him how much had happened to him and the 
other villagers in such a short time and how easy it had been for the Em-
pire to destroy their lives in Palancar Valley. Resuscitating old terrors was 
painful for Roran, but he at least had the pleasure of seeing Jeod exhibit 
unfeigned astonishment as he heard about how the villagers had rousted 
the soldiers and Ra’zac from their camp, the siege of Carvahall thereafter, 
Sloan’s treachery, Katrina’s kidnapping, how Roran had convinced the vil-
lagers to flee, and the hardships of their journey to Teirm. 
 
 “By the Lost Kings!” exclaimed Jeod. “That’s the most extraordinary 
tale. Extraordinary! To think you’ve managed to thwart Galbatorix and 
that right now the entire village of Carvahall is hiding outside one of the 
Empire’s largest cities and the king doesn’t even know it....” He shook his 
head with admiration. 
 

 
464
 “Aye, that’s our position,” growled Loring, “and it’s precarious at best, so 
you’d better explain well and good why we should risk letting you live.” 
 
 “It places me in as much—” 
 
 Jeod stopped as someone rattled the latch behind Roran’s chair, trying 
to open the door, followed by pounding on the oak planks. In the hall-
way, a woman cried, “Jeod! Let me in, Jeod! You can’t hide in that cave 
of yours.” 
 
 “May I?” murmured Jeod. 
 
 Roran clicked his fingers at Nolfavrell, and the boy tossed his dagger to 
Roran, who slipped around the writing desk and pressed the flat of the 
blade against Jeod’s throat. “Make her leave.” 
 
 Raising his voice, Jeod said, “I can’t talk now; I’m in the middle of a 
meeting.” 
 
 “Liar! You don’t have any business. You’re bankrupt! Come out and 
face me, you coward! Are you a man or not that you won’t even look 
your wife in the eye?” She paused for a second, as if expecting a response, 
then her screeches increased in volume: “Coward! You’re a gutless rat, a 
filthy, yellow-bellied sheep-biter without the common sense to run a 
meat stall, much less a shipping company. My father would have never 
lost so much money!” 
 
 Roran winced as the insults continued. I can’t restrain Jeod if she goes on 
much longer. 
 
 “Be still, woman!” commanded Jeod, and silence ensued. “Our fortunes 
might be about to change for the better if you but have the sense to re-
strain your tongue and not rail on like a fishmonger’s wife.” 
 
 Her answer was cold: “I shall wait upon your pleasure in the dining 
room, dear husband, and unless you choose to attend me by the evening 
meal and explain yourself, then I shall leave this accursed house, never to 
return.” The sound of her footsteps retreated into the distance. 
 
 When he was sure that she was gone, Roran lifted the dagger from 
Jeod’s neck and returned the weapon to Nolfavrell before reseating him-
self in the chair pushed against the door. 
 
 Jeod rubbed his neck and then, with a wry expression, said, “If we don’t 

 
465
reach an understanding, you had better kill me; it’d be easier than ex-
plaining to Helen that I shouted at her for naught.” 
 
 “You have my sympathy, Longshanks,” said Loring. 
 
 “It’s not her fault... not really. She just doesn’t understand why so much 
misfortune has befallen us.” Jeod sighed. “Perhaps it’s my fault for not dar-
ing to tell her.” 
 
 “Tell her what?” piped Nolfavrell. 
 
 “That I’m an agent for the Varden.” Jeod paused at their dumbfounded 
expressions. “Perhaps I should start from the beginning. Roran, have you 
heard rumors in the past few months of the existence of a new Rider 
who opposes Galbatorix?” 
 
 “Mutterings here and there, yes, but nothing I’d give credence to.” 
 
 Jeod hesitated. “I don’t know how else to say this, Roran... but there is a 
new Rider in Alagaësia, and it’s your cousin, Eragon. The stone he found 
in the Spine was actually a dragon egg I helped the Varden steal from 
Galbatorix years ago. The dragon hatched for Eragon and he named her 
Saphira. That is why the Ra’zac first came to Palancar Valley. They re-
turned because Eragon has become a formidable enemy of the Empire 
and Galbatorix hoped that by capturing you, they could bring Eragon to 
bay.” 
 
 Roran threw back his head and howled with laughter until tears gath-
ered at the corners of his eyes and his stomach hurt from the convulsions. 
Loring, Birgit, and Nolfavrell looked at him with something akin to fear, 
but Roran cared not for their opinions. He laughed at the absurdity of 
Jeod’s assertion. He laughed at the terrible possibility that Jeod had told 
the truth. 
 
 Taking rasping breaths, Roran gradually returned to normal, despite an 
occasional outburst of humorless chuckles. He wiped his face on his 
sleeve and then regarded Jeod, a hard smile upon his lips. “It fits the facts; 
I’ll give you that. But so do a half dozen other explanations I’ve thought 
of.” 
 
 Birgit said, “If Eragon’s stone was a dragon egg, then where did it come 
from?” 
 
 “Ah,” replied Jeod, “now there’s an affair I’m well acquainted with....” 

 
466
 
 Comfortable in his chair, Roran listened with disbelief as Jeod spun a 
fantastic story of how Brom—grumpy old Brom!—had once been a Rider 
and had supposedly helped establish the Varden, how Jeod had discov-
ered a secret passageway into Urû’baen, how the Varden arranged to filch 
the last three dragon eggs from Galbatorix, and how only one egg was 
saved after Brom fought and killed Morzan of the Forsworn. As if that 
were not preposterous enough, Jeod went on to describe an agreement 
between the Varden, dwarves, and elves that the egg should be ferried 
between Du Weldenvarden and the Beor Mountains, which was why the 
egg and its couriers were near the edge of the great forest when they 
were ambushed by a Shade. 
 
 A Shade—ha! thought Roran. 
 
 Skeptical as he was, Roran attended with redoubled interest when Jeod 
began to talk of Eragon finding the egg and raising the dragon Saphira in 
the forest by Garrow’s farm. Roran had been occupied at the time—
preparing to leave for Dempton’s mill in Therinsford—but he remem-
bered how distracted Eragon had been, how he spent every moment he 
could outdoors, doing who knows what.... 
 
 As Jeod explained how and why Garrow died, rage filled Roran that 
Eragon had dared keep the dragon secret when it so obviously put every-
one in danger. It’s his fault my father died! 
 
 “What was he thinking?” burst out Roran. 
 
 He hated how Jeod looked at him with calm understanding. “I doubt 
Eragon knew himself. Riders and their dragons are bound together so 
closely, it’s often hard to differentiate one from the other. Eragon could 
have no more harmed Saphira than he could have sawed off his own leg.” 
 
 “He could have,” muttered Roran. “Because of him, I’ve had to do things 
just as painful, and I know—he could have.” 
 
 “You’ve a right to feel as you do,” said Jeod, “but don’t forget that the 
reason Eragon left Palancar Valley was to protect you and all who re-
mained. I believe it was an extremely hard choice for him to make. From 
his point of view, he sacrificed himself to ensure your safety and to 
avenge your father. And while leaving may not have had the desired ef-
fect, things would have certainly turned out far worse if Eragon had 
stayed.” 
 

 
467
 Roran said nothing more until Jeod mentioned that the reason Brom 
and Eragon had visited Teirm was to see if they could use the city’s ship-
ping manifests to locate the Ra’zac’s lair. “And did they?” cried Roran, 
bolting upright. 
 
 “We did indeed.” 
 
 “Well, where are they, then? For goodness’ sake, man, say it; you know 
how important this is to me!” 
 
 “It seemed apparent from the records—and I later had a message from 
the Varden that Eragon’s own account confirmed this—that the Ra’zac’s 
den is in the formation known as Helgrind, by Dras-Leona.” 
 
 Roran gripped his hammer with excitement. It’s a long way to Dras-
Leona, but Teirm has access to the only open pass between here and the 
southern end of the Spine. If I can get everyone safely heading down the 
coast, then I could go to this Helgrind, rescue Katrina if she’s there, and fol-
low the Jiet River down to Surda. 
 
 Something of Roran’s thoughts much have revealed themselves on his 
face, because Jeod said, “It can’t be done, Roran.” 
 
 “What?” 
 
 “No one man can take Helgrind. It’s a solid, bare, black mountain of 
stone that’s impossible to climb. Consider the Ra’zac’s foul steeds; it 
seems likely they would have an eyrie near the top of Helgrind rather 
than bed near the ground, where they are most vulnerable. How, then, 
would you reach them? And if you could, do you really believe that you 
could defeat both Ra’zac and their two steeds, if not more? I have no 
doubt you are a fearsome warrior—after all, you and Eragon share 
blood—but these are foes beyond any normal human.” 
 
 Roran shook his head. “I can’t abandon Katrina. It may be futile, but I 
must try to free her, even if it costs me my life.” 
 
 “It won’t do Katrina any good if you get yourself killed,” admonished 
Jeod. “If I may offer a bit of advice: try to reach Surda as you’ve planned. 
Once there, I’m sure you can enlist Eragon’s help. Even the Ra’zac cannot 
match a Rider and dragon in open combat.” 
 
 In his mind’s eye, Roran saw the huge gray-skinned beasts the Ra’zac 
rode upon. He was loath to acknowledge it, but he knew that such crea-

 
468
tures were beyond his ability to kill, no matter the strength of his motiva-
tion. The instant he accepted that truth, Roran finally believed Jeod’s 
tale—for if he did not, Katrina was forever lost to him. 
 
 Eragon, he thought. Eragon! By the blood I’ve spilled and the gore on my 
hands, I swear upon my father’s grave I’ll have you atone for what you’ve 
done by storming Helgrind with me. If you created this mess, then I’ll have 
you clean it up. 
 
 Roran motioned to Jeod. “Continue your account. Let us hear the rest 
of this sorry play before the day grows much older.” 
 
 Then Jeod spoke of Brom’s death; of Murtagh, son of Morzan; of cap-
ture and escape in Gil’ead; of a desperate flight to save an elf; of Urgals 
and dwarves and a great battle in a place called Farthen Dûr, where Er-
agon defeated a Shade. And Jeod told them how the Varden left the Beor 
Mountains for Surda and how Eragon was even now deep within Du 
Weldenvarden, learning the elves’ mysterious secrets of magic and war-
fare, but would soon return. 
 
 When the merchant fell silent, Roran gathered at the far end of the 
study with Loring, Birgit, and Nolfavrell and asked their thoughts. Lower-
ing his voice, Loring said, “I can’t tell whether he’s lying or not, but any 
man who can weave a yarn like that at knifepoint deserves to live. A new 
Rider! And Eragon to boot!” He shook his head. 
 
 “Birgit?” asked Roran. 
 
 “I don’t know. It’s so outlandish....” She hesitated. “But it must be true. 
Another Rider is the only thing that would spur the Empire to pursue us 
so fiercely.” 
 
 “Aye,” agreed Loring. His eyes were bright with excitement. “We’ve 
been entangled in far more momentous events than we realized. A new 
Rider. Just think about it! The old order is about to be washed away, I 
tell you.... You were right all along, Roran.” 
 
 “Nolfavrell?” 
 
 The boy looked solemn at being asked. He bit his lip, then said, “Jeod 
seems honest enough. I think we can trust him.” 
 
 “Right, then,” said Roran. He strode back to Jeod, planted his knuckles 
on the edge of the desk, and said, “Two last questions, Longshanks. What 

 
469
do Brom and Eragon look like? And how did you recognize Gertrude’s 
name?” 
 
 “I knew of Gertrude because Brom mentioned that he left a letter for 
you in her care. As for what they looked like: Brom stood a bit shorter 
than me. He had a thick beard, a hooked nose, and he carried a carved 
staff with him. And I dare say he was rather irritable at times.” Roran 
nodded; that was Brom. “Eragon was... young. Brown hair, brown eyes, 
with a scar on his wrist, and he never stopped asking questions.” Roran 
nodded again; that was his cousin. 
 
 Roran stuck his hammer back under his belt. Birgit, Loring, and Nol-
favrell sheathed their blades. Then Roran pulled his chair away from the 
door, and the four of them resumed their seats like civilized beings. 
“What now, Jeod?” asked Roran. “Can you help us? I know you’re in a 
difficult situation, but we... we are desperate and have no one else to turn 
to. As an agent of the Varden, can you guarantee us the Varden’s protec-
tion? We are willing to serve them if they’ll shield us from Galbatorix’s 
wrath.” 
 
 “The Varden,” said Jeod, “would be more than happy to have you. 
More than happy. I suspect you already guessed that. As for help...” He 
ran a hand down his long face and stared past Loring at the rows of books 
on the shelves. “I’ve been aware for almost a year that my true identity—
as well as that of many other merchants here and elsewhere who have 
assisted the Varden—was betrayed to the Empire. Because of that, I ha-
ven’t dared flee to Surda. If I tried, the Empire would arrest me, and then 
who knows what horrors I’d be in for? I’ve had to watch the gradual de-
struction of my business without being able to take any action to oppose 
or escape it. What’s worse, now that I cannot ship anything to the 
Varden and they dare not send envoys to me, I feared that Lord Risthart 
would have me clapped in irons and dragged off to the dungeons, since 
I’m of no further interest to the Empire. I’ve expected it every day since I 
declared bankruptcy.” 
 
 “Perhaps,” suggested Birgit, “they want you to flee so they can capture 
whoever else you bring with you.” 
 
 Jeod smiled. “Perhaps. But now that you are here, I have a means to 
leave that they never anticipated.” 
 
 “Then you have a plan?” asked Loring. 
 
 Glee crossed Jeod’s face. “Oh yes, I have a plan. Did the four of you see 

 
470
the ship Dragon Wing moored at port?” 
 
 Roran thought back to the vessel. “Aye.” 
 
 “The Dragon Wing is owned by the Blackmoor Shipping Company, a 
front for the Empire. They handle supplies for the army, which has mo-
bilized to an alarming degree recently, conscripting soldiers among the 
peasants and commandeering horses, asses, and oxen.” Jeod raised an eye-
brow. “I’m not sure what it indicates, but it’s possible Galbatorix means 
to march on Surda. In any case, the Dragon Wing is to sail for Feinster 
within the week. She’s the finest ship ever built, from a new design by 
master shipwright Kinnell.” 
 
 “And you want to pirate her,” concluded Roran. 
 
 “I do. Not only to spite the Empire or because the Dragon Wing is re-
puted to be the fastest square-rigged ship of her tonnage, but because 
she’s already fully provisioned for a long voyage. And since her cargo is 
food, we’d have enough for the whole village.” 
 
 Loring uttered a strained cackle. “I ’ope you can sail her yourself, Long-
shanks, ’cause not one of us knows how to handle anything larger than a 
barge.” 
 
 “A few men from the crews of my ships are still in Teirm. They’re in 
the same position I am, unable to fight or flee. I’m confident they’ll jump 
at a chance to get to Surda. They can teach you what to do on the Dragon 
Wing. It won’t be easy, but I don’t see much choice in the matter.” 
 
 Roran grinned. The plan was to his liking: swift, decisive, and unex-
pected. 
 
 “You mentioned,” said Birgit, “that in the past year none of your ships—
nor those from other merchants who serve the Varden—have reached 
their destination. Why, then, should this mission succeed when so many 
have failed?” 
 
 Jeod was quick to answer: “Because surprise is on our side. The law re-
quires merchant ships to submit their itinerary for approval with the port 
authority at least two weeks before departure. It takes a great deal of 
time to prepare a ship for launch, so if we leave without warning, it 
could be a week or more before Galbatorix can launch intercept vessels. 
If luck is with us, we won’t see so much as the topmast of our pursuers. 
So,” continued Jeod, “if you are willing to attempt this enterprise, this is 

 
471
what we must do....” 
 
 
 
 

 
472
ESCAPE 
 
 
 After they considered Jeod’s proposal from every possible angle and 
agreed to abide by it—with a few modifications—Roran sent Nolfavrell 
to fetch Gertrude and Mandel from the Green Chestnut, for Jeod had of-
fered their entire party his hospitality. 
 
 “Now, if you will excuse me,” said Jeod, rising, “I must go reveal to my 
wife that which I should never have hidden from her and ask if she’ll ac-
company me to Surda. You may take your pick of rooms on the second 
floor. Rolf will summon you when supper is ready.” With long, slow 
steps, he departed the study. 
 
 “Is it wise to let him tell that ogress?” asked Loring. 
 
 Roran shrugged. “Wise or not, we can’t stop him. And I don’t think he’ll 
be at peace until he does.” 
 
 Instead of going to a room, Roran wandered through the mansion, un-
consciously evading the servants as he pondered the things Jeod had said. 
He stopped at a bay window open to the stables at the rear of the house 
and filled his lungs with the brisk and smoky air, heavy with the familiar 
smell of manure. 
 
 “Do you hate him?” 
 
 He started and turned to see Birgit silhouetted in the doorway. She 
pulled her shawl tight around her shoulders as she approached. 
 
 “Who?” he asked, knowing full well. 
 
 “Eragon. Do you hate him?” 
 
 Roran looked at the darkening sky. “I don’t know. I hate him for caus-
ing the death of my father, but he’s still family and for that I love him.... I 
suppose that if I didn’t need Eragon to save Katrina, I would have nothing 
to do with him for a long while yet.” 
 
 “As I need and hate you, Stronghammer.” 
 
 He snorted with grim amusement. “Aye, we’re joined at the hip, aren’t 
we? You have to help me find Eragon in order to avenge Quimby on the 
Ra’zac.” 

 
473
 
 “And to have my vengeance on you afterward.” 
 
 “That too.” Roran stared into her unwavering eyes for a moment, ac-
knowledging the bond between them. He found it strangely comforting 
to know that they shared the same drive, the same angry fire that quick-
ened their steps when others faltered. In her, he recognized a kindred 
spirit. 
 
 Returning through the house, Roran stopped by the dining room as he 
heard the cadence of Jeod’s voice. Curious, he fit his eye to a crack by the 
middle door hinge. Jeod stood opposite a slight, blond woman, who Ro-
ran assumed was Helen. 
 
 “If what you say is true, how can you expect me to trust you?” 
 
 “I cannot,” answered Jeod. 
 
 “Yet you ask me to become a fugitive for you?” 
 
 “You once offered to leave your family and wander the land with me. 
You begged me to spirit you away from Teirm.” 
 
 “Once. I thought you were terribly dashing then, what with your sword 
and your scar.” 
 
 “I still have those,” he said softly. “I made many mistakes with you, 
Helen; I understand that now. But I still love you and want you to be 
safe. I have no future here. If I stay, I’ll only bring grief to your family. 
You can return to your father or you can come with me. Do what will 
make you the happiest. However, I beg you to give me a second chance, 
to have the courage to leave this place and shed the bitter memories of 
our life here. We can start anew in Surda.” 
 
 She was quiet for a long time. “That young man who was here, is he 
really a Rider?” 
 
 “He is. The winds of change are blowing, Helen. The Varden are about 
to attack, the dwarves are gathering, and even the elves stir in their an-
cient haunts. War approaches, and if we’re fortunate, so does Galbatorix’s 
downfall.” 
 
 “Are you important among the Varden?” 
 

 
474
 “They owe me some consideration for my part in acquiring Saphira’s 
egg.” 
 
 “Then you would have a position with them in Surda?” 
 
 “I imagine so.” He put his hands on her shoulders, and she did not draw 
away. 
 
 She whispered, “Jeod, Jeod, don’t press me. I cannot decide yet.” 
 
 “Will you think about it?” 
 
 She shivered. “Oh yes. I’ll think about it.” 
 
 Roran’s heart pained him as he left. 
 
 Katrina. 
 
 That night at dinner, Roran noticed Helen’s eyes were often upon him, 
studying and measuring—comparing him, he was sure, to Eragon. 
 
 After the meal, Roran beckoned to Mandel and led him out into the 
courtyard behind the house. 
 
 “What is it, sir?” asked Mandel. 
 
 “I wished to talk with you in private.” 
 
 “About what?” 
 
 Roran fingered the pitted blade of his hammer and reflected on how 
much he felt like Garrow when his father gave a lecture on responsibil-
ity; Roran could even feel the same phrases rising in his throat. And so one 
generation passes to the next, he thought. “You’ve become quite friendly 
with the sailors as of late.” 
 
 “They’re not our enemies,” objected Mandel. 
 
 “Everyone is an enemy at this point. Clovis and his men could turn on 
us in an instant. It wouldn’t be a problem, though, if being with them 
hadn’t caused you to neglect your duties.” Mandel stiffened and color 
bloomed in his cheeks, but he did not lower himself in Roran’s esteem by 
denying the charge. Pleased, Roran asked, “What is the most important 
thing we can do right now, Mandel?” 

 
475
 
 “Protect our families.” 
 
 “Aye. And what else?” 
 
 Mandel hesitated, uncertain, then confessed, “I don’t know.” 
 
 “Help one another. It’s the only way any of us are going to survive. I 
was especially disappointed to learn that you’ve gambled food with the 
sailors, since that endangers the entire village. Your time would be far 
better spent hunting than playing games of dice or learning to throw 
knives. With your father gone, it’s fallen upon you to care for your 
mother and siblings. They rely on you. Am I clear?” 
 
 “Very clear, sir,” replied Mandel with a choked voice. 
 
 “Will this ever happen again?” 
 
 “Never again, sir.” 
 
 “Good. Now I didn’t bring you here just to chastise you. You show 
promise, which is why I’m giving you a task that I would trust to no one 
else but myself.” 
 
 “Yes, sir!” 
 
 “Tomorrow morning I need you to return to camp and deliver a mes-
sage to Horst. Jeod believes the Empire has spies watching this house, so 
it’s vital that you make sure you aren’t followed. Wait until you’re out of 
the city, then lose whoever is trailing you in the countryside. Kill him if 
you have to. When you find Horst, tell him to...” As Roran outlined his 
instructions, he watched Mandel’s expression change from surprise, to 
shock, and then to awe. 
 
 “What if Clovis objects?” asked Mandel. 
 
 “That night, break the tillers on the barges so they can’t be steered. It’s a 
dirty trick, but it could be disastrous if Clovis or any of his men arrive at 
Teirm before you.” 
 
 “I won’t let that happen,” vowed Mandel. 
 
 Roran smiled. “Good.” Satisfied that he had resolved the matter of 
Mandel’s behavior and that the young man would do everything possible 

 
476
to get the message to Horst, Roran went back inside and bade their host 
good night before heading off to sleep. 
 
   
 
 With the exception of Mandel, Roran and his companions confined 
themselves to the mansion throughout the following day, taking advan-
tage of the delay to rest, hone their weapons, and review their stratagems. 
 
 From dawn till dusk, they saw some of Helen as she bustled from one 
room to the next, more of Rolf with his teeth like varnished pearls, and 
none of Jeod, for the gray-pated merchant had left to walk the city and—
seemingly by accident—meet with the few men of the sea whom he 
trusted for their expedition. 
 
 Upon his return, he told Roran, “We can count on five more hands. I 
only hope it’s enough.” Jeod remained in his study for the rest of the eve-
ning, drawing up various legal documents and otherwise tending to his 
affairs. 
 
 Three hours before dawn, Roran, Loring, Birgit, Gertrude, and Nol-
favrell roused themselves and, fighting back prodigious yawns, congre-
gated in the mansion’s entryway, where they muffled themselves in long 
cloaks to obscure their faces. A rapier hung at Jeod’s side when he joined 
them, and Roran thought the narrow sword somehow completed the 
rangy man, as if it reminded Jeod who he really was. 
 
 Jeod lit an oil lantern and held it up before them. “Are we ready?” he 
asked. They nodded. Then Jeod unlatched the door and they filed outside 
to the empty cobblestone street. Behind them, Jeod lingered in the en-
tryway, casting a longing gaze toward the stairs on the right, but Helen 
did not appear. With a shudder, Jeod left his home and closed the door. 
 
 Roran put a hand on his arm. “What’s done is done.” 
 
 “I know.” 
 
 They trotted through the dark city, slowing to a quick walk whenever 
they encountered watchmen or a fellow creature of the night, most of 
whom darted away at the sight of them. Once they heard footsteps on 
top of a nearby building. “The design of the city,” explained Jeod, “makes 
it easy for thieves to climb from one roof to another.” 
 
 They slowed to a walk again when they arrived at Teirm’s eastern gate. 

 
477
Because the gate opened to the harbor, it was closed only four hours each 
night in order to minimize the disruption to commerce. Indeed, despite 
the time, several men were already moving through the gate. 
 
 Even though Jeod had warned them it might happen, Roran still felt a 
surge of fear when the guards lowered their pikes and asked what their 
business was. He wet his mouth and tried not to fidget while the elder 
soldier examined a scroll that Jeod handed to him. After a long minute, 
the guard nodded and returned the parchment. “You can pass.” 
 
 Once they were on the wharf and out of earshot of the city wall, Jeod 
said, “It’s a good thing he couldn’t read.” 
 
 The six of them waited on the damp planking until, one by one, Jeod’s 
men emerged from the gray mist that lay upon the shore. They were 
grim and silent, with braided hair that hung to the middle of their backs, 
tar-smeared hands, and an assortment of scars even Roran respected. He 
liked what he saw, and he could tell they approved of him as well. They 
did not, however, take to Birgit. 
 
 One of the sailors, a large brute of a man, jerked a thumb at her and ac-
cused Jeod, “You didn’t say there’d be a woman along for the fightin’. 
How am I supposed to concentrate with some backwoods tramp getting 
in m’ way?” 
 
 “Don’t talk about her like that,” said Nolfavrell between clenched teeth. 
 
 “An’ her runt too?” 
 
 In a calm voice, Jeod said, “Birgit has fought the Ra’zac. And her son has 
already killed one of Galbatorix’s best soldiers. Can you claim as much, 
Uthar?” 
 
 “It’s not proper,” said another man. “I wouldn’t feel safe with a woman 
at my side; they do naught but bring bad luck. A lady shouldn’t—” 
 
 Whatever he was going to say was lost, for at that instant, Birgit did a 
very unladylike thing. Stepping forward, she kicked Uthar between his 
legs and then grabbed the second man and pressed her knife against his 
throat. She held him for a moment, so everyone could see what she had 
done, then released her captive. Uthar rolled on the boards by her feet, 
holding himself and muttering a stream of curses. 
 
 “Does anyone else have an objection?” demanded Birgit. Beside her, 

 
478
Nolfavrell stared with openmouthed amazement at his mother. 
 
 Roran pulled his hood lower to conceal his grin. Good thing they haven’t 
noticed Gertrude, he thought. 
 
 When no one else challenged Birgit, Jeod asked, “Did you bring what I 
wanted?” Each sailor reached inside his vest and divulged a weighted club 
and several lengths of rope. 
 
 Thus armed, they worked their way down the harbor toward the 
Dragon Wing, doing their best to escape detection. Jeod kept his lantern 
shuttered the whole while. Near the dock, they hid behind a warehouse 
and watched the two lights carried by sentries bob around the deck of 
the ship. The gangway had been pulled away for the night. 
 
 “Remember,” whispered Jeod, “the most important thing is to keep the 
alarm from being sounded until we’re ready to leave.” 
 
 “Two men above, two men below, right?” asked Roran. 
 
 Uthar replied, “That be the custom.” 
 
 Roran and Uthar stripped to their breeches, tied the rope and clubs 
around their waists—Roran left his hammer behind—and then ran far-
ther down the wharf, out of the sentries’ sight, where they lowered 
themselves into the frigid water. 
 
 “Garr, I hate when I have to do this,” said Uthar. 
 
 “You’ve done it before?” 
 
 “Four times now. Don’t stop moving or you’ll freeze.” 
 
 Clinging to the slimy piles underneath the wharf, they swam back up 
the way they had come until they reached the stone pier that led to the 
Dragon Wing, and then turned right. Uthar put his lips to Roran’s ear. “I’ll 
take the starboard anchor.” Roran nodded his agreement. 
 
 They both dove under the black water, and there they separated. Uthar 
swam like a frog under the bow of the ship, while Roran went straight to 
the port anchor and clung to its thick chain. He untied the club from his 
waist and fit it between his teeth—as much to stop them from chattering 
as to free his hands—and prepared to wait. The rough metal sapped the 
warmth from his arms as fast as ice. 

 
479
 
 Not three minutes later, Roran heard the scuff of Birgit’s boots above 
him as she walked to the end of the pier, opposite the middle of the 
Dragon Wing, and then the faint sound of her voice as she engaged the 
sentries in conversation. Hopefully, she would keep their attention away 
from the bow. 
 
 Now! 
 
 Roran pulled himself hand over hand along the chain. His right shoul-
der burned where the Ra’zac had bit him, but he pressed on. From the 
porthole where the anchor chain entered the ship, he clambered up the 
ridges that supported the painted figurehead, over the railing, and onto 
the deck. Uthar was already there, dripping and panting. 
 
 Clubs in hand, they padded toward the aft of the ship, using whatever 
cover they could find. They stopped not ten feet behind the sentries. The 
two men leaned on the railing, bandying words with Birgit. 
 
 In a flash, Roran and Uthar burst into the open and struck the sentries 
on the head before they could draw their sabers. Below, Birgit waved for 
Jeod and the rest of their group, and between them they raised the gang-
way and slid one end across to the ship, where Uthar lashed it to the rail-
ing. 
 
 As Nolfavrell ran aboard, Roran tossed his rope to the boy and said, 
“Tie and gag these two.” 
 
 Then everyone but Gertrude descended belowdecks to hunt for the 
remaining sentries. They found four additional men—the purser, the bo-
sun, the ship’s cook, and the ship’s cook’s assistant—all of whom were 
trundled out of bed, knocked on the head if they resisted, and then se-
curely trussed. In this, Birgit again proved her worth, capturing two men 
herself. 
 
 Jeod had the unhappy prisoners placed in a line on the deck so they 
could be watched at all times, then declared, “We have much to do, and 
little time. Roran, Uthar is captain on the Dragon Wing. You and the 
others will take your orders from him.” 
 
 For the next two hours, the ship was a frenzy of activity. The sailors 
tended to the rigging and sails, while Roran and those from Carvahall 
worked to empty the hold of extraneous supplies, such as bales of raw 
wool. These they lowered overboard to prevent anyone on the wharf 

 
480
from hearing a splash. If the entire village was to fit on the Dragon Wing, 
they needed to clear as much space as possible. 
 
 Roran was in the midst of fitting a cable around a barrel when he heard 
the hoarse cry, “Someone’s coming!” Everyone on deck, except Jeod and 
Uthar, dropped to their bellies and reached for their weapons. The two 
men who remained standing paced the ship as if they were sentries. Ro-
ran’s heart pounded while he lay motionless, wondering what was about 
to happen. He held his breath as Jeod addressed the intruder... then foot-
steps echoed on the gangway. 
 
 It was Helen. 
 
 She wore a plain dress, her hair was bound under a kerchief, and she 
carried a burlap sack over one shoulder. She spoke not a word, but 
stowed her gear in the main cabin and returned to stand by Jeod. Roran 
thought he had never seen a happier man. 
 
 The sky above the distant mountains of the Spine had just begun to 
brighten when one of the sailors in the rigging pointed north and whis-
tled to indicate he had spotted the villagers. 
 
 Roran moved even faster. What time they had was now gone. He 
rushed up on deck and peered at the dark line of people advancing down 
the coast. This part of their plan depended on the fact that, unlike other 
coastal cities, Teirm’s outer wall had not been left open to the sea, but 
rather completely enclosed the bulk of the city in order to ward off fre-
quent pirate attacks. This meant that the buildings skirting the harbor 
were left exposed—and that the villagers could walk right up to the 
Dragon Wing. 
 
 “Hurry now, hurry!” said Jeod. 
 
 At Uthar’s command, the sailors brought out armfuls of javelins for the 
great bows on deck, as well as casks of foul-smelling tar, which they 
knocked open and used to paint the upper half of the javelins. They then 
drew and loaded the ballistae on the starboard side; it took two men per 
bow to pull out the sinew cord until it caught on its hook. 
 
 The villagers were two-thirds of the way to the ship before the soldiers 
patrolling the battlements of Teirm spotted them and trumpeted the 
alarm. Even before that first note faded, Uthar bellowed, “Light and fire 
’em!” 
 

 
481
 Dashing open Jeod’s lantern, Nolfavrell ran from one ballista to the 
next, holding the flame to the javelins until the tar ignited. The instant a 
missile caught, the man behind the bow pulled the release line and the 
javelin vanished with a heavy thunk. In all, twelve blazing bolts shot from 
the Dragon Wing and pierced the ships and buildings along the bay like 
roaring, red-hot meteors from the heavens above. 
 
 “Draw and reload!” shouted Uthar. 
 
 The creak of bending wood filled the air as every man hauled back on 
the twisted cords. Javelins were slotted in place. Once again, Nolfavrell 
made his run. Roran could feel the vibration in his feet as the ballista in 
front of him sent its deadly projectile winging on its way. 
 
 The fire quickly spread along the waterfront, forming an impenetrable 
barrier that prevented soldiers from reaching the Dragon Wing though 
Teirm’s east gate. Roran had counted on the pillar of smoke to hide the 
ship from the archers on the battlements, but it was a near thing; a flight 
of arrows tugged at the rigging, and one dart embedded itself in the deck 
by Gertrude before the soldiers lost sight of the ship. 
 
 From the bow, Uthar shouted, “Pick your targets at will!” 
 
 The villagers were running pell-mell down the beach now. They 
reached the north end of the wharf, and a handful of them stumbled and 
fell as the soldiers in Teirm redirected their aim. Children screamed in 
terror. Then the villagers regained momentum. They pounded down the 
planks, past a warehouse engulfed in flame and along the pier. The pant-
ing mob charged onto the ship in a confused mass of jostling bodies. 
 
 Birgit and Gertrude guided the stream of people to the fore and aft 
hatches. In a few minutes, the various levels of the ship were packed to 
their limit, from the cargo hold to the captain’s cabin. Those who could 
not fit below remained huddled on deck, holding Fisk’s shields over their 
heads. 
 
 As Roran had asked in his message, all able-bodied men from Carvahall 
clustered around the mainmast, waiting for instructions. Roran saw 
Mandel among them and tossed him a proud salute. 
 
 Then Uthar pointed at a sailor and barked, “You there, Bonden! Get 
those swabs to the capstans and weigh anchors, then down to the oars. 
Double time!” To the rest of the men at the ballistae, he ordered, “Half of 
you leave off and take the port ballistae. Drive away any boarding par-

 
482
ties.” 
 
 Roran was one of those who switched sides. As he prepared the ballis-
tae, a few laggards staggered out of the acrid smoke and onto the ship. 
Beside him, Jeod and Helen hoisted the six prisoners one by one onto the 
gangway and rolled them onto the pier. 
 
 Before Roran quite knew it, anchors had been raised, the gangway was 
cut loose, and a drum pounded beneath his feet, setting the tempo for 
the oarsmen. Ever so slowly, the Dragon Wing turned to starboard—
toward the open sea—and then, with gathering speed, pulled away from 
the dock. 
 
 Roran accompanied Jeod to the quarterdeck, where they watched the 
crimson inferno devour everything flammable between Teirm and the 
ocean. Through the filter of smoke, the sun appeared a flat, bloated, 
bloody orange disk as it rose over the city. 
 
 How many have I killed now? wondered Roran. 
 
 Echoing his thoughts, Jeod observed, “This will harm a great many in-
nocent people.” 
 
 Guilt made Roran respond with more force than he intended: “Would 
you rather be in Lord Risthart’s prisons? I doubt many will be injured in 
the blaze, and those that aren’t won’t face death, like we will if the Em-
pire catches us.” 
 
 “You needn’t lecture me, Roran. I know the arguments well enough. 
We did what we had to. Just don’t ask me to take pleasure in the suffer-
ing we’ve caused to ensure our own safety.” 
 
   
 
 By noon the oars had been stowed and the Dragon Wing sailed under 
her own power, propelled by favorable winds from the north. The gusts 
of air caused the rigging overhead to emit a low hum. 
 
 The ship was miserably overcrowded, but Roran was confident that 
with some careful planning they could make it to Surda with a minimum 
of discomfort. The worst inconvenience was that of limited rations; if 
they were to avoid starvation, food would have to be dispensed in mis-
erly portions. And in such cramped quarters, disease was an all too likely 
possibility. 

 
483
 
 After Uthar gave a brief speech about the importance of discipline on a 
ship, the villagers applied themselves to the tasks that required their im-
mediate attention, such as tending to their wounded, unpacking their 
meager belongings, and deciding upon the most efficient sleeping ar-
rangement for each deck. They also had to choose people to fill the vari-
ous positions on the Dragon Wing : who would cook, who would train as 
sailors under Uthar’s men, and so forth. 
 
 Roran was helping Elain hang a hammock when he became embroiled 
in a heated dispute between Odele, her family, and Frewin, who had ap-
parently deserted Torson’s crew to stay with Odele. The two of them 
wanted to marry, which Odele’s parents vehemently opposed on the 
grounds that the young sailor lacked a family of his own, a respectable 
profession, and the means to provide even a modicum of comfort for 
their daughter. Roran thought it best if the enamored couple remained 
together—it seemed impractical to try and separate them while they re-
mained confined to the same ship—but Odele’s parents refused to give 
his arguments credence. 
 
 Frustrated, Roran said, “What would you do, then? You can’t lock her 
away, and I believe Frewin has proved his devotion more than—” 
 
 “Ra’zac!” 
 
 The cry came from the crow’s nest. 
 
 Without a second thought, Roran yanked his hammer from his belt, 
whirled about, and scrambled up the ladder through the fore hatchway, 
barking his shin on the way. He sprinted toward the knot of people on 
the quarterdeck, coming to a halt beside Horst. 
 
 The smith pointed. 
 
 One of the Ra’zac’s dread steeds drifted like a tattered shadow above 
the edge of the coastline, a Ra’zac on its back. Seeing the two monsters 
exposed in daylight in no way diminished the creeping horror they in-
spired in Roran. He shuddered as the winged creature uttered its terrify-
ing shriek, and then the Ra’zac’s insectile voice drifted across the water, 
faint but distinct: “You shall not essscape!” 
 
 Roran looked at the ballistae, but they could not turn far enough to aim 
at the Ra’zac or its mount. “Does anyone have a bow?” 
 

 
484
 “I do,” said Baldor. He dropped to one knee and began to string his 
weapon. “Don’t let them see me.” Everyone on the quarterdeck gathered 
in a tight circle around Baldor, shielding him with their bodies from the 
Ra’zac’s malevolent gaze. 
 
 “Why don’t they attack?” growled Horst. 
 
 Puzzled, Roran searched for an explanation but found none. It was Jeod 
who suggested, “Perhaps it’s too bright for them. The Ra’zac hunt at 
night, and so far as I know they do not willingly venture forth from their 
lairs while the sun is yet in the sky.” 
 
 “It’s not just that,” said Gertrude slowly. “I think they’re afraid of the 
ocean.” 
 
 “Afraid of the ocean?” scoffed Horst. 
 
 “Watch them; they don’t fly more than a yard over the water at any 
given time.” 
 
 “She’s right,” said Roran. At last, a weakness I can use against them! 
 
 A few seconds later, Baldor said, “Ready!” 
 
 At his word, the ranks of people who stood before him jumped aside, 
clearing the path for his arrow. Baldor sprang to his feet and, in a single 
motion, pulled the feather to his cheek and loosed the reed shaft. 
 
 It was a heroic shot. The Ra’zac was at the extreme edge of a longbow’s 
range—far beyond any mark Roran had seen an archer hit—and yet Bal-
dor’s aim was true. His arrow struck the flying creature on the right flank, 
and the beast gave a scream of pain so great that the glass on the deck 
was shattered and the stones on the shore were riven in shards. Roran 
clapped his hands over his ears to protect them from the hideous blast. 
Still screaming, the monster veered inland and dropped behind a line of 
misty hills. 
 
 “Did you kill it?” asked Jeod, his face pale. 
 
 “I fear not,” replied Baldor. “It was naught but a flesh wound.” 
 
 Loring, who had just arrived, observed with satisfaction, “Aye. But at 
least you hurt him, and I’d wager they’ll think twice about bothering us 
again.” 

 
485
 
 Gloom settled over Roran. “Save your triumph for later, Loring. This 
was no victory.” 
 
 “Why not?” demanded Horst. 
 
 “Because now the Empire knows exactly where we are.” The quarter-
deck fell silent as they grasped the implications of what he had said. 
 
 

 
486
CHILD’S PLAY 
 
 
 “And this,” said Trianna, “is the latest pattern we’ve invented.” 
 
 Nasuada took the black veil from the sorceress and ran it through her 
hands, marveling at its quality. No human could throw lace that fine. She 
gazed with satisfaction at the rows of boxes on her desk, which contained 
samples of the many designs Du Vrangr Gata now produced. “You’ve 
done well,” she said. “Far better than I had hoped. Tell your spellcasters 
how pleased I am with their work. It means much to the Varden.” 
 
 Trianna inclined her head at the praise. “I will convey your message to 
them, Lady Nasuada.” 
 
 “Have they yet—” 
 
 A disturbance at the doors to her quarters interrupted Nasuada. She 
heard her guards swear and raise their voices, then a yelp of pain. The 
sound of metal clashing on metal rang in the hallway. Nasuada backed 
away from the door in alarm, drawing her dagger from its sheath. 
 
 “Run, Lady!” said Trianna. The sorceress placed herself in front of 
Nasuada and pushed back her sleeves, baring her white arms in prepara-
tion to work magic. “Take the servants’ entrance.” 
 
 Before Nasuada could move, the doors burst open and a small figure 
tackled her legs, knocking her to the floor. Even as Nasuada fell, a silvery 
object flashed through the space she had just occupied, burying itself in 
the far wall with a dull thud. 
 
 Then the four guards entered, and all was confusion as Nasuada felt 
them drag her assailant off her. When Nasuada managed to stand, she saw 
Elva hanging in their grip. 
 
 “What is the meaning of this?” demanded Nasuada. 
 
 The black-haired girl smiled, then doubled over and retched on the 
braided rug. Afterward, she fixed her violet eyes on Nasuada and—in her 
terrible, knowing voice—she said, “Have your magician examine the wall, 
O Daughter of Ajihad, and see if I have not fulfilled my promise to you.” 
 
 Nasuada nodded to Trianna, who glided to the splintered hole in the 
wall and muttered a spell. She returned holding a metal dart. “This was 

 
487
buried in the wood.” 
 
 “But where did it come from?” asked Nasuada, bewildered. 
 
 Trianna gestured toward the open window overlooking the city of 
Aberon. “Somewhere out there, I guess.” 
 
 Nasuada returned her attention to the waiting child. “What do you 
know about this, Elva?” 
 
 The girl’s horrible smile widened. “It was an assassin.” 
 
 “Who sent him?” 
 
 “An assassin trained by Galbatorix himself in the dark uses of magic.” 
Her burning eyes grew half-lidded, as if she were in a trance. “The man 
hates you. He’s coming for you. He would have killed you if I hadn’t 
stopped him.” She lurched forward and retched again, spewing half-
digested food across the floor. Nasuada gagged with revulsion. “And he’s 
about to suffer great pain.” 
 
 “Why is that?” 
 
 “Because I will tell you he stays in the hostel on Fane Street, in the last 
room, on the top floor. You had better hurry, or he’ll get away... away.” 
She groaned like a wounded beast and clutched her belly. “Hurry, before 
Eragon’s spell forces me to stop you from hurting him. You’ll be sorry, 
then!” 
 
 Trianna was already moving as Nasuada said, “Tell Jörmundur what’s 
happened, then take your strongest magicians and hunt down this man. 
Capture him if you can. Kill him if you can’t.” After the sorceress left, 
Nasuada looked at her men and saw that their legs were bleeding from 
numerous small cuts. She realized what it must have cost Elva to hurt 
them. “Go,” she told them. “Find a healer who can mend your injuries.” 
 
 The warriors shook their heads, and their captain said, “No, Ma’am. We 
will stay by your side until we know it’s safe again.” 
 
 “As you see fit, Captain.” 
 
 The men barricaded the windows—which worsened the already swel-
tering heat that plagued Borromeo Castle—then everyone retreated to 
her inner chambers for further protection. 

 
488
 
 Nasuada paced, her heart pounding with delayed shock as she contem-
plated how close she had come to being killed. What would become of the 
Varden if I died? she wondered. Who would succeed me? Dismay gripped 
her; she had made no arrangements for the Varden in the event of her 
own demise, an oversight that now seemed a monumental failing. I won’t 
allow the Varden to be thrown into chaos because I failed to take precau-
tions! 
 
 She halted. “I am in your debt, Elva.” 
 
 “Now and forever.” 
 
 Nasuada faltered, disconcerted as she often was by the girl’s responses, 
then continued: “I apologize for not ordering my guards to let you pass, 
night or day. I should have anticipated an event like this.” 
 
 “You should have,” agreed Elva in a mocking tone. 
 
 Smoothing the front of her dress, Nasuada resumed pacing, as much to 
escape the sight of Elva’s stone-white, dragon-marked face as to disperse 
her own nervous energy. “How did you escape your rooms unaccompa-
nied?” 
 
 “I told my caretaker, Greta, what she wanted to hear.” 
 
 “That’s all?” 
 
 Elva blinked. “It made her very happy.” 
 
 “And what of Angela?” 
 
 “She left on an errand this morning.” 
 
 “Well, be as that may, you have my gratitude for saving my life. Ask 
me any boon you want and I shall grant it if it’s within my power.” 
 
 Elva glanced around the ornate bedroom, then said, “Do you have any 
food? I’m hungry.” 
 

 
489
PREMONITION OF WAR 
 
 
 Two hours later, Trianna returned, leading a pair of warriors who car-
ried a limp body between them. At Trianna’s word, the men dropped the 
corpse on the floor. Then the sorceress said, “We found the assassin 
where Elva said we would. Drail was his name.” 
 
 Motivated by a morbid curiosity, Nasuada examined the face of the 
man who had tried to kill her. The assassin was short, bearded, and plain-
looking, no different from countless other men in the city. She felt a cer-
tain connection to him, as if his attempt on her life and the fact that she 
had arranged his death in return linked them in the most intimate man-
ner possible. “How was he killed?” she asked. “I see no marks on his 
body.” 
 
 “He committed suicide with magic when we overwhelmed his defenses 
and entered his mind, but before we could take control of his actions.” 
 
 “Were you able to learn anything of use before he died?” 
 
 “We were. Drail was part of a network of agents based here in Surda 
who are loyal to Galbatorix. They are called the Black Hand. They spy on 
us, sabotage our war efforts, and—best we could determine in our brief 
glimpse into Drail’s memories—are responsible for dozens of murders 
throughout the Varden. Apparently, they’ve been waiting for a good 
chance to kill you ever since we arrived from Farthen Dûr.” 
 
 “Why hasn’t this Black Hand assassinated King Orrin yet?” 
 
 Trianna shrugged. “I can’t say. It may be that Galbatorix considers you 
to be more of a threat than Orrin. If that’s the case, then once the Black 
Hand realizes you are protected from their attacks”— here her gaze 
darted toward Elva—“Orrin won’t live another month unless he is 
guarded by magicians day and night. Or perhaps Galbatorix has abstained 
from such direct action because he wanted the Black Hand to remain 
unnoticed. Surda has always existed at his tolerance. Now that it’s be-
come a threat...” 
 
 “Can you protect Orrin as well?” asked Nasuada, turning to Elva. 
 
 Her violet eyes seemed to glow. “Maybe if he asks nicely.” 
 
 Nasuada’s thoughts raced as she considered how to thwart this new 

 
490
menace. “Can all of Galbatorix’s agents use magic?” 
 
 “Drail’s mind was confused, so it’s hard to tell,” said Trianna, “but I’d 
guess a fair number of them can.” 
 
 Magic, cursed Nasuada to herself. The greatest danger the Varden faced 
from magicians—or any person trained in the use of their mind—was not 
assassination, but rather espionage. Magicians could spy on people’s 
thoughts and glean information that could be used to destroy the Varden. 
That was precisely why Nasuada and the entire command structure of 
the Varden had been taught to know when someone was touching their 
minds and how to shield themselves from such attentions. Nasuada sus-
pected that Orrin and Hrothgar relied upon similar precautions within 
their own governments. 
 
 However, since it was impractical for everyone privy to potentially 
damaging information to master that skill, one of Du Vrangr Gata’s many 
responsibilities was to hunt for anyone who was siphoning off facts as 
they appeared in people’s minds. The cost of such vigilance was that Du 
Vrangr Gata ended up spying on the Varden as much as on their ene-
mies, a fact that Nasuada made sure to conceal from the bulk of her fol-
lowers, for it would only sow hatred, distrust, and dissent. She disliked 
the practice but saw no alternative. 
 
 What she had learned about the Black Hand hardened Nasuada’s con-
viction that, somehow, magicians had to be governed. 
 
 “Why,” she asked, “didn’t you discover this sooner? I can understand 
that you might miss a lone assassin, but an entire network of spellcasters 
dedicated to our destruction? Explain yourself, Trianna.” 
 
 The sorceress’s eyes flashed with anger at the accusation. “Because here, 
unlike in Farthen Dûr, we cannot examine everyone’s minds for duplic-
ity. There are just too many people for us magicians to keep track of. 
That is why we didn’t know about the Black Hand until now, Lady 
Nasuada.” 
 
 Nasuada paused, then inclined her head. “Understood. Did you discover 
the identities of any other members of the Black Hand?” 
 
 “A few.” 
 
 “Good. Use them to ferret out the rest of the agents. I want you to de-
stroy this organization for me, Trianna. Eradicate them as you would an 

 
491
infestation of vermin. I’ll give you however many men you need.” 
 
 The sorceress bowed. “As you wish, Lady Nasuada.” 
 
 At a knock on the door, the guards drew their swords and positioned 
themselves on either side of the entranceway, then their captain yanked 
open the door without warning. A young page stood outside, a fist raised 
to knock again. He stared with astonishment at the body on the floor, 
then snapped to attention as the captain asked, “What is it, boy?” 
 
 “I have a message for Lady Nasuada from King Orrin.” 
 
 “Then speak and be quick about it,” said Nasuada. 
 
 The page took a moment to compose himself. “King Orrin requests 
that you attend him directly in his council chambers, for he has received 
reports from the Empire that demand your immediate attention.” 
 
 “Is that all?” 
 
 “Yes, Ma’am.” 
 
 “I must attend to this. Trianna, you have your orders. Captain, will you 
leave one of your men to dispose of Drail?” 
 
 “Aye, Ma’am.” 
 
 “Also, please have him locate Farica, my handmaid. She will see to it 
that my study is cleaned.” 
 
 “And what of me?” asked Elva, tilting her head. 
 
 “You,” said Nasuada, “shall accompany me. That is, if you feel strong 
enough to do so.” 
 
 The girl threw back her head, and from her small, round mouth ema-
nated a cold laugh. “I’m strong enough, Nasuada. Are you?” 
 
 Ignoring the question, Nasuada swept forth into the hallway with her 
guards clustered around her. The stones of the castle exuded an earthy 
smell in the heat. Behind her, she heard the patter of Elva’s footsteps and 
was perversely pleased that the ghastly child had to hurry to keep pace 
with the adults’ longer stride. 
 

 
492
 The guards remained behind in the vestibule to the council chambers 
while Nasuada and Elva proceeded inside. The chambers were bare to 
the point of severity, reflecting the militant nature of Surda’s existence. 
The country’s kings had devoted their resources to protecting their peo-
ple and overthrowing Galbatorix, not to decorating Borromeo Castle 
with idle riches as the dwarves had done with Tronjheim. 
 
 In the main room lay a rough-hewn table twelve feet long, upon which 
a map of Alagaësia was staked open with daggers at the four corners. As 
was custom, Orrin sat at the head of the table, while his various advis-
ers—many of whom, Nasuada knew, vehemently opposed her—
occupied the chairs farther down. The Council of Elders was also present. 
Nasuada noticed the concern on Jörmundur’s face as he looked at her and 
deduced that Trianna had indeed told him about Drail. 
 
 “Sire, you asked for me?” 
 
 Orrin rose. “That I did. We have now—” He stopped in midword as he 
noticed Elva. “Ah, yes, Shining Brow. I have not had the opportunity to 
grant you audience before, though accounts of your feats have reached 
my ear and, I must confess, I have been most curious to meet you. Have 
you found the quarters I arranged for you satisfactory?” 
 
 “They are quite nice, Sire. Thank you.” At the sound of her eerie voice, 
the voice of an adult, everyone at the table flinched. 
 
 Irwin, the prime minister, bolted upright and pointed a quivering finger 
at Elva. “Why have you brought this... this abomination here?” 
 
 “You forget your manners, sir,” replied Nasuada, though she understood 
his sentiment. 
 
 Orrin frowned. “Yes, do restrain yourself, Irwin. However, his point is 
valid, Nasuada; we cannot have this child present at our deliberations.” 
 
 “The Empire,” she said, “has just tried to assassinate me.” The room 
echoed with cries of surprise. “If it were not for Elva’s swift action, I 
would be dead. As a result, I have taken her into my confidence; where I 
go, she goes.” Let them wonder what it is exactly Elva can do. 
 
 “This is indeed distressing news!” exclaimed the king. “Have you caught 
the blackguard responsible?” 
 
 Seeing the eager expressions of his advisers, Nasuada hesitated. “It 

 
493
would be best to wait until I can give you an account in private, Sire.” 
 
 Orrin appeared put out by her response, but he did not pursue the is-
sue. “Very well. But sit, sit! We have just received the most troubling re-
port.” After Nasuada took her place opposite him—Elva lurking behind 
her—he continued: “It seems that our spies in Gil’ead have been deceived 
as to the status of Galbatorix’s army.” 
 
 “How so?” 
 
 “They believe the army to be in Gil’ead, whereas we have here a mis-
sive from one of our men in Urû’baen, who says that he witnessed a great 
host march south past the capital a week and a half ago. It was night, so 
he could not be sure of their numbers, but he was certain that the host 
was far larger than the sixteen thousand that form the core of Galba-
torix’s troops. There may have been as many as a hundred thousand sol-
diers, or more.” 
 
 A hundred thousand! A cold pit of fear settled in Nasuada’s stomach. 
“Can we trust your source?” 
 
 “His intelligence has always been reliable.” 
 
 “I don’t understand,” said Nasuada. “How could Galbatorix move that 
many men without our knowing of it before? The supply trains alone 
would be miles long. It’s been obvious the army was mobilizing, but the 
Empire was nowhere near ready to deploy.” 
 
 Falberd spoke then, slapping a heavy hand on the table for emphasis: 
“We were outfoxed. Our spies must have been deceived with magic to 
think the army was still in their barracks in Gil’ead.” 
 
 Nasuada felt the blood drain from her face. “The only person strong 
enough to sustain an illusion of that size and duration—” 
 
 “Is Galbatorix himself,” completed Orrin. “That was our conclusion. It 
means that Galbatorix has finally abandoned his lair in favor of open 
combat. Even as we speak, the black foe approaches.” 
 
 Irwin leaned forward. “The question now is how we should respond. 
We must confront this threat, of course, but in what manner? Where, 
when, and how? Our own forces aren’t prepared for a campaign of this 
magnitude, while yours, Lady Nasuada—the Varden—are already accus-
tomed to the fierce clamor of war.” 

 
494
 
 “What do you mean to imply?” That we should die for you? 
 
 “I but made an observation. Take it how you will.” 
 
 Then Orrin said, “Alone, we will be crushed against an army so large. 
We must have allies, and above all else we must have Eragon, especially 
if we are to confront Galbatorix. Nasuada, will you send for him?” 
 
 “I would if I could, but until Arya returns, I have no way to contact the 
elves or to summon Eragon.” 
 
 “In that case,” said Orrin in a heavy voice, “we must hope that she ar-
rives before it is too late. I do not suppose we can expect the elves’ assis-
tance in this affair. While a dragon may traverse the leagues between 
Aberon and Ellesméra with the speed of a falcon, it would be impossible 
for the elves to marshal themselves and cross that same distance before 
the Empire reaches us. That leaves only the dwarves. I know that you 
have been friends with Hrothgar for many years; will you send him a plea 
for help on our behalf? The dwarves have always promised they would 
fight when the time came.” 
 
 Nasuada nodded. “Du Vrangr Gata has an arrangement with certain 
dwarf magicians that allows us to transfer messages instantaneously. I will 
convey your—our—request. And I will ask Hrothgar to send an emissary 
to Ceris to inform the elves of the situation so that they are forewarned, 
if nothing else.” 
 
 “Good. We are quite a ways from Farthen Dûr, but if we can delay the 
Empire for even a week, the dwarves might be able to get here in time.” 
 
 The discussion that followed was an exceedingly grim one. Various tac-
tics existed for defeating a larger—although not necessarily superior—
force, but no one at the table could imagine how they might defeat Gal-
batorix, especially when Eragon was still so powerless compared to the 
ancient king. The only ploy that might succeed would be to surround Er-
agon with as many magicians, dwarf and human, as possible, and then at-
tempt to force Galbatorix to confront them alone. The problem with that 
plan, thought Nasuada, is that Galbatorix overcame far more formidable 
enemies during his destruction of the Riders, and his strength has only 
grown since. She was certain that this had occurred to everyone else as 
well. If we but had the elves’ spellweavers to swell our ranks, then victory 
might be within our reach. Without them... If we cannot overthrow Galba-
torix, the only avenue left may be to flee Alagaësia across the sundering sea 

 
495
and find a new land in which to build a life for ourselves. There we could 
wait until Galbatorix is no more. Even he cannot endure forever. The only 
certainty is that, eventually, all things shall pass. 
 
 They moved on then from tactics to logistics, and here the debate be-
came far more acrimonious as the Council of Elders argued with Orrin’s 
advisers over the distribution of responsibilities between the Varden and 
Surda: who should pay for this or that, provide rations for laborers who 
worked for both groups, manage the provisions for their respective war-
riors, and how numerous other related subjects should be dealt with. 
 
 In the midst of the verbal fray, Orrin pulled a scroll from his belt and 
said to Nasuada, “On the matter of finances, would you be so kind as to 
explain a rather curious item that was brought to my attention?” 
 
 “I’ll do my best, Sire.” 
 
 “I hold in my hand a complaint from the weavers’ guild, which asserts 
that weavers throughout Surda have lost a good share of their profits be-
cause the textile market has been inundated with extraordinarily cheap 
lace—lace they swear originates with the Varden.” A pained look crossed 
his face. “It seems foolish to even ask, but does their claim have basis in 
fact, and if so, why would the Varden do such a thing?” 
 
 Nasuada made no attempt to hide her smile. “If you remember, Sire, 
when you refused to lend the Varden more gold, you advised me to find 
another way for us to support ourselves.” 
 
 “So I did. What of it?” asked Orrin, narrowing his eyes. 
 
 “Well, it struck me that while lace takes a long time to make by hand, 
which is why it’s so expensive, lace is quite easy to produce using magic 
due to the small amount of energy involved. You of all people, as a natu-
ral philosopher, should appreciate that. By selling our lace here and in the 
Empire, we have been able to fully fund our efforts. The Varden no 
longer want for food or shelter.” 
 
 Few things in her life pleased Nasuada so much as Orrin’s incredulous 
expression at that instant. The scroll frozen halfway between his chin and 
the table, his slightly parted mouth, and the quizzical frown upon his 
brow conspired to give him the stunned appearance of a man who had 
just seen something he did not understand. She savored the sight. 
 
 “Lace?” he sputtered. 

 
496
 
 “Yes, Sire.” 
 
 “You can’t fight Galbatorix with lace !” 
 
 “Why not, Sire?” 
 
 He struggled for a moment, then growled, “Because... because it’s not 
respectable, that’s why. What bard would compose an epic about our 
deeds and write about lace ?” 
 
 “We do not fight in order to have epics written in our praise.” 
 
 “Then blast epics! How am I supposed to answer the weavers’ guild? By 
selling your lace so cheaply, you hurt people’s livelihoods and undermine 
our economy. It won’t do. It won’t do at all.” 
 
 Letting her smile become sweet and warm, Nasuada said in her friend-
liest tone, “Oh dear. If it’s too much of a burden for your treasury, the 
Varden would be more than willing to offer you a loan in return for the 
kindness you’ve shown us... at a suitable rate of interest, of course.” 
 
 The Council of Elders managed to maintain their decorum, but behind 
Nasuada, Elva uttered a quick laugh of amusement. 
 

 
497
RED BLADE, WHITE BLADE 
 
 
 The moment the sun appeared over the tree-lined horizon, Eragon 
deepened his breathing, willed his heart to quicken, and opened his eyes 
as he returned to full awareness. He had not been asleep, for he had not 
slept since his transformation. When he felt weary and lay himself down 
to rest, he entered a state that was unto a waking dream. There he beheld 
many wondrous visions and walked among the gray shades of his memo-
ries, yet all the while remained aware of his surroundings. 
 
 He watched the sunrise and thoughts of Arya filled his mind, as they 
had every hour since the Agaetí Blödhren two days before. The morning 
after the celebration, he had gone looking for her in Tialdarí Hall—
intending to try and make amends for his behavior—only to discover that 
she had already left for Surda. When will I see her again? he wondered. In 
the clear light of day, he had realized just how much the elves’ and drag-
ons’ magic had dulled his wits during the Agaetí Blödhren. I may have 
acted a fool, but it wasn’t entirely my fault. I was no more responsible for 
my conduct than if I were drunk. 
 
 Still, he had meant every word he said to Arya—even if normally he 
would not have revealed so much of himself. Her rejection cut Eragon to 
the quick. Freed of the enchantments that had clouded his mind, he was 
forced to admit that she was probably right, that the difference between 
their ages was too great to overcome. It was a difficult thing for him to 
accept, and once he had, the knowledge only increased his anguish. 
 
 Eragon had heard the expression “heartbroken” before. Until then, he 
always considered it a fanciful description, not an actual physical symp-
tom. But now he felt a deep ache in his chest—like that of a sore mus-
cle—and each beat of his heart pained him. 
 
 His only comfort was Saphira. In those two days, she had never criti-
cized what he had done, nor did she leave his side for more than a few 
minutes at a time, lending him the support of her companionship. She 
talked to him a great deal as well, doing her best to draw him out of his 
shell of silence. 
 
 To keep himself from brooding over Arya, Eragon took Orik’s puzzle 
ring from his nightstand and rolled it between his fingers, marveling at 
how keen his senses had become. He could feel every flaw in the twisted 
metal. As he studied the ring, he perceived a pattern in the arrangement 
of the gold bands, a pattern that had escaped him before. Trusting his in-

 
498
stinct, he manipulated the bands in the sequence suggested by his obser-
vation. To his delight, the eight pieces fit together perfectly, forming a 
solid whole. He slid the ring onto the fourth finger of his right hand, ad-
miring how the woven bands caught the light. 
 
 You could not do that before, observed Saphira from the bowl in the 
floor where she slept. 
 
 I can see many things that were once hidden to me. 
 
 Eragon went to the wash closet and performed his morning ablutions, 
including removing the stubble from his cheeks with a spell. Despite the 
fact that he now closely resembled an elf, he had retained the ability to 
grow a beard. 
 
 Orik was waiting for them when Eragon and Saphira arrived at the 
sparring field. His eyes brightened as Eragon lifted his hand and displayed 
the completed puzzle ring. “You solved it, then!” 
 
 “It took me longer than I expected,” said Eragon, “but yes. Are you here 
to practice as well?” 
 
 “Eh. I already got in a bit o’ ax work with an elf who took a rather 
fiendish delight in cracking me over the head. No... I came to watch you 
fight.” 
 
 “You’ve seen me fight before,” pointed out Eragon. 
 
 “Not for a while, I haven’t.” 
 
 “You mean you’re curious to see how I’ve changed.” Orik shrugged in 
response. 
 
 Vanir approached from across the field. He cried, “Are you ready, 
Shadeslayer?” The elf’s condescending demeanor had lessened since their 
last duel before the Agaetí Blödhren, but not by much. 
 
 “I’m ready.” 
 
 Eragon and Vanir squared off against each other in an open area of the 
field. Emptying his mind, Eragon grasped and drew Zar’roc as fast as he 
could. To his surprise, the sword felt as if it weighed no more than a wil-
low wand. Without the expected resistance, Eragon’s arm snapped 
straight, tearing the sword from his hand and sending it whirling twenty 

 
499
yards to his right, where it buried itself in the trunk of a pine tree. 
 
 “Can you not even hold on to your blade, Rider?” demanded Vanir. 
 
 “I apologize, Vanir-vodhr,” gasped Eragon. He clutched his elbow, rub-
bing the bruised joint to lessen the pain. “I misjudged my strength.” 
 
 “See that it does not happen again.” Going to the tree, Vanir gripped 
Zar’roc’s hilt and tried to pull the sword free. The weapon remained mo-
tionless. Vanir’s eyebrows met as he frowned at the unyielding crimson 
blade, as if he suspected some form of trickery. Bracing himself, the elf 
heaved backward and, with the crack of wood, yanked Zar’roc out of the 
pine. 
 
 Eragon accepted the sword from Vanir and hefted Zar’roc, troubled by 
how light it was. Something’s wrong, he thought. 
 
 “Take your place!” 
 
 This time it was Vanir who initiated the fight. In a single bound, he 
crossed the distance between them and thrust his blade toward Eragon’s 
right shoulder. To Eragon, it seemed as if the elf moved slower than 
usual, as if Vanir’s reflexes had been reduced to the level of a human’s. It 
was easy for Eragon to deflect Vanir’s sword, blue sparks flying from the 
metal as their blades grated against one another. 
 
 Vanir landed with an astonished expression. He struck again, and Er-
agon evaded the sword by leaning back, like a tree swaying in the wind. 
In quick succession, Vanir rained a score of heavy blows upon Eragon, 
each of which Eragon dodged or blocked, using Zar’roc’s sheath as often 
as the sword to foil Vanir’s onslaught. 
 
 Eragon soon realized that the spectral dragon from the Agaetí Blödhren 
had done more than alter his appearance; it had also granted him the 
elves’ physical abilities. In strength and speed, Eragon now matched even 
the most athletic elf. 
 
 Fired by that knowledge and a desire to test his limits, Eragon jumped 
as high as he could. Zar’roc flashed crimson in the sunlight as he flew 
skyward, soaring more than ten feet above the ground before he flipped 
like an acrobat and came down behind Vanir, facing the direction from 
which he had started. 
 
 A fierce laugh erupted from Eragon. No more was he helpless before 

 
500
elves, Shades, and other creatures of magic. No more would he suffer the 
elves’ contempt. No more would he have to rely on Saphira or Arya to 
rescue him from enemies like Durza. 
 
 He charged Vanir, and the field rang with a furious din as they strove 
against each other, raging back and forth upon the trampled grass. The 
force of their blows created gusts of wind that whipped their hair into 
tangled disarray. Overhead, the trees shook and dropped their needles. 
The duel lasted long into the morning, for even with Eragon’s newfound 
skill, Vanir was still a formidable opponent. But in the end, Eragon would 
not be denied. Playing Zar’roc in a circle, he darted past Vanir’s guard and 
struck him upon the upper arm, breaking the bone. 
 
 Vanir dropped his blade, his face turning white with shock. “How swift 
is your sword,” he said, and Eragon recognized the famous line from The 
Lay of Umhodan. 
 
 “By the gods!” exclaimed Orik. “That was the best swordsmanship I’ve 
ever seen, and I was there when you fought Arya in Farthen Dûr.” 
 
 Then Vanir did what Eragon had never expected: the elf twisted his 
uninjured hand in the gesture of fealty, placed it upon his sternum, and 
bowed. “I beg your pardon for my earlier behavior, Eragon-elda. I thought 
that you had consigned my race to the void, and out of my fear I acted 
most shamefully. However, it seems that your race no longer endangers 
our cause.” In a grudging voice, he added: “You are now worthy of the ti-
tle Rider.” 
 
 Eragon bowed in return. “You honor me. I’m sorry that I injured you so 
badly. Will you allow me to heal your arm?” 
 
 “No, I shall let nature tend to it at her own pace, as a memento that I 
once crossed blades with Eragon Shadeslayer. You needn’t fear that it will 
disrupt our sparring tomorrow; I am equally good with my left hand.” 
 
 They both bowed again, and then Vanir departed. 
 
 Orik slapped a hand on his thigh and said, “Now we have a chance at 
victory, a real chance! I can feel it in my bones. Bones like stone, they say. 
Ah, this’ll please Hrothgar and Nasuada to no end.” 
 
 Eragon kept his peace and concentrated on removing the block from 
Zar’roc’s edges, but he said to Saphira, If brawn were all that was required 
to depose Galbatorix, the elves would have done it long ago. Still, he could 

 
501
not help being pleased by his heightened prowess, as well as by his long-
awaited reprieve from the torment of his back. Without the constant 
bursts of pain, it was as if a haze had been lifted from his mind, allowing 
him to think clearly once again. 
 
 A few minutes remained before they were supposed to meet with 
Oromis and Glaedr, so Eragon took his bow and quiver from where they 
hung on Saphira’s back and walked to the range where elves practiced 
archery. Since the elves’ bows were much more powerful than his, their 
padded targets were both too small and too far away for him. He had to 
shoot from halfway down the range. 
 
 Taking his place, Eragon nocked an arrow and slowly pulled back the 
string, delighted by how easy it had become. He aimed, released the ar-
row, and held his position, waiting to see if he would hit his mark. Like a 
maddened hornet, the dart buzzed toward the target and buried itself in 
the center. He grinned. Again and again, he fired at the target, his speed 
increasing with his confidence until he loosed thirty arrows in a minute. 
 
 At the thirty-first arrow, he pulled on the string slightly harder than he 
had ever done—or was capable of doing—before. With an explosive re-
port, the yew bow broke in half underneath his left hand, scratching his 
fingers and discharging a burst of splinters from the back of the bow. His 
hand went numb from the jolt. 
 
 Eragon stared at the remains of his weapon, dismayed by the loss. Gar-
row had made it as a birthday present for him over three years ago. Since 
then, hardly a week went by when Eragon had not used his bow. It had 
helped him to provide food for his family on numerous occasions when 
they would have otherwise gone hungry. With it, he had killed his first 
deer. With it, he had killed his first Urgal. And through it, he had first 
used magic. Losing his bow was like losing an old friend who could be 
relied upon in even the worst situation. 
 
 Saphira sniffed the two pieces of wood dangling from his grip and said, 
It seems you need a new stick thrower. He grunted—in no mood to talk—
and stomped out to retrieve his arrows. 
 
 From the open field, he and Saphira flew to the white Crags of 
Tel’naeír and presented themselves to Oromis, who was seated on a stool 
in front of his hut, gazing out over the cliff with his farseeing eyes. He 
said, “Have you entirely recovered, Eragon, from the potent magic of the 
Blood-oath Celebration?” 
 

 
502
 “I have, Master.” 
 
 A long silence followed as Oromis drank from a cup of blackberry tea 
and resumed contemplating the ancient forest. Eragon waited without 
complaint; he was used to such pauses when dealing with the old Rider. 
At length, Oromis said, “Glaedr explained to me, as best he could, what 
was done to you during the celebration. Such a thing has never before oc-
curred in the history of the Riders.... Once again, the dragons have proved 
themselves capable of far more than we imagined.” He sipped his tea. 
“Glaedr was uncertain exactly what changes you would experience, so I 
would like you to describe the full extent of your transformation, includ-
ing your appearance.” 
 
 Eragon quickly summarized how he had been altered, detailing the in-
creased sensitivity of his sight, smell, hearing, and touch, and ending with 
an account of his clash with Vanir. 
 
 “And how,” asked Oromis, “do you feel about this? Do you resent that 
your body was manipulated without your permission?” 
 
 “No, no! Not at all. I might have resented it before the battle of Farthen 
Dûr, but now I’m just grateful that my back doesn’t hurt anymore. I 
would have willingly submitted myself to far greater changes in order to 
escape Durza’s curse. No, my only response is gratitude.” 
 
 Oromis nodded. “I am glad that you are wise enough to take that posi-
tion, for your gift is worth more than all the gold in the world. With it, I 
believe that our feet are at last set upon the correct path.” Again, he 
sipped his tea. “Let us proceed. Saphira, Glaedr expects you at the Stone 
of Broken Eggs. Eragon, you will begin today with the third level of 
Rimgar, if you can. I would know everything you are capable of.” 
 
 Eragon started toward the square of tamped earth where they usually 
performed the Dance of Snake and Crane, then hesitated when the silver-
haired elf remained behind. “Master, won’t you join me?” 
 
 A sad smile graced Oromis’s face. “Not today, Eragon. The spells re-
quired by the Blood-oath Celebration exacted a heavy toll from me. That 
and my... condition. It took the last of my strength to come sit outside.” 
 
 “I am sorry, Master.” Does he resent that the dragons didn’t choose to heal 
him as well? wondered Eragon. He immediately discounted the thought; 
Oromis would never be so petty. 
 

 
503
 “Do not be. It is no fault of yours that I am crippled.” 
 
 As Eragon struggled to complete the third level of the Rimgar, it be-
came obvious that he still lacked the elves’ balance and flexibility, two 
attributes that even the elves had to work to acquire. In a way, he wel-
comed those limitations, for if he was perfect, what was left for him to 
accomplish? 
 
 The following weeks were difficult for Eragon. On one hand, he made 
enormous progress with his training, mastering subject after subject that 
had once confounded him. He still found Oromis’s lessons challenging, 
but he no longer felt as if he were drowning in a sea of his own inade-
quacy. It was easier for Eragon to read and write, and his increased 
strength meant that he could now cast elven spells that required so much 
energy, they would kill any normal human. His strength also made him 
aware of how weak Oromis was compared to other elves. 
 
 And yet, despite those accomplishments, Eragon experienced a growing 
sense of discontent. No matter how hard he tried to forget Arya, every 
day that passed increased his yearning, an agony made worse by knowing 
that she did not want to see or talk with him. But more than that, it 
seemed to him as if an ominous storm was gathering beyond the edge of 
the horizon, a storm that threatened to break at any moment and sweep 
across the land, devastating everything in its path. 
 
 Saphira shared his unease. She said, The world is stretched thin, Eragon. 
Soon it will snap and madness will burst forth. What you feel is what we 
dragons feel and what the elves feel—the inexorable march of grim fate as 
the end of our age approaches. Weep for those who will die in the chaos that 
shall consume Alagaësia. And hope that we may win a brighter future by 
the strength of your sword and shield and my fangs and talons. 
 
 
 
 

 
504
VISIONS NEAR AND FAR 
 
 
 The day came when Eragon went to the glade beyond Oromis’s hut, 
seated himself on the polished white stump in the center of the mossy 
hollow, and—when he opened his mind to observe the creatures around 
him—sensed not just the birds, beasts, and insects but also the plants of 
the forest. 
 
 The plants possessed a different type of consciousness than animals: 
slow, deliberate, and decentralized, but in their own way just as cogni-
zant of their surroundings as Eragon himself was. The faint pulse of the 
plants’ awareness bathed the galaxy of stars that wheeled behind his 
eyes—each bright spark representing a life—in a soft, omnipresent glow. 
Even the most barren soil teemed with organisms; the land itself was 
alive and sentient. 
 
 Intelligent life, he concluded, existed everywhere. 
 
 As Eragon immersed himself in the thoughts and feelings of the beings 
around him, he was able to attain a state of inner peace so profound that, 
during that time, he ceased to exist as an individual. He allowed himself 
to become a nonentity, a void, a receptacle for the voices of the world. 
Nothing escaped his attention, for his attention was focused on nothing. 
 
 He was the forest and its inhabitants. 
 
 Is that what a god feels like? wondered Eragon when he returned to 
himself. 
 
 He left the glade, sought out Oromis in his hut, and knelt before the 
elf, saying, “Master, I have done as you told me to. I listened until I heard 
no more.” 
 
 Oromis paused in his writing and, with a thoughtful expression, looked 
at Eragon. “Tell me.” For an hour and a half, Eragon waxed eloquent 
about every aspect of the plants and animals that populated the glade, 
until Oromis raised his hand and said, “I am convinced; you heard all 
there was to hear. But did you understand it all?” 
 
 “No, Master.” 
 
 “That is as it should be. Comprehension will come with age.... Well 
done, Eragon-finiarel. Well done indeed. If you were my student in Ilirea, 

 
505
before Galbatorix rose to power, you would have just graduated from 
your apprenticeship and would be considered a full member of our order 
and accorded the same rights and privileges as even the oldest Riders.” 
Oromis pushed himself up out of his chair and then remained standing in 
place, swaying. “Lend me your shoulder, Eragon, and help me outside. My 
limbs betray my will.” 
 
 Hurrying to his master’s side, Eragon supported the elf’s slight weight as 
Oromis hobbled to the brook that rushed headlong toward the edge of 
the Crags of Tel’naeír. “Now that you have reached this stage in your 
education, I can teach you one of the greatest secrets of magic, a secret 
that even Galbatorix may not know. It is your best hope of matching his 
power.” The elf’s gaze sharpened. “What is the cost of magic, Eragon?” 
 
 “Energy. A spell costs the same amount of energy as it would to com-
plete the task through mundane means.” 
 
 Oromis nodded. “And where does the energy come from?” 
 
 “The spellcaster’s body.” 
 
 “Does it have to?” 
 
 Eragon’s mind raced as he considered the awesome implications of 
Oromis’s question. “You mean it can come from other sources?” 
 
 “That is exactly what happens whenever Saphira assists you with a 
spell.” 
 
 “Yes, but she and I share a unique connection,” protested Eragon. “Our 
bond is the reason I can draw upon her strength. To do that with some-
one else, I would have to enter...” He trailed off as he realized what 
Oromis was driving at. 
 
 “You would have to enter the consciousness of the being—or beings—
who was going to provide the energy,” said Oromis, completing Eragon’s 
thought. “Today you proved that you can do just that with even the 
smallest form of life. Now...” He stopped and pressed a hand against his 
chest as he coughed, then continued, “I want you to extract a sphere of 
water from the stream, using only the energy you can glean from the for-
est around you.” 
 
 “Yes, Master.” 
 

 
506
 As Eragon reached out to the nearby plants and animals, he felt 
Oromis’s mind brush against his own, the elf watching and judging his 
progress. Frowning with concentration, Eragon endeavored to eke the 
needed force from the environment and hold it within himself until he 
was ready to release the magic.... 
 
 “Eragon! Do not take it from me! I am weak enough as is.” 
 
 Startled, Eragon realized that he had included Oromis in his search. “I’m 
sorry, Master,” he said, chastised. He resumed the process, careful to 
avoid draining the elf’s vitality, and when he was ready, commanded, 
“Up!” 
 
 Silent as the night, a sphere of water a foot wide rose from the brook 
until it floated at eye level across from Eragon. And while Eragon experi-
enced the usual strain that results from intense effort, the spell itself 
caused him no fatigue. 
 
 The sphere was only in the air for a moment when a wave of death 
rolled through the smaller creatures Eragon was in contact with. A line of 
ants keeled over motionless. A baby mouse gasped and entered the void 
as it lost the strength to keep its heart beating. Countless plants withered 
and crumbled and became inert as dust. 
 
 Eragon flinched, horrified by what he had caused. Given his new re-
spect for the sanctity of life, he found the crime appalling. What made it 
worse was that he was intimately linked with each being as it ceased to 
exist; it was as if he himself were dying over and over. He severed the 
flow of magic—letting the sphere of water splash across the ground—and 
then whirled on Oromis and growled, “You knew that would happen!” 
 
 An expression of profound sorrow engulfed the ancient Rider. “It was 
necessary,” he replied. 
 
 “Necessary that so many had to die?” 
 
 “Necessary that you understand the terrible price of using this type of 
magic. Mere words cannot convey the feeling of having those whose 
minds you share die. You had to experience it for yourself.” 
 
 “I won’t do that again,” vowed Eragon. 
 
 “Nor will you have to. If you are disciplined, you can choose to draw 
the power only from plants and animals that can withstand the loss. It’s 

 
507
impractical in battle, but you may do so in your lessons.” Oromis gestured 
at him, and, still simmering, Eragon allowed the elf to lean on him as they 
returned to the hut. “You see why this technique was not taught to 
younger riders. If it were to become known to a spellweaver of evil dis-
position, he or she could wreak vast amounts of destruction, especially 
since it would be difficult to stop anyone with access to so much power.” 
Once they were back inside, the elf sighed, lowered himself into his 
chair, and pressed the tips of his fingers together. 
 
 Eragon sat as well. “Since it’s possible to absorb energy from”— he 
waved his hand—“from life, is it also possible to absorb it directly from 
light or fire or from any of the other forms of energy?” 
 
 “Ah, Eragon, if it were, we could destroy Galbatorix in an instant. We 
can exchange energy with other living beings, we can use that energy to 
move our bodies or to fuel a spell, and we can even store that energy in 
certain objects for later use, but we cannot assimilate the fundamental 
forces of nature. Reason says that it can be done, but no one has managed 
to devise a spell that allows it.” 
 
   
 
 Nine days later, Eragon presented himself to Oromis and said, “Master, 
it struck me last night that neither you nor the hundreds of elven scrolls 
I’ve read have mentioned your religion. What do elves believe?” 
 
 A long sigh was Oromis’s first answer. Then: “We believe that the 
world behaves according to certain inviolable rules and that, by persistent 
effort, we can discover those rules and use them to predict events when 
circumstances repeat.” 
 
 Eragon blinked. That did not tell him what he wanted to know. “But 
who, or what, do you worship?” 
 
 “Nothing.” 
 
 “You worship the concept of nothing?” 
 
 “No, Eragon. We do not worship at all.” 
 
 The thought was so alien, it took Eragon several moments to grasp 
what Oromis meant. The villagers of Carvahall lacked a single overriding 
doctrine, but they did share a collection of superstitions and rituals, most 
of which concerned warding off bad luck. During the course of his train-

 
508
ing, it had dawned upon Eragon that many of the phenomena that the 
villagers attributed to supernatural sources were in fact natural processes, 
such as when he learned in his meditations that maggots hatched from fly 
eggs instead of spontaneously arising from the dirt, as he had thought be-
fore. Nor did it make sense for him to put out an offering of food to keep 
sprites from turning the milk sour when he knew that sour milk was ac-
tually caused by a proliferation of tiny organisms in the liquid. Still, Er-
agon remained convinced that otherworldly forces influenced the world 
in mysterious ways, a belief that his exposure to the dwarves’ religion had 
bolstered. He said, “Where do you think the world came from, then, if it 
wasn’t created by the gods?” 
 
 “Which gods, Eragon?” 
 
 “Your gods, the dwarf gods, our gods... someone must have created it.” 
 
 Oromis raised an eyebrow. “I would not necessarily agree with you. But 
be as that may, I cannot prove that gods do not exist. Nor can I prove 
that the world and everything in it was not created by an entity or enti-
ties in the distant past. But I can tell you that in the millennia we elves 
have studied nature, we have never witnessed an instance where the rules 
that govern the world have been broken. That is, we have never seen a 
miracle. Many events have defied our ability to explain, but we are con-
vinced that we failed because we are still woefully ignorant about the 
universe and not because a deity altered the workings of nature.” 
 
 “A god wouldn’t have to alter nature to accomplish his will,” asserted 
Eragon. “He could do it within the system that already exists.... He could 
use magic to affect events.” 
 
 Oromis smiled. “Very true. But ask yourself this, Eragon: If gods exist, 
have they been good custodians of Alagaësia? Death, sickness, poverty, 
tyranny, and countless other miseries stalk the land. If this is the handi-
work of divine beings, then they are to be rebelled against and over-
thrown, not given obeisance, obedience, and reverence.” 
 
 “The dwarves believe—” 
 
 “Exactly! The dwarves believe. When it comes to certain matters, they 
rely upon faith rather than reason. They have even been known to ignore 
proven facts that contradict their dogma.” 
 
 “Like what?” demanded Eragon. 
 

 
509
 “Dwarf priests use coral as proof that stone is alive and can grow, which 
also corroborates their story that Helzvog formed the race of dwarves out 
of granite. But we elves discovered that coral is actually an exoskeleton 
secreted by minuscule animals that live inside the coral. Any magician 
can sense the animals if he opens his mind. We explained this to the 
dwarves, but they refused to listen, saying that the life we felt resides in 
every kind of stone, although their priests are the only ones who are sup-
posed to be able to detect the life in landlocked stones.” 
 
 For a long time, Eragon stared out the window, turning Oromis’s words 
over in his mind. “You don’t believe in an afterlife, then.” 
 
 “From what Glaedr said, you already knew that.” 
 
 “And you don’t put stock in gods.” 
 
 “We give credence only to that which we can prove exists. Since we 
cannot find evidence that gods, miracles, and other supernatural things 
are real, we do not trouble ourselves about them. If that were to change, 
if Helzvog were to reveal himself to us, then we would accept the new 
information and revise our position.” 
 
 “It seems a cold world without something... more.” 
 
 “On the contrary,” said Oromis, “it is a better world. A place where we 
are responsible for our own actions, where we can be kind to one another 
because we want to and because it is the right thing to do instead of be-
ing frightened into behaving by the threat of divine punishment. I won’t 
tell you what to believe, Eragon. It is far better to be taught to think 
critically and then be allowed to make your own decisions than to have 
someone else’s notions thrust upon you. You asked after our religion, and 
I have answered you true. Make of it what you will.” 
 
   
 
 Their discussion—coupled with his previous worries—left Eragon so 
disturbed that he had difficulty concentrating on his studies in the fol-
lowing days, even when Oromis began to show him how to sing to 
plants, which Eragon had been eager to learn. 
 
 Eragon recognized that his own experiences had already led him to 
adopt a more skeptical attitude; in principle, he agreed with much of 
what Oromis had said. The problem he struggled with, though, was that 
if the elves were right, it meant that nearly all the humans and dwarves 

 
510
were deluded, something Eragon found difficult to accept. That many 
people can’t be mistaken, he insisted to himself. 
 
 When he asked Saphira about it, she said, It matters little to me, Eragon. 
Dragons have never believed in higher powers. Why should we when deer 
and other prey consider usto be a higher power? He laughed at that. Only 
do not ignore reality in order to comfort yourself, for once you do, you make 
it easy for others to deceive you. 
 
 That night, Eragon’s uncertainties burst forth in his waking dreams, 
which raged like a wounded bear through his mind, tearing disparate im-
ages from his memories and mixing them into such a clamor, he felt as if 
he were transported back into the confusion of the battle under Farthen 
Dûr. He saw Garrow lying dead in Horst’s house, then Brom dead in the 
lonely sandstone cave, and then the face of Angela the herbalist, who whis-
pered, “Beware, Argetlam, betrayal is clear. And it will come from within 
your family. Beware, Shadeslayer!” 
 
 Then the crimson sky was torn apart and Eragon again beheld the two 
armies from his premonition in the Beor Mountains. The banks of warriors 
collided upon an orange and yellow field, accompanied by the harsh 
screams of gore-crows and the whistle of black arrows. The earth itself 
seemed to burn: green flames belched from scorched holes that dotted the 
ground, charring the mangled corpses left in the armies’ wake. He heard the 
roar of a gigantic beast from above that rapidly app— 
 
 Eragon jolted upright in bed and scrabbled at the dwarf necklace, 
which burned at his throat. Using his tunic to protect his hand, he pulled 
the silver hammer away from his skin and then sat and waited in the 
dark, his heart thudding from the surprise. He felt his strength ebb as 
Gannel’s spell thwarted whoever was trying to scry him and Saphira. 
Once again, he wondered if Galbatorix himself was behind the spell, or if 
it was one of the king’s pet magicians. 
 
 Eragon frowned and released the hammer as the metal grew cold again. 
Something’s wrong. I know that much, and I’ve known it for a while, as has 
Saphira. Too uneasy to resume the trancelike state that had replaced 
sleep for him, he crept from their bedroom without waking Saphira and 
climbed the spiral staircase to the study. There he unshuttered a white 
lantern and read one of Analísia’s epics until sunrise in an attempt to 
calm himself. 
 
 Just as Eragon put away the scroll, Blagden flew through the open por-
tal in the eastern wall and, with a flutter of wings, landed on the corner 

 
511
of the carved writing desk. The white raven fixed his beady eyes on Er-
agon and croaked, “Wyrda!” 
 
 Eragon inclined his head. “And may the stars watch over you, Master 
Blagden.” 
 
 The raven hopped closer. He cocked his head to the side and uttered a 
barking cough, as if he were clearing his throat, then recited in his hoarse 
voice: 
 
 
 By beak and bone, 
 
 Mine blackened stone 
 
 Sees rooks and crooks 
 
 And bloody brooks! 
 
 
 “What does that mean?” asked Eragon. 
 
 Blagden shrugged and repeated the verse. When Eragon still pressed 
him for an explanation, the bird ruffled his feathers, appearing displeased, 
and cackled, “Son and father alike, both as blind as bats.” 
 
 “Wait!” exclaimed Eragon, jolting upright. “Do you know my father? 
Who is he?” 
 
 Blagden cackled again. This time he seemed to be laughing. 
 
 
 While two may share two, 
 
 And one of two is certainly one, 
 
 One might be two. 
 
 
 “A name, Blagden. Give me a name!” When the raven remained silent, 
Eragon reached out with his mind, intending to wrench the information 
from the bird’s memories. 
 
 Blagden was too wily, however. He deflected Eragon’s probe with a 

 
512
flick of his thoughts. Shrieking “Wyrda!” he darted forward, plucked a 
bright glass stopper from an inkwell, and sped away with his trophy 
clutched in his beak. He dove out of sight before Eragon could cast a 
spell to bring him back. 
 
 Eragon’s stomach knotted as he tried to decipher Blagden’s two riddles. 
The last thing he had expected was to hear his father mentioned in 
Ellesméra. Finally, he muttered, “That’s it.” I’ll find Blagden later and 
wring the truth out of him. But right now... I would have to be a half-wit to 
ignore these portents. He jumped to his feet and ran down the stairs, wak-
ing Saphira with his mind and telling her what had transpired during the 
night. Retrieving his shaving mirror from the wash closet, Eragon sat be-
tween Saphira’s two front paws so that she could look over his head and 
see what he saw. 
 
 Arya won’t appreciate it if we intrude on her privacy, warned Saphira. 
 
 I have to know if she’s safe. 
 
 Saphira accepted that without argument. How will you find her? You 
said that after her imprisonment, she erected wards that—like your neck-
lace—prevent anyone from scrying her. 
 
 If I can scry the people she’s with, I might be able to figure out how Arya 
is. Concentrating on an image of Nasuada, Eragon passed his hand over 
the mirror and murmured the traditional phrase, “Dream stare.” 
 
 The mirror shimmered and turned white, except for nine people clus-
tered around an invisible table. Of them, Eragon was familiar with 
Nasuada and the Council of Elders. But he could not identify a strange 
girl hooded in black who lurked behind Nasuada. This puzzled him, for a 
magician could only scry things that he had already seen, and Eragon was 
certain he had never laid eyes upon the girl before. He forgot about her, 
though, as he noticed that the men, and even Nasuada, were armed for 
battle. 
 
 Let us hear their words, suggested Saphira. 
 
 The instant Eragon made the needed alteration to the spell, Nasuada’s 
voice emanated from the mirror: “... and confusion will destroy us. Our 
warriors can afford but one commander during this conflict. Decide who 
it is to be, Orrin, and quickly too.” 
 
 Eragon heard a disembodied sigh. “As you wish; the position is yours.” 

 
513
 
 “But, sir, she is untried!” 
 
 “Enough, Irwin,” ordered the king. “She has more experience in war 
than anyone in Surda. And the Varden are the only force to have de-
feated one of Galbatorix’s armies. If Nasuada were a Surdan general—
which would be peculiar indeed, I admit—you would not hesitate to 
nominate her for the post. I shall be happy to deal with questions of au-
thority if they arise afterward, for they will mean I’m still on my feet and 
not lying in a grave. As it is, we are so outnumbered I fear we are 
doomed unless Hrothgar can reach us before the end of the week. Now, 
where is that blasted scroll on the supply train?... Ah, thank you, Arya. 
Three more days without—” 
 
 After that the discussion turned to a shortage of bowstrings, which Er-
agon could glean nothing useful from, so he ended the spell. The mirror 
cleared, and he found himself staring at his own face. 
 
 She lives, he murmured. His relief was overshadowed, though, by the 
larger meaning of what they had heard. 
 
 Saphira looked at him. We are needed. 
 
 Aye. Why hasn’t Oromis told us about this? He must know of it. 
 
 Maybe he wanted to avoid disrupting our training. 
 
 Troubled, Eragon wondered what else of import was happening in Ala-
gaësia that he was unaware of. Roran. With a pang of guilt, Eragon real-
ized that it had been weeks since he last thought of his cousin, and even 
longer since he scryed him on the way to Ellesméra. 
 
 At Eragon’s command, the mirror revealed two figures standing against 
a pure white background. It took Eragon a long moment to recognize the 
man on the right as Roran. He was garbed in travel-worn clothes, a ham-
mer was stuck under his belt, a thick beard obscured his face, and he 
bore a haunted expression that bespoke desperation. To the left was 
Jeod. The men surged up and down, accompanied by the thunderous 
crash of waves, which masked anything they said. After a while, Roran 
turned and walked along what Eragon assumed was the deck of a ship, 
bringing dozens of other villagers into view. 
 
 Where are they, and why is Jeod with them? demanded Eragon, bewil-
dered. 

 
514
 
 Diverting the magic, he scryed in quick succession Teirm—shocked to 
see that the city’s wharfs had been destroyed—Therinsford, Garrow’s old 
farm, and then Carvahall, whereupon Eragon uttered a wounded cry. 
 
 The village was gone. 
 
 Every building, including Horst’s magnificent house, had been burned 
to the ground. Carvahall no longer existed except as a sooty blot beside 
the Anora River. The sole remaining inhabitants were four gray wolves 
that loped through the wreckage. 
 
 The mirror dropped from Eragon’s hand and shattered across the floor. 
He leaned against Saphira, tears burning in his eyes as he grieved anew for 
his lost home. Saphira hummed deep in her chest and brushed his arm 
with the side of her jaw, enveloping him in a warm blanket of sympathy. 
Take comfort, little one. At least your friends are still alive. 
 
 He shuddered and felt a hard core of determination coalesce in his 
belly. We have remained sequestered from the world for far too long. It’s 
high time we leave Ellesméra and confront our fate, whatever it may be. For 
now, Roran must fend for himself, but the Varden... the Varden we can 
help. 
 
 Is it time to fight, Eragon? asked Saphira, an odd note of formality in her 
voice. 
 
 He knew what she meant: Was it time to challenge the Empire head-
on, time to kill and rampage to the limit of their considerable abilities, 
time to unleash every ounce of their rage until Galbatorix lay dead before 
them? Was it time to commit themselves to a campaign that could take 
decades to resolve? 
 
 It is time. 
 

 
515
GIFTS 
 
 
 Eragon packed his belongings in less than five minutes. He took the 
saddle Oromis had given them, strapped it onto Saphira, then slung his 
bags over her back and buckled them down. 
 
 Saphira tossed her head, nostrils flared, and said, I will wait for you at 
the field. With a roar, she launched herself from the tree house, unfolding 
her blue wings in midair, and flew off, skimming the forest canopy. 
 
 Quick as an elf, Eragon ran to Tialdarí Hall, where he found Orik sit-
ting in his usual corner, playing a game of Runes. The dwarf greeted him 
with a hearty slap on the arm. “Eragon! What brings you here at this time 
of the morn? I thought you’d be off banging swords with Vanir.” 
 
 “Saphira and I are leaving,” said Eragon. 
 
 Orik stopped with his mouth open, then narrowed his eyes, going seri-
ous. “You’ve had news?” 
 
 “I’ll tell you about it later. Do you want to come?” 
 
 “To Surda?” 
 
 “Aye.” 
 
 A wide smile broke across Orik’s hairy face. “You’d have to clap me in 
irons before I’d stay behind. I’ve done nothing in Ellesméra but grow fat 
and lazy. A bit of excitement will do me good. When do we leave?” 
 
 “As soon as possible. Gather your things and meet us at the sparring 
grounds. Can you scrounge up a week’s worth of provisions for the two 
of us?” 
 
 “A week’s? But that won’t—” 
 
 “We’re flying on Saphira.” 
 
 The skin above Orik’s beard turned pale. “We dwarves don’t do well 
with heights, Eragon. We don’t do well at all. It’d be better if we could 
ride horses, like we did coming here.” 
 
 Eragon shook his head. “That would take too long. Besides, it’s easy to 

 
516
ride Saphira. She’ll catch you if you fall.” Orik grunted, appearing both 
queasy and unconvinced. Leaving the hall, Eragon sped through the syl-
van city until he rejoined Saphira, and then they flew to the Crags of 
Tel’naeír. 
 
 Oromis was sitting upon Glaedr’s right forearm when they landed in 
the clearing. The dragon’s scales gilded the landscape with countless chips 
of golden light. Neither elf nor dragon stirred. Descending from Saphira’s 
back, Eragon bowed. “Master Glaedr. Master Oromis.” 
 
 Glaedr said, You have taken it upon yourself to return to the Varden, have 
you not? 
 
 We have, replied Saphira. 
 
 Eragon’s sense of betrayal overcame his self-restraint. “Why did you 
hide the truth from us? Are you so determined to keep us here that you 
must resort to such underhand trickery? The Varden are about to be at-
tacked and you didn’t even mention it!” 
 
 Calm as ever, Oromis asked, “Do you wish to hear why?” 
 
 Very much, Master, said Saphira before Eragon could respond. In pri-
vate, she scolded him, growling, Be polite! 
 
 “We withheld the tidings for two reasons. Chief among them was that 
we ourselves did not know until nine days past that the Varden were 
threatened, and the true size, location, and movements of the Empire’s 
troops remained concealed from us until three days after that, when Lord 
Däthedr pierced the spells Galbatorix used to deceive our scrying.” 
 
 “That still doesn’t explain why you said nothing of this.” Eragon 
scowled. “Not only that, but once you discovered that the Varden were 
in danger, why didn’t Islanzadí rouse the elves to fight? Are we not al-
lies?” 
 
 “She has roused the elves, Eragon. The forest echoes with the ring of 
hammers, the tramp of armored boots, and the grief of those who are 
about to be parted. For the first time in a century, our race is set to 
emerge from Du Weldenvarden and challenge our greatest foe. The time 
has come for elves to once more walk openly in Alagaësia.” Gently, 
Oromis added, “You have been distracted of late, Eragon, and I under-
stand why. Now you must look beyond yourself. The world demands 
your attention.” 

 
517
 
 Shamefaced, all Eragon could say was, “I am sorry, Master.” He remem-
bered Blagden’s words and allowed himself a bitter smile. “I’m as blind as 
a bat.” 
 
 “Hardly, Eragon. You have done well, considering the enormous re-
sponsibilities we have asked you to shoulder.” Oromis looked at him 
gravely. “We expect to receive a missive from Nasuada in the next few 
days, requesting assistance from Islanzadí and that you rejoin the Varden. 
I intended to inform you of the Varden’s predicament then, when you 
would still have enough time to reach Surda before swords are drawn. If I 
told you earlier, you would have been honor-bound to abandon your 
training and rush to the defense of your liegelord. That is why I and Islan-
zadí held our tongues.” 
 
 “My training won’t matter if the Varden are destroyed.” 
 
 “No. But you may be the only person who can prevent them from be-
ing destroyed, for a chance exists—slim but terrible—that Galbatorix 
will be present at this battle. It is far too late for our warriors to assist the 
Varden, which means that if Galbatorix is indeed there, you shall con-
front him alone, without the protection of our spellweavers. Under those 
circumstances, it seemed vital that your training continue for as long as 
possible.” 
 
 In an instant, Eragon’s anger melted away and was replaced with a cold, 
hard, and brutally practical mind-set as he understood the necessity for 
Oromis’s silence. Personal feelings were irrelevant in a situation as dire as 
theirs. With a flat voice, he said, “You were right. My oath of fealty com-
pels me to ensure the safety of Nasuada and the Varden. However, I’m 
not ready to confront Galbatorix. Not yet, at least.” 
 
 “My suggestion,” said Oromis, “is that if Galbatorix reveals himself, do 
everything you can to distract him from the Varden until the battle is 
decided for good or for ill and avoid directly fighting him. Before you go, 
I ask but one thing: that you and Saphira vow that—once events per-
mit—you will return here to complete your training, for you still have 
much to learn.” 
 
 We shall return, pledged Saphira, binding herself in the ancient lan-
guage. 
 
 “We shall return,” repeated Eragon, and sealed their fate. 
 

 
518
 Appearing satisfied, Oromis reached behind himself and produced an 
embroidered red pouch that he tugged open. “In anticipation of your de-
parture, I gathered together three gifts for you, Eragon.” From the pouch, 
he withdrew a silver bottle. “First, some faelnirv I augmented with my 
own enchantments. This potion can sustain you when all else fails, and 
you may find its properties useful in other circumstances as well. Drink it 
sparingly, for I only had time to prepare a few mouthfuls.” 
 
 He handed the bottle to Eragon, then removed a long black-and- blue 
sword belt from the pouch. The belt felt unusually thick and heavy to 
Eragon when he ran it through his hands. It was made of cloth threads 
woven together in an interlocking pattern that depicted a coiling Lianí 
Vine. At Oromis’s instruction, Eragon pulled at a tassel at the end of the 
belt and gasped as a strip in its center slid back to expose twelve dia-
monds, each an inch across. Four diamonds were white, four were black, 
and the remainder were red, blue, yellow, and brown. They glittered cold 
and brilliant, like ice in the dawn, casting a rainbow of multicolored 
specks onto Eragon’s hands. 
 
 “Master...” Eragon shook his head, at a loss for words for several breaths. 
“Is it safe to give this to me?” 
 
 “Guard it well so that none are tempted to steal it. This is the belt of 
Beloth the Wise—who you read of in your history of the Year of Dark-
ness—and is one of the great treasures of the Riders. These are the most 
perfect gems the Riders could find. Some we traded for with the 
dwarves. Others we won in battle or mined ourselves. The stones have 
no magic of their own, but you may use them as repositories for your 
power and draw upon that reserve when in need. This, in addition to the 
ruby set in Zar’roc’s pommel, will allow you to amass a store of energy so 
that you do not become unduly exhausted casting spells in battle, or even 
when confronting enemy magicians.” 
 
 Last, Oromis brought out a thin scroll protected inside a wooden tube 
that was decorated with a bas-relief sculpture of the Menoa tree. Unfurl-
ing the scroll, Eragon saw the poem he had recited at the Agaetí 
Blödhren. It was lettered in Oromis’s finest calligraphy and illustrated 
with the elf’s detailed ink paintings. Plants and animals twined together 
inside the outline of the first glyph of each quatrain, while delicate 
scrollwork traced the columns of words and framed the images. 
 
 “I thought,” said Oromis, “that you would appreciate a copy for your-
self.” 
 

 
519
 Eragon stood with twelve priceless diamonds in one hand and Oromis’s 
scroll in the other, and he knew that it was the scroll he deemed the 
most precious. Eragon bowed and, reduced to the simplest language by 
the depth of his gratitude, said, “Thank you, Master.” 
 
 Then Oromis surprised Eragon by initiating the elves’ traditional greet-
ing and thereby indicating his respect for Eragon: “May good fortune rule 
over you.” 
 
 “May the stars watch over you.” 
 
 “And may peace live in your heart,” finished the silver-haired elf. He 
repeated the exchange with Saphira. “Now go and fly as fast as the north 
wind, knowing that you—Saphira Brightscales and Eragon Shadeslayer—
carry the blessing of Oromis, last scion of House Thrándurin, he who is 
both the Mourning Sage and the Cripple Who Is Whole.” 
 
 And mine as well, added Glaedr. Extending his neck, he touched the tip 
of his nose to Saphira’s, his gold eyes glittering like swirling pools of em-
bers. Remember to keep your heart safe, Saphira. She hummed in response. 
 
 They parted with solemn farewells. Saphira soared over the tangled 
forest and Oromis and Glaedr dwindled behind them, lonely on the crags. 
Despite the hardships of his stay in Ellesméra, Eragon would miss being 
among the elves, for with them he had found the closest thing to a home 
since fleeing Palancar Valley. 
 
 I leave here a changed man, he thought, and closed his eyes, clinging to 
Saphira. 
 
 Before going to meet with Orik, they made one more stop: Tialdarí 
Hall. Saphira landed in the enclosed gardens, careful not to damage any of 
the plants with her tail or claws. Without waiting for her to crouch, Er-
agon leaped straight to the ground, a drop that would have injured him 
before. 
 
 A male elf came out, touched his lips with his first two fingers, and 
asked if he could help them. When Eragon replied that he sought an au-
dience with Islanzadí, the elf said, “Please wait here, Silver Hand.” 
 
 Not five minutes later, the queen herself emerged from the wooded 
depths of Tialdarí Hall, her crimson tunic like a drop of blood among the 
white-robed elf lords and ladies who accompanied her. After the appro-
priate forms of address were observed, she said, “Oromis informed me of 

 
520
your intention to leave us. I am displeased by this, but one cannot resist 
the will of fate.” 
 
 “No, Your Majesty.... Your Majesty, we came to pay our respects be-
fore departing. You have been most considerate of us, and we thank you 
and your House for clothing, lodging, and feeding us. We are in your 
debt.” 
 
 “Never in our debt, Rider. We but repaid a little of what we owe you 
and the dragons for our miserable failure in the Fall. I am gratified, 
though, that you appreciate our hospitality.” She paused. “When you ar-
rive in Surda, convey my royal salutations to Lady Nasuada and King 
Orrin and inform them that our warriors will soon attack the northern 
half of the Empire. If fortune smiles upon us, we shall catch Galbatorix 
off guard and, given time, divide his forces.” 
 
 “As you wish.” 
 
 “Also, know that I have dispatched twelve of our finest spellweavers to 
Surda. If you are still alive when they arrive, they will place themselves 
under your command and do their best to shield you from danger both 
night and day.” 
 
 “Thank you, Your Majesty.” 
 
 Islanzadí extended a hand and one of the elf lords handed her a shallow, 
unadorned wooden box. “Oromis had his gifts for you, and I have mine. 
Let them remind you of your time spent with us under the dusky pines.” 
She opened the box, revealing a long, dark bow with reflexed limbs and 
curled tips nestled on a bed of velvet. Silver fittings chased with dogwood 
leaves decorated the ears and grip of the bow. Beside it lay a quiver of 
new arrows fletched with white swan feathers. “Now that you share our 
strength, it seems only proper that you should have one of our bows. I 
sang it myself from a yew tree. The string will never break. And so long 
as you use these arrows, you will be hard-pressed to miss your target, 
even if the wind should gust during your shot.” 
 
 Once again, Eragon was overwhelmed by the elves’ generosity. He 
bowed. “What can I say, my Lady? You honor me that you saw fit to give 
me the labor of your own hands.” 
 
 Islanzadí nodded, as if agreeing with him, then stepped past him and 
said, “Saphira, I brought you no gifts because I could think of nothing you 
might need or want, but if there is aught of ours you desire, name it and 

 
521
it shall be yours.” 
 
 Dragons, said Saphira, do not require possessions to be happy. What use 
have we for riches when our hides are more glorious than any treasure hoard 
in existence? No, I am content with the kindness that you have shown Er-
agon. 
 
 Then Islanzadí bade them a safe journey. Sweeping around, her red 
cape billowing from her shoulders, she made to leave the gardens, only to 
stop at the edge of the pleasance and say, “And, Eragon?” 
 
 “Yes, Your Majesty?” 
 
 “When you meet with Arya, please express my affection to her and tell 
her that she is sorely missed in Ellesméra.” The words were stiff and for-
mal. Without waiting for a reply, she strode away and disappeared among 
the shadowed boles that guarded the interior of Tialdarí Hall, followed 
by the elf lords and ladies. 
 
 It took Saphira less than a minute to fly to the sparring field, where 
Orik sat on his bulging pack, tossing his war ax from one hand to the 
other and scowling ferociously. “About time you got here,” he grumbled. 
He stood and slipped the ax back under his belt. Eragon apologized for 
the delay, then tied Orik’s pack onto the back of his saddle. The dwarf 
eyed Saphira’s shoulder, which loomed high above him. “And how, by 
Morgothal’s black beard, am I supposed to get up there? A cliff has more 
handholds than you, Saphira.” 
 
 Here, she said. She lay flat on her belly and pushed her right hind leg 
out as far as she could, forming a knobby ramp. Pulling himself onto her 
shin with a loud huff, Orik crawled up her leg on hands and knees. A 
small jet of flame burst from Saphira’s nostrils as she snorted. Hurry up—
that tickles! 
 
 Orik paused on the ledge of her haunches, then placed one foot on ei-
ther side of Saphira’s spine and carefully walked his way up her back to-
ward the saddle. He tapped one of the ivory spikes between his legs and 
said, “There be as good a way to lose your manhood as ever I’ve seen.” 
 
 Eragon grinned. “Don’t slip.” When Orik lowered himself onto the front 
of the saddle, Eragon mounted Saphira and sat behind the dwarf. To hold 
Orik in place when Saphira turned or inverted, Eragon loosened the 
thongs that were meant to secure his arms and had Orik put his legs 
through them. 

 
522
 
 As Saphira rose to her full height, Orik swayed, then clutched the spike 
in front of him. “Garr! Eragon, don’t let me open my eyes until we’re in 
the air, else I fear I’ll be sick. This is unnatural, it is. Dwarves aren’t meant 
to ride dragons. It’s never been done before.” 
 
 “Never?” 
 
 Orik shook his head without answering. 
 
 Clusters of elves drifted out of Du Weldenvarden, gathered along the 
edge of the field, and with solemn expressions watched Saphira lift her 
translucent wings in preparation to take off. 
 
 Eragon tightened his grip as he felt her mighty thews bunch underneath 
his legs. With a rush of acceleration, Saphira launched herself into the az-
ure sky, flapping swift and hard to rise above the giant trees. She wheeled 
over the vast forest—spiraling upward as she gained altitude—and then 
aimed herself south, toward the Hadarac Desert. 
 
 Though the wind was loud in Eragon’s ears, he heard an elf woman in 
Ellesméra raise her clear voice in song, as he had when they first arrived. 
She sang: 
 
 
 Away, away, you shall fly away, 
 
 O’er the peaks and vales 
 
 To the lands beyond. 
 
 Away, away, you shall fly away, 
 
 And never return to me.... 
 
 

 
523
THE MAW OF THE OCEAN 
 
 
 The obsidian seas heaved underneath the Dragon Wing, propelling the 
ship high in the air. There it teetered on the precipitous crest of a foam-
capped swell before pitching forward and racing down the face of the 
wave into the black trough below. Billows of stinging mist drove through 
the frigid air as the wind groaned and howled like a monstrous spirit. 
 
 Roran clung to the starboard rigging at the waist of the ship and 
retched over the gunwale; nothing came up but sour bile. He had prided 
himself that his stomach never bothered him while on Clovis’s barges, 
but the storm they raced before was so violent that even Uthar’s men—
seasoned tars each and every one—had difficulty keeping their whisky 
down. 
 
 It felt like a boulder of ice clouted Roran between the shoulder blades 
as a wave struck the ship crossways, drenching the deck before draining 
through the scuppers and pouring back into the frothing, furrowed, furi-
ous ocean from whence it came. Roran wiped the salty water from his 
eyes with fingers as clumsy as frozen lumps of wood, and squinted to-
ward the inky horizon to the aft. 
 
 Maybe this will shake them off our scent. Three black-sailed sloops had 
pursued them ever since they passed the Iron Cliffs and rounded what 
Jeod dubbed Edur Carthungavë and Uthar identified as Rathbar’s Spur. 
“The tailbone of the Spine, that’s what it be,” Uthar said, grinning. The 
sloops were faster than the Dragon Wing, weighed down with villagers as 
it was, and had quickly gained upon the merchant ship until they were 
close enough to exchange volleys of arrows. Worst of all, it seemed that 
the lead sloop carried a magician, for its arrows were uncannily accurate, 
splitting ropes, destroying ballistae, and clogging the blocks. From their 
attacks, Roran deduced that the Empire no longer cared about capturing 
him and only wanted to stop him from finding sanctuary with the 
Varden. He had just been preparing the villagers to repel boarding parties 
when the clouds above ripened to a bruised purple, heavy with rain, and 
a ravening tempest blew in from the northwest. At the present, Uthar 
had the Dragon Wing tacked crossways to the wind, heading toward the 
Southern Isles, where he hoped to elude the sloops among the shoals and 
coves of Beirland. 
 
 A sheet of horizontal lightning flickered between two bulbous thun-
derheads, and the world became a tableau of pale marble before darkness 
reigned once more. Every blinding flash imprinted a motionless scene 

 
524
upon Roran’s eyes that lingered, pulsing, long after the brazen bolts van-
ished. 
 
 Then came another round of forked lightning, and Roran saw—as if in 
a series of monochrome paintings—the mizzen topmast twist, crack, and 
topple into the thrashing sea, port amidships. Grabbing a lifeline, Roran 
pulled himself to the quarterdeck and, in unison with Bonden, hacked 
through the cables that still connected the topmast to the Dragon Wing 
and dragged the stern low in the water. The ropes writhed like snakes as 
they were cut. 
 
 Afterward, Roran sank to the deck, his right arm hooked through the 
gunwale to hold himself in place as the ship dropped twenty... thirty... 
feet between waves. A swell washed over him, leaching the warmth from 
his bones. Shivers racked his body. 
 
 Don’t let me die here, he pleaded, though whom he addressed, he knew 
not. Not in these cruel waves. My task is yet unfinished. During that long 
night, he clung to his memories of Katrina, drawing solace from them 
when he grew weary and hope threatened to desert him. 
 
   
 
 The storm lasted two full days and broke during the wee hours of the 
night. The following morning brought with it a pale green dawn, clear 
skies, and three black sails riding the northern horizon. To the southwest, 
the hazy outline of Beirland lay underneath a shelf of clouds gathered 
about the ridged mountain that dominated the island. 
 
 Roran, Jeod, and Uthar met in a small fore cabin—since the captain’s 
stateroom was given over to the infirm—where Uthar unrolled sea charts 
on the table and tapped a point above Beirland. “This’d be where we are 
now,” he said. He reached for a larger map of Alagaësia’s coastline and 
tapped the mouth of the Jiet River. “An’ this’d be our destination, since 
food won’t last us to Reavstone. How we get there, though, without be-
ing overtaken is beyond me. Without our mizzen topgallant, those ac-
cursed sloops will catch us by noon tomorrow, evening if we manage the 
sails well.” 
 
 “Can we replace the mast?” asked Jeod. “Vessels of this size carry spars 
to make just such repairs.” 
 
 Uthar shrugged. “We could, provided we had a proper ship’s carpenter 
among us. Seeing as we don’t, I’d rather not let inexperienced hands 

 
525
mount a spar, only to have it crash down on deck and perhaps injure 
somebody.” 
 
 Roran said, “If it weren’t for the magician or magicians, I’d say we 
should stand and fight, since we far outnumber the crews of the sloops. 
As it is, I’m chary of battle. It seems unlikely that we could prevail, con-
sidering how many ships sent to help the Varden have disappeared.” 
 
 Grunting, Uthar drew a circle around their current position. “This’d be 
how far we can sail by tomorrow evening, assuming the wind stays with 
us. We could make landfall somewhere on Beirland or Nía if we wanted, 
but I can’t see how that’d help us. We’d be trapped. The soldiers on those 
sloops or the Ra’zac or Galbatorix himself could hunt us at his leisure.” 
 
 Roran scowled as he considered their options; a fight with the sloops 
appeared inevitable. 
 
 For several minutes, the cabin was silent except for the slap of waves 
against the hull. Then Jeod placed his finger on the map between Beir-
land and Nía, looked at Uthar, and asked, “What about the Boar’s Eye?” 
 
 To Roran’s amazement, the scarred sailor actually blanched. “I’d not risk 
that, Master Jeod, not on my life. I’d rather face the sloops an’ die in the 
open sea than go to that doomed place. There has consumed twice as 
many ships as in Galbatorix’s fleet.” 
 
 “I seem to recall reading,” said Jeod, leaning back in his chair, “that the 
passage is perfectly safe at high tide and low tide. Is that not so?” 
 
 With great and evident reluctance, Uthar admitted, “Aye. But the Eye 
is so wide, it requires the most precise timing to cross without being de-
stroyed. We’d be hard-pressed to accomplish that with the sloops near on 
our tail.” 
 
 “If we could, though,” pressed Jeod, “if we could time it right, the 
sloops would be wrecked or—if their nerve failed them—forced to cir-
cumvent Nía. It would give us time to find a place to hide along Beir-
land.” 
 
 “If, if... You’d send us to the crushing deep, you would.” 
 
 “Come now, Uthar, your fear is unreasoning. What I propose is danger-
ous, I admit, but no more than fleeing Teirm was. Or do you doubt your 
ability to sail the gap? Are you not man enough to do it?” 

 
526
 
 Uthar crossed his bare arms. “You’ve never seen the Eye, have you, sir?” 
 
 “I can’t say I have.” 
 
 “It’s not that I’m not man enough, but that the Eye far exceeds the 
strength of men; it puts to shame our biggest ships, our grandest build-
ings, an’ anything else you’d care to name. Tempting it would be like try-
ing to outrun an avalanche; you might succeed, but then you just as well 
might be ground into dust.” 
 
 “What,” asked Roran, “is this Boar’s Eye?” 
 
 “The all-devouring maw of the ocean,” proclaimed Uthar. 
 
 In a milder tone, Jeod said, “It’s a whirlpool, Roran. The Eye forms as 
the result of tidal currents that collide between Beirland and Nía. When 
the tide waxes, the Eye rotates north to west. When the tide wanes, it 
rotates north to east.” 
 
 “That doesn’t sound so dangerous.” 
 
 Uthar shook his head, queue whipping the sides of his wind-burned 
neck, and laughed. “Not so dangerous, he says! Ha!” 
 
 “What you fail to comprehend,” continued Jeod, “is the size of the vor-
tex. On average, the center of the Eye is a league in diameter, while the 
arms of the pool can be anywhere from ten to fifteen miles across. Ships 
unlucky enough to be snared by the Eye are borne down to the floor of 
the ocean and dashed against the jagged rocks therein. Remnants of the 
vessels are often found as flotsam on the beaches of the two islands.” 
 
 “Would anyone expect us to take this route?” Roran queried. 
 
 “No, an’ for good reason,” growled Uthar. Jeod shook his head at the 
same time. 
 
 “Is it even possible for us to cross the Eye?” 
 
 “It’d be a blasted fool thing to do.” 
 
 Roran nodded. “I know it’s not something you want to risk, Uthar, but 
our options are limited. I’m no seaman, so I must rely upon your judg-
ment: Can we cross the Eye?” 

 
527
 
 The captain hesitated. “Maybe, maybe not. You’d have t’ be stark raving 
mad to go nearer’n five miles of that monster.” 
 
 Pulling out his hammer, Roran banged it on the table, leaving a dent a 
half-inch deep. “Then I’m stark raving mad!” He held Uthar’s gaze until 
the sailor shifted with discomfort. “Must I remind you, we’ve only gotten 
this far by doing what quibbling worrywarts said couldn’t, or shouldn’t, 
be done? We of Carvahall dared to abandon our homes and cross the 
Spine. Jeod dared to imagine we could steal the Dragon Wing. What will 
you dare, Uthar? If we can brave the Eye and live to tell the tale, you 
shall be hailed as one of the greatest mariners in history. Now answer me 
and answer me well and true: Can this be done?” 
 
 Uthar drew a hand over his face. When he spoke, it was in a low voice, 
as if Roran’s outburst had caused him to abandon all bluster. “I don’t 
know, Stronghammer.... If we wait for the Eye to subside, the sloops may 
be so close to us that if we escape, they’d escape. An’ if the wind should 
falter, we’d be caught in the current, unable to break free.” 
 
 “As captain, are you willing to attempt it? Neither Jeod nor I can 
command the Dragon Wing in your place.” 
 
 Long did Uthar stare down at the charts, one hand clasped over the 
other. He drew a line or two from their position and worked a table of 
figures that Roran could make nothing of. At last he said, “I fear we sail 
to our doom, but aye, I’ll do my best to see us through.” 
 
 Satisfied, Roran put away his hammer. “So be it.” 
 
 
 
 

 
528
RUNNING THE BOAR’S EYE 
 
 
 The sloops continued to draw closer to the Dragon Wing over the 
course of the day. Roran watched their progress whenever he could, con-
cerned that they would get near enough to attack before the Dragon 
Wing reached the Eye. Still, Uthar seemed able to outrun them, at least 
for a little while longer. 
 
 At Uthar’s orders, Roran and the other villagers worked to tidy up the 
ship after the storm and prepare for the ordeal that was to come. Their 
work ended at nightfall, when they extinguished every light on board in 
an attempt to confuse their pursuers as to the Dragon Wing ’s heading. 
The ruse succeeded in part, for when the sun rose, Roran saw that the 
sloops had fallen back to the northwest another mile or so, though they 
soon made up the lost distance. 
 
 Late that morning, Roran climbed the mainmast and pulled himself up 
into the crow’s nest a hundred and thirty feet above the deck, so high 
that the men below appeared no larger than his little finger. The water 
and sky seemed to rock perilously about him as the Dragon Wing heeled 
from side to side. 
 
 Taking out the spyglass he had brought with him, Roran put it to his 
eye and adjusted it until the sloops came into focus not four miles astern 
and approaching faster than he would have liked. They must have realized 
what we intend to do, he thought. Sweeping the glass around, he searched 
the ocean for any sign of the Boar’s Eye. He stopped as he descried a great 
disk of foam the size of an island, gyrating from north to east. We’re late, 
he thought, a pit in his stomach. High tide had already passed and the 
Boar’s Eye was gathering in speed and strength as the ocean withdrew 
from land. Roran trained the glass over the edge of the crow’s nest and 
saw that the knotted rope Uthar had tied to the starboard side of the 
stern—to detect when they entered the pull of the whirlpool—now 
floated alongside the Dragon Wing instead of trailing behind as was usual. 
The one thing in their favor was that they were sailing with the Eye’s 
current and not against it. If it had been the other way around, they 
would have had no choice but to wait until the tide turned. 
 
 Below, Roran heard Uthar shout for the villagers to man the oars. A 
moment later, the Dragon Wing sprouted two rows of poles along each 
side, making the ship look like nothing more than a giant water strider. 
At the beat of an ox-hide drum, accompanied by Bonden’s rhythmic 
chant as he set the tempo, the oars arched forward, dipped into the sea of 

 
529
green, and swept back across the surface of the water, leaving white 
streaks of bubbles in their wake. The Dragon Wing accelerated quickly, 
now moving faster than the sloops, which were still outside the Eye’s in-
fluence. 
 
 Roran watched with horrified fascination the play that unfolded around 
him. The essential plot element, the crux upon which the outcome de-
pended, was time. Though they were late, was the Dragon Wing, with its 
oars and sails combined, fast enough to traverse the Eye? And could the 
sloops—which had deployed their own oars now—narrow the gap be-
tween them and the Dragon Wing enough to ensure their own survival? 
He could not tell. The pounding drum measured out the minutes; Roran 
was acutely aware of each moment as it trickled by. 
 
 He was surprised when an arm reached over the edge of the basket and 
Baldor’s face appeared, looking up at him. “Give me a hand, won’t you? I 
feel like I’m about to fall.” 
 
 Bracing himself, Roran helped Baldor into the basket. Baldor handed 
Roran a biscuit and a dried apple and said, “Thought you might like some 
lunch.” With a nod of thanks, Roran tore into the biscuit and resumed 
gazing through the spyglass. When Baldor asked, “Can you see the Eye?” 
Roran passed him the glass and concentrated on eating. 
 
 Over the next half hour, the foam disk increased the speed of its revo-
lutions until it spun like a top. The water around the foam bulged and 
began to rise, while the foam itself sank from view into the bottom of a 
gigantic pit that continued to deepen and enlarge. The air over the vortex 
filled with a cyclone of twisting mist, and from the ebony throat of the 
abyss came a tortured howl like the cries of an injured wolf. 
 
 The speed with which the Boar’s Eye formed amazed Roran. “You’d 
better go tell Uthar,” he said. 
 
 Baldor climbed out of the nest. “Tie yourself to the mast or you may 
get thrown off.” 
 
 “I will.” 
 
 Roran left his arms free when he secured himself, making sure that, if 
needed, he could reach his belt knife to cut himself free. Anxiety filled 
him as he surveyed the situation. The Dragon Wing was but a mile past 
the median of the Eye, the sloops were but two miles behind her, and the 
Eye itself was quickly building toward its full fury. Worse, disrupted by 

 
530
the whirlpool, the wind sputtered and gasped, blowing first from one di-
rection and then the other. The sails billowed for a moment, then fell 
slack, then filled again as the confused wind swirled about the ship. 
 
 Perhaps Uthar was right, thought Roran. Perhaps I’ve gone too far and 
pitted myself against an opponent that cannot be overcome by sheer deter-
mination. Perhaps I am sending the villagers to their deaths. The forces of 
nature were immune to intimidation. 
 
 The gaping center of the Boar’s Eye was now almost nine and a half 
miles in circumference, and how many fathoms deep no one could say, 
except for those who had been trapped within it. The sides of the Eye 
slanted inward at a forty-five-degree angle; they were striated with shal-
low grooves, like wet clay being molded on a potter’s wheel. The bass 
howl grew louder, until it seemed to Roran that the entire world must 
crumble to pieces from the intensity of the vibrations. A glorious rain-
bow emerged from the mist over the whirling chasm. 
 
 The current moved faster than ever, driving the Dragon Wing at a 
breakneck pace as it whipped around the rim of the whirlpool and mak-
ing it more and more unlikely that the ship could break free at the Eye’s 
southern edge. So prodigious was her velocity, the Dragon Wing tilted far 
to the starboard, suspending Roran out over the rushing water. 
 
 Despite the Dragon Wing ’s progress, the sloops continued to gain on 
her. The enemy ships sailed abreast less than a mile away, their oars mov-
ing in perfect accord, two fins of water flying from each prow as they 
plowed the ocean. Roran could not help but admire the sight. 
 
 He tucked the spyglass away in his shirt; he had no need of it now. The 
sloops were close enough for the naked eye, while the whirlpool was in-
creasingly obscured by the clouds of white vapor thrown off the lip of 
the funnel. As it was pulled into the deep, the vapor formed a spiral lens 
over the gulf, mimicking the whirlpool’s appearance. 
 
 Then the Dragon Wing tacked port, diverging from the current in 
Uthar’s bid for the open sea. The keel chattered across the puckered wa-
ter, and the ship’s speed dropped in half as the Dragon Wing fought the 
deadly embrace of the Boar’s Eye. A shudder ran up the mast, jarring Ro-
ran’s teeth, and the crow’s nest swung in the new direction, making him 
giddy with vertigo. 
 
 Fear gripped Roran when they continued to slow. He slashed off his 
bindings and—with reckless disregard for his own safety—swung himself 

 
531
over the edge of the basket, grabbed the ropes underneath, and shinnied 
down the rigging so quickly that he lost his grip once and fell several feet 
before he could catch himself. He jumped to the deck, ran to the fore 
hatchway, and descended to the first bank of oars, where he joined Bal-
dor and Albriech on an oak pole. 
 
 They said not a word, but labored to the sound of their own desperate 
breathing, the frenzied beat of the drum, Bonden’s hoarse shouts, and the 
roar of the Boar’s Eye. Roran could feel the mighty whirlpool resisting 
with every stroke of the oar. 
 
 And yet their efforts could not keep the Dragon Wing from coming to 
a virtual standstill. We’re not going to make it, thought Roran. His back 
and legs burned from the exertion. His lungs stabbed. Between the 
drumbeats, he heard Uthar ordering the hands above deck to trim the 
sails to take full advantage of the fickle wind. 
 
 Two places ahead of Roran, Darmmen and Hamund surrendered their 
oar to Thane and Ridley, then lay in the middle of the aisle, their limbs 
trembling. Less than a minute later, someone else collapsed farther down 
the gallery and was immediately replaced by Birgit and another woman. 
 
 If we survive, thought Roran, it’ll only be because we have enough people 
to sustain this pace however long is necessary. 
 
 It seemed an eternity that he worked the oar in the murky, smoky 
room, first pushing, then pulling, doing his best to ignore the pain mount-
ing within his body. His neck ached from hunching underneath the low 
ceiling. The dark wood of the pole was streaked with blood where his 
skin had blistered and torn. He ripped off his shirt—dropping the spy-
glass to the floor—wrapped the cloth around the oar, and continued row-
ing. 
 
 At last Roran could do no more. His legs gave way and he fell on his 
side, slipping across the aisle because he was so sweaty. Orval took his 
place. Roran lay still until his breath returned, then pushed himself onto 
his hands and knees and crawled to the hatchway. 
 
 Like a fever-mad drunk, he pulled himself up the ladder, swaying with 
the motion of the ship and often slumping against the wall to rest. When 
he came out on deck, he took a brief moment to appreciate the fresh air, 
then staggered aft to the helm, his legs threatening to cramp with every 
step. 
 

 
532
 “How goes it?” he gasped to Uthar, who manned the wheel. 
 
 Uthar shook his head. 
 
 Peering over the gunwale, Roran espied the three sloops perhaps a half 
mile away and slightly more to the west, closer to the center of the Eye. 
The sloops appeared motionless in relation to the Dragon Wing. 
 
 At first, as Roran watched, the positions of the four ships remained un-
changed. Then he sensed a shift in the Dragon Wing ’s speed, as if the 
ship had crossed some crucial point and the forces restraining her had 
diminished. It was a subtle difference and amounted to little more than a 
few additional feet per minute—but it was enough that the distance be-
tween the Dragon Wing and the sloops began to increase. With every 
stroke of the oars, the Dragon Wing gained momentum. 
 
 The sloops, however, could not overcome the whirlpool’s dreadful 
strength. Their oars gradually slowed until, one by one, the ships drifted 
backward and were drawn toward the veil of mist, beyond which waited 
the gyrating walls of ebony water and the gnashing rocks at the bottom of 
the ocean floor. 
 
 They can’t keep rowing, realized Roran. Their crews are too small and 
they’re too tired. He could not help but feel a pang of sympathy for the 
fate of the men on the sloops. 
 
 At that precise instant, an arrow sprang from the nearest sloop and 
burst into green flame as it raced toward the Dragon Wing. The dart 
must have been sustained by magic to have flown so far. It struck the 
mizzen sail and exploded into globules of liquid fire that stuck to what-
ever they touched. Within seconds, twenty small fires burned along the 
mizzenmast, the mizzen sail, and the deck below. 
 
 “We can’t put it out,” shouted one of the sailors with a panicked ex-
pression. 
 
 “Chop off whatever’s burning an’ throw it overboard!” roared Uthar in 
reply. 
 
 Unsheathing his belt knife, Roran set to work excising a dollop of green 
fire from the boards by his feet. Several tense minutes elapsed before the 
unnatural blazes were removed and it became clear that the conflagra-
tions would not spread to the rest of the ship. 
 

 
533
 Once the cry of “All clear!” was sounded, Uthar relaxed his grip on the 
steering wheel. “If that was the best their magician can do, then I’d say 
we have nothing more to fear of him.” 
 
 “We’re going to get out of the Eye, aren’t we?” asked Roran, eager to 
confirm his hope. 
 
 Uthar squared his shoulders and flashed a quick grin, both proud and 
disbelieving. “Not quite this cycle, but we’ll be close. We won’t make real 
progress away from that gaping monster until the tide slacks off. Go tell 
Bonden to lower the tempo a bit; I don’t want them fainting at the oars 
if’n I can help it.” 
 
 And so it was. Roran took another shift rowing and, by the time he re-
turned to the deck, the whirlpool was subsiding. The vortex’s ghastly 
howl faded into the usual noise of the wind; the water assumed a calm, 
flat quality that betrayed no hint of the habitual violence visited upon 
that location; and the contorted fog that had writhed above the abyss 
melted under the warm rays of the sun, leaving the air as clear as oiled 
glass. Of the Boar’s Eye itself—as Roran saw when he retrieved the spy-
glass from among the rowers—nothing remained but the selfsame disk of 
yellow foam rotating upon the water. 
 
 And in the center of the foam, he thought he could discern, just barely, 
three broken masts and a black sail floating round and round and round 
in an endless circle. But it might have been his imagination. 
 
 Leastways, that’s what he told himself. 
 
 Elain came up beside him, one hand resting on her swollen belly. In a 
small voice, she said, “We were lucky, Roran, more lucky than we had 
reason to expect.” 
 
 “Aye,” he agreed. 
 
 

 
534
TO ABERON 
 
 
 Underneath Saphira, the pathless forest stretched wide to each white 
horizon, fading as it did from the deepest green to a hazy, washed-out 
purple. Martins, rooks, and other woodland birds flitted above the 
gnarled pines, uttering shrieks of alarm when they beheld Saphira. She 
flew low to the canopy in order to protect her two passengers from the 
arctic temperatures in the upper reaches of the sky. 
 
 Except for when Saphira fled the Ra’zac into the Spine, this was the 
first time she and Eragon had had the opportunity to fly together over a 
great stretch of distance without having to stop or hold back for compan-
ions on the ground. Saphira was especially pleased with the trip, and she 
delighted in showing Eragon how Glaedr’s tutelage had enhanced her 
strength and endurance. 
 
 After his initial discomfort abated, Orik said to Eragon, “I doubt I could 
ever be comfortable in the air, but I can understand why you and Saphira 
enjoy it so. Flying makes you feel free and unfettered, like a fierce-eyed 
hawk hunting his prey! It sets my heart a-pounding, it does.” 
 
 To reduce the tedium of the journey, Orik played a game of riddles 
with Saphira. Eragon excused himself from the contest as he had never 
been particularly adept at riddles; the twist of thought necessary to solve 
them always seemed to escape him. In this, Saphira far exceeded him. As 
most dragons are, she was fascinated by puzzles and found them quite 
easy to unravel. 
 
 Orik said, “The only riddles I know are in Dwarvish. I will do mine best 
to translate them, but the results may be rough and unwieldy.” Then he 
asked: 
 
 
 Tall I am young. 
 
 Short I am old. 
 
 While with life I do glow, 
 
 Urûr’s breath is my foe. 
 
 
 Not fair, growled Saphira. I know little of your gods. Eragon had no need 

 
535
to repeat her words, for Orik had granted permission for her to project 
them directly into his mind. 
 
 Orik laughed. “Do you give up?” 
 
 Never. For a few minutes, the only sound was the sweep of her wings, 
until she asked, Is it a candle? 
 
 “Right you are.” 
 
 A puff of hot smoke floated back into Orik’s and Eragon’s faces as she 
snorted. I do poorly with such riddles. I’ve not been inside a house since the 
day I hatched, and I find enigmas difficult that deal with domestic subjects. 
Next she offered: 
 
 
 What herb cures all ailments? 
 
 
 This proved a terrible poser for Orik. He grumbled and groaned and 
gnashed his teeth in frustration. Behind him, Eragon could not help but 
grin, for he saw the answer plain in Saphira’s mind. Finally, Orik said, 
“Well, what is it? You have bested me with this.” 
 
 
 By the black raven’s crime, and by this rhyme, 
 
 the answer would be thyme. 
 
 
 Now it was Orik’s turn to cry, “Not fair! This is not mine native 
tongue. You cannot expect me to grasp such wordplay!” 
 
 Fair is fair. It was a proper riddle. 
 
 Eragon watched the muscles at the back of Orik’s neck bunch and knot 
as the dwarf jutted his head forward. “If that is your stance, O Irontooth, 
then I’d have you solve this riddle that every dwarf child knows.” 
 
 
 I am named Morgothal’s Forge and Helzvog’s Womb. 
 
 I veil Nordvig’s Daughter and bring gray death, 
 

 
536
 And make the world anew with Helzvog’s Blood. 
 
 What be I? 
 
 
 And so they went, exchanging riddles of increasing difficulty while Du 
Weldenvarden sped past below. Gaps in the thatched branches often re-
vealed patches of silver, sections of the many rivers that threaded the for-
est. Around Saphira, the clouds billowed in a fantastic architecture: vault-
ing arches, domes, and columns; crenelated ramparts; towers the size of 
mountains; and ridges and valleys suffused with a glowing light that made 
Eragon feel as if they flew through a dream. 
 
 So fast was Saphira that, when dusk arrived, they had already left Du 
Weldenvarden behind and entered the auburn fields that separated the 
great forest from the Hadarac Desert. They made their camp among the 
grass and hunkered round their small fire, utterly alone upon the flat face 
of the earth. They were grim-faced and said little, for words only empha-
sized their insignificance in that bare and empty land. 
 
 Eragon took advantage of their stop to store some of his energy in the 
ruby that adorned Zar’roc’s pommel. The gem absorbed all the power he 
gave it, as well as Saphira’s when she lent her strength. It would, con-
cluded Eragon, be a number of days before they could saturate both the 
ruby and the twelve diamonds concealed within the belt of Beloth the 
Wise. 
 
 Weary from the exercise, he wrapped himself in blankets, lay beside 
Saphira, and drifted into his waking sleep, where his night phantasms 
played out against the sea of stars above. 
 
 
 
 
 Soon after they resumed their journey the following morning, the rip-
pling grass gave way to tan scrub, which grew ever more scarce until, in 
turn, it was replaced by sunbaked ground bare of all but the most hardy 
plants. Reddish gold dunes appeared. From his vantage on Saphira, they 
looked to Eragon like lines of waves forever sailing toward a distant 
shore. 
 
 As the sun began its descent, he noticed a cluster of mountains in the 
distant east and knew he beheld Du Fells Nángoröth, where the wild 
dragons had gone to mate, to raise their young, and eventually to die. We 

 
537
must visit there someday, said Saphira, following his gaze. 
 
 Aye. 
 
 That night, Eragon felt their solitude even more keenly than before, for 
they were camped in the emptiest region of the Hadarac Desert, where 
so little moisture existed in the air that his lips soon cracked, though he 
smeared them with nalgask every few minutes. He sensed little life in the 
ground, only a handful of miserable plants interspersed with a few insects 
and lizards. 
 
 As he had when they fled Gil’ead through the desert, Eragon drew wa-
ter from the soil to replenish their waterskins, and before he allowed the 
water to drain away, he scryed Nasuada in the pool’s reflection to see if 
the Varden had been attacked yet. To his relief, they had not. 
 
   
 
 On the third day since leaving Ellesméra, the wind rose up behind 
them and wafted Saphira farther than she could have flown on her own, 
carrying them entirely out of the Hadarac Desert. 
 
 Near the edge of the waste, they passed over a number of horse-
mounted nomads who were garbed in flowing robes to ward against the 
heat. The men shouted in their rough tongue and shook their swords and 
spears at Saphira, though none of them dared loose an arrow at her. 
 
 Eragon, Saphira, and Orik bivouacked for the night at the southernmost 
end of Silverwood Forest, which lay along Lake Tüdosten and was named 
so because it was composed almost entirely of beeches, willows, and 
trembling poplars. In contrast to the endless twilight that lay beneath the 
brooding pines of Du Weldenvarden, Silverwood was filled with bright 
sunshine, larks, and the gentle rustling of green leaves. The trees seemed 
young and happy to Eragon, and he was glad to be there. And though all 
signs of the desert had vanished, the weather remained far warmer than 
he was accustomed to at that time of year. It felt more like summer than 
spring. 
 
   
 
 From there they flew straight to Aberon, the capital of Surda, guided 
by directions Eragon gleaned from the memories of birds they encoun-
tered. Saphira made no attempt to conceal herself along the way, and 
they often heard cries of amazement and alarm from the villages she 

 
538
swept over. 
 
 It was late afternoon when they arrived at Aberon, a low, walled city 
centered around a bluff in an otherwise flat landscape. Borromeo Castle 
occupied the top of the bluff. The rambling citadel was protected by 
three concentric layers of walls, numerous towers, and, Eragon noted, 
hundreds of ballistae made for shooting down a dragon. The rich amber 
light from the low sun cast Aberon’s buildings in sharp relief and illumi-
nated a plume of dust rising from the city’s western gate, where a line of 
soldiers sought entrance. 
 
 As Saphira descended toward the inner ward of the castle, she brought 
Eragon into contact with the combined thoughts of the people in the 
capital. The noise overwhelmed him at first—how was he supposed to 
listen for foes and still function at the same time?—until he realized that, 
as usual, he was concentrating too much on specifics. All he had to do 
was sense people’s general intentions. He broadened his focus, and the 
individual voices clamoring for his attention subsided into a continuum 
of the emotions surrounding him. It was like a sheet of water that lay 
draped over the nearby landscape, undulating with the rise and fall of 
people’s feelings and spiking whenever someone was racked by extremes 
of passion. 
 
 Thus, Eragon was aware of the alarm that gripped the people below as 
word of Saphira spread. Careful, he told her. We don’t want them to at-
tack us. 
 
 Dirt billowed into the air with each beat of Saphira’s powerful wings as 
she settled in the middle of the courtyard, sinking her claws into the bare 
ground to steady herself. The horses tethered in the yard neighed with 
fear, creating such an uproar that Eragon finally inserted himself in their 
minds and calmed them with words from the ancient language. 
 
 Eragon dismounted after Orik, eyeing the many soldiers that lined the 
parapets and the drawn ballistae they manned. He did not fear the weap-
ons, but he had no desire to become engaged in a fight with his allies. 
 
 A group of twelve men, some soldiers, hurried out of the keep toward 
Saphira. They were led by a tall man with the same dark skin as Nasuada, 
only the third person Eragon had met with such a complexion. Halting 
ten paces away, the man bowed—as did his followers—then said, “Wel-
come, Rider. I am Dahwar, son of Kedar. I am King Orrin’s seneschal.” 
 
 Eragon inclined his head. “And I, Eragon Shadeslayer, son of none.” 

 
539
 
 “And I, Orik, Thrifk’s son.” 
 
 And I, Saphira, daughter of Vervada, said Saphira, using Eragon as her 
mouthpiece. 
 
 Dahwar bowed again. “I apologize that no one of higher rank than my-
self is present to greet guests as noble as you, but King Orrin, Lady 
Nasuada, and all the Varden have long since marched to confront Galba-
torix’s army.” Eragon nodded. He had expected as much. “They left or-
ders that if you came here seeking them, you should join them directly, 
for your prowess is needed if we are to prevail.” 
 
 “Can you show us on a map how to find them?” asked Eragon. 
 
 “Of course, sir. While I have that fetched, would you care to step out 
of the heat and partake of some refreshments?” 
 
 Eragon shook his head. “We have no time to waste. Besides, it is not I 
who needs to see the map but Saphira, and I doubt she would fit in your 
halls.” 
 
 That seemed to catch the seneschal off guard. He blinked and ran his 
eyes over Saphira, then said, “Quite right, sir. In either case, our hospital-
ity is yours. If there is aught you and your companions desire, you have 
but to ask.” 
 
 For the first time, Eragon realized that he could issue commands and 
expect them to be followed. “We need a week’s worth of provisions. For 
me, only fruit, vegetables, flour, cheese, bread—things like that. We also 
need our waterskins refilled.” He was impressed that Dahwar did not 
question his avoidance of meat. Orik added his requests then for jerky, 
bacon, and other such products. 
 
 Snapping his fingers, Dahwar sent two servants running back into the 
keep to collect the supplies. While everyone in the ward waited for the 
men to return, he asked, “May I assume by your presence here, Shade-
slayer, that you completed your training with the elves?” 
 
 “My training shall never end so long as I’m alive.” 
 
 “I see.” Then, after a moment, Dahwar said, “Please excuse my imperti-
nence, sir, for I am ignorant of the ways of the Riders, but are you not 
human? I was told you were.” 

 
540
 
 “That he is,” growled Orik. “He was... changed. And you should be glad 
he was, or our predicament would be far worse than it is.” Dahwar was 
tactful enough not to pursue the subject, but from his thoughts Eragon 
concluded that the seneschal would have paid a handsome price for fur-
ther details—any information about Eragon or Saphira was valuable in 
Orrin’s government. 
 
 The food, water, and map were soon brought by two wide-eyed pages. 
At Eragon’s word, they deposited the items beside Saphira, looking terri-
bly frightened as they did, then retreated behind Dahwar. Kneeling on 
the ground, Dahwar unrolled the map—which depicted Surda and the 
neighboring lands—and drew a line northwest from Aberon to Cithrí. He 
said, “Last I heard, King Orrin and Lady Nasuada stopped here for prov-
ender. They did not intend to stay, however, because the Empire is ad-
vancing south along the Jiet River and they wished to be in place to con-
front Galbatorix’s army when it arrives. The Varden could be anywhere 
between Cithrí and the Jiet River. This is only my humble opinion, but I 
would say the best place to look for them would be the Burning Plains.” 
 
 “The Burning Plains?” 
 
 Dahwar smiled. “You may know them by their old name, then, the 
name the elves use: Du Völlar Eldrvarya.” 
 
 “Ah, yes.” Now Eragon remembered. He had read about them in one of 
the histories Oromis assigned him. The plains—which contained huge 
deposits of peat—lay along the eastern side of the Jiet River where 
Surda’s border crossed it and had been the site of a skirmish between the 
Riders and the Forsworn. During the fight, the dragons inadvertently lit 
the peat with the flames from their mouths and the fire had burrowed 
underground, where it remained smoldering ever since. The land had 
been rendered uninhabitable by the noxious fumes that poured out of 
the glowing vents in the charred earth. 
 
 A shiver crawled down Eragon’s left side as he recalled his premonition: 
banks of warriors colliding upon an orange and yellow field, accompanied 
by the harsh screams of gore-crows and the whistle of black arrows. He 
shivered again. Fate is converging upon us, he said to Saphira. Then, ges-
turing at the map: Have you seen enough? 
 
 I have. 
 
 In short order, he and Orik packed the supplies, remounted Saphira, 

 
541
and from her back thanked Dahwar for his service. As Saphira was about 
to take off again, Eragon frowned; a note of discord had entered the 
minds he was monitoring. “Dahwar, two grooms in the stables have got-
ten into an argument and one of them, Tathal, intends to commit mur-
der. You can stop him, though, if you send men right away.” 
 
 Dahwar widened his eyes in an expression of astonishment, and even 
Orik twisted round to look at Eragon. The seneschal asked, “How do you 
know this, Shadeslayer?” 
 
 Eragon merely said, “Because I am a Rider.” 
 
 Then Saphira unfurled her wings, and everyone on the ground ran back 
to avoid being battered by the rush of air as she flapped downward and 
soared into the sky. As Borromeo Castle dwindled behind them, Orik 
said, “Can you hear my thoughts, Eragon?” 
 
 “Do you want me to try? I haven’t, you know.” 
 
 “Try.” 
 
 Frowning, Eragon concentrated his attention on the dwarf’s conscious-
ness and was surprised to find Orik’s mind well protected behind thick 
mental barriers. He could sense Orik’s presence, but not his thoughts and 
feelings. “Nothing.” 
 
 Orik grinned. “Good. I wanted to make sure I hadn’t forgotten my old 
lessons.” 
 
 By unspoken consent, they did not stop for the night, but rather forged 
onward through the blackened sky. Of the moon and stars they saw no 
sign, no flash or pale gleam to breach the oppressive gloom. The dead 
hours bloated and sagged and, it seemed to Eragon, clung to each second 
as if reluctant to surrender to the past. 
 
 When the sun finally returned—bringing with it its welcome light—
Saphira landed by the edge of a small lake so Eragon and Orik could 
stretch their legs, relieve themselves, and eat breakfast without the con-
stant movement they experienced on her back. 
 
 They had just taken off again when a long, low brown cloud appeared 
on the edge of the horizon, like a smudge of walnut ink on a sheet of 
white paper. The cloud grew wider and wider as Saphira approached it, 
until by late morning it obscured the entire land beneath a pall of foul 

 
542
vapors. 
 
 They had reached the Burning Plains of Alagaësia. 
 
 
 
 

 
543
THE BURNING PLAINS 
 
 
 Eragon coughed as Saphira descended through the layers of smoke, an-
gling toward the Jiet River, which was hidden behind the haze. He 
blinked and wiped back tears. The fumes made his eyes smart. 
 
 Closer to the ground, the air cleared, giving Eragon an unobstructed 
view of their destination. The rippling veil of black and crimson smoke 
filtered the sun’s rays in such a way that everything below was bathed in 
a lurid orange. Occasional rents in the besmirched sky allowed pale bars 
of light to strike the ground, where they remained, like pillars of translu-
cent glass, until they were truncated by the shifting clouds. 
 
 The Jiet River lay before them, as thick and turgid as a gorged snake, its 
crosshatched surface reflecting the same ghastly hue that pervaded the 
Burning Plains. Even when a splotch of undiluted light happened to fall 
upon the river, the water appeared chalky white, opaque and opales-
cent—almost as if it were the milk of some fearsome beast—and seemed 
to glow with an eerie luminescence all its own. 
 
 Two armies were arrayed along the eastern banks of the oozing water-
way. To the south were the Varden and the men of Surda, entrenched 
behind multiple layers of defense, where they displayed a fine panoply of 
woven standards, ranks of proud tents, and the picketed horses of King 
Orrin’s cavalry. Strong as they were, their numbers paled in comparison 
to the size of the force assembled in the north. Galbatorix’s army was so 
large, it measured three miles across on its leading edge and how many in 
length it was impossible to tell, for the individual men melded into a 
shadowy mass in the distance. 
 
 Between the mortal foes was an empty span of perhaps two miles. This 
land, and the land that the armies camped on, was pocked with countless 
ragged orifices in which danced green tongues of fire. From those sickly 
torches billowed plumes of smoke that dimmed the sun. Every scrap of 
vegetation had been scorched from the parched soil, except for growths 
of black, orange, and chartreuse lichen that, from the air, gave the earth a 
scabbed and infected appearance. 
 
 It was the most forbidding vista Eragon had clapped eyes upon. 
 
 Saphira emerged over the no-man’s-land that separated the grim armies, 
and now she twisted and dove toward the Varden as fast as she dared, for 
so long as they remained exposed to the Empire, they were vulnerable to 

 
544
attacks from enemy magicians. Eragon extended his awareness as far as he 
could in every direction, hunting for hostile minds that could feel his 
probing touch and would react to it—the minds of magicians and those 
trained to fend off magicians. 
 
 What he felt instead was the sudden panic that overwhelmed the 
Varden’s sentinels, many of whom, he realized, had never before seen 
Saphira. Fear made them ignore their common sense, and they released a 
flock of barbed arrows that arched up to intercept her. 
 
 Raising his right hand, Eragon cried, “Letta orya thorna!” The arrows 
froze in place. With a flick of his wrist and the word “Gánga,” he redi-
rected them, sending the darts boring toward the no-man’s-land, where 
they could bury themselves in the barren soil without causing harm. He 
missed one arrow, though, which was fired a few seconds after the first 
volley. 
 
 Eragon leaned as far to his right as he could and, faster than any normal 
human, plucked the arrow from the air as Saphira flew past it. 
 
 Only a hundred feet above the ground, Saphira flared her wings to slow 
her steep descent before alighting first on her hind legs and then her front 
legs as she came to a running stop among the Varden’s tents. 
 
 “Werg,” growled Orik, loosening the thongs that held his legs in place. 
“I’d rather fight a dozen Kull than experience such a fall again.” He let 
himself hang off one side of the saddle, then dropped to Saphira’s foreleg 
below and, from there, to the ground. 
 
 Even as Eragon dismounted, dozens of warriors with awestruck expres-
sions gathered around Saphira. From within their midst strode a big bear 
of a man whom Eragon recognized: Fredric, the Varden’s weapon master 
from Farthen Dûr, still garbed in his hairy ox-hide armor. “Come on, you 
slack-jawed louts!” roared Fredric. “Don’t stand here gawking; get back to 
your posts or I’ll have the lot of you chalked up for extra watches!” At 
his command, the men began to disperse with many a grumbled word 
and backward glance. Then Fredric drew nearer and, Eragon could tell, 
was startled by the change in Eragon’s countenance. The bearded man did 
his best to conceal the reaction by touching his brow and saying, “Wel-
come, Shadeslayer. You’ve arrived just in time.... I can’t tell you how 
ashamed I am you were attacked. The honor of every man here has been 
blackened by this mistake. Were the three of you hurt?” 
 
 “No.” 

 
545
 
 Relief spread across Fredric’s face. “Well, there’s that to be grateful for. 
I’ve had the men responsible pulled from duty. They’ll each be whipped 
and reduced in rank.... Will that punishment satisfy you, Rider?” 
 
 “I want to see them,” said Eragon. 
 
 Sudden concern emanated from Fredric; it was obvious he feared that 
Eragon wanted to enact some terrible and unnatural retribution on the 
sentinels. Fredric did not voice his concern, however, but said, “If you’d 
follow me, then, sir.” 
 
 He led them through the camp to a striped command tent where 
twenty or so miserable-looking men were divesting themselves of their 
arms and armor under the watchful eye of a dozen guards. At the sight of 
Eragon and Saphira, the prisoners all went down on one knee and re-
mained there, gazing at the ground. “Hail, Shadeslayer!” they cried. 
 
 Eragon said nothing, but walked along the line of men while he studied 
their minds, his boots sinking through the crust of the baked earth with 
an ominous crunch. At last he said, “You should be proud that you re-
acted so quickly to our appearance. If Galbatorix attacks, that’s exactly 
what you should do, though I doubt arrows would prove any more effec-
tive against him than they were against Saphira and me.” The sentinels 
glanced at him with disbelief, their upturned faces tinted the color of 
tarnished brass by the variegated light. “I only ask that, in the future, you 
take a moment to identify your target before shooting. Next time I might 
be too distracted to stop your missiles. Am I understood?” 
 
 “Yes, Shadeslayer!” they shouted. 
 
 Stopping before the second-to-last man in the line, Eragon held out the 
arrow he had snared from Saphira’s back. “I believe this is yours, Harwin.” 
 
 With an expression of wonder, Harwin accepted the arrow from Er-
agon. “So it is! It has the white band I always paint on my shafts so I can 
find them later. Thank you, Shadeslayer.” 
 
 Eragon nodded and then said to Fredric so all could hear, “These are 
good and true men, and I want no misfortune to befall them because of 
this event.” 
 
 “I will see to it personally,” said Fredric, and smiled. 
 

 
546
 “Now, can you take us to Lady Nasuada?” 
 
 “Yes, sir.” 
 
 As he left the sentinels, Eragon knew that his kindness had earned him 
their undying loyalty, and that tidings of his deed would spread through-
out the Varden. 
 
 The path Fredric took through the tents brought Eragon into close con-
tact with more minds than he had ever touched before. Hundreds of 
thoughts, images, and sensations pressed against his consciousness. De-
spite his effort to keep them at a distance, he could not help absorbing 
random details of people’s lives. Some revelations he found shocking, 
some meaningless, others touching or, conversely, disgusting, and many 
embarrassing. A few people perceived the world so differently, their 
minds leaped out at him on account of that very difference. 
 
 How easy it is to view these men as nothing more than objects that I and a 
few others can manipulate at will. Yet they each possess hopes and dreams, 
potential for what they might achieve and memories of what they have al-
ready accomplished. And they all feel pain. 
 
 A handful of the minds he touched were aware of the contact and re-
coiled from it, hiding their inner life behind defenses of varying strength. 
At first Eragon was concerned—imagining that he had discovered a great 
many enemies who had infiltrated the Varden—but then he realized 
from his quick glimpse that they were the individual members of Du 
Vrangr Gata. 
 
 Saphira said, They must be scared out of their wits, thinking that they’re 
about to be assaulted by some strange magician. 
 
 I can’t convince them otherwise while they block me like this. 
 
 You should meet them in person, and soon too, before they decide to band 
together and attack. 
 
 Aye, although I don’t think they pose a threat to us.... Du Vrangr Gata—
their very name betrays their ignorance. Properly, in the ancient language, it 
should be Du Gata Vrangr. 
 
 Their trip ended near the back of the Varden, at a large red pavilion 
flying a pennant embroidered with a black shield and two parallel swords 
slanting underneath. Fredric pulled back the flap and Eragon and Orik en-

 
547
tered the pavilion. Behind them, Saphira pushed her head through the 
opening and peered over their shoulders. 
 
 A broad table occupied the center of the furnished tent. Nasuada stood 
at one end, leaning on her hands, studying a slew of maps and scrolls. Er-
agon’s stomach clenched as he saw Arya opposite her. Both women were 
armored as men for battle. 
 
 Nasuada turned her almond-shaped face toward him. “Eragon?” she 
whispered. 
 
 He was unprepared for how glad he was to see her. With a broad grin, 
he twisted his hand over his sternum in the elves’ gesture of fealty and 
bowed. “At your service.” 
 
 “Eragon!” This time Nasuada sounded delighted and relieved. Arya, too, 
appeared pleased. “How did you get our message so quickly?” 
 
 “I didn’t; I learned about Galbatorix’s army from my scrying and left 
Ellesméra the same day.” He smiled at her again. “It’s good to be back 
with the Varden.” 
 
 While he spoke, Nasuada studied him with a wondering expression. 
“What has happened to you, Eragon?” 
 
 Arya must not have told her, said Saphira. 
 
 And so Eragon gave a full account of what had befallen Saphira and 
him since they left Nasuada in Farthen Dûr so long ago. Much of what he 
said, he sensed that she had already heard, either from the dwarves or 
from Arya, but she let him speak without interrupting. Eragon had to be 
circumspect about his training. He had given his word not to reveal 
Oromis’s existence without permission, and most of his lessons were not 
to be shared with outsiders, but he did his best to give Nasuada a good 
idea of his skills and their attendant risks. Of the Agaetí Blödhren, he 
merely said, “... and during the celebration, the dragons worked upon me 
the change you see, giving me the physical abilities of an elf and healing 
my back.” 
 
 “Your scar is gone, then?” asked Nasuada. He nodded. A few more sen-
tences served to end his narrative, briefly mentioning the reason they had 
left Du Weldenvarden and then summarizing their journey thence. She 
shook her head. “What a tale. You and Saphira have experienced so 
much since you left Farthen Dûr.” 

 
548
 
 “As have you.” He gestured at the tent. “It’s amazing what you’ve ac-
complished. It must have taken an enormous amount of work to get the 
Varden to Surda.... Has the Council of Elders caused you much trouble?” 
 
 “A bit, but nothing extraordinary. They seem to have resigned them-
selves to my leadership.” Her mail clinking together, Nasuada seated her-
self in a large, high-backed chair and turned to Orik, who had yet to 
speak. She welcomed him and asked if he had aught to add to Eragon’s 
tale. Orik shrugged and provided a few anecdotes from their stay in 
Ellesméra, though Eragon suspected that the dwarf kept his true observa-
tions a secret for his king. 
 
 When he finished, Nasuada said, “I am heartened to know that if we 
can weather this onslaught, we shall have the elves by our side. Did any 
of you happen to see Hrothgar’s warriors during your flight from Aberon? 
We are counting on their reinforcements.” 
 
 No, answered Saphira through Eragon. But then, it was dark and I was 
often above or between clouds. I could have easily missed a camp under 
those conditions. In any case, I doubt we would have crossed paths, for I 
flew straight from Aberon, and it seems likely the dwarves would choose a 
different route—perhaps following established roads—rather than march 
through the wilderness. 
 
 “What,” asked Eragon, “is the situation here?” 
 
 Nasuada sighed and then told of how she and Orrin had learned about 
Galbatorix’s army and the desperate measures they had resorted to since 
in order to reach the Burning Plains before the king’s soldiers. She fin-
ished by saying, “The Empire arrived three days ago. Since then, we’ve 
exchanged two messages. First they asked for our surrender, which we 
refused, and now we wait for their reply.” 
 
 “How many of them are there?” growled Orik. “It looked a mighty 
number from Saphira’s back.” 
 
 “Aye. We estimate Galbatorix mustered as many as a hundred thou-
sand soldiers.” 
 
 Eragon could not contain himself: “A hundred thousand! Where did 
they come from? It seems impossible that he could find more than a 
handful of people willing to serve him.” 
 

 
549
 “They were conscripted. We can only hope that the men who were 
torn from their homes won’t be eager to fight. If we can frighten them 
badly enough, they may break ranks and flee. Our numbers are greater 
than in Farthen Dûr, for King Orrin has joined forces with us and we 
have received a veritable flood of volunteers since we began to spread the 
word about you, Eragon, although we are still far weaker than the Em-
pire.” 
 
 Then Saphira asked, and Eragon was forced to repeat the dreadful ques-
tion: What do you think our chances of victory are? 
 
 “That,” said Nasuada, putting emphasis on the word, “depends a great 
deal upon you and Eragon, and the number of magicians seeded through-
out their troops. If you can find and destroy those magicians, then our 
enemies shall be left unprotected and you can slay them at will. Outright 
victory, I think, is unlikely at this point, but we might be able to hold 
them at bay until their supplies run low or until Islanzadí can come to 
our assistance. That is... if Galbatorix doesn’t fly into battle himself. In 
that case, I fear retreat will be our only option.” 
 
 Just then, Eragon felt a strange mind approaching, one that knew he 
was watching and yet did not shrink from the contact. One that felt cold 
and hard, calculating. Alert for danger, Eragon turned his gaze toward the 
rear of the pavilion, where he saw the same black-haired girl who had 
appeared when he scryed Nasuada from Ellesméra. The girl stared at him 
with violet eyes, then said, “Welcome, Shadeslayer. Welcome, Saphira.” 
 
 Eragon shivered at the sound of her voice, the voice of an adult. He wet 
his dry mouth and asked, “Who are you?” 
 
 Without answering, the girl brushed back her glossy bangs and exposed 
a silvery white mark on her forehead, exactly like Eragon’s gedwëy igna-
sia. He knew then whom he faced. 
 
 No one moved as Eragon went to the girl, accompanied by Saphira, 
who extended her neck farther into the pavilion. Dropping to one knee, 
Eragon took the girl’s right hand in his own; her skin burned as if with 
fever. She did not resist him, but merely left her hand limp in his grip. In 
the ancient language—and also with his mind, so that she would under-
stand—Eragon said, “I am sorry. Can you forgive me for what I did to 
you?” 
 
 The girl’s eyes softened, and she leaned forward and kissed Eragon upon 
the brow. “I forgive you,” she whispered, for the first time sounding her 

 
550
age. “How could I not? You and Saphira created who I am, and I know 
you meant no harm. I forgive you, but I shall let this knowledge torture 
your conscience: You have condemned me to be aware of all the suffer-
ing around me. Even now your spell drives me to rush to the aid of a man 
not three tents away who just cut his hand, to help the young flag carrier 
who broke his left index finger in the spokes of a wagon wheel, and to 
help countless others who have been or are about to be hurt. It costs me 
dearly to resist those urges, and even more if I consciously cause someone 
discomfort, as I do by saying this.... I cannot even sleep at night for the 
strength of my compulsion. That is your legacy, O Rider.” By the end, her 
voice had regained its bitter, mocking edge. 
 
 Saphira interposed herself between them and, with her snout, touched 
the girl in the center of her mark. Peace, Changeling. You have much an-
ger in your heart. 
 
 “You don’t have to live like this forever,” said Eragon. “The elves taught 
me how to undo a spell, and I believe I can free you of this curse. It 
won’t be easy, but it can be done.” 
 
 For a moment, the girl seemed to lose her formidable self-control. A 
small gasp escaped her lips, her hand trembled against Eragon’s, and her 
eyes glistened with a film of tears. Then just as quickly, she hid her true 
emotions behind a mask of cynical amusement. “Well, we shall see. Ei-
ther way, you shouldn’t try until after this battle.” 
 
 “I could save you a great deal of pain.” 
 
 “It wouldn’t do to exhaust you when our survival may depend on your 
talents. I do not deceive myself; you are more important than me.” A sly 
grin crossed her face. “Besides, if you remove your spell now, I won’t be 
able to help any of the Varden if they are threatened. You wouldn’t want 
Nasuada to die because of that, would you?” 
 
 “No,” admitted Eragon. He paused for a long time, considering the is-
sue, then said, “Very well, I will wait. But I swear to you: If we win this 
fight, I shall right this wrong.” 
 
 The girl tilted her head to one side. “I will hold you to your word, 
Rider.” 
 
 Rising from her chair, Nasuada said, “Elva was the one who saved me 
from an assassin in Aberon.” 
 

 
551
 “Did she? In that case, I am in your debt... Elva... for protecting my 
liegelord.” 
 
 “Come now,” said Nasuada. “I must introduce the three of you to Orrin 
and his nobles. Have you met the king before, Orik?” 
 
 The dwarf shook his head. “I’ve never been this far west.” 
 
 As they left the pavilion—Nasuada in the lead, with Elva by her side—
Eragon tried to position himself so he could talk with Arya, but when he 
neared her, she quickened her pace until she was level with Nasuada. 
Arya never even looked at him while she walked, a slight that caused 
him more anguish than any physical wound he had endured. Elva glanced 
back at him, and he knew that she was aware of his distress. 
 
 They soon arrived at another large pavilion, this one white and yel-
low—although it was difficult to determine the exact hue of the colors, 
given the garish orange that glazed everything on the Burning Plains. 
Once they were granted entrance, Eragon was astonished to find the tent 
crammed with an eccentric collection of beakers, alembics, retorts, and 
other instruments of natural philosophy. Who would bother toting all this 
onto a battlefield? he wondered, bewildered. 
 
 “Eragon,” said Nasuada, “I would like you to meet Orrin, son of Larkin 
and monarch of the realm of Surda.” 
 
 From the depths of the tangled piles of glass emerged a rather tall, 
handsome man with shoulder-length hair held back by the gold coronet 
resting upon his head. His mind, like Nasuada’s, was protected behind 
walls of iron; it was obvious he had received extensive training in that 
skill. Orrin seemed pleasant enough to Eragon from their discussion, if a 
bit green and untried when it came to commanding men in war and more 
than a little odd in the head. On the whole, Eragon trusted Nasuada’s 
leadership more. 
 
 After fending off scores of questions from Orrin about his stay among 
the elves, Eragon found himself smiling and nodding politely as one earl 
after another paraded past, each of whom insisted on shaking his hand, 
telling him what an honor it was to meet a Rider, and inviting him to 
their respective estates. Eragon dutifully memorized their many names 
and titles—as he knew Oromis would expect—and did his best to main-
tain a calm demeanor, despite his growing frustration. 
 
 We’re about to engage one of the largest armies in history, and here we 

 
552
are, stuck exchanging pleasantries. 
 
 Patience, counseled Saphira. There aren’t that many more.... Besides, 
look at it this way: if we win, they’ll owe us an entire year of free dinners, 
what with all their promises. 
 
 He stifled a chuckle. I think it would dismay them to know what it takes 
to feed you. Not to mention that you could empty their cellars of beer and 
wine in a single night. 
 
 I would never, she sniffed, then relented. Maybe in two nights. 
 
 When at last they won free of Orrin’s pavilion, Eragon asked Nasuada, 
“What shall I do now? How can I serve you?” 
 
 Nasuada eyed him with a curious expression. “How do you think you 
can best serve me, Eragon? You know your own abilities far better than I 
do.” Even Arya watched him now, waiting to hear his response. 
 
 Eragon gazed up at the bloody sky while he pondered her question. “I 
shall take control of Du Vrangr Gata, as they once asked me to, and or-
ganize them underneath me so I can lead them into battle. Working to-
gether will give us the best chance of foiling Galbatorix’s magicians.” 
 
 “That seems an excellent idea.” 
 
 Is there a place, asked Saphira, where Eragon can leave his bags? I don’t 
want to carry them or this saddle any longer than I have to. 
 
 When Eragon repeated her question, Nasuada said, “Of course. You 
may leave them in my pavilion, and I will arrange to have a tent erected 
for you, Eragon, where you can keep them permanently. I suggest, 
though, that you don your armor before parting with your bags. You 
might need it at any moment.... That reminds me: we have your armor 
with us, Saphira. I shall have it unpacked and brought to you.” 
 
 “And what of me, Lady?” asked Orik. 
 
 “We have several knurlan with us from Dûrgrimst Ingeitum who have 
lent their expertise to the construction of our earthen defenses. You may 
take command of them if you wish.” 
 
 Orik seemed heartened by the prospect of seeing fellow dwarves, espe-
cially ones from his own clan. He clapped his fist to his chest and said, “I 

 
553
think I will at that. If you’ll excuse me, I’ll see to it at once.” Without a 
backward glance, he trundled off through the camp, heading north to-
ward the breastwork. 
 
 Returning to her pavilion with the four who remained, Nasuada said to 
Eragon, “Report to me once you have settled matters with Du Vrangr 
Gata.” Then she pushed aside the entrance flap to the pavilion and disap-
peared with Elva through the dark opening. 
 
 As Arya started to follow, Eragon reached toward her and, in the an-
cient language, said, “Wait.” The elf paused and looked at him, betraying 
nothing. He held her gaze without wavering, staring deep into her eyes, 
which reflected the strange light around them. “Arya, I won’t apologize 
for how I feel about you. However, I wanted you to know that Iam sorry 
for how I acted during the Blood-oath Celebration. I wasn’t myself that 
night; otherwise, I would have never been so forward with you.” 
 
 “And you won’t do it again?” 
 
 He suppressed a humorless laugh. “It wouldn’t get me anywhere if I 
did, now would it?” When she remained silent, he said, “No matter. I 
don’t want to trouble you, even if you—” He bit off the end of his sen-
tence before he made a remark he knew he would regret. 
 
 Arya’s expression softened. “I’m not trying to hurt you, Eragon. You 
must understand that.” 
 
 “I understand,” he said, but without conviction. 
 
 An awkward pause stretched between them. “Your flight went well, I 
trust?” 
 
 “Well enough.” 
 
 “You encountered no difficulty in the desert?” 
 
 “Should we have?” 
 
 “No. I only wondered.” Then, in an even gentler voice, Arya asked, 
“What of you, Eragon? How have you been since the celebration? I heard 
what you said to Nasuada, but you mentioned nothing other than your 
back.” 
 
 “I...” He tried to lie—not wanting her to know how much he had 

 
554
missed her—but the ancient language stopped the words dead in his 
mouth and rendered him mute. Finally, he resorted to a technique of the 
elves: telling only part of the truth in order to create an impression oppo-
site the whole truth. “I’m better than before,” he said, meaning, in his 
mind, the condition of his back. 
 
 Despite his subterfuge, Arya appeared unconvinced. She did not press 
him on the subject, though, but rather said, “I am glad.” Nasuada’s voice 
emanated from inside the pavilion, and Arya glanced toward it before 
facing him again. “I am needed elsewhere, Eragon.... We are both needed 
elsewhere. A battle is about to take place.” Lifting the canvas flap, she 
stepped halfway into the gloomy tent, then hesitated and added, “Take 
care, Eragon Shadeslayer.” 
 
 Then she was gone. 
 
 Dismay rooted Eragon in place. He had accomplished what he wanted 
to, but it seemed to have changed nothing between him and Arya. He 
balled his hands into fists and hunched his shoulders and glared at the 
ground without seeing it, simmering with frustration. 
 
 He started when Saphira nosed him on the shoulder. Come on, little 
one, she said gently. You can’t stay here forever, and this saddle is begin-
ning to itch. 
 
 Going to her side, Eragon pulled on her neck strap, muttering under his 
breath when it caught in the buckle. He almost hoped the leather would 
break. Undoing the rest of the straps, he let the saddle and everything 
tied to it fall to the ground in a jumbled heap. It feels good to have that 
off, said Saphira, rolling her massive shoulders. 
 
 Digging his armor out of the saddlebags, Eragon outfitted himself in the 
bright dress of war. First he pulled his hauberk over his elven tunic, then 
strapped his chased greaves to his legs and his inlaid bracers to his fore-
arms. On his head went his padded leather cap, followed by his coif of 
tempered steel and then his gold and silver helm. Last of all, he replaced 
his regular gloves with his mail-backed gauntlets. 
 
 Zar’roc he hung on his left hip using the belt of Beloth the Wise. 
Across his back, he placed the quiver of white swan feathers Islanzadí 
had given him. The quiver, he was pleased to find, could also hold the 
bow the elf queen had sung for him, even when it was strung. 
 
 After depositing his and Orik’s belongings into the pavilion, Eragon and 

 
555
Saphira set out together to find Trianna, the current leader of Du Vrangr 
Gata. They had gone no more than a few paces when Eragon sensed a 
nearby mind that was shielded from his view. Assuming that it was one 
of the Varden’s magicians, they veered toward it. 
 
 Twelve yards from their starting point, they came upon a small green 
tent with a donkey picketed in front. To the left of the tent, a blackened 
iron cauldron hung from a metal tripod placed over one of the malodor-
ous flames birthed deep within the earth. Cords were strung about the 
cauldron, over which were draped nightshade, hemlock, rhododendron, 
savin, bark of the yew tree, and numerous mushrooms, such as death cap 
and spotted cort, all of which Eragon recognized from Oromis’s lessons 
on poison. And standing next to the cauldron, wielding a long wood pad-
dle with which she stirred the brew, was Angela the herbalist. At her feet 
sat Solembum. 
 
 The werecat uttered a mournful meow, and Angela looked up from 
her task, her corkscrew hair forming a billowing thundercloud around her 
glistening face. She frowned, and her expression became positively ghoul-
ish, for it was lit from beneath by the flickering green flame. “So you’ve 
returned, eh!” 
 
 “We have,” said Eragon. 
 
 “Is that all you have to say for yourself? Have you seen Elva yet? Have 
you seen what you did to that poor girl?” 
 
 “Aye.” 
 
 “Aye!” cried Angela. “How inarticulate can a person be? All this time in 
Ellesméra being tutored by the elves, and aye is the best you can manage? 
Let me tell you something, blockhead: anyone who is stupid enough to 
do what you did deserves—” 
 
 Eragon clasped his hands behind his back and waited as Angela in-
formed him, in many explicit, detailed, and highly inventive terms, ex-
actly how great a blockhead he was; what kind of ancestors he must pos-
sess to be such a monumental blockhead—she even went so far as to in-
sinuate that one of his grandparents had mated with an Urgal—and the 
quite hideous punishments he ought to receive for his idiocy. If anyone 
else had insulted him in that manner, Eragon would have challenged 
them to a duel, but he tolerated her spleen because he knew he could 
not judge her behavior by the same standards as he did others, and be-
cause he knew her outrage was justified; he had made a dreadful mistake. 

 
556
 
 When she finally paused for breath, he said, “You’re quite right, and I’m 
going to try to remove the spell once the battle is decided.” 
 
 Angela blinked three times, one right after the other, and her mouth 
remained open for a moment in a small “O” before she clamped it shut. 
With a glare of suspicion, she asked, “You’re not saying that just to pla-
cate me, are you?” 
 
 “I would never.” 
 
 “And you really intend to undo your curse? I thought such things were 
irrevocable.” 
 
 “The elves have discovered many uses of magic.” 
 
 “Ah... Well, then, that’s settled, isn’t it?” She flashed him a wide smile 
and then strode past him to pat Saphira on her jowls. “It’s good to see you 
again, Saphira. You’ve grown.” 
 
 Well met indeed, Angela. 
 
 As Angela returned to stirring her concoction, Eragon said, “That was 
an impressive tirade you gave.” 
 
 “Thank you. I worked on it for several weeks. It’s a pity you didn’t get 
to hear the ending; it’s memorable. I could finish it for you if you want.” 
 
 “No, that’s all right. I can imagine what it’s like.” Glancing at her out of 
the corner of his eye, Eragon then said, “You don’t seem surprised by how 
I’ve changed.” 
 
 The herbalist shrugged. “I have my sources. It’s an improvement, in my 
opinion. You were a bit... oh, how shall I say it?...unfinished before.” 
 
 “That I was.” He gestured at the hanging plants. “What do you plan to 
do with these?” 
 
 “Oh, it’s just a little project of mine—an experiment, if you will.” 
 
 “Mmm.” Examining the pattern of colors on a dried mushroom that 
dangled before him, Eragon asked, “Did you ever figure out if toads exist 
or not?” 
 

 
557
 “As a matter of fact, I did! It seems that all toads are frogs, but not all 
frogs are toads. So in that sense, toads don’t really exist, which means that 
I was right all along.” She stopped her patter abruptly, leaned to the side, 
grabbed a mug from a bench next to her, and offered it to Eragon. “Here, 
have a cup of tea.” 
 
 Eragon glanced at the deadly plants surrounding them and then back at 
Angela’s open face before he accepted the mug. Under his breath—so the 
herbalist would not hear—he muttered three spells to detect poison. 
Only once he ascertained that the tea was free of contamination did he 
dare drink. The tea was delicious, though he could not identify the ingre-
dients. 
 
 At that moment, Solembum padded over to Saphira and began to arch 
his back and rub himself up against her leg, just as any normal cat would. 
Twisting her neck, Saphira bent down and with the tip of her nose 
brushed the werecat the length of his spine. She said, I met someone in 
Ellesméra who knows you. 
 
 Solembum stopped rubbing and cocked his head. Is that so? 
 
 Yes. Her name was Quickpaw and The Dream Dancer and also Maud. 
 
 Solembum’s golden eyes widened. A deep, throaty purr rumbled in his 
chest, and he rubbed against Saphira with renewed vigor. 
 
 “So,” said Angela, “I assume you already spoke with Nasuada, Arya, and 
King Orrin.” He nodded. “And what did you think of dear old Orrin?” 
 
 Eragon chose his words with care, for he was aware that they were talk-
ing about a king. “Well... he seems to have a great many interests.” 
 
 “Yes, he’s as balmy as a moonstruck fool on Midsummer Night Eve. But 
then everyone is, in one way or another.” 
 
 Amused by her forthrightness, Eragon said, “He must be crazy to have 
carted so much glass all the way from Aberon.” 
 
 Angela raised an eyebrow. “What’s this now?” 
 
 “Haven’t you seen the inside of his tent?” 
 
 “Unlike some people,” she sniffed, “I don’t ingratiate myself with every 
monarch I meet.” So he described for her the mass of instruments Orrin 

 
558
had brought to the Burning Plains. Angela abandoned her stirring as he 
spoke and listened with great interest. The instant he finished, she began 
bustling around the cauldron, gathering the plants off the lines—often us-
ing tongs to do so—and saying, “I think I had best pay Orrin a visit. The 
two of you will have to tell me about your trip to Ellesméra at a later 
time.... Well, go on, both of you. Be gone!” 
 
 Eragon shook his head as the short little woman drove him and Saphira 
away from her tent, and he still holding the cup of tea. Talking with her is 
always... 
 
 Different? suggested Saphira. 
 
 Exactly. 
 
 
 
 

 
559
THE CLOUDS OF WAR 
 
 
 From there it took them almost half an hour to locate Trianna’s tent, 
which apparently served as the unofficial headquarters of Du Vrangr 
Gata. They had difficulty finding the tent because few people knew of its 
existence, and even fewer could tell them where it lay because the tent 
was hidden behind a spur of rock that served to conceal it from the gaze 
of enemy magicians in Galbatorix’s army. 
 
 As Eragon and Saphira approached the black tent, the entrance was 
thrust open and Trianna strode out, her arms bare to the elbow in prepa-
ration to use magic. Behind her clustered a group of determined if fright-
ened-looking spellcasters, many of whom Eragon had seen during the bat-
tle in Farthen Dûr, either fighting or healing the wounded. 
 
 Eragon watched as Trianna and the others reacted with the now-
expected surprise at his altered appearance. Lowering her arms, Trianna 
said, “Shadeslayer, Saphira. You should have told us sooner that you were 
here. We’ve been preparing to confront and battle what we thought was 
a mighty foe.” 
 
 “I didn’t mean to upset you,” said Eragon, “but we had to report to 
Nasuada and King Orrin immediately after we landed.” 
 
 “And why have you graced us with your presence now? You never 
deigned to visit us before, we who are more your brethren than any in 
the Varden.” 
 
 “I have come to take command of Du Vrangr Gata.” The assembled 
spellcasters muttered with surprise at his announcement, and Trianna 
stiffened. Eragon felt several magicians probe his consciousness in an at-
tempt to divine his true intentions. Instead of guarding himself—which 
would blind him to impending attacks—Eragon retaliated by jabbing the 
minds of the would-be invaders hard enough that they retreated behind 
their own barriers. As he did, Eragon had the satisfaction of seeing two 
men and a woman flinch and avert their gazes. 
 
 “By whose order?” demanded Trianna. 
 
 “By Nasuada’s.” 
 
 “Ah,” said the sorceress with a triumphant smile, “but Nasuada has no 
direct authority over us. We help the Varden of our own free will.” 

 
560
 
 Her resistance puzzled Eragon. “I’m sure Nasuada would be surprised 
to hear that, after everything she, and her father, have done for Du 
Vrangr Gata. It might give her the impression that you no longer wanted 
the support and protection of the Varden.” He let the threat hang in the 
air for a moment. “Besides, I seem to remember you were willing to give 
me this post before. Why not now?” 
 
 Trianna lifted an eyebrow. “You refused my offer, Shadeslayer... or have 
you forgotten?” Composed as she was, a trace of defensiveness colored 
her response, and Eragon suspected she knew her position was untenable. 
She seemed more mature to him than when they last met, and he had to 
remind himself of the hardships she must have endured since: marching 
across Alagaësia to Surda, supervising the magicians of Du Vrangr Gata, 
and preparing for war. 
 
 “We could not accept then. It was the wrong time.” 
 
 Abruptly changing tack, she asked, “Why does Nasuada believe you 
should command us anyway? Surely you and Saphira would be more use-
ful elsewhere.” 
 
 “Nasuada wants me to lead you, Du Vrangr Gata, in the coming battle, 
and so I shall.” Eragon thought it best not to mention that it was his idea. 
 
 A dark scowl gave Trianna a fierce appearance. She pointed at the clus-
ter of spellcasters behind her. “We have devoted our lives to the study of 
our art. You have been casting spells for less than two years. What makes 
you more qualified for this task than any of us?... No matter. Tell me: 
What is your strategy? How do you plan to employ us?” 
 
 “My plan is simple,” he said. “The lot of you will join minds and search 
for enemy spellcasters. When you find one, I’ll add my strength to yours, 
and together we can crush the spellcaster’s resistance. Then we can slay 
the troops that previously were protected by his or her wards.” 
 
 “And what will you be doing the rest of the time?” 
 
 “Fighting alongside Saphira.” 
 
 After an awkward silence, one of the men behind Trianna said, “It’s a 
good plan.” He quailed as Trianna cast an angry glare at him. 
 
 She slowly faced Eragon again. “Ever since the Twins died, I have led 

 
561
Du Vrangr Gata. Under my guidance, they have provided the means to 
fund the Varden’s war effort, ferreted out the Black Hand—Galbatorix’s 
network of spies that tried to assassinate Nasuada—as well as performing 
innumerable other services. I do not boast when I say these are no mean 
accomplishments. And I’m certain I can continue to produce such re-
sults.... Why, then, does Nasuada want to depose me? How have I dis-
pleased her?” 
 
 Everything became clear to Eragon, then. She has grown accustomed to 
power and doesn’t want to surrender it. But more than that, she thinks that 
my replacing her is a criticism of her leadership. 
 
 You need to resolve this debate, and quickly too, said Saphira. Our time 
grows short. 
 
 Eragon racked his brain for a way to establish his authority in Du 
Vrangr Gata without further alienating Trianna. At last he said, “I didn’t 
come here to stir up trouble. I came to ask for your help.” He spoke to 
the entire congregation but looked only at the sorceress. “I am strong, yes. 
Saphira and I could probably defeat any number of Galbatorix’s pet ma-
gicians. But we cannot protect everyone in the Varden. We cannot be 
everywhere. And if the Empire’s battle-mages join forces against us, then 
even we will be hard-pressed to survive.... We cannot fight this battle 
alone. You are quite right, Trianna—you have done well with Du Vrangr 
Gata, and I’m not here to usurp your authority. It’s only that—as a magi-
cian—I need to work with Du Vrangr Gata, and—as a Rider—I may also 
need to give you orders, orders that I have to know will be obeyed with-
out question. The chain of command must be established. That said, you 
will retain the greater part of your autonomy. Most times I’ll be too busy 
to devote my attention to Du Vrangr Gata. Nor do I intend to ignore 
your counsel, for I’m aware that you have far more experience than I.... 
So I ask again, will you help us, for the good of the Varden?” 
 
 Trianna paused, then bowed. “Of course, Shadeslayer—for the good of 
the Varden. It will be an honor to have you lead Du Vrangr Gata.” 
 
 “Then let us begin.” 
 
 Over the next few hours, Eragon talked with every one of the assem-
bled magicians, although a fair number were absent, being occupied with 
one task or another to help the Varden. He did his best to acquaint him-
self with their knowledge of magic. He learned that the majority of men 
and women in Du Vrangr Gata had been introduced to their craft by a 
relative, and usually in profound secrecy to avoid attracting attention 

 
562
from those who feared magic—and, of course, Galbatorix himself. Only a 
handful had received proper apprenticeships. As a result, most of the 
spellcasters knew little about the ancient language—none could truly 
speak it fluently—their beliefs about magic were often distorted by reli-
gious superstitions, and they were ignorant of numerous applications of 
gramarye. 
 
 No wonder the Twins were so desperate to extract your vocabulary of the 
ancient language when they tested you in Farthen Dûr, observed Saphira. 
With it they could have easily conquered these lesser magicians. 
 
 They’re all we have to work with, though. 
 
 True. I hope you can see now I was right about Trianna. She places her 
own desires before the good of the many. 
 
 You were right, he agreed. But I don’t condemn her for it. Trianna deals 
with the world in the best way she can, as do we all. I understand that, 
even if I don’t approve, and understanding—as Oromis said—breeds empa-
thy. 
 
 A bit more than a third of the spellcasters specialized as healers. Those 
Eragon sent on their way after giving them a quintet of new spells to 
memorize, enchantments that would allow them to treat a greater range 
of injuries. The remaining spellcasters Eragon worked with to establish a 
clear chain of command—he appointed Trianna his lieutenant and let her 
ensure that his orders were carried out—and to weld their disparate per-
sonalities into a cohesive fighting unit. Trying to convince magicians to 
cooperate, he discovered, was like trying to get a pack of dogs to share a 
meat bone. Nor did it help that they were in evident awe of him, for he 
could find no way of using his influence to smooth relations among the 
contentious magicians. 
 
 In order to gain a better idea of their exact proficiency, Eragon had 
them cast a series of spells. As he watched them struggle with enchant-
ments that he now considered simple, Eragon became aware of just how 
far his own powers had advanced. To Saphira, he marveled, And to think 
I once had trouble lifting a pebble in the air. 
 
 And to think, she replied, Galbatorix has had over a century to hone his 
talent. 
 
 The sun was low in the west, intensifying the fermented orange light 
until the Varden’s camp, the livid Jiet River, and the entirety of the 

 
563
Burning Plains glowed in the mad, marbled effulgence, as if in a scene 
from a lunatic’s dreams. The sun was no more than a finger’s breadth 
above the horizon when a runner arrived at the tent. He told Eragon that 
Nasuada ordered him to attend her at once. “An’ I think you’d better 
hurry, Shadeslayer, if you don’t mind me saying so.” 
 
 After extracting a promise from Du Vrangr Gata that they would be 
ready and willing when he called upon them for assistance, Eragon ran 
alongside Saphira through the rows of gray tents toward Nasuada’s pavil-
ion. A harsh tumult above them caused Eragon to lift his eyes from the 
treacherous ground long enough to glance overhead. 
 
 What he saw was a giant flock of birds wheeling between the two ar-
mies. He spotted eagles, hawks, and falcons, along with countless greedy 
crows and their larger, dagger-beaked, blue-backed, rapacious cousin, the 
raven. Each bird shrieked for blood to wet its throat and enough hot 
meat to fill its belly and sate its hunger. By experience and instinct, they 
knew that whenever armies appeared in Alagaësia, they could expect to 
feast on acres of carrion. 
 
 The clouds of war are gathering, observed Eragon. 
 
 
 
 

 
564
NAR GARZHVOG 
 
 
 Eragon entered the pavilion, Saphira pushing her head through after 
him. He was met by a steely rasp as Jörmundur and a half-dozen of 
Nasuada’s commanders drew their swords at the intruders. The men 
lowered their weapons as Nasuada said, “Come here, Eragon.” 
 
 “What is your bidding?” Eragon asked. 
 
 “Our scouts report that a company of some hundred Kull approach 
from the northeast.” 
 
 Eragon frowned. He had not expected to encounter Urgals in this bat-
tle, since Durza no longer controlled them and so many had been killed 
in Farthen Dûr. But if they had come, they had come. He felt his blood-
lust rise and allowed himself a savage grin as he contemplated destroying 
Urgals with his new strength. Clapping his hand to Zar’roc’s hilt, he said, 
“It will be a pleasure to eliminate them. Saphira and I can handle it by 
ourselves, if you want.” 
 
 Nasuada watched his face carefully as she said, “We can’t do that, Er-
agon. They’re flying a white flag, and they have asked to talk with me.” 
 
 Eragon gaped at her. “Surely you don’t intend to grant them an audi-
ence?” 
 
 “I will offer them the same courtesies I would to any foe who arrives 
under the banner of truce.” 
 
 “They’re brutes, though. Monsters! It’s folly to allow them into the 
camp.... Nasuada, I have seen the atrocities Urgals commit. They relish 
pain and suffering and deserve no more mercy than a rabid dog. There is 
no need for you to waste time over what is surely a trap. Just give the 
word and I and every last one of your warriors will be more than willing 
to kill these foul creatures for you.” 
 
 “In this,” said Jörmundur, “I agree with Eragon. If you won’t listen to us, 
Nasuada, at least listen to him.” 
 
 First Nasuada said to Eragon in a murmur low enough that no one else 
could hear, “Your training is indeed unfinished if you are so blinded.” 
Then she raised her voice, and in it Eragon heard the same adamantine 
notes of command that her father had possessed: “You all forget that I 

 
565
fought in Farthen Dûr, the same as you, and that I saw the savagery of 
the Urgals.... However, I also saw our own men commit acts just as hei-
nous. I shall not denigrate what we have endured at the Urgals’ hands, 
but neither shall I ignore potential allies when we are so greatly outnum-
bered by the Empire.” 
 
 “My Lady, it’s too dangerous for you to meet with a Kull.” 
 
 “Too dangerous?” Nasuada raised an eyebrow. “While I am protected 
by Eragon, Saphira, Elva, and all the warriors around me? I think not.” 
 
 Eragon gritted his teeth with frustration. Say something, Saphira. You 
can convince her to abandon this harebrained scheme. 
 
 No, I won’t. Your mind is clouded on this issue. 
 
 You can’t agree with her! exclaimed Eragon, aghast. You were there in 
Yazuac with me; you know what the Urgals did to the villagers. And what 
about when we left Teirm, my capture at Gil’ead, and Farthen Dûr? Every 
time we’ve encountered Urgals, they’ve tried to kill us or worse. They’re 
nothing more than vicious animals. 
 
 The elves believed the same thing about dragons during Du Fyrn 
Skulblaka. 
 
 At Nasuada’s behest, her guards tied back the front and side panels of 
the pavilion, leaving it open for all to see and allowing Saphira to crouch 
low next to Eragon. Then Nasuada seated herself in her high-backed 
chair, and Jörmundur and the other commanders arranged themselves in 
two parallel rows so that anyone who sought an audience with her had to 
walk between them. Eragon stood at her right hand, Elva by her left. 
 
 Less than five minutes later, a great roar of anger erupted from the 
eastern edge of the camp. The storm of jeers and insults grew louder and 
louder until a single Kull entered their view, walking toward Nasuada 
while a mob of the Varden peppered him with taunts. The Urgal—or 
ram, as Eragon remembered they were called—held his head high and 
bared his yellow fangs, but did not otherwise react to the abuse directed 
at him. He was a magnificent specimen, eight and a half feet tall, with 
strong, proud—if grotesque—features, thick horns that spiraled all the 
way around, and a fantastic musculature that made it seem he could kill a 
bear with a single blow. His only clothing was a knotted loincloth, a few 
plates of crude iron armor held together with scraps of mail, and a curved 
metal disk nestled between his two horns to protect the top of his head. 

 
566
His long black hair was in a queue. 
 
 Eragon felt his lips tighten in a grimace of hate; he had to struggle to 
keep from drawing Zar’roc and attacking. Yet despite himself, he could 
not help but admire the Urgal’s courage in confronting an entire army of 
enemies alone and unarmed. To his surprise, he found the Kull’s mind 
strongly shielded. 
 
 When the Urgal stopped before the eaves of the pavilion, not daring to 
come any closer, Nasuada had her guards shout for quiet to settle the 
crowd. Everyone looked at the Urgal, wondering what he would do next. 
 
 The Urgal lifted his bulging arms toward the sky, inhaled a mighty 
breath, and then opened his maw and bellowed at Nasuada. In an instant, 
a thicket of swords pointed at the Kull, but he paid them no attention 
and continued his ululation until his lungs were empty. Then he looked 
at Nasuada, ignoring the hundreds of people who, it was obvious, longed 
to kill him, and growled in a thick, guttural accent, “What treachery is 
this, Lady Nightstalker? I was promised safe passage. Do humans break 
their word so easily?” 
 
 Leaning toward her, one of Nasuada’s commanders said, “Let us punish 
him, Mistress, for his insolence. Once we have taught him the meaning of 
respect, then you can hear his message, whatever it is.” 
 
 Eragon longed to remain silent, but he knew his duty to Nasuada and 
the Varden, so he bent down and said in Nasuada’s ear, “Don’t take of-
fense. This is how they greet their war chiefs. The proper response is to 
then butt heads, but I don’t think you want to try that.” 
 
 “Did the elves teach you this?” she murmured, never taking her eyes off 
the waiting Kull. 
 
 “Aye.” 
 
 “What else did they teach you of the Urgals?” 
 
 “A great deal,” he admitted reluctantly. 
 
 Then Nasuada said to the Kull and also to her men beyond, “The 
Varden are not liars like Galbatorix and the Empire. Speak your mind; 
you need fear no danger while we hold council under the conditions of 
truce.” 
 

 
567
 The Urgal grunted and raised his bony chin higher, baring his throat; 
Eragon recognized it as a gesture of friendship. To lower one’s head was a 
threat in their race, for it meant that an Urgal intended to ram you with 
his horns. “I am Nar Garzhvog of the Bolvek tribe. I speak for my peo-
ple.” It seemed as if he chewed on each word before spitting it out. “Ur-
gals are hated more than any other race. Elves, dwarves, humans all hunt 
us, burn us, and drive us from our halls.” 
 
 “Not without good reason,” pointed out Nasuada. 
 
 Garzhvog nodded. “Not without reason. Our people love war. Yet how 
often are we attacked just because you find us as ugly as we find you? 
We have thrived since the fall of the Riders. Our tribes are now so large, 
the harsh land we live in can no longer feed us.” 
 
 “So you made a pact with Galbatorix.” 
 
 “Aye, Lady Nightstalker. He promised us good land if we killed his 
enemies. He tricked us, though. His flame-haired shaman, Durza, bent 
the minds of our war chiefs and forced our tribes to work together, as is 
not our way. When we learned this in the dwarves’ hollow mountain, the 
Herndall, the dams who rule us, sent my brood mate to Galbatorix to ask 
why he used us so.” Garzhvog shook his ponderous head. “She did not re-
turn. Our finest rams died for Galbatorix, then he abandoned us like a 
broken sword. He is drajl and snake-tongued and a lack-horned betrayer. 
Lady Nightstalker, we are fewer now, but we will fight with you if you 
let us.” 
 
 “What is the price?” asked Nasuada. “Your Herndall must want some-
thing in return.” 
 
 “Blood. Galbatorix’s blood. And if the Empire falls, we ask that you 
give us land, land for breeding and growing, land to avoid more battles in 
the future.” 
 
 Eragon guessed Nasuada’s decision by the set of her face, even before 
she spoke. So apparently did Jörmundur, for he leaned toward her and 
said in an undertone, “Nasuada, you can’t do this. It goes against nature.” 
 
 “Nature can’t help us defeat the Empire. We need allies.” 
 
 “The men will desert before they’ll fight with Urgals.” 
 
 “That can be worked around. Eragon, will they keep their word?” 

 
568
 
 “Only so long as we share a common enemy.” 
 
 With a sharp nod, Nasuada again lifted her voice: “Very well, Nar 
Garzhvog. You and your warriors may bivouac along the eastern flank of 
our army, away from the main body, and we shall discuss the terms of 
our pact.” 
 
 “Ahgrat ukmar,” growled the Kull, clapping his fists to his brow. “You 
are a wise Herndall, Lady Nightstalker.” 
 
 “Why do you call me that?” 
 
 “Herndall?” 
 
 “No, Nightstalker.” 
 
 Garzhvog made a ruk-ruk sound in his throat that Eragon interpreted as 
laughter. “Nightstalker is the name we gave your sire because of how he 
hunted us in the dark tunnels under the dwarf mountain and because of 
the color of his hide. As his cub, you are worthy of the same name.” With 
that he turned on his heel and strode out of the camp. 
 
 Standing, Nasuada proclaimed, “Anyone who attacks the Urgals shall be 
punished as if he attacked a fellow human. See that word of this is posted 
in every company.” 
 
 No sooner had she finished than Eragon noticed King Orrin approach-
ing at a quick pace, his cape flapping around him. When he was close 
enough, he cried, “Nasuada! Is it true you met with an Urgal? What do 
you mean by it, and why wasn’t I alerted sooner? I don’t—” 
 
 He was interrupted as a sentry emerged from the ranks of gray tents, 
shouting, “A horseman approaches from the Empire!” 
 
 In an instant, King Orrin forgot his argument and joined Nasuada as she 
hurried toward the vanguard of the army, followed by at least a hundred 
people. Rather than stay among the crowd, Eragon pulled himself onto 
Saphira and let her carry him to their destination. 
 
 When Saphira halted at the ramparts, trenches, and rows of sharpened 
poles that protected the Varden’s leading edge, Eragon saw a lone soldier 
riding at a furious clip across the bleak no-man’s-land. Above him, the 
birds of prey swooped low to discover if the first course of their feast had 

 
569
arrived. 
 
 The soldier reined in his black stallion some thirty yards from the 
breastwork, keeping as much distance as possible between him and the 
Varden. He shouted, “By refusing King Galbatorix’s generous terms of 
surrender, you choose death as your fate. No more shall we negotiate. 
The hand of friendship has turned into the fist of war! If any of you still 
hold regard for your rightful sovereign, the all-knowing, all-powerful 
King Galbatorix, then flee! None may stand before us once we set forth 
to cleanse Alagaësia of every miscreant, traitor, and subversive. And 
though it pains our lord—for he knows that most of these rebellious acts 
are instigated by bitter and misguided leaders—we shall gently chastise 
the unlawful territory known as Surda and return it to the benevolent 
rule of King Galbatorix, he who sacrifices himself day and night for the 
good of his people. So flee, I say, or suffer the doom of your herald.” 
 
 With that the soldier untied a canvas sack and flourished a severed 
head. He threw it into the air and watched it fall among the Varden, then 
turned his stallion, dug in his spurs, and galloped back toward the dark 
mass of Galbatorix’s army. 
 
 “Shall I kill him?” asked Eragon. 
 
 Nasuada shook her head. “We will have our due soon enough. I won’t 
violate the sanctity of envoys, even if the Empire has.” 
 
 “As you—” He yelped with surprise and clutched Saphira’s neck to 
keep from falling as she reared above the ramparts, planting her front legs 
upon the chartreuse bank. Opening her jaws, Saphira uttered a long, deep 
roar, much like Garzhvog had done, only this roar was a defiant challenge 
to their enemies, a warning of the wrath they had roused, and a clarion 
call to all who hated Galbatorix. 
 
 The sound of her trumpeting voice frightened the stallion so badly, he 
jinked to the right, slipped on the heated ground, and fell on his side. The 
soldier was thrown free of the horse and landed in a gout of fire that 
erupted at that very instant. He uttered a single cry so horrible, it made 
Eragon’s scalp prickle, then was silent and still forevermore. 
 
 The birds began to descend. 
 
 The Varden cheered Saphira’s accomplishment. Even Nasuada allowed 
herself a small smile. Then she clapped her hands and said, “They will at-
tack at dawn, I think. Eragon, gather Du Vrangr Gata and prepare your-

 
570
self for action. I will have orders for you within the hour.” Taking Orrin 
by the shoulder, she guided him back toward the center of the com-
pound, saying, “Sire, there are decisions we must make. I have a certain 
plan, but it will require...” 
 
 Let them come, said Saphira. The tip of her tail twitched like that of a 
cat stalking a rabbit. They will all burn. 
 
 
 
 

 
571
WITCH’S BREW 
 
 
 Night had fallen on the Burning Plains. The roof of opaque smoke cov-
ered the moon and stars, plunging the land into profound darkness that 
was broken only by the sullen glow of the sporadic peat fires, and by the 
thousands of torches each army lit. From Eragon’s position near the fore 
of the Varden, the Empire looked a dense nest of uncertain orange lights 
as large as any city. 
 
 As Eragon buckled the last piece of Saphira’s armor onto her tail, he 
closed his eyes to maintain better contact with the magicians from Du 
Vrangr Gata. He had to learn to locate them at a moment’s notice; his life 
would depend on communicating with them in a quick and timely man-
ner. In turn, the magicians had to learn to recognize the touch of his mind 
so they did not block him when he needed their assistance. 
 
 Eragon smiled and said, “Hello, Orik.” He opened his eyes to see Orik 
clambering up the low knuckle of rock where he and Saphira sat. The 
dwarf, who was fully armored, carried his Urgal-horn bow in his left 
hand. 
 
 Hunkering beside Eragon, Orik wiped his brow and shook his head. 
“How’d you know it was me? I was shielding myself.” 
 
 Every consciousness feels different, explained Saphira. Just like no two 
voices sound exactly the same. 
 
 “Ah.” 
 
 Eragon asked, “What brings you here?” 
 
 Orik shrugged. “It struck me you might appreciate a spot of company 
in this grim night. Especially since Arya’s otherwise engaged and you 
don’t have Murtagh with you for this battle.” 
 
 And I wish I did, thought Eragon. Murtagh had been the only human 
who matched Eragon’s skill with a sword, at least before the Agaetí 
Blödhren. Sparring with him had been one of Eragon’s few pleasures dur-
ing their time together. I would have enjoyed fighting with you again, old 
friend. 
 
 Remembering how Murtagh was killed—dragged underground by Ur-
gals in Farthen Dûr—forced Eragon to confront a sobering truth: No mat-

 
572
ter how great a warrior you were, as often as not, pure chance dictated 
who lived and who died in war. 
 
 Orik must have sensed his mood, for he clapped Eragon on the shoul-
der and said, “You’ll be fine. Just imagine how the soldiers out there feel, 
knowing they have to face you before long!” 
 
 Gratitude made Eragon smile again. “I’m glad you came.” 
 
 The tip of Orik’s nose reddened, and he glanced down, rolling his bow 
between gnarled hands. “Ah, well,” he grumbled, “Hrothgar wouldn’t 
much like it if I let something happen to you. Besides, we’re foster broth-
ers now, eh?” 
 
 Through Eragon, Saphira asked, What about the other dwarves? Aren’t 
they under your command? 
 
 A twinkle sprang into Orik’s eyes. “Why, yes, so they are. And they’ll 
be joining us before long. Seeing as Eragon’s a member of Dûrgrimst 
Ingeitum, it’s only right we fight the Empire together. That way, the two 
of you won’t be so vulnerable; you can concentrate on finding Galba-
torix’s magicians instead of defending yourselves from constant attacks.” 
 
 “A good idea. Thank you.” Orik grunted an acknowledgment. Then Er-
agon asked, “What do you think about Nasuada and the Urgals?” 
 
 “She made the right choice.” 
 
 “You agree with her!” 
 
 “I do. I don’t like it any more than you, but I do.” 
 
 Silence enveloped them after that. Eragon sat against Saphira and stared 
out at the Empire, trying to prevent his growing anxiety from over-
whelming him. Minutes dragged by. To him, the interminable waiting be-
fore a battle was as stressful as the actual fighting. He oiled Saphira’s sad-
dle, polished rust off his hauberk, and then resumed familiarizing himself 
with the minds of Du Vrangr Gata, anything to pass the time. 
 
 Over an hour later, he paused as he sensed two beings approaching 
from across the no-man’s-land. Angela? Solembum? Puzzled and alarmed, 
he woke Orik—who had dozed off—and told him what he had discov-
ered. 
 

 
573
 The dwarf frowned and drew his war ax from his belt. “I’ve only met 
the herbalist a few times, but she didn’t seem like the sort who would 
betray us. She’s been welcome among the Varden for decades.” 
 
 “We should still find out what she was doing,” said Eragon. 
 
 Together they picked their way through the camp to intercept the duo 
as they approached the fortifications. Angela soon trotted into the light, 
Solembum at her heels. The witch was muffled in a dark, full-length 
cloak that allowed her to blend into the mottled landscape. Displaying a 
surprising amount of alacrity, strength, and flexibility, she clambered over 
the many rows of breastwork the dwarves had engineered, swinging from 
pole to pole, leaping over trenches, and finally running helter-skelter 
down the steep face of the last rampart to stop, panting, by Saphira. 
 
 Throwing back the hood of her cloak, Angela flashed them a bright 
smile. “A welcoming committee! How thoughtful of you.” As she spoke, 
the werecat shivered along his length, fur rippling. Then his outline 
blurred as if seen through cloudy water, resolving once more into the 
nude figure of a shaggy-haired boy. Angela dipped her hand into a leather 
purse at her belt and passed a child’s tunic and breeches back to Solem-
bum, along with the small black dagger he fought with. 
 
 “What were you doing out there?” asked Orik, peering at them with a 
suspicious gaze. 
 
 “Oh, this and that.” 
 
 “I think you better tell us,” said Eragon. 
 
 Her face hardened. “Is that so? Don’t you trust Solembum and me?” 
The werecat bared his pointed teeth. 
 
 “Not really,” admitted Eragon, but with a small smile. 
 
 “That’s good,” said Angela. She patted him on the cheek. “You’ll live 
longer. If you must know, then, I was doing my best to help defeat the 
Empire, only my methods don’t involve yelling and running around with 
a sword.” 
 
 “And what exactly are your methods?” growled Orik. 
 
 Angela paused to roll up her cloak into a tight bundle, which she stored 
in her purse. “I’d rather not say; I want it to be a surprise. You won’t have 

 
574
to wait long to find out. It’ll start in a few hours.” 
 
 Orik tugged on his beard. “What will start? If you can’t give us a 
straight answer, we’ll have to take you to Nasuada. Maybe she can wring 
some sense out of you.” 
 
 “It’s no use dragging me off to Nasuada,” said Angela. “She gave me 
permission to cross lines.” 
 
 “So you say,” challenged Orik, ever more belligerent. 
 
 “And so I say,” announced Nasuada, walking up to them from behind, 
as Eragon knew she would. He also sensed that she was accompanied by 
four Kull, one of whom was Garzhvog. Scowling, he turned to face them, 
making no attempt to hide his anger at the Urgals’ presence. 
 
 “My Lady,” muttered Eragon. 
 
 Orik was not as composed; he jumped back with a mighty oath, grasp-
ing his war ax. He quickly realized that they were not under attack and 
gave Nasuada a terse greeting. But his hand never left the haft of his 
weapon and his eyes never left the hulking Urgals. Angela seemed to 
have no such inhibitions. She paid Nasuada the respect due to her, then 
addressed the Urgals in their own harsh language, to which they an-
swered with evident delight. 
 
 Nasuada drew Eragon off to the side so they could have a measure of 
privacy. There, she said, “I need you to put aside your feelings for a mo-
ment and judge what I am about to tell you with logic and reason. Can 
you do that?” He nodded, stiff-faced. “Good. I’m doing everything I can to 
ensure we don’t lose tomorrow. It doesn’t matter, though, how well we 
fight, or how well I lead the Varden, or even if we rout the Empire if 
you, ” she poked him in the chest, “are killed. Do you understand?” He 
nodded again. “There’s nothing I can do to protect you if Galbatorix re-
veals himself; if he does, you will face him alone. Du Vrangr Gata poses 
no more of a threat to him than they do to you, and I’ll not have them 
eradicated without reason.” 
 
 “I have always known,” said Eragon, “that I would face Galbatorix alone 
but for Saphira.” 
 
 A sad smile touched Nasuada’s lips. She looked very tired in the flicker-
ing torchlight. “Well, there’s no reason to invent trouble where none ex-
ists. It’s possible Galbatorix isn’t even here.” She did not seem to believe 

 
575
her own words, though. “In any case, I can at least keep you from dying 
from a sword in the gut. I heard what the dwarves intend to do, and I 
thought I could improve upon the concept. I asked Garzhvog and three 
of his rams to be your guards, so long as they agreed—which they have—
to let you examine their minds for treachery.” 
 
 Eragon went rigid. “You can’t expect me to fight with those monsters. 
Besides, I already accepted the dwarves’ offer to defend Saphira and me. 
They would take it poorly if I rejected them in favor of Urgals.” 
 
 “Then they can both guard you,” retorted Nasuada. She searched his 
face for a long time, looking for what he could not tell. “Oh, Eragon. I’d 
hoped you could see past your hate. What else would you do in my posi-
tion?” She sighed when he remained silent. “If anyone has cause to hold a 
grudge against the Urgals, it is I. They killed my father. Yet I cannot al-
low that to interfere with deciding what’s best for the Varden.... At least 
ask Saphira’s opinion before you say yea or nay. I can order you to accept 
the Urgals’ protection, but I would rather not.” 
 
 You’re being foolish, observed Saphira without prompting. 
 
 Foolish to not want Kull watching my back? 
 
 No, foolish to refuse help, no matter where it comes from, in our present 
situation. Think. You know what Oromis would do, and you know what he 
would say. Don’t you trust his judgment? 
 
 He can’t be right about everything, said Eragon. 
 
 That’s no argument.... Search yourself, Eragon, and tell me whether I 
speak the truth. You know the correct path. I would be disappointed if you 
could not bring yourself to embrace it. 
 
 Saphira and Nasuada’s cajoling only made Eragon more reluctant to 
agree. Still, he knew he had no choice. “All right, I’ll let them guard me, 
but only if I find nothing suspicious in their minds. Will you promise 
that, after this battle, you won’t make me work with an Urgal again?” 
 
 Nasuada shook her head. “I can’t do that, not when it might hurt the 
Varden.” She paused and said, “Oh, and Eragon?” 
 
 “Yes, my Lady?” 
 
 “In the event of my death, I have chosen you as my successor. If that 

 
576
should happen, I suggest you rely upon Jörmundur’s advice—he has more 
experience than the other members of the Council of Elders—and I 
would expect you to place the welfare of those underneath you before 
all else. Am I clear, Eragon?” 
 
 Her announcement caught him by surprise. Nothing meant more to her 
than the Varden. Offering it to him was the greatest act of trust she 
could make. Her confidence humbled and touched him; he bowed his 
head. “I would strive to be as good a leader as you and Ajihad have been. 
You honor me, Nasuada.” 
 
 “Yes, I do.” Turning away from him, she rejoined the others. 
 
 Still overwhelmed by Nasuada’s revelation, and finding his anger tem-
pered by it, Eragon slowly walked back to Saphira. He studied Garzhvog 
and the other Urgals, trying to gauge their mood, but their features were 
so different from those he was accustomed to, he could discern nothing 
more than the broadest of emotions. Nor could he find any empathy 
within himself for the Urgals. To him, they were feral beasts that would 
kill him as soon as not and were incapable of love, kindness, or even true 
intelligence. In short, they were lesser beings. 
 
 Deep within his mind, Saphira whispered, I’m sure Galbatorix is of the 
same opinion. 
 
 And for good reason, he growled, intending to shock her. Suppressing his 
revulsion, he said out loud, “Nar Garzhvog, I am told that the four of you 
agreed to allow me within your minds.” 
 
 “That is so, Firesword. Lady Nightstalker told us what was required. 
We are honored to have the chance to battle alongside such a mighty 
warrior, and one who has done so much for us.” 
 
 “What do you mean? I have killed scores of your kin.” Unbidden, ex-
cerpts from one of Oromis’s scrolls rose in Eragon’s memory. He remem-
bered reading that Urgals, both male and female, determined their rank in 
society through combat, and that it was this practice, above all else, that 
had led to so many conflicts between Urgals and other races. Which 
meant, he realized, that if they admired his feats in battle, then they may 
have accorded him the same status as one of their war chiefs. 
 
 “By killing Durza, you freed us from his control. We are in your debt, 
Firesword. None of our rams will challenge you, and if you visit our halls, 
you and the dragon, Flametongue, will be welcomed as no outsiders ever 

 
577
before.” 
 
 Of all the responses Eragon had expected, gratitude was the last, and it 
was the one he was least prepared to deal with. Unable to think of any-
thing else, he said, “I won’t forget.” He switched his gaze to the other Ur-
gals, then returned it to Garzhvog and his yellow eyes. “Are you ready?” 
 
 “Aye, Rider.” 
 
 As Eragon reached toward Garzhvog’s consciousness, it reminded him 
of how the Twins invaded his mind when he first entered Farthen Dûr. 
That observation was swept away as he immersed himself in the Urgal’s 
identity. The very nature of his search—looking for malevolent intent 
perhaps hidden somewhere in Garzhvog’s past—meant Eragon had to 
examine years of memories. Unlike the Twins, Eragon avoided causing 
deliberate pain, but he was not overly gentle. He could feel Garzhvog 
flinch with occasional pangs of discomfort. Like dwarves and elves, the 
mind of an Urgal possessed different elements than a human mind. Its 
structure emphasized rigidity and hierarchy—a result of the tribes the 
Urgals organized themselves into—but it felt rough and raw, brutal and 
cunning: the mind of a wild animal. 
 
 Though he made no effort to learn more about Garzhvog as an individ-
ual, Eragon could not help absorbing pieces of the Urgal’s life. Garzhvog 
did not resist. Indeed, he seemed eager to share his experiences, to con-
vince Eragon that Urgals were not his born enemies. We cannot afford to 
have another Rider rise up who seeks to destroy us, said Garzhvog. Look 
well, O Firesword, and see if we are truly the monsters you call us.... 
 
 So many images and sensations flashed between them, Eragon almost 
lost track: Garzhvog’s childhood with the other members of his brood in 
a ramshackle village built deep in the heart of the Spine; his dam brush-
ing his hair with an antler comb and singing a soft song; learning to hunt 
deer and other prey with his bare hands; growing larger and larger until it 
was apparent that the old blood still flowed in his veins and he would 
stand over eight feet tall, making him a Kull; the dozens of challenges he 
made, accepted, and won; venturing out of the village to gain renown, so 
he might mate, and gradually learning to hate, distrust, and fear—yes, fear 
—a world that had condemned his race; fighting in Farthen Dûr; discov-
ering they had been manipulated by Durza; and realizing that their only 
hope of a better life was to put aside old differences, befriend the 
Varden, and see Galbatorix overthrown. Nowhere was there evidence 
that Garzhvog lied. 
 

 
578
 Eragon could not understand what he had seen. Tearing himself from 
Garzhvog’s mind, he dove into each of the three remaining Urgals. Their 
memories confirmed the facts presented by Garzhvog. They made no at-
tempt to conceal that they had killed humans, but it had been done at 
the command of Durza when the sorcerer controlled them, or when 
fighting humans over food or land. We did what we had to in order to care 
for our families, they said. 
 
 When he finished, Eragon stood before Garzhvog and knew the Urgal’s 
bloodline was as regal as any prince’s. He knew that, though uneducated, 
Garzhvog was a brilliant commander and as great a thinker and philoso-
pher as Oromis himself. He’s certainly brighter than me, admitted Eragon 
to Saphira. Baring his throat as a sign of respect, he said out loud, “Nar 
Garzhvog,” and for the first time, he was aware of the lofty origins of the 
title nar. “I am proud to have you at my side. You may tell the Herndall 
that so long as the Urgals remain true to their word and do not turn 
against the Varden, I shall not oppose you.” Eragon doubted that he 
would ever like an Urgal, but the iron certitude of his prejudice only a 
few minutes before now seemed ignorant, and he could not retain it in 
good conscience. 
 
 Saphira flicked him on the arm with her barbed tongue, making the 
mail clink together. It takes courage to admit you were wrong. 
 
 Only if you are afraid of looking foolish, and I would have looked far 
more foolish if I persisted with an erroneous belief. 
 
 Why, little one, you just said something wise. Despite her teasing, he 
could sense her warm pride in what he had accomplished. 
 
 “Again, we are in your debt, Firesword,” said Garzhvog. He and the 
other Urgals pressed their fists against their jutting brows. 
 
 Eragon could tell that Nasuada wanted to know the details of what had 
just transpired but that she restrained herself. “Good. Now that this is 
settled, I must be off. Eragon, you’ll receive my signal from Trianna when 
the time has arrived.” With that she strode away into the darkness. 
 
 As Eragon settled against Saphira, Orik sidled up to him. “It’s lucky we 
dwarves are going to be here, eh? We’ll watch the Kull like hawks, we 
will. We won’t let them catch you while your back is turned. The mo-
ment they attack, we’ll cut their legs out from under them.” 
 
 “I thought you agreed with Nasuada’s accepting the Urgals’ offer.” 

 
579
 
 “That doesn’t mean I trust them or want to be right alongside them, 
now does it?” Eragon smiled and did not bother to argue; it would be im-
possible to convince Orik that the Urgals were not rapacious killers when 
he himself had refused to consider the possibility until sharing an Urgal’s 
memories. 
 
 The night lay heavy around them as they waited for dawn. Orik re-
moved a whetstone from his pocket and proceeded to hone the edge of 
his curved ax. Once they arrived, the six other dwarves did the same, and 
the rasp of metal on stone filled the air with a grating chorus. The Kull 
sat back to back, chanting death songs under their breaths. Eragon spent 
the time casting wards about himself, Saphira, Nasuada, Orik, and even 
Arya. He knew that it was dangerous to protect so many, but he could 
not bear it if they were harmed. When he finished, he transferred what 
power he dared into the diamonds embedded within the belt of Beloth 
the Wise. 
 
 Eragon watched with interest as Angela clad herself in green and black 
armor and then, taking out a carved-wood case, assembled her staff-
sword from two separate handles that attached in the middle and two 
blades of watered steel that threaded into the ends of the resulting pole. 
She twirled the completed weapon around her head a few times before 
seeming satisfied that it would hold up to the shock of battle. 
 
 The dwarves eyed her with disapproval, and Eragon heard one grumble, 
“... blasphemy that any but Dûrgrimst Quan should wield the hûthvír.” 
 
 After that the only sound was the discordant music of the dwarves 
honing their blades. 
 
 It was near dawn when the cries began. Eragon and Saphira noticed 
them first because of their heightened senses, but the agonized screams 
were soon loud enough for the others to hear. Rising to his feet, Orik 
looked out toward the Empire, where the cacophony originated. “What 
manner of creatures are they torturing to extract such fearsome howls? 
The sound chills the marrow in my bones, it does.” 
 
 “I told you that you wouldn’t have to wait very long,” said Angela. Her 
former cheer had deserted her; she looked pale, drawn, and gray in the 
face, as if she were ill. 
 
 From his post by Saphira, Eragon asked, “You did this?” 
 

 
580
 “Aye. I poisoned their stew, their bread, their drink—anything I could 
get my hands on. Some will die now, others will die later as the various 
toxins take their toll. I slipped the officers nightshade and other such poi-
sons so they will hallucinate in battle.” She tried to smile, but without 
much success. “Not a very honorable way to fight, I suppose, but I’d 
rather do this than be killed. Confusion to our enemies and all that.” 
 
 “Only a coward or a thief uses poison!” exclaimed Orik. “What glory is 
there in defeating a sick opponent?” The screams intensified even as he 
spoke. 
 
 Angela gave an unpleasant laugh. “Glory? If you want glory, there are 
thousands more troops I didn’t poison. I’m sure you will have your fill of 
glory by the end of today.” 
 
 “Is this why you needed the equipment in Orrin’s tent?” asked Eragon. 
He found her deed repugnant but did not pretend to know whether it 
was good or evil. It was necessary. Angela had poisoned the soldiers for 
the same reason Nasuada had accepted the Urgals’ offer of friendship—
because it might be their only hope of survival. 
 
 “That’s right.” 
 
 The soldiers’ wails increased in number until Eragon longed to plug his 
ears and block out the sound. It made him wince and fidget, and it put 
his teeth on edge. He forced himself to listen, though. This was the cost 
of resisting the Empire. It would be wrong to ignore it. So he sat with his 
hands clenched into fists and his jaw forming painful knots while the 
Burning Plains echoed with the disembodied voices of dying men. 
 
 
 
 

 
581
THE STORM BREAKS 
 
 
 The first horizontal rays of dawn already streaked across the land when 
Trianna said to Eragon, It is time. A surge of energy erased Eragon’s 
sleepiness. Jumping to his feet, he shouted the word to everyone around 
him, even as he clambered into Saphira’s saddle, pulling his new bow 
from its quiver. The Kull and dwarves surrounded Saphira, and together 
they hurried down the breastwork until they reached the opening that 
had been cleared during the night. 
 
 The Varden poured through the gap, quiet as they could be. Rank 
upon rank of warriors marched past, their armor and weapons padded 
with rags so no sound would alert the Empire of their approach. Saphira 
joined the procession when Nasuada appeared on a roan charger in the 
midst of the men, Arya and Trianna by her side. The five of them ac-
knowledged each other with quick glances, nothing more. 
 
 During the night, the mephitic vapors had accumulated low to the 
ground, and now the dim morning light gilded the turgid clouds, turning 
them opaque. Thus, the Varden managed to cross three-quarters of the 
no-man’s-land before they were seen by the Empire’s sentries. As the 
alarm horns rang out before them, Nasuada shouted, “Now, Eragon! Tell 
Orrin to strike. To me, men of the Varden! Fight to win back your 
homes. Fight to guard your wives and children! Fight to overthrow Gal-
batorix! Attack and bathe your blades in the blood of our enemies! 
Charge!” She spurred her horse forward, and with a great bellow, the 
men followed, shaking their weapons above their heads. 
 
 Eragon conveyed Nasuada’s order to Barden, the spellcaster who rode 
with King Orrin. A moment later, he heard the drumming of hooves as 
Orrin and his cavalry—accompanied by the rest of the Kull, who could 
run as fast as horses—galloped out of the east. They charged into the 
Empire’s flank, pinning the soldiers against the Jiet River and distracting 
them long enough for the Varden to cross the remainder of the distance 
between them without opposition. 
 
 The two armies collided with a deafening roar. Pikes clashed against 
spears, hammers against shields, swords against helms, and above it all 
whirled the hungry gore-crows uttering their harsh croaks, driven into a 
frenzy by the smell of fresh meat below. 
 
 Eragon’s heart leaped within his chest. I must now kill or be killed. Al-
most immediately he felt his wards drawing upon his strength as they de-

 
582
flected attacks from Arya, Orik, Nasuada, and Saphira. 
 
 Saphira held back from the leading edge of the battle, for they would 
be too exposed to Galbatorix’s magicians at the front. Taking a deep 
breath, Eragon began to search for those magicians with his mind, firing 
arrows all the while. 
 
 Du Vrangr Gata found the first enemy spellcaster. The instant he was 
alerted, Eragon reached out to the woman who made the discovery, and 
from there to the foe she grappled with. Bringing the full power of his 
will to bear, Eragon demolished the magician’s resistance, took control of 
his consciousness—doing his best to ignore the man’s terror—determined 
which troops the man was guarding, and slew the man with one of the 
twelve words of death. Without pause, Eragon located the minds of each 
of the now-unprotected soldiers and killed them as well. The Varden 
cheered as the knot of men went limp. 
 
 The ease with which he slew them amazed Eragon. The soldiers had 
had no chance to escape or fight back. How different from Farthen Dûr, he 
thought. Though he marveled at the perfection of his skills, the deaths 
sickened him. But there was no time to dwell on it. 
 
 Recovering from the Varden’s initial assault, the Empire began to man 
their engines of war: catapults that cast round missiles of hard-baked ce-
ramic, trebuchets armed with barrels of liquid fire, and ballistae that 
bombarded the attackers with a hail of arrows six feet long. The ceramic 
balls and the liquid fire caused terrific damage when they landed. One 
ball exploded against the ground not ten yards from Saphira. As Eragon 
ducked behind his shield, a jagged fragment spun toward his head, only to 
be stopped dead in the air by one of his wards. He blinked at the sudden 
loss of energy. 
 
 The engines soon stalled the Varden’s advance, sowing mayhem wher-
ever they aimed. They have to be destroyed if we’re going to last long 
enough to wear down the Empire, realized Eragon. It would be easy for 
Saphira to dismantle the machines, but she dared not fly among the sol-
diers for fear of an attack by magic. 
 
 Breaking through the Varden lines, eight soldiers stormed toward 
Saphira, jabbing at her with pikes. Before Eragon could draw Zar’roc, the 
dwarves and Kull eliminated the entire group. 
 
 “A good fight!” roared Garzhvog. 
 

 
583
 “A good fight!” agreed Orik with a bloody grin. 
 
 Eragon did not use spells against the engines; they would be protected 
against any conceivable enchantment. Unless... Extending himself, he 
found the mind of a soldier who tended one of the catapults. Though he 
was sure the soldier was defended by some magician, Eragon was able to 
gain dominance over him and direct his actions from afar. He guided the 
man up to the weapon, which was being loaded, then had him use his 
sword to hack at the skein of twisted rope that powered the machine. 
The rope was too thick to sever before the soldier was dragged away by 
his comrades, but the damage was already done. With a mighty crack, the 
partially wound skein broke, sending the arm of the catapult flying 
backward and injuring several men. His lips curled in a grim smile, Er-
agon proceeded to the next catapult and, in short order, disabled the re-
mainder of the engines. 
 
 Returning to himself, Eragon became aware of dozens of the Varden 
collapsing around Saphira; one of Du Vrangr Gata had been over-
whelmed. He uttered a dreadful curse and flung himself back along the 
trail of magic as he searched for the man who cast the fatal spell, entrust-
ing the welfare of his body to Saphira and his guards. 
 
 For over an hour, Eragon hunted Galbatorix’s magicians, but to little 
avail, for they were wily and cunning and did not directly attack him. 
Their reticence puzzled Eragon until he tore from the mind of one spell-
caster—moments before he committed suicide—the thought,... ordered 
not to kill you or the dragon... not to kill you or the dragon. 
 
 That answers my question, he said to Saphira, but why does Galbatorix 
still want us alive? We’ve made it clear we support the Varden. 
 
 Before she could respond, Nasuada appeared before them, her face 
streaked with filth and gore, her shield covered with dents, blood sheet-
ing down her left leg from a wound on her thigh. “Eragon,” she gasped. “I 
need you, both of you, to fight, to show yourselves and embolden the 
men... to frighten the soldiers.” 
 
 Her condition shocked Eragon. “Let me heal you first,” he cried, afraid 
she might faint. I should have put more wards around her. 
 
 “No! I can wait, but we are lost unless you stem the tide of soldiers.” 
Her eyes were glazed and empty, blank holes in her face. “We need... a 
Rider.” She swayed in her saddle. 
 

 
584
 Eragon saluted her with Zar’roc. “You have one, my Lady.” 
 
 “Go,” she said, “and may what gods there are watch over you.” 
 
 Eragon was too high on Saphira’s back to strike his enemies below, so 
he dismounted and positioned himself by her right paw. To Orik and 
Garzhvog, he said, “Protect Saphira’s left side. And whatever you do, 
don’t get in our way.” 
 
 “You will be overrun, Firesword.” 
 
 “No,” said Eragon, “I won’t. Now take your places!” As they did, he put 
his hand on Saphira’s leg and looked her in one clear-cut sapphire eye. 
Shall we dance, friend of my heart? 
 
 We shall, little one. 
 
 Then he and she merged their identities to a greater degree than ever 
before, vanquishing all differences between them to become a single en-
tity. They bellowed, leaped forward, and forged a path to the front line. 
Once there, Eragon could not tell from whose mouth emanated the rav-
enous jet of flame that consumed a dozen soldiers, cooking them in their 
mail, nor whose arm it was that brought Zar’roc down in an arc, cleaving 
a soldier’s helm in half. 
 
 The metallic scent of blood clogged the air, and curtains of smoke 
wafted over the Burning Plains, alternately concealing and revealing the 
knots, clumps, ranks, and battalions of thrashing bodies. Overhead, the 
carrion birds waited for their meal and the sun climbed in the firmament 
toward noon. 
 
 From the minds of those around them, Eragon and Saphira caught 
glimpses of how they appeared. Saphira was always noticed first: a great 
ravening creature with claws and fangs dyed red, who slew all in her path 
with swipes of her paws and lashes of her tail and with billowing waves 
of flame that engulfed entire platoons of soldiers. Her brilliant scales glit-
tered like stars and nearly blinded her foes with their reflected light. 
Next they saw Eragon running alongside Saphira. He moved faster than 
the soldiers could react and, with strength beyond men, splintered shields 
with a single blow, rent armor, and clove the swords of those who op-
posed him. Shot and dart cast at him fell to the pestilent ground ten feet 
away, stopped by his wards. 
 
 It was harder for Eragon—and, by extension, Saphira—to fight his own 

 
585
race than it had been to fight the Urgals in Farthen Dûr. Every time he 
saw a frightened face or looked into a soldier’s mind, he thought,  This 
could be me. But he and Saphira could afford no mercy; if a soldier stood 
before them, he died. 
 
 Three times they sallied forth and three times Eragon and Saphira slew 
every man in the Empire’s first few ranks before retreating to the main 
body of the Varden to avoid being surrounded. By the end of their last 
attack, Eragon had to reduce or eliminate certain wards around Arya, 
Orik, Nasuada, Saphira, and himself in order to keep the spells from ex-
hausting him too quickly. For though his strength was great, so too were 
the demands of battle. 
 
 Ready? he asked Saphira after a brief respite. She growled an affirma-
tive. 
 
 A cloud of arrows whistled toward Eragon the instant he dove back 
into combat. Fast as an elf, he dodged the bulk of them—since his magic 
no longer protected him from such missiles—caught twelve on his shield, 
and stumbled as one struck his belly and one his side. Neither shaft 
pierced his armor, but they knocked the wind out of him and left bruises 
the size of apples. Don’t stop! You’ve dealt with worse pain than this be-
fore, he told himself. 
 
 Rushing a cluster of eight soldiers, Eragon darted from one to the next, 
knocking aside their pikes and jabbing Zar’roc like a deadly bolt of light-
ning. The fighting had dulled his reflexes, though, and one soldier man-
aged to drive his pike through Eragon’s hauberk, slicing his left triceps. 
 
 The soldiers cringed as Saphira roared. 
 
 Eragon took advantage of the distraction to fortify himself with energy 
stored within the ruby in Zar’roc’s pommel and then to kill the three re-
maining soldiers. 
 
 Sweeping her tail over him, Saphira knocked a score of men out of his 
way. In the lull that followed, Eragon looked over at his throbbing arm 
and said, “Waíse heill.” He also healed his bruises, relying upon Zar’roc’s 
ruby, as well as the diamonds in the belt of Beloth the Wise. 
 
 Then the two of them pressed onward. 
 
 Eragon and Saphira choked the Burning Plains with mountains of their 
enemies, and yet the Empire never faltered or fell back. For every man 

 
586
they killed, another stepped forth to take his place. A sense of hopeless-
ness engulfed Eragon as the mass of soldiers gradually forced the Varden 
to retreat toward their own camp. He saw his despair mirrored in the 
faces of Nasuada, Arya, King Orrin, and even Angela when he passed 
them in battle. 
 
 All our training and we still can’t stop the Empire, raged Eragon. There 
are just too many soldiers! We can’t keep this up forever. And Zar’roc and 
the belt are almost depleted. 
 
 You can draw energy from your surroundings if you have to. 
 
 I won’t, not unless I kill another of Galbatorix’s magicians and can take 
it from the soldiers. Otherwise, I’ll just be hurting the rest of the Varden, 
since there are no plants or animals here I can use to support us. 
 
 As the long hours dragged by, Eragon grew sore and weary and—
stripped of many of his arcane defenses—accumulated dozens of minor 
injuries. His left arm went numb from the countless blows that ham-
mered his mangled shield. A scratch on his forehead kept blinding him 
with rivulets of hot, sweat-mixed blood. He thought one of his fingers 
might be broken. 
 
 Saphira fared no better. The soldiers’ armor tore the inside of her 
mouth, dozens of swords and arrows cut her unprotected wings, and a 
javelin punctured one of her own plates of armor, wounding her in the 
shoulder. Eragon saw the spear coming and tried to deflect it with a spell 
but was too slow. Whenever Saphira moved, she splattered the ground 
with hundreds of drops of blood. 
 
 Beside them, three of Orik’s warriors fell, and two of the Kull. 
 
 And the sun began its descent toward evening. 
 
 As Eragon and Saphira prepared for their seventh and final assault, a 
trumpet sounded in the east, loud and clear, and King Orrin shouted, 
“The dwarves are here! The dwarves are here!” 
 
 Dwarves? Eragon blinked and glanced around, confused. He saw noth-
ing but soldiers. Then a jolt of excitement raced through him as he un-
derstood. The dwarves! He climbed onto Saphira and she jumped into the 
air, hanging for a moment on her tattered wings as they surveyed the bat-
tlefield. 
 

 
587
 It was true—a great host marched out of the east toward the Burning 
Plains. At its head strode King Hrothgar, clad in gold mail, his jeweled 
helm upon his brow, and Volund, his ancient war hammer, gripped in his 
iron fist. The dwarf king raised Volund in greeting when he saw Eragon 
and Saphira. 
 
 Eragon howled at the top of his lungs and returned the gesture, bran-
dishing Zar’roc in the air. A surge of renewed vigor made him forget his 
wounds and feel fierce and determined again. Saphira added her voice to 
his, and the Varden looked to her with hope, while the Empire’s soldiers 
hesitated with fear. 
 
 “What did you see?” cried Orik as Saphira dropped back to earth. “Is it 
Hrothgar? How many warriors did he bring?” 
 
 Ecstatic with relief, Eragon stood in his stirrups and shouted, “Take 
heart, King Hrothgar is here! And it looks like every single dwarf is be-
hind him! We’ll crush the Empire!” After the men stopped cheering, he 
added, “Now take your swords and remind these flea-bitten cowards why 
they should fear us. Charge!” 
 
 Just as Saphira leaped toward the soldiers, Eragon heard a second cry, 
this one from the west: “A ship! A ship is coming up the Jiet River!” 
 
 “Blast it,” he snarled. We can’t let a ship land if it’s bringing reinforce-
ments for the Empire. Contacting Trianna, he said, Tell Nasuada that 
Saphira and I will take care of this. We’ll sink the ship if it’s from Galba-
torix. 
 
 As you wish, Argetlam, replied the sorceress. 
 
 Without hesitation, Saphira took flight, circling high over the trampled, 
smoking plain. As the relentless clamor of combat faded from his ears, 
Eragon took a deep breath, feeling his mind clear. Below, he was sur-
prised by how scattered both armies had become. The Empire and the 
Varden had disintegrated into a series of smaller groups contending 
against one another over the entire breadth and width of the Burning 
Plains. It was into this confused tumult that the dwarves inserted them-
selves, catching the Empire from the side—as Orrin had done earlier with 
his cavalry. 
 
 Eragon lost sight of the battle when Saphira turned to her left and 
soared through the clouds in the direction of the Jiet River. A gust of 
wind blew the peat smoke out of their way and unveiled a large three-

 
588
masted ship riding upon the orange water, rowing against the current 
with two banks of oars. The ship was scarred and damaged and flew no 
colors to declare its allegiance. Nevertheless, Eragon readied himself to 
destroy the vessel. As Saphira dove toward it, he lifted Zar’roc overhead 
and loosed his savage war cry. 
 
 

 
589
CONVERGENCE 
 
 
 Roran stood at the prow of the Dragon Wing and listened to the oars 
swish through the water. He had just finished a stint rowing and a cold, 
jagged ache permeated his right shoulder. Will I always have to deal with 
this reminder of the Ra’zac? He wiped the sweat from his face and ignored 
the discomfort, concentrating instead on the river ahead, which was ob-
scured by a bank of sooty clouds. 
 
 Elain joined him at the railing. She rested a hand on her swollen belly. 
“The water looks evil,” she said. “Perhaps we should have stayed in 
Dauth, rather than drag ourselves in search of more trouble.” 
 
 He feared she spoke the truth. After the Boar’s Eye, they had sailed east 
from the Southern Isles back to the coast and then up the mouth of the 
Jiet River to Surda’s port city of Dauth. By the time they made landfall, 
their stores were exhausted and the villagers sickly. 
 
 Roran had every intention of staying in Dauth, especially after they re-
ceived an enthusiastic welcome from its governor, Lady Alarice. But that 
was before he was told about Galbatorix’s army. If the Varden were de-
feated, he would never see Katrina again. So, with the help of Jeod, he 
convinced Horst and many of the other villagers that if they wanted to 
live in Surda, safe from the Empire, they had to row up the Jiet River and 
assist the Varden. It was a difficult task, but in the end Roran prevailed. 
And once they told Lady Alarice about their quest, she gave them all the 
supplies they wanted. 
 
 Since then, Roran often wondered if he made the right choice. By now 
everyone hated living on the Dragon Wing. People were tense and short-
tempered, a situation only aggravated by the knowledge they were sailing 
toward a battle. Was it all selfishness on my part? wondered Roran. Did I 
really do this for the benefit of the villagers, or only because it will bring me 
one step closer to finding Katrina? 
 
 “Perhaps we should have,” he said to Elain. 
 
 Together they watched as a thick layer of smoke gathered overhead, 
darkening the sky, obscuring the sun, and filtering the remaining light so 
that everything below was colored a nauseating hue of orange. It pro-
duced an eerie twilight the likes of which Roran had never imagined. The 
sailors on deck looked about fearfully and muttered charms of protec-
tion, pulling out stone amulets to ward off the evil eye. 

 
590
 
 “Listen,” said Elain. She tilted her head. “What is that?” 
 
 Roran strained his ears and caught the faint ring of metal striking metal. 
“That,” he said, “is the sound of our destiny.” Twisting, he shouted back 
over his shoulder, “Captain, there’s fighting just ahead!” 
 
 “Man the ballistae!” roared Uthar. “Double-time on those oars, Bonden. 
An’ every able-bodied man jack among you better be ready or you’ll be 
using your guts for pillows!” 
 
 Roran remained where he was as the Dragon Wing exploded with ac-
tivity. Despite the increase in noise, he could still hear swords and shields 
clanging together in the distance. The screams of men were audible now, 
as were the roars of some giant beast. 
 
 He glanced over as Jeod joined them at the prow. The merchant’s face 
was pale. “Have you ever been in battle before?” asked Roran. 
 
 The knob in Jeod’s throat bobbed as he swallowed and shook his head. 
“I got into plenty of fights along with Brom, but never anything of this 
scale.” 
 
 “A first for both of us, then.” 
 
 The bank of smoke thinned on the right, providing them with a 
glimpse of a dark land that belched forth fire and putrid orange vapor and 
was covered with masses of struggling men. It was impossible to tell who 
was the Empire and who was the Varden, but it was apparent to Roran 
that the battle could tip in either direction given the right nudge. We can 
provide that nudge. 
 
 Then a voice echoed over the water as a man shouted, “A ship! A ship 
is coming up the Jiet River!” 
 
 “You should go belowdecks,” said Roran to Elain. “It won’t be safe for 
you here.” She nodded and hurried to the fore hatchway, where she 
climbed down the ladder, closing the opening behind her. A moment 
later, Horst bounded up to the prow and handed Roran one of Fisk’s 
shields. 
 
 “Thought you might need that,” said Horst. 
 
 “Thanks. I—” 

 
591
 
 Roran stopped as the air around them vibrated, as if from a mighty 
concussion. Thud. His teeth jarred together. Thud. His ears hurt from the 
pressure. Close upon the heels of the second impact came a third—
thud—and with it a raw-throated yell that Roran recognized, for he had 
heard it many times in his childhood. He looked up and beheld a gigantic 
sapphire dragon diving out of the shifting clouds. And on the dragon’s 
back, at the juncture between its neck and shoulders, sat his cousin, Er-
agon. 
 
 It was not the Eragon he remembered, but rather as if an artist had 
taken his cousin’s base features and enhanced them, streamlined them, 
making them both more noble and more feline. This Eragon was garbed 
like a prince, in fine cloth and armor—though tarnished by the grime of 
war—and in his right hand he wielded a blade of iridescent red. This Er-
agon, Roran knew, could kill without hesitation. This Eragon was power-
ful and implacable.... This Eragon could slay the Ra’zac and their mounts 
and help him to rescue Katrina. 
 
 Flaring its translucent wings, the dragon pulled up sharply and hung be-
fore the ship. Then Eragon met Roran’s eyes. 
 
 Until that moment, Roran had not completely believed Jeod’s story 
about Eragon and Brom. Now, as he stared at his cousin, a wave of con-
fused emotions washed over him. Eragon is a Rider! It seemed inconceiv-
able that the slight, moody, overeager boy he grew up with had turned 
into this fearsome warrior. Seeing him alive again filled Roran with unex-
pected joy. Yet, at the same time, a terrible, familiar anger welled up in-
side him over Eragon’s role in Garrow’s death and the siege of Carvahall. 
In those few seconds, Roran knew not whether he loved or hated Eragon. 
 
 He stiffened with alarm as a vast and alien being touched his mind. 
From that consciousness emanated Eragon’s voice: Roran? 
 
 “Aye.” 
 
 Think your answers and I’ll hear them. Is everyone from Carvahall with 
you? 
 
 Just about. 
 
 How did you... No, we can’t go into it; there’s no time. Stay where you are 
until the battle is decided. Better yet, go back farther down the river, where 
the Empire can’t attack you. 

 
592
 
 We have to talk, Eragon. You have much to answer for. 
 
 Eragon hesitated with a troubled expression, then said, I know. But not 
now, later. With no visible prompting, the dragon veered away from the 
ship and flew off to the east, vanishing in the haze over the Burning 
Plains. 
 
 In an awed voice, Horst said, “A Rider! A real Rider! I never thought I’d 
see the day, much less that it would be Eragon.” He shook his head. “I 
guess you told us the truth, eh, Longshanks?” Jeod grinned in response, 
looking like a delighted child. 
 
 Their words sounded muted to Roran as he stared at the deck, feeling 
like he was about to explode with tension. A host of unanswerable ques-
tions assailed him. He forced himself to ignore them. I can’t think about 
Eragon now. We have to fight. The Varden must defeat the Empire. 
 
 A rising tide of fury consumed him. He had experienced this before, a 
berserk frenzy that allowed him to overcome nearly any obstacle, to 
move objects he could not shift ordinarily, to face an enemy in combat 
and feel no fear. It gripped him now, a fever in his veins, quickening his 
breath and setting his heart a-pounding. 
 
 He pushed himself off the railing, ran the length of the ship to the 
quarterdeck, where Uthar stood by the wheel, and said, “Ground the 
ship.” 
 
 “What?” 
 
 “Ground the ship, I say! Stay here with the rest of the soldiers and use 
the ballistae to wreak what havoc you can, keep the Dragon Wing from 
being boarded, and guard our families with your lives. Understand?” 
 
 Uthar stared at him with flat eyes, and Roran feared he would not ac-
cept the orders. Then the scarred sailor grunted and said, “Aye, aye, 
Stronghammer.” 
 
 Horst’s heavy tread preceded his arrival at the quarterdeck. “What do 
you intend to do, Roran?” 
 
 “Do?” Roran laughed and spun widdershins to stand toe to toe with the 
smith. “Do? Why, I intend to alter the fate of Alagaësia!” 

 
593
ELDEST 
 
 
 Eragon barely noticed as Saphira carried him back into the swirling 
confusion of the battle. He had known that Roran was at sea, but it never 
occurred to him that Roran might be heading for Surda, nor that they 
would reunite in this manner. And Roran’s eyes! His eyes seemed to bore 
into Eragon, questioning, relieved, enraged...accusing. In them, Eragon saw 
that his cousin had learned of Eragon’s role in Garrow’s death and had not 
yet forgiven him. 
 
 It was only when a sword bounced off his greaves that Eragon returned 
his attention to his surroundings. He unleashed a hoarse shout and slashed 
downward, cutting away the soldier who struck him. Cursing himself for 
being so careless, Eragon reached out to Trianna and said, No one on that 
ship is an enemy. Spread the word that they’re not to be attacked. Ask 
Nasuada if, as a favor to us, she can send a herald to explain the situation 
to them and see that they stay away from the fighting. 
 
 As you wish, Argetlam. 
 
 From the western flank of the battle, where she alighted, Saphira trav-
ersed the Burning Plains in a few giant leaps, stopping before Hrothgar 
and his dwarves. Dismounting, Eragon went to the king, who said, “Hail, 
Argetlam! Hail, Saphira! The elves seem to have done more for you than 
they promised.” Beside him stood Orik. 
 
 “No, sir, it was the dragons.” 
 
 “Really? I must hear your adventures once our bloody work here is 
done. I’m glad you accepted my offer to become Dûrgrimst Ingeitum. It 
is an honor to have you as mine kin.” 
 
 “And you mine.” 
 
 Hrothgar laughed, then turned to Saphira and said, “I still haven’t for-
gotten your vow to mend Isidar Mithrim, dragon. Even now, our artisans 
are assembling the star sapphire in the center of Tronjheim. I look for-
ward to seeing it whole once again.” 
 
 She bowed her head. As I promised, so it shall be. 
 
 After Eragon repeated her words, Hrothgar reached out with a gnarled 
finger and tapped one of the metal plates on her side. “I see you wear our 

 
594
armor. I hope it has served you well.” 
 
 Very well, King Hrothgar, said Saphira through Eragon. It has saved me 
many an injury. 
 
 Hrothgar straightened and lifted Volund, a twinkle in his deep-set eyes. 
“Well then, shall we march out and test it once again in the forge of 
war?” He looked back at his warriors and shouted, “Akh sartos oen dûr-
grimst!” 
 
 “Vor Hrothgarz korda! Vor Hrothgarz korda!” 
 
 Eragon looked at Orik, who translated with a mighty yell, “By Hroth-
gar’s hammer!” Joining the chant, Eragon ran with the dwarf king toward 
the crimson ranks of soldiers, Saphira by his side. 
 
 Now at last, with the help of the dwarves, the battle turned in favor of 
the Varden. Together they pushed back the Empire, dividing them, 
crushing them, forcing Galbatorix’s vast army to abandon positions they 
had held since morn. Their efforts were helped by the fact that more of 
Angela’s poisons had taken effect. Many of the Empire’s officers behaved 
irrationally, giving orders that made it easier for the Varden to penetrate 
deeper into the army, sowing chaos as they went. The soldiers seemed to 
realize that fortune no longer smiled upon them, for hundreds surren-
dered, or defected outright and turned on their former comrades, or 
threw down their weapons and fled. 
 
 And the day passed into the late afternoon. 
 
 Eragon was in the midst of fighting two soldiers when a flaming javelin 
roared past overhead and buried itself in one of the Empire’s command 
tents twenty yards away, igniting the fabric. Dispatching his opponents, 
Eragon glanced back and saw dozens of fiery missiles arcing out from the 
ship on the Jiet River. What are you playing at, Roran? wondered Eragon 
before charging the next batch of soldiers. 
 
 Soon afterward, a horn echoed from the rear of the Empire’s army, then 
another and another. Someone began to pound a sonorous drum, the 
peals of which stilled the field as everyone looked about for the source of 
the beat. Even as Eragon watched, an ominous figure detached itself from 
the horizon in the north and rose up in the lurid sky over the Burning 
Plains. The gore-crows scattered before the barbed black shadow, which 
balanced motionless upon the thermals. At first Eragon thought it a 
Lethrblaka, one of the Ra’zac’s mounts. Then a ray of light escaped the 

 
595
clouds and struck the figure crossways from the west. 
 
 A red dragon floated above them, glowing and sparkling in the sun-
beam like a bed of blood-red coals. His wing membranes were the color 
of wine held before a lantern. His claws and teeth and the spikes along 
his spine were white as snow. In his vermilion eyes there gleamed a terri-
ble glee. On his back was fixed a saddle, and in that saddle sat a man 
garbed in polished steel armor and armed with a hand-and-a-half sword. 
 
 Dread clutched at Eragon. Galbatorix managed to get another dragon to 
hatch! 
 
 Then the man in steel raised his left hand and a shaft of crackling ruby 
energy sprang from his palm and smote Hrothgar on the breast. The 
dwarf spellcasters cried out with agony as the energy from their bodies 
was consumed trying to block the attack. They collapsed, dead, then 
Hrothgar clutched his heart and toppled to the ground. The dwarves gave 
a great groan of despair as they saw their king fall. 
 
 “No!” cried Eragon, and Saphira roared in protest. He glared with hate 
at the enemy Rider. I’ll kill you for that. 
 
 Eragon knew that, as they were, he and Saphira were too tired to con-
front such a mighty opponent. Glancing around, Eragon spotted a horse 
lying in the mud, a spear through its side. The stallion was still alive. Er-
agon put his hand on its neck and murmured, Sleep, brother. Then he 
transferred the horse’s remaining vitality into himself and Saphira. It was 
not enough energy to restore all their strength, but it soothed their aching 
muscles and stopped their limbs from shaking. 
 
 Rejuvenated, Eragon leaped onto Saphira, shouting, “Orik, take com-
mand of your kinsmen!” Across the field, he saw Arya gaze at him with 
concern. He put her out of his mind as he tightened the saddle straps 
around his legs. Then Saphira launched herself toward the red dragon, 
pumping her wings at a furious rate to gain the necessary speed. 
 
 I hope you remember your lessons with Glaedr, he said. He tightened his 
grip on his shield. 
 
 Saphira did not answer him but roared out with her thoughts at the 
other dragon, Traitor! Egg breaker, oath breaker, murderer! Then as one, 
she and Eragon assaulted the minds of the pair, seeking to overwhelm 
their defenses. The consciousness of the Rider felt strange to Eragon, as if 
it contained multitudes; scores of distinct voices whispered in the caverns 

 
596
of his mind, like imprisoned spirits begging for release. 
 
 The instant they made contact, the Rider retaliated with a blast of pure 
force greater than any even Oromis was capable of summoning. Eragon 
retreated deep behind his own barriers, frantically reciting a scrap of dog-
gerel Oromis taught him to use in such predicaments: 
 
 
 Under a cold and empty winter sky 
 
 Stood a wee, small man with a silver sword. 
 
 He jumped and stabbed in a fevered frenzy, 
 
 Fighting the shadows massed before him.... 
 
 
 The siege on Eragon’s mind abated as Saphira and the red dragon 
crashed together, two incandescent meteors colliding head-on. They 
grappled, kicking each other’s bellies with their hind legs. Their talons 
produced hideous screeches as they grated against Saphira’s armor and the 
red dragon’s flat scales. The red dragon was smaller than Saphira, but 
thicker in his legs and shoulders. He managed to kick her off for a mo-
ment, then they closed again, each struggling to get their jaws around the 
other’s neck. 
 
 It was all Eragon could do to keep hold of Zar’roc as the dragons tum-
bled toward the ground, battering one another with terrible blows from 
their feet and tails. No more than fifty yards above the Burning Plains, 
Saphira and the red dragon disengaged, struggling to regain altitude. Once 
she halted her descent, Saphira reared her head, like a snake about to 
strike, and loosed a thick torrent of fire. 
 
 It never reached its destination; twelve feet from the red dragon, the 
fire bifurcated and passed harmlessly on either side. Blast it, thought Er-
agon. Even as the red dragon opened its maw to retaliate, Eragon cried, 
“Skölir nosu fra brisingr!” He was just in time. The conflagration swirled 
around them but did not even scorch Saphira’s scales. 
 
 Now Saphira and the red dragon raced up through the striated smoke 
into the clear, chill sky beyond, darting back and forth as they tried to 
climb above their opponent. The red dragon nipped Saphira’s tail, and 
she and Eragon yelped with shared pain. Panting from the effort, Saphira 
executed a tight backward loop, ending up behind the dragon, who then 

 
597
pivoted to the left and tried to spiral up and over Saphira. 
 
 While the dragons dueled with increasingly complex acrobatics, Eragon 
became aware of a disturbance on the Burning Plains: the spellcasters of 
Du Vrangr Gata were beset by two new magicians from the Empire. 
These magicians were far more powerful than those who had preceded 
them. They had already killed one of Du Vrangr Gata and were battering 
past the barriers of a second. Eragon heard Trianna scream with her mind, 
Shadeslayer! You have to help us! We can’t stop them. They’ll kill all the 
Varden. Help us, it’s the— 
 
 Her voice was lost to him as the Rider stabbed at his consciousness. 
“This must end,” spat Eragon between clenched teeth as he strove to 
withstand the onslaught. Over Saphira’s neck, he saw the red dragon dive 
toward them, angling beneath Saphira. Eragon dared not open his mind 
enough to talk with Saphira, so he said out loud, “Catch me!” With two 
strokes of Zar’roc, he severed the straps around his legs and jumped off 
Saphira’s back. 
 
 This is insane, thought Eragon. He laughed with giddy exhilaration as 
the feeling of weightlessness took hold of him. The rush of air tore off his 
helm and made his eyes water and sting. Releasing his shield, Eragon 
spread out his arms and legs, as Oromis had taught him, in order to stabi-
lize his flight. Below, the steel-clad Rider noticed Eragon’s action. The red 
dragon shied to Eragon’s left but could not evade him. Eragon lashed out 
with Zar’roc as the dragon’s flank flashed by, and he felt the blade sink 
into the creature’s hamstring before his momentum carried him past. 
 
 The dragon roared in agony. 
 
 The impact of the blow sent Eragon spinning up, down, and around. By 
the time he managed to stop his rotation, he had plummeted through the 
cloud cover and was heading toward a swift and fatal landing on the 
Burning Plains. He could stop himself with magic if he had to, but it 
would drain his last reserves of energy. He glanced over both his shoul-
ders. Come on, Saphira, where are you? 
 
 As if in answer, she dropped out of the foul smoke, her wings pressed 
tight against her body. She swooped underneath him and opened her 
wings a bit to slow her fall. Careful not to impale himself on one of her 
spikes, Eragon maneuvered himself back into the saddle, welcoming the 
return of gravity as she pulled out of the dive. 
 
 Never do that to me again, she snapped. 

 
598
 
 He surveyed the steaming blood that laced Zar’roc’s blade. It worked, 
didn’t it? 
 
 His satisfaction disappeared as he realized that his stunt had placed 
Saphira at the mercy of the red dragon. He hurtled at her from above, 
harrying her this way and that as he forced her toward the ground. 
Saphira tried to maneuver out from under him, but every time she did, 
he dove at her, biting and buffeting her with his wings in order to make 
her change course. 
 
 The dragons twisted and lunged until their tongues lolled out of their 
mouths, their tails drooped, and they gave up flapping and merely glided. 
 
 His mind once again closed to all contact, friendly or not, Eragon said 
out loud, “Land, Saphira; it’s no good. I’ll fight him on the ground.” 
 
 With a grunt of weary resignation, Saphira descended to the nearest flat 
open area, a small stone plateau set along the western edge of the Jiet 
River. The water had turned red from the blood pouring into it from the 
battle. Eragon jumped off Saphira once she alighted on the plateau and 
tested his footing. It was smooth and hard, with nothing to trip on. He 
nodded, pleased. 
 
 A few seconds later, the red dragon rushed by overhead and settled on 
the opposite side of the plateau. He held his left hind leg off the ground 
to avoid aggravating his wound: a long gash that nearly severed the mus-
cle. The dragon trembled his entire length, like an injured dog. He tried 
to hop forward, then stopped and snarled at Eragon. 
 
 The enemy Rider unbuckled his legs and slid down the uninjured side 
of his dragon. Then he walked around the dragon and examined his leg. 
Eragon let him; he knew how much pain it would cause the man to see 
the damage inflicted on his bonded partner. He waited too long, though, 
for the Rider muttered a few indecipherable words, and within the span 
of three seconds the dragon’s injury was healed. 
 
 Eragon shivered with fear. How could he do that so quickly, and with 
such a short spell? Still, whoever he might be, the new Rider certainly 
was not Galbatorix, whose dragon was black. 
 
 Eragon clung to that knowledge as he stepped forward to confront the 
Rider. As they met in the center of the plateau, Saphira and the red 
dragon circled in the background. 

 
599
 
 The Rider grasped his sword with both hands and swung it over his 
head toward Eragon, who lifted Zar’roc to defend himself. Their blades 
collided with a burst of crimson sparks. Then Eragon shoved back his 
opponent and started a complex series of blows. He stabbed and parried, 
dancing on light feet as he forced the steel-clad Rider to retreat toward 
the edge of the plateau. 
 
 When they reached the edge, the Rider held his ground, fending off Er-
agon’s attacks, no matter how clever. It’s as if he can anticipate my every 
move, thought Eragon, frustrated. If he were rested, it would have been 
easy for him to defeat the Rider, but as it was, he could make no head-
way. The Rider did not have the speed and strength of an elf, but his 
technical skill was better than Vanir’s and as good as Eragon’s. 
 
 Eragon felt a touch of panic when his initial surge of energy began to 
subside and he had accomplished nothing more than a slight scratch 
across the Rider’s gleaming breastplate. The last reserves of power stored 
in Zar’roc’s ruby and the belt of Beloth the Wise were only enough to 
maintain his exertions for another minute. Then the Rider took a step 
forward. Then another. And before Eragon knew it, they had returned to 
the center of the plateau, where they stood facing each other, exchanging 
blows. 
 
 Zar’roc grew so heavy in his hand, Eragon could barely lift it. His shoul-
der burned, he gasped for breath, and sweat poured off his face. Not even 
his desire to avenge Hrothgar could help him to overcome his exhaus-
tion. 
 
 At last Eragon slipped and fell. Determined not to be killed lying down, 
he rolled back onto his feet and stabbed at the Rider, who knocked aside 
Zar’roc with a lazy flick of his wrist. 
 
 The way the Rider flourished his sword afterward—spinning it in a 
quick circle by his side—suddenly seemed familiar to Eragon, as did all 
his preceding swordsmanship. He stared with growing horror at his en-
emy’s hand-and-a-half sword, then back up at the eye slits of his mirrored 
helm, and shouted, “I know you!” 
 
 He threw himself at the Rider, trapping both swords between their 
bodies, hooked his fingers underneath the helm, and ripped it off. And 
there in the center of the plateau, on the edge of the Burning Plains of 
Alagaësia, stood Murtagh. 

 
600
INHERITANCE 
 
 
 Murtagh grinned. Then he said, “Thrysta vindr,” and a hard ball of air 
coalesced between them and struck Eragon in the middle of his chest, 
tossing him twenty feet across the plateau. 
 
 Eragon heard Saphira growl as he landed on his back. His vision flashed 
red and white, then he curled into a ball and waited for the pain to re-
cede. Any delight he felt in Murtagh’s reappearance was overwhelmed by 
the macabre circumstances of their meeting. A unstable mixture of 
shock, confusion, and anger boiled within him. 
 
 Lowering his sword, Murtagh pointed at Eragon with his steel-encased 
hand, curling every finger but his index into a spiny fist. “You never 
would give up.” 
 
 A chill crept along Eragon’s spine, for he recognized the scene from his 
premonition while rafting the Az Ragni to Hedarth: A man sprawled in 
the clotted mud with a dented helm and bloody mail—his face concealed 
behind an upthrown arm. An armored hand entered Eragon’s view and 
pointed at the downed man with all the authority of fate itself. Past and fu-
ture had converged. Now Eragon’s doom would be decided. 
 
 Pushing himself to his feet, he coughed and said, “Murtagh... how can 
you be alive? I watched the Urgals drag you underground. I tried to scry 
you but saw only darkness.” 
 
 Murtagh uttered a mirthless laugh. “You saw nothing, just as I saw 
nothing the times I tried to scry you during my days in Urû’baen.” 
 
 “You died, though!” shouted Eragon, almost incoherent. “You died un-
der Farthen Dûr. Arya found your bloody clothes in the tunnels.” 
 
 A shadow darkened Murtagh’s face. “No, I did not die. It was the 
Twins’ doing, Eragon. They took control of a group of Urgals and ar-
ranged the ambush in order to kill Ajihad and capture me. Then they en-
sorcelled me so I could not escape and spirited me off to Urû’baen.” 
 
 Eragon shook his head, unable to comprehend what had happened. 
“But why did you agree to serve Galbatorix? You told me you hated him. 
You told me—” 
 
 “Agree!” Murtagh laughed again, and this time his outburst contained 

 
601
an edge of madness. “I did not agree. First Galbatorix punished me for 
spiting his years of protection during my upbringing in Urû’baen, for de-
fying his will and running away. Then he extracted everything I knew 
about you, Saphira, and the Varden.” 
 
 “You betrayed us! I was mourning you, and you betrayed us!” 
 
 “I had no choice.” 
 
 “Ajihad was right to lock you up. He should have let you rot in your 
cell, then none of this—” 
 
 “I had no choice!” snarled Murtagh. “And after Thorn hatched for me, 
Galbatorix forced both of us to swear loyalty to him in the ancient lan-
guage. We cannot disobey him now.” 
 
 Pity and disgust welled inside of Eragon. “You have become your fa-
ther.” 
 
 A strange gleam leaped into Murtagh’s eyes. “No, not my father. I’m 
stronger than Morzan ever was. Galbatorix taught me things about magic 
you’ve never even dreamed of.... Spells so powerful, the elves dare not ut-
ter them, cowards that they are. Words in the ancient language that were 
lost until Galbatorix discovered them. Ways to manipulate energy... Se-
crets, terrible secrets, that can destroy your enemies and fulfill all your 
desires.” 
 
 Eragon thought back to some of Oromis’s lessons and retorted, “Things 
that should remain secrets.” 
 
 “If you knew, you would not say that. Brom was a dabbler, nothing 
more. And the elves, bah! All they can do is hide in their forest and wait 
to be conquered.” Murtagh ran his eyes over Eragon. “You look like an elf 
now. Did Islanzadí do that to you?” When Eragon remained silent, 
Murtagh smiled and shrugged. “No matter. I’ll learn the truth soon 
enough.” He stopped, frowned, then looked to the east. 
 
 Following his gaze, Eragon saw the Twins standing at the front of the 
Empire, casting balls of energy into the midst of the Varden and the 
dwarves. The curtains of smoke made it difficult to tell, but Eragon was 
sure the hairless magicians were grinning and laughing as they slaughtered 
the men with whom they once pledged solemn friendship. What the 
Twins failed to notice—and what was clearly visible to Eragon and 
Murtagh from their vantage point—was that Roran was crawling toward 

 
602
them from the side. 
 
 Eragon’s heart skipped a beat as he recognized his cousin. You fool! Get 
away from them! You’ll be killed. 
 
 Just as he opened his mouth to cast a spell that would transport Roran 
out of danger—no matter the cost—Murtagh said, “Wait. I want to see 
what he’ll do.” 
 
 “Why?” 
 
 A bleak smile crossed Murtagh’s face. “The Twins enjoyed tormenting 
me when I was their captive.” 
 
 Eragon glanced at him, suspicious. “You won’t hurt him? You won’t 
warn the Twins?” 
 
 “Vel eïnradhin iet ai Shur’tugal.” Upon my word as a Rider. 
 
 Together they watched as Roran hid behind a mound of bodies. Eragon 
stiffened as the Twins looked toward the pile. For a moment, it seemed 
they had spotted him, then they turned away and Roran jumped up. He 
swung his hammer and bashed one of the Twins in the head, cracking 
open his skull. The remaining Twin fell to the ground, convulsing, and 
emitted a wordless scream until he too met his end under Roran’s ham-
mer. Then Roran planted his foot upon the corpses of his foes, lifted his 
hammer over his head, and bellowed his victory. 
 
 “What now?” demanded Eragon, turning away from the battlefield. 
“Are you here to kill me?” 
 
 “Of course not. Galbatorix wants you alive.” 
 
 “What for?” 
 
 Murtagh’s lips quirked. “You don’t know? Ha! There’s a fine jest. It’s 
not because of you; it’s because of her. ” He jabbed a finger at Saphira. 
“The dragon inside Galbatorix’s last egg, the last dragon egg in the world, 
is male. Saphira is the only female dragon in existence. If she breeds, she 
will be the mother of her entire race. Do you see now? Galbatorix 
doesn’t want to eradicate the dragons. He wants to use Saphira to rebuild 
the Riders. He can’t kill you, either of you, if his vision is to become real-
ity.... And what a vision it is, Eragon. You should hear him describe it, 
then you might not think so badly of him. Is it evil that he wants to unite 

 
603
Alagaësia under a single banner, eliminate the need for war, and restore 
the Riders?” 
 
 “He’s the one who destroyed the Riders in the first place!” 
 
 “And for good reason,” asserted Murtagh. “They were old, fat, and cor-
rupt. The elves controlled them and used them to subjugate humans. 
They had to be removed so that we could start anew.” 
 
 A furious scowl contorted Eragon’s features. He paced back and forth 
across the plateau, his breathing heavy, then gestured at the battle and 
said, “How can you justify causing so much suffering on the basis of a 
madman’s ravings? Galbatorix has done nothing but burn and slaughter 
and amass power for himself. He lies. He murders. He manipulates. You 
know this! It’s why you refused to work for him in the first place.” Eragon 
paused, then adopted a gentler tone: “I can understand that you were 
compelled to act against your will and that you aren’t responsible for kill-
ing Hrothgar. You can try to escape, though. I’m sure that Arya and I 
could devise a way to neutralize the bonds Galbatorix has laid upon 
you.... Join me, Murtagh. You could do so much for the Varden. With us, 
you would be praised and admired, instead of cursed, feared, and hated.” 
 
 For a moment, as Murtagh gazed down at his notched sword, Eragon 
hoped he would accept. Then Murtagh said in a low voice, “You cannot 
help me, Eragon. No one but Galbatorix can release us from our oaths, 
and he will never do that.... He knows our true names, Eragon.... We are 
his slaves forever.” 
 
 Though he wanted to, Eragon could not deny the sympathy he felt for 
Murtagh’s plight. With the utmost gravity, he said, “Then let us kill the 
two of you.” 
 
 “Kill us! Why should we allow that?” 
 
 Eragon chose his words with care: “It would free you from Galbatorix’s 
control. And it would save the lives of hundreds, if not thousands, of 
people. Isn’t that a noble enough cause to sacrifice yourself for?” 
 
 Murtagh shook his head. “Maybe for you, but life is still too sweet for 
me to part with it so easily. No stranger’s life is more important than 
Thorn’s or my own.” 
 
 As much as he hated it—hated the entire situation, in fact—Eragon 
knew then what had to be done. Renewing his attack on Murtagh’s mind, 

 
604
he leaped forward, both feet leaving the ground as he lunged toward 
Murtagh, intending to stab him through the heart. 
 
 “Letta!” barked Murtagh. 
 
 Eragon dropped back to the ground as invisible bands clamped around 
his arms and legs, immobilizing him. To his right, Saphira discharged a jet 
of rippling fire and sprang at Murtagh like a cat pouncing on a mouse. 
 
 “Rïsa!” commanded Murtagh, extending a clawlike hand as if to catch 
her. 
 
 Saphira yelped with surprise as Murtagh’s incantation stopped her in 
midair and held her in place, floating several feet above the plateau. No 
matter how much she wriggled, she could not touch the ground, nor 
could she fly any higher. 
 
 How can he still be human and have the strength to do that? wondered 
Eragon. Even with my new abilities, such a task would leave me gasping for 
air and unable to walk. Relying upon his experience counteracting 
Oromis’s spells, Eragon said, “Brakka du vanyalí sem huildar Saphira un 
eka!” 
 
 Murtagh made no attempt to stop him, only gave him a flat stare, as if 
he found Eragon’s resistance a pointless inconvenience. Baring his teeth, 
Eragon redoubled his efforts. His hands went cold, his bones ached, and 
his pulse slowed as the magic sapped his energy. Without being asked, 
Saphira joined forces with him, granting him access to the formidable re-
sources of her body. 
 
 Five seconds passed.... 
 
 Twenty seconds... A thick vein pulsed on Murtagh’s neck. 
 
 A minute... 
 
 A minute and a half... Involuntary tremors racked Eragon. His quadri-
ceps and hamstrings fluttered, and his legs would have given way if he 
were free to move. 
 
 Two minutes passed.... 
 
 At last Eragon was forced to release the magic, else he risked falling un-
conscious and passing into the void. He sagged, utterly spent. 

 
605
 
 He had been afraid before, but only because he thought he might fail. 
Now he was afraid because he did not know what Murtagh was capable 
of. 
 
 “You cannot hope to compete with me,” said Murtagh. “No one can, 
except for Galbatorix.” Walking up to Eragon, he pointed his sword at 
Eragon’s neck, pricking his skin. Eragon resisted the impulse to flinch. “It 
would be so easy to take you back to Urû’baen.” 
 
 Eragon gazed deep into his eyes. “Don’t. Let me go.” 
 
 “You just tried to kill me.” 
 
 “And you would have done the same in my position.” When Murtagh 
remained silent and expressionless, Eragon said, “We were friends once. 
We fought together. Galbatorix can’t have twisted you so much that 
you’ve forgotten.... If you do this, Murtagh, you’ll be lost forever.” 
 
 A long minute passed where the only sound was the hue and cry of the 
clashing armies. Blood trickled down Eragon’s neck from where the 
sword point cut him. Saphira lashed her tail with helpless rage. 
 
 Finally, Murtagh said, “I was ordered to try and capture you and 
Saphira.” He paused. “I have tried.... Make sure we don’t cross paths again. 
Galbatorix will have me swear additional oaths in the ancient language 
that will prevent me from showing you such mercy when next we meet.” 
He lowered his sword. 
 
 “You’re doing the right thing,” said Eragon. He tried to step back but 
was still held in place. 
 
 “Perhaps. But before I let you go...” Reaching out, Murtagh pried Zar’roc 
from Eragon’s fist and unbuckled Zar’roc’s red sheath from the belt of Be-
loth the Wise. “If I have become my father, then I will have my father’s 
blade. Thorn is my dragon, and a thorn he shall be to all our enemies. It is 
only right, then, that I should also wield the sword Misery. Misery and 
Thorn, a fit match. Besides, Zar’roc should have gone to Morzan’s eldest 
son, not his youngest. It is mine by right of birth.” 
 
 A cold pit formed in Eragon’s stomach. It can’t be. 
 
 A cruel smile appeared on Murtagh’s face. “I never told you my 
mother’s name, did I? And you never told me yours. I’ll say it now: 

 
606
Selena. Selena was my mother and your mother. Morzan was our father. 
The Twins figured out the connection while they were digging around in 
your head. Galbatorix was quite interested to learn that particular piece 
of information.” 
 
 “You’re lying!” cried Eragon. He could not bear the thought of being 
Morzan’s son. Did Brom know? Does Oromis know?... Why didn’t they tell 
me? He remembered, then, Angela predicting that someone in his family 
would betray him. She was right. 
 
 Murtagh merely shook his head and repeated his words in the ancient 
language, then put his lips to Eragon’s ear and whispered, “You and I, we 
are the same, Eragon. Mirror images of one another. You can’t deny it.” 
 
 “You’re wrong,” growled Eragon, struggling against the spell. “We’re 
nothing alike. I don’t have a scar on my back anymore.” 
 
 Murtagh recoiled as if he had been stung, his face going hard and cold. 
He lifted Zar’roc and held it upright before his chest. “So be it. I take my 
inheritance from you, brother. Farewell.” 
 
 Then he retrieved his helm from the ground and pulled himself onto 
Thorn. Not once did he look at Eragon as the dragon crouched, raised its 
wings, and flew off the plateau and into the north. Only after Thorn van-
ished below the horizon did the web of magic release Eragon and Saphira. 
 
 Saphira’s talons clicked on the stone as she landed. She crawled over to 
Eragon and touched him on the arm with her snout. Are you all right, lit-
tle one? 
 
 I’m fine. But he was not, and she knew it. 
 
 Walking to the edge of the plateau, Eragon surveyed the Burning Plains 
and the aftermath of the battle, for the battle was over. With the death 
of the Twins, the Varden and dwarves regained lost ground and were 
able to rout the formations of confused soldiers, herding them into the 
river or chasing them back from whence they came. 
 
 Though the bulk of their forces remained intact, the Empire had 
sounded the retreat, no doubt to regroup and prepare for a second at-
tempt to invade Surda. In their wake, they left piles of tangled corpses 
from both sides of the conflict, enough men and dwarves to populate an 
entire city. Thick black smoke roiled off the bodies that had fallen into 
the peat fires. 

 
607
 
 Now that the fighting had subsided, the hawks and eagles, the crows 
and ravens, descended like a shroud over the field. 
 
 Eragon closed his eyes, tears leaking from under the lids. 
 
 They had won, but he had lost. 
 
 
 
 

 
608
REUNION 
 
 
 Eragon and Saphira picked their way between the corpses that littered 
the Burning Plains, moving slowly on account of their wounds and their 
exhaustion. They encountered other survivors staggering through the 
scorched battlefield, hollow-eyed men who looked without truly seeing, 
their gazes focused somewhere in the distance. 
 
 Now that his bloodlust had subsided, Eragon felt nothing but sorrow. 
The fighting seemed so pointless to him. What a tragedy that so many 
must die to thwart a single madman. He paused to sidestep a thicket of 
arrows planted in the mud and noticed the gash on Saphira’s tail where 
Thorn had bitten her, as well as her other injuries. Here, lend me your 
strength; I’ll heal you. 
 
 Tend to those in mortal danger first. 
 
 Are you sure? 
 
 Quite sure, little one. 
 
 Acquiescing, he bent down and mended a soldier’s torn neck before 
moving on to one of the Varden. He made no distinction between friend 
and foe, treating both to the limit of his abilities. 
 
 Eragon was so preoccupied with his thoughts, he paid little attention to 
his work. He wished he could repudiate Murtagh’s claim, but everything 
Murtagh had said about his mother—their mother—coincided with the 
few things Eragon knew about her: Selena left Carvahall twenty-some 
years ago, returned once to give birth to Eragon, and was never seen 
again. His mind darted back to when he and Murtagh first arrived in Far-
then Dûr. Murtagh had discussed how his mother had vanished from 
Morzan’s castle while Morzan was hunting Brom, Jeod, and Saphira’s egg. 
After Morzan threw Zar’roc at Murtagh and nearly killed him, Mother must 
have hidden her pregnancy and then gone back to Carvahall in order to pro-
tect me from Morzan and Galbatorix. 
 
 It heartened Eragon to know that Selena had cared for him so deeply. It 
also grieved him to know she was dead and they would never meet, for 
he had nurtured the hope, faint as it was, that his parents might still be 
alive. He no longer harbored any desire to be acquainted with his father, 
but he bitterly resented that he had been deprived of the chance to have 
a relationship with his mother. 

 
609
 
 Ever since he was old enough to understand that he was a fosterling, 
Eragon had wondered who his father was and why his mother left him to 
be raised by her brother, Garrow, and his wife, Marian. Those answers 
had been thrust upon him from such an unexpected source, and in such 
an unpropitious setting, it was more than he could make sense of at the 
moment. It would take months, if not years, to come to terms with the 
revelation. 
 
 Eragon always assumed he would be glad to learn the identity of his fa-
ther. Now that he had, the knowledge revolted him. When he was 
younger, he often entertained himself by imagining that his father was 
someone grand and important, though Eragon knew the opposite was far 
more likely. Still, it never occurred to him, even in his most extravagant 
daydreams, that he might be the son of a Rider, much less one of the For-
sworn. 
 
 It turned a daydream into a nightmare. 
 
 I was sired by a monster.... My father was the one who betrayed the Rid-
ers to Galbatorix. It left Eragon feeling sullied. 
 
 But no...As he healed a man’s broken spine, a new way of viewing the 
situation occurred to him, one that restored a measure of his self-
confidence: Morzan may be my parent, but he is not my father. Garrow was 
my father. He raised me. He taught me how to live well and honorably, 
with integrity. I am who I am because of him. Even Brom and Oromis are 
more my father than Morzan. And Roran is my brother, not Murtagh. 
 
 Eragon nodded, determined to maintain that outlook. Until then, he 
had refused to completely accept Garrow as his father. And even though 
Garrow was dead, doing so relieved Eragon, gave him a sense of closure, 
and helped to ameliorate his distress over Morzan. 
 
 You have grown wise, observed Saphira. 
 
 Wise? He shook his head. No, I’ve just learned how to think. That much, 
at least, Oromis gave me. Eragon wiped a layer of dirt off the face of a 
fallen banner boy, making sure he really was dead, then straightened, 
wincing as his muscles spasmed in protest. You realize, don’t you, that 
Brom must have known about this. Why else would he choose to hide in 
Carvahall while he waited for you to hatch?... He wanted to keep an eye 
upon his enemy’s son. It unsettled him to think that Brom might have 
considered him a threat. And he was right too. Look what ended up hap-

 
610
pening to me! 
 
 Saphira ruffled his hair with a gust of her hot breath. Just remember, 
whatever Brom’s reasons, he always tried to protect us from danger. He died 
saving you from the Ra’zac. 
 
 I know.... Do you think he didn’t tell me about this because he was afraid 
I might emulate Morzan, like Murtagh has? 
 
 Of course not. 
 
 He looked at her, curious. How can you be so certain? She lifted her 
head high above him and refused to meet his eyes or to answer. Have it 
your way, then. Kneeling by one of King Orrin’s men, who had an arrow 
through the gut, Eragon grabbed his arms to stop him from writhing. 
“Easy now.” 
 
 “Water,” groaned the man. “For pity’s sake, water. My throat is as dry as 
sand. Please, Shadeslayer.” Sweat beaded his face. 
 
 Eragon smiled, trying to comfort him. “I can give you a drink now, but 
it’d be better if you wait until after I heal you. Can you wait? If you do, I 
promise you can have all the water you want.” 
 
 “You promise, Shadeslayer?” 
 
 “I promise.” 
 
 The man visibly struggled against another wave of agony before saying, 
“If I must.” 
 
 With the aid of magic, Eragon drew out the shaft, then he and Saphira 
worked to repair the man’s innards, using some of the warrior’s own en-
ergy to fuel the spell. It took several minutes. Afterward, the man exam-
ined his belly, pressing his hands against the flawless skin, then gazed at 
Eragon, tears brimming in his eyes. “I... Shadeslayer, you...” 
 
 Eragon handed him his waterskin. “Here, keep it. You have greater 
need of it than I.” 
 
 A hundred yards beyond, Eragon and Saphira breached an acrid wall of 
smoke. There they came upon Orik and ten other dwarves—some 
women—arrayed around the body of Hrothgar, who lay upon four 
shields, resplendent in his golden mail. The dwarves tore at their hair, 

 
611
beat their breasts, and wailed their lamentations to the sky. Eragon 
bowed his head and murmured, “Stydja unin mor’ranr, Hrothgar 
Könungr.” 
 
 After a time, Orik noticed them and rose, his face red from crying and 
his beard torn free of its usual braid. He staggered over to Eragon and, 
without preempt, asked, “Did you kill the coward responsible for this?” 
 
 “He escaped.” Eragon could not bring himself to explain that the Rider 
was Murtagh. 
 
 Orik stamped his fist into his hand. “Barzûln!” 
 
 “But I swear to you upon every stone in Alagaësia that, as one of Dûr-
grimst Ingeitum, I’ll do everything I can to avenge Hrothgar’s death.” 
 
 “Aye, you’re the only one besides the elves strong enough to bring this 
foul murderer to justice. And when you find him... grind his bones to 
dust, Eragon. Pull his teeth and fill his veins with molten lead; make him 
suffer for every minute of Hrothgar’s life that he stole.” 
 
 “Wasn’t it a good death? Wouldn’t Hrothgar have wanted to die in bat-
tle, with Volund in his hand?” 
 
 “In battle, yes, facing an honest foe who dared stand and fight like a 
man. Not brought low by a magician’s trickery....” Shaking his head, Orik 
looked back at Hrothgar, then crossed his arms and tucked his chin 
against his collarbone. He took several ragged breaths. “When my parents 
died of the pox, Hrothgar gave me a life again. He took me into his hall. 
He made me his heir. Losing him...” Orik pinched the bridge of his nose 
between his thumb and forefinger, covering his face. “Losing him is like 
losing my father again.” 
 
 The grief in his voice was so clear, Eragon felt as if he shared the 
dwarf’s sorrow. “I understand,” he said. 
 
 “I know you do, Eragon.... I know you do.” After a moment, Orik wiped 
his eyes and gestured at the ten dwarves. “Before anything else is done, 
we have to return Hrothgar to Farthen Dûr so he can be entombed with 
his predecessors. Dûrgrimst Ingeitum must choose a new grimstborith, 
and then the thirteen clan chiefs—including the ones you see here—will 
select our next king from among themselves. What happens next, I know 
not. This tragedy will embolden some clans and turn others against our 
cause....” He shook his head again. 

 
612
 
 Eragon put his hand on Orik’s shoulder. “Don’t worry about that now. 
You have but to ask, and my arm and my will are at your service.... If you 
want, come to my tent and we can share a cask of mead and toast Hroth-
gar’s memory.” 
 
 “I’d like that. But not yet. Not until we finish pleading with the gods to 
grant Hrothgar safe passage to the afterlife.” Leaving Eragon, Orik re-
turned to the circle of dwarves and added his voice to their keening. 
 
 Continuing on through the Burning Plains, Saphira said, Hrothgar was a 
great king. 
 
 Aye, and a good person. Eragon sighed. We should find Arya and 
Nasuada. I couldn’t even heal a scratch right now, and they need to know 
about Murtagh. 
 
 Agreed. 
 
 They angled south toward the Varden’s encampment, but before they 
traveled more than a few yards, Eragon saw Roran approaching from the 
Jiet River. Trepidation filled him. Roran stopped directly in front of 
them, planted his feet wide apart, and stared at Eragon, working his jaw 
up and down as if he wanted to talk but was unable to get the words past 
his teeth. 
 
 Then he punched Eragon on the chin. 
 
 It would have been easy for Eragon to avoid the blow, but he allowed 
it to land, rolling away from it a bit so Roran did not break his knuckles. 
 
 It still hurt. 
 
 Wincing, Eragon faced his cousin. “I guess I deserved that.” 
 
 “That you did. We have to talk.” 
 
 “Now?” 
 
 “It can’t wait. The Ra’zac captured Katrina, and I need your help to res-
cue her. They’ve had her ever since we left Carvahall.” 
 
 So that’s it. In an instant, Eragon realized why Roran appeared so grim 
and haunted, and why he had brought the entire village to Surda. Brom 

 
613
was right, Galbatorix sent the Ra’zac back to Palancar Valley. Eragon 
frowned, torn between his responsibility to Roran and his duty to report 
to Nasuada. “There’s something I need to do first, and then we can talk. 
All right? You can accompany me if you want....” 
 
 “I’ll come.” 
 
 As they traversed the pockmarked land, Eragon kept glancing at Roran 
out of the corner of his eye. Finally, he said in a low voice, “I missed you.” 
 
 Roran faltered, then responded with a curt nod. A few steps later, he 
asked, “This is Saphira, right? Jeod said that was her name.” 
 
 “Aye.” 
 
 Saphira peered at Roran with one of her glittering eyes. He bore her 
scrutiny without turning away, which was more than most people could 
do. I have always wanted to meet Eragon’s nest-mate. 
 
 “She speaks!” exclaimed Roran when Eragon repeated her words. 
 
 This time Saphira addressed him directly: What? Did you think I was as 
mute as a rock lizard? 
 
 Roran blinked. “I beg your pardon. I didn’t know that dragons were so 
intelligent.” A grim smile twisted his lips. “First Ra’zac and magicians, 
now dwarves, Riders, and talking dragons. It seems the whole world has 
gone mad.” 
 
 “It does seem that way.” 
 
 “I saw you fight that other Rider. Did you wound him? Is that why he 
fled?” 
 
 “Wait. You’ll hear.” 
 
 When they reached the pavilion Eragon was searching for, he swept 
back the flap and ducked inside, followed by Roran and Saphira, who 
pushed her head and neck in after them. In the center of the tent, 
Nasuada sat on the edge of the table, letting a maid remove her twisted 
armor while she carried on a heated discussion with Arya. The cut on her 
thigh had been healed. 
 
 Nasuada stopped in the middle of her sentence as she spotted the new 

 
614
arrivals. Running toward them, she threw her arms around Eragon and 
cried, “Where were you? We thought you were dead, or worse.” 
 
 “Not quite.” 
 
 “The candle still burns,” murmured Arya. 
 
 Stepping back, Nasuada said, “We couldn’t see what happened to you 
and Saphira after you landed on the plateau. When the red dragon left 
and you didn’t appear, Arya tried to contact you but felt nothing, so we 
assumed...” She trailed off. “We were just debating the best way to trans-
port Du Vrangr Gata and an entire company of warriors across the river.” 
 
 “I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to worry you. I was just so tired after the fight, 
I forgot to lower my barriers.” Then Eragon brought Roran forward. 
“Nasuada, I would like to introduce my cousin, Roran. Ajihad may have 
mentioned him to you before. Roran, Lady Nasuada, leader of the Varden 
and my liegelord. And this is Arya Svit-kona, the elves’ ambassador.” Ro-
ran bowed to each of them in turn. 
 
 “It is an honor to meet Eragon’s cousin,” said Nasuada. 
 
 “Indeed,” added Arya. 
 
 After they finished exchanging greetings, Eragon explained that the en-
tire village of Carvahall had arrived on the Dragon Wing, and that Roran 
was the one responsible for killing the Twins. 
 
 Nasuada lifted a dark eyebrow. “The Varden are in your debt, Roran, 
for stopping their rampage. Who knows how much damage the Twins 
would have caused before Eragon or Arya could have confronted them? 
You helped us to win this battle. I won’t forget that. Our supplies are 
limited, but I will see that everyone on your ship is clothed and fed, and 
that your sick are treated.” 
 
 Roran bowed even lower. “Thank you, Lady Nasuada.” 
 
 “If I weren’t so pressed for time, I would insist upon knowing how and 
why you and your village evaded Galbatorix’s men, traveled to Surda, and 
then found us. Even just the bare facts of your trek make an extraordi-
nary tale. I still intend to learn the specifics—especially since I suspect it 
concerns Eragon—but I must deal with other, more urgent matters at the 
moment.” 
 

 
615
 “Of course, Lady Nasuada.” 
 
 “You may go, then.” 
 
 “Please,” said Eragon, “let him stay. He should be here for this.” 
 
 Nasuada gave him a quizzical look. “Very well. If you want. But enough 
of this dawdling. Jump to the meat of the matter and tell us about the 
Rider!” 
 
 Eragon began with a quick history of the three remaining dragon eggs—
two of which had now hatched—as well as Morzan and Murtagh, so that 
Roran would understand the significance of his news. Then he proceeded 
to describe his and Saphira’s fight with Thorn and the mysterious Rider, 
paying special attention to his extraordinary powers. “As soon as he spun 
his sword around, I realized we had dueled before, so I threw myself at 
him and tore off his helm.” Eragon paused. 
 
 “It was Murtagh, wasn’t it?” asked Nasuada quietly. 
 
 “How... ?” 
 
 She sighed. “If the Twins survived, it only made sense that Murtagh had 
as well. Did he tell you what really happened that day in Farthen Dûr?” 
So Eragon recounted how the Twins betrayed the Varden, recruited the 
Urgals, and kidnapped Murtagh. A tear rolled down Nasuada’s cheek. “It’s 
a pity that this befell Murtagh when he has already endured so much 
hardship. I enjoyed his company in Tronjheim and believed he was our 
ally, despite his upbringing. I find it hard to think of him as our enemy.” 
Turning to Roran, she said, “It seems I am also personally in your debt for 
slaying the traitors who murdered my father.” 
 
 Fathers, mothers, brothers, cousins, thought Eragon. It all comes down to 
family. Summoning his courage, he completed his report with Murtagh’s 
theft of Zar’roc and then his final, terrible secret. 
 
 “It can’t be,” whispered Nasuada. 
 
 Eragon saw shock and revulsion cross Roran’s face before he managed 
to conceal his reactions. That, more than anything else, hurt Eragon. 
 
 “Could Murtagh have been lying?” asked Arya. 
 
 “I don’t see how. When I questioned him, he told me the same thing in 

 
616
the ancient language.” 
 
 A long, uncomfortable silence filled the pavilion. 
 
 Then Arya said, “No one else can know about this. The Varden are 
demoralized enough by the presence of a new Rider. And they’ll be even 
more upset when they learn it’s Murtagh, whom they fought alongside 
and came to trust in Farthen Dûr. If word spreads that Eragon Shade-
slayer is Morzan’s son, the men will grow disillusioned and few people 
will want to join us. Not even King Orrin should be told.” 
 
 Nasuada rubbed her temples. “I fear you’re right. A new Rider...” She 
shook her head. “I knew it was possible for this to occur, but I didn’t 
really believe it would, since Galbatorix’s remaining eggs had gone so 
long without hatching.” 
 
 “It has a certain symmetry,” said Eragon. 
 
 “Our task is doubly hard now. We may have held our own today, but 
the Empire still far outnumbers us, and now we face not one but two 
Riders, both of whom are stronger than you, Eragon. Do you think you 
could defeat Murtagh with the help of the elves’ spellcasters?” 
 
 “Maybe. But I doubt he’d be foolish enough to fight them and me to-
gether.” 
 
 For several minutes, they discussed the effect Murtagh could have on 
their campaign and strategies to minimize or eliminate it. At last Nasuada 
said, “Enough. We cannot decide this when we are bloody and tired and 
our minds are clouded from fighting. Go, rest, and we shall take this up 
again tomorrow.” 
 
 As Eragon turned to leave, Arya approached and looked him straight in 
the eye. “Do not allow this to trouble you overmuch, Eragon-elda. You 
are not your father, nor your brother. Their shame is not yours.” 
 
 “Aye,” agreed Nasuada. “Nor imagine that it has lowered our opinion of 
you.” She reached out and cupped his face. “I know you, Eragon. You 
have a good heart. The name of your father cannot change that.” 
 
 Warmth blossomed inside Eragon. He looked from one woman to the 
next, then twisted his hand over his chest, overwhelmed by their friend-
ship. “Thank you.” 
 

 
617
 Once they were back out in the open, Eragon put his hands on his hips 
and took a deep breath of the smoky air. It was late in the day, and the 
garish orange of noon had subsided into a dusky gold light that suffused 
the camp and battlefield, giving it a strange beauty. “So now you know,” 
he said. 
 
 Roran shrugged. “Blood always tells.” 
 
 “Don’t say that,” growled Eragon. “Don’t ever say that.” 
 
 Roran studied him for several seconds. “You’re right; it was an ugly 
thought. I didn’t mean it.” He scratched his beard and squinted at the 
bloated sun resting upon the horizon. “Nasuada wasn’t what I expected.” 
 
 That forced a tired chuckle out of Eragon. “The one you were expect-
ing was her father, Ajihad. Still, she’s as good a leader as he was, if not 
better.” 
 
 “Her skin, is it dyed?” 
 
 “No, that’s the way she is.” 
 
 Just then, Eragon felt Jeod, Horst, and a score of other men from Car-
vahall hurrying toward them. The villagers slowed as they rounded a tent 
and glimpsed Saphira. “Horst!” exclaimed Eragon. Stepping forward, he 
grasped the smith in a bear hug. “It’s good to see you again!” 
 
 Horst gaped at Eragon, then a delighted grin spread across his face. 
“Blast if it isn’t good to see you as well, Eragon. You’ve filled out since 
you left.” 
 
 “You mean since I ran away.” 
 
 Meeting the villagers was a strange experience for Eragon. Hardship had 
altered some of the men so much, he barely recognized them. And they 
treated him differently than before, with a mixture of awe and reverence. 
It reminded him of a dream, where everything familiar is rendered alien. 
He was disconcerted by how out of place he felt among them. 
 
 When Eragon came to Jeod, he paused. “You know about Brom?” 
 
 “Ajihad sent me a message, but I’d like to hear what happened directly 
from you.” 
 

 
618
 Eragon nodded, grave. “As soon as I have the chance, we’ll sit down to-
gether and have a long talk.” 
 
 Then Jeod moved on to Saphira and bowed to her. “I waited my entire 
life to see a dragon, and now I have seen two in the same day. I am in-
deed lucky. However, you are the dragon I wanted to meet.” 
 
 Bending her neck, Saphira touched Jeod on the brow. He shivered at 
the contact. Give him my thanks for helping to rescue me from Galbatorix. 
Otherwise, I would still be languishing in the king’s treasury. He was 
Brom’s friend, and so he is our friend. 
 
 After Eragon repeated her words, Jeod said, “Atra esterní ono thelduin, 
Saphira Bjartskular,” surprising them with his knowledge of the ancient 
language. 
 
 “Where did you go?” Horst asked Roran. “We looked high and low for 
you after you took off in pursuit of those two magicians.” 
 
 “Never mind that now. Return to the ship and have everyone disem-
bark; the Varden are sending us food and shelter. We can sleep on solid 
ground tonight!” The men cheered. 
 
 Eragon watched with interest as Roran issued his commands. When at 
last Jeod and the villagers departed, Eragon said, “They trust you. Even 
Horst obeys you without question. Do you speak for all of Carvahall 
now?” 
 
 “I do.” 
 
 Heavy darkness was advancing upon the Burning Plains by the time 
they found the small two-man tent the Varden had assigned Eragon. 
Since Saphira could not fit her head through the opening, she curled up 
on the ground beside and prepared to keep watch. 
 
 As soon as I get my strength back, I’ll see to your wounds, promised Er-
agon. 
 
 I know. Don’t stay up too late talking. 
 
 Inside the tent, Eragon found an oil lantern that he lit with steel and 
flint. He could see perfectly well without it, but Roran needed the light. 
 
 They sat opposite each other: Eragon on the bedding laid out along one 

 
619
side of the tent, Roran on a folding stool he found leaning in a corner. Er-
agon was uncertain how to begin, so he remained silent and stared at the 
lamp’s dancing flame. 
 
 Neither of them moved. 
 
 After uncounted minutes, Roran said, “Tell me how my father died.” 
 
 “Our father.” Eragon remained calm as Roran’s expression hardened. In 
a gentle voice, he said, “I have as much right to call him that as you. Look 
within yourself; you know it to be true.” 
 
 “Fine. Our father, how did he die?” 
 
 Eragon had recounted the story upon several occasions. But this time he 
hid nothing. Instead of just listing the events, he described what he had 
thought and felt ever since he had found Saphira’s egg, trying to make 
Roran understand why he did what he did. He had never been so anxious 
before. 
 
 “I was wrong to hide Saphira from the rest of the family,” Eragon con-
cluded, “but I was afraid you might insist on killing her, and I didn’t real-
ize how much danger she put us in. If I had... After Garrow died, I de-
cided to leave in order to track down the Ra’zac, as well as to avoid put-
ting Carvahall in any more danger.” A humorless laugh escaped him. “It 
didn’t work, but if I had remained, the soldiers would have come far 
sooner. And then who knows? Galbatorix might have even visited Palan-
car Valley himself. I may be the reason Garrow—Father—died, but that 
was never my intention, nor that you and everyone else in Carvahall 
should suffer because of my choices....” He gestured helplessly. “I did the 
best I could, Roran.” 
 
 “And the rest of it—Brom being a Rider, rescuing Arya at Gil’ead, and 
killing a Shade at the dwarves’ capital—all that happened?” 
 
 “Aye.” As quickly as he could, Eragon summarized what had taken 
place since he and Saphira set forth with Brom, including their sojourn to 
Ellesméra and his own transformation during the Agaetí Blödhren. 
 
 Leaning forward, Roran rested his elbows on his knees, clasped his 
hands, and gazed at the dirt between them. It was impossible for Eragon 
to read his emotions without reaching into his consciousness, which he 
refused to do, knowing it would be a terrible mistake to invade Roran’s 
privacy. 

 
620
 
 Roran was silent for so long, Eragon began to wonder if he would ever 
respond. Then: “You have made mistakes, but they are no greater than 
my own. Garrow died because you kept Saphira secret. Many more have 
died because I refused to give myself up to the Empire.... We are equally 
guilty.” He looked up, then slowly extended his right hand. “Brother?” 
 
 “Brother,” said Eragon. 
 
 He gripped Roran’s forearm, and they pulled each other into a rough 
embrace, wrestling to and fro as they used to do at home. When they 
separated, Eragon had to wipe his eyes with the heel of his hand. “Galba-
torix should surrender now that we’re together again,” he joked. “Who 
can stand against the two of us?” He lowered himself back onto the bed-
ding. “Now you tell me, how did the Ra’zac capture Katrina?” 
 
 All happiness vanished from Roran’s face. He began to speak in a low 
monotone, and Eragon listened with growing amazement as he wove an 
epic of attacks, sieges, and betrayal, of leaving Carvahall, crossing the 
Spine, and razing the docks of Teirm, of sailing through a monstrous 
whirlpool. 
 
 When at last he finished, Eragon said, “You are a greater man than I. I 
couldn’t have done half those things. Fight, yes, but not convince every-
one to follow me.” 
 
 “I had no choice. When they took Katrina—” Roran’s voice broke. “I 
could either give up and die, or I could try to escape Galbatorix’s trap, no 
matter the cost.” He fixed his burning eyes on Eragon. “I have lied and 
burned and slaughtered to get here. I no longer have to worry about pro-
tecting everyone from Carvahall; the Varden will see to that. Now I have 
only one goal in life, to find and rescue Katrina, if she’s not already dead. 
Will you help me, Eragon?” 
 
 Reaching over, Eragon grabbed his saddlebags from the corner of the 
tent—where the Varden had deposited them—and removed a wooden 
bowl and the silver flask of enchanted faelnirv Oromis had given him. He 
took a small sip of the liqueur to revitalize himself and gasped as it raced 
down his throat, making his nerves tingle with cold fire. Then he poured 
faelnirv into the bowl until it formed a shallow pool the width of his 
hand. 
 
 “Watch.” Gathering up his burst of new energy, Eragon said, “Draumr 
kópa.” 

 
621
 
 The liqueur shimmered and turned black. After a few seconds, a thin 
key of light appeared in the center of the bowl, revealing Katrina. She lay 
slumped against an invisible wall, her hands suspended above her with 
invisible manacles and her copper hair splayed like a fan across her back. 
 
 “She’s alive!” Roran hunched over the bowl, grasping at it as if he 
thought he could dive through the faelnirv and join Katrina. His hope 
and determination melded with a look of such tender affection, Eragon 
knew that only death could stop Roran from trying to free her. 
 
 Unable to sustain the spell any longer, Eragon let the image fade away. 
He leaned against the wall of the tent for support. “Aye,” he said wearily, 
“she’s alive. And chances are, she’s imprisoned in Helgrind, in the Ra’zac’s 
lair.” Eragon grasped Roran by the shoulders. “The answer to your ques-
tion, brother, is yes. I will travel to Dras-Leona with you. I will help you 
rescue Katrina. And then, together, you and I shall kill the Ra’zac and 
avenge our father.” 
 
   
 
END OF BOOK TWO 
 
THE STORY WILL CONTINUE IN 
BOOK THREE OF INHERITANCE 
 
 
 
 
 

 
622
PRONUNCIATION GUIDE AND GLOSSARY 
 
 
ON THE ORIGIN OF NAMES: 
 
 To the casual observer, the various names an intrepid traveler will en-
counter throughout Alagaësia might seem but a random collection of la-
bels with no inherent integrity, culture, or history. However, as with any 
land that has been repeatedly colonized by different cultures—and in this 
case, different races—Alagaësia quickly accumulated layers of names 
from the elves, dwarves, humans, and even Urgals. Thus, we can have 
Palancar Valley (a human name), the Anora River and Ristvak’baen 
(elven names), and Utgard Mountain (a dwarf name) all within a few 
square miles of each other. 
 
 While this is of great historical interest, practically it often leads to con-
fusion as to the correct pronunciation. Unfortunately, there are no set 
rules for the neophyte. Each name must be learned upon its own terms, 
unless you can immediately place its language of origin. The matter grows 
even more confusing when you realize that in many places the spelling 
and pronunciation of foreign words were altered by the resident popula-
tion to conform to their own language. The Anora River is a prime ex-
ample. Originally anora was spelled äenora, which means broad in the 
ancient language. In their writings, the humans simplified the word to 
anora, and this, combined with a vowel shift wherein äe (ay-eh) was said 
as the easier a (uh), created the name as it appears in Eragon’s time. 
 
 To spare readers as much difficulty as possible, the following list is 
provided, with the understanding that these are only rough guidelines to 
the actual pronunciation. The enthusiast is encouraged to study the 
source languages in order to master their true intricacies. 
 
 
PRONUNCIATION: 
 
Aiedail — AY-uh-dale 
 
Ajihad — AH-zhi-hod 
 
Alagaësia — al-uh-GAY-zee-uh 
 
Arya — AR-ee-uh 
 
Carvahall — CAR-vuh-hall 

 
623
 
Dras-Leona — DRAHS lee-OH-nuh 
 
Du Weldenvarden — doo WELL-den-VAR-den 
 
Ellesméra — el-uhs-MEER-uh 
 
Eragon — EHR-uh-gahn 
 
Farthen Dûr — FAR-then DURE (dure rhymes with lure ) 
 
Galbatorix — gal-buh-TOR-icks 
 
Gil’ead — GILL-ee-id 
 
Glaedr — GLAY-dur 
 
Hrothgar — HROTH-gar 
 
Islanzadí — iss-lan-ZAH-dee 
 
Jeod — JODE (rhymes with code ) 
 
Murtagh — MUR-tag (mur rhymes with purr ) 
 
Nasuada — nah-SOO-ah-dah 
 
Nolfavrell — NOLL-fah-vrel (noll rhymes with toll ) 
 
Oromis — OR-uh-miss 
 
Ra’zac — RAA-zack 
 
Saphira — suh-FEAR-uh 
 
Shruikan — SHREW-kin 
 
Sílthrim — SEAL-thrim (síl is a hard sound to transcribe; it’s made by 
flicking the tip of the tongue off the roof of the mouth.) 
 
Teirm — TEERM 
 
Trianna — TREE-ah-nuh 
 

 
624
Tronjheim — TRONJ-heem 
 
Urû’baen — OO-roo-bane 
 
Vrael — VRAIL 
 
Yazuac — YAA-zoo-ack 
 
Zar’roc — ZAR-rock 
 
 
 
THE ANCIENT LANGUAGE: 
 
adurna — water 
 
Agaetí Blödhren — Blood-oath Celebration 
 
Aiedail — The Morning Star 
 
Argetlam — Silver Hand 
 
Atra esterní ono thelduin/Mor’ranr lífa unin hjarta onr/Un du evarínya 
ono varda. — May good fortune rule over you/Peace live in your 
heart/And the stars watch over you. 
 
Atra guliä un ilian tauthr ono un atra ono waíse skölir fra rauthr. — May 
luck and happiness follow you and may you be a shield from misfortune. 
 
Atra nosu waíse vardo fra eld hórnya. — Let us be warded from listeners. 
 
Bjartskular — Brightscales 
 
blöthr — halt; stop 
 
Brakka du vanyalí sem huildar Saphira un eka! — Reduce the magic that 
holds Saphira and me! 
 
brisingr — fire 
 
Dagshelgr — Hallowed Day 
 
draumr kópa — dream stare 
 

 
625
Du Fells Nángoröth — The Blasted Mountains 
 
Du Fyrn Skulblaka — The Dragon War 
 
Du Völlar Eldrvarya — The Burning Plains 
 
Du Vrangr Gata — The Wandering Path 
 
Du Weldenvarden — The Guarding Forest 
 
dvergar — dwarves 
 
ebrithil — master 
 
edur — a tor or prominence 
 
Eka fricai un Shur’tugal. — I am a Rider and friend. 
 
elda — a gender-neutral honorific of great praise 
 
Eyddr eyreya onr! — Empty your ears! 
 
fairth — a picture taken by magical means 
 
finiarel — an honorific for a young man of great promise 
 
Fricai Andlát — death friend (a poisonous mushroom) 
 
Gala O Wyrda brunhvitr/Abr Berundal vandr-fódhr/Burthro laufsblädar 
ekar undir/Eom kona dauthleikr... — Sing O white-browed Fate/Of ill-
marked Berundal/Born under oaken leaves/To mortal woman... 
 
gánga aptr — to go backward 
 
gánga fram — to go forward 
 
Gath sem oro un lam iet. — Unite that arrow with my hand. 
 
gedwëy ignasia — shining palm 
 
Gëuloth du knífr. — Dull the knife. 
 
haldthin — thornapple 
 

 
626
Helgrind — The Gates of Death 
 
hlaupa — run 
 
hljödhr — silent 
 
jierda — break; hit 
 
kodthr — catch 
 
Kvetha Fricai. — Greetings, Friend. 
 
lethrblaka — a bat; the Ra’zac’s mounts (literally, leather-flapper) 
 
letta — stop 
 
Letta orya thorna! — Stop those arrows! 
 
Liduen Kvaedhí — Poetic Script 
 
Losna kalfya iet. — Release my calves. 
 
malthinae — to bind or hold in place; confine 
 
nalgask — a mixture of beeswax and hazelnut oil used to moisten the 
skin 
 
Osthato Chetowä — the Mourning Sage 
 
Reisa du adurna. — Raise/Lift the water. 
 
rïsa — rise 
 
Sé mor’ranr ono finna. — May you find peace. 
 
Sé onr sverdar sitja hvass! — May your swords stay sharp! 
 
Sé orúm thornessa hávr sharjalví lífs. — May this serpent have life’s 
movement. 
 
skölir — shield 
 
Skölir nosu fra brisingr! — Shield us from fire! 
 

 
627
sköliro — shielded 
 
skulblaka — dragon (literally, scale-flapper) 
 
Stydja unin mor’ranr, Hrothgar Könungr. — Rest in peace, King Hroth-
gar. 
 
svit-kona — a formal honorific for an elf woman of great wisdom 
 
thrysta — thrust; compress 
 
Thrysta vindr. — Compress the air. 
 
Togira Ikonoka — the Cripple Who Is Whole 
 
the Varden — the Warders 
 
Vel eïnradhin iet ai Shur’tugal. — Upon my word as a Rider. 
 
Vinr Älfakyn — Elf Friend 
 
vodhr — a male honorific of middling praise 
 
vor — a male honorific for a close friend 
 
Waíse heill. — Be healed. 
 
Wiol ono. — For you. 
 
wyrda — fate 
 
Wyrdfell — elven name for the Forsworn 
 
yawë — a bond of trust 
 
zar’roc — misery 
 
  
 
THE DWARF LANGUAGE: 
 
Akh sartos oen dûrgrimst! — For family and clan! 
 
Ascûdgamln — fists of steel 

 
628
 
Astim Hefthyn — Sight Guard (inscription on a necklace given to Er-
agon) 
 
Az Ragni — The River 
 
Az Sweldn rak Anhûin — The Tears of Anhûin 
 
Azt jok jordn rast. — Then you may pass. 
 
barzûl — to curse someone with ill fate 
 
Barzûl knurlar! — Curse them! 
 
barzûln — to curse someone with multiple misfortunes 
 
Beor — cave bear (elf word) 
 
dûrgrimst — clan (literally, our hall/home) 
 
eta — no 
 
Etzil nithgech! — Stop there! 
 
Farthen Dûr — Our Father 
 
Feldûnost — frostbeard (a species of goat native to the Beor Mountains) 
 
Formv Hrethcarach... formv Jurgencarmeitder nos eta goroth bahst Tar-
nag, dûr encesti rak kythn! Jok is warrev az barzûlegûr dûr dûrgrimst, Az 
Sweldn rak Anhûin, môgh tor rak Jurgenvren? Né ûdim etal os rast knur-
lag. Knurlag ana... — This Shadeslayer... this Dragon Rider has no place in 
Tarnag, our holiest of cities! Do you forget the curse our clan, The Tears 
of Anhûin, bears from the Dragon War? We will not let him pass. He is... 
 
grimstborith — clan chief 
 
grimstcarvlorss — arranger of the house 
 
Gûntera Arûna — Gûntera Bless 
 
Hert dûrgrimst? Fild rastn? — What clan? Who passes? 
 
hírna — likeness; statue 

 
629
 
hûthvir — double-bladed staff weapon used by Dûrgrimst Quan 
 
Ignh az voth! — Bring the food! 
 
IIf gauhnith. — A peculiar dwarf expression that means “It is safe and 
good.” Commonly uttered by the host of a meal, it is a holdover from 
days when poisoning of guests was prevalent among the clans. 
 
Ingeitum — fire workers; smiths 
 
Isidar Mithrim — Star Rose 
 
Jok is frekk dûrgrimstvren? — Do you want a clan war? 
 
knurl — stone; rock 
 
knurla — dwarf (literally, one of stone) 
 
Knurlag qana qirânû Dûrgrimst Ingeitum! Qarzûl ana Hrothgar oen 
volfild — He was made a member of Clan Ingeitum! Cursed is Hrothgar 
and all who— 
 
knurlagn — men 
 
Knurlhiem — Stonehead 
 
Knurlnien — Heart of Stone 
 
Nagra — giant boar, native to the Beor Mountains 
 
oeí — yes; affirmative 
 
Orik Thrifkz menthiv oen Hrethcarach Eragon rak Dûrgrimst Ingeitum. 
Wharn, az vanyali-carharûg Arya. Né oc Ûndinz grimstbelardn. — Orik, 
Thrifk’s son, and Shadeslayer Eragon of Clan Ingeitum. Also, the elf-
courier Arya. We are Ûndin’s hall-guests. 
 
Os il dom qirânû carn dûr thargen, zeitmen, oen grimst vor formv edaris 
rak skilfz. Narho is belgond... — Let our flesh, honor, and hall be made as 
one by this blood of mine. I do pledge... 
 
otho — faith 
 

 
630
Ragni Hefthyn — River Guard 
 
Shrrg — giant wolf, native to the Beor Mountains 
 
Smer voth. — Serve the food. 
 
Tronjheim — Helm of Giants 
 
Urzhad — cave bear 
 
vanyali — elf (The dwarves borrowed this word from the ancient lan-
guage, wherein it means magic. ) 
 
Vor Hrothgarz korda! — By Hrothgar’s hammer! 
 
vrron — enough 
 
werg — an exclamation of disgust (the dwarves’ equivalent of ugh ) 
 
 
 
THE URGAL LANGUAGE: 
 
Ahgrat ukmar. — It is done. 
 
drajl — spawn of maggots 
 
nar — a gender-neutral title of great respect 
 
 
 

 
631
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
 
Kvetha Fricäya. 
 
 As with many authors who undertake an epic the length of the Inheri-
tance trilogy, I have found that the creation of Eragon, and now Eldest, 
has become my own personal quest, one that has proven every bit as 
transforming as Eragon’s. 
 
 When first I conceived Eragon, I was fifteen—not quite a boy and not 
yet a man—just out of high school, unsure of what path to take in life, 
and addicted to the potent magic of the fantasy literature that adorned 
my shelves. The process of writing Eragon, marketing it across the world, 
and now finally completing Eldest has swept me into adulthood. I am 
twenty-one now and, to my continual astonishment, have already pub-
lished two novels. Stranger things have occurred, I’m sure, but never to 
me. 
 
 Eragon’s journey has been my own: plucked from a sheltered rural up-
bringing and forced to rove the land in a desperate race against time; en-
during intense and arduous training; achieving success against all expecta-
tions; dealing with the consequences of fame; and eventually finding a 
measure of peace. 
 
 Just as in fiction when the determined and well-meaning protagonist—
who really isn’t all that bright, now is he?—is helped along his way by a 
host of wiser characters, so too have I been guided by a number of stu-
pendously talented people. They are: 
 
 At home: Mom, for listening whenever I need to talk about a problem 
with the story or characters and for giving me the courage to throw out 
twelve pages and rewrite Eragon’s entrance into Ellesméra (painful); Dad, 
as always, for his incisive editing; and my dear sister, Angela, for deigning 
to reprise her role as a witch and for her contributions to her doppel-
gänger’s dialogue. 
 
 At Writers House: my agent, the great and mighty Comma Master, 
Simon Lipskar, who makes all things possible (Mervyn Peake!); and his 
brave assistant Daniel Lazar, who keeps the Comma Master from being 
buried alive underneath a pile of unsolicited manuscripts, many of which 
I fear are the result of Eragon. 
 
 

 
632
 At Knopf: my editor, Michelle Frey, who has gone above and beyond 
the call of duty in performing her job and has made Eldest so much bet-
ter than it would have been otherwise; publicity director Judith Haut, for 
once again proving that no feat of promotion is beyond her reach (hear 
her roar!); Isabel Warren-Lynch, art director nonpareil who, with Eldest, 
has exceeded her previous accomplishments; John Jude Palencar, for a 
cover painting that I like even better than the one for Eragon ; copy chief 
Artie Bennett, who has done a splendiferous job of checking all the ob-
scure words in this trilogy and probably knows more than I do about the 
ancient language, although his Urgal is a mite weak; Chip Gibson, grand 
master of the children’s division at Random House; Nancy Hinkel, pub-
lishing director extraordinaire; Joan DeMayo, director of sales (much ap-
plause, cheers, and bowing!) and her team; Daisy Kline, who with her 
team designed the wonderful and eye-catching marketing materials; Linda 
Palladino, Rebecca Price, and Timothy Terhune, production; a bow of 
thanks to Pam White and her team, who have helped to spread Eragon to 
the four corners of the world; Melissa Nelson, design; Alison Kolani, copy 
editing; Michele Burke, Michelle Frey’s dedicated, hardworking assistant; 
and everyone else at Knopf who has supported me. 
 
 At Listening Library: Gerard Doyle, who brings the world of Alagaësia 
to life; Taro Meyer for getting the pronunciation of my languages just 
right; Jacob Bronstein for pulling all the threads together; and Tim Dit-
low, publisher of Listening Library. 
 
 
 Thank you all. 
 
 
 One more volume to go and we shall reach the end of this tale. One 
more manuscript of heartache, ecstasy, and perseverance.... One more co-
dex of dreams. 
 
 Stay with me, if it please you, and let us see where this winding path 
will carry us, both in this world and in Alagaësia. 
 
 Sé onr sverdar sitja hvass! 
 
 
Christopher Paolini 
 
August 23, 2005 
 
 

 
633
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
 
 
 Christopher Paolini’s abiding love of fantasy and science fiction inspired 
him to begin writing his debut novel, Eragon, when he graduated from 
high school at fifteen after being homeschooled all his life. He became a 
New York Times bestselling author at nineteen. Christopher lives in Mon-
tana, where the dramatic landscape feeds his visions of Alagaësia. He is at 
work on the final volume in the Inheritance trilogy. 
 
 You can find out more about Christopher, Eldest, and Inheritance at 
www.alagaesia.com. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
634
Eldest is also available in an unabridged 
audio edition from Listening Library 
 
Cassette ISBN 1-4000-9862-9 
$45.00 U.S. / $65.00 CAN. 
 
 
CD ISBN 0-307-28072-1 
$55.00 U.S. / $77.00 CAN. 

 
635
THIS IS A BORZOI BOOK PUBLISHED BY ALFRED A. KNOPF 
 
Text copyright © 2005 by Christopher Paolini 
 
Illustrations on endpapers, copyright © 2002 by Christopher Paolini 
 
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright 
Conventions. Published in the United States by Alfred A. Knopf, an im-
print of Random House Children’s Books, a division of Random House, 
Inc., New York, and simultaneously in Canada by Random House of 
Canada Limited, Toronto. Distributed by Random House, Inc., New 
York. 
 
KNOPF, BORZOI BOOKS, and the colophon are registered trademarks 
of Random House, Inc. 
 
www.alagaesia.com 
www.randomhouse.com/teens 
 
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 
Paolini, Christopher. 
 
Eldest / Christopher Paolini. — 1st ed. 
 
p. cm. — (Inheritance ; bk. 2) 
 
SUMMARY: After successfully evading an Urgal ambush, Eragon is 
adopted into the Ingeitum clan and sent to finish his training so he can 
further help the Varden in their struggle against the Empire. 
 
eISBN 0-375-83753-1 
 
[1. Fantasy. 2. Dragons—Fiction. 3. Youths’ writings.] I. Title. II. Series: 
Paolini, Christopher. Inheritance ; bk. 2. 
 
PZ7.P19535El 2005 
 
[Fic]—dc22     2005009325 
 
 
v1.0 
 

