
Patent Law 
Essentials

This page intentionally left blank 

Patent Law 
Essentials
A Concise Guide
THIRD EDITION
Alan L. Durham

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Durham, Alan L., 1963-
Patent law essentials : a concise guide / Alan Durham. — 3rd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978–0–313–35394–9 (alk. paper)
1.  Patent laws and legislation—United States.  I. Title. 
KF3114.85.D87 2009
346.7304'86—dc22
2008036354
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data is available.
Copyright © 2009 by Alan L. Durham
All rights reserved. No portion of this book may be 
reproduced, by any process or technique, without the
express written consent of the publisher.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 2008036354
ISBN: 978–0–313–35394–9
First published in 2009
Praeger Publishers, 88 Post Road West, Westport, CT 06881
An imprint of Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc.
www.praeger.com
Printed in the United States of America
The paper used in this book complies with the 
Permanent Paper Standard issued by the National
Information Standards Organization (Z39.48–1984).
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

Contents
Preface
ix
1
OVERVIEW
1
1.1
Origins
1
1.2
Summary and Roadmap
3
1.3
Sources of Law
6
2
PATENTS DISTINGUISHED FROM OTHER RIGHTS
9
2.1
Copyrights
9
2.2
Trademarks
11
2.3
Trade Secrets
11
2.4
Patents
14
3
READING A PATENT
15
3.1
General Information
15
3.2
Drawings
17
3.3
Speciﬁcation
18
3.4
Claims
19
4
PATENTABLE SUBJECT MATTER
23
4.1
Abstract Ideas
24
4.2
Thought Processes
24

4.3
Principles of Nature
25
4.4
Living Organisms
27
4.5
Artistic and Literary Creations
28
4.6
Printed Matter
29
4.7
Methods of Doing Business
30
5
PATENT PROSECUTION
33
5.1
Examination 
33
5.2
Continuations and Continuations-in-Part 
36
5.3
Divisional Applications 
38
5.4
Interferences 
38
5.5
Reissue 
40
5.6
Reexamination 
42
6
OWNERSHIP AND OTHER RIGHTS
45
6.1
Inventorship
45
6.2
Assignments 
48
6.3
Licenses 
48
7
INTERPRETING PATENT CLAIMS
53
7.1
“Ordinary Meaning” 
56
7.2
Speciﬁcation 
57
7.3
Prosecution History 
59
7.4
Other Claims 
61
7.5
Validity 
62
7.6
Preambles 
62
7.7
Special Claim Formats 
64
8
CONDITIONS OF PATENTABILITY
71
8.1 
Examination versus Litigation 
71
8.2 
Presumption of Validity 
72
8.3 
Assignor Estoppel 
73
8.4 
Utility 
74
8.5 
Deﬁniteness 
77
8.6 
Enablement 
80
8.7 
Best Mode 
85
8.8 
The Written Description Requirement 
90
vi
Contents

8.9 
Novelty and Obviousness
94
8.10
Section 102(b) Statutory Bars 
121
8.11
Other Statutory Bars (§ 102(c), (d)) 
128
8.12
Double Patenting 
129
9
ENFORCEABILITY DEFENSES
133
9.1 
Inequitable Conduct 
133
9.2 
Misuse 
137
10
INFRINGEMENT
141
10.1 Patent Term 
141
10.2 Geographic Limitations 
143
10.3 State of Mind 
144
10.4 Direct and Indirect Infringement 
145
10.5 Literal Infringement 
149
10.6 The Doctrine of Equivalents 
151
10.7 Equivalence in the Context of 
Means-Plus-Function Claims 
171
10.8 The Reverse Doctrine of Equivalents 
174
10.9 Experimental Use Exception 
to Infringement 
175
11
PATENT LITIGATION
177
11.1 Jurisdiction and Venue 
178
11.2 Declaratory Judgment 
180
11.3 Burden of Proof 
182
11.4 The Role of Judge and Jury 
182
11.5 Bifurcation 
184
11.6 Preliminary Injunctions 
185
11.7 Summary Judgment 
186
11.8 Remedies 
187
11.9 The International Trade Commission 
199
11.10 Judgments of Invalidity 
200
12
SPECIAL TOPICS
201
12.1 Design Patents 
201
12.2 Plant Patents 
204
Contents
vii

12.3 Foreign Patents 
206
12.4 Patenting Computer Programs 
207
12.5
Patent Reform
212
Note on Sources 
215
Appendix A: Sample Utility Patents 
217
Appendix B: Sample Design Patents 
235
Index
253
viii
Contents

Preface
This book began with an expert witness. A preeminent authority in a spe-
cialized ﬁeld of engineering, he had been hired to testify on the defendant’s
behalf in a high-stakes patent infringement case. Like many people who ﬁnd
themselves confronting the arcane system of patent law for the ﬁrst time, he
wanted know the “rules of the game.” At the time there were expansive
resources for lawyers, generally in many volumes, and study aids directed at
law students, but no books I could recommend offering the right mixture of
sophistication and simplicity. If there were such a book, I thought, I could
use it myself. As an attorney in the ﬁeld I knew the standard rules of patent
law, but I did not always have at my ﬁngertips recent authorities to support
them. Those authorities had to be sought out in the multi-volume treatises or
the indexed case reporters—a time-consuming chore simply because they
included so much material. So I determined to write for myself a concise
book on patent law that could serve either purpose. It would be accessible
enough, I hoped, to introduce non-lawyers to the “rules of the game,” while
sophisticated enough to provide attorneys a useful desk reference—a starting
place, at least, for further research. This is the result of that ambition, now in
its third edition. I have been pleased to learn that not only attorneys and
engineers have found it useful, but also business people, judges, patent
examiners, professors, and law students—some of whom have contacted me
with encouraging feedback. I thank them all. 
As this edition goes to press, there are hints of change on the horizon.
For years patent law seemed to grow irrepressibly. Through a series of land-
mark court decisions, computer software, biological organisms, and business
methods all came within its expanding borders. Businesses found in their

patent portfolios a new source of wealth, and disputes with corporate giants
like Microsoft and Research In Motion made headlines. At the same time, the
patent system seemed to lose some popular respect, as the idea caught on that
“anything can be patented.” Dubious patents, like the one for a method of
exercising a cat using a laser pointer,1 became the butt of humor. Yet now
there are signs of contrary forces at work. The Supreme Court has rejected
legalistic formulas to identify which inventions are patentably “non-obvious”
in favor of plain common sense.2 The Federal Circuit Court of Appeals has
raised new questions about the patentability of abstract thought-based
processes.3 Meanwhile, Congress is considering dramatic patent law reforms
that would make the U.S. system more like those of other nations, including
enhanced opportunities for the public to oppose questionable patents.4 What
happens next is anyone’s guess, but it is certain that patent law will remain,
as it has always been, a dynamic and challenging ﬁeld. 
As before, I wish to thank my friends, colleagues, and students at the
University of Alabama School of Law for their inspiration and encouragement.
Dean Kenneth Randall and the Law School Foundation have supplied critical
and much appreciated support for my research. I also thank my former col-
leagues at Morrison & Foerster and Brown & Bain (now Perkins Coie), whose
understanding and ﬂexibility made the ﬁrst edition of this book a reality.
x
Preface
1 U.S. Patent No. 5,443,036.
2 KSR Int’l Co. v. Teleﬂex Inc., 127 S. Ct. 1727 (2007).
3 In re Comiskey, 499 F.3d 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2007).
4 See Section 12.5. 

CHAPTER 1
Overview
1.1 ORIGINS
The historical antecedents of the United States patent system are often
traced to seventeenth-century England. Then a “patent” might refer to
nothing more than a legally sanctioned monopoly, granted to reward a
loyal subject or sold to raise funds for the government. A merchant guild,
for example, might purchase a patent for the exclusive right to sell
playing cards. Freedom from competition allowed the patent owner to sell
in larger volumes and at a higher price. Undoubtedly popular with the
government and with the patent owners, these “odious monopolies” were
a source of resentment to consumers and potential competitors. In 1624
the crown relented and the Statute of Monopolies, abolishing the general
power of the monarch to grant exclusive rights, became law. Impor-
tantly, the statute ending the general practice of monopolies speciﬁ-
cally exempted patents allowing inventors the exclusive right to their
inventions.
The tradition of granting patents to inventors continued in colonial
America and, in spite of some skepticism by influential thinkers such as
Thomas Jefferson, it was incorporated in the laws of the United States.
The framers of the Constitution provided to Congress, in Article I, Sec-
tion 8, the power to “promote the Progress of Science and [the] useful
Arts, by securing for limited Times to Authors and inventors the exclu-
sive Right to their respective Writings and Discoveries.” This brief lan-
guage is the source of both patent law and copyright law in the United

States.1 The specifics were left to Congress, whose last wholesale revision
of the Patent Act occurred in 1952, and to the Patent and Trademark
Office (also known as the Patent Office or PTO), a division of the Depart-
ment of Commerce created in 1836. The federal courts too have played
a significant role in interpreting, supplementing, and perhaps, on some
occasions, rewriting the rules set down by Congress.
Although patent law has evolved in some ways, the theories behind it are
much the same today as they were in the beginning. One theory, which still has
an eighteenth-century ﬂavor, is that inventors possess a natural right to their
inventions that must be recognized by law. Creations are naturally the property
of those who labored to create. The more common theory, and the one most
clearly reﬂected in the Constitution, is that patents provide the encouragement
necessary for industrial advancement. If a budding Edison feared that the
rewards of his inventive efforts would be reaped by a copyist—who did not bear
the costs of original research—he might abandon the laboratory for other pur-
suits. Society would then be denied the beneﬁt of useful inventions. If an inven-
tor can obtain a patent ensuring that only he will proﬁt from his invention, he
is more likely to invest the time, effort, skill and resources necessary to discover
new technologies.2
Patents also beneﬁt society by making available precise descriptions of
new inventions. A patent is a public document published by the United
States government. One requirement of a patent is that it describe the inven-
tion, in both words and drawings, in such detail that other persons in the
ﬁeld can understand the invention and practice it themselves. During the
term of the patent, when only the patent owner and licensees have the legal
right to practice the invention, this information may be of little interest. Yet
patents remain in force only for a limited time, and when the patent expires
the invention enters the public domain. The millions of patents that have
already expired are a resource that may be freely exploited by anyone, and
even an unexpired patent can provide inspiration for new and different
approaches to technological problems.
The view that a patent is a kind of bargain between the inventor and the
public, by which the inventor receives a limited monopoly in exchange for
2
Patent Law Essentials
1 When the Constitution was drafted, “science” was used in a broader sense than it is today,
and was generally synonymous with “knowledge.” “Arts” also held a different meaning, and
the term “useful arts” probably referred to what we would now call “technology.” Although
counterintuitive, the prevailing view of legal historians is that patent law promotes the “arts,”
while copyright law promotes “science.”
2 Another theory, popular with some legal scholars, is that patents make the exploitation of
resources more efﬁcient by putting a single entity—the owner of the patent—in charge. If mul-
tiple parties, without legal restriction, could race to exploit a newly discovered and valuable
invention, much wasteful duplication of effort could occur. The costs of such waste are borne,
ultimately, by society. Other scholars argue that the stimulating effects of competition coun-
terbalance the waste of duplication. 

disclosing the invention to the public, is of more than theoretical interest.
Together with the overall constitutional goal of promoting the “useful arts,” the
bargain model of patents helps to shape the speciﬁc rules that determine
whether a patent is valid or invalid. In particular, this model will resurface as
we examine the concepts of enablement and best mode in Sections 8.6 and 8.7.
1.2 SUMMARY AND ROADMAP
A book about patent law is difﬁcult to organize because an understanding
of one principle is so often dependent on an understanding of other princi-
ples, ad inﬁnitum. As a New Yorker article once observed, patent law is “apt
to plunge all but the stoutest minds into dizzying swirls of logic.”3 What follows
is a sort of roadmap to this book that may keep readers better oriented as
they wind their way through the maze.
Chapter 1 (this chapter) introduces some of the history and theory
underpinning patent law, and concludes with a brief discussion of the laws,
judicial opinions, and other authorities that are cited throughout this book.
Chapter 2 distinguishes patents from other forms of intellectual property
rights with which patents are often confused. Speciﬁcally, Chapter 2 brieﬂy
discusses copyrights, which protect works of authorship such as writings,
musical compositions, and illustrations; trademarks, which protect corporate
names and logos; and trade secrets, constituting conﬁdential business infor-
mation protected by law.
Chapter 3 leads the reader through a close examination of an actual
United States patent found in Appendix A. This includes the patent draw-
ings; the speciﬁcation, which is a detailed prose description of the inventor’s
work; and the claims. The claims are the last portion of a patent, and they
describe in careful terms exactly what the patented invention is.
Chapter 4 discusses the kinds of discoveries that can and cannot be
patented, with sections devoted to abstract ideas, principles of nature, living
organisms, artistic and literary creations, printed matter, and methods of doing
business. Patent protection for computer software is a particularly thorny sub-
ject, and it is reserved for discussion with other specialized topics in Chapter 12.
Chapter 5 explains the process one goes through to obtain a patent from
the United States Patent Ofﬁce—a process known as patent prosecution. The
complexities discussed include patent applications that spawn offspring,
known as continuations, continuations-in-part, or divisional applications;
interferences—procedures for determining which of two inventors having
competing patents or patent applications actually invented ﬁrst; and reissue
and reexamination, both procedures allowing the Patent Ofﬁce a second
look at applications that have already issued as patents.
Overview
3
3 John Seabrook, The Flash of Genius, THE NEW YORKER, January 11, 1993, at 40.

Chapter 6 examines the issue of inventorship—that is, who should or
should not be credited as an inventor—and how an inventor can convey rights
to a patented invention, either by assignment or by license. Chapter 6 also
discusses how rights to a patented invention can be conveyed, intentionally
or unintentionally, by an implied license.
Chapter 7 deals with the issue of interpreting patent claims. This is a dif-
ﬁcult but extremely important issue, because deciding what a patent claim
means is the starting point for determining if the patent is valid or infringed.
Chapter 7 reviews some of the tools used to interpret patent claims, includ-
ing the patent speciﬁcation and the prosecution history. The latter is a record
of the applicant’s dealings with the Patent Ofﬁce. Chapter 7 also discusses
problems associated with certain specialized claim formats. Among these are
“product-by-process” claims, which describe the invention in terms of the
way it is made, and “means-plus-function” claims, which describe claim ele-
ments in terms of the functions they perform.
Chapter 8 is one of the longer chapters because it deals with the various
conditions of patentability. If a patent application fails to meet any one of
these conditions, it should be rejected by the Patent Ofﬁce. If the application
nevertheless slips through the Patent Ofﬁce, the patent can be held invalid
by a court. In fact, in most cases where a charge of infringement results in a
lawsuit, the accused infringer argues that the patent is invalid.
Chapter 8 begins with a general discussion of the conditions of patentabil-
ity, including the presumption that any patent is valid until proven otherwise.
The speciﬁc topics covered in Chapter 8 include the utility requirement, which
means that the patented invention must perform some useful function; the
deﬁniteness requirement, which means that the claims must be reasonably
precise in identifying the patented invention; the enablement requirement,
which means that the patent must include enough information so that others
can practice the claimed invention without undue experimentation; the best
mode requirement, which means that the inventor must have disclosed the
best way he or she knew of practicing the invention at the time the application
was ﬁled; and the written description requirement, which means that the
patent speciﬁcation, as ﬁled, must describe the invention ultimately claimed.
Chapter 8 then looks at the novelty requirement, which in many respects
is the key to patentability. The claimed invention must be new and non-obvious,
in comparison with the “prior art.” Chapter 8 discusses the various kinds of
prior art that may be relevant, including prior inventions, prior patents, and
prior publications. Chapter 8 also discusses how the date of invention is
determined, which can be a critical issue in deciding if another invention, or
a patent or publication, is actually prior art.
Chapter 8 discusses both anticipation, which invalidates a claim covering
an invention found in the prior art, and obviousness, which invalidates a claim
covering subject matter that would have been obvious to a person of ordinary
skill. If an invention is obvious, perhaps as an elaboration or a combination of
4
Patent Law Essentials

prior inventions, it is not considered worthy of a patent. Obviousness is a dif-
ﬁcult and subjective inquiry, invariably conducted in hindsight. Chapter 8
examines some of the “secondary considerations,” such as commercial suc-
cess, that are intended as more objective measures of whether an invention
was obvious.
Chapter 8 continues with a discussion of the “statutory bars” that can
invalidate a patent if the applicant was too slow in ﬁling an application after
the occurrence of a critical event—such as an offer to sell a product embody-
ing the invention. Chapter 8 concludes with an examination of double
patenting. Double patenting is a ground for invalidating a patent if the same
inventor had already patented the invention. This prevents an inventor from
obtaining multiple patents on the same thing, thereby extending the period
of the patent monopoly beyond the intended span.
Chapter 9 examines two potential defenses to a charge of infringement
that, if successful, result in a holding that a patent is “unenforceable.” If a
patent is unenforceable, a court will not use its powers to prevent that patent
from being infringed. The ﬁrst such defense discussed in Chapter 9 is
inequitable conduct. Because only the applicant and the Patent Ofﬁce are
allowed to take part when an application is examined, it is important to hold
applicants to a high standard of candor and fair dealing. Inequitable conduct
occurs if an applicant intentionally deceives the Patent Ofﬁce, or withholds
critical information, during prosecution. The other unenforceability defense
discussed in Chapter 9 is misuse. Misuse refers to attempts to leverage the
patent monopoly beyond its intended scope—for example, by requiring that
anyone practicing the patented invention purchase an unpatented product from
the patent owner. This kind of “tying” and other forms of misuse may violate
the federal antitrust laws, in addition to rendering a patent unenforceable.
Chapter 10 is another lengthy chapter because it deals with the subject
of infringement. After a preliminary discussion covering the temporal and
geographical limitations of a patent, Chapter 10 discusses “direct” and “indi-
rect” infringement. Direct infringement includes making, using, selling,
offering to sell, or importing into the United States something that falls
within the scope of a patent claim. Indirect infringement means inducing or
contributing to infringement—for example, by supplying a part that can be
used only in a patented combination. An indirect infringer is liable in the
same way that a direct infringer is liable.
Chapter 10 then discusses “literal infringement,” which occurs if the infring-
ing product or process includes every element required by a patent claim,
exactly as described. Next is a discussion of the “doctrine of equivalents,” which
holds that a product or process can still infringe a claim even though it is dif-
ferent from what the claim literally requires, as long as the differences are insub-
stantial. This is a difﬁcult concept, even for experts and judges, so it is covered
in some detail. Chapter 10 discusses how the doctrine of equivalents has
evolved, and it examines some of the tests used to determine if a product or
Overview
5

process is or is not equivalent to a claimed invention. Chapter 10 also discusses
limitations on the scope of equivalency imposed by the prosecution history, the
patent disclosure, and the prior art. Chapter 10 further considers equivalency
in the related context of means-plus-function claims, as well as the “reverse doc-
trine of equivalents,” which holds that a product does not infringe, even though
it is literally described by the patent claims, if it is sufﬁciently “changed in prin-
ciple” from what the applicant actually invented. Finally, Chapter 10 discusses
a little-used experimental use exception to infringement.
Chapter 11 introduces the subject of patent litigation. Speciﬁc topics dis-
cussed include jurisdiction and venue, which determine in what court a suit
for infringement can be ﬁled; actions for declaratory judgment, which per-
mit an accused infringer to sue a patent owner rather than wait to be sued;
burdens of proof, which determine who must prove what and how com-
pelling the evidence must be; and the roles of judge and jury in deciding the
various issues presented in a typical case. Chapter 11 also examines the
kinds of relief that can be awarded in a suit for patent infringement. These
include preliminary injunctions, which bar the continuance of the allegedly
infringing activity during the pendency of the lawsuit; permanent injunc-
tions, which permanently bar infringing activity if the patent owner prevails;
and money damages, which compensate the patent owner for past infringe-
ment. The last award can take the form of lost proﬁts or a reasonable roy-
alty, and they can be increased as much as threefold if the infringement is
found to have been willful. Chapter 11 also discusses defenses that can limit
the recovery of damages, including the six-year statute of limitations, the
patent owner’s failure to properly mark products that it has sold, laches, and
equitable estoppel. “Laches” refers to unreasonable delay in ﬁling suit that
somehow prejudices the accused infringer. “Equitable estoppel” refers to
conduct by the patent owner that leads the accused infringer to believe that
the patent owner will not pursue a claim.
Chapter 11 ends with a brief discussion of the International Trade Com-
mission, an alternative forum for raising a claim of patent infringement if the
accused products are imported into the United States from abroad.
Chapter 12 discusses several specialized topics, including design
patents, plant patents, foreign patents, patents claiming computer programs,
and the prospects for signiﬁcant new legislation.
Appendices A and B provide, respectively, samples of actual utility
and design patents issued by the United States Patent Ofﬁce.
1.3 SOURCES OF LAW
Several important sources of patent law will be referenced throughout this
book. One is the Patent Act, found at Title 35 of the United States Code. The
Patent Act contains most of the legislation enacted by Congress that relates
6
Patent Law Essentials

to patents. References to particular sections of the Act will generally be in
the format “35 U.S.C. §____.” Other important authorities are the Code of
Federal Regulations (37 C.F.R.) and the Manual of Patent Examining Proce-
dure (MPEP), which set forth detailed rules and regulations for obtaining a
patent.
In addition to the statutes, rules, and regulations, one can ﬁnd countless
reported court decisions interpreting the patent laws. As in any ﬁeld of fed-
eral law, the controlling precedents are those of the United States Supreme
Court. However, the Supreme Court only rarely accepts appeals in patent
cases, leaving most of the decision making to the lower courts. The most sig-
niﬁcant of these lower courts, at present, is the Federal Circuit Court of
Appeals. Established in 1982, the Federal Circuit, based in Washington,
D.C., hears all appeals of patent-related cases, regardless of the place where
the suit was initially ﬁled. Except on those occasions when the Supreme
Court intervenes, the Federal Circuit is the ultimate authority on what patent
laws mean, and all inferior courts, as well as the Patent Ofﬁce, are bound by
its interpretations.
Cases referred to in this book are accompanied by citations, generally in
the footnotes. The standard citation format includes the name of the case,
followed by the volume of the ofﬁcial reporter in which it appears, the
abbreviated name of the ofﬁcial reporter, the relevant page numbers, and in
parentheses an identiﬁcation of the court and the date of the decision. For
example, Pﬁzer Inc. v. Apotex, Inc., 480 F.3d 1348, 1359–60 (Fed. Cir. 2007),
refers to a case reported in Volume 480 of the Federal Reporter (Third Series)
beginning at page 1348. The pages of particular interest are pages 1359–60,
and the decision was rendered by the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals in
2007. These citations are provided in case the reader needs additional infor-
mation or authority to support a particular proposition.
Overview
7

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 2
Patents Distinguished 
from Other Rights
People sometimes confuse patents with copyrights or trademarks, saying, for
example, that George Lucas has a “patent” on the name “Star Wars.”
Patents, copyrights, trademarks, and trade secrets are all legal means of pro-
tecting “intellectual property”—a term referring to the intangible creations of
the human mind in which the law recognizes some form of ownership.
However, patents, copyrights, trademarks, and trade secrets are each gov-
erned by a unique body of rules and requirements, and, in spite of some
overlap, they are generally designed to protect different sorts of intellectual
creations. Therefore, a good starting point for explaining what a patent is
may be to explain what it is not.
2.1 COPYRIGHTS
Copyrights protect “works of authorship,” broadly deﬁned by statute to
include writings in the conventional sense and, among other things, dra-
matic works, musical compositions, choreography, paintings, sculptures,
photographs, motion pictures, audio recordings, and architecture. To some
degree, any work of authorship has an aspect of creative “expression.”
Copyright protects this expression, not the underlying ideas. Although idea
and expression can be difﬁcult to sort out, one could, for example, borrow
the information published in this book without violating its copyright. No
matter what labor was expended to compile the information, it can be freely

used.1 On the other hand, duplicating the book’s language or organization
could tread on areas of expression—creative choices unique to the author
and protected by copyright.
Copyrights do not apply to technological innovations or to the useful fea-
tures of products. A new and more efﬁcient spark plug design could not be
copyrighted. Some useful products do have an aesthetic aspect that can be
protected by copyright, but the artistic component of the design must be dis-
tinguishable from the utilitarian component. For example, a belt buckle
might be copyrighted as a sculpture,2 but the copyright cannot prevent the
borrowing of some mechanical aspect of the design, such as an improved
latching mechanism. In this respect a copyright is the antithesis of a patent,
which is speciﬁcally intended to protect technological advancements. If one
had both a copyright and a patent on the same belt buckle, the copyright
would protect only the aesthetic appearance of the belt buckle, and the
patent would protect only the mechanism by which it worked.3
As we will see in Section 8.9, an invention is patentable only if it is sufﬁ-
ciently new and different compared with prior inventions that persons skilled
in the ﬁeld would not have considered it obvious. In contrast, copyright law has
no requirement of novelty. As long as the work of authorship is an original
product of the author’s imagination, a copyright cannot be denied simply
because the work is similar to others that have gone before. This may be the
case because of the difﬁculty of judging novelty or obviousness in relation to
the kinds of creative works that are traditionally protected by copyright. Who
can say whether the latest mystery novel is an obvious variation of the thou-
sands that have gone before? By the same token, independent creation is a
complete defense to infringement of copyright, regardless of the similarity of
two works. If two songs are nearly identical to one another, but it can be shown
that the second composer never had access to the ﬁrst composition, the second
composer committed no act of infringement.4 Patent law is very different. One
who innocently infringes a patent, perhaps not even knowing that the patent or
the patented product exists, can still be held accountable in the courts.
One area in which patent and copyright converge is in the protection of
computer software. Software blurs the boundaries between a work of author-
ship and a machine. From the perspective of a programmer, a computer pro-
gram is a kind of writing. It is expressed in a language that resembles in some
respects ordinary human languages, and the process of authorship involves
some of the aesthetic choices and personal style associated with other forms of
10
Patent Law Essentials
1 See Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340, 347 (1991) (Facts are
not copyrightable because they “do not owe their origin to an act of authorship.”).
2 See Kieselstein-Cord v. Accessories By Pearl, Inc., 632 F.2d 989 (2d Cir. 1980).
3 Unless the patent was a “design patent,” a special category of patent discussed in Section 12.1.
4 Although the similarity of the two works could be considered evidence that the second
composer did not, in fact, work independently.

writing. Copyright, rather than patent, would seem the proper vehicle for pro-
tecting this expression. On the other hand, a program is akin to a machine part
when executed by a computer. The program controls the operation of the
computer much as cogs and wheels controlled machines of an earlier era.
From this perspective, a computer program seems outside of the subject
matter protected by copyright and more suitable for protection by patent.
Courts and scholars have struggled for decades to determine the proper
application of copyright and patent law to computer software. At present,
both forms of protection are available, though each has its limitations. A
computer program can be copyrighted, but this may not prevent someone
else from extracting the functional aspects of the program to incorporate in
a new program. The functional aspects of computer software can be
patented as long as they meet the various requirements of patentability (such
as novelty and non-obviousness) and as long as the patent steers clear of
monopolizing an abstract idea, mathematical algorithm, or principle of
nature. These special concerns are discussed in some detail in Section 12.4.
2.2 TRADEMARKS
Trademarks are governed by federal statutes, by state laws, and by com-
mon law. A trademark is a device, such as a word, phrase, or symbol, that is
used to represent the origin of a product. A consumer who ﬁnds the word
“Nike” on a shoe box, or the familiar Nike “swoosh” symbol, is entitled to
conclude that the shoe sold in the box is the genuine article. The overriding
purpose of trademark law is the protection of consumers, and disputes in this
area are usually resolved by determining whether consumers would be con-
fused by the use of a mark that is similar to the mark of another business. If
another shoe manufacturer adopted the name “Nikke” for its line of prod-
ucts, the original Nike would doubtless challenge such use as unfair and con-
fusing. Patents are granted only on inventions—not on labels, logos, or brand
names. Trademarks, on the other hand, do not secure exclusive rights to the
functional aspects of a product.5
2.3 TRADE SECRETS
Patents are not the only way that inventors can prevent others from taking
advantage of their labors. Another option is to keep the invention a secret. An
inventor cannot do both. As soon as a patent issues, the invention becomes
public knowledge. This is a part of the bargain that the inventor strikes with
the government in order to obtain the patent monopoly. However, the process
of applying for a patent can be kept conﬁdential. If an inventor applies for a
Patents Distinguished from Other Rights
11
5 Trafﬁx Devices, Inc. v. Marketing Displays, Inc., 532 U.S. 23, 29 (2001). 

patent, but the application is rejected, the inventor can abandon the attempt
and still retain some protection by keeping the invention a secret.
Whether an inventor is better advised to patent an invention or simply
keep it a secret may depend on the nature of the invention. If it is something
that will be revealed as soon as products incorporating the invention are
placed on the market, attempts to keep the invention secret may be self-
defeating. On the other hand, certain inventions can be exploited without
making them public. For example, an ordinary product, indistinguishable
from any other, might be manufactured less expensively because of an inno-
vative process. The process might be better protected through secrecy than
through a patent, which would last only for a limited term.
If secret information is of the kind that gives one an advantage in busi-
ness, it may be protectable under “trade secret” law. Trade secrets are largely
governed by state laws, rather than federal law, so there is some geographic
variation in the way the laws are organized and worded, and possibly in their
scope of protection. However, nearly all states have adopted, in some form,
a model statute known as the Uniform Trade Secrets Act. The deﬁnition of
“trade secret” under the Uniform Act extends to various forms of informa-
tion, including “a formula, pattern, compilation, program, device, method,
technique or process.”6 Although such things as formulas, devices, and
processes also fall within the realm of potentially patentable inventions,7
trade secret law imposes a different set of requirements. To qualify as a pro-
tectable trade secret under the Uniform Act, the information must “derive
independent economic value, actual or potential, from not being generally
known to, and not being readily ascertainable by proper means by, other
persons who can obtain economic value from its disclosure or use.”8 In other
words, not only must the information be secret, it must also be valuable. In
addition, the information must be “the subject of efforts that are reasonable
under the circumstances to maintain its secrecy.”9 A company that is lax
about security may be unable to resort to trade secret law to protect its infor-
mation from use or disclosure. Patent law, in contrast, requires neither that
an invention be economically valuable nor (under most circumstances) that
it have been kept secret.10
While patent law bars “infringement,” trade secret law forbids “misap-
propriation.” Misappropriation includes unauthorized disclosure or use of
12
Patent Law Essentials
6 Uniform Trade Secrets Act § 1(4). 
7 Trade secret law can also be used to protect certain kinds of business information that would
not be patentable—for example, customer lists and marketing plans. As long as information is
secret and valuable to a business, it can be protected as a trade secret, even though it is not
an invention in the usual sense.
8 Uniform Trade Secrets Act § 1(4)(i).
9 Uniform Trade Secrets Act § 1(4)(ii). 
10 An exception arises if the invention was disclosed more than one year before a patent appli-
cation was ﬁled. See Section 8.10.

trade secret information by someone who has a duty to keep the information
secret or to limit its use.11 Employees, for example, are generally duty-bound
to refrain from using or disclosing the trade secret information of their
employers. So is anyone who has signed a contract or conﬁdentiality agree-
ment promising to protect the information. An employee of a soda company
who publicized his employer’s secret formula on the Internet, or who used
the formula to devise a rival soda, would likely be held liable for trade secret
misappropriation.
Misappropriation also includes (1) the use of information known to be
derived from someone under a duty to keep it conﬁdential and (2) acquisition
of the secret information by “improper means.”12 A person who bribed a soda
company employee to obtain its secret formula would likely be guilty of mis-
appropriation. Finally, misappropriation can occur, under the Uniform Act,
if trade secret information is used by persons who know that the information
has come into their possession only because of a mistake. If a soda manufac-
turer received a fax from a competitor setting out a secret formula, and it was
evident that the fax had been intended for someone else, the rival would
probably not be permitted to keep the fax and use the formula.
Trade secret law differs from patent law in requiring either some con-
nection with a duty, contractual or otherwise, to protect the conﬁdential
information; the use of improper means to acquire the information; or an
evident mistake. If the information was acquired under other circum-
stances, it can be freely used. For example, the Uniform Act allows the
acquisition of information by “reverse engineering.” Reverse engineering
means beginning with the ﬁnished product and analyzing it to determine
the process by which it was developed or the principle of its operation. As
long as the ﬁnished product was acquired legitimately—by purchase on
the open market, for example—it is not a violation of trade secret law to
reverse-engineer the product and use the resulting information in a com-
peting product. Hence, if a rival soda manufacturer could analyze a
beverage and determine the formula, trade secret law (applying the
Uniform Act) would not prevent the rival from discovering and using that
information. Patent law, in contrast, does not distinguish between infor-
mation acquired legitimately or illegitimately. A product can still infringe
a patent, even if it was the result of reverse engineering or independent
development.
Trade secret law might seem at odds with patent law, which requires the
public disclosure of information in exchange for exclusive rights. The Supreme
Court, however, has ruled that the two bodies of law are not incompatible, and
federal patent law does not preempt state trade secret laws.13 One complements
Patents Distinguished from Other Rights
13
11 Uniform Trade Secrets Act § 1(2)(ii).
12 Id.
13 Kewanee Oil Co. v. Bicron Corp., 416 U.S. 470 (1974).

the other, and inventors have a choice of means to protect their inventions, the
most appropriate of which will be determined by the circumstances.
2.4 PATENTS
Patents cover practical inventions in the “useful arts.” Any technological
advance, from a new microchip to an improved formula for bubble gum,
can be the subject of a patent. A special form of patent known as a “design
patent” can protect some forms of artistic expression (see Section 12.1), but
the usual kind of patent—the “utility patent”—applies only to technological
inventions. As a result, a patent cannot be granted for a painting, a novel, a
song, a product name, or a company logo.
To obtain a patent, an inventor must ﬁle an application with the United
States Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce, and the application must describe the
invention in such a way that persons skilled in the ﬁeld could practice the
invention. The application must conclude with numbered “claims” that
describe in precise terms exactly what the patent is intended to cover. A
patent can be granted, or if granted can be held valid in the courts, only if
the claims describe an invention that is both new and non-obvious. Patent law
thus includes a requirement of novelty that is absent from copyright and
trademark law.
Once an application issues as a patent, the patent remains in force until
20 years after the date the application was ﬁled. During that time, no one
without the permission of the patent owner can (within the geographical
limits of the United States) make, use, sell, offer to sell, or import the
invention described by the patent claims. To do so is an infringement of
the patent, regardless of whether the infringer copied the inventor’s ideas
or discovered them independently. In contrast to trademark law, which
requires that the protected mark be used in business, a patent owner can
choose to practice the claimed invention, license it to others, or prevent
its practice altogether.14
14
Patent Law Essentials
14 Until recently, a patent owner had unquestioned power to prevent anyone from practicing
the claimed invention. However, since the Supreme Court’s decision in eBay Inc. v.
MercExchange L.L.C., 547 U.S. 388 (2006), courts no longer issue injunctions automatically,
even after a patent has been found valid and infringed. Particularly where the patent owner
does not practice the claimed invention itself, a court may determine that the balance of hard-
ships and the interests of the public counsel against entering a permanent injunction. Without
an injunction, the patent owner is essentially forced to accept a compulsory license arrange-
ment, where infringement cannot be stopped but the patent owner collects an ongoing roy-
alty. See Section 11.8.

CHAPTER 3
Reading a Patent
Anyone interested in patent law should take the time to study an actual patent.
Copies of three United States patents can be found in Appendix A of this
book. The examples have been chosen for the sake of simplicity and brevity,
and to show that inventors are still searching for a “better mousetrap.”
The ﬁrst patent claims a device for trapping a mouse with the help of a
Ping-Pong ball. The mouse enters a tube, the tube tips forward as the mouse
heads for the “smelly bait,” and a Ping-Pong ball rolls down to block the
mouse’s escape. In the second patent, bait lures the mouse onto a bridge.
Although the bridge appears to be secure, the weight of the mouse causes
the bridge to spin sideways, sending the mouse plunging headlong into a
bucket. The third patent claims a trap made from a soda can.
Although none of these inventions is complex, each patent includes the
basic components found in patents awarded to the most sophisticated
advancements. The ﬁrst patent will be used as an example for most of the
following discussion, but the reader should examine all three in order to get
a feel for the way patents are organized.
3.1 GENERAL INFORMATION
Patents are ofﬁcially known by their serial numbers, printed at the top
right-hand corner of the patent.1 For the sake of convenience patents are
often referred to by the last name of the ﬁrst listed inventor or by the last
1 Serial numbers on recent patents are followed by a “kind code” indicating the type of docu-
ment one is looking at. This code is typically either B2 (indicating an issued patent published
before as an application) or B1 (indicating a patent not published as an application). 

three digits of the patent’s serial number. The ﬁrst patent in Appendix A
would be referred to as the Oviatt patent, or as the ’918 patent. The date on
which the patent issued appears directly below the serial number.
The title of the Oviatt patent appears at the top of the left-hand column:
“Mousetrap for Catching Mice Live.” The title of a patent has little ofﬁcial
signiﬁcance and can sometimes be misleading.2 The description of the
“Mousetrap for Catching Mice Live” suggests that the trap can be immersed
in water and the rodent drowned. The name of the inventor, or inventors,
appears directly below the title, together with the inventor’s place of origin.
Beneath the inventor’s name is the name of any person or company to
whom the inventor assigned rights in the patent, prior to the date of issue.3
Since the Oviatt patent shows no assignee, ownership of the patent evidently
was retained by the inventor. Patent rights can be assigned after the patent
issues. When this is the case, the transfer of ownership will not be evident
from the patent itself, but it may be recorded in the Patent Ofﬁce’s prosecu-
tion history ﬁle.
Moving down the left-hand column of the Oviatt patent, the next item to
appear is the number of the original patent application.4 The Patent Ofﬁce
assigns each patent application a serial number; it is not the same serial
number ultimately assigned to the patent itself. Although this can result in
some confusion, it allows reference to applications that never issued as
patents. The Oviatt patent is the result of a single application, numbered
347,890. Often the situation is more complicated. The applicant may have
ﬁled an application that was rejected and abandoned in favor of a “continu-
ation” or a “continuation-in-part” application.5 Sometimes this happens sev-
eral times, resulting in a chain of applications preceding the patent
ultimately issued. In such cases, the patent will provide the “family history”
as well as the serial number of the original application. 
The Patent Ofﬁce assigns each application to subject matter categories,
which are sometimes narrowed to very particular ﬁelds. This is done so that
the Patent Ofﬁce (or anyone else for that matter) can conveniently search a
given area and determine what has been patented so far. On the Oviatt
patent, this classiﬁcation information appears next to the bracketed numbers
[51] and [52], the ﬁrst part relating to international classiﬁcation and the
second to U.S. classiﬁcation. Oviatt’s mousetrap has been assigned to U.S.
subject matter Class 43: “Fishing, Trapping and Vermin Destroying.” It can
16
Patent Law Essentials
2 See Pitney Bowes, Inc. v. Hewlett-Packard Co., 182 F.3d 1298, 1312 (Fed. Cir. 1999) (“[T]he
purpose of the title is not to demarcate the precise boundaries of the claimed invention but
rather to provide a useful reference tool for future classiﬁcation purposes. . . . [W]e certainly
will not read limitations into the claims from the patent title.”). 
3 See Section 6.2.
4 The next item on more recent patents is an indication of whether the patent term has been
extended to account for delays during prosecution. See Section 10.1.  
5 See Sections 5.2 and 5.3.

be found speciﬁcally under subclasses 60 (“Traps: Imprisoning”), 61 (“Traps:
Imprisoning: Swinging or Sliding Closure”), and 66 (“Traps: Self and Ever
Set: Nonreturn Entrance: Victim-Opened”).
As discussed in Section 5.1, part of the Patent Ofﬁce’s duty on receiving
an application is to search its collection of prior patents to determine
whether the application claims something new. The “Field of Search” area
shows the categories that were reviewed by the Patent Ofﬁce in its search for
earlier patents. In the case of the Oviatt patent, the Patent Ofﬁce searched
the same subclasses noted above, with the addition of subclasses 58
(“Traps”), 67 (“Traps: Self and Ever Set: Nonreturn Entrance: Victim-
Closed”) and 75 (“Traps: Self-Reset: Smiting”). The search categories estab-
lished by the Patent Ofﬁce provide a brief catalog of modern technology.
Class 43 is a testament to man’s continuing war with the mouse, including
subcategories for “impaling,” “explosive,” “choking or squeezing” and “elec-
trocuting” traps, in addition to those that “smite.”
Moving downward, the next section of the patent is a list of prior art ref-
erences cited by the Patent Ofﬁce during prosecution of the application.
Prior art, discussed in Section 8.9.1, includes earlier patents and publications
disclosing inventions similar to the one claimed by the patent applicant. The
cited references are those that the Patent Ofﬁce considered closest to the
patented invention, though not so close as to prevent the patent from issu-
ing. Looking once again to the Oviatt patent, the Patent Ofﬁce cited three
patents as prior art, two of them more than 75 years old: the Turnbo patent,
issued in 1909; the Cushing patent, issued in 1917; and the Sackett patent,
issued in 1988. All disclose some form of rat or mouse trap with a tilting
mechanism to prevent the victim’s escape.
Next to appear are the name of the patent examiner, or examiners, who
reviewed the application for the Patent Ofﬁce, and the name of the counsel
or patent agent who represented the inventor during this process.
The paragraph entitled “Abstract” provides a summary of the invention.6
This is the place to look for the gist of the invention, before tackling the
detailed description that follows the drawings. The abstract typically
includes a brief description of how the invention works and why it is useful.
3.2 DRAWINGS
After the abstract appear the patent drawings. These are often far more
helpful in understanding the invention than a written description alone
would be. Although drawings are not required for every patent, nearly all
Reading a Patent
17
6 I use the term “invention” here to refer loosely to the technological advancement described
in the patent disclosure. In a speciﬁc sense, the “invention” is deﬁned by the patent claims.
See Section 3.4. 

include some form of illustration. The Oviatt patent, like most patents,
shows the invention from a variety of views so that all details are readily
visible. Figures 3 and 8 show the invention before the mouse has sprung the
trap. Figure 9 shows the movement of the Ping-Pong ball and the appear-
ance of the trap after it has tipped forward on its pivot. Figure 2 is a “mouse
eye view.” Patents sometimes include exploded views, cross sections, or
views of individual components when those views are helpful in explaining
the invention. Some patents include graphs or ﬂow charts.
Patent drawings are generally surrounded by numbers and arrows, as are
the drawings in the Oviatt patent. These are reference numbers correspon-
ding to the written description of the invention found in the body of the
patent. For example, the Oviatt patent identiﬁes sphere 9 as the Ping-Pong
ball, lump 10 as the bait, and rodent M as the mouse.7 Patent drawings some-
times depict different embodiments of the invention. Figure 1 of the Oviatt
patent shows the trap set up on a stand made of wire, whereas Figure 5
shows the trap resting on the edge of a plastic ring. The inclusion of alter-
native embodiments shows that the inventor’s ideas were not limited to a
particular implementation of the invention.
3.3 SPECIFICATION
After the drawings comes the section of the patent referred to as the
“speciﬁcation.” The speciﬁcation describes the invention, or technology
related to the invention, in words rather than pictures. Often the speciﬁca-
tion begins with a “Background of the Invention” section discussing the tech-
nology as it existed before the patented invention was made. This allows the
inventor to point out the shortcomings of what has gone before and highlight
the advantages of the patented invention. The Oviatt patent begins in typi-
cal fashion by describing the health menace posed by mice and the disad-
vantages of typical traps that kill the mouse, where it is left to decompose,
smell, and endanger children and pets. Oviatt then explains that his own
invention avoids these problems by trapping the mouse alive.
Many speciﬁcations include a “Summary of the Invention” section, which
is used to list the objectives of the patented invention. Oviatt states that the
“main object” of his invention is to “trap a mouse alive.” Other, subsidiary
objectives are to provide an inexpensive trap, a trap that can be immersed
in water to drown the mouse, and a trap that is reusable.
The next section of the Oviatt patent is, again in typical fashion, a “Brief
Description of the Drawings.” This portion of the patent explains in the most
general way what is depicted in the drawings: Figure 1 is a top view, Figure 3
is a cross section, Figure 5 is an alternative embodiment.
18
Patent Law Essentials
7 Note that the numbers used in labeling a patent drawing need not be consecutive. The Ovi-
att patent uses numbers 90 and 100, but there is no 89 or 99.

The next section of the Oviatt patent is entitled “Description of the Pre-
ferred Embodiment.” Almost every patent has a similar section where the
inventor describes the “preferred embodiment” in great detail, identifying in
the process all of the components visible in the drawings. The preferred
embodiment is the inventor’s favored implementation of the invention. Inven-
tions are usually general concepts that, at a detailed level, could be imple-
mented in any number of ways. In the Oviatt patent, the tilting tube and the
rolling ball are general concepts that characterize the invention. Oviatt might
be entitled to claim any mousetrap that shares those features. But in the spec-
iﬁcation, we learn of the inventor’s preference for a Ping-Pong ball, and we are
given two possible designs for the fulcrum on which the trap teeters—one a
stand preferably made of wire, and the other a plastic ring with one ﬂat edge.
Disclosure at this level of detail satisﬁes two requirements of the patent
laws: that inventors provide in the speciﬁcation sufﬁcient information to
allow persons skilled in the ﬁeld to practice the invention, and that inventors
disclose the best way they know of to practice the invention. These require-
ments, known respectively as the “enablement” and “best mode” require-
ments, are discussed in Sections 8.6 and 8.7. The details discussed in the
speciﬁcation do not, under most circumstances, limit what the patent covers.
Even though the speciﬁcation describes a Ping-Pong ball, the patent might
still cover a similar mousetrap that used a rubber ball.
In fact, the Oviatt speciﬁcation includes warnings to that effect. Just
before the numbered claims, we ﬁnd the following caveat:
Although the present invention has been described with reference to
preferred embodiments, numerous modiﬁcations and variations can be
made and still the result will come within the scope of the invention.
No limitation with respect to the speciﬁc embodiments disclosed
herein is intended or should be inferred.
3.4 CLAIMS
The last and most important section of a patent consists of the numbered
“claims.” The claims, not the drawings or the speciﬁcation, deﬁne what the
patent “covers” and what will infringe. In the Oviatt patent we ﬁnd eight
claims.
Claims come in two forms—independent claims and dependent claims.
An independent claim stands by itself, whereas a dependent claim explicitly
refers to another claim and incorporates its terms by reference.8 Claim 1 of
Reading a Patent
19
8 See Monsanto Co. v. Syngenta Seeds, Inc., 503 F.3d 1352, 1357 (Fed. Cir. 2007). One cannot
infringe a dependent claim without also infringing the independent claim to which it refers.
Id. at 1359. A dependent claim is invalid if, through some error of drafting, it somehow fails
to incorporate all of the elements of the independent claim. Pﬁzer, Inc. v. Ranbaxy Labs. Ltd.,
457 F.3d 1284, 1291-92 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

the Oviatt patent is an independent claim. Claim 2 is a dependent claim
because it refers to “The mousetrap of claim 1 wherein . . .” Claim 2 is read
as though it incorporates all of the language of Claim 1, plus the additional
language of Claim 2. Claim 3 is another dependent claim, which this time
refers to Claim 2 (“The mousetrap of claim 2 wherein . . .”). Since Claim 2
depends from Claim 1, the effect of Claim 3 is to incorporate all of the lan-
guage of Claims 1, 2, and 3.
Claims generally begin with a “preamble” that establishes the context of the
invention. As discussed in Section 7.6, the preamble is sometimes treated as a
claim limitation and sometimes as introductory language that has no legal
effect. This can have important consequences. Claim 1 of the Oviatt patent
begins with the preamble “A mousetrap comprising . . .” If this were the last
reference in the claim to a mouse, the effect given to the preamble would
determine whether the claim covered an otherwise identical squirrel trap. The
preamble usually ends with the term “consisting of” or “comprising.”9
The indented paragraphs following the preamble are the claim “ele-
ments” or claim “limitations.” Almost all patent claims cover a combination
of elements or limitations. Looking at Claim 1 of the Oviatt patent, we ﬁnd
the following combination set forth:
1. A mousetrap comprising:
a main tube having a central fulcrum means, a bait end, and a ball end;
a base stand having a means to support the main tube at the fulcrum;
said bait end further comprising mouse bait and a main tube closure;
said ball end further comprising a ball and a main tube closure;
an entrance tube depending down from the main tube at the central fulcrum
means, and angled toward the ball end;
said entrance tube having a mouse entrance adjacent a supporting surface for
the base stand; and
said main tube having a horizontal load position where said ball rests at the ball
end, wherein a mouse enters the mouse entrance, walks toward the base up the
entrance tube, and passes the fulcrum means, thereby causing the main tube to
teeter down at the bait end, and cause the ball to roll down the main tube and
then down the entrance tube, functioning to block an egress of the mouse out
the mouse entrance.
Claim 1 of the Oviatt patent would cover any mousetrap that included
each of the elements described. If a mousetrap did not incorporate one or
more of the described elements, it would fall outside the scope of the claim.
Hence if a mousetrap did not tip like the Oviatt mousetrap, but instead
20
Patent Law Essentials
9 See Section 7.6.

relied on a spring-loaded mechanism to shoot a Ping-Pong ball down the
tube to trap the mouse, that trap would lack the “fulcrum means” required
by Claim 1, and it would fall outside the literal scope of the claim.10
The language used in patent claims is generally more formal and techni-
cal, and sometimes more obscure, than everyday language. Claim 1 of the
Oviatt patent is not a particularly bad example, but it does include terms
such as “fulcrum means,” “supporting surface,” “horizontal load position”
and “egress,” which might seem more grandiose than the invention requires.
Claim drafters, whether inventors or attorneys, resort to such technical or
pseudo-technical language because of the importance of the words to the
legal effect of the patent. Insofar as possible, the claim language must
describe exactly what the patent covers. Claim drafters therefore must be
precise in their description of the invention but must not limit themselves by
the choice of language to something narrower than the inventor intends to
claim.
The Oviatt patent has three independent claims—Claims 1, 6, and 8—and
ﬁve dependent claims. A patent generally can have as many claims as the
inventor desires, although more claims can mean paying the Patent Ofﬁce
an additional fee. Each claim can be treated in some respects as if it were a
separate patent. Although people often speak of a patent being infringed, it
is really a claim, or a series of claims, that is infringed. A device may infringe
one claim of a patent but not another, perhaps because of a minor variation
in language. An inventor who describes the invention through more than
one claim decreases the chance that a potentially infringing product will
escape because of some small difference. Using more than one claim is also
a hedge against the possibility that a claim will be held invalid by the courts.
One claim may be held invalid, while another, with slightly different lan-
guage, survives.11
Note how the Oviatt patent describes the same concept, in slightly differ-
ent terms, in Claims 1, 6, and 8. Claim 1 speaks of a pair of tubes—a “main
tube” and an “entrance tube.” Claim 8, on the other hand, speaks of a “‘Y’
shaped tube.” The Oviatt patent also illustrates how dependent claims are
often used to include details described in the speciﬁcation but omitted from
the broader claims. For example, Claim 4 speciﬁcally limits the “ball” of
Claim 1 to a “ping-pong ball.” If it proved to be the case that a mousetrap
had been invented prior to Oviatt’s that used a rubber ball, the broader
claim might be held invalid while the narrow claim might not.
Reading a Patent
21
10 See Section 10.5. As discussed in Section 10.6, a product that differs from what the claim lit-
erally requires may still infringe, under the “doctrine of equivalents,” if the differences are
insubstantial.
11 See 35 U.S.C. § 282 (“Each claim of a patent . . . shall be presumed valid independently of
the validity of other claims. . . .”). 

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 4
Patentable Subject Matter
The Supreme Court has observed that the realm of patents embraces
“anything under the sun that is made by man,”1 but this is not literally true.
First, the Constitution limits the power of Congress to the promotion of the
“useful arts.” These are generally understood to include technological
endeavors rather than, for example, artistic or social endeavors.2 The types of
creations that can be patented are further limited by the language of the
Patent Act. Section 101 of the Patent Act (35 U.S.C. § 101) provides as follows:
Whoever invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine,
manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful
improvement thereof, may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the con-
ditions and requirements of this title.3
In order to be patented, an invention must fall within one of the statutory
categories of “process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter.”4
1 Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303, 309 (1980).
2 See In re Comiskey, 499 F.3d 1365, 1374–75 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (the Constitution limits
patentable subject matter to the “useful arts”). In a recent en banc decision, the Federal Cir-
cuit noted that a “technological arts” test of patentability would be unclear due to the uncer-
tain meaning of the term “technology,” and declined the opportunity to adopt such a test
explicitly. In re Bilski, 2008 U.S. App. LEXIS 22497, *41 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (en banc). Never-
theless, it may be that the Constitution demands such a limitation.
3 “Manufacture” is an abbreviated term for an article produced by a manufacturing process. In re
Nuitjen, 500 F.3d 1346, 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2007). “Composition of matter” is a broad term that is
most often applied to chemical compounds and the like, but that could literally refer to any
agglomeration of physical substances. See Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303, 308 (1980).
4 See Nuitjen, 500 F.3d at 1353 (claims to transitory electromagnetic signals are unpatentable
because they fall within none of the categories enumerated in § 101).

Since these terms are deliberately broad, this is seldom an obstacle. Yet certain
categories of invention or discovery have been held to exceed the statutory
boundaries of patentable subject matter, or are sufﬁciently close to those
boundaries as to generate controversy. The most important of these fall under
the rubric of abstract ideas, thought processes, principles of nature, living
organisms, literary or artistic creations, printed matter, methods of doing busi-
ness, or computer programs.
4.1 ABSTRACT IDEAS
The most general category of unpatentable subject matter, and perhaps
the hardest to deﬁne, is “abstract ideas.”5 Obviously, one can patent an
idea if it is in the form of a new process, machine, manufacture, or com-
position of matter. On the other hand, one cannot patent an idea that is
without a material form or a practical application.6 For example, one prob-
ably could not patent the idea of “renewable energy resources.” The idea
is a useful one, but to be patentable it should take the form of a particular
kind of renewable energy resource. Patents are intended to reward and
encourage those who make tangible contributions to the useful arts. If
patents were awarded to abstract ideas, rather than to practical applica-
tions of those ideas, the effect might be to discourage advancements in
those arts.
4.2 THOUGHT PROCESSES
Whether one can patent a thought process is a question with a complicated
history. The term “process,” as found in § 101 of the Patent Act, does not exclude
the possibility. Although in some contexts courts have described a patentable
process as one that transforms a physical material into “a different state or thing,”7
it was not necessarily their intention to limit the term “process” to those situations
alone.8 On the other hand, courts have sometimes held it self-evident that
thought processes are unpatentable.9 Some cases discuss a patentability exception
for purely mental processes, as opposed to processes that might also be performed
by a machine.10 A machine might calculate a number, but it could not select the
right drapes for the living room.11 Other cases suggest that a “mental steps doc-
trine” is unnecessary; the real issue is whether the claimed process falls within the
24
Patent Law Essentials
5 See In re Comiskey, 499 F.3d 1365, 1376 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 
6 See Id. at 1376–77. 
7 Cochrane v. Deener, 94 U.S. 780, 788 (1876). 
8 See In re Prater, 415 F.2d 1393, 1403 (C.C.P.A. 1969). 
9 In re Abrams, 188 F.2d 165, 168 (C.C.P.A. 1951).
10 See id. at 1401–02; In re Yuan, 188 F.2d 377, 380 (C.C.P.A. 1951). 
11 See In re Musgrave, 431 F.2d 882, 889 n.4 (C.C.P.A. 1970) (discussing methods requiring the
exercise of “peculiarly human” values).

“useful arts.”12 Supreme Court cases addressing other issues continued to list men-
tal process, together with abstract ideas and principles of nature, among the kinds
of unpatentable invention,13 but the Federal Circuit’s emphasis on useful results,
rather than physicality,14 began to give the “mental steps” exception to patentable
subject matter the character of a historical curiosity.
This changed abruptly in 2007 with In re Comiskey.15 Here the Federal
Circuit, addressing a patent application for a system of legal arbitration, held
that “mental processes—or processes of human thinking—standing alone are not
patentable even if they have practical application.”16 In order to be patentable,
a thought process must be tied to something physical; the exercise of human
intelligence alone is a matter beyond the scope of the patent laws.17 Together
with other recent Federal Circuit opinions,18 Comiskey seems to mark the end of
an era in which the bounds of patentable subject matter were ever expanding.
4.3 PRINCIPLES OF NATURE
Although the Patent Act deﬁnes “invention” as meaning “invention or
discovery,”19 the courts have long held that the truths of nature cannot be
patented, even by the people who discover those truths. The clearest exam-
ples can be found in the formulas of mathematics or the physical sciences.
Pythagoras may have been the ﬁrst to appreciate that the sums of the squares
of the two sides of a right triangle are equal to the square of the hypotenuse,
but such insights do not qualify as patentable inventions.20 Similarly,
Einstein could not have patented the relationship of mass to energy in the
form of the equation E = mc 2.21 On the other hand, one could patent a novel
apparatus, method or composition of matter that puts a principle of nature
to practical application—for example, a new surveying instrument that
makes use of the Pythagorean theorem, or a nuclear reactor based on
Patentable Subject Matter
25
12 Id. at 893. This development, according to Justice Stevens, “effectively disposed of any vestiges of
the mental-steps doctrine.” Diamond v. Diehr, 450 U.S. 175, 200 (1981) (Stevens, J., dissenting).
13 See Gottschalk v. Benson, 409 U.S. 63, 67 (1972).
14 See State Street Bank & Trust Co. v. Signature Financial Gp., 149 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 1998)
(holding patentable under § 101 a system of organizing a family of mutual funds). 
15 499 F.3d 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2007).
16 Id. at 1377. 
17 Id. at 1378–79. In the Bilski case, the Federal Circuit adopted a “machine-or-transformation
test” for patentable processes that seems to exclude any process consisting entirely of mental
steps. The test holds that a patentable process must be tied to a particular machine or it must
transform an article “into a different state or thing.” See In re Bilski, 2008 U.S. App. LEXIS
22497, *43–44 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (en banc).
18 See, e.g., In re Nuitjen, 500 F.3d 1346 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (“signals” are too intangible to fall within
any recognized category of patentable subject matter). 
19 35 U.S.C. § 100. 
20 See Parker v. Flook, 437 U.S. 584, 590 (1978). 
21 See Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303, 309 (1980) (“Einstein could not patent his
celebrated law”).

Einstein’s discovery.22 Because the formulas of science and mathematics are
generalized descriptions of the universe, any invention, at some level, can be
described by those formulas.23 As long as the invention is not the formula
itself but instead a useful application or embodiment of the formula, it is
potentially patentable.
The rule against patenting a principle of nature has been applied to mate-
rials discovered in nature, as well as to abstract relationships and physical
laws. The discovery of a new mineral in the earth would not entitle the
discoverer to patent it.24 On the other hand, one who discovers a speciﬁc use
for a natural material, such as the treatment of a disease, can patent that
method of use, so long as it is new and non-obvious.25 If others discover
further uses for the material, those also are potentially patentable. Some
problems can be avoided through careful claim drafting. The Patent Ofﬁce
denied one inventor a patent on a shrimp that was beheaded and cleaned,
but still protected by its shell.26 Although the shrimp was no longer whole,
that which remained was still a “product of nature” and in its original state.
Had the inventor instead claimed a method of preparing a shrimp, he would
more likely have met the qualiﬁcation for patentable subject matter.
It might be argued that investigation into the principles of nature is a pur-
suit just as valuable as the development of technology, and that awarding
patents to signiﬁcant discoveries would encourage such investigation. Why,
then, are patents unobtainable on newly discovered natural laws? One argu-
ment is that a patent on a principle of nature would be too broad. A principle
may lead to a vast spectrum of practical applications, many of which could not
have been foreseen by the discoverer of the principle. However, as we will see
in Section 10.6.5, even inventions of the ordinary kind (such as machines,
processes, and compositions of matter) may be applied after their invention in
ways that the inventor could not have predicted. This is particularly true of
“pioneering” inventions, often regarded as those most worthy of a patent.
Another, perhaps sounder argument is that patent law should not take from
the public that which it has already possessed. New inventions take nothing
from the public because, by deﬁnition, the inventions did not exist before. On
the other hand, principles of nature exist even before they are discovered, and
the public may, in some sense, have used these principles before they were
appreciated. One patentee discovered that omitting antioxidants from vitamin
26
Patent Law Essentials
22 See Mackay Radio & Telegraph Co. v. RCA, 306 U.S. 86, 94 (1939) (“While a scientiﬁc truth,
or the mathematical expression of it, is not a patentable invention, a novel and useful structure
created with the aid of knowledge of scientiﬁc truth may be.”).
23 See Dickey-John Corp. v. Int’l Tapetronics Corp., 710 F.2d 329, 348 n.9 (7th Cir. 1983) (“all
inventions that work can be explained in terms of basic truths”). 
24 Diamond v. Chakrabarty, 447 U.S. 303, 309 (1980). 
25 Similarly, a new use for an existing artiﬁcial compound can be patented, though the discov-
erer of the new use is not entitled to a patent on the compound itself. See In re Schoenwald,
964 F.2d 1122, 1124 (Fed. Cir. 1992). 
26 Ex parte Grayson, 51 U.S.P.Q. 413 (Pat. Off. Bd. App. 1941).

supplements ensured the effectiveness of other ingredients. Yet the Federal
Circuit found no patentable invention in this discovery. Vitamin supplements
without antioxidants had already been available to the public, even if the ben-
eﬁts of omitting the antioxidants had never been fully appreciated. 27
A recent case of interest is Laboratory Corp. v. Metabolite Labs., Inc.,28 where
the patented invention was a method of diagnosing a vitamin deﬁciency by
observing the level of a certain amino acid in a patient’s blood. The Supreme
Court decided to hear the case, but then changed its mind and dismissed the
appeal. Justice Breyer, joined by two other justices, objected to the dismissal
and wrote an opinion with some noteworthy observations on patentable sub-
ject matter. Justice Breyer argued that too much patent protection can impede
the advancement of the useful arts.29 In this case, he said, infringement
required nothing more than observing a natural phenomenon and thinking
about it, which crossed the line of patentable subject matter.30 Interestingly,
Justice Breyer disowned the Federal Circuit’s frequent pronouncement that a
process producing a “useful, concrete, and tangible result” is always within
the scope of § 101.31 Justice Breyer’s views are not necessarily those of the
majority of the Supreme Court, but like In re Comiskey,32 his Lab Corp. opin-
ion seems to mark a push-back against the expansionism of recent years.
4.4 LIVING ORGANISMS
Advances in technology sometimes compel a reassessment of the scope of
protection available through the patent laws. Until recently, the idea of
patenting a living animal might have seemed absurd. Even when an explorer
discovered a species that was previously unknown, the explorer could not
claim to have invented the species; the explorer merely discovered what was
already there.33 The situation has changed with the development of tech-
niques allowing scientists to rearrange the genetic codes of existing species.
Now biologists can truly claim to have invented a form of life that did not
exist before. Still, the notion that a person or a company can claim a prop-
erty interest in a life form is one that is unsettling to many people.
The Supreme Court, in Diamond v. Chakrabarty,34 addressed the question
of whether a genetically engineered bacterium devised to break down crude
Patentable Subject Matter
27
27 Upsher-Smith Lab., Inc. v. Pamlan, L.L.C., 412 F.2d 1319, 1323 (Fed. Cir. 2005). 
28 548 U.S. 124 (2006). 
29 Id. at 127–28. 
30 Id. at 136. 
31 Id. at 136–37.
32 See Section 4.2. 
33 A breeder might stake a stronger claim to invention, but the idea of patenting an improved
cow or chicken seems never to have been seriously entertained before the era of genetic
engineering.
34 447 U.S. 303 (1980). 

oil could be patented. The bacterium was undeniably useful, since it could
be used to treat oil spills. It was also new. No naturally occurring bacteria
possessed the same ability to break down all of the components found in
crude oil. The Patent Ofﬁce rejected Chakrabarty’s patent application on the
ground that a living organism cannot be patented. The majority of the
Supreme Court disagreed, holding that Congress had established a broad
scope of patentability, and that if Congress wished to exclude genetically
engineered life forms it would have to do so explicitly. The court also
observed that the most important inventions may be those least foreseeable
to the legislature. Literally speaking, new bacteria are “manufactures” and
“compositions of matter,” and are patentable as such.
The principles of Chakrabarty have since been extended to multicellular
organisms. In 1988 Harvard University obtained a celebrated patent on a
genetically engineered mouse. The mouse is useful in laboratory studies
because it is particularly susceptible to cancer. The PTO Board of Appeals and
Interferences35 has also held patentable a genetically altered oyster that can be
enjoyed year-round, in contrast to naturally occurring oysters, which must be
avoided during the summer months.36 The Patent Ofﬁce has announced that it
will not permit a patent on a human being, though certain activists, so far
unsuccessfully, have pressed claims to “human-animal chimeras” genetically
combining the attributes of humans and those of other species.
Although a special kind of patent, discussed in Section 12.2, is available
for plant life, the Supreme Court has held that plant life is also appropriate
subject matter for a utility patent.37 This is a natural extension of
Chakrabarty, although if Congress saw ﬁt to create a speciﬁc set of rules gov-
erning plants, one might infer that plants were outside the scope of the pre-
existing statute.
4.5 ARTISTIC AND LITERARY CREATIONS
Generally speaking, the proper vehicle for protecting artistic and literary
creations is the copyright.38 Utility patents are intended to protect, as the
name implies, useful inventions. In this context, “useful” is meant in the nar-
row sense of a practical advancement in a technological art.39 Design
patents are available for ornamental designs as applied to utilitarian objects,
but they are a different kind of patent subject to a different set of rules.40 If
28
Patent Law Essentials
35 See Section 5.1. 
36 Ex parte Allen, 2 U.S.P.Q.2d 1425 (PTO Bd. App. & Int. 1987).
37 J.E.M. AG Supply, Inc. v. Pioneer Hi-Bred Int’l, Inc., 534 U.S. 124 (2001). 
38 See Section 2.1.
39 See In re Comiskey, 499 F.3d 1365, 1374–75 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 
40 See Section 12.1.

an inventor applies for a utility patent on what is essentially an ornamental
feature, the invention may be held outside of the subject matter permitted
under § 101.41
4.6 PRINTED MATTER
Another exception to patentability concerns “printed matter.” Generally
speaking, a manufactured article or composition of matter is not patentable
if the only thing that distinguishes it from prior inventions is the presence of
pictures or writing. One could not, for example, obtain a utility patent for a
baseball cap merely because it bears a new team logo, even though the cap
is new and useful, and caps, as such, are articles of manufacture.
On the other hand, an invention that involves printed matter may be
patentable, as long as the invention as a whole calls for a new structure, or
the printed matter bears a novel functional relationship to the “substrate”—
that is, the physical object on which the matter is printed. In one instance,
an inventor applied for a patent on a scheme for deliberately mislabeling
a measuring cup to solve the problem of measuring when making less than
a full recipe. A cook who wishes to prepare, for example, one-third of the
amount speciﬁed in a recipe may be left with the difﬁcult task of measur-
ing quantities such as 1/3 of 2/3 of a cup. The inventor conceived of a
measuring cup for fractional portions. The cook who wishes to make a 1/3
recipe simply selects the 1/3 recipe cup, and when he ﬁlls the cup to the
2/3 cup mark, he actually has the desired 2/9 cup. Although the markings
were the only difference between the inventor’s measuring cups and other
measuring cups, the useful relationship between the markings and the cups
was enough to place the invention within the scope of patentable subject
matter.42
A similar issue can arise in the case of computer storage media, which
function to store information, though not in printed form. Is a computer disk
patentable merely because it contains new information? The answer may
depend on the nature of the information. Under its current guidelines, the
Patent Ofﬁce will presume that a computer-readable storage medium that
can be used to direct a computer to operate in a particular manner is an
“article of manufacture” and falls within the scope of patentable subject mat-
ter. A CD-ROM, for example, that contains a new computer program will
presumptively qualify as patentable subject matter. However, a known storage
Patentable Subject Matter
29
41 See, e.g., Levi Strauss & Co. v. Golden Trade S.r.L., 1995 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 4899 (S.D.N.Y.
1995) (garments treated to produce a “stone-washed” pattern, but which did not differ from
their predecessors in any manner affecting utility, were not patentable subject matter).
42 Application of Miller, 418 F.2d 1392 (C.C.P.A. 1969). 

medium encoding data representing “creative or artistic expression,” such as
a work of art, literature or music, will be considered unpatentable.43
4.7 METHODS OF DOING BUSINESS
Business methods were long thought to be unpatentable, perhaps because
they exceed the scope of the technology-oriented “useful arts.” Accounting
techniques and the like may be too remote from the disciplines of science and
engineering to be suitable for the patent system.44 On the other hand, an appa-
ratus used in business—such as a cash register—would usually be considered
patentable subject matter. An apparatus is a technological means to an end.
The Federal Circuit bucked tradition in 1998, when in State Street Bank &
Trust Co. v. Signature Financial Gp.45 it rejected the business method exception
to patentability as “ill-conceived” and thinly supported. Business methods,
the court held, are subject to the same standards of patentability as any other
method. The patented invention in State Street involved a system for organ-
izing a group of mutual funds under the common ownership of a partner-
ship, an arrangement that produced economies of scale and tax advantages.
The claims described a system and method for performing the necessary
accounting, though in such broad terms that anyone creating such a fund
and using a computer would necessarily infringe. The court found that the
claims did not describe an unpatentably abstract algorithm46 because the
computerized manipulation of data representing money is a “useful, con-
crete and tangible result.”47 Whether the invention represented an advance-
ment in the “useful arts” the court did not say, perhaps assuming that any
claim to a computerized “system” must qualify automatically.
Predictably, State Street opened the door to numerous patent applications
claiming business methods. But in 2007 In re Comiskey 48 suggested a change of
30
Patent Law Essentials
43 MPEP § 2106. The Federal Circuit has stated that the “printed matter” cases have no rele-
vance where the “matter” is to be processed not by a human mind, but by a computer. In re
Lowry, 32 F.3d 1579, 1583 (Fed. Cir. 1994). However, if the distinguishing feature of the
invention consists of stored information rather than revised structure, whether in the form of
printing on paper or data on a computer disk, the same concerns can be raised about the
suitability of the invention for patent protection. The Patent Ofﬁce has embarked on a
reasonable course by attempting to distinguish between a computer program that causes a
computer to function in a particular way, and stored data that merely represents a musical,
literary, or artistic creation. Still, future court decisions will likely be necessary to sort out
when a computer disk with stored data is patentable and when it is not.
44 See Ex parte Murray, 9 U.S.P.Q.2d 1819 (PTO Bd. Pat. App. & Int. 1988) (holding unpatentable
an accounting method allowing users to enter, categorize, and total expenditures, and display
the results in an expense analysis report).
45 149 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 1998). 
46 See Section 12.4. 
47 State Street, 149 F.3d at 1373. 
48 499 F.3d 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2007). 

course. First, the Federal Circuit held explicitly that patentable subject matter
is limited to advancements in the “useful arts,”49 perhaps excluding business
methods not associated with technological innovations. Second, the court
revived the “mental steps” doctrine, which forbids patents to thought
processes.50 Although many business methods will be implemented by com-
puters, some may require nothing more than human thought. That was the case
for Comiskey, whose method of legal arbitration could be conducted without
the assistance of a machine. Finally, inventions combining mental process with
computers may be patentable subject matter, but “[t]he routine addition of
modern electronics to an otherwise unpatentable invention typically creates a
prima facie case of obviousness.”51 In the subsequent Bilski decision, the Fed-
eral Circuit disavowed the “useful, concrete and tangible result” language of
State Street as inadequate. Rather, a patentable process must be tied to a partic-
ular apparatus or it must transform an article “into a different state or thing.” If
a business method meets neither qualiﬁcation, it is not patentable subject mat-
ter.52 In Bilski, the court continued to deny that business methods are always
unpatentable, yet many of the abstract business innovations that seemed
patentable after State Street now seem ineligible. Although Comiskey did not
overrule State Street, it marks a signiﬁcant change of emphasis.
As methods of doing business become increasingly dependent on com-
puters, questions regarding the patentability of business methods are often
subsumed within the larger question of when computer programs can be
patented. This complex question is reserved for discussion in Section 12.4.
Patentable Subject Matter
31
49 Id. at 1374. 
50 Id. at 1377–79.
51 Id. at 1380. A “prima facie” case means a case that must be rebutted with contrary evidence.
Section 8.9.6 discusses obviousness, a separate ground for invalidating a patent or denying a
patent application.
52 In re Bilski, 2008 U.S. App. LEXIS 22497, *38–42 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (en banc).

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 5
Patent Prosecution
5.1 EXAMINATION
The process of applying for a patent, also known as patent “prosecution,”
begins when the inventor, on his own or through his agent or attorney, ﬁles an
application with the Patent Ofﬁce for “examination.” The application includes
essentially the same things that a patent would include—a speciﬁcation describ-
ing the invention in detail, drawings, and claims.1 The Patent Ofﬁce assigns the
application to a “patent examiner” who has expert knowledge in the ﬁeld of
the invention. Since the Patent Ofﬁce requires a ﬁling fee, an issue fee, and
various other fees, obtaining a patent can easily cost several thousand dollars,
exclusive of any fees paid to a patent attorney or agent.2
The patent examiner searches for “prior art” patents already granted on
similar inventions in order to determine if the invention claimed in the appli-
cation is new and non-obvious.3 The examiner also reviews the application
to determine if it meets the other requirements of a valid patent, such as hav-
ing claims that are sufﬁciently deﬁnite.4 After reviewing the application and
searching for prior art, the examiner prepares a written “Ofﬁce Action” to
tell the applicant which claims are “allowed” or rejected and to explain any
problems with the application. In many cases the examiner will reject the
1 As discussed below, a “provisional application” may omit the claims.
2 Reduced fees are available to individuals and “small entities” (see MPEP § 509.02), but the
costs are still considerable. A current fee schedule can be obtained by visiting the PTO
website at http://www.uspto.gov.
3 See Section 8.9.
4 See Section 8.5.

claims as originally ﬁled on grounds that the invention is already disclosed
in, or obvious in light of, prior patents.
Following such a rejection, the applicant is permitted to ﬁle a written
response. Sometimes the response is to argue the point with the examiner
and attempt to explain, on legal or technical grounds, why the claims should
be allowed after all. Often, however, the response is to amend the claims in
an effort to distinguish the invention from what has gone before. It is also
possible to cancel claims or add new claims. When claims are amended, or
new claims added, the applicant should explain why the changes overcome
the problems found by the examiner.5
After a response from the applicant, the examiner prepares another Ofﬁce
Action, which may allow the claims or reject them once again. This process
continues until the claims are allowed or until the examiner announces that
the rejection is “ﬁnal,” which generally occurs after the second rejection.6 A
ﬁnal rejection can be appealed to the Patent Ofﬁce Board of Appeals and
Interferences, and from there to the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals.7 If the
situation appears hopeless, the application can be abandoned.
Although patent prosecution resembles a court proceeding in some
respects—applicants are typically represented by attorneys who present
legal arguments to the examiner “judge”—the situation differs in a very
signiﬁcant respect. In a typical court proceeding, the judge hears argu-
ment and evidence presented by adversaries having opposing points of
view. Patent prosecution, on the other hand, is “ex parte,” meaning that
there is no adversary present. A company that might infringe the patent
has no opportunity to argue to the examiner that the patent should not
issue. In fact, a potential infringer may have no way of knowing that the
application is under consideration. It is the job of the examiner to repre-
sent the interests of the public and ensure that no patent issues unless it
meets all of the legal requirements. Yet the opportunity to present unre-
butted arguments provides applicants with a great advantage, and that
advantage is magniﬁed in litigation by the presumption that all issued
patents are valid.8
Because patent prosecution is ex parte, the individuals involved are held
to a higher standard of candor and fair dealing than is typical of court
34
Patent Law Essentials
5 Although the claims can be amended, the speciﬁcation cannot be changed to add “new
matter.” 37 C.F.R. § 1.118. “New matter” can be added only by ﬁling a continuation-in-part.
See Section 5.2.
6 Recent legislation permits applicants to extend examination of disputed claims on payment
of a fee, without the need to resort to the ﬁling of a “continuation” of the kind discussed in
Section 5.2. 35 U.S.C. § 132(b). A request under the new legislation is known as a Request for
Continued Examination, or RCE.
7 See 35 U.S.C. § 141. Alternatively, an applicant disappointed with the decision of the PTO
Board may ﬁle a civil action in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia,
from which any further appeal would be, again, to the Federal Circuit. See 35 U.S.C. § 145.
8 See Section 8.2.

proceedings. If, for example, the applicant is aware of information that
might call into question whether the patent should issue—such as a close
prior art reference—the applicant must bring that to the attention of the
examiner. If the applicant, or the applicant’s attorney, fails in that duty of
candor, the patent may later be held “unenforceable” by a court.9
In some other countries, patent applications are made public or “laid
open” after an initial examination by the patent ofﬁce, to allow the inter-
ested public to oppose the application. This lessens the likelihood that a
patent will be granted simply because the patent ofﬁce failed to discover
the most pertinent prior art. The United States, which long conducted
examinations in secret, recently enacted legislation requiring the publica-
tion of patent applications10 18 months after they are ﬁled, or sooner at the
request of the applicant.11 Applicants may request swift publication
because of the opportunity to obtain “provisional rights” before the patent
issues.12 On the other hand, an applicant can avoid publication by certify-
ing that the invention has not and will not be the subject of an application
in another country that already requires publication 18 months after ﬁling.13
Moreover, the law forbids, without the consent of the applicant, any form
of third-party opposition or protest following the publication of the pend-
ing application.14 While the new rules may advantage patent applicants
under some circumstances, they offer marginal beneﬁts to potential chal-
lengers, and prosecution remains ex parte.
The Patent Act also allows “provisional applications.”15 A provisional
application includes a speciﬁcation and drawings, but it need not include
any claim.16 Within 12 months, the applicant must ﬁle an ordinary applica-
tion, or the provisional application will be deemed abandoned.17 The advan-
tage of a provisional application is that it allows an inventor to ﬁle an
application, and obtain a priority date,18 before the applicant is ready to for-
mulate a claim.19 In addition, while the applicant enjoys the beneﬁts of the
provisional application’s early ﬁling date, the resulting patent does not
expire until 20 years after the ﬁling date of the ordinary application.20
Nevertheless, applicants should approach this option with caution. The
Patent Prosecution
35
9 See Section 9.1.
10 This applies to utility patents, not design patents. See 35 U.S.C. § 1222(b)(A)(iv). Design
patents are discussed in Section 12.1.
11 35 U.S.C. § 122(b).
12 See Section 10.1.
13 35 U.S.C. § 122(B)(i).
14 35 U.S.C. § 122(c).
15 See 35 U.S.C. § 111(b).
16 35 U.S.C. § 111(b)(2).
17 35 U.S.C. § 111(b)(5).
18 See Section 8.9.3.
19 See 35 U.S.C. § 119(e)(1).
20 See Section 10.1.

beneﬁt of the earlier ﬁling date can be obtained only if the disclosures of the
provisional application satisfy the requirements of Section 112, Paragraph 1,
of the Patent Act, including the enablement,21 best mode,22 and written
description23 requirements. Since satisfaction of those requirements ulti-
mately depends on what is claimed, preparing one’s disclosure before one is
ready to formulate a claim may be a hazardous affair.24
Prosecution is a slow process and may take years. All of the documents
ﬁled by the applicant or by the examiner become part of the “prosecution
history” of the patent. The prosecution history (also known as the “ﬁle his-
tory” or “ﬁle wrapper”) becomes available to the public if the patent issues,
and it is an important resource for interpreting what the claims mean. If in
response to a rejection the applicant argues in favor of a narrow claim inter-
pretation, that same interpretation is likely to be adopted by a court in any
subsequent litigation.25
5.2 CONTINUATIONS AND CONTINUATIONS-IN-PART
In some instances, an applicant may choose to start over, in a sense, by
ﬁling a “continuation.” A continuation is an application that has the same
disclosure as the prior application (i.e., the same speciﬁcation) but new
claims.26 As long as the continuation is ﬁled before the original application
is abandoned, and as long as the continuation includes an explicit reference
to the original application, the continuation, and any patent claims that issue
from it, will be treated as though ﬁled on the date that the original applica-
tion was ﬁled.27 As in the case of reliance on a provisional application,28 the
earlier ﬁling date may be important in determining the priority of the
invention as compared to other inventions or references.29 The original
36
Patent Law Essentials
21 See Section 8.6.
22 See Section 8.7.
23 See Section 8.8.
24 See New Railhead Mfg., L.L.C., v. Vermeer Mfg. Co., 298 F.3d 1290 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (The dis-
closure of a provisional application did not adequately describe the later-claimed invention;
consequently, the patentee could not obtain the early ﬁling date necessary to avoid invalida-
tion of the patent based on a public use bar (see Section 8.10.2).).
25 See Section 7.3.
26 See Transco Prods. Inc. v. Performance Contracting, Inc., 38 F.3d 551, 555 (Fed. Cir. 1994);
MPEP § 201.07. One reason to ﬁle a continuation is to permit the amendment of claims that
have already been subject to a “ﬁnal” rejection. See Transco, 38 F.3d at 559. Hence the avail-
ability of extended examination (35 U.S.C. § 132(b)) reduces the need for continuations.
27 See Mendenhall v. Cedarapids, Inc., 5 F.3d 1557, 1565 (Fed. Cir. 1993); 35 U.S.C. § 120;
MPEP § 201.11. If the original application names more than one joint inventor, the continu-
ation must name the same inventors, or a subset of them. 35 U.S.C. § 120; In re Chu, 66 F.3d
292, 297 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
28 See Section 5.1.
29 See Section 8.9.2.

application may be abandoned after the continuation is ﬁled, or prosecution
of the two applications may continue in parallel.
The second application may lead to another, and a “chain” of applica-
tions can be created in this way.30 The application that comes last on the
chain will receive the beneﬁt of the ﬁrst application’s ﬁling date, as long as
each link in the chain meets the requirements of continuity—that is, each
application includes the same disclosure as the one preceding it, and each
was ﬁled before the preceding application was abandoned. Related appli-
cations are often referred to using a family tree analogy, in which case an
earlier application may be referred to as the “parent” or “grandparent” of a
later application.
On other occasions, an applicant may choose to ﬁle a “continuation-in-part.”
A continuation-in-part is like a continuation, but it includes additional disclosure
in the speciﬁcation.31 A continuation-in-part might be ﬁled if the applicant
discovers an improvement on the basic invention disclosed in the original
application and desires a patent claim to match. The important difference
between a continuation and a continuation-in-part is that the latter is entitled to
the ﬁling date of the original application only as to claims supported by the dis-
closure of the original application.32 Any claim supported by newly added
material (referred to as “new matter”) is entitled only to the ﬁling date of the
continuation-in-part application.33
Suppose, for example, that an inventor ﬁled an application for a basic
mousetrap on January 1, 2001. The application disclosed and claimed the
combination of a spring, a latch, and a trigger that releases the spring
when disturbed by a mouse. Later that month, the inventor discovered a
new kind of trigger less likely to release the spring prematurely. Because
the original application was still in prosecution, the inventor ﬁled, on
February 1, 2001, a continuation-in-part disclosing both the basic mouse-
trap design of the ﬁrst application and the improved trigger. If the second
application includes a claim having nothing to do with the new trigger,
and the claim is fully supported by the disclosure of the original applica-
tion, that claim will receive the beneﬁt of the January 1 ﬁling date.
However, a claim that does refer to the new trigger is entitled only to the
Patent Prosecution
37
30 PTO rules intended to limit the number of continuations available to applicants were recently
held to exceed the PTO’s rulemaking authority. See Tafas v. Dudas, 2008 U.S. Dist. LEXIS
26086 (E.D. Va. 2008). Excessive delay through the unnecessary ﬁling of continuation after
continuation may give rise to “prosecution laches,” barring the patentee from relief. See
Symbol Techs., Inc. v. Lemelson Medical, Education & Research Found., LP, 422 F.3d 1378,
1385 (Fed. Cir. 2005).
31 See Transco, 38 F.3d at 555; MPEP § 201.08.
32 The support must be adequate to satisfy the written description requirement of 35 U.S.C. 
§ 112. See Section 8.8.
33 See Augustine Medical, Inc. v. Gaymar Indus., Inc., 181 F.3d 1291, 1302 (Fed. Cir. 1999);
Waldemar Link GmbH v. Osteonics Corp., 32 F.3d 556, 558 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

February 1 ﬁling date. If another inventor ﬁled an application on a mouse-
trap trigger on January 15, 2001, the difference could be signiﬁcant in
determining priority.34
An exception to the rules just described arises if the matter newly added
to the continuation-in-part application is inherent in the original application,
even though not explicitly disclosed. Suppose that the inventor of the
mousetrap realized that the design disclosed in the original application was
more compact than most, so that the trap could be slipped into a smaller
space. The inventor might decide to ﬁle a second application, styled as a
continuation-in-part, explicitly pointing out this newly discovered advan-
tage, and a claim might be drafted that referred explicitly to the trap’s
dimensions. As long as this characteristic was inherent in the design origi-
nally disclosed, even though not discussed, the claim would be entitled to
the ﬁling date of the original application.35
5.3 DIVISIONAL APPLICATIONS
Another complication in a patent “family tree” arises when, in the view
of the examiner, the application claims more than one distinct invention.
For example, the same application might claim both a new mousetrap
design and a new “artiﬁcial cheese” to be used as bait, either of which
could be used without the other. The examiner might determine that each
was a separate invention, which should be claimed in its own application
subject to its own fees and prior art search. When this occurs, the exam-
iner issues a “restriction requirement” compelling the applicant to choose
which of the two inventions to pursue. The other invention can then be
made the subject of a “divisional” application. The divisional application
includes the pertinent part of the original disclosure, and it is entitled to the
same ﬁling date.36
5.4 INTERFERENCES
One responsibility of a patent examiner is to search for other patent appli-
cations that claim the same invention as the application under consideration.
Since it is not uncommon for an invention to occur to two inventors at
nearly the same time, it is also not uncommon for two patent applications to
claim essentially the same thing. If such an application is discovered, the
38
Patent Law Essentials
34 See Section 8.9.2.
35 See Therma-Tru Corp. v. Peachtree Doors Inc., 44 F.3d 988, 992–93 (Fed. Cir. 1995);
Kennecott Corp. v. Kyocera Int’l, Inc., 835 F.2d 1419, 1421–23 (Fed. Cir. 1987).
36 See 35 U.S.C. § 121; MPEP § 201.06; Transco Prods. Inc. v. Performance Contracting, Inc.,
38 F.3d 551, 555 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

Patent Ofﬁce will conduct an “interference” proceeding to determine which
of the applications deserves priority.37 Interference proceedings are con-
ducted by the Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences, and examination
of the interfering applications is generally halted until the interference is
resolved. In contrast to the usual course of patent prosecution, an interfer-
ence is a trial-like adversarial proceeding in which each applicant has an
opportunity to present evidence and argument in favor of its position.38 An
interference is time-consuming and can delay issue of a patent for years.
Although interferences are generally a contest between two or more pend-
ing applications, occasionally an interference occurs between an application
and a patent that has already issued. In this case, the interference may occur
at the instigation of the applicant, but the applicant must claim entitlement to
an interference no more than one year after the patent has issued.39
Even if two applicants describe essentially the same invention, they are
likely to use different language in their claims. In order to clarify what the
disputed invention is, the Patent Ofﬁce devises its own claims, known as
“counts,” to describe the subject matter of the interference. A count may be
identical to a claim submitted by one of the applicants, or it may be a new
description of the invention. The purpose of the interference is to decide if
both applications support a claim to the invention described by the count,
and, if so, which applicant invented ﬁrst. Although an applicant may be able
to avoid an interference by denying any intention to claim the subject matter
described by the count, the denial will prevent the applicant from afterward
obtaining a patent on that invention.40
In an interference, the applicant who was ﬁrst to ﬁle is known as the
“senior party” and other applicants are known as “junior parties.” The sen-
ior party is presumed to have invented ﬁrst, but that presumption can be
overcome by evidence presented by a junior party.41 Ultimately, the issue of
Patent Prosecution
39
37 See 35 U.S.C. § 135; Case v. CPC Int’l, Inc., 730 F.2d 745, 748 (Fed. Cir. 1984). Two applica-
tions claim the “same invention” if the invention of one is the same as, or obvious in light of,
the invention of the other. 37 C.F.R. § 1.601(i), (n); see also Medichem, S.A. v. Rolabo, S.L.,
437 F.3d 1157, 1161 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (“two-way” test requiring that invention A would antici-
pate or render obvious invention B if it came ﬁrst, and vice versa). A patent on a species will
prevent the later patenting of a genus that includes that species. The species always antici-
pates the genus. On the other hand, a patent on a genus (e.g., all A plus B) will not prevent
the later patenting of a species within that genus (e.g., A plus B plus C ), so long as the species
is a non-obvious variation. See Eli Lilly & Co. v. Bd. of Regents of the Univ. of Washington,
334 F.3d 1264, 1270 (Fed. Cir. 2003). Consequently, overlapping genus and species patents
can sometimes co-exist.
38 Note that similar contests over priority can arise in the course of infringement litigation. See
Section 8.9.1.3.
39 35 U.S.C. § 135(b). An interference can occur between two issued patents, but in this case the
Patent Ofﬁce has no jurisdiction. An interference between two issued patents must be con-
ducted by a federal court. See 35 U.S.C. § 291.
40 See 37 C.F.R. § 1.605(a).
41 See Brown v. Barbacid, 276 F.3d 1327, 1332–33 (Fed. Cir. 2002).

which applicant was ﬁrst to invent turns on questions of conception, reduc-
tion to practice, and diligence, all of which are discussed in Section 8.9.2.
The victor in an interference can proceed with patent prosecution. The loser,
barring an appeal,42 must abandon his application or pursue claims to a dif-
ferent invention.
5.5 REISSUE
Apart from an interference, there are two instances in which an already
issued patent may return to the Patent Ofﬁce to undergo further proceed-
ings. They are known as “reissue” and “reexamination.” Reissue is a
means for applicants to correct errors in a patent. The error may be a
defect in the speciﬁcation or drawings, or the applicant’s claims may have
been too broad or too narrow in comparison to what the applicant could
rightfully claim.43 If the claims are too narrow, they may fail to protect the
full measure of the invention; if too broad, they may run afoul of the
prior art.44
The reissue application cannot add “new matter” to the original applica-
tion,45 and the patentee can wait no more than two years to seek claims
through reissue that would broaden the scope of the original claims.46 If the
PTO allows the reissue, the applicant must “surrender” the original patent in
40
Patent Law Essentials
42 An appeal can be taken either to the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals or to a federal district
court. See 35 U.S.C. § 146.
43 See 35 U.S.C. § 251. Minor errors of a clerical or typographical nature can be rectiﬁed with-
out further examination by a “certiﬁcate of correction.” See 35 U.S.C. §§ 254, 255; Central
Admixture Pharmacy Services, Inc. v. Advanced Cardiac Solutions, P.C., 482 F.3d 1347, 1353
(Fed. Cir. 2007). If correcting the error would mean broadening the claim, the error (and how
to correct it) must be clearly evident to persons examining the original document. See Central
Admixture, 482 F.3d at 1353; Arthrocare Corp. v. Smith & Nephew, Inc., 406 F.3d 1365,
1374–75 (Fed. Cir. 2005). Note that the PTO examines all claims of a patent during reissue
proceedings, including those that are unchanged from the original patent. A patentee who ini-
tiates a reissue proceeding therefore runs some risk that a claim already issued will be held
invalid when looked at again. See Hewlett-Packard Co. v. Bausch & Lomb Inc., 882 F.2d 1556,
1563 (Fed. Cir. 1989).
44 See Section 8.9.
45 See Section 5.2. Furthermore, the reissued patent must claim the same invention disclosed, if
not adequately claimed, in the original patent. See Hester Indus., Inc. v. Stein, Inc., 142 F.3d
1472, 1484 (Fed. Cir. 1998). This is similar to the “written description” requirement, discussed
in Section 8.8.
46 35 U.S.C. § 251. This rule is strictly interpreted. If there is any conceivable device or method
that would infringe the new claims but would not have infringed the original claims, the new
claims are “broader” and cannot be obtained more than two years after the patent issued. See
Tillotson, Ltd. v. Walbro Corp., 831 F.2d 1033, 1037 n.2 (Fed. Cir. 1987). On the other hand,
an original claim and a reissue claim may be identical in scope, even if they do not use pre-
cisely the same words (e.g., one could refer to “12 inches” where the other refers to “one
foot”). See Anderson v. International Eng’g & Mfg., Inc., 160 F.3d 1345, 1349 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

favor of the revised version.47 The latter is enforced from its own date of
issue, and it expires when the original patent would have expired.48 Any
claims carried forward in substantially identical form are enforceable as
though they had been in effect from the issue date of the original patent. In
other words, a court can assess damages for infringement after and before the
reissue, even though the patentee “surrendered” the original claims.49
When applying for a reissue, the applicant must ﬁle a declaration identi-
fying an error requiring correction and afﬁrming that any errors occurred
without deceptive intent.50 What constitutes “error” can be a difﬁcult issue.
An applicant’s deliberate choice to cancel a broad claim in favor of a narrow
one in order to avoid prior art is not an “error” that can be corrected by reis-
sue, even if the applicant has second thoughts.51 On the other hand, a patent
attorney’s “failure to appreciate the full scope of the invention” generally is
recognized as an “error” justifying reissue with broadened claims.52
Although patent claims can be broadened by reissue, Congress foresaw
the potential unfairness to anyone who steered clear of the original narrow
claims, but not the new, broader ones. To protect such persons, the law rec-
ognizes “intervening rights.”53 If, prior to the reissue, a person or corpora-
tion made, used, purchased, imported, or offered to sell a product that did
not infringe the original narrow claims, that person or corporation may con-
tinue to use that product, or may sell it to someone else or offer it for sale,
even if doing so would infringe the broadened claims.54 If, for example, a
business had in its inventory items manufactured before the reissue that
Patent Prosecution
41
47 35 U.S.C. §§ 251, 252.
48 35 U.S.C. § 251. Reissued patents have a serial number beginning with “Re” or ending
with “E.”
49 See 35 U.S.C. § 252; Laitram Corp. v. NEC Corp., 952 F.2d 1357, 1360–61 (Fed. Cir. 1991).
50 See 37 C.F.R. § 1.175; Medrad, Inc. v. Tyco Healthcare Gp. LP, 466 F.3d 1047, 1052 (Fed. Cir.
2006).
51 See In re Serenkin, 479 F.3d 1359, 1362 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (“the deliberate action of an inventor
or attorney during prosecution generally fails to qualify as a correctable error”); Medtronic,
Inc. v. Guidant Corp., 465 F.3d 1360, 1372–73 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (discussing the “recapture
rule” that forbids regaining, through reissue, claim coverage deliberately surrendered during
prosecution). “Error under the reissue statute does not include a deliberate decision to sur-
render speciﬁc subject matter in order to overcome prior art, a decision which in light of sub-
sequent developments in the marketplace might be regretted. It is precisely because the
patentee amended his claims to overcome prior art that a member of the public is entitled to
occupy the space abandoned by the patent applicant.” Mentor Corp. v. Coloplast, Inc., 998
F.2d 992, 994–95 (Fed. Cir. 1993); see also Hewlett-Packard, 882 F.2d at 1565 (“error” must
involve “inadvertence, accident, or mistake”). The rationale for the “recapture rule” is also
relevant to prosecution history estoppel, discussed in Section 10.6.8.
52 See Medtronic, 465 F.3d at 1372; Hester, 142 F.3d at 1479–80. The error need not have been
unavoidable or undiscoverable. Medtronic, 465 F.3d at 1372.
53 See 35 U.S.C. § 252.
54 See 35 U.S.C. § 252; Shockley v. Arcan, Inc., 248 F.3d 1349, 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2001). These
absolute rights apply only to items that existed before the reissue, not to additional items of
the same type. Id.

would infringe only the modiﬁed claims, that business would have the
absolute right to sell those products after the reissue without incurring lia-
bility. Moreover, a court may allow additional items of the same nature to
be made, used, or sold after the date of the reissue if “substantial prepara-
tion” to do so occurred before the reissue, and the court deems such meas-
ures equitable in light of the investments made and businesses commenced
before the reissue.55 A business that had invested in a factory to manufacture
the newly infringing item would likely be allowed to continue producing and
selling the item even after the reissue. Naturally, these rights do not extend
to anyone who made no investments in an infringing activity until after the
date of reissue.
5.6 REEXAMINATION
“Reexamination” allows the Patent Ofﬁce to reconsider the validity of
already issued claims in light of newly discovered prior art patents or printed
publications. The purpose of reexamination is to provide a quicker and less
expensive alternative to litigation when, for one reason or another, the
Patent Ofﬁce failed to consider important prior art during the initial prose-
cution, and as a result the validity of the patent is in doubt. Reexamination
differs from most Patent Ofﬁce proceedings in one important respect.
Although third parties generally have no role in patent prosecution, reex-
amination can be requested by anyone, including a licensee, an accused
infringer, or a government agency.56 All that is necessary to begin (besides
the money to pay the reexamination fee) is knowledge of a prior patent or
printed publication that casts doubt on the validity of some or all of the
patent claims.57
The party requesting the reexamination must submit to the Patent
Ofﬁce a list of prior art and a statement explaining why it is pertinent.58
The Patent Ofﬁce forwards a copy of the request to the patent owner.
Within three months, the Patent Ofﬁce must decide whether the request
raises “a substantial new question of patentability.”59 If the answer is no,
the decision is ﬁnal and unappealable. If the answer is yes, the Patent
Ofﬁce orders a reexamination. At that point the patent owner may ﬁle a
42
Patent Law Essentials
55 See 35 U.S.C. § 252; Shockley, 248 F.3d at 1360–61.
56 See 35 U.S.C. § 302; In re Freeman, 30 F.3d 1459, 1468 (Fed. Cir. 1994); Syntex (U.S.A.) 
Inc. v. U.S. PTO, 882 F.2d 1570, 1573 (Fed. Cir. 1989).
57 Reexamination can be based only on prior patents or printed publications, not, for example,
on a claim of invalidity based on sales of the patented product prior to the application’s
“critical date.” See Section 8.10.1. This limitation helps to keep reexamination proceedings
comparatively simple and expedient.
58 See 35 U.S.C. § 302.
59 35 U.S.C. § 303. The “new question” may be based on prior art already considered by the
Patent Ofﬁce. 35 U.S.C. § 303(a).

statement, including any proposed changes to the claims, and the party
requesting the reexamination may ﬁle a reply.60
If the traditional procedures are followed, from that point onward reex-
amination proceeds by the rules devised for ordinary patent prosecution,
and the party requesting reexamination has no further involvement.61
Recently, Congress created an alternative “inter partes” procedure allowing
the requesting party much greater participation, including the opportunity to
comment upon and rebut arguments made by the patent owner throughout
the reexamination.62 However, the party requesting inter partes reexamina-
tion cannot raise any invalidity arguments in subsequent litigation that were
or could have been raised during the reexamination63—a drawback that may
lead some to choose the traditional procedure.
If necessary, claims can be narrowed during reexamination so that they
avoid the newly discovered prior art.64 The patentee is not allowed to
enlarge the scope of the claims.65 When the reexamination is concluded, the
examiner issues a certiﬁcate canceling any claims held invalid, conﬁrming
any claims held patentable, and incorporating into the patent any new or
revised claims.66
Although one would expect reexamination to be requested by someone
wishing to attack the patent, sometimes it is requested by the patentee, as a
way of strengthening a patent that might be held invalid in litigation. If the
Patent Ofﬁce ﬁnds that the claims are valid in spite of the additional prior
art, a court is unlikely to hold otherwise. On the other hand, if the prior art
is so close that the claims must be modiﬁed, reexamination provides an
opportunity to do so. Thus, while a request for reexamination may signal
doubts as to the validity of the patent, if the patent survives the process it is
likely to be stronger than ever.
Patent Prosecution
43
60 35 U.S.C. § 304. If the request for reexamination is made by someone other than the pat-
entee, the patentee has no opportunity to make its views known until after the Patent Ofﬁce
has decided whether there is a “substantial new question of patentability.” See 37 C.F.R. 
§ 1.530(a); Platlex Corp. v. Mossinghoff, 771 F.2d 480, 483–84 (Fed. Cir. 1985).
61 See In re Opprecht, 868 F.2d 1264, 1265 (Fed. Cir. 1989).
62 See 35 U.S.C. §§ 311–318.
63 35 U.S.C. § 315(c).
64 However, “[u]nless a claim granted or conferred upon reexamination is identical to an original
claim, the patent can not be enforced against infringing activity that occurred before issuance
of the reexamination certiﬁcate. ‘Identical’ does not mean verbatim, but means at most without
substantive change.” Bloom Eng’g Co. v. North American Mfg. Co., 129 F.3d 1247, 1250 
(Fed. Cir. 1997).
65 35 U.S.C. § 305.
66 35 U.S.C. § 307.

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 6
Ownership and Other Rights
6.1 INVENTORSHIP
The right to obtain a patent initially belongs to the inventor.1 When a patent
application is ﬁled it is important to designate the proper inventor of the sub-
ject matter claimed. A patent can name a single inventor, or it can name two
or more joint inventors.2 It is often in the latter case that questions arise
regarding who should or should not receive credit.
An inventor is anyone who participated in the mental act of conceiving the
invention.3 If two people work together on a project and both contribute to a
1 See 35 U.S.C. §§ 111, 115, 116; Beech Aircraft Corp. v. EDO Corp., 990 F.2d 1237, 1248 (Fed.
Cir. 1993). The inventors named on the patent are presumed to be correctly named. See Cook
Biotech Inc. v. Acell, Inc., 460 F.3d 1365, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Caterpillar Inc. v. Sturman
Indus., Inc., 387 F.3d 1358, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2004). That presumption can be overcome only
by “clear and convincing evidence.” Caterpillar, 387 F.3d at 1377; Linear Technology Corp.
v. Impala Linear Corp., 379 F.3d 1311, 1318–19 (Fed. Cir. 2004). 
2 Each joint inventor named on an application need not have contributed to every claim.
35 U.S.C. § 116; Stern v. Trustees of Columbia University, 434 F.3d 1375, 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2006)
(“a contribution to one claim is sufﬁcient to be a co-inventor”); Ethicon, Inc. v. United States
Surgical Corp., 135 F.3d 1456, 1460 (Fed. Cir. 1998). If an application names A, B, and C as
joint inventors, some claims may represent the work of A and B alone, or B and C alone, or A
alone, or B alone, and so forth. Absent an agreement to the contrary, each inventor owns “a
pro rata undivided interest in the entire patent, no matter what their respective contributions.”
Id. at 1465. This is true even if an inventor contributed to the subject matter of only one claim
in a patent having many claims. Id. at 1466. 
3 See Stern, 434 F.3d at 1378 (conception is the “‘touchstone of inventorship’”); Board of Educ.
v. American Bioscience, Inc., 333 F.3d 1330, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2003). The contribution should
be to the claimed invention, not to peripheral matters that may have been discussed in the
patent speciﬁcation. See Caterpillar, 387 F.3d at 1378. 

patentable idea, both can be named on the application as joint inventors. This
is true whether the speciﬁc contribution of each is difﬁcult to identify, as may
be the case when an idea arises from collaborative “brainstorming,”4 or
whether the contribution of each inventor is a discrete component of the whole.
Not all contributions rise to the level of invention. Someone who had
supervisory responsibility for a project but added nothing to the conception
of the invention would not properly be considered an inventor. Similarly,
someone who built or tested the completed invention, but did not contribute
to its conception, could not be considered an inventor, no matter how
important that person’s contribution to the project as a whole.5 Even some-
one who identiﬁes a problem is not considered a co-inventor of the solution,
in spite of the fact that identifying the problem is often a signiﬁcant step. As
one court observed, “[i]t is one thing to suggest that a better mousetrap ought
to be built; it is another thing to build it.”6
Deciding who should be credited as an inventor can be a difﬁcult task, as
illustrated by the case of Hess v. Advanced Cardiovascular Sys., Inc.7 The invention
was a balloon angioplasty catheter—a device that can be threaded through a
narrowed artery and then inﬂated in order to reduce the blockage. The doctors
responsible for the invention had tried various materials without success, when
they were referred to Mr. Hess, an engineer with Raychem who was familiar
with their line of heat-shrinkable plastics. Hess identiﬁed speciﬁc materials that
would provide the doctors with what they needed. The materials worked, the
doctors obtained a patent, and the invention was a commercial success.
Eventually, Hess claimed that he should have been named on the patent
as a co-inventor because the invention would not have succeeded without
his contribution. The Federal Circuit disagreed. The court compared
Hess’s contribution to that of a scientiﬁc treatise or a product catalog; he
merely provided information regarding existing technology. “The princi-
ples [Hess] explained to [the doctors] were well known and found in text-
books. Mr. Hess did no more than a skilled salesman would do in
explaining how his employer’s product could be used to meet a customer’s
46
Patent Law Essentials
4 See Canon Computer Sys., Inc. v. Nu-Kote Int’l, Inc., 134 F.3d 1085, 1088 (Fed. Cir. 1998)
(“As any member of a large discussion group well knows, it is often difﬁcult to remember who
ﬁrst said what.”).
5 See Board of Educ., 333 F.3d at 1338 (“One does not qualify as a joint inventor merely by assist-
ing the actual inventor.”); Ethicon, 135 F.3d at 1460 (“[O]ne of ordinary skill in the art who
simply reduced the inventor’s idea to practice is not necessarily a joint inventor, even if the
speciﬁcation discloses that embodiment to satisfy the best mode requirement.”); Sewell v.
Walters, 21 F.3d 411, 416–17 (Fed. Cir. 1994). Although attorneys often assist inventors in
preparing a patent application, they generally should not be considered joint inventors. See
Solomon v. Kimberly-Clark Corp., 216 F.3d 1372, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (“An attorney per-
forming that role should not be a competitor of the client, asserting inventorship as a result
of representing his client.”). 
6 See Buildex Inc. v. Kason Indus. Inc., 4 U.S.P.Q.2d 1803, 1805–06 (E.D.N.Y. 1987).
7 106 F.3d 976 (Fed. Cir. 1997).

requirements.”8 Still, one can understand why Hess felt that identifying the
right materials for the new application added more to the inventive idea
than the passive contributions of a textbook author.
For two or more persons to be named as joint inventors, they must have
collaborated in some way.9 Two inventors who were unaware of each other’s
work could not be considered joint inventors, even if their efforts overlapped
and even if the two inventors were employed by the same company.10 Sim-
ilarly, if inventor B simply builds on the published work of inventor A, the
result is the sole invention of inventor B, not the joint invention of A and B.
On the other hand, joint inventors need not have physically worked together
at the same time, nor is it necessary that the contribution of each be equiva-
lent in type or amount.11 If inventor A partially completed an invention, then
passed it along to inventor B with the intention that inventor B continue,
A and B could be considered joint inventors of the ﬁnished invention. There
are no distinctions drawn between co-inventors based on the signiﬁcance,
ingenuity, or timing of their contributions.12
If an application names the wrong inventors (as can easily happen, given
the ambiguities in deﬁning the role of “inventor”), the application, or issued
patent, can be corrected to name the proper inventors without affecting the
validity of the patent.13 The incorrect naming of the inventors must, how-
ever, have occurred through error and without deceptive intent.14
Ownership and Other Rights
47
8 Id. at 981; see also Board of Educ., 333 F.3d at 1342 (“teaching skills or general methods that
somehow facilitate a later invention, without more, does not render one a coinventor”). 
9 Burroughs Wellcome Co. v. Barr Labs., Inc., 40 F.3d 1223, 1227 (Fed. Cir. 1994) (“A joint
invention is the product of a collaboration between two or more persons working together to
solve the problem addressed.”); Credle v. Bond, 25 F.3d 1566, 1574 (Fed. Cir. 1994). Accord-
ingly, co-inventors should have had an “open line of communication” during the relevant
period. Cook Biotech, 460 F.3d at 1373. 
10 Kimberly-Clark Corp. v. Procter & Gamble Dist. Co., 973 F.2d 911, 916 (Fed. Cir. 1992). 
11 35 U.S.C. § 116; Burroughs, 40 F.3d at 1227. 
12 The contribution of an inventor cannot, however, be so minor as to be “insigniﬁcant.” See
Cook Biotech, 460 F.3d at 1373; Caterpillar, 387 F.3d at 1377; Acromed Corp. v. Sofamor Danek
Gp., Inc., 253 F.3d 1371, 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“[A] purported inventor must show that he
made ‘a contribution to the claimed invention that is not insigniﬁcant in quality, when that
contribution is measured against the dimension of the full invention, and [did] more than
merely explain to the real inventors well-known concepts and/or the current state of the
art’.”). The contribution of a joint inventor must have been more than “merely exercising
ordinary skill in the art,” which includes explaining concepts already well known. Caterpillar,
387 F.3d at 1377. 
13 See 35 U.S.C. §§ 116 (correction of inventorship for a pending application), 256 (correction of
inventorship for an issued patent). If the inventors are incorrectly named, and the patent is
not saved by correction, the patent can be considered invalid under § 102(f), discussed in
Section 8.9.7. See Solomon, 216 F.3d at 1381; Pannu v. Iolab Corp., 155 F.3d 1344, 1349–50
(Fed. Cir. 1998). If the problem is corrected, the validity of the patent is restored even for the
period before the correction. Vikase Corp. v. American National Can Co., 261 F.3d 1316,
1329 (Fed. Cir. 2001). This is a rare example of a kind of “conditional invalidity.” 
14 35 U.S.C. §§ 116, 256. 

6.2 ASSIGNMENTS
Although the right to apply for a patent belongs to the inventor, and an
application must be ﬁled on the inventor’s behalf,15 often someone other
than the inventor owns the patent. A transfer of rights of ownership is known
as an “assignment.” An assignment might include all rights in the patent, or
a more limited interest such as the exclusive right to a geographical area.16
The assignee may ﬁle a document with the Patent Ofﬁce recording the fact
of the assignment.17 An assignee who receives all rights to the patent by
assignment is henceforth the party with the power to sue for infringement.18
A common element of an employment contract, particularly in the case of
engineers and scientists, is that any patentable inventions made by the
employee in the course of employment must be assigned to the employer. Even
if the employment contract is silent, an obligation to assign is likely implied if
invention falls within the natural scope of the employee’s duties.19 Thus, while
patents bear the name of individual inventors (the “Smith patent” or the “Jones
patent”), often a corporate assignee owns the rights. In fact, a corporate
assignee can prosecute a patent in the name of the inventor and ultimately
obtain rights to the invention, even if the inventor refuses to cooperate.20
6.3 LICENSES
A patent license is a more limited transfer of rights than an assignment. A
licensor retains ownership of the patent but grants the licensee the right to
practice the claimed invention, usually in exchange for some sort of royalty.
48
Patent Law Essentials
15 See 35 U.S.C. §§ 115–16.
16 35 U.S.C. § 261. Courts usually characterize assignments of less than an entire interest as
“licenses” rather than assignments. The Federal Circuit has called the borderline between
assignments and licenses “impressionistic,” urging that one focus less on labels than on the
characteristics of the transferred rights, which, as we will see, can affect the transferee’s abil-
ity to ﬁle suit. International Gamco, Inc. v. Multimedia Games, Inc., 504 F.3d 1273, 1279 (Fed.
Cir. 2007). 
17 35 U.S.C. § 261. Failing to record the transfer may cause problems if another party, without
notice of the assignment, subsequently purchases an overlapping interest. See id. (assignment
void against a subsequent purchaser without notice, unless recorded before that purchase or
within three months of the date of the patent). 
18 See Rite-Hite Corp. v. Kelley Co., 56 F.3d 1538, 1551 (Fed. Cir. 1995) (right to sue belongs to
the patentee or the patentee’s successors). 
19 See Teets v. Chromalloy Gas Turbine Corp., 83 F.3d 403, 407 (Fed. Cir. 1996). Even if no
agreement to assign is express or implied, if the inventor used company time or materials, or
if the employee introduced the practice of the invention into the employer’s business, a court
is likely to recognize a “shop right” beneﬁting the employer. A shop right is a non-exclusive,
non-transferable right allowing the employer to practice the invention, royalty-free, even if
the employee is allowed to patent the invention as an individual. See McElmurry v. Arkansas
Power & Light Co., 995 F.2d 1576, 1580–82 (Fed. Cir. 1993).
20 See 37 C.F.R. § 1.47. 

A license can be exclusive or non-exclusive. If it is exclusive, there is only
one licensee, and only that licensee has the right to practice the claimed
invention. Sometimes, but not always, a licensee obtains the right to “sub-
license” others.
An exclusive licensee may ﬁle suit against an infringer in order to pre-
serve its exclusivity. Whether the owner of the patent must join in that suit,
and be bound by the result, depends on the nature of the license. The issue
turns on whether the license divides rights to the patent in such a way that a
potential infringer might be subject to multiple claims. If the licensee owns
“all substantial rights” to the patent, making the transfer an assignment in all
but name, the licensee may sue on its own behalf.21 The same is true if the
licensee received an exclusive license to practice the patent in a geographi-
cal area.22 On the other hand, an exclusive “ﬁeld of use” license does not
give the licensee standing to sue on its own. In International Gamco, the
licensee received exclusive New York rights to use a computerized gaming
system in the ﬁeld of “lottery games.” Because one could debate the mean-
ing of “lottery games,” a potential infringer in New York might have been
subject to competing claims for royalties. Consequently, the licensee could
not sue in its own name but had to involve the patent owner as co-plaintiff.23
A non-exclusive licensee cannot sue at all and must rely on the patent owner
to protect its interests.24
Some patent owners practice the claimed invention themselves, while
others proﬁt by licensing others to do so.25 Patent owners have no obligation
to license.26 Although this might give the patent owner the power to reap
monopoly proﬁts, such is the reward for discovering patentable innova-
tions.27 On the other hand, the Supreme Court recently held that injunctions
barring future infringement may be refused even after an infringer has been
Ownership and Other Rights
49
21 See International Gamco, Inc. v. Multimedia Games, Inc., 504 F.3d 1273, 1276 (Fed. Cir.
2007).
22 Id. at 1276. 
23 Id. at 1277–80. If a patentee refuses to cooperate as co-plaintiff, an exclusive licensee may join
the patentee as a defendant. See Rite-Hite Corp. v. Kelley Co., 56 F.3d 1538, 1552 (Fed. Cir.
1995). 
24 See Rite-Hite, 56 F.3d at 1552. 
25 On occasion patent owners “cross-license” their patents, each patent owner granting to the
other the right to practice some or all of the inventions in its patent portfolio. Where two or
more companies hold basic patents in the same ﬁeld of technology, this can be an expedient
way to ensure that mutually destructive litigation does not take the place of competition in
the marketplace.
26 See 35 U.S.C. § 271(d)(4). 
27 Whether a patent really confers that kind of power depends on the availability of alternatives
that easily substitute for the patented invention. If one has patented a mousetrap, but other
mousetraps work just is well, there is no leverage for demanding more than a competitive
proﬁt. In the end, consumer demands in the marketplace decide the ﬁnancial reward for any
patentable advancement. 

successfully sued.28 If the court ﬁnds that the adequacy of monetary relief
and other factors counsel against entering a permanent injunction, the result
is, in effect, a compulsory license to the infringer with royalties determined
by the court.29
6.3.1 Implied Licenses
Sometimes patent licenses are not express but implied.30 An implied
license is a reﬂection of the shared expectations of parties who have had
dealings with one another, even if those expectations were not made
explicit.31 An implied license, like an express license, is a defense to a claim
of infringement.32
6.3.1.1
“First Sale”
Because a patent owner has, among other rights, the exclusive right to “use”
the patented invention, a patent owner might sell a patented article, only to
forbid its use by the purchaser. Needless to say, most purchasers expect to use
the things they buy. In order to fulﬁll this expectation and similar ones, when-
ever a patented article is purchased from the patent owner, without any
express restriction or reservation of rights, the law recognizes an implied
license allowing the purchaser to use the article, repair it,33 or sell it to some-
one else. As stated in one Federal Circuit opinion, “an authorized sale of a
patented product places that product beyond the reach of the patent. . . . The
patent owner’s rights with respect to the product end with its sale.”34 A patent
owner who intends otherwise must make those intentions explicit.35
The “ﬁrst sale” of a patented article, without restrictions, is said to “exhaust”
the rights of the patent owner.36 In other words, whatever compensation the
50
Patent Law Essentials
28 eBay Inc. v. MercExchange, L.L.C., 547 U.S. 388, 391–94 (2006).
29 See Paice LLC v. Toyota Motor Corp., 504 F.3d 1293, 1314–15 (Fed. Cir. 2007).
30 Carborundum Co. v. Molten Metal Equipment Innovations, Inc., 72 F.3d 872, 878 (Fed. Cir.
1995).
31 See Carborundum, 72 F.3d at 878; McCoy v. Mitsuboshi Cutlery, Inc., 67 F.3d 917, 920 (Fed.
Cir. 1995) (implied license arises from “entire course of conduct” between the parties).
32 Carborundum, 72 F.3d at 878. 
33 Unless the repairs are so extensive that they are really a “reconstruction” of the patented
invention. See Section 10.4. 
34 Intel Corp. v. ULSI Sys. Tech., Inc., 995 F.2d 1566, 1568 (Fed. Cir. 1993); see also Hewlett-
Packard Co. v. Repeat-O-Type Stencil Mfg. Corp., 123 F.3d 1445, 1451 (Fed. Cir. 1997). 
35 Explicit restrictions are possible. For example, one could sell a patented item with the require-
ment that it be used only once. Reuse of that item by the purchaser would be considered
patent infringement. See Mallinckrodt, Inc. v. Medipart, Inc., 976 F.2d 700 (Fed. Cir. 1992). 
36 See Quanta Computer Inc. v. LG Electronics Inc., 128 S. Ct. 2109, 2115 (2008); Monsanto Co.
v. Scruggs, 459 F.3d 1328, 1335–36 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Anton/Bauer Inc. v. PAG Ltd., 329 F.3d
1343, 1349 (Fed. Cir. 2003). 

patent owner receives from the “ﬁrst sale” is all the patent owner can expect,
even if the article is sold and resold, used and reused, many times.37 The same
result follows a “ﬁrst sale” by a licensee of the patent owner; the licensee may
owe royalties to the patent owner, but the article sold is afterward “free of the
patent.”38
A similar rule applies where a patent claims a method and the patent
owner sells an apparatus used in that method.39 For example, a patent might
claim a “method of catching mice,” and the apparatus sold might be a kind
of mousetrap. Anyone who purchases a mousetrap expects to use it for
catching mice, and if the only method of using the mousetrap is the same
one claimed in the patent, the purchaser reasonably expects to use that
method. Such expectations lead to the following rule: an unrestricted sale of
an apparatus by the patent owner confers an implied license to use that appa-
ratus to practice a patented method, if the apparatus has no non-infringing
uses.40 On the other hand, if the apparatus does have other uses, one cannot
infer a license to the patented method.41
6.3.1.2
Legal Estoppel
Another situation in which a patent license can be implied falls under the
heading of “legal estoppel.” Simply put, legal estoppel is a doctrine that pre-
vents a patent owner from licensing one patent, only to make that license
worthless by enforcing another.42 Suppose that an inventor obtained two
patents—one a broad patent covering a new mousetrap design, and the other
a narrow patent covering a particular variation of that design. A mousetrap
Ownership and Other Rights
51
37 The “ﬁrst sale” must be an authorized sale by the patent owner or a licensee of the patent
owner. If the product originated with an infringer, downstream purchasers can be held to
infringe by using or reselling the product. See Intel, 995 F.2d at 1572–73 (Plager, J., dissenting).
However, if the infringer was sued and compelled to pay money damages to the patentee,
that payment amounts to a “ﬁrst sale,” and the infringing goods are subsequently beyond the
reach of the patent. See King Instrument Corp. v. Otari Corp., 814 F.2d 1560, 1564 (Fed. Cir.
1987). 
38 See Unidisco, Inc. v. Schattner, 824 F.2d 965, 968 (Fed. Cir. 1987). 
39 See Quanta, 128 S. Ct. at 2117 (“methods . . . may be ‘embodied’ in a product, the sale of which
exhausts the patent rights”). 
40 See Quanta, 128 S. Ct. at 2119; Met-Coil Sys. Corp. v. Korners Unlimited, Inc., 803 F.2d 684,
686 (Fed. Cir. 1986). There is no ongoing right to practice the method after the apparatus is
worn out. See Carborundum Co. v. Molten Metal Equipment Innovations, Inc., 72 F.3d 872,
878 (Fed. Cir. 1995). 
41 See Bandag, Inc. v. Al Bolser’s Tire Stores, Inc., 750 F.2d 903, 924 (Fed. Cir. 1984). The alter-
native use need not be optimal, but it should be “reasonable.” See Glass Equipment Devel-
opment, Inc. v. Besten, Inc., 174 F.3d 1337, 1343 (Fed. Cir. 1999).
42 See Spindelfabrik Suessen-Schurr Stahlecker & Grill GmbH v. Schubert & Salzer 
Maschinenfabrik Atiengesellschaft, 829 F.2d 1075, 1080 (Fed. Cir. 1987). “The rationale . . .
is to estop the grantor from taking back that for which he received consideration.” Id.

within the scope of the narrower patent would necessarily fall within the
scope of the broader patent as well. Anyone who received an express license
to the second patent would likely receive an implied license to the ﬁrst under
the principle of legal estoppel. Otherwise the patent owner could prevent the
licensee from taking any beneﬁt from the license it obtained.
6.3.1.3
Industry Standards
The preceding are merely common examples of implied licenses. Any
conduct by a patentee that could lead one to infer a waiver or an abandon-
ment of the patentee’s rights may have similar effects.43 An increasingly
common example involves the adoption of a patented technology as an
“industry standard.” Many industries, such as the computer and telecom-
munications industries, depend on such standards to ensure that equipment
from different manufacturers can work together. Once such a standard is
adopted, companies in the industry are virtually compelled to conform. If
the industry standard is covered by a patent, should all companies in the
industry be forced to pay a royalty? In some cases the answer is yes, but if
the patent owner promoted the adoption of the technology as a standard and
gave the impression that the standard could be practiced free of obligations,
the circumstances could establish an implied license.44 Otherwise an indus-
try could be lured into adopting a standard, only later to be faced with
claims of infringement.
52
Patent Law Essentials
43 See Wang Labs., Inc. v. Mitsubishi Electronics America, Inc., 103 F.3d 1571, 1580 (Fed. Cir.
1997). 
44 See Wang, 103 F.2d at 1575, 1581–82.

CHAPTER 7
Interpreting Patent Claims
The claims are the most important part of any patent. They deﬁne what the
patented invention is.1 Hence, the ﬁrst step in determining whether a
patent is valid or infringed is to analyze the claims and determine precisely
what they mean.2 This analysis is known as “claim construction” or “claim
interpretation.”3
Claims are written in the English language, but they often employ an
obscure technical vocabulary. The following is an example of patent claim
language:
1. An aqueous cosmetic emulsion comprising:
i) an isoparafﬁn;
ii) a C8-C22 alkyl phosphate salt;
wherein the isoparafﬁn and alkyl phosphate salt are present in a respective weight
ratio of from about 40:1 to about 1:1, and said emulsion having a viscosity ranging
1 Phillips v. AWH Corp., 415 F.3d 1303, 1312 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (en banc); Computer Docking
Station Corp. v. Dell, Inc., 519 F.3d 1366, 1373 (Fed. Cir. 2008).
2 In the rare instance that the parties do not dispute the meaning of the claims, a formal step
of claim construction may be unnecessary. See Hakim v. Cannon Avent Gp., PLC, 479 F.3d
1313, 1318 (Fed. Cir. 2007).
3 The Patent Ofﬁce during prosecution will give claims their “broadest reasonable interpreta-
tion.” In re Bigio, 381 F.3d 1320, 1324 (Fed. Cir. 2004). This provides extra insurance that
newly issued claims do not encroach on the prior art. If the applicant did not intend the
broader interpretation, the applicant can amend the claim language to make that clear. Once
the patent has issued, courts no longer apply the broadest reasonable interpretation if the evi-
dence better supports a narrow construction. See Atlantic Thermoplastics Co. v. Faytex Corp.,
970 F.2d 834, 846 (Fed. Cir. 1992). In most other respects, the claim interpretation rules
applied by the courts and the Patent Ofﬁce are the same.

from about 35 to about 90 Brookﬁeld units as measured with a Brookﬁeld
Viscometer Model LTV using a #4 spindle rotating at 60 rpm at 25° C.4
The claim is for a hand lotion.
The opacity of claim language can be traced to two sources. First, because
patents are awarded to technological advancements, a technical vocabulary is
often best suited to describe what the invention is. The language of the pre-
ceding example would be meaningful to the chemist who invented the lotion
and to other chemists who are likely to be reading the patent. Second, because
of its legal signiﬁcance, claim language must describe the invention precisely.
If a claim employs a narrow term instead of a more accurate, broader term,
the patent may exclude a product legitimately within the scope of the appli-
cant’s invention. If the preceding example had used the term “hand lotion”
instead of “cosmetic emulsion,” the claim might have been too narrow to
cover a face cream that consisted of the same combination of materials. On
the other hand, if claim language is too broad, the patent may be anticipated
by a prior art reference and made invalid.5 The speciﬁc measure of viscosity
in the preceding example may have been all that distinguished the invention
from other lotions. So everyday language that would serve as a casual descrip-
tion of an invention will not do for a patent claim. Finding the right words to
describe an invention, from both a technical and a legal viewpoint, is one of
the most important tasks faced by a patent attorney.
Patent claims should be interpreted from the perspective of their intended
audience—persons skilled in the ﬁeld of the invention at the time the patent
application was ﬁled.6 In deciding what a patent claim means, guidance can
be found in the following sources:
• The “ordinary meaning” of a word
• The speciﬁcation
• The prosecution history
• Other claims
Although patentees sometimes testify as to what they intended a claim to
mean, such subjective, post hoc testimony carries little weight.7 Indeed, even if
what the claim says is clearly not what the applicant intended, a court will not
54
Patent Law Essentials
4 Conopco, Inc. v. May Dep’t Stores Co., 46 F.3d 1556, 1560 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
5 See Section 8.9.5.
6 See Phillips, 415 F.3d at 1312–13; Computer Docking Station, 519 F.3d at 1373; Ortho-McNeil
Pharmaceutical, Inc. v. Caraco Pharmaceutical Labs., Ltd., 476 F.3d 1321, 1326 (Fed. Cir.
2007); Dayco Products, Inc. v. Total Containment, Inc., 258 F.3d 1317, 1324 (Fed. Cir. 2001)
(“If an argument offered in support of a particular claim construction is so convoluted and
artiﬁcial that it would not be apparent to a skilled artisan reading the patent and the prose-
cution history, the argument is simply unhelpful to the performance of our task.”).
7 See Solomon v. Kimberly-Clark Corp., 216 F.3d 1372, 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Senmed, Inc. v.
Richard-Allan Medical Indus., Inc., 888 F.2d 815, 819 (Fed. Cir. 1989).

overlook unambiguous claim language. In Chef America, Inc. v. Lamb-Weston,
Inc.,8 the claim required that dough be heated in an oven to a temperature of
400 to 800 degrees Fahrenheit, a temperature that would give one’s frozen
pizza the consistency of a charcoal briquette. The patentee meant that the oven
should be that hot, not the dough itself. The court refused to ignore the
language of the claim, in spite of the absurd result: “we construe the claim as
written, not as the patentees wish they had written it.”9
Sometimes it is difﬁcult to reconcile conﬂicting evidence on how claim lan-
guage should be interpreted. For example, in Vitronics Corp. v. Conceptronic, Inc,10
the critical term “solder reﬂow temperature” could have meant the temperature
at which solder began to melt, or the higher temperature at which it ﬂowed
freely. The standard literature in the ﬁeld supported the former meaning, but
the examples discussed in the patent seemed consistent only with the latter. The
court had to choose, because infringement depended on the proper deﬁnition.
On various occasions, the Federal Circuit has discussed procedures for
weighing conﬂicting evidence. In Vitronics, the court emphasized “intrinsic”
evidence—evidence, that is, found in the patent itself or in the prosecution
history.11 It approved resort to “extrinsic” evidence, such as technical diction-
aries, only in the rare case that the intrinsic evidence was ambiguous.12 On the
other hand, some later cases—most notably Texas Digital Systems, Inc. v. Telegenix,
Inc.13—emphasized the “plain meaning” of claim language, best exempliﬁed by
neutral sources such as dictionaries.14 Following Texas Digital, one might begin
the process of claim interpretation with just the kind of extrinsic evidence
dismissed in Vitronics.
In 2005 the Federal Circuit, in Phillips v. AWH Corp.,15 addressed these
contradictions through a hearing en banc. Although the court found the
recent emphasis on dictionaries overdone, it refrained from introducing a
rigid hierarchy excluding extrinsic evidence in all but the rarest of cases. It
admitted that there is “no magic formula or catechism” for construing claim
Interpreting Patent Claims
55
8 358 F.3d 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2004).
9 Id. at 1374. Mistakes can be corrected through other procedures. See Section 5.5.
10 90 F.3d 1576 (Fed. Cir. 1996).
11 Id. at 1583.
12 See id. (“In most situations, an analysis of the intrinsic evidence alone will resolve any ambi-
guity in a disputed claim term. In such circumstances, it is improper to rely on extrinsic
evidence.”). The emphasis on intrinsic evidence reﬂects the idea that patents must provide
fair warning to the public. See id. (“The claims, speciﬁcation, and ﬁle history, rather than
extrinsic evidence, constitute the public record of the patentee’s claim, a record on which the
public is entitled to rely.”).
13 308 F.3d 1193 (Fed. Cir. 2002).
14 See id. at 1202–03 (“Dictionaries, encyclopedias and treatises, publicly available at the time
the patent is issued, . . . are unbiased reﬂections of common understanding.”); Interactive Gift
Express, Inc. v. CompuServe Inc., 231 F.3d 859, 866 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (“Dictionaries, which
are a form of extrinsic evidence, hold a special place. . . .”).
15 415 F.3d 1303 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (en banc).

language, and no particular sequence of steps that a court must invariably
apply. Rather, one must interpret claim language as it would be understood
by persons in the ﬁeld of the invention, which includes proper regard for
what the patent itself has to say. Extrinsic evidence can be illuminating, but
if the patent is perfectly clear, one cannot contradict its meaning by resort to
other sources of information.16 In that respect, the court reafﬁrmed Vitronics
at the expense of Texas Digital. With that general guidance in mind, one can
still usefully apply the rules discussed in the remainder of this chapter to the
challenging task of claim interpretation.
7.1 “ORDINARY MEANING”
A natural place to begin one’s claim interpretation is with the “ordinary
meaning” of the terms in question.17 Many cases speak of a “heavy pre-
sumption” that claim terminology should be given its ordinary or customary
meaning.18 On occasion, the ordinary meaning of a term may be apparent
even to a layman.19 Or, if the term is not a technical one, its ordinary mean-
ing may be found in a general-purpose dictionary.20 Often the terms used in
patent claims are technical terms with specialized meaning to persons skilled
in the art of the invention.21 On those occasions, a court may also look to
technical dictionaries and similar references for assistance.22 Of course, the
56
Patent Law Essentials
16 See id. at 1324.
17 See Phillips v. AWH Corp., 415 F.3d 1303, 1312 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (en banc) (“We have frequently
stated that the words of a claim ‘are generally given their ordinary and customary mean-
ing.’”); Computer Docking Station Corp. v. Dell, Inc., 519 F.3d 1366, 1373 (Fed. Cir. 2008).
18 See Elbex Video, Ltd. v. Sensormatic Electronics Corp., 508 F.3d 1366, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2007);
Leibel-Flarsheim Co. v. Medrad Inc., 358 F.3d 898, 913 (Fed. Cir. 2004); CCS Fitness, Inc. v.
Brunswick Corp., 288 F.3d 1359, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2002).
19 See Phillips, 415 F.3d at 1314; C.R. Bard, Inc. v. U.S. Surgical Corp., 388 F.3d 858, 863 (Fed.
Cir. 2004) (questioning the need to consult references when the terms were as commonplace
as “conformable” and “pliable”).
20 See Phillips, 415 F.3d. at 1314 (for non-technical vocabulary “general purpose dictionaries may
be helpful”); Greenberg v. Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc., 91 F.3d 1580, 1583 (Fed. Cir. 1996).
21 Even terms that have non-technical meanings may have to be placed in an appropriate tech-
nological context. See TAP Pharmaceutical Prods., Inc. v. Owl Pharmaceuticals, L.L.C., 
419 F.3d 1346, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2005). If the patentee uses a term that means nothing in the ﬁeld
of the invention, a court must look entirely to intrinsic evidence to construe it. See Network
Commerce, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 422 F.3d 1353, 1359–60 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (the term
“download component” had no “commonly understood meaning reﬂected in general dic-
tionaries” nor any “specialized meaning in the relevant art”); Irdeto Access, Inc. v. Echostar
Satellite Corp., 383 F.3d 1295, 1300 (Fed. Cir. 2004).
22 See Phillips, 415 F.3d at 1314 (“Because dictionaries, and especially technical dictionaries, attempt
to collect accepted meanings of terms used in various ﬁelds of science and technology . . . [they]
can assist the court in determining the meaning of particular terminology to those of skill in the
art of the invention.”); MIT v. Abacus Software, 462 F.3d 1344, 1351 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (where
the speciﬁcation provided no deﬁnition, explicit or implicit, of the term “scanner,” the court
could look to deﬁnitions from technical and general-purpose dictionaries).

claims are not to be read through the use of a dictionary alone, as though
one were translating a Russian novel word by word; instead, one must read
the claims, as a person skilled in the art would, in the context of the entire
patent document.23
Even expert testimony may be admitted “to clarify the patented technol-
ogy and to explain its meaning through the eyes of experience.”24 On the
other hand, courts are well aware that the opinions of experts maybe colored
by hindsight and the interests of the litigants who employ them. Hence courts
treat expert testimony with appropriate skepticism; unsupported assertions
may be ignored and expert testimony discounted if it is “at odds with the
claim construction mandated by . . . the written record of the patent.”25
7.2 SPECIFICATION
If a word has an “ordinary” or “plain meaning,” one might suppose that
its interpretation would be uncontroversial, yet words as simple as “on”
and “a” have been the subjects of intense debate in the context of infringe-
ment litigation.26 One reason is that a patent applicant can be “his own
lexicographer”—which is to say, an applicant can devise his own vocabu-
lary to describe the invention.27 Words can be used in ways that differ
from their ordinary sense, or new words can be invented. Nevertheless, if
the applicant uses words in a specialized or unusual sense, that sense must
be made clear in the patent speciﬁcation.28
Interpreting Patent Claims
57
23 See Phillips, 415 at 1313; Atoﬁna v. Great Lakes Chemical Corp., 441 F.3d 991, 996 (Fed. Cir.
2006) (court can choose from dictionary deﬁnitions as directed by intrinsic evidence); Free
Motion Fitness, Inc. v. Cybex Int’l, Inc., 423 F.3d 1343, 1349 (Fed. Cir. 2005).
24 Aqua-Aerobic Sys., Inc v. Aerators Inc., 211 F.3d 1241, 1245 (Fed. Cir. 2000); see also Philips,
415 F.3d at 1318 (Expert testimony may be admitted “to provide background on the technology
at issue, to explain how an invention works, to ensure that the court’s understanding of the tech-
nical aspects of the patent is consistent with that of a person of skill in the art, or to establish that
a particular term in the patent or the prior art has a particular meaning in the pertinent ﬁeld.”);
Serio-US Indus., Inc. v. Plastic Recovery Techs. Corp., 459 F.3d 1311, 1319 (Fed. Cir. 2006).
25 Phillips, 415 F.3d at 1318; Network Commerce, 422 F.3d at 1361.
26 Senmed, Inc. v. Richard-Allan Medical Indus., Inc., 888 F.2d 815, 819 (Fed. Cir. 1989); North
American Vaccine, Inc. v. American Cyanamid Co., 7 F.3d 1571, 1575–76 (Fed. Cir. 1993).
27 See Phillips v. AWH Corp., 415 F.3d 1303, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (en banc); Sinorgchem Co. v.
Int’l Trade Comm’n, 511 F.3d 1132, 1136 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Honeywell Int’l, Inc. v. Universal
Avionics Sys. Corp., 493 F.3d 1358, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (“When a patentee deﬁnes a claim
term, the patentee’s deﬁnition governs, even if it is contrary to the conventional meaning of
the term.”).
28 See Merck & Co. v. Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc., 395 F.3d 1364, 1370 (Fed. Cir. 2005);
Bell Atlantic Network Services, Inc. v. Covad Communications Gp., Inc., 262 F.2d 1258,
1268 (Fed. Cir. 2001). The speciﬁcation “must clearly redeﬁne a claim term ‘so as to put a rea-
sonable competitor or one reasonably skilled in the art on notice that the patentee intended
to so redeﬁne that claim term.’” Elekta Instrument S.A. v. O.U.R. Scientiﬁc Int’l Inc., 214 F.3d
1302, 1307 (Fed. Cir. 2000).

The patent speciﬁcation is a place for the applicant to elaborate on the
invention, and it serves as a “dictionary” to deﬁne, expressly or by implica-
tion, any specialized meaning to be given terms used in the claims. Accord-
ingly, the speciﬁcation is “the single best guide to the meaning of a disputed
term.”29 In all cases it is highly relevant, and in many it is dispositive.30 If the
speciﬁcation clearly shows that the applicant did not use a term in its ordi-
nary sense, the speciﬁcation takes precedence.31
Although the speciﬁcation is an indispensable tool for claim interpreta-
tion, there is always a danger that it will be used not to deﬁne a term used in
a claim, but to add limitations that do not appear in the claim at all. A speci-
ﬁcation must describe speciﬁc examples, or “preferred embodiments,” that
fall within the scope of the patent claims but are not co-extensive with
them.32 The details of these preferred embodiments do not limit the scope of
the claims, unless the claims say so.33
Consider, for example, the claims in In re Paulsen,34 which described a
“portable computer” with a hinged case allowing the display screen to be
latched in an upright position during use. The patentee argued that the
term “portable computer” did not include a calculator. If the claims did
cover a calculator, they would be found invalid because of a prior Japanese
patent. The patentee pointed out that the speciﬁc “portable computer” dis-
closed in the speciﬁcation incorporated a sophisticated display, advanced
data processing capability, communications ports, and other attributes that
are characteristic of a laptop personal computer rather than a calculator.
58
Patent Law Essentials
29 Phillips, 415 F.3d at 1321; Kim v. Conagra Foods, Inc., 465 F.3d 1312, 1318 (Fed. Cir. 2006);
Vitronics Corp. v. Conceptronic, Inc., 90 F.3d 1576, 1582 (Fed. Cir. 1996).
30 Phillips, 415 F.3d at 1315; Computer Docking Station Corp. v. Dell, Inc., 519 F.3d 1366, 1374
(Fed. Cir. 2008); Vitronics, 90 F.3d at 1582.
31 Phillips, 415 F.3d at 1316.
32 See Section 3.3. It is seldom correct to interpret claim language to exclude the patentee’s own
preferred embodiments. See Oatey Co. v. IPS Corp., 514 F.3d 1271, 1277 (Fed. Cir. 2008);
Chimie v. PPG Indus., Inc., 402 F.3d 1371, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2005); Vitronics, 90 F.3d at 1583
(“[s]uch an interpretation is rarely, if ever, correct and would require highly persuasive evi-
dentiary support”). But on occasion no other reading of the claim language is possible. See
Elekta, 214 F.3d at 1308 (“in light of the prosecution history and the unambiguous language
of the amended claim, we conclude that this is the rare case in which such an interpretation
is compelled”).
33 See Phillips, 415 F.3d at 1323 (“although the speciﬁcation often describes very speciﬁc embod-
iments of the invention, we have repeatedly warned against conﬁning the claims to those
embodiments”); Computer Docking Station, 519 F.3d at 1374; Ventana Medical Sys., Inc. v.
Biogenix Labs., Inc., 473 F.3d 1173, 1181 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Teleﬂex, Inc. v. Ficosa North
America Corp., 299 F.3d 1313, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (“the claims must be read in view of the
speciﬁcation . . . but limitations from the speciﬁcation are not to be read into the claims”).
Even if the speciﬁcation describes only one embodiment, the claims will not be limited to that
embodiment without “expressions of manifest exclusion or restriction.” Gemstar-TV Guide
Int’l, Inc. v. Int’l Trade Comm’n, 383 F.3d 1352, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2004).
34 30 F.3d 1475 (Fed. Cir. 1994).

Nevertheless, the court found that none of these things were required by
the claims. Since the claims merely said “portable computer,” and the
court found that a calculator was a kind of “portable computer” as that
term is generally understood, the claims were broad enough to include a
calculator.35
Sometimes, as in Paulsen, the patentee tries to “read into” the claims lim-
itations found in the speciﬁcation, in order to narrow the claims sufﬁciently
to avoid the prior art. In other cases, it is the accused infringer who seeks to
read in those limitations in order to narrow the claim and avoid infringe-
ment. In neither case is the practice allowed. Note that there is sometimes a
ﬁne line between “reading in” a limitation absent from the claims and using
the speciﬁcation to interpret the claims in a particular fashion.36 The patentee
in Paulsen, for example, might have argued that “computer” is a term with
various meanings and that reading the claim language in light of the speciﬁ-
cation would suggest the narrower meaning.37
There is one important exception to the rule that limitations found only
in the speciﬁcation cannot be read into the claims. This exception applies
to claims drafted in the “means-plus-function” format provided for in
Paragraph 6 of 35 U.S.C. § 112. Claims of this type are discussed in
Section 7.7.4.
7.3 PROSECUTION HISTORY
Another resource for interpreting claim language is the prosecution
history. This is (ideally) a complete record of the proceedings before the
Patent Ofﬁce.38 It includes both the prior art cited during examination and
any remarks or representations that may have been made by the applicant
Interpreting Patent Claims
59
35 Id. at 1479–80.
36 See Phillips, 415 F.3d at 1323; Liebel-Flarsheim Co. v. Medrad Inc., 358 F.3d 898, 904 (Fed.
Cir. 2004).
37 Resolving the tension between interpreting claim language in light of the speciﬁcation and
reading into the claim limitations found only in the speciﬁcation depends upon “how the spec-
iﬁcation characterizes the claimed invention.” Alloc, Inc. v. International Trade Comm’n, 
342 F.3d 1361, 1370 (Fed. Cir. 2003). The speciﬁcation may “refer[] to a limitation only as a
part of less than all possible embodiments,” or it may “suggest[] that the very character of the
invention requires [that] the limitation be a part of every embodiment.” Id. If “the speciﬁca-
tion makes clear at various points that the claimed invention is narrower than the claim
language might imply, it is entirely permissible and proper to limit the claims.” Id. If, for
example, the speciﬁcation strongly discourages a particular approach, the claims may be
interpreted to exclude that approach. See Honeywell Int’l, Inc. v. ITT Indus., Inc., 452 F.3d
1312, 1320 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (“Repeated derogatory statements concerning one type of mate-
rial” served as a disavowal of the subject matter: “If the written description could talk, it
would say, ‘Do not use carbon ﬁbers.’”).
38 Sometimes matters are decided in a telephone conference, of which there is often an inade-
quate record.

concerning the proper interpretation of the claims.39 The prosecution history
may be more ambiguous than the speciﬁcation because it documents ongo-
ing discussion between the patent applicant and the examiner. Nevertheless,
the prosecution history can “demonstrat[e] how the inventor understood the
invention and whether the inventor limited the invention . . . making the
claim scope narrower than it would otherwise be.”40
Claims must be interpreted in the same way in litigation as they were
in the Patent Ofﬁce. Otherwise applicants could treat their claims as the
proverbial “nose of wax” to be twisted one direction in prosecution (per-
haps to avoid a close prior art reference) and another direction in litiga-
tion (perhaps to encompass an accused product similar to that
reference).41 Such inconsistency in interpretation would pervert the
process of examination, and it would hinder potential competitors who
should be entitled to rely on the public record in judging the scope of the
patentee’s claims.42
During prosecution, an applicant may disavow a claim interpretation that
would otherwise have been plausible based on the ordinary meaning of
the term.43 The surrender must be “clear and unmistakable” from the per-
spective of a person of ordinary skill reviewing the prosecution history.44
Occasionally, a court will overlook what was obviously a mistaken charac-
60
Patent Law Essentials
39 See Phillips v. AWH Corp., 415 F.3d 1303, 1317 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (en banc).
40 Id.; see also Regents of the Univ. of California v. Dakocytomation California, Inc., 517 F.3d
1364, 1372–73 (Fed. Cir. 2008); Seachange Int’l, Inc. v. C-Core, Inc., 413 F.3d 1361, 1372 (Fed.
Cir. 2005).
41 See Vitronics Corp. v. Conceptronic, Inc., 90 F.3d 1576, 1583 (Fed. Cir. 1996); Southwall
Techs., Inc. v. Cardinal IG Co., 54 F.3d 1570, 1578 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
42 See Springs Window Fashions LP v. Novo Indus., L.P., 323 F.3d 989, 995 (Fed. Cir. 2003)
(“The public notice function of a patent and its prosecution history requires that a patentee
be held to what he declares during the prosecution of his patent. A patentee may not state
during prosecution that the claims do not cover a particular device and then change position
and later sue a party who makes that same device for infringement.”).
43 See Elbex Video, Ltd. v. Sensormatic Electronics Corp., 508 F.3d 1366, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2007);
Golight Inc. v. Wal-Mart Stores Inc., 355 F.3d 1327, 1333 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Omega Eng’g, Inc.
v. Raytek Corp., 334 F.3d 1314, 1324 (Fed. Cir. 2003) (“[W]here the patentee has unequivo-
cally disavowed a certain meaning to obtain his patent, the doctrine of prosecution disclaimer
attaches and narrows the ordinary meaning of the claim congruent with the scope of the sur-
render.”). A disclaimer may occur “where an applicant argues that a claim possesses a feature
that the prior art does not possess in order to overcome a prior art rejection.” Seachange, 413
F.3d at 1372–73.
44 Elbex, 508 F.3d at 1371; Seachange, 413 F.3d at 1373 (“A disclaimer must be clear and
unambiguous.”); Cordis Corp. v. Medtronic AVE, Inc., 339 F.3d 1352, 1363 (Fed. Cir.
2003).

terization of the invention by the applicant during prosecution.45 This is
appropriate, however, only when the error is so apparent that a reasonable
person would not be misled.46
7.4 OTHER CLAIMS
Comparing different claims can assist in determining their meaning.47
This particularly occurs in the context of the “doctrine of claim differentia-
tion,” which holds that each claim should be presumed to differ in scope
from every other claim.48 For example, if a dependent claim adds a limita-
tion to an independent claim, one should presume that the same limitation
is not present, implicitly, in both claims.49 The assumption is that an appli-
cant would not intentionally draft two claims that covered, in different
words, precisely the same subject matter. The doctrine of claim differentia-
tion is not absolute, however.50 Sometimes the only reasonable interpreta-
tion of a claim is one that makes it redundant.
Interpreting Patent Claims
61
45 See, e.g., Intervet America, Inc. v. Kee-Vet Labs., Inc., 887 F.2d 1050, 1053–54 (Fed. Cir.
1989).
46 See Biotec Biologische Naturverpackungen GmbH v. Biocorp, Inc., 249 F.3d 1341, 1348 (Fed.
Cir. 2001) (“An error in the prosecution record must be viewed as errors are in documents in
general; that is, would it have been apparent to the interested reader that an error was made,
such that it would be unfair to enforce the error.”); Hockerson-Halberstadt, Inc. v. Avia Gp.
Int’l, Inc., 222 F.3d 951, 957 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (distinguishing Intervet and denying the patentee
the requested “mulligan that would erase from the prosecution history the inventor’s dis-
avowal of a particular aspect of a claim term’s meaning”).
47 See Phillips v. AWH Corp., 415 F.3d 1303, 1314 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (en banc) (“Because claim
terms are normally used consistently throughout the patent, the usage of a term in one claim
can often illuminate the meaning of the same term in other claims. . . . Differences among
claims can also be a useful guide in understanding the meaning of particular claim terms.”).
48 See Curtiss-Wright Flow Control Corp. v. Velan, Inc., 438 F.3d 1374, 1380 (Fed. Cir. 2006);
Kraft Foods, Inc. v. International Trading Co., 203 F.3d 1362, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (“two
claims of a patent are presumptively of different scope”); Beachcombers, Int’l, Inc. v.
Wildwood Creative Prods., Inc., 31 F.3d 1154, 1162 (Fed. Cir. 1994) (an interpretation that
would render a claim superﬂuous is “presumptively unreasonable”).
49 See Phillips, 415 F.3d at 1315; Curtiss-Wright, 438 F.3d at 1380; SunRace Roots Enterprise Co.
v. SRAM Corp., 336 F.3d 1298, 1303 (Fed. Cir. 2003) (the “presumption is especially strong
when the limitation in dispute is the only meaningful difference between an independent and
dependent claim, and one party is urging that the limitation in the dependent claim should
be read into the independent claim”).
50 See Regents of the Univ. of California v. Dakocytomation California, Inc., 517 F.3d 1364, 1375
(Fed. Cir. 2008); Curtiss-Wright, 438 F.3d at 1380–81; Kraft Foods, 203 F.3d at 1368 (claim dif-
ferentiation “is ‘not a hard and fast rule’”).

7.5 VALIDITY
Another basic principle of claim interpretation is that claims should, if pos-
sible, be read in a manner that preserves their validity.51 The source of this
rule is obscure, but perhaps the underlying assumption is that the interpreta-
tion supporting validity must be the interpretation the Patent Ofﬁce had in
mind. Like the doctrine of claim differentiation, this principle does not justify
a claim interpretation that is unreasonable or unsupported by the evidence.52
In any case, a claim must be interpreted in the same way when the issue
is infringement as it is when the issue is validity.53 If a claim is interpreted in
a narrow fashion to avoid a potentially invalidating prior art reference, that
same narrow interpretation must be applied in comparing the claim to the
accused product. The meaning of a claim cannot change to suit the conven-
ience of the patent owner.54
7.6 PREAMBLES
A peculiar rule of claim interpretation involves the “preamble”—the ﬁrst
paragraph of a patent claim, typically ending with the word “comprising.” In
the claim set out at the beginning of this chapter, the preamble language is
“An aqueous cosmetic emulsion comprising . . .” The preamble often char-
acterizes the category of invention or its intended use—e.g., a mousetrap or
a “cosmetic emulsion”—but it does not in itself recite the checklist of claim
62
Patent Law Essentials
51 Liebel-Flarsheim Co. v. Medrad Inc., 358 F.3d 898, 911 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Tate Access Floors,
Inc. v. Interface Architectural Resources, Inc., 279 F.3d 1357, 1367 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Apple
Computer, Inc. v. Articulate Sys., Inc., 234 F.3d 14, 24 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (“‘claims should be
read in a way that avoids ensnaring the prior art if it is possible to do so’”). The axiom applies,
however, only if the meaning of the claim remains ambiguous in spite of the normal proce-
dures of claim interpretation. Liebel-Flarsheim, 358 F.3d at 911.
52 See Nazomi Communications, Inc. v. ARM Holdings, PLC, 403 F.3d 1364, 1368 (Fed. Cir.
2005) (interpretation preserving validity adopted only “if practicable”; courts “should not
re-write claims to preserve their validity”); Apple Computer, 324 F.3d at 24; Quantum Corp.
v. Rodime, PLC, 65 F.3d 1577, 1584 (Fed. Cir. 1995) (“Although [courts] construe claims,
if possible, so as to sustain their validity . . . it is well settled that no matter how great the
temptations of fairness or policy making, courts do not redraft claims.”). Claim construc-
tion should not begin with preserving the validity of the claim; when it does, “the constru-
ing court has put the validity cart before the claim construction horse.” Nazomi, 403 F.3d
at 1369.
53 Kim v. Conagra Foods, Inc., 465 F.3d 1312, 1324 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Amgen, Inc. v. Hoechst
Marion Roussel, Inc., 314 F.3d 1313, 1330 (Fed. Cir. 2003); Amazon.com, Inc. v. 
Barnesandnoble.com, Inc., 239 F.3d 1343, 1351 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
54 A disadvantage borne by patent owners in litigation is that they must ﬁnd a single claim inter-
pretation that supports a ﬁnding of both validity and infringement. An accused infringer, on
the other hand, can be satisﬁed with an interpretation that renders the claim invalid or a dif-
ferent interpretation that renders the claim not infringed. Which interpretation the court
chooses may be a matter of indifference to the accused infringer.

elements that deﬁnes the patented invention. In such cases the preamble is
not considered a claim limitation, and this can have important conse-
quences. Imagine a product identical to the “cosmetic emulsion” described
in the example but used as an industrial lubricant. If the preamble were dis-
regarded, the lubricant would infringe the claim.
Courts treat a preamble as a claim limitation only if it “‘recites essential
structure or steps, or if it is necessary to give life, meaning, and vitality to the
claim.’”55 This is a nebulous distinction. On occasion the preamble must be
counted because the “body” of the claim that follows includes references to
language found there. The body of the claim used as an example refers to
“said emulsion,” so it is likely that a court would consider the “aqueous cos-
metic emulsion” language a claim limitation.56 On other occasions, pream-
ble language is “essential” because the applicant relied upon it to distinguish
the invention from the prior art.57 On the other hand, if the preamble states
an intended use or environment for the invention, but the remainder of the
claim by itself describes what the invention is, then the preamble will not be
treated as a part of the claim.58
If the claim read without the preamble leaves one guessing what the
invention is, the preamble cannot be ignored. In Diversitech Corp. v. Century
Steps, Inc.,59 for example, the claim referred to an equipment-supporting base
Interpreting Patent Claims
63
55 NTP, Inc. v. Research in Motion, Ltd., 418 F.3d 1282, 1305 (Fed. Cir. 2005); see also Bicon,
Inc. v. Straumann Co., 441 F.3d 945, 952 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Catalina Mktg. Int’l, Inc. v.
Coolsavings.com, Inc., 289 F.3d 801, 808 (Fed. Cir. 2002). Yet there is no “litmus test” for
deciding if a preamble should be considered a claim limitation. Bicon, 441 F.3d at 952. “To
say that a preamble is a limitation if it gives ‘meaning to the claim’ may merely state the prob-
lem rather than lead one to the answer.” Corning Glass Works v. Sumitomo Electric U.S.A.,
Inc., 868 F.2d 1251, 1257 (Fed. Cir. 1989). The decision must be made in the context of the
entire patent, which may establish “‘what the inventors actually invented and intended to
encompass by the claim.’” Catalina, 289 F.3d at 808. Speciﬁcally, structure or steps recited in
the preamble and “underscored as important by the speciﬁcation” are more likely to be con-
sidered claim limitations. Id.
56 See Bicon, 441 F.3d at 952 (“when the limitations in the body of the claim ‘rely upon and
derive antecedent basis from the preamble, then the preamble may act as a necessary com-
ponent of the claimed invention’”); NTP, 418 F.3d at 1306.
57 See In re Cruciferous Sprout Litigation, 301 F.3d 1343, 1347 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Catalina,
289 F.3d at 808.
58 “[A] preamble is not limiting ‘where a patentee deﬁnes a structurally complete invention in
the claim body and uses the preamble only to state a purpose or intended use for the inven-
tion.’” Catalina, 289 F.3d at 808; see also Bicon, 441 F.3d at 952. “[P]reamble language merely
extolling beneﬁts or features of the claimed invention does not limit the claim scope without
clear reliance on those beneﬁts or features as patentably signiﬁcant.” Catalina, 289 F.3d at
809. Similar rules apply to “whereby clauses.” If a method claim describes a step “whereby”
the invention accomplishes some task, the clause will be overlooked if it does no more than
recite the intended result. On the other hand, if the whereby clause “states a condition that is
material to patentability, it cannot be ignored in order to change the substance of the inven-
tion.” Hoffer v. Microsoft Corp., 405 F.3d 1326, 1329 (Fed. Cir. 2005).
59 850 F.2d 675, 677–78 (Fed. Cir. 1988).

comprising a foam core and a cementitious coating. Without the preamble,
the claim would have referred to the core and the coating, but one would
have no idea what the invention really was. In Diversitech the court found
the preamble necessary to deﬁne the invention. In contrast, in STX LLC v.
Brine, Inc.,60 the preamble boasted that the patented lacrosse stick would
provide “improved handling and playing characteristics.” Because the
remainder of the claim stood alone as a structurally complete description of
the stick, the court did not ﬁnd that the preamble language limited the claim.61
On the subject of preambles, it is important to note the difference
between “comprising” and “consisting of,” the two phrases that typically
conclude a claim preamble. “Comprising” is a term of art, meaning that the
invention consists of the following combination of claim elements, by
themselves or in combination with additional elements.62 In Gillette Co. v.
Energizer Holdings, Inc.,63 the court found that claims to a razor “comprising”
three blades could be applied to four-blade razors too. A four-blade razor
has three blades—plus one more. “Consisting of,” on the other hand, means
“the following elements and no others.”64 “Comprising” is the broader and
generally more useful term. If the preamble ends with “consisting essentially
of,” the claim allows additional, unrecited ingredients, but only if they do not
change the basic characteristics of the combination.65
7.7 SPECIAL CLAIM FORMATS
Several specialized claim formats are available to inventors who wish to
use them.
7.7.1 Jepson Claims
One specialized claim format is known as a “Jepson claim.”66 A Jepson
claim covers an improvement to an existing product. The Jepson format
includes a recitation of the pre-existing components in the preamble, and the
improvement in the body of the claim.67 For example:
In an instrument marker pen body including an ink reservoir and
means for receiving a writing tip, the improvement comprising a pen arm
64
Patent Law Essentials
60 211 F.3d 588 (Fed. Cir. 2000).
61 Id. at 591.
62 See Carl Zeiss Stiftung v. Renishaw PLC, 945 F.2d 1173, 1178 (Fed. Cir. 1991); Water Techs.
Corp. v. Calco, Ltd., 850 F.2d 660, 666 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
63 405 F.3d 1367 (Fed. Cir. 2005).
64 See CIAS, Inc. v. Alliance Gaming Corp., 504 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2007).
65 See Water Techs., 850 F.2d at 666.
66 Named after Ex parte Jepson, 243 O.G. 525 (Ass’t Comm’r Pat. 1917), the case that ﬁrst
approved the format.
67 See Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc. v. U.S. Surgical Corp., 93 F.3d 1572, 1577 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

holding means consisting of an integrally molded hinged member
adapted to fold against a surface of the pen body and to be locked
against said surface by engageable locking means and to receive and
secure in place against said surface a pen arm when said hinged mem-
ber is in its folded and locked position.68
The words “In [a pre-existing device], the improvement comprising” are typ-
ical of a Jepson claim. The signiﬁcance of a Jepson claim is that the elements
recited in the preamble are claim limitations, and the patent applicant, by
implication, admits that those elements exist in the prior art.69
7.7.2 Markush Claims
Another specialized claim format is the “Markush claim,” generally used
to describe chemical and biological inventions. A Markush claim includes a
claim element selected from a group of possibilities—for example, “a sugar
selected from the group consisting of sucrose, fructose, and lactose.”70
“Markush groups” are used when there is no generic term that conveniently
describes the desired claim element.71
7.7.3 Product-by-Process Claims
While most patent claims can be characterized as process, apparatus, or
composition of matter claims, a so-called product-by-process claim straddles
the usual categories. A product-by-process claim, as the name suggests,
describes a product made by a speciﬁc process. Traditionally, product-by-
process claims have been used when the invention is best described in terms
of how it is made rather than what it is.72 Consider how an omelet could be
described to someone who had never seen one. One might attempt to
describe an omelet in physical or chemical terms, but a better approach
would be to provide the recipe. At one time product-by-process claims were
allowed only when the invention could not be described except through the
“recipe”—for example, when the precise physical characteristics of the prod-
uct could not be determined. Now they are allowed even if they are not
strictly necessary.
There has been much debate about the role to be given the process in
interpreting a product-by-process claim. In Scripps Clinic & Research Found.
v. Genentech, Inc.,73 the Federal Circuit held that the process described in a
Interpreting Patent Claims
65
68 Pentec, Inc. v. Graphic Controls Corp., 776 F.2d 309, 312 (Fed. Cir. 1985) (emphasis added).
69 Id. at 315.
70 For an example of a Markush claim, see Merck & Co., Inc. v. Mylan Pharmaceuticals, Inc.,
190 F.3d 1335, 1339 (Fed. Cir. 1999).
71 See Application of Weber, 580 F.2d 455, 457 n.4 (C.C.P.A. 1978).
72 See In re Thorpe, 777 F.2d 695, 697 (Fed. Cir. 1985).
73 927 F.2d 1565 (Fed. Cir. 1991).

product-by-process claim could be ignored in determining the scope of the
claim. In other words, if the claim recited the product of process X, an identi-
cal product made by a different process would still infringe.74 According to this
way of thinking, the process recited in a product-by-process claim simply
deﬁnes the product in a roundabout manner. The subject matter of the claim
is still the omelet, not the recipe. This interpretation of the law follows the
practice of the Patent Ofﬁce in determining if a product-by-process claim
should issue. The Patent Ofﬁce will not issue a product-by-process claim
unless it ﬁnds that the product, not just the process, is something new.75
However, in Atlantic Thermoplastics Co. v. Faytex Corp.,76 a different panel
of Federal Circuit judges rejected the earlier interpretation and held that the
process set forth in a product-by-process claim does limit the claim, at least
in litigation, so an identical product made by a different process does not
infringe.77 According to this court, the Scripps Clinic rule was contrary to
Supreme Court authority and the hornbook principle of patent law that all
elements of a claim are essential in determining infringement. Although it
acknowledged that different standards are applied in patent prosecution, the
court noted that this discrepancy is not unique. For example, the Patent
Ofﬁce will give claims their “broadest reasonable interpretation,” whereas
no such rule applies in litigation.78
Conﬂict in the Federal Circuit can be resolved through a procedure
allowing an expanded, or en banc, panel of all the judges on the Federal
Circuit to review the case and decide collectively how the conﬂict will be
settled. Unfortunately, the procedure was not followed in this instance,
and the conﬂict between Scripps Clinic and Atlantic Thermoplastics remains.
As a rule, if two decisions of the Federal Circuit conﬂict, the earlier one
(i.e., Scripps Clinic) takes precedence.79 Yet if Scripps Clinic really was con-
trary to Supreme Court precedent (a matter on which the Federal Circuit
judges disagree), then the Supreme Court authority would control.80 More
66
Patent Law Essentials
74 “[T]he correct reading of product-by-process claims is that they are not limited to product[s]
prepared by the process set forth in the claims.” Scripps Clinic & Research Found. v. Genen-
tech, Inc., 927 F.2d 1565, 1583 (Fed. Cir. 1991).
75 See Thorpe, 777 F.2d at 697.
76 970 F.2d 834 (Fed. Cir. 1992).
77 Id. at 847.
78 Id. at 846. The court suggested, but did not clearly state, that a product-by-process claim
involving a new process but an old product would be held valid in litigation, even though
it would be (or should be) rejected by the Patent Ofﬁce. If this were not true, it would vio-
late the principle that claims must be given the same interpretation for infringement as for
validity.
79 Newell Co. v. Kenney Mfg. Co., 846 F.2d 787, 765 (Fed. Cir. 1988). Relying on this principle,
some lower courts have rejected the reasoning of Atlantic Thermoplastics in favor of Scripps
Clinic. See, e.g., Trustees of Columbia Univ. v. Roche Diagnostics GmbH, 126 F. Supp. 2d 16,
32 (D. Mass. 2000).
80 Some lower courts have adopted this approach. See, e.g., Lupin Ltd. v. Abbott Labs., 491 F.
Supp. 2d 563, 567–68 (E.D. Va. 2007).

than a decade later, it is still impossible for anyone to say precisely what
the law is.81
7.7.4 “Means-Plus-Function” Claims
One form of specialized claim format that has become extremely com-
mon is the “means-plus-function” format authorized by 35 U.S.C. § 112,
Paragraph 6. At one time, courts held that a claim to an apparatus must
describe the features of the apparatus in precise physical terms rather than
in terms of the functions they perform. So, for example, a claim to a mouse-
trap could properly refer to a “steel spring” but could not refer simply to a
“means for snapping the trap shut.” The latter claim would literally cover a
mousetrap with a steel spring, a plastic spring, a rubber band, or any other
mechanism that might close the trap. Such a claim would not adequately
deﬁne the invention, since it could cover many things that the patentee had
not invented or disclosed.
Permitting a patentee to describe a feature of the invention in terms of its
function does have certain advantages, however. In the prior example, the
inventor might have in mind the steel spring, the plastic spring, the rubber
band, and dozens of other means for snapping the trap shut, and the choice of
which to use might have little to do with the essence of the invention. A person
skilled in designing mousetraps who read the patent might also realize that var-
ious forms of springs and elastic bands could be used. In this situation, it would
seem pointless to require the inventor to provide a long list of every variety of
spring, rubber band, or similar device that the inventor could imagine. More-
over, it might be too easy for a competitor to avoid the patent simply by com-
ing up with a closing mechanism that the patentee had neglected to list.
The result of this tension between convenience and the need for speci-
ﬁcity in claim drafting was legislative compromise, embodied in § 112, ¶ 6,
which states:
An element in a claim for a combination may be expressed as a means
or step for performing a speciﬁed function without the recital of struc-
ture, material or acts in support thereof, and such claim shall be con-
strued to cover the corresponding structure, material or acts described
in the speciﬁcation and equivalents thereof.
Thus, an inventor can choose to describe an element of the invention as
a physical structure (i.e., “steel spring”) or as a “means” for performing a
speciﬁed function (i.e., “means for snapping the trap shut”), leaving it to
the speciﬁcation to describe the physical structure that performs the func-
tion. If the inventor chooses the latter option, the claim will cover the
Interpreting Patent Claims
67
81 In SmithKline Beecham Corp. v. Apotex Corp., 439 F.3d 1312, 1316–17 (Fed. Cir. 2006), the
Federal Circuit noted the long-standing conﬂict but declined to address it.

speciﬁc structure disclosed in the speciﬁcation and “equivalents” of that
structure (i.e., a mousetrap with a steel spring or the equivalent of a steel
spring).82 Deciding just what is “equivalent” is a matter discussed in
Section 10.7.
Although any claim element including the word “means” is presumed to be a
means-plus-function element construed in accordance with § 112, ¶ 6,83 that
presumption can be rebutted if the claim element, contrary to the language of
§ 112, ¶ 6, does recite structure.84 For example, in Envirco Corp. v. Clestra Clean-
room, Inc.,85 the Federal Circuit held that a claim element calling for a “second
bafﬂe means” was not a means-plus-function element because the claim recited
structural information concerning the location and formation of the bafﬂe.86
The difference is signiﬁcant; when a claim element is construed as a means-
68
Patent Law Essentials
82 For an inventor to take advantage of § 112 ¶ 6, the patent or prosecution history must pro-
vide a clear association between the means element and corresponding structure in the spec-
iﬁcation. Default Proof Credit Card Sys., Inc. v. Home Depot U.S.A., Inc., 412 F.3d 1291,
1298 (Fed. Cir. 2005). If multiple structures described in the speciﬁcation perform the speci-
ﬁed function, the means element reads on each of them and their equivalents. See Linear
Tech. Corp. v. Impala Linear Corp., 379 F.3d 1311, 1322 (Fed. Cir. 2004); TI Gp. Automotive
Sys., Inc. v. VDO North America, L.L.C., 375 F.3d 1126, 1137 (Fed. Cir. 2004). If no embod-
iment described in the speciﬁcation provides structure to support the means-plus-function
element, then the claim is invalid on grounds of indeﬁniteness. Biomedino, LLC v. Waters
Techs. Corp., 490 F.3d 946, 950 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Intellectual Property Development Inc. v.
UA-Columbia Cablevision of Westchester Inc., 336 F.3d 1308, 1319 (Fed. Cir. 2003). When
a patent claims a computer-implemented invention in means-plus-function format, its disclo-
sure of structure must be more than a reference to a general-purpose computer or micro-
processor. Aristocrat Techs. Australia PTY Ltd. v. Int’l Game Tech., 521 F.3d 1328, 1333 (Fed.
Cir. 2008). However, reference to a speciﬁc program algorithm can supply the missing “struc-
ture,” because a programmed general-purpose computer is, in effect, a special-purpose
machine. Id.
83 Biomedino, 490 F.3d at 950; Lighting World, Inc. v. Birchwood Lighting, Inc., 382 F.3d 1354,
1358 (Fed. Cir. 2004).
84 See Biomedino, 490 F.3d at 950 (“‘This presumption can be rebutted when the claim, in addi-
tion to the functional language, recites structure sufﬁcient to perform the claimed function in
its entirety.’”); TI Gp., 375 F.3d at 1135; Micro Chemical, Inc. v. Great Plains Chemical Co.,
194 F.3d 1250, 1257 (Fed. Cir. 1999). The presumption also fails if the claim element recites
no function for the “means” to perform. See Allen Eng’g Corp. v. Bartell Indus., Inc., 299 F.3d
1336, 1347 (Fed. Cir. 2002). An element that does not use the word “means” is presumed not
to be a “means-plus-function” element. Depuy Spine, Inc. v. Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Inc.,
469 F.3d 1005, 1023 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (describing the presumption as “‘a strong one that is not
easily overcome’”); MIT v. Abacus Software, 462 F.3d 1344, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2006). However,
the presumption will be rebutted and § 112, ¶ 6 applied if, even in the absence of “means”
vocabulary, the element employs functional language and omits an adequate disclosure of
structure. See MIT, 462 F.3d at 1353–54 (“colorant selection mechanism” interpreted as a
means-plus-function element because the word “mechanism” does not describe any speciﬁc
structure); but cf. Lighting World, 382 F.3d at 1358–61 (although the term “connector” does not
bring to mind any speciﬁc structure, it is still a structural term; it is not a nonce word like
“widget” or “ram-a-fram”).
85 209 F.3d 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2000).
86 Id. at 1365.

plus-function element, the patent owner is put to the additional burden of
demonstrating that the structures of the accused product are identical or equiv-
alent to the structures disclosed in the patent speciﬁcation. Some patent appli-
cants seem to overuse the “means” format, perhaps not appreciating the risks.87
Note that § 112, ¶ 6 applies only to a “claim for a combination.” A “sin-
gle means claim” is still considered invalid.88 One could not claim, for exam-
ple, just “a means for catching a mouse” and leave it at that. The
“means-plus-function” format can be used only when the claim breaks down
the invention into speciﬁc components.
7.7.5 “Step-Plus-Function” Claims
The language of § 112, ¶ 6 also provides for a “step-plus-function” claim—
in other words, a process claim in which a step of the process is described
solely in terms of the “function” performed by that step, without the recital
of a speciﬁc “act.” Such a claim would cover the “act” described in the spec-
iﬁcation and its equivalents.89 While it is comparatively easy to distinguish
between a function and a structure, it is much more difﬁcult to distinguish
between a function and an act. Returning to the mousetrap example, a claim
element that referred to a “means for snapping the trap shut” would clearly
be a means-plus-function claim element, because, other than the generic
term “means,” the language describes the physical structure solely in terms
of the function it performs. Imagine, however, a mouse-trapping process
claim, one element of which is “closing the trap to imprison the mouse.” Is
“closing the trap” (or for that matter “imprisoning the mouse”) a “function”
or an “act”? Does it describe the step itself or only the result of the step?
According to the Federal Circuit, a “function” refers to “‘what a claim ele-
ment ultimately accomplishes.’”90 An “act” corresponds to “‘how the function
is accomplished.’”91 This would suggest that “imprisoning the mouse” is a
function, and “closing the trap” is an act. However, it is difﬁcult to maintain
the supposed distinction. In Masco Corp v. United States, the court held that
“transmitting a force” was an “act” because “transmitting” described how the
force was conveyed through mechanical parts.92 Yet “transmitting a force”
Interpreting Patent Claims
69
87 See Allen Eng’g, 299 F.3d at 1348 (patent applicant was “clearly enamored of the word
‘means,’” using it repeatedly where, due to the recitation of structure, such use did not trig-
ger § 112, ¶ 6).
88 See In re Hyatt, 708 F.2d 712, 714 (Fed. Cir. 1983).
89 The term “step for” suggests an intention to invoke § 112, ¶ 6, though the term “steps of” does
not. Masco Corp. v. United States, 303 F.3d 1316, 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2002).
90 Id. (emphasis in original).
91 Id. (emphasis in original); see also Seal-Flex, Inc. v. Athletic Track and Court Construction, 
172 F.3d 836, 849–50 (Fed. Cir. 1999) (Rader, J., concurring).
92 Masco, 303 F.3d at 1328; see also O.I. Corp. v. Tamar Co., 115 F.3d 1576 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (“the
step[] of . . . passing the [material] through a passage” construed as an “act” rather than a
function).

93 O.I. Corp., 115 F.3d at 1583; see also Cardiac Pacemakers, Inc. v. St. Jude Medical, Inc., 381
F.3d 1371, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2004) (“Method claims necessarily recite the steps of the method,
and the preamble words that ‘the method comprises the steps of’ do not automatically con-
vert each ensuing step into the form of § 112 ¶ 6.”). Claims that use the term “step for” are
not presumed to be drafted with §112 ¶ 6 in mind; however, claims that omit the words “step
for” are presumed to be ordinary method claims. Id. at 1382–83.
70
Patent Law Essentials
could be understood as a necessary result, accomplished by the action of any
number of mechanical contrivances—more of a what than a how.
The Federal Circuit seems reluctant to construe any claim as a step-plus-
function claim—which is understandable given the difﬁculties. It has
observed that “[i]f we were to construe every process claim containing steps
described by an ‘ing’ verb, such as passing, heating, reacting, transferring, etc.
into a step-plus-function limitation, we would be limiting process claims in
a manner never intended by Congress.”93 Unless patentees ﬁnd the step-
plus-function option indispensable, which is unlikely considering how
seldom courts hold it to apply, perhaps the best solution would be legisla-
tion removing the problematic language from § 112, ¶ 6.

CHAPTER 8
Conditions of Patentability
8.1 EXAMINATION VERSUS LITIGATION
Before a patent issues, the application must go through a process of
“examination” by the Patent Ofﬁce.1 The purpose of the examination is to
ensure that the application meets various requirements imposed by law.
These requirements, which are explained in some detail in the pages that
follow, include the following:
• The invention must have utility.
• The claims must be deﬁnite.
• The speciﬁcation must enable the practice of the invention and must disclose the
inventor’s best mode of practicing the invention.
• The claimed invention must be novel—that is, it must be new and non-obvious in
comparison to the prior art.
In spite of the examination process, patents sometimes issue that fail to
meet these fundamental requirements. This is not always the fault of the
Patent Ofﬁce. For example, the Patent Ofﬁce cannot judge whether a claim
is novel in comparison to an earlier product if, as not infrequently occurs,
the Patent Ofﬁce is not even aware of the earlier product. Moreover, patent
examination is not a practical forum for inquiring into certain questions,
such as whether the information disclosed in a speciﬁcation really reﬂects the
applicant’s “best mode.” Questions like these can be explored effectively
only in an adversarial proceeding. For all of these reasons, courts have the
1 See Section 5.1.

power to ﬁnd an issued patent invalid,2 and invalidity is a complete defense
to infringement.3
The patentability requirements discussed in this chapter are relevant in
the examination process, where they can be grounds for rejecting an appli-
cation, and in the litigation context, where they can be grounds for holding
an already issued patent invalid. There are some procedural differences in
the way these requirements are enforced in the Patent Ofﬁce and in the
courts. For example, when judging whether a claim is novel, the Patent
Ofﬁce will give the claim its “broadest reasonable construction.”4 A court
will not.5 Nevertheless, the rules and precedent that apply in one context
generally apply in the other context as well.
8.2 PRESUMPTION OF VALIDITY
Although courts have the power to hold an issued patent invalid, they do
not discount the work of the Patent Ofﬁce entirely. All patents are presumed
valid, and the burden of overcoming that presumption rests with the accused
infringer.6 The presumption can be overcome only by “clear and convincing
evidence” of invalidity.7 This standard of proof is something less than the
“beyond a reasonable doubt” standard of criminal law, but it requires more
than just a preponderance of the evidence.8 The presumption of validity
applies only after a patent has issued; there is no presumption in the Patent
Ofﬁce in favor of the applicant.9
72
Patent Law Essentials
2 See Pﬁzer, Inc. v. Apotex, Inc., 480 F.3d 1348, 1359 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (“a court is never bound
by an examiner’s ﬁnding in an ex parte patent application proceeding”); Quad Environmental
Technologies Corp. v. Union Sanitary Dist., 946 F.2d 870, 876 (Fed. Cir. 1991) (“The courts are
the ﬁnal arbiter of patent validity and, although courts may take cognizance of, and beneﬁt
from, the proceedings before the patent examiner, the question is ultimately for the courts to
decide, without deference to the rulings of the patent examiner.”).
3 Lough v. Brunswick Corp., 86 F.3d 1113, 1123 (Fed. Cir. 1996).
4 Phillips v. AWH Corp., 415 F.3d 1303, 1316 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (en banc); In re Icon Health & Fitness,
Inc., 496 F.3d 1374, 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2007); In re Morris, 127 F.3d 1048, 1054 (Fed. Cir. 1997).
5 See Atlantic Thermoplastics Co. v. Faytex Corp., 970 F.2d 834, 846 (Fed. Cir. 1992).
6 35 U.S.C. § 282; Pﬁzer, Inc. v. Apotex, Inc., 480 F.3d 1348, 1359 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Apotex
USA, Inc. v. Merck & Co., 254 F.3d 1031, 1036 (Fed. Cir. 2001); Budde v. Harley-Davidson,
Inc., 250 F.3d 1369, 1376 (Fed. Cir. 2001). The presumption is “related to the presumption
that the PTO does its job properly.” Superior Fireplace Co. v. Majestic Prods. Co., 270 F.3d
1358, 1367 n.1 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
7 Pﬁzer, 480 F.3d at 1359; Intellectual Property Development Inc. v. UA-Columbia Cablevision
of Westchester Inc., 336 F.3d 1308, 1319 (Fed. Cir. 2003); Budde, 250 F.3d at 1376.
8 Pﬁzer, 480 F.3d at 1359 n.5 (“The ‘clear and convincing’ standard is an intermediate standard
which lies somewhere in between the ‘beyond a reasonable doubt’ and the ‘preponderance
of the evidence’ standards of proof.”). The evidence must produce an “abiding conviction”
that the facts are “highly probable.” Id.
9 In re Morris, 127 F.3d 1048, 1054 (Fed. Cir. 1997).

Some older cases found a weakened presumption of validity where the
challenger relied on grounds that were not considered by the Patent Ofﬁce.
The Federal Circuit maintains that the presumption of validity is ever pres-
ent and unchanging, no matter what grounds of invalidity may be asserted.10
It admits, however, that the presumption is easier to overcome when the
grounds are new, since the court is not put in the position of contradicting
an expert examiner.11
The presumption of validity applies separately to each claim of a patent.12
Even if Claim 1 has been proven invalid by clear and convincing evidence,
Claim 2 is unaffected until a challenger proves that it, too, is invalid. Gener-
ally, a patentee’s goal in litigation is to prove infringement of at least one
valid claim.
8.3 ASSIGNOR ESTOPPEL
“Assignor estoppel” is a doctrine that prevents one who assigns patent
rights from arguing when convenient that the same patent is invalid.
Consider the following scenario. An inventor obtains a patent on a new
apparatus and then assigns all rights to his employer.13 The inventor
receives valuable consideration for the assignment—perhaps a bonus.
Afterward the inventor leaves his employer to form his own company and
produces a product covered by the patent. The former employer accuses
the inventor of infringing what is now its patent. The inventor can argue
about the scope of the patent, but cannot assert an invalidity defense such
as anticipation or obviousness.14
Conditions of Patentability
73
10 Pﬁzer, 480 F.3d at 1359–60; Hybritech Inc. v. Monoclonal Antibodies, Inc., 802 F.2d 1367,
1375 (Fed. Cir. 1986) (“the presumption remains intact and on the challenger throughout the
litigation, and the clear and convincing evidence standard does not change”).
11 Ultra-Tex Surfaces, Inc. v. Hill Bros. Chemical Co., 204 F.3d 1360, 1367 (Fed. Cir. 2000)
(describing the “additional burden” faced by the challenger who relies on “the very same ref-
erences that were before the examiner”); Hybritech, 802 F.2d at 1375 (“the introduction of
prior art not before the examiner may facilitate the challenger’s meeting [its] burden of
proof”).
12 35 U.S.C. § 282 (“Each claim of a patent . . . shall be presumed valid independently of the
validity of other claims; dependent or multiple dependent claims shall be presumed valid
even though dependent upon an invalid claim.”). There is one very specialized exception
involving obviousness challenges to claims describing substances produced by biotechno-
logical processes. See 35 U.S.C. §§ 282, 103(b)(1).
13 See Section 6.2.
14 See Pandrol USA, LP v. Airboss Railway Prods., Inc., 424 F.3d 1161, 1166 (Fed. Cir. 2005);
Mentor Graphics Corp. v. Quickturn Design Sys., Inc., 150 F.3d 1374, 1378 (Fed. Cir. 1998)
(“Without exceptional circumstances (such as an express reservation by the assignor of the
right to challenge the validity of the patent or an express waiver of the assignee of the right
to assert assignor estoppel), one who assigns a patent surrenders with that assignment the
right to later challenge the validity of the assigned patent.”).

Anyone who assigns patent rights to another in exchange for valuable
consideration15 implicitly acknowledges the validity of the patent and gives up
the right to challenge that validity later on. In fairness, “an assignor should not
be permitted to sell something and later assert that what was sold is worthless,
all to the detriment of the assignee.”16 The rule applies to the individual who
assigned the patent, and it may apply to others with whom that individual is
involved. For example, if the defendant company is not owned by the inven-
tor/assignor, but it employs him in a position of responsibility, the company
may still be barred from contesting the validity of the patent.17
8.4 UTILITY
Section 101 of the Patent Act states that a patent may be granted to the
discoverer of a “new and useful” invention. Article 1, Section 8 of the
Constitution also speaks of promoting the “useful” arts. From these sources,
courts have derived the rule, known as the utility requirement, that an inven-
tion must be useful before it can be patented.18
A patentable invention must have a “speciﬁc and substantial utility”—
meaning a practical or “real-world” application.19 Incremental achieve-
ments in basic research, important to researchers as steps toward practical
advancements, still lack the immediate beneﬁt needed to satisfy the utility
requirement.20 Similarly, the discovery of a new substance, or a process for
making a substance, does not warrant a patent unless a use for that sub-
stance has been identiﬁed.21 In these cases a patent might only impede the
further research required to produce genuinely useful discoveries.22
Accordingly, an application must describe the utility of the claimed inven-
tion in terms that are speciﬁc, not speculative or nebulous.23 One cannot,
74
Patent Law Essentials
15 The “valuable consideration” need not be a separate payment or bonus. Where the
inventor/assignor is an employee of a corporation, that employee’s regular salary is likely to 
be considered adequate consideration, at least if the invention was within the scope of the
inventor/assignor’s employment. See Diamond Scientiﬁc Co. v. Ambico, Inc., 848 F.2d 1220,
1225 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
16 Diamond Scientiﬁc, 848 F.2d at 1224; see also Pandrol, 424 F.3d at 1166–67 (assignor estoppel
prevents “unfairness and injustice”).
17 See Shamrock Techs., Inc. v. Medical Sterilization, Inc., 903 F.2d 789, 793 (Fed. Cir. 1990).
18 See Stiftung v. Renishaw PLC, 945 F.2d 1173, 1180 (Fed. Cir. 1991). The utility requirement
does not apply to design patents, discussed in Section 12.1.
19 In re Fischer, 421 F.3d 1365, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2005).
20 See id. at 1375.
21 See In re Ziegler, 992 F.2d 1197, 1201–03 (Fed. Cir. 1993) (that a compound can produce a
“ﬁlm” is an inadequate statement of utility, if the usefulness of the ﬁlm itself is unclear).
22 Although the unavailability of patents for basic scientiﬁc research may discourage endeavors
that would ultimately prove of great beneﬁt, courts have concluded as a matter of policy that
it is more important to leave scientiﬁc knowledge unencumbered until it reaches the stage of
practical application. See Brenner v. Manson, 383 U.S 519, 534 (1966).
23 Fischer, 421 F.3d at 1371.

for example, merely argue that the substance one has discovered holds
promise as a research tool.24
New pharmaceuticals present a special problem because years of testing
may be required to demonstrate that they are safe and effective. In In re
Brana,25 the Federal Circuit held that animal studies could provide
sufﬁcient evidence of utility, even though FDA approval would require fur-
ther testing.26 The court explained that if full FDA approval were required
before a patent could be granted, the costs would discourage some com-
panies from patenting, and perhaps from developing, potentially impor-
tant discoveries.
Inventions that serve a relatively trivial purpose still have utility. One can
ﬁnd many patents claiming toys, novelties, and the like. If they serve their
purpose, they are useful enough to receive a patent.27 The only kinds of prac-
tical invention categorically excluded from patentability on grounds of non-
utility are those whose purpose is deemed illegal or “immoral.” Until 1977,
gambling machines were held to lack utility.28 The exclusion still applies to
any invention useful only in committing a crime or fraud—such as a method
of counterfeiting currency.29
One of the more curious utility cases of recent years is Juicy Whip, Inc. v.
Orange Bang, Inc.,30 where the invention was a beverage dispenser like those one
might see at the concession stand of a movie theater. The dispenser appeared to
dispense the beverage from a supply in a glass bowl. In fact, the machine
mixed the beverage elsewhere as it was dispensed—more practical option,
Conditions of Patentability
75
24 Because other countries have different requirements regarding such disclosures, see Cross v.
Iizuka, 753 F.2d 1040 (Fed. Cir. 1985), these problems often arise when the applicant
attempts to rely on a foreign application in order to establish priority. See Section 12.3.
25 51 F.3d 1560 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
26 “Usefulness in patent law, and in particular in the context of pharmaceutical inventions, nec-
essarily includes the expectation of further research and development. The stage at which an
invention in this ﬁeld becomes useful is well before it is ready to be administered to humans.”
Brana, 51 F.3d at 1568.
27 “The threshold of utility is not high: An invention is ‘useful’ under section 101 if it is capa-
ble of providing some identiﬁable beneﬁt.” Juicy Whip, Inc. v. Orange Bang, Inc., 185 F.3d
1364, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 1999). One patent demonstrating the potential breadth of the concept
of utility is U.S. Patent No. 5,457,821, entitled “Hat Simulating a Fried Egg.” According to
the speciﬁcation, “[t]he hat ﬁnds utility, for example, as an attention-getting item in connec-
tion with promotional activities at trade shows, conventions, and the like. Further the hat is
useful in connection with egg sale promotions in the egg industry.” Perhaps a design patent
would have been more appropriate. See Section 12.1.
28 See Tol-O-Matic, Inc. v. Proma Produkt-Und Marketing Gesellschaft M.b.H, 945 F.2d 1546,
1552 (Fed. Cir. 1991).
29 “‘All that the law requires is that the invention should not be frivolous, or injurious to the
well-being, good policy, or good morals of society. The word useful therefore is incorporated
into the act in contradistinction to mischievous or immoral.’” Id., 945 F.2d at 1553. Even the
exception for inventions with immoral or illegal purposes “has not been applied broadly in
recent years.” Juicy Whip, 185 F.3d at 1366–67.
30 185 F.3d 1364 (Fed. Cir. 1999).

but somehow less tempting to purchasers.31 Although the purpose of the inven-
tion was to mislead consumers, the court found that the invention had utility.
As the court observed, “[i]t is not at all unusual for a product to be designed to
appear to viewers to be something it is not,” examples including imitation dia-
monds and simulated leather.32 It is the task of other government agencies, not
the Patent Ofﬁce, to protect consumers from potential deception.33
It might be argued that an invention is useful only if it is an improve-
ment over the prior art. However, an invention can still be patented even
if it is inferior to, or no better than, existing devices or methods.34 As the
Federal Circuit has observed, “An invention need not be the best or
the only way to accomplish a certain result, and it need only be useful to
some extent and in certain applications.”35 It would be difﬁcult, and per-
haps pointless, for the Patent Ofﬁce to attempt to assess in every case
whether the claimed invention is really an improvement. An invention
inferior to its predecessors in some respects may be superior in others. In
many cases, the advantages of a particular invention cannot be fully appre-
ciated until long after it is patented. In the end, the Patent Ofﬁce is not in
the business of judging whether one invention is better than another. This
is one reason the popular conception of a patent as an award for techno-
logical achievement is misguided. In spite of the frequent attempts of
advertisers to imply that a product is “so good it’s patented,” patents are a
reﬂection of novelty, not of merit.
Inventions must achieve a minimum level of operability, since an inven-
tion that fails to work at all cannot be said to have utility.36 In most cases,
the Patent Ofﬁce accepts the applicant’s representation that the invention
works.37 The Patent Ofﬁce is not equipped to perform experiments. But
76
Patent Law Essentials
31 “The display bowl is said to stimulate impulse buying by providing the consumer with a
visual beverage display. A pre-mix display bowl, however, has a limited capacity and is sub-
ject to contamination by bacteria.” Id. at 1365.
32 Id. at 1367. The comparison may be a bit unfair. Imitation goods may substitute for the real
thing without, necessarily, fooling anyone. The purpose of the beverage dispenser seems to
have been only to mislead.
33 Id. at 1368.
34 Demaco Corp. v. F. Von Langsdorff Licensing Ltd., 851 F.2d 1387, 1390 (Fed. Cir. 1988) (“The
patent statute does not require that a patentable invention be superior to all prior devices.”).
35 Stiftung, 945 F.2d at 1180; see also Envirotech Corp. v. Al George, Inc., 730 F.2d 753, 762 (Fed.
Cir. 1984) (“the fact that an invention has only limited utility and is only operable in certain
applications is not grounds for ﬁnding lack of utility”).
36 Process Control Corp. v. Hydreclaim Corp., 190 F.3d 1350, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 1999); 
Tol-O-Matic, 945 F.2d at 1553 (referring to the “total incapacity” that could lead to a ﬁnding
of non-utility). On the other hand, if a claimed invention achieves some of its objectives but
not others, it will still be deemed to have utility. Stiftung, 945 F.2d at 1180 (“‘When a pro-
perly claimed invention meets at least one stated objective, utility under § 101 is clearly
shown.’”). Note that if a claimed invention is an impossibility, the patent fails on grounds of
enablement (see Section 8.6) as well as utility. Process Control, 190 F.3d at 1358.
37 See Rasmusson v. Smithkline Beecham Corp., 413 F.3d 1318, 1323 (Fed. Cir. 2005).

occasionally the nature of the invention raises suspicions, as when appli-
cants, defying the most fundamental principles of physics, attempt to patent
perpetual motion machines. On such occasions, the applicant may be
required to come forward with experimental evidence demonstrating that
the invention succeeds.38 In one case where the claimed device purported
to produce more energy than it consumed, the Patent Ofﬁce arranged for
tests to be conducted by the Bureau of Standards. Unfortunately, those tests
were unsuccessful.39
While the Patent Ofﬁce has limited means to challenge claims on grounds
of inoperability or impossibility, this is not necessarily the case in litigation.
A party charged with patent infringement may offer evidence demonstrating
that whatever is required by the claim is either physically impossible or
useless.40 On the other hand, if a claim actually has been infringed, a court
will be reluctant to ﬁnd that the invention lacks utility. As one court
observed, “People rarely, if ever, appropriate useless inventions.”41
8.5 DEFINITENESS
The function of patent claims is to identify what is covered by the patent.
If patent infringement can be compared to trespassing, the claims serve as
the boundary markers that deﬁne what is, and what is not, an encroachment
on the inventor’s exclusive territory.42 The law therefore requires that the
claims have a deﬁnite meaning understandable to those skilled in the art.43
This requirement is embodied in the second paragraph of 35 U.S.C. § 112,
which provides that the “speciﬁcation shall conclude with one or more
Conditions of Patentability
77
38 One example of an invention met with skepticism is discussed in Fregau v. Mossinghoff, 776
F.2d 1034 (Fed. Cir. 1985). The claimed method was supposed to enhance the density and
ﬂavor of beverages by passing them through a magnetic ﬁeld. The Patent Ofﬁce did not con-
sider the experimental evidence offered by the applicant convincing. Strangely, the Patent
Ofﬁce also found several examples of close, and equally unbelievable, prior art.
39 See Newman v. Quigg, 877 F.2d 1575 (Fed. Cir. 1989). Inventions based on cold fusion are
currently treated with great skepticism, but baldness cures have entered the realm of the
believable. See In re Swartz, 232 F.3d 862 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (cold fusion); In re Cortright, 
165 F.3d 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1999) (baldness cures).
40 See Raytheon Co. v. Roper Corp., 724 F.2d 951, 956–57 (Fed. Cir. 1983).
41 Raytheon, 724 F.2d at 959.
42 See S3 Inc. v. Nvidia Corp., 259 F.3d 1364, 1369 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“The purpose of claims is not
to explain the technology or how it works, but to state the legal boundaries of the patent grant.”).
43 See Halliburton Energy Servs., Inc. v. M-I LLC, 514 F.3d 1244, 1249 (Fed. Cir. 2008)
(“Because claims delineate the patentee’s right to exclude, the patent statute requires that the
scope of the claims be sufﬁciently deﬁnite to inform the public of the bounds of the protected
invention. . . . Otherwise, competitors cannot avoid infringement, defeating the public notice
function of patent claims.”); Young v. Lumenis, Inc., 492 F.3d 1336, 1346 (Fed. Cir. 2007);
All Dental Prodx, LLC v. Advantage Dental Prods., Inc., 309 F.3d 774, 779–80 (Fed. Cir.
2002); Oakley, Inc. v. Sunglass Hut Int’l, 316 F.3d 1331, 1340 (Fed. Cir. 2003).

claims particularly pointing out and distinctly claiming the subject matter
which the applicant regards as his invention.”
The test for compliance is whether a person experienced in the ﬁeld of
the invention, reading the claims and the patent speciﬁcation, would under-
stand the scope of the subject matter covered by the claims.44 If the claims
are so vague or unclear that those in the industry cannot reasonably deter-
mine what does or does not infringe the patent, the claims may be held
unpatentable or invalid. Recently, the Federal Circuit has described the
indeﬁniteness threshold as “somewhat high”45—invalidating only claims that
are “insolubly ambiguous” and impossible to narrow.46 A claim is not indef-
inite merely because it is difﬁcult to interpret.47
Because language is inherently imprecise, the law requires only such
precision in claim drafting as the subject matter permits.48 In Orthokinetics,
Inc. v. Safety Travel Chairs, Inc.,49 the patent claimed a wheelchair with a part
“so dimensioned” that it could be inserted in the space between the seats
and door frame of an automobile. The claim did not state what those
dimensions should be, nor could it have stated them precisely since they
would vary depending on the model of the automobile. The dimensions
for any particular automobile could easily be obtained by one skilled in the
art. The court held that the claim language was as precise as the subject
matter permitted: “The patent law does not require that all possible lengths
78
Patent Law Essentials
44 See Microprocessor Enhancement Corp. v. Texas Instruments Inc., 520 F.3d 1367, 1374
(Fed. Cir. 2008); Young, 492 F.3d at 1346; IPXL Holdings, L.L.C. v. Amazon.com, Inc.,
430 F.3d 1377, 1383–84 (Fed. Cir. 2005); Invitrogen Corp. v. Biocrest Mfg., L.P., 424 F.3d
1374, 1383 (Fed. Cir. 2005). Like enablement, discussed in Section 8.6, deﬁniteness is
determined from the perspective of one skilled in the art at the time the patent applica-
tion was ﬁled. W.L. Gore & Assocs., Inc. v. Garlock, Inc., 721 F.2d 1540, 1557 (Fed. Cir.
1983). A term that can be deﬁned only in terms of a subjective point of view—such as
“aesthetically pleasing”—is indeﬁnite. Datamize, LLC v. Plumtree Software, Inc., 417 F.3d
1342, 1350 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (“The scope of claim language cannot depend solely on the
unconstrained, subjective opinion of a particular individual purportedly practicing the
invention.”).
45 See Amgen, Inc. v. Hoechst Marion Roussel, Inc., 314 F.3d 1313, 1342 (Fed. Cir. 2003).
46 See Microprocessor Enhancement, 250 F.3d at 1374; Halliburton, 514 F.3d at 1249; Young, 492 F.3d
at 1346; Invitrogen, 424 F.3d at 1383.
47 Halliburton, 514 F.3d at 1249 (claims are not indeﬁnite even if the task of interpreting them is
“formidable” and the conclusion “one over which reasonable persons will disagree”);
Invitrogen, 424 F.3d at 1383; Datamize, 417 F.3d at 1374. Moreover, a claim is not indeﬁnite
merely because it is difﬁcult to determine whether one’s own product infringes. The difﬁculty
may lie in the inadequacy of testing procedures, not imprecision in the claim language. See
Invitrogen, 424 F.3d at 1384.
48 Hybritech Inc. v. Monoclonal Antibodies, Inc., 802 F.2d 1367, 1385 (Fed. Cir. 1986); see also
S3, 259 F.3d at 1367 (“‘If the claims when read in light of the speciﬁcation reasonably apprise
those skilled in the art of the scope of the invention, § 112 demands no more.’”). It has been
observed that a patent claim is “‘one of the most difﬁcult legal instruments to draw with accu-
racy.’” Slimfold Mfg. Co. v. Kinkead Indus., Inc., 810 F.2d 1113, 1117 (Fed. Cir. 1987).
49 806 F.2d 1565 (Fed. Cir. 1986).

corresponding to the spaces in hundreds of different automobiles be listed
in the patent, let alone that they be listed in the claims.”50 On the other
hand, in Halliburton Energy Servs., Inc. v. M-I LLC, the court held indeﬁnite
claims describing a “fragile gel.” The patent lacked any quantitative meas-
ure of fragility, and to say that the gel must be “adequate for the circum-
stances” did not resolve the ambiguity.51
The test for indeﬁniteness is whether the claim language is understandable
when read in light of the speciﬁcation. One function of the speciﬁcation is to
serve as a dictionary or glossary for any claim terms that might have a spe-
cialized meaning.52 The speciﬁcation may provide a speciﬁc deﬁnition for
otherwise vague claim language, or it may provide a test for measuring
whether a product falls within the intended meaning of the claim.53 Even if
some experimentation is required to determine the boundaries of the claim,
the claim will not be held indeﬁnite if the language is as precise as the subject
matter permits.54 The prosecution history also may provide information to
clarify the meaning of a disputed term.55
In spite of the requirement that claims use deﬁnite language, such
“words of degree” as “generally,” “approximately,” and “substantially
equal to” are commonly used.56 While these terms are inherently inexact,
they are often tolerated because they are “as precise as the subject matter
permits.” For example, in Rosemount, Inc. v. Beckman Instruments, Inc.,57 the
patent claims described a device having one component “in close
proximity” to another. The court found that “close proximity” was a term
used and understood in the industry. Had the inventor been forced to
specify a precise dimension (e.g., “within 0.5 centimeters”), the claim
would likely have been narrower than the true scope of the invention.
Moreover, requiring a precise deﬁnition of “close proximity” in the patent
Conditions of Patentability
79
50 Id. at 1576; see also Young, 492 F.3d at 1346 (the term “near” in the context of a procedure
for de-clawing a cat was not indeﬁnite, because dependent on the physical characteristics
of the cat).
51 Halliburton, 514 F.3d at 1254–56.
52 See Beachcombers, Int’l, Inc. v. Wildwood Creative Prods., Inc., 31 F.3d 1154, 1158 (Fed. Cir.
1994) (“As we have repeatedly said, a patentee can be his own lexicographer provided the
patentee’s deﬁnition, to the extent it differs from the conventional deﬁnition, is clearly set
forth in the speciﬁcation.”).
53 See Shatterproof Glass Corp. v. Libbey-Owens Ford Co., 758 F.2d 613, 624 (Fed. Cir. 1985);
Seattle Box Co. v. Industrial Crating & Packing, Inc., 731 F.2d 818, 826 (Fed. Cir. 1984); W.L.
Gore & Assocs., Inc. v. Garlock, Inc., 721 F.2d 1540, 1557–58 (Fed. Cir. 1983).
54 Exxon Research & Eng’g Co. v. U.S., 265 F.3d 1371, 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
55 See All Dental Prodx, 309 F.3d at 780 (“The prosecution history can . . . be relied upon to
clarify claim meaning and hence provide deﬁniteness.”); Texas Instruments Inc. v. U.S. Int’l
Trade Comm’n, 871 F.2d 1054, 1063 (Fed. Cir. 1989) (“The public is entitled to know the
scope of the claims but must look to both the patent speciﬁcation and the prosecution his-
tory, especially where there is doubt concerning the scope of the claims.”).
56 See Andrew Corp. v. Gabriel Elec., Inc., 847 F.2d 819, 821 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
57 727 F.2d 1540 (Fed. Cir. 1984).

speciﬁcation would “turn the construction of a patent into a mere semantic
quibble that serves no useful purpose.”58
On the other hand, a court will treat words of degree with suspicion if,
in litigation, the patentee argues that the term is broad enough to encom-
pass the accused product but narrow enough to avoid the prior art, with
no suggestion as to where the line in between should be drawn.59 In
Amgen, Inc. v. Chugai Pharmaceuticals Co.,60 the patentee claimed a protein
having a “speciﬁc activity” of “at least about 160,000 IU/AU.” A prior art
product exhibited a “speciﬁc activity” of 128,620 IU/AU. Since nothing
in the claims, the speciﬁcation, the prosecution history, or the prior art
provided any hint as to whether, for example, a protein having a “speciﬁc
activity” of 145,000 IU/AU would come within the scope of the claims,
the court held that the term “about” was insufﬁciently deﬁnite in the context
of that patent.
A deﬁnite claim provides competitors of the patent owner with fair warn-
ing of what will or will not infringe the patent. If claim language is vague,
competitors must proceed at their peril, and the uncertainty provides the
patent owner with what is, in effect, a broader claim. Yet the laudable effects
of the deﬁniteness requirement are undermined to some extent by the
“doctrine of equivalents.”61 According to that doctrine, even a product that
is not literally described by the claim language may infringe, if the
differences are “insubstantial.” The effect is to add an extra dimension of
uncertainty to every patent claim. The tension between the deﬁniteness
requirement and the doctrine of equivalents is one of the reasons that the
latter doctrine, though long established, is often criticized.62
8.6 ENABLEMENT
As discussed in Section 1.1, a patent can be regarded as a bargain between
the inventor and the public. In exchange for a monopoly on the invention
for a period of years, the inventor must disclose the invention in such clear
terms that, when the patent has expired, the public at large can take advan-
tage of the invention. This concept is behind the “enablement” and “best
80
Patent Law Essentials
58 Id. at 1547. The Patent Ofﬁce guidelines also require only a “reasonable degree of particu-
larity and distinctness.” MPEP § 2173.02. “Some latitude in the manner of expression and the
aptness of terms should be permitted even though the claim language is not as precise as the
examiner might desire.” Id. See also Oakley, 316 F.3d at 1341 (“a patentee need not deﬁne his
invention with mathematical precision”).
59 See Datamize, 417 F.3d at 1347 (claims must “‘clearly distinguish what is claimed from what
went before in the art and clearly circumscribe what is foreclosed from future enterprise’”
(quoting United Carbon Co. v. Binney & Smith Co., 317 U.S. 228, 236 (1942)).
60 927 F.2d 1200 (Fed. Cir. 1991).
61 See Section 10.6.
62 See Section 10.6.3.

mode” requirements.63 The enablement requirement comes from the following
language of 35 U.S.C. § 112 (emphasis added):
The speciﬁcation shall contain a written description of the inven-
tion, and of the manner and process of making and using it, in such
full, clear, concise, and exact terms as to enable any person skilled in
the art to which it pertains, or with which it is most nearly connected,
to make and use the same.
To satisfy the enablement requirement, the patent must describe the
invention in such clear and exact terms that persons skilled in the art can
make and use the invention without “undue experimentation.”64 Because
patents are intended to be read and used by those skilled in the art, the spec-
iﬁcation need not include information that such persons would already
know.65 A patent on an improved radio antenna need not disclose the entire
theory and practice of how to build a radio, beginning with Marconi.
Persons skilled in the radio art would know the basics already and would
have to be informed only of the inventor’s improvement.66
A patent can be enabling even though some experimentation is necessary,
so long as the experimentation is not “undue.”67 The deﬁnition of “undue”
varies depending on the nature of the invention and expectations in the indus-
try.68 Even time-consuming experimentation may not be “undue” if the exper-
iments are routine. In the biotechnology industry, for example, isolating cells
Conditions of Patentability
81
63 The enablement requirement also helps to ﬁx the date of invention for purposes of deter-
mining priority. See Section 8.9.2. The inclusion of an enabling disclosure in a patent appli-
cation demonstrates that the applicant had a completed invention no later than the ﬁling date.
64 Sitrick v. Dreamworks, LLC, 516 F.3d 993, 999 (Fed. Cir. 2008); Koito Mfg. Co. v. 
Turn-Key-Tech, LLC, 381 F.3d 1142, 1155 (Fed. Cir. 2004); AK Steel Corp. v. Sollac, 344
F.3d 1234, 1244 (Fed. Cir. 2003); Enzo Biochem, Inc. v. Calgene, Inc., 188 F.3d 1362, 1371
(Fed. Cir. 1999).
65 Koito, 381 F.3d at 1156; Chiron Corp. v. Genentech, Inc., 363 F.3d 1247, 1254 (Fed. Cir.
2004); Hybritech Inc. v. Monoclonal Antibodies, Inc., 802 F.2d 1367, 1384 (Fed. Cir. 1986)
(“[A] patent need not teach, and preferably omits, what is well known in the art.”).
66 See S3 Inc. v. Nvidia Corp., 259 F.3d 1364, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“To hold otherwise would
require every patent document to include a technical treatise for the unskilled reader.
Although an accommodation to the ‘common experience’ of lay persons may be feasible, it
is an unnecessary burden for inventors and has long been rejected as a requirement of patent
disclosures.”); Ajinomoto Co. v. Archer-Daniels-Midland Co., 228 F.3d 1338, 1346–47 (Fed.
Cir. 2000) (offering similar observations in the context of the best mode requirement).
67 See Chiron, 363 F.3d at 1253; Enzo, 188 F.3d at 1371. A patent disclosure is not meant to be a
“production speciﬁcation.” Koito, 381 F.3d at 1156.
68 Factors to consider include the amount of experimentation required, the presence or absence
of guidance in the patent disclosure, the skill of those practicing in the ﬁeld, and the extent
to which the art is “predictable.” See Enzo, 188 F.3d at 1371. If the patentee cannot succeed in
implementing its own invention, this suggests that the patent disclosure is non-enabling.
Ormco Corp. v. Align Tech., Inc., 498 F.3d 1307, 1319 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

that will produce a desired antibody may require testing many cells and dis-
carding all but a few. If the screening is routine and the patent speciﬁcation
tells the experimenter how to proceed, the disclosure is likely to sufﬁce.69
Patentees risk violating the enablement requirement when they reserve as
a trade secret some piece of information necessary to practice the claimed
invention.70 In one case a patentee claimed a machine tool control system
but did not disclose the proprietary software that made the system work.71
Without better evidence that commercially available software could be sub-
stituted, the court found the patent non-enabling. To have constructed the
necessary software from scratch would have required 11⁄2 to 2 years of
“undue” experimentation. On the other hand, another patent that failed to
disclose software passed muster where supplying a substitute would have
been a comparatively quick and straightforward task for an experienced
programmer.72
In the case of inventions that depend on the use of living materials, such
as microorganisms or cultured cells, words alone may be insufﬁcient to
enable one skilled in the art to make and use the invention. A sample of the
biological materials may be necessary to begin. In such cases, inventors can
satisfy the enablement requirement by depositing samples of the material in
a certiﬁed depository where they are available to researchers in the ﬁeld.73
In other cases, it may be sufﬁcient to direct researchers to commercial
sources of supply or provide them with the directions necessary to produce
the materials for themselves.
As far as the enablement requirement is concerned, the speciﬁcation need
disclose only some manner in which the invention can be practiced. It need
not disclose every manner of practicing the invention, or even the best
manner.74 Moreover, the inventor need not understand or disclose the
principles that make the invention work.75
82
Patent Law Essentials
69 See In re Wands, 858 F.2d 731 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
70 See Section 2.3.
71 White Consolidated Indus. v. Vega Servo-Control, Inc., 713 F.2d 788 (Fed. Cir. 1983).
72 Northern Telecom, Inc. v. Datapoint Corp., 908 F.2d 931 (Fed. Cir. 1990). The absence of a
speciﬁc disclosure of software is also a potential best mode violation. See Section 8.7.
However, “it is generally sufﬁcient if the functions of the software are disclosed, it usually
being the case that creation of the speciﬁc source code is within the skill of the art.” Robotic
Vision Sys., Inc. v. View Eng’g Inc., 112 F.3d 1163, 1166 (Fed. Cir. 1997).
73 See 37 C.F.R. § 1.802; MPEP § 2401 et seq.; Ajinomoto, 228 F.3d at 1345–46.
74 Engel Indus., Inc. v. Lockformer Co., 946 F.2d 1528, 1533 (Fed. Cir. 1991). Failure to disclose
the best manner known to the inventor may violate the best mode requirement. See Section 8.7.
75 See Process Control Corp. v. Hydreclaim Corp., 190 F.3d 1350, 1359 (Fed. Cir. 1999) (“an
otherwise valid patent covering a meritorious invention should not be struck down simply
because of the patentee’s misconceptions about scientiﬁc principles concerning the inven-
tion”); In re Cortright, 165 F.3d 1353, 1359 (Fed. Cir. 1999) (“‘[I]t is not a requirement of
patentability that an inventor correctly set forth, or even know, how or why the invention
works.’”); Newman v. Quigg, 877 F.2d 1575, 1581 (Fed. Cir. 1989).

Whether a speciﬁcation is enabling is measured at the time the patent appli-
cation was ﬁled.76 If the claimed invention cannot be practiced without tech-
nology developed after that date, the patent is invalid. On the other hand,
applicants are not put to the impossible task of describing additional means of
practicing the claimed invention that have not yet been invented,77 even
though in such cases one could question whether the claim was overbroad.78
8.6.1 Scope of Enablement
Enablement questions arise when the patent claims are substantially
broader than the speciﬁc embodiments disclosed in the speciﬁcation. Patent
claims are often, in a certain sense, generic. A claim might (hypothetically)
cover every mousetrap that included the combination of (1) a spring, (2) a latch,
and (3) a trigger to unhook the latch and release the spring when disturbed by
a mouse. The speciﬁcation might disclose in detail only one example of such a
trap—with a particular kind of spring, latch, and trigger. If the claim covers
other versions of the trap that are not discussed at all, is the speciﬁcation ade-
quate to enable one skilled in the art to practice the claimed invention?
It is said that the enabling disclosure in the speciﬁcation must be “com-
mensurate in scope” with the claims.79 But until recently, at least in the case of
“predictable arts,” courts seemed to allow patent applicants considerable lee-
way to claim the invention broadly, even though the speciﬁcation disclosed
very few of the speciﬁc alternatives that one might employ.80 If the speciﬁca-
tion disclosed a plastic spring for the mousetrap, persons skilled in the art
would know how to substitute a steel spring without additional instruction. In
“unpredictable arts,” such as chemistry and biotechnology, the courts
demanded a more extensive disclosure, apparently because one functioning
Conditions of Patentability
83
76 See Plant Genetic Sys., N.V. v. DeKalb Genetics Corp., 315 F.3d 1335, 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2003);
Enzo, 188 F.3d at 1371.
77 See Invitrogen Corp. v. Clontech Labs., Inc., 429 F.3d 1052, 1071 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (“Enablement
does not require the inventor to foresee every means of implementing an invention at pains of
losing his patent franchise. Were it otherwise, claimed inventions would not include improved
modes of practicing those inventions. Such narrow patent rights would rapidly become
worthless. . . .”); Chiron, 363 F.3d at 1254 (“The law does not expect an applicant to disclose
knowledge invented or developed after the ﬁling date. Such disclosure would be impossible.”).
78 See Section 8.6.1.
79 See, e.g., Chiron Corp. v. Genentech, Inc., 363 F.3d 1247, 1253 (Fed. Cir. 2004); National
Recovery Techs., Inc. v. Magnetic Separation Sys., Inc., 166 F.3d 1190, 1195–96 (Fed. Cir.
1999); Amgen, Inc. v. Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., 927 F.2d 1200, 1213 (Fed. Cir. 1991).
“Pioneering” inventions that establish an entirely new ﬁeld of inquiry (see Section 10.6.7),
may support broad claims, but they are subject to the same requirement that the claims “bear
a reasonable correlation to the scope of enablement.” See Plant Genetic Sys., N.V. v. DeKalb
Genetics Corp., 315 F.3d 1335, 1339–40 (Fed. Cir. 2003).
80 “If an invention pertains to an art where the results are predictable, e.g., the mechanical as
opposed to the chemical arts, a broad claim can be enabled by disclosure of a single embod-
iment. . . .” Spectra-Physics, Inc. v. Coherent, Inc., 827 F.2d 1524, 1533 (Fed. Cir. 1987).

example leads less reliably to other successful means of practicing the inven-
tion. Even a tiny change in the structure of a molecule, for example, may have
large and unanticipated effects. One patentee claimed all possible sequences
of DNA that would produce the protein EPO, which stimulates the produc-
tion of red blood cells, or any analog of EPO that would have a similar effect.81
The speciﬁcation disclosed the information needed to prepare EPO and just a
few of its analogs. The court found that the number of possible DNA
sequences within the scope of the claim vastly outstripped the enabling dis-
closure: “There may be many other genetic sequences that code for EPO-type
products. [The patentee] has told us how to make and use only a few of them
and is therefore not entitled to claim all of them.”82
Now the courts are applying a stricter standard even where the inven-
tion falls within the mechanical or electronic arts. If the claim encom-
passes alternative manners of practicing the invention, but the
speciﬁcation teaches only one of those alternatives, the claim may be held
invalid for failing to enable the “full scope” of the claim.83 For example,
in Sitrick v. Dreamworks, LLC,84 the patent claimed a system for integrating
user-created images into existing movies or video games. Because the
speciﬁcation did not describe how to apply the technology to movies (as
opposed to video games), and the teachings of one could not be applied
to the other, the patent was invalid.85 The court observed that enabling
the full scope of the claim is a quid quo pro of the patent bargain, and a
“patentee who chooses broad claim language must make sure the broad
claims are fully enabled.”86 The Federal Circuit seems to have turned to
84
Patent Law Essentials
81 Amgen, 927 F.2d at 1212–14.
82 Id.
83 Sitrick, 516 F.3d at 999; see also Automotive Techs. Int’l, Inc. v. BMW of North America, Inc.,
501 F.3d 1274, 1285 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (because “claims must be enabled to correspond to their
scope,” a patent on a side-impact crash sensor claiming mechanical and electronic sensors,
but enabling only the former, was invalid); Liebel-Flarsheim Co. v. Medrad, Inc., 481 F.3d
1371, 1380 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (claims encompassed injectors with and without pressure jackets,
but the patent did not enable the jacketless alternative); AK Steel Corp. v. Sollac, 344 F.3d
1234, 1244 (Fed. Cir. 2003) (“[W]hen a range is claimed, there must be reasonable enable-
ment of the scope of the range.”). If the claim encompasses an alternative that the speciﬁca-
tion positively discourages as impractical, it is difﬁcult to argue that the alternative could be
implemented with reasonable experimentation. See AK Steel, 344 F.3d at 1244.
84 316 F.3d 993 (Fed. Cir. 2008).
85 Id. at 1000–01.
86 Id. at 999. That is not to say that the speciﬁcation must describe explicitly every possible
embodiment of the claimed invention; the “‘artisan’s knowledge of the prior art and routine
experimentation can often ﬁll gaps, interpolate between embodiments, and perhaps even
extrapolate beyond the disclosed embodiments, depending upon the predictability of the
art.’” AK Steel, 344 F.3d at 1244; see also Chiron, 363 F.3d at 1253. Because persons skilled in
the art have few other sources of useful information, “nascent” technologies require a more
thorough disclosure. Chiron, 363 F.3d at 1254. In Sitrick, the alternative embodiment would
have differed so much from the disclosed embodiment that it could not have been accom-
plished through extrapolation.

the enablement requirement, as it earlier turned to the written description
requirement,87 to curb the natural tendency of patentees to claim as
broadly as they can. Consequently, patentees are well advised to have
some claims, at least, that adhere closely to the disclosed embodiments,
particularly where the broader claims include some distinctly implied but
incompletely enabled alternatives.
8.7 BEST MODE
The “best mode” requirement, like the enablement requirement, arises
from the language of 35 U.S.C. § 112, which provides that a speciﬁcation
“shall set forth the best mode contemplated by the inventor for carrying
out his invention.” The “best mode” means the best manner of practicing
the invention, or the best operative example, known to the inventor. If the
inventor of a hypothetical mousetrap envisioned two variants of the
claimed invention, one using an inferior plastic spring and the other a supe-
rior steel spring, the best mode requirement would demand that the better
embodiment be disclosed in the patent, even though both came within the
scope of the claim.88
Like the enablement requirement, the best mode requirement reﬂects
the bargain model of patent law. If a patentee is to be awarded a monopoly
on an invention for a period of years, the public is entitled to disclosure of
the best that the patentee has to offer. If there were no best mode require-
ment, patentees might be tempted to disclose the least effective or most
impractical embodiments of their inventions, perhaps reserving the better
embodiments as trade secrets. The result would do little to advance the
“useful arts.”89
Where the enablement requirement can be satisﬁed by the disclosure of
any operable method of practicing the invention, the best mode requirement
Conditions of Patentability
85
87 See Section 8.8.
88 See High Concrete Structures, Inc. v. New Enterprise Stone & Lime Co., 377 F.3d 1379, 1383
(Fed. Cir. 2004) (“The best mode requirement precludes inventors ‘from applying for patents
while at the same time concealing from the public preferred embodiments of their inventions
which they have in fact conceived.’”).
89 “[T]he best mode requirement . . . ensure[s] that a patent applicant plays ‘fair and square’
with the patent system. It is a requirement that the quid pro quo of the patent grant be satis-
ﬁed. One must not receive the right to exclude others unless at the time of ﬁling he has pro-
vided an adequate disclosure of the best mode known to him of carrying out the invention.”
Amgen, Inc. v. Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., 927 F.2d 1200, 1209–10 (Fed. Cir. 1991). In some
cases, a “better mode” may have been devised by someone other than the inventor, after the
date of invention but before the ﬁling of the patent application. If the inventor is aware of
this “better mode” before the application is ﬁled, it must be disclosed in the speciﬁcation,
even though it does not represent the inventor’s own work and he could not claim it in the
patent. See Graco, Inc. v. Binks Mfg. Co., 60 F.3d 785, 789 (Fed. Cir. 1995).

compels disclosure of the one method believed by the inventor to be the
best.90 The relevant time period is the time at which the patent application
was ﬁled, and the relevant perspective is that of the inventor.91 If the inven-
tor believed the disclosed method superior, the best mode requirement is
satisﬁed even if the inventor was mistaken at the time, or even if better meth-
ods were later discovered. The patent does not have to be updated to dis-
close improvements.92
Since satisfaction of the best mode requirement is dependent on the sub-
jective beliefs of the inventor, violation of the requirement may be difﬁcult to
prove. Sometimes in litigation the inventor’s contemporaneous documents
are used to show that a better mode was recognized but not disclosed.93 One
can also consider the means adopted by the patentee for commercializing the
invention. For example, in Northern Telecom, Inc. v. Datapoint Corp.,94 the patent
described a system for capturing data on standard audio cassettes. Employees
of the patent owner testiﬁed that cassettes with special characteristics, differ-
ent from those of ordinary audio cassettes, had been ordered by the patent
owner for its own use. This evidence helped to establish a violation of the best
mode requirement.95
The best mode requirement also has an objective component: was the
best mode known to the inventor disclosed in the application in such clear
terms that persons skilled in the art, reviewing the patent speciﬁcation,
would recognize it as the best mode and have sufﬁcient information to prac-
tice it themselves?96 Even if the speciﬁcation includes a general reference to
the best mode, the reference may be so lacking in detail that, as a practical
matter, the best mode is concealed.97 Alternatively, the best mode may be
disclosed together with so many inferior modes that the best mode is inade-
quately differentiated.98 The determination of whether the best mode was
adequately disclosed must take into account the level of skill in the art and
86
Patent Law Essentials
90 See Teleﬂex, Inc. v. Ficosa North America Corp., 299 F.3d 1313, 1330 (Fed. Cir. 2002)
(distinguishing between best mode and enablement requirements).
91 See Bayer A.G. v. Schein Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 301 F.3d 1306, 1314 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (“Unlike
enablement, the existence of a best mode is a purely subjective matter depending upon what
the inventor actually believed at the time the application was ﬁled.”).
92 See Transco Prods. Inc. v. Performance Contracting, Inc., 38 F.3d 551 (Fed. Cir. 1994). Con-
stant changes in patent disclosures, to account for progressive improvements in technology,
might cause more administrative difﬁculties than the beneﬁts would warrant. The addition of
new disclosure might also cause difﬁculty in applying the “new matter” rules. See Section 5.2.
93 See, e.g., Dana Corp. v. IPC Ltd. Partnership, 860 F.2d 415, 418–20 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
94 908 F.2d 931 (Fed. Cir. 1990).
95 Id. at 940.
96 See Go Medical Indus., Pty., Ltd. v. Inmed Corp., 471 F.3d 1264, 1271 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Bayer,
301 F.3d at 1320; Eli Lilly & Co. v. Barr Labs., Inc., 222 F.3d 973, 981 (Fed. Cir. 2000).
97 See U.S. Gypsum Co. v. National Gypsum Co., 74 F.3d 1209, 1215 (Fed. Cir. 1996); Spectra-
Physics, Inc. v. Coherent, Inc., 827 F.2d 1524, 1536 (Fed. Cir. 1987).
98 See Randomex, Inc. v. Scopus Corp., 849 F.2d 585, 592 (Fed. Cir. 1988) (Mayer, J., dissenting).

the extent to which information would be understood implicitly by those of
ordinary skill.99
Although a patent speciﬁcation must reveal the inventor’s best mode of
practicing the invention, the level of detail that must be included is not
unlimited.100 The focus is on the invention as claimed.101 The speciﬁcation
need not be equivalent to a “product speciﬁcation” or a blueprint for mass
production. It need not, for example, disclose all of the dimensions, toler-
ances, drawings, and other information that a factory foreman would need
to gear up for production.102 Such detailed information would be impractical
to include in every patent, and it would be an unnecessary gift to the paten-
tee’s competitors. Still, the line between best mode and product speciﬁcation
can be a difﬁcult one to draw.
In Christianson v. Colt Indust.,103 the court held that patents to various parts
of the M-16 riﬂe were not invalid, even though they failed to disclose the
Conditions of Patentability
87
99 See Chemcast Corp. v. Arco Indus. Corp., 913 F.2d 923, 927 (Fed. Cir. 1990). Several cases
suggest that “routine details” within reach of those skilled in the art need not be disclosed.
See, e.g. Liquid Dynamics Corp. v. Vaughan Co., 449 F.3d 1209, 1223 (Fed. Cir. 2006);
Teleﬂex, 299 F.3d at 1332. Moreover, the best mode may be adequately described even if
“some experimentation is necessary.” Eli Lilly, 222 F.3d at 984. On the other hand, the best
mode requirement cannot be satisﬁed solely by reference to information already known in the
art. Bayer, 301 F.3d at 1314. The applicant still must disclose the best mode. See Robotic Vision
Sys., Inc. v. View Eng’g, Inc., 112 F.3d 1163, 1165 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (“While a disclosure . . . is
to be understood from the standpoint of one skilled in the relevant art, a certain basic
disclosure is needed of the best mode.”).
100 See Bayer, 301 F.3d at 1314–15 (inventor’s “every preference” need not be disclosed).
101 See AllVoice Computing PLC v. Nuance Communications, Inc., 504 F.3d 1236, 1246 (Fed. Cir.
2007); Cardiac Pacemakers, Inc. v. St. Jude Medical, Inc., 381 F.3d 1371, 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2004)
(requiring disclosure of unclaimed subject matter would make “‘the disclosure . . . boundless,
and the pitfalls endless’”); Teleﬂex, 299 F.3d at 1329–30 (best mode analysis “must begin and
remain focused on the language of the claim,” as opposed, for example, to “unclaimed subject
matter relating to production details dictated by customer requirements”). Recent statements
by the Federal Circuit suggest that an inventor need not disclose preferred methods of making
or using the claimed invention, unless the claims show that such methods are a part of “carry-
ing out the invention” or “materially affect[] the properties of the claimed invention.” Bayer, 301
F.3d at 1315; see also Pﬁzer, Inc. v. Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc., 518 F.3d 1353, 1364 (Fed.
Cir. 2008). If the claim described the mechanical aspects of a novel mousetrap, the enablement
requirement would demand an adequate description of how to make and use the trap without
“undue experimentation.” See Section 8.6. However, the inventor might not be required to dis-
close the best method of making or using the trap, so long as the claims were about the mechan-
ical aspects of the trap, as opposed to its manufacture or use. The result would be different only
if the inferior method of manufacture (or use) resulted in a mechanically inferior mousetrap. If
a method of manufacture was disfavored because it was more expensive, but it produced an
identical mousetrap, it would have nothing to do with “carrying out the invention” and need
not be disclosed. In any event, the analysis in Bayer suggests a strong focus on the claimed inven-
tion, which may assist in resolving some difﬁcult best mode issues.
102 Teleﬂex, 299 F.3d at 1331 (“[t]he best mode requirement does not extend to ‘production
details’”).
103 822 F.2d 1544, 1562–63 (Fed. Cir. 1987).

dimensions and tolerances that would have been necessary for others to
manufacture interchangeable parts. Because interchangeability was not
required by the claims, the production details were deemed separable from
the best mode of the invention, even though, as a practical matter, the
absence of those details would prevent others from competing in the market
for riﬂe parts. The patents were still adequate to allow one to manufacture a
riﬂe, even if it was not a riﬂe that the army, which required interchangeabil-
ity with M-16 parts, would care to purchase.
Similarly, a patent applicant is not always required to disclose the details
of components that may be used with the claimed invention, but that are not
part of the claimed invention itself. To borrow an analogy used by the court
in Randomex, Inc. v. Scopus Corp.,104 the inventor of a new engine might have
to disclose the kind of fuel that is best for its operation, but the inventor of
the engine would not have to disclose the best formula for making that fuel.
It would be sufﬁcient to disclose the fuel by brand name, as long as that
brand, or its equivalent, was readily available. Engines and fuels are differ-
ent arts, and a patent claiming only the engine need not disclose how to
manufacture the fuel.
One case that put this principle to practice is DeGeorge v. Bernier,105 where
the claimed invention was electrical circuitry that would automatically
indent paragraphs composed on a word processor. Even though the appli-
cant did not disclose any details of the word processor, the court found no
violation of the best mode requirement or the enablement requirement. The
applicant did not claim to have invented a word processor, and one could
practice the best mode of the invention even in conjunction with an inferior
word processor.
Whether an inventor is required to disclose such information as the
names of companies supplying parts, or the trade names of ingredients used
in the inventor’s composition, depends on the particular facts of the case.106
If, for example, only one company sells an ingredient pure enough to pro-
duce an effective version of the patented compound, the inventor would
probably be required to disclose the name of that company—at least if that
information was not already generally known.107 In other cases, the name of
a supplier might be a convenience, but its absence would not prevent others
from practicing the inventor’s best mode.
Companies that have manufactured a product prior to the ﬁling date of
their patent are particularly vulnerable to claims of a best mode violation.
88
Patent Law Essentials
104 849 F.2d 585, 590 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
105 768 F.2d 1318, 1324–25 (Fed. Cir. 1985).
106 See Transco, 38 F.3d at 560.
107 See U.S. Gypsum, 74 F.3d at 1214 (since inventor did not know the composition of or method
of manufacturing a critical ingredient, “he was required, at a minimum, to provide supplier/
trade name information”).

Something can always be found in the patentee’s product, or in its manu-
facturing methods, that was not disclosed in the patent. Whatever that
thing is, it will be singled out by those challenging the validity of the
patent, who will argue that the patentee must have considered that thing
the “best” choice, or the patentee would have chosen something else.108 In
the end, the court will have to decide whether that choice is sufﬁciently
related to the claimed invention that it should have been disclosed as the
best mode, or whether it is a choice that has little to do with the invention
itself.
Some cases suggest that an inventor violates the best mode requirement
only by deliberately concealing information.109 Other cases, while still speak-
ing of “concealment,” suggest that concealment can be unintentional.110
Intentional concealment of the best mode may constitute “inequitable
conduct”111 rendering all claims of the patent, and possibly those of related
patents, unenforceable.112
A best mode violation occurs only if the best mode contemplated by the
inventor is inadequately disclosed in the patent speciﬁcation. Knowledge of
better modes will not be imputed to the inventor through legal ﬁctions. For
example, if other engineers working for the same corporation knew of an
improvement to the basic invention, but the improvement was not communi-
cated to the inventor before the ﬁling date of the patent, failure to disclose the
improvement in the patent speciﬁcation would not violate the best mode
requirement.113 This result might encourage a “head in the sand” mentality
among corporations, which could isolate researchers just to avoid the disclo-
sure of more information than necessary. On the other hand, § 112 literally
refers only to the knowledge of the “inventor,” not the inventor’s colleagues
or employer, and it could be difﬁcult to determine whether the inventor had
been deliberately shielded from knowledge of improvements to his invention.
Conditions of Patentability
89
108 See Wahl Instruments, Inc. v. Acvious, Inc., 950 F.2d 1575, 1581 (Fed. Cir. 1991).
109 “Invalidation based on a best mode violation requires that the inventor knew of and inten-
tionally concealed a better mode than was disclosed.” High Concrete, 377 F.3d at 1383; see also
Cardiac Pacemakers, 381 F.3d at 1378; Brooktree Corp. v. Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., 977
F.2d 1555, 1575 (Fed. Cir. 1992). In High Concrete, the undisclosed information—that heavy loads
should be moved with a crane—was already known to persons skilled in the art. 377 F.3d at
1384. In spite of the “intentionally concealed” language, arguably that was a more signiﬁcant
factor than whether the omission of the information was deliberate. See Ajinomoto Co. v.
Archer-Daniels-Midland Co., 28 F.3d 1338, 1346–47 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (omitted reference to a
publication known in the art was not a best mode violation).
110 “[O]nly evidence of ‘concealment,’ whether accidental or intentional, is considered.” Spectra-
Physics, Inc. v. Coherent, Inc., 827 F.2d 1524, 1535 (Fed. Cir. 1987) (emphasis added); see also
U.S. Gypsum, 74 F.3d at 1215–16.
111 See Section 9.1.
112 See Consolidated Aluminum Corp. v. Foseco Int’l, Ltd., 910 F.2d 804 (Fed. Cir. 1990)
(application’s disclosure was of a “ﬁctitious” and “inoperable” mode).
113 See Glaxo Inc. v. Novopharm Ltd., 52 F.3d. 1043, 1050 (Fed. Cir. 1995).

8.8 THE WRITTEN DESCRIPTION REQUIREMENT
Another test of validity is the so-called written description requirement,
taken from the following language of 35 U.S.C. § 112, Paragraph 1:
The speciﬁcation shall contain a written description of the invention, and
of the manner and process of making and using it, in such full, clear,
concise, and exact terms as to enable any person skilled in the art to
which it pertains, or with which it is most nearly connected, to make
and use the same.
The written description requirement is one of the more nebulous con-
cepts in patent law, in part because it is so easily confused with the deﬁnite-
ness and enablement requirements, and in part because its function seems
largely redundant. It is, after all, the function of the claims to describe the
invention in precise terms.114 Why should the speciﬁcation also be required to
describe the invention? On the other hand, if the “description” simply
means an enabling disclosure, as the remainder of the sentence seems to
imply, why not leave that to the enablement requirement?
The Federal Circuit made some attempt to sort out the confusion in 
Vas-Cath Inc. v. Mahurkar.115 As the court explained, the written description
requirement can be characterized in part as an historical accident, traceable
to the late eighteenth century, when patents were not required to have claims.
In those days, it was the function of the speciﬁcation to enable the practice
of the invention and to “describe” it to potential infringers. Today the writ-
ten description requirement most often comes into play where the claims
have changed during prosecution of the patent application.
As discussed in Section 5.1, applicants commonly change or “amend”
claims during patent prosecution. The patent examiner may object to the
claims as ﬁled for any number of reasons, including the applicant’s failure to
distinguish the invention from the prior art. The applicant may respond by
substituting new language. Such changes are allowed as long as the speciﬁ-
cation as ﬁled supports the modiﬁed claims. In most cases, the speciﬁcation
itself remains the same throughout prosecution.
The ﬁling date of the patent application is often critical to establishing the
priority of the invention—in other words, whether the applicant is entitled to
a patent because he was the ﬁrst to invent, or whether the applicant is not
entitled to a patent because someone else invented ﬁrst.116 If the application
fully described the claimed invention, then the applicant’s date of invention
90
Patent Law Essentials
114 According to the second paragraph of § 112, the speciﬁcation must conclude with “one or
more claims particularly pointing out and distinctly claiming the subject matter which the
applicant regards as his invention.” See Section 8.5.
115 935 F.2d 1555, 1560–64 (Fed. Cir. 1991).
116 A foreign patent application can be of similar importance if the applicant relies on that appli-
cation for his “ﬁling date.” See Section 12.3.

is, at the very latest, his ﬁling date. But if the applicant amended the claims
during prosecution, they might describe a new and different invention than
that originally disclosed. Then the application date would have no bearing
on the actual date of invention. The written description requirement pre-
vents this result by requiring a match between the invention claimed and the
invention “described” in the speciﬁcation.117 The test is whether the speciﬁ-
cation demonstrates, to persons skilled in the art, that the applicant “pos-
sessed” the invention set forth in the claims.118 The level of detail required is
said to depend on the scope of the invention and the state of knowledge in
the ﬁeld.119
Problems can arise if the speciﬁcation, as originally ﬁled, disclosed only a
single species of a later-claimed genus.120 For example, in In re Curtis,121 the
application claimed dental ﬂoss made of PTFE (better known as “Teﬂon”)
Conditions of Patentability
91
117 The description requirement “‘guards against the inventor’s overreaching by insisting that he
recount his invention in such detail that his future claims can be determined to be encom-
passed within his original creation.’” Vas-Cath, 935 F.2d at 1561; see also In re Wright, 866
F.2d 422, 424 (Fed. Cir. 1989) (“When the scope of a claim has been changed by amendment
in such a way as to justify an assertion that it is directed to a different invention than was the
original claim, it is proper to inquire whether the newly claimed subject matter was described
in the patent application when ﬁled as the invention of the applicant. That is the essence of
the so-called ‘description requirement.’” (emphasis in original)). If the patentee is attempting
to rely on the ﬁling date of a “parent” or “grandparent” application (see Section 5.2), and that
application does not adequately describe the subsequent claim, the result may be not that the
claim is invalid but only that it cannot rely on the earlier ﬁling date. See Reifﬁn v. Microsoft
Corp., 214 F.3d 1342, 1346 (Fed. Cir. 2000).
118 See Falkner v. Inglis, 448 F.3d 1357, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Bilstad v. Wakalopulos, 386 F.3d
1116, 1123 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Purdue Pharma L.P. v. Faulding Inc., 230 F.3d 1320, 1323 (Fed.
Cir. 2000) (“Put another way, one skilled in the art, reading the original disclosure, must imme-
diately discern the limitation at issue in the claims.”). Note that it is not possession itself that is
the issue, but the adequacy of the disclosure to demonstrate possession. Hence, the description
requirement as a rule cannot be satisﬁed by other evidence, such as sworn testimony, that the
applicant did possess (though he did not adequately describe) the claimed invention. See Enzo
Biochem, Inc. v. Gen-Probe Inc., 296 F.3d 1316, 1330 (Fed. Cir. 2002). The applicant may
“possess” the invention even though there has been no actual reduction to practice. Falkner,
448 F.3d at 1366–67. On the other hand, an applicant cannot “possess” technology that did not
exist at all. Chiron Corp. v. Genentech, Inc., 363 F.3d 1247, 1255 (Fed. Cir. 2004).
119 See Capon v. Eshhar, 418 F.3d 1343, 1357 (Fed. Cir. 2005). A broad claim is more likely to
be supported if results in the ﬁeld are relatively “predictable.” See id. at 1359–60; Bilstad, 386
F.3d at 1125. If a written description is impossible, as may be the case with biological or
chemical discoveries that are not entirely understood, deposit of a physical sample can
sufﬁce. Capon, 418 F.3d at 1357; see also Enzo Biochem, 296 F.3d at 1326.
120 See Regents of the Univ. of California v. Eli Lilly & Co., 119 F.3d 1559, 1567–68 (Fed. Cir.
1997); Vas-Cath, 935 F.2d at 1561–62. But sometimes disclosure of a single species is sufﬁcient
to “describe” an entire genus. Bilstad, 386 F.3d at 1124. Similar problems occur if the disclo-
sure is too general. The disclosure of a large genus may lack any “blaze marks” leading per-
sons skilled in the art to (and showing possession of) a particular species later singled out in
a claim. See Purdue Pharma, 230 F.3d at 1326. “[O]ne cannot disclose a forest in the original
application, and then later pick a tree out of the forest and say here is my invention.” Id.
121 354 F.3d 1347 (Fed. Cir. 2004).

improved with a friction-enhancing coating. Because of the non-stick prop-
erties for which PTFE is known, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd a material that will
adhere to it. The inventor, surprised to ﬁnd anything that would work, dis-
covered and disclosed one possibility: microcrystalline wax. This disclosure
did not show that the inventor was “in possession” of a broad genus includ-
ing any and all friction-enhancing coatings, particularly when the art was
notoriously unpredictable.122
It may appear that the enablement requirement, discussed in Section 8.6,
would prevent an applicant from claiming more than the original applica-
tion can support. If a modiﬁed claim really reﬂected a new and different
invention, it would seem unlikely that the speciﬁcation as ﬁled would be ade-
quate to enable one to practice that invention. However, according to the
Federal Circuit and its predecessor court, “‘it is possible for a speciﬁcation to
enable the practice of invention as broadly as it is claimed, and still not
describe that invention.’”123 An example of this distinction can be found in
Martin v. Mayer,124 where the invention concerned an electrical cable con-
structed of various layers, including a conductor, a dielectric, and a “high fre-
quency absorption medium.” One of the claims at issue required a “harness”
composed of more than one such cable. The speciﬁcation as ﬁled disclosed
only a single cable. A person skilled in the art might have been enabled by
the description of the solitary cable to construct a “harness” of several cables
(particularly if the later-ﬁled claim suggested it), but the speciﬁcation
included no written description of the “harness” to demonstrate that the
applicant had conceived of that invention when the application was ﬁled.
A patent satisﬁes the written description requirement if the speciﬁcation
“conveys with reasonable clarity to those skilled in the art that, as of the ﬁling
date [of the application], he or she was in possession of the invention. The inven-
tion is, for purposes of the ‘written description’ inquiry, whatever is now
claimed.”125 This does not mean that the speciﬁcation has to describe the later-
claimed invention in the very same terms.126 In In re Wright,127 for example, the
claim language “not permanently ﬁxed,” as applied to a microcapsule powder
used in an imaging process, did not appear in the speciﬁcation. Yet the speciﬁ-
cation included enough information, including a warning that the powder
should not be disturbed, to show that the invention as originally contemplated
and disclosed included powder that was “not permanently ﬁxed.”
92
Patent Law Essentials
122 Id. at 1353.
123 Vas-Cath, 935 F.2d at 1561 (emphasis in original); see also Lizardtech, Inc. v. Earth Resource
Mapping, Inc., 433 F.3d 1373, 1374 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (“Our case law has been quite consistent
in holding that the patent law requires a written description of a claimed invention inde-
pendent of the requirements to enable one skilled in the art to make and use the invention.”).
124 823 F.2d 500 (Fed. Cir. 1987).
125 Vas-Cath, 935 F.2d at 1563–64 (emphasis in original).
126 See Lampi Corp. v. American Power Prods., Inc., 228 F.3d 1365, 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2000).
127 866 F.2d 422, 425 (Fed. Cir. 1989).

The speciﬁcation must demonstrate that the applicant invented the
claimed subject matter, not just that he had a plan for doing so. This prob-
lem has been known to arise where the patent claims a particular variety
of DNA. “An adequate written description of DNA requires more than a
mere statement that it is a part of the invention and reference to a poten-
tial method for isolating it; what is required is a description of the DNA
itself.”128 In these cases it is difﬁcult to disentangle the written description
requirement from the enablement requirement. In Fiers v. Revel,129 for
example, the court seemed to fear that the applicants were claiming an
invention much broader than what they had so far achieved: “Claiming
all DNA’s that achieve a result without deﬁning the means that will do so
is not in compliance with the description requirement; it is an attempt to
preempt the future before it has arrived.”130 Unless the issue arises from a
discrepancy between the originally ﬁled speciﬁcation and a modiﬁed claim,
this concern should be one that can be adequately addressed by the
enablement requirement.131
The description requirement certainly seems most useful, and most dis-
tinct from the other requirements of patentability, when claims have
changed during prosecution. Some judges of the Federal Circuit believe that
it should be invoked only as “a priority policeman.”132 On some occasions,
however, the description requirement has been enforced as an absolute
requirement of disclosure, even when claims have not been changed so as
to make the timing of the disclosure the issue.133 One can still inquire
whether the speciﬁcation demonstrates “possession of the invention” and
perhaps, in that way, guard against over-ambitious claiming accompanied
by an inadequate quid pro quo of disclosure.134 Again, the enablement
Conditions of Patentability
93
128 Fiers v. Revel, 984 F.2d 1164, 1170 (Fed. Cir. 1993). Functional descriptions of genetic mate-
rial may be adequate. See Enzo Biochem, 296 F.3d at 1324.
129 984 F.2d 1164 (Fed. Cir. 1993).
130 Fiers, 984 F.2d at 1171.
131 See Section 8.6.
132 See Enzo Biochem, Inc. v. Gen-Probe Inc., 63 U.S.P.Q.2d 1618, 1624 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (non-
precedential opinion; Rader, J., dissenting).
133 See Lizardtech, 433 F.3d at 1375; Moba, B.V. v. Diamond Automation, Inc., 325 F.3d 1306,
1320 (Fed. Cir. 2003). The ﬁrst case to use the description requirement in this fashion seems
to have been Regents of the Univ. of California v. Eli Lilly & Co., 119 F.3d 1559 (Fed. Cir. 1997).
In University of Rochester v. G.D. Searle & Co., 358 F.3d 916 (Fed. Cir. 2004), the Federal
Circuit, addressing this issue more squarely than before, held that the description requirement
applies “whether a question of priority has arisen or not.” Id. at 924. While earlier cases of this
sort had dealt with “genetic materials,” the principle “applies to all types of inventions.” Id. at
925. The Federal Circuit is so divided on this issue that the denial of a rehearing en banc in the
University of Rochester case produced no less than ﬁve concurring and dissenting opinions. See
University of Rochester v. G.D. Searle & Co., 375 F.3d 1303 (Fed. Cir. 2004).
134 See Capon, 418 F.3d at 1357 (“The written description requirement . . . satisﬁes the policy
premises of the law, whereby the inventor’s technical/scientiﬁc advance is added to the body
of knowledge, as consideration for the grant of patent exclusivity.”).

requirement, an easier test to deﬁne and perhaps to satisfy, arguably covers
that ground already.
8.9 NOVELTY AND OBVIOUSNESS
An invention can be patented only if it is new. So an important part of
patent prosecution and patent litigation is comparing the claimed invention
with prior inventions to determine if the claims are “novel.” Prior inventions,
as well as patents, patent applications, and publications that disclose prior
inventions, are known as “prior art references.” The various kinds of prior art
references can be found in 35 U.S.C. § 102, a complex provision discussed in
detail in the sections that follow. If a claimed invention is identical to one or
more prior art references, the claim is “anticipated.”135 If the claimed inven-
tion differs from the prior art, but the differences are of the sort that would
occur to a person of ordinary skill, the claim is “obvious.”136 Either condition
is a sufﬁcient ground for holding a claim unpatentable or invalid.
8.9.1 Categories of Prior Art
One of the most important provisions of the Patent Act is 35 U.S.C. § 102,
but because of its length and structure it is also one of the most difﬁcult to grasp.
The provision begins “A person shall be entitled to a patent unless . . . ,” and
the following seven paragraphs (§ 102(a) to § 102 (g)) list various circumstances
under which a patent cannot be granted, most of them related to a lack of
novelty. If a patent issues even though it violates one of these conditions, the
patent can be held invalid in the course of infringement litigation.
8.9.1.1
Prior Knowledge, Use, Patents and Publications (§ 102(a))
Section 102(a) reads as follows:
A person shall be entitled to a patent unless—
(a) the invention was known or used by others in this country, or
patented or described in a printed publication in this or a foreign coun-
try, before the invention thereof by the applicant for patent. . . .
This section identiﬁes four kinds of prior art reference that might invali-
date a patent if they occurred before the applicant’s date of invention:137
• Prior knowledge of the invention by others in this country.
• Prior use of the invention by others in this country.
94
Patent Law Essentials
135 See Section 8.9.5.
136 See Section 8.9.6.
137 The “date of invention” is discussed in Section 8.9.2.

• A prior patent on the invention in any country.
• A prior “printed publication” of the invention in any country.138
Patents, printed publications, prior “use,” and prior “knowledge” are four
common categories of prior art. One feature they share is that, to some
degree, they all place the invention in the possession of the public.139 If an
invention has already been the subject of a patent or printed publication, or
if the invention is one that has already been known or used, granting a
patent on the invention would not “promote the progress of . . . the useful
arts.”140 On the contrary, it would take away an invention that the public had
already enjoyed. In § 102, “[s]ociety, speaking through Congress and the
courts, has said ‘thou shalt not take it away.’”141
Although prior use, prior knowledge, prior patents, and prior publica-
tions are fairly straightforward concepts, they have been reﬁned through
judicial analysis, primarily to clarify the extent to which a reference must be
publicly available. For example, although “known or used” could literally
refer to secret knowledge or secret use, § 102(a) has been interpreted to
require knowledge or use that is accessible to the public.142 Similarly, the
term “patented” means that the invention was disclosed in a patent, not
merely that it was encompassed within the scope of a broad patent claim.143
“Patented” can refer to the rights granted by foreign countries, even if they
differ somewhat from U.S. patent rights,144 but the foreign “patent” must be
“available to the public.”145
Conditions of Patentability
95
138 Section 102(a) excludes prior use or knowledge of the invention in a foreign country, per-
haps because in an earlier era such knowledge or use would have been difﬁcult to verify. The
increasingly global nature of both commerce and scientiﬁc research has spurred some com-
mentators to suggest that the national distinctions embodied in § 102(a) are out of date.
139 See Ormco Corp. v. Align Tech., Inc., 463 F.3d 1299, 1305 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (“Art that is not
accessible to the public is generally not recognized as prior art.”); Carella v. Starlight Archery
& Pro Line Co., 804 F.2d 135, 139 (Fed. Cir. 1986). A prior patent at least gives the public
knowledge of the invention and the expectation of possessing it as soon as the patent has expired.
140 See Section 1.1.
141 Kimberly-Clark Corp. v. Johnson & Johnson, 745 F.2d 1437, 1453–54 (Fed. Cir. 1984).
142 See Astra Aktiebolag v. Andrx Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 483 F.3d 1364, 1380 (Fed. Cir. 2007)
(secret information is not prior art); Minnesota Mining & Mfg. Co. v. Chemque, Inc., 303
F.3d 1294, 1301 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Woodland Trust v. Flowertree Nursery, Inc., 148 F.3d 1368,
1370 (Fed. Cir. 1998). Public use is also an issue under § 102(b), if it occurs more than
one year before the ﬁling date of the patent. In either context, conﬁdentiality obligations may
undermine the “public” nature of the use. This issue, which under § 102(b) often arises in the
context of the inventor’s own activities, is discussed in detail in Section 8.10.2.
143 See In re Benno, 768 F.2d 1340, 1346 (Fed. Cir. 1985).
144 See In re Carlson, 983 F.2d 1032 (Fed. Cir. 1992).
145 See Carlson, 983 F.2d at 1037. The standard of “availability” is rather low. See id. at 1037–38
(a German Geschmacksmuster can qualify as a publicly available “patent” under § 102, even
though one must travel to a courthouse in a remote German city to see the design to which
it applies).

“[D]escribed in a printed publication” may be the language of § 102(a)
that has received the most intense judicial scrutiny.146 “Printed” is not to be
taken literally. Information distributed through other forms of media—such
as photographs, CD-ROMs, and microfilm—can qualify as “printed
publications.”147 The two critical characteristics of a “printed publication” are
(1) that it is “accessible” to the public and (2) that it includes an “enabling
disclosure.”
“Accessible” means that “interested members of the public could obtain
the information if they wanted to.”148 Most books, journals, and other mate-
rials normally thought of as publications are easily accessible to the public,
but inventions are sometimes disclosed in classiﬁed documents or docu-
ments distributed only on a conﬁdential basis (e.g., documents for the inter-
nal use of a corporation). Those do not qualify as “publications.”149 On the
other hand, distribution of even a small number of copies without restriction
can be considered sufﬁcient qualiﬁcation.150
Some of the most difﬁcult cases arise when a document has not been dis-
tributed, but has been made available in a library or similar collection. In In re
Hall,151 for example, the potentially invalidating reference was a doctoral thesis.
The thesis had not been published in the usual sense, but it had been deposited
in a university library in Germany, where it was, theoretically, available for
review. The court held that “a single catalogued thesis in one university” might
96
Patent Law Essentials
146 The same term also appears in the statutory bar provision of 35 U.S.C. § 102(b). See Section
8.10.
147 See In re Klopfenstein, 380 F.3d 1345, 1348 n.2 (Fed. Cir. 2004) (the meaning of “printed
publication” has changed since it was ﬁrst used; today it means “a perceptible description of
the invention, in whatever form it may have been recorded”); In re Hall, 781 F.2d 897, 898
(Fed. Cir. 1986) (“The statutory phrase ‘printed publication’ has been interpreted to give
effect to ongoing advances in the technologies of data storage, retrieval, and dissemination.”).
148 Constant v. Advanced Micro-Devices, Inc., 848 F.2d 1560, 1569 (Fed. Cir. 1988); see also SRI
Int’l, Inc. v. Internet Security Sys., Inc., 511 F.3d 1186, 1194 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (a publication is
“publicly accessible” if it has been “‘made available to the extent that persons interested . . .
in the subject matter . . . exercising reasonable diligence, can locate it’”). If the publication is
“accessible,” it is irrelevant whether anyone in particular actually reviewed it. Constant, 848
F.2d at 1569.
149 See Northern Telecom, Inc. v. Datapoint Corp., 908 F.2d 931, 936–37 (Fed. Cir. 1990); but cf.
Cooper Cameron Corp. v. Kvaerner Oilﬁeld Prods., Inc., 291 F.3d 1317, 1323–24 (Fed. Cir.
2002) (in spite of a “conﬁdential” label, a report may have been sufﬁciently available to the
public to qualify as prior art). Restricted publications might serve as evidence of a prior
invention under § 102(g). See Section 8.9.1.3.
150 See Massachusetts Inst. of Tech. v. A.B. Fortia, 774 F.2d 1104, 1109 (Fed. Cir. 1985) (paper that
was discussed at a conference attended by 50 to 100 interested persons, and that was dis-
tributed “on request” to at least six persons without restrictions, constituted a “publication”);
but cf. Preemption Devices, Inc. v. Minnesota Mining & Mfg. Co., 732 F.2d 903, 906 (Fed.
Cir. 1984) (six copies of an article sent to a “friend” were not a “publication”). Sometimes the
“interested public” to whom the publication must be available is a relatively small group. See
Cooper Cameron, 291 F.3d at 1324.
151 781 F.2d 897 (Fed. Cir. 1986).

“constitute sufﬁcient accessibility to those interested in the art exercising rea-
sonable diligence.”152 On the other hand, in In re Cronyn,153 the court held that
three undergraduate theses did not constitute “printed publications.” The court
held that, in this case, the documents “were not accessible to the public because
they had not been either cataloged or indexed in a meaningful way.”154 They
could have been located only by sorting through a collection of index cards
kept in a shoe box in the university’s chemistry department. These cases obvi-
ously draw ﬁne, and somewhat arbitrary, distinctions. Although the under-
graduate theses in Cronyn would have been difﬁcult to track down, as a practical
matter the thesis in Hall might have been equally elusive.155
A display of information may also qualify as a “printed publication.” In In
re Klopfenstein,156 printed materials were afﬁxed to poster boards and dis-
played at a professional conference for 21⁄2 days. The materials were seen by
numerous persons skilled in the relevant art, who could have copied the
information at their leisure. Although the materials were neither distributed
nor indexed in a library, the court found that the display qualiﬁed as a
“printed publication” because it was accessible to the interested public.157
The other important requirement of a “printed publication” is that it
include an “enabling disclosure” of the invention.158 An enabling disclosure is a
description of the invention that would allow a person skilled in the art to make
and use the invention without undue experimentation.159 If, for example, a
marketing brochure boasts of the advantages of a process, but it does not
Conditions of Patentability
97
152 Hall, 781 F.2d at 900.
153 890 F.2d 1158 (Fed. Cir. 1989).
154 Cronyn, 890 F.2d at 1161.
155 A case illustrating the low standard of accessibility is Bruckelmyer v. Ground Heaters, Inc.,
445 F.3d 1374 (Fed. Cir. 2006). The disputed reference was a Canadian patent application.
Because the relevant illustrations related to canceled claims, they were omitted from the
issued patent. However, a person skilled in the art might have been led by the patent to
investigate the patent’s ﬁle history, and upon doing so would have discovered the missing
illustrations. The majority found the “roadmap” provided by the issued patent sufﬁcient to
lead a diligent researcher to the original application, although it is difﬁcult to imagine this
actually occurring. Id. at 1379.
156 380 F.3d 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2004).
157 Factors relevant to the court’s decision included “the length of time the display was exhib-
ited, the expertise of the target audience, the existence (or lack thereof) or reasonable expec-
tations that the material displayed would not be copied, and the simplicity or ease with which
the material displayed could have been copied.” Id. at 1350.
158 Elan Pharmaceuticals, Inc. v. Mayo Found., 346 F.3d 1051, 1054 (Fed. Cir. 2003); Amgen,
Inc. v. Hoechst Marion Roussel, Inc., 314 F.3d 1313, 1354 (Fed. Cir. 2003); Constant v.
Advanced Micro-Devices, Inc., 848 F.2d 1560, 1569 (Fed. Cir. 1988). A publication need not
be enabling to serve as evidence of obviousness, discussed in Section 8.9.6. See Amgen, 314 F.3d
at 1357.
159 The enabling disclosure requirement also applies to patent applications. See Section 8.6. One
difference is that a prior art reference is enabling if it discloses the invention but does not tell
one how to use it. Patent applications must enable a substantial utility. See Rasmusson v.
Smithkline Beecham Corp., 413 F.3d 1318, 1325–26 (Fed. Cir. 2005).

include enough information to allow the process to be duplicated, the brochure
lacks an enabling disclosure.160 In deciding whether a disclosure is “enabling,”
the knowledge that would be available to those of skill in the art can be taken
into account. In other words, the publication does not have to include infor-
mation that would already be known to persons of ordinary skill.161
8.9.1.2
Prior Applications (§ 102(e))162
Another category of prior art reference, not discussed in § 102(a), is a
patent application. The circumstances under which a patent application can
constitute prior art are set forth in § 102(e). Section 102(e) has evolved into
a complex paragraph freighted with cross-references to other portions of the
Patent Act, but the gist of it is the addition of the following to the list of
potential prior art references:
A patent application, ﬁled by another inventor in the United States,163
before the applicant’s date of invention, if (eventually) the application
issued as a patent or it was published.
If Inventor A had a patent application on ﬁle before Inventor B conceived
of the same invention, then Inventor A’s application would be prior art to
Inventor B, even if Inventor A’s application neither issued as a patent nor
was published as an application until some later date. Note that § 102(e) does
not apply to patent applications that are never made public.
8.9.1.3
Prior Inventions (§ 102(g))
Section 102(g) establishes a ﬁnal category of prior art reference:164
A person shall be entitled to a patent unless—
(g)(2) before the applicant’s invention thereof, the invention was
made in this country by another inventor who had not abandoned, sup-
pressed, or concealed it. . . .
Here we are looking for a second inventor—a second inventor who, before
the applicant’s own date of invention, made the same invention in this country.
Two inventors can conceive of the same invention, even if they are working
98
Patent Law Essentials
160 See Heleﬁx Ltd. v. Blok-Lok, Ltd., 208 F.3d 1339, 1346–48 (Fed. Cir. 2000).
161 In re Donohue, 766 F.2d 531, 533 (Fed. Cir. 1985).
162 There is no apparent logic to the ordering of paragraphs in § 102. They will therefore be dis-
cussed in the order that seems easiest to understand, rather than in the order in which they
appear in the statute.
163 Under certain circumstances, an “international application” may qualify. See 35 U.S.C. 
§ 102(e)(1).
164 Other than those that apply only to the statutory bar provisions discussed in Sections 8.10
and 8.11.

independently. The telephone, for example, is said to have been invented inde-
pendently, and almost simultaneously, by Alexander Graham Bell and Elisha
Gray.165 Other countries award priority to the ﬁrst inventor to ﬁle a patent appli-
cation, but in the United States the patent goes to the ﬁrst to invent. Section
102(g) denies a patent to an applicant who was not the ﬁrst to invent.166
There is, however, an important exception. The ﬁrst invention does not
count against a later inventor if the ﬁrst invention was “abandoned, suppressed,
or concealed.” An invention is “abandoned, suppressed, or concealed if, within
a reasonable time after completion, no steps are taken to make the invention
publicly known.”167 Abandonment, suppression, or concealment can be
inferred if, after a reasonable period of time, the ﬁrst inventor has not ﬁled a
patent application, used the invention in public, embodied the invention in a
product for sale, or described the invention in a publication.168 This exception
to the “ﬁrst to invent” rule rewards those who make inventions available to the
public, and penalizes those who hide or abandon inventions.169
If the delay in publicizing an invention, or applying for a patent, is
more than a few years, abandonment may be presumed.170 The
presumption can be overcome by evidence that efforts to perfect the
invention caused the delay.171 On the other hand, efforts to commercialize
the invention cannot excuse an applicant’s failure to ﬁle promptly.172 In
Conditions of Patentability
99
165 Although a recent book claims that Bell stole essential information from Gray’s own patent
application, thanks to some chicanery at the Patent Ofﬁce. See SETH SHULMAN, THE TELEPHONE
GAMBIT: CHASING ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL’S SECRET (2008).
166 Section 102(g)(2) may be invoked in litigation to invalidate an issued patent. See, e.g., Flex-
Rest, LLC v. Steelcase, Inc., 455 F.3d 1351, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Dow Chemical Co. v.
Astro-Valcour, Inc., 267 F.3d 1334, 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2001); Apotex USA, Inc. v. Merck & Co.,
254 F.3d 1031, 1035 (Fed. Cir. 2001). If the contest for priority occurs in the course of pros-
ecuting a patent application, the result can be an interference proceeding, discussed in Sec-
tion 5.4. In that event, § 102(g)(1) controls. The rule is much the same, except that work in
some foreign countries can sufﬁce to establish priority, whereas § 102(g)(2) is restricted to
prior invention in the United States.
167 Apotex, 254 F.3d at 1039; Correge v. Murphy, 705 F.2d 1326, 1330 (Fed. Cir. 1983).
168 See Flex-Rest, 455 F.3d at 1359; Dow Chemical, 267 F.3d at 1342.
169 See Checkpoint Sys., Inc. v. U.S. Int’l Trade Comm’n, 54 F.3d 765, 761 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
170 See Lutzker v. Plet, 843 F.2d 1364, 1367 (Fed. Cir. 1988) (discussing cases in which delays of
29 months to 4 years were held sufﬁcient to show abandonment, suppression, or conceal-
ment). However, there is no period of time that is unreasonable per se. See Flex-Rest, 455 F.3d
at 1359; Dow Chemical, 267 F.3d at 1342–43. “Rather a determination of abandonment, sup-
pression or concealment has ‘consistently been based on equitable principles and public pol-
icy as applied to the facts of each case.’” Checkpoint, 54 F.3d at 761.
171 See Lutzker, 843 F.2d at 1367.
172 If the prior inventor never intended to ﬁle a patent application but, instead, meant to intro-
duce the invention to the public by a product, courts are far more tolerant of commercial
activities as an excuse for delay. See Flex-Rest, 455 F.3d at 1360; Dow Chemical, 267 F.3d at
1343; Checkpoint, 54 F.3d at 762. This means, oddly enough, that the prior inventor who
never ﬁled a patent application himself may be better off, since he can more easily invalidate
the subsequent patent of someone else.

Lutzker v. Plet,173 where the invention was a device for making canapés, the ﬁrst
inventor (Lutzker) waited more than four years after completing the invention
before disclosing it to the public at a trade show. By the time of the trade show,
the second inventor (Plet) had invented the device independently and ﬁled a
patent application. Lutzker argued that the delay should be excused because it
had been due to efforts to perfect the invention. The Patent Ofﬁce, afﬁrmed by
the court, disagreed. The delay was attributed to the development of a recipe
book, packaging, and other things unrelated to the invention itself. Lutzker was
therefore found to have abandoned, suppressed, or concealed the invention,
and his activities did not prevent the issuance of a patent to Plet.174
Two points should be mentioned about the timing of an “abandonment.”
First, the abandonment can be nulliﬁed if the ﬁrst inventor renews his efforts
to patent the invention, or to make it available to the public, before the sec-
ond inventor “enters the ﬁeld.”175 The ﬁrst inventor would be credited with
the date of renewed activity as his “date of invention.” Thus, if Lutzker had
begun work on a patent application before Plet entered the ﬁeld, his earlier
inactivity could have been overlooked. Second, § 102(g) refers to prior inven-
tions that “had” not been abandoned, suppressed, or concealed, implying
that an invention abandoned, suppressed, or concealed after the entry into the
ﬁeld of the second inventor would still be effective as prior art.176
8.9.2 Date of Invention
To evaluate whether a patent, patent application, publication, or other ref-
erence is prior art under § 102(a) or (e), it is necessary to determine the paten-
tee’s (or applicant’s) “date of invention.” In applying § 102(g), it is necessary to
determine the “date of invention” of both the patentee (or applicant) and the
alleged prior inventor. References subsequent to the patentee’s (or applicant’s)
date of invention have no relevance under these statutory provisions.177
“Invention,” as deﬁned in patent law, involves two steps: “conception”
and “reduction to practice.”178 “Conception” is the mental act of
100
Patent Law Essentials
173 843 F.2d 1364 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
174 The court was inﬂuenced by the fact that the recipe book and other items accounting for
the delay were not related to the disclosure in Lutzker’s patent application. Lutzker, 843
F.2d at 1367–68.
175 See Lutzker, 843 F.2d at 1368; Paulik v. Rizkalla, 760 F.2d 1270, 1275–76 (Fed. Cir. 1985).
176 The language of the statute seems clear. However, the Federal Circuit has not ruled on this
issue, and it could be argued that ignoring a later abandonment would hinder the policy of
making inventions available to the public.
177 They may, however, be relevant under the “statutory bar” provisions (see Section 8.10), and
they may have a bearing on obviousness as instances of “near-simultaneous invention” (see
Section 8.9.6.1).
178 The Supreme Court regards conception as the more important of the two. See Pfaff v. Wells
Elecs., Inc., 525 U.S. 55, 60 (1998) (“The primary meaning of the word ‘invention’ in the
Patent Act unquestionably refers to the inventor’s conception rather than to a physical
embodiment of that idea.”). However, as discussed below, reduction to practice still plays an
important role in establishing priority.

invention—the moment of insight when the inventor imagines the thing
that ultimately will be claimed. As formally deﬁned by the Federal
Circuit, conception requires the formation in the inventor’s mind of “a
deﬁnite and permanent idea of the invention, including every feature of
the subject matter sought to be patented.”179 If the inventor has done no
more than recognize a problem, the conception of the invention is still
incomplete.180 Conception is complete only when the inventor ﬁnds the
solution to a problem, and the solution is worked out in sufﬁcient detail, in
the inventor’s mind, that persons of ordinary skill in the art could put
the inventor’s ideas to practice without extensive research or undue
experimentation.181
“Reduction to practice” means reducing the idea to a physical embodi-
ment and, in most cases, testing it to conﬁrm that it will work.182 In the case
of an apparatus, reduction to practice means that the apparatus was assem-
bled, at least in prototype. In the case of a method, reduction to practice
means that the method was actually performed.183 A patent claim is not
reduced to practice until there is a physical embodiment that includes all ele-
ments of the claim.184
The amount of testing of the physical embodiment necessary to establish
reduction to practice varies considerably depending on the nature of the
invention. The courts are instructed to employ a “common sense
approach.”185 Some devices are so simple, and their effectiveness so obvious,
that no testing at all is required.186 On the other hand, some inventions
Conditions of Patentability
101
179 Sewall v. Walters, 21 F.3d 411, 415 (Fed. Cir. 1994); see also Shum v. Intel Corp., 499 F.3d
1272, 1277 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (“‘Conception is the formation “in the mind of the inventor of
a deﬁnite and permanent idea of the complete and operative invention, as it is thereafter
to be applied in practice.”’”); Stern v. Trustees of Columbia Univ., 434 F.3d 1375, 1378
(Fed. Cir. 2006). A mere research plan coupled with a vague hope of success does not
amount to a conception. See In re Jolley, 308 F.3d 1317, 1323 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Hitzeman
v. Rutter, 243 F.3d 1345, 1356–57 (Fed. Cir. 2001); Burroughs Wellcome Co. v. Barr Labs.,
Inc., 40 F.3d 1223, 1228 (Fed. Cir. 1994) (“An idea is deﬁnite and permanent when the
inventor has a speciﬁc, settled idea, a particular solution to the problem at hand, not just
a general goal or research plan he hopes to pursue.”). An inventor who has stumbled
across a patentable invention must recognize it, though he need not appreciate that it is,
in fact, patentable. See Invitrogen Corp. v. Clontech Labs., Inc., 429 F.3d 1052, 1074 (Fed.
Cir. 2005); Rosco, Inc. v. Mirror Lite Co., 304 F.3d 1373, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Hitzeman,
243 F.3d at 1358–59.
180 See Morgan v. Hirsch, 728 F.2d 1449 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
181 See Brand v. Miller, 487 F.3d 862, 870 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Stern, 434 F.3d at 1378.
182 See Z4 Techs., Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 507 F.3d 1340, 1352 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Slip Track Sys.,
Inc. v. Metal-Lite, Inc., 304 F.3d 1256, 1265 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (reduction to practice “may
require testing, depending on the character of the invention and the problem that it solves”).
183 See Z4, 507 F.3d at 1352 (“‘the inventor must prove that . . . he constructed an embodiment
or performed a process that met all of the [claim] limitations’”); Slip Track, 304 F.3d at 1265.
184 See Eaton v. Evans, 204 F.3d 1094, 1097 (Fed. Cir. 2000).
185 Scott v. Finney, 34 F.3d 1058, 1061 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
186 See Slip Track, 304 F.3d at 1265.

require careful evaluation under conditions that duplicate, or simulate, the
intended working environment of the invention. The testing required is
whatever is reasonably necessary to demonstrate that the invention will
work.187 Even where testing is required, it is not necessary to demonstrate
that the invention is so reﬁned that it is ready to market.188 A prototype that
is not yet of commercial quality may be sufﬁcient to show that the principle
of the invention is sound.189 Moreover, “[t]esting need not show utility
beyond a possibility of failure, but only utility beyond a probability of
failure.”190
In rare cases, an invention is so unpredictable that it cannot be fully
conceived until experiments have been performed and the results evaluated.
Conception and reduction to practice are, in these cases, simultaneous. This
is most likely to occur in the ﬁelds of chemistry and biotechnology, where
useful combinations sometimes can be discovered only by trial and error.191
In Smith v. Bousquet,192 for example, the court held that the effectiveness of a
chemical as an insecticide, on particular species and under particular condi-
tions, could not be predicted until realistic experiments were carried out.
Until then, plans to use the chemical as an insecticide were mere hope or
speculation, not an invention.193
The “reduction to practice” discussed so far is actual reduction to practice.
Filing a patent application effects a “constructive reduction to practice.”194 “Con-
structive” is a word often used in the law when an act is treated as though it
102
Patent Law Essentials
187 “[The] common sense approach prescribes more scrupulous testing under circumstances
approaching actual use conditions when the problem includes many uncertainties. On the
other hand, when the problem to be solved does not present myriad variables, common
sense similarly permits little or no testing to show the soundness of the principles of opera-
tion of the invention.” Scott, 34 F.3d at 1063; see also Taskett v. Dentlinger, 344 F.3d 1337,
1341 (Fed. Cir. 2003).
188 “Reduction to practice does not require ‘that the invention, when tested, be in a commer-
cially satisfactory stage of development.’” Scott, 34 F.3d at 1061; see also Loral Fairchild Corp.
v. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., 266 F.3d 1358, 1362–63 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“Once the invention
has been shown to work for its intended purpose, reduction to practice is complete. . . .
Further efforts to commercialize the invention are simply not relevant. . . .”).
189 See Scott, 34 F.3d at 1062.
190 Id.
191 See Mycogen Plant Science, Inc. v. Monsanto Co., 243 F.3d 1316, 1330 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“The
doctrine of simultaneous conception and reduction to practice is somewhat rare but certainly
not unknown, especially in the unpredictable arts such as chemistry and biology.”), vacated
on other grounds, 535 U.S. 1109 (2002).
192 111 F.2d 157 (C.C.P.A. 1940).
193 More recently, the concept of simultaneous conception and reduction to practice has been
applied to inventions involving DNA. See, e.g., Mycogen, 243 F.3d at 1330–31; Amgen, Inc. v.
Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., 927 F.2d 1200, 1206–07 (Fed. Cir. 1991).
194 Frazer v. Schlegel, 498 F.3d 1283, 1287 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Hoffman-La Roche, Inc. v. Promega
Corp., 323 F.3d 1354, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2003).

were one thing, when it is actually something else.195 Although ﬁling a patent
application is not a reduction to practice at all, it is treated as though it were
for purposes of ﬁxing the date of invention. Consequently, an inventor who
never produces a physical embodiment of the invention, or who does so only
later, will be considered to have reduced to practice on his ﬁling date.196
If “date of invention” were always synonymous with “date of reduction
to practice,” life would be simpler. In fact, the date of conception must also
be taken into account, because of the following complication introduced
by § 102(g):
In determining priority of invention under this subsection, there shall
be considered not only the respective dates of conception and reduc-
tion to practice of the invention, but also the reasonable diligence of
one who was ﬁrst to conceive and last to reduce to practice, from a
time prior to conception by the other.
In other words, when two inventors contend for the title of “ﬁrst to invent,”
in the context of either an interference proceeding or a prior art challenge to
an issued patent, the inventor who was ﬁrst to conceive but last to reduce to
practice will prevail if, but only if, he was “diligent” in reducing the inven-
tion to practice.197
The easiest cases to resolve are those in which the ﬁrst inventor to con-
ceive of the invention is also the ﬁrst to reduce to practice. Suppose, for
example, that Inventor A, who has received a patent, sues an infringer.
The infringer argues that the invention of Inventor B is prior art to Inven-
tor A’s patent under § 102(g). If Inventor A’s date of conception precedes
Inventor B’s date of conception, and Inventor’s A’s date of reduction to
practice precedes Inventor B’s date of reduction to practice, Inventor B’s
work is not prior art. If the situation is reversed (Inventor B’s dates of
Conditions of Patentability
103
195 See the discussion of “constructive notice” in Section 11.8.3.2.
196 Treating the ﬁling of a patent application as equivalent to producing a physical embodiment
of the invention is not so far-fetched, since the application should include all of the informa-
tion necessary to allow one skilled in the art to complete such an embodiment without undue
experimentation. If it does not include that information, the patent will be invalid for lack of
enablement. See Section 8.6.
197 See Pfaff, 525 U.S. at 61 (“[A]ssuming diligence on the part of the applicant, it is normally
the ﬁrst inventor to conceive, rather than the ﬁrst to reduce to practice, who establishes
the right to patent.”); Brand v. Miller, 487 F.3d 862, 869 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Medichem, S.A.
v. Rolabo, S.L., 437 F.3d 1157, 1169 (Fed. Cir. 2006). The Federal Circuit has applied the
diligence principle in the context of § 102(a). See In re Mulder, 716 F.2d 1542, 1545 (Fed.
Cir. 1983) (printed publication); Loral Fairchild Corp. v. Matsushita Elec. Indus. Co., 266
F.3d 1358, 1365–66 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (Newman, J., dissenting). However, the recent addi-
tion of the phrase “under this subsection” suggests that it is appropriate only in the prior
invention context of § 102(g).

conception and reduction to practice precede Inventor A’s respective
dates), then Inventor B’s invention is prior art to Inventor A. In neither
case is anyone’s diligence an issue. When, however, the ﬁrst inventor to
conceive was last to reduce to practice, diligence comes into play. To
return to the example, if Inventor A was the ﬁrst to conceive of the inven-
tion, but before he could reduce the invention to practice Inventor B both
conceived and reduced to practice, the patent to Inventor A would be
valid only if Inventor A had been diligent from a time prior to B’s date of
conception.198
The rules can be more easily visualized with the aid of a time line. In the
following examples, C stands for the date of conception and RTP for the
date of reduction to practice. Time progresses from left to right. Assume that
Inventor A has received a patent. Inventor B developed the same invention
independently, and his work is alleged to be prior art under § 102(g). In the
ﬁrst example, B’s invention is not prior art because he was last to conceive
and last to reduce to practice:
A: C - - - - - - - - - RTP
B:
C - - - - - - - - - - - - RTP
In the second example, B’s invention is prior art because he was ﬁrst to
conceive and ﬁrst to reduce to practice:
A:
C - - - - - - - - - - - - RTP
B: C - - - - - - - - - RTP
In the third example, A was ﬁrst to conceive, but B was ﬁrst to reduce to
practice. B’s invention is not prior art if A was diligent, though not as swift
as B, in reducing his invention to practice:
A: C - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - RTP (diligent?)
B:
C - - - - - RTP
In the last example, B was ﬁrst to conceive, but A was ﬁrst to reduce to
practice. B’s invention is prior art if B was diligent in reducing his invention
to practice:
A:
C - - - - - RTP
B: C - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - RTP (diligent?)
The purpose of this rather confusing set of rules is to reward inventors
who are the ﬁrst to conceive of an idea, and at the same time to encourage
104
Patent Law Essentials
198 See Singh v. Brake, 317 F.3d 1334, 1340 (Fed. Cir. 2003); Jolley, 308 F.3d at 1326. The time
period that begins just before a rival’s conception and ends with one’s own reduction to prac-
tice is frequently called the “critical period” for diligence. See, e.g., Scott v. Koyama, 281 F.3d
1243, 1247 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Bey v. Kollonitsch, 806 F.2d 1024, 1025–26 (Fed. Cir. 1986).
Earlier lapses in diligence can be overlooked.

inventors to bring their ideas to a practical end, or a public disclosure, as
soon as possible.
“Diligence” in this context means reasonable efforts to reduce the
invention to practice or to ﬁle a patent application. “Diligent” effort must
be relatively continuous. Some excuses for lapses of effort have been
recognized—most notably the need to complete some other invention
before the ﬁrst can be reduced to practice.199 The courts will also consider
“the reasonable everyday problems and limitations encountered by an
inventor,” including illness, poverty, the need for an occasional vacation,
or the need to make a living by other means.200 Time spent on efforts to
fund or commercialize the invention, or to develop an unrelated inven-
tion, is not considered an adequate excuse for delay.201
Although diligence seems the inverse of abandonment or concealment,
and the factual considerations are similar, remember that they are distinct
issues under § 102(g). Abandonment can negate a prior art reference that
was both conceived and reduced to practice before the patentee entered the
scene. Diligence is an issue only in the rarer circumstance that the ﬁrst inven-
tor to conceive was the last to reduce to practice.
8.9.3 Burdens of Proof for Conception, Reduction 
to Practice, and Diligence
If a question of priority turns on the ﬁling date of a patent application or the
publication date of a technical journal, the proof is relatively straightforward.
The ﬁling date of a patent application is a matter of public record, and the pub-
lication date of a journal is usually easy to verify. If, however, priority depends
on the dates of conception and reduction to practice, the facts can be much
harder to establish. A conception date, in particular, can be a difﬁcult thing to
prove because the essential activity occurs entirely in the mind of the inventor.
Whenever a successful invention appears, there are sure to be those who
purport to have had the same idea ﬁrst. By the same token, it is easy for any
patentee faced with prior art to claim that his conception occurred even
Conditions of Patentability
105
199 See, e.g., Keizer v. Bradley, 270 F.2d 396 (C.C.P.A. 1959).
200 See Grifﬁth v. Kanamaru, 816 F.2d 624, 626–27 (Fed. Cir. 1987). If the reduction to practice
had been a “constructive” reduction to practice, accomplished by ﬁling a patent application,
the patent attorney’s need to work on other applications can be considered an adequate
excuse for delay, if the applications were handled in the order received, or if there was a
need to work on related applications as a group. See Bey, 806 F.2d at 1028–30.
201 See Grifﬁth, 816 F.2d at 627–28. As in the case of abandonment or concealment, the line
between work on the invention and unrelated commercial activity can be difﬁcult to draw.
“Precedent illustrates the continuum between, on the one hand, ongoing laboratory
experimentation, and on the other hand, pure money-raising activity that is entirely unre-
lated to practice of the process.” Scott, 281 F.3d at 1248 (holding that construction of facil-
ities for large-scale practice of the claimed process sufﬁced to show diligence).

earlier. The courts have therefore established certain rules governing the
proof required to establish conception and reduction to practice.
First, the application ﬁling date is presumed to be the applicant’s date of
invention in the absence of other evidence.202 During prosecution of a patent
application, if the applicant needs to establish an earlier date of invention in
order to pre-date a potential prior art reference, this can be accomplished under
certain circumstances by means of a sworn afﬁdavit from the inventor estab-
lishing prior conception and reduction to practice.203 This is known as “swear-
ing behind” a reference. In litigation, such claims must be subject to proof. A
party challenging a patent must establish prior conception and reduction to
practice by “clear and convincing evidence,”204 and a patentee claiming an
invention date prior to the ﬁling date must introduce evidence to support it.205
A date of conception cannot be established entirely by the inventor’s
own testimony, which is likely to be untrustworthy.206 The date must be
corroborated, usually by the testimony of a non-inventor who was made
aware of the inventor’s work soon after the date in question.207 For this rea-
son, engineers involved in organized research programs often have their
laboratory notebooks periodically reviewed, signed and dated by a col-
league.208 A witnessed notebook can be the best evidence of what was con-
ceived and when,209 and it is a practice strongly recommended to anyone
pursuing work that may eventually prove patentable. Dates of reduction to
practice and allegations of diligence also must be corroborated by evi-
dence independent of the inventor.210 Although eyewitness testimony is
106
Patent Law Essentials
202 See Ecolochem, Inc. v. Southern California Edison Co., 227 F.3d 1361, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2000);
Bausch & Lomb, Inc. v. Barnes-Hind/Hydrocurve, Inc., 796 F.2d 443, 449 (Fed. Cir. 1986).
203 See 37 C.F.R. § 1.131.
204 Apotex, USA, Inc. v. Merck& Co., 254 F.3d 1031, 1036 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
205 The ultimate burden of proof on validity, however, always remains with the party challeng-
ing the patent. See Innovative Scuba Concepts, Inc. v. Feder Indus., Inc., 26 F.3d 1112, 1115
(Fed. Cir. 1994).
206 See Medichem, S.A. v. Rolabo, S.L., 437 F.3d 1157, 1170 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (“Credibility con-
cerns undergird the corroboration requirement, the purpose of which is to prevent fraud.”).
207 See Rosco, Inc. v. Mirror Lite Co., 304 F.3d 1373, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Sandt Tech., Ltd. v.
Resco Metal and Plastics Corp., 264 F.3d 1344, 1350 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
208 The colleague, however, cannot be a co-inventor. See Medichem, 437 F.3d at 1171.
209 See Sandt Technology, 264 F.3d at 1350–51 (“Documentary or physical evidence that is made con-
temporaneously with the inventive process provides the most reliable proof that the inventor’s
testimony has been corroborated.”). In comparison, “post-invention oral testimony is more sus-
pect, as there is more of a risk that the witness may have a litigation-inspired motive to cor-
roborate the inventor’s testimony, and that the testimony may be inaccurate.” Id. at 1351.
210 See Medichem, 437 F.3d at 1169 (corroboration of reduction to practice); Brown v. Barbacid, 436
F.3d 1376, 1380 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (corroboration of diligence). The Federal Circuit has described
the standard for corroborating reduction to practice as “more stringent.” Singh v. Brake, 222
F.3d 1362, 1370 (Fed. Cir. 2000). Perhaps that is because reduction to practice requires the
inventor to take things farther than does conception. See id. (“a notebook page may well show
that the inventor conceived what he wrote on the page, whereas it may not show that the exper-
iments were actually performed, as required for a reduction to practice” (emphasis in original)).

often best, corroboration is subject to a “rule of reason” that allows the
inventor’s claims to be substantiated by any evidence sufﬁcient to establish
credibility.211 For example, testimony regarding a reduction to practice
might be corroborated by dated invoices for the parts that were used to
build an embodiment of the invention.212
8.9.4 Prior Work by the Same Inventor
The kinds of prior art listed in § 102(a), (e), and (g) are limited,
expressly or by implication, to prior inventions, patents, patent applica-
tions, printed publications, public knowledge, or public use attributable to
persons other than the inventor.213 This limitation can be difﬁcult to apply in
cases where a patent names two or more joint inventors.214 For example,
is a publication by A alone prior art to the joint invention of A and B? In
these cases, courts resort to the concept of the “inventive entity,” which is
simply a way of referring to a speciﬁc group of inventors. A reference can
be considered prior art to a patent or patent application if it is attributa-
ble to a different inventive entity. This is true whether the prior inventive
entity is composed of entirely different individuals, or whether some indi-
viduals are common to both inventive entities. Thus, a publication by A,
describing his work alone, could invalidate the subsequent patent of A
Conditions of Patentability
107
211 See Medichem, 437 F.3d at 1170–71 (“‘[I]t is not necessary to produce an actual over-the-shoulder
observer. Rather, sufﬁcient circumstantial evidence of an independent nature can satisfy the
corroboration requirement.’”); Sandt Technology, 264 F.3d at 1350 (“rule of reason” test, exam-
ining “all pertinent evidence”); Cooper v. Goldfarb, 154 F.3d 1321, 1330 (Fed. Cir. 1998). In
Woodland Trust v. Flowertree Nursery, Inc., 148 F.3d 1368, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 1998), the court listed a
number of factors relevant to whether the testimony of a corroborating witness satisﬁes the rule
of reason. These include the interest of the corroborating witness in the subject matter of the
suit and the amount of time that has elapsed since the events in question.
212 See Lacotte v. Thomas, 758 F.2d 611, 613 (Fed. Cir. 1985).
213 In re Katz, 687 F.2d 450, 454 (C.C.P.A. 1982); see also Invitrogen Corp. v. Biocrest Mfg.,
L.P., 424 F.3d 1374, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2005); Rapoport v. Dement, 254 F.3d 1053, 1056 (Fed.
Cir. 2001) (report cannot be cited as prior art against its author). Section 102(a) refers to an
invention “patented or described in a printed publication . . . before the invention thereof
by the applicant.” While there is no explicit exception for the applicant’s own work, clearly
the applicant himself cannot patent or describe an invention in a printed publication
before he has at least conceived it. It might be possible for the applicant to produce a
patent or publication in comparison with which his later invention is obvious (see Section
8.9.6), but the courts have generally ruled out the use of an inventor’s own work as the
basis for an obviousness challenge. See Katz, 687 F.2d at 454. The statutory bar provisions
(see Sections 8.10 and 8.11) create an important exception. A statutory bar, based on either
anticipation or obviousness, can be triggered by the inventor’s own activities, if they occur
more than one year before an application is ﬁled. See Invitrogen, 424 F.3d at 1381. A prior
patent by the same inventor can raise issues of double patenting. See Section 8.12.
214 See Section 6.1.

and B together.215 A publication describing the work of A and B together
could invalidate a subsequent patent to A alone. But a publication
describing the work of A and B together would not be prior art to the sub-
sequent patent of A and B.216 Note that the question is not who wrote the
publication, but rather whose invention the publication describes. A publi-
cation by A and B describing the work of A alone would not be § 102(a)
prior art to A’s subsequent patent.217
Section 103(c) provides another twist. Even if a prior invention is attribut-
able to a different inventive entity, if the invention is only a potential reference
under § 102(e), (f), or (g), and if the prior invention and the subsequent appli-
cation are owned by the same person (or both are subject to an obligation to
assign to the same person), the prior invention cannot render the subsequent
patent invalid for obviousness.218 This provision applies most often where
several people are working on a project for the same corporation,219 and it
prevents the work of one person from invalidating the work of a colleague,
recognizing that both are generally working under the same direction and
toward the same goal.
8.9.5 Anticipation
Establishing that a patent, patent application, publication, or other poten-
tial reference falls within one of the categories of prior art is only a ﬁrst step.
Next one must ask whether or not the claimed invention is novel when com-
pared with the reference. If the claim includes subject matter identical to that
disclosed or embodied in a prior art reference, the claim is “anticipated” and
invalid for lack of novelty.
Testing for anticipation is much like testing for infringement.220 First,
one “construes” the claim to determine exactly what it means.221 The
same claim construction must be used for all issues of infringement and
validity. After construing the claim, one compares the claim to the
reference.222 The claim serves as a checklist, and if every element of the
108
Patent Law Essentials
215 This is one occasion on which A and B might reconsider whether B was properly named as
a joint inventor. If B’s contribution did not rise to the level of invention, and if B was named
as an inventor only accidentally, it would be possible to correct the patent to name only A
as the inventor, thereby removing the prior publication as a potential prior art reference. See
Section 6.1.
216 Unless, again, it could sufﬁce for a statutory bar under § 102(b). See Section 8.10.
217 See Katz, 687 F.2d at 455.
218 See Section 8.9.6.
219 The law generally treats a corporation as a “person.” People are “natural persons.”
220 See Chapter 10.
221 See Chapter 7.
222 See Teleﬂex, Inc. v. Ficosa North America Corp., 299 F.3d 1313, 1335 (Fed. Cir. 2000)
(describing the “two-step procedure”).

claim finds an exact match in the reference, the claim is anticipated.223
Anticipation requires that all claim elements appear in a single refer-
ence.224 This is because combining the teachings of one reference with the
teachings of another reference might be sufficiently inventive to warrant
a patent.225 The question in such a case is whether the combination was
“non-obvious,” a separate issue discussed in the next section.
If the prior art reference is a patent or printed publication, it anticipates
only if it discloses or “teaches” every element of the claimed invention,
when read by a person skilled in the art.226 A particular claim element can
be mentioned explicitly in the reference,227 or it can be inherent.228 Suppose,
for example, that a claim to a mousetrap required a “ﬂexible” spring, and a
Conditions of Patentability
109
223 See Hakim v. Cannon Avent Gp., PLC, 479 F.3d 1313, 1319 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Impax Labs.,
Inc. v. Aventis Pharmaceuticals Inc., 468 F.3d 1366, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Amgen Inc. v.
Hoechst Marion Roussel, Inc., 457 F.3d 1293, 1304 (Fed. Cir. 2006). The tests of anticipation
and literal infringement (see Section 10.5) are so similar, it is sometimes said that whatever
would literally infringe a claim if it came later in time, anticipates if it came before. See
Upsher-Smith Labs., Inc. v. Pamlab, L.L.C., 412 F.3d 1319, 1322 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (referring
to the “century-old axiom”). However, since anticipation can be based on references that
would not infringe (for example, the description of an invention in a publication), the
“infringement test” of anticipation may be more confusing than helpful.
224 Hakim, 479 F.3d at 1219; Impax, 468 F.3d at 1381.
225 See Clearstream Wastewater Sys., Inc. v. Hydro-Action, Inc., 206 F.3d 1440, 1445 (Fed. Cir.
2000) (combination claims “can consist of new combinations of old elements”; individual
elements of those combinations “may, and often do, read on the prior art”).
226 Like a patent disclosure, an anticipating reference must be “enabling.” See Impax, 468 F.3d at
1381; Amgen, 457 F.3d at 1306; Elan Pharmaceuticals, Inc. v. Mayo Foundation for Medical
Education and Research, 346 F.3d 1051, 1054 (Fed. Cir. 2003) (“The disclosure in an assert-
edly anticipating reference must be adequate to enable possession of the desired subject mat-
ter. It is insufﬁcient to name or describe the desired subject matter, if it cannot be produced
without undue experimentation.”). On the other hand, a reference can be enabling, and
anticipating, even if what it describes has not actually been attempted. See Elan, 346 F.3d at
1055. For anticipation, a reference may be enabling even if it does not describe how the
invention can be usefully applied. See Impax, 468 F.3d at 1381–82.
227 The reference does not have to describe a claim element in precisely the same words used
in the patent claim. See In re Bond, 910 F.2d 831, 832 (Fed. Cir. 1990) (anticipation is not an
“ipsissimis verbis” test).
228 See Abbott Labs. v. Baxter Pharmaceutical Prods., Inc., 471 F.3d 1363, 1368 (Fed. Cir.
2006); Eli Lilly & Co. v. Barr Labs., Inc. 251 F.3d 955, 970 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“A reference
is anticipatory if it discloses every limitation of the claimed invention either explicitly or
inherently. . . . A reference includes an inherent characteristic if that characteristic is the
‘natural result’ ﬂowing from the reference’s explicitly explicated limitations.”);Telemac
Cellular Corp. v. Topp Telecom, Inc., 247 F.3d 1316, 1327 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“‘Under the
principles of inherency, if the prior art necessarily functions in accordance with, or
includes, the claimed limitation, it anticipates.’”). Although anticipation requires that
every claim element be found in a single reference, other references can be used to prove
the fact of inherency. Teleﬂex, 299 F.3d at 1335; Continental Can Co. v. Monsanto Co., 948
F.2d 1264, 1268–69 (Fed. Cir. 1991).

prior publication disclosed a mousetrap with a steel spring of certain dimen-
sions. Even if the publication did not refer to the ﬂexibility of the spring, the
spring described might be inherently ﬂexible because of its materials and
design. In this situation, the “ﬂexible” spring element of the claim would be
met by the reference, even though it was not explicit.229
Although anticipation requires that all of the elements of a claim be
found in one reference, it may be proper to look to other references as an
aid to understanding the anticipatory reference.230 It is not proper to look
to other references to ﬁll in claim elements missing in the primary refer-
ence.231 This relatively clear distinction was blurred somewhat by the
decision in In re Graves.232 There the Federal Circuit held that a reference
lacking a claim element could still be held to anticipate, if the missing ele-
ment was “within the knowledge of a skilled artisan.”233 This sounds sus-
piciously close to an obviousness test, rather than the classic test of
anticipation, and it is not clear how far in this direction the Federal Circuit
is willing to go.234
110
Patent Law Essentials
229 The Federal Circuit has issued conﬂicting statements on whether an inherent characteris-
tic must have been recognized in order to count for anticipation. Some opinions state that
the inherent characteristic must be “necessarily present” and “so recognized by persons
of ordinary skill.” Finnegan Corp. v. International Trade Comm’n, 180 F.3d 1354, 1365 
(Fed. Cir. 1999); see also Crown Operations Int’l, Ltd. v. Solutia Inc., 289 F.3d 1367, 1377
(Fed. Cir. 2002). On other occasions, the court has observed that “[i]nherency is not
necessarily coterminous with the knowledge of those of ordinary skill in the art,” and
“[a]rtisans of ordinary skill may not recognize the inherent characteristics of functioning
of the prior art.” In re Cruciferous Sprout Litigation, 301 F.3d 1343, 1349 (Fed. Cir. 2002).
The more recent decisions disavow the requirement of recognition. See, e.g., Abbott, 471
F.3d at 1367–68; Prima Tek II, L.L.C. v. Polypap, S.A.R.L., 412 F.3d 1284, 1289 (Fed. Cir.
2005); Toro Co. v. Deere & Co., 355 F.3d 1313, 1320–21 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Recognition
may be superﬂuous if beneﬁcial characteristics were present in the prior art, and the
advantages were enjoyed whether anyone knew it or not. If certain vegetable sprouts
always included cancer-preventing chemicals, the people who ate them reaped the bene-
ﬁts, even if unknowingly. See Cruciferous Sprout, 301 F.3d at 1350 (the inherent character-
istics “have existed as long as the sprouts themselves. . . . It matters not that those of
ordinary skill heretofore may not have recognized these inherent characteristics of the
sprouts”). In some instances, however, failure to recognize an inherent characteristic may
negate the beneﬁts. For example, if a diet described in a publication could cure cancer but
no one realized it, the diet would not be prescribed to those who could proﬁt from it. The
Federal Circuit has not explained things in quite this fashion, but it seems a plausible way
to resolve the conﬂict.
230 See Teleﬂex, 299 F.3d at 1335; Bristol-Meyers Squibb Co. v. Ben Venue Labs., Inc., 246 F.3d
1368, 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2001). When used in that limited fashion, the additional references need
not be prior art. See Bristol-Meyers, 246 F.3d at 1379.
231 Teleﬂex, 299 F.3d at 1335.
232 69 F.3d 1147 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
233 Id. at 1152.
234 See Teleﬂex, 299 F.3d at 1334–35 (rejecting an argument based on Graves and reiterating that
additional prior art references cannot ﬁll gaps in the allegedly anticipating reference).

If a patent claims a broad genus, a reference that includes a single species
of the genus will anticipate the claim.235 For example, a claim that speciﬁed
a fuel composed of (among other things) “10 to 50 percent methane” would
be anticipated by a prior fuel that met all of the other claim elements and
that was composed of 25 percent methane. The claim is anticipated because
it would otherwise prevent the practice of at least one fuel combination
already in use. The converse, however, is not true. If a claim called for a fuel
composed of exactly 25 percent methane, and a prior publication discussed
such a fuel with a methane concentration of anywhere from 10 to 50 percent,
the claim requiring exactly 25 percent would not be anticipated. 236 It might
or might not be invalid for obviousness.
8.9.6 Obviousness (§ 103)
Obviousness is a concept drawn from the following language of 35
U.S.C. § 103(a):
A patent may not be obtained though the invention is not identically
disclosed or described as set forth in section 102 of this title, if the dif-
ferences between the subject matter sought to be patented and the
prior art are such that the subject matter as a whole would have been
obvious at the time the invention was made to a person having ordi-
nary skill in the art to which said subject matter pertains.
Like anticipation, obviousness is a ground for rejecting a patent claim in the
course of prosecution or invalidating a patent claim in the course of infringe-
ment litigation. Obviousness, however, does not require that the claimed
invention be identical to the prior art. Instead, obviousness focuses on the dif-
ferences between the claim and the prior art, and asks whether those differ-
ences are really inventive, or whether they are differences that might have
occurred to anyone of ordinary skill.237 Like § 102, § 103 prevents a patent
claim from taking from the public what, in a sense, it already possesses.
Conditions of Patentability
111
235 See Eli Lilly, 251 F.3d at 971 (“Our case law ﬁrmly establishes that a later genus claim limitation
is anticipated by, and therefore not patentably distinct from, an earlier species claim.”); Atlas Pow-
der Co. v. Ireco, Inc., 190 F.3d 1342, 1346 (Fed. Cir. 1999) (“[I]f granting patent protection on the
disputed claim would allow the patentee to exclude the public from practicing the prior art, then
that claim is anticipated, regardless of whether it also covers subject matter not in the prior art.”).
236 See Atoﬁna v. Great Lakes Chemical Corp., 441 F.3d 991, 999 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Upsher-Smith,
412 F.3d at 1323. Disclosure of a sufﬁciently limited genus might anticipate a species of the
genus, even if the prior art did not name that species speciﬁcally. See Bristol-Meyers, 246 F.3d
at 1380. The detailed description of a small genus might be equivalent to an explicit descrip-
tion of each of its members. See Atoﬁna, 441 F.3d at 999; but cf. Impax, 468 F.3d at 1381
(disclosure in reference of “hundreds of compounds” did not allow a person skilled in the art
to separately envision each member of the class).
237 Although obviousness looks to the differences between the claimed invention and the prior
art, the invention still must be viewed “as a whole.” See 35 U.S.C. § 103; Princeton
Biochemicals, Inc. v. Beckman Coulter, Inc., 411 F.3d 1332, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 2005); Para-
Ordnance Mfg., Inc. v. SGS Imports Int’l, Inc., 73 F.3d 1085, 1087 (Fed. Cir. 1995).

Obviousness must be judged from the perspective of the “person of ordi-
nary skill in the art” at the time the invention was made.238 The “person of
ordinary skill in the art” is a mythical everyman whose viewpoint is often
called upon in patent law, not only in context of obviousness but also, for
example, in deciding whether a patent speciﬁcation enables the practice of
the claimed invention.239 The person of ordinary skill is not an inventor or
innovator, but a person of ordinary competence who does the expected
thing.240 The level of expertise and education required of the person of ordi-
nary skill varies depending on the art. In a very sophisticated art, a person
of ordinary skill might have a Ph.D. and years of hands-on experience. In a
less sophisticated art, the person of ordinary skill might be a shade tree
mechanic. A court must decide what level of skill represents “ordinary skill”
in the art at the time the invention was made.241
Non-obviousness should not be confused with complexity. Sometimes the
simplest inventions are the most innovative.242 Nor must the invention embrace
a “ﬂash of genius”—the kind of sudden inspiration that led Archimedes to shout
112
Patent Law Essentials
238 See 35 U.S.C. § 103; Arkie Lures, Inc. v. Gene Larew Tackle, Inc., 119 F.3d 953, 956 (Fed.
Cir. 1997) (obviousness must be approached “not from the viewpoint of the inventor, but
from the viewpoint of a person of ordinary skill in the ﬁeld of the invention”); Custom Acces-
sories, Inc. v. Jeffrey-Allan Indus., Inc., 807 F.2d 955, 962 (Fed. Cir. 1986) (“obvious” mean
obvious to a person of ordinary skill—“not to the judge, or to a layman, or to those skilled in
remote arts, or to geniuses in the art”).
239 See Section 8.6.
240 Life Techs., Inc. v. Clontech Labs., Inc., 224 F.3d 1320, 1325 (Fed. Cir. 2000); Standard Oil
Co. v. American Cyanamid Co., 774 F.2d 448, 454 (Fed. Cir. 1985) (“A person of ordinary
skill in the art is . . . presumed to be one who thinks along the lines of conventional wisdom
in the art and is not one who undertakes to innovate, whether by patient, and often expen-
sive, systematic research or by extraordinary insights, it makes no difference which.”).
241 See KSR Int’l Co. v. Teleﬂex Inc., 127 S. Ct. 1727, 1734 (2007); Abbott Labs. v. Andrx
Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 452 F.3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Ruiz v. A.B. Chance Co., 234
F.3d 654, 666 (Fed. Cir. 2000). Factors that may be considered include “‘(1) the educational
level of the inventor; (2) [the] type of problems encountered in the art; (3) prior art solutions
to those problems; (4) [the] rapidity with which innovations are made; (5) [the] sophistication
of the technology; and (6) [the] educational level of active workers in the ﬁeld.’” Daiichi
Sankyo Co. v. Apotex, Inc., 501 F.3d 1254, 1256 (Fed. Cir. 2007). An invention may be obvi-
ous to a person of “ordinary skill” even if it would not be obvious to a layperson. On the
other hand, an invention that would be obvious to an inventor can still be patentable. Inven-
tors and patentees are often assumed to be persons of extraordinary skill. See Life Technologies,
224 F.3d at 1325; Kloster Speedsteel AB v. Crucible Inc., 793 F.2d 1565, 1574 (Fed. Cir.
1986). However, the “person of ordinary skill” is someone who makes things, not someone
who only uses the technology supplied by others. See Dystar Textilfarben GmbH v. C.H.
Patrick Co., 464 F.3d 1356, 1362–63 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (person skilled in the art of dyeing
would be someone familiar with chemistry, not the high school–educated equipment opera-
tor who merely “ﬂips the switches”).
242 See Gentry Gallery, Inc. v. Berkline Corp., 134 F.3d 1473, 1478 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (“simplicity
alone is not determinative of obviousness”); In re Oetiker, 977 F.2d 1443, 1447 (Fed. Cir.
1992) (“Simplicity is not inimical to patentability.”); Demaco Corp. v. F. Von Langsdorff
Licensing Ltd., 851 F.2d 1387, 1390-91 (Fed. Cir. 1988).

“Eureka!” An invention that is the product of patient experimentation, or that
is discovered entirely by accident, is just as patentable as one that arises from
pure mental effort.243 The only requirement is that the invention would not
have occurred to a person of ordinary skill. This principle accounts for the ﬁrst
sentence of § 103(c), which provides, rather cryptically, that “[p]atentability
shall not be negatived by the manner in which the invention was made.”244
While anticipation requires that all the elements of the claimed invention be
found in a single prior art reference, obviousness can be based on the combina-
tion of more than one reference. For example, if some elements of the claimed
invention were found in one technical journal, and the remaining elements
were found in another journal, the combination might have been obvious to a
person of ordinary skill in the art. Courts sometimes imagine this hypothetical
person standing in a workshop, surrounded by all of the relevant patents, pub-
lications, and other prior art references.245 The question then becomes, would
such a person, confronting the problem solved by the invention and aware of
all of these references, have found it obvious to make the claimed combination?
The references that may be considered include any of the kinds of prior
art set forth in § 102, as long as they are “analogous art.” A reference quali-
ﬁes as analogous art if (1) it comes from the “the ﬁeld of the inventor’s
endeavor,” or (2) it is “reasonably pertinent to the problem with which the
inventor was concerned.”246 The latter includes material from other ﬁelds
Conditions of Patentability
113
243 See Graham v. John Deere Co., 383 U.S. 1, 15 (1966); Life Techs., 224 F.3d at 1325 (“the path
that leads an inventor to the invention is . . . irrelevant to patentability”); In re Dow Chemical
Co., 837 F.2d 469, 472 (Fed. Cir. 1988) (“[m]ost technological advance is the fruit of methodi-
cal, persistent investigation”).
244 An invention may have been obvious from a technological point of view, but not from a busi-
ness point of view. Because patents are meant to encourage the technological arts, even an
advancement ingenious from a marketing perspective is unpatentable if it is obvious from a
technological perspective. See Orthopedic Equipment Co. v. U.S., 702 F.2d 1005, 1013 (Fed.
Cir. 1983) (“[T]he fact that the two disclosed apparatus would not be combined by business-
men for economic reasons is not the same as saying that it could not be done because skilled
persons in the art felt that there was some technological incompatibility that prevented their
combination. Only the latter fact is telling on the issue of nonobviousness.”).
245 See Para-Ordnance, 73 F.3d at 1088. However, the visual image of the art “tableau” was criti-
cized by the judge who ﬁrst created it, perhaps because it suggests the use of hindsight in
selecting the references to “hang in the workshop.” See Standard Oil Co. v. American
Cyanamid Co., 774 F.2d 448, 454 n.3 (Fed. Cir. 1985) (referring to the “unfortunate popu-
larity” of the tableau imagery).
246 In re Kahn, 441 F.3d 977, 987 (Fed. Cir. 2006); see also Princeton Biochemicals, 411 F.3d at 1339.
The pertinent art should be deﬁned in terms of the problem faced by the inventor, not the solution
embodied in the patented invention. The latter would introduce inappropriate hindsight. See
Monarch Knitting Machinery Corp. v. Sulzer Morat GmbH, 139 F.3d 877, 881 (Fed. Cir. 1998).
Sometimes it is difﬁcult to deﬁne the “ﬁeld of the inventor’s endeavor.” In Bigio, the court
afﬁrmed ﬁndings by the PTO that toothbrushes and hairbrushes are in the same ﬁeld of
endeavor. Their construction is similar and a small hairbrush (perhaps for a moustache) would
be much like a toothbrush. Id. at 1325–27. Judge Newman, dissenting, wrote that “[a] brush for
hair has no more relation to a brush for teeth than does hair resemble teeth.” Id. at 1327.

that, as a source of ideas, “logically would have commended itself to an inven-
tor’s attention.”247 For example, in In re Paulsen,248 the claimed invention con-
cerned a case for a portable computer, hinged in such a way that it could be
closed tight for carrying or latched in an upright position for viewing the dis-
play screen. The court found it appropriate to consider references concerning
hinges and latches, even if they were not in the portable computer ﬁeld:
The problems encountered by the inventors . . . were problems that
were not unique to portable computers. They concerned how to con-
nect and secure the computer’s display housing to the computer while
meeting certain size constraints and functional requirements. . . . We
agree with the Board that given the nature of the problems confronted
by the inventors, one of ordinary skill in the art “would have consulted
the mechanical arts for housings, hinges, latches, springs, etc.”249
In In re Oetiker,250 on the other hand, the court found insufﬁcient evidence
that a person working on hose clamps would have been motivated to con-
sider fasteners used in clothing.251
Sometimes a prior reference “teaches away” from the claimed invention. To
“teach away” means to suggest that the claimed combination should be
avoided as undesirable or ineffective.252 This is one factor to consider in decid-
ing whether certain references render a claimed invention obvious. Never-
theless, sufﬁcient disclosure can render an invention obvious and unpatentable,
even if the reference suggests that the invention is an inferior approach.253
It is no easy task to adopt the perspective of a different person (a person
of ordinary skill in the art) at a different time (the time the invention was
114
Patent Law Essentials
247 In re Icon Health & Fitness, Inc., 496 F.3d 1374, 1379–80 (Fed. Cir. 2007); see also Princeton
Biochemicals, 411 F.3d at 1339; Wang Labs., Inc. v. Toshiba Corp., 993 F.2d 858, 864 (Fed.
Cir. 1993).
248 30 F.3d 1475 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
249 Id. at 1481–82. Similarly, in Icon Health the court found that an inventor designing a folding
treadmill might have considered earlier work on folding beds. Even though beds and tread-
mills are in different ﬁelds of endeavor, the invention had more to do with the problem of
folding than with treadmills per se. Icon Health, 496 F.3d at 1380.
250 977 F.2d 1443 (Fed. Cir. 1992).
251 Id. at 1447.
252 See Icon Health, 496 F.3d at 1381 (“‘A reference may be said to teach away when a person of
ordinary skill, upon reading the reference, would be discouraged from following the path set
out in the reference, or would be led in a direction divergent from the path that was taken
by the applicant.’”); Kahn, 441 F.3d at 990; In re Gurley, 27 F.3d 551, 553 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
“Teaching away” is not relevant to anticipation. Celeritas Techs., Ltd. v. Rockwell Int’l Corp.,
150 F.3d 1354, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (“A reference is no less anticipatory if, after disclosing
the invention, the reference then disparages it.”).
253 See Gurley, 27 F.3d at 553 (“A known and obvious composition does not become patentable
simply because it has been described as somewhat inferior to some other product for the
same use.”).

made). One can easily fall prey to hindsight. Once you have seen the inven-
tion and how it solves a problem, it may seem like the obvious thing to
do254—particularly if, as is often the case, the ingredients of the solution were
already available. Concerned that worthy inventions might, in retrospect, be
held obvious simply because their component parts already existed,255
the Federal Circuit held that a combination can be found obvious only if
there was some “teaching, suggestion or motivation” to support it.256 In other
words, one cannot prove the obviousness of combination A plus B simply
by showing that A already existed and so did B. One has to show that per-
sons of ordinary skill would have been led, in some fashion, to combine A
with B to solve the problem at hand.257 In a similar vein, the Federal Circuit
emphasized that the standard of obviousness is not whether something
would have been “obvious to try.”258 Instead, one has to show that the inven-
tion was obvious to do, and that a person of ordinary skill would have
proceeded with a reasonable expectation of success.259
These rules, when strictly applied, made obviousness difﬁcult to estab-
lish—too difﬁcult, in the end, for the Supreme Court to approve. In one of
the more important patent cases of recent years, KSR Int’l Co. v. Teleﬂex
Inc.,260 the court considered the obviousness of a height-adjustable accelera-
tor pedal equipped with an electronic sensor. Height-adjustable pedals
already existed, as did electronic sensors for pedals that were not adjustable,
but no one had combined them as the patentee did. Finding no “teaching,
suggestion or motivation” to support the combination, the Federal Circuit
Conditions of Patentability
115
254 “Good ideas may well appear ‘obvious’ after they have been disclosed, despite having been
previously unrecognized.” Arkie Lures, 119 F.3d at 956.
255 See Crown, 289 F.3d at 1376 (“‘Determination of obviousness cannot be based on the hind-
sight combination of components selectively culled from the prior art to ﬁt the parameters
of the patented invention.’”); Life Techs., 224 F.3d at 1326 (“It is axiomatic that a claimed
invention is not obvious solely because it is composed of elements that are all individually
found in the prior art.”); In re Gorman, 933 F.2d 982, 987 (Fed. Cir. 1991).
256 Pﬁzer, Inc. v. Apotex, Inc., 480 F.3d 1348, 1362 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Kahn, 441 F.3d at 986; In
re Fulton, 391 F.3d 1195, 1200 (Fed. Cir. 2004).
257 See Crown, 289 F.3d at 1376 (“There must be a teaching or suggestion within the prior art,
within the nature of the problem to be solved, or within the general knowledge of a person
of ordinary skill in the ﬁeld of the invention, to look to particular sources, to select particu-
lar elements, and to combine them as combined by the inventor.”).
258 Pﬁzer, 480 F.3d at 1365 (it is a “truism” that “obvious to try” is not the correct standard of
obviousness); Novo Nordisk A/S v. Becton Dickinson & Co., 304 F.3d 1216, 1220 (Fed. Cir.
2002).
259 See Pharmastem Therapeutics, Inc. v. Viacell, Inc., 491 F.3d 1342, 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2007);
Pﬁzer, 480 F.3d at 1364; In re O’Farrell, 853 F.2d 894, 903–04 (Fed. Cir. 1988). An “obvious
to try” situation might occur if a publication included “a general disclosure [to] pique the sci-
entist’s curiosity, such that further investigation might be done as a result of the disclosure,
but the disclosure itself [did] not contain a sufﬁcient teaching of how to obtain the desired
result.” In re Eli Lilly & Co., 902 F.2d 943, 945 (Fed. Cir. 1990).
260 127 S. Ct. 1727 (2007).

reversed the district court’s judgment that the invention was obvious. On
appeal, the Supreme Court found that the “teaching, suggestion or motiva-
tion” test had been applied too woodenly in this case.261 There may have
been no explicit teaching encouraging persons skilled in the art to combine
a height-adjustable pedal with an electronic sensor, yet the course of the
industry made the combination inevitable, even with ordinary levels of inge-
nuity. Electronic sensors were becoming standard, so eventually persons
skilled in the art would add them to adjustable pedals—just as the patentee
had done.262
Although it recognized the need to avoid hindsight, the Supreme Court
endorsed “common sense” as a better guide to obviousness than any rigid
formula.263 Even the “obvious to try” approach can be useful. If there were
only a few options to try, and one could have tried them with a fair expec-
tation of success, then the solution might be considered obvious.264 The
court also observed that combinations are more likely to be obvious if they
consist of known components performing their usual functions—e.g., a
known perfume added to a known sunblock, each behaving as one would
expect.265 On the other hand, a combination might be non-obvious if it cre-
ates some unexpected “synergy”—perhaps a perfume combined with a sun-
block producing an unexpected mosquito repellent. In KSR, the sensor and
pedal in combination produced nothing more than the sum of the parts.
Common sense showed, in the end, that the improvement did not rise to the
level of a patentable invention.
Although obviousness determinations are highly fact-speciﬁc,266 two addi-
tional examples will give the reader some ﬂavor for how the decisions are
made. In In re Gorman,267 the claimed invention was a novelty lollipop in the
116
Patent Law Essentials
261 Id. at 1741 (“The obviousness analysis cannot be conﬁned by a formalistic conception of the
words teaching, suggestion, and motivation, or by overemphasis on the importance of pub-
lished articles and the explicit content of issued patents.”).
262 See id. at 1744–45. In some ﬁelds, “market demand, rather than scientiﬁc literature, will drive
design trends.” Id. at 1741.
263 Id. at 1742–43; see also Leapfrog Enterprises, Inc. v. Fisher-Price, Inc., 485 F.3d 1157, 1161
(Fed. Cir. 2007).
264 “When there is a design need or a market pressure to solve a problem and there are a ﬁnite
number of identiﬁed, predictable solutions, a person of ordinary skill has good reason to pur-
sue the known options within his or her technical grasp. If this leads to the anticipated suc-
cess, it is likely the product not of innovation but of ordinary skill and common sense. In that
instance the fact that a combination was obvious to try might show that it was obvious under
§ 103.” Id. at 1742; see also Takeda Chemical Indus., Ltd. v. Alphapharm Pty., Ltd., 492 F.3d
1350, 1359 (Fed. Cir. 2007).
265 Id. at 1739 (“The combination of familiar elements according to known methods is likely to
be obvious when it does no more than yield predictable results.”); see also Leapfrog, 485 F.3d
at 1161.
266 See Pﬁzer, 480 F.3d at 1366. Once the facts are determined, the ultimate decision on obvious-
ness is a “question of law.” See Section 11.4.
267 933 F.2d 892, 897 (Fed. Cir. 1991).

shape of a thumb. The elements of the claimed invention included a thumb-
shaped candy core; a protective covering, also thumb-shaped, which served
ﬁrst as a mold for the candy core and then as a “toy and novelty item for
placement upon the thumb of the user”; a lollipop stick; a plug of chewing
gum or similar edible material to seal the bottom of the candy; and a plastic
or cardboard disk at the base of the “thumb.”
The prior art located by the Patent Ofﬁce included 13 references. Some
showed candy or ice cream formed in a rubbery mold, which served double-
duty as a wrapper for the product. One ice cream product on a stick
included a similar cardboard base. Other references (believe it or not) dis-
closed thumb-shaped candies and confections. Edible plugs also had been
disclosed for sealing liquid inside of candy and ice cream products. Although
Gorman’s claim was very detailed, and none of the references included all
of the things that Gorman claimed, the Patent Ofﬁce found that the combi-
nation still would have been obvious to any person of ordinary skill. The
Federal Circuit afﬁrmed: “The various elements Gorman combined . . . are
all shown in the cited references in various subcombinations, used in the
same way, for the same purpose as in the claimed invention.”268
In Moleculon Research Corp. v. CBS, Inc.,269 on the other hand, the Federal
Circuit upheld the determination of the trial court that the claimed invention
was not obvious. There the invention was a cube puzzle of the kind popu-
larized by Rubik’s Cube. In fact, Rubik’s Cube was the product accused of
infringement. The claims described a puzzle in the shape of a subdivided
cube, the pieces of which could be scrambled and restored by rotating the
facets of the cube. CBS, which owned the rights to Rubik’s Cube, argued
that the claims were obvious in light of a prior patent, to one Gustafson, dis-
closing a spherical puzzle with a subdivided, rotating shell. A person skilled
in the art might have considered converting Gustafson’s sphere puzzle into a
cube with rotating faces, but nothing in the art suggested that such a change
would have been desirable. On the contrary, the evidence showed that
Gustafson, while considering other shapes, had dismissed a cube as inade-
quate.270 Moreover, one expert described the cube as a “quantum leap” from
the sphere.271 On the basis of this evidence, the lower court properly con-
cluded that even someone aware of Gustafson’s sphere would not have
found it obvious to make the cube.
Even these two examples are enough to prove the Federal Circuit’s obser-
vation that “[t]he obviousness standard, while easy to expound, is sometimes
difﬁcult to apply.”272 It is not hard to imagine Gorman or Moleculon reaching
an opposite conclusion.
Conditions of Patentability
117
268 Gorman, 933 F.2d at 987.
269 793 F.2d 1261 (Fed. Cir. 1986).
270 Id. at 1268.
271 Id.
272 Uniroyal, Inc. v. Rudkin-Wiley Corp., 837 F.2d 1044, 1050 (Fed. Cir. 1988).

8.9.6.1
Secondary Considerations
Because the obviousness determination is such a difﬁcult and subjective one,
courts have increasingly emphasized the importance of “secondary considera-
tions”—factors thought to provide objective evidence of non-obviousness. In
Graham v. John Deere Co.,273 the Supreme Court suggested that these
“secondary considerations,” including “commercial success, long felt but
unsolved needs, failure of others, etc.,”274 might be illuminating. Under sub-
sequent Federal Circuit precedent, secondary considerations have become a
mandatory aspect of the obviousness analysis.275
Secondary considerations include the following:
• Commercial success
• Long-felt need
• Failure of others
• Industry recognition
• Expressions of skepticism or disbelief
• Unexpected results
• Copying
• Near-simultaneous invention
The secondary consideration most frequently encountered is “commercial
success.” Commercial success means evidence that a product covered by a
patent claim has earned substantial proﬁts in the marketplace. In theory, an
invention that has been successful in the marketplace could not have been
an obvious one. Otherwise, someone else would have stepped ahead of the
inventor in order to reap the available rewards. 276
There are at least three possible objections to this theory. First, the theory
works only if the success of the invention had been foreseeable. Second,
118
Patent Law Essentials
273 383 U.S. 1 (1966).
274 Id. at 17–18. The factors speciﬁcally mentioned in Graham may be given greater weight than
others subsumed in the “etc.” See Ecolochem, Inc. v. Southern California Edison Co., 227
F.3d 1361, 1380 (Fed. Cir. 2000).
275 See Ruiz v. A.B. Chance Co., 234 F.3d 654, 667 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (“Our precedents clearly
hold that secondary considerations, when present, must be considered in determining
obviousness.”); Hybritech, Inc. v. Monoclonal Antibodies, Inc., 802 F.2d 1367, 1380 (Fed.
Cir. 1986) (secondary considerations are more than “icing on the cake”); Stratoﬂex, Inc. v.
Aeroquip Corp., 713 F.2d 1530, 1539 (Fed. Cir. 1983).
276 See Syntex (USA) LLC v. Apotex, Inc., 407 F.3d 1371, 1383 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (“commercial
success permits the inference that others have tried and failed”); Dickey-John Corp. v.
Int’l Tapetronics Corp., 710 F.2d 329, 346–47 (7th Cir. 1983) (“If individuals believe there
is ‘a fortune waiting in the wings’ for the person who solves the problem, we infer that
with such an incentive, many artisans were actually attempting to ﬁnd the solution. The
longer they failed to do so, the stronger the inference that it took extraordinary skill to
solve the problem.”).

someone has to be ﬁrst to invent, even if the invention is an obvious one and
the rewards are substantial. Finally, commercial success can be due to any
number of factors other than the claimed invention, including marketing
know-how, advertising, manufacturing techniques, quality control, price, or
features of the product other than those covered by the claim. In order to
meet this last objection, a “nexus” must exist between the success and the
claimed invention.277 Nexus means a logical, cause-and-effect relationship
between the success of the product and the claimed invention. Such a con-
nection might be shown in a number of ways, including consumer surveys,
comparisons to similar products, or testimony concerning the relative
advantages of the claimed invention.278
Commercial success is useful as a secondary consideration to patentees or
applicants who have marketed a product covered by the claim. Commercial
success can also be premised on a product marketed by someone else—even
an infringer—as long as there is a nexus between the success of the product
and the invention claimed.279 Success in licensing280 may also be offered as
evidence of commercial success.281
The other secondary considerations are relatively straightforward. If there
had been a “long-felt need” for an invention, or if others had tried and failed
to solve the problem addressed by the invention, it is reasonable to infer that
the invention was not an obvious one. Otherwise the problem would have
been solved before, and the need already satisﬁed.282 Reactions to the inven-
tion by persons skilled in the art can also be important. If experts in the ﬁeld
praised the invention or, even better, if they expressed skepticism or disbe-
lief that anyone had solved the problems overcome by the invention, this
Conditions of Patentability
119
277 See Ormco Corp. v. Align Tech., Inc., 463 F.3d 1299, 1311–12 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Iron Grip
Barbell Co. v. USA Sports, Inc., 392 F.3d 1317, 1324 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Demaco Corp. v. F.
Von Langsdorff Licensing Ltd., 851 F.2d 1387, 1392 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
278 See Demaco, 851 F.2d at 1392–93. “[I]f the marketed product embodies the claimed features,
and is coextensive with them, then a nexus is presumed and the burden shifts to the party
asserting obviousness to present evidence to rebut the presumed nexus.” Brown &
Williamson Tobacco Corp. v. Philip Morris Inc., 229 F.3d 1120, 1130 (Fed. Cir. 2000). One
way to rebut the presumption might be to show that other products embodying the patented
invention were commercial failures; hence, the successful product must owe its success to
something other than the invention. See id.
279 See Brown & Williamson, 229 F.3d at 1130.
280 See Section 6.3.
281 See In re GPAC Inc., 57 F.3d 1573, 1580 (Fed. Cir. 1995). Here the nexus requirement is
essential because the reason for a license may be nothing more than avoidance of litigation.
See Iron Grip, 392 F.3d at 1324.
282 See Advanced Display Sys., Inc. v. Kent State Univ., 212 F.3d 1272, 1285 (Fed. Cir. 2000)
(failure of others); Gambro Lundia AB v. Baxter Healthcare Corp., 110 F.3d 1573, 1579–80
(Fed. Cir. 1997); In re Dow Chemical Co., 837 F.2d 469, 472 (Fed. Cir. 1988) (“Recognition
of need, and difﬁculties encountered by those skilled in the ﬁeld, are classical indicia of unob-
viousness.”). On the other hand, “mere passage of time without the claimed invention” does
not prove non-obviousness. In re Kahn, 441 F.3d 977, 990 (Fed. Cir. 2006).

also serves as evidence of non-obviousness.283 “Unexpected results” can be
useful in showing that an invention was not an obvious one, particularly
where the results are unexpectedly good.284 Finally, since imitation is the
sincerest form of ﬂattery, copying of the invention can be taken as objective
evidence that the invention was not obvious.285
All of the secondary considerations discussed so far are potential evidence
of non-obviousness.286 “Near-simultaneous invention” is one secondary consider-
ation that is positive evidence of obviousness. If an invention is made independ-
ently by another inventor, at nearly the same time as the applicant or patentee,
this is evidence that the invention was not the result of uncommon effort or
insight. Rather, the art may simply have progressed to the point where the
claimed invention was the obvious next step.287 Note that an independent near-
simultaneous invention can serve as objective evidence of obviousness, even if
that invention occurred shortly after the invention by the patentee or applicant,
thereby disqualifying it as potential prior art under § 102.
8.9.7 Derivation (§ 102(f))
One rule of patentability that almost goes without saying is that an
applicant cannot claim someone else’s invention. This rule is embodied in
35 U.S.C. § 102(f), which states that a patent cannot be obtained if the appli-
cant “did not himself invent the subject matter sought to be patented.” If the
purported inventor took the idea from someone else, the claim is
unpatentable or, if already issued, invalid. A defense based on § 102(f) is
120
Patent Law Essentials
283 See Ortho-McNeil Pharmaceutical, Inc. v. Mylan Labs., Inc., 520 F.3d 1358, 1365 (Fed. Cir.
2008) (expert skepticism); Ecolochem, 227 F.3d at 1380 (acclamation); Monarch Knitting
Machinery Corp. v. Sulzer Morat GmbH, 139 F.3d 877, 885 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (“general skep-
ticism” as evidence of non-obviousness); Gillette Co. v. S.C. Johnson & Son, Inc., 919 F.2d
720, 726 (Fed. Cir. 1990) (skepticism toward “new-fangled approach”). “Teaching away” (see
Section 8.9.6) can be one form of expressing skepticism. See Monarch Knitting, 139 F.3d at 885
(“[i]n effect, ‘teaching away’ is a more pointed and probative form of skepticism”).
284 See Ortho-McNeil, 520 F.3d at 1365; Kao Corp. v. Unilever U.S., Inc., 441 F.3d 963, 970 (Fed.
Cir. 2006); Richardson-Vicks Inc. v. Upjohn Co., 122 F.3d 1476, 1483 (Fed. Cir. 1997).
Unexpected results should match the scope of the claim. Unexpected results for only a sub-
set of a claimed range do not support the non-obviousness of the entire claimed invention.
See In re Harris, 409 F.3d 1339, 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2005); In re Peterson, 315 F.3d 1325, 1330–31
(Fed. Cir. 2003).
285 Ortho-McNeil, 520 F.3d at 1365; Advanced Display, 212 F.3d at 1285–86; Diversitech Corp. v.
Century Steps, Inc., 850 F.2d 675, 679 (Fed. Cir. 1988). But cf. Ecolochem, 227 F.3d at 1380
(Copying “is only equivocal evidence of non-obviousness in the absence of more compelling
objective indicia”; copying could have occurred only because of “‘a general lack of concern
for patent property.’”).
286 The absence of commercial success, long-felt need, and the other indicia of non-obviousness
has generally been held a “neutral factor,” rather than positive evidence of obviousness. See
Gentry Gallery, Inc. v. Berkline Corp., 134 F.3d 1473, 1478 (Fed. Cir. 1998).
287 See Ecolochem, 227 F.3d at 1379; In re Merk & Co., 800 F.2d 1091, 1098 (Fed. Cir. 1986).

usually referred to as a “derivation” defense, because the claim is said to be
“derived” from someone else’s invention.288
A derivation defense requires proof, by clear and convincing evidence,
(1) that the invention was fully conceived by another person before it had
been conceived by the purported inventor, and (2) that the conception was
communicated to the purported inventor.289 The information communicated
must have been an “enabling disclosure” of the invention,290 not merely
information that could have made the invention obvious.291
8.10 SECTION 102(b) STATUTORY BARS
The previous discussion of § 102 concerned the effect of events occurring
before the applicant’s date of invention. The portions of § 102 that deal with
these events (paragraphs (a), (e) and (g)) ensure that on the date of the appli-
cant’s invention, the invention was new. Paragraph (b) of § 102 serves a dif-
ferent purpose. Section 102(b) ensures that the applicant did not delay too
long in ﬁling a patent application, after the occurrence of certain key events.
Section 102(b) provides as follows:
A person shall be entitled to a patent unless—
(b) the invention was patented or described in a printed publication
in this or a foreign country or in public use or on sale in this country,
more than one year prior to the date of the application for patent in the
United States. . . .
Section 102(b) is similar to 102(a) in that both refer to prior patents,
printed publications, and public use. However, § 102(b) differs fundamen-
tally from § 102(a) in three respects. First, § 102(b) adds the “on sale”
language. Second, a § 102(b) issue often arises from the actions of the appli-
cant, whereas a § 102(a) issue can arise only from the acts of a third party.
Finally, the important date for § 102(b) is not the date of the invention, but
a date exactly one year before the patent application was ﬁled.292 This date is
known as the application’s “critical date.”
Conditions of Patentability
121
288 See Eaton Corp. v. Rockwell Int’l Corp., 323 F.3d 1332, 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2003); Price v.
Symsek, 988 F.2d 1187, 1190 (Fed. Cir. 1993).
289 International Rectiﬁer Corp. v. Ixys Corp., 361 F.3d 1363, 1376 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Eaton, 323
F.3d at 1344; Gambro Lundia AB v. Baxter Healthcare Corp., 110 F.3d 1573, 1576 (Fed. Cir.
1997). The claim of prior conception must be corroborated (see Section 8.9.3). Lacks Indus.,
Inc. v. McKechnie Vehicle Components USA, Inc., 322 F.3d 1335, 1349 (Fed. Cir. 2003).
290 Eaton, 323 F.3d at 1344. Enabling disclosures are discussed in Section 8.6.
291 Gambro, 110 F.3d at 1577–78. Gambro suggests that one could never base a ﬁnding of obvi-
ousness on the kind of disclosure contemplated in § 102(f). However, the Federal Circuit later
decided that a § 102(f) disclosure, combined with other references, can lead to a ﬁnding of
obviousness. Oddzon Prods., Inc. v. Just Toys, Inc., 122 F.3d 1396, 1403–04 (Fed. Cir. 1997).
292 When prosecution results in a chain of related applications, a later application may be entitled
to the effective ﬁling date of a preceding application for purposes of § 102(b). See Section 5.2.

Imagine the following scenario. On January 1, 2000, an inventor con-
ceives of a better mousetrap and reduces the invention to practice by con-
structing a prototype in his workshop. January 1, 2000 is the “date of the
invention,” and that date is corroborated by a witnessed laboratory note-
book. The inventor submits a complete description of the mousetrap to the
Inventor’s Newsletter, which publishes the description on February 1, 2000. On
February 2, 2001, the inventor ﬁles a patent application. The “critical date”
of the application, under § 102(b), is February 2, 2000. The publication in the
Inventor’s Newsletter on February 1, 2000 is not prior art under § 102(a)
because it did not occur before the applicant’s date of invention. However,
the publication did occur before the “critical date.” Consequently, if the pub-
lication included a complete and enabling description of the invention, the
patent application would be rejected under § 102(b).
In essence, § 102(b) provides a one-year grace period after the ﬁrst patent,
publication, public use, or offer to sell that relates to the claimed inven-
tion.293 An inventor has that long to ﬁle a patent application, or the right to
a patent is lost. Any problems that might arise from the inventor’s own activ-
ities can be avoided simply by ensuring that a patent application is on ﬁle
within one year of the date of invention. This practice should be adopted by
all inventors, though frequently it is not.
The rationale for § 102(b) is threefold. First, and most generally, it encour-
ages diligence by penalizing inventors who are lazy, or inclined to suppress
their inventions, or who for some other reason delay in ﬁling a patent appli-
cation.294 Second, it prevents the public from being misled where the avail-
ability of the invention to the public, without evidence that the inventor
intends to obtain a patent, might create the impression that the invention is
up for grabs.295 Finally, it prevents what could be an unwarranted extension
of the inventor’s monopoly powers beyond the 20 years contemplated by
the patent system.296 If there were no § 102(b), an inventor might delay seek-
ing patent protection indeﬁnitely, and the mere threat that he would do so
eventually could prevent potential competitors from daring to compete. On
the other hand, an inventor does need a certain amount of time to perfect
122
Patent Law Essentials
293 See Gemmy Indus. Corp. v. Chrisha Creations Ltd., 452 F.3d 1353, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2006);
Woodland Trust v. Flowertree Nursery, Inc., 148 F.3d 1368, 1370 (Fed. Cir. 1998).
294 See Special Devices, Inc. v. OEA, Inc., 270 F.3d 1353, 1357 (Fed. Cir. 2001); La Bounty Mfg.,
Inc. v. U.S. Int’l Trade Comm’n, 958 F.2d 1066, 1071 (Fed. Cir. 1992) (“The general purpose
behind [the] section 102(b) bars is to require inventors to assert with due diligence their right
to a patent through the prompt ﬁling of a patent application.”).
295 See Continental Plastic Containers v. Owens Brockway Plastic Prods., Inc., 141 F.3d 1073,
1079 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (“[t]he primary policy underlying the ‘public use’ case is that of
detrimental public reliance”); Baxter Int’l, Inc. v. Cobe Labs., Inc., 88 F.3d 1054, 1058 (Fed.
Cir. 1996).
296 See Atlanta Attachment Co. v. Leggett & Platt, Inc., 516 F.3d 1361, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (“The
overriding concern of the on-sale bar is an inventor’s attempt to commercialize his invention
beyond the statutory term.”); Continental Plastic, 141 F.3d at 1079.

the invention, judge whether it is worth pursuing, and prepare a patent appli-
cation.297 Section 102(b) establishes one year as the period that most effec-
tively balances the needs of the inventor against the needs of the public.
The prohibitions of § 102(b) are commonly known as “statutory bars.” A
statutory bar can prevent the issuance of a claim in a patent application, or
it can be used to challenge the validity of an issued patent in subsequent
infringement litigation. A reference that qualiﬁes under § 102(b) can also be
used as the basis for a ﬁnding of obviousness.298 In some cases, a reference
can qualify as prior art under either § 102(a) or § 102(b). If so, § 102(b) can
provide the simpler analysis since it relies on the easily determined “critical
date” of the patent application, rather than the often difﬁcult to determine
“date of invention.”
8.10.1 “On-Sale Bar”
The most frequently encountered statutory bar is probably the “on-sale
bar” created when the inventor, or a third party,299 takes steps to commer-
cialize the claimed invention more than one year before the ﬁling date of the
patent application.300 A single sale, or a single offer to sell, is sufﬁcient to
invoke the statutory bar.301
Disputes frequently arise over whether certain activity did or did not con-
stitute a sale or deﬁnite offer to sell. For example, an inventor may contend
that a commercial relationship with a potential customer was not related to
a bona ﬁde sale of patented product, but rather to joint development effort.
Conditions of Patentability
123
297 See Baxter Int’l, 88 F.3d at 1058 (policies behind § 102(b) include “‘allowing the inventor a
reasonable amount of time following sales activity to determine the potential economic value
of a patent’”).
298 See Dippin’ Dots, Inc. v. Mosey, 476 F.3d 1337, 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Elmer v. ICC Fabricating,
Inc., 67 F.3d 1571, 1574 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
299 See Special Devices, Inc. v. OEA, Inc., 270 F.3d 1353, 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“By phrasing the
statutory bar in the passive voice, Congress indicated that it does not matter who places the
invention ‘on sale’; it only matters that someone—inventor, supplier or other third party—
placed it on sale.”).
300 See Atlanta Attachment Co. v. Leggett & Platt, Inc., 516 F.3d 1361, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2008)
(“Our patent laws deny a patent to an inventor who applies for a patent more than one year
after making an attempt to proﬁt from his invention by putting it on sale.”); Honeywell Int’l
Inc. v. Universal Avionics Sys. Corp., 488 F.3d 982, 998 (Fed. Cir. 2007).
301 Electromotive Div. of General Motors Corp. v. Transportation Sys. Div. of General Electric
Co., 417 F.3d 1203, 1209 (Fed. Cir. 2005). An offer to sell must be so deﬁnite and ﬁnal that,
applying traditional principles of contract law, acceptance of that offer would form a bind-
ing contract. See MEMC Elec. Materials, Inc. v. Mitsubishi Materials Silicon Corp., 420 F.3d
1369, 1376 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (emails with technical data did not include price terms); Lacks
Indus., Inc. v. McKechnie Vehicle Components USA, Inc., 322 F.3d 1335, 1347–48 (Fed. Cir.
2003); Group One, Ltd. v. Hallmark Cards, Inc., 254 F.3d 1041, 1046 (Fed. Cir. 2001). The
offer itself is sufﬁcient even if no sale was completed. Cargill, Inc. v. Canbra Foods, Ltd., 476
F.3d 1359, 1370 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Scaltech, Inc. v. Retec/Tetra, L.L.C., 269 F.3d 1321, 1328
(Fed. Cir. 2001).

In Continental Can Co. v. Monsanto Co.,302 a plastics company entered into an
agreement with the Coca-Cola Company to develop a plastic bottle. Under
the agreement, the companies would work together to produce a suitable
bottle, with the plastics company making the bottles and Coca-Cola testing
them. If a satisfactory bottle were developed, Coca-Cola would purchase the
bottles from the plastics company, under terms that were partially negoti-
ated. The plastics company produced bottles in a variety of shapes, includ-
ing one that allegedly embodied the patent claim in question, but the project
was abandoned when tests proved unsuccessful.303 Although the trial court
found that the relationship had placed the patented bottle “on sale” before
the critical date, the Federal Circuit disagreed and reversed:
Although Admiral Plastic’s hope was surely commercial sales, and the
record shows that prices and quantities were discussed, this does not of
itself place the subject matter “on sale” in the sense of § 102(b). The . . .
bottle was a part of a terminated development project that never bore
commercial fruit and was cloaked in conﬁdentiality. While the line is
not always bright between development and being on sale . . . in this
case the line was not crossed.304
A transaction does not constitute a bar under § 102(b) if it is part of an
“experimental use”—that is, if the primary object of the “sale” was not to
proﬁt from the invention, but to test it in the ﬁeld.305 Although a court will
consider a variety of factors in deciding if a sale was for purposes of com-
merce or of experiment,306 at a minimum the seller must inform the
124
Patent Law Essentials
302 948 F.2d 1264 (Fed. Cir. 1991).
303 See id. at 1269.
304 Id. at 1270. A sale or offer to sell must be to a separate entity. A transaction between related
corporations completed purely for accounting purposes would not constitute a genuine
“sale,” at least if the “selling” entity “so controls the purchaser that the invention remains out
of the public’s hands.” See Ferag AG v. Quipp, Inc., 45 F.3d 1562, 1567 (Fed. Cir. 1995). On
the other hand, sales to the patentee by an independent supplier, not for purposes of experi-
ment or development but in preparation for release to the general public, can invalidate a
patent. See Special Devices, 270 F.3d at 1355–57. Licensing someone to practice the invention
(see Section 6.3) is not a sale that triggers § 102(b). Elan Corp. v. Andrx Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
366 F.3d 1336, 1341 (Fed. Cir. 2004); In re Kollar, 286 F.3d 1326, 1330–34 (Fed. Cir. 2002).
305 See Pfaff v. Wells Elecs., Inc., 525 U.S. 55, 64 (1998) (“[A]n inventor who seeks to perfect his
discovery may conduct extensive testing without losing his right to obtain a patent for his
invention—even if such testing occurs in the public eye. The law has long recognized the dis-
tinction between inventions put to experimental use and products sold commercially.”);
Electromotive, 417 F.3d at 1210; EZ Dock, Inc. v. Schafer Sys., Inc., 276 F.3d 1347, 1352–53
(Fed. Cir. 2002) (sale may have been primarily to test dock in rougher waters). To qualify as
experimental, the transaction must have been primarily for purposes of experimentation,
rather than proﬁt. Electromotive, 417 F.3d at 1210; Allen Eng’g Corp. v. Bartell Indus., Inc., 299
F.3d 1336, 1352–53 (Fed. Cir. 2002). Sales may have been experimental even though they
did not result in any changes to the claimed invention. Honeywell Int’l Inc. v. Universal
Avionics Sys. Corp., 488 F.3d 982, 997 (Fed. Cir. 2007).
306 See Electromotive, 417 F.3d at 1213 (listing 13 nonexclusive factors).

purchaser that the goods are experimental, and the seller must retain sufﬁ-
cient control over the goods to conduct the required monitoring or tests.307
A court will also consider whether payment was made, whether the seller
kept the kind of records that would suggest experimentation, and whether
the seller required the purchaser to keep the activities conﬁdential.308
Keeping track of customer responses and complaints after sale of a new
product is not sufﬁcient to show that the sales were primarily experimen-
tal.309 Moreover, the experiments have to relate to the claimed invention. If the
experiments relate to some other aspect of a product, or if they are nothing
more than marketing tests to gauge consumer demand, the sale is not within
the experimental use exception.310
One issue that long divided opinion is the extent to which the invention
must be complete before it can be offered for sale in a manner triggering
§ 102(b).311 The Supreme Court eventually decreed, in Pfaff v. Wells Elec-
tronics, Inc.,312 that the invention must be “ready for patenting” before the
critical date in order for a sale or offer to sell to be invalidating.313 Once the
invention is “ready for patenting,” there is no excuse to delay (more than one
year) ﬁling a patent application. One way to demonstrate that the invention
was ready for patenting is an actual reduction to practice.314 An inventor who
has reduced the invention to practice—building the claimed apparatus or per-
forming the claimed method—should be ready to prepare the kind of
enabling disclosure required in a patent application.315 Alternatively, one can
Conditions of Patentability
125
307 See id. at 1213–14; Paragon Podiatry Lab., Inc. v. KLM Labs., Inc. 984 F.2d 1182, 1186–87
(Fed. Cir. 1993); La Bounty Mfg., Inc. v. U.S. Int’l Trade Comm’n, 958 F.2d 1066, 1071–72
(Fed. Cir. 1992).
308 See Eli Lilly & Co. v. Zenith Goldline Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 471 F.3d 1369, 1381 (Fed. Cir.
2006); Allen Eng’g, 299 F.3d at 1353–55; U.S. Environmental Prods. Inc. v. Westall, 911 F.2d
713, 717 (Fed. Cir. 1990). An inventor’s subjective intent to experiment is not relevant. See
Electromotive, 417 F.3d at 1212.
309 See Paragon, 984 F.2d at 1187–88.
310 See Dippin’ Dots, Inc. v. Mosey, 476 F.3d 1337, 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Smithkline Beecham
Corp. v. Apotex Corp., 365 F.3d 1306, 1317 (Fed. Cir. 2004); In re Smith, 714 F.2d 1127,
1135–36 (Fed. Cir. 1983). Testing features that are not mentioned in the claim but that are
inherent to the invention—such as durability—may sufﬁce. See Electromotive, 417 F.3d at
1211–12.
311 See, e.g., UMC Elecs. Co. v. United States, 816 F.2d 647 (Fed. Cir. 1987) (where the majority
held that an invention need not be reduced to practice to be offered for sale, and Judge Smith
penned a sharp dissent).
312 525 U.S. 55 (1998).
313 Id. at 67. The court speaks of the invention being “ready for patenting” before the critical date,
rather than before the date of the offer to sell. Id. This suggests that the event triggering the com-
mencement of the one-year grace period could be the event that makes the invention “ready for
patenting” (such as a reduction to practice), if that event occurs subsequent to the offer.
314 Id.; Atlanta Attachment, 516 F.3d at 1366–67; Honeywell, 488 F.3d at 997. An invention cannot,
under any circumstances, be offered for sale before the date on which it was conceived.
Sparton Corp. v. United States, 399 F.3d 1321, 1324 (Fed. Cir. 2005).
315 See Section 8.6.

demonstrate that an invention was ready for patenting through “drawings or
other descriptions of the invention that were sufﬁciently speciﬁc to enable a
person skilled in the art to practice the invention.”316 If these “descriptions”
were available to the inventor, they could have been incorporated in a
patent application. Consequently, an offer to sell an invention that has yet to
be built can bar or invalidate a subsequent patent. In Pfaff, for example, the
inventor had such conﬁdence in his ability to proceed directly from an engi-
neering drawing to a ﬁnished product that he offered to sell the product in
large quantities before any had been made.317 The drawing showed that the
invention was ready for patenting, so the offer, before the critical date, inval-
idated the patent.
8.10.2 Public Use Bar
Public use of the claimed invention before the application’s critical date
can also operate as a bar under § 102(b). A use of the invention by any
person, other than the inventor, who is under no obligation of secrecy may
constitute a “public use” of the invention.318 It is “public use” even if not
communicated to a wider public, as was likely true in the celebrated case of
a corset steel used by the lady friend of the man who invented it.319 On the
other hand, because § 102(b) refers to “public” use, a use that is observed
only by persons under an obligation of secrecy does not invoke the statutory
bar.320 The public use bar is subject to the same experimental use exception
126
Patent Law Essentials
316 Pfaff, 525 U.S. at 67. An invention may be fully conceived but not yet ready for patenting
if the development necessary for putting the invention to practice is incomplete. See Space
Sys./Loral, Inc. v. Lockheed Martin Corp., 271 F.3d 1076, 1080–81 (Fed. Cir. 2001). On
the other hand, the invention can be ready for patenting even if the inventor does not yet
have perfect conﬁdence that it will work. See Robotic Vision Sys., Inc. v. View Eng’g, Inc.,
249 F.3d 1307, 1312 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“It will be a rare case indeed in which an inventor
has no uncertainty concerning the workability of his invention before he has reduced it
to practice.”). Whether an invention was “ready for patenting” or “not quite ready for
patenting” is certain to be a matter of frequent dispute.
317 See Pfaff, 525 U.S. at 58. As the inventor testiﬁed at his deposition: “Q. It was in a drawing.
Is that correct? A. Strictly in a drawing. Went from the drawing to the hard tooling. That’s
the way I do my business. Q. Boom-boom? A. You got it. Q. You are satisﬁed, obviously,
when you come up with some drawings that it is going to go—‘it works’? A. I know what I
am doing, yes, most of the time.” Id. at 58 n.3.
318 American Seating Co. v. USSC Gp., Inc., 514 F.3d 1262, 1267 (Fed. Cir. 2008); Adenta
GmbH v. OrthoArm, Inc., 501 F.3d 1364, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Motionless Keyboard Co. v.
Microsoft Corp., 486 F.3d 1376, 1384 (Fed. Cir. 2007). The public use bar is said to “dis-
courage ‘the removal of inventions from the public domain which the public justiﬁably
comes to believe are freely available.’” American Seating, 514 F.3d at 1267.
319 Egbert v. Lippman, 104 U.S. 333 (1881); see also Motionless Keyboard, 486 F.3d at 1384.
320 See Motionless Keyboard, 486 F.3d at 1385 (keyboard tester had signed a nondisclosure agree-
ment); Eli Lilly & Co. v. Zenith Goldline Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 471 F.3d 1369, 1381 (Fed. Cir.
2006) (restricted access to information on drug tests).

as the on-sale bar.321 Some inventions must be tested in a more or less public
environment, and if it is clear that the use is experimental it will not invali-
date a claim.322
When the inventor demonstrates his invention to a few friends or associ-
ates, the determination of whether such use was “public” can be difﬁcult. In
Moleculon Research Corp. v. CBS, Inc.,323 the inventor displayed a model of his
cube puzzle to a few university colleagues. The “personal relationships and
surrounding circumstances” were sufﬁcient for the court to ﬁnd that the
inventor had retained control over the invention and the distribution of
information concerning it, even though there was no express agreement of
conﬁdentiality.324 In contrast, a jury in Beachcombers v. Wildwood Creative
Products, Inc.325 found that a demonstration of an improved kaleidoscope to
20 to 30 party guests was a public use, and the Federal Circuit afﬁrmed. The
purpose of the demonstration was “getting feedback on the device,” and the
host made no efforts toward secrecy.326
Although it does not ﬁt neatly in the categories of “public use” or “on-sale,”
a commercial use of the invention by the applicant before the critical date,
even if that use does not make the invention itself a matter of public knowl-
edge, is considered sufﬁcient to invoke the statutory bar.327 Suppose, for exam-
ple, that the applicant invented a more efﬁcient method of manufacturing
copper wire. If the ﬁnished product resembled any other copper wire, no one
outside of the factory might know anything of the improved process.
Nevertheless, if the applicant used that process, and proﬁted from it, prior to
Conditions of Patentability
127
321 See Honeywell Int’l Inc. v. Universal Avionics Sys. Corp., 488 F.3d 982, 998 (Fed. Cir. 2007);
Eli Lilly, 471 F.3d at 1381. The “ready for patenting” test of Pfaff applies here as well. Invit-
rogen Corp. v. Biocrest Mfg., LP, 424 F.3d 1374, 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2005).
322 See Pfaff v. Wells Electronics, Inc., 525 U.S. 55, 64 (1998); Netscape Communications Corp.
v. Konrad, 295 F.3d 1315, 1320 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Allied Colloids Inc. v. American Cyanamid
Co., 64 F.2d 1570, 1574 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
323 793 F.2d 1261 (Fed. Cir. 1986).
324 Id. at 1266; see also American Seating, 514 F.3d at 1268 (limited group who saw the invention
“shared a general understanding of conﬁdentiality”); Invitrogen, 424 F.3d at 1381 (conﬁden-
tiality obligations need not be express); Bernhardt, L.L.C. v. Collezione Europa USA, Inc.,
386 F.3d 1371, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2004).
325 31 F.3d 1154 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
326 Id. at 1160.
327 See American Seating, 514 F.3d at 1267 (bar applies if invention is publicly accessible or
“commercially exploited”); Invitrogen, 424 F.3d at 1382 (“secrecy of use alone is not sufﬁcient
to show that existing knowledge has not been withdrawn from public use: commercial
exploitation is also forbidden”); Special Devices, Inc. v. OEA, Inc., 270 F.3d 1353, 1357 (Fed.
Cir. 2001); Woodland Trust v. Flowertree Nursery, Inc., 148 F.3d 1368, 1370–71 (Fed. Cir.
1998). Sometimes the bar is characterized as an on-sale bar, sometimes as a public use bar.
See Special Devices, 270 F.3d at 1357 (characterizing Woodland Trust as referring to the on-sale
bar); Woodland Trust, 148 F.3d at 1998 (citing cases referring to “public use”). In the para-
doxical words of Kinzenbaw v. Deere & Co., 741 F.2d 383, 390 (Fed. Cir. 1984), “[a] commer-
cial use is a public use even if it is kept secret.”

the critical date of the patent application, the Federal Circuit has held that such
use forfeits the right to obtain a patent.328 Here there is a difference between
the activities of the patent applicant and unrelated third parties. If a third party
made commercial use of the method before the applicant’s critical date, but
such use did not disclose the invention to the public, § 102(b) does not apply.329
Perhaps the distinction exists because an inventor’s own secret but commer-
cial use, or a third party’s non-secret commercial use, can put the inventor on
notice of the need to ﬁle promptly.330 A secret third-party use, on the other
hand, could catch the inventor off guard.
8.11 OTHER STATUTORY BARS (§ 102(c), (d))
A similar type of “statutory bar” is created by 35 U.S.C. § 102(d), which
provides as follows:
A person shall be entitled to a patent unless—
(d) the invention was ﬁrst patented or caused to be patented, or was
the subject of an inventor’s certiﬁcate, by the applicant or his legal rep-
resentatives or assigns in a foreign country prior to the date of the
application for patent in this country on an application for patent or
inventor’s certiﬁcate ﬁled more than twelve months before the ﬁling of
the application in the United States. . . .
Simply put, an inventor who applies for a patent in a foreign country, waits
more than twelve months before ﬁling in the United States, and receives the for-
eign patent before ﬁling in the United States, will be denied a United States
patent.331 As in the case of § 102(b), § 102(d) promotes diligence in ﬁling and pre-
vents the extension of the patent monopoly.332 Anyone who applies for a patent
in a foreign country and plans to obtain a United States patent is well advised to
ﬁle in the United States no more than 12 months later, thereby avoiding the risk
that the foreign patent will be granted sooner than expected.
Finally, one other rarely used form of “statutory bar” arises from
§ 102(c), which provides that an inventor is not entitled to a patent if “he
128
Patent Law Essentials
328 See D.L. Auld Co. v. Chroma Graphics Corp., 714 F.2d 1144, 1147–48 (Fed. Cir. 1983) (secret
commercial use by “applicant for patent or his assignee” triggers § 102(b)). Sale of a product
that embodies the patented invention, without, somehow, disclosing it, triggers § 102(b) regard-
less of who sold it. In re Epstein, 32 F.3d 1559, 1568 (Fed. Cir. 1994); J.A. LaPorte, Inc. v.
Norfolk Dredging Co., 787 F.2d 1577, 1583 (Fed. Cir. 1986). Perhaps that is because the sale
of the claimed invention itself does not straddle the “public use” and “on-sale” bars as prob-
lematically as the sale of a product made by a secret process.
329 Woodland Trust, 148 F.3d at 1371 (“when an asserted prior use is not that of the applicant, § 102(b)
is not a bar when that prior use or knowledge is not available to the public”).
330 See Special Devices, 270 F.3d at 1355.
331 See Bayer AG v. Schein Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 301 F.3d 1306, 1312 (Fed. Cir. 2002).
332 See In re Kathawala, 9 F.3d 942, 947 (Fed. Cir. 1993).

has abandoned the invention.”333 “Abandoning the invention” means aban-
doning the right to patent the invention. Mere delay in ﬁling a patent applica-
tion does not show that the invention was “abandoned,”334 although it can
have important consequences in a priority contest under § 102(g),335 and it can
allow the imposition of an on-sale or similar bar under § 102(b). However, if
an inventor were to announce to the public that he would not patent his inven-
tion, such an announcement might constitute an abandonment.336
8.12 DOUBLE PATENTING
An inventor is entitled to one patent on one invention.337 If more than one
patent could be obtained on the same invention, an inventor could extend the
period of exclusivity beyond what the law intends.338 For example, an inventor
could apply for one patent in 2005 and a second on the same invention in 2015,
thereby obtaining the equivalent of a 30-year patent. To prevent this result, a
claim can be held unpatentable or invalid if it duplicates the subject matter of
a claim in an earlier patent to the same inventor. This is known as “double
patenting.” Double patenting can also be found where the claims are attributa-
ble to different “inventive entities”339 but are owned by a common assignee.340
Double patenting comes in two forms. The ﬁrst is “same invention” double
patenting, which means that the later claim is substantially identical in scope
to the earlier claim.341 The prohibition against “same invention” double
patenting is said to have a statutory basis in 35 U.S.C. § 101, which states that
“[w]hoever invents or discovers any new and useful process . . . may obtain a
patent therefor.”342 The more common form of double patenting is “obvious-
ness-type double patenting,” which means that the later claim, though not
identical, is only an obvious variation of the earlier claim.343 The reasoning
behind this prohibition is that once a patent has expired, the public should be
Conditions of Patentability
129
333 See Oddzon Prods., Inc. v. Just Toys, Inc., 122 F.2d 1396, 1402 (Fed. Cir. 1997).
334 See Paulik v. Rizkalla, 760 F.2d 1270, 1272 (Fed. Cir. 1985) (“‘the mere lapse of time’ will not
prevent the inventor from receiving a patent”).
335 See Section 8.9.1.3.
336 An application can be “abandoned” and then reﬁled, without abandoning the invention in
terms of § 102(c). The abandonment could, however, sacriﬁce the early ﬁling date of the
application for purposes of § 102(b).
337 Perricone v. Medicis Pharmaceutical Corp., 432 F.3d 1368, 1373 (Fed. Cir. 2005); Geneva
Pharmaceuticals, Inc. v. Glaxosmithkline PLC, 349 F.3d 1373, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2003).
338 See AstraZeneca AB v. KV Pharmaceutical Co., 494 F.3d 1011, 1016 (Fed. Cir. 2007);
Perricone, 432 F.3d at 1372; In re Goodman, 11 F.3d 1046, 1053 (Fed. Cir. 1993).
339 See Section 8.9.4.
340 See AstraZeneca, 494 F.3d at 1016; In re Longi, 759 F.2d 887, 893 (Fed. Cir. 1985).
341 See In re Lonardo, 119 F.3d 960, 965 (Fed. Cir. 1997); Goodman, 11 F.3d at 1052; Longi, 759
F.2d at 892.
342 See Perricone, 432 F.3d at 1372–73.
343 See AstraZeneca, 494 F.3d at 1016; Perricone, 432 F.3d at 1373; Eli Lilly & Co. v. Barr Labs.,
Inc., 251 F.3d 955, 967–68 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

at liberty to use not only the precise invention claimed, but also variations that
would be obvious to one of ordinary skill.344
Issues of obviousness-type double patenting often arise where an inventor
seeks to patent both a broad genus and a narrow species of that genus. For
example, an inventor might conceive of both a generic design for a new mouse-
trap and a speciﬁc variation of that design using a particularly sensitive trigger.
If the inventor obtained a patent on the broad invention ﬁrst and then sought
a patent on the variation or improvement, the question would be whether the
variation was obvious in light of the more general design. If not, the inventor
would be entitled to both patents.345 On the other hand, if the inventor
obtained the narrower patent ﬁrst and the broader patent second, the second
patent would almost certainly be held “obvious” in light of the ﬁrst.346 This
result conforms with the rule derived in the context of § 102 that a claim to a
genus is anticipated if a single species of that genus is found in the prior art.347
On rare occasions the inventor actually ﬁled the application for the
broader patent ﬁrst, and it issued second only because of delays in prosecu-
tion over which the inventor had no control. Under these circumstances, the
second patent has been denied only if each claimed invention would be obvi-
ous in light of the other—a so-called two-way test of obviousness.348 While this
can result in an extension of the patent monopoly beyond the contemplated
period, where it was not the patentee’s fault the extension is not
“unjustiﬁed.”349 Note that the term of patents applied for after June 7, 1995
runs from their ﬁling date rather than their issue date, as was previously the
case, so this particular concern will eventually be eliminated.
130
Patent Law Essentials
344 See Geneva Pharmaceuticals, 349 F.3d at 1378; Lonardo, 119 F.3d at 965; Longi, 759 F.2d at 892–93.
345 It is true that the combination of both patents, issued at different times, might prevent any-
one from making the speciﬁc mousetrap for a period of more than 20 years. This is not
improper. If one product embodies several distinct patentable inventions, each such inven-
tion can result in a patent. When a particular patent expires, that invention is available to the
public as long as it is practiced in a way that does not violate some other patent. See In re
Kaplan, 789 F.2d 1574, 1577–78 (Fed. Cir. 1986).
346 See Perricone, 432 F.3d at 1374 (double patenting where second patent claimed a treatment
for skin damage, and the earlier patent claimed the same treatment for sunburn—a species
of skin damage).
347 See Section 8.9.5. Although this is classiﬁed as an instance of “obviousness-type” double
patenting, see Goodman, 11 F.3d at 1052–53, one can conceive of cases in which the full scope
of a genus is not obvious merely from the disclosure of a species of the genus. Perhaps this
would be better classiﬁed as “anticipation-type” double patenting. See Eli Lilly, 251 F.3d at
968 (claim in second patent is not “patentably distinct . . . if the later claim is obvious over,
or anticipated by, the earlier claim”).
348 A “two-way” approach for obviousness-type double patenting is also adopted whenever
when one of the patents at issue is a utility patent and the other is a design patent. See In re
Dembiczak, 175 F.3d 994, 1002 (Fed. Cir. 1999).
349 In re Braat, 937 F.2d 589, 595 (Fed. Cir. 1991). The “two-way” test is not appropriate if the
applicant is at least partially responsible for the delay in issuing the ﬁrst-ﬁled application. See
Eli Lilly, 251 F.3d at 968 n.7. Nor is it appropriate if the applicant could have ﬁled all of the
claims in one application. See In re Berg, 140 F.3d 1428, 1434 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

Obviousness-type double patenting can be cured, in a sense, by ﬁling a
“terminal disclaimer” with the Patent Ofﬁce.350 A terminal disclaimer is
a binding statement that (1) a later patent will expire at the same time as a
prior patent, and (2) the later patent will be enforceable only as long as it and
the prior patent are commonly owned.351 The voluntary curtailment of the
term of the second patent removes any concern that the existence of two
similar patents will improperly extend the duration of the patent monopoly.
The requirement of common ownership eliminates the additional risk that
the two similar patents might be assigned to different parties, each of whom
could press duplicative and harassing claims against a potential infringer.352
The terminal disclaimer mechanism provides inventors with some incen-
tive to further develop their patented ideas, even in ways that might be con-
sidered obvious, and to disclose those developments to the public through
additional patents.353 This procedure applies only to obviousness-type dou-
ble patenting; “same invention” double patenting cannot be remedied by a
terminal disclaimer. A terminal disclaimer is also no protection against
grounds of invalidity other than double patenting.354
Sometimes related patents will issue as the result of a “restriction
requirement.”355 A restriction requirement results when the patent exam-
iner, during prosecution, ﬁnds that an application claims two or more dis-
tinct inventions. The applicant must elect which invention to pursue in the
pending application, and if the applicant wishes to pursue one of the other
inventions, the applicant must ﬁle a “divisional” application. That appli-
cation and the original application may each result in a patent. Because,
in this case, the existence of two separate patents is attributable to the
Patent Ofﬁce’s determination that each application represents a distinct
invention, the patents are immune from a challenge of double patent-
ing.356 A different result would be unfair to the applicant. But if the claims
of the separate applications evolve during the course of prosecution, as
they sometimes do, the applicant must maintain “consonance”—that is,
the claims cannot be changed in such a way that what was formerly
patentably distinct is no longer so. If “consonance” is lost, so is the immu-
nity from double patenting.357
Conditions of Patentability
131
350 See 35 U.S.C. § 253; Perricone, 432 F.3d at 1375; Goodman, 11 F.3d at 1052; Longi, 759 F.2d at 894.
351 See 37 C.F.R. § 1.321(c); In re Van Ornum, 696 F.2d 937, 944–48 (C.C.P.A. 1982).
352 See Van Ornum, 686 F.2d at 944–45.
353 See Quad Environmental Technologies Corp. v. Union Sanitary Dist., 946 F.2d 870, 873 (Fed.
Cir. 1991).
354 See id. at 874.
355 See Section 5.3.
356 See 35 U.S.C. § 121; Geneva Pharmaceuticals, 349 F.3d at 1378; Applied Materials, Inc. v.
Advanced Semiconductor Materials America, Inc., 98 F.3d 1563, 1568 (Fed. Cir. 1996);
Gerber Garment Technology, Inc. v. Lectra Sys., Inc., 916 F.2d 683, 687 (Fed. Cir. 1990).
357 See Geneva Pharmaceuticals, 349 F.3d at 1381; Gerber, 916 F.2d at 688.

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 9
Enforceability Defenses
Certain defenses to a claim of patent infringement produce, if successful, a
holding that the patent is “unenforceable” rather than invalid. The most
important of these are the inequitable conduct and misuse defenses.1 If a
patent is unenforceable, it cannot be the basis of an infringement claim.
9.1 INEQUITABLE CONDUCT
In court proceedings, the adversarial system keeps litigants honest. If a
party shades the truth or withholds important evidence from the court, the
other party will expose the error, if it can. As discussed in Section 5.1, patent
prosecution is ex parte, meaning that persons who might oppose the issuance
of a patent have no opportunity to participate. So when applicants misrep-
resent the facts, there is no one to contradict them. The Patent Ofﬁce must
rely heavily on information provided by applicants. An applicant’s sales
activities, for example, might be enough to raise a statutory bar under
§ 102(b),2 but the patent examiner generally knows about those activities
only what the applicant chooses to tell. Nevertheless, every issued patent
enjoys a presumption of validity.
1 Transferring ownership of a patent subject to a terminal disclaimer, contrary to the require-
ment that patents linked by a terminal disclaimer remain commonly owned, might also cre-
ate an unenforceability defense. See Section 8.12.
2 See Section 8.10.1.

Because applicants could take unfair advantage of this situation, they are
charged with a duty of candor more demanding than what is normally
expected of parties in an adversarial proceeding.3 Applicants must disclose
to the patent examiner any information that is “material” to the issuance of
the patent.4 Applicants do not have to search for such information. They do
not, for example, have to search the prior art for potentially invalidating
references.5 But an applicant aware of such a reference must inform the
patent examiner. This duty extends to the applicant, to the applicant’s
attorneys, and to anyone else who has substantial involvement in the appli-
cation process.6 Failure to meet the required duty of candor is known as
“inequitable conduct.”
Inequitable conduct may be raised as a defense in patent infringement
litigation, and, if it is proven, the patent will be held unenforceable.7
Although technically the patent may not be invalid, the effect is much the
same, with one important exception. If a single claim of a patent is invalid,
the remaining claims of the patent survive if they do not suffer the same
defect.8 In contrast, if an applicant obtained a single patent claim through
inequitable conduct, the entire patent is unenforceable.9 This result often
134
Patent Law Essentials
3 See Honeywell Int’l Inc. v. Universal Avionics Sys. Corp., 488 F.3d 982, 999 (Fed. Cir. 2007)
(“Applicants for patents have a duty to prosecute patent applications in the Patent Ofﬁce with
candor, good faith, and honesty.”).
4 37 C.F.R. § 1.56.
5 See Frazier v. Roessel Cine Photo Tech., Inc., 417 F.3d 1230, 1238 (Fed. Cir. 2005); Brasseler,
U.S.A. I, L.P. v. Stryker Sales Corp., 267 F.3d 1370, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2001); FMC Corp. v.
Hennessy Indus., Inc., 836 F.2d 521, 526 n.6 (Fed. Cir. 1987). The “possibility that material infor-
mation may exist” is not enough to trigger a duty to inquire; there must be some clue “sug-
gest[ing] the existence of speciﬁc information the materiality of which may be ascertained with
reasonable inquiry.” Brasseler, 267 F.3d at 1382. On the other hand, an applicant cannot cultivate
ignorance if there are sufﬁcient warnings of invalidating prior art. See Bruno Independent Living
Aids, Inc. v. Acorn Mobility Servs., Ltd., 394 F.3d 1348, 1352 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (“‘an applicant
who knew of the art or information cannot intentionally avoid learning of its materiality . . . it
may be found that the applicant “should have known” of that materiality’”); Hewlett-Packard Co.
v. Bausch & Lomb Inc., 882 F.2d 1556, 1562 (Fed. Cir. 1989) (wrongful intent may be inferred
from evidence of “studied ignorance”). Usually an attorney can rely on information provided by
the applicant, unless there is reason to doubt its accuracy or completeness. See Brasseler, 267 F.3d
at 1382–83 (“[t]here is no need for an attorney to pursue a ﬁshing expedition”).
6 37 C.F.R. § 1.56(c); Evident Corp. v. Church & Dwight Co., 399 F.3d 1310, 1315-16 (Fed. Cir.
2005); Brasseler, 267 F.3d at 1383 n.6. Note that “inventors represented by counsel are pre-
sumed to know the law.” Id. at 1385.
7 Liquid Dynamics Corp. v. Vaughan Co., Inc., 449 F.3d 1209, 1226 (Fed. Cir. 2006).
8 35 U.S.C. § 288.
9 Impax Labs., Inc. v. Aventis Pharmaceuticals Inc., 468 F.3d 1366, 1375 (Fed. Cir. 2006);
Pharmacia Corp. v. Par Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 417 F.3d 1369, 1374–75 (Fed. Cir. 2005); Baxter
Int’l, Inc. v. McGaw, Inc., 149 F.3d 1321, 1332 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (“It is . . . settled law that
inequitable conduct with respect to one claim renders the entire patent unenforceable.”).
Unenforceability can even extend to another patent if the patents are sufﬁciently related. This
is sometimes called “infectious unenforceability.” See Baxter, 149 F.3d at 1327.

makes inequitable conduct a more attractive defense than, for example,
anticipation, even though both defenses could rely on the same prior art
reference.
An inequitable conduct defense can be based on a misrepresentation
made to the Patent Ofﬁce, or a withholding of information.10 In either case,
two elements must be proven: materiality and intent.11 Both standards have
been subject to conﬂicting deﬁnitions over the years, suggesting that the
courts have had difﬁculty in deﬁning the conduct that should be considered
inequitable.
“Materiality” means that the information withheld or misrepresented was
of sufﬁcient importance to warrant the penalties associated with inequitable
conduct. One test of materiality is whether there is a substantial likelihood that
a reasonable patent examiner would have considered the information important
in deciding whether the application should issue as a patent.12 Information
can be material as deﬁned by this test even if, ultimately, the examiner
would have decided that the patent should issue.13 This test has often been
adopted by the Federal Circuit as the threshold test of materiality. If the
withheld or misrepresented information does not meet this threshold, the
inequitable conduct defense necessarily fails.
The source of the “reasonable examiner” standard was the Patent
Ofﬁce’s own Rule 56, which changed in 1992 to adopt a new deﬁnition of
materiality. According to the new deﬁnition, information is material if, by
itself or in combination with other information, it is inconsistent with a
position taken by the applicant, or it is sufﬁcient to establish a prima facie
case of unpatentability.14 The latter means that the information initially
compels a conclusion of unpatentability (under a preponderance-of-the-
evidence burden of proof), before any evidence in favor of patentability is
Enforceability Defenses
135
10 See Honeywell, 488 F.3d at 999; Cargill, Inc. v. Canbra Foods, Ltd., 476 F.3d 1359,
1363 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Flex-Rest, LLC v. Steelcase, Inc., 455 F.3d 1351, 1362 (Fed. Cir. 
2006).
11 Honeywell, 488 F.3d at 999; Brasseler, 267 F.3d at 1379-80; PerSeptive Biosystems, Inc. v.
Pharmacia Biotech, Inc., 225 F.3d 1315, 1318–19 (Fed. Cir. 2000). The party challenging
the patent must prove both materiality and intent by “clear and convincing” evidence.
Dippin’ Dots, Inc. v. Mosey, 476 F.3d 1337, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Flex-Rest, 455 F.3d at
1363.
12 Honeywell, 488 F.3d at 1000; Cargill, 476 F.3d at 1364. In a close case, it is best to assume that
the information is material. See Flex-Rest, 455 F.3d at 1363 (“When materiality of information
is close . . . a patent applicant should err on the side of disclosure.”). “[A]fﬁrmative misrep-
resentations by the patentee, in contrast to misleading omissions, are more likely to be
regarded as material.” Hoffman-La Roche, Inc. v. Promega Corp., 323 F.3d 1354, 1367 (Fed.
Cir. 2003).
13 See Cargill, 476 F.3d at 1366; Digital Control, Inc. v. Charles Machine Works, 437 F.3d 1309,
1318 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Li Second Family Ltd. Partnership v. Toshiba Corp., 231 F.3d 1373,
1380–81 (Fed. Cir. 2000).
14 37 C.F.R. § 1.56(b).

considered.15 In the Federal Circuit’s view, the new standard supplements
rather than replaces its own “reasonable examiner” standard. An omission
or misstatement may be material under either standard—warranting further
inquiry into the applicant’s intent.16
Information cannot be material, under any standard, if it is cumulative of
other information available to the examiner.17 For example, if the information
is a withheld prior art reference, it is not material if the examiner considered
prior art that was just as pertinent, or more pertinent, than the reference in
question.18 Similarly, if the applicant withheld information but the examiner
discovered it independently, the applicant’s action does not qualify as
inequitable conduct.19
The intent threshold of inequitable conduct is as important as the mate-
riality threshold. If the applicant withheld or misrepresented information
because of an innocent mistake, the applicant did not commit inequitable
conduct, no matter how material the information may have been.20 At one
time, some courts considered gross negligence to be sufﬁcient intent to warrant
a ﬁnding of inequitable conduct.21 However, in Kingsdown Medical Consul-
tants v. Hollister Inc.,22 the Federal Circuit, resolving conﬂicting precedent,
held that inequitable conduct can occur only if the applicant or attorney
deliberately attempted to deceive the Patent Ofﬁce. Hence, a lapse that is
the result of carelessness, even gross carelessness, does not amount to
inequitable conduct.23
Intent to deceive can be proven by indirect evidence. It is rare that
inequitable conduct will be proven by an applicant’s admission or a “smok-
ing gun” document referring to a planned deception. Rather, the proof is
likely to be found in circumstances where the information was so important,
136
Patent Law Essentials
15 Id.
16 Digital Control, 437 F.3d at 1316; see also Cargill, 476 F.3d at 1364; Impax, 468 F.3d at 1374.
17 Honeywell, 488 F.3d at 1000; Tap Pharmaceuticals Prods., Inc. v. Owl Pharmaceuticals, L.L.C.,
419 F.3d 1346, 1351 (Fed. Cir. 2005).
18 See LNP Eng’g Plastics, Inc. v. Miller Waste Mills, Inc., 275 F.3d 1347, 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2001);
GFI, Inc. v. Franklin Corp., 265 F.3d 1268, 1274 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
19 Molins PLC v. Textron, Inc., 48 F.3d 1172, 1185 (Fed. Cir. 1995); Scripps Clinic Research
Foundation v. Genentech, Inc., 927 F.2d 1565, 1582 (Fed. Cir. 1991).
20 See Cargill, 476 F.3d at 1364 (“‘the involved conduct, viewed in light of all the evidence,
including evidence indicative of good faith, must indicate sufﬁcient culpability to require a
ﬁnding of intent to deceive’”); Impax, 468 F.3d at 1375; Liquid Dynamics, 449 F.3d at 1227
(“Intent is a subjective inquiry into whether the inventor knew the information was material
and chose not to disclose it.”). Although “subjective good faith can support a defense to
inequitable conduct . . . there is no such thing as a good faith intent to deceive.” Cargill,
476 F.3d at 1367–68.
21 See, e.g., Driscoll v. Cebalo, 731 F.2d 878, 885 (Fed. Cir. 1984).
22 863 F.2d 867 (Fed. Cir. 1988) (resolution of conﬂicting precedent decided en banc).
23 Id.; see also Brasseler, 267 F.3d at 1382 (“a ﬁnding of deceptive intent may not be based solely
on gross negligence”).

and the situation so devoid of any possibility of an excuse, that one must
conclude that the deception was deliberate.24
If the information withheld or misrepresented meets the threshold test of
materiality, and if there is also proof of intent to deceive, the ultimate deci-
sion of whether there was inequitable conduct is left to the discretion of the
judge,25 who must balance the materiality of the information against the seri-
ousness of the intent.26 The more important the information, the less the
required showing of intent before the patent will be held unenforceable.27
Charges of inequitable conduct have become so routine in patent litiga-
tion that the Federal Circuit has referred to them as “an absolute plague.”28
It is difﬁcult to say whether this reﬂects a low standard of ethics among appli-
cants and patent attorneys, or just the readiness of accused infringers to raise
every conceivable defense.
9.2 MISUSE
The patent system strikes a delicate balance between, on the one hand, the
desire to encourage innovation by rewarding inventors with exclusive rights
to their inventions and, on the other hand, the desire to promote healthy
competition in the marketplace. While the essence of the patent system is the
grant of a monopoly, it is still a monopoly of limited scope and duration. If a
patent owner attempts to leverage the advantage of a patent into something
beyond its intended boundaries, the patent owner may be held to have
Enforceability Defenses
137
24 See Cargill, 476 F.3d at 1366 (intent may be inferred where the applicant knew, or should have
known, that the information was material); Impax, 468 F.3d at 1375 (“intent to deceive is gen-
erally inferred from the facts and circumstances surrounding the applicant’s overall conduct”);
Dippin’ Dots, 476 F.3d at 1345 (“‘[S]moking gun’ evidence is not required in order to establish
an intent to deceive. . . .”); Hoffman-La Roche, 323 F.3d at 1371 (“a ﬁnding of intent does not
require a confession from the stand by the inventor or the prosecuting attorney”). If the cir-
cumstantial evidence is sufﬁcient to infer the necessary intent, “a mere denial of intent to mis-
lead (which would defeat every effort to establish inequitable conduct) will not sufﬁce [to rebut
that evidence].” GFI, 265 F.3d at 1275. Sometimes the absence of a credible explanation for
nondisclosure is enough to infer bad intent. See Bruno, 394 F.3d at 1354 (“Normally . . . an inno-
cent party will be motivated to try to present convincing reasons for its actions or inaction.”).
25 See Kemin Foods, L.C. v. Pigmentos Vegetales Del Centro S.A. de C.V., 464 F.3d 1340, 1346
(Fed. Cir. 2006); Hoffman-La Roche, 323 F.3d at 1372; PerSeptive Biosystems, 225 F.3d at 1318
(“The defense of inequitable conduct is entirely equitable in nature, and thus not an issue for
a jury to decide.”).
26 See Honeywell, 488 F.3d at 999; Cargill, 476 F.3d at 1364; AGFA Corp. v. Creo Prods. Inc., 
451 F.3d 1366, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2006).
27 See Cargill, 476 F.3d at 1364 (“‘[t]he more material the omission or the misrepresentation, the
lower the level of intent required to establish inequitable conduct, and vice versa’”); Impax,
468 F.3d at 1375; Purdue Pharma L.P. v. Endo Pharmaceuticals Inc., 438 F.3d 1123, 1128–29
(Fed. Cir. 2006).
28 Burlington Indus., Inc. v. Dayco Corp., 849 F.2d 1418, 1422 (Fed. Cir. 1988).

committed “misuse.”29 Like the inequitable conduct defense, the misuse
defense leads, if successful, to a holding that the patent is unenforceable.
An early example of overreaching by a patent owner can be found in Morton
Salt Co. v. G.S. Suppiger.30 Suppiger obtained a patent on a machine used in the
canning industry for adding salt tablets to the contents of the cans. Only the
machine was patented; the salt tablets were not. Nevertheless, when Suppiger
leased its machines to canneries, it licensed the canneries to use the machines
only if they agreed to buy all of their salt tablets from a Suppiger subsidiary.
The Supreme Court viewed this extension of the patent grant as improper and
held that a patent owner guilty of such practices could not look to a court for
relief.31 Today such conduct might be characterized as misuse.
Although there is no exhaustive list of the kinds of behavior that consti-
tute misuse, the following may raise questions:
• A patent license, such as that discussed in Morton Salt, which compels the licensee
to purchase separate, unpatented goods from the patent owner. This is called a
“tying” arrangement.32
• A patent license that forbids the licensee from dealing with the patent owner’s com-
petitors. This is sometimes called “tying out,” in contrast to the “tying in” found in
Morton Salt.
• A patent license granted on the condition that other patents are also licensed, even
though the other patents may be undesired or even invalid.33
138
Patent Law Essentials
29 See Monsanto Co. v. Scruggs, 459 F.3d 1328, 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (“In order for competitive
behavior to amount to patent misuse, one must ‘impermissibly broaden[] the scope of the patent
grant with anticompetitive effect.’”); Monsanto Co. v. McFarling, 363 F.3d 1336, 1341 (Fed. Cir.
2004); C.R. Bard, Inc. v. M3 Sys., Inc., 157 F.3d 1340, 1372 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (“Patent misuse relates
primarily to a patentee’s actions that affect competition in unpatented goods or that otherwise
extend the economic effect beyond the scope of the patent grant.”); Windsurﬁng Int’l, Inc. v.
AMF, Inc., 782 F.2d 995, 1001 (Fed. Cir. 1986) (a misuse defense “requires that the alleged
infringer show that the patentee has impermissibly broadened ‘the physical or temporal scope’ of
the patent grant with anticompetitive effect”). “In cases in which the restriction is reasonably
within the patent grant, the patent misuse defense can never succeed.” Monsanto, 363 F.3d at 1341.
30 314 U.S. 488 (1941).
31 Id. at 492–94.
32 See Monsanto, 363 F.3d at 1341; Virginia Panel Corp. v. Mac Panel Co., 133 F.3d 860, 869
(Fed. Cir. 1997) (referring to tying of “staple good[s]” as an example of “per se patent misuse”).
It is not misuse to demand that licensees purchase from the patent owner goods which, if pur-
chased from someone else, could supply the basis of a claim of contributory infringement—
for example, goods useful only in practicing the patented invention. See 35 U.S.C. § 271(d).
Contributory infringement is discussed in Section 10.4.
33 It is common for patent owners to license a group of related patents as a package—an arrange-
ment that may be convenient for the licensee as well as for the patent owner. See U.S. Philips
Corp. v. Int’l Trade Comm’n, 424 F.3d 1179, 1192–93 (Fed. Cir. 2005). The U.S. Philips case
casts some doubt on whether package licensing can ever be anticompetitive, even if the licensee
has no alternative. The negotiated price for the package will reﬂect the value of the technology
that the licensee does need, and the “extra” licenses do not compel the licensee to use those tech-
nologies instead of others. See 424 F.3d at 1190–91.

• Extending the collection of royalty payments past the expiration of the patent term.34
• Charging royalties on products that do not use the patented invention.35
The misuse defense covers some of the same territory as the federal
antitrust laws,36 at least where the challenged activity takes the form of a
threat to competition. Conduct may rise to the level of misuse without
violating the antitrust laws,37 but similar considerations of “market power,”
anticompetitive effects, and business justiﬁcations appear in either context,38
particularly after changes to 35 U.S.C. § 271. The latter now states that it is
misuse to condition a patent license on the sale of a separate, unpatented
product only if the patent owner has “market power” in the relevant mar-
ket.39 The same limitation applies to patent licenses offered only as a group.40
“Market power” is a concept developed in the setting of antitrust law, and
perhaps only an economist could provide a thorough deﬁnition. In general
terms, market power means the ability to alter the conditions of trade, and
in particular to raise prices, beyond what could be accomplished in a com-
petitive market. Whether a company has market power depends on the
availability of acceptable substitutes for whatever goods or services that com-
pany controls. Thus, if Morton Salt had applied the current version of § 271,
the court might have considered whether Suppiger’s patented salt depositing
machines were so superior that it could compel canneries to obtain a patent
license, even at the cost of having to purchase unpatented salt tablets from
Suppiger’s subsidiary. If the canneries could easily have chosen another
machine without such restrictions, Suppiger would not have had the
“power” to restrain competition.
Even where a misuse defense is dependent on a demonstration of anti-
competitive effects, it is not necessary that the party raising the defense have
Enforceability Defenses
139
34 See Brulotte v. Thys Co., 379 U.S. 29, 33 (1964); Virginia Panel, 133 F.3d at 869.
35 See U.S. Philips, 424 F.3d at 1184.
36 The federal antitrust laws (e.g., the Sherman Antitrust Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1–7) are designed to
protect competition in the marketplace. Because a patent is a legal form of monopoly, efforts
to enforce a patent within its legitimate scope do not violate the antitrust laws. See In re Inde-
pendent Service Organizations Antitrust Litigation, 203 F.3d 1322, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (gen-
erally a patent owner who brings suit to enforce right to exclude is exempt from antitrust
laws). Antitrust concerns should arise only if the patent was obtained by fraud, or was known
to be invalid, or if the suit for infringement was a “mere sham.” See id.; Atari Games Corp. v.
Nintendo of America, Inc., 897 F.2d 1572, 1576 (Fed. Cir. 1990).
37 U.S. Philips, 424 F.3d at 1185–86; Monsanto, 459 F.3d at 1339.
38 See Virginia Panel, 133 F.3d at 869 (discussing “rule of reason” applied to some practices
alleged to be misuse); Windsurﬁng, 782 F.2d at 1002 (unless conduct has been deemed per se
anticompetitive, there must be a showing that it “tends to restrain competition unlawfully in
an appropriately deﬁned market”).
39 35 U.S.C. § 271(d). A patent does not confer market power automatically, nor can a court pre-
sume that a patent confers such power. Illinois Tool Works Inc. v. Independent Ink, Inc., 547
U.S. 28, 45–46 (2006).
40 35 U.S.C. § 271(d).

suffered those anticompetitive effects personally. Protection of the public
from abusive practices, and denial of relief to those undeserving of the
court’s protection, are sufﬁcient reasons to hold a patent unenforceable, no
matter what effect the challenged conduct has had on the litigants in a par-
ticular case.41
Some conduct that might seem anticompetitive is not considered misuse.
For example, it is not misuse to grant only a limited number of licenses to a
patent, to grant no licenses to a patent, or to completely suppress an inven-
tion by neither practicing it nor licensing it.42 Generally, it is up to the pat-
entee to decide whether the invention will be exploited during the term of
the patent. On the other hand, recent decisions give courts some leeway to
deny an injunction even after a successful suit for infringement. One factor
courts may consider is the impact on the public if the patentee does not per-
mit the invention to be made available for its use.43
Unlike invalidity, or unenforceability resulting from inequitable conduct,
unenforceability resulting from misuse is reversible. The patent can be
enforced again as soon as the objectionable conduct has ceased and any lin-
gering effects have “dissipated.”44
140
Patent Law Essentials
41 Morton Salt, 314 U.S. at 493–94.
42 See 35 U.S.C. § 271(d) (stating that “refus[al] to license or use any rights to the patent” is not
an act of misuse); Independent Service Organizations, 203 F.3d at 1326; Cygnus Therapeutics Sys.
v. Alza Corp., 92 F.3d 1153, 1160 (Fed. Cir. 1996) (“a patentee may, if it wishes, do nothing
with the subject matter of the patent”); King Instruments Corp. v. Perego, 65 F.3d 941, 950
(Fed. Cir. 1995) (“The market may well dictate that the best use of a patent is to exclude
infringing products, rather than to market the invention.”).
43 See eBay Inc. v. MercExchange, L.L.C., 547 U.S. 388, 391 (2006).
44 Morton Salt, 314 U.S. at 493; see also Senza-Gel Corp. v. Seiffhart, 803 F.2d 661, 668 n.10 (Fed.
Cir. 1986).

CHAPTER 10
Infringement
The owner of a patent has the exclusive right to make, use, sell, offer to
sell, or import into the United States the invention described by the
claims.1 Anyone else who engages in those activities, without the permis-
sion of the patent owner, is an “infringer.” An infringer can be sued for
money damages2 and can be compelled by a court to cease the infringing
activities.
10.1 PATENT TERM
Generally speaking, the exclusive rights conferred by a patent begin on
the date the patent issues and expire 20 years after the ﬁling date of the
application (or any earlier application cited for purposes of priority).3
Consequently, the term of the patent will vary depending on how long it
takes for the application to make its way through the Patent Ofﬁce. A
patent issued in 2005 on an application ﬁled in 2000 would last only 15 years,
expiring in 2020.4
1 See 35 U.S.C. § 271(a).
2 See Section 11.8.
3 35 U.S.C. § 154(2).
4 The 20-year term applies to utility patents. Design patents, discussed in Section 12.1, have a
term of 14 years from the date of issue. 35 U.S.C. § 173.

The term of a patent used to be 17 years from the date of issue.5 Con-
sequently, long delays in prosecution,6 sometimes due to maneuvering by
the applicant, occasionally resulted in patents issuing on inventions that
had already been in public use for decades.7 In 1990, for example, com-
puter chip manufacturers learned that a patent had been issued to one
Gilbert Hyatt claiming the basic concept of the microprocessor—already
the subject of a long-established and lucrative industry. This patent
appeared at such a late date because it took 21 years and the prosecution
of a long chain of related applications before the patent issued. Since the
application process was conducted in secret, none of the chip manufac-
turers knew of the patent until, from their perspective, it was too late to
do anything about it. The current practice of measuring the effective term
of a patent from its filing date reduces the incentive for applicants to
delay prosecution and surprise an industry with a so-called submarine
patent.
Under the current rules, if the examination is unduly delayed and the
PTO bears the blame, the term of the patent may be extended accordingly.8
The term may also be extended if a successful appeal,9 an interference pro-
ceeding,10 or certain kinds of regulatory delay,11 such as FDA review of the
patented product, prevent the patentee from enjoying the full term of its
commercial monopoly.
In the event a patent application is published before its date of issue,12
the patentee enjoys “provisional rights,” meaning the right to demand a
reasonable royalty from anyone who practiced the patented invention in
the interval.13 These rights apply only against parties with actual notice of
the patent application,14 and they can be collected only after the patent
has issued. Such rights are one incentive for applicants to publish their
applications, even when the law does not require it.15 Except for these
142
Patent Law Essentials
5 Due to the change from a 17-year to a 20-year term, patents applied for prior to June 8, 1995
are entitled to the greater of the 20-year term provided by the current statute, or the term of
17 years from issue provided by the former statute. 35 U.S.C. § 154(c).
6 The record holder in this respect might be U.S. Patent No. 6,130,946, disclosing a cryptog-
raphy machine resembling the German Enigma device. The patent issued on October 10,
2000, based on an application ﬁled on October 23, 1936.
7 Calculated delay may allow an accused infringer to raise the defense of “prosecution laches.”
See Section 11.8.3.3.
8 See 35 U.S.C. § 154(b).
9 See 35 U.S.C. § 154(b)(1)(C).
10 See 35 U.S.C. § 154(b)(1)(C). Interference proceedings are discussed in Section 5.4.
11 See 35 U.S.C. §§ 155, 156.
12 See Section 5.1.
13 35 U.S.C. § 154(d). The invention claimed in the issued patent must be “substantially identi-
cal” to the invention claimed in the published application. Id.
14 35 U.S.C. § 154(d)(1)(B).
15 See Section 5.1.

provisional rights, an applicant with a “patent pending” has no exclusive
rights until the patent issues. On the other hand, with few exceptions,16 the
patentee can demand that infringing activity cease when the patent issues,
even if it had already begun. Warnings of a “patent pending” advise
potential infringers that they should not begin what they may not be per-
mitted to continue. On the other hand, one should remember that many
pending applications result in relatively narrow patent claims, or are
denied altogether.
10.2 GEOGRAPHIC LIMITATIONS
United States patent law does not apply to activities that take place
entirely in another country.17 The sale or use of a patented product in
Japan, for example, is not an infringement of a United States patent,
although it could be an infringement of a corresponding Japanese patent.
The law also provides an explicit exception for inventions built into vehi-
cles, such as aircraft, that may enter the United States temporarily. If a
United States patent covered a design for landing gear, and a Japanese air-
liner with the claimed landing gear ﬂew into the United States to deliver
passengers, the use of the landing gear in the United States would not
infringe the patent.18
In two respects, United States patent law does take notice of activities
occurring in another country. First, supplying the components of a patented
invention from the United States to a foreign country, where they will be
assembled into the claimed combination, can be an infringement of a United
Infringement
143
16 One exception involves a claim to a “method of doing or conducting business.” See
35 U.S.C. § 173(a)(3). An accused infringer who can demonstrate that, acting in good faith,
it (1) reduced to practice the claimed method at least one year before the ﬁling date of the
patent, and (2) used the method commercially before the ﬁling date of the patent, may con-
tinue to use the method without the patentee’s consent. See 35 U.S.C. § 273(b). This recently
created defense to infringement protects parties who already invested in a method of doing
business, but whose use of that method was not sufﬁciently public to trigger a statutory bar.
See Section 8.10. It remains to be seen how broadly the term “method of doing or con-
ducting business” will be interpreted. The other instance of “intervening rights” arises in the
context of reissued patents. See Section 5.5.
17 See Microsoft Corp. v. AT&T Corp., 127 S. Ct. 1746, 1750 (2007) (“It is the general rule under
United States patent law that no infringement occurs when a patented product is made and
sold in another country.”); Rotec Indus., Inc. v. Mitsubishi Corp., 215 F.3d 1246, 1251 (Fed.
Cir. 2000) (“‘[t]he right conferred by a patent under our law is conﬁned to the Unites States
and its territories, and infringement of this right cannot be predicated of acts wholly done in
a foreign country’”).
18 See 35 U.S.C. § 272; National Steel Car, Ltd. v. Canadian Paciﬁc Railway, Ltd., 357 F.3d
1319, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2004). The exception applies to countries offering reciprocal
privileges.

States patent.19 The legal analysis mirrors that of “contributory infringement”
or “inducement” of infringement in the United States, topics discussed in
Section 10.4. Second, it can be an infringement of a United States patent to
import, use, sell, or offer to sell in the United States a product made in a for-
eign country by a process patented in the United States.20 This prevents the
evasion of United States patents by moving production overseas.21
The latter provision does not apply if the product is “materially changed by
subsequent processes” or if the product “becomes a trivial and nonessential
component of another product.”22 So, for example, if the patent claimed a
process for reﬁning aluminum, it would probably not be an infringement to
import an automobile having an aluminum ashtray, even if the material from
which the ashtray was made could be traced back to the patented process. At
some point, the imported product becomes too far removed from the claimed
process for the importation of that product to be regarded as an infringement.
10.3 STATE OF MIND
Generally speaking, the intentions of the infringer are irrelevant to
infringement. A patent can be infringed even by someone who is unaware
144
Patent Law Essentials
19 See 35 U.S.C. § 271(f). The components must be supplied with the intent that they be combined
in an infringing manner. See Liquid Dynamics Corp. v. Vaughan Co., 449 F.3d 1209, 1222 (Fed.
Cir. 2006). The intention is what counts. Proof that they were actually combined is unnecessary.
Waymark Corp. v. Porta Sys. Corp., 245 F.3d 1364, 1367–68 (Fed. Cir. 2001). In that respect,
§ 271(f) differs from contributory infringement or inducement. See id. In Microsoft Corp. v. AT&T
Corp., 127 S. Ct. 1746 (2007), the Supreme Court held that sending software code to a foreign
country does not qualify as supplying a “component” of a patented combination. A component
is a tangible thing. Software is more like a construction blueprint—something not covered by
§ 271(f). Id. at 1755 (“A blueprint may contain precise instructions for the construction and com-
bination of the components of a patented device, but it is not itself a combinable component
of that device.”); see also Pellegrini v. Analog Devices, Inc., 375 F.3d 1113, 1118 (Fed. Cir. 2004).
On the other hand, some Federal Circuit decisions hold that § 271(f) may be applied to a com-
ponent of a patented process, which might include an article uniquely adapted to be used in that
process. See Union Carbide Chemicals & Plastics Tech. Corp. v. Shell Oil Co., 425 F.3d 1366,
1378–80 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (catalyst used in patented process); but cf. NTP, Inc. v. Research in
Motion, Ltd., 418 F.3d 1282, 1322 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (U.S. sales of BlackBerry devices did not vio-
late § 102(f), even if used abroad in a patented process).
20 35 U.S.C. § 271(g); Kinik Co. v. Int’l Trade Comm’n, 362 F.3d 1359, 1361–62 (Fed. Cir.
2004); Biotec Biologische Naturverpackungen GmbH v. Biocorp, Inc., 249 F.3d 1341,
1351–52 (Fed. Cir. 2001). The patent must be in force when the steps of the process are per-
formed abroad. Monsanto Co. v. Syngenta Seeds, Inc., 503 F.3d 1352, 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2007).
Section 271(g) applies only to physical products made abroad; it does not apply to intangi-
ble products like information. NTP, 418 F.3d at 1323; Bayer AG v. Housey Pharmaceuticals,
Inc. 340 F.3d 1367, 1377 (Fed. Cir. 2003).
21 See Eli Lilly & Co. v. American Cyanamid Co., 82 F.3d 1568, 1571–72 (Fed. Cir. 1996).
22 35 U.S.C. § 271(g); see also Biotec, 249 F.3d at 1352; Eli Lilly, 82 F.3d at 1572; Bio-Technology
General Corp. v. Genentech, Inc., 80 F.3d 1553, 1560 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

that the patent exists.23 On the other hand, infringement that is intentional,
referred to as “willful infringement,” can result in an award of increased
damages, up to three times the amount of damages that could be recovered
from an innocent infringer, together with attorneys’ fees. These increased
awards, intended as a penalty or deterrent, are discussed in Section 11.8.2.
Indirect infringement, discussed in Section 10.4, is an exception to the
general rule. “Inducement” of infringement and “contributory infringe-
ment,” both forms of indirect infringement, do require an awareness of the
patent and knowledge of the infringing acts.
10.4 DIRECT AND INDIRECT INFRINGEMENT
One who, without authority, makes, uses, sells, offers to sell, or imports
into the United States a product covered by a patent is a “direct infringer.”
One who is not a direct infringer may be held equally liable for encourag-
ing or contributing to infringement by someone else. This is sometimes
referred to as “indirect” or “dependent” infringement.24
Indirect infringement comes in two forms—“inducement” of infringement
and “contributory infringement.” The concept of inducement is the simpler
one. Anyone who “actively induces” the infringement of a patent by another
may be held liable as an infringer.25 Consider the case of Moleculon Research
Corp. v. CBS, Inc.26 CBS sold the popular toy known as Rubik’s Cube, a
product that Moleculon believed to infringe its patent on a rotating-cube
puzzle. Some of the claims, rather than describing the puzzle as a physical
object, instead claimed a method of solving the puzzle by rotating the facets
of the cube. These method claims could be directly infringed only by someone
Infringement
145
23 Hilton Davis Chemical Co. v. Warner-Jenkinson Co., 62 F.3d 1512, 1519 (Fed. Cir. 1995) (en
banc) (“Intent is not an element of infringement. . . . A patent may exclude others from prac-
ticing the claimed invention, regardless of whether the infringers even know of the patent.”),
rev’d on other grounds, Warner-Jenkinson Co. v. Hilton-Davis Chemical Co., 520 U.S. 17
(1997); see also Florida Prepaid Postsecondary Education Expense Board v. College Savings
Bank, 527 U.S. 627, 645 (1999) (“Actions predicated on direct patent infringement . . . do not
require any showing of intent to infringe.”); Jurgens v. CBK, Ltd., 80 F.3d 1566, 1570 n.2
(Fed. Cir. 1996) (infringement is “a strict liability offense”).
24 See RF Delaware, Inc. v. Paciﬁc Keystone Techs., Inc., 326 F.3d 1255, 1268 (Fed. Cir. 2003)
(“dependent infringement”); Moba, B.V. v. Diamond Automation, Inc., 325 F.3d 1306, 1318
(Fed. Cir. 2003) (“indirect infringement”). In any case of indirect infringement, there must be
evidence of a related direct infringement by someone else. See Acco Brands, Inc. v. ABA
Locks Mfrs. Co., 501 F.3d 1307, 1312–13 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Glenayre Elecs., Inc. v. Jackson,
443 F.3d 851, 858 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Aquatex Indus., Inc. v. Techniche Solutions, 419 F.3d
1374, 1380 (Fed. Cir. 2005). However, that direct infringement can be shown by circumstan-
tial evidence. See Golden Blount, Inc. v. Robert H. Peterson Co., 438 F.3d 1354, 1362 (Fed.
Cir. 2006).
25 35 U.S.C. § 271(b).
26 793 F.2d 1261 (Fed. Cir. 1986).

performing the steps of the method—that is, by someone using the puzzle. It
would have been impractical, however, to ﬁle suit against every consumer
who purchased Rubik’s Cube. Even though CBS did not directly infringe
those method claims, the court found that it could be held liable for induc-
ing infringement by purchasers, largely because it sold puzzles and instruc-
tion sheets that would lead purchasers to practice the method.27
Although a direct infringer can be completely unaware of the existence of
the patent, one who induces infringement must know of the patent and must
intend to cause the infringing acts.28 Where such intent is found, it is even
possible to hold ofﬁcers or directors of a corporation liable for an infringe-
ment by their corporation, if they “actively assisted” in that infringement.29
This is one instance in which the corporate form will not shield ofﬁcers or
directors from personal liability for the acts of their corporation. Such liabil-
ity still is comparatively rare since it is seldom possible to prove the neces-
sary intent.30
A “contributory infringer” is one who imports, sells or offers to sell a com-
ponent of a patented combination, or a material or apparatus to be used in a
patented process, if all of the following conditions are met:31
• The item is a “material part of the patented invention.”
• The item is imported, sold, or offered for sale with knowledge that the item was
“especially made or especially adapted” for use in an infringing manner.32
• The item is not a “staple article or commodity of commerce suitable for substantial
noninfringing use.”
146
Patent Law Essentials
27 Id. at 1272.
28 See ACCO, 501 F.3d at 1312; DSU Medical Corp. v. JMS Co., 471 F.3d 1293, 1304 (Fed. Cir.
2006) (resolution of conﬂicting precedent en banc); Moba, 325 F.3d at 1318 (“Although § 271(b)
does not use the word ‘knowingly,’ this court has uniformly imposed a knowledge require-
ment.”). Some courts impose a “knew or should have known” standard of knowledge. See DSU,
471 F.3d at 1304; Ferguson Beauregard/Logic Controls v. Mega Sys., LLC, 350 F.3d 1327,
1342 (Fed. Cir. 2003); Manville Sales Corp. v. Paramount Sys., Inc., 917 F.2d 544, 553 (Fed.
Cir. 1990). This may be another way of saying that the necessary intent can be proven by
circumstantial evidence. See nCube Corp. v. SeaChange Int’l, Inc., 436 F.3d 1317, 1324 (Fed.
Cir. 2006). Although it is difﬁcult to distinguish between intending to cause infringing acts
and intending to cause infringement, the Federal Circuit seems to require consciousness of
the legal implications. See DSU, 471 F.3d at 1305–06; Ferguson, 350 F.3d at 1342.
29 See Manville, 917 F.2d at 553; Orthokinetics, Inc. v. Safety Travel Chairs, Inc., 806 F.2d 1565,
1578–79 (Fed. Cir. 1986).
30 See Al-Site Corp. v. VSI Int’l, Inc., 174 F.3d 1308, 1331 (Fed. Cir. 1999).
31 35 U.S.C. § 271(c); Husky Injection Molding Sys. Ltd. v. R & D Tool Eng’g Co., 291 F.3d 780,
784 (Fed. Cir. 2002).
32 Although it is not apparent on the face of the statute, contributory infringement requires both
knowledge that the component is adapted to a particular use and knowledge of the patent
that proscribes that use. Hewlett-Packard Co. v. Bausch & Lomb Inc., 909 F.2d 1464, 1469
(Fed. Cir. 1990). Someone who is not aware of a patent cannot be a contributory infringer,
at least until notiﬁed that the patent exists. However, in contrast to inducement, contributory
infringement does not require intent to cause the infringing acts. See id.

Many patented combinations include individual elements that themselves
are common and unpatentable. The Oviatt mousetrap design (see Appendix A)
includes an ordinary Ping-Pong ball. The Oviatt patent cannot prevent any-
one from making, using, importing, selling or offering to sell Ping-Pong balls,
which have obvious uses unrelated to the mousetrap invention. The inven-
tor’s legitimate monopoly extends only to the claimed combination.
Suppose, however, that someone sold the remaining components of the
Oviatt mousetrap, without the Ping-Pong ball. Since all of the claims of the
Oviatt patent require a ball, selling the remaining pieces would not directly
infringe the patent.33 However, it is likely that anyone who purchased the
incomplete trap would eventually supply the missing ball, thereby forming
an infringing combination. If the patent owner were forced to sue only those
who formed that combination—consumers who purchased an incomplete
trap and supplied their own Ping-Pong ball—enforcement of the Oviatt
patent would be impractical.
Patent law treats as contributory infringement the importation, sale, or
offer to sell a component of a claimed combination if the component is
“especially made” for use in the patented combination (like the tubed struc-
ture depicted in the Oviatt patent) and not a “staple article or commodity of
commerce suitable for substantial noninfringing use” (like a Ping-Pong ball).
Originally, the law made no distinction between contributory infringement
and inducement, and it is still useful to consider contributory infringement
in the inducement context. The sale of a Ping-Pong ball could not, by itself,
be legitimately regarded as an inducement to infringe the Oviatt patent,
since the Ping-Pong ball could be used for something else. The sale of the
single-purpose apparatus could, however, be viewed as an inducement to
infringe, since the apparatus has no other plausible use.
The concept of a “staple article of commerce” most obviously applies to
basic materials sold in large quantities and useful in numerous applications.
Ordinary nuts and bolts and common chemicals would be considered
“staples,” and their sale would not trigger contributory infringement.34 But in
this context “staple” also applies to goods having even one “substantial” non-
infringing use.35 If it did not, in practical effect the patentee’s monopoly
would extend to unpatented uses and combinations. If Oviatt could prevent
the unlicensed sale of Ping-Pong balls, he would have an effective monopoly
not only on his own invention, but also on the game of Ping-Pong.
Issues of contributory infringement often arise in the context of replacing
worn or broken parts in a patented device. One who obtains a patented
Infringement
147
33 See Section 10.5.
34 There might be a legitimate claim of inducement, however, if the sale were accompanied by
instructions telling the purchaser how to use the goods in an infringing manner. See Dynacore
Holdings Corp. v. U.S. Philips Corp., 363 F.3d 1263, 1277 n.6 (Fed. Cir. 2004).
35 See id. at 1275; Preemption Devices, Inc. v. Minnesota Mining & Mfg. Co., 803 F.2d 1170,
1174 (Fed. Cir. 1986).

device from a legitimate source is permitted to repair that device, or replace
a broken or exhausted part, without further obligation to the patent owner.36
On the other hand, one cannot “reconstruct” the patented device to such an
extent that one is, in effect, building a new and unlicensed device.37 If the sub-
stitution of a part effects a reconstruction rather than a repair of the patented
device, that reconstruction can constitute an infringement, and whoever sup-
plied the part may be found liable as a contributory infringer.38
The line between “repair” and “reconstruction” is a difﬁcult one to draw,39
but courts generally have taken a broad view of what may be repaired or
replaced.40 If it is simply a matter of replacing a spent and easily replaceable
component, the replacement will probably not be considered an infringement,
as long as the component is not the subject of a patent in its own right.41 For
example, the Federal Circuit held that supplying replacement liners for a bio-
hazard disposal system was not an infringement of the related patent because
148
Patent Law Essentials
36 See Fuji Photo Film Co. v. Int’l Trade Comm’n, 474 F.3d 1281, 1296 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (“the
replacement of a spent part [is] a fundamental example of a permissible repair”); Husky, 291
F.3d at 785–86; Surfco Hawaii v. Fin Control Sys., Ltd., 264 F.3d 1062, 1065 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
This is true whether or not the replaced part is one “essential” to the combination, and
whether or not the replaced part is the thing that distinguished the invention from the prior
art. See Fuji, 474 F.3d at 1297; Husky, 291 F.3d at 786–87; Porter v. Farmers Supply Service,
Inc., 790 F.2d 882, 885–86 (Fed. Cir. 1986). Parts can also be exchanged to modify the
patented combination for reasons other than extending its useful life. See Husky, 291 F.3d at
786, 788 (modiﬁcations that are “kin to repair,” involving a substitution for an easily replace-
able part, are permitted); Surfco, 264 F.3d at 1065–66 (owner may replace ﬁns on a surfboard,
even though ﬁns are not worn out, in order to make the surfboard safer).
37 See Aro Mfg. Co. v. Convertible Top Replacement Co., 365 U.S. 336, 346 (1961).
38 See FMC Corp. v. Up-Right, Inc., 21 F.3d 1073, 1076 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
39 See Husky, 291 F.3d at 784–85 (the courts “have struggled for years to appropriately distinguish
between repair of a patented machine and reconstruction”). One court, in a passage cited with
approval by the Federal Circuit, declined to adopt any bright-line test to distinguish between
repair and reconstruction, placing its reliance instead on “‘the exercise of sound common sense
and an intelligent judgment.’” FMC, 21 F.3d at 1079 (quoting Goodyear Shoe Machinery Co. v.
Jackson, 112 F. 146, 150 (1st Cir. 1901)); see also Bottom Line Management, Inc. v. Pan Man, Inc.,
228 F.3d 1352, 1355 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (no “bright line test”). The Federal Circuit has suggested a
“concept of proportionality inherent in the distinction between repair and reconstruction.”
Husky, 291 F.3d at 786–87; see also Fuji, 474 F.3d at 1296 (no contention that refurbishment was
“disproportionate to the overall value of the parts that were not replaced”). Such “proportional-
ity” would lead one to distinguish between replacing the spark plugs on a vehicle (a permissible
repair) and replacing the rest of the vehicle at a single stroke, retaining only the spark plugs (an
impermissible reconstruction). Of course, few cases will be so easy to categorize.
40 Sage Prods., Inc. v. Devon Indus., Inc., 45 F.3d 1575, 1578 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
41 Although the distinction between replacement and repair is difﬁcult to draw, the Federal Circuit
has recently implied that the substitution of a new part for one that is “readily replaceable” is con-
duct within a “safe harbor.” See Husky, 291 F.3d at 787. Consequently, the difﬁcult cases involve
parts that are not easily replaced. See, e.g., Fuji, 474 F.3d at 1296 (reloading ﬁlm in a “single use”
camera was not impermissible reconstruction, even though the back of the camera had to be bro-
ken and replaced); Bottom Line, 228 F.3d at 1356 (refurbishing cooking surfaces with worn Teﬂon
coatings was not impermissible reconstruction, even though it meant breaking welds).

the liners, only a component of the patented combination, were meant to be
replaced after a single use.42 In fact, though it deﬁes logic, one may be allowed
to replace an entire device over a period of time, by the successive replacement
of worn out or spent parts, as long as in no single instance are the replacements
so extensive that they amount to “reconstruction.”43 On the other hand, if the
entire product is spent, as a patented torpedo would be following its explo-
sion,44 construction of a new item from what remains would not be permitted.
Also, the courts have sometimes balked at the replacement of a component
clearly not meant to be, nor customarily considered to be, replaceable.45
10.5 LITERAL INFRINGEMENT
Determining if a patent is infringed is a two-step process.46 First, one must
examine the language of the claims at issue and determine what the claims
mean. This step, referred to as “claim construction” or “claim interpreta-
tion,” proceeds according to the rules discussed in Chapter 7. Although it is
a principle difﬁcult to apply in practice, claims are supposed to be construed
without any reference to the thing that has been accused of infringing.47
Infringement
149
42 Sage Prods., 45 F.3d 1575 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
43 See Husky, 291 F.3d at 786; FMC, 21 F.3d at 1077.
44 See Husky, 291 F.3d at 785.
45 In Sandvik Aktiebolag v. E.J. Co., 121 F.3d 669 (Fed. Cir. 1997), the Federal Circuit held that
replacement of a carbide drill tip constituted reconstruction of the patented drill, rather than
repair, even though the tip was only a component of the claimed combination. A number of
factors inﬂuenced the court, including the elaborate procedures necessary to replace the tip,
the long useful life of the tip compared with other components of the drill, the lack of any
substantial industry in replacement tips, and the lack of any evidence that the patentee
intended for the drill tip to be replaced. Id. at 673.
46 Elbex Video, Ltd. v. Sensormatic Elecs. Corp., 508 F.3d 1366, 1370 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Stumbo
v. Eastman Outdoors, Inc., 508 F.3d 1358, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Wilson Sporting Goods Co.
v Hillerich & Bradsby Co., 442 F.3d 1322, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2006).
47 SRI Int’l v. Matsushita Elec. Corp., 775 F.2d 1107, 1118 (Fed. Cir. 1985) (en banc) (“[C]laims are
not construed ‘to cover’ or ‘not to cover’ the accused device. That procedure would make
infringement a matter of judicial whim. It is only after the claims have been construed without ref-
erence to the accused device that the claims, as so construed, are applied to the accused device to
determine infringement.” (emphasis in original)). But see Serio-US Indus., Inc. v. Plastic Recov-
ery Techs. Corp., 459 F.3d 1311, 1319 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (“a trial court may consult the accused
device for context that informs the claim construction process”); Wilson Sporting Goods, 442 F.3d
at 1326–27 (“[W]hile a trial court should certainly not prejudge the ultimate infringement analy-
sis by construing claims with an aim to include or exclude an accused product or process, knowl-
edge of that product or process provides meaningful context for the ﬁrst step of the infringement
analysis, claim construction.”); Vivid Techs., Inc. v. American Science & Eng’g, Inc., 200 F.3d
795, 803 (Fed. Cir. 1999) (“although the claims are construed objectively and without reference
to the accused device, only those terms need be construed that are in controversy, and only
to the extent necessary to resolve the controversy”); Scripps Clinic & Research Found. v.
Genentech, Inc., 927 F.2d 1565, 1580 (Fed. Cir. 1991) (“Of course the particular accused prod-
uct (or process) is kept in mind, for it is efﬁcient to focus on the construction of only the disputed
elements or limitations of the claims.”).

Once the claims have been properly construed, they must be compared with
the accused product or method to see if the claims are infringed. A patent is
said to be “literally infringed” if the claims literally or “exactly” describe the
thing accused of infringement.48
A claim cannot be literally infringed if any claim element is missing
entirely from the accused product.49 This is so even if the missing element
seems an insigniﬁcant part of the invention as a whole. If a mousetrap claim
refers to a hook for hanging the trap on a wall when the trap is not in use, a
trap that has no hook does not literally infringe. This principle is often called
the “all elements” rule. It can be helpful to think of a patent claim as a kind
of checklist of features, every one of which must be found in the accused
product in order for the claim to be infringed.
On the other hand, infringement is not avoided by adding things that are
not described in the claim.50 Suppose, for example, that a ﬁrst inventor
claimed a mousetrap comprising the combination of a spring, a latch, a
mouse-trapping jaw, and a trigger that releases the latch and closes the jaw.
A later inventor improves the combination by adding an audible alarm that
sounds when the trap has sprung. The improved trap would still literally
infringe, as long as it had the spring, latch, jaw and trigger claimed.51
150
Patent Law Essentials
48 DeMarini Sports, Inc. v. Worth, Inc., 239 F.3d 1314, 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2001); General Am.
Transp. Corp. v. Cryro-Trans, Inc., 93 F.3d 766, 770 (Fed. Cir. 1996); Southwall Techs., Inc.
v. Cardinal IG Co., 54 F.3d 1570, 1575 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
49 See BMC Resources, Inc. v. Paymentech, L.P., 498 F.3d 1373, 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Gemstar-TV
Guide Int’l, Inc. v. Int’l Trade Comm’n, 383 F.3d 1352, 1360 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Techsearch, L.L.C.
v. Intel Corp., 286 F.3d 1360, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (“To establish literal infringement, all of the
elements of the claim, as correctly construed, must be present in the accused system.”).
50 See Free Motion Fitness, Inc. v. Cybex Int’l, Inc., 423 F.3d 1343, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (“Basic
patent law holds that a party may not avoid infringement of a patent claim using an open
transitional phrase, such as comprising, by adding additional elements.”); Suntiger, Inc. v.
Scientiﬁc Research Funding Gp., 189 F.3d 1327, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Northern Telecom,
Inc. v. Datapoint Corp., 908 F.2d 931, 945 (Fed. Cir. 1990) (“Nor is infringement avoided if
a claimed feature performs not only as shown in the patent, but also performs an additional
function.”). The same principle applies to method claims. See Smith & Nephew, Inc. v.
Ethicon, Inc., 276 F.3d 1304, 1311 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“Infringement arises when all of the steps
of a claimed method are performed, whether or not the infringer also performs additional
steps.”). There is an exception if the claim is limited by its terms to the recited elements and
no others. See Suntiger, 189 F.3d at 1336 (“If a claim is speciﬁc as to the number of elements
and the addition of an element eliminates an inherent feature of the claim, then that addi-
tional element will prevent a ﬁnding of literal infringement.”). When a claim preamble ends
with the words “consisting of” (rather than the more common “comprising”), the claim is
limited to only the elements recited. See Section 7.6.
51 See Innogenetics, N.V. v. Abbott Labs., 512 F.3d 1363, 1371–72 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (“Abbott
argues that a patent can never be literally infringed by embodiments that did not exist at the
time of the ﬁling. Our case law allows for after-arising technology to be captured within the
literal scope of valid claims that are drafted broadly enough.”); JVW Enters., Inc. v. Interact
Accessories, Inc., 424 F.3d 1324, 1333 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (additional features and improve-
ments do not avoid infringement).

Some accused infringers mistakenly believe that if they have obtained a
patent covering their own product, they are immune from charges of infring-
ing another patent. This is simply not the case. A patent conveys only the
right to exclude others; it does not convey a right to produce or sell the inven-
tion claimed.52 Even if the inventor of the trap-with-alarm had obtained a
patent on the improvement (which is perfectly proper as long as the
improvement is “non-obvious”), the product would still infringe.53 However,
the new patent would prevent the ﬁrst inventor from adding an alarm to his
invention, without a license from the second inventor.
The concept of literal infringement is relatively straightforward—a patent
is literally infringed if the accused product is exactly what the claims
describe. But this is not the end of the infringement inquiry. Even if the
accused product is not exactly what the claims describe, it can still be found
infringing under the “doctrine of equivalents.” Alternatively, if an accused
product is exactly what the claims describe, it can still theoretically be found
non-infringing under the “reverse doctrine of equivalents.” These doctrines
are discussed in the sections that follow.
10.6 THE DOCTRINE OF EQUIVALENTS
The “doctrine of equivalents” is one of the most important doctrines in
patent law, and one of the most perplexing. It is not based on the patent
statutes passed by Congress, but is entirely a product of judicial reasoning.
Some critics view the doctrine as inconsistent with other fundamental prin-
ciples of patent law. However, the doctrine has a long history, and, having
survived recent criticisms, it is clearly here to stay.
10.6.1 Winans v. Denmead
Winans v. Denmead,54 an ancient but important case in the evolution of the
doctrine of equivalents, provides a useful introduction. Winans obtained a
patent on a coal-carrying railroad car shaped like the base (or “frustum”) of
a cone, with the smaller end extending below the level of the axles. The
circular cross section and tapered dimensions of the car equalized the pressures
Infringement
151
52 Bio-Technology General Corp. v. Genentech, Inc., 80 F.3d 1553, 1559 (Fed. Cir. 1996)
(“‘[T]he existence of one’s own patent does not constitute a defense to infringement of some-
one else’s patent. It is elementary that a patent grants only the right to exclude others and con-
fers to right on its holder to make, use, or sell.’” (emphasis in original)); Atlas Powder Co. v.
E.I. Du Pont de Nemours & Co., 750 F.2d 1569, 1580 (Fed. Cir. 1984).
53 See Atlas Powder, 750 F.2d at 1580 (“if Atlas patents A+B+C and Du Pont then patents the
improvement A+B+C+D, Du Pont is liable to Atlas for any manufacture, use, or sale of
A+B+C+D because the latter directly infringes claims to A+B+C”). A second patent can
bear on whether an improvement is “equivalent” to the original, if there is no literal infringe-
ment. See Section 10.6.
54 56 U.S. 330 (1853).

on the load-bearing surfaces, with the result that a lighter car could carry a
relatively larger burden without damage. Winans’ patent claim speciﬁcally
referred to a car “in the form of a frustum of a cone.” The car accused of
infringing Winans’ patent was similarly tapered, but it had an octagonal
rather than a circular cross section. Rather than the “frustum of a cone,” the
shape of the car was closer to an octagonal pyramid. The accused car did not
fall within the literal language of the claim, but it provided similar (though
reduced) beneﬁts in equalizing the pressures exerted by the load.
Even though the accused car was outside of the literal language of the
claim, the court found that it employed the principle of Winans’ invention.
The differences were merely differences of “form,” and the court held these
differences insufﬁcient to avoid infringement.
The exclusive right to the thing patented is not secured, if the public
are at liberty to make substantial copies of it, varying its form or pro-
portions. And, therefore, the patentee, having described his invention,
and shown its principles, and claimed it in that form which most per-
fectly embodies it, is, in contemplation of law, deemed to claim every
form in which his invention may be copied, unless he manifests an
intention to disclaim some of those forms.55
A dissenting justice rejected this “substance over form” approach to infringe-
ment and emphasized the importance of deﬁnite claims in informing the pub-
lic of the limits of the patentee’s monopoly. A patentee, he felt, should be held
to the limitations made explicit in the claims. He also warned that nothing
could be “more mischievous, more productive of oppressive and costly litiga-
tion, or exorbitant and unjust pretensions and vexatious demands” than relax-
ation of the requirement that patentees be bound by deﬁnite claims.56
10.6.2 Graver Tank
The modern history of the doctrine of equivalents begins in 1950 with
Graver Tank & Mfg. Co. v. Linde Air Prods. Co.57 The patent at issue claimed a
material to be used in an electric welding process, including as a principal
ingredient an “alkaline earth metal” such as magnesium. The accused product
used manganese instead of magnesium, and while the names of the ingredients
are nearly the same, manganese is not an “alkaline earth metal” as speciﬁcally
required by the patent claims. Nevertheless, invoking the doctrine of equiva-
lents as expressed in Winans v. Denmead, the court found the patent infringed.
The following paragraph summed up the majority’s support for the doctrine:
[T]o permit imitation of a patented invention which does not copy
every literal detail would be to convert the protection of the patent
152
Patent Law Essentials
55 Id. at 343.
56 Id. at 347 (Campbell, J., dissenting).
57 339 U.S. 605 (1950).

grant into a hollow and useless thing. Such a limitation would leave
room for—indeed encourage—the unscrupulous copyist to make unim-
portant and insubstantial changes and substitutions in the patent which,
though adding nothing, would be enough to take the copied matter out-
side the claim, and hence outside the reach of law. . . . Outright and
forthright duplication is a dull and very rare type of infringement. To
prohibit no other would place the inventor at the mercy of verbalism
and would subordinate substance to form.58
The court declined to establish any deﬁnite test of whether something out-
side of the literal scope of a patent claim is still “equivalent.” “Equivalence,”
said the court, “is not the prisoner of a formula.”59 Rather, the judgment must
be made in the context of the particular invention, the functions performed
by the claimed and the substituted element, and the knowledge available to
those skilled in the art. In addition, “[a]n important factor is whether persons
reasonably skilled in the art would have known of the interchangeability of
an ingredient not contained in the patent with one that was.”60 The court also
referred to an earlier case inquiring whether the accused product performs
“‘substantially the same function in substantially the same way to obtain the
same result,’”61 reasoning that “‘if two devices do the same work in substan-
tially the same way, and accomplish substantially the same result, they are the
same, even though they differ in name, form or shape.’”62
Applying these principles to the case before it, the court found the patent
infringed, even though the accused welding material did not include the
“alkaline earth metal” apparently required by the claim. The manganese
served the same purpose as an “alkaline earth metal,” and persons skilled in
the art knew the two ingredients to be interchangeable. The substitution was
nothing more than a slight and obvious variation of the invention literally
described.63
10.6.3 Challenges to the Doctrine
The doctrine of equivalents is intended to free the infringement inquiry
from excessive literalism and to elevate substance over form.64 From that
perspective, the doctrine seems an enlightened policy. On the other hand,
Infringement
153
58 Id. at 607.
59 Id. at 609.
60 Id.
61 Id. at 608 (quoting Sanitary Refrigerator Co. v. Winters, 280 U.S. 30, 42 (1929)).
62 Id. at 608 (quoting Union Paper-Bag Machine Co. v. Murphy, 97 U.S. 120, 125 (1877)).
63 Id. at 612.
64 “Unfortunately, the nature of language makes it impossible to capture the essence of a thing
in a patent application. . . . If patents were always interpreted by their literal terms, their value
would be greatly diminished. Unimportant and insubstantial substitutes for certain elements
could defeat the patent, and its value to inventors could be destroyed by simple acts of copy-
ing.” Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co., 535 U.S. 722, 731 (2002).

the doctrine is at odds with the requirement of claims “particularly pointing
out and distinctly claiming the subject matter which the applicant regards
as his invention.”65 Ideally, claims notify the public of what can or cannot
be done without risk of infringing the patent.66 But when the doctrine of
equivalents applies, claims can be positively misleading, by seeming to
include restrictions that, in the end, a court will disregard. Attempting to
honor the “competitor’s need for precise wording as an aid in avoiding
infringement” while avoiding “the risk of injustice that may result from a
blindered focus on words alone,”67 Graver Tank committed courts to a nar-
row and difﬁcult path.
Recognizing the tension between the doctrine of equivalents and fair
notice to potential infringers, the Federal Circuit has warned that
[a]pplication of the doctrine of equivalents is the exception . . . not
the rule, for if the public comes to believe (or fear) that the language
of patent claims can never be relied on, and that the doctrine of
equivalents is simply the second prong of every infringement
charge, regularly available to extend protection beyond the scope of
the claims, then claims will cease to serve their intended purpose.
Competitors will never know whether their actions infringe a
granted patent.68
Yet in practice, allegations of infringement under the doctrine of equiva-
lents have become the rule, not the exception. Wherever there is any doubt
as to literal infringement, patent owners routinely invoke the doctrine of
equivalents as a fallback position. Indeed, attorneys representing patent
owners would be remiss if they failed to take advantage of the opportunities
the doctrine provides. The principle that “the protected invention is what the
claims say it is”69 appears increasingly “utopian.”70
Eventually, critics began to suggest ways in which application of the
doctrine of equivalents might be limited. For example, because Graver
Tank had alluded to the “pirating” of an invention, or a “fraud on the
patent” by an “unscrupulous copyist,” some critics suggested that the doc-
trine of equivalents ought to be applied only in such egregious circum-
154
Patent Law Essentials
65 35 U.S.C. § 112.
66 See Slimfold Mfg. Co., Inc. v. Kinkead Indus., Inc., 932 F.2d 1453, 1457 (Fed. Cir. 1991) (“Inher-
ent in our claim-based patent system is also the principle that the protected invention is what
the claims say it is, and thus that infringement can be avoided by avoiding the language of the
claims.”).
67 Laitram Corp. v. Cambridge Wire Cloth Co., 863 F.2d 855, 856–57 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
68 London v. Carson Pirie Scott & Co., 946 F.2d 1534, 1538 (Fed. Cir. 1991).
69 Slimfold, 932 F.2d at 1457.
70 Paper Converting Machine Co. v. Magna-Graphics Corp., 745 F.2d 11, 19 (Fed. Cir. 1984).

stances.71 Had this approach been adopted, it would have signiﬁcantly
changed the prevailing practice of applying the doctrine even against
“innocent infringers.”
In Warner-Jenkinson Co. v. Hilton Davis Chemical Co.,72 the Supreme
Court entered the debate for the ﬁrst time since Graver Tank. Although the
court “share[d] the concern . . . that the doctrine of equivalents . . . has
taken on a life of its own, unbounded by the patent claims,”73 it declined
the invitation to abolish the doctrine of equivalents or limit it to
“unscrupulous copyists.”74 Instead, it reafﬁrmed the principles of Graver
Tank and the generalized application of the doctrine, with some reﬁne-
ments discussed below. Unless Congress enacts new legislation, which
seems very unlikely, the doctrine of equivalents will be with us for the
foreseeable future.75
10.6.4 Tests of Equivalence
One of the most intractable problems raised by the doctrine of equiva-
lents is how a court, or in many cases a jury, can decide what is “equivalent”
and what is not. Fulﬁlling the prophecy of the dissenting justice in Winans v.
Infringement
155
71 See, e.g., International Visual Corp. v. Crown Metal Mfg. Co., 991 F.2d 768, 773–75 (Fed. Cir.
1993) (Lourie, J., concurring). Note, however, that one person’s “piracy” is another person’s
“designing around” a patent claim. The latter, which refers to the deliberate avoidance of a
patent claim, is encouraged as a means of furthering the “useful arts” promoted by patent
law. See State Indus., Inc. v. A.O. Smith Corp., 791 F.2d 1226, 1235–36 (Fed. Cir. 1985) (“One
of the beneﬁts of a patent system is its so-called ‘negative incentive’ to ‘design around’ a com-
petitor’s products, even when they are patented, thus bringing a steady ﬂow of innovations
to the marketplace.”). As the Supreme Court remarked in rejecting an “equitable” distinc-
tion, “one wonders how ever to distinguish between the intentional copyist making minor
changes to lower the risk of legal action, and the incremental innovator designing around the
claims, yet seeking to capture as much as is permissible of the patented advance.” Warner-
Jenkinson Co. v. Hilton Davis Chemical Co., 520 U.S. 17, 36 (1997).
72 520 U.S. 17 (1997).
73 Id. at 28–29.
74 Id. at 34–36.
75 In 2002, the Supreme Court reafﬁrmed the doctrine of equivalents, while taking note of the
usual arguments against it. As the court explained:
It is true that the doctrine of equivalents renders the scope of patents less certain.
It may be difﬁcult to determine what is, or is not, an equivalent to a particular ele-
ment of an invention. If competitors cannot be certain about a patent’s extent, they
may be deterred from engaging in legitimate manufactures outside its limits, or they
may invest by mistake in competing products that the patent secures. In addition the
uncertainty may lead to wasteful litigation between competitors, suits that a rule of
literalism might avoid. These concerns with the doctrine of equivalents, however, are
not new. Each time the Court has considered the doctrine, it has acknowledged this
uncertainty as the price of ensuring the appropriate incentive for innovation, and it
has afﬁrmed the doctrine over dissents that urged a more certain rule.
Festo, 535 U.S. at 732.

Denmead, the issue of equivalence has been as “productive of oppressive and
costly litigation” as any other, primarily because the results are unpre-
dictable.76 In virtually any case, the patentee can produce evidence of simi-
larities between the accused product and the invention described in the
claims, seemingly leading to a conclusion of equivalence. At the same time,
the defendant can produce evidence of dissimilarities, seemingly leading to
a conclusion of non-equivalence. How is a judge or jury to decide? What Jus-
tice Story observed as long ago as 1818 remains true today:
In all my experience I can scarcely recollect a single instance, in which
the general question, whether the principles of two machines were the
same or different, has not produced from different witnesses, equally
credible and equally intelligent, opposite answers.77
Although the Graver Tank court declined to reduce equivalence to a for-
mula, its reference to equivalence based on performing “substantially the
same function in substantially the same way to obtain the same result” was
adopted in many subsequent Federal Circuit decisions as the touchstone of
infringement.78 Indeed, this function-way-result test of equivalence (also
referred to as the “three-prong” test or “triple identity” test of equivalence)
took on a signiﬁcance that the Graver Tank court may not have intended or
foreseen. The Federal Circuit went so far as to require that a patentee pro-
duce independent evidence on each part of the three-prong test—in other
words, evidence that the substituted ingredient or apparatus (1) performs
substantially the same function, in (2) substantially the same way, to (3)
achieve substantially the same result as that which is literally claimed.79
Without such close adherence to the three-prong test, the court feared that
juries would be “put to sea without guiding charts.”80 Still, the debate com-
monly boils down to the second prong of the test—whether the accused
product and the claimed invention function in “substantially the same
way”81—and the answer to that question is rarely straightforward.
156
Patent Law Essentials
76 See Paper Converting Machine Co. v. Magna-Graphics Corp., 745 F.2d 11, 19 (Fed. Cir. 1984)
(“In view of [the doctrine of equivalents], a copier rarely knows whether his product
‘infringes’ a patent or not until a district court passes on the issue.”).
77 Barrett v. Hall, 2 F. Cas. 914, 923 (C.C.D. Mass. 1818).
78 See, e.g., Malta v. Schulmerich Carillons, Inc., 952 F.2d 1320, 1327 (Fed. Cir. 1991); Lear
Siegler, Inc. v. Sealy Mattress Co., 873 F.2d 1422, 1425 (Fed. Cir. 1989).
79 See Malta, 952 F.2d at 1327; Lear Siegler, 873 F.2d at 1425.
80 Lear Siegler, 873 F.2d at 1426–27. A patentee invoking the three-part test should offer “par-
ticularized testimony and linking argument” showing, speciﬁcally, how the accused product
performs substantially the same function as the claimed invention, in substantially the same
way, to achieve substantially the same result. “Generalized testimony as to . . . overall simi-
larity” will not sufﬁce. Paice LLC v. Toyota Motor Co., 504 F.3d 1293, 1304–05 (Fed. Cir.
2007).
81 See Slimfold Mfg. Co., Inc. v. Kinkead Indus., Inc., 932 F.2d 1453, 1457 (Fed. Cir. 1991).

Another important consideration is whether the item found in the
accused product is known to be interchangeable with the item literally
claimed.82 This is not a deﬁnitive test of equivalence.83 Things may be inter-
changeable in the broadest sense if they produce similar results but still
operate in substantially different ways. A word processor may be inter-
changeable with a ballpoint pen for the purpose of preparing a grocery list,
but the two may not be equivalent in an infringement analysis.84 On the
other hand, a physical incompatibility that would complicate the substitu-
tion of one thing for another (e.g., putting instant ﬁlm in a 35 mm camera)
does not, necessarily, prevent those things from being equivalent in a more
conceptual sense.85
In recent years, the trend has been to downplay the function-way-result test
as the conclusive test of equivalency.86 Instead, the three-prong test has been
described as just one approach to the fundamental inquiry, which is whether the
differences between the claimed and the accused product are “insubstantial.”87
Infringement
157
82 See Graver Tank & Mfg. Co. v. Linde Air Prods. Co., 339 U.S. 605, 609 (1950); Vulcan Eng’g
Co. v. Fata Aluminium, Inc., 278 F.3d 1366, 1374 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (“Known interchangeabil-
ity is an important factor in determining equivalence.”).
83 See Warner-Jenkinson Co. v. Hilton Davis Chemical Co., 520 U.S. 28, 37 (1997) (known
interchangeability “is not relevant for its own sake, but rather for what it tells the fact-ﬁnder
about the similarities or differences between those elements”); Abraxis Bioscience, Inc. v.
Mayne Pharma (USA) Inc., 467 F.3d 1370, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (absence of known inter-
changeability is not determinative: “known interchangeability is only one factor to consider
in a doctrine of equivalents analysis”); Key Mfg. Gp., Inc. v. Microdot, Inc., 925 F.2d 1444,
1449 (Fed. Cir. 1991) (“an interchangeable device is not necessarily an equivalent device”);
Perkin-Elmer Corp. v. Westinghouse Elec. Corp., 822 F.2d 1528, 1535 (Fed. Cir. 1987) (inter-
changeable devices “still must perform substantially the same function in substantially the
same way to obtain the same result”).
84 See Perkin-Elmer, 822 F.2d at 1535 (devices were “interchangeable” only in “entirely different
and unrelated environments” and were not interchangeable for performing certain functions).
85 See Interactive Pictures Corp. v. Inﬁnite Pictures, Inc., 274 F.3d 1371, 1383 (Fed. Cir. 2001)
(“Rather than focusing on physical or electronic compatibility, the known interchangeability
test looks to the knowledge of a skilled artisan to see whether that artisan would contemplate
the interchange as a design choice.”); but cf. Frank’s Casing Crew & Rental Tools, Inc. v.
Weatherford Int’l, Inc., 389 F.3d 1370, 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2004) (mechanical incompatibility
“underscored” a ﬁnding of substantial differences).
86 See Warner-Jenkinson, 520 U.S. at 39–40 (“[W]hile the triple identity test may be suitable for
analyzing mechanical devices, it often provides a poor framework for analyzing other
products or processes.”); Toro Co. v. White Consolidated Indus., Inc., 266 F.3d 1367, 1370
(Fed. Cir. 2001) (the function-way-result test “offers additional guidance” in “appropriate
cases”).
87 See Stumbo v. Eastman Outdoors, Inc., 508 F.3d 1358, 1364 (function-way-result test is “one
way” to show that the differences are insubstantial); Aquatex Indus., Inc. v. Techniche Solutions,
479 F.3d 1320, 1326 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Upjohn Co. v. Mova Pharmaceutical Corp., 225 F.3d 1306,
1309 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (three-prong test is “[t]he usual test of the substantiality of the differences”).
As one court explained the test, an equivalent is “an insubstantial change which, from the per-
spective of one of ordinary skill in the art, adds nothing of signiﬁcance to the claimed invention.”
Valmont Indus., Inc. v. Reinke Mfg. Co., 983 F.2d 1039, 1043 (Fed. Cir. 1993).

Yet to ask whether a difference is “substantial” or “insubstantial” seems more a
rephrasing of the equivalence question than a clariﬁcation.88 For its part, the
Supreme Court in Warner-Jenkinson declined to endorse any particular “linguis-
tic framework” for deciding the ultimate question of equivalence.89 In short, the
question of equivalence is likely to remain a perennial source of confusion and
difﬁculty.
10.6.5 Improvements
Equivalency calls on the perspective of the person of ordinary skill in
the art at the time of the alleged infringement.90 Consequently, variations that
the patentee had not even imagined, much less enabled, can be held
infringing under the doctrine of equivalents. For example, if a transistor
were substituted for a vacuum tube referenced in a patent claim, that claim
might still be infringed under the doctrine of equivalents even if, when the
patent application was ﬁled, transistors had not been invented yet. If the
rule were otherwise, technological advancements would allow competitors
to take the substance of an invention but still avoid infringement. This does
not mean, however, that technological advancements are irrelevant in
judging equivalency. A transistor might be such a marked advancement
over a vacuum tube that, in the context of a particular invention, the dif-
ferences between the two would be thought substantial even at the time of
infringement.
One factor that bears on whether an improvement is still an equivalent is
whether the improvement is itself the subject of a patent. If we limit equivalence
to “insubstantial variations,” a change worthy of its own patent seems beyond
reach. However, while it is a factor to be considered and given “due weight,”91
158
Patent Law Essentials
88 See Warner-Jenkinson, 520 U.S. at 40 (“the insubstantial differences test offers little additional
guidance as to what might render a given difference ‘insubstantial’”). However, “[i]n some
cases, the change in the accused device is so facially ‘unimportant and insubstantial’ that lit-
tle additional guidance is needed.” Toro, 266 F.3d at 1370.
89 Warner-Jenkinson, 520 U.S. at 40.
90 Warner-Jenkinson Co. v. Hilton Davis Chemical Co., 520 U.S. 28, 37 (1997) (“[T]he
proper time for evaluating equivalency—and thus knowledge of interchangeability
between elements—is at the time of infringement, not at the time the patent was
issued.”); Lighting World, Inc. v. Birchwood Lighting, Inc., 382 F.3d 1354, 1357 (Fed.
Cir. 2004).
91 National Presto Indus., Inc. v. West Bend Co., 76 F.3d 1185, 1192 (Fed. Cir. 1996); see also
Zygo Corp. v. Wyko Corp., 79 F.3d 1563, 1570 (Fed. Cir. 1996) (“The nonobviousness of the
accused device, evidenced by the grant of a United States patent, is relevant to the issue of
whether the change therein is substantial.”).

it cannot be said categorically that a patented improvement is never
equivalent.92
Texas Instruments, Inc. v. U.S. Int’l Trade Comm’n93 illustrates the difﬁculty of
applying the equivalency concept in ﬁelds subject to rapid technological
change.94 Texas Instruments obtained the ﬁrst patent ever issued on a pocket
calculator. The court acknowledged it as a “pioneering invention”95 and
noted that the prototype had become part of the permanent collection at the
Smithsonian’s Museum of History and Technology. In essence, the claims of
the patent called for the basic combination of a keyboard, a processing cir-
cuit, a memory, and a display, but because the claims were drafted in
“means-plus-function” format,96 the claims literally incorporated only the
particular keyboard, processing circuit, memory, and display described in
the patent speciﬁcation, and their “equivalents.”
About 17 years after ﬁling its patent application, and 10 years after the
patent issued, Texas Instruments brought an action to prevent the importa-
tion of pocket calculators by foreign manufacturers. During those years, the
ﬁeld had advanced in signiﬁcant ways. MOS transistors had replaced bipo-
lar transistors, liquid crystal displays had replaced thermal printer displays,
and so forth. The Federal Circuit found that each substitution, by itself,
might be considered the substitution of an equivalent, but when considered
as a whole, all of the technological changes were sufﬁcient to take the accused
devices beyond the protection of the doctrine of equivalents.97 The decision
was a controversial one, even among the judges of the Federal Circuit.
Years later, and in spite of the result in Texas Instruments, the Federal Circuit
announced in Chiuminatta Concrete Concepts, Inc. v. Cardinal Indus., Inc.98 that
Infringement
159
92 Fiskars, Inc. v. Hunt Mfg. Co., 221 F.3d 1318, 1324 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (“it is well established that
separate patentability does not avoid equivalency as a matter of law”); National Presto, 76 F.3d
at 1192; Atlas Powder Co. v. E.I. Du Pont de Nemours & Co., 750 F.2d 1569, 1580 (Fed. Cir.
1984). In Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co., 493 F.3d 1368, 1379 (Fed. Cir.
2007), the court observed that “[w]e have not directly decided whether a device—novel and
separately patentable because of the incorporation of an equivalent feature—may be captured
by the doctrine of equivalents.” However, “there is a strong argument that an equivalent can-
not be both non-obvious and insubstantial.” Id. at 1380. Just as an improvement is sometimes
still an equivalent, an inferior variation may also be equivalent. See Whapeton Canvas Co. v.
Frontier, Inc., 870 F.2d 1546, 1548 n.2 (Fed. Cir. 1989) (“inferior infringement is still infringe-
ment”). The question, as before, is whether or not the differences are “insubstantial.”
93 805 F.2d 1558 (Fed. Cir. 1986). Also see the opinion on denial of rehearing en banc, 846 F.2d
1369 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
94 The opinion deals with equivalence under 35 U.S.C. § 112, ¶ 6, discussed in Section 10.7, and
under the doctrine of equivalents. At the time, the court treated the analysis as essentially the
same. See Texas Instruments, 805 F.2d at 1571. More recently, the court has suggested a difference—
conﬁning § 112, ¶ 6 equivalence to structures that existed in the art when the patent was ﬁled,
and equivalence under the doctrine of equivalents to later-developed structures. See Section 10.7.
95 See Section 10.6.7.
96 See Section 7.7.4.
97 Texas Instruments, 805 F.2d at 1570–72.
98 145 F.3d 1303 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

the unpredictability of technological developments is the primary reason,
perhaps the only reason, to invoke the doctrine of equivalents. “The doctrine
of equivalents is necessary,” the court observed, “because one cannot predict
the future.”99 If the applicant knew about the unclaimed equivalent (because
it is “technology that predates the invention itself”), and could have claimed it
in the patent, the court knew of “no policy-based reason why a patentee
should get two bites at the apple.”100 In other words, unless the failure to claim
the full scope of the invention explicitly can be excused by historical neces-
sity, the court may refuse to apply the doctrine of equivalents.
Chiuminatta’s emphasis on later-developed technology may be over-
done.101 The Supreme Court has justiﬁed the doctrine of equivalents, at least
in part, by reference to the inherent imprecision of language102—a problem
that goes beyond that of advancing technologies. Graver Tank itself dealt with
an equivalent known at the time the patent application was ﬁled. Later cases
have interpreted Chiuminatta’s “two bites at the apple” reasoning as applying
only to means-plus-function claims, where equivalence of structure is
already an issue for literal infringement.103 Except in those cases, “the mere
fact that the asserted equivalent structure was pre-existing technology does
not foreclose a ﬁnding of infringement under the doctrine of equivalents.”104
The rhetoric of Chiuminatta is, however, representative of recent efforts
by the Federal Circuit to conﬁne the doctrine of equivalents to situations
where the uncertainty it creates is easiest to justify.105
10.6.6 Impact of the “All Elements” Rule on Equivalence
One of the most important reﬁnements of the principles announced in
Graver Tank involves the “all elements” rule, which states that every element
of the claimed invention must be found in an infringing product.106 In
Pennwalt Corp. v. Durand-Wayland, Inc.,107 the Federal Circuit, in the form of
160
Patent Law Essentials
99 Id. at 1310.
100 Id. at 1311.
101 The paragraphs discussing the “after-developed technology” rationale for the doctrine of
equivalents are uncharacteristically free of citations to precedent. See id. at 1310–13.
102 “[T]the nature of language makes it impossible to capture the essence of a thing in a patent
application.” Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co., 535 U.S. 722, 731 (2002).
103 See Section 10.7.
104 Kraft Foods, Inc. v. International Trading Co., 203 F.3d 1362, 1373 (Fed. Cir. 2000).
105 A more speciﬁc application of the Chiuminatta reasoning is the Federal Circuit’s refusal to
recognize equivalents that were actually disclosed in the application, without being explicitly
claimed. See Section 10.6.9.
106 See Cook Biotech Inc. v. Acell, Inc., 460 F.3d 1365, 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Freedman Seating
Co. v. American Seating Co., 420 F.3d 1350, 1358 (Fed. Cir. 2005); Forest Labs., Inc. v.
Abbott Labs., 239 F.3d 1305, 1310 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
107 833 F.2d 931 (Fed. Cir. 1987) (en banc).

an expanded en banc panel, considered whether the doctrine of equivalents
could be applied if the claimed invention and the accused product were
similar as a whole, even though individual claim elements were entirely
absent in the accused product.
The invention in Pennwalt was a machine used to sort fruit by color and
weight. One of the claimed components of the machine was a “position indi-
cating means,” which kept track of the physical location of a piece of fruit as
it passed through the sorter. The accused product—also a sorting device—
produced comparable results. However, it did so without any means for
keeping track of the physical location of a piece of fruit. Although a number
of judges dissented, the majority held that an accused product cannot
infringe a claim under the doctrine of equivalents unless every claim ele-
ment, or its equivalent, can be found in the accused product. Overall simi-
larity is insufficient if any claim element is entirely missing.108 In
Warner-Jenkinson Co. v. Hilton Davis Chemical Co.,109 the Supreme Court reaf-
ﬁrmed the rule established in Pennwalt, stating that a strict, element-by-
element application of the doctrine would ensure fair notice to potential
infringers.110
As a corollary to the “all elements” rule, courts resist any argument, even
one couched in terms of equivalence, that seems to ignore completely a very
clear claim limitation. As the Supreme Court stated, “[i]t is important to
ensure that the application of the doctrine, even as to an individual element,
is not allowed such broad play as to effectively eliminate that element in its
Infringement
161
108 Pennwalt, 833 F.2d at 935, 939; see also E-Pass Technologies, Inc. v. 3Com Corp., 473 F.3d
1213, 1221 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (“Under the ‘all elements’ rule, ‘the doctrine of equivalents must
be applied to individual elements of the claim, not to the invention as a whole.’”); Depuy
Spine, Inc. v. Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Inc., 469 F.3d 1005, 1017 (Fed. Cir. 2006);
Freedman, 420 F.3d at 1358 (“an accused product or process is not infringing unless it con-
tains each limitation of the claim, either literally or by an equivalent”). On the other hand,
there need not be a “one-to-one correspondence” between the claim and the accused prod-
uct. A single component of an accused product can perform the functions of several com-
ponents described in the claim, and the single component can be considered the equivalent
of each claimed component. Dolly, Inc. v. Spalding & Evenﬂo Co., 16 F.3d 394, 398 (Fed. Cir.
1994); Sun Studs, Inc. v. ATA Equipment Leasing, Inc., 872 F.2d 978, 989 (Fed. Cir. 1989)
(“elements or steps may be combined without ipso facto loss of equivalency”). This principle
allows somewhat greater ﬂexibility in applying the doctrine of equivalents than the “all
elements” rule might suggest.
109 520 U.S. 17 (1997)
110 Id. at 29–30 (“Each element in a patent claim is deemed material to deﬁning the scope of
the patented invention, and thus the doctrine of equivalents must be applied to individ-
ual elements of the claim, not to the invention as a whole.”). Interestingly, the Supreme
Court did not mention Pennwalt, and discussed the “all elements” approach as though it
were a newly discovered compromise solution to the problems posed by the doctrine of
equivalents.

entirety.”111 When a claim limitation speciﬁcally excludes an alternative, a
court may refuse to ﬁnd them equivalent.112 For example, in Moore U.S.A., Inc.
v. Standard Register Co.,113 the patent claims described a “business type mailer
form” having adhesive strips extending “the majority of the lengths” of the
margins.114 The accused product had adhesive strips covering only a minor-
ity of the margins, but the plaintiff argued that the product was still equiva-
lent. The court rejected that argument, in part because “it would defy logic to
conclude that a minority—the very antithesis of a majority—could be insub-
stantially different from a claim limitation requiring a majority.”115 Of course,
whether something is an opposite or “antithesis” as opposed to an insigniﬁ-
cant difference is sometimes a matter of perspective. “Majority” seems the
opposite of “minority,” but, as a dissenting judge in Moore pointed out, just
under 50 percent might differ insubstantially from just over 50 percent.116
10.6.7 Impact of the Prior Art on Equivalence
The prior art imposes another limitation on the doctrine of equivalents.117
The doctrine of equivalents cannot expand the scope of a claim so far that it
162
Patent Law Essentials
111 Warner-Jenkinson, 520 U.S. at 29; see also Depuy, 469 F.3d at 1017; Planet Bingo, LLC v. Gametech
Int’l, Inc., 472 F.3d 1338, 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Primos, Inc. v. Hunter’s Specialties, Inc., 451 F.3d
841, 850 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (“The ‘all limitations rule’ restricts the doctrine of equivalents by pre-
venting its application when doing so would vitiate a claim limitation.”); Lear Siegler, Inc. v. Sealy
Mattress Co., 873 F.2d 1422, 1425 (Fed. Cir. 1989) (“‘a court may not, under the guise of apply-
ing the doctrine of equivalents, erase a plethora of meaningful structural and functional limita-
tions of the claims[s] on which the public is entitled to rely in avoiding infringement.’”). There is
“no set formula” for deciding if a broad reading of equivalence would actually “vitiate” the rele-
vant claim limitation. “Rather, courts must consider the totality of the circumstances of each case
and determine whether the alleged equivalent can be fairly characterized as an insubstantial
change . . . without rendering the pertinent limitation meaningless.” Freedman, 420 F.3d at 1359.
It does not “vitiate” a claim element each time a court or jury ﬁnds an equivalent for a claim ele-
ment not literally met. That approach would “‘swallow the doctrine of equivalents entirely.’” See
Abbott Labs. v. Andrx Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 473 F.3d 1196, 1212 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Depuy, 469
F.3d at 1018 (the doctrine of equivalents “‘necessarily deals with subject matter that is “beyond,”
“ignored” by, and not included in the literal scope of the claim’” (emphasis in original)).
112 See Cook Biotech, 460 F.3d at 1379 (“‘the concept of equivalency cannot embrace a structure
that is speciﬁcally excluded from the scope of the claims’”); Scimed Life Sys., Inc. v.
Advanced Cardiovascular Sys., Inc., 242 F.3d 1337, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“Having speciﬁ-
cally identiﬁed, criticized, and disclaimed the dual lumen conﬁguration, the patentee cannot
now invoke the doctrine of equivalents to ‘embrace a structure that was speciﬁcally excluded
from the claims.’”); Athletic Alternatives, Inc. v. Prince Mfg., Inc., 73 F.3d 1573, 1582 (Fed.
Cir. 1996). A detailed claim may be read to exclude alternatives implicitly. See Bicon, Inc. v.
Straumann Co., 441 F.3d 945, 955 (Fed. Cir. 2006).
113 229 F.3d 1091 (Fed. Cir. 2000).
114 Id. at 1095.
115 Id. at 1106; see also Asyst Techs., Inc. v. Emtrak, Inc., 402 F.3d 1188, 1195 (Fed. Cir. 2005)
(“the term ‘mounted’ can fairly be said to speciﬁcally exclude objects that are ‘unmounted’”).
116 See Moore, 229 F.3d at 1119 (Newman, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).
117 Section 8.9 discusses “prior art.”

encompasses the prior art.118 One method of analyzing the problem (though
it is not an exclusive method) is to imagine a “hypothetical claim” that would
be literally infringed by the product at issue.119 If the patentee could not have
obtained such a claim—because it would have been anticipated by the prior
art or rendered obvious120—then the accused product does not infringe. The
purpose of this limitation is to ensure that patentees do not achieve indi-
rectly, through the doctrine of equivalents, a monopoly that could not have
been obtained directly by prosecution of a broader claim.121
The restrictions imposed by the prior art create, in effect, a “safe
harbor” insofar as the doctrine of equivalents is concerned, if the accused
product in all relevant respects is identical to an invention in the prior art.
No hypothetical claim could encompass such a product yet avoid invalid-
ity. The restriction applies only to the claim as a whole, so there is no
immunity from infringement by equivalence unless all of the relevant
features of the accused product are found in the prior art, either in one ref-
erence or in several that, together, made the combination obvious. Because
patents are often granted to novel combinations of known elements, one
cannot escape infringement, either literal or under the doctrine of equiva-
lents, merely by identifying isolated features of the accused product in the
prior art.122
The prior art also inﬂuences the doctrine of equivalents in a subtler fash-
ion, through the concept of the “pioneer patent.” Whereas most patents are
granted to incremental improvements of inventions that have gone before, a
pioneer patent is one that breaks with the past so distinctly that it creates an
entirely new ﬁeld. Patents such as Bell’s on the telephone, or the Texas
Instruments calculator patent, have staked claims to “pioneering” status.
Some cases have held that a pioneer patent, as a very basic advancement in
technology, should be given a correspondingly broad scope of equivalence.
A patent on a narrow improvement, on the other hand, should be held more
Infringement
163
118 Tate Access Floors, Inc. v. Interface Architectural Resources, Inc., 279 F.3d 1357, 1367 (Fed.
Cir. 2002); Interactive Pictures Corp. v. Inﬁnite Pictures, Inc., 274 F.3d 1371, 1380 (Fed. Cir.
2001) (“It is well settled law that a patentee cannot assert a range of equivalents that encom-
passes the prior art.”).
119 Abbott Labs. v. Dey, L.P., 287 F.3d 1097, 1105 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Interactive Pictures, 274 F.3d
at 1380; Wilson Sporting Goods Co. v. David Geoffrey & Assoc., 904 F.2d 677, 684 (Fed. Cir.
1990).
120 See Sections 8.9.5 and 8.9.6.
121 See Tate Access Floors, 279 F.3d at 1367 (“the doctrine of equivalents is an equitable doctrine
and it would not be equitable to allow a patentee to claim a scope of equivalents encom-
passing material that had been previously disclosed by someone else, or that would have
been obvious in light of others’ earlier disclosures”); Wilson Sporting Goods, 904 F.2d at 684
(“The doctrine of equivalents exists to prevent fraud on a patent . . . not to give a patentee
something which he could not lawfully have obtained from the PTO had he tried.”).
122 See Abbott Labs., 287 F.3d at 1106; Corning Glass Works v. Sumitomo Elec. U.S.A., Inc., 868
F.2d 1251, 1261 (Fed. Cir. 1989).

strictly to the language of the claims.123 Of course, whether or not a patent
deserves to be called “pioneering” will often be a subject for debate.124
For the most part, the Federal Circuit has declined to divide patents into
“pioneering” and “non-pioneering” categories. Instead, it has treated pio-
neering patents as just one end of a spectrum that embraces various degrees
of inventiveness.125 Moreover, it has emphasized that pioneer patents are not
subject to different legal standards than other patents, as a reward for merit
or otherwise.126 A pioneering patent merely enjoys a potentially broader
scope of equivalence because it is not hemmed in by large numbers of sim-
ilar inventions in the prior art, as is generally true of an incremental
improvement in an already crowded ﬁeld.127
10.6.8 Prosecution History Estoppel
One of the most important limitations on the doctrine of equivalents is
“prosecution history estoppel.” The prosecution history is the written
record of an applicant’s dealings with the Patent Ofﬁce, including any
actions taken by the examiner and any statements, arguments, or modiﬁca-
tions of the claims made by the applicant.128 “Estoppel” means that a claim
is barred because the claimant’s prior actions are inconsistent with that
claim. Simply put, prosecution history estoppel prevents a patent owner
164
Patent Law Essentials
123 See Sun Studs, Inc. v. ATA Equipment Leasing, Inc., 872 F.2d 978, 987 (Fed. Cir. 1989) (“The
concept of the ‘pioneer’ arises from an ancient jurisprudence, reﬂecting judicial appreciation
that a broad breakthrough invention merits a broader scope of equivalents than does a nar-
row improvement in a crowded technology.”).
124 “That an improvement enjoys commercial success and has some industry impact, as many
do, cannot compel a ﬁnding that an improvement falls within the pioneer category.” Perkin-
Elmer Corp. v. Westinghouse Elec. Corp., 822 F.2d 1528, 1532 (Fed. Cir. 1987). Even the pio-
neering status of Texas Instruments’ calculator patent was challenged. See Texas Instruments,
Inc. v. U.S. Int’l Trade Comm’n, 846 F.2d 1369, 1370 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
125 See Sun Studs, 872 F.2d at 987 (“[T]he ‘pioneer’ is not a separate class of invention, carrying
a unique body of law. The wide range of technological advance between pioneering break-
through and modest improvement accommodates gradations in scope of equivalency.”);
Texas Instruments, 846 F.2d at 1370 (“[t]here is not a discontinuous transition from ‘mere
improvement’ to ‘pioneer’”).
126 See Augustine Medical, Inc. v. Gaymar Indus., Inc., 181 F.3d 1291, 1301 (Fed. Cir. 1999) (“no
objective legal test separates pioneers from non-pioneers”).
127 See Abbott Labs., 287 F.3d at 1105 (“A pioneer patent by deﬁnition will have little applicable
prior art to limit it, whereas an improvement patent’s scope is conﬁned by the existing
knowledge on which the improvement is based.”); Augustine Medical, 181 F.3d at 1301
(“Without extensive prior art to conﬁne and cabin their claims, pioneers acquire broader
claims than non-pioneers who must craft narrow claims to evade the strictures of a crowded
art ﬁeld.”); Texas Instruments, 846 F.2d at 1370 (the “liberal” scope of equivalency afforded to
pioneer patents “ﬂows directly from the relative sparseness of prior art in nascent ﬁelds of
technology”).
128 See Section 5.1.

from contradicting the prosecution history, by claiming as an equivalent
subject matter given up during prosecution in order to obtain the patent.129
Brenner v. United States130 illustrates the principle. The patented invention
in Brenner concerned a system for coding and sorting mail. The claims
described a means for applying a “codable” material, such as a magnetic
strip, to an article of mail. The material would carry the information needed
for the sorting. Initially, the claims referred to a “coded” rather than “cod-
able” material, implying that the information was encoded beforehand.
However, the applicant changed the claim language to “codable,” telling the
examiner that the new language more accurately described the invention
“‘since when the material is placed on the mail it is not yet coded.’”131 When
compelled to distinguish certain prior art, the applicant stressed this distinc-
tion and also emphasized that the material could be erased after encoding.
The system accused of infringing used an ink jet printer to spray bar
codes directly on the mail to be sorted. The only article applied to the mail
was the ink itself, and the ink was not literally “codable.” By the time the ink
hit the paper, it was ﬁxed in a predetermined pattern, and it could not be
altered or erased afterward. The trial court, afﬁrmed by the Federal Circuit,
found that the accused system could not be held equivalent to the system
claimed because the applicant, during prosecution, had clearly limited the
invention to “codable” material.132
Prosecution history estoppel checks the inclination of some patent
owners to treat claims as a “nose of wax,” to be twisted in one direction to
avoid invalidity and in another to ensure infringement. An applicant who
represents the invention as one thing in prosecution must be prepared to
live with that interpretation in litigation. There can be no “second bite at
the abandoned apple.”133 The doctrine also provides better notice to a
Infringement
165
129 See Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co., 535 U.S. 722, 741 (2002); Regents
of the Univ. of California v. Dakocytomation California, Inc., 517 F.3d 1364, 1376 (Fed. Cir.
2008); Cross Medical Prods., Inc. v Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Inc., 480 F.3d 1335, 1341 (Fed.
Cir. 2007). While the clearest cases of estoppel arise when the applicant narrows a claim by
amendment, see Cross Medical, 480 F.3d at 1341 (“a narrowing amendment classically invokes the
doctrine”), estoppel can also result when the applicant argues in favor of a narrow claim inter-
pretation. See Pods, Inc. v. Porta Stor, Inc., 484 F.3d 1359, 1368 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Conoco, Inc. v.
Energy & Environmental Int’l, L.C., 460 F.3d 1349, 1363 (Fed. Cir. 2006). As the Supreme
Court has observed, “the doctrine of equivalents is premised on language’s inability to capture
the essence of innovation”—a premise “undercut” when the applicant speciﬁcally abandoned
material now urged to be equivalent. Festo, 535 U.S. at 734. Applicant arguments may create an
estoppel even if they were unnecessary to secure the issuance of the patent. See Pods, 484 F.3d
at 1368. However, estoppel does require that the prosecution history demonstrate a “clear and
unmistakable surrender of subject matter.” Id. at 1367; Conoco, 460 F.3d at 1364.
130 773 F.2d 306 (Fed. Cir. 1985).
131 Id. at 307.
132 Id. at 308.
133 Lemelson v. General Mills, Inc., 968 F.2d 1202, 1208 (Fed. Cir. 1992).

patentee’s competitors of the scope of the patented invention, at least in
those cases where the competitors have an opportunity to review the
prosecution history.134 Most important, the doctrine of prosecution history
estoppel prevents applicants from circumventing the process of patent
examination. If the scope of equivalence were not limited by the prosecu-
tion history, an applicant could narrow the claims as much as necessary to
satisfy the examiner, while resorting to the doctrine of equivalents to pre-
serve what amounts to a broader claim. Prosecution history estoppel helps
to ensure that a patent claim is no broader in scope than the examiner
understood it to be.135
In Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co.,136 the Federal
Circuit, to the surprise of many patent attorneys, announced that if a claim
element had been narrowed during prosecution, for reasons related to
patentability, the doctrine of equivalents could not be applied to that ele-
ment at all in any subsequent litigation.137 Suppose, for example, that a
claim to a mousetrap originally called for “at least one spring,” but the
examiner found the claim to be anticipated by a prior trap with a single
spring. The applicant might amend the claim to call for “two springs,”
perhaps pointing out how the two springs of the preferred embodiment pro-
duced non-obvious advantages compared to the one-spring prior art. The
patentee could not argue afterward that a trap with three springs infringed
by equivalency, even though the difference between two and three springs
might be insigniﬁcant. By speciﬁcally referring to “two springs,” the appli-
cant disclaimed anything else. The majority of the court viewed this as the
only “workable” approach, fostering predictability and respect for the
notice function of claims.138 However, the decision contradicted earlier
cases promoting a more ﬂexible brand of estoppel, and it confounded the
expectations of many patent attorneys who had routinely amended claims
without being aware of the drastic effect.139
166
Patent Law Essentials
134 See id. at 1208 (“Other players in the marketplace are entitled to rely on the record made
in the Patent Ofﬁce in determining the meaning and scope of the patent.”). For the same
reason, a patentee may be barred from claiming as an equivalent an alternative distin-
guished and criticized in the patent speciﬁcation. See L.B. Plastics, Inc. v. Amerimax Home
Prods., Inc., 499 F.3d 1303, 1309 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Astrazeneca AB v. Mutual Pharmaceu-
tical Co., 384 F.3d 1333, 1342 (Fed. Cir. 2004) (clear disavowal in speciﬁcation bars claim
of equivalence).
135 See Genentech, Inc. v. Wellcome Found. Ltd., 29 F.3d 1555, 1564 (Fed. Cir. 1994) (“An appli-
cant should not be able deliberately to narrow the scope of examination to avoid during
prosecution scrutiny by the PTO of subject matter . . . and then, obtain in court, either liter-
ally or under the doctrine of equivalents, a scope of protection which encompasses that sub-
ject matter.”).
136 234 F.3d 558 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (en banc).
137 Id. at 574.
138 Id. at 575–77.
139 See Festo, 234 F.3d at 638 (Newman, J., concurring in part and dissenting in part).

The Supreme Court accepted the appeal and reversed.140 The court reaf-
ﬁrmed the principle of prosecution history estoppel141 and held that the
scope of equivalence could be limited by any claim amendment made in
order to secure a patent (and not merely to avoid prior art).142 On the other
hand, the court rejected the notion that a claim amendment leads automati-
cally to a complete bar on equivalents:
By amending the application, the inventor is deemed to concede that
the patent does not extend as far as the original claim. It does not fol-
low, however, that the amended claim becomes so perfect in its
description that no one could devise an equivalent. After amendment,
as before, language remains an imperfect ﬁt for invention. The nar-
rowing amendment may demonstrate what the claim is not; but it may
still fail to capture precisely what the claim is. There is no reason why
a narrowing amendment should be deemed to relinquish equivalents
unforeseeable at the time of the amendment and beyond a fair inter-
pretation of what was surrendered. Nor is there any call to foreclose
claims of equivalence for aspects of the invention that have only a
peripheral relation to the reason the amendment was submitted.
Consequently, one must consider whether the thing now claimed as an
equivalent is precisely what the patentee relinquished. In changing “at least
one spring” to “two springs,” did the patent applicant surrender the three-
spring mousetrap?
The more subtle approach breeds uncertainty, but this is alleviated, to
some degree, by the Supreme Court’s assignment of the burden of proof.
First, one must presume that a narrowing claim amendment offered during
prosecution was occasioned by a “substantial reason related to patentabil-
ity.”143 The burden is on the patent owner to rebut that presumption by
showing that the amendment had another explanation “sufﬁcient to over-
come prosecution history estoppel.”144 It might have been, for example, a
“truly cosmetic” 145 or clarifying amendment, having no impact on the scope
of the claim. Second, if the amendment was related to patentability, the pat-
entee also “bear[s] the burden of showing that the amendment [did] not sur-
render the particular equivalent in question.”146 If the patentee cannot meet
Infringement
167
140 535 U.S. 722 (2002).
141 Id. at 733–34.
142 Id. at 736–37.
143 Warner-Jenkinson, Inc. v. Hilton Davis Chemical Co., 520 U.S. 17, 33 (1997).
144 Warner-Jenkinson, 520 U.S. at 33. Alternative reasons for claim amendment should be demon-
strated by evidence in the prosecution history, not by an after-the-fact declaration of the
patentee’s intentions. See Pioneer Magnetics, Inc. v. Micro Linear Corp., 330 F.3d 1352, 1356
(Fed. Cir. 2003) (rejecting patent attorney’s contention that a narrowing amendment had
been made “through sheer inadvertence”).
145 Festo, 535 U.S. at 736–37.
146 Id. at 740.

that burden, a court will presume that the patentee gave up, irretrievably, all
of the subject matter excluded from the claim due to the amendment—like
the three-spring mousetrap encompassed, in our hypothetical, by the origi-
nal claim language.147
After remand of Festo from the Supreme Court, the Federal Circuit
explained that the presumption of surrender can be rebutted in three ways.
First, the patentee can show that “the rationale underlying the amendment
[bore] no more than a tangential relation to the equivalent in question.”148 If
the amendment in our example had depended on a fundamental distinction
between a single spring and multiple springs (perhaps it had been ques-
tioned whether any single spring could generate the force required), the pat-
entee might argue that the one-spring-versus-two-spring rationale had been,
at best, tangential to the issue of equivalence between two springs and three.
Second, the patentee can demonstrate that the alleged equivalent was
unforeseeable at the time of the amendment. 149 If a three spring mousetrap
had been inconceivable, perhaps because of some technical barrier in the art
168
Patent Law Essentials
147 If the applicant adds a narrowing limitation to one claim, and that same term was already
present in another claim, the estoppel may limit the range of equivalents available to both
claims, a phenomenon dubbed “infectious estoppel” by one litigant. See Glaxo Wellcome
Inc. v. Impax Labs. Inc., 356 F.3d 1348, 1356 (Fed. Cir. 2004) (“[S]ubject matter surrendered
via claim amendments during prosecution is also relinquished for other claims containing the
same limitation. . . . This court follows this rule to ensure consistent interpretation of the
same claim terms in the same patent.”).
148 Festo Corp. v. Shoketzu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co., 344 F.3d 1359, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2003)
(en banc) (quoting Festo, 535 U.S. at 740); see also Regents of the Univ. of California, 517 F.3d at
1378 (claim narrowed for reasons tangential to the issue at hand); Primos, Inc. v. Hunter’s
Specialties, Inc., 451 F.3d 841, 849 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (same). The Federal Circuit has warned
that the “tangential relation criterion for overcoming the Festo presumption is very narrow.”
Cross Medical, 480 F.3d at 1342.
149 “This criterion presents an objective inquiry, asking whether the alleged equivalent would
have been unforeseeable to one of ordinary skill in the art at the time of the amendment.”
Festo, 344 F.3d at 1369. Patentees who argue, for purposes of infringement, that the alleged
equivalent was a known substitute (see Section 10.6.4) may have a particularly difﬁcult time
arguing that unforeseeability rebuts the presumption of estoppel. See Ranbaxy Pharmaceuti-
cals Inc. v. Apotex, Inc. 350 F.3d 1235, 1241 (Fed. Cir. 2003). In a recent opinion still related
to the Festo dispute, the Federal Circuit held that a known technology is not “unforeseeable”
merely because a person skilled in the art would not have expected it to be an equivalent
capable of performing substantially the same function, in substantially the same way, to
achieve substantially the same result. Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co.,
493 F.3d 1368, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (“An equivalent is foreseeable if one skilled in the art
would have known that the alternative existed . . . even if the suitability of the alternative for
the particular purposes deﬁned by the amended claim scope were unknown.”). In other
words, if transistors were known of at the time of the amendment, the estoppel effect of nar-
rowing a vacuum tube claim to exclude transistors could not be undone on grounds of
unforeseeability, even if no one knew they could perform like a vacuum tube. Judge
Newman penned a strong dissent, arguing that unknown capabilities produce unforeseeable
equivalents. See id. at 1385.

that no one expected to overcome, the applicant could not have anticipated
the limiting effect of the amendment, nor might an objective observer,
equally skilled in the art, have expected such an effect. Generally, if the
alleged equivalent embodies technology unknown in the art at the time of
the claim amendment—for example, a variant with transistors unforeseeable
when vacuum tubes were the state of the art—the equivalent will be consid-
ered unforeseeable. Old technology, particularly if found in prior art in the
ﬁeld of the invention, is likely to be considered foreseeable.150 Finally, the
patentee may rebut the presumption by showing “some other reason” it
could not have been expected to express the claim amendment in such a
way as to still include what is now argued to be equivalent.151 This catch-all
category is necessarily vague, but it might include arguments based on a
“shortcoming of language.”152 Whether the patentee has met its burden of
proof will be determined by the judge as a matter of law, not by the jury.153
If Festo is not the watershed it might have been had the original Federal
Circuit decision been allowed to stand, it does at least promise a more pre-
dictable analysis for prosecution history estoppel. The focus on foreseeabil-
ity recognizes both the difﬁculties of patent applicants, who hope to reap the
rewards of their efforts for years to come, and the interests of potential
infringers, who deserve fair warning of prohibited conduct.
10.6.9 Disclosure of Unclaimed Embodiments
Even when an alleged “equivalent” is beyond the literal scope of the
claims, sometimes it is discussed in the speciﬁcation. In some ways this
seems to bolster the patentee’s argument in favor of infringement. At least it
shows that the patentee was aware of the equivalent, and it suggests the pos-
sibility of substituting that equivalent for the matter literally claimed. But the
effect of the disclosure can be quite the opposite, as illustrated in the case of
Maxwell v. J. Baker, Inc.154
Maxwell was a store employee who invented a system for tying together
pairs of shoes for display. Previous systems had relied on plastic ﬁlaments
strung through the eyelets of the shoes, but this only worked for shoes that
had eyelets. This led some retailers to punch holes in the shoes, just to pro-
vide a way of tying them together. Maxwell’s idea was to anchor plastic tabs
inside the shoes and use holes or loops in the tabs as the attachment point
Infringement
169
150 Festo, 344 F.3d at 1369. Expert testimony may be useful in determining what would have
been foreseeable at the time of the claim amendment. See id.
151 Id. at 1370.
152 Amgen Inc. v. Hoechst Marion Roussel, Inc. 457 F.3d 1293, 1313–16 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Festo,
344 F.3d at 1370. The Federal Circuit cautions that this third category of excuse is, like the
tangential relation argument, “a narrow one.” Amgen, 457 F.3d at 1313.
153 Festo, 344 F.3d at 1369.
154 86 F.3d 1098 (Fed. Cir. 1996).

for the ﬁlament. The ﬁgures in Maxwell’s patent speciﬁcation showed the
tabs anchored between the inner and outer soles of the shoes, and the claims
explicitly referred to this construction, but the speciﬁcation also observed
that the tabs could be stitched into the lining of the shoes. The court held
that shoes having tabs sewn into the lining did not infringe Maxwell’s patent
under the doctrine of equivalents, precisely because that option had been
disclosed, but not claimed, in Maxwell’s patent. Such unclaimed disclosures
are “dedicated to the public” and cannot be recaptured through the doctrine
of equivalents.155
The court’s position tends to penalize applicants for making their disclo-
sures more thorough and informative. If Maxwell had kept silent about the
unclaimed alternative, it might well have been found infringing. On the other
hand, from the perspective of a competitor trying to determine what would
infringe, it may be reasonable to conclude that things discussed in the patent,
but speciﬁcally excluded from the claims, were not meant to be covered by
the patent. In addition, the Supreme Court has stressed the inability of lan-
guage to capture the essence of an invention as the rationale for the doctrine
of equivalents.156 A patentee who described an alleged equivalent in the spec-
iﬁcation can hardly claim that he “lacked the words to describe the subject
matter in question.”157 Finally, the “dedication to the public” of unclaimed
embodiments forces applicants to subject to the rigors of PTO examination
claims as broad as the monopoly they ultimately attempt to enforce.
For a time, it was uncertain whether the principle of Maxwell would ﬁnd
broad application,158 but in 2002 the Federal Circuit’s en banc opinion in
Johnson & Johnston Assoc., Inc. v. R.E. Serv. Co.159 reafﬁrmed the rule that “when
a patent drafter discloses but declines to claim subject matter . . . this action
dedicates that unclaimed subject matter to the public.”160 In this case, the
patentee, whose claims called for an “aluminum sheet,” could not argue that
170
Patent Law Essentials
155 Id. at 1106-07; see also Unique Concepts, Inc. v. Brown, 939 F.2d 1558, 1562–63 (Fed. Cir.
1991).
156 See Festo Corp. v. Shoketsu Kinzoku Kogyo Kabushiki Co., 535 U.S. 722, 734–38 (2002).
157 Festo, 535 U.S. at 734 (applying the same reasoning where claims were narrowed to exclude
the alleged equivalent).
158 See YBM Magnex, Inc. v. Int’l Trade Comm’n, 145 F.3d 1317 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (holding that
Maxwell creates no “blanket rule” regarding disclosed but unclaimed embodiments, but offer-
ing little to clarify the limits of the Maxwell principle).
159 285 F.3d 1046 (Fed. Cir. 2002).
160 Johnson & Johnston, 285 F.3d at 105; see also PSC Computer Prods. Inc. v. Foxconn Int’l
Inc., 355 F.3d 1353, 1357–60 (Fed. Cir. 2004). Although in the landmark Supreme Court
case of Graver Tank the equivalent alternative of manganese was disclosed in the speciﬁ-
cation, the Federal Circuit distinguished that case as one in which the applicant at least
tried to obtain the broader claim, though it failed when the PTO rejected it. That reason-
ing presents some difﬁculties, but at least the Graver Tank situation is less likely an instance
of a patentee attempting to “game the system.” See Johnson & Johnston, 285 F.3d at 1060
(Dyk, J., concurring).

a steel sheet was equivalent when the patent speciﬁcally disclosed, without
claiming, the steel alternative.161 The court cited the usual concerns regard-
ing the primacy of claims and the desirability of fair notice to the public.162
Like its unsuccessful attempt in Festo,163 the “disclosure-dedication rule” can
be seen as another effort by the Federal Circuit to rein in the doctrine of
equivalents and restore some certainty to the patent system.
10.7 EQUIVALENCE IN THE CONTEXT OF 
MEANS-PLUS-FUNCTION CLAIMS
Patent law would be less confusing if equivalence were an issue arising
solely in connection with the doctrine of equivalents. However, equivalence
is also an issue affecting literal infringement if the claim is a means-plus-
function claim, drafted in accordance with Paragraph 6 of 35 U.S.C. § 112.164
Section 7.7.4 discusses means-plus-function claims. To summarize, literal
infringement where a claim element recites a “means” for performing a spec-
iﬁed function requires (1) that the accused product perform that function and
(2) that it use a structure identical or “equivalent” to the corresponding struc-
ture disclosed in the patent speciﬁcation.165
Suppose that a mousetrap claim includes “a means for snapping the trap
shut,” and the speciﬁcation discloses a steel spring to perform that function.
The ﬁrst step in addressing infringement is to see if the accused mousetrap
has any means for “snapping the trap shut.” If no component of the accused
mousetrap performs that function, the claim is not literally infringed.166 If the
Infringement
171
161 Id. at 1055.
162 Id. at 1052. In order to be “dedicated to the public,” the unclaimed alternative must be
described in the patent with sufﬁcient speciﬁcity that it can be identiﬁed by a person of ordi-
nary skill in the art as a variation disclosed but not claimed. PSC, 355 F.3d at 1360; see also
Pﬁzer, Inc. v. Teva Pharmaceuticals, USA, Inc., 429 F.3d 1364, 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (the ded-
icated subject matter must have been “identiﬁed by the patentee as an alternative to a claim
limitation”). Whether the patentee subjectively intended to disclaim is not a factor. Toro Co.
v. White Consolidated Indus., Inc., 383 F.3d 1326, 1333 (Fed. Cir. 2004).
163 See Section 10.6.8.
164 “An element in a claim for a combination may be expressed as a means or step for per-
forming a speciﬁed function without the recital of structure, material, or acts in support
thereof, and such claim shall be construed to cover the corresponding structure, material or
acts described in the speciﬁcation and equivalents thereof.”
165 Frank’s Casing Crew & Rental Tools, Inc. v. Weatherford Int’l, Inc., 389 F.3d 1370, 1378 (Fed.
Cir. 2004); Momos Corp. v. Brainlab USA, Inc., 357 F.3d 1364, 1369 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Over-
head Door Corp. v. Chamberlain Gp., Inc., 194 F.3d 1261, 1273 (Fed. Cir. 1999).
166 One might inquire, however, whether it performs an equivalent function sufﬁcient to apply
the doctrine of equivalents. See Interactive Pictures Corp. v. Inﬁnite Pictures, Inc., 274 F.3d
1371, 1382 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“[I]nfringement under the doctrine of equivalents may be
premised on the accused and the patented component having substantially the same function,
whereas structure corresponding to the disclosed limitation in a means-plus-function clause
must perform the identical function.” (emphasis in original)).

accused mousetrap does have some means for “snapping the trap shut,” we
then ask whether the structure performing that function is identical or equiv-
alent to the steel spring. If the accused mousetrap uses a rubber band, we
have to decide whether a rubber band and a steel spring are equivalent in
the context of the invention.
Paradoxically, this is one case in which literal infringement does not
involve taking the language of the claims literally. Literally, a claim
requiring a “means for snapping the trap shut” would be satisﬁed by any
means performing that function. The compromise embodied in § 112, ¶ 6
is that patentees are allowed to express a claim element as a “means”
(which otherwise might be considered indeﬁnite), but literal infringement
is restricted to equivalents of the corresponding structure shown in the
speciﬁcation.167
Equivalency for purposes of § 112, ¶ 6 should not to be confused with
equivalency for purposes of the doctrine of equivalents. The contexts are dif-
ferent, since the latter is a specialized subset of the literal infringement
inquiry.168 The basis for comparison is also different. Section 112, ¶ 6
requires comparison of the accused product with the structures disclosed in
the speciﬁcation, while the doctrine of equivalents requires comparison of the
accused product with the claims.
The tests of equivalence are generally similar. Both “invoke[] the famil-
iar concept of an insubstantial change which adds nothing of signiﬁ-
cance.”169 It is less clear whether the traditional function-way-result test of
the doctrine of equivalents can also be applied to equivalence under § 112,
¶ 6. In the Texas Instruments case, the court stated that in either instance “the
test is the same three-part test of history: does the asserted equivalent per-
form substantially the same function in substantially the same way to
accomplish substantially the same result?”170 Later, the court held that “[a]
determination of section 112 equivalence does not involve the . . . tripartite
172
Patent Law Essentials
167 See Warner-Jenkinson Co. v. Hilton Davis Chemical Co., 520 U.S. 17, 28 (1997) (equivalence
under §112, ¶ 6 is “an application of the doctrine of equivalents in a restrictive role, nar-
rowing the application of broad literal claim elements”); Al-Site Corp. v. VSI Int’l, Inc.,
174 F.3d 1308, 1320 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Johnston v. IVAC Corp., 885 F.2d 1574, 1580 (Fed. Cir.
1989) (§ 112, ¶ 6 “operates to cut back on the types of means which could literally satisfy the
claim language” (emphasis in original)).
168 See Valmont Indus., Inc. v. Reinke Mfg. Co., 983 F.2d 1039, 1043 (Fed. Cir. 1993) (“The doc-
trine of equivalents has a different purpose and application than section 112.”).
169 Valmont, 983 F.2d at 1043; see also Chiuminatta Concrete Concepts, Inc. v. Cardinal Indus.,
Inc., 145 F.3d 1303, 1310 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (both forms of equivalency “protect the substance
of a patentee’s right to exclude by preventing mere colorable differences or slight improve-
ments from escaping infringement,” and they do so “by applying similar analyses of insub-
stantiality of the differences”).
170 Texas Instruments, Inc. v. United States Int’l Trade Comm’n, 805 F.2d 1558, 1571 (Fed. Cir.
1986).

test of the doctrine of equivalents.”171 Perhaps the most that can really be
said is that equivalence under § 112, ¶ 6, like the equivalence discussed in
Graver Tank, is “not the prisoner of a formula,” but depends on the circum-
stances of each case.172
In Chiuminatta Concrete Concepts, Inc. v. Cardinal Indus., Inc.,173 the Federal
Circuit distinguished the rationales for the doctrine of equivalents and equiv-
alency under § 112, ¶ 6. The reason for the doctrine of equivalents, the court
said, is that unforeseen technological advances may allow minor variations
in what the applicant has literally described.174 It would not be fair to an
applicant whose claims required a “vacuum tube” to allow the substitution
of its modern equivalent, the solid-state transistor.175 In cases of newly devel-
oped technology, the court seemed willing to permit a broader range of
equivalents than would be permitted under § 112, ¶ 6.176 If, on the other
hand, the alleged equivalent is “technology that predates the invention
itself” rather than a newly developed variation, a ﬁnding of non-equivalence
under § 112, ¶ 6 should preclude a ﬁnding of equivalence under the doctrine
of equivalents.177
The Chiuminatta opinion is not a model of clarity, and it seems to overstate
the differences in rationale between the doctrine of equivalents and § 112, ¶ 6.
Arguably, each is a remedy for the inherent inability of language to capture the
essence of an invention, whether that inability is due to evolving technologies
Infringement
173
171 Valmont, 983 F.2d at 1043. The function-way-result test may be inappropriate to the literal
infringement analysis under § 112, ¶ 6 because the function must be identical, not merely “sub-
stantially the same.” See IMS Tech., Inc. v. Haas Automation, Inc., 206 F.3d 1422, 1435 (Fed.
Cir. 2000) (“[A] reduced version of the well-known tripartite test for the doctrine of equivalents
has been applied in the § 112, ¶ 6 context to determine if the differences are insubstantial, i.e.,
after determining that the accused device performs the identical function, as required by
statute, whether it performs the function in substantially the same way to achieve substantially
the same result.”).
172 See IMS Tech., 206 F.3d at 1436 (“the context of the invention should be considered when
performing a § 112, ¶ 6 equivalence analysis just as it is in a doctrine of equivalents deter-
mination”); Intel Corp. v. U.S. Int’l Trade Comm’n, 946 F.2d 821, 842–43 (Fed. Cir. 1991)
(“[A]ids for determining a structural equivalent to the structure disclosed in the patent
speciﬁcation are the same as those used in interpreting any other type of claim language,
namely, the speciﬁcation, the prosecution history, other claims in the patent, and expert
testimony.”).
173 145 F.3d 1303 (Fed. Cir. 1998).
174 See Section 10.6.5.
175 See Chiuminatta, 145 F.3d at 1310.
176 See id. at 1310 (“Even if [a later-developed] element is found not to be a § 112, ¶ 6, equiva-
lent because it is not equivalent to the structure disclosed in the patent, this analysis should
not foreclose it from being an equivalent under the doctrine of equivalents.”).
177 Id. at 1311; see also Frank’s Casing, 389 F.3d at 1379 (the difference between § 112, ¶ 6 and the
doctrine of equivalents is “a question of timing”; after-arising technology should be analyzed
under the doctrine of equivalents, but existing technology under § 112, ¶ 6 (into which the
doctrine of equivalents analysis “collapses”)).

or to lack of foresight and suitable vocabulary.178 Later interpretations of Chiu-
minatta suggest that an important difference is between equivalence of structure,
where the issues of equivalence may merge, and equivalence of function, where
only the doctrine of equivalents is relevant.179 This line of cases, however, has
produced one important distinction, which may explain how the results could
differ when the tests of equivalence seem to be identical. Under the doctrine of
equivalents, equivalence is judged as of the date of the alleged infringement.180
Equivalence under § 112, ¶ 6 is judged as of the date the patent issued, since
the literal meaning of a claim should be ﬁxed at that time.181 Accordingly, an
alternative that a person skilled in the art might not have considered equivalent
when the patent issued—perhaps because he had never heard of it—might be
considered equivalent at a later date.
10.8 THE REVERSE DOCTRINE OF EQUIVALENTS
The doctrine of equivalents has a judicially devised counterpart known as
the “reverse doctrine of equivalents.” The source of the “reverse doctrine” is
the following language in Graver Tank:182
The wholesome realism of [the doctrine of equivalents] is not always
applied in favor of a patentee but is sometimes used against him. Thus,
where a device is so far changed in principle from a patented article
that it performs the same or a similar function in a substantially differ-
ent way, but nevertheless falls within the literal words of the claim, the
doctrine of equivalents may be used to restrict the claim and defeat the
patentee’s action for infringement.
Thus, a product literally described by a claim can be held non-infringing if
it is “so far changed in principle” that it functions in a “substantially differ-
ent way” compared with what the patentee actually invented.
174
Patent Law Essentials
178 See Kraft Foods, Inc. v. International Trading Co., 203 F.3d 1362, 1372–73 (Fed. Cir. 2000)
(except in the case of means-plus-function claims, where equivalent structures known at the
time of the patent already literally infringe, infringement under the doctrine of equivalents is
not limited to later-developed technologies).
179 See Interactive Pictures, 274 F.3d at 1381–82; WMS Gaming, Inc. v. International Game Tech-
nology, 184 F.3d 1339, 1353 (Fed. Cir. 1999). The later cases, however, still preserve the pos-
sibility of newly developed structure that is equivalent only under the doctrine of
equivalents. Interactive Pictures, 274 F.3d at 1381; Al-Site, 174 F.3d at 1320 n.2 (because of the
problem of unforeseeable technological change, “the doctrine of equivalents appropriately
allows marginally broader coverage than § 112, ¶ 6”).
180 Warner-Jenkinson, 520 U.S. at 37.
181 Al-Site, 174 F.3d at 1320.
182 Graver Tank & Mfg. Co. v. Linde Air Prods. Co., 339 U.S. 605, 608–09 (1950); see also Scripps
Clinic & Research Found. v. Genentech, Inc., 927 F.2d 1565, 1581 (“the purpose of the ‘reverse’
doctrine is to prevent unwarranted extension of the claims beyond a fair scope of the patentee’s
invention”); SRI Int’l v. Matsushita Elec. Corp., 775 F.2d 1107, 1123 (Fed. Cir. 1985) (en banc).

The language in Graver Tank suggests that the doctrine of equivalents is a
two-way street, but in practice the “reverse doctrine” has proven to be far less
potent than its counterpart. Cases won on the reverse doctrine of equivalents
are exceedingly rare.183 In 2002 the Federal Circuit observed that it had
never, in its 20-year history, afﬁrmed a ﬁnding of non-infringement based on
the reverse doctrine.184 Before the legislative adoption of means-plus-function
claims and their explicit limitations, the judicially created reverse doctrine of
equivalents may have served to restrict the scope of overly broad claims.
Today, the court found, the strictures of § 112—including the deﬁniteness,
description, and enablement requirements—left the reverse doctrine an
“anachronistic exception . . . long mentioned but rarely applied.”185 Absent a
problem of enablement or description, it would be difﬁcult to persuade a
court that an accused product literally described by a patent claim was still so
“changed in principle” as to avoid infringement.
10.9 EXPERIMENTAL USE EXCEPTION TO INFRINGEMENT
A rarely invoked defense to a charge of infringement is that the chal-
lenged activity was done for purposes of experimentation rather than proﬁt.
This defense ﬁnds some support in a number of older cases in which a
patented device was constructed not to sell it, but to test its advantages. For
example, in Akro Agate Co. v. Master Marble Co.,186 the court held that the use
of a patented machine to make glass marbles was not an infringement
because the marbles had been made only as an experiment, the results were
unsatisfactory, and the marbles themselves were not sold. In Kaz Mfg. Co. v.
Chesebrough-Ponds, Inc.,187 the defendant constructed a patented vaporizer
solely for the purpose of a television commercial in which it compared the
design unfavorably with its own (using the slogan “steam is dangerous”). The
court did not view this as an infringement either.
The Federal Circuit has viewed the experimental use exception as an
extremely narrow one, applicable only when the experiments were conducted
“solely for amusement, to satisfy idle curiosity, or for strictly philosophical
inquiry.”188 In other words, a kitchen experimenter amusing himself on a rainy
afternoon might practice a patent without infringing, but experiments conducted
Infringement
175
183 See, e.g., Precision Metal Fabricators Inc. v. Jetstream Sys. Co., 6 U.S.P.Q.2d 1704 (N.D. Cal.
1988); Lesona Corp. v. United States, 530 F.2d 896, 905–06 (Ct. Cl. 1976).
184 Tate Access Floors, Inc. v. Interface Architectural Resources, Inc., 279 F.3d 1357, 1368 (Fed.
Cir. 2002).
185 Tate Access Floors, 279 F.3d at 1368.
186 318 F. Supp. 305, 315, 333 (N.D. W. Va. 1937).
187 317 F.2d 679 (2d Cir. 1963).
188 Madey v. Duke Univ., 307 F.3d 1351, 1362 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Embrex, Inc. v. Service Eng’g
Corp., 216 F.3d 1343, 1349 (Fed. Cir. 2000).

for commercial purposes are likely to violate a patent, if they involve making or
using the claimed invention.189 Any use “in keeping with the legitimate business
of the alleged infringer” fails to qualify for the limited exception,190 including
research undertaken by a university solely for purposes of education and
discovery.191
In 35 U.S.C. § 271(e), Congress established a narrow experimental use
exception to cover the testing of patented pharmaceuticals.192 When a patent
on a particular drug expires, rival manufacturers are, of course, permitted to
market their own versions of the drug. But before this can happen, the new
drug must undergo extensive government-required tests of safety and effec-
tiveness. If manufacturing and using the drug for purposes of such tests were
held to be an infringement, the tests could not begin until after the patent had
expired. Consequently, there would be a considerable delay between the
expiration of the patent and the opportunity to market a competitive drug.
The patent owner would have, in effect, a patent of longer duration than the
patent laws intend. Section 271(e) prevents this by allowing these tests to
occur prior to the expiration of the patent, without fear of liability.
176
Patent Law Essentials
189 See Douglas v. United States, 181 U.S.P.Q. 170, 176–77 (Ct. Cl. 1974). In the former instance,
the infringement is seemingly excused on the legal principle of “de minimis non curat lex,”
or “the law does not concern itself with triﬂes.” But see Embrex, 216 F.3d at 1352–53 (Rader, J.,
concurring) (arguing that patent law does not permit de minimis infringement; “the statute
leaves no leeway to excuse infringement because the infringer only infringed a little”).
190 Madey, 307 F.3 at 1362.
191 Id. at 1362 (“[M]ajor research universities . . . often sanction and fund research projects with
arguably no commercial application whatsoever. However, these projects unmistakably fur-
ther the institution’s legitimate business objectives, including educating and enlightening stu-
dents and faculty participating in these projects. These projects also serve . . . to increase the
status of the institution and lure lucrative research grants, students and faculty.”).
192 See Merck KGaA v. Integra Life Sciences I, Ltd., 545 U.S. 193, 202 (2005) (the statute “pro-
vides a wide berth for the use of patented drugs in activities related to the federal regulatory
process”). Although the statute is not clear on this point, it has been held to cover both drugs
and medical devices that must undergo government-required tests. Eli Lilly & Co. v.
Medtronic, Inc., 496 U.S. 661 (1990).

CHAPTER 11
Patent Litigation
A patent owner whose rights have been infringed can ﬁle a lawsuit in a
Federal District Court.1 If the suit is successful, the court can compel the
infringer to stop the infringing activity and pay the patent owner for infringe-
ment that has already occurred. Litigation, or the threat of litigation, is what
gives a patent its “teeth.”
The suit may be brought by the original recipient of the patent, or its suc-
cessor if rights to the patent have been transferred by assignment.2 Either
may be referred to as the “patentee.” If the owner of the patent transfers “all
substantial rights,” the new owner may sue in its name alone.3 A licensee
who possesses an exclusive license,4 but not “all substantial rights,” may sue
for infringement but must join the patent owner in the suit, to guard against
the possibility of multiple judgments against the same infringer.5 A licensee
who does not have an exclusive license lacks the kind of injury necessary for
“standing” to sue.6 A non-exclusive licensee cannot expect to be the only
party making, using, or selling the patented invention. On the other hand,
1 The patent owner cannot sue in a state court because the federal courts have “exclusive
jurisdiction.” See 28 U.S.C. § 1338(a). If the defendant imports infringing goods, the patent
owner may initiate proceedings in the International Trade Commission in lieu of, or in addi-
tion to, a suit in a district court. See Section 11.9. Suits against the United States government
must be brought in the Court of Claims. See 28 U.S.C. § 1498.
2 See 35 U.S.C. §§ 281 (patentee’s right to sue for infringement), 100(d) (“patentee” includes
successors in interest); Morrow v. Microsoft Corp., 499 F.3d 1332, 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2007).
3 Morrow, 499 F.3d at 1340.
4 See Section 6.3.
5 Morrow, 499 F.3d at 1340.
6 Id.

the licensee may be disadvantaged in competition if it is paying for the right
to practice the patented invention and the infringer is not, so the licensee
may wish to persuade the patent owner to bring suit—something the owner
should be willing to consider in order to preserve the value of a license.
A typical lawsuit involves three issues:
• Is the patent valid and enforceable?
• Are the claims infringed?
• If the claims are infringed, what relief should be awarded?
The patentee can prevail only if the patent is valid and infringed. On occasion,
the defendant7 will concede that the patent is valid and will challenge only the
charge of infringement, or it will concede infringement and argue invalidity,
but it is more common for the defendant to make war on both fronts. Patent lit-
igation may also involve related claims (e.g., breach of contract, unfair compe-
tition, or antitrust claims) if they arise from the same factual situation.
Infringement litigation is often a complicated, time-consuming, and costly
process. Patent cases typically involve both subtle issues of law and complex
questions of technology. In order to try such a case, both parties have to
acquire a thorough understanding of, at a minimum, the patent and its ﬁle
history, the accused products, and any prior art that might be used to chal-
lenge the validity of the patent. As a result, just the “discovery” phase of the
litigation, in which both parties gather the evidence needed to try the case,
often takes more than a year. It is not unusual for an infringement suit to last
several years from the day it is ﬁled until the ﬁnal disposition of the case, and
worse examples can be found.8
Patent cases are difﬁcult for courts and juries, both because the law is unfa-
miliar and because an understanding of complex technology may be critical.
Imagine how difﬁcult it would be for an average juror to determine whether
one complex procedure in genetic engineering is “equivalent” to another. Sim-
ply mastering the vocabulary can be a daunting task. These difﬁculties con-
tribute to a certain level of unpredictability in the outcome of patent litigation.
11.1 JURISDICTION AND VENUE
The geographical location where a suit for patent infringement must be ﬁled
(for example, in the Northern District of California or in the Eastern District of
New York) depends on the rules of “in personam jurisdiction” and “venue.” A
178
Patent Law Essentials
7 It is convenient to use the term “defendant” interchangeably with “accused infringer,” but in
a declaratory judgment action (see Section 11.2) the accused infringer may technically be the
plaintiff.
8 For example, in March 1999 the Supreme Court denied the last appeal in United States v.
Hughes Aircraft Co., a case ﬁled in 1973. See 525 U.S. 1177 (1999).

federal court has in personam jurisdiction (or jurisdiction over the person) only
if the individual or corporate defendant has had certain “minimum contacts”
with the district in which that court resides.9 If an accused infringer has had no
contact whatsoever with, for example, the state of Florida, then suit cannot be
ﬁled there. The minimum contacts doctrine has constitutional origins in the due
process clause. The rules are subtle and depend in part on the jurisdictional
rules of the state where the court is located.10 If the accused infringer has an
ofﬁce in the district, or regularly transacts business in the district, or conducts
infringing activity in the district, the minimum contacts test will likely be
satisﬁed.11 It may even be sufﬁcient that the infringer intended the accused
products to enter the district via the “stream of commerce.”12
If a court has jurisdiction over the defendant, the next question is that of
venue. The rules of venue create further restrictions on where suit can be
ﬁled. In a patent case, venue is appropriate in the following districts:
• Where the defendant “resides,” or
• Where the defendant has committed acts of infringement and has a regular and
established place of business.13
In 1988 the federal venue statutes were altered so that corporate defen-
dants are now held to “reside” in any district where the corporation is subject
Patent Litigation
179
9 See International Shoe Co. v. State of Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316 (1945) (defendant must
have “certain minimum contacts with [the forum] such that the maintenance of the suit does
not offend ‘traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice’”). The defendant’s contacts
with the forum must be such that “he should reasonably anticipate being haled into court
there.” See World-Wide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 297 (1980); LSI Indus.
Inc. v. Hubbell Lighting, Inc., 232 F.3d 1369, 1375 (Fed. Cir. 2000). The emphasis is on delib-
erate or “purposeful” contacts rather than those that may occur by accident. See Beverly Hills
Fan Co. v. Royal Sovereign Corp., 21 F.3d 1558, 1565 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
10 See Trintec Indus., Inc. v. Pedre Promotional Prods., Inc., 395 F.3d 1275, 1279–80 (Fed. Cir.
2005) (discussing the state “long-arm statute”).
11 If the accused infringer’s contacts with the forum are “continuous and systematic,” the court
may have “general jurisdiction” concerning any matter involving the accused infringer. See
id. at 1279; Deprenyl Animal Health, Inc. v. University of Toronto Innovations Found.,
297 F.3d 1343, 1350 (Fed. Cir. 2002). If the contacts are more sporadic but relate speciﬁcally
to the subject matter of the suit, the court may exercise “speciﬁc jurisdiction,” so long as that
is consistent with “fair play and substantial justice.” See Trintec, 395 F.3d at 1279; Deprenyl,
297 F.3d at 1350–51. A thorny issue is whether a corporate internet website accessible in the
region is sufﬁcient to establish jurisdiction. The answer may depend on whether the site is a
passive one, available only for reading, or an interactive one that permits business transac-
tions. See Trintec, 395 F.3d at 1281.
12 See Viam Corp. v. Iowa Export-Import Trading Co., 84 F.3d 424, 427–28 (Fed. Cir. 1996);
Beverly Hills Fan, 21 F.3d at 1565 (“The allegations are that defendants purposefully shipped
the accused fan into Virginia through an established distribution channel. The cause of action
for patent infringement is alleged to arise out of those activities. No more is usually required
to establish speciﬁc jurisdiction.”).
13 28 U.S.C. § 1400(b).

to in personam jurisdiction—in other words, wherever it has established
“minimum contacts.”14 Most patent cases are ﬁled against corporations rather
than against individuals or partnerships, so the minimum contacts standard is
generally the test of whether a suit can or cannot be ﬁled in a particular
judicial district.
Because a corporate defendant typically has “minimum contacts” with
several states—possibly all 50—patent owners may have a number of choices
in deciding where to ﬁle suit. The choice is likely to be governed by factors
such as geographical convenience, the experience of the court in dealing
with patent litigation, whether the court’s docket permits a speedy trial, and
any perceived “home ﬁeld” advantages. Within the limits set by the rules of
jurisdiction and venue, the location of the lawsuit is generally within the con-
trol of the plaintiff. If, however, the defendant can show that another district
would be more suitable (for the “convenience of parties and witnesses” and
“in the interest of justice”15), the court in which the suit was ﬁled has the
power to transfer the case to another district, if it is a district in which the suit
could have been ﬁled in the ﬁrst instance.
11.2 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT
Patent cases generally arise when a patent owner ﬁles suit against a party
it accuses of infringement. However, it is also possible for the accused
infringer to launch a preemptive strike by ﬁling suit against a patentee. A suit
of this kind is called an action for “declaratory judgment” because it asks the
court to declare that the party ﬁling suit is not liable to the patent owner,
either because the patent is invalid or is not infringed, or for some other
reason.16 The potential infringer in such a case is nominally the plaintiff, and
the patent owner is the defendant.17
If it were not for declaratory judgment actions, parties accused of infringe-
ment would have to wait until the patent owner chose to litigate before the
dispute could be resolved. In the meantime, the accused infringer would
have to give in to the patent owner’s demands, or proceed as before with the
risk that investments would be lost, and accumulated damages assessed,
when the patent owner ﬁnally did sue.18 A suit for declaratory judgment
180
Patent Law Essentials
14 See 28 U.S.C. § 1391(c); Trintec, 395 F.3d at 1280 (“Venue in a patent action against a
corporate defendant exists wherever there is personal jurisdiction.”); VE Holding Corp. v.
Johnson Gas Appliance Co., 917 F.2d 1574 (Fed. Cir. 1990).
15 28 U.S.C § 1404(a).
16 See 22 U.S.C. § 2201 (Declaratory Judgment Act).
17 Even if the patent owner initiates the lawsuit, the accused infringer may choose to ﬁle a
counterclaim for declaratory judgment.
18 See Cardinal Chemical Co. v. Morton Int’l, Inc., 508 U.S. 83, 95 (1993) (discussing the
Declaratory Judgment Act as a cure for the “scarecrow patent”).

allows the potential infringer to bring matters to a head. It also gives the
accused infringer more control over the forum in which the case will be
heard.
Federal courts generally follow a “ﬁrst to ﬁle” rule in deciding where a
case will be tried.19 Suppose that a patent owner in California accused a
company in Illinois of infringement. For the sake of convenience, and
possibly in the hope of sympathy from a local jury, the patent owner
would likely prefer that any litigation take place in California, while the
accused infringer, for the same reasons, would prefer Illinois. If the
accused infringer sues for declaratory judgment in Illinois before the patent
owner sues in California, the ﬁrst-to-ﬁle rule generally means that the case
will be heard in Illinois. The ﬁrst-to-ﬁle rule is not absolute, however. An
exception can be made if the interests of justice or expediency so
require.20
A federal court can try a case only if there is a genuine dispute—a “case
or controversy,” in constitutional terms.21 A potential infringer cannot ﬁle
an action for declaratory judgment simply because there is a hypothetical
possibility that a patent owner will allege infringement;22 the threat must
be deﬁnite and concrete. The Federal Circuit long applied strict standards
of immediacy, including a reasonable apprehension of imminent litigation
by the patentee.23 In 2007 the Supreme Court criticized that test,24 saying
that the dispute must be “real and substantial,” and one that admits of
concrete relief rather than an advisory opinion.25 The patent owner’s pat-
tern of suing similar businesses, together with public statements that it will
pursue an aggressive litigation strategy, may be sufﬁcient grounds for a
potential defendant to ﬁle for declaratory judgment.26 Or a licensee may
ﬁle suit to have a patent declared invalid, without ﬁrst breaching the
license agreement to create the circumstances under which it could be
sued for infringement.27
Patent Litigation
181
19 See Electronics for Imaging, Inc. v. Coyle, 394 F.3d 1341, 1347 (Fed. Cir. 2005); Genentech,
Inc. v. Eli Lilly & Co., 998 F.2d 931, 937 (Fed. Cir. 1993).
20 See Electronics for Imaging, 394 F.3d at 1347–48; Serco Services Co. v. Kelley Co., 51 F.3d 1037,
1039 (Fed. Cir. 1995); Genentech, 998 F.2d at 937.
21 See Micron Tech., Inc. v. Mosaid Techs., Inc., 518 F.3d 897, 901 (Fed. Cir. 2008); Sandt Tech,,
Ltd. v. Resco Metal & Plastics Corp., 264 F.3d 1344, 1356 n.4 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
22 See Vanguard Research, Inc. v. Peat, Inc., 304 F.3d 1249, 1254–55 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (“To
invoke the court’s declaratory judgment jurisdiction, a plaintiff must show ‘more than the
nervous state of mind of a possible infringer,’ but does not have to show that the patentee is
‘poised on the courthouse steps.’”).
23 See Phillips Plastics Corp. v. Kato Hatsujou K.K., 57 F.3d 1051, 1052–54 (Fed. Cir. 1995)
(ongoing license negotiations did not create a reasonable apprehension of litigation).
24 MedImmune, Inc. v. Genentech, Inc., 127 S. Ct. 764, 774 n.11 (2007).
25 Id. at 771; see also Micron, 518 F.3d at 901.
26 See Micron, 518 F.3d at 901.
27 MedImmune, 127 S. Ct. at 777.

11.3 BURDEN OF PROOF
The patent owner has the burden of proving infringement by a “prepon-
derance of the evidence.”28 In other words, based on the evidence presented,
it must be more likely than not that the patent is infringed. If the evidence
on each side is equally persuasive, the claim must fail.
If the accused infringer raises a defense of invalidity or unenforceability,
the defendant bears the burden of proof with respect to that defense.29
Moreover, the burden is one of “clear and convincing” evidence, a higher
standard of proof than a mere preponderance of the evidence.30 The
evidence not only must favor the accused infringer’s version of the facts; it
must be sufﬁcient to produce an “abiding conviction” that the facts are
“highly probable.”31 The reason for this higher standard of proof is the
“presumption of validity,” discussed in Section 8.2.
11.4 THE ROLE OF JUDGE AND JURY
Litigants in a patent case are entitled to trial by jury.32 This right can be
waived, by consent of both parties, in favor of a bench trial, in which the
judge decides all issues.33 Even if the trial does involve a jury, the judge will
still decide certain questions. Generally speaking, a judge decides “ques-
tions of law,” whereas the jury decides “questions of fact.”34 In reality, most
questions have a factual aspect and a legal aspect. For example, to decide if
an accused product is “equivalent” to a claimed invention, one has to
address questions of fact (how does the accused product differ from the
182
Patent Law Essentials
28 Warner-Lambert Co. v. Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc., 418 F.3d 1326, 1342 (Fed. Cir.
2005); Centricut, LLC v. ESAB Gp., Inc., 390 F.3d 1361, 1367 (Fed. Cir. 2004); Advanced
Cardiovascular Sys., Inc. v. Scimed Life Sys., Inc., 261 F.3d 1329, 1336 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
29 35 U.S.C. § 282; PowerOasis, Inc. v. T-Mobile USA, Inc., 522 F.3d 1299, 1303 (Fed. Cir.
2008); Adenta GmbH v. OrthoArm, Inc., 501 F.3d 1364, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Pﬁzer, Inc. v.
Apotex, Inc., 480 F.3d 1348, 1359 (Fed. Cir. 2007).
30 Zenith Electronics Corp. v. PDI Communications Sys., Inc., 522 F.3d 1348, 1363 (Fed. Cir.
2008); Sitrick v. Dreamworks, LLC, 516 F.3d 993, 999 (Fed. Cir. 2008); Pﬁzer, 480 F.3d at
1359.
31 Pﬁzer, 480 F.3d at 1359 n.5; Am-Pro Protective Agency, Inc. v. United States, 281 F.3d 1234,
1239–40 (Fed. Cir. 2002) (also referring to the standard as one of “well-nigh irrefragable”
proof).
32 See Markman v. Westview Instruments, Inc., 517 U.S. 370, 377 (1996) (“there is no dispute
that infringement cases today must be tried to a jury, as their predecessors were more than
two centuries ago”).
33 See Rule 38 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
34 See Jurgens v. McKasy, 927 F.2d 1552, 1557 (Fed. Cir. 1991) (“In a jury trial, there are two
decisionmakers, the judge and the jury. In general, the judge decides issues of law and issues
committed to his discretion, and the jury decides issues of fact that are material to the case
and in genuine dispute.”).

claimed invention?) and questions of law (how much can the accused
product differ from the claimed invention before the law no longer consid-
ers them “equivalent”?).
Because there is no practical way to separate every nuance of fact and
law, certain issues have, somewhat arbitrarily, been deemed questions of law
for the judge, and others questions of fact for the jury.35 Anticipation is a
question of fact,36 but obviousness is a question of law.37 Compliance with the
enablement and deﬁniteness requirements are questions of law.38 Compli-
ance with the written description and utility requirements are questions of
fact.39 Claim interpretation is a question of law,40 while infringement is a
question of fact.41 Some questions of law, such as obviousness, depend in part
on underlying issues of fact that can be submitted to the jury.42
The judge also rules on “equitable” claims and defenses. In the eighteenth
century, there were two varieties of court—courts of law and courts of
equity—and they differed in the kinds of claims that could be heard and the
remedies that could be granted. Only courts of law provided a right to a jury
trial. In the United States, courts of law and equity were merged long ago,
so the distinction would be little more than a historical curiosity if not for the
language of the Seventh Amendment of the Constitution. In lieu of setting
forth the right to a jury trial in explicit terms, the Seventh Amendment pro-
vides that “the right of trial by jury shall be preserved” as it was under English
common law. To this day courts are required to examine claims from a his-
torical perspective and try to determine whether, applying eighteenth-
century standards, the claim is “legal” or “equitable.” If the latter, there is no
right to a jury.43
For purposes of patent litigation, it is enough to know that a claim seeking
money damages is a legal claim with a right to a jury trial, but a claim to an
Patent Litigation
183
35 Frequent disagreements among the Federal Circuit judges as to whether something is a ques-
tion of law or a question of fact illustrates how arbitrary the distinctions can be. See, e.g.,
Markman v. Westview Instruments, Inc., 52 F.3d 967 (Fed. Cir. 1995) (en banc panel split on
whether claim interpretation is an issue of law decided by the judge alone); Lough v.
Brunswick Corp., 103 F.3d 1517 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (panel split on whether “experimental use”
in the context of § 102(b) is a question of fact or law).
36 Finisar Corp. v. DirecTV Group, Inc., 523 F.3d 1323, 1334 (Fed. Cir. 2008).
37 Agrizap, Inc. v. Woodstream Corp., 520 F.3d 1337, 1343 (Fed. Cir. 2008).
38 Ormco Corp. v. Align Tech., Inc., 498 F.3d 1307, 1318 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (enablement ); IPXL
Holdings, L.L.C. v. Amazon.com, Inc., 430 F.3d 1377, 1380 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (deﬁniteness).
39 Falkner v. Inglis, 448 F.3d 1357, 1363 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (written description); In re Swartz, 232
F.3d 862, 863 (Fed. Cir. 2000) (utility).
40 Markman, 517 U.S. at 372.
41 Finisar, 523 F.3d at 1332.
42 See Mycogen Plant Science, Inc. v. Monsanto Co., 243 F.3d 1316, 1331 (Fed. Cir. 2001)
(questions of law with underlying issues of fact can be submitted to the jury, accompanied by
appropriate instructions on the law).
43 See Tegal Corp. v. Tokyo Electron America, Inc., 257 F.3d 1331, 1339 (Fed. Cir. 2001).

injunction is an equitable claim. In the rare instance that a patentee chooses to
forgo damages and sue only for an injunction, neither party has a right to a jury
trial.44 Certain defenses are also equitable in nature and are reserved for the
judge to decide. These include inequitable conduct45 (discussed in Section 9.1),
laches, and estoppel46 (discussed in Sections 11.8.3.3 and 11.8.3.4). The Federal
Circuit has held that infringement under the doctrine of equivalents (discussed
in Section 10.6), often referred to as the “equitable doctrine of equivalents,” is in
fact a matter for decision by a jury.47
In spite of the latter development, there may be a trend toward assigning
more decision-making responsibility to judges and less to juries. At least
certain disapproving Federal Circuit judges perceive such a trend.48 This
shift, if there is one, may reﬂect a feeling that juries are overmatched by the
complex and difﬁcult issues often presented in patent cases.
11.5 BIFURCATION
Patent cases are often tried in phases rather than all at once. A trial
divided into two phases is “bifurcated,” but division into three or more
phases is also possible. The purpose of holding trial in stages is to focus the
issues, avoid confusion, and save unnecessary effort.
One common practice is to hold separate trials on liability and damages.
If the court does not ﬁnd the accused infringer liable, there is no need to pro-
ceed with the damages phase. Another option is to hold a preliminary bench
trial on those issues that do not require fact ﬁnding by the jury. For example,
if a patent has been challenged on grounds of inequitable conduct (an
“equitable” defense reserved to the judge), that part of the case can be tried
before the jury has been selected.
When the Supreme Court held in Markman v. Westview Instruments 49 that
claim interpretation is a matter within the province of the judge rather than
the jury, questions arose as to how and when judges should decide questions
of claim interpretation, and how judges should communicate their ﬁndings
to the jury. Many courts have responded by scheduling a “Markman hearing”
before the jury trial. During the hearing, the court may receive evidence and
argument from all parties regarding their proposed claim interpretations.
184
Patent Law Essentials
44 See id. at 1341.
45 Kingsdown Medical Consultants, Ltd. v. Hollister, Inc., 863 F.2d 867, 876 (Fed. Cir. 1988)
(“the ultimate question of whether inequitable conduct occurred is equitable in nature”).
46 A.C. Aukerman Co. v. R.L. Chaides Construction Co., 960 F.2d 1020, 1028 (Fed. Cir. 1992).
47 Miken Composites, L.L.C. v. Wilson Sporting Goods Co., 515 F.3d 1331, 1336 (Fed. Cir.
2008).
48 See Judge Newman’s dissent in Lough v. Brunswick Corp., 103 F.3d 1517, 1519 (Fed. Cir. 1997)
(“In converting the factual question of experimental purpose into a matter of law, our court
has cut another notch in the removal of patent issues from the trier of fact.”).
49 517 U.S. 370, 372 (1996).

The judge’s ﬁndings are then incorporated into the jury instructions so that
the jury can determine whether or not the claims have been infringed.50
11.6 PRELIMINARY INJUNCTIONS
Patent litigation often begins with a motion for a preliminary injunction.51
A preliminary injunction is a court order preventing the accused infringer
from making, using, selling, offering to sell, or importing the accused prod-
uct until the case has been decided. In effect, it forces the accused infringer
to put its activities on hold. On occasion, the Federal Circuit has character-
ized a preliminary injunction as “a drastic and extraordinary remedy that is
not to be routinely granted.”52
The judge decides whether to grant the motion for a preliminary injunc-
tion by weighing the following factors:53
• The likelihood that the patent owner will ultimately prevail in the litigation—in
other words, the likelihood that the patent will be held valid, enforceable, and
infringed. This requires the judge to make a preliminary assessment of the evi-
dence, including any defenses that may be raised by the accused infringer.
• Whether the patent owner would suffer “irreparable harm” if the injunction were
denied. Irreparable harm is harm that cannot be cured by the eventual payment
of money damages. If the only harm to the patentee is a temporary loss of royalty
income pending trial, this loss is one that probably can be made up, with interest,
when damages are received. However, the harm might be irreparable if the
accused infringer would not have the funds to pay damages after trial, or if sales of
infringing articles would create some form of intangible harm. For example, if the
patent owner itself sold an article within the scope of the patent, the infringer’s
sales of an inferior product pending trial might injure the patent owner’s reputa-
tion and market share in ways that would be difﬁcult to translate into a payment
of money. Note that if the patent owner fails to seek a preliminary injunction at the
ﬁrst opportunity, it may be difﬁcult to convince the court that there is a threat of
immediate harm.54
Patent Litigation
185
50 See Sulzer Textile A.G. v. Picanol, N.V., 358 F.3d 1356, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2004) (“[I]t is the duty
of trial courts . . . to inform jurors both of the court’s claim construction rulings on all dis-
puted claim terms and of the jury’s obligation to adopt and apply the court’s determined
meanings of disputed claim terms to the jury’s deliberation of the facts.”).
51 See 35 U.S.C. § 283.
52 National Steel Car, Ltd. v. Canadian Paciﬁc Railway, Ltd., 357 F.3d 1319, 1324 (Fed. Cir.
2004).
53 See Erico Int’l Corp. v. Vutec Corp., 516 F.3d 1350, 1353–54 (Fed. Cir. 2008); Abbott Labs.
v. Andrx Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 473 F.3d 1196, 1200–01 (Fed. Cir. 2007); PHG Technologies,
LLC v. St. John Cos., Inc., 469 F.3d 1361, 1365 (Fed. Cir. 2006).
54 See, e.g., High Tech Medical Instrumentation, Inc. v. New Image Indus., Inc., 49 F.3d 1551,
1557 (Fed. Cir. 1995) (“Absent a good explanation, not offered or found here, 17 months is a
substantial period of delay that militates against the issuance of a preliminary injunction by
demonstrating that there is no apparent urgency to the request for injunctive relief.”).

• The balance of hardships if the motion is granted or denied. In other words, would
the harm to the patent owner if the injunction were denied outweigh the harm
to the accused infringer if the injunction were granted? The harm to the accused
infringer is often more tangible and immediate. If the accused product accounts for
a substantial portion of the accused infringer’s business, the loss of that business
pending trial could result in diminished proﬁts, employee layoffs, or even bank-
ruptcy. A court is unlikely to grant an injunction with such severe consequences
unless it is very clear that the patent owner will prevail on the merits.
• The public interest. A court may hesitate to grant an injunction that would deny
the public an important product—for example, a drug or medical device—even
temporarily.55 On the other hand, the enforcement of valid patents ultimately ben-
eﬁts the public by encouraging innovation.
A court must weigh each of these factors and determine whether a prelimi-
nary injunction is appropriate. The stronger the patent owner’s case, the
lesser the showing of irreparable harm necessary to justify an injunction.56
11.7 SUMMARY JUDGMENT
Sometimes the merits of a case are so clear that it is unnecessary to con-
duct a full-blown jury trial. The mechanism for cutting short such a case is
known as “summary judgment.” The judge grants summary judgment when
there is no “genuine issue of material fact” for decision by a jury.57 In other
words, the evidence is so one-sided that the outcome of the case cannot rea-
sonably be disputed, and a competent jury could reach only one decision.58
Either party to a patent infringement suit may bring a motion for summary
judgment, supported by evidence in its favor (usually in the form of docu-
ments and sworn testimony), or pointing out the absence of evidence sup-
porting claims on which the other party bears the burden of proof.59 The
186
Patent Law Essentials
55 See Hybritech Inc. v. Abbott Labs., 849 F.2d 1466, 1458 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
56 See New England Braiding Co. v. A.W. Chesterton Co., 970 F.2d 878, 883 n.5 (Fed. Cir. 1992).
57 Rule 56(c) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure states that summary judgment “shall be
rendered forthwith if the pleadings, depositions, answers to interrogatories, and admissions
on ﬁle, together with the afﬁdavits, if any, show that there is no genuine issue as to any mate-
rial fact and that the moving party is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law.” A dispute as
to an “immaterial fact”—one that need not be decided to render judgment—does not preclude
summary judgment. “A disputed fact is material to the outcome of the suit if a ﬁnding of that
fact is necessary and relevant to the proceeding.” Madey v. Duke Univ., 307 F.3d 1351, 1358
(Fed. Cir. 2002).
58 See Madey, 307 F.3d at 1358 (“Issues of fact are genuine only ‘if the evidence is such that a
reasonable jury could return a verdict for the nonmoving party.’”).
59 See Exigent Tech., Inc. v. Atrana Solutions, Inc., 442 F.3d 1301, 1308–09 (Fed. Cir. 2006);
Golan v. Pingel Enter., Inc., 310 F.3d 1360, 1367–68 (Fed. Cir. 2002); Celotex Corp. v.
Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 325 (1986). The party opposing the motion “must show more than a
mere metaphysical doubt regarding the material facts” and must produce more than “a mere
scintilla of evidence.” Golan, 310 F.3d at 1368.

opposing party naturally submits its own evidence in an attempt to convince
the judge that there is, at least, a “genuine issue of material fact” to be
decided.
An entire matter may be decided by summary judgment, or the judge
may determine that individual questions raise no genuine issue of fact, even
if they do not resolve the entire case.60 For example, a court might grant
summary judgment (or “summary adjudication”), ﬁnding that a particular
invention predates the patentee’s invention, while leaving to the jury the
genuinely disputed question of whether the prior invention anticipates the
claims at issue. Occasionally courts grant summary judgment that a patent is
infringed,61 but usually the accused infringer can at least raise a “genuine
issue of fact” regarding alleged differences between the accused product and
the claimed invention. More frequently, a court holds a patent not infringed
on summary judgment,62 often because of prosecution history estoppel.63
Sometimes courts grant summary judgment that patents are invalid or unen-
forceable.64 Since liability can be found only if a patent is valid, enforceable,
and infringed, a negative judgment on one of these issues can dispose of the
entire case.
11.8 REMEDIES
When a court determines that a patent is both valid and infringed, it
must decide what remedies to grant the patentee. Permanent injunctions
against further infringement were once granted to victorious patent owners
almost automatically.65 But in eBay Inc. v. MercExchange, L.L.C.,66 the
Supreme Court held that courts should not enter injunctions routinely, sim-
ply because infringement has been proven. Instead, the plaintiff must
Patent Litigation
187
60 See Rule 56(d) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
61 See, e.g., Monsanto Co. v. Scruggs, 459 F.3d 1328, 1332 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Amgen Inc. v.
Hoechst Marion Roussel, Inc., 314 F.3d 1313, 1351 (Fed. Cir. 2003); McGinley v. Franklin
Sports, Inc., 262 F.3d 1339, 1348–49 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
62 See, e.g., PSN Illinois, LLC v. Ivoclar Vivadent, Inc., 525 F.3d 1159 (Fed. Cir. 2008); Schwarz
Pharma, Inc. v. Paddock Labs., Inc., 504 F.3d 1371, 1378 (Fed. Cir. 2007); Planet Bingo, LLC
v. Gametech Int’l, Inc., 472 F.3d 1338, 1345 (Fed. Cir. 2006).
63 See Section 10.6.8.
64 See, e.g., Automotive Techs. Int’l, Inc. v. BMW of North America, Inc., 501 F.3d 1274, 1276
(Fed. Cir. 2007) (enablement); Ferring B.V. v. Barr Labs., Inc., 437 F.3d 1181, 1183 (Fed. Cir.
2006) (inequitable conduct); Electromotive Div. of General Motors Corp. v. Transportation
Sys. Div. of General Electric Co., 417 F.3d 1203, 1205–06 (Fed. Cir. 2005) (on-sale bar);
Mazzari v. Rogan, 323 F.3d 1000, 1002 (Fed. Cir. 2003) (obviousness and anticipation).
65 See Richardson v. Suzuki Motor Co., 868 F.2d 1226, 1246–47 (Fed. Cir. 1989) (“Infringement
having been established, it is contrary to the laws of property, of which the patent law par-
takes, to deny the patentee’s right to exclude others from use of his property. . . . It is the gen-
eral rule that an injunction will issue when infringement has been adjudged, absent a sound
reason for denying it.”).
66 547 U.S. 388 (2006).

demonstrate the following conditions traditionally required in other types
of lawsuit: (1) that it has suffered irreparable injury, (2) that monetary dam-
ages cannot compensate for the injury, (3) that the balance of hardships
warrants injunctive relief, and (4) that the public interest would not be dis-
served by a permanent injunction.67 If these conditions do not prevail, a
court may decide to impose what amounts to a compulsory license; the
infringer may continue, but owes the patentee an ongoing royalty payment
in an amount ﬁxed by the court.68 This new approach may beneﬁt the pub-
lic, perhaps ensuring the supply of products needed by consumers or pre-
venting economic disruptions such as unemployment. On the other hand,
patent owners have lost a signiﬁcant bargaining chip because it is no longer
certain that infringing activity must cease following a successful lawsuit.
11.8.1 Damages
The other remedy available to a patentee is an award of money damages
to compensate for past infringement. While injunctions are a matter within
the discretion of the judge, the calculation of damages is a question of fact
for the jury.69 A patentee can elect to pursue damages in either of two forms.
One is lost proﬁts attributable to the infringement.70 This form of recovery is
appropriate if the infringer competed with the patentee in the marketplace,
and it can be shown that sales made by the infringer were sales lost to the
patentee.71 The standard of proof is one of “reasonable probability.”72
188
Patent Law Essentials
67 Id. at 391.
68 See Paice LLC v. Toyota Motor Corp., 504 F.3d 1293, 1313–14 (Fed. Cir. 2007).
69 Utah Medical Prods., Inc. v. Graphic Controls Corp., 350 F.3d 1376, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2003);
Micro Chemical, Inc. v. Lextron, Inc., 317 F.3d 1387, 1394 (Fed. Cir. 2003). “A court is not at
liberty to supplant its own judgment on the damages amount for the jury’s ﬁndings.” Oiness v.
Walgreen Co., 88 F.3d 1025, 1030 (Fed. Cir. 1996). The award can be rejected by the court only
if “the amount is grossly excessive or monstrous, clearly not supported by the evidence or
based only on speculation or guesswork.” Monsanto Co. v. McFarling, 488 F.3d 973, 981 (Fed.
Cir. 2007). This assumes that the case was tried by a jury. If the parties waived their right to a
jury trial, the judge would determine all issues of fact, including the amount of damages.
70 The infringer cannot be compelled to turn over its proﬁts in lieu of calculating the patentee’s
lost proﬁts, except where the infringed patent is a design patent. See 35 U.S.C. § 289.
71 See American Seating Co. v. USSC Gp., Inc., 514 F.3d 1262, 1268 (Fed. Cir. 2008); Stryker
Corp. v. Intermedics Orthopedics, Inc., 96 F.3d 1409, 1417 (Fed. Cir. 1996). Lost proﬁts are
most easily proven in a two-supplier market, but they can also be based on suppositions relat-
ing to market share. See King Instruments Corp. v. Perego, 65 F.3d 941, 953 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
In the two-supplier situation (the two suppliers being the patentee and the infringer), proof
of lost proﬁts typically focuses on the following factors: (1) the demand for the patented prod-
uct; (2) the absence of acceptable substitutes; (3) the capacity of the patentee to exploit the
demand had there been no infringement (for example, did the patentee have the manufac-
turing capacity to make the sales that the infringer made?); and (4) the amount of proﬁt the
patentee would have made if the patentee, rather than the infringer, had made the sales. See
Stryker, 96 F.3d at 1418.
72 See Wechsler v. Macke Int’l Trade, Inc., 486 F.3d 1286, 1297 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

The calculation of lost proﬁts is often complicated by disputes over col-
lateral sales that the patentee might have lost together with sales of the
patented item. Suppose, for example, that the patent covered a component
of a larger item—perhaps an improved lens for a ﬂashlight. The patentee
would demand the proﬁts that could have been made from the sale of ﬂash-
lights if the infringer had not misappropriated the lens design. The infringer,
on the other hand, might attempt to apportion the proﬁts in some way so
that only proﬁts from the lens could be recovered. The patentee might argue
further that lost ﬂashlight sales led to lost sales of accessories and spare
parts—for example, spare bulbs, batteries, and so forth. The infringer would
likely attempt to exclude these from the calculation.
These disputes are resolved by the “entire market value” rule, which
“allows calculation of damages based on the value of an entire apparatus
containing several features, when the patent-related feature in the ‘basis
for customer demand.’”73 The patented and unpatented features must con-
stitute “components of a single assembly or parts of a complete machine,”
or together they must operate as “a single functional unit.”74 Recovery
cannot be had for functionally unrelated items sold together with the
patented invention as a matter of convenience, or to satisfy customer
demand for a package deal.75 Returning to the example, the entire ﬂash-
light would likely be held the appropriate base for calculating lost proﬁts
because the patented lens, together with the unpatented bulb and housing,
form a “single functional unit.” On the other hand, if the ﬂashlights were
sold as part of a tool kit, the other tools would likely be excluded from the
calculation of lost proﬁts because their use and function are unrelated to
the patented lens.76
Another issue is whether a patentee can recover proﬁts lost on sales of an
unpatented item that competes with sales of an infringing item. Suppose, for
example, that the inventor of the improved ﬂashlight lens decided, for what-
ever reason, to market only ﬂashlights that are not covered by the patent.
Meanwhile, the infringer marketed ﬂashlights that are covered by the patent.
Patent Litigation
189
73 Imonex Servs., Inc. v. W.H. Munzprufer Dietmar Trenner GmbH, 408 F.3d 1374, 1380 (Fed.
Cir. 2005).
74 American Seating, 514 F.3d at 1268; Rite-Hite Corp. v. Kelley Co., 56 F.3d 1538, 1550 (Fed.
Cir. 1995) (en banc).
75 See American Seating, 514 F.3d at 1268; Rite-Hite, 56 F.3d at 1550.
76 The ﬂashlight batteries might be a close call. They are a necessary part of a functioning ﬂash-
light but are often sold separately. The infringer might argue that when batteries are sold with
a ﬂashlight, it is done only as a matter of “convenience and business advantage.” Rite-Hite,
56 F.3d at 1550. Alternatively, a distinction might be drawn between the original batteries,
which are sold as a part of the ﬂashlight, and replacement batteries, which the patentee could
not have expected to sell. See Kaufman Co. v. Lantech, Inc., 926 F.2d 1136, 1144 (Fed. Cir.
1991) (whether “accessories” should be included in the calculation of lost proﬁts depends on
whether there is a reasonable probability that the patentee would have made the sale if not
for the infringement).

Can the patentee recover the proﬁts that it would have made on unpatented
ﬂashlights if not for the sales of the infringing ones? According to the Federal
Circuit, those proﬁts can be recovered, as long as it can be shown that the
sales of the unpatented ﬂashlights would have been made if not for the
infringement.77
In many cases lost proﬁts are difﬁcult to calculate, or the patentee did not
lose any proﬁts through competition because the patentee did not sell a
product of its own. In these situations, the patentee may choose to pursue a
reasonable royalty as the measure of damages. This is, by statute, the minimum
that a patentee can be awarded.78 A reasonable royalty is the amount that the
infringer would have paid the patentee if, instead of infringing the patent, it
had negotiated a license. This is generally assessed as a percentage of the
sales price of the infringing goods, multiplied by total sales.
The best guide to calculating a reasonable royalty is evidence of an
established royalty.79 If the patentee has already licensed the patent to oth-
ers at a standard royalty of 3 percent, then 3 percent appears to be an
amount that the market will bear, and that is adequate to satisfy the pat-
entee. If there is no established royalty, then a reasonable royalty must be
determined through a difﬁcult mental exercise. One must imagine what
would have occurred if, at the time the infringement began, the patentee
and the infringer sat down together and negotiated the terms of a patent
license. The amount that the patentee would have been willing to accept,
and that the infringer would have been willing to pay, is the amount of a
reasonable royalty.80
The courts have identiﬁed a number of factors that should be considered
in the context of this “hypothetical negotiation.” These are commonly
known as “Georgia-Paciﬁc factors”—a reference to one of the ﬁrst opinions to
set them down.81 The Georgia-Paciﬁc factors include the following:82
190
Patent Law Essentials
77 Rite-Hite, 56 F.3d at 1548–49.
78 35 U.S.C. § 284 (“Upon ﬁnding for the claimant the court shall award the claimant damages
adequate to compensate for the infringement, but in no event less than a reasonable royalty
for the use made of the invention by the infringer, together with interest and costs as ﬁxed
by the court.”).
79 Monsanto Co. v. McFarling, 488 F.3d 973, 978–79 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (“An established royalty
is usually the best measure of a ‘reasonable’ royalty for a given use of an invention because
it removes the need to guess at the terms to which parties would hypothetically agree.”);
Nickson Indus., Inc. v. Rol Mfg. Co., 847 F.2d 795, 798 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
80 See Mitutoyo Corp. v. Central Purchasing, LLC, 499 F.3d 1284, 1292 (Fed. Cir. 2007);
Applied Medical Resources Corp. v. U.S. Surgical Corp., 435 F.3d 1356, 1361 (Fed. Cir.
2006); Rite-Hite, 56 F.3d at 1554.
81 Georgia-Paciﬁc Corp. v. United States Plywood Corp., 318 F. Supp. 1116 (S.D.N.Y. 1970); see
also Parental Guide of Texas, Inc. v. Thomson, Inc., 446 F.3d 1265, 1270 (Fed. Cir. 2006);
Micro-Chemical, 317 F.3d at 1393; Interactive Pictures Corp. v. Inﬁnite Pictures, Inc., 274 F.3d
1371, 1385–86 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
82 See Georgia-Paciﬁc, 318 F. Supp. at 1120.

• Any evidence of an established royalty rate;
• Rates paid by the infringer for rights to similar patents;
• Whether the patentee had a policy of refusing licenses;
• Whether the patentee and the infringer were competitors;
• Whether sales of the patented item would generate (for the infringer or the pat-
entee) additional sales of non-patented items, including such things as accessories
and spare parts;83
• The time remaining before the patent’s expiration;
• The established success and proﬁtability of items within the scope of the patent;
• The advantages of the patented invention over available substitutes;
• The portion of both selling price and proﬁts that could be attributed to the
patented invention rather than to other product components or features.
The hypothetical negotiation exercise is difﬁcult and imprecise, in part
because it requires the jury, or the judge in a bench trial, to imagine the state
of affairs as they existed when the infringement began, putting aside knowl-
edge of subsequent events.84 It also requires that the patentee and the
infringer be pictured as a willing licensor and a willing licensee, respectively,
when the reality may have been very different.85
Even if the hypothetical negotiation could be imagined perfectly, basing
a damages ﬁgure on the result would seem to make infringement a “no-lose”
proposition.86 The potential infringer who would otherwise pay for a license
might decide to take its chances, knowing that, at worst, it would be forced
to pay after litigation no more than would have been required for a license.
In reality, things are not so easy for the would-be infringer. First, courts rec-
ognize that the hypothetical negotiation is only a mental exercise. In the end,
an infringer may be compelled to pay more than an actual licensee would
have paid.87 More important, if the infringement was “willful,” damages can
be increased as a punishment.
Patent Litigation
191
83 These additional sales are known as “convoyed sales” or “derivative sales.”
84 See Unisplay, S.A. v. American Elec. Sign Co., 69 F.3d 512, 518 (Fed. Cir. 1995); Hanson v.
Alpine Ski Area, Inc., 718 F.2d 1075, 1079 (Fed. Cir. 1983) (“‘The key element in setting a
reasonable royalty . . . is the necessity for return to the date when the infringement began.’”).
In seeming contradiction to this rule, some cases have approved the use of later information
to suggest what a reasonable royalty might have been. See Fromson v. Western Litho Plate &
Supply Co., 853 F.2d 1568, 1575 (Fed. Cir. 1988) (the law “permits and often requires a court
to look to events and facts that occurred thereafter and that could not have been known to
or predicted by the hypothesized negotiators”).
85 See Rite Hite, 56 F.3d at 1554 n.13 (imagining the patentee as a willing licensor is “inaccurate,
and even absurd”).
86 See Fromson, 853 F.2d at 1574–75.
87 See King Instruments, 65 F.3d at 951 n.6; Fromson, 853 F.2d at 1575 n.11 (“Courts have on
occasion recognized the need to distinguish between royalties payable by infringers and 
non-infringers.”).

11.8.2 Willful Infringement
Although unintentional infringement is still infringement, the law recognizes
a difference in culpability between the innocent infringer and the deliberate
infringer. A court can as much as triple the damages assessed against a “willful”
infringer.88 Willfulness is a question of fact,89 and the standard of proof is one of
clear and convincing evidence.90 Whether or not to increase the damages, and
by how much, is a decision left to the discretion of the trial judge.91
To behave willfully means to behave recklessly—to ignore a high likelihood
that one’s actions infringe a valid patent. The patentee must demonstrate that
the risk would have been apparent to an objectively reasonable observer,
and that the danger was known, “or so obvious that it should have been
known,” to the infringer.92 Willfulness depends on the totality of the circum-
stances,93 but an important consideration is whether the infringer sought out
and relied on competent advice of counsel. Although the advice must have
been mistaken (because willfulness is an issue only after the defendant has been
found to infringe), the fact that it was solicited tends to show that the infringer
acted reasonably and in good faith. The Federal Circuit has retreated from ear-
lier suggestions that one must always, or almost always, seek legal advice, even
when such precautions seem unnecessary.94 Nevertheless, an accused infringer
is wise to seek such advice. If it is competent advice, a patentee will ﬁnd it dif-
ﬁcult to prove that the infringer who relied upon it acted recklessly.95
192
Patent Law Essentials
88 See 35 U.S.C. § 284 (“the court may increase the damages up to three times the amount
found or assessed”). Although the statute does not specify the circumstances under which
damages may be increased, the courts have held that “an award of enhanced damages
requires a showing of willful infringement.” In re Seagate Tech., LLC, 497 F.3d 1360, 1368
(Fed. Cir. 2007) (en banc).
89 Biotec Biologische Naturverpackungen GmbH v. Biocorp, Inc., 249 F.3d 1341, 1356 (Fed.
Cir. 2001) (willful infringement “is quintessentially a question of fact, for it depends on ﬁnd-
ings of culpable intent and deliberate or negligent wrongdoing”).
90 Seagate, 497 F.3d at 1371.
91 See Electro Scientiﬁc Indus., Inc. v. General Scanning Inc., 247 F.3d 1341, 1353 (Fed. Cir.
2001) (“A ﬁnding of willfulness does not mandate enhanced damages.”); Graco, Inc. v. Binks
Mfg. Co., 60 F.3d 785, 792 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
92 Seagate, 497 F.3d at 1371. Prior to its en banc decision in Seagate, the Federal Circuit applied a
standard of willfulness closer to negligence than to recklessness. In other words, a careless
defendant might willfully infringe. The new standard appears to require a knowing disregard
of serious risk, though the “should have been known” language introduces some ambiguity.
93 Liquid Dynamics Corp. v. Vaughan Co., Inc., 449 F.3d 1209, 1225 (Fed. Cir. 2006); 
Knorr-Bremse Systeme Fuer Nutzfahrzeuge GmbH v. Dana Corp., 383 F.3d 1337, 1342 
(Fed. Cir. 2004) (en banc).
94 See Seagate, 497 F.3d at 1371 (“Because we abandon the afﬁrmative duty of due care, we also
reemphasize that there is no afﬁrmative obligation to obtain opinion of counsel.”).
95 There may be some legal advice so lacking in substance or preparation that one could not
reasonably rely upon it. See Comark Communications, Inc. v. Harris Corp., 156 F.3d 1182,
1191 (Fed. Cir. 1998). Competent advice is advice from a qualiﬁed attorney, based on a thor-
ough investigation, with support for its conclusions spelled out in reasonable detail.

Although communications between attorney and client are privileged,
the client waives that privilege, exposing to discovery matters it would
rather keep conﬁdential, if it relies on those communications in court.
Until recently, defendants who might rely on advice of counsel to rebut
claims of willfulness were put to a difﬁcult choice. If the accused infringer
chose to stand on its right to attorney-client privilege, courts would infer
that legal advice received by the infringer, if it received any advice at all,
was unfavorable.96 If it wished to avoid that inference, the infringer had to
waive the privilege. In Knorr-Bremse, the Federal Circuit en banc removed
the adverse inference, giving accused infringers a more realistic choice.97
Moreover, in the subsequent Seagate decision, also en banc, the Federal
Circuit limited the scope of the privilege waiver. The waiver allows the
patentee to examine attorney-client communications between the infringer
and the counsel who rendered the advice, to make sure that the advice
was what the infringer claims it to have been. But in most cases the pat-
entee cannot inquire into communications between the infringer and its
trial counsel, who are often different attorneys than those offering pre-
litigation advice.98
A court may consider as evidence of willfulness whether the infringer
deliberately set out to copy the patentee’s invention.99 On the other hand, an
attempt to “design around” the claims of the patent (making changes
deemed necessary to avoid the scope of the claims) may be viewed as
evidence of good faith.100 The conduct of the infringer during litigation and
the closeness of the questions decided against it may also be weighed in the
balance.101
Another potential remedy against a willful infringer is an award of rea-
sonable attorneys’ fees. The general rule in the United States is that each
litigant must bear its own legal costs, regardless of the outcome of the
case, but 35 U.S.C. § 285 provides for an award of attorneys’ fees in an
“exceptional case.” Willful infringement may create such an exceptional
Patent Litigation
193
96 See Electro Medical Sys., S.A. v. Cooper Life Sciences, Inc., 34 F.3d 1048, 1056 (Fed. Cir.
1994); L.A. Gear, Inc. v. Thom McAn Shoe Co., 988 F.2d 1117, 1126 (Fed. Cir. 1993).
97 Knorr-Bremse, 383 F.3d at 1344 (“[I]nference that withheld opinions are adverse to the client’s
actions can distort the attorney-client relationship, in derogation of the foundations of that
relationship. We conclude that a special rule affecting attorney-client relationships in patent
cases is not warranted.”).
98 Seagate, 497 F.3d at 1374.
99 See Liquid Dynamics, 449 F.3d at 1225; Crystal Semiconductor Corp. v. Tritech Microelec-
tronics Int’l, Inc., 246 F.3d 1336, 1352 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
100 See Westvaco Corp. v. International Paper Co., 991 F.2d 735, 745 (Fed. Cir. 1993);
Rolls-Royce Ltd. v. GTE Valeron Corp., 800 F.2d 1101, 1109–10 (Fed. Cir. 1986). Yet often it
is difﬁcult to distinguish between “designing around” a patent claim and introducing an
“insubstantial variation” that subjects the potential infringer to liability under the doctrine of
equivalents. See Section 10.6.3.
101 Liquid Dynamics, 449 F.3d at 1225.

case,102 though it is still a matter for the judge’s discretion.103 On occasion
courts award attorneys’ fees to the accused infringer, generally when the
patentee committed inequitable conduct or the claim of infringement was
frivolous.104 It is by no means proper to award attorneys’ fees to the pre-
vailing party as a matter of routine.105
11.8.3 Limitations
Recovery of damages for patent infringement can be limited under cer-
tain circumstances. Some of the most important limiting factors are the
statute of limitations, failure to properly mark products or give notice of
infringement, laches, and equitable estoppel.
11.8.3.1
Statute of Limitations
Under 35 U.S.C. § 286, no damages may be recovered for infringement
that occurred more than 6 years prior to the ﬁling of a claim. This statute of
limitations is equivalent to those found in many other areas of the law, and the
purpose is the usual one of encouraging the prompt disposition of potential
claims. Section 286 does not prevent the ﬁling of a suit, unless the only relief
that could be granted is damages for infringement more than 6 years ago. If,
for example, the defendant had infringed continuously for the past 10 years,
the patentee could still sue to recover damages for the most recent 6 years of
infringement and could obtain an injunction against future infringement.106
194
Patent Law Essentials
102 See Serio-US Indus. v. Plastic Recovery Techs. Corp., 459 F.3d 1311, 1321 (Fed. Cir. 2006)
(“[e]xceptional cases usually feature some material, inappropriate conduct related to the matter
in litigation, such as willful infringement”); Tate Access Floors, Inc. v. Maxcess Techs., Inc., 222
F.3d 958, 972 (Fed. Cir. 2000). Even if the infringement was not willful, “vexatious conduct” by
the infringer in the course of the litigation may justify an award of attorneys’ fees. See Beckman
Instruments, Inc. v. LKB Produkter AB, 892 F.2d 1547, 1551–52 (Fed. Cir. 1989).
103 Odetics, Inc. v. Storage Tech. Corp., 185 F.3d 1259, 1274 (Fed. Cir. 1999). Where the jury has
found willful infringement, a judge’s unexplained failure to treat the case as “exceptional” may
be an abuse of discretion. See Tate Access Floors, 222 F.3d at 972.
104 See Monsanto Co. v. Bayer Bioscience N.V., 514 F.3d 1229, 1242 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (inequitable
conduct); Haynes Int’l, Inc. v. Jessop Steel Co., 8 F.3d 1573, 1579 (Fed. Cir. 1993) (a “frivolous”
lawsuit justifying an award of attorneys’ fees is one that “the patentee knew or, on reasonable
investigation, should have known, was baseless”); Stevenson v. Sears Roebuck & Co., 713 F.2d
705, 713 (Fed. Cir. 1983) (“There must be some ﬁnding of unfairness, bad faith, or inequitable
conduct on the part of the unsuccessful patentee.”). A patentee’s failure to investigate
thoroughly before bringing an unsuccessful claim of infringement may render the case
“exceptional.” See Superior Fireplace Co. v. Majestic Prods. Co., 270 F.3d 1358, 1378 (Fed. Cir.
2001) (“From the record on appeal, it is unclear if Superior inspected the allegedly infringing
products, prepared claim charts, construed the claims at issue, or even read those claims.”).
105 See Revlon, Inc. v. Carson Prods. Co., 803 F.2d 676, 679 (Fed. Cir. 1986).
106 See Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc. v. Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corp., 482 F.3d 1330, 1341
(Fed. Cir. 2007).

11.8.3.2
Notice and Marking
Many manufactured articles bear markings referring to a speciﬁc patent
or patents. These are the result of 35 U.S.C. § 287, which states that such
markings provide “notice to the public” that the article is patented. They
may not provide actual notice to a particular individual who has never seen
the article, but the law considers them “constructive notice” to anyone.107
Where it is not practical to mark a patent number on the article itself, the
number can be displayed on packaging.108 If a patent owner or licensee
makes, sells, offers to sell, or imports into the United States articles covered
by the patent but not marked in this fashion, no damages for infringement
can be recovered until (1) marking begins or (2) the infringer receives from
the patent owner actual notice of the infringement.109 This limitation of dam-
ages provides an incentive to patent owners to mark their goods and provide
at least that much notice to the public.110
The marking of goods must be “substantially consistent and continu-
ous.”111 If the patentee sells a large shipment of unmarked goods, this resets
the damages clock, so to speak. The obligation to mark applies to goods
made or sold by the patent owner or licensee (express or implied).112 Patent
owners therefore have to make sure that licensees are properly marking their
goods, or the patent owner’s ability to recover damages for infringement will
be impaired.113 Section 287 does not apply to patents with just method
claims, for the simple reason that a method cannot be marked.114 If neither
the patent owner nor the patent owner’s licensees have sold any products
covered by the patent, no marking or other notice is required to begin the
accumulation of damages for infringement.
If products have not been properly marked, the patentee can provide
actual notice to the infringer.115 The notice can come in the form of a warning
Patent Litigation
195
107 See Syngenta Seeds, Inc. v. Delta Cotton Coop., Inc., 457 F.3d 1269, 1276 (Fed. Cir. 2006);
Sentry Protection Prods., Inc. v. Eagle Mfg. Co., 400 F.3d 910, 918 (Fed. Cir. 2005).
108 35 U.S.C. § 287(a).
109 See id.; SRI Int’l, Inc. v. Advanced Tech. Labs., Inc., 127 F.3d 1462, 1469 (Fed. Cir. 1997);
Maxwell v. J. Baker, Inc., 86 F.3d 1098, 1111 (Fed. Cir. 1996).
110 See Nike, Inc. v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 138 F.3d 1437, 1443 (Fed. Cir. 1998).
111 Maxwell, 86 F.3d at 1111; American Medical Sys., Inc. v Medical Eng’g Corp., 6 F.3d 1523,
1537 (Fed. Cir. 1993).
112 Maxwell, 86 F.3d at 1111; Amstead Indus. Inc. v. Buckeye Steel Castings Co., 24 F.3d 178, 185
(Fed. Cir. 1994).
113 This obligation is subject to a “rule of reason,” and “substantial compliance” may be held suf-
ﬁcient. See Maxwell, 86 F.3d at 1111–12 (patentee’s reasonable efforts were sufﬁcient, even
though a “numerically large number” of goods—although still a small percentage of the total—
were not properly marked).
114 American Medical, 6 F.3d at 1538. If a patent includes both method and apparatus claims, and
the method is related to an apparatus that can be marked, such marking will likely be
required, at least if both method and apparatus claims are infringed. See id. at 1538–39.
115 See U.S. Philips Corp. v. Iwasaki Elec. Co., 505 F.3d 1371, 1375 (Fed. Cir. 2007).

letter from the patentee or without ceremony in the form of a suit for
infringement.116 Once such notice has been provided, damages with respect
to that infringer can begin to accrue. The notice must come from the patent
owner; it is not sufﬁcient that the accused infringer discovered the infringe-
ment on its own or through a third party.117 Moreover, the notice must iden-
tify the patent, and it must specifically charge the recipient with
infringement of that patent.118 In Amstead Indus. Inc. v. Buckeye Steel Castings
Co.,119 the infringer (Buckeye) received a form letter from the patent owner
mentioning the patent and warning it not to infringe. The same letter had
been sent to other companies throughout the industry. The court found that
this was not actual notice of infringement to Buckeye because it did not
speciﬁcally charge Buckeye with infringement, nor did it identify any
infringing device.120
11.8.3.3
Laches
The equitable principle of “laches” may also bar recovery of damages
accrued before suit was ﬁled. As explained by the Federal Circuit in A.C.
Aukerman Co. v. R. L. Chaides Construction Co.,121 laches may bar the recov-
ery of pre-ﬁling damages if (1) the patentee unreasonably and inexcusably
delayed in ﬁling suit and (2) the accused infringer was materially harmed
by the delay.122 If the patentee delayed ﬁling suit for more than six years,
196
Patent Law Essentials
116 See American Medical, 6 F.3d at 1537.
117 U.S. Philips, 505 F.3d at 1375; Lans v. Digital Equipment Corp., 252 F.3d 1320, 1327 (Fed.
Cir. 2001).
118 See U.S. Philips, 505 F.3d at 1375 (actual notice “requires the afﬁrmative communication of a
speciﬁc charge of infringement by a speciﬁc accused product or device”). It is immaterial
whether the patent owner “threatens suit, demands cessation of infringement, or offers a
license under the patent.” SRI, 127 F.3d at 1470. The important thing is that “the recipient is
notiﬁed, with sufﬁcient speciﬁcity, that the patent holder believes that the recipient of the
notice may be an infringer.” Id.
119 24 F.3d 178, 185–87 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
120 Id. at 187. Somewhat clouding the picture, the Federal Circuit has stated that the notice of
infringement must be speciﬁc, but not necessarily an “unqualiﬁed charge of infringement.”
Gart v. Logitech, Inc., 254 F.3d 1334, 1344 (Fed. Cir. 2001). Speciﬁc reference to the patent
and the potentially infringing product, together with advice that the recipient seek an opin-
ion of counsel to determine “whether a non-exclusive license under the patent is needed,” is
sufﬁcient to warn the recipient that it is believed to be infringing. Id.
121 960 F.2d 1020 (Fed. Cir. 1992) (en banc).
122 Aukerman, 960 F.2d at 1032; see also Symantec Corp. v. Computer Assocs. Int’l, Inc., 522 F.3d
1279, 1294 (Fed. Cir. 2008); Intirtool, Ltd. v. Texar Corp., 369 F.3d 1289, 1297 (Fed. Cir.
2004); State Contracting & Eng’g Corp. v. Condotte America, Inc., 346 F.3d 1057, 1065 (Fed.
Cir. 2003). Enforcement of the laches defense is still left to the judge’s discretion and sense
of fairness. See Gasser Chair Co. v. Infanti Chair Mfg. Corp., 60 F.3d 770, 773 (Fed. Cir.
1995). If the infringer itself has behaved unfairly (perhaps by deliberately copying the paten-
tee’s invention), the court may decline to exercise its equitable powers. See id.

measured from the time it ﬁrst knew or should have known of the alleged
infringement, 123 laches is presumed, though that presumption can be over-
come with the introduction of contrary evidence.124
The harm to the accused infringer can be either “economic” or
“evidentiary.”125 Economic harm means the loss of investments or the
incurring of additional damages that could have been avoided if suit had
been ﬁled earlier. For example, during the period of delay the accused
infringer might have made unrecoverable investments in a factory to
manufacture the accused product. A patentee cannot delay unreasonably
while such investments are made, nor can it “lie silently in wait watching
damages escalate.”126 Evidentiary prejudice refers to the loss of evidence
that the accused infringer might have used in its defense had the case been
brought sooner. Such prejudice can arise where, for example, important
documents have been lost, memories have faded, or witnesses have
died.127
Laches is an equitable defense that depends on the exercise of the judge’s
discretion, in view of all the circumstances.128 Those circumstances include
the length of the delay and any excuses or justiﬁcations offered by the pat-
entee. Excuses for delay that may be acceptable include the demands of
other litigation, negotiations with the accused infringer, and disputes over
ownership of the patent.129 Fairness may sometimes require that the patentee
notify the accused infringer of the reason for its delay.130
Patent Litigation
197
123 See Wanlass v. General Elec. Co., 148 F.3d 1334, 1337 (Fed. Cir. 1998) (“The period of
delay begins at the time the patentee had actual or constructive knowledge of the defen-
dant’s potentially infringing activities.”). Because laches can arise based on what the
patentee should have known, patentees are, in effect, required to “police their rights” by
keeping themselves reasonably informed of potentially infringing activity. Id. at 1338. A
patentee cannot remain “negligently or willfully oblivious,” where the potentially
infringing activity is so “pervasive, open, and notorious” that a reasonable patentee would
investigate. Id.
124 Symantec, 522 F.3d at 1294; Aukerman, 960 F.2d at 1028, 1037-39; Wanlass, 148 F.3d at 1337
(“A delay of more than six years raises a presumption that it is unreasonable, inexcusable,
and prejudicial.”).
125 State Contracting, 346 F.3d at 1066; Aukerman, 960 F.2d at 1033.
126 Id. at 1033. The court must ﬁnd that the potential infringer would have acted differently if
the infringer had made its claim more promptly. In other words, the losses must have been
caused by the delay. See State Contracting, 346 F.3d at 1066; Gasser, 60 F.3d at 775.
127 Aukerman, 960 F.2d at 1033.
128 Id. at 1032.
129 Id. at 1033. Poverty or inability to ﬁnd an attorney willing to work for a contingent fee has
not been recognized as a valid excuse for delay. See Hall v. Aqua Queen Mfg., Inc., 93 F.3d
1548, 1554 (Fed. Cir. 1996).
130 See Aukerman, 960 F.2d at 1033; Vaupel Textilmaschinen KG v. Meccanica Euro Italia S.P.A.,
944 F.2d 870, 877 (Fed. Cir. 1991) (for the “other litigation” excuse to apply, the patentee
must inform the accused infringer of the other litigation and of its intention to enforce the
patent when the other litigation concludes).

The effect of a successful laches defense is to bar recovery of damages
incurred before the lawsuit was ﬁled.131 The patentee can still recover dam-
ages for subsequent infringement, as well as an injunction against future
infringement.
Recently the Federal Circuit endorsed the concept of “prosecution
laches,” which bars enforcement of a patent issuing after unreasonable
and unexplained delays in prosecution, even though the applicant com-
plied with the relevant PTO regulations.132 The defense prevents an appli-
cant from unreasonably delaying the issuance of a patent, simply to put
itself in a more advantageous position with respect to others who, not
knowing of the pending application, may be investing in infringing tech-
nology. In this instance, a successful laches defense appears to render the
claims generally unenforceable.133 A severe remedy, prosecution laches
“should be applied only in egregious cases of misuse of the statutory
patent system.”134
11.8.3.4
Equitable Estoppel
“Equitable estoppel” is an equitable defense similar to laches, but it
depends on a somewhat different set of circumstances. In order for this
defense to apply, the patentee must somehow have communicated to the
potential infringer the idea that the patentee would not press a claim.135 This
communication can be in the form of words, conduct, or even silence if,
under the circumstances, one would expect the patentee to voice any
objections to the potential infringer’s activities.136 In addition, the potential
198
Patent Law Essentials
131 Odetics, Inc. v. Storage Tech. Corp., 185 F.3d 1259, 1272–73 (Fed. Cir. 1999); Aukerman, 960
F.2d at 1041.
132 See Symbol Techs., Inc. v. Lemelson Medical, Educ. & Research Found., LP, 277 F.3d 1361,
1363–65 (Fed. Cir. 2002).
133 See id. at 1364.
134 Symbol Techs., Inc. v. Lemelson Medical, Educ. & Research Found., LP, 422 F.3d 1378, 1385
(Fed. Cir. 2005). An example of such egregious misuse is “reﬁling an application solely con-
taining previously-allowed claims for the business purpose of delaying their issuance,” par-
ticularly when it is done repeatedly. Id. The tactics employed by the patentee in Symbol Techs.
resulted in gaps of 18 to 39 years between ﬁling and issue. Id. at 1386.
135 Vanderlande Indus. Nederland BV v. Int’l Trade Comm’n, 366 F.3d. 1311, 1324 (Fed. Cir.
2004); A.C. Aukerman Co. v. R.L. Chaides Construction Co., 960 F.2d 1020, 1042 (Fed. Cir.
1992) (en banc).
136 Id. at 1041–42. If the “communication” is in the form of inaction, then there must have been
some contact or relationship with the patentee that would allow the inaction to be reason-
ably interpreted as a sign of abandonment. Id. at 1042. For example, the patentee might have
threatened immediate enforcement of its patents and then failed to follow through, which
could reasonably be interpreted as a change of heart. See Meyers v. Asics Corp., 974 F.2d
1304, 1309 (Fed. Cir. 1993). Ironically, the patentee who insists most emphatically that it will
enforce its patent rights is the patentee most likely to be found to have abandoned those
rights by its subsequent inaction.

infringer must have relied on the communication and suffered material harm
as a result of that reliance.137 Equitable estoppel is most easily applied where,
for example, the patentee told the potential infringer that it would not inter-
fere, the potential infringer relied on that communication and invested in a
new factory, and the patentee then reversed itself and ﬁled suit.138 The more
difﬁcult cases are those where the patentee did nothing and the potential
infringer interpreted that inaction as tacit permission.
As in applying the laches defense, the court must weigh all of the cir-
cumstances and determine what fairness dictates.139 If the defense of equi-
table estoppel applies, it bars any relief to the patentee.140 In this respect, the
consequences are more severe than those of the traditional laches defense,
which prevents only the recovery of past damages.
11.9 THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMISSION
If allegedly infringing products are being imported into the United States,
a patent owner can request an investigation by the International Trade Com-
mission (ITC). In many ways, an ITC investigation is similar to a suit for
patent infringement in a district court, but there are important differences.
First, the matter will be handled by an administrative law judge (ALJ)
rather than a conventional judge or jury. The decision of the ALJ is reviewed
by the ITC commissioners and, if an exclusion of infringing goods is
ordered, by the president of the United States.141 Second, the patent owner
must demonstrate that importation of infringing articles threatens a “domes-
tic industry” in those articles—in other words, there must be signiﬁcant busi-
ness activity in the United States, either under way or imminent, that will be
injured by the illicit competition of infringing goods.142 Third, the ITC can
award no money damages for past infringement; it can only order that the
importation of infringing goods be stopped.143 Finally, although an ITC
investigation involves much of the same effort as does a suit in a district
court, the schedule is generally more compressed. An ITC investigation,
from start to ﬁnish, is generally completed in a little more than a year.
Patent Litigation
199
137 See Vanderlande, 366 F.3d. at 1324; Aukerman, 960 F.2d at 1042–43. The accused infringer
“must have knowledge of the patentee and its patent and must reasonably infer that the pat-
entee acquiesced to the allegedly infringing activity for some time.” Winbond Elecs. Corp. v.
International Trade Comm’n, 262 F.3d 1363, 1374 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
138 Unlike the laches defense, equitable estoppel does not require any element of delay.
Aukerman, 960 F.2d at 1041–42.
139 Id. at 1043.
140 Id. at 1041.
141 See 19 U.S.C. § 1337(c), (j).
142 See 19 U.S.C. § 1337(a)(2)-(3).
143 See 19 U.S.C. § 1337(d).

11.10 JUDGMENTS OF INVALIDITY
When a court has held a patent invalid, and all avenues of appeal have
been exhausted, the patent cannot in the future be asserted against any
potential infringer.144 In a sense, a patent owner has only one chance to
defend the validity of the patent. On the other hand, an unsuccessful attempt
by one accused infringer to challenge the validity of a patent generally does
not preclude another accused infringer from raising similar arguments.
200
Patent Law Essentials
144 Assuming that the patent owner had a “full and fair opportunity” to defend the patent. See
Blonder-Tongue Labs., Inc. v. Univ. of Illinois Found., 402 U.S. 313, 328 (1971).

CHAPTER 12
Special Topics
This chapter covers a number of specialized topics outside the mainstream of
patent law but still worthy of discussion. These include design patents, plant
patents, foreign patents, and the complex problem of extending patent pro-
tection to computer software. The concluding section discusses the prospect of
patent reform legislation.
12.1 DESIGN PATENTS
Throughout this book, the term “patent” generally refers to a utility
patent. A utility patent is a patent on a device, method, or composition of
matter having a practical use.1 Most of the inventions one commonly
thinks of—from mousetraps, to pharmaceuticals, to communications
satellites—are things properly within the domain of a utility patent.
However, the Patent Ofﬁce also issues design patents. A design patent is a
curious hybrid similar in some respects to an ordinary utility patent but
applied to the kinds of artistic (or, at any rate, decorative) expression that
also fall in the domain of copyright or trademark protection.2 Whereas
utility patents exist to promote the “useful arts,” design patents exist to
promote the “decorative arts.”3
1 “Utility” is deﬁned rather broadly, however, and can be applied to inventions such as toys
that have minimal practical value. See Section 8.4.
2 See Sections 2.1 and 2.2.
3 Avia Group Int’l, Inc. v. L.A. Gear California, Inc., 853 F.2d 1557, 1563 (Fed. Cir. 1988).

The PTO issues design patents to new, original, and ornamental designs,
as they are embodied in manufactured objects.4 The design can be a surface
ornament, such as a pattern on a cream pitcher, or it can derive from the
shape and conﬁguration of the object itself. A sleek new shape for a tele-
phone, for example, could be the subject of a design patent. Copies of three
design patents can be found in Appendix B. They depict a candle holder, a
faucet, and an automobile tire, respectively.
A design patent cannot be awarded to an entirely abstract design, not
associated with any particular utilitarian object. One could not, for example,
obtain a design patent on a painting of sunﬂowers.5 One could, however,
obtain a design patent on a vase that bears the same painting as a decora-
tion. Although a design patent must claim an article of manufacture, the
design cannot be dictated by functional considerations.6 If the shape of a
new tennis racket were dictated by a scheme to enlarge the “sweet spot,” that
shape should not be the subject of a design patent. Instead, the shape should
be protected by a utility patent, assuming that it meets the criteria of
patentability. One factor to consider in judging whether a design is func-
tional or ornamental is whether the same functions could be accomplished
by designs of signiﬁcantly different appearance.7
Although neither the Patent Ofﬁce nor the courts are well suited to
judge artistic merit, a design must be “ornamental” before it can be
granted a design patent. The design need not be a ﬁne example of artistic
expression, but it must, in some way, appeal to the “aesthetic sense.” On
occasion, design patents have been denied because the depicted article
failed to meet this criterion.8 On the other hand, design patents have been
202
Patent Law Essentials
4 35 U.S.C. § 171.
5 See MPEP § 1504.01A.
6 See PHG Techs., LLC v. St. John Co., 469 F.3d 1361, 1366 (Fed. Cir. 2006) (“If the patented
design is primarily functional rather than ornamental, the patent is invalid.”); Door-Master
Corp. v. Yorktowne, Inc., 256 F.3d 1308, 1312 (Fed. Cir. 2001) (“only ‘the non-functional
aspects of an ornamental design as shown in a patent’ are proper bases for design patent pro-
tection”); L.A. Gear, Inc. v. Thom McAn Shoe Co., 988 F.2d 1117, 1123 (Fed. Cir. 1993).
7 See PHG, 469 F.3d at 1366–37; Rosco, Inc. v. Mirror Lite Co., 304 F.3d 1373, 1378 (Fed. Cir.
2002) (“[I]f other designs could produce the same or similar functional capabilities, the design
of the article in question is likely ornamental, not functional.”); L.A. Gear, 988 F.2d at 1123.
Even if every element of the design has a function, the overall conﬁguration may be a mat-
ter of patentable aesthetic expression. See L.A. Gear, 988 F.2d at 1123; Avia, 853 F.2d at 1563.
8 See, e.g., Blisscraft of Hollywood v. United Plastics Co., 294 F.2d 694, 696 (2d Cir. 1961) (ﬁnd-
ing a pitcher design insufﬁciently ornamental: “Plaintiff’s pitcher has no particularly aesthetic
appeal in line, form, color, or otherwise. . . . The reaction which the pitcher inspires is sim-
ply that of the usual, useful and not unattractive piece of kitchenware.”). In more recent cases,
designs are unlikely to be criticized for failing to look attractive. Instead, the debate is likely
to center on whether aesthetic aspirations (however successful) or functional necessity dic-
tated the design. See Seiko Epson Corp. v. Nu-Kote Int’l, Inc., 190 F.3d 1360, 1368 (Fed. Cir.
1999) (“Nor need the design be aesthetically pleasing. . . . The design may contribute dis-
tinctiveness or consumer recognition to the [product], but an absence of artistic merit does
not mean that the design is purely functional.”).

granted to objects that would not ordinarily be thought of as having an
ornamental aspect—for example, a hip prosthesis.9 Apparently, a physi-
cian selecting a hip prosthesis might be moved to select the one that
appeals to the eye.
Because design patents protect visually appealing designs, they may be
denied to objects hidden from view.10 A vacuum cleaner bag, for example,
was denied a design patent on that ground.11 Nevertheless, a design may be
sufﬁciently ornamental if its appearance is “a matter of concern” during
some signiﬁcant portion of its life cycle.12 A hip prosthesis, for example, is
not visible in use, but it is visible when displayed at a trade show or in
advertising.
Whereas utility patents include many pages describing the invention in
words, design patents describe the invention only through drawings.13 This
is appropriate since the purpose of the patent is to protect a visual design. A
utility patent can have many claims. A design patent has only one,14 typically
in the form “the ornamental design for the [object] as shown.”15 The brack-
eted portion would name the kind of object depicted—for example, a candle
holder, faucet, or automobile tire.
A patented design need not have utility, but it must be new and non-
obvious.16 Obviousness is difﬁcult to judge in aesthetic matters,17 and the
prior art available for the Patent Ofﬁce to consult—primarily earlier design
patents and utility patents—may barely scratch the surface. Nevertheless, a
design patent, like a utility patent, carries a presumption of validity.
The term of a design patent is 14 years from the date of issue.18 An object
can infringe a design patent if it presents substantially the same appearance
Special Topics
203
9 See In re Webb, 916 F.2d 1553 (Fed. Cir. 1990).
10 See Door-Master, 256 F.3d at 1312 (“generally concealed features are not proper bases for
design patent protection because their appearance cannot be a ‘matter of concern’”); Webb,
916 F.2d at 1557.
11 See Ex parte Fesco, 147 U.S.P.Q. 74 (Pat. Off. Bd. App. 1965).
12 See Contessa Food Prods., Inc. v. Conagra, Inc., 282 F.3d 1370, 1379 (Fed. Cir. 2002);
Keystone Retaining Wall Sys., Inc. v. Westrock, Inc., 997 F.2d 1444, 1451 (Fed. Cir. 1993);
Webb, 916 F.2d at 1557–58.
13 See Amini Innovation Corp. v. Anthony California, Inc., 439 F.3d 1365, 1371 (Fed. Cir. 2006)
(“It is the drawings of the patent . . . that deﬁne the patented design.”); Hupp v. Siroﬂex of
America, Inc., 122 F.3d 1456, 1464 (Fed. Cir. 1997) (“A design patent contains no written
description; the drawings are the claims to the patented subject matter.”).
14 See 37 C.F.R. § 1.153.
15 See MPEP § 1503.03.
16 35 U.S.C. §§ 171, 103; L.A. Gear, 988 F.2d at 1124; Avia, 853 F.2d at 1563.
17 As in the case of a utility patent, factors to consider include the scope and content of the prior
art, the differences between the prior art and the claimed subject matter, the level of ordinary
skill in the art, and secondary considerations such as commercial success or copying. Avia,
853 F.2d at 1564. See Section 8.9.6. In the case of a design patent, obviousness must be
judged from the perspective of a designer of ordinary capabilities. Litton Sys., Inc. v.
Whirlpool Corp., 728 F.2d 1423, 1443 (Fed. Cir. 1984).
18 35 U.S.C. § 173.

to an ordinary observer.19 Differences will not avoid infringement if the
patented design and the accused product are sufﬁciently similar overall.20 It
is not an infringement to copy only the functional aspects of a patented
design.21
In addition to the ordinary observer test of infringement, the Federal
Circuit required that the accused product incorporate the patented design’s
“point of novelty”—the element or elements that distinguished the patented
design from the prior art—in order to infringe. Recently, in the en banc deci-
sion Egyptian Goddess, Inc. v. Swisa, Inc.,22 the court abandoned that require-
ment. However, the court held that the hypothetical observer must compare
the patented design and the accused product with knowledge of the prior art
and attention to the distinguishing elements of the patented design. If the
patented design and the accused product resemble each other primarily
because of elements also found in the prior art, then the accused product
does not infringe.
The patentee can recover the “entire proﬁt” of an infringer who has sold
an article covered by a design patent.23
12.2 PLANT PATENTS
A new plant variety can be the subject of a utility patent,24 but only if the
variety is non-obvious,25 and only if the patent disclosure satisﬁes the usual
requirements, such as the enablement and written description require-
ments.26 These are often problematic in the case of a plant variety. If the dif-
ference between a newly discovered rose and a known variety is a subtle
difference in color and perfume, it is difﬁcult to describe these differences in
204
Patent Law Essentials
19 “‘[I]f, in the eye of an ordinary observer, giving such attention as a purchaser usually gives,
two designs are substantially the same, if the resemblance is such as to deceive such an
observer, inducing him to purchase one supposing it to be the other, the ﬁrst one patented is
infringed by the other.’” Amini, 439 F.3d at 1371; see also Lawman Armor Corp. v. Winner
Int’l, LLC, 437 F.3d 1383, 1384 (Fed. Cir. 2006); Contessa, 282 F.3d at 1377. If the item is spe-
cialized, the court may adopt the perspective of an ordinary purchaser of that item. See
Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. v. Hercules Tire & Rubber Co., 162 F.3d 1113, 1117 (Fed. Cir.
1998). Note the similarity to the test of trademark infringement, discussed at Section 2.2. The
proper comparison, however, is between the accused product and the design depicted in the
patent, not between the accused product and the patentee’s own commercial embodiment,
which may include features not depicted in the patent. See Sun Hill Indus., Inc. v. Easter
Unlimited, Inc., 48 F.3d 1193, 1196 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
20 See Contessa, 282 F.3d at 1376–78.
21 See Lee v. Dayton-Hudson Corp., 838 F.2d 1186, 1189 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
22 2008 U.S. App. LEXIS 20104 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (en banc).
23 35 U.S.C. § 289.
24 J.E.M. AG Supply, Inc. v. Pioneer Hi-Bred Int’l, Inc., 534 U.S. 124, 127 (2001).
25 See Section 8.9.6.
26 See Sections 8.6.8 and 8.8.

words and equally difﬁcult to decide if the differences are non-obvious.
Congress addressed these difﬁculties by providing a special form of patent
for plant varieties, thereby putting agriculture on a more even footing with
industry when it comes to encouraging, and rewarding, innovation.
A plant patent can be obtained by one who “invents or discovers and asex-
ually reproduces any distinct and new variety of plant, including cultivated
spores, mutants, hybrids, and newly found seedlings, other than a tuber prop-
agated plant or a plant found in an uncultivated state.”27 Asexual reproduc-
tion refers to reproduction by grafting, budding, and similar procedures that
reproduce a genetically identical plant from a portion of the ﬁrst plant or its
progeny.28 The “invention” is complete only when the new variety has been
discovered, its distinguishing characteristics have been identiﬁed, and it has
been asexually reproduced. If the asexually reproduced plant has the dis-
tinctive characteristics of its parent, this demonstrates that the characteristics
likely represent a genetic rather than an environmental variation.
A patent cannot be granted for the discovery of a new plant in the wild—
that is, in an “uncultivated state.” However, patents can be granted for vari-
eties that arise from unplanned sports or mutations of cultivated crops.
Imazio Nursery, Inc. v. Dania Greenhouses,29 for example, discusses a patented
variety of heather discovered as a seedling in a cultivated ﬁeld. This variety,
dubbed “Erica Sunset,” blooms during the Christmas season, much earlier
than the ordinary heather from which it arose.
Plant patents have only one claim, which typically refers to the plant vari-
ety “shown and described” in the speciﬁcation, usually with a brief recital of
the characteristics that distinguish the new variety.30 In contrast to a utility
patent, a description found in a plant patent need only be “as complete as is
reasonably possible.”31 Because of their function in identifying the patented
variety, illustrations are an important part of a plant patent, and they must
be “artistically and competently executed.”32
Special Topics
205
27 35 U.S.C. § 161. According to the Manual of Patent Examining Procedure, tubers (such as
potatoes) are excluded because “this group alone, among asexually reproduced plants, is
propagated by the same part of the plant that is sold as food.” MPEP § 1601. The term “plant”
is used in its popular sense rather than a strict scientiﬁc sense, so species such as bacteria are
also excluded. Id.
28 See MPEP § 1601. The Plant Variety Protection Act, 7 U.S.C. § 2321 et seq., provides similar
legal protection for sexually reproduced plant varieties (e.g., plants grown from seed), but not as
a part of the patent system. The Plant Variety Protection Act is administered by the Department
of Agriculture.
29 69 F.3d 1560 (Fed. Cir. 1995).
30 See 35 U.S.C. § 162 (“The claim in the speciﬁcation shall be in formal terms to the plant
shown and described.”).
31 35 U.S.C. § 162.
32 MPEP § 1606. Either drawings or color photographs are acceptable. Id. Examples of plant
patents have been omitted from the appendices due to the difﬁculty of reproducing the
illustrations.

A plant variety is patentable if it is “distinct and new”33—a threshold of nov-
elty less demanding than “non-obviousness.” The patent confers the right to
exclude others from asexually reproducing the claimed plant or from using or
selling such a plant.34 It is not an infringement of a plant patent to grow the
claimed plant from seed.35 It is also not an infringement to develop inde-
pendently a variety that is indistinguishable from the patented variety. An
infringement occurs only if the accused variety is an offspring of the original,
which means that an element of proving infringement is evidence that the
accused infringer had access to the original plant or its asexually reproduced
progeny.36 This is in contrast to the usual rule (applied to utility patents) that
independent development is not a defense to infringement.
12.3 FOREIGN PATENTS
An inventor who wishes to protect an invention in a foreign country must
apply for a patent in that country.37 Foreign patent systems generally convey
rights similar to those obtainable in the United States, but there are impor-
tant differences.
Other countries award a patent to the ﬁrst person to ﬁle a patent application,
whereas the United States awards a patent to the ﬁrst person to invent. The ﬁrst-
to-ﬁle system provides a far simpler way to handle issues of priority, which in
the United States must be resolved by complex inquiries into conception,
reduction to practice, and diligence.38 The United States may adopt the ﬁrst-
to-ﬁle rule in order to make its practice consistent with that of the rest of the
world.39 Still, there is something to be said for rewarding the person who is ﬁrst
to invent, rather than the person who wins the “race to the Patent Ofﬁce.”
Many other countries allow a degree of public participation in the process
of patent examination. In Japan, for example, applications are “laid open”—
that is, made public—18 months after ﬁling. Afterward members of the pub-
lic, most likely competitors of the applicant, may submit prior art that bears
upon the patentability of the claimed invention. If the Patent Ofﬁce still
determines that the patent should issue, those who disagree may oppose.
206
Patent Law Essentials
33 35 U.S.C. § 161.
34 35 U.S.C. § 163.
35 One may infringe a utility patent by growing the patented plant variety from saved seed. See
Monsanto Co. v. David, 516 F.3d 1009, 1014 (Fed. Cir. 2008); Monsanto Co. v. McFarling,
302 F.3d 1291, 1299 (Fed. Cir. 2002).
36 See Imazio Nursery, 69 F.3d at 1569–70.
37 Many countries, including the United States, are parties to the Patent Cooperation Treaty,
which provides for a standardized patent application acceptable for ﬁling in any of the par-
ticipating countries. The patent laws of the participating countries differ, however, so an
invention that is patentable in one country may be denied a patent in another.
38 See Sections 8.9.2 and 8.9.3.
39 See Section 12.5.

This system ensures a more rigorous examination than typically occurs in
the United States, where the Patent Ofﬁce deals only with the applicant. As
discussed in Section 5.1, the legislation allowing publication of United States
patent applications does not provide for any form of third-party opposition.
An applicant for a United States patent can take the beneﬁt of an earlier ﬁl-
ing date in most foreign countries, if the ﬁling date of the foreign application
is no more than 12 months before the United States ﬁling date.40 This earlier
effective ﬁling date does not remove any “statutory bar” problems raised by
35 U.S.C. § 102(b).41 The foreign ﬁling date can, however, be used to establish
an earlier constructive reduction to practice,42 possibly avoiding certain prior
art references or improving the applicant’s position in an interference con-
test.43 Generally an inventor who ﬁles an application in a foreign country
should wait no longer than 12 months before ﬁling in the United States. Oth-
erwise, the foreign patent, if it issues before the United States application is on
ﬁle, may constitute invalidating prior art under 35 U.S.C. § 102(d).44
12.4 PATENTING COMPUTER PROGRAMS
One of the thorniest questions in patent law has been whether a computer
program can be patented. At ﬁrst blush, there seems no reason to doubt it.
A program is a process—one of the categories of patentable subject matter
set out in 35 U.S.C. § 101. Computer programs are technological in nature.
Although writing a program involves a degree of personal expression, the
program ultimately controls the operation of a machine. Finally, from a con-
stitutional perspective, there is little reason to suppose that progress in the
art of computer programming is less dependent on patent protection than
progress in other technological arts. Why, then, have software patents met
with resistance?
The chief difﬁculty is the kinship between a computer program and a
mathematical operation, or “algorithm.” The following is an example of a
mathematical algorithm that begins with two quantities, a and b:
1. Raise a to the power 2, and call the result x.
2. Raise b to the power 2, and call the result y.
Special Topics
207
40 See 35 U.S.C. § 119.
41 “[B]ut no patent shall be granted on any application for patent for an invention which had
been patented or described in a printed publication in any country more than one year before
the date of the actual ﬁling of the application in this country, or which had been in public
use or on sale in this country more than one year prior to such ﬁling.” 35 U.S.C. § 119(a). The
§ 102(b) “statutory bar” provisions are discussed in Section 8.10.
42 See In re Mulder, 716 F.2d 1542, 1544–45 (Fed. Cir. 1983). Constructive reduction to practice
is discussed in Section 8.9.2.
43 See Section 5.4.
44 See Section 8.11.

3. Add x and y, and call the result z.
4. Take the square root of z, and call the result c.
As we have seen, a patent cannot be granted on a “principle of nature,”
such as a mathematical formula.45 The truths of mathematics cannot be
owned, even by their discoverers. Pythagoras, for example, could not have
patented his famous theorem. When the mathematical truth expresses a rela-
tionship, as in the case of the Pythagorean theorem, the relationship also sug-
gests a process by which one set of numbers can be converted, by
mathematics, to another. As the reader may already have recognized, the
algorithm set forth above is simply a sequence of steps, based on the rela-
tionship expressed in the Pythagorean theorem, by which one could derive
the length (c) of the hypotenuse of a right triangle, given the lengths of the
two sides (a and b).
If the formula itself cannot be patented, it seems to follow that an algo-
rithm based on the formula cannot be patented either. If it were otherwise,
only the patentee could use the formula, and the effect would be the same as
if the patentee owned the formula itself. Hence, courts have categorized
“mathematical algorithms” as unpatentable subject matter, akin to “princi-
ples of nature” and “abstract ideas.”
Computers carry out their myriad functions by performing, at tremen-
dously high speeds, a number of very fundamental mathematical and logi-
cal operations. The program controls these operations by dictating the
sequence of steps that the computer is to perform. Expressed in slightly
different terms, the algorithm set forth above could be a program instructing
a computer to calculate, in an instant, the length of hypotenuse c. If a
programmer attempted to patent such a program, the question would arise
whether the program was a practical advancement in the technological art
of computer programming or nothing more than an unpatentable “mathe-
matical algorithm.”
12.4.1 The Supreme Court Decisions
The Supreme Court has addressed the patentability of computer pro-
grams on three occasions. The ﬁrst case, Gottschalk v. Benson,46 involved a
method of converting binary-coded numbers from one format to another.
The method did not rely on a new kind of computer. It could be performed
with any computer, then existing or yet to be invented, and it could be used
in an unlimited variety of applications. The court held the applicant’s
claims unpatentable, ﬁnding that the method embodied an abstract idea or
a mathematical truth, rather than the application of an idea to a speciﬁc
technological end.
208
Patent Law Essentials
45 See Section 4.3.
46 409 U.S. 64 (1972).

Regarding “process” claims in general, the court observed that “[t]rans-
formation and reduction of an article ‘to a different state or thing’ is the clue
to the patentability of a process claim that does not include particular
machines.”47 If this statement is taken at face value, it would appear that no
computer program would be patentable as such, since programs involve the
manipulation of information, not the physical transformation of an article to
“a different state or thing.” Yet the court denied that it intended to bar the
patentability of computer programs altogether. Instead, it focused on the
preemptive effect of allowing an inventor to patent a method that is “not lim-
ited to any particular art or technology, to any particular apparatus or
machinery, or to any particular end use.”48 Benson left open the question of
whether one could patent a computer program embodying a mathematical
algorithm if its use were limited to a speciﬁc technological application.
That issue confronted the court in Parker v. Flook,49 where the claim at
issue involved a method of updating an “alarm limit.” An alarm limit is a
number used to indicate an abnormal, possibly dangerous condition arising
during the catalytic conversion of hydrocarbons. During certain stages of the
operation, the alarm limit needs to be adjusted or updated. Flook tried to
patent a computer-implemented algorithm to perform that function. As in
Benson, the court found the algorithm unpatentable. Even though Flook
claimed the algorithm only in connection with a catalytic conversion
process, and even though a certain amount of speciﬁc “post-solution activ-
ity” followed the calculation (namely, the adjustment of the alarm limit), the
court still found that patenting the process would be tantamount to patent-
ing an abstract idea or phenomenon of nature. As a part of its analysis, the
court adopted an odd mixture of the patentable subject matter standard of
35 U.S.C. § 101 and the standard of novelty under 35 U.S.C. § 102. The
court found that if the algorithm were treated as though it were already known,
the claim as a whole would describe no patentable invention.50
The last case of the “Supreme Court trilogy” was Diamond v. Diehr.51
While the facts in Diehr are curiously similar to those in Flook, the result was
very different. Diehr’s invention involved a process for curing rubber inside
a molding press. To determine the proper time to open the press and
remove the ﬁnished article, Diehr’s method called for constant measure-
ment of the temperature inside the press. A computer used this data and the
well-known Arrhenius equation to periodically recalculate the time neces-
sary for the rubber to cure. When the calculated optimum and the actual
curing time were the same, the computer opened the press automatically.
This time, the court found the invention to be patentable subject matter.
Special Topics
209
47 Id. at 70.
48 Id. at 64.
49 437 U.S. 584 (1978).
50 Id. at 594.
51 450 U.S. 175 (1981).

Diehr was decided not long after Chakrabarty,52 and it reﬂects a similarly
expansive interpretation of the Patent Act. The majority viewed the invention
not as a mathematical algorithm per se, but as a method of curing rubber that
happened to make use of a mathematical algorithm. Viewed in this light,
Diehr’s method was an industrial process for “transforming . . . an article . . .
into a different state or thing”—the kind of process that has always been con-
sidered patentable.53 The use of an equation and a programmed computer
did not make the process as a whole unpatentable. Although Flook had seem-
ingly dismissed “ﬁeld of use” limitations as the key to patentability, the Diehr
court distinguished Flook as a case in which the claimed method did nothing
more than calculate a number, hardly mentioning the physical process steps
associated with that calculation. The implication is that if the claims in Flook
had been drafted with additional references to the catalytic conversion
process, they might have been patentable, even if the only novel aspect of the
process had been the use of the mathematical algorithm.
Diehr marked a signiﬁcant change in the Supreme Court’s attitude toward
the patentability of computer software. However, since Diehr did not over-
rule the earlier cases, the lower courts, and the Federal Circuit in particular,
were left with the difﬁcult task of reconciling and applying the rules set out
in Benson, Flook, and Diehr.
12.4.2 The Federal Circuit Decisions
The Federal Circuit has distinguished between patent claims drawn to
mathematical algorithms in the abstract, and claims that call for application
of an algorithm to a physical process, or claims that call for a speciﬁc machine
to perform the algorithm. For example, the Federal Circuit rejected claims
to a method of conducting an auction, where the mathematical algorithm
was neither tied to speciﬁc computer hardware nor used to accomplish any
physical transformation.55 It similarly denied a patent to an algorithm for
constructing a “bubble hierarchy” to deﬁne the space around an object. This
algorithm could be used to keep industrial robots from colliding with ﬁxed
objects, but, signiﬁcantly, the challenged claims did not refer to this speciﬁc
use.56 On the other hand, the Federal Circuit held patentable an apparatus
claim reciting various physical components, one of which used an “auto-cor-
relation” algorithm to recognize patterns in signals (e.g., for voice recogni-
tion).57
210
Patent Law Essentials
52 See Section 4.4.
53 Diehr, 450 U.S. at 184.
54 Arrhythmia Research Tech., Inc. v. Corazonix Corp., 958 F.2d 1053, 1058 (Fed. Cir. 1992).
55 In re Schrader, 22 F.3d 290 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
56 In re Warmerdam, 33 F.3d 1354 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
57 In re Iwahashi, 888 F.2d 1370 (Fed. Cir. 1989).

No computer software performs a useful function without computer
hardware to run it. Hence, a claim to a computer program can always be
couched in terms of apparatus—in other words, I claim not “program
x,y,z” but “a machine conﬁgured to execute program x,y,z.” The power of that
idea for avoiding issues of patentable subject matter was revealed in In re
Alappat.58
In Alappat, the Patent Ofﬁce had rejected Alappat’s claims to an improved
oscilloscope display, which used a software algorithm to make jagged lines
appear smoother. The claims called for an apparatus comprising a combi-
nation of “means” to perform the necessary functions of calculation and
display.59 On appeal, the majority of the court held the claims patentable
subject matter, stressing the disclosure of speciﬁc memory and logic circuits
to perform the functions recited in the claims: “This is not a disembodied
mathematical concept which may be characterized as an ‘abstract idea,’ but
rather a speciﬁc machine to produce a useful, concrete, and tangible
result.”60 Two dissenting judges complained that the “apparatus” on which
the majority relied was nothing more than conventional computer hardware,
and the only thing that Alappat had invented was a mathematical operation.
In the dissenters’ view, Alappat’s choice to describe the invention not as
mathematics per se, but as conventional hardware to perform the mathe-
matics, should not have determined whether the invention was patentable
subject matter.
Alappat suggests that virtually any software invention can be patented,
as long as it is claimed in terms of a machine to perform the necessary func-
tions. This is so even if the apparatus disclosed is nothing more than what
one would ﬁnd in any run-of-the mill computer. In the majority’s view,
“[new] programming creates a new machine, because a general-purpose
computer in effect becomes a special purpose computer once it is pro-
grammed to perform particular functions pursuant to instructions from
program software.”61 Alappat also introduced the idea that software is not
unpatentably abstract if it produces a “useful, concrete and tangible
result.”62 The software at issue did that, by creating an improved oscillo-
scope display.
In State Street Bank & Trust Co. v. Signature Financial Gp.,63 the court
showed how far these ideas might be pushed. In Alappat, the applicant’s
invention was a technological advancement; in State Street, it was a method
of organizing a family of mutual funds to save expenses and avoid taxes. Yet
Special Topics
211
58 33 F.3d 1526 (Fed. Cir. 1994) (en banc).
59 See the discussion of “means-plus-function” claims in Section 7.7.4.
60 Alappat, 33 F.3d at 1544.
61 Id. at 1545.
62 Id. at 1544.
63 149 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 1998).

the patentee claimed invention in terms of the computer “system” used to
implement the business scheme. Although the hardware was nothing new,
and it was depicted in the patent only in cartoon-like sketches, the court held
that the invention—a statutory machine—produced the “useful, concrete and
tangible result” necessary to distinguish the invention from a mathematical
abstraction.64
State Street implied that any useful software-implemented invention could
be patented, if it were claimed in the right way. However, the tide may be
turning once again. In In re Bilski, the Federal Circuit rejected the “useful,
concrete and tangible result” standard. A patentable process, the court held,
must be tied to a particular machine, or it must transform an article “into a
different state or thing”—a standard that calls into question the patentability
of much computer software.65 It remains to be seen whether the problem can
be avoided by conﬁning the process to a general-purpose computer (techni-
cally, a “machine”) programmed to perform a novel software algorithm.66
12.5 PATENT REFORM
The Patent Act has lasted, with relatively minor changes, for more than
half a century. Recently Congress has considered signiﬁcant new legislation
that would, in many respects, make the United States patent system more
like that of other nations. Nothing is certain at the time of writing. Although
many had predicted rapid adoption of these reform proposals, opposition
212
Patent Law Essentials
64 “Today, we hold that the transformation of data, representing discrete dollar amounts, by a
machine through a series of mathematical calculations into a ﬁnal share price, constitutes a
practical application of a mathematical algorithm, formula, or calculation, because it pro-
duces ‘a useful, concrete and tangible result’—a ﬁnal share price momentarily ﬁxed for record-
ing and reporting purposes and even accepted and relied upon by regulatory authorities and
in subsequent trades.” Id. at 1373.
65 In re Bilski, 2008 U.S. App. LEXIS 22497, *38-42 (Fed. Cir. 2008) (en banc); see also In re
Comiskey, 499 F.3d 1365, 1376 (Fed. Cir. 2007) (“a claim reciting an algorithm or abstract
idea can state statutory subject matter only if, as employed in the process, it is embodied in,
operates on, transforms, or otherwise involves another class of statutory subject matter, i.e., a
machine, manufacture, or composition of matter”).
66 See Bilski, 2008 U.S. App. LEXIS 22497 at *47 (“We leave to future cases the elaboration of
the precise contours of machine implementation, as well as answers to particular questions,
such as whether or when recitation of a computer sufﬁces to tie a process claim to a particu-
lar machine.”). In Comiskey, the court observed that “[t]he routine addition of modern elec-
tronics to an otherwise unpatentable invention typically creates a prima facie case of
obviousness.” Comiskey, 499 F.3d at 1379. Here the court seems to be conﬂating patentable
subject matter and novelty in the manner of Flook, subsequently disapproved in Diehr. If a
mathematical algorithm was non-obvious (whether or not it was patentable subject matter on
its own), combining that algorithm with obvious electronics could not, logically, make obvi-
ous the invention as a whole.

from some U.S. industries has slowed the process. If reform does occur,
these are among its more likely components:
• Introduction of a ﬁrst-to-ﬁle system for determining priority. Currently if more
than one person has invented the same thing, the right to secure a patent
belongs to the person who invented ﬁrst.67 In other countries, the right
belongs to the ﬁrst person to ﬁle a patent application. A change to the ﬁrst-
to-ﬁle system would encourage the prompt submission of applications and
it would greatly simplify the resolution of priority issues, now burdened by
difﬁcult issues of proof.
• Publication of all patent applications. Currently many patent applications are
published, but applicants can avoid publication by ﬁling only in the
United States.68 Reform proposals would require that all patent applica-
tions be published 18 months after ﬁling.
• Expanded opportunities for public participation. Currently third parties have
very limited opportunities to bring to the attention of the patent examiner
reasons that a published patent application should be rejected.69 They can-
not, for example, explain why certain prior art is relevant to the applica-
tion. Reform proposals would expand those opportunities, making U.S.
procedures more like those of other nations.
• Elimination of the “best mode” requirement. Currently patent applications
must disclose the best method known to the applicant for making and using
the claimed invention.70 Reform proposals would eliminate the “best
mode” defense to infringement, which is said to invite complex inquiry into
highly subjective matters. The “enablement” requirement71 would still
demand disclosure of information sufﬁcient to make and use the invention.
• Invalidating patents based on pre–ﬁling date disclosures. Currently public dis-
closure of the invention more than one year before the ﬁling date may
invalidate a patent.72 Reform proposals would limit that one-year “grace
period” to disclosures made by the applicant. Third-party disclosures
would invalidate a patent if made at any time prior to the ﬁling date.
• Limiting “reasonable royalty” damages to some portion of the value of the infring-
ing product. Currently courts often award a “reasonable royalty” for
infringement based upon the “entire market value” of the infringing prod-
uct.73 Although the amount of the royalty may take into account the
importance of the patented invention to consumer demand for the entire
product, some reform proposals would allow courts to apportion more
explicitly in order to avoid over-compensating patentees whose inventions
are relatively minor aspects of the infringing product. Whether this would
really change anything is debatable.
Special Topics
213
67 See Section 8.9.1.3.
68 See Section 5.1.
69 See id.
70 See Section 8.7.
71 See Section 8.6.
72 See Section 8.10.
73 See Section 11.8.1.

• Changes to the standard of willful infringement. Damages for patent infringe-
ment may be increased if the defendant “willfully” infringed.”74 Reform
proposals would conﬁne willful infringement to limited circumstances—
including where the infringer ignored a written notice from the patentee,
where the infringer deliberately copied from the patentee, or where the
infringer continued to infringe after an adverse decision by a court.
214
Patent Law Essentials
74 See Section 11.8.2.

Note on Sources
In any area of the law, there is no substitute for the original sources. In the
speciﬁc case of patent law, the primary source is Title 35 of the United States
Code, known as the Patent Act. Several one-volume references reproduce the
Patent Act and other selected legislation concerning copyright and trademark
law. A good example is Selected Statutes and International Agreements on Unfair
Competition, Trademark, Copyright and Patent, edited by Paul Goldstein and
Edmund W. Kitch and published by Foundation Press. Rules and regulations
speciﬁcally relating to patent applications and prosecution can be found in
Title 37 of the Code of Federal Regulations, published by the Ofﬁce of the
Federal Register, National Archives and Records, and the Manual of Patent
Examining Procedure (or MPEP), published by the Department of Com-
merce. All of these materials can now be conveniently located online at the
PTO website, http://www.uspto.gov/main/patents.htm.
Judicial opinions cited in this book can be found in any good law library
or through electronic resources like Lexis or Westlaw. Supreme Court deci-
sions are found in the United States Reports (abbreviated in case citations as
U.S.), published by West Publishing Co. Published decisions of the Federal
Circuit Court of Appeals are found in West’s Federal Reporter (abbreviated as
F.2d or F.3d). District Court opinions are found in West’s Federal Supplement
(F. Supp. or F. Supp. 2d) or in BNA’s United States Patent Quarterly (U.S.P.Q.
or U.S.P.Q.2d).
Several multi-volume treatises provide very detailed surveys of United
States patent law, including its historical development. The one the author
turns to most frequently is Professor Donald S. Chisum’s Chisum on Patents,
published by Matthew Bender. Ernest Bainbridge Lipscomb’s Lipscomb’s

Walker on Patents, published by Clark Boardman Callaghan, is also a valu-
able resource. Robert L. Harmon’s Patents and the Federal Circuit, published
by BNA Books, is a work that concentrates on the development of the law
in the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals. Any of these works will serve as a
useful supplement to this book when greater detail is required.
216
Note on Sources

APPENDIX A
Sample Utility 
Patents

218

219

220

221

222

223

224

225

226

227

228

229

230

231

232

233

234

APPENDIX B
Sample Design 
Patents

236

237

238

239

240

241

242

243

244

245

246

247

248

249

250

251

This page intentionally left blank 

Index
Abandonment, 99-100, 105, 128-29
Abstract ideas, 24, 208-9
Advice of counsel, 192-93
All elements rule, 150, 160-62
Amendments to claims, 34, 90, 167
Analogous arts, 113-14
Anticipation, 94, 108-11, 183
Application for patent, 11-12, 14, 16,
32, 47, 98. See also Claims
Drawings, 17-18
Preferred embodiments, 19, 58
Provisional applications, 35
Speciﬁcation, 18-19, 57-59, 79, 90
Artistic and literary creations, 28-29
Assignments, 16, 48, 177
Assignor estoppel, 73-74
Attorneys’ fees, 193-94
Bargain model of patent law, 2-3, 80, 85
Best mode requirement, 19, 80-81, 85-89
Bifurcation, 184-85
Board of Patent Appeals and
Interferences, 34, 39
Burdens of proof, 72-73, 105-8, 182
Claims, 14, 19-21, 52-70, 77-78
Amendments, 34, 90, 167
Dependent claims, 19-21
Doctrine of claim differentiation, 61
Independent claims, 19-20
Interpretation, 52-70, 79, 108, 149-50,
184-85
Jepson claims, 64-65
Markush claims, 65
Means-plus-function claims, 59, 67-69,
171-74
Ordinary meaning, 56-57
Preambles, 20, 62-64
Product-by-process claims, 65-67
Step-plus-function claims, 69-70
Classiﬁcation of inventions, 16-17
Combination of prior art references,
113, 115-16
Commercial success, 118-19
Computer programs, 10-11, 29, 207-12
Conception, 45-46, 100-102, 105-6
Constitutional source of patent law, 1-2,
23
Constructive reduction to practice, 102-3
Continuations, 16, 34, 36-37
Continuations-in-part, 16, 37-38
Contributory infringement, 145-49

Copyrights, 9-11
Critical date, 121-23
Damages, 183, 188-91
Date of invention, 100-107, 121
Declaratory judgment, 180-81
Deﬁniteness requirement, 77-80
Dependent claims, 19-21
Derivation, 120-21
Design patents, 14, 201-4
Diligence toward reduction to practice,
103-6
Direct infringement, 145
Divisional applications, 38, 131
Doctrine of claim differentiation, 61
Doctrine of equivalents, 80, 151-75, 184
All elements rule, 160-62
Improvements, 158-60
Limited by prior art, 162-64
Prosecution history estoppel, 164-69
Reverse doctrine of equivalents,
174-75
Unclaimed embodiments, 169-71
Double patenting, 129-31
Drawings, 17-18
Duty of candor in prosecution, 34-35,
134
Enablement requirement, 19, 80-85,
92-94
Equitable estoppel, 184, 198-99
Examination. See Prosecution
Experimental use exception to
infringement, 175-76
Federal Circuit Court of Appeals, 7
File wrapper. See Prosecution history
First sale doctrine, 50-51
Foreign patents, 143, 206-7
History of patents, 1-2
Implied licenses, 50-52
Improvements, 150-51, 158-60
Incentive theory of patent law, 2
Independent claims, 19-20
Indirect infringement, 145-49
Inducement to infringe, 145-46
Industry standards, 52
Inequitable conduct, 133-37, 184
Infringement, 14, 21, 108, 141-76. See
also Remedies for infringement
All elements rule, 150, 160-62
Burden of proof, 182
Claim interpretation, 52-70, 79, 108,
149-50, 184-85
Contributory infringement, 145-49
Direct infringement, 145
Doctrine of equivalents, 80, 151-75,
184
Experimental use exception, 175-76
Geographic limitations, 143-44
Indirect infringement, 145-49
Inducement, 145-46
Literal infringement, 149-51, 171-72
Means-plus-function claims, 59, 67-69,
171-74
Notice of infringement, 195-96
Repair and reconstruction, 147-49
Reverse doctrine of equivalents,
174-75
State of mind, 144-45
Willful infringement, 145, 191-94
Injunctions, 14, 49-50, 183-84, 187-88
Interferences, 38-40
International Trade Commission (ITC),
199
Interpretation of claims. See Claims,
Interpretation
Intervening rights, 41-42
Inventive entity, 107-8
Inventorship, 45-47
Jepson claims, 64-65
Jurisdiction, 178-79
Laches, 184, 196-98
Legal estoppel, 51-52
Licenses, 48-51, 138-39, 177-78
Literal infringement, 149-51, 171-72
Litigation, 49, 71-72, 177-200. See also
Remedies for infringement
Advice of counsel, 192-93
Attorneys’ fees, 193-94
254
Index

Bifurcation, 184-85
Burdens of proof, 72-73, 105-8, 182
Damages, 183, 188-91
Declaratory judgment, 180-81
Federal Circuit Court of Appeals, 7
Injunctions, 14, 49-50, 183-84, 187-88
International Trade Commission
(ITC), 199
Jurisdiction, 178-79
Laches, 184, 196-98
Markman hearing, 184-85
Notice and marking, 195-96
Preliminary injunctions, 185-86
Presumption of validity, 72-73, 133
Role of judge and jury, 182-84
Statute of limitations, 194
Summary judgment, 186-87
Venue, 177-80
Living organisms, 27-28
Lost proﬁts measure of damages, 188-90
Marking of patented goods, 195-96
Markman hearing, 184-85
Markush claims, 65
Means-plus-function claims, 59, 67-69,
171-74
Mental steps, 24-25, 31
Methods of doing business, 30-31
Misuse, 137-40
Natural rights theory of patent law, 2
Near-simultaneous invention, 120
New matter, 34, 40
Nexus, 119
Notice and marking, 195-96
Novelty, 14, 94-111
Obviousness, 14, 94, 111-20, 123
Analogous arts, 113-14
Combination of references, 113,
115-16
Commercial success, 118-19
Near-simultaneous invention, 120
Nexus, 119
Obviousness-type double patenting,
129-31
Ordinary skill in the art, 112
Secondary considerations, 118-20
Teaching away, 114
On-sale bar, 123-26
Ordinary skill in the art, 112
Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (PTO), 2,
14, 17
Patentable subject matter, 23-31
Abstract ideas, 24, 208-9
Artistic and literary creations, 28-29
Computer programs, 10-11, 29, 
207-12
Living organisms, 27-28
Mental steps, 24-25, 31
Methods of doing business, 30-31
Principles of nature, 25-27
Printed matter, 29-30
“Useful arts,” 1-2, 14, 23-25, 30-31
Pioneer patents, 163-64
Plant patents, 28, 204-6
Preambles, 20, 62-64
Preferred embodiments, 19, 58
Preliminary injunctions, 185-86
Presumption of validity, 72-73, 133
Printed matter, 29-30
Principles of nature, 25-27
Printed publications, 94-98
Prior art, 17, 32, 94-108, 162-64
Printed publications, 94-98
Prior inventions, 94-95, 98-100
Prior knowledge, 94-95
Prior patent applications, 98
Prior use, 94-95
Priority of invention, 98-107
Conception, 45-46, 100-102, 105-6
Constructive reduction to practice,
102-3
Date of invention, 100-107, 121
Diligence toward reduction to
practice, 103-6
Interferences, 38-40
Reduction to practice, 100-103, 106-7
Product-by-process claims, 65-67
Prosecution, 32-43, 71-72, 141-42
Amendments to claims, 34, 90, 167
Application for patent, 11-12, 14, 16,
32, 47, 98
Index
255

Prosecution (continued)
Board of Patent Appeals and
Interferences, 34, 39
Classiﬁcation of inventions, 16-17
Continuations, 16, 34, 36-37
Continuations-in-part, 16, 37, 38
Divisional applications, 38, 131
Double patenting, 129-131
Duty of candor, 34-35, 134
Inequitable conduct, 133-37, 184
Interferences, 38-40
New matter, 37-40
Patent and Trademark Ofﬁce (PTO),
2, 14, 17
Patent examiners, 17, 32
Prosecution history, 36, 59-61, 79
Prosecution history estoppel, 164-69
Provisional applications, 35
Reexamination, 42-43
Reissue, 40-42
Request for continued examination
(RCE), 34
Restriction requirements, 38, 131
Terminal disclaimers, 131
Prosecution history, 36, 59-61, 79
Prosecution history estoppel, 164-69
Provisional applications, 35
Provisional rights, 35, 142-43
Public use bar, 126-28
Reasonable royalty measure of
damages, 190-91
Reduction to practice, 100-103, 106-7
Reexamination, 42-43
Reform proposals, 212-24
Reissue, 40-42
Remedies for infringement, 187-91
Attorneys’ fees, 193-94
Damages, 183, 188-91
Injunctions, 14, 49-50, 183-84, 187-88
Lost proﬁts measure of damages,
188-90
Preliminary injunctions, 185-86
Reasonable royalty measure of
damages, 190-91
Willful infringement, 145, 191-94
Repair and reconstruction, 147-49
Request for continued examination
(RCE), 34
Restriction requirements, 38, 131
Reverse doctrine of equivalents, 174-75
Secondary considerations, 118-20
Simultaneous conception and
reduction to practice, 102
Sources of law, 6-7
Speciﬁcation, 18-19, 57-59, 79, 90
Preferred embodiments, 19, 58
Use in interpreting claims, 19, 57-59,
79
Statute of limitations, 194
Statute of monopolies, 1
Statutory bars, 121-29
Critical date, 121-23
On-sale bar, 123-26 
Public use bar, 126-28
Step-plus-function claims, 69-70
Summary judgment, 186-87
Terminal disclaimers, 131
Term of patents, 14, 141-43
Trademarks, 11
Trade secrets, 11-14
Tying, 119-21
Unclaimed embodiments, 169-71
Unenforceability, 35, 133-34, 137-38,
140
Inequitable conduct, 133-37, 184
Misuse, 137-40
United States Constitution, 1-2, 23, 183
“Useful arts,” 1-2, 14, 23, 24-25, 30-31
Utility patents, 14, 28
Utility requirement, 74-77
Validity, 62, 71-131, 200
Anticipation, 94, 108-111, 183
Assignor estoppel, 73-74
Best mode requirement, 19, 80-81,
85-89
Burden of proof, 72-73, 105-8, 182
Deﬁniteness requirement, 77-80
Derivation, 120-21
Double patenting, 129-31
256
Index

Enablement requirement, 19, 80-85,
92-94
Novelty requirement, 14, 94-111
Obviousness, 14, 94, 111-120, 123
On-sale bar, 123-26 
Patentable subject matter, 23-31
Presumption of validity, 72-73, 133
Public use bar, 126-128
Statutory bars, 121-129
Utility requirement, 74-77
Written description requirement,
90-94
Venue, 177-80
Willful infringement, 145, 191-94
Written description requirement, 90-94
Index
257

This page intentionally left blank 

About the Author
ALAN L. DURHAM is Professor of Law at the University of Alabama
School of Law, where he teaches in the areas of intellectual property,
antitrust, and torts. A native of California's Silicon Valley, he practiced law
there from 1989 to 1998, primarily in the ﬁeld of high-technology patent lit-
igation. He has a J.D. from the University of California, Berkeley.

