Mike Barlow & Gregory Fell
What You Don’t Know Will Hurt You
Patrolling 
the Dark Net



Mike Barlow and Gregory Fell
Patrolling the Dark Net
What You Don’t Know Will Hurt You
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-94427-1
[LSI]
Patrolling the Dark Net
by Mike Barlow and Gregory Fell
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Courtney Allen
Production Editor: Shiny Kalapurakkel
Copyeditor: Dianne Russell, Octal Pub‐
lishing, Inc.
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
Illustrator: Rebecca Panzer
July 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-06-15: First Release
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Patrolling the
Dark Net, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media,
Inc.
While the publisher and the authors have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the authors disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without
limitation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this
work. Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own
risk. If any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is sub‐
ject to open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your
responsibility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or
rights.

Table of Contents
Patrolling the Dark Net. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
Underneath the Surface                                                                            2
Economic Whack-a-Mole                                                                        3
Anonymity Rules                                                                                       4
Distributing Trust                                                                                     5
From Niche to Mainstream                                                                     6
Conducting Reconnaissance                                                                   8
Gathering Threat Intelligence                                                               10
Lurking Within the Perimeter                                                               11
Shining a Light into the Darkness                                                        11
iii


Patrolling the Dark Net
If you’ve ever been burglarized, you know the drill: police officers
arrive, they look briefly around your home, and then they ask you
for a detailed list of the stolen items. In some cases, the stolen items
are recovered within a few days and eventually returned.
When cops find stolen goods quickly, it’s most likely because they
know where to look. Burglars aren’t interested in keeping your flat-
screen monitor and Xbox; they want cash. They bring their loot to a
middleman (also known as a fence) who specializes in reselling sto‐
len goods. Usually, the stolen goods sit in the fence’s shed or base‐
ment until a buyer is found.
Cybercrime is similar to burglary, except that cyber criminals steal
electronic information rather than electronic gear, and the stolen
information sits in hidden databases instead of someone’s basement.
There’s also another critical difference between cybercrime and
ordinary burglary: when your home has been burglarized, you know
it immediately. There are broken doors, smashed windows, and an
open space on the wall where your widescreen television was moun‐
ted. When a cybercrime is committed, it often remains undetected
for weeks or months. The time lag creates an advantage for cyber
criminals, giving them an edge that ordinary criminals rarely enjoy.
1

Underneath the Surface
Detecting cybercrime and defending your organization from cyber
criminals requires understanding how the bad guys operate and
gaining a basic familiarity with the parts of the Internet they use to
commit their crimes.
The part of the Internet we’re most accustomed to using is the
World Wide Web, or surface web. We use search engines such as
Google, Yahoo, and Bing to find information on the surface web.
The look, feel, and protocol (HTTP) of the surface web have become
familiar.
Underneath the surface web is the deep web, a much larger pool of
information that is largely untouched by search engines. No one
exactly knows the size of the deep web, because most of it is beyond
the reach of traditional search engines.
Typically, information resources on the deep web are accessed
through direct queries. In other words, you need to know precisely
what information you’re looking for and you often need to have
some kind of authorization to obtain the information. The vast
majority of information on the deep web is public—it’s just not as
easy to find as the information on the surface web.
Examples of deep-web resources include court records, government
records, medical and legal databases, economic data, election data,
newspaper and magazine articles, scholarly content, corporate intra‐
nets, and content from older or inactive websites. On any given day,
the majority of people using the deep web are likely to be librarians,
archivists, and government workers.
The dark net is a smaller realm existing within the deep web. Infor‐
mation on the dark net is often intentionally obscured, hidden or
anonymized. Accessing the dark net requires special tools and soft‐
ware—nobody accidentally “stumbles” into the dark net.
That makes the dark net an ideal place for people whose interests or
careers require secrecy and anonymity. The dark net is where people
go when they want to connect on the sly with political dissidents,
whistleblowers, informants, undercover detectives, investigative
reporters, espionage agents, cyber criminals, spammers, drug deal‐
ers, child pornographers, terrorists, and assassins.
2 
| 
Patrolling the Dark Net

Even if the dark net isn’t the nicest neighborhood on the deep web,
many see it as a sacred bastion of privacy in a global culture of
omnipresent computing, ubiquitous wireless access, high-speed dig‐
ital networks, and continual surveillance.
You don’t need to be a libertarian or an anarchist to appreciate the
value of privacy or to question the degree to which governments
impose their authority. The dark net is a place where people are free
to express their innermost thoughts and act on their desires. Most of
those thoughts and desires are harmless. Some of them are danger‐
ous.
Economic Whack-a-Mole
Resistance to authority is a common thread in history. Flouting
rules, circumventing convention, and bending laws are human
traits. When there’s an economic incentive, the urge to ignore or
subvert the law becomes even stronger.
Black markets thrive when governments make it difficult for people
to obtain goods and services needed for survival or enjoyment. In a
sense, black markets are symptoms of dysfunctional free markets. If
you could buy everything you wanted legally, there would be no
need for black markets.
For example, we can view the proliferation of file-sharing networks
as a natural reaction to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act
(DMCA), which was enacted to curtail the rise of digital file sharing.
In a similar way, the emergence of online markets for illegal drugs
can be seen as a natural response to the “war on drugs,” which
actually made it more dangerous for people to buy drugs on the
street.
It’s a never-ending game of economic whack-a-mole in which gov‐
ernments pass laws restricting certain types of behaviors and black
markets emerge to help people circumvent those laws.
There are also black markets for ideas. Those of us who are fortu‐
nate enough to live in free and open societies often forget that our
freedoms of expression are not universal. In many parts of the
world, expressing ideas that your government finds objectionable
will get you thrown in jail—or worse. For people living under
authoritarian regimes, the dark net provides a forum for sharing
ideas anonymously.
Economic Whack-a-Mole 
| 
3

Even in free societies, consumers are pushing back at being treated
as raw material by large search engine firms, which create value by
converting consumer browsing habits into digital marketing assets.
Although it’s marginally less creepy than the plot of Soylent Green,
the process by which Internet companies now routinely collect our
data, process it, and then sell it back to us as a product is troubling
to many people.
It also raises the question of how much surveillance is too much.
Companies that collect data about our online habits refer to their
practices as traffic analysis. But in practice, there is little difference
between traffic analysis and surveillance. Internet companies know
what you’re reading, listening to, and watching. They also know who
you’re communicating with, and when.
The dark net is a place where people can escape from that kind of
routine surveillance. If the idea of sharing your browsing habits with
a third party doesn’t appeal to you, the dark net is a haven.
Not all security experts see the dark parts of the web as unredeema‐
ble minefields of existential danger. “The dark net isn’t all bad. It
provides anonymity, which means folks of all walks of life can be
found there,” says Justine Bone, an independent cyber security con‐
sultant. She agrees that large companies—especially large companies
in highly regulated industries—should monitor the dark net for
signs of information theft.
“It’s no more risky than surfing the regularly accessible parts of the
web,” says Bone. “One could even argue there’s less malware target‐
ing folks over the dark net. And we’re already seeing companies
such as DarkSum, which provides products and services for navigat‐
ing the dark net.”
Anonymity Rules
The existence of the dark net is scarcely a secret. For dark net users,
secrecy is less important than anonymity. That might seem like a
fine point, but it makes all the difference. Anonymity is critical to
the longevity of sub rosa networks, even after they become known to
the public.
Ironically, the software most closely associated with dark net ano‐
nymity was developed at the United States Naval Research Labora‐
tory in the mid-1990s. Tor, an acronym for “The Onion Routing,” is
4 
| 
Patrolling the Dark Net

free software that makes it very difficult to trace Internet activity
back to a user. Tor essentially routes Internet traffic through an open
volunteer network of about 10,000 nodes, encrypting data multiple
times as it passes randomly through successive nodes. Here’s a brief
description from the Tor Project website:
The idea is similar to using a twisty, hard-to-follow route in order
to throw off somebody who is tailing you—and then periodically
erasing your footprints. Instead of taking a direct route from source
to destination, data packets on the Tor network take a random
pathway through several relays that cover your tracks so no
observer at any single point can tell where the data came from or
where it’s going.
What makes Tor incomparably useful is its ability to hide both the
contents of a data packet and the header used for routing. As a
result, the message itself is encrypted and it’s difficult for a tracker to
determine who sent the message or who received it.
The inventors of onion routing thought that it would be useful tech‐
nology for open-source intelligence gathering and for protecting
travelling Navy personnel, explains Paul Syverson, one of the
researchers who pioneered Tor. Prior to the development of onion
routing, Navy personnel could send encrypted messages while trav‐
eling, but had no practical way of completely concealing their Inter‐
net activities from watchful enemies.
Distributing Trust
Cyber criminals look for the most vulnerable parts of your systems,
and attack you there. Every segment of every system should be con‐
sidered vulnerable and susceptible to attack, even the parts that are
designed to be secure, such as virtual private networks (VPNs).
The problem with a VPN is that other people can still “see” when
you are using it. Messages going in and out of VPNs are recogniza‐
ble, which means you can be identified by people who want to vio‐
late your privacy or steal your secrets.
“Your VPN is a single point of trust, which means it can also
become a single point of failure,” says Syverson. “Maybe someone
hacked into it. Or, if it’s a commercial VPN, they might be selling
your data. Or maybe your VPN is bought by another company that
will sell your data. So you have to worry about your VPN. And even
Distributing Trust 
| 
5

if your traffic is encrypted, other people can still see that you’re log‐
ging into a secure network, which identifies your interests.”
Syverson and his colleagues set out to develop a practical alternative
to the single point of trust/failure scenario facing agents in the field
or anyone who requires anonymity to remain safe and secure.
“We came up with the idea of separating identification from routing
so the data packet can get where it’s going without the network auto‐
matically knowing who sent what to whom,” Syverson explains.
“Onion routing distributes the trust around the network so even if
one point is compromised, your identity isn’t revealed.”
Onion routing preserves the anonymity of the sender and the
receiver of a message, creating an end-to-end continuum of privacy.
Because Tor is an open source project, anyone can download it and
begin using it. By design, each additional node adds strength to the
Tor community of users.
From Niche to Mainstream
What can we learn from the dark net and the technologies that
enable it? A fair amount, as it happens. “There’s a whole group of
companies out there developing or providing services designed to
answer growing concerns about privacy and security,” says Dr.
Shaun Brady, an expert on risk and data management who consults
regularly for government and the private sector.
“Allowing your emails, searches, location, and transactions to be
monitored and monetized in return for free services may remain
appealing to many,” says Brady. “But more people are waking up to
the reality that in order to truly protect their privacy, they need to
take back control of their digital identities.”
A new generation of email servers and browsers provides anonymity
to everyday users. New password management systems offer both
security and manageability. “We’re seeing new privacy services that
are easy to navigate and easy to use. People are picking up on these
services and they’re becoming mainstream,” says Brady.
Brady is among a group of security experts and cryptologists that
recently formed the Identity Wallet Foundation, a nonprofit organi‐
zation focused on grassroots-level privacy.
6 
| 
Patrolling the Dark Net

“We’re trying to make it easier for the average citizen to take advan‐
tage of the tools that are available,” he says. “You can’t preserve your
privacy unless you have control over what you release into the world
about yourself.”
Online privacy begins with hiding your computer’s IP address. That
will require installing Tor or similar software. After you’ve done
that, there are email services you can use that will keep you anony‐
mous, such as TorGuard Anonymous Email, Secure Mail, Guerrilla
Mail, The AnonymousEmail, and Tutanota.
For anonymous purchasing, there are cryptocurrencies such as Bit‐
coin, Auroracoin, BlackCoin, Mastercoin, Ether, PotCoin, and oth‐
ers. Password management tools include Enpass, Keychain,
LastPass, and mSecure.
Do any of those products or services, by themselves or in combina‐
tion, offer total privacy and security? It would seem unlikely. But
like seat belts and airbags in cars, they represent our common desire
for greater safety.
The emergence of “privacy as a business model” also reflects our
rejection of the idea that it’s okay to trade our innermost personal
secrets for the privilege of using products that are free or reasonably
priced.
Slowly but surely, we’re developing a more nuanced view of privacy.
Back in 1999, when Scott McNealy, then the CEO of Sun Microsys‐
tems, told a group of reporters, “You have zero privacy anyway…Get
over it,” it seemed like a shocking statement. Now it seems misin‐
formed and short-sighted.
Most of us accept the fact that technology has transformed our lives.
But that doesn’t mean we want to be treated as “data generators” for
the information economy. Somewhere between total transparency
and total secrecy is a balancing point. The dark net offers clues for
finding that balance.
More immediately, the dark net and the dark web are the places to
look for signs that your organization’s information systems have
been hacked. If your confidential data has been stolen and is for sale,
the dark parts of the Internet are where you can find it. That makes
a dark net and the dark web worth patrolling, whether you do it
yourself or with the help of experts.
From Niche to Mainstream 
| 
7

Conducting Reconnaissance
Sometimes, months or even years can pass before stolen data surfa‐
ces publicly. According to the rumor mill in cyber security circles,
stolen data from the Target and Sony breaches sat on the dark web—
which is a collection of secretive websites operating within the dark
net—for months before making headlines.
Experienced cyber investigators know the best place to begin look‐
ing for stolen information is on the dark web. Many security experts
now recommend conducting regular, proactive reconnaissance of
the dark web for the express purpose of making sure your compa‐
ny’s confidential information isn’t already out there, waiting to be
bought and exploited by cyber criminals.
That said, you can’t just go strolling across the dark web and blithely
ask if anyone has seen your private data. Like a good undercover
cop, you need to know how to ask questions without revealing your
identity or accidentally breaking the law.
Mark Johnson is CEO of Sovereign Intelligence, one of several con‐
sulting firms specializing in helping companies deal with potential
dangers posed by the dark net. A former Naval Criminal Investiga‐
tive Service (NCIS) special agent and intelligence case officer, he
understands the nuts and bolts of clandestine investigations.
It all begins with good defensive measures, but there’s a catch: in the
old days, the perimeter was much smaller and more manageable.
Today, the perimeter is virtually limitless. “Companies should watch
for conspiracies,” says Johnson. “If you are able to extend the perim‐
eter of your cyber security into these illicit domains, you can catch
the conspiracy and potentially find out who’s involved. Remember, it
can be days, weeks, or months before an actual exploitation actually
happens.”
Johnson recalls an investigation in which a large firm learned that it
had been hacked. The hacker had covered his tracks internally, but
Johnson’s team quickly discovered that one of the company’s
employees had offered to sell the stolen data on a criminal website in
the dark web.
Plowing through the dark web and actually finding good informa‐
tion isn’t easy, but it can be done with the right set of investigative
skills and a certain amount of tradecraft.
8 
| 
Patrolling the Dark Net

“Part of it is just good old-fashioned research, where you’re doing
search after search after search. Eventually, you start pulling in use‐
ful data and indexing the sites so you can go back,” he explains.
Last year, NASA and DARPA joined forces to index the deep web. If
their partnership is successful and yields positive results, it will
probably encourage entrepreneurs and investors to launch startups
aimed at “commercializing” deep-web indexing. In the meantime,
however, patrolling the dark web is mainly a job for cyber security
professionals.
Does that mean every large company should set up a division to
monitor the dark web? Probably not, says James Chappell, chief
technology officer and cofounder of Digital Shadows, a firm that
helps companies protect themselves from cyber attacks, loss of intel‐
lectual property, and loss of brand and reputational integrity.
“The dark web itself does not necessarily pose a direct risk to organ‐
izations,” Chappell notes in an email response to our questions. But
because criminal syndicates now use the dark web, it would be fool‐
hardy to simply ignore it.
“A whole criminal ecosystem has evolved over time, facilitating a
growing new subversive economy,” writes Chappell. Different kinds
of organizations face different kinds of risks from criminals special‐
izing in various types of crime.
For example, banks need to worry about the theft and sale of finan‐
cial data such as credit card numbers and bank accounts. Manufac‐
turing companies need to worry about intellectual property theft
that would compromise trade secrets. Hospitals and healthcare pro‐
viders need to worry about keeping patient information secure and
confidential.
“One of the best ways that organizations can mitigate those risks is
to maintain a high level of awareness of the activities taking place
online,” writes Chappell. Keeping an eye on the dark web can help
you stay ahead of the criminals and align your security efforts more
effectively to counter new and emerging tactics, techniques, and
procedures (TTPs) used by the bad guys.
Conducting Reconnaissance 
| 
9

Gathering Threat Intelligence
Marc Goodman, a former LAPD investigator and author of Future
Crimes: Inside the Digital Underground the Battle for Our Connected
World, urges businesses to engage in “open-source intelligence gath‐
ering,” which involves searching the dark web regularly for publicly
available information that might provide indications of a breach.
“You need to be aware when your company data is floating around
out there,” says Goodman. “You need to be proactive and on the
lookout. You need to know when people in chat rooms or channels
are talking about hacking your company. The dark web is a great
place to look for threat intelligence.”
Goodman warns of an increasingly well-organized criminal infra‐
structure emerging within the dark web. It’s all part of what he
describes as a larger “technological arms race” between good guys
and bad guys. From Goodman’s perspective, it would be a mistake to
rely primarily on law enforcement for protection from cyber crimi‐
nals. It makes more sense, he says, for the burden of responsibility to
be shared more widely across society.
But, he is not in favor of untrained individuals or small companies
with limited resources conducting their own recon missions on the
dark web. “You don’t want people accidentally viewing child pornog‐
raphy on their corporate network,” he says. “There’s a level of inves‐
tigative tradecraft required. The average systems administrator
probably doesn’t have the operational skills necessary to pass himself
off as a hacker on the dark web.”
DarkSum’s website certainly appears to address mainstream con‐
cerns about the dark net:
The DarkSum™ platform allows customers to safely search, monitor,
and create custom alerts for information of interest in publicly
available darknet systems.
It’s far too early to tell whether the dark net will emerge as a growth
market within the tech industry. But it seems entirely fair to say the
dark net is worth watching and warrants a deeper dive.
10 
| 
Patrolling the Dark Net

Lurking Within the Perimeter
Companies must also be watchful for illicit usage of their networks
and IT resources by cyber criminals operating from sites on the dark
net or dark web. “A question you should be asking is, ‘Are our net‐
works being used to support a dark net operation?’ That’s a potential
hazard,” says Richard Moore, a managing director specializing in
cyber risk at Alvarez & Marsal, a global professional services firm.
“There were companies that had dark nets running on their net‐
works and they weren’t aware of it.”
Cyber criminals will look for companies with large, decentralized IT
systems and lax security. After the bad guys are inside your network,
they can be hard to spot.
In addition to posing liability and reputational risks, cyber criminals
operating inside your networks can disrupt your business. “If you’re
running a highly customized application that requires a certain
bandwidth and there’s a criminal also consuming that bandwidth,
the criminal’s activity might put you offline, and then you’re in
breach of contract with your customers,” Moore explains.
Companies should inspect their networks and systems regularly to
make sure they are used exclusively for their intended purposes and
not being used by cyber criminals, says Moore. Finding unauthor‐
ized peer-to-peer or friend-to-friend applications, or discovering
unrecognized VPNs, would be telltale signs of improper usage and
warrant deeper probing.
Shining a Light into the Darkness
Because the dark parts of the Internet also provide safety for people
and organizations with legitimate reasons for seeking privacy, it
would be imprudent to simply advocate in favor of measures to
abolish or eradicate the deeper and darker layers, even when those
layers provide temporary or occasional havens for criminals.
A better strategy would be learning and understanding as much
about the dark net as possible, and taking advantage of its positive
qualities to improve the security, safety and privacy of law-abiding
citizens and companies.
Lurking Within the Perimeter 
| 
11

An excellent resource is Building Security in Maturity Model Version
6 (BSIMM6), a document based on a multiyear study of software
security at dozens of major firms. BSIMM6 also highlights the evo‐
lutionary nature of cyber security and cyber risk.
It’s entirely possible to imagine a future in which individuals or
organizations will use Tor (or similar secure networks) routinely,
much the way we lock the doors of our homes and our automobiles
today, without the neighbors wondering what we’re trying to hide.
12 
| 
Patrolling the Dark Net

About the Authors
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author, and communi‐
cations strategy consultant. Since launching his own firm, Cumulus
Partners, he has worked with various organizations in numerous
industries.
Barlow is the author of Learning to Love Data Science (O’Reilly,
2015). He is the coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise
Social Media Strategy (Wiley, 2011) and Partnering with the CIO: The
Future of IT Sales Seen Through the Eyes of Key Decision Makers
(Wiley, 2007). He is also the writer of many articles, reports, and
white papers on numerous topics such as collaborative social net‐
working, cloud computing, IT infrastructure, predictive mainte‐
nance, data analytics, and data visualization.
Over the course of a long career, Barlow was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including The Journal
News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns
appeared regularly in The Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune,
Miami Herald, Newsday, and other major US dailies. He has also
written extensively for O’Reilly Media.
A graduate of Hamilton College, he is a licensed private pilot, avid
reader, and enthusiastic ice hockey fan.
Gregory Fell is a general partner in The Investors Collaborative, a
Boston-based venture capital group. He is the former chief strategy
officer at Crisply, an enterprise SaaS company that pioneered the
algorithmic quantification of work. Previously, he served as vice
president and chief information officer of Terex Corp., a global
manufacturer of industrial equipment.
Before joining Terex, Fell spent nearly 20 years with Ford Motor
Company. He started as a developer and worked his way through a
variety of management roles supporting the global Engineering and
Manufacturing functions of the company. He has domain expertise
on CAD/CAM/CAE systems, lean manufacturing, and control sys‐
tems.
Fell is a graduate of Michigan State University. He spent several
years on staff in the College of Engineering as a senior research pro‐
grammer and instructor.

He is active in the CIO community: the former chairman of the
Fairfield Westchester Society of Information Managers, a former
board member with Junior Achievement, and he has mentored high
school students through the First Tee Program.
His book, Decoding the IT Value Problem (Wiley, 2013), is used
widely by CIOs to calculate the economic value of IT projects.

