
The Tradition of Non-Use of Nuclear Weapons


The Tradition of Non-Use 
 of Nuclear Weapons
T. V. Paul
STANFORD SECURITY STUDIES
An Imprint of Stanford University Press
Stanford, California

Stanford University Press
Stanford, California
© 2009 by the Board of Trustees of the Leland Stanford Junior University.  
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system without the prior written permission of Stanford University Press.
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free, archival-quality paper
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Paul, T. V. 
  The tradition of non-use of nuclear weapons / T. V. Paul. 
       p. cm. 
  Includes bibliographical references and index. 
  ISBN 978-0-8047-6131-4 (cloth : alk. paper)—ISBN 978-0-8047-6132-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
 1.  Nuclear weapons—Government policy. 2.  Nuclear nonproliferation—Government 
policy. 3.  Nuclear weapons—Moral and ethical aspects. 4.  Nuclear warfare—Psychological 
aspects. 5.  Deterrence (Strategy)  I. Title. 
  U264.P38 2009 
  355.02'17—dc22 
	
2008025300
Typeset by Thompson Type in 10/14 Minion
Special discounts for bulk quantities of Stanford Security Studies are available to 
corporations, professional associations, and other organizations. For details and discount 
information, contact the special sales department of Stanford University Press.  
Tel: (650) 736-1783, Fax: (650) 736-1784

Contents
	
	 Acknowledgments	
vii
	
1	 Introduction	
1
	
2	 Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use	
15
	
3	 The United States and the Tradition I:  
The Truman and Eisenhower Years (1945–1961)	
38
	
4	 The United States and the Tradition II:  
Kennedy to Clinton (1961–2001)	
64
	
5	 Russia, Britain, France, China, and the Tradition	
92
	
6	 The Second-Generation Nuclear States:  
Israel, India, Pakistan, and the Tradition	
124
	
7	 Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars	
143
	
8	 The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime	
158
	
9	 Changing U.S. Policies and the Tradition	
178
	
10	 Conclusions	
197
	
	 Notes	
217
	
	 Select Bibliography	
277
	
	 Index	
305


vii
Acknowledgments
The idea of  wr it ing a book on nuclear non-use first occurred to me in 
1990 when as a doctoral student at the University of California, Los Angeles 
(UCLA), I attended a presentation on the subject by Thomas Schelling. The 
eminent strategic scholar had discussed this subject briefly in several of his 
writings, but a book-length study was missing in the literature. Since then, 
scholars, especially of the Constructivist vein, have written on the subject of 
the nuclear taboo, but they tend to undervalue the material dimensions of the 
issue. In this book, I have developed an argument for the rise and persistence of 
the tradition of non-use based on reputation and image concerns while linking 
these factors to normative considerations. The work is partially motivated by  
a concern for the preservation of the tradition in light of changes taking place 
in the nuclear policies of the United States and other nuclear powers, as this 
tradition serves many cherished goals of the international community, espe-
cially in the areas of nuclear nonproliferation and prevention of nuclear war.
My work has been immensely helped by a wide array of scholars and grad-
uate student assistants over the years. I am especially thankful to Timothy 
Crawford, Jeffrey Knopf, and Patrick Morgan, who made extensive comments 
on my full draft manuscript. Others who read and commented various chapters 
include the late Hayward Alker, William Bain, Rajesh Basrur, Avner Cohen, 
Richard Harknett, Patrick James, Paul Kapur, Hiro Katsumata, Peter Katzen-
stein, Christopher Layne, Michael Lipson, Mark Manger, Terry McNamee,  
Vincent Pouliot, Richard Price, Norrin Ripsman, T. P. Sreenivasan, John 
Vasquez, and Christopher Way. Special praise goes to Theodore McLauchlin 

and Mahesh Shankar for reading and copy-editing the manuscript. Theodore 
also made many constructive suggestions for improving the manuscript. Over 
the years, Simon Collard-Wexler and William Hogg collected a considerable 
amount of material for this project.
Others who helped me in some way or other in making this book possible 
include Bahar Akman, John Hall, Izumi Kawaskai, Christopher Manfredi, 
Imad Mansour, Carman Miller, Douglas Porch, Lawrence Prabhakar, Richard  
Schultz, Nina Tannenwald, Stéfanie Von Hlatky, and James Wirtz. Presen-
tations at the University of British Columbia, the University of Cincinnati, 
Cornell University, the University of Hong Kong, the University of Southern 
California, the George Bush School at Texas A&M University, Jawaharlal 
Nehru University (New Delhi), Loyola College (Chennai), Mahatma Gandhi 
University (Kottayam), S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies (Singa-
pore), the Indian Institute of Science (Bangalore), Kerala University (Trivan-
drum), the Royal United Services Institute for Defense Studies (London), and 
the University of Wales at Aberystwyth, and several conference panels at the 
American Political Science Association, International Studies Association, 
and British International Studies Association, all have provided me oppor-
tunities for examining the validity of my ideas. Generous funding from the 
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC), Fonds 
québécois de la recherche sur la société et la culture (FQRSC), James McGill 
Chair, Naval Postgraduate School, and the Security and Defense Forum (SDF) 
helped me tremendously in undertaking travel, research, and writing. Geoffrey  
Burn, Editor and Director of Stanford University Press, showed keen interest 
in the book project. I also acknowledge that portions of Chapters 1 and 7 are 
drawn from my article, “Nuclear Taboo and War Initiation: Nuclear Weapons 
in Regional Conflicts,” Journal of Conἀict Resolution 39(4) (December 1995), 
696–717 (with permission from Sage Publications). It has taken many years 
for me to complete this book as other projects intervened. My family mem-
bers frequently bore with my absences for field research and conferences, and 
I lovingly dedicate this book to them—my wife, Rachel, and my daughters, 
Kavya and Leah.
Montreal
August 2008 
viii  Acknowledgments

The Tradition of Non-Use of Nuclear Weapons


1
 1 INTRODUCTION
in august  2008, the world observed the sixty-third anniversary of the atomic 
bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, history’s first and only instances of 
nuclear attack. Since 1945, the nuclear age has generated considerable debate 
on the utility, morality, and legitimacy of the acquisition, possession, con-
trol, and use of nuclear weapons. Buried in the global discourse on the nu-
clear dilemma is the fact that atomic weapons have not been used militarily 
by any nuclear state since 1945. While their non-use between nuclear states 
may largely be explained by the operation of mutual deterrence, it remains 
a puzzle as to why these weapons have not been used against nonnuclear 
opponents, who could not retaliate in kind. In some cases, nuclear weapon 
states (NWS) have lost the wars they fought against nonnuclear weapon states 
(NNWS). Occasionally, NWS have experienced the temptation to use their 
atomic arms, yet desisted from doing so. In other instances, nonnuclear states 
initiated crises or wars, anticipating non-use of atomic weapons by the de-
fending nuclear state. In some other cases, NNWS continued fighting with 
NWS, and thereby imposed enormous costs on the latter in personnel and 
resources, even though the NWS had the capability to retaliate with nuclear 
weapons and thus terminate the war expeditiously.
I argue that the unwillingness to use nuclear weapons can be partially 
attributed to an informal norm inherent in the tradition of non-use, which 
has gradually emerged since 1945. A tradition in this sense is a time-honored 
practice of non-use that has been followed by nuclear states since 1945 as 
an “accus­tomed obligation.”1 This tradition has largely been shaped by two 

2  Introduction
dominant factors: first, an appreciation of the material character of the 
weapon concerned (i.e., the horrendous short- and long-term impact its use 
would create), beginning with Hiroshima and Nagasaki, but more powerfully 
entrenched following the hydrogen bomb tests in the early 1950s; second, the 
negative reputational effects its use would generate, especially in terms of pro-
jecting poor images, signaling wrong intentions, and setting bad precedents. 
The awareness among nuclear states that the unpredictability and enormity 
of nuclear weapons use actually reduced their utility for most strategic pur-
poses involving nonnuclear states caused them to practice self-deterrence. 
Over time, the iterated non-use of nuclear weapons became self-perpetuating 
through the establishment of an informal norm: that is, later decisions to re-
frain from nuclear use were based, in part, on previous decisions to desist and 
a desire to continue the practice.
Tactical/strategic constraints also need to be examined in order to under-
stand why nuclear arms have not been used since 1945. However, an explana-
tion solely based on the tactical and strategic unsuitability of the weapon is 
unlikely to show us the larger picture of non-use for over sixty years as these 
considerations are context-dependent. The non-use of nuclear weapons under 
varying strategic/tactical circumstances suggests that other causal mecha-
nisms might be operating more powerfully or alongside strategy and tactics 
in the choices of nuclear states. In other words, the story of non-use of nuclear 
arms is much larger than what a pure strategic/tactical account can offer. This 
book provides a larger discussion of the politics of nuclear non-use, not only 
in terms of the crisis decisions made by nuclear powers involving nonnuclear 
states but also from the perspectives of different states on the usability or non­
usability of nuclear weapons in world politics at large.
Although previous works on the subject locate the reasons for non-use 
largely in either rationalist/materialistic or in normative/ideational consid-
erations, I argue that both sets of factors need to be examined in order to 
get a comprehensive and more accurate view of the phenomenon of non-
use. In that sense, this book approaches the subject on the basis of analytical 
eclecticism that has been proposed by some social scientists.2 This approach 
also combines the logic of consequences and the logic of appropriateness as 
presented by James March and Johan Olsen. The reputational argument de-
veloped in Chapter 2 is based on a rational logic of consequences, while the 
normative argument inherent in the tradition of non-use relies on a logic of 
appropriateness. I argue that the reputational variables linked to the logic of 

Introduction  3
consequences are the primary causal factors for understanding the continued 
non-use of nuclear weapons, but the logic of appropriateness in the form of a 
normative prohibition inherent in the tradition of non-use has intermingled 
with the former, especially as the nuclear age has advanced.3 First, reputa-
tion arbiters such as scientists, strategists, peace movements, and developing-
country leaders helped increase the reputational costs of nuclear use through 
compelling arguments using a logic of appropriateness as well as a logic of 
consequences. Second, the practice of non-use became reinforced through it-
eration over time, through mechanisms that included both the entrenchment 
of costs for using nuclear weapons (consequences) and the development of 
ideas about responsible state behavior (appropriateness).
This book approaches the subject from a puzzle-driven perspective as op-
posed to a purely paradigm-driven approach. While paradigms offer disci-
plinary coherence, allowing scholars to devote their energies to research pro-
grams that share common assumptions, premises, dominant variables, and 
units of analysis, they also limit the prospects for answering pressing policy 
issues or intellectual puzzles that do not have black-or-white answers. Fur-
ther, when analysts attempt to pigeonhole explanations to fit one paradigm 
or another, they tend to leave out the nuances involved in the explanation for 
the phenomenon they study. The effort in this book is to offer a richer analysis 
and not to create a grand theory but an intermediate theory, in order to ex-
plain the puzzle of nuclear non-use.4
The tradition seems to have emerged due to the realizations that nuclear 
weapons are radically different from conventional weapons and that their use 
would show the user in an excessively bad light in international public opin-
ion. However, beyond reputation, there exists a practical value of non-use to 
the NWS, especially for the United States and the Soviet Union. The reputa-
tion for non-use served the twin goals of U.S. international security policy 
during the Cold War, that is, preserving peace through mutual deterrence but 
at the same time preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union 
had similar objectives vis-à-vis the West and the developing world. In this 
sense, this has been a partially “invented tradition” (a practice that is delib-
erately constructed) in order to impart legitimacy for the major powers’ mo-
nopoly over nuclear weapons.5 Moral, ethical, and legal factors are important 
to the extent that they enter into reputational considerations. Since it is not a 
formal, enforceable legal norm, but a practice followed by the nuclear states,  
I use the term informal norm to denote the normative restraint inherent in the 

4  Introduction
tradition of non-use. Moreover, most nuclear states proclaim that they intend 
to use their weapons only under certain circumstances—for example, to deter 
or retaliate against challenges to the vital interests of their nation-state, in-
cluding survival. In contrast, when it comes to the use of chemical or biologi-
cal weapons, most of these states have made legal commitments, and tend to 
deny any deterrence or retaliatory intent. In that respect, the nuclear non-use 
norm is legally less enshrined than the norms against the use of chemical and 
biological weapons (although, ironically, these norms have been more widely 
violated). Therefore, until it becomes a full-fledged legal prohibition, the nu-
clear non-use norm will remain an informal norm rooted in a tradition.
In order to gain a broader understanding of the tradition of non-use, this 
book examines several interrelated questions. First, what have been the rea-
sons for the unwillingness of nuclear weapons states, both new and old, to use 
their capability against nonnuclear adversaries in war? Second, what have been 
the calculations of nonnuclear states that confronted nuclear powers on the 
battlefield? Third, if nuclear use is constrained by reputational considerations, 
what are the implications for theories of deterrence and compellence, as well 
as for the political utility of these weapons as instruments of power? Fourth, 
does the existence of the unequal nuclear nonproliferation regime partially 
depend on the maintenance of this tradition? Specifically, what role did it play 
in the bargain between nuclear haves and have-nots, especially in the con-
clusion of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) and its continued ex-
istence? Fifth, how resilient or fragile is this informal norm? Do new political 
and technological developments have the potential to unravel the restraining 
power of the tradition? If so, what precisely are these forces in the contempo-
rary and emerging international system? Finally, does the preservation of the 
tradition of non-use serve any fundamental interests of the global community 
(involving both nuclear and nonnuclear states)? If yes, what are they?
Taboo or Tradition? 
Many analysts explain the non-use of nuclear weapons by referring to a “ta-
boo” that arose against their use.6 Others refer to the practice of non-use as 
a “tradition.” The terms are often used interchangeably, although they have 
different meanings. The presence of a taboo-like prohibition against nuclear 
use has been noted by important scholars and policy makers such as Thomas 
Schelling, McGeorge Bundy, and Robert McNamara. Former American Sec-
retary of State John Foster Dulles initially used the term taboo to describe 

Introduction  5
the unwritten prohibition against the use of nuclear weapons. On October 7, 
1953, Dulles was reported to have said: “Somehow or other we must man-
age to remove the taboo from the use of these weapons.”7 Dulles was in favor 
of developing usable nuclear weapons to obtain the key battlefield military 
objectives of the United States in Korea. George Ball presented a stringent 
prohibition when he contended that the revulsion against nuclear use “has 
enveloped nuclear weapons in a rigid taboo,” and that the nation that first 
broke it “would suffer universal condemnation.”8 
While scholars such as Bernard Brodie saw no purpose in nuclear weap-
ons other than deterrence, Thomas Schelling popularized the concept of a 
“tradition of non-use” in his writings in the 1960s. In his words, what makes 
atomic weapons different is a powerful tradition for their non-use, “a jointly 
recognized expectation that they may not be used in spite of declarations of 
readiness to use them, even in spite of tactical advantages in their use.”9 A 
tradition in this respect is based on a habit or disposition that prevents the use 
of nuclear weapons as a serious option for consideration by decision makers.10 
Schelling argues that the main reason for the non-use of nuclear weapons is 
the perception that they are unique and that once introduced into combat 
they could not be “contained, restrained, confined, or limited.”11 Although 
prolonged conventional war can also cause somewhat similar levels of casu-
alties, the difference is in the perception of the impact.12 The swiftness with 
which widespread destruction can take place and the lingering aftereffects in 
the form of radiation hazards are the distinguishing marks of nuclear weapon 
use vis-à-vis attacks relying on conventional weapons.
Social Taboos
While it is possible that some elements of a taboo-like prohibition might ex-
ist, the tradition of non-use does not contain a strict prohibitionary norm. 
Let us explore what a taboo means in order to assess whether the literal use 
of the term is justified in this instance. The term taboo is derived from the 
Polynesian word tabu or tapu which means “prohibition.” In its sociological 
aspects, it refers to “a system of prohibitions observed as customs.”13 A taboo 
arises from the fear of something “mystically dangerous,” and generally its 
authority is based on custom. As Webster states: “The authority of a taboo 
is unmatched by that of any other prohibition. There is no reflection on it, 
no reasoning about it, no discussion of it. A taboo amounts simply to an im-
perative thou-shalt-not in the presence of the danger apprehended.”14 Taboo 

6  Introduction
denotes the prohibitions arising from the mysterious attributes of a person, 
thing, or place, or a transitory condition. To Freud, it connotes attributes such 
as “sacred,” “consecrated,” “above the ordinary,” “dangerous,” “forbidden,” “un­
clean,” and “uncanny.”15 It thus refers to a social prohibition on a human ac-
tivity considered as forbidden or sacred.
According to the Encyclopedia Britannica, a taboo is a “prohibition of an 
action or the use of an object based on ritualistic distinctions of them either as 
being sacred and consecrated or as being dangerous, unclean, and accursed.” 
Taboos “include prohibitions on fishing or picking fruits at certain seasons; 
food taboos that restrict the diet of pregnant women; prohibitions on talking 
to or touching chiefs or members of other high social classes; taboos on walk-
ing or traveling in certain areas, such as forests; and various taboos that func-
tion during important life events such as birth, marriage, and death.”16 As-
sumptions of danger and fear of repercussions of the particular act committed 
characterize most social taboos. For some social taboos, the anticipated reper-
cussions could be in the form of disease or death or an incalculable trauma 
to the victim, the violator, and his or her associates, while for others, it could 
be shame, embarrassment, and social isolation.17 For some social taboos, the 
violator is stigmatized as “eccentric” and “abnormal,” although the level of 
punishment and redemption could vary from one social taboo to another.18
In modern societies, there are a number of well-established social taboos 
in evidence. They include restrictions on diets, sexual activities, and expo-
sure of particular body parts. Two of the most significant ones are the taboos 
against incest and cannibalism.19 These two acts are not only forbidden by 
law, but people rarely discuss them in regular conversations. In other words, 
ordinarily people do not wish to talk about them, and when they hear that 
transgressions have occurred, reactions are usually those of horror and dis-
gust; the transgressor is characterized as a “psychopath” who is in need of ur-
gent psychiatric intervention. People in general observe these and other social 
taboos not simply because of the legal prohibitions against them, but because 
of the socially accepted understanding of their prohibition. Taboos are also 
powerful instruments of social order, although some of them may not have a 
clear rational basis.
Why Is Nuclear Non-Use a Tradition? 
As discussed above, the tradition of non-use of nuclear weapons has been 
characterized as equivalent to a taboo, although many scholars and practi­
tioners use the term taboo in a figurative and a loose sense, as an unwritten  

Introduction  7
and uncodified prohibitionary norm against nuclear use. The term is also 
used to the extent that both social and nuclear taboos are based on the fear of 
consequences of a given course of action. Similarly, both may be reinforced by 
legal and nonlegal restraints and considerations as well. Thus, like social ta-
boos, the nuclear taboo is likely to have been influenced by a number of con-
siderations—moral and legal norms and rational calculations in particular. 
The nuclear taboo might have arisen as a response to a realization of the dan-
ger or the unforeseeable consequences of a nuclear war. The mysterious attri-
butes of the weapon might have played a role in the creation and persistence of 
the taboo. States George Quester: “The very notion of a ‘taboo’ involves a ban 
on human behavior that is not subjected continuously to a rational balancing 
of costs and benefits, but that settles in, through wide-spread social accep-
tance, as an axiomatic redefinition of what constitutes legitimate behavior.”20
But the differences between well-entrenched social taboos and the nuclear 
taboo are many. Most social taboos are punishable acts—punishable either by 
the community (through customs) or the state (through law), each expecting 
observance by its members. The legal and moral opprobria are so strong that 
transgressors of powerful social taboos, if caught, would be punished seri-
ously, and their fundamental rights could be curtailed drastically. This is also 
the case with many social taboos practiced in tribal societies. Some such soci-
eties imposed the death penalty on transgressors of deeply held taboos.
In contrast, the prohibition against nuclear use is not as absolute as in the 
case of many social taboos. International law does not explicitly prohibit the 
use of nuclear weapons, especially if it is in retribution or in the protection of 
a state in danger of being overrun. This is clear in the judgment on the legal-
ity of nuclear weapons offered by the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in 
July 1996, holding that neither customary nor conventional international law 
explicitly prohibits the use of nuclear weapons, although nuclear use could be 
considered to be a violation of international humanitarian law under most cir-
cumstances. The majority opinion stated: “The threat or use of nuclear weap-
ons would generally be contrary to the rules of international law appli­cable 
in armed conflict, and in particular the principles and rules of humani­tarian 
law.” It continued: “However, in view of the current state of inter­national 
law, and of the elements of fact at its disposal, the Court cannot conclude 
definitively whether the threat or use of nuclear weapons would be lawful or 
unlawful in an extreme circumstance of self-defense, in which the very sur-
vival of a State would be at stake.”21 The court did not clarify what constitutes  

8  Introduction
an extreme circumstance of self-defense, thereby leaving its judgment open to  
interpretation by the national leadership during times of crisis. Moreover, 
the court did not “address the status of self-defence claims in circumstances 
where no nuclear weapons are threatened, used or even possessed by an ag-
gressor state that has put the survival of its adversary at risk.”22 Despite the 
apparent lack of stringent legal sanctions, nuclear states still have been re-
luctant to use these weapons, and this has been viewed as due to a taboo-like 
prohibition.23 However, the regulatory aspect in this respect is ambiguous, as 
there is no formal punishment mechanism for violation of the nuclear taboo, 
while the effects of informal punishments such as shame and humiliation are 
at best uncertain. Social taboos will not persist without expectations of severe 
punishments if the taboo is broken.24
In some other aspects as well, the tradition of non-use of nuclear weapons 
is not as powerful as social taboos such as the ones against incest or can-
nibalism. The difference is that nation-states have contingency plans to use 
nuclear weapons under certain circumstances. Individuals do not even con-
sider breaking deeply held social taboos (as the concept implies no rational 
consideration of performing a forbidden act), such as those against incest 
or cannibalism—unless the perpetrator is a psychopath or is facing extreme 
circumstances such as extinction. In contrast, supposedly rational military 
planners of responsible states have considered and continue to assess the pos-
sibility of nuclear use. The doctrines and strategies, especially those of the 
United States, Russia, the United Kingdom, and France, have kept open the 
option of nuclear use against nonnuclear states under certain contingencies. 
The procurement and deployment of nuclear weapons by rational military 
organizations suggest that they envision nuclear use. Deterrence against con-
ventional and nonconventional attacks prompts most nuclear states to keep 
the first-use option open, but the expansion of possible use for purposes be-
yond deterrence, including maintaining the credibility of power status, com-
pellence, prevention, preemption, signaling resolve, getting allies and adver-
saries to intervene on one’s side, and domestic political calculations, suggests 
the wide range of uses for nuclear weapons perceived by decision makers of 
nuclear states. For most nuclear states, the redlines for nuclear use have been 
changing, especially in the post–Cold War era as deterrence against nuclear 
attack is no longer the only consideration for the threat of nuclear retalia-
tion. The chance of use, however improbable, lies beneath the threat of use, 
even when the threatening party, in reality, does not want to consummate the 

Introduction  9
threat. Even if, in the first instance, there is no intention to carry out a threat, 
such an intention can change if the target does not comply and the sender 
perceives high credibility costs in not following the threat through. Therefore, 
the threat of use also is a form of violation of the taboo against nuclear use. 
Using a strict definition of the term taboo, a leader is not supposed to even 
contemplate the option.
Given the fact that some nuclear states maintain the option of nuclear first 
use, I argue that the tradition of non-use is not yet a taboo or a fully developed 
formal norm. Rather it is an informal social norm. Conceptually, norms are 
characterized by “regularities of behavior” containing “sanctions for failing 
to follow them.”25 Social norms are “widely internalized patterns of behavior, 
deviation from which is likely to meet with social disapproval . . . law often in-
directly influences such action by shaping social norms.”26 Martha Finnemore 
defines norms as “shared expectations about appropriate behavior held by a 
community of actors. Unlike ideas which may be held privately, norms are 
shared and social; they are not subjective, but inter-subjective. Ideas may or 
may not have behavioral implications; norms by definition concern behav-
ior.”27 But different social norms have varying strengths, and hence have dif-
ferent impacts on national choices in disparate realms. Legal support may be 
necessary for a norm to be called a hard or formal norm. Those norms that 
lack a strong legal basis are soft or intermediate norms derived from informal 
customs and practices. Legal norms, even though they can also be violated, 
nevertheless raise the bar for infringement.
If fully developed as a hard legal norm, the practice of non-use would be 
treaty-based, and the principal norm in this regard would read: “nuclear states 
shall not use their nuclear weapons against nonnuclear states,” under circum-
stances in which survival is not immediately threatened. No nuclear state has 
made an unequivocal legally binding commitment to this effect. They have 
made partial assurances to NPT signatories, but in recent years have changed 
those pledges to allow for nuclear weapons use against nonnuclear states hold-
ing and threatening to use chemical and biological weapons. They have op-
posed any formal agreement on non-use. In fact, nuclear states do not want to 
accept the formal existence of such a norm, lest the credibility of their policies 
of nuclear deterrence and compellence suffer. Their unwillingness may also 
result from a fear of further raising the bar for nuclear use, suggesting that 
legality does have an impact in their calculations. However, they have made 
limited pledges of no first use toward members of the NPT in good standing.

10  Introduction
If the tradition of non-use were a full-fledged norm, an associated propo-
sition would read: “nuclear states shall not make loose nuclear threats against 
non-nuclear states.” Threats, by their very nature, presume a contingent use. 
This dimension of the norm has been violated, especially by the United States 
and Israel, in the context of conflicts in the Persian Gulf and the Middle East. 
Further, if it is a full-fledged taboo-like prohibition, a third associated norm 
would read: “nuclear states shall not introduce nuclear weapons into theaters 
of conflict with non-nuclear states.” Such introduction implies a potential 
willingness to use, however improbable it may be. This norm has also been 
violated in the Korean, Falklands, and Gulf conflict zones. In other words, 
the norm needs to be unconditional in order for it to qualify as a hard norm. 
For the norm of non-use of nuclear weapons to be robust, resembling a taboo-
like prohibition, the above-mentioned three components should be observed 
continuously by nuclear states.
The discussions by legal scholars of formal and informal laws are useful 
here in clarifying the concept of the tradition of non-use even further. Formal 
laws are equivalent to hard laws that are “created using precise constitutional 
processes,” as opposed to “norms that are not produced through specific 
sources or processes.” Hard law is assumed to be more “precise,” “inevita-
bly more effective,”28 and binding, whereas informal law is “based upon the 
premise that certain principles are important, and should ideally shape inter-
national law and policy even if they are not binding.”29 International lawyers 
also “speak of a progression along a continuum from soft to hard law, though 
this progression is by no means inevitable or invariably desirable,” and “iden-
tifying the point on the continuum where the ‘soft norm’ becomes a ‘hard’ 
is notoriously challenging.”30 Some scholars also believe that social norms, 
by definition, are different from legal norms. Legal norms are “created by  
design—usually through some kind of deliberative process, precisely specified 
in written texts, linked to particular sanctions, and enforced by a specialized 
bureaucracy. Social norms, by contrast, often are spontaneous rather than de-
liberately planned (hence, of uncertain origin), unwritten (hence, their con-
tent and rules for application are often imprecise), and enforced informally.”31 
This does not mean states cannot break norms enshrined in international law. 
But breaking a legal norm becomes harder (but not impossible) as a norm is 
enshrined in precise legal terms. Legal texts add another layer to the strength 
of a norm, and in that sense legal norms are superior to social norms that 
do not have legality attached to them. However, even informal social norms 

Introduction  11
have restraining power on states, as in the nuclear area, the main theme of  
this book.
The tradition of non-use of nuclear weapons has not made the progression 
from an informal norm to a legal norm because of the desire of nuclear states 
to maintain ambiguity in their nuclear policies for deterrence and compel-
lence purposes. The key test for the robustness of the non-use norm is whether 
it has only limited declaratory or rhetorical value or whether states observe 
it in the face of compelling circumstances. Are nonnuclear states fairly con­
fident that the threat of use of nuclear weapons is not going to be executed 
due to the presence of the norm? Historically, how has the norm affected the 
choices of the concerned states, both nuclear and nonnuclear, in crisis and 
noncrisis situations? Is it possible that the ambiguity inherent in the informal 
norm of non-use is both a weakness and a strength, because it allows a certain 
amount of malleability for deterrence purposes? Does it offer partial legiti-
macy to the unequal nuclear possession allowed by the NPT, since the perma-
nent five (P‑5) major powers of the United Nations (UN) Security Council are 
permitted to keep their weapons as custodians of international security while 
assuring other states that they would not be attacked with nuclear weapons 
and that they do not need to possess nuclear weapons in order to deter NWS? 
In this sense, can the preservation of the informal norm be explained by the 
considerable strategic advantages that it offers to nuclear and nonnuclear 
states?
Although it is not a fully developed legal norm, the non-use of nuclear 
weapons has been a standard expected behavior of nuclear states over an 
extended period of time. The non-use of nuclear weapons due to deterrent 
threats is to be excluded from the purview of the tradition, as it is often dif-
ficult to distinguish whether nuclear weapons were not used because of the 
tradition or because of a fear of retaliation. This study therefore strictly limits 
the tradition to the non-use of nuclear weapons by nuclear states against non-
nuclear states. In addition, nuclear states have so far desisted from using their 
nuclear weapons for preventive purposes (i.e., the rise of a new nuclear state) 
despite threatening to do so, suggesting that the tradition may have broader 
relevance.
As I demonstrate in Chapter 2, the tradition of non-use has developed due to 
both rational-materialistic and reputational considerations, and has emerged 
as a key source of self-deterrence practiced by nuclear states vis-à-vis non-
nuclear powers. Historical examples, largely drawn from U.S. policy, suggest  

12  Introduction
that nuclear use has been considered but rejected. At times, this was due to 
instrumental strategic and tactical reasons, that is, nuclear attack would not 
have achieved stated strategic and tactical objectives. However, the empiri-
cal evidence, as presented in Chapters 3 and 4, demonstrates that the larger 
reasons appear to be reputational and norm-driven, as self-deterrence was 
practiced by leaders even in contexts where they perceived tactical suitability 
of nuclear use.
The awesome destructive power of nuclear weapons gave the basic impe-
tus to the rise of the tradition of non-use, as the potential for total destruction 
gives nuclear weapons an all-or-nothing character unlike any other weapon 
invented so far. This means a nuclear state may not use its ultimate capability 
unless a threshold is crossed, for example, when a vital issue, such as the sur-
vival of the state itself, is threatened. The notion of a “weapon of last resort” 
is crucial here. Decision makers and the public at large in most NWS believe 
that there is great danger in the use of nuclear weapons with respect to casual-
ties and aftereffects, in both psychological and physical terms. Breaking the 
tradition would elicit the revulsion of generations to come, unless it was for a 
question of extremely vital importance, such as the physical existence of the 
nuclear state or its key allies. It would bring severe reputational costs to the 
user and result in an extremely bad precedent. Nuclear use could also push 
some of the hitherto nonnuclear states to attempt to acquire nuclear weapons 
capability as their own independent national deterrent.
The tradition has been observed by all established and new nuclear states 
thus far. Nations with different ideological and political systems and military 
traditions—the United States, Russia, the United Kingdom, France, China, 
India, Pakistan, and Israel—have not used them in conflict, pointing toward 
the emergence of a global “recognition that nuclear weapons are unusable 
across much of the range of traditional military and political interests.”32 The 
unwillingness of the United States to use them in Korea and Vietnam to obtain 
a decisive military victory, and the Soviet demurral from using them to avert 
defeat in Afghanistan (although it would have been difficult in the context of 
the guerilla resistance they were facing),33 suggest the entrenchment of the 
tradition among the superpowers even during the peak years of the Cold War 
era. Paradoxically, both the United States and the Soviet Union used chemical 
weapons (in Vietnam and Afghanistan, respectively) even though they were 
waging war against guerilla forces.34 The Chinese aversion to using nuclear 

Introduction  13
weapons against Vietnam to obtain victory in the 1979 Sino-Vietnamese War 
indicates that other nuclear powers have observed the tradition of non-use 
as well.
The Chapters
In Chapter 2, two perspectives are presented, one that rejects the tradition 
and the other that views nuclear non-use as a strict taboo-like prohibition. 
The former is based on realpolitik skepticism, while the latter is developed 
by Constructivist scholars. After looking at the strengths and weaknesses 
of both perspectives, I develop an eclectic model of non-use, combining rep­
utational and normative factors that cause the practice of self-deterrence 
among nuclear states. This rationalist-normative analysis attempts to capture 
how and why the tradition emerged and became acceptable to a wide vari-
ety of states of different ideological coloration, while elucidating its rational/ 
instrumental value for both nuclear and nonnuclear states. Chapters 3 and 4 
look at how the tradition developed in the United States and how it was sus-
tained, despite pressures on or temptations for successive American presidents 
to use nuclear weapons in different regional conflicts. Chapter 5 focuses on the 
other P‑5 powers—Russia, Britain, France, and China—and examines their 
policies toward nuclear use and their contributions toward the development 
and sustenance of the informal norm. Chapter 6 explores the nuclear policies 
of India and Pakistan and the undeclared nuclear state, Israel, and their ap-
proaches toward nuclear use in general and the tradition of non-use in partic-
ular. Chapter 7 focuses on NNWS and their perceptions of the tradition while 
engaging in wars with nuclear powers. It probes the calculations of NNWS 
that initiated wars against NWS and the unwillingness of NNWS to give up 
their conflicts once they were well underway, even when their opponents held 
nuclear weapons. In Chapter 8, the relationship between the tradition and the 
nonproliferation regime is discussed. Of particular interest are the efforts by 
the NNWS to convert the informal norm into a formal enforceable legal norm 
by demanding negative security guarantees, and through their efforts at the 
UN General Assembly, the NPT bargaining table, and the World Court (on a 
decision on the legality of nuclear use). With respect to nonproliferation, it is 
crucial to see why 184 NNWSs (of whom several are technologically capable) 
have, by signing the NPT, given up their option to acquire nuclear weapons, 
while allowing the five declared states to possess them. Are they assured that 

14  Introduction
there exists a normative prohibition against nuclear use and that these weap-
ons are only intended for deterrence? If so, why do NNWS then constantly 
demand a formal no-first-use commitment from nuclear weapon states? Is 
this demand a reflection of a lack of complete faith in the tradition? It appears 
that they are eagerly pursuing a formal norm through the creation of a legal 
instrument because of their desire to make the tradition of non-use a robust 
legal norm.
Chapter 9 analyzes the changing nuclear policy of the United States in 
response to the complex security environment since the end of the Cold War, 
and especially after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. It is argued 
that the current U.S. nuclear policy and possible development of new weapons 
may undermine the tradition. The concluding chapter presents the findings 
of the study and implications of the tradition of non-use. The key implica-
tions are for deterrence theory and policy, as well as for compellence and co-
ercive diplomacy. There are other implications as well, both for the prospects 
of nuclear war and for nuclear disarmament. The chapter concludes with a 
cost/benefit assessment of the preservation of the tradition and its utility in 
a wide range of areas of national and international security interests. I con-
clude that the informal norm’s survival in perpetuity is highly desirable, but 
is contingent on several factors, including the specific destructive character of 
the nuclear weapons available today and in the foreseeable future. The policy 
implication is that if the informal norm is to achieve higher potency, unam-
biguous legal sanctions will have to be developed and decision makers will 
have to internalize the norm fully and nurture it so that nuclear weapons, be 
they small or large, will never again be used as an instrument of interstate war 
and intimidation.

15
 2 BASES OF THE TRADITION OF NON-USE
f rom a social  science per spect ive, it is crucial to explain the sources of 
the tradition of non-use of nuclear weapons and the reasons for its persis-
tence today. Social scientists have not yet fully unpacked the rise, persistence, 
or weakening of an informal social norm similar to the one inherent in the 
tradition of non-use. Understanding the mechanisms by which the tradi-
tion emerged is important in order to know the causes of its persistence and 
the conditions of its potential demise. In this chapter, I outline the plausible 
sources of the tradition of non-use and assess their relative significance.
To begin with, is there a normative prohibition on nuclear use? Only a 
few scholars have delved into this question directly. But they differ signifi-
cantly on the existence of the norm and its importance. Here I look at two 
perspectives. One comes from realpolitik skeptics who reject the existence of 
a taboo or a tradition on the non-use of nuclear weapons. The other is devel-
oped by Constructivist scholars who treat the norm of non-use as a powerful, 
taboo-like prohibition, with both regulative and constitutive effects over the 
choices of nuclear states. Some scholars who do not identify themselves as 
belonging to any particular theoretical paradigm have discussed the tradition 
as a powerful force in international politics. They include Thomas Schelling, 
John Lewis Gaddis, George Quester, and McGeorge Bundy; their writings, 
although containing many realist assumptions and theoretical components, 
nevertheless accept the existence of a normative tradition.

16  Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use
The Skeptics
Skepticism on the presence of a taboo or a tradition has been raised by  
realpolitik-oriented scholars, although realists in general have not paid much 
attention to this issue. Skeptics base their arguments about the non-use of 
nuclear weapons on: (1) deterrence—either mutual or extended; (2) tactical/ 
strategic unsuitability; and (3) power politics considerations—for example 
Cold War calculations preventing the nuclear powers from using nuclear 
weapons against non­nuclear states for fear of escalation in the central stra-
tegic theater, that is, Europe. Accordingly, nuclear weapons have not been 
used against nonnuclear states because of: (a) fear of retaliation by the other 
nuclear powers; (b) lack of military utility; (c) dearth of good targets for nu-
clear attacks; (d) the possibility of using conventional weapons to destroy the 
targets that existed; and (e) complication and contamination of the battlefield 
by nuclear attacks. States Colin Gray, a critic of the taboo argument: “Policy 
makers in the eight nuclear weapon states do not equate such stigmatization—
or singularization, for a less pejorative rendering—with unusability. Nuclear 
weapons may be weapons of last resort—for us, at least—but last resort should 
not be confused with ‘no resort. ’ ”1 To Gray, “the postulate of a nuclear taboo 
is an ethno­centric delusion on the part of Western theorists.”2
More nuanced realist explanations base the non-use of nuclear weapons 
on concerns of prudence, inappropriateness for achieving political or stra-
tegic goals, fear of negative impact on national goals (especially in a limited 
war situation), adverse impact on great power relationships and power struc-
tures (e.g., the Cold War-era bipolar strategic relationship between the super­
powers), and a high estimation of the value of nuclear weapons for deterrence— 
which by its very nature would fail if nuclear weapons were ever used in anger 
or in retribution. These concerns do not necessarily have any connection to 
morality, ethics, law, or culture, as these are the products of power and power 
relationships in the first place, under realist logic.3
Ideational and Cultural Bases:  
Constructivist Explanations
While the skeptics reject the presence of a normative prohibition, Constructiv-
ist scholars have argued that the tradition is indeed a stringent, taboo-like pro-
hibition; that it is a socially constructed, intersubjective norm; and that the ori-
gins of this norm go beyond material/rationalist factors.4 For instance, Richard  
Price and Nina Tannenwald argue that a rationalist-materialist explanation,  

Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use  17
based on the intrinsic characteristics of the weapon, or on deterrence grounded 
in cost-benefit calculations deriving from the possibility of retaliatory threat, 
cannot account for the origins of the norm of non-use of nuclear weapons. 
They draw on both domestic structures and a genealogical approach in ex-
plaining the origin and persistence of a nuclear weapons taboo in U.S. policy. 
The former argument suggests that the democratic nature of the United States 
and its interest and identity helped the creation of a prohibitionary norm. As 
for the latter, the evolution of the nuclear non-use norm occurred gradually in 
a nonlinear fashion and it was not inevitable: “it owes much to the combined 
workings of contingency and the iterated practice of non-use over time, as well 
as to self-conscious efforts on the part of some to foster a normative stigma.”5 
In subsequent work, Tannenwald explores the intersubjective nature of the 
taboo and the pathways through which it originated. These pathways include 
societal pressure, especially by domestic and transnational social groups; stra-
tegic social construction; the acceptance of the taboo by individual leaders; 
and finally, iterated behavior over time, “similar to the notion of custom in 
international law, where obligation arises out of convention.”6 Tannenwald, in 
her book-length study on the nuclear taboo, modifies the position to include 
material factors, although the thrust of her argument still remains ideational 
as opposed to material. She argues that the taboo has “delegitimize[d] nuclear 
weapons as weapons of war,” and has embedded “deterrence practices in a set 
of norms, both regulative (regulating behavior) and constitutive (defining roles 
and identities), that stabilize and restrain the self-help behavior of states.”7 To 
Tannenwald, nuclear non-use is “not simply a tradition both because people 
believe it is a taboo (with associated taboo-like qualities) and because, as it 
strengthens over time, it becomes decreasingly based on reciprocity.”8
Critique
I examine the problems with both these positions before introducing my 
eclectic framework, which gives importance to rational and normative con-
siderations, presented in terms of logic of consequences and logic of appropri-
ateness, respectively.
Problems with Realpolitik Claims 
The claim by realpolitik scholars that there is never a tradition of non-use nor a 
normative prohibition against nuclear use in existence is belied by the fact that 
the weapon has not been used since August 1945, even though highly realpolitik- 
oriented leaders (e.g., Eisenhower, Dulles, Nixon, and Kissinger) considered 

18  Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use
their use (for detailed analysis, see Chapters 3 and 4). Although issues of tac­
tical and strategic unsuitability come to the fore on some such occasions, the 
empirical evidence strongly suggests that considerations beyond tactical/ 
strategic constraints entered decision-makers’ calculations when nuclear use 
was considered. A pure realpolitik explanation has difficulty answering sev-
eral questions. First, why would countries stop using a weapon for such a long 
period of time after two early instances of use, all the while building newer 
and more lethal weapons of that same category, expending massive amounts 
of resources toward their development, acquisition, and maintenance? Sec-
ond, nuclear superpowers lost wars with minor powers; these defeats dimin-
ished their credibility, status, and prestige, causing great internal and external 
changes (e.g., Vietnam for the United States, and Afghanistan for the Soviet 
Union). Yet these same nuclear superpowers refrained from using all their 
capabilities, including nuclear weapons, in order to avert such an outcome. 
Despite the limitations of nuclear weapons in confronting guerilla warfare, 
the use of tactical nuclear weapons could have probably decapitated leaders 
of resistance and revolutionary movements and averted the possibility of fail-
ure for the superpower concerned, a consideration that was given substantial 
prominence in U.S. thinking during the Johnson and Nixon eras. Moreover, 
the superpowers used chemical weapons (napalm and Agent Orange in the 
case of Vietnam and yellow rain in the case of Afghanistan), suggesting that 
they were not waging simple counterinsurgency wars in those countries.9 As 
I discuss in Chapters 3 and 4, the United States did indeed consider nuclear 
use against China, North Korea, and Vietnam, whose forces were waging 
asymmetric wars partially based on guerilla principles. Third, archival mate-
rials now available suggest that it was more than crude realpolitik calculations 
that entered the minds of many of these leaders; they did not view nuclear 
weapons as just like other weapons, but saw them as possessing uniquely de-
structive qualities that placed them beyond simple war-winning instruments. 
This unique attribute of nuclear weapons as perceived by decision makers is 
not captured by simple realpolitik explanations of their non-use.10
However, a broadened interest-based explanation can incorporate ele-
ments of some of the realist logic, while drawing on factors from other non­
realist perspectives such as morality/ethics and international law.
Problems with the Constructivist Position 
Although I see much merit in the ideational arguments of Constructivists, 
their dominant focus on ideas and national culture and their tendency to  

Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use  19
undervalue material factors, especially the brute physical characteristics of 
the bomb and the self-interests of states in non-use, seem to make their case 
an overstated one. Even while stating the need to link material and nonmate-
rial variables, and while acknowledging the presence of material factors in ex-
plaining the origins of the taboo, they tend to underplay the latter in account-
ing for the persistence of a norm. Tannenwald’s works acknowledge material 
factors, but she provides very little, if any, discussion of what material factors 
contribute to the creation and persistence of the taboo-like prohibition. It is 
true that Constructivists have come a long way from their earlier either/or 
arguments, but the analytical purchase of ideas and national culture are still 
overdetermined in these perspectives, ironically similar to a criticism they 
make against material approaches. Although Constructivists are currently 
doing much work on creating eclectic models, they have yet to fully tease out 
the linkage between ideas and material factors so as to get a clearer under-
standing of how the two intermesh.11 This seems necessary for us to obtain a 
convincing handle on a complex subject such as nuclear non-use. In addition, 
Constructivist accounts of nuclear taboo give considerable weight to actor 
identity and culture, which I do not find very valuable in my explanation.
A critical test for the ideational argument is to find out if the norm of non-
use has been in the security interests of nuclear weapons states, especially the 
United States and the Soviet Union, given that one of their key aims in the 
Cold War was to obtain the allegiance of states in the developing world, with a 
secondary goal being the prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons to addi-
tional states. The Constructivist scholars’ claim that the tradition originated 
in the United States also needs further verification. Even on the Western Bloc 
side, it seems that the British, as well as other European allies, were major op-
ponents of U.S. plans to use nuclear weapons in Korea.
In addition, the nondemocratic Soviet Union and China have contributed 
powerfully to the rise of the tradition, especially by declaring no-first-use pol-
icies and by refraining from the use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear 
states. Appreciating their contribution is highly important for an understand-
ing of norms like the non-use of nuclear weapons in a divided international 
system. Though these two Communist states cared little about acceptable  
behavior in internal repression of dissidents, their words and actions still 
helped to reinforce a vital norm of international conduct in the nuclear area. 
In part, this contribution originated from a Cold War environment of com-
petition in reputation, with the Third World as audience. In China’s case, 

20  Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use
the norm has more recently been perpetuated by Beijing’s weaknesses in the 
number of nuclear weapons it possesses and a desire to appear as a responsible 
great power.
The Soviet and Chinese contributions also help to demonstrate that non-
use does not necessarily have a close relationship with domestically driven 
political culture. Although in the post–Cold War era, Russia has backed off 
from its no-first-use policy, nondemocratic China has continued to profess 
it, while democratic America, Britain, and France have been making plans to 
use nuclear weapons in possible preemptive and preventive situations vis-à-vis  
regional challengers and terrorist groups pursuing weapons of mass destruc-
tion. The Western powers, along with democratic Israel, have been the most 
prone to making loose nuclear threats in crisis and noncrisis situations in-
volving nonnuclear states. Although the Soviets and Chinese had fewer oc-
casions to threaten the use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear states, and 
although their archives are yet to be open to public access on this issue, going 
by available historical record, it is possible to make a contention that it has 
been the democratic United States that has most often contemplated nuclear 
use on occasions of threat to less-than-vital interests. Democracies also have 
a tendency to use unlimited conventional force against nondemocracies (un-
like their behavior toward fellow democracies). In recent years, it has been 
democracies that have engaged in threats of nuclear and conventional strikes 
against nondemocracies such as Iraq (under Saddam Hussein), North Korea, 
and Iran, in order to prevent them from acquiring nuclear weapons.12
Despite these criticisms, I agree with Constructivists that the non-use of 
nuclear weapons cannot be purely explained by material or power politics 
considerations and that there is a certain amount of normative prohibition 
(based on considerations of a logic of appropriateness). Self-deterrence in the 
area of nuclear weapons use is explainable not by tactical or strategic con-
siderations alone, but by a normative tradition against nuclear use that has 
emerged over the past several decades. I also concur with Constructivists on 
the role of norm entrepreneurs who appear to be intermediaries in the cre-
ation and diffusion of a norm of non-use.
In this book, however, I differentiate my arguments from Constructivist 
perspectives on the following grounds. First, I give national culture or re-
gime type no significant role, as the tradition has been observed by nuclear 
weapon states of all political cultures. Second, I treat the tradition as an in-
formal and intermediate norm; its regulatory and constitutive effects are not 

Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use  21
as powerful or absolute as a taboo-like prohibition. Third, states’ self-interest,  
partially driven by a logic of consequences, has underpinned the creation and 
sustenance of the tradition. Self-interest and the logic of consequences go be-
yond the emergence of the tradition (a role that Constructivists sometimes 
acknowledge), and are also prominent factors in its maintenance. Rational 
calculations, that is, Cold War concerns regarding reputation and image, 
maintenance of alliance relationships, allegiance of nonallied states, and non-
proliferation, all were important factors behind the maintenance of the tradi-
tion, and these are largely self-interest-driven concerns even if they are rein-
forced by norms. During the Cold War, the superpowers’ competition for the 
allegiance of developing countries was intense, as is evident in the immense 
resources they spent on propaganda and public diplomacy in those countries. 
Similarly, the United States especially feared that alliance cohesion among 
Western countries would be loosened if nuclear weapons were used against 
nonnuclear states.
Finally, I argue that the informal norm is contingent on changing tech-
nological and political conditions that are material, and not necessarily ide-
ational, in nature. It could degrade if new weapons that have low collateral 
damage are developed and are deployed for use. Further, if political condi-
tions change such that several nonnuclear states seek nuclear weapons and 
the potential for their use by state and nonstate actors increases in different 
parts of the world, the tradition could weaken and break down. The efforts 
by the United States and Russia to develop mininukes are indeed attempts to 
overcome the reputational constraints inherent in the tradition of non-use. In 
my perspective, although the tradition has strengthened over the years, there 
appears to be no linear progression toward a world of robust nuclear non-use; 
active human action is necessary in order to preserve this tradition. I foresee 
a mixed pattern in the tradition’s future: at some level the tradition is embed-
ded, but at another level, ongoing efforts are being made by political, scien-
tific, and bureaucratic elites in many nuclear states to transcend the tradition 
and make nuclear weapons useable by devising new weapons and strategies. 
Through these efforts, these elites are implicitly accepting the presence of the 
tradition and are seeking to overcome it one way or another.
The explanation below lies between material and normative perspectives, 
respectively giving importance to the logic of consequences and logic of ap-
propriateness (although I weigh in favor of the former over the latter). It rejects 
arguments of both a powerful taboo-like prohibition and simple realpolitik 

22  Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use
skepticism. I give much more weight to the tradition than realpolitik skeptics 
do, but not as much as Constructivists make of it. Elements of the explana-
tion draw on the analyses offered by John Lewis Gaddis, Thomas Schelling, 
George Quester, and McGeorge Bundy. However, these scholars have not yet 
developed a powerful causal argument for the rise and persistence of the tra-
dition. This is where I hope to make my contribution to the understanding of 
this subject.
Explaining Nuclear Non-Use
In this book, I develop an explanation for the emergence and persistence of 
the tradition of non-use of nuclear weapons, based on material factors and 
reputation. This reflects eclecticism as an approach to the study of interna-
tional relations. Unlike pure realist arguments, this explanation does not 
reject the moral and legal logic completely. The relevant material concerns, 
especially the intrinsic physical effects of nuclear weapons, have moral, legal, 
and normative as well as rational connotations. Further, the reputation of a 
state is partly based on other states’ views of morality and law and whether 
the former is adhering to these in its security and foreign policy behavior.
This approach also reflects a strong preference for a problem- or puzzle-
based international relations research as opposed to paradigm-driven work. 
While there are many reasons for paradigm-driven scholarship, I contend that 
important puzzles should also form the second leg of any discipline. When 
scholars try hard to place analytical phenomena in one paradigm or the other, 
they tend to miss considerable nuances. I believe that in a problem- or puzzle-
driven analysis, variables from different paradigms can be used to explain a 
phenomenon more accurately. The effort here is not creating a grand theory 
but developing a puzzle-driven intermediate theory and explanation for a sig-
nificant intellectual and policy problem.13
In Figure 2.1 and the following text, I show the working of an eclectic 
model that treats both the material and nonmaterial considerations in the 
origins and maintenance of a tradition of non-use and its impact on actual 
practice.
The Material Bases
The informal norm inherent in the tradition of non-use arose and persisted 
partially from the material bases of the weapon concerned and the conse-
quences of its use as understood by decision makers over the past half century.  

Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use  23
In that sense, it is a prudential or rational norm developed or partially “in-
vented” in view of the enlightened self-interest of nuclear states—and its fu-
ture depends on the evolving character of the weapon and its utility as an 
instrument of deterrence as well as compellence.
The material bases of the tradition pertains to the fact that nuclear arms 
are “absolute” or “uncontestable” weapons, in that they are unique in their 
destructiveness while their use generates several consequences that decision 
makers cannot fathom or calculate.14 They are qualitatively different from 
conventional weapons in terms of their short- and long-term impact. As 
Thomas Schelling argues, nuclear weapons are unique because once intro-
duced into combat they cannot be “contained, restrained, confined, or lim-
ited.”15 In many respects, the destructive power of nuclear weapons is so awe-
some that it belies the fundamental Clausewitzian dictum that war is politics 
by other means. As Mandelbaum argues, the use of nuclear weapons would 
jeopardize “both the natural limits on violence, and the prospects for impos-
ing further, political controls, that Clausewitz believed kept all actual wars 
from mounting to horrible, senseless, ‘absolute’ extremes.”16 Although a pro-
longed conventional war can also cause horrendous levels of destruction, the 
difference is in the decision makers’ perception of control of events and the 
impact of a given course of action in the military realm. Decision makers tend 
to engage in conventional wars believing that they can control events and that 
victory is possible with limited costs. They tend to enter wars hoping military 
conflict will be short and costs not prohibitive. In the nuclear context, this 
expectation of victory and control over events disappears altogether, making 
leaders unsure of the consequences of their actions. The swiftness with which 
destruction takes place and the long-term lingering effects of an attack are the 
Figure 2.1.  Causal Linkage of Non-Use.
Material aspects 
of the weapon
Reputation and 
image concerns
Self-deterrence
Reputation 
Intermediaries
Tradition of 
non-use
Iterated non-use 
in practice

24  Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use
two distinguishing points in this respect. Moral concerns enter the picture to 
the point that, once unleashed, a leader loses control of the weapon, making 
it impossible to scale down the destruction and its possible unimaginable ef-
fects; thus, he or she may be entering a morally unacceptable realm of human 
action.
The perception of the uniqueness of nuclear weapons arose because the 
potential for total destruction gives them an all-or-nothing character unlike 
any other weapon invented thus far. This perception is based on a real mate-
rial fact, and it is not largely an idea developed due to cultural factors. The 
perception that nuclear weapons are different arose largely as a result of the 
impact of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki attacks and the thermonuclear tests 
in the South Pacific in the 1950s; as a result, even “ordinary people have come 
to see such weapons as different, and so destructive that they can never be 
treated as ‘just another weapon.’ ”17 Though other weapons such as subma-
rines and mustard gas had been subjected to international condemnation and 
norms against their use,18 the immense destructiveness of nuclear weapons 
activated global concern and focused international attention more than any 
previous weapon. In the United States, it was President Harry Truman who 
took away the custody of the weapon from the military and gave it to the civil-
ian Atomic Energy Agency, in appreciation of the unique destructive nature 
of the weapon vis-à-vis conventional weapons and hence the need for civilian 
control over its use. The uniqueness of the weapon means that a nuclear state 
may not use its ultimate capability unless a threshold is crossed (e.g., when a 
vital interest, such as the survival of the state itself, is threatened).
State leaders seem to calculate that military victory following a nuclear 
attack may not be materially, politically, psychologically, or morally worth 
obtaining if it involves the destruction of the total, or a sizable segment, of an 
enemy’s population and results in the contamination of a large portion of its 
territory with radioactive debris. Thus, the tradition seems to have emerged 
plausibly from the realization by nuclear states that there are severe limits to 
what they can accomplish by actually using a nuclear weapon.19 It also implies 
that after a certain point the capacity to destroy may not be useful, as the re-
lationship between the power to harm and the power to modify the behavior 
of others is not linear.20 
Additionally, the effects of even a limited nuclear attack may extend be-
yond the local area of attack, spatially and temporally.21 There exists no guar-
antee that the aftereffects, such as the spread of radioactive debris, can be 

Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use  25
confined to the target state’s territory. Neighboring states that may be neutral 
or aligned with the nuclear state could be the victims of the nuclear fallout 
as well. The fear that, once unleashed, nuclear terror will escape meaning-
ful political and military control and physical limitation seems to have in-
fluenced decision-makers’ choices in this regard. Thus, a norm (defined as 
“collective expectations about proper behavior for a given identity,” in this 
case as a responsible nuclear power)22 seems to have arisen partially as a func-
tion of the perception of the awesome destructive power of atomic weapons. 
It is also based on the self-interests of actors concerned, a point that is not 
often given due prominence in norm analysis.23 This perception did not arise 
suddenly. It was evolutionary; the Hiroshima and Nagasaki attacks and their 
consequences were the initial military and political shocks that gave birth to 
this perception. These were later compounded by the increase in lethality and 
numbers of different types of nuclear weapons that were introduced by the 
nuclear powers, and the open testing in the atmosphere of powerful hydrogen 
bombs, especially in the 1950s.
Reputational Factors
The argument based on the physical character of a nuclear weapon can take us 
only up to a point, because their retaliatory use is a cardinal feature of deter-
rence theory and policy, implying that the use of nuclear weapons is envis-
aged under at least some conditions; if the character of nuclear weapons were 
sufficient to explain their non-use, then their use should never be contem-
plated. This means that a convincing explanation needs to bring in nonmate-
rial factors also. This is where reputational considerations enter the picture. 
I argue that the unique material character of the weapon leads to reputational 
costs involved in its use. Leaders often tend to worry about the costs in terms 
of reputation and image of their nation and themselves when they undertake 
a particular course of action in the military realm.24 The chief concern here 
may be that the use of nuclear weapons would be condemned worldwide and 
can bring the revulsion of generations to come. The leader who orders the 
use of such a weapon could suffer incredible reputational costs. The reputa-
tional costs can also be very high among allies who may abandon the power 
that used such a weapon in anger. Positive reputation, on the other hand, can 
attract the allegiance of allies and additional members or sympathizers to 
one’s side. The Cold War competition for allies was also a contest between the  
superpowers for positive reputation to attract nonaligned states to their side.

26  Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use
Reputation connotes a shared expectation which in turn is reinforced 
through time by iterated practice. The tradition of non-use, therefore, has 
a strong dimension of temporal reinforcement. Thomas Schelling puts it  
cogently: 
What makes atomic weapons different is a powerful tradition that they are 
different. The reason—in answer to the usual rhetorical question—why we do 
not ban bows and arrows on the grounds that they too, like nuclear weapons, 
kill and maim people, is that there is a tradition for the use of bows and arrows, 
a jointly recognized expectation that they will be used if it is expedient to 
use them. There is no such tradition for the use of atomic weapons. There is 
instead a tradition for their nonuse—a jointly recognized expectation that 
they may not be used in spite of declarations of readiness to use them, even in 
spite of tactical advantages in their use.25
As shown in Figure 2.1, the temporal dynamics operate in the follow-
ing way. First, the material character of the weapon gives rise to reputation 
concerns through a logic of consequences, that is, in the calculations of deci-
sion makers. Reputation concerns are highlighted due to the efforts of norm 
entrepreneurs or reputation intermediaries, who make arguments based on 
the logic of consequences and the logic of appropriateness. These reputation 
concerns lead to self-deterrence on the part of the nuclear states, as evident 
during the crises/wars of the 1950s and 1960s. Second, when self-deterrence is 
practiced over a period of time, it becomes a tradition which in turn helps to 
self-deter in contexts of potential nuclear use vis-à-vis nonnuclear states. This 
feedback loop becomes stronger over the passage of time; as more years go by 
without use, the more times an opportunity for use is not taken, the harder it 
becomes to cross the threshold. The tradition thus affects self-deterrence in a 
feedback loop effect. This does not mean that the progression of the tradition 
is linear and that it will automatically get stronger over time, however, since 
material changes to the character of the weapon could undermine the tradi-
tion. If the absolute destructive nature of the weapon changes radically, the 
reputation costs will decrease and hence the probability will increase for use. 
This seems to be the hope of those who favor developing “usable” mininuclear 
weapons which indeed could create a new risk of eroding the tradition.
Theorists of international law have used the concept of reputation to refer 
to (a) “the extent to which a state is considered to be an honorable member of 
the international community,” and (b) “the degree to which a state reliably 

Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use  27
upholds its international commitments.”26 Fear of international opprobrium 
is a motivating factor for compliance.27 According to Downs and Jones, the 
rational-choice meaning of reputation—“the reliability with which a state 
abides by its commitments determines its value as a prospective partner and 
what others are willing to commit in return”—is the most important dimen-
sion of the concept. According to them, “a state might be interested in main-
taining different reputations in different areas.”28 Similarly, Beth Simmons ar-
gues that international legal commitment is a means by which “governments 
seek to raise the reputational costs of reneging,” and that “governments make 
commitments to further their interests and comply with them to preserve 
their reputation for predictable behavior” in a given area.29
Reputation has emerged as an important factor in the study of the behav-
ior of firms, especially in the marketing of products and services. Firms spend 
a considerable amount of resources and efforts to obtain, retain, and improve 
their reputations and brand names, lest their product become outdated or 
they lose customer base and eventually go out of business.30 Although na-
tions are unlikely to go out of business due to a loss of reputation, states can 
also be driven by reputation considerations in order to achieve the support of 
public opinion for their policies, both nationally and internationally. This is 
why countries, similar to firms, spend enormous amounts of money on public 
diplomacy and propaganda, especially in other states. In addition, individual 
leaders may also be driven by reputation considerations. They may want to 
protect their personal reputation; translating this consideration to the inter-
national realm would mean avoidance of a certain kind of warfare that may 
simply make them and their nation look like immoral and unlawful actors. 
Nuclear arms fall into the category of a weapon that, if used, could elicit con-
siderable negative reputation to the leader who ordered it.
In the nuclear area, reputation and image thus work at three levels— 
international, nation-state, and decision maker. At the international level, key 
state leaders could make a national interest calculation that the reactions of 
third parties would impose costs for the state that outweigh the benefits of 
nuclear use. At the nation-state level, a leader could fear losing power or public 
confidence if there is a public opinion backlash against nuclear use. At the 
decision-maker level, a leader could be self-deterred from nuclear use as a re-
sult of worries about the opinion of others, the judgment of history, his or her 
legacy, and his or her desire to maintain a self-image as a morally good per-
son.31 It is often a combination of these three levels that enters the reputation  

28  Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use
calculations of leaders, although empirical work could establish which dimen-
sion dominates in a given decision-maker’s choices in a particular situation.
Reputation considerations at the international level could be based on the 
fear that the use of nuclear weapons would be condemned worldwide, upset-
ting the reputation and image of the user, with the demand for global nuclear 
disarmament becoming an issue of highest salience. The expected possible 
aftereffects of a nuclear attack generate fears among decision makers that, if 
they break the tradition, they could become political pariahs at home and 
abroad, and that their use of nuclear weapons could establish a bad precedent 
for others to follow. From this perspective, the moral factors might be mixing 
with the fear of consequences in generating the tradition of non-use.32 The 
innocent victims of a nuclear attack, and the possibility of aftereffects lasting 
for generations, could make the leader who casually ordered a nuclear attack 
a permanent immoral figure in history books, and thus could act partially as 
a deterrent against nuclear use by decision makers.33
In this perspective, legal and moral/ethical considerations are not totally 
irrelevant in explaining the tradition of non-use. Just like morality, leaders 
may consider legality as part of their overall cost-benefit calculations. They 
may view that an act like nuclear use does necessitate legal justification, and 
if perceived by others as a totally illegal act, their reputation, image, prestige, 
and legitimacy would suffer irreparable damage, nationally and internation-
ally. According to legal positivists, international legal norms are generally not 
enforced by coercive state action but “by fear on the part of nations . . . of 
provoking general hostility, and incurring its probable evils, in case they shall 
violate maxims generally received and respected.”34 Leaders, especially in de-
mocracies, tend to view legality as part of their choices in the military realm, 
often for reputational and domestic and international legitimacy reasons.
A secondary dimension of reputation is related to the nonproliferation 
objectives of nuclear powers. Of the nuclear states, five are both permanent 
members of the UN Security Council (P-5) and have their nuclear possession 
enshrined in the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT). These five states 
want to preserve both deterrent and nonproliferation goals. First, it is likely 
that the actual use of nuclear weapons would mean that deterrence had failed. 
Second, if nuclear weapons were used against a nonnuclear state, it would also 
break the nonproliferation commitment by the nuclear states vis-à-vis non­
nuclear states made during and after the conclusion of the NPT. It would also 
set a bad precedent for other nuclear powers to follow. The tradition could have 

Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use  29
been strengthened partially because of its value in preserving the nonprolif-
eration objectives of the nuclear weapon states (NWS), especially the United 
States. The informal norm is an assurance to the nonnuclear weapon states 
(NNWS) that they need not acquire independent nuclear weapons capability 
for deterrence purposes. The NWS justify their nuclear monopoly by arguing 
that their nuclear weapons are primarily meant for mutual deterrence and not 
for use against NNWS. The NNWS also see benefit in the informal norm, as it 
lowers the attractiveness of nuclear weapons as instruments of deterrence or 
coercion against them. In fact, several NNWS have confronted NWS in wars 
and crises, apparently believing that nuclear weapons would not be used in 
retaliation (as I discuss in Chapter 7).
The nonproliferation regime is built around legitimacy and exchange 
power. Legitimacy in this respect is the general acceptance of the nuclear 
order by most nations, even though the regime is unequal and sovereignty-
limiting for some actors. The regime gives partial legitimacy to the P‑5 states 
to maintain their monopoly rights and offers legal grounds for coercive action 
against those nonnuclear states attempting to violate the regime’s rules and 
principles. Legitimacy in this regard is based on the principle of “serving the 
larger good” as the regime has been “duly constituted by the international 
community.”35 It is based on an acceptance by states that the nuclear order, 
even though it is unequal, ought to be respected as an instrument of collec-
tive good and as a way to manage a complex security problem. This mutu-
ally rewarding aspect is the crux of exchange theory, which is relevant to the 
nonproliferation regime. Nuclear have-nots are exchanging their sovereign 
right to build nuclear weapons in return for a normative order that implicitly 
prohibits nuclear use on them by the nuclear haves.36 The exchange also in-
cluded a pledge by the NWS that they would pursue disarmament in earnest, 
as stated in Article VI of the NPT. Without legitimacy and exchange power, 
the regime would collapse, as neither coercive sanctions nor brute force is 
likely to keep it intact for long.
The NWS have in general attempted to preserve the nuclear status quo, 
which allows a limited number of states the right to hold these weapons. The 
use of nuclear weapons, especially since the 1960s, would have prompted the 
unraveling of the nuclear nonproliferation regime, as additional countries 
would seek nuclear weapons in their effort to acquire countervailing deter-
rent capabilities. Once used, the uniqueness surrounding nuclear weapons 
would have been lost. Country studies in subsequent chapters will explore  

30  Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use
the extent to which these considerations entered into the creation and suste-
nance of the tradition of non-use.
Deterrence Reputation Versus Non-Use Reputation  This discussion suggests 
that the NWS have been driven by two types of reputation concerns. First, 
they have been motivated to maintain a reputation for resolve in signaling re-
taliatory threats, for deterrence vis-à-vis other nuclear states. Second, toward 
NNWS, the reverse becomes the case; they have been driven by a desire to sig-
nal non-use so as to obtain their allegiance in Cold War competition (through 
projecting an image as good states and reliable partners) and secondarily to 
prevent NNWS from seeking nuclear weapons to deter nuclear states.
The nuclear arena shows that a nation can hold different and competing 
reputational concerns. For instance, during the Cold War, both superpowers 
were keen on developing reputations for peace and order and as promoters 
of nuclear nonproliferation and eventual nuclear disarmament. They spent 
an enormous amount of resources on public diplomacy by producing and 
distributing propaganda materials and operating information centers in dif-
ferent countries.37 Simultaneously, they wanted to cultivate a reputation for 
resolve so that their nuclear capability would be valued as instruments of de-
terrence by other nuclear powers and as a currency of power in the interna-
tional system by all states, especially in the context of extended deterrence 
covering nonnuclear protégés.
Deterrence theorists developed the widely used meaning of reputation in 
international relations.38 Reputation in the deterrence context is very much 
part of the three building blocks of the theory and policy: capability, credibil-
ity, and communication. The deterrer should have sufficient capability to in-
flict unacceptable punishment on the deteree, the threat of retaliation should 
be credible or believable, and the threat should be meaningfully communi-
cated to the target state. Credibility is assumed to be very much dependent 
on the state’s reputation for use of force in the past.39 If, in the past, the state 
wavered, a challenger would believe that the commitment to use of force was 
shaky and the threat of retaliation noncredible. Therefore, for deterrence to 
succeed, an opponent should believe that the deterrer will fight rather than 
back down. With nuclear weapons, the components of deterrence are not sim-
ple or straightforward. From an existential deterrence perspective, a nuclear 
state may be able to show resolve when confronting another nuclear state 
even without much communication of retaliatory intent, as the fear of nuclear  

Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use  31
escalation could act as a deterrent from direct attack. However, resolve to use 
nuclear weapons is difficult to communicate to a nonnuclear adversary, espe-
cially if it is not for something as important as the survival of the threatened 
state itself. It is thus virtually impossible to develop a reputation for nuclear 
use around past conflict behavior, when that behavior invariably precluded 
nuclear use. Furthermore, states tend not to make extremely explicit threats 
or promises, because of the fear of cost to the “actor’s reputation if he de-
faults.”40 This problem is particularly manifest in the case of nuclear threats 
that a state can make vis-à-vis a nonnuclear state. The constraint of this na-
ture may be termed self-deterrence.
It is problematic to suggest that reputation only matters in terms of resolve 
in the deterrence context, as reputation can also be built around the non-use 
of force. In other words, a nuclear state can create an expectation that for 
anything other than a real challenge to its survival, it will not use its nuclear 
weapons, as the threat of use of nuclear weapons will not be taken seriously. 
Credibility for nuclear deterrence will decrease if all and sundry threats are 
to be deterred with nuclear weapons. If all threats are deterrable with nuclear 
weapons and they are equivalent to a panacea for all diseases, then the ten-
dency on the part of the nonnuclear state would be to disregard the threat, 
thereby raising considerable questions about credibility or believability.41 The 
credibility of a threat can also decline if threats are not carried out for a long 
period of time. States Kenneth Boulding: “credibility, as it were, is a commod-
ity which depreciates with the mere passage of time.”42 
Reputation for unwillingness to use nuclear weapons may be driven by a 
desire to dissuade future use of nuclear weapons by other nuclear states, that 
is, extend the shadow of the future in order to achieve reciprocity in non-
use. Reputation concerns operate as self-deterrents here. The understanding 
of reputation as used in neoliberal institutionalist theory is useful in this con-
text. The theory of decentralized cooperation gives reputation a central role. 
According to this school, a key reason for states to comply with commitments 
is their “fear that any evidence of unreliability will damage their current co-
operative relationships and lead other states to reduce their willingness to 
enter into future agreements.”43 Axelrod contends that cooperation can occur 
without a central authority on the basis of reciprocity and if the “shadow of 
the future” is long enough for future interactions. However, a reputation for 
cooperation is vital in order to sustain cooperation in the long run.44 Similarly, 
Robert Keohane argues that states want to maintain a good reputation so as 

32  Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use
to enter into advantageous agreements with other states. Rule violation could 
establish bad precedents, which could, in the end, produce a “col­lec­tive bad.”45
Reputation affects how an international regime is formed and sustained. 
It is assumed that if states believe in the implicit promises that other states 
make, they will reciprocate. Thus the successful maintenance of the nonpro-
liferation regime depends on the belief that nuclear states hold a reputation 
for non-use for anything other than existential threat.46 Game theorists pay 
special attention to reputation, and their findings are relevant for understand-
ing regime formation and maintenance. Positive reputation seems to help 
efficiency and cooperation as actors receive information “on their partner’s 
behavior in interactions with third parties.”47
Reputation Intermediaries  Reputation at the interstate level becomes salient 
in part when particular groups succeed in propagating certain adverse ef­fects 
of choices that decision makers may have to make in an issue area. These norm 
entrepreneurs frame the issues, and “are critical for norm emergence because 
they call attention to issues . . . by using language that names, interprets, and 
dramatizes them.”48 They are indeed agents of the socialization of a norm. 
Without their active work, the public might not know much about the rami-
fications of issues, and, as a result, governments could ignore ad­verse pub-
lic reactions and reputation costs. These norm entrepreneurs are rep­utation 
intermediaries and facilitators. The tradition of non-use of nuclear weapons 
that emerged over a period of time is owed, to a large extent, to the works 
of these reputation intermediaries or norm entrepreneurs who propagate 
the dangers of nuclear war, a point that Constructivist scholars have rightly 
highlighted. Different groups of norm entrepreneurs were necessary to bring 
forth the rational/material and reputational dimensions of nuclear weapons 
to worldwide attention.49 Four groups of norm entrepreneurs played a role in 
the creation and sustenance of the tradition. They are atomic scientists, peace 
groups, nuclear strategists, and nonnuclear nonaligned states.
The first groups of norm entrepreneurs were atomic scientists involved in 
the Manhattan project. Scientists such as Leo Szilard, Niels Bohr, and J. Robert 
Oppenheimer argued that unless an international authority was created to 
control the atom, nuclear weapons would spread to various countries, and ag­
gres­sive powers could use them for aggressive purposes.50 President Truman 
partially agreed with them. The Acheson/Lilienthal proposals and the Baruch 
Plan of 1946, which called for an international body to conduct nuclear re-
search and development while removing such controls from national hands, 

Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use  33
resulted to a great extent from the views of nuclear scientists, especially Niels 
Bohr. These scientists engaged in intense lobbying of the Truman adminis-
tration and disseminated their views through a series of memoranda. Prior 
to the end of World War II, Vannevar Bush, chairman of the Manhattan 
Project’s Military Committee and his deputy, James Conant, had urged Sec-
retary of War Henry Stimson to turn over atomic weapons to an international 
agency once the war ended.51 Both Bush and Conant were members of the 
Acheson/Lilienthal Panel, appointed by President Truman to enquire about 
the possibility of international control, and the Panel’s recommendations 
were adopted under the Baruch Plan.52 The Federation of Atomic Scientists 
began publishing the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists in 1945, and its famous 
Doomsday Clock played a considerable role in the propagation of the dangers 
of nuclear war.53 However, the early influence of scientists waned and the idea 
of international control of the atom was virtually dead by 1947. The McMahon 
Act of 1946 enshrined secrecy as the key characteristic of U.S. nuclear policy, 
banning all international cooperation at sharing nuclear technology, includ-
ing with its close wartime ally Britain.54 Many scientists continued to play a 
critical role in highlighting the ill effects of nuclear weapons, while others 
were creating deadlier and deadlier nuclear weapons in national laboratories.
Peace movements constituted a second group of reputation intermediaries. 
Starting from the early 1950s, these groups played an important role in raising 
the world’s consciousness about the dangers of nuclear weapons testing and 
the nuclear arms race, while they called for effective arms control and disar-
mament.55 There have been hundreds of peace groups that have clamored for 
nuclear disarmament, but the most prominent ones included the Campaign 
for Nuclear Disarmament (CND), the National Committee for a Sane Nuclear 
Policy (SANE), the World Peace Council, the World Federation of Churches,  
Pugwash, and Greenpeace. Prominent intellectuals and scientists such as 
Bertrand Russell, Albert Schweitzer, Irène and Frédéric Joliot-Curie, Norman 
Cousins, Eugine Rabinowitch, and Joseph Rotblat, played key roles during 
the 1950s in the international peace movements.56 However, the role of peace 
groups waxed and waned according to the urgency of issues relating to the 
nuclear arms race. For instance, these groups were very active during the at-
mospheric tests in the 1950s and the post–Cuban Missile Crisis and Vietnam 
War eras. They would emerge as important norm defenders during the 1980s 
in response to the loose talk by Reagan administration officials of a win-
nable nuclear war. They also received a fillip when Soviet President Mikhail  
Gorbachev accepted their logic on the dangers of the unbridled nuclear arms 

34  Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use
race. However, in the post–Cold War era, many peace movements have re-
ceded in prominence as nuclear issues have become less newsworthy, partly 
because, in the public perception, nuclear war between old nuclear powers 
is unlikely, but also because the focus has turned to new nuclear states and 
nonstate actors.
The third critical group of reputation intermediaries consisted of mili-
tary strategists, led by Bernard Brodie. In his edited collection, The Absolute 
Weapon: Atomic Power and World Order, Brodie argued that “[e]verything 
about the bomb is overshadowed by the twin facts that it exists and that its de-
structive power is fantastically great,” and that “[n]o adequate defense against 
the atomic bomb exists, and the possibilities of its existence in the future are 
exceedingly remote.”57 Brodie’s most influential statement read: “Thus far the 
chief purpose of our military establishment has been to win wars. From now 
on its chief purpose must be to avert them. It can have almost no other useful 
purpose.”58 This group included Arnold Wolfers, Jacob Viner, and William 
T. R. Fox.59 Some of these strategists thus helped to project the uniqueness of 
nuclear weapons and their unsuitability to wage regular war. Their intellectual 
efforts influenced future scholarly works on nuclear weapons and deterrence 
theory. However, leading strategists also devised theories and policies on de-
terrence and nuclear use if deterrence failed.60 Hence, like scientists, the role 
of strategic analysts is a mixed one in the creation of the tradition of non-use.
The final group of reputation intermediaries consisted of developing states, 
under the aegis of the Non-Aligned Movement. The movement had its ori-
gins in the 1955 Afro-Asian Conference in Bandung, the declaration of which 
stated that “disarmament and the prohibition of the production, experimen-
tation, and use of nuclear and thermonuclear weapons of war are imperative 
to save mankind and civilization from . . . wholesale destruction.”61 At every 
summit meeting that followed its founding, nuclear disarmament would 
emerge as a key theme for the group. Non-aligned leaders, especially India’s 
Jawaharlal Nehru and Yugoslavia’s Josip Broz Tito, actively participated in 
promoting peace movements by throwing the support of their governments 
behind them. As nonnuclear states, the nonaligned states made substantial 
contributions at the UN disarmament forums, especially the Eighteen Na-
tion Disarmament Committee, and the NPT negotiations and five-year NPT 
review conferences.62 As I discuss in Chapter 8, they also were in the forefront 
of creating nuclear-weapon-free zones and consulting the International Court 
of Justice (ICJ) for its opinion on the legality of nuclear use.

Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use  35
These four groups of norm intermediaries played different roles, some-
times coordinated but often independently, in helping to generate high repu-
tation costs for nuclear use. Each decade saw ups and downs in their role as 
well as that of the tradition itself. During the 1950s and 1960s, with the de-
velopment of even larger nuclear weapons, the bombs dropped on Hiroshima  
and Nagasaki paled in comparison; consequently, the powerful aura sur-
rounding nuclear weapons increased. The latter part of 1950s saw some seri-
ous efforts to control the spread of nuclear weapons (such as with the Atoms 
for Peace proposal). This decade also witnessed the arrival of the Soviet Union 
as a nuclear weapon state, and the U.S.-Soviet arms race accelerated to new 
levels. Nuclear testing of ever more destructive weapons took place, generat-
ing strong international protests. The most significant protests were mounted 
against atmospheric nuclear testing by the superpowers over the Pacific in 
the first half of the 1950s and its larger implications for health. In the United 
States, a national movement against nuclear testing emerged, supported by 
the 1956 presidential campaign of Adlai Stevenson, which included peace 
groups such as “Leo Szilard’s Council for a Livable World; Bernard Lown’s 
Physicians for Social Responsibility; and SANE, the National Committee for 
a SANE Nuclear Policy.”63
The decade of the 1960s witnessed the development of high-yield nuclear 
weapons, an intensified discourse on deterrence and mutual assured destruc-
tion (MAD), and criticisms of deterrence theory and policy as “abstract” and 
“potentially catastrophic” for a variety of reasons, including irrationality 
among decision makers.64 The civil defense programs and the national drills 
initiated by the Kennedy administration further galvanized international at-
tention on the dangers of nuclear war.65 The Cuban Missile Crisis was a piv-
otal turning point for the tradition. The crisis brought the world to the brink 
of nuclear war, and made clear the dangers of an uncontrolled arms race and 
political brinkmanship. Following the crisis, peace movements played a sig-
nificant role in publicizing the dangers of nuclear arms races, testing, and use. 
Particularly in the U.S. context, these movements helped to strengthen the 
call for arms control agreements.66 However, the conclusion of the Partial Test 
Ban Treaty (PTBT) in 1963 and the ending of atmospheric testing removed 
the issue from the American public’s radar screen for over a decade, even as 
the superpowers accelerated their arms buildup and underground testing of 
new and lethal nuclear arms. The conflict in Vietnam, the loss of the imme-
diacy of the nuclear threat, and the promise of cheaper nuclear power, helped 

36  Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use
the issue to fade from the U.S. public’s perceptions; it emerged again only with 
the arrival of the Reagan administration in 1980.67
Despite the escalation of the U.S.-Soviet nuclear rivalry, international ef-
forts at nonproliferation became intense in the 1960s. The NPT negotiations 
and the hard bargaining that led to the conclusion of the treaty appeared to 
have strengthened the non-use principle. No explicit non-use convention was 
signed as part of the NPT, but one of the key demands of the nonnuclear states 
has been a concrete legal convention to that effect. They have maintained that 
demand in almost all review conferences since 1968. There was thus an under-
standing that the NPT implicitly forbids nuclear use and eventually will lead 
to nuclear disarmament. The NNWS signed on to the unequal treaty with the 
expectation that the NPT would become a forerunner of general and complete 
nuclear disarmament. However, following the signing of the NPT, the United 
States under the Nixon administration considered nuclear use in Vietnam, 
so it is not clear how serious the U.S. commitment was on the non-use issue. 
Despite efforts by some weapon makers and hard-core military planners to 
break the tradition and treat nuclear weapons like any other weapon, the con-
ventionalization of nuclear weapons has failed to occur.
In the post–Cold War world, the tradition has shown some resilience, 
with U.S. leaders choosing not to exercise the nuclear option even prior to the 
start of the 1991 and 2003 Gulf wars. However, they also stepped up a policy 
of “calculated ambiguity” in order to create uncertainty in the minds of the 
so-called “rogue leaders,” thus dissuading them from developing and using 
weapons of mass destruction. The United States also changed its policy on nu-
clear weapons by considering nuclear weapons use as a possible tool for pre-
vention and preemption. Together, these policy changes have raised questions 
about the robustness of the tradition in the United States. Second-generation 
nuclear states such as Israel, India, Pakistan, and North Korea have entered 
the nuclear club, while others, such as Iran, have stepped up their efforts to 
acquire nuclear weapons. It is yet to be seen how strongly these states have 
internalized the tradition of non-use in their national security calculations.
Conclusion
The tradition of non-use of nuclear weapons emerged over several decades. I 
have argued that there is an informal normative prohibition against nuclear 
use and that different nuclear actors have behaved as if they have a respon-
sibility not to use nuclear weapons vis-à-vis nonnuclear states. The intrinsic 

Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use  37
destructive characteristics of nuclear weapons have been part of the reason 
for the tradition’s rise and persistence. The destabilizing and absolute charac-
ter of nuclear weapons has limited their strategic utility. With the passage of 
time, these characteristics also fed the reputational considerations that helped 
to sustain the informal norm. The reputation costs associated with use and 
the reputation benefits for refraining from use both played a significant role 
in leaders’ calculations regarding nuclear weapons in crisis contexts. Repu-
tational interests thus became the leading reason for the non-use of nuclear 
weapons over the past sixty-three years. The next chapter addresses the evolu-
tion of the tradition in the United States and explores how the various factors 
presented here operated in determining U.S. policy with respect to the non-
use of nuclear weapons.

38
 3 THE UNITED STATES AND THE TRADITION I: 
THE TRUMAN AND EISENHOWER YEARS 
(1945–1961)
It is a terrible thing to order the use of something that . . . is so 
terribly destructive, destructive beyond anything we have ever had. 
You have got to understand that this isn’t a military weapon . . . 
It is used to wipe out women and children and unarmed people, 
and not for military uses. So we have got to treat this differently 
from riἀes and cannon and ordinary things like that.
—President Harry S. Truman, April 1948
You boys must be crazy. We can’t use those awful things against 
Asians for a second time in less than ten years. My God.
—President Dwight Eisenhower, April 1954
as t he f ir st  nat ion t o devel op, test, and acquire nuclear weapons, and 
most significantly as the one and only state ever to use an atomic weapon, the 
United States has played a crucial role in the evolution and sustenance of the 
tradition of non-use. Much of the discourse on the tradition has occurred in 
the United States. This is not surprising given that the intellectual founda-
tions of nuclear deterrence theory came out of American policy and academic 
worlds. However, based on available historical records, among all the nuclear 
powers, it has been the United States that has most often pondered the pos-
sibility of nuclear use against nonnuclear adversaries.1
It is important to trace the evolution of the tradition of non-use of nuclear 
weapons for the United States by looking at the key turning points and events 
that shaped its path. What contributed to the rise and persistence of the tradi-
tion in the U.S. case? What role did reputation, strategic/tactical calculations, 
and moral considerations play in this process? This chapter goes through the 
historical record under presidents Truman and Eisenhower, by exploring 
the key events that marked significant turning points in the evolution of the  

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  39
nascent tradition. It will also see if the tradition itself constrained these presi-
dents in any meaningful way.
The Truman Years (1945–1953)
Harry Truman was president during the most critical formative years of the 
tradition of nuclear non-use. He was the first and only American president 
ever to order the use of atomic weapons, on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki in August 1945. The Hiroshima bombing on August 6 killed 
over 70,000 people instantly and another 130,000 over five years, while the 
Nagasaki attacks on August 9 ended nearly 70,000 lives instantaneously and 
another 70,000 within five years of the attack.2 A large number of survivors 
would suffer permanently due to cancer and other diseases caused by atomic 
radiation as well as burn injuries. Truman justified these attacks as neces-
sary to end the war expeditiously and thereby save the lives of half a mil-
lion U.S. soldiers and thousands of Japanese citizens, who, he claimed, would 
have been casualties of any U.S. invasion to obtain Japan’s unconditional sur-
render.3 Controversy surrounds the decision to use the bombs and Truman’s 
justification of it, especially regarding the Nagasaki attack, which some his-
torians argue was intended as a warning shot to Soviet leader Joseph Stalin 
not to enter the Japanese theater.4 Others contend that Truman did not make 
a serious effort to gain Japan’s surrender until he was able to use the bomb.5 
Truman has also been criticized for exaggerating the number of U.S. casual-
ties likely to result from a land invasion of Japan.6 It may well be possible that 
given the differences of opinion the Western Allies and the Soviets had over 
territorial demarcations and control of postwar Europe, and the Soviet dec-
laration of war on Japan two days after the Hiroshima bombing, Truman felt 
compelled to order the Nagasaki attack. Obviously, three days were not suf-
ficient for Japan to agree on an unconditional surrender. A desire to deny Rus-
sia any territorial claims in Manchuria and postwar power sharing in Japan 
thus seems a plausible explanation for the second nuclear attack.7 The attacks 
prompted a powerful international response, although it can be argued that 
neither Truman nor the scientists involved in the Manhattan Project fully 
grasped beforehand the potential impact in both human toll and political 
ramifications.

40  The United States and the Tradition I
The Hiroshima/Nagasaki Experience and the  
International Control of the Atom 
The Hiroshima and Nagasaki episodes seem to have exerted a profound im-
pact on American foreign policy. In a fundamental sense, the idealist tradition 
in America came to the forefront temporarily as a result of the Hiroshima/ 
Nagasaki experiences.8 Truman himself stated: “the destruction of Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki was lesson enough for me. The world could not afford to risk 
war with atomic weapons.”9 Truman was successfully (though temporarily) 
persuaded by leading American scientists to control and eventually eliminate 
all nuclear weapons under an international authority. These scientists, led by 
Vannevar Bush, James Conant, and Robert Oppenheimer, would become the 
first group of norm intermediaries at this point. During the war, they had 
recommended to Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson the sharing of atomic 
technology with the Soviet Union in collaboration with Britain as a way to 
achieve international control of the atom.10 They expressed the concern that 
many other countries would eventually acquire the bomb, and that aggressive 
states would use them to pursue their offensive goals, especially in a surprise 
fashion. Therefore, before the genie got fully out of the bottle, an international 
mechanism was needed to control the spread of the atom and achieve eventual 
elimination of the weapon.11 Those hopes motivated the Acheson-Lilienthal 
Report of 1946, which was later adopted by Bernard Baruch in his proposals 
contained in the Baruch Plan.12
The Acheson-Lilienthal Report recommended the creation of an interna-
tional atomic development authority with complete control over world sup-
plies of uranium and thorium, as well as the power to lease such materials to 
national facilities and offer a workable system of safeguards to remove from 
individual nations’ “intrinsically dangerous” nuclear activities. The interna-
tional authority would leave as much freedom as possible to national estab-
lishments to conduct peaceful nuclear activities. The report cited three rea-
sons for international control: first, atomic energy and atomic weapons “have 
placed at the disposal of mankind ‘means of destruction hitherto unknown’ ”; 
second, “there can be no adequate military defense against atomic weapons”; 
and third, “no single nation can in fact have a monopoly” in the employment 
of these weapons.13 Remarkably, the proposal assumed that nations would not 
allow any single power to get control of civilian atomic materials dispersed in 
their territories and start building nuclear weapons.14

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  41
The Baruch Plan, which followed the Acheson-Lilienthal proposals, was 
even more ambitious. Bernard Baruch, the chief U.S. delegate to the UN 
Atomic Energy Commission (UNAEC), advocated international control with 
a veto-proof system of “swift and assured penalties” on violators. However, 
a critical part of the Baruch Plan was to allow the United States to retain its 
nuclear monopoly until all countries had signed on to the plan and a proper 
international control mechanism was developed.15 This plan was rejected by 
the Soviets, who formulated their own proposals for a convention prohibit-
ing the production, stockpile, and use of nuclear weapons by all states. The 
signatories of the convention would destroy all existing stockpiles of nuclear 
weapons within three months of its coming into force, a measure aimed at the 
United States, which was the only atomic power at that time. However, there 
was no enforcement or control mechanism attached to the proposed conven-
tion.16 The United States opposed this proposal while the Soviets refused to 
accept the Baruch Plan, thus dooming early efforts at international control of 
the atom. Whether genuinely committed or not, during the first three years of 
the atomic age, Truman became an advocate of international control, as a re-
sult of the devastation of Hiroshima/Nagasaki and the arguments presented 
by influential scientists and other peace activists, while his advisors came out 
with plans for eventual nuclear disarmament.
Nuclear Preponderance and Plans for  
War with the Soviet Union
The Truman administration, while pursuing an international control agenda, 
also wished to retain America’s military preponderance, especially in the nu-
clear area.17 Although the international control issue was being considered, the 
question of a preventive war against the Soviet Union in view of its impending 
nuclear acquisition was very much on top of the administration’s agenda. The 
military was in favor of a preventive attack on the Soviet Union. Three war 
plans produced by military planners between 1945 and 1950, drawing heavily 
on the lessons of air power in World War II, proposed that the United States 
engage in a preventive attack on Soviet industrial and military targets in order 
to stop it from becoming a nuclear weapon power. These plans, Pincher (1946), 
Broiler (November 1947), and Crankshaft (1948), all called for nuclear air of-
fensives against Soviet war-making capabilities as the best way to prevent a 
future war with the Communist nation.18 

42  The United States and the Tradition I
The Pincher Plan, prepared by the Joint War Planning Committee of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS), proposed the use of nuclear weapons against the 
Soviet Union in the event of a war in Europe. With the rapid decline of U.S.-
Soviet relations, especially in the wake of the Communist coup in Czechoslo-
vakia and the June 1948 Berlin Blockade by the Soviets, air offensives relying 
on nuclear weapons became a crucial part of U.S. war plans against the Soviet 
Union.19 However, immediately prior to the Blockade crisis, Truman had re-
jected the “Joint Emergency War Plan,” prepared by the JCS, which had called 
for a “powerful air offensive designed to exploit the destructive and psycho-
logical power of atomic weapons against the vital elements of the Soviet war 
making capacity.”20 Truman asked for an alternative plan relying on conven-
tional capability, as he was still hoping for the outlawing of nuclear weapons 
through international convention, and thinking also that “the American peo-
ple might not permit the government to use atomic weapons for ‘aggressive 
purposes.’ ”21 As Truman put it: 
I don’t think we ought to use this thing unless we absolutely have to. It is a 
terrible thing to order the use of something that . . . is so terribly destructive, 
destructive beyond anything we have ever had. You have got to understand 
that this isn’t a military weapon . . . It is used to wipe out women and children 
and unarmed people, and not for military uses. So we have got to treat this 
differently from rifles and cannon and ordinary things like that.22
Reputation and disarmament concerns come to the forefront in Truman’s 
choice at this time.
However, the efforts at finding a conventional alternative to confront the 
Soviet Union were jettisoned in July 1948.23 Truman dispatched three squad-
rons of nuclear-capable B‑29 aircraft to Europe, the same type of aircraft that 
was used in the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, without revealing that 
they were only conventionally armed. According to Defense Secretary James 
Forrestal, there was a consensus among Western leaders that in the event of 
a war, nuclear weapons would be used.24 However, during the crisis Truman 
rejected a request made by Forrestal to transfer nuclear weapons from civilian 
to military control, stating that he did not want “to have some dashing lieu­
tenant colonel decide when would be the proper time to drop one.” Forrestal 
had argued that “there was a very serious question as to the wisdom of relying 
upon an agency other than the user of such a weapon, to assure the integ-
rity and usability of such a weapon.”25 Truman, in his Memoirs, contends that 

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  43
he opposed preventive war as “there is nothing more foolish than to think 
that war can be stopped by war. You don’t ‘prevent’ anything by war except 
peace.”26 Secretary of War Henry Stimson presented the reputational con-
cerns powerfully, calling preventive war “worse than nonsense,” arguing that 
it “results from a cynical incomprehension of what the people of the world 
will tolerate from any nation,” and adding that “we could not possibly take 
that opportunity without deserting our inheritance. Americans as conquer-
ors would be tragically miscast.”27 
It has been argued that the United States only had fifty or so unassembled 
weapons and that operational constraints actually prevented their use in the 
Berlin Crisis.28 However, the available evidence suggests that Truman’s mili-
tary advisors were generally confident that nuclear weapons would be used, 
but the president hesitated and made little effort to openly play the atomic 
card as an instrument of blackmail. What is remarkable is that it was not de-
terrence (i.e., fear of Soviet retaliation in kind) that prevented nuclear use, as 
the United States had an atomic monopoly during this period. Truman was 
still hoping for international control, and was not confident of the implica-
tions of nuclear use in that regard. He was also concerned about domestic and 
international opinion on the use of nuclear weapons.
In May 1949, the report of the Harmon Committee (headed by Lt. General 
Hubert Harmon of the Air Force) studied the likely effects of atomic attacks 
on seventy Soviet cities and concluded that nuclear attack would destroy 30 to 
40 percent of Soviet industrial capabilities, kill 2.7 million and injure 4 million 
Russians, and leave 28 million homeless, while inflicting serious damage to 
Soviet war-making capacity. However, it warned that the use of atomic weap-
ons would not “bring about capitulation, destroy the roots of Communism 
or critically weaken the power of Soviet leadership to dominate the people.” 
Instead, “it would validate Soviet propaganda against the United States, unify 
the people, and increase their will to fight.”29 This report reinforced the posi-
tion of critics, especially in the U.S. Navy, who were skeptical of the efficacy 
of atomic air offensives. But it also encouraged a substantial expansion of U.S. 
nuclear forces so as to achieve dominance vis-à-vis the Soviets in Europe.30
The early enthusiasm of the scientists and others for international con-
trol did not last long. By 1947, many scientists had returned to laboratories 
in pursuit of careers in the cutting edge of atomic research. Moreover, the 
McMahon Act of July 1946 ended all international cooperation in atomic 
sharing, including with America’s wartime ally Britain, and placed nuclear 

44  The United States and the Tradition I
weapons development in the hands of a civilian agency, the Atomic Energy 
Commission (AEC). This did not mean that the military gave up all control 
over atomic weapons. A military liaison committee was given the authority 
to review all AEC decisions.31 American leaders were determined to retain 
the U.S. atomic monopoly as long as they could. By July 1949, Truman had 
given up hopes of achieving meaningful international control, since the con-
flict with the Soviets had intensified, and he ordered the strengthening of U.S. 
nuclear capability.32 After a period of intense internal debate in 1949, Truman  
finally approved the hydrogen bomb project, despite the opposition of the 
General Advisory Committee of the AEC, led by J. Robert Oppenheimer, fa-
ther of the atomic bomb.33 The committee had argued that “the moral op-
probrium associated with building such a weapon, together with the possi-
bilities of international control and the poor state of Soviet thermonuclear 
research . . . outweighed any political or strategic use the superbomb might 
provide.”34 However, this argument did not dissuade Truman from launching 
the hydrogen bomb project.
The Truman administration’s thinking on atomic use against the Soviet 
Union was contained in National Security Council Document 68 (NSC‑68), 
which was approved in April 1950. It called for a massive increase in arms 
spending, but contended that the threat the United States faced was of “piece-
meal aggression,” and that “excessive reliance on nuclear weapons would 
leave the United States, in such situations, with ‘no better choice than to ca-
pitulate or precipitate a global war.’ ”35 The document contained sections that 
discussed the benefits and disadvantages of a preventive nuclear strike on the 
Soviet Union. It concluded that preventive war was “generally unacceptable 
to Americans” and that it would be “repugnant” and “morally corrosive.”36 
An annex to NSC‑68 proposed that in order to maintain its leadership role in 
the global arena, the United States must act with “patience and self-restraint,” 
“avoid being arbitrary, domineering and condescending,” and convince other 
nations that war with the Soviet Union was not inevitable and that it was not 
in the American “character to wage aggressive or preventive war.”37 Reputa-
tion and image considerations thus come to the fore in the calculations of the 
authors of NSC‑68 and its annexes.
The Truman administration rejected another proposal, contained in 
NSC‑100, that before the United States lost its nuclear advantage, it should 
mount an atomic offensive against the Soviet Union (especially if Moscow en-
gaged in further acts of aggression in vital U.S. areas of interest) as well as 

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  45
a combined air and sea campaign using nuclear weapons against China in 
order to stop Chinese advances in Korea. The plan was submitted by Stuart  
Symington, chairman of the National Security Resources Board, in Janu-
ary 1951, as an alternative to NSC‑68. Its rationale was that the use of atomic 
weapons was morally justified as it would offer “a measure of moral freedom 
for the United States.”38 Despite the rejection of NSC‑100 and the adoption of 
the more cautious NSC‑68, U.S. plans for war with the Soviet Union relied 
heavily on nuclear weapons. According to one historian, “Truman was never 
happy with this emphasis on atomic weaponry, but he neither spent much 
time pondering options nor asked his subordinates to study alternatives. 
Comparatively, atomic weapons were cheap, and Truman accepted plans and 
approved budgets that made the United States dependent on their use should 
war erupt.”39
Despite the urgings of many in the military, Truman avoided a preventive 
nuclear strike on the Soviet Union, thus helping to create a nascent tradition 
of non-use of nuclear weapons, even when the United States held a nuclear 
monopoly. Truman’s stated reasons for non-use of nuclear weapons in Korea 
were moral reputation and projection of America’s image as a peaceful nation. 
In his farewell radio address, Truman declared “Now, once in a while, I get a 
letter from some impatient person asking, why don’t we get it over with? Why 
don’t we issue an ultimatum—make all out war, drop the atomic bomb? For 
most Americans, the answer is quite simple: We are not made that way. We 
are a moral people. Peace is our goal, with justice and freedom. We cannot, of 
our own free will, violate the very principles that we are striving to defend.”40 
The non-use at this time was remarkable to an extent, but the test of such a 
policy of non-use would be in Korea, where the first major war since the end 
of World War II occurred.
The Korean War: 1950–53
The U.S. intervention in Korea, under the UN banner, to defend its South 
Korean ally against invasion and occupation by North Korea, was the first 
critical test of the emerging tradition of non-use. It is also an interesting case 
given that the U.S. decision makers considered nuclear use to prevent a Chi-
nese invasion in support of North Korea. It is reported that on June 25, 1950, 
the first day of the war, President Truman “asked whether we could knock out 
[Russian] bases in the Far East,” as it was assumed that Moscow was behind 
the policies of its Communist allies, China and North Korea. After hearing 

46  The United States and the Tradition I
that this was possible if nuclear weapons were employed, President Truman 
ordered the Air Force to prepare a plan to wipe out all Soviet air bases in the 
Far East without a specific order for action.41 
Two weeks into the war, on July 9, 1950, General Douglas MacArthur, the 
commander in charge of the UN operations in Korea, sent the JCS a “hot mes-
sage” in which he requested the dispatch of twenty or so nuclear bombs to the 
Korean theater for tactical use. This was agreeable to Assistant Chief of Staff 
for Operations General Charles Bolte, who thought that “some 10 to 20 bombs 
could be spared for the Korean theater.” The JCS rejected the use of nuclear 
weapons at this point in the war, “because targets sufficiently large to require 
atomic bombs were lacking, because of concerns about world opinion 5 years 
after Hiroshima, and because the JCS expected the tide of battle to be reversed 
by conventional military means.”42 The military’s opposition was driven by 
concerns of depreciation of the weapon’s deterrent value if it was used in a 
theater like Korea,43 but the political elite, especially Secretary Acheson, cited 
fears that it would “frighten our allies to death.”44 Reputational considerations, 
in the form of fears of adverse world opinion, formed a large part of the mix 
of reasons for the abandonment of proposals to use nuclear weapons in Korea, 
or against China or the Soviet Union, at this stage.
Despite this earlier rejection of the use of atomic weapons, Truman threat-
ened to use nuclear weapons in response to the intervention of Chinese troops, 
who were pushing the UN troops from North Korea. At a press conference 
on November 30, 1950, he stated that “every weapon that we have,” includ-
ing the atomic bomb, might be used, and that “always there has been active 
consid­eration of its use.”45 This led British Prime Minister Attlee to under-
take a hasty trip to the United States to urge the president not to use nuclear 
weapons in Korea, as he thought “American threats to use the bomb would  
suggest that ‘Europeans and Americans have a low regard for the value of Asi-
atic lives,’ and that such weapons should be reserved only for times when ‘des-
perate measures were warranted’—‘certainly not [in] a conflict in which the 
U.S. were confronted with a Power like Korea.”46 Strong opposition came from 
other European countries such as France, which believed that the conflict  
in Korea did not warrant the use of atomic weapons and that an American 
use of such weapons in East Asia would result in a Soviet attack on Western 
Europe.47
Bruce Cumings, in his major historical work on the Korean War, narrates 
the efforts by General Douglas MacArthur, the commander of the UN forces 

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  47
in Korea, to obtain approval by Truman for the use of nuclear weapons in 
order to relieve beleaguered UN forces. On several occasions, MacArthur 
made requests to the president for the release of nuclear weapons to his com-
mand for use. On December 9, 1950, he reportedly asked for commander’s 
discretion for atomic use, and on December 24, he made another request for 
twenty-six nuclear bombs to be used against twenty-four “retardation tar-
gets” and Manchurian bases of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA). 
Again, on March 10, 1951, MacArthur asked for atomic weapons to gain su-
periority against the large Chinese forces assembled near the Korean border, 
ready to intervene. Partially in support of the general’s position, the JCS or-
dered atomic retaliation against Chinese bases in Manchuria in the event that 
a large number of forces entered the battle against UN forces.48 But this large 
Chinese entry did not occur.
However, in April 1951, as a result of the worsening military situation in 
Korea and reports of troop movements by the Soviets, Truman approved the 
military’s request for the transfer of nine Mark IV nuclear bombs from AEC 
custody to Strategic Air Command (SAC) bases in Guam and Okinawa. AEC 
Chairman Gordon Dean wrote in his diary that he was told by Truman that 
there was a heavy concentration of Russian and Chinese forces in the region, 
“all of which indicates that not only are the Reds [Chinese and the North Ko-
reans] and the Russians ready to push us out of Korea, but [that they] may 
attempt to take the Japanese islands and with their submarines cut our supply 
lines to Japan and Korea.” He had a request from the JCS for weapons, but 
stated that “no decision had been made to use these weapons and he hoped 
very much that there would be no necessity for using them.”49 
Gordon was concerned about placing the bombs in the vicinity of Mac­
Arthur, and Truman agreed to discuss the matter thoroughly at the NSC in 
case the bomb was to be used. However, JCS Chairman General Omar Brad-
ley did not inform MacArthur of Truman’s decision or the availability of the 
bomb for use.50 According to Cumings, the president’s order was never sent 
because Truman wanted to remove MacArthur and appoint a reliable com-
mander before a decision to use atomic bombs was made. Further, contrary 
to expectations of U.S. leaders, “the Chinese and the Soviets did not escalate 
the war.” However, according to Cumings, the nine Mark IVs did not go back 
to the AEC, but remained in SAC custody in Guam after their transfer on 
April 11, 1951.51 Truman apparently wanted the new commander of the UN 
forces, General Matthew Ridgway, to be able to use nuclear weapons in the 

48  The United States and the Tradition I
event that the Communists attacked U.S. forces outside Korea.52 While reliev-
ing MacArthur on “confidence grounds,” Truman used the argument that he 
needed a reliable commander in case nuclear use was decided.53 
U.S. contemplation of the use of nuclear weapons in Korea continued 
throughout the year. In September and October 1951, the United States con-
ducted Operation Hudson Harbor, an exercise involving dummy warheads 
dropped by a B‑29 bomber, to test the utility of actual nuclear use in North 
Korea. However, the results showed that atomic bombs would not be effective, 
as the “identification of a large number of enemy troops was extremely dif-
ficult in a timely manner.”54
A State Department official in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs, John K. 
Emmerson, captured the difficulties of using nuclear weapons in Korea in his 
secret memo to the administration, presented in November 1950. He warned 
that atomic use would be deplored by a large number of states, even by al-
lies who were participating in the U.S.-led operations in Korea. To him, the 
nuclear weapon “has the status of a peculiar monster conceived by Ameri-
can cunning, and its use by us, in whatever situation, would be exploited to 
our serious detriment.” It could result in the “breaking apart the United Na-
tions Coalition then fighting in Korea and possibly the United Nations itself,” 
a “disastrous loss of confidence on the part of Western Europe” and “irrep­
arable damage to the moral position of the United States.” In addition, the 
Soviet Union would be likely to intervene in the war, and it would receive less 
global condemnation than the United States if the latter resorted to nuclear 
use. Moreover, in Asia, another atomic use would cause a “revulsion of feel-
ing,” and would confirm fears that “we reserve atomic weapons exclusively for 
Japanese and Chinese,” with the result that “our influence in non-Communist 
nations of Asia would deteriorate to an almost non-existent quantity.”55 We do 
not know the precise impact the report had on the administration’s decisions, 
but it powerfully reflects the unease among U.S. officials on nuclear use.
Truman’s statement in November 1950 did evoke considerable opposition 
in Asia. India’s Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru warned of the “widespread 
feeling in Asia that the atomic bomb is a weapon used only against Asiatics,” 
and Attlee told his French counterpart, René Pleven, “any action [regarding 
the use of the bomb] must be thought of in relation to its effect on Asiatic 
opinion.”56 In his Memoirs, Truman wrote: “Europeans generally assumed 
that a new war would be a battle of atomic weapons, and the slightest mention 
of atomic bombs was enough to make them jittery.” Referring to his remark 

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  49
on possible atomic use in Korea, he stated, “just how sensitive and on edge 
the world has become was demonstrated when the words ‘atomic bomb’ were 
mentioned at my press conference on November 30.”57 Truman’s reluctance 
to use nuclear weapons in Korea was thus caused largely by two fundamental 
factors: the concerns regarding creating a bad reputation worldwide if Wash-
ington used nuclear weapons again in Asia, and the tactical/strategic unsuit-
ability of the weapon for the particular military goal. A close reading of the 
documents and statements, however, show that the reputation concerns were 
more prominent than tactical considerations.
Truman is also notable for his decision to keep atomic weapons and con-
ventional weapons separate in the U.S. arsenal, thereby showing the unique-
ness of the former. Equally important was his decision to leave the control of 
atomic weapons to the AEC, as opposed to the military. Notes one historian: 
“by denying the military control over atomic weapons, he reasserted civilian 
authority over how wars were to be fought.”58 The civilian control of atomic 
weapons was justified by Truman thus: “because of the power and world signif-
icance of atomic energy, I was convinced that it had to be placed under civilian 
control.”59 States Gaddis: “In this way, Truman took the first step toward build-
ing what has turned out to be one of the most important principles of postwar 
international relations: the idea that nuclear weapons differ emphatically from 
all other weapons, and should be treated with corresponding respect.”60
The Truman presidency thus saw the beginning of a tradition of non-use. 
As discussed above, Truman also initially hoped for an international mecha-
nism to control nuclear energy and thus prevent the spread of weapons and 
materials to other countries. This goal of international control and nonpro-
liferation of the atom partially prevented him from seriously considering the 
preventive use of atomic weapons against the Soviet Union before it acquired 
nuclear arms in 1949. However, in the later years of his presidency, Truman 
presided over a massive expansion of the U.S. arsenal. In that process, he made 
the fateful decision to acquire the more powerful hydrogen bomb. In addition, 
he considered using nuclear weapons in the Korean theater, only to back down 
in the end. This restraint emerged largely for reputational reasons, that is, fear 
of adverse domestic and international opinion, especially among the U.S. al-
lies. His reluctance to use nuclear weapons prevented an early conclusion of 
the Korean War, dragging the war on for three years, resulting in over fifty 
thousand battlefield deaths for the United States, over a quarter of a million 
for South Korea, one hundred and thirty thousand for the People’s Republic  

50  The United States and the Tradition I
of China (PRC), and an undetermined number for North Korea, in addition 
to the several hundred thousand injured.61 
The Truman-era reluctance to use nuclear weapons despite pressures and 
urgings by the military, and the assertion of civilian control over the weapon, 
helped to generate the embryonic tradition of non-use, but it was not at all 
apparent that it would be observed by the next president, Dwight Eisenhower, 
who considered the threat of nuclear use against nonnuclear adversaries a le-
gitimate means to achieve U.S. strategic and war aims.
The Eisenhower Years (1953–61)
Testing the Tradition of Non-Use in Crisis
The Eisenhower era faced considerable pressures on the nascent tradition, as 
his administration toyed with the idea of nuclear use to end the Korean War. 
Eisenhower had a different approach toward nuclear weapons from Truman. 
He entered the White House with a strategic mind-set developed during his 
World War II experience in commanding the U.S. forces in Europe to victory, 
in the process relying on massive use of force, especially air power. He was 
determined to gain an advantage in the Cold War competition with the Soviet 
bloc, even if it meant a nuclear war.62 Eisenhower came to power in 1953 with 
the determination to end the Korean War, which had been going on for over 
two and a half years at great human and material costs for all sides involved. 
In his Memoirs, Eisenhower discusses his plans to threaten the use of nuclear 
weapons in order to expedite the armistice agreement with China in North 
Korea. To Eisenhower: 
to keep the attack from becoming overly costly, it was clear that we would have 
to use atomic weapons . . . If we decided upon a major, new type of offensive, 
the present policies would have to be changed and the new ones agreed to by 
our allies. Foremost would be the proposed use of atomic weapons. In this 
respect American views have always differed somewhat from those of some 
of our allies. For the British, for example, the use of atomic weapons in war 
at that time would have been a decision of the gravest kind. My feeling was 
then, and still remains, that it would be impossible for the United States to 
maintain the military commitments which it now sustains around the world 
(without turning into a garrison state) did we not possess atomic weapons and 
the will to use them when necessary. But an American decision to use them 
at that time would have created strong disrupting feelings between ourselves 
and our allies.63

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  51
In addition to the fear of adverse reactions from allies, Eisenhower was wor-
ried about the possibility of the Soviet Union entering the war, and he was 
concerned about the “unprotected cities of Japan” becoming Soviet nuclear 
targets.64 Here he was concerned about setting a bad precedent for the Soviets 
to follow suit.
Eisenhower decided to “let the Communist authorities understand that, 
in the absence of satisfactory progress, we intended to move decisively with-
out inhibition in our use of weapons, and would no longer be responsible for 
confining hostilities to the Korean peninsula. We would not be limited by 
any world-wide gentlemen’s agreement.”65 Eisenhower, in his memoirs as well 
as in conversations with his special assistant Sherman Adams, claims that it 
was the danger of nuclear war that compelled the Communists to end the 
Korean War quickly.66 In its nuclear brinkmanship policy, the administra-
tion made specific nuclear threats to China. After moving atomic weapons to 
Okinawa, Secretary of State John Foster Dulles told Indian Prime Minister 
Nehru in May 1953 that the United States “could not be held responsible for 
failing to use atomic weapons if a truce could not be arranged. This message 
was planted deliberately in India so that it would get to the Chinese Com-
munists, as it did,” claims Adams.67 Through lower-ranking U.S. officials at 
the Panmunjom talks, the administration sent covert messages to the Chinese 
that if the armistice was not concluded, the United States would “remove the 
restrictions of area and weapons,” meaning an expansion of the war to main-
land China involving nuclear weapons.68
However, doubts have been raised over the Eisenhower/Dulles claim that it 
was the nuclear threat that compelled the Chinese and North Koreans to agree 
to the Armistice Agreement in July 1953 despite the nonresolution of issues 
such as the repatriation of prisoners of war. It is argued that the main Chinese 
concessions were announced before the nuclear threats were made and that 
the U.S.-led conventional attacks had already created sufficient devastation 
for the Chinese and the North Koreans to rethink their strategy. Moreover, 
Stalin’s death increased the sense of vulnerability among the Communist al-
lies.69 There is also doubt whether the Chinese Communist leaders received 
the threat, and, according to Richard Immerman, “Mao was convinced that 
because it enhanced PRC security and respect for his regime and military, the 
draw with the United States constituted a great victory.”70
In May 1953, the administration had appointed a working committee of 
the National Security Council (NSC) under Robert Cutler, special assistant 
for National Security Affairs, to reassess U.S. national security policy. It was 

52  The United States and the Tradition I
called Project Solarium, and involved three task forces assessing various di-
mensions of U.S. policy, including nuclear use. The military-led task forces 
recommended active policies to roll back Communism, relying on U.S. mili-
tary superiority, while others proposed a comprehensive approach to deal 
with the Soviet threat so as to avoid a nuclear war, showing a lack of consensus 
among the planners on the questions of containment or nuclear coercion.71
At an NSC meeting on October 7, 1953, Secretary of Defense Charles E. 
Wilson and JCS Chairman Admiral Arthur Radford pressed the president 
for a decision on nuclear use, as the United States was spending enormous 
amounts of money on the building and maintenance of its nuclear weapons 
capability. Radford argued that the United States must not be paralyzed by 
American and world opinion and that the “administration must not grant 
the Europeans a veto.” Radford was supported by Dulles, who made his now  
famous statement: “Somehow or other we must manage to remove the taboo 
from the use of nuclear weapons.” Eisenhower responded by saying that se­
curing allies’ understanding must precede the use of nuclear weapons as 
“nothing would so upset the whole world as an announcement at this time by 
the United States of a decision to use these weapons.”72 Despite this position of 
Eisenhower, NSC-162/2 states that “in the event of hostilities, the United States 
will consider nuclear weapons to be available for use as other munitions.”73
The nuclear option came up again during the crisis in Indochina. The ad-
ministration seriously considered nuclear use as an option to relieve the be-
sieged French fortress in Dien Bien Phu in 1954. The Viet Minh attack on the 
fortress began on March 13, 1954, and ended on July 21 with the surrender 
of the French forces and disastrous consequences for French colonial rule in 
Indochina. The contingency plan Operation Vulture involved U.S. air strikes 
including nuclear weapons, but it was not executed. Two studies, prepared 
by the army operations staff, had recommended using “one to six 31-kiloton 
bombs, to be delivered by Navy carrier aircraft during daylight against Viet 
Minh positions around Dien Bien Phu,” and concluded that “the use of atomic 
weapons was technically and militarily feasible and could produce a major 
alteration in the military situation in favor of the French” and to “the U.S. ad-
vantage.” They also proposed disguising the aircraft with French markings to 
reduce the reactions from other countries. These studies provoked intense de-
bate among other staff divisions, especially U.S. Air Force intelligence, which 
contended that suitable targets did not exist; it would not only provoke a seri-
ous risk of all-out war, but also would: 

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  53
completely alienate Asian nations such as India, Burma, and Indonesia and 
furnish a rationale for overt Chinese intervention in Southeast Asia. The 
Psychological Warfare Office dismissed the idea that U.S. involvement could 
somehow be disguised. World opinion would certainly attribute a nuclear 
strike to the United States regardless of the cover plan employed. Communist 
propaganda would depict the United States as unstable, barbaric, and im­
patient. The chief of psychological warfare concluded that the damage to 
America’s reputation arising from use of atomic weapons “would outweigh the 
psychological disadvantages which would follow the loss of Dien Bien Phu.”74
On April 20, 1954, Dulles and Radford discussed the possibility of nuclear 
use to relieve the French forces. To Radford, the proper use of three tactical 
nuclear weapons could “smash the Viet Minh.”75 A State Department Coun-
selor, Douglas MacArthur II, raised the major challenge to Radford’s propos-
als. To him, the proposal would prompt “very serious questions affecting the 
whole position of U.S. leadership in the world,” raising “great hue and cry 
throughout the parliaments of the free world,” and giving the Russians and 
other critics an opportunity to declare “that we were testing out weapons on 
native peoples and were in fact preparing to act irresponsibly and drop weap-
ons of mass destruction on the Soviet Union whenever we believed it was nec-
essary.”76 At the end of April, at an NSC meeting, military planners brought 
up the idea once again, to which Eisenhower responded: “You boys must be 
crazy. We can’t use those awful things against Asians for a second time in less 
than ten years. My God.”77 This implies that the United States did not want 
to look racist by hitting Asians again. It also places reputation at the center of 
Truman’s reasons for refusing to use nuclear weapons.
The First Taiwan Straits Crisis of 1954–55 offers another incident when 
the nascent tradition of non-use was tested. The crisis, which lasted for nine 
months, erupted in September 1954, as a result of the heavy shelling by Chinese 
Communist troops of the Republic of China (ROC)-held islands of Quemoy  
and Matsu. In response, the United States began to ponder a strategy of in-
tervention. The administration had secretly committed to Chiang Kai-shek 
to defend the islands in the event of a major attack by the PRC, and, in April 
1955, promised Chiang that in case the nationalists were forced to evacuate  
the islands, the “United States would establish a 500-mile blockade of China’s 
coastal waters until the Communists renounced their intention to liberate  
Taiwan.”78 The administration’s thinking on nuclear use came out when Dulles  

54  The United States and the Tradition I
proclaimed: “If we defend Quemoy and Matsu, we’ll have to use atomic weap-
ons. They alone will be effective against the mainland airfields.” Eisenhower 
himself replied in the affirmative to a reporter’s question, on March 16, 1955, 
on whether the United States would use tactical nuclear weapons in East 
Asia.79 However, Dulles also acknowledged that a decision to defend the is-
lands, which were not critical to Taiwan’s security, “would alienate world 
opinion and gravely strain our alliances . . . because it would probably lead to 
initiating the use of atomic weapons.”80
However, during this crisis, Dulles pressed hard to abandon the distinc-
tion between conventional and nuclear weapons and consider a nuclear attack 
on China in response to the PRC’s occupation of the small Tachen islands 
and the military buildup opposite Quemoy and Matsu. In his view, “it does 
not seem to make much sense,” “if you have one bomb—one artillery shot—
which will do the business, but use a hundred others which are most costly 
and the result is just the same.”81 Dulles spoke on March 12, 1955, of “new 
and powerful weapons of precision which can utterly destroy military targets 
without endangering unrelated civilian centers,” adding that “if the United 
States became engaged in a major military activity anywhere in the world that 
those weapons would come into use.”82 Dulles was even more emphatic when 
he stated three days later that the “United States was prepared to use tactical 
atomic weapons in case of war in the Formosa Straits.”83 Vice President Rich-
ard Nixon stated: “tactical atomic explosives are now conventional and will be 
used against the targets of any aggressive force.”84 In Eisenhower’s words, “in 
any combat where these things can be used on strictly military targets and for 
strictly for military purposes, I see no reason why they shouldn’t be used just 
exactly as you would use a bullet or anything else.”85 This episode showed that 
tactical/strategic constraints were not as prominent in the non-use of nuclear 
weapons against China.
Eisenhower and Dulles decided to educate the public that there was no 
major distinction between conventional and nuclear weapons. Eisenhower 
encouraged Dulles to add a paragraph in a speech he was going to make that 
“we would use atomic weapons as interchangeable with conventional weap-
ons,” but not as “weapons of mass destruction.”86 The effort was to show peo-
ple that tactical nuclear weapons were qualitatively different from strategic 
nuclear weapons: that the former would not cause as much destruction as the 
latter and were hence acceptable as a battlefield weapon. However, a Central 
Intelligence Agency (CIA) estimate, on March 16, 1955, warned that if atomic 
weapons were to be used, “the predominant world reaction would be one of 

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  55
shock. These reactions would be particularly adverse if these weapons were 
used to defend the offshore islands or destroy military concentrations prior 
to an all-out Chinese Communist attempt to take the offshore islands.”87 In 
another report, the CIA chief had warned of dangerous levels of radioactive 
fallout on Quemoy itself and the possibility of thousands of casualties on the 
islands from radiation if nuclear bombs were used on mainland China.88
The crisis de-escalated in April 1955 after Chinese premier Chou En-lai 
made conciliatory moves toward the United States. The Chinese backing off 
under nuclear threat thus bolstered the case of hardliners in the administra-
tion. Eisenhower, however, was much more cautious than Radford and Dulles 
were during this crisis. Despite his caution, the crisis showed the willingness 
of the administration to go to the extreme of nuclear brinkmanship suppos-
edly to protect worthless islands, but more importantly to bolster the cred-
ibility of its New Look policy contained in NSC-162/2.89 This policy sought 
to balance the economic resources and options available to the United States 
to confront conventional and nuclear threats from Communist countries 
through massive reliance on nuclear weapons forces.
The Taiwan Straits witnessed another crisis in August 1958, when Com-
munist forces resumed shelling Quemoy and Matsu again. This crisis un-
folded in a very similar fashion to the first crisis. The administration was bent 
on defending the islands, even if it meant nuclear escalation. Reportedly, the 
air and naval vessels and howitzers that were assembled by the United States 
on the islands were nuclear armed. Strong warnings by Dulles seem to have 
influenced the Chinese to back down from full-scale invasion of the islands, 
and on September 6 Chou En-lai expressed the desire to settle the conflict 
peacefully.90 Thus the two Taiwan Straits Crises brought the United States 
very close to nuclear use against a nonnuclear China. The crises escalated as 
a result of the administration’s get-tough policy with the Communist regime, 
which it perceived as a test case for the credibility of the massive retaliation 
strategy. In these crises, the non-use norm was marginalized while the com-
pellent aspect of nuclear policy was highlighted.
The ongoing conflict with China and the Soviet Union would push the ad-
ministration to ponder nuclear use in limited wars involving the Communist 
countries. Administration officials debated the feasibility of nuclear use in 
limited wars at NSC meetings in 1956. At a meeting in February 1956, in re-
sponse to Radford, who had “called for greater flexibility in the employment of 
nuclear weapons for small wars,” Eisenhower replied that “the use of nuclear 
weapons would raise serious political problems in view of the current state of 

56  The United States and the Tradition I
world opinion as to the use of such weapons.” Although the president did not 
think “world opinion was right in its views about the use of nuclear weapons in 
small wars . . . [it] was nevertheless a fact” and “it would be some considerable 
time before the United States reaches a point where it can adopt any military 
course of action it regards as appropriate without regard for the political reper-
cussions of such a course of action.”91 Harold Stassen, special assistant to the 
president on disarmament policy, warned of the “terrible repercussions which 
we would experience if we had recourse to the use of nuclear weapons aginst 
the colored peoples of Asia.”92 On the issue of waging a war with China, Eisen-
hower himself told Dulles, “it is oftentimes necessary to take heavy liabilities 
from a purely military standpoint, in order to avoid being in the position of 
being an aggressor and the initiator of war.”93 At another NSC meeting in May 
1957, the president said that the allies “do not wish to be defended by nuclear 
weapons. They all regard these weapons as essentially offensive in character, 
and our allies are absolutely scared to death that we will use such weapons.”94
During another meeting, Dulles said, “world public opinion was not yet 
ready to accept the general use of nuclear weapons in local conflicts. If we 
resort to such a use of nuclear weapons we will in the eyes of the world, be 
cast as ruthless military power, as was Germany.” He added that each of the 
assistant secretaries of state was strongly opposed to nuclear use, “because of 
the disastrous effect of such a policy on public opinion in the areas for which” 
they were responsible.95 In fact, Dulles appeared to have been taking a very 
contradictory position on nuclear weapons. Initially, Dulles opposed the use 
of nuclear weapons against Japan on moral and reputation grounds, arguing 
that it would create a dangerous precedent and that he favored international 
control of the atom. However, he also became the chief advocate of massive 
retaliation and worked hard to remove the “taboo” against nuclear use and 
the distinction between conventional and nuclear weapons. He favored the 
creation of so-called small, “clean,” useable weapons, and encouraged their 
use in several crisis situations.96
The discussion above and the statements by U.S. policy makers powerfully 
attest to the argument that reputation and image concerns were a primary 
reason for the Eisenhower administration’s reluctance to use nuclear weapons 
in East Asia. Based on available evidence, tactical and strategic considerations 
appear in some discussions among U.S. officials, but they were at most second-
ary in the final decision not to resort to the use of nuclear weapons. Despite its 
strident rhetoric otherwise, the administration was hamstrung by fear of ad-
verse world public opinion, especially in allied countries. The president over-

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  57
ruled the advice of some of his key officials on the question of nuclear use in 
an effort to maintain the distinction between conventional and nuclear weap-
ons. Yet he also showed a determination to engage in nuclear brinkmanship 
and crisis management in order to obtain political and diplomatic goals, that 
is, reap the benefits of nuclear possession without actually using the weapon. 
Eisenhower’s brinkmanship policy was partly driven by the desire to prevent 
the outbreak of war by raising the stakes so high that the fear of an automatic 
thermonuclear war would engender caution among the Soviets and their al-
lies. The administration claimed that compromise on the part of the Chinese 
and Soviet Communist powers, as in the Quemoy-Matsu crises in 1954–55 
and 1958 and the Berlin Crisis in 1958–59, was driven largely by their fear of 
war and the U.S. willingness to employ nuclear coercion.97
Diplomacy, Domestic Control, and Weapons Development
While pondering the possibility of nuclear use, the Eisenhower administra-
tion was also concerned about nuclear proliferation, or the “fourth country 
problem,” as it was referred to at that time.98 International control of the atom 
reemerged as a major theme during the Eisenhower administration, alongside 
defense, deterrence, and arms control. However, the solution was no longer 
based on an international control mechanism, as had been proposed in the 
Baruch Plan in 1946. The Atoms for Peace proposal was put forward by Eisen-
hower in a speech at the UN General Assembly on December 8, 1953. In the 
proposal, Eisenhower called upon the nuclear powers to make “joint contri-
butions from their stockpiles of normal uranium and fissionable materials to 
an International Atomic Energy Agency” to be “set up under the aegis of the 
United Nations.” He added: “The Atomic Energy Agency would be made re-
sponsible for the impounding, storage, and protection of the contributed fis-
sionable and other materials,” and the agency would devise methods to allocate 
the fissionable materials for peaceful purposes such as generation of electrical 
energy and addressing the needs of agriculture and medicine. He pledged that 
the United States would undertake its contributions in good faith.99
The administration’s aim was to encourage states to abandon nuclear 
weapons plans in return for civilian energy benefits through international 
cooperation.100 More importantly, the United States was attempting to elicit 
cooperation from the Soviet Union in the matter of nuclear control. It served 
the administration’s many goals, was “an excellent public diplomacy,” was at-
tractive to domestic opinion, supported “U.S. commercial interests,” and was 
useful to the “cohesion and defense of the Atlantic Alliance.”101 In hindsight, 

58  The United States and the Tradition I
it can be argued that Atoms for Peace perhaps accentuated the proliferation 
problem, as states such as Israel, India, and Pakistan acquired much of their 
early civilian capabilities under this program but later on were able to con-
vert them to the development of nuclear weapons. Both France and China 
increased their nuclear efforts during this period and would test their weap-
ons subsequently. However, it has been argued that without Atoms for Peace, 
nuclear proliferation would have occurred more rapidly through the unregu-
lated international market, absent any restraining framework or safeguards 
by an international agency.102
Despite its efforts at stemming horizontal proliferation, the Eisenhower 
administration was notable for its massive expansion of U.S. nuclear forces 
and the testing of hydrogen bombs over the Pacific, which drew major inter-
national protests. The atmospheric testing of the hydrogen bomb (code-named 
Bravo) on March 1, 1954, produced a fifteen megaton yield—seven hundred 
fifty times that of the Hiroshima bomb, and three times more than expected. 
Unparalleled radiation levels spread across a large area of the Pacific, affecting 
nearby Japanese fishermen (one of whom died) and Marshall Islanders (many 
of whom developed radiation-related illnesses).103 The radiation was detected 
worldwide, and a general fear spread through the globe: “if a single thermo-
nuclear blast could have global ecological consequences, what would be the 
effects of using tens, hundreds, or even thousands of nuclear weapons?”104
Soviet leader Georgii Malenkov warned of the “end of world civilization,” 
while Winston Churchill, who had until then urged the United States to en-
gage in a preventive nuclear war on the Soviet Union, made a complete u-turn, 
warning that a “few such explosions on British soil would leave his country 
uninhabitable.”105 Despite these expressions of concern, the United States, the 
Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom conducted 231 atmospheric nuclear 
tests between 1953 and 1958. These tests and their fallout increased global 
awareness of the escalating nuclear arms race. The visit of thirty-four female 
victims of Hiroshima (Hiroshima Maidens) in June 1952 and May 1955 to 
the United States for medical treatment received considerable media cover-
age.106 Witnessing, first-hand, the material effects of nuclear weapon use and 
testing was essential for increased global opposition to nuclear arms and the 
strengthening of the tradition at this stage.
Worldwide calls for a test ban emerged, and the Eisenhower administra-
tion was forced to engage in a public relations campaign in order to quell the 
op­position, which it did by proposing a partial test ban agreement with the  
Soviet Union. Among the chorus of those protesting were different peace 

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  59
movements and newly emerging Asian and African states. Indian Prime Min-
ister Nehru called for a “standstill agreement” on nuclear testing as a prelude 
to an international treaty banning nuclear tests. British philosopher Bertrand 
Russell took a leadership role, along with Albert Einstein, Albert Schweitzer, 
and Soviet-supported peace movements such as the World Peace Council, 
in questioning the nuclear arms race while arguing for a world government. 
Groups such as Pugwash emerged in the 1950s as a result of the tests, and a 
worldwide movement favoring nuclear disarmament and a test ban remained 
active for the next several years.107 In the United States, the 1952 and 1956 
Democratic presidential candidate, Adlai Stevenson, argued in favor of a test 
ban. President Eisenhower was somewhat favorable but his powerful chief of 
the AEC, Lewis Strauss, was fervently opposed to any such proposal.108
The efforts by various groups in promoting a test ban did not succeed im-
mediately and had to wait until President Kennedy’s arrival to fructify.109 Ad-
ministration officials resisted calls for a test ban, fearing Soviet unreliability. 
Eisenhower, mindful of Washington’s international reputation, stated: “every­
body seems to think that we’re skunks, saber-rattlers and war mongers. We 
ought not to miss any chance to make clear our peaceful objectives.”110 Even 
Strauss felt that the hydrogen bomb tests were creating a major embarrass-
ment for the United States in the propaganda war with the Soviets, even driv-
ing the allies away. “They think we are getting ready for a war of this kind.”111 
At an NSC meeting in May 1954, Dulles proposed a test moratorium, which 
would place the United States “in a much better position from the point of 
view of propaganda and our posture vis-à-vis the free world. It would cer-
tainly help us to meet the vicious attacks on us as warmongers by Soviet pro-
paganda.” Vice President Nixon supported the idea, arguing that the “United 
States was taking a ‘hell of a licking’ on the propaganda front.” The president 
agreed that “the world is much more terrified now than it was in 1946. The 
long list of Russian violations of agreements wasn’t as physically terrifying to 
people as was the prospect of atomic warfare.”112
The administration engaged in some serious negotiations with the Soviets 
on a test ban and disarmament in the latter half of the 1950s. In his meeting 
with his disarmament advisors on April 26, 1958, Secretary of State Dulles 
stated that: 
it was urgent that we do something to erase the picture which people abroad 
hold of the United States as a militaristic nation . . . In this respect the Soviet 
Union, with its ability to control what is known about it, has an advantage over 

60  The United States and the Tradition I
a free society like that of the United States. This picture of continued military 
emphasis in the United States hurts us and probably causes us to lose more 
than we gain from small technical military advances . . . It is thus imperative 
that actions be taken which will make evident the United States interest in 
peace and in controlling armaments.113 
Serious negotiations on a draft test ban treaty were held in Geneva in October 
1958 and March 1959 and continued until December 1960, but had to be post-
poned due to the technical difficulties in verification and the worsening East-
West relations during this period.114 Reputation concerns emerge as a primary 
reason for the administration’s test ban and nonproliferation proposals.
The Eisenhower era also saw some major changes in the civilian control 
of nuclear weapons that the Truman administration had established. The 
changes included the transfer of control of nuclear weapons from the AEC 
to the military and the dispersal of the weapons onto bases around the world. 
In addition, an attempt was made to blur the distinction between nuclear and 
conventional arms. For instance, NSC-162/1 stated: “in the event of hostili-
ties, the United States will consider nuclear weapons to be as available for use 
as other munitions.”115 Accordingly, “nuclear weapons were integrated to all 
aspects of force procurement, deployment and war planning.”116 
It was also the Eisenhower administration that approved “pre-delegation”  
authority to commanders in the field. This authorized them to launch a nu-
clear attack on the Soviet Union if a Soviet attack destroyed the U.S. com-
mand and killed the president and there was no time for consultation after 
the enemy had launched a nuclear attack on U.S. territory.117 Further, it was 
under Eisenhower that the United States created the Single Integrated Opera-
tion Plan (SIOP) for nuclear war, which involved targeting, weapons delivery 
systems, flight paths, nuclear detonation, measurements of devastation, de-
fensive measures, and other planning concerns. The plan included preemptive 
and retaliatory strikes on thousands of targets in Russia, China, and other 
Warsaw Pact states, including their nuclear weapon facilities, command and 
control centers, and at least one hundred thirty of their cities. Eisenhower 
unsuccessfully tried to place limits on the war plans prepared by his military 
planners, and had reportedly stated when he received SIOP for 1962 that “it 
frighten[ed] the devil out of me.”118 Yet the president himself was aware of 
the dangers of atmospheric testing and the unbridled arms race. His part-
ing words in 1961, warning of the undue influence of the “military-industrial 

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  61
complex” and the need for societal vigilance, suggest that he was concerned 
about the internal implications of the uncontrolled arms race.119 However, he 
had done very little to curb the power of the military-industrial complex in 
the system when he was in power.
In terms of the tradition of nuclear non-use, Eisenhower’s legacy is a 
mixed one, and to some extent negative, as he toyed with the idea of nuclear 
use against nonnuclear China on a few occasions. He also presided over the 
massive growth of nuclear weaponry under the New Look policy, and the 
launching of the doctrine of massive retaliation which called for use of nu-
clear weapons against any major threat posed by the Soviet Union. Deterrence 
based on massive retaliation became the cardinal feature of American policy, 
which was “designed to promote caution in Soviet foreign policy, to restrain 
what the Americans regarded as the Soviet’s natural aggressive impulses.”120 
The massive retaliation doctrine was based on an “undiscriminating threat 
to respond to any communist-inspired aggression, however marginal the 
confrontation, by means of a massive nuclear strike against the centers of 
the Soviet Union and China.”121 However, many nuclear strategists opposed 
massive retaliation while seeking a more flexible strategy to confront both 
strategic and substrategic conventional challenges. The Communist doctrines 
relied on flexible tactics, making them able to launch “many different kinds of 
challenges,” and the United States “needed to prepare for many types of non-
­nuclear or ‘limited’ war,” which meant “outfitting the American land, sea, and 
air forces with ‘conventional’ armaments.”122 Massive retaliation appeared to 
be an incredible strategy for the opponents, and it was later rejected by the 
Kennedy administration in favor of a ἀexible response strategy. Eisenhower’s 
efforts at a nuclear test ban and for containing the proliferation problem did 
not go too far either, due largely to disagreement among administration of-
ficials, Cold War suspicions, and lack of presidential leadership.123
Some historians have argued that Eisenhower was not as bellicose as some 
of his policies might have suggested. Although he had engaged in a calculated 
policy of brinkmanship, he had no intention of using nuclear weapons.124 Oth-
ers contend that Eisenhower was willing to use nuclear weapons more readily 
than argued by previous scholars.125 This debate is the result of the contradic-
tory nuclear policies that Eisenhower pursued. At times he talked about win-
ning an all-out nuclear war against the Soviet Union and its allies, but at other 
times, he pondered the possibilities for nuclear disarmament. He also showed 
a tendency to threaten nuclear war in order to protect less-than-vital interests,  

62  The United States and the Tradition I
such as the Quemoy and Matsu islands, in order to shore up U.S. credibil-
ity and resolve. Gaddis summarizes the predicament: “The Eisenhower re-
cord on nuclear weapons is, in short, riddled with apparent inconsistencies, 
and as a result historians have had great difficulty deciding what his strategy  
really was. He himself, despite the remarkably full record he left behind, did 
remarkably little to clarify the matter.”126 
Despite the administrative changes to nuclear control, the nascent tradi-
tion of non-use survived during the Eisenhower era, as the United States re-
frained from engaging in a nuclear war with both nuclear and nonnuclear ad-
versaries. The non-use of nuclear weapons, especially in the Far East, helped 
to preserve and strengthen the embryonic tradition of non-use. Whatever the 
merits of the debate on Eisenhower’s nuclear brinkmanship policies, fortu-
nately the tradition survived despite the intense Cold War competition the 
United States was waging with the Soviet Union and China during the 1950s.
Conclusion
This discussion of the nuclear policies of the Truman and Eisenhower admin-
istrations shows that different factors—reputational, strategic/tactical, and 
moral—appear to have influenced these administrations’ choices regarding 
the non-use of atomic weapons against nonnuclear states in the crises in which 
they were involved. However, the documentary evidence powerfully suggests 
that tactical or strategic considerations were not as significant for them as rep-
utational and image considerations were. Although they talked about possible 
Russian military reactions, American leaders were cognizant that the Soviet 
Union had no nuclear weapons until 1949 and had only a handful of them 
and limited delivery capacities for another half decade, which gave the United 
States overwhelming preponderance and a near monopoly.127 In August 1958, 
Eisenhower himself acknowledged, while discussing the need for a test ban 
that “the new thermonuclear weapons are tremendously powerful,” but they 
“are not, in many ways, as powerful as is world opinion today in obliging the 
United States to follow certain lines of policy.”128 The vast number of docu-
ments these administrations left behind all show that reputational consider-
ation in terms of adverse world public opinion acted as a major self-deterrent 
to the United States to using nuclear weapons during these two presidencies. 
Although the Nth-country problem (that is, additional states acquiring nu-
clear weapons) was an issue, nonproliferation considerations were not piv-
otal, at least in the first two presidencies, for the rise of the tradition. Atoms 

The Truman and Eisenhower Years  63
for Peace and the test ban initiatives were driven partially by the U.S. desire 
to mollify world public opinion and to regain Washington’s reputation as a 
peace-loving nation in the face of worldwide opposition to nuclear testing.
The nascent tradition of non-use began during the presidencies of Truman 
and Eisenhower. The reluctance to use nuclear weapons in wars and crises 
during these administrations gave rise to the tradition in the U.S. case. By 
the time Eisenhower came to power, the reputational concerns inherent in 
the tradition were already acting as a constraint, as evident in the several dis-
cussions at NSC meetings. The United States faced two forms of reputational 
considerations with respect to nuclear weapons since the first decades of the 
atomic age. First, it wanted to keep the threat of nuclear use vis-à-vis adver-
saries credible for deterrence and compellence purposes. Second, the desire to 
maintain a reputation as a peace-loving nation and the fear of adverse world 
opinion prevented Truman and Eisenhower from using nuclear weapons, 
even when the United States possessed tremendous nuclear advantages over 
its adversaries.

64
 4 THE UNITED STATES AND THE TRADITION II: 
KENNEDY TO CLINTON (1961–2001)
Make no mistake . . . There is no such thing as a conventional 
nuclear weapon. For 19 peril-filled years no nation has loosed 
the atom against another. To do so now is a political decision of 
the highest order. And it would lead us down an uncertain path 
of blows and counterblows whose outcome none may know. No 
President of the United States of America can divest himself  
of the responsibility for such a decision.
—President Lyndon B. Johnson, September 1964
as discussed in t he pr evious chapt er , the embryonic tradition of non-use 
emerged and survived during the key formative years of 1945 to 1960, un-
der the Truman and Eisenhower administrations. Eisenhower left office with 
a huge nuclear arsenal in place, and with the notion of massive retaliation 
well ingrained in the U.S. strategic doctrine. A state of Mutual Assured De-
struction (MAD) was in operation, as the Soviet Union had developed its own 
matching nuclear capabilities during this period. The Cuban Missile Crisis, 
which occurred under the Kennedy administration, was a pivotal event which 
further embedded the fear of nuclear weapons globally and, consequently, so-
lidified the non-use tradition. This chapter addresses U.S. nuclear policy, and, 
in particular, the approach toward non-use against nonnuclear states from 
the Kennedy era to the Clinton years.
The Kennedy Years (1961–63)
John F. Kennedy began his presidency in January 1961 opposed to the massive 
retaliation policy of the Eisenhower administration. Instead, his administra-
tion instituted a strategy of ἀexible response which would rely on multiple 
options to respond to a Soviet attack, beginning with a conventional response 
and then escalating to nuclear retaliation, if warranted. This was aimed at 
creating firebreaks on conflicts, preventing them from going nuclear instan-

Kennedy to Clinton  65
taneously, which would have been the consequence of massive retaliation. 
However, according to critics, “from the military perspective, there was no 
fundamental change in strategy” under the Kennedy administration, as po-
litical and bureaucratic factors prevented it from making radical changes. 
Despite their skepticism of battlefield nuclear weapons, “many within the ad-
ministration believed that the United States had to be able to credibly threaten 
the first use of U.S. strategic forces.”1
The Kennedy administration witnessed two major crises in which nuclear 
war with the Soviet Union was of high probability. During the intense Sec-
ond Berlin Crisis in September 1961, the administration considered propos-
als for a limited nuclear first strike against Soviet military targets in case 
the Berlin crisis turned violent. According to Fred Kaplan, officials from 
the Pentagon and the White House “had worked out a plan for a first strike 
that would virtually wipe out the Soviets’ nuclear arsenal, minimizing the 
chance of retaliation.”2 However, Kennedy realized that his options were not 
very good in view of the Soviet ultimatum on a peace treaty between East 
and West Germany. The U.S. demand for a “free city” or “neutral status” for 
West Berlin was not met, and the U.S.S.R. built the Berlin Wall in August 
1961. Despite the intensification of the conflict relationship with the Sovi-
ets, and despite the gung-ho attitude of many of his military officials, it is 
ap­parent from his decisions that Kennedy wanted to prevent a nuclear war by 
all means.3
The Cuban Missile Crisis was the second key crisis and the closest the 
super­powers ever came to a nuclear war. The crisis engendered a great fear 
of nuclear war and the possibility of both calculated and inadvertent nuclear 
escalation as the Kennedy administration upped the ante and attempted to 
compel the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, to withdraw Soviet missiles from 
Cuba. Although critics have contended that Kennedy’s aggressive policies to-
ward Cuba (such as the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961) led to the Soviet decision 
to bring nuclear missiles to the island nation, it is now well-documented that 
Kennedy played a decisive role in preventing a disastrous nuclear war, despite 
being urged by many of his advisors, military commanders, and congressio-
nal leaders to resort to the most dangerous military option, a surgical strike.4 
Such an attack could certainly have prompted Khrushchev to respond, possi-
bly by launching a war in Europe. It can be argued that the fear of nuclear war 
was now embedded, and that deterrence based on MAD and the tradition of 
non-use both became stronger as a result of the Cuban Missile Crisis.

66  The United States and the Tradition II
Though it bolstered the credibility of mutual deterrence, the Cuban Mis-
sile Crisis showed that a miscalculation on either side could have resulted in a 
catastrophic war. Kennedy was concerned about the dangers of relying on the 
chain of command from the president to the field commander and the dual-
key arrangements attached to nuclear launch facilities. Bundy argues that the 
most powerful impact of the crisis was that “neither side want[ed] to run such 
risk again.”5 The crisis was followed by efforts both at horizontal arms control 
and at a vertical arms race, a contradictory outcome. The vertical arms race 
took off largely because of a Soviet recognition of weaknesses vis-à-vis the 
United States.6 Further, it helped to remove the “stereotypical cold war im-
ages,” especially in Europe, helping to generate support for a détente and more 
concrete arms control measures such as the Hot Line and test ban talks.7
In the aftermath of the Cuban Missile Crisis, the United States and the So-
viet Union began to take an active interest in preventing the spread of nuclear 
weapons to additional countries.8 President Kennedy had warned of the ar-
rival of fifteen to twenty-five nuclear weapon states if the international com-
munity did not do something urgently.9 The Partial Test Ban Treaty (PTBT), 
which prohibited nuclear testing in the atmosphere, space, and underwater—
but allowed underground testing—was signed in August 1963. It was a result 
of consistent demands by nonnuclear states and peace movements, who were 
appalled by the effects of uncontrolled atmospheric nuclear tests, especially 
in the Pacific.10 In addition, the negotiations for the Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty (NPT) began during this period.
The PTBT was part of intense efforts made by the Kennedy administration 
to arrest the spread of nuclear weapons, especially to China. Kennedy was 
alarmed by the possibility of Chinese acquisition of nuclear weapons, and his 
administration made plans to use all possible avenues, such as coercive force 
if necessary, to stop the Chinese from going nuclear and adhere to the PTBT. 
Kennedy sought Soviet cooperation in order to launch a preventive attack on 
Chinese nuclear facilities, which the Russian leader Khrushchev rejected.11 
Kennedy and his advisors initiated extensive spying of China’s nuclear ac-
tivities and considered military action with or without Soviet support. These 
discussions for preventive action intensified during the Johnson presidency, 
which I will discuss below.
It is also now revealed that Kennedy was uncertain of the utility of build-
ing massive numbers of nuclear weapons. In conversations with his advisors 
in December 1962, Kennedy stated, “You can’t use them as a first weapon 

Kennedy to Clinton  67
yourself, they are only good for deterring . . . I don’t see quite why we’re build-
ing as many as we’re building.”12 
Despite these considerations, the possibility of use of nuclear weapons by 
the Kennedy administration appeared in some crisis situations. Recently de-
classified official documents suggest that the issue of nuclear use appeared 
in the conversations of Kennedy and his advisors in the National Security 
Council (NSC) in May 1963, when they discussed the possibility of the United 
States using nuclear weapons to prevent China from invading India a second 
time. To Kennedy, the fall of India would be tantamount to the fall of another 
significant domino to Communism, and must be stopped. At the meeting, 
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara stated: “Before any substantial com-
mitment to defend India against China is given, we should recognize that in 
order to carry out that commitment against any substantial Chinese attack, 
we would have to use nuclear weapons. Any large Chinese Communist at-
tack on any part of that area would require the use of nuclear weapons by the 
U.S. and this is to be preferred over the introduction of large numbers of U.S. 
soldiers.” General Maxwell D. Taylor, then Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff (JCS), stated: “This is just one spectacular aspect of the overall problem 
of how to cope with Red China politically and militarily in the next decade.  
I would hate to think that we would fight this on the ground in a non-nuclear 
way.” In response, Kennedy said, “[w]e should defend India, and therefore, we 
will defend India” if it was attacked, without mentioning the nuclear option.
The important dimension of these discussions for the tradition of non-
use is the opinion of two of the other members of the NSC. Secretary of State 
Dean Rusk cautioned that a nuclear attack on China should only occur with 
the support of critical allies, while then-Undersecretary of State George Ball 
warned of the negative reputational effects of using weapons against East 
Asians. According to Ball: “If there is a general appearance of a shift in strat-
egy to the dependence on a nuclear defense against the Chinese in the Far 
East, we are going to inject into the whole world opinion the old bugaboo of 
being willing to use nuclear weapons against Asians . . . This is going to create 
great problems with the Japanese—with all the yellow people.”13
The Johnson Era (1963–69)
The Johnson period witnessed the strengthening of the tradition, manifested 
in the administration’s opposition to using nuclear weapons to win the Viet-
nam War, its refusal to use nuclear weapons against China to prevent that 
country from becoming nuclear, and its active efforts in concluding the NPT.

68  The United States and the Tradition II
During the 1964 Presidential campaign, Johnson fiercely opposed Re-
publican candidate Barry Goldwater’s call for victory in the Cold War using 
nuclear weapons, especially in Vietnam. In one of his speeches, at Detroit in 
September 1964, Johnson described nuclear war as a great catastrophe, with 
“hundreds of millions dead, cities in ashes, fields gone barren, and industry 
destroyed.” He stated:
Make no mistake. There is no such thing as a conventional nuclear weapon. 
For 19 peril-filled years no nation has loosed the atom against another. To 
do so now is a political decision of the highest order. And it would lead us 
down an uncertain path of blows and counterblows whose outcome none may 
know. No President of the United States of America can divest himself of the 
responsibility for such a decision.14 
The logic of consequences appears powerfully in this statement. This state-
ment was perhaps the first by a U.S. leader showing the power of the tradition 
of non-use, and it attests that the tradition had entered the calculations of 
the U.S. president. To Johnson, nuclear use was not a viable option because 
it would break a tradition that was maintained by his predecessors, and if he 
violated it, it would set a bad precedent for others to follow. In that sense, the 
reverse loop shown in my model in Chapter 2 is present in the calculations of 
U.S. decision makers here.
Reputational reasons were powerful factors presented by other adminis-
tration officials in their opposition to the use of nuclear weapons in Vietnam. 
Undersecretary of State George Ball, in a memo presented to the adminis-
tration in October 1964, argued that it would be difficult to maintain a dis-
tinction between tactical and strategic weapons for public opinion, and that 
U.S. nuclear use would create a “profound shock” not only in Japan but also 
“among the non-white nations on every continent.” Ball contended that the 
use of even one nuclear weapon would cause a “loss of prestige” for the United 
States among the nonaligned developing countries, and would “liberate the 
Soviet Union from the inhibitions that world sentiments had imposed on it,” 
as the United States would have “provided a justification for their use.” “The 
Communists would certainly point out that we were the only nation that had 
ever employed nuclear weapons in anger. And the Soviet Union would em-
phasize its position of relative virtue in having a nuclear arsenal which it had 
never used.”15 Surprisingly, in his memo, Ball devotes only one sentence to 
the military consequences of nuclear use.16 Ball was presenting powerfully the 
concerns about the negative impact on reputation, prestige, and image as well 

Kennedy to Clinton  69
as the dangers of precedent-setting behavior if the United States used nuclear 
weapons. What is noticeable is the relatively limited concerns about nuclear 
retribution by the Soviet Union as a source of restraint.
McGeorge Bundy, who was Special Assistant for National Security Affairs 
to Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, contends that no one close to Johnson 
proposed nuclear use in Vietnam, as the anticipated consequences of such 
an attack deterred them from doing so. This was not due to the absence of 
suitable targets, as there were plenty of ports, landing places, supply lines, 
and so forth that could have been attacked by low-yield nuclear weapons. 
He also discounts the probability of Russian and Chinese intervention as a 
cause for restraint. Bundy locates the causes of non-use solely on reputational  
concerns:
We may begin to get an answer when we think of the effect of any such use 
of nuclear weapons on the Vietnamese. What kind of reaction would there 
have been, on both sides in divided Vietnam, to such attacks? Would what was 
decisive in a military sense have had terrible consequences not only in human 
terms but in the minds of the survivors? Could you, in that reaction, lose the 
war by winning it? And what would have been the reputation of the United 
States elsewhere—in the nearby countries whose future was so large a part of 
what had led the American government to persist, or in the rest of the newly 
independent world, or in Latin America, or in the Atlantic Alliance?17
Despite the reputational problems inherent in nuclear use as outlined by  
Bundy, during the war senior military leaders and the U.S. ambassador to 
South Vietnam, Henry Cabot Lodge, Jr., raised the possibility of nuclear use, 
which was rejected by Johnson and his senior advisors. Instead, Johnson did 
escalate the conventional bombing of North Vietnam. Massive bombing op-
erations such as “Rolling Thunder” were meant to break the will of the North 
Vietnamese and force them to give up their resistance. The use of nuclear 
weapons in Vietnam was considered by the administration, especially to de-
stroy targets such as tunnels that the Vietcong used to transport weapons and 
men, but McNamara and other officials such as Rusk and Bundy all opposed 
such proposals, and Johnson concurred with their positions.18
In 1966, in response to rumors of proposals for the use of nuclear weap-
ons in Vietnam, a four-member team of scientists under the name JASON 
Group conducted a study on the impact of tactical nuclear use in Vietnam.19 
The group was responding to discussions within the Defense Department re-
garding the use of tactical nuclear weapons to destroy the mountain passes 

70  The United States and the Tradition II
between North Vietnam and Laos that the Vietcong were using as a route for 
large-scale troop reinforcement and supply of materials. The Pentagon-funded 
group concluded that the use of tactical nuclear weapons in Southeast Asia 
would offer the United States no decisive military advantage. These weapons 
may have been effective in “stopping the enemy from moving large masses of 
men in concentrated formations,” but were of “little use against troops mov-
ing in small groups under forest cover.” In addition, they argued that the po-
litical and military costs of nuclear use would outweigh any possible benefits. 
Politically, crossing the nuclear threshold could “greatly weaken the barriers 
to proliferation and general use of nuclear weapons.” They also argued that the 
“effect on world opinion, and on the opinion of U.S. allies in particular, would 
be extremely unfavorable,” while its effect on domestic opinion in the United 
States “would be extremely divisive.” Militarily, nuclear weapons would not 
be effective unless used in large quantities, but the U.S. staging areas in South 
Vietnam could become targets of nuclear retaliation by Communist guerillas, 
who might gain nuclear arms from China or the Soviet Union.20 It is not clear 
if this report had any direct effect on U.S. decision making at that time, but 
it is assumed that McNamara decided to put an end to discussions of nuclear 
use in the Defense Department, calling them irrelevant.21 The scientists were 
emphasizing the general problems with breaking the tradition of non-use, 
and the reasons they cited most prominently included both reputational and 
tactical considerations.
During the Johnson era, Chinese acquisition of nuclear weapons became 
a major concern again. Many studies by U.S. military planners proposed pre-
ventive attacks, as Chinese nuclear acquisition was perceived as a major threat 
not only to the United States, but also to its allies and other states in East, 
South, and Southeast Asia.22 The administration continued Kennedy’s efforts 
to stop China from going nuclear, in the end deciding only to refrain from 
concrete military action. The reasons for inaction in the military realm were 
both political and military related. According to a State Department official, 
Robert Johnson, who had prepared a report on the costs and benefits of pre-
ventive action against China, a military attack would be dangerous and could 
fail; “it could hurt the United States’ image and weaken its prestige, the intan-
gible assets of world power.”23
The Johnson memorandum, which became the basis for U.S. policy, re-
jected military action to prevent China from acquiring nuclear weapons on 
the grounds that the effect of any successful attack would last only four to five 
years, as China would rebuild its capabilities, and the United States would 

Kennedy to Clinton  71
have to resort to another round of attacks. Most prominently, the memoran-
dum listed the following adverse international political reaction as grounds 
for desisting from military action: 
(a) It is an illustration of the U.S. unwillingness to accept the existence of 
Communist China as a major world actor; (b) it conflicts with U.S. efforts 
to argue the limited military significance of Chicom [Chinese Communist] 
nuclear capability; (c) it is an action with strong racialist overtones—the white 
man (including the French) can develop the bomb, but it is not considered 
safe for colored people to possess them; (d) it is highly dangerous, involving 
grave risk of precipitating war (or escalation of existing conflict) in Asia and 
even of bringing the Soviets to the support of the Chinese; and (e) it is another 
illustration of the U.S. preoccupation with military considerations.24 
According to Burr and Richelson, the U.S. decision not to pursue a preven-
tive military option was influenced by uncertainties in intelligence analysis, 
probable adverse “overseas reactions,” and a negative effect on U.S. nuclear 
deterrent capabilities.25 
The Chinese nuclear tests in October 1964 prompted major efforts by the 
Johnson administration on the issue of stemming nuclear proliferation.26 
The Gilpatric Report, named after the chairman of the taskforce appointed 
by Johnson in November 1964, former Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell 
Gilpatric, became the basis of much of this newfound enthusiasm for nuclear 
nonproliferation. The report proposed that the United States “greatly inten-
sify” nonproliferation efforts by concluding an international treaty for the 
“non-dissemination and non-acquisition of nuclear weapons,” and pursue 
a carrot-and-stick policy to halt the spread of nuclear weapons.27 President 
Johnson carried through the NPT negotiations, along with the Soviet Union 
and Britain, and it was during his term that the treaty was finally concluded 
in 1968. It came into force in 1970. Although the United States and the other 
nuclear powers did not commit a formal non-use guarantee to the nonnuclear 
states under the Treaty, the implicit understanding was that those states that 
gave up their nuclear weapons option would not be targeted or attacked with 
nuclear weapons, and that they would be offered the civilian benefits of the 
atom under international safeguards.28 In Chapter 8, this subject is discussed 
more elaborately.
The Johnson era showed the power of the tradition of non-use, as the ad-
ministration refused to use nuclear weapons even when it was facing enor-
mous difficulties in Vietnam. Though active in the nonproliferation arena, 

72  The United States and the Tradition II
Johnson rejected proposals for a nuclear attack on China to prevent it from 
becoming a nuclear power. Nuclear use would have seriously hampered the 
administration’s nonproliferation efforts as well as other arms control goals 
that it wanted to pursue with the Soviet Union.
The Nixon Years (1969–74)
The Nixon era is known for several attempts by the United States to threaten 
the use of nuclear weapons for political and strategic purposes. These at-
tempts show that the tradition was not progressing in a linear fashion and 
that it could be challenged if leaders who did not believe in its value gained 
control of the government. In fact, an active effort was made by the admin-
istration, especially Nixon’s National Security Advisor Henry Kissinger, to 
use nuclear weapons as a coercive instrument in order to achieve U.S. foreign 
policy goals vis-à-vis Communist and some other developing nations. These 
included a nuclear alert in October 1969; several efforts to use the nuclear 
threat, including Operation Duck Hook in 1969, to compel the North Viet-
namese to agree to U.S. war terms; and the nuclear alerts during the 1971 
India-Pakistan and the 1973 Middle East wars. Nixon believed that by pre-
tending to act irrationally in terms of nuclear use, he could manipulate the 
Soviets and their allies to modify their behavior in the developing world. To 
some extent, Nixon and Kissinger were attempting to imitate the brinkman-
ship strategy of Eisenhower, but in the end their efforts at nuclear coercion 
showed little if any success. Their war policies in Vietnam were not popular 
domestically or internationally, as evident in widespread protest rallies, con-
straining the nuclear use option even further than in the Eisenhower years. 
However, the Nixon/Kissinger team valiantly continued to use nuclear threat 
as the key means of achieving U.S. strategic goals. Although these were bluffs 
in some instances, a conditional intent to use lies beneath a threat if it has any 
meaning to an adversary’s calculations. In that sense, these were affronts to 
the tradition of non-use.
The most prominent efforts by the Nixon administration at nuclear coer-
cion occurred in Vietnam. In March 1969, the administration considered an 
escalation strategy in order to end the intransigence of the North Vietnam-
ese in the Paris peace negotiations. The strategy included the potential use of 
nuclear weapons. Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) position papers and memoranda 
studying progressive escalation from conventional to nuclear means were 
forwarded to Kissinger. One such paper suggested that “a team of Pentagon  

Kennedy to Clinton  73
technical experts in atomic and chemical warfare [make] an extended visit of 
the Far East, stopping off at CINCPAC [office of the Commander-in-Chief, 
Pacific], Okinawa, Saigon and Bangkok” as a feigned way to show an Ameri-
can willingness to use nuclear weapons if the Communists did not compro-
mise. However, these reports had rejected the actual “use of atomic, biological 
or lethal chemical weapons in Vietnam” as “it would excite very strong public 
and congressional reaction.” In addition, “the predictable reaction worldwide, 
particularly in Japan and Okinawa, upon the surfacing of this scenario, mili-
tates against its employment.”29
Despite these negative assessments, the administration launched a world-
wide nuclear alert in 1969, which was couched as a “Joint Chiefs of Staff Read-
iness Test.”
The alert began on October 13, 1969, when U.S. tactical and strategic air forces 
in the United States, Europe, and East Asia began a stand-down of training 
flights to raise operational readiness; Strategic Air Command [SAC] in­creased 
the numbers of bombers and tankers on ground alert; and the readi­ness 
posture of selected overseas units was heightened. On October 25, SAC took 
the additional step of increasing the readiness of nuclear bombers, and two 
days later SAC B-52s undertook a nuclear-armed “Show of Force” alert over 
Alaska, code-name “Giant Lance.”30
By the end of October 1969 the alert was rescinded. The purpose of this alert 
was to convince the Soviets to persuade their Vietnamese allies to end the 
war. However, these alerts had no palpable effects on the Soviets or their Viet-
namese allies, suggesting that they did not view the U.S. threat as credible.31
President Nixon began his term in 1969 with a secret plan to win the Viet-
nam War. Nixon believed that the reason why the Chinese and the North 
Koreans agreed to negotiate the Armistice Agreement in 1953 was President 
Eisenhower’s threat to use nuclear weapons. Prior to the Republican National 
Convention of 1969, Nixon told Richard J. Whalen, his speech writer, that if 
elected president, “I would use nuclear weapons,” and would be willing “to 
threaten their use in appropriate circumstances.”32
Nixon’s strategy was to act like a “madman” to induce cooperation from 
Communist adversaries, akin to the strategy in a game of chicken. Nixon 
told White House Chief of Staff H. R. Haldeman that Eisenhower’s nuclear 
threats were responsible for the ending of the Korean War in 1953. “I call it the 
madman theory, Bob,” he said. “I want the North Vietnamese to believe I’ve 

74  The United States and the Tradition II
reached the point where I might do anything to stop the war. We’ll just slip the 
word to them that ‘for God’s sake, you know Nixon is obsessed about Com-
munists. We can’t restrain him when he’s angry—and he has his hand on the 
nuclear button’—and Ho Chi Minh himself will be in Paris in two days beg-
ging for peace.”33 The threat was incredible to the Vietnamese because of the 
possible retaliation by Russia and China and the difficulty of mounting it in 
secrecy, without which it would have provoked further peace demonstrations 
against the war in the United States and abroad.
Kissinger did indeed work on a plan to use nuclear weapons in order to 
expedite the end of the war. The plan, code-named Operation Duck Hook, had 
called for: 
massive bombing of Hanoi, Haiphong, and other key areas in North Vietnam; 
the mining of harbors and rivers; the bombing of the dike system; a ground 
invasion of North Vietnam; the destruction—possibly with nuclear devices—
of the main north–south passes along the Ho Chi Minh Trail; and the bomb­
ing of North Vietnam’s main railroad links with China. There was a separate, 
even more secret study dealing with the implications of using tactical nuclear 
weapons on the rail lines, the main funnel for supplies from the Soviet Union 
as well as China. In all, twenty-nine major targets in North Vietnam were 
targeted for destruction in a series of air attacks planned to last four days and 
be renewed, if necessary, until Hanoi capitulated.34
Kissinger told Roger Morris, a senior NSC staff member, in response to a ques-
tion on nuclear use, “it is the policy of this administration not to use nuclear 
weapons and we shall not, so these options exclude that one thing. But you 
are not to exclude the possibility of a nuclear device being used for purposes 
of a blockade in the pass to China if that seems to be the only way to close the 
pass,” referring to the railroad between North Vietnam and China. The plan 
was never carried out due to fears of increased domestic violence and the pos-
sibility that it would cost Nixon re-election.35 Reputational costs at the domes-
tic political level are central in explaining this decision of non-use.
Tapes released by the U.S. National Archives in March 2002 reveal that, 
a few weeks before escalating the conventional bombing, President Nixon  
matter-of-factly raised the idea of using a nuclear bomb. During a conversa-
tion with Nixon on April 25, 1972, Kissinger presented various options to com-
pel the Vietnamese to agree to peace, including attacking power plants and 
docks. Nixon responded by saying “I’d rather use the nuclear bomb.” Kissinger  

Kennedy to Clinton  75
replied: “That, I think, will just be too much,” and in response, Nixon quipped: 
“The nuclear bomb. Does that bother you?” adding, “I just want you to think 
big.”36 However, in an interview with Time Magazine in 1985, Nixon said he 
rejected the bombing of the dikes because it “would have drowned 1 million 
people, for the same reason that I rejected the nuclear option. Because the 
targets presented were not military targets.” In addition, Nixon feared that 
massive retaliation including nuclear use would have destroyed “any chances 
for moving forward with the Soviets and China.”37
McGeorge Bundy argues that the use of nuclear weapons would have pro-
voked the opponents of the war both at home and abroad even further, mak-
ing the American position untenable.38 Even a realist like Kissinger found 
that nuclear nations, although capable of destroying each other, would not be 
able to impose their will. He states: “the capacity to destroy proved difficult 
to translate into a plausible threat even against countries with no capacity for 
retaliation. The margin of the superpowers over non-nuclear states had been 
widening; yet the awesomeness of their power had increased their inhibitions. 
As power had grown more awesome, it had also turned abstract, intangible, 
elusive.”39 Later on Nixon himself stated that if the United States had “cho-
sen to go for a knockout blow by bombing the dikes or using tactical nuclear 
weapons, the resulting domestic and international uproar would have dam-
aged our foreign policy on all fronts.”40 At a meeting in May 1972, in response 
to Nixon’s comment that he did not care about civilian casualties, Kissinger 
stated: “I’m concerned about the civilians because I don’t want the world to be 
mobilized against you as a butcher.”41 Self-deterrence appears a very powerful 
check on nuclear use against nonnuclear states even for a hard realist such as 
Kissinger.
Going by Nixon’s statement, both reputational and tactical concerns ap-
pear significant in his decision not to execute the nuclear threats that he and 
his advisors considered on different occasions. If the United States used nu-
clear weapons in Vietnam, there was recognition that American and world 
opinion would have turned much more oppositional as the anti-Vietnam pro-
tests were surging nationally and internationally.42 In addition, the weapon 
conceived was inappropriate due to its immense destructive capability against 
nonmilitary targets. The massive destruction of those targets would have cost 
too much in terms of reputational considerations. A disproportionate de-
struction would have resulted in the deaths of hundreds of thousands of Viet-
namese and contaminated vast areas of that country with radioactive debris. 

76  The United States and the Tradition II
Moral concerns, albeit to a limited extent, appear to be entering the calcula-
tions even for leaders who did not want to be concerned about them.
The Nixon period also saw efforts by the United States to develop plans for 
waging limited nuclear war with the Soviet Union, both in the European and 
regional contexts. Nixon was appalled by the prospects of an all-out nuclear 
war and was interested in the United States developing less damaging limited- 
war options. Kissinger was an early proponent of such a strategy and was in-
strumental in developing some plans for limited war.43 Kissinger sought to 
identify targets for limited nuclear strikes in the Middle East in order to signal 
the Soviets not to escalate the conflict.44 The so-called Schlesinger Doctrine 
(named after Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger) called for developing 
new targeting plans, based on smaller, more limited nuclear strike options, 
to retaliate against Soviet aggression without causing major dangers to So-
viet cities. The intent was to deter both conventional and nuclear conflict; if 
deterrence failed, the policy was to “terminate nuclear hostilities at the low-
est level of conflict possible,” and if war escalated, the United States “would 
seek to secure the best possible outcome for itself and its allies.”45 In January 
1974, Nixon signed National Security Decision Memorandum (NSDM) 242, 
which directed the preparation of a “wide range of limited nuclear employ-
ment options,” to demonstrate the seriousness of the United States’ intent to 
use nuclear weapons if necessary.46
The Nixon-Kissinger strategy was to make nuclear weapons a key in-
strument to deter Soviet involvement in regional theaters. “Yet, the civilian- 
military consensus for limited options remained relatively shallow. For ex-
ample, nuclear planners at the Pentagon dragged their feet, even question-
ing whether civilians should be involved in such sensitive issues as nuclear 
targeting or whether limited strategic options even made sense.”47 Skeptics 
argued that it would not be possible to limit nuclear war; such a policy might 
undermine deterrence in Europe, “damage relations with Western Europe, 
and lower the threshold for nuclear weapons use.”48
The Nixon administration also engaged in nuclear saber rattling in the In-
dian subcontinent in 1971. The war between India and Pakistan in December 
1971 saw the liberation of East Pakistan as the new state of Bangladesh, partly 
the result of military intervention by neighboring India. As the Pakistani mil-
itary position began to crumble, on December 10, 1971 the Nixon administra-
tion decided to dispatch the nuclear-armed Seventh Fleet (a ten-ship naval 
force spearheaded by USS Enterprise) from the Pacific to the Bay of Bengal 

Kennedy to Clinton  77
with the intention of coercing India not to escalate the war on West Pakistan. 
The task force carried seventy-five nuclear-armed fighter-bombers on board 
and included a nuclear attack submarine. “Nixon and Kissinger believed that 
coercive diplomacy worked. India offered an unconditional ceasefire in the 
West, removing the threat there.”49
Nixon, in a subsequent interview, claimed that the United States consid-
ered the nuclear option in 1971 because of the fear that the Soviets would 
intervene in support of India if China invaded India.50 His aim appeared to 
be more to deter India than to deter a Soviet intervention. However, there is 
little evidence that Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi was planning an 
escalation in the West, as she had obtained her strategic objective of bifur-
cating Pakistan. By the time the task force reached the Bay of Bengal on De-
cember 15, 1971, “India had already eliminated Pakistani military resistance 
in the East, established an air and sea blockade isolating East Pakistan, and 
unilaterally chosen to confine its attention in the West to the long-disputed 
territory of Kashmir” and not Pakistan proper.51 This episode of nuclear coer-
cion of a nonnuclear state added to India’s determination to acquire nuclear 
weapons capability, and it subsequently tested its first device in May 1974.
The Nixon administration once again raised the nuclear alert in the 1973 
Middle East War. On October 23, Israeli advancing forces broke the ceasefire 
agreement and surrounded Egypt’s Third Army in Suez City. In the face of the 
Egyptian Army’s imminent collapse, Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev put on 
alert two Warsaw pact divisions in Bulgaria. On October 24, Brezhnev sent 
a message to Kissinger threatening unilateral action. In response, on Octo-
ber 25, the Nixon administration ordered U.S. nuclear forces to raise their 
alert status from DEFCON 4 to DEFCON 3. The U.S. claim that Moscow was 
delivering SCUD nuclear armed missiles to Egypt was proven incorrect later 
on.52 States Nixon: “We could not allow Israel to go down the tube. We could 
not allow the Soviets to have a predominant position in the region. That had 
to be the bottom line. I wanted to send that message, and putting the weapons 
on alert did that.”53
In both the India-Pakistan and Middle East wars, the Nixon administra-
tion saw regional wars as Soviet-inspired, and threatened nuclear escalation 
as a way to end the wars in a manner favorable to the United States. By exag-
gerating the Soviet role in these conflicts, the administration courted possible 
global war as a result of escalating regional conflicts which had their own re-
gional causes. The threats of nuclear use against India and Egypt constituted 

78  The United States and the Tradition II
cases of disregard of the tradition of non-use of nuclear weapons against non-
nuclear states. Even if its actions in the Middle East were intended primarily 
to coerce Moscow to refrain from intervention in favor of Cairo, the Nixon 
administration was disregarding the spirit of the tradition. Further, although 
each state had limited alliance relationships with Moscow, neither Egypt nor 
India was under the Soviet nuclear umbrella as the East European states were, 
or taking its orders from Moscow.
The tradition of non-use survived the Nixon/Kissinger era, although it 
faced some major challenges during this period. The United States retreated 
from Vietnam without achieving victory, and its unwillingness or inabil-
ity to use nuclear weapons to defeat North Vietnam gave a new fillip to the 
tradition. Nixon and Kissinger attempted to use nuclear weapons as devices 
for compellence and had very little positive results to show at the end. Their 
reluctance to use nuclear weapons was influenced by both tactical/strategic 
considerations and reputational concerns (especially at the domestic level). 
However, it is clear that their efforts to break the tradition did not succeed and 
that the tradition persisted through those crucial years.
The end of the Nixon era brought an end to the possibility of nuclear use 
against nonnuclear states for at least another two decades. There were hardly 
any occasions during the presidencies of Ford, Carter, or Reagan to threaten 
the use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear states.
The Carter Years (1977–81)
The Carter years were significant for the tradition to the extent that there was 
considerable discussion about developing the neutron bomb, a “usable” nu-
clear weapon that would not destroy material assets or contaminate the envi-
ronment, but would kill living beings. Carter decided to suspend the plans to 
develop the neutron bomb (an enhanced radiation weapon) after considerable 
national and international protests, especially in Europe, and partially due to 
his own personal beliefs about the inappropriateness of the weapon.54 James 
Schlesinger, who served as Secretary of Energy under Carter, argues that 
Carter decided not to proceed with the neutron bomb, despite disagreement 
of all his advisors with that decision, by “exercising his moral judgment.”55 
The proposed plan was to install neutron bombs on Lance missiles and artil-
lery shells which were to be deployed in Europe. However, Carter “kept open 
the option of proceeding with production at a later date so he [could] use it as 
a ‘bargaining chip’ with the Russians in arms reduction negotiations.”56 The 

Kennedy to Clinton  79
“ban the neutron bomb” campaign, which started in Europe, also had a major 
impact on Carter’s decision.57 The outcry was also driven by the argument 
that the neutron bomb would kill people as opposed to property, thereby priv-
ileging the latter over the former. However, the strong opposition of allies and 
the worldwide outcry were the primary reasons for the cancellation.58
Arguments against developing the neutron bomb included: (1) that it was 
important not to blur the distinction—the firebreak, as it was called—between 
nuclear and conventional weapons; (2) that either because of its low yield or 
because of its “benign” kind of lethality, there would be a strong temptation to 
use this type of weapon where other kinds of nuclear weapons were otherwise 
not allowed; and (3) that the “use of neutron weapons would pave the way for 
nuclear escalation.”59 These arguments suggest that the fear of breaking the 
tradition of non-use underlay the opponents’ views, and that Carter accepted 
it as a legitimate concern in canceling the plan to develop the new bomb.60
Despite the importance of moral considerations in his approach to inter-
national politics in the nuclear weapons area, Carter’s legacy is a mixed one.  
In July 1980, he issued Presidential Directive PD‑59, which called for U.S. 
forces, in the event of deterrence failure, to be “capable of fighting success-
fully so that the adversary would not achieve his war aims and would suffer 
costs that are unacceptable, or in any event greater than his gains, from hav-
ing initiated an attack.”61 Moreover, the Carter Doctrine, promulgated in the 
aftermath of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979, declared that “an 
attempt by an outside force to gain control of the Persian Gulf region will be 
regarded as an assault on the vital interests of the United States” and “will be 
repelled by any means necessary including military force.”62 This doctrine,  
if implemented verbatim, would not have precluded the use of nuclear weap-
ons against Soviet troops or regional states which offered the Soviets military 
assistance.63
PD-59 “set as the center of U.S. policy a countervailing strategy, defined 
as a strategy that denies an enemy the possibility of winning a nuclear war,” 
and the basis for denying such a victory was the U.S. capability to attack 
the political leadership’s control of the Soviet Union and the Soviet military 
leadership’s control of its military forces. Thus PD‑59 directed the U.S. armed 
forces to prepare for fighting a prolonged but limited nuclear war, targeting 
what “the Soviet leadership values most—its military forces and its own abil-
ity to maintain control after a war starts.”64 According to one analyst, “in the 
four years of the Carter administration, options for nuclear war-fighting were 

80  The United States and the Tradition II
set in policy more firmly than ever before. Carter’s switch was popularly ex-
plained, at the time, as a product of his campaign to appease the hawkish right 
wing of the Senate so that its most influential members would vote to ratify 
the SALT II arms control treaty that he had negotiated with the Soviets.”65
Despite the talk of nuclear war with the Soviets, in the context of policy 
vis-à-vis nonnuclear states, the administration made some positive steps to-
ward a more formal non-use pledge. This was largely because of the activism 
of the administration in the nonproliferation arena. And in that context it 
made a qualified commitment to non-use of nuclear weapons against non-
nuclear states. At a Special Session of the UN General Assembly on Disarma-
ment in 1978, the administration pledged: 
The United States will not use nuclear weapons against any non-nuclear states 
party to the NPT or any comparable internationally binding commitment not 
to acquire nuclear explosive devices, except in the case of an attack on the 
United States, its territories or armed forces, or its allies, by such state allied to 
a nuclear weapon-state or associated with a nuclear weapon state in carrying 
out or sustaining the attack.66
The Carter administration had adopted nuclear nonproliferation, along with 
human rights, as one of its core global agenda items, but in the end had lim-
ited success in each area. Carter made serious efforts with countries such as 
India, which had exploded a nuclear bomb in 1974, to persuade them to sign 
on to the NPT. The Nonproliferation Act of 1978 was brought forward by the 
Carter administration, further tightening the U.S. nonproliferation policy. In 
general, his efforts had limited success, but during his presidency the tradi-
tion of non-use received limited legal status through the United States mak-
ing a qualified negative security assurance toward nonnuclear states at the 
United Nations.
The Reagan Era (1981–89)
Ronald Reagan became president in 1981, after defeating Jimmy Carter, with 
the avowed intention of dramatically increasing U.S. military spending and 
defeating the Soviet Union in the nuclear arms race. Nuclear weapons fitted 
well in the administration’s newly bellicose strategy toward the Soviet bloc. 
The intellectual basis of the Reagan approach was enunciated by a group of 
conservative strategic analysts who believed in “peace through strength.” The 
Committee on Present Danger (composed of hard-line strategists and officials 

Kennedy to Clinton  81
such as Richard Pipes, William R. Van Cleave, General Daniel O. Graham, 
Thomas W. Wolfe, John Vogt, Foy Kohler, Paul Nitze, Seymour Weiss, Jasper 
Welch, and Paul Wolfowitz) had warned of a “window of vulnerability” in 
which the Soviets had amassed a massive nuclear advantage over the United 
States and could threaten a nuclear war. They questioned the official U.S. in-
telligence estimates by arguing that the Soviets were bent on developing an 
offensive nuclear capability and pursuing a war-fighting doctrine. In response 
to this projected threat, they proposed substantial increases in U.S. military 
spending, which President Reagan accepted as official policy. One of their 
proposals was that the United States should be prepared to fight and win a 
nuclear war with the Soviet Union.67 
In its pursuit of strategic superiority over the Soviet Union, the admin-
istration launched a massive arms modernization program in addition to 
adopting a war-fighting counterforce strategy. The idea behind the buildup 
was that the Soviet Union would not be able to match U.S. capabilities and that 
it would give the United States political and diplomatic advantages, but more 
importantly the ability to fight and win a long nuclear war.68 The Reagan- 
era buildup of nuclear weaponry included ten-warhead MX missiles, Tri-
dent II missiles, B-1B bombers carrying air-launched cruise missiles, stealth 
bombers, and ballistic-missile-defense systems that would undercut the Anti-
Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty. Under Reagan, strategic long-range nuclear 
weapons in U.S. possession increased by twenty-five hundred warheads, al-
though nonstrategic weapons declined by three thousand due to the retire-
ment of older systems.69
The administration also launched a program to improve the rapid deploy-
ment capabilities of the United States in order to ensure that Washington 
could intervene in theaters in the developing world, which the Soviet Union 
was attempting to incorporate into its sphere of influence. Although the doc-
trinal change did not include direct nuclear use in such theaters, if the super-
powers collided in nonnuclear state theaters, escalation to nuclear war was 
possible. However, the intensified U.S.-Soviet conflict in Afghanistan, Africa, 
and Latin America remained nonnuclear as the superpowers avoided direct 
confrontation while pursuing active proxy wars wordwide.70 This arms race 
gave rise to the Freeze Now movement, which called for an end to U.S. buildup 
and for strategic arms negotiations with the Soviets. Reagan acceded to those 
calls in 1982 when his administration began negotiations on a Strategic Arms 
Reduction Treaty (START).71 The 1987 Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces 

82  The United States and the Tradition II
Treaty (INF) with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev was a major capstone in 
Reagan’s success in the nuclear arms control area.
The Reagan administration is notable for launching the Strategic Defense 
Initiative (SDI), popularly known as “Star Wars.” In his speech on March 23, 
1983, Reagan called upon U.S. nuclear scientists “to turn their great talents 
now to the cause of mankind and world peace, to give us the means of render-
ing these nuclear weapons impotent and obsolete.”72 The multilayered system 
was expected to protect the United States against incoming Soviet missiles 
at different stages—the launch phase, passage through the atmosphere, flight 
outside the atmosphere, and the terminal phase. Other than the technical dif-
ficulties of attaining a foolproof system, it has been argued that the deploy-
ment of SDI “would increase Soviet fears that the United States was preparing 
for a preventive war or for the unfettered use of nuclear coercion. These fears 
might lead the Soviet Union to launch its own preemptive strike.”73 It is pos-
sible that SDI, if successfully developed, would have resulted in the destruc-
tion of U.S.-Soviet strategic stability built around MAD.
The tradition of non-use was reinforced in the 1980s when, in the face of 
the Reagan administration’s talk of limited nuclear war, an international front 
emerged forcing the administration officials to withdraw their war-fighting 
doctrines. Freeze Now and the worldwide protests against nuclear tests helped 
to reinforce further the perception that nuclear weapons were different from 
conventional weapons and that no state could use them casually in anger or 
retribution.74 The public was also deeply opposed to Reagan administration 
efforts to revive civil defense, showing that public opinion rejected the idea 
of nuclear use. The antinuclear front was galvanized by the leak of the Penta-
gon’s May 1982 Draft Defense Planning Guidance on fighting a long nuclear 
war with the Soviet Union. It stated that “should deterrence fail and strate-
gic nuclear war with the USSR occur, the United States must prevail and be 
able to force the Soviet Union to seek earliest termination of the hostilities on 
terms favorable to the United States.”75 The plan was partially the basis of the 
administration’s stress on the modernization of strategic weapons as opposed 
to initiating major quantitative increases in the U.S. nuclear arsenal.
President Reagan offers a good example of how competing moral, politi-
cal, and reputational considerations came into play in making hard national 
security decisions. Despite his hard-nosed approach toward the Soviet Union, 
Reagan apparently was appalled by the horrendous aftereffects of a nuclear 
war. Some suggest that after getting a briefing on how he should be ordering 
the use of nuclear weapons, Reagan became very worried and began to talk 

Kennedy to Clinton  83
about nuclear abolition.76 In fact, at the Reykjavik summit with Gorbachev in 
October 1986, President Reagan abruptly proposed a treaty to abolish nuclear 
weapons.77 This generated considerable anxiety among his advisors, who at-
tempted to persuade him to abandon the proposal. Reagan also seemed to 
have genuinely believed that SDI would make nuclear abolition possible. This 
pro-SDI position would kill any chances of nuclear abolition, however, as 
Gorbachev refused to abandon his opposition to the SDI.78
The end of the Cold War in 1991 inaugurated a brief period of enthusiasm 
for nuclear disarmament and even nuclear abolition. Gorbachev’s far-reaching 
arms control initiatives as well as successes in nonproliferation—for example, 
the rolling back of the South African nuclear capability—all gave support to 
the tradition of non-use. However, rising concerns about Iraq’s attempts at 
nuclear acquisition and its invasion of Kuwait changed the discourse on nu-
clear weapons. The 1991 Gulf War offered an opportunity to test the vitality 
and robustness of the tradition in a changed global strategic environment.
The Bush (Senior) Period (1989–93)
The presidency of George H. W. Bush witnessed the fall of the Berlin Wall, 
the dismantling of the Warsaw Pact alliance, the end of the Cold War, and 
the collapse of the Soviet Union as a state. Along with Gorbachev, President 
Bush pursued far-reaching arms control initiatives such as the first Strategic 
Arms Reduction Treaty (START I) and the removal of tactical nuclear weap-
ons worldwide. The September 1991 Bush arms control proposals included 
the elimination of 2,150 land-based tactical weapons in Lance missiles and 
nuclear artillery; the withdrawal of 700 air-based and 2,175 sea-based tactical 
missiles and 360 submarine-launched cruise missiles (SLCMs); the elimina-
tion of all strategic bombers, 450 minuteman II missiles, and 1,600 Poseidon 
C3 submarine-launched ballistic missile (SLBM) warheads; and the cancella-
tion of the Rail-Mobile MX and Road-Mobile Midgetman.79 The reduction of 
tactical nuclear forces, in particular, has had major implications for the tradi-
tion of non-use, as these are weapons that could be used in theaters of conflict 
against nonnuclear states if ever such an option was considered.
The Bush presidency saw a major opportunity to test the robustness of the 
nuclear non-use tradition. This occurred during the Persian Gulf War against 
Iraq, waged by the United States and its coalition partners to eject Iraq from 
Kuwait in 1990–91. The President and his officials warned Iraqi leader Saddam  
Hussein not to carry out “unconscionable acts” like “the use of chemical or bi-
ological weapons,” and deliberately made ambiguous threats of retaliation. On 

84  The United States and the Tradition II
the eve of the war, in a letter sent to Hussein through Secretary of State James 
Baker via Saddam’s Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz, President Bush warned that 
the “American people would demand the strongest possible response. You and 
your country will pay a terrible price if you order unconscionable acts of this 
sort.”80 According to Baker, although Bush did not state that the “unconscio-
nable act” would produce an American nuclear attack, he “used words that 
were clearly designed not to exclude the possibility” of nuclear use.81
The president avoided directly answering the question whether the United 
States would retaliate with nuclear weapons if Iraq used chemical weapons, at a 
press conference on February 5, 1991. He stated: “I think it’s better never to say 
what option you may be considering,” since he wanted the Iraqi leader to “think 
very carefully” about launching a chemical attack and since the United States 
“would like to have every possible chance that he decides not to do this.”82
Despite the contradictory messages the administration sent out to Bagh-
dad, “before the start of the war, President Bush privately ruled out the use of 
nuclear weapons even if Iraq used chemical weapons (although this decision 
was never communicated to the Defense Department or the military leaders 
planning the war). Baker called this policy of secretly planning not to use nu-
clear weapons, yet publicly threatening just the opposite, “calculated ambigu-
ity.”83 At a meeting with his advisers at Camp David in December 1990, Bush 
had decided that the United States would not retaliate with nuclear weapons 
in the event of a chemical or biological attack, but it would go after the re-
gime.84 The threat of regime removal was viewed as more of an effective deter-
rent than nuclear retaliation, although U.S. officials outwardly kept open the 
possibility of nuclear retaliation in order to gain deterrent value from a policy 
of “calculated ambiguity.”
With respect to the tradition of non-use, the interesting dimension here is 
that no formal guidelines on the presidential decision were ever given to the 
Pentagon with respect to the use or non-use of nuclear weapons. Although 
postwar statements by then-Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney and General 
H. Norman Schwarzkopf suggest that they would have considered using nu-
clear weapons in response to an Iraqi chemical attack, their behavior during 
the war suggested that nuclear weapons would not have been used even in re-
sponse to chemical weapons attack. Then-JCS Chairman General Colin Powell 
declares that he asked to destroy JCS nuclear strike analysis, and Schwarzkopf 
has said he would never have recommended a nuclear strike, contradicting 
his own previous statement on the issue.85 On nuclear use, President Bush 

Kennedy to Clinton  85
himself stated in a postwar interview: “I will stay with that view, that it would 
be extremely difficult. I suppose you could conjure up some horrible scenario 
that would call for the use of battlefield tactical nuclear weapons or some-
thing, but it was not something we really contemplated at all.”86
Following the war, in response to Iraq’s clandestine nuclear program, 
Cheney issued a top-secret “Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy,” which 
detailed the use of nuclear weapons against proliferators. “In response, the 
United States Strategic Command (STRATCOM) began developing targeting 
scenarios for military strikes against command and control facilities and nu-
clear, chemical, and biological weapons facilities in ‘rogue nations’ (including 
Iran, Iraq, Libya, and North Korea).”87
The Gulf War, according to some, helped to preserve the tradition of 
non-use. More than that, the tradition itself appeared to have influenced the 
choices of top U.S. decision makers, as they were reluctant to break it, fear-
ing adverse consequences. To McGeorge Bundy, “the Gulf War has in fact 
reinforced that tradition, and in ways more remarkable than the simple fact 
that no nuclear weapon was exploded.”88 To Bundy, it was very unlikely that 
President Bush would have ordered a nuclear attack in response to a gas attack 
by Saddam Hussein, and his motive in the war appeared to be to “help mod-
erate the behavior” of Saddam Hussein.89 This unwillingness to consider the 
nuclear option, unlike in Korea and Vietnam, suggests, on the one hand the 
deepening of the tradition of non-use. On the other hand, the policy of “cal-
culated ambiguity” and the public hinting of a response that might include 
nuclear weapons in retaliation to chemical and biological attacks suggest a 
weakening of the tradition (at least rhetorically) in the changed international 
security context. During Gulf War I, there was an increasing willingness on 
the part of U.S. leaders to use the nuclear threat (a threat they were not will-
ing to follow through) with the intent of deterring chemical and biological 
weapon use by a weaker opponent.90
An argument against the use of nuclear weapons made by Newt Gingrich, 
then-Republican whip in the U.S. House of Representatives, is useful for under­
standing the role of the tradition in the calculations of U.S. decision makers. 
Fellow Republican Dan Burton of Indiana had argued that “if the alternative 
was bloody ground warfare, tactical nuclear weapons should be used to save 
American lives.” Gingrich responded that “if the United States should estab-
lish a pattern out there that it is legitimate to use those kinds of weapons, our 
children and grandchildren are going to rue the day.” On a more immediate  

86  The United States and the Tradition II
note he added: “we would not want to live in a world in which we had sent 
a signal to every country on the planet to get nuclear weapons as fast as we 
can.”91 Gingrich, although not a direct decision maker with respect to the war, 
was echoing a widely held belief that the United States should not establish a 
bad precedent. He did not want to legitimize the use of nuclear weapons for 
the sake of the next generation, and he did not want to encourage nuclear 
proliferation as a result of U.S. policy.
The fact that President Bush decided against nuclear use early on suggests 
the power of the tradition on his calculations. He was cognizant that the U.S.-
led coalition was waging a war against Saddam Hussein’s regime and that he 
did not want to alienate the Iraqi people completely. In addition, this was a 
war waged with UN approval and the support of many Arab nations and any 
disproportionate use of force, especially nuclear weapons, on innocent Iraqis 
would have thrown away the international legitimacy that the United States 
wanted to maintain in the war.
The Clinton Era (1993–2001)
The Bill Clinton presidency was notable for renewed U.S. efforts at nonprolif-
eration. Most elements of the Bush approach with regard to the extension of 
the potential use of nuclear weapons against chemical and biological weapons 
use were accepted, with some concrete additions. Since July 1993, the Clinton  
administration openly suggested that the United States would use force to pre-
vent “rogue states” from developing nuclear, biological, and chemical (NBC) 
weapons, and it launched the Counterproliferation Initiative in 1994 in sup-
port of this aim. The administration’s plans also included the development of 
a theater missile defense system to protect the United States and its allies from 
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) attacks by regional states.92
The 1994 Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) confirmed the targeting policy 
vis-à-vis potential proliferators developed by the Bush administration. The 
United States has, since then, expanded the target list for nuclear use to in-
clude developing countries possessing or seeking WMD. In February 1996, 
the United States adopted the Doctrine for Joint Theater Nuclear Operations, 
“which ‘translated’ overall doctrine for use in regional scenarios in Europe, 
the Middle East, and the Korean peninsula. Third World proliferation dan-
gers had been transformed to ‘the preeminent threat.’ The targets of deter-
rence were to be short-, medium-, and intermediate-range missiles capable 
of carrying nuclear, biological, or chemical warheads.”93 This JCS doctrine 

Kennedy to Clinton  87
also allowed the United States to use nuclear weapons against terrorist groups 
such as al-Qaeda if they possess WMD capabilities. Furthermore, regional 
and local U.S. commanders do not necessarily have to wait to be attacked 
with NBC weapons before retaliating. Rather they are told that both active 
and passive defense measures should be taken against this possibility, “which 
may include nuclear first strike.”94
The administration enlarged the Bush policy of “calculated ambiguity,” 
to include preventive attacks against nonnuclear enemies. During his Senate 
testimony, on March 28, 1996, Defense Secretary William Perry declared that 
“as we stated during the Gulf War, if any country were foolish enough to use 
chemical weapons against the United States, the response would be absolutely 
overwhelming and devastating.”95 Perry once again stated (in response to the 
possibility of a chemical attack by Libya), “if some nation were to attack the 
United States with chemical weapons, then they would have to fear the conse-
quences of a response from any weapon in our inventory . . . We could make 
a devastating response without the use of nuclear weapons, but we would not 
forswear the possibility.”96
The Clinton administration was also sympathetic to developing earth-
penetrating nuclear weapons and mini-nukes. For instance, the administra-
tion’s budget for the 1994 fiscal year included funding for research and devel-
opment of weapons such as the High Power Radio Frequency Warhead, the 
Precision Low Yield Warhead, the Cruise Missile Warhead, and the B‑61 Di­
ameter Bomb, all purported to be used against WMD targets in the so-called 
“rogue states.”97
However, in the larger nuclear policy, the administration initiated some 
changes. The major change was Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 60 in 
November 1997, which reversed the Reagan-era U.S. policy to fight and win 
a protracted nuclear war. The framework also made a change to the proce-
dures for launch-on-warning, although Bush’s expansion of nuclear use 
against chemical and biological weapons use was maintained. According to 
administration officials, the United States reserved the right to the first use of 
nuclear weapons against a state which is “not in good standing under the Non- 
proliferation Treaty or an equivalent International Convention,” and “if a state 
attacks the United States, its allies or its forces ‘in alliance’ with a nuclear ca-
pable state.”98 This document also contained “language that would permit US 
nuclear strikes after enemy attacks using chemical or biological weapons.”99 
Perry’s successor, William Cohen, also reaffirmed the administration’s policy 

88  The United States and the Tradition II
in 1998 when he stated that keeping the nuclear first-use option open would 
serve to deter, as it would keep “any potential adversary who might use chem-
ical or biological [weapons] unsure of what our response would be.”100
North Korea’s nuclear program became a key anti-proliferation issue dur-
ing the Clinton era. In 1994, Clinton’s military advisors and political leaders 
from both parties proposed a preventive strike on North Korean nuclear fa-
cilities. It is not clear that the attack ever was supposed to include a nuclear 
component, but it is possible that if the war escalated to North Korean at-
tacks on South Korea and Japan, by treaty commitments, the United States 
would have had to come to the defense of those allied states, a posture which 
included nuclear retaliation as well. According to one analyst, by the time 
the Clinton era arrived, the norm against preventive war had virtually been 
marginalized by an “anti-proliferation imperative,” as the “administration 
explicitly considered the preventive attack option to destroy North Korea’s 
nuclear infrastructure without the slightest hint of normative hesitation. The 
most outspoken members of Congress and opinion leaders, those who domi-
nated the public discussion of North Korea’s nuclear program in 1993 and 
1994, urged the administration to take a tougher line, including the use of 
preventive military force.”101
In the summer of 1993, the administration’s approach included “gradu-
ated coercive diplomacy, using sanction and military deployment to pressure 
Pyongyang,” which included air strikes and covert operations. The Pentagon 
opposed those measures because of the difficulties of destroying deeply bur-
ied facilities and the likely high casualties during the first 90 days of war—in 
the range of 300,000 to 500,000, especially given the forward deployment of 
North Korean forces near the demilitarized zone and their artillery reach to 
Seoul.102 Two meetings in May and June involving the president and top civil-
ian and military advisors discussed the Osiraq option, referring to the pre-
ventive strike by Israel of Iraq’s Osiraq reactor in 1981, but concluded that 
while an attack could delay the North Korean program, it would not stop it. 
More importantly, they assessed the possible North Korean military response 
on South Korea and the conflict’s impact in terms of high casualties and eco-
nomic devastation and concluded then to proceed with sanctions with the 
support of other countries. The crisis ended in 1994 following diplomatic in-
tervention by Jimmy Carter, who brokered an agreement called the Agreed 
Framework, under which North Korea concurred to freeze its nuclear activi-
ties in return for food and energy aid.103 Defense Secretary William Perry told 

Kennedy to Clinton  89
an interviewer on the question of nuclear weapons use against North Korea,  
“I can’t envision the circumstances in which the use of nuclear weapons would 
be a reasonable or prudent military action.”104
During its tenure, the Clinton administration focused intensely on the 
question of nuclear nonproliferation and counterproliferation. It was active in 
extending the NPT in perpetuity in 1995 and in the conclusion of the Com-
prehensive Test Ban Treaty in 1996, although the latter has yet to receive the 
mandated number of adherents or ratification by the U.S. Senate. In 1995, 
prior to the indefinite extension of the NPT, the administration renewed this 
U.S. commitment by declaring:
The United States reaffirms that it will not use nuclear weapons against non-
nuclear weapon States Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nu­
clear Weapons except in the case of an invasion or any other attack on the 
United States, its territories, its armed forces or other troops, its allies, or on 
a State towards which it has a security commitment, carried out or sustained 
by such a non-nuclear weapon state in association or alliance with a nuclear-
weapon state.”105
The UN Security Council in 1995 acknowledged this and similar commit-
ments by the United States and other nuclear weapons states and incorpo-
rated them in the final document relating to the permanent extension of the 
NPT. In addition, the United States had also signed and ratified the non-use 
clause in the Africa Nuclear-Free Zone (Pelindaba) Treaty, and had given a 
similar bilateral assurance to Ukraine in 1994 in order for Kiev to abandon its 
nuclear weapons. However, despite these pledges, U.S. officials had “enunci-
ated purposefully ambiguous qualifications” in response to specific perceived 
threats from chemical and biological weapons of regional states, and repeat-
edly state that Washington’s pledge is political and not legal.106
The Clinton legacy in terms of the tradition of non-use is a mixed one. 
The Clinton era witnessed efforts by the United States to transcend the tradi-
tion in U.S. official policy even while making some serious efforts in the area 
of nonproliferation. The efforts at developing “useable” nuclear weapons, the 
decision to enlarge nuclear response in order to deter chemical and biological 
weapons use, and the enunciation of “calculated ambiguity” as part of official 
policy, all affected the way nuclear weapons were perceived, as against the 
previous four decades. None of this means that the tradition was violated, 
as the administration did not engage in intense military conflicts, although 

90  The United States and the Tradition II
it threatened and engaged in limited crisis behavior that could have resulted 
in nuclear use with regional adversaries possessing WMD. But the policy ex-
pansion regarding the use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear states is a 
significant aberration to the tradition of non-use and perhaps its continued 
robustness.
President Clinton’s departure from office was followed by the arrival of the 
George W. Bush administration, which included proponents of the potential 
use of nuclear weapons against states and non-state actors possessing or at-
tempting to acquire NBC weapons. In Chapter 9, I continue the discussion on 
the nuclear use policies of the Bush (Junior) administration, especially since 
the September 11 terrorist attacks.
Conclusion
The presidents under consideration in this chapter—especially Kennedy, 
Johnson, Carter, and Reagan—engaged in massive nuclear arms buildups  
in their quest to achieve superiority over the Soviet bloc. Three presidents, 
Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon, considered the use of nuclear weapons against 
non­nuclear states during periods of crises and wars. The historical survey 
presented in this chapter suggests that the tradition was maintained over the 
years under different administrations, despite impulses toward breaking it. 
Evidence presented here strongly supports the contention that reputational 
considerations were the primary factor for the entrenchment of the tradition 
in the U.S. case. Each time a president or his advisors thought about using nu-
clear weapons, they were discouraged by these considerations. While Johnson  
was concerned about both internal and external reputations, Nixon was more 
worried about domestic reputation costs. The Nixon administration attempted 
to ignore the reputational considerations but was in the end hamstrung by 
fears of adverse domestic repercussions.
The Kennedy and Johnson administrations were constrained by reputa-
tional and strategic considerations in their decisions not to pursue preventive 
war with a nonnuclear China. Nixon was eager to follow Eisenhower’s brink-
manship policies, especially in Vietnam and the Middle East, but could not 
carry it further. Carter was morally constrained, as evident in his abandon-
ment of the neutron bomb, although the peace movements also had an impact  
on his policies. During Carter’s tenure, a formal commitment on negative as­
sur­ances was made, which added a quasi-legal dimension to the tradition of 
non-use, although U.S. officials insist that it was a “political” and not a “legal” 

Kennedy to Clinton  91
commitment. Reagan had no occasion to threaten a nonnuclear state with 
nuclear weapons. Bush had such an opportunity in the 1991 Persian Gulf War, 
when the United States began to subtly change its nuclear deterrence policy to 
include retaliation against chemical and biological attacks. The administra-
tion used ambiguous nuclear threats to prevent Saddam Hussein from using 
WMD, especially chemical and biological weapons. But the fact that nuclear 
use was discounted before the war started suggests the vitality of the tradition 
in the United States. The Clinton era saw the restatement of the negative secu-
rity assurances to nonnuclear states. However, the official change to include 
chemical and biological weapons use and development as possible reason for 
the United States using nuclear weapons has perhaps weakened the founda-
tions of the tradition. The “calculated ambiguity” policy which began under 
Bush (Senior) was enlarged by the Clinton administration, and would further 
become part of the Bush (Junior) administration’s preemptive and preventive 
doctrines (see Chapter 9).
One important conclusion that emerges from this historical assessment 
is the high propensity of some U.S. presidents to raise the threat of nuclear 
use against nonnuclear adversaries, in some cases states aligned with the So-
viet Union or China. Unlike the claims of previous studies that portray the 
United States as the lead originator and supporter of the tradition, it seems 
that Washington considered nuclear use or threat of use on many occasions. 
Desperate military situations, as in Korea and Vietnam, and relative inferior-
ity in conventional troop levels, plausibly compelled U.S. presidents to seek 
quick fixes involving nuclear use, but the threats were never executed. Part of 
the explanation for this dual nature of American policy lies in the competing 
reputational concerns that its defense and foreign policies sought to address; 
on the one hand, U.S. administrations wanted to retain high levels of credibil-
ity for deterrence and compellence purposes, but on the other hand, they were 
constrained by fear of high reputational costs in the event of nuclear use and 
by the apprehension that the disproportionate effects for nuclear use nullified 
any particular tactical gains nuclear use would have produced.

92
 5 RUSSIA, BRITAIN, FRANCE, CHINA,  
AND THE TRADITION
whil e t he unit ed st at es is t he pivot al  case in examining the tradition 
of non-use, a brief survey of the nuclear policies of the other four core nuclear 
weapon states (Russia, Britain, France, and China) is important in order to un-
derstand whether they have contributed to the rise and observance of the tra-
dition of non-use. It is vital also to explore whether these other major nuclear 
powers have been affected by the tradition with respect to the potential use of 
nuclear weapons against nonnuclear states. This chapter seeks to answer the 
following additional questions: How have these other declared nuclear weap-
ons states perceived the utility of nuclear weapons vis-à-vis nonnuclear states, 
especially in the crises/wars in which they have been involved? How have their 
evolving positions on nuclear first use affected the tradition of non-use? The 
discussion here is amplified in Chapter 7’s examination of some of the key 
wars that these states have fought with their nonnuclear rivals.
The Soviet Union/Russia
The Soviet Union’s contribution to the tradition is not well understood be­
cause of the dearth of released archival materials. The actual behavior of the 
Soviet Union during its crises and wars involving nonnuclear states indicates 
that Moscow rarely—if at all—brandished its nuclear weapons against non­
nuclear states. This apparent restraint suggests that the Soviet Union and its 
successor, Russia, have clearly observed the tradition of non-use and have 
played a crucial role in the emergence and sustenance of the tradition over half 
a century.1 However, in the post–Cold War era, due to the decline of its conven-
tional capabilities, Russia has been increasingly relying on nuclear weapons  

Russia, Britain, France, and China  93
for its security and has revised its no-first-use policy. This means that under 
some extreme circumstances, the tradition of non-use may be broken by Rus-
sia in a future crisis involving nonnuclear states.
In general, the Soviet policy toward nuclear weapons was motivated by a 
combination of strategic and reputational considerations. Strategically, the So­
viet Union was concerned that the United States would consolidate and expand 
its early advantage in nuclear arms. The Soviet Union was a proponent of inter­
national control of nuclear weapons, as well as of an international ban on nuclear 
use against nuclear and nonnuclear states anywhere in the world.2 The measures 
it advanced during the late 1940s were aimed at causing the United States to 
abandon its nuclear capability. Later, it also supported a ban on nuclear testing, 
and proposals for the setting up of nuclear-free zones in different parts of the 
world, such as the Rapacki Plan of 1957, introduced by Poland to denuclear-
ize Central Europe, involving East and West Germany, Poland, and Czechoslo-
vakia.3 These nonproliferation proposals were specifically intended to prevent 
Germany from acquiring nuclear weapons. With regard to reputation, Soviet 
proposals were also aimed at gaining an upper hand in the propaganda war with 
the United States during the Cold War.4 The chief concern of Moscow was with 
gaining support among the nonnuclear states of the developing world. In addi-
tion, the record indicates the importance of norm entrepreneurs in the develop-
ment of reputation concerns for the Soviet Union. The World Peace Council re-
ceived strong backing from the Soviet Union, and Moscow vigorously supported 
meetings of the Pugwash movement. Soviet leaders such as Nikita Khrushchev 
“sent repeated, fulsome messages to these gatherings.”5 The peace movements 
seem also to have influenced Soviet positions partially on nuclear disarmament 
issues. This influence was most clearly manifest during the Khrushchev and 
Mikhail Gorbachev eras. Possible ulterior motives that the Soviet Union held do 
not detract from the contribution that it made to the tradition of non-use and 
its emergence as an informal norm. Throughout the Cold War, Moscow did not 
use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against non­nuclear states and its propa-
ganda position—though aimed at securing a strategic advantage—had, it seems, 
the result of constraining policy in a significant way.
Stalin: Responses to the U.S. Nuclear Monopoly  
and the Beginning of the Cold War
The Soviets began the post–World War II era as a disadvantaged power in the 
nuclear arena. Their response to this imbalance was to seek, in international 
organizations, to limit the U.S. upper hand, while continuing to rely on its  

94  Russia, Britain, France, and China
advantage in conventional forces in military planning, as it simultaneously 
developed its own nuclear capability. In June 1946, in response to the U.S.- 
initiated Baruch Plan, which had envisioned international control of the 
atom, the Soviet Union proposed to the United Nations a draft international 
Convention on the Prohibition of the Production and Use of Nuclear Weap-
ons Under All Circumstances, and the destruction—within a three-month 
period of the date on which the convention went into effect—of all stockpiles 
of complete and incomplete atomic weapons. This Plan, proposed by Soviet 
representative Andrei Gromyko, also contained a provision that within six 
months of its conclusion, “the signatory states were to enact legislation pro-
viding for punishment of any breach of the Convention,” premised on the 
1925 Geneva Convention against the use of chemical weapons. However, the 
Soviet proposal relied on national governments to enforce the agreement and 
lacked inter­national inspection and control provisions.6 The Soviets wanted 
the United States to get rid of its weapons while the United States desired to 
preserve its monopoly until the Russians gave up their plans to acquire nu-
clear weapons. Other Soviet proposals in this area during the 1940s and 1950s 
included the creation of the UN Atomic Energy Commission in June 1947; 
a proposal to the UN General Assembly in September 1948 to ban the pro-
duction and utilization of atomic energy for military purposes and reduce by 
one-third the armed forces of the Permanent Five members of the UN Secu-
rity Council (P‑5); a draft declaration submitted to the U.S. Secretary of State 
in January 1954, urging the P-5 nations to pledge unconditionally not to use 
atomic, hydrogen, or other kinds of weapons of mass destruction (WMD); and 
the September 1959 and March 1962 treaty proposals on general and complete 
disarmament submitted to the 18-Nation Geneva Disarmament Committee.7 
The 1954 draft declaration is perhaps one of the first formal contributions of 
the Soviet Union to the emergence of the tradition of non-use.
During the period of U.S. atomic monopoly, 1945–49, the Soviet Union 
played down the role of atomic weapons in its war plans. The Soviet leadership 
relied on bravado and its experience during World War II against Germany, 
when the Soviet forces could withdraw to their vast interior against the advanc-
ing German troops, who failed to defeat Russia despite massive air bombing  
by the Luftwaffe. The Soviet military claimed that its air defenses and Soviet 
counterattacks on U.S. air bases would limit any major U.S. nuclear assault. 
Although Soviet Premier Josef Stalin did not ignore the bomb, he believed 
that the impact of an American use of nuclear weapons could be nullified by  

Russia, Britain, France, and China  95
effective ground forces and sea power. The presumed Soviet ability to conquer 
Western Europe conventionally was viewed as a strong deterrent against the 
United States resorting to nuclear attack. The loss of Europe would also deprive 
the United States of the staging ground for airbases for the B-29, its chief deliv-
ery system for nuclear weapons.8
According to David Holloway, there is no evidence that Soviet behavior 
in Europe or the Middle East (e.g., Iran in 1946) was influenced by the U.S. 
monopoly on nuclear weapons. The Soviet policy on nuclear weapons under 
Stalin “was guided by two principles: the concept of the war of nerves, and the 
idea of limits.” According to the first, the Soviets anticipated that the United 
States would attempt to intimidate Moscow with nuclear threats; the Soviet 
response would be to appear not frightened, and to raise international ten-
sions occasionally. The concept of “limits” was a policy approach that meant 
no escalation or major war with the West, despite increased tensions with 
their erstwhile allies.9 Stalin tested these propositions during the 1948 Berlin 
Blockade, when the United States could not derive much advantage from its 
atomic monopoly.10
Soviet testing of the atomic bomb in 1949 altered Moscow’s approach to-
ward nuclear weapons. In 1951, Stalin declared that nuclear weapons were ac-
quired only to deter an American nuclear attack, and not to deter conventional 
strikes.11 Although the Soviets accepted deterrence as the basis for its nuclear 
relationship with the West early on, a belief that nuclear war with the West 
could be fought and won was also part of Soviet strategic thinking in the 1950s 
and 1960s. The Soviet regime kept on asserting the notion that “it must con-
tinue to believe in survival and victory of some form” in the event of a nuclear 
war with the United States.12 However, by the 1970s, deterrence, based on re-
taliatory strikes, was acknowledged as the basis for Soviet security, and by the 
end of 1980s, second-strike threats were accepted as the foundation of Soviet 
nuclear strategy, suggesting that a war-fighting strategy was abandoned.13
Khrushchev: Confrontation and Coexistence
Stalin’s immediate successor, Premier Georgii Malenkov, believed that “nu-
clear war would likely mean the death of civilization” and hence “war was not  
inevitable.” He was also “unwilling to invest heavily in nuclear weapons.”14 In 
February 1955, Malenkov was replaced by Nikita Khrushchev, whose nuclear 
policy, like his general approach toward the West, was complicated. Khrush-
chev could be confrontational, as part of a general “anti-imperialist” policy, 

96  Russia, Britain, France, and China
while at the same time advocating peaceful coexistence. On nuclear policy, he 
attempted to control nuclear proliferation, while at the same time presiding 
over an enormous increase in the Soviet arsenal, and engaged in preparing for 
a winnable nuclear war.
After presenting Malenkov’s antinuclear approach as a reason for his 
ouster, the new leader engaged in an active foreign policy, vigorously back-
ing liberation wars against colonial rule through economic, political, and, in 
some instances, military support to newly emerging states. However, nuclear 
weapons had no role to play in this process, “except to serve as symbols of 
Soviet prestige and scientific ability.”15 Khrushchev was aware of the dangers 
of nuclear war as he initiated a policy of peaceful coexistence with the West. 
Paradoxically, he was also instrumental in the massive expansion of Soviet 
inter­continental ballistic missile (ICBM) forces, which generated prospects for 
“preemption by surprise” and increased the conflict with the West.16 His goal 
was to “use the nuclear stalemate to undermine NATO [North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization], make the United States acknowledge the USSR as an equal 
power, and facilitate the dismantling of ‘imperialism’ in the Third World.”17
Despite his bellicose rhetoric and efforts at raising the level of nuclear con-
frontation with the West, Khrushchev was perhaps more antinuclear than 
is generally understood. In 1953, upon his assumption of the position of the 
General Secretary of the Communist Party, Khrushchev received his first 
briefing on nuclear weapons. According to Khrushchev, when he learned all 
the facts about nuclear weapons, he could not sleep for several days. He states: 
“Then I became convinced that we could never possibly use these weapons, 
and when I realized that I was able to sleep again. But all the same we must be 
prepared. Our understanding is not sufficient answer to the arrogance of the 
imperialists.”18
Khrushchev’s policy of peaceful coexistence with the West, his offer of a 
moratorium on atmospheric tests in 1958, and his unwillingness to hand over 
a prototype nuclear bomb to China, were all partially motivated by his desire 
to avoid a nuclear war and develop a “cooperative-conflictual” relationship 
with the West. The idea behind this policy was to conduct competition with 
the West in the areas of ideology and economic affairs, in which he believed 
the Soviet Union would emerge as the victor.19 Khrushchev believed that “fear 
of nuclear war in a country’s leader can paralyze that country’s defenses,” 
making war inevitable; hence, while pursuing efforts to avoid war, the nation 
should not reveal that it is “frightened of it.”20

Russia, Britain, France, and China  97
The peaceful coexistence policy was opposed by Communist party stal-
wart Vyacheslav Molotov and his supporters, but Khrushchev emerged victo-
rious in inner-party conflict. This policy, and his opposition to China’s devel-
oping nuclear weapons, also led to a gradual estrangement with Mao and to 
the onset of Sino-Soviet rivalry. Khrushchev was concerned that once “irre-
sponsible powers” (e.g., West Germany and China) acquired nuclear capabil-
ity, they “might use nuclear weapons to trigger a U.S.-Soviet war.”21 The Soviet 
proposal for a test ban was thus motivated by the desire to arrest nuclear pro-
liferation to additional countries such as Germany and China.22 Khrushchev’s 
policy on nonproliferation led to bitter conflict with China, as Beijing did not 
share concerns about the spread of the bomb to additional countries, or the 
“enemy-partner” image of the United States held by the Soviet Union.23 In 
June 1959, the USSR unilaterally abrogated an agreement that it had signed in 
October 1957 to transfer nuclear technology and materials to China. This oc-
curred in the aftermath of the Chinese efforts to acquire Quemoy and Matsu 
from Taiwan, when Moscow feared that it would be dragged into a conflict 
between China and the United States. This event was a crucial watershed for 
both the Sino-Soviet split and the Soviet Union’s evolving position on nuclear 
nonproliferation.24
The Berlin Crisis of 1961 was an intense interchange which saw the erec-
tion of a wall dividing East and West Berlin. The Soviet perception of events 
was that under Kennedy, the United States raised the threat of nuclear attack, 
but Khrushchev stood his ground.25 The 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis, which was 
prompted by Khrushchev’s policy of deploying medium- and intermediate- 
range nuclear missiles in Cuba, influenced Soviet perceptions on nuclear 
brinkmanship. Although the stated goal for the deployment was to protect 
the island from the United States, and to force Washington to withdraw Jupi-
ter missiles from Turkey, it has been argued that Khrushchev was concerned 
about a closer Cuba-China relationship.26 The escalation of the crisis, especially 
the U.S. decision to quarantine Soviet vessels, forced Khrushchev to concede, 
as he began to realize the possibility of a nuclear war and the limits of his own 
brinkmanship policies.27 Soviet inferiority in nuclear capability was revealed 
in the crisis, and henceforth the policy shifted to achieving strategic parity, 
and later superiority, driven by a “never again” determination on the part of 
the Soviet military to avoid humiliation. While the political leadership was 
thinking of war avoidance, the military was planning to fight preemptively 
and win a nuclear war, in case the West unleashed one.28 New data suggest 

98  Russia, Britain, France, and China
that starting in the early 1960s, the Soviets and their Warsaw pact allies, after 
realizing strategic inferiority, had a plan to initiate a nuclear first strike deep 
into Western Europe in order to preempt a Western nuclear strike so that the 
Pact could “fight” and “win” a nuclear war.29
Brezhnev: From Détente to the Second Cold War
The regime of Khrushchev’s successor, Leonid Brezhnev, was an active par-
ticipant in the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) negotiations as Mos-
cow accepted arms control as a major part of its post–Cuban Missile Crisis 
diplomatic approach towards the West. In order to make the NPT acceptable 
to nonnuclear states, in 1966 the Soviet Union proposed to conclude a no-
first-use convention at the United Nations. Prime Minister Alexei Kosygin 
proposed a ban on nuclear attacks on states that did not deploy nuclear weap-
ons on their territory. This was a move aimed at mollifying the concerns of 
the nonnuclear states, but also partially intended to prompt West Germany to 
abandon NATO nuclear weapons deployed on its territory. The United States 
and its Western allies rejected the plan.30 The Soviet Union again proposed, 
in September 1967, a draft convention on the prohibition of the use of nuclear 
weapons. In September 1972, Foreign Minister Gromyko proposed permanent 
prohibition of the use of nuclear weapons, and in September 1980, Moscow  
presented a draft Resolution to the UN General Assembly, urging nuclear 
states to offer “guarantees to non-nuclear states against the use or threat of 
use of nuclear weapons, [and] to make efforts for the speedy elaboration and 
conclusion of an international convention on this matter.”31
In response to the persistent demands of the developing world, Moscow 
offered a more formal commitment not to be the first to use nuclear weapons. 
On June 16, 1982, while addressing a UN Special Session on disarmament, 
Brezhnev declared that the USSR “assume[d] an obligation not to be the first 
to use nuclear weapons.” This commitment came into effect immediately, as 
“should a nuclear war start, it could mean the destruction of human civiliza-
tion and perhaps the end of life itself on earth.”32 The Soviet armed forces were 
given orders to plan nuclear war only in response to a first strike by nuclear 
opponents, although some questioned the counterforce potential of the Soviet 
military. However, the pledge was made in the context of seeking to influence 
world public opinion, and in response especially to the NATO decision to de-
ploy new missiles in Europe. Further, the geographic and strategic contiguity 
of Eastern Europe to its territory made a no-first-use policy strategically vi-
able to the Soviet Union.33 Geographic contiguity meant that it did not need 

Russia, Britain, France, and China  99
to offer extended deterrence; instead “it could rely on direct conventional de-
fense . . . While the U.S. first-use policy risks Soviet nuclear retaliation in the 
event of a European war, the Soviet Union can at least put the onus to escalate 
on U.S. decisionmakers by forswearing first use.”34
The Soviet Union maintained its no-use policy during the Afghan War 
(1979–89), despite the major reverses its forces suffered and their eventual 
withdrawal without achieving any war objectives. Based on the information 
available, it is not clear whether the Soviet leaders ever contemplated using 
nuclear weapons against the Afghan resistance. Although tactical weapons 
might have been useful against some supply routes and possible chokepoints, 
it is unclear how such strikes would have contributed to the Soviet political 
aims in Afghanistan. Soviet occupation was not meant to decimate Afghani-
stan (although it had that result), but to establish a pro-Soviet regime there. 
This would have meant achieving some semblance of popular support for the 
Soviet-installed regime.
Tactical considerations might have also played a role in Moscow’s de-
sistence from considering nuclear use against the Afghan resistance. Given 
the nature of the terrain and the asymmetric war method employed by the 
resistance, the Soviets would have only achieved limited gains by the intro-
duction of nuclear weapons in combat. The Mujahedin resistance to Soviet 
occupation was both urban and rural, and the war was prosecuted by loose 
networks, often based on norms of reciprocity in a tribal context, rather than 
by a trained, professional military with a central leadership.35 The Afghan 
resistance pursued localized objectives, and “this made the resistance diffi-
cult to decapitate or coopt.”36 Thus, it is unlikely that the Soviets would have 
achieved anything more by using nuclear weapons. But tactical explanations 
may not fully capture the wider causes of Soviet non-use.
In a larger political/strategic perspective, the Afghan resistance was wag-
ing the war with the active participation of the United States and Pakistan, 
and any use of nuclear weapons would also have resulted in stronger U.S. 
countermeasures. The Soviet invasion ended the superpower détente and ini-
tiated the Second Cold War with the West. Soviet use of nuclear weaponry 
would have heightened the rivalry and intensified the East-West conflict. 
However, despite their reluctance to use nuclear weapons, the Soviets were re-
ported to have used chemical weapons against the Afghan resistance. The U.S. 
State Department reported that between 1980 and 1982, there were thirty-six 
incidents of chemical weapon use by the Soviet Union, which resulted in over 
3,000 deaths.37 This, however, is not fully verified. What is anomalous is the 

100  Russia, Britain, France, and China
fact that the nuclear-armed superpower gave up the conflict (which subse-
quently hastened its demise as a global power and considerably shrunk its 
territory) without threatening or even considering all the capabilities under 
its command, including nuclear weapons. The answer may lie partially in the 
nonnuclear reputation that the Soviets had assiduously built up in the devel-
oping world over four decades.
During the 1970s, Soviet strategic thinking very much revolved around 
the notion of correlation of forces, which was measured in terms of the ide-
ological, political, economic, industrial, and military strength of the Soviet 
Union vis-à-vis the capitalist countries led by the United States. It had a larger 
ideological focus than pure balance of power as obtained strictly through mil-
itary capabilities or countervailing alliance blocs. The Soviet assessment that 
the correlation of forces had shifted in its favor led to an active intervention 
policy in the Third World as adopted by Brezhnev in the 1970s, even alongside 
détente. This reading of the favorable correlation of forces gave incentives to 
the Soviets to consolidate the position of world socialism, supporting national 
liberation struggles and increasing camaraderie with the Socialist countries 
on the basis of the principle of nonintervention. This new assertiveness was 
very much evident in Soviet policy shifts in Angola, the Horn of Africa, South 
Yemen, and Afghanistan.38 Soviet interventions to shore up the support of 
friendly regimes meant that Moscow placed enormous importance on reputa-
tion in the developing world vis-à-vis the United States and its Western allies. 
Any use or threat of use of nuclear weapons for these purposes would have 
dealt a severe blow to its reputation as a friend of the developing world and the 
Socialist countries.
In fact there seems to be no instance, including the Afghan case, in which 
the Soviets considered nuclear use against nonnuclear states. To Moscow, 
the Cold War was also a war of ideologies and over world public opinion. 
Although the Cold War competition was conducted most ferociously in the 
realm of arms buildup and external interventions, both superpowers, espe-
cially the Soviet Union, expended a considerable amount of resources to pro-
pagandize their pro-peace agendas and pro-developing world policies. The 
So­viet Union was a major cosponsor of peace initiatives along with devel-
oping countries at the UN and associated agencies, such as the Geneva Dis­
armament Forum. It co-sponsored the NPT and the London Suppliers Club, 
and eventually joined the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) to ar-
rest the spread of nuclear weapons and missiles to other countries. In that 
sense, the Soviet use or threat of nuclear weapons against a nonnuclear state  

Russia, Britain, France, and China  101
would have adversely affected Moscow’s reputation and image in the develop-
ing world. After expending so much on goodwill in the Third World, it was 
unlikely that the Soviet Union could have easily given up what it regarded as 
its moral high ground in the propaganda war with the West. Soviet prestige 
would have been dealt a severe blow had it used a nuclear weapon against a 
nonnuclear state. The Soviet example shows that states could become compli-
ant with the normative views inherent in their propaganda and rhetoric, as 
violating them could cause considerable damage to their reputation, image, 
and global power position.
Gorbachev: Nuclear Perestroika
The arrival of Mikhail Gorbachev as Soviet Communist Party general sec-
retary in March 1985 catapulted the Soviet approach toward nuclear arms 
to a larger significance in world politics. Gorbachev came to power with the 
intention of radically changing the Soviet position in the world. Preventing 
a nuclear war became a pivotal policy plank of the Gorbachev team.39 His 
Glasnost (openness) and Perestroika (restructuring) policies were driven by 
the desire to prevent Soviet decline and find an accommodation with the 
West. Nuclear disarmament, based on “reasonable sufficiency,” was crucial to 
Gorbachev’s plans for rapprochement with the West and reduction in Soviet 
military spending. Gorbachev relentlessly pushed the idea of restructuring 
Soviet forces from an offensive to a defensive posture and was willing to make 
radical changes to the organization, doctrine, and training of the Soviet mili-
tary establishment.40 Gorbachev was heavily influenced by President Ronald 
Reagan’s announcement, in March 1983, launching a strategic defense initia-
tive (SDI) or Star Wars program, and by the Chernobyl accident of April 1986. 
Chernobyl, especially, had a tremendous influence on Gorbachev and his team, 
and they used the tragedy in Ukraine to question orthodoxy in Soviet nuclear 
beliefs.41 At the Reykjavik summit in 1986, Gorbachev proposed, and Reagan 
accepted, the elimination of all nuclear weapons by 1996. However, Gorba­
chev’s insistence that the United States abandon the SDI program evoked the 
total opposition of U.S. officials, which doomed the proposal. In any event, 
most U.S. officials were not supportive of the Reagan initiative. Gorbachev, 
his team, and many leading Soviet scientists were influenced by the nuclear 
protest movements such as Freeze Now that were engulfing Western Europe 
and other parts of the world in response to Reagan’s nuclear buildup and the 
American decision to deploy new missiles in Western Europe.42

102  Russia, Britain, France, and China
Gorbachev and his key advisors believed that nuclear war was the primary 
challenge to global security, and he was willing to make several unilateral 
disarmament proposals that changed the Western perception of the Soviet 
threat. Both the United States and the Soviet Union, during the 1991–92 pe-
riod, took unilateral initiatives to reduce their tactical nuclear weapons. In 
October 1991, Gorbachev announced tactical nuclear weapons reductions, 
and in January 1992, his successor Boris Yeltsin confirmed these initiatives. 
When Gorbachev ended his term, several arms control treaties had been 
signed, such as the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF) in 1987; 
the first Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START I) in 1991; the Conventional 
Armed Forces in Europe treaty (CFE); and the Ballistic Missile Notification 
Agreement in 1988.43 At the global level, the end of the Cold War, the dissolu-
tion of the Warsaw Pact, and the breakup of the Soviet Union all reduced the 
nuclear threat tremendously. However, after the fall of the Soviet Union, Rus-
sia did not fully embrace the Gorbachev approach to nuclear arms, and began 
to count on these weapons for its security in the post–Cold War era. The Rus-
sian government, especially under Vladimir Putin, also failed to dismantle 
the tactical weapons that Russia had agreed to abolish under Gorbachev.
Post–Cold War Changes
The dismantling of the Warsaw Pact and the collapse of the Soviet Union 
compelled Russia to revisit its nuclear policy. The steady decline in Russia’s 
conventional forces encouraged Russian military planners to assign new roles 
to nuclear weapons, such as deterrence against conventional attacks. Accord-
ingly, a new draft military doctrine was adopted in November 1993, which 
proposed that “Russia could use nuclear weapons not only in response to a 
nuclear attack but also in case of a conventional attack against nuclear weap-
ons or the early-warning system, which would be classified as a nuclear at-
tack. No-first-use was seen as a policy that could be adopted in the future on 
a multilateral basis.” In November 1993, the final version was adopted, which 
mentioned that nuclear weapons would not be used “against any state-party 
to the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty of 1968 that does not have nuclear 
weapons,” but with these caveats: “nuclear weapons could be used against 
non-nuclear weapons states that were allies of a nuclear weapon state or acted 
together with a nuclear weapon state; in both cases, nuclear weapons could 
be used only in response to an attack against Russia, its armed forces, or its 
allies.”44 These changes brought Russia’s nuclear doctrine somewhat closer to 
the doctrines of NATO and the United States. Despite these changes, in 1993, 

Russia, Britain, France, and China  103
Moscow made a formal non-use commitment to Ukraine, Belarus, and Ka-
zakhstan as part of their denuclearization program.45 
Russia increased the role of nuclear weapons for its security policy in its 
January 2000 New National Security Concept and April 2000 military doc-
trine. The military doctrine stated: 
The Russian Federation reserves the right to use nuclear weapons in response 
to the use of nuclear and other types of weapons of mass destruction against 
it and (or) its allies, as well as in response to large-scale aggression utilizing 
conventional weapons in situations critical to the national security of the 
Russian Federation. The Russian Federation will not use nuclear weapons 
against states party to the Nonproliferation Treaty that do not possess nuclear 
weapons except in the event of an attack on the Russian Federation, the 
Russian Federation armed forces or other troops, its allies, or a state to which 
it has security commitments that is carried out or supported by a state without 
nuclear weapons jointly or in the context of allied commitments with a state 
with nuclear weapons.46
These documents suggest that Russia could use nuclear weapons in retali-
ation against conventional, chemical, or biological attacks by smaller powers 
on its periphery. Russia thus sees nuclear weapons as usable not only in con-
flict with other major powers, but also “in conflicts on Russia’s periphery” if 
the Russian leadership decided that it had no other option to counter a WMD 
attack involving chemical or biological weapons. “They might also be used 
to counter attacks by small-scale but capable conventional forces impacting 
targets that Russia considers to be of strategic importance.”47
The 2000 Doctrine made a couple of crucial changes to the 1993 Doctrine. 
It permits Russia to use nuclear weapons “in response to the use of other weap-
ons of mass destruction,” such as chemical weapons (provision similar to the 
one adopted by the United States) and against any country or coalition—not 
necessarily one that includes a nuclear state—if the situation is critical to Rus-
sian national security.48 The key events that led to the changes to the Russian 
military doctrine in the area of nuclear first use were NATO’s military opera-
tions in Kosovo in 1999 against strident Russian opposition to an attack on its 
Serb allies, and the continued violence in Chechnya, the Muslim-dominated 
Russian republic attempting to break away from the Russian Federation.49 The 
2003 Defense White Paper assigned additional functions to nuclear weapons, 
“to prevent political pressure against Russia and her allies; to be able to de­
escalate aggression; to be in a position to use certain components of the forces 

104  Russia, Britain, France, and China
incrementally; and to demonstrate resolve by raising alert status, holding ex-
ercises and redeployments,” all making it possible for Russia to wage a limited 
nuclear war.50
According to a critic of the Russian nuclear policy: 
Russia’s persistent emphasis on nuclear deterrence limits Russia’s maneuver 
in local and regional wars (in the spectrum from low-intensity operations 
to nuclear warfare). Limited or demonstrative use of nuclear weapons in 
armed conflict is unacceptable for the world public opinion. The threat or use 
of nuclear weapons, when there is no threat or use of such weapons against 
Russia, mean the breach of the limits of acceptable use of military force.51 
The nuclear doctrine has also been criticized for the reasons that none of 
Russia’s neighbors holds military assets capable of challenging Russia militar-
ily without outside help; that “it would be senseless to use nuclear weapons 
against the territory and population, which Russia hypothetically might want 
to occupy”; and that “[i]n most cases if military conflict occurs Moscow may 
face only guerrilla-type warfare, for which nuclear force is neither required, 
nor effective.”52
Russia has, however, denied any role for nuclear weapons in a preventive 
or preemptive strike against terrorists.53 In response to the U.S. initiatives to 
develop bunker-buster mini-nukes, Russian generals expressed concerns that 
these were highly destabilizing weapons, but also suggested that Russia should 
develop them as well. Col. Gen. Yuri Baluyevsky, a senior Russian military of-
ficial, described the U.S. plans as “very destabilizing” and “extremely scary,” 
and said that “nuclear weapons, which have served as a political deterrent, are 
being transformed into a battlefield instrument.” In his view, Russia should 
review its military strategy and hold on to its tactical nuclear weapons.54 Rus-
sia has also shown interest in developing low-yield nuclear weapons. In Feb-
ruary 2004, Viktor Mikhailov, a former Russian nuclear minister and, at the 
time, head of the Nuclear Research Institute, conceded that Russia was also 
conducting research on low-yield weapons, but it would take at least 10–15 
years to create such a weapon. He also claimed Russia was ahead of the United 
States in the research.55 More importantly, Russia has kept a large arsenal of 
nonstrategic weapons, including tactical nuclear weapons, despite its 1991–92 
commitments to dismantle them.56 
Russia’s main security concern is with Western encroachment in its 
spheres of influence. The United States has expanded its military facilities into 
ex-Soviet republics, such as Kazakhstan and Tajikistan. Further, the March 

Russia, Britain, France, and China  105
2004 expansion of NATO to include the Baltic states (Estonia, Latvia, and 
Lithuania) and several Eastern European states (Bulgaria, Romania, Slove-
nia, and Slovakia) and the potential inclusion of Georgia and Ukraine in the 
Western alliance also worry Russian strategists. They fear that these states, in 
collusion with Western countries, could challenge Russian dominance of the 
region and endanger Russian security interests. However, unlike the United 
States, Russia’s relations with countries in the Middle East, including Iran, are 
not adversarial, making it improbable that it would be in a position to violate 
the tradition of non-use of nuclear weapons. Further, none of the states in the 
Russian periphery has nuclear weapons, and all are conventionally inferior to 
Russia.57 The major security challenge to Russia is posed by nonstate actors 
such as the Chechen insurgent groups, but nuclear weapons do not have much 
value in waging that type of asymmetric warfare. Thus the Russian policy 
change in the area of nuclear doctrine may have little practical application.
Soviet and Russian Contributions
The discussion suggests that the Soviet Union played a crucial role in the 
rise and persistence of the tradition of non-use of nuclear weapons by mak-
ing many efforts to give it legal standing through its proposals on non-use 
and declaration of a no-first-use policy. The Soviet Union was also an active 
participant at world peace movements, which often carried anti-U.S. conno-
tations, and this weakened Soviet ability to promote non-use ideas, because 
their motives were suspected in the West. Soviet actions vis-à-vis nonnuclear 
states during the Cold War suggest a respect for the tradition of non-use of 
nuclear weapons. The historical record indicates that the USSR was motivated 
primarily by reputational concerns, including its doctrine of the correlation 
of forces in the ongoing struggle with the West. Since the end of the Cold War, 
the successor state, Russia, has changed the official policy to include nuclear 
use against nonnuclear states. Even with this policy change, it is highly un-
likely that Russia would confront a security challenge vis-à-vis nonnuclear 
states in the near term that can be met with nuclear weapons. Thus, the tra-
dition might be more significant in Russia’s foreign policy posture than ac-
knowledged by Moscow’s contemporary security planners.
Britain
The attitudes of successive British governments toward the question of nu-
clear use present evidence that the tradition has had multiple sources for its 
origin and persistence. Britain decided to develop nuclear weapons on its own  

106  Russia, Britain, France, and China
following the passage of the McMahon Act of 1946 by the U.S. Congress, 
which prohibited the sharing of nuclear materials and technology with any 
other state, including Britain—notwithstanding their wartime alliance. The 
British focus on nuclear weapons was aimed at obtaining a seat at the great 
power table. To many in the British political elite, “a nuclear capability seemed 
the perfect response to the problems facing Britain in the aftermath of the Sec­
ond World War, namely an uncertain relationship with the United States, the 
threat of the Soviet Union, an unstable Empire, a shattered economy and a new 
strategic environment dominated by the bomb.”58 Subsequently, in response 
to Cold War competition with the Soviet Union, the United States changed its 
policy, and in January 1948, Anglo-American nuclear cooperation resumed.59 
Some of the British attitude toward nuclear use mirrored American policies. 
However, there was an active antinuclear movement in Britain, which, in a 
limited way, influenced the country’s discourse on nuclear weapons and nu-
clear use.
The British antipathy toward nuclear use was most prominently evident 
in Prime Minister Clement Attlee’s dash to Washington in December 1950 to 
urge President Harry Truman not to use nuclear weapons in Korea without 
prior consultation with countries involved in the UN force stationed in the 
peninsula. Truman, at a press conference on November 30, 1950, had declared 
that UN sanction was not necessary for him to authorize use of nuclear weap-
ons in Korea. A communiqué was issued after the British-American meeting, 
on December 8, 1950, which read: “The President stated that it was his hope 
that world conditions would never call for the use of the atomic bomb. The 
President told the Prime Minister that it was also his desire to keep the Prime 
Minister at all times informed of developments which might bring about a 
change in the situation.”60 This did not imply that the U.S. president would ob-
tain prior concurrence of Britain before a decision to use the bomb was made. 
Attlee expressed his reason for seeking such a commitment in his statement 
to the French prime minister that an attack on China might lead to an impres-
sion that “European and Americans have a low regard for the value of Asi-
atic lives.”61 He was also of the opinion that such weapons should be reserved 
only for times when “ ‘desperate measures’ were warranted—certainly not [in] 
conflicts in which the U.S. were confronted with a power like Korea.”62
Despite Attlee’s antipathy toward nuclear use, it appears that many British 
military planners: 

Russia, Britain, France, and China  107
regarded nuclear weapons as on a continuum with conventional weapons, 
albeit a much more powerful weapon. The armed forces were therefore taught 
to regard them as just another category of weapon. Public opinion, on the 
other hand, tended to perceive nuclear weapons as of a qualitatively different 
order, special instruments of awesome mass annihilation, the use of which 
would cross moral and political thresholds.63
Attlee, especially, presided over the early buildup of nuclear weapons. But he 
was concerned about the dangers of nuclear war and hoped for a world where 
war would be ruled out.64 Winston Churchill, while in opposition (1945–51), 
proposed preventive war on the Soviet Union. He urged the West to make 
use of its advantage in atomic weapons to refashion the European order and 
use the bomb, if necessary, to prevent Soviet expansionism into areas consid-
ered the spheres of Western influence. However, his peace-through-strength  
approach changed after the Soviets acquired a nuclear capability. After return-
ing to power in 1951, Churchill proposed a much more conciliatory policy of 
intensified superpower negotiations to avoid a catastrophic war.65 The atmo-
spheric tests in the Pacific by the United States altered Churchill’s percep-
tion of war as he recognized that nuclear weapons could destroy humanity as  
a whole.66
The Suez War of 1956, involving Britain, France, and Israel, was an oppor-
tunity for Britain to use its newly acquired nuclear capability—first tested in 
October 1952—as an instrument of compellence. Egyptian President Gamal 
Abdel Nasser, despite confronting a formidable coalition of three states, one 
of them a nuclear power, refused to abandon his policy of nationalizing the 
Suez Canal. In response, the three states began an attack on Egypt in October 
1956. However, the war had to be called off as a result of U.S. pressures as well 
as Soviet threats to intervene. Even though Britain did not directly threaten 
nuclear use, the general lack of effectiveness of nuclear weapons against non-
nuclear adversaries as a potential instrument of compellence was revealed in 
this crisis. Despite this episode, Britain expanded its nuclear arsenal under 
Prime Minister Harold Wilson, who was opposed to Britain’s agreeing to a 
test ban before building a substantial nuclear arsenal. Britain tested its first 
hydrogen bomb under Wilson in May 1957. However, the British government 
also was sensitive to the rising tide of protest movements across the world in 
the second half of 1950s demanding a test ban treaty.67 There was also an active  

108  Russia, Britain, France, and China
“ban the bomb” movement in Britain which was much stronger than its U.S. 
counterparts.
During the 1960s, nonproliferation concerns became dominant in British 
policy. Britain attempted to act as an intermediary between nuclear and non-
nuclear states in order to accomplish the conclusion of the NPT. London at-
tempted unsuccessfully to allay the fears of many nonnuclear states, especially 
India, regarding possible nuclear use by nuclear weapon states. In the after-
math of the Chinese nuclear tests in 1964, Indian Prime Minister Lal Bahadur 
Shastri visited London and sought Britain’s assistance in providing “a nuclear 
umbrella to protect the non-nuclear powers from nuclear blackmail by third 
parties.”68 Britain was not able to persuade the nuclear powers, as the non-
aligned policy of India precluded such an umbrella, while neither the Soviet 
Union nor the United States was willing to offer anything other than vague 
diplomatic commitments.
During the 1960s, British leaders tied nonproliferation to the future use 
of nuclear weapons. To Prime Minister Harold Macmillan, “nuclear weapons 
are so barbarous as to be almost incredible. If nuclear proliferation continued 
unabated, the great crime against humanity would eventually be commit-
ted.”69 However, in 1963, Britain committed its nuclear forces to NATO as a 
second pillar of the alliance’s deterrence against the Soviet Union, agreeing to 
be involved in the defense of Europe, based on a flexible response strategy.70
Nuclear weapons again became a crucial part of British defense policy 
under Margaret Thatcher. The Conservative prime minister was a strong sup-
porter of the Reagan administration, which ardently believed in the need for a 
strong defense buildup in order to defeat Communism. However, later on she 
supported partial disarmament, as a result of the Gorbachev revolution. But 
she also sanctioned the purchase of Trident II missiles from the United States 
as a replacement for the aging Polaris system.71 
Thatcher’s conduct of the Falklands War raises questions about Britain’s 
commitment to the non-use tradition. The British task force that sailed to the 
South Atlantic carried nuclear weapons on its ships, an action that has been 
attributed to the lack of time required for offloading. However, this also car-
ried with it a great danger of nuclear accidents, as Argentina could have de-
stroyed some of the nuclear weapon-carrying vessels, leaving the possibility 
of radioactive materials spread around the South Atlantic region.72 (Chapter 
Seven discusses the Falklands War in greater detail.) French President François 
Mitterrand seemed to have revealed that Thatcher threatened to use nuclear 

Russia, Britain, France, and China  109
weapons against Buenos Aires if France, which had supplied Argentina with 
Exocet missiles before the war, did not disclose the secret codes for their op-
eration. In confidential discussions, Mitterrand told his psychoanalyst, Ali 
Magoudi: “With her four nuclear submarines on mission in the Southern At-
lantic, she threatens to launch the atomic weapon against Argentina—unless 
I supply her with the secret codes that render deaf and blind the missiles we 
have sold to the Argentines. Margaret has given me very precise instructions 
on the telephone.”73 This conversation is still difficult to verify given that no 
other accounts have surfaced on it.
In the post–Cold War era, questions began to be aired on the utility of Brit-
ish nuclear forces and its policy toward nuclear disarmament, including the 
no-first-use issue. The changes in the East-West competition affected British 
nuclear policy as well. “In 1990, NATO decided that with the end of the Cold 
War, nuclear weapons were to be regarded solely as ‘weapons of last resort.’ ”74 
Together with the removal of most U.S. and British tactical nuclear weapons 
from Europe, this doctrinal shift represented a departure from European war-
fighting scenarios. It is likely that the continued public perception of nuclear 
arms as qualitatively different, more destructive, and higher-threshold weap-
ons has contributed to the diminished utility of tactical nuclear weapons. Al-
though military planners have been prepared to contemplate their use in a 
range of regional conflict scenarios, political calculations about anticipated 
adverse reactions from allies or from the general public might have acted as 
decisive inhibitors. To one analyst, “[i]t is also clear from the terms and lan-
guage employed that the policy-makers are aware that to the extent that there 
is public consent for British nuclear weapons, it is almost entirely for an in-
strument of international prestige that will never be used: a deterrent, not a 
weapon of war.”75 The public perception of the weapons as a last resort was 
evident in many polls before and after the end of the Cold War. According to 
one survey, conducted between 1979 and 1984, only 3 percent of the respon-
dents agreed to the proposition that Britain would have been justified in using 
nuclear weapons if it were losing the Falklands War. While 34 percent would 
use the weapons only if the opponent used them first, 49 percent wanted to 
keep them as a deterrent but never actually use them.76
With the fall of Communism, Britain also changed its nuclear weapons 
policy. The focus shifted from the Soviet threat to challenges coming from 
aspiring nuclear states in the developing world. Under the Conservative gov-
ernment of John Major, Britain changed its policy on its no-first-use pledge, 

110  Russia, Britain, France, and China
along with the United States, when, on the eve of and during the Persian Gulf 
War of 1991, it threatened Saddam Hussein that it would use nuclear weapons 
if Iraq employed chemical or biological weapons against the coalition forces 
or their regional allies.77 
Following its electoral victory in 1997, the Labour government of Tony 
Blair launched a Strategic Defense Review in May 1997 and published it as 
a White Paper which presented British defense needs until 2015. The results 
of the review were announced in July 1998. According to the review, Britain 
would have the smallest number of nuclear weapons of any declared nuclear 
state; it proclaimed the eventual goal of “global elimination of nuclear weap-
ons.”78 In the meantime, the major change in this review has been the ex-
pansion of a possible substrategic role for the Trident nuclear missile system. 
It stated: “The credibility of deterrence also depends on retaining an option 
for a limited strike that would not automatically lead to a full scale nuclear 
exchange. Unlike Polaris and Chevaline, Trident must also be capable of per-
forming this ‘sub-strategic’ role.”79 The implication here is that Britain could 
use Trident to deter or to retaliate against chemical and biological attacks 
from a state or a regional rogue actor. According to a critic, by expanding the 
role of nuclear weapons to deter the use of other WMD, “sub-strategic weap-
ons themselves help promote complex games of micro-deterrence in regional 
crises, the complexities of which make the deterrence of the Cold War appear 
very simple indeed.”80
British policy again underwent changes in the wake of the September 11, 
2001, terrorist attacks on U.S. targets. In the run-up to the 2003 attack on Iraq, 
Britain upped the ante regarding nuclear retaliation in response to chemical 
or biological attacks by Iraq. Defence Secretary Geoff Hoon told a Parliamen-
tary defense committee in March 2002 that dictators such as Saddam Hussein 
could “be absolutely confident that in the right conditions we would be willing 
to use our nuclear weapons.” The states of concern at that time included Iraq, 
Libya, North Korea, and Iran. However, Hoon was less confident that such a 
threat would be sufficient to deter some states of concern, such as Iraq, from 
using WMD.81 Hoon restated this threat in an interview with the BBC in Feb-
ruary 2003, when he stated that “Saddam Hussein ‘can be absolutely confident’ 
that the UK is willing to use nuclear weapons ‘in the right conditions.’ ”82 The 
discussion suggests that although Britain contributed to the tradition of non-
use and observed it, on occasions it engaged in making loose nuclear threats 
vis-à-vis nonnuclear states. Most British prime ministers advocated nuclear 
disarmament even when presiding over the buildup of British nuclear forces.83 

Russia, Britain, France, and China  111
Its introduction of nuclear weapons to the Falklands War zone, its threat of 
use against Iraq in both Gulf wars, and its possible plans for converting Tri-
dent missiles for substrategic purposes, suggest that Britain, along with the 
United States, has challenged the tradition that it has helped to create and that 
its current and prospective strategic plans could, in the future, help under-
mine the tradition even further.
France
France became the fourth nuclear weapon state on February 13, 1960, when it 
conducted a large atmospheric test in Algeria. France had decided to pursue the 
nuclear path after its withdrawal from the Suez in 1956, following the aborted 
Anglo-French-Israeli invasion of Egypt. U.S. opposition and the British deci-
sion to abandon the invasion gave incentives to President Charles de Gaulle to 
further pursue an independent foreign policy and withdraw from NATO. As 
part of this push toward strategic independence, including a self-supporting  
approach to defense against the Soviet Union, France acquired a nuclear force—
the Force de frappe—to support its great-power goals.84 Although France was 
not forthcoming with a no-first-use policy, given that the French nuclear ca-
pability was small and meant to offer deterrence by punishment to a potential 
invader, it seems such a policy was implicit in the French nuclear posture.
According to France’s policy of dissuasion (deterrence), strategic weapons 
were meant to threaten severe reprisal should an opponent decide to strike. It 
was also based on the notion of “proportional deterrence,” which would mean 
that the adversary would suffer more than France in a war.85 The limited tacti-
cal nuclear weapons in the French arsenal were not meant for waging a limited 
nuclear war, but “to deliver a single ‘ultimate warning’ (ultime avertissement), 
before the possible all-out strategic strike. To fulfill these first roles, France 
needs only a limited nuclear capability, which follows the principle of ‘reason-
able sufficiency’ (suffisance raisonnable).”86 The independent nuclear ca­pability 
was maintained under Presidents de Gaulle, Georges Pompidou, and Valéry 
Giscard d’Estaing, and claimed to offer France a greater deterrent and more 
weight in intra-alliance matters, although France was not a formal member 
of NATO.87
Six years before it acquired an independent nuclear capability, in 1954, 
France was in favor of using nuclear weapons in Indochina. In the Dien Ben 
Phu debacle of May 1954, when the French garrison was overrun by Vietminh 
forces under General Vo Nguyen Giap, France requested that the United 
States use nuclear weapons to relieve the besieged French forces. A U.S. war 

112  Russia, Britain, France, and China
plan for Indochina, called Operation Vulture, seemed to have both nuclear 
and conventional components. A U.S. nuclear attack would have involved 
three bombs. When U.S. Secretary of State John Foster Dulles told President 
Dwight Eisenhower that the French leadership expected the United States to 
drop two or three atomic bombs against the Vietminh, Eisenhower responded 
to tell the French that “they must have misunderstood [Chairman of the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff Admiral Arthur] Radford.”88 Eisenhower turned down the re-
quest.89 It is unclear how the besieged fort and the French soldiers in it could 
have been saved by the use of nuclear weapons, as radiation effects would have 
probably killed French soldiers themselves. However, its defeat in Indochina 
increased the French resolve to acquire nuclear weapons.
France conducted its first nuclear tests in February 1960 in the Algerian 
Sahara Desert, continued atmospheric testing there until April 1961, and then 
carried out underground testing up to February 1966. The last of the atmo-
spheric tests was a “low yield ‘scuttle’ of the test device to prevent it from 
falling into the hands of mutineers during the ‘Revolt of the Generals,’ set 
in motion three days earlier by General Maurice Challe.”90 As a result of in-
tense condemnation by African nations, the tests were finally ended in 1966 
when France moved its testing site to the Mururoa Atoll in the South Pacific. 
In response to its difficulties in fighting the Algerian war of independence 
(which relied mainly on guerrilla warfare), there is no indication that France 
under President de Gaulle ever considered using nuclear weapons to keep its 
North African colony. In fact, France made every effort to prevent the army 
mutineers who opposed French withdrawal from Algeria from gaining access 
to nuclear weapons, due to concerns that they would use or threaten to use 
nuclear weapons in order to further their objective of preventing Algerian 
independence.91
The direct French contribution to the tradition of non-use has been min-
imal, although during the past forty-three years as a nuclear weapon state, 
France has never used or threatened to use its weapon against a nonnuclear 
state. Despite this record, at times France engaged in activities that contrib-
uted to nuclear proliferation. France was also a persistent opponent of a ban 
on atmospheric and underground testing until the mid-1990s, and it refused 
to sign the NPT until 1992. The reasons for the opposition were a desire on 
the part of France to retain autonomy from the United States and Britain and 
its hope to engage in nuclear commerce with developing countries, which it 
feared would be affected by the NPT restrictions.92 It contributed to the de-
velopment of Israel’s nuclear capability by giving its first nuclear reactor at 

Russia, Britain, France, and China  113
Dimona and then supplying nuclear materials for its operation. France was 
also willing to provide nuclear reactors to Pakistan in 1990, only to withdraw 
under intense U.S. pressure.
As a result of considerable international opposition and in view of the end 
of the Cold War, France modified its long-standing independent nuclear pol-
icy in the early 1990s when it joined the NPT and other supplier-led export 
control regimes. It stopped nuclear testing in February 1996, just before the 
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) was approved by the United Nations. 
In addition, it signed the additional protocols of the South Pacific Nuclear-
Free Zone and other nuclear-free zones, which legally made it incumbent 
upon France not to use nuclear weapons against states that were parties to the 
zonal arrangements. However, simultaneously, France changed its policy on 
nuclear use in ways that would affect the tradition of non-use.
These changes were undertaken in the post–Cold War era, along with the 
alterations in nuclear policies of the United States and Britain. During the 
early 1990s, French strategists debated the need to refashion nuclear strat-
egy to mirror the U.S. counterproliferation strategy and to change the French 
prevention-deterrent strategy from a weak to the strong to a strong to the weak 
or strong to the crazy war-fighting strategy. The 1994 Defense White Paper 
had rejected a war-fighting strategy in response to challenges from the Third 
World “as [a] dangerous mistake.”93 However, the White Paper acknowledged 
for the first time that French vital interests could be threatened by regional 
powers. The core vital interests were defined as “integrity of the national terri-
tory, including the mainland as well as overseas departments and territories, 
the free exercise of our sovereignty, and the protection of the population.”94 
This White Paper generated a limited debate, which, however, ended in a 
stalemate as President Mitterrand and his successor, Jacques Chirac, agreed to 
maintain ambiguity in nuclear policy, but not to radically change the French 
deterrent strategy.
France also offered qualified negative security assurances somewhat simi-
lar to the ones made by other nuclear weapon states—the United States, Rus-
sia, and Britain. According to a letter sent to the UN Secretary General and 
a statement presented to the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, France 
reaffirmed its 1982 commitment that “it will not use nuclear weapons against 
non-nuclear weapon States Parties to the NPT, except in the case of an in-
vasion or any other attack on France, its territory, its armed forces or other 
troops, or against its allies or a State toward which it has a security commit-
ment, carried out or sustained by such a State in alliance or association with 

114  Russia, Britain, France, and China
a nuclear-weapon State.”95 During the 1991 Gulf War, President Mitterrand 
declared that France would not use nuclear weapons in retaliation against 
chemical or biological attacks, a move that was criticized by opposition leader 
Jacques Chirac.96 In addition, France joined the NPT in 1992 and committed 
itself to most of the nonproliferation commitments as a nuclear weapon state 
and a supplier country.
Despite this commitment, France had changed its position on nuclear use 
in an effort to deter possible chemical or biological attacks by the mid-1990s. 
In August 1995, new President Chirac declared: “Only the [nuclear] deterrent 
force guarantees France against the possible use of weapons of mass destruc-
tion, of whatever type they may be.”97 In September 1995, Foreign Minister 
Alain Juppé stated that the use of WMD could justify a French response with 
nuclear weapons. This declaration was made despite the negative security as-
surance that was offered at the time of the NPT renewal conference in May 
1995 that France would not use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear states, 
parties to the NPT, that were also not aligned with a nuclear weapon state.98 
The purpose of the policy change was that France wanted to keep its response 
to possible WMD attacks uncertain so as to enhance the credibility of its de-
terrent threats.99
In the wake of the September 11, 2001, terrorist strikes in the United States, 
the nuclear use issue became even more critical for France and other West-
ern nuclear powers. According to reports in October 2003, President Chirac 
signed an order according to which France could use nuclear weapons to 
“meet the threat of a chemical attack,” implying that France could use nuclear 
weapons against a nonnuclear state and just not in retaliation, but also in a 
preventive mode. The French newspaper Libération said in an editorial that, in 
contrast to the previous French doctrine of “the weak facing down the strong” 
(du faible au fort), which refrained from spelling out when France would use 
nuclear weapons, the new doctrine was described as “the strong facing down 
the mad” (du fort au fou), and that this change had been effected without pub-
lic debate.100 France thus has been emulating the other two Western nuclear 
powers, the United States and Britain, on the nuclear use issue.
In January 2006, President Chirac made a radical announcement regard-
ing the use of nuclear weapons against a nonnuclear state. For the first time, 
unlike any other nuclear state, France declared that it would be willing to 
use nuclear retaliation against a state sponsoring a major terrorist attack on 
the country, even if it did not involve a WMD. While addressing the crew 

Russia, Britain, France, and China  115
of Vigilant, a submarine that carries French nuclear weapons, Chirac stated: 
“The leaders of states who use terrorist methods against us, as well as those 
who consider using in one way or another weapons of mass destruction, 
must understand that they would expose themselves to a firm and appropri-
ate response on our part,” and “this response could be a conventional one. 
It might also be a different kind.” He added that “all our nuclear forces have 
been reconfigured accordingly. To this end, the number of warheads has been 
reduced on some missiles on our submarines,” so as to achieve precision in 
striking selected targets.101 Some consider the decision as a way to justify the 
enormous amount of money spent on nuclear weapons and to position Chirac 
as a tough fighter on terrorism for domestic public opinion purposes.102 But 
the rhetoric has consequences for the French commitment to the tradition of 
non-use of nuclear weapons.
France, however, is constrained by possible consequences in view of ad-
verse public opinion in case it resorted to nuclear use. A substantial majority 
of the French public (69 percent in 1999) supported the maintenance of a nu-
clear capability only for deterrence purposes. According to a French analyst, 
Pascal Boniface, only the extreme Right political party, the National Front, 
has argued in favor of a nuclear use strategy. Boniface warns that if France 
alters its policy on nuclear use, it “would be playing into the hands of its anti-
nuclear foes, by associating itself with the idea that such [a] weapon can be 
used to fight, and not to preserve the peace. In so doing, France would have 
squandered any further prospect of maintaining the political legitimacy it has 
fought so hard to gain for its arsenal.” It would also give a fillip to antinuclear 
public opinion in both France and Germany.103 Other French military ana-
lysts have argued that France should not break the tradition against the use 
of nuclear weapons because that is the “basis of their peace-preserving effect”; 
the “banalization of nuclear weapons would not fail to lead to their use and 
then to the end of their peace-preserving effect.”104
During the Cold War, in many respects, France was a unique nuclear 
weapon state, as its Force de frappe was developed both to deter Soviet inva-
sion and to maintain a currency of power in the international system. France  
also refrained from using or threatening to use nuclear weapons against non­
nuclear states, even though it was not a full member of the NPT or other 
nuclear supplier-led regimes. In the post–Cold War era, Paris has changed 
its nuclear use policy in line with the United States and Britain, thereby un-
dermining the strength of the tradition of non-use. Further, France has raised 

116  Russia, Britain, France, and China
the possibility of the use of nuclear weapons against a state that sponsors a 
major terrorist attack on French territory, even if it did not involve WMD. The 
vitality of the tradition may be under challenge due to France’s new nuclear 
policy, but it is difficult to see when and where France would ever get an op-
portunity to use nuclear weapons against nonnuclear states.
China
The nuclear policy of the People’s Republic of China (PRC), the fifth official 
nuclear state, from the early days of its nuclear acquisition, has been in sup-
port of the tradition of nuclear non-use. In fact, among all the P-5 nuclear 
states, China has been the only power to consistently maintain a no-first-use 
policy and has made proposals for a multilateral treaty formalizing that posi-
tion among the nuclear powers. China acquired nuclear weapons in reaction 
to U.S. threats of nuclear use during conflicts in Korea and the Taiwan Straits 
in the 1950s. China obtained the necessary skills, technology, and materials 
while it was in alliance with the Soviet Union. The first nuclear test was con-
ducted in October 1964, and a hydrogen bomb was tested in June 1967. After 
the test, the Chinese government made a statement that it “solemnly declares 
that China will never at any time or under any circumstances be the first to 
use nuclear weapons.”105
Subsequently, it made an unconditional commitment toward nonnuclear 
states of non-use of its weapons in the event of a conflict with them.106 In a 1964 
statement, China also proposed that: 
a summit conference of all the countries of the world be convened to discuss 
the question of the complete prohibition and thorough destruction of the 
nuclear weapons, and that as the first step, the summit conference conclude 
an agreement to the effect that the nuclear powers and those countries which 
may soon become nuclear powers undertake not to use nuclear weapons either 
against non-nuclear countries and nuclear-free zones or against each other.107 
China repeated this commitment in 1971, after assuming its seat on the UN 
Security Council, when it called on the nuclear states to “undertake the obli-
gation not to be the first to use nuclear weapons against each other; particu-
larly the obligation not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon 
states, nor against nuclear-free zones.”108 During the June 1982 UN General 
Assembly session on disarmament, it called on all nuclear states “to reach 
an agreement on the non-use of nuclear weapons. Pending this, the nuclear 

Russia, Britain, France, and China  117
states should each undertake unconditionally not to use or threaten to use 
nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon states or nuclear free-zones and 
not to be the first to use nuclear weapons against each other at any time or 
under any circumstances.”109
The 2002 National Defense White Paper reiterated the Chinese position 
that China consistently upholds the policy of no first use of nuclear weap-
ons, and adopts an extremely restrained attitude toward the development of 
nuclear weapons. The White Paper repeated the earlier commitment that “un­
der no circumstances would it be the first to use nuclear weapons,” and that it 
has undertaken “unconditionally not to use or threaten to use nuclear weap-
ons against non-nuclear weapon states or nuclear-weapon-free zones, and has 
consistently urged all nuclear weapon states to enshrine these commitments 
in a legal form.”110 Consistent with its declaratory position of no first use, 
China developed only a small nuclear arsenal, and its nuclear missiles have 
been liquid-fuelled, making them slow to assemble. They are also low in ac-
curacy due to their limited circular error probable (CEP). Beijing also claimed 
to have not deployed tactical nuclear weapons, although there are some ques-
tions surrounding this claim.
The ideological basis of China’s position on nuclear weapons may be part 
of the reason for its long adherence to a no-first-use policy. In the 1950s, in 
public statements Mao Zedong underrated the effectiveness of nuclear weap-
ons. In August 1946, Mao stated: “The atom bomb is a paper tiger with which 
the U.S. reactionaries try to terrify the people. It looks terrible, but in fact is 
not. Of course, the atom bomb is a weapon of mass destruction, but the out-
come of war is decided by the people, not by one or two new weapons.”111 His 
decision to intervene in Korea in October 1950 in support of North Korean 
allies was partially driven by these calculations.112 Chinese statements during 
that time argued that nuclear weapons could be defended against and that the 
United States was vulnerable to Soviet intervention in the event of a nuclear 
strike on China. In international forums, however, China repeatedly argued 
that “the nation that first used nuclear weapons should be condemned and 
punished for war criminality.”113 This suggests that the Chinese were calculat-
ing the normative restraints on the United States, as well as considering strate-
gic and tactical concerns in preventing a U.S. nuclear strike while intervening 
in Korea.
Despite this public posture, Mao sanctioned China’s nuclear program in  
1956 in order to avoid being “bullied” by others, especially the United States.114 

118  Russia, Britain, France, and China
China initiated a nuclear weapons program in response to U.S. nuclear threats 
in Korea and in the Quemoy-Matsu crises, and as such wanted to show to 
the developing world that it was not acquiring nuclear weapons for anything 
other than for defense or minimum deterrence.115 Nuclear weapons did not 
fit well into Mao’s guerrilla strategy or into the war strategies and doctrines 
adopted by the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) later on. “The Maoist mili-
tary discourse about ‘people’s war’ and active defense was designed in part 
deliberately to portray China as defensively-oriented, a non-traditional major 
power that defended the interests of the military have-nots in the interna-
tional system.”116 Notably, “Chinese strategists were unable to reconcile nu-
clear weapons and Mao’s doctrine of people’s war . . . until the early 80s there 
was no strategic research in China and no direct linkage of nuclear weapons 
to foreign policy. Earnest efforts to come up with a nuclear strategy suitable  
to China, a medium sized nuclear power like . . . Britain and France began 
in the mid-80s.”117 The lingering Maoist influence on strategy may partially 
explain the Chinese aversion toward developing and deploying a large nuclear 
force or a first-use policy, which would definitely raise the stakes in its rela-
tionship with other great powers, especially the United States.
The Chinese strategists initially adopted a minimum deterrence strategy, 
which, according to them, “requires only the ability to carry out a simple, un-
differentiated countervalue second strike. The adversary’s people and social 
wealth are held hostage, and the fear of unacceptable damage deters any first 
strike. Any measures that might reduce the destructiveness of nuclear war are 
destabilizing.” China only needs a handful of warheads to achieve its deter-
rence objectives.118 This strategy is based on a “delayed second strike (DSS): 
China will retaliate after withstanding a nuclear strike rather than attempt-
ing either a launch under attack (LUA) or a launch-on-warning (LOW)-type 
strategy, where missiles are launched after detection of an attack but before 
impact. China arguably does not possess the requisite early warning capabili-
ties in order to move toward a LOW-type policy.”119
However, by the 1980s many strategists had started questioning this strat-
egy, arguing that “minimum deterrence capabilities are too vulnerable to a 
disarming first strike, and thus have little deterrent value.”120 They began to 
discuss more openly the idea of “limited deterrence,” giving it: 
[a] distinctly limited counterforce-war-fighting flavor. A number of Chinese 
strategists now argue that a limited deterrent means having enough capa­
bilities to deter conventional, theater, and strategic nuclear war, and control  

Russia, Britain, France, and China  119
and suppress escalation during a nuclear war. That is, a limited deterrent should 
be able to respond to any level or type of attack from tactical to strategic, and 
the initial response should be calibrated to the scope of the initial attack.121
Accordingly, Chinese strategists have developed a list of both countervalue 
and counterforce targets in order to engage in a flexible strategy, departures 
from the earlier thinking favoring a “single counter-value punitive strike” 
and limited deterrence. This also meant abandoning the no-first-use pledge, 
as striking first may be essential given the inferiority of the Chinese nuclear 
forces.122 How­ever, the “bulk of China’s aging missile force is liquid-fueled, 
the missiles are on a low state of alert, with fuel, warheads, and missiles all 
stored separately,” and “Beijing has no ability to launch ‘on warning’ that is, 
at short notice or once an attack has already begun.” But this situation “will 
change once it deploys more advanced missiles in years to come.”123
China’s rethinking of nuclear strategy is partially the result of changes in 
U.S. nuclear policy, especially under the George W. Bush administration. The 
administration’s withdrawal from the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty; its 
pursuit of national and theater missile defenses and their possible deployment 
in East Asia in the protection of Taiwan, Korea, and Japan; its inclusion of 
China as a potential target for a nuclear strike in the Nuclear Posture Review 
(NPR) of 2002; and the increased role of nuclear weapons in U.S. strategy 
and doctrine are factors in this regard. With respect to the NPR, the Chinese 
policymakers were: 
disturbed because the document directly contradicts several tenets that are 
strongly held in the Chinese security community: that nuclear weapons are 
becoming less relevant in the modern world; that nuclear weapons can never 
be used; and that a conflict with the United States over Taiwan would not 
involve nuclear weapons. Chinese analysts are particularly focused on two 
sections of the NPR: the specific mention of the conditions for the use of 
nuclear weapons over a conflict in the Taiwan Strait and the possible pursuit 
of earth-penetrating tactical nuclear weapons.124
Over the years, questions have been raised about the redlines for China’s 
use of nuclear weapons given its track record in military confrontations with 
smaller neighbors. China’s use of coercive diplomacy against Taiwan and its 
use of force against India and Vietnam suggested that the Chinese position 
on the use of force against smaller adversaries is less than benign. However,  
China withdrew from Vietnam after failing to achieve its goals, and there was 

120  Russia, Britain, France, and China
no indication that China used the threat of nuclear weapons in any way to 
achieve its strategic or battlefield objectives vis-à-vis Hanoi. The main pur-
pose of the intervention was Deng Xiaoping’s desire to “teach Vietnam a les-
son” and show the Soviets that China did not fear Moscow. Vietnam resisted 
valiantly, as the Vietnamese had experience in fighting the United States and 
French forces for two decades. The offensive “failed to halt Hanoi’s joining 
with Moscow in an implicit anti-China alliance, and coercive diplomacy 
failed to accomplish anything substantive.”125
Taiwan is a theater where China could slide into a situation of nuclear use 
even though it does not correspond with China’s ultimate aim to reincorporate 
the territory it considers a renegade province. In March 2005, China passed a 
law which effectively preauthorized the use of force in the event of Taiwan 
taking steps toward formal independence. The legislation declared that:
in the event that the “Taiwan independence” forces should act under any 
name or by any means to cause the fact of Taiwan’s secession from China, or 
that major incidents entailing Taiwan’s secession from China should occur, or 
that possibilities for a peaceful reunification should be completely exhausted, 
that state shall employ non-peaceful means and other necessary measures to 
protect China’s sovereignty and territorial integrity . . . The law stipulates that 
the State Council, China’s cabinet, and the Central Military Commission, the 
top military body, “are authorized to decide on and execute” military action 
with no more than a notice provided to the legislature.126
However, Chinese strategists had already added a caveat by stating that China 
does not consider it a violation of the no-first-use pledge if it uses nuclear 
weapons on its own territory, which presumably includes Taiwan.127 
In July 2005, a Chinese general raised the possibility of abandoning the 
no-first-use policy and resorting to nuclear use against the United States in 
order to defend its claim over Taiwan. Major General Zhu Chenghu stated 
that China had “no capability to fight a conventional war against the United 
States,” and that “war logic” dictated that the weaker state employ all it can, 
which involves the use of nuclear weapons in the event that the United States 
intervened in a conflict over Taiwan.128 Although no formal announcements 
preceded this individual statement, it showed that Chinese military leaders are 
beginning to question the feasibility of no-first-use in the event of a conflict 
over Taiwan.129 Military action need not mean that China would succeed in de-
feating the Taiwanese, given the qualitatively superior conventional weaponry 
that Taiwan holds and the strong possibility of U.S. intervention in support  

Russia, Britain, France, and China  121
of the Taiwanese forces. China could be compelled to up the ante, includ-
ing issuing nuclear threats, if the situation turned against it in a major way. 
China’s deployment of short- and intermediate-range missiles in the Fujian 
province, across the strait from Taiwan, adds credence to the concern about a 
potential scenario of nuclear use.130 However, this may be nothing more than 
a way to deter U.S. intervention; the credibility of Chinese nuclear use is ques-
tionable given the massively disproportionate nuclear response the United 
States can inflict on China in the event of a nuclear exchange. In September 
1999, China issued a pledge stating that it “will not be the first to use nuclear 
weapons and will not use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon coun-
tries and regions, let alone against our Taiwan compatriots.” This pledge was 
made by Chinese foreign ministry spokesman Sun Yuxi, who was respond-
ing to China’s claim that it had developed neutron bomb “and did nothing to 
damp speculation that the announcement was a warning to Taiwan.” Taiwan 
President Lee Teng-hui provoked a crisis when he stated that the “two sides 
should deal with each other as separate states.”131
Despite China’s consistent position on nuclear no-first-use, its behavior 
has been contradictory on the question of other nuclear norms, such as the 
transfer of weapons technology and materials to nonnuclear states aspiring 
to become nuclear powers. China, despite joining the NPT, has continued to 
supply Pakistan with nuclear and fissile materials for some years.132
On the positive side, China has been reluctant to increase its nuclear 
weapon capability despite pressures to do so, largely as a result of U.S. mis-
sile defense policies. Even with the planned modernization of China’s aging 
DF‑5 ICBMs with DF‑31 missiles and the submarine-launched version JL‑2, 
the number of missiles still range between eighty to one hundred thirty war-
heads, although some estimates put it around four hundred. China also re-
portedly stopped production of fissile materials in 1990. It is also reported 
that China can produce a larger number of weapons and missiles, but has de­
liberately chosen not to do so due to fears of an arms race with the United 
States and unintended use by its own officers. The deliberate ambiguity has 
gen­erated different estimates by Western sources and much confusion in stra-
tegic circles over the years.133
China’s non-use pledge is also somewhat challenged by its deployment of 
short-range nuclear missiles toward Taiwan and India, even before the latter 
became a declared nuclear weapon state in 1998. According to some stud-
ies, China has deployed two to three brigades of DF-15 missiles targeted to-
ward Taiwan, two DF-3 and DF-21 missile brigades in Kunming and Yunnan  

122  Russia, Britain, France, and China
provinces, targeted toward Southeast Asia and India, and three DF-3/DF-4 
brigades of missiles in Xining and Qinghai provinces, targeted toward Rus-
sia and India. It is possible that some of these missiles were targeted toward 
India even before it conducted its nuclear tests in 1998 and developed an op-
erational nuclear capability.134 The likely targeting of Southeast Asian states, 
especially Vietnam and the Philippines from Kunming, also suggests China’s 
not-so-immutable position in this regard.135 Both Tibet’s Dalai Lama and 
George Fernandes, India’s Defense Minister in 1998, have stated that China 
has been deploying nuclear missiles and other nuclear weapons systems in 
Tibet aimed at India.136
Despite these aberrations toward Taiwan and India, the significant con-
tribution of China to the tradition of non-use has to be recognized. China is 
the only nuclear state that has consistently maintained a no-first-use policy 
and expressed a willingness to sign a no-first-use convention. China has also 
proposed to the United Nations the conclusion of a no-first-use treaty and has 
supported the creation of nuclear-free zones, with an undertaking by nuclear 
states of non-use against parties to the zonal treaties.137 China has also signed 
the additional protocols of all nuclear-free zones that are open to signature.138 
Image and reputation (conceived in terms of world public opinion, espe-
cially among the developing countries) seem to be significant variables in the 
Chinese approach toward nuclear non-use. The no-first-use policy has “sig-
nificant political value for China in the international community”; to Chinese 
scholars “it shows China is a responsible partner in terms of enhancing global 
security.”139 China has maintained the position that it acquired nuclear weap-
ons as a last resort to deter American pressures and that its position is consis-
tent with nonnuclear states, especially in the developing world. China’s use or 
threat of use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear powers would tarnish the 
image and reputation that China has built with considerable difficulty over 
several decades. Despite China’s not-so-impeccable credentials in the nonpro-
liferation arena, in the development of the tradition of non-use and its persis-
tence China has played a critical role.
Conclusion
This chapter discussed the nuclear policies of the Soviet Union/Russia and 
the three second-tier nuclear powers, Britain, France, and China, in the con-
text of their approach on the question of nuclear non-use against nonnuclear 
powers. All four nuclear powers, despite possessing different political systems 

Russia, Britain, France, and China  123
and strategic cultures, contributed to the rise and persistence of the tradition 
of non-use. Of these states, the Soviet Union and China perhaps contributed 
most to the tradition by making formal non-use commitments and adhering 
to them. Post-1991 Russia, Britain, and France have also refrained from us-
ing their weapons, although they have made no firm commitments regarding 
their non-use as the Soviet Union and China did, and have modified their 
nuclear use policies during the post–Cold War era to encompass nuclear use 
against rogue states and nontraditional threats. Britain also contributed to 
the tradition by nudging its ally, the United States, not to use nuclear weapons 
during some early critical turning points in the evolution of the tradition. The 
formal contribution of France is ambiguous, although its non-use in conflicts 
such as in Algeria is commendable.
In the post-September 11, 2001, international environment, France, by 
widening the role of nuclear use has probably raised the most significant chal-
lenge to the tradition, although the new nuclear policies of Russia and Britain 
have also questioned its basis to an extent. It is, however, quite possible that 
the newfound uses for nuclear weapons have been articulated by these states 
in view of the elusive security challenges they face from terrorism and WMD 
threats from regional states. Expectations of residual deterrence that may re-
sult from the threat of nuclear retaliation against WMD attacks seem to be 
the main reason for these policy changes. The new policy pronouncements are 
also meant to satisfy domestic constituencies who question the rationale and 
high expenditures for nuclear weapons maintenance and modernization after 
the end of the Cold War.

124
 6 THE SECOND-GENERATION NUCLEAR STATES: 
ISRAEL, INDIA, PAKISTAN, AND THE TRADITION
in t his chapt er , the nuclear policies of three second-generation nuclear 
states—Israel, India, and Pakistan—are analyzed. The effort is to see how 
their nuclear policies have supported or diminished the tradition of non-use, 
the reasons for their particular approaches to nuclear weapons, and the future 
implications of their policies for the tradition. In particular, an analysis of 
their behavior in crises and wars involving nuclear and nonnuclear powers is 
useful for understanding the robustness of the tradition as far as these states 
are concerned. In terms of the tradition of non-use, the Israeli nuclear policy 
is the most significant of the three, as it confronted nonnuclear Arab states in 
several crises and wars since it became a de facto nuclear state in 1966, and 
made ambiguous threats of nuclear use in case its opponents crossed certain 
redlines. The discussion will also illuminate how these states—India and Pak-
istan in particular—plan to use nuclear weapons in a future conflict situation. 
India has announced its commitment to a non-use policy toward nonnuclear 
states and a no-first-use policy toward nuclear states. Pakistan has not articu-
lated an explicit non-use policy vis-à-vis nonnuclear states, as its main focus 
is on a first-use threat with the intent of deterring any conventional attacks by 
India. Therefore, the discussion on Pakistan will largely center on its nuclear 
doctrines vis-à-vis India, another nuclear state, although the tradition as I 
study here is focused on nuclear versus nonnuclear states. However, Pak­istani 
supply of nuclear materials to other countries and terrorist groups that are 
more likely to use nuclear weapons suggests that the tradition has been in-
directly challenged by Islamabad and its officials involved in such transfers.  

Israel, India, and Pakistan  125
A fourth nuclear state, North Korea, is excluded from the analysis, as it is 
impossible to obtain reliable information on its national security policy, es-
pecially its nuclear posture. Further, it has agreed to give up nuclear weap-
ons following the six-party talks led by the United States in February 2007 in 
return for normalization of relations, security guarantees, and economic as-
sistance.1 In the future, Iran is likely to emerge with nuclear weapons, and its 
commitment to the tradition is yet to be determined. Going by the fears that 
the Iranian program has caused among the United States and fellow Gulf and 
Arab states such as Saudi Arabia and Egypt, at least for these countries, Iran 
cannot be trusted with nuclear weapons, as its policy may be unpredictable.
Israel
Israel is believed to be the world’s fifth largest nuclear power, behind the 
United States, Russia, China, and France, with an arsenal comparable in size 
to Britain’s. In 2006, it was estimated that Israel possessed about two hundred 
weapons of all sizes.2 The ambiguity (amimut in Hebrew) that characterizes 
Israel’s nuclear posture is referred to by a leading scholar of Israeli nuclear 
policy as “Israel’s last taboo.” The taboo, according to Anver Cohen, is ob-
served by a “code of secrecy, non-acknowledgment,” and censorship, both at 
the official and the societal levels. Israel has rarely made explicit its capabil-
ity or strategy/doctrine with respect to nuclear use.3 The ambiguity was first 
developed in the 1960s in response to U.S. pressures to abandon the bomb 
project, but later it was viewed as a way to give Arab states less reason to go 
nuclear by reducing domestic pressures for nuclear weapons. Israeli policy 
makers also found ambiguity useful for maintaining domestic consensus, ar-
resting public debate on nuclear policy, and preventing the Israeli forces from 
relying excessively on nuclear deterrence.4 Finally, opacity has also been a rea-
son for the tacit U.S. approval of the Israeli nuclear program.5 In December 
2006, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert inadvertently stated that Israel had 
nuclear weapons, which led to a furor, and he retracted his statement.6
Israeli governments have, on several occasions, maintained that they will 
not be the first to introduce nuclear weapons in the region, and that they would 
sign the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) after a comprehensive peace 
settlement was concluded with all Arab states.7 Despite this ambiguous for-
mula, Israel is believed to possess nuclear weapons as a last resort or as an ex-
istential insurance against a combined assault by Arab states. The superiority  

126  The Second-Generation Nuclear States
that Israel possesses in conventional capability and the politico-military sup-
port it enjoys from the United States have made the probability of an Arab 
assault unlikely, especially since the mid-1970s. With the settlement of its 
border dispute with Egypt in 1978, Israel’s main adversarial relationship also 
eased. Moreover, political changes within the Arab states have made it im-
probable that a coordinated all-out assault could occur in the near or medium 
terms. However, the efforts by Iran to acquire nuclear weapons, the posses-
sion of chemical and biological weapons by Israel’s principal foes, Syria and 
Iran, and the possibility that, in the future, terrorist groups might acquire and 
use nuclear weapons or dirty bombs—crude radiological weapons made from 
nuclear material—all create uncertainty for Israeli strategic planning and its 
approach toward the use of nuclear weapons.8 In the twenty-first century, Is-
rael may well emerge as a leading candidate for the use of nuclear weapons, 
especially if it is attacked with chemical and biological weapons by its enemy 
states in conjunction with networks of terrorist groups and nonstate actors 
such as Hezbollah.
It would be illuminating to look briefly at the four major crises involving Is-
rael and nonnuclear states since it became a de facto nuclear state around 1966.9 
These cases are the 1967 War, the 1973 War, the 1991 Gulf War, and the 2003 
Iraq War. Some of these cases are further discussed in Chapter 7. According to 
Cohen, Israel had assembled two rudimentary nuclear devices on the eve of the 
1967 war with Egypt and other Arab states for use in case Israel’s national exis-
tence were in peril.10 To Cohen, Israeli nuclear weapons were conceived of as a 
“national insurance policy” and “national safety valve,” in the event of “a colos-
sal failure of the IDF [Israel Defense Forces] and decisive strategic surprise by 
Egypt,”11 Arab states acquiring nuclear weapons, or its adversaries’ resorting to 
an attack that would destroy the Israeli state itself. According to Cohen, on the 
eve of the 1967 War, Israel had taken steps to weaponize the capability and had 
made contingency plans to test it behind enemy lines, east of Sinai.12 Michael 
Karpin also contends that during the second half of 1966, Israel had acquired a 
nuclear weapon capability, and that it had conducted a cold nuclear test in No-
vember 1966.13 In 1966, the Israeli military establishment had developed four 
redlines whose crossing would lead to the use of nuclear weapons. These were: 
“(a) a successful Arab military penetration into populated areas within Israel’s 
post-1949 borders; (b) the destruction of the Israeli Air Force; (c) the exposure 
of Israeli cities to massive and devastating air attacks or to possible chemical 
or biological attacks; (d) the use of nuclear weapons against Israeli territory.”14

Israel, India, and Pakistan  127
However, Cohen argues that nuclear use in 1967 for anything other than 
for maintaining Israel’s existence as a sovereign state would not have had any 
political or military benefits and “would have added a huge element of uncer-
tainty” and “created shock waves with unanticipated consequences.” To him, 
“the situation in May 1967 demonstrated the unsettled nature of the Israeli 
nuclear dilemma: Israel could not afford not to realize its nuclear option (as 
a weapon of last resort), but it could also not afford to make any use of it (in 
circumstances short of last resort).”15 Since Israel won the war and the exis-
tence of the state was not in question during it, a demonstration test was not 
necessary. The high level of secrecy and the unwillingness to brandish the 
weapon, other than for a supreme emergency, suggest that the Israeli leaders 
were treating these weapons differently from conventional weapons and that 
their use could not be sanctioned under any ordinary circumstances.
What considerations went into the Israeli leadership’s decision not to use 
nuclear weapons during the three subsequent military crises/conflicts? In 1973, 
Israel was the target of a limited war, launched by Egypt and Syria, while in the 
1991 Gulf War, it sustained missile attacks from Iraq. In the 2003 Gulf War, it 
was feared that Iraq would attack Israel, possibly with chemical weapons, but 
that contingency failed to materialize; indeed, it is doubtful that Iraq had the 
weapons or the capability for delivering them. In terms of nuclear non-use, 
all three wars are important, as Israel considered or threatened to use nuclear 
weapons in response to the opponent’s military attacks or provocation.
Several studies suggest that in 1973, in the face of Egyptian and Syrian ad-
vances, the Israeli leadership considered a nuclear response. Seymour Hersh 
contends that at an October 8, 1973, meeting of the Israeli kitchen cabinet, 
consisting of Prime Minister Golda Meir, Chief of Army Staff Moshe Dayan, 
Army Chief General David Elazar, military aide General Israel Leor, and 
minister without portfolio Israel Galili, three decisions were made. The first 
was to make operational the nuclear missile launchers at Hirbat Zachariah 
and put on alert eight specially marked F-4 aircraft. “The initial target list 
included the Egyptian and Syrian military headquarters near Cairo and Da-
mascus. It could not be learned how many weapons were armed, although 
Dimona was known to have manufactured twenty warheads by 1973.”16 There 
were two purposes behind these nuclear moves. First, Israel aimed to compel 
the Soviets, who would come to know about this deployment, to “urge their 
allies in Egypt and Syria to limit their offensive and not attempt to advance 
beyond the pre-1967 borders.” The second, more significant, purpose was to  

128  The Second-Generation Nuclear States
“force the United States to begin an immediate and massive resupply of the 
Israeli military” as there was a strong perception among the Israeli elite that 
the Nixon-Kissinger White House was trying to let the Arabs win some 
ground in order to compel Israel to negotiate a peace treaty later on.17
Reports published in later years have suggested that nuclear use was a pos-
sibility in 1973. According to a report in the Washington Times in April 2003, 
Israel came dangerously close to nuclear use during the 1973 War. Quoting a 
senior U.S. state department official involved in the crisis, the paper said that 
on October 8, “Israel’s northern front commander, Maj. Gen. Yitzak Hoffi . . . 
informed Israeli Defense Minister Moshe Dayan that he could not hold out 
much longer against the 1,400 Syrian tanks rolling through Israeli defenses 
on the Golan Heights.” Dayan was “attacked by acute panic” and declared 
to advisors: “This is the end of the Third Temple.” But he also resolved that 
“if Israel was to perish, it would take Damascus and Cairo with it.” Dayan 
secured Prime Minister Golda Meir’s approval for arming “13 intermediate 
range Jericho missiles with nuclear weapons. Eight F-4 Phantom fighter air-
craft were also to be given nuclear arms.” “Over the next 3 days, the launchers 
were armed at Hirbat Zachariah while the F-4s, on 24-hour alert, based at Tel 
Nof Rehovot, were also prepared, according to former Pentagon officials.” The 
nuclear attack did not take place, as the United States began an air bridge to 
replenish Israeli capability, aiding its subsequent victory over Egypt.18
It is also reported that the idea of using nuclear weapons was presented by 
Israeli military leaders on October 9, when “Israel had lost 50 combat planes 
and more than 500 tanks.” Golda Meir rejected Dayan’s gloom-and-doom 
scenario but instead decided to approach Washington. The nuclear card was 
used to gain Washington’s immediate military support.19 Some believe that 
Israel used the threat of nuclear escalation in order to compel President Nixon 
to order an airlift of arms and ammunition to replenish the dwindling Is-
raeli conventional arsenal.20 One could conclude that in this instance, Israel’s 
subsequent victories, and the Egyptian/Syrian failure to advance further pre-
vented nuclear use.
The key point here is the Israeli leadership’s efforts to raise the nuclear 
threat to gain political objectives that are not directly related to the redlines 
mentioned previously, especially survival as a state. The purpose of the alert 
appeared to be to persuade the Soviets not to intervene in the war in support 
of Egypt and Syria, while encouraging the United States to offer superior con-
ventional capability in order to mount a counteroffensive. There was certainly 
a sense among Israeli decision makers that nuclear weapons were a class apart 

Israel, India, and Pakistan  129
and meant for the protection of the Third Temple (a metaphorical reference 
for Israel itself).21 But there was an inclination to resort to nuclear threat for 
purposes other than deterrence, as exemplified in the 1973 instance of bring-
ing out nuclear missiles to elicit cooperation from the United States. This be-
lies the uniqueness of nuclear weapons as a deterrent-only weapon, and sug-
gests that the attitude of the Israeli leadership towards nuclear weapons use 
has been ambivalent over the years.
In the Israeli case, there has been no proper debate on nuclear weapons 
possession or use, and leadership perceptions mattered in particular choices 
that the country has made in this realm. For instance, in 1973, Moshe Dayan 
was sure of Israel’s imminent collapse and the need for nuclear retaliation, 
while Prime Minister Meir and her confidants, especially Army Chief Elazar,  
were less convinced. Had it not been for Meir’s powerful presence, it is likely 
that nuclear weapons would have been brought out and used as a tool for polit-
ical leverage as well as for deterrence and compellence purposes. It also shows 
a modest impact of the tradition of non-use on Meir, who appears to have 
been reluctant to resort to the absolute weapon even when great uncertainty 
existed about the course of the war and Israel’s chances of success. However, 
although Israel did not use nuclear weapons, it remains an open question if 
the tradition of non-use or even Meir’s personal opposition would have been 
sufficient to deter Israel had the United States not supplied weapons and spare 
parts and especially if an Israeli military collapse seemed likely.
In the post–Cold War era, Israel also appears to have taken a leaf from 
U.S. policy with regard to the threat of use of nuclear weapons to deter the use 
of chemical and biological weapons by opponents. The Israeli response during 
the 1991 Persian Gulf War suggests that the tradition of non-use does exist for 
Israel, albeit in a weakened form. This crisis implies that by 1991, Israel had ex-
panded the role of nuclear weapons to deter the use of chemical and biological 
weapons by its adversaries. Israel desisted from responding militarily to Iraqi 
aggression due to a combination of factors. First, the United States pressured 
it not to intervene, as the Israeli intervention would have broken the coalition 
against Saddam Hussein, which involved many Arab states. Second, Israel 
would not have done a better job in locating and destroying the Scud missiles 
than the United States did. Third, the Iraqi Scud attacks resulted in low fatali-
ties, reducing the pressure to counterattack disproportionately. Despite these 
constraints, Israel was reported to have rolled out a Jericho missile, capable 
of carrying nuclear weapons, a week after the first Scud missile attack, be-
fore pulling it back. The objectives appear to have been to encourage Moscow  

130  The Second-Generation Nuclear States
to exert pressure on Saddam Hussein to stop the attacks and demonstrate to 
the United States that “Israel’s patience was wearing thin.” Others believe this 
was intended “primarily as a sign of Israeli frustration.”22
Prior to the 2003 Gulf War, there were calls on Israel to threaten or use nu­
clear weapons if Saddam Hussein used chemical or biological weapons against 
Israel. It was argued that in order to make Israel’s nuclear deterrent credible, 
such a threat was necessary. However, such proposals generated some amount 
of debate within Israel. According to a critic of this policy, if Israel broke the 
tradition of non-use, “it might lose its international legitimacy,” and “violat-
ing the nuclear taboo without facing a clear and immediate threat to our exis-
tence is one of the worst possible crimes against humanity.”23
Although the nuclear weapons issue is a prohibited subject for the Israeli 
public and officials, public opinion consistently and increasingly supported 
Israel’s possession and possible use of nuclear arms. According to one an-
nual survey, the support for nuclear use in the face of a major security threat 
increased steadily from 36 percent in 1986 to 80 percent in 1998. On a sepa-
rate question on the possible contingencies in which Israel could use nuclear 
weapons, the answers in 1998 were: 99 percent in response to nuclear attack, 
86 percent in response to gas or biological attack, 45 percent to avoid defeat 
in a conventional war, and 25 percent to save many lives. In 1986, 91 percent 
agreed with the idea of use of nuclear weapons in a desperate military situa-
tion.24 Further, it was reported that Israel had developed low-yield neutron 
bombs which could destroy troops but not property, and in 1990 it was sug-
gested that Israel might already be developing mini-nukes to destroy hard-
ened command-and-control centers in enemy states.25 
The discussion above suggests that although Israel has observed the tradi-
tion of non-use and has been partially influenced by it, the country remains 
perhaps one of the leading candidates to use nuclear weapons against a non-
nuclear state and thereby break the tradition of non-use. The fact that none of 
its opponents among the Arab and Gulf states hold nuclear weapons precludes 
the mutual nuclear deterrent scenario (until Iran obtains the capability). Israel 
made ambiguous nuclear threats in 1973, 1991, and 2002–03. Israel is also a 
likely target of future weapons of mass destruction (WMD) attacks by non-
state actors, raising the possibility of Israel resorting to preventive or preemp-
tive attacks on countries that harbor such groups. However, the reluctance of 
Israel to use its nuclear weapons in past crises and wars involving nonnuclear 
states offers some comfort that the tradition of non-use may have reasonably 

Israel, India, and Pakistan  131
entrenched itself even in this hard test case. One can also argue that many of 
their nuclear threats have been meant to deter adversaries or to elicit cooperation 
from the United States, but this kind of situation could give rise to a “commit-
ment trap”—a temptation to resort to nuclear use to lend credibility to the de-
clared policy—in a severe crisis situation, a problem identified by Scott Sagan.26
India
India became a nuclear-capable state in 1974, when it tested its first device 
in the Rajasthan desert. However, for over two decades it kept an ambivalent 
position on weaponization and decided to pursue a full-fledged program only 
in the late 1980s, largely in response to Pakistan’s nuclear weapons acquisi-
tion and India’s frustration with the slow pace of global nuclear disarmament. 
The tests themselves were prompted by a mixture of systemic and domestic 
factors, such as the extension of the NPT in perpetuity; the pressure on India 
to sign the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), which would have fore-
closed a nuclear weapons option; and, above all, the arrival of the nationalistic 
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)-led coalition government into power.27 Since the 
nuclear tests in 1998, India has openly made a no-first-use pledge and has 
incorporated this policy into its nuclear doctrine. However, in response to 
a growing fear of nuclear weapons falling into the hands of terrorist groups, 
and of such actors using chemical and biological weapons with or without the 
connivance of its enemy states, India has modified its no-first-use policy. It 
now includes the contingency of nuclear attack in retaliation against chemical 
or biological attacks by adversaries.
India’s attitude toward nuclear weapons offers a major test case for morality-
based arguments about nuclear weapons possession and use. The possession 
of the bomb was early on perceived as against the peaceful ideals that India’s 
father of the nation, Mohandas Gandhi, stood for. His political heir appar-
ent, Jawaharlal Nehru, also outwardly showed great antipathy toward nuclear 
weapons. However, it is argued that Nehru implicitly laid the foundations of a 
nuclear weapons program when he initiated the civilian program, which was 
used in subsequent years for developing a nuclear bomb.28
However, to a certain extent, it was India’s lack of trust in the robustness  
of the tradition of non-use and of negative security assurances that encour-
aged New Delhi to initiate a nuclear weapons program. After the Chinese nu-
clear tests in 1962, India approached the Western powers for nuclear protec-
tion. Later on, it opposed joining the NPT, partly due to the treaty’s failure to  

132  The Second-Generation Nuclear States
fully guarantee nonnuclear states protection against nuclear first use.29 India’s 
decision to conduct a nuclear test in 1974 was to some extent influenced by its 
experience during the 1971 Bangladesh War, when the Nixon administra­tion 
dispatched the nuclear-armed USS Enterprise to deter India from attacking 
West Pakistan.30 India justified its May 1998 Pokhran tests by the absence of 
decisive steps by nuclear states toward a “nuclear-weapon-free world,” and by 
the fact that some nuclear states had “doctrines that permit the first use of nu-
clear weapons.” Thus India had decided to exercise its nuclear option and forgo 
its self-imposed restraint.31 In his statement in the Indian Parliament, Prime 
Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee stated that India does not “intend to use” nuclear 
weapons for “aggression or for mounting threats against any country; these are 
weapons of self-defense, to ensure that India is not subjected to nuclear threats 
or coercion.”32 An authoritative study on Indian nuclear policy states: 
By refusing to treat deterrence as an outcome that is best assured by developing 
various strategies of defense, such as preemptive attacks, limited nuclear 
options, or robust strategic defenses, New Delhi has adhered to the traditional 
opposition that theorists like [Glenn] Snyder have postulated to exist between 
deterrence and defense, coming down strongly in favor of the former and 
rejecting the latter, at least at the level of declaratory policy.33
However, the tradition seems to have played a role in the formulation of 
India’s nuclear doctrine. India, similarly to China, has a policy of no first use 
and non-use against nonnuclear states, which is enshrined in its official nu­
clear doctrine. The nuclear doctrine approved by the Indian government on 
January 2003 consists of eight components. They are: (1) “[b]uilding and main-
taining a credible minimum deterrent”; (2) “[a] posture of ‘No-first Use,’ ” that 
is, “[n]uclear weapons will only be used in retaliation against a nuclear attack 
on Indian territory or on Indian forces anywhere”; (3) “[n]uclear retaliation 
to a first strike will be massive and designed to inflict unacceptable damage”; 
(4) “[n]uclear retaliatory attacks can only be authorized by the civilian po-
litical leadership through the Nuclear Command Authority”; (5) “[n]on-use 
of nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon states”; (6) “[h]owever, in the 
event of a major attack against India, or Indian forces anywhere, by biological 
or chemical weapons, India will retain the option of retaliating with nuclear 
weapons”; (7) a continuance of strict controls on export of nuclear and missile 
related materials and technologies, participation in the Fissile Material Cutoff 
Treaty negotiations, and continued observance of the moratorium on nuclear 

Israel, India, and Pakistan  133
tests; and (8) “[c]ontinued commitment to the goal of a nuclear-free world, 
through global, verifiable, and non-discriminatory nuclear disarmament.”34 
These elements suggest that along with deterrence, non-use and nonprolifera-
tion calculations also figure in Indian policy toward nuclear weapons.
India’s policy of no first use is derived from both normative and instru-
mental calculations. India has been a major advocate of nuclear disarmament 
and the conclusion of a legal treaty on non-use by nuclear weapon states since 
the early days of the nuclear age. The Indian nuclear doctrine is a continua-
tion of that policy. It shows that India as of now wants to limit nuclear weap-
ons solely to deterrence and prestige/power purposes, and has no intention of 
using them as an instrument for fighting or winning wars. It also shows that 
India does not seek to obtain territorial goals by using or threatening to use 
nuclear weapons. By incorporating a no-use policy against nonnuclear states 
in its nuclear doctrine, India is signaling to different categories of states its 
adherence to a more robust tradition of non-use, of which it has been an early 
and active advocate.
In an instrumental sense, the minimum-deterrent posture based on a no-
first-use policy precludes building an operational system on a hair-trigger  
alert, or the amassing of large quantities of weapons or delivery systems be-
yond what is needed for a minimum deterrent capability. It is based on the 
assumption that India does not need to match its adversaries in terms of num-
ber or yield of weapons. Moreover, it rejects battlefield nuclear weapons, a 
brinkmanship strategy, and nuclear blackmail of any kind.35 Foreign Minister 
Jaswant Singh stated on May 9, 2000, that although India was not a party to 
the NPT, it was a nuclear weapons state bound by the NPT provisions for nu-
clear states and that it supported demands for “unqualified negative security 
assurances raised by a large majority of non-nuclear states” and was willing to 
“ ‘provide requisite assurances to the nuclear weapon free zones in existence 
or being negotiated,’ except in South Asia.”36
However, there is evidence that after its nuclear tests India has slowly 
moved away from its normative position on complete global nuclear dis­
armament to more modest arms control aims. This is the result of changes 
taking place at the domestic, regional, and international levels. Domestically, 
the BJP-led government was more interested in realpolitik uses of nuclear 
capability for obtaining great power status. Regionally, the intensification of 
conflict with Pakistan following the nuclear tests, and globally, the changing 
nuclear policies of the United States and other nuclear states contributed to 

134  The Second-Generation Nuclear States
this transformation. India is eager to acquire theater missile defenses while 
expressing willingness to join a whole host of arms control agreements that 
it had opposed in the past.37 In its 2005–06 agreement with the United States, 
India also agreed to bifurcate its civilian and military nuclear facilities and 
place the former under the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safe-
guards. This willingness is also partly derived from the need to lift the inter-
national sanctions against India, imposed under various supplier regimes in 
the civilian energy sector, so as to gain technology and materials from the 
international nuclear market.38
Questions have been raised of the utility of India’s no-first-use pledge in 
the wake of the Kargil offensive by Pakistan and in the post–September 11, 
2001, fear of terrorist groups gaining access to chemical, biological, and nu-
clear weapons. The no-first-use pledge has been under severe criticism among 
some Indian strategists, who believe that the policy would leave the full initia-
tive to Pakistan to undertake conventional offensives, given India’s commit-
ment against nuclear counterattack. This was evident in December 2003 when 
the National Security Advisory Board (NSAB), a government-appointed body 
consisting of the country’s leading national security experts, recommended 
abandoning India’s no-first-use pledge, “as the other nuclear weapon states 
have not accepted this policy,” and lifting the self-imposed moratorium on 
nuclear testing.39 The NSAB also proposed allowing nuclear use against non-
nuclear allies of nuclear weapons states, somewhat similar to the policies of 
other nuclear states.40 The Indian government, however, rejected these pro-
posals, stating that “the policy could not be changed overnight unless there 
was an extraordinary situation.”41 Instead, India has chosen a “delayed but 
assured retaliation strategy,” purely for deterrence purposes.42 
It has also been argued that in order to maintain a no-first-use policy, 
“India must be prepared to absorb multiple strikes before launching its retalia-
tory forces.” Indeed, the nuclear doctrine recognizes the likelihood of “repeti-
tive attrition attempts” by its nuclear opponents. The survivability of India’s 
command-and-control arrangements, especially between national com­mand 
and storage facilities and predelegation of launch authority in the event of a 
decapitation strike, also pose a challenge to the no-first-use pledge.43 The “wid-
ening of the core mission of nuclear weapons,” to include deterrence against 
chemical and biological attacks, although consistent with the nuclear policies 
of all first-generation nuclear states except China, poses additional problems. 
Further, “given the volatile ground realities in South Asia, it is not clear how 

Israel, India, and Pakistan  135
India would react if attacked by chemical and biological weapons by a non-
state actor.”44 It is also debatable if a large number of Indian nuclear missiles 
would survive an initial attack by Pakistan or China, and it may require mul-
tiple bombings of multiple targets of the opponents for retaliation to have a 
powerful impact.
A contingency that could severely test the Indian no-first-use policy would 
be a terrorist nuclear attack on Indian cities, troop formations, or nuclear fa-
cilities.45 With the help of elements of the Pakistani nuclear establishment or 
rogue nuclear scientists, terrorist groups could acquire nuclear weapons or 
nuclear materials, then assemble a dirty bomb, and use it against Indian pop-
ulation centers, troop deployments, or civilian/military facilities. If this sce-
nario develops, will India refrain from nuclear retaliation, especially if it has 
credible information that sections of the Pakistani military or scientific com-
munity have colluded with the terrorists? The terrorists need not come from 
Pakistan, but could be stationed in Afghanistan or another smaller neighbor-
ing state of India, like Nepal or Bangladesh. India is particularly vulnerable 
to nuclear terrorism given the presence of a number of terrorist outfits (some 
with the active support of the Pakistani intelligence agency, Inter-Services In-
telligence [ISI]) in neighboring countries, including Bangladesh and Nepal. 
The Indian decision to keep the weapon disassembled may be useful in delay-
ing a response, but it may have little or no relevance to terrorists using dirty 
bombs against Indian targets.
New Delhi’s harsh reaction to the December 2001 attack on the Indian 
parliament suggests that in the event of a dirty bomb attack by terrorist groups 
trained in Pakistan, the Indian government will be forced to take drastic steps 
to bolster its deterrent and to regain domestic credibility. Its response to the 
2001 crisis was to move toward a posture of massive mobilization of its troops 
all along the Pakistani border, initiating a limited war strategy with the as-
sumption that Pakistan would not use nuclear weapons in response to India’s 
conventional strikes against terrorist camps within Pakistani­-controlled 
Kashmir, as those attacks would not challenge Pakistan’s existence as a nation­-
state or its core strategic/security interests.
The mobilization crisis of 2002–03 ended inconclusively, leaving many 
questions about the Indian strategy. In response, in April 2004, India unveiled 
a new war doctrine called Cold Start, which changed the Indian defense pos-
ture from deterrence to compellence. As per Cold Start, India would station 
troops closer to the Pakistani border, cutting short the mobilization time for  

136  The Second-Generation Nuclear States
response and preventing international intervention. In response to Pakistani 
transgressions, India would strike back conventionally, with the assumption 
that Pakistan would be prevented from using nuclear weapons because of In­
dia’s retaliatory capability. It adopted an offensive posture in response to any 
Pakistan-induced crisis similar to the 2001 terrorist attacks on the Indian 
Parliament. Taking a leaf from NATO’s offensive doctrine during the Cold 
War, India now would mobilize its forces within a shorter span of time and 
engage in an integrated operation involving its Army, Navy, and Air Force. 
The blitzkrieg-style operation is meant to inflict multiple assaults on the Paki-
stani Army. For this purpose, India has constituted eight battle groups and 
deployed them nearer the border. The new doctrine and strategy are supposed 
to increase the political will of the Indian decision makers to use offensive 
power, prevent the United States and China from intervening in support of 
Pakistan, and put pressure on Islamabad to engage in peace negotiations.46 
According to some critics, this strategy is not all that credible and may cause 
nuclear war in the region.47 The reason is that if Pakistan prepares for a nu-
clear launch, India may have to preempt the attack with its own nuclear strike, 
abrogating its no-first-use policy.
Although India’s doctrinal commitment to non-use of nuclear weapons 
against nonnuclear states has some merits, critics point out that it is only a de-
claratory policy and that India could change it if and when a crisis emerges.48 
India has also been criticized for the exclusion of military allies of nuclear 
weapon states from the pledge of non-use. In India’s favor it is argued that  
“a country’s nuclear force structure, command and control system, alert sta-
tus and its deployment posture are based on its nuclear doctrine. First use 
doctrines require hair trigger alerts, launch-on-warning and launch-through-
attack strat­egies and elaborate surveillance, early warning and intelligence 
systems with nuclear warheads loaded on launchers and ready to fire.”49 In 
order to embellish its no-first-use policy, India has maintained its warheads 
in dis­assembled fashion and kept the delivery systems and nuclear core sepa-
rately, and it takes several days to assemble them as usable weapons. The no-
first-use policy also may be a factor in maintaining strategic stability in the 
region, given the short geographical distances between Indian and Pakistani 
cities and the danger associated with a policy of hair-trigger alert. Reputa-
tion considerations are also important here to the extent that India wants to 
project the image of a responsible nuclear weapon state and one that has kept 
nuclear capability for deterrence and status purposes only. It also wants to 
distinguish its policy from that of its archenemy, Pakistan.

Israel, India, and Pakistan  137
Although there are indications of rethinking on the issue of nuclear use, 
India seems in general to be observing the tradition of non-use, and is par-
tially influenced by it, as evident in its nuclear no-first-use policy, enshrined 
in the nuclear doctrine that it has adopted. India is treating nuclear weapons 
as different from war-fighting weapons and has been reluctant to engage in a 
massive arms buildup or the assembly of weapons which may change in the 
future if it gets into an arms race with China.50 The low-key approach to nu-
clear arms as an operational weapon suggests that India, somewhat similar to 
China, perceives nuclear possession for deterrence and status purposes, and 
is unlikely to widen its use even in the face of security threats it is likely to 
confront in the short and medium terms.
Pakistan
Pakistan pursued a nuclear program largely in response to the Indian pro-
gram and to offset its conventional inferiority vis-à-vis its longtime rival. 
Nuclear weapons have been perceived by the Pakistani elite as a great strategic 
equalizer in its relationship with India. In that sense, deterrence seems to be 
the main purpose of the Pakistani nuclear capability. However, the Pakistani 
military elite has found other uses for nuclear weapons, that is, as a means to 
obtain territorial gains in Kashmir in a limited war (with the nuclear threat 
shielding against India’s escalation), as evident in the 1999 Kargil operations, 
and in its continued resort to asymmetric warfare to wrest the territory from 
Indian control.51 Pakistan raised the nuclear threat in different crises involv-
ing India, in 1987, 1990, 1999, and 2002.52 The nuclear-use threats came in the 
context of Pakistani fears that India might use its conventional superiority 
to escalate military conflict in response to Pakistan’s asymmetric warfare in 
Kashmir.
How strongly ingrained is the tradition of non-use in the Pakistani case? 
There is no direct evidence of Pakistan’s willingness to break the tradition of 
non-use. In fact, Pakistan rarely mentions its attitude regarding nuclear use in 
contingencies other than those involving its nuclear adversary, India. In 2001, 
when a U.S. official suggested the possibility of nuclear use against its non-
nuclear neighbor Afghanistan, which was under the control of its former ally 
the Taliban, Pakistan countered that it could not entertain even the thought 
of using nuclear weapons in any fashion.53 This might have been partly be-
cause any hint of use of nuclear weapons against the Taliban and al-Qaeda 
would have created considerable domestic problems for the Pervez Musharaff 

138  The Second-Generation Nuclear States
regime. The threat of nuclear use against Muslim brethren would cause strong 
opposition in the Islamic world.
Beyond the deliberate choices of national leaders, Pakistan poses another 
risk to the tradition of nuclear use, of an inadvertent variety. Pakistan’s nu-
clear facilities may not be well-protected, despite American support in this re-
gard, and the country is prone to large-scale internal conflicts. The danger is if 
a Pakistani nuclear capability falls into the hands of terrorist groups through 
sympathizers within the Pakistani nuclear establishment. Such a group might 
then develop dirty bombs. In such a scenario, Pakistan could become a source 
of the breaking of the tradition of non-use, through active or passive conniv-
ance of nuclear use by nonstate actors. In addition, Pakistan, like India, may 
be facing difficulties in the basing of delivery systems. Mobile launchers are 
vulnerable to accidents, theft, and counterforce attacks, and it may be difficult 
to maintain communication with the National Command Authority in times 
of crisis. Hardened silos are also susceptible to preemptive attack, thereby 
raising the prospects of nuclear use early in a crisis.54
It also appears that the Pakistani military and scientific elite have been the 
most careless among all the nuclear states in the spread of such weapons and 
materials to actors that might potentially use these weapons. In that sense, 
Pakistan has been challenging the tradition of non-use indirectly. This is evi-
dent in the network of nuclear supplies centering on Abdul Qadeer Khan, the 
father of the Pakistani bomb, who provided nuclear weapon materials and 
technology to Iran, Libya, North Korea, and Iraq under Saddam Hussein.55
A second source of concern is the sympathies that some members of the 
Pakistani elite, especially within the nuclear establishment and the military, 
hold for the al-Qaeda terrorist network. Concerns have been raised regarding 
the possibility of transfer of nuclear weapons or materials to the terrorist group 
for creating a dirty bomb. Paperwork on designs for dirty bombs was uncov-
ered from al-Qaeda houses evacuated after the November 2001 American- 
led offensive in Afghanistan. These terrorist efforts benefited from the help of 
“two Pakistani nuclear scientists, Sultan Bashiruddin Mahmood and Chaudiri 
Abdul Majeed, who have admitted that they had had long discussions with al-
Qaeda officials in August 2001 about nuclear, chemical, and biological weap-
ons. Pakistani intelligence officials told The Washington Post that they believe 
that the scientists used a charity they had created as a cover to conduct secret 
talks with bin Laden.”56
Domestic turmoil, violent regime changes in Pakistan, and the possibility 
of nuclear weapons falling into wrong hands are other related issues. Although 

Israel, India, and Pakistan  139
Pakistan may not resort to nuclear use against its enemy India due to fear of 
nuclear retaliation, the question arises as to what happens if a terrorist group 
based in Pakistan or Afghanistan acquires such weapons. Will such a group 
be bound by the tradition of non-use or no first use? Will it try to use the ca-
pability in Afghanistan against U.S. and allied troops or against India so as 
to draw the two nuclear enemies into a nuclear war? Pakistan thus could be 
dragged into a nuclear war due to the behavior of terrorist groups operating 
from its territory, although its leaders may not wish one. Pakistan may thus 
indirectly cause the breaking down of the tradition of non-use under certain 
circumstances, especially given the weaknesses of the Pakistani state and the 
security circumstances of the region involving substate actors.
The domestic support in Pakistan for nuclear use is again a cause of con­cern. 
Surveys conducted by the Kroc Institute at the University of Notre Dame prior 
to the 1998 nuclear tests showed that a large majority of the Pakistani elite and 
general public surveyed were willing to use nuclear weapons in response to an 
Indian conventional assault. To a question on when nuclear weapons could be 
used, 44 percent of all Indian respondents said “never,” while only 1 percent 
of Pakistani respondents answered the same way. Among the Indian respon-
dents, 30 percent believed that nuclear weapons could be used if Pakistan were 
about to take over Kashmir, 24 percent if China was about to overwhelm India 
militarily, while 99 percent of Pakistani respondents suggested that nuclear 
weapons could be used “if India were about to attack Pakistan across the inter­
national border,” and “77 percent felt these weapons could be used if India 
were to intervene across Kashmir’s Line of Control.” According to the authors 
of this survey, “this difference in public opinion between the two countries 
may reflect both a greater sense of insecurity in Pakistan vis-à-vis the military 
superiority of its giant neighbor, as well as a lack of knowledge and informed 
debate about the actual consequences of using these weapons.”57 This lack of 
knowl­edge may mean that the tradition of non-use as well as deterrence based 
on caution and prudence may not have taken deep roots in Pakistan.
In the nuclear context, Pakistan’s ambitious grand strategy and tumultu-
ous domestic politics are part of the problem. A tendency on the part of the 
Pakistani elite to use any possible instrument to gain a tactical advantage in 
the zero-sum conflict with its larger neighbor, and also in its bargaining with 
the United States, suggests that nuclear weapons are yet to be perceived as 
very different instruments for conducting brinkmanship policies. According 
to one analyst, the Pakistani elite has viewed nuclear weapons as military “in-
struments that permit and facilitate low intensity conflict against India,” “ ‘last 

140  The Second-Generation Nuclear States
resort’ weapons to prevent the loss of Pakistan’s territory or the military defeat 
of the Pakistan armed forces,” and “deterrents to Indian conventional mili-
tary attack.” They are viewed politically as “instruments for nation-building,”  
“tools for domestic political and civil-military competition,” “symbols of defi-
ance of Western influence and Pakistan’s leadership within groups of regional 
and Islamic states,” “devices to draw international attention to the Kashmir 
issue,” and “materials and technology as potential goods to be sold or bar-
tered for acquiring foreign exchange and/or promoting the causes of friendly 
states or non-state movements.”58 This is further compounded by deeply held 
Islamist notions among members of the elite, who may favor the spread of nu­
clear weapons to other Islamic countries in order to wage jihad, an acceptable 
form of warfare.59
An Italy-based arms control group, Landau, conducted extensive inter-
views with members of the Pakistani ruling elite which shed light on con-
ceptions of nuclear use and the general utility of nuclear weapons. Accord-
ing to the report, General Musharaff has declared that the bomb is kept in 
a “disassembled state”—that is, “the fission core is kept separately from the 
non-nuclear (ignition) components” but can be assembled “very quickly.” The 
authors of the report interviewed Lt. Gen. Khalid Kidwai of the Strategic Plan 
Division, which controls nuclear weapons. Kidwai stated that nuclear weapons 
“are aimed solely at India” and that Pakistan will use nuclear weapons “if the 
very existence of Pakistan as a state is at stake.” However, he presented some 
thresholds or redlines under which the Pakistani military would consider 
nuclear use. These are: “a. India attacks Pakistan and conquers a large part 
of its territory; . . . b. India destroys a large part of either its land or air forces; 
 . . . c. India proceeds to the economic strangling of Pakistan; . . . d. India 
pushes Pakistan into political destabilization or creates a large scale inter-
nal subversion in Pakistan.” The authors of the report point out the problems 
with this approach, as it is an excessively diverse and broad set of motivations, 
and the use of “the nuclear threat to enforce a rational decision-making” by 
the opponent “is not reassuring.”60
The Pakistani elite also suffers from a peculiar dysfunctional learning 
from one India-Pakistan crisis to the next. The primary lessons drawn from 
crises are that realpolitik approaches work, that failure in previous coercive 
bargaining was due to lack of serious effort, and that next time, coercion will 
be effective. This tendency on Pakistan’s part to engage in multiple coercive 
bargaining crises has heightened the likelihood of nuclear use, as crisis begets 

Israel, India, and Pakistan  141
crisis.61 Some suggest that the Pakistani elites also seem to hold benign as-
sumptions about likely Indian responses to their conventional military offen-
sives and asymmetric attacks. Evidence to this effect came from past behavior, 
especially in 1999, when the elite believed that the “Indian response to the 
Pakistani fait accompli would be passive and quiescent; and that the Kargil 
war would have little effect on India-Pakistan relations.”62
All this implies that Pakistan may be in the early stages of nuclear learn-
ing, and the tradition of non-use may have yet to take deep roots in Pakista­ni 
calculations. The Pakistani elite has assigned a multitude of functions to 
nu­clear weapons beyond deterrence, which makes it difficult to maintain 
a strong normative commitment against nuclear use or threat of use. Fur-
ther, Pakistan’s use of nuclear cover to continue an asymmetric war against 
its stronger adversary also suggests a continuing revisionist streak in Paki-
stan’s foreign policy, coupled with a high risk-taking propensity in pursuit 
of that policy. Pakistan has attempted to make use of its nuclear capability 
against India in a conflict characterized by a “stability-instability paradox”— 
maintaining stability at the larger interstate level but instability at the substra-
tegic level so as to force concessions by the stronger nuclear adversary. This 
strategy has increased Indian resolve to confront Pakistan, and New Delhi 
has now abandoned its earlier cautious approach to newly devised limited-
war strategies, and has conducted mobilization all across the border. Turning 
stability into instability at all levels, the Indian proactive strategy may have 
called Pakistan’s strategic bluff, but it carries much higher risks that both an-
tagonists will allow nuclear brinkmanship beyond limits.63
Conclusion
The second-generation nuclear states—Israel, India, and Pakistan—exhibit 
varying degrees of commitment to the tradition of non-use. Yet, how deeply 
ingrained the tradition is in their national policies is yet to be determined. 
Learning in these nuclear states may be taking place slowly. One problem for 
all three is the possibility of terrorist strikes on their territories with WMD or 
dirty bombs, and uncertainty about the possible responses they may resort to.
Although none of these three countries has used nuclear weapons, Israel 
came closest in 1991, and has shown a willingness to employ the threat of use 
of nuclear weapons for political bargaining with Washington. India is perhaps 
the most committed to nuclear non-use and the tradition of non-use, as it has 
been historically a major advocate of a nondiscriminatory NPT and nuclear 

142  The Second-Generation Nuclear States
disarmament. Of the three states, Pakistan is the least normatively predis-
posed toward nuclear non-use, as its military elite has assigned a wide variety 
of goals to nuclear possession and has deliberately kept a low threshold for 
nuclear use, especially against its rival India. The willingness of its scientists 
and officials to spread nuclear materials and technology to regional challeng-
ers such as Iran and North Korea, as well as to terrorist groups who presum-
ably do not hold any inhibitions against nuclear use, suggest that the tradi-
tion of non-use has yet to take deep roots in the Pakistani elite’s calculations. 
However, as years pass by, Pakistan may recognize the need to observe more 
closely the norms against the spread of materials and realize the connection 
between such spread and the potential use of nuclear weapons or dirty bombs. 
Israel will still face challenges until a full-fledged peace develops with its Arab 
neighbors and subnational actors and a nuclear free zone is created in the 
Middle East, precluding nuclear acquisition by Arab states.

143
 7 NONNUCLEAR STATES, THE TRADITION,  
AND LIMITED WARS
t he t r adit ion of  non-use of  nucl ear weapons has profound implications 
beyond the security policies of nuclear weapon states (NWS). Because the tra-
dition chiefly refers to the non-use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear 
weapon states (NNWS), it is imperative to see if it has influenced NNWS’ for-
eign and security policy behaviors in a variety of regional and strategic con-
texts. How have NNWS perceived the operation of the tradition, and have 
they adjusted their policies in view of their understanding of it? Two areas can 
be identified in which the tradition seems to have been influential. The first 
area is the wars and crises involving NWS and NNWS and the role that nu-
clear weapons might have played in terms of both compellence and deterrence 
calculations. The second area relates to the bargaining between nuclear haves 
and have-nots in the nonproliferation realm, in particular the conclusion and 
extension of the unequal Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT). This chap-
ter focuses on the first subject, while Chapter 8 deals with the latter.1
The Tradition and Limited Wars
Cases of limited wars involving NWS and NNWS constitute a major area to 
assess the role of nuclear weapons in the strategic calculations of belligerent 
states. In this regard, a major puzzle is why the possession of nuclear weap-
ons did not prevent nonnuclear states from initiating wars and military cri-
ses against nuclear states. Some pertinent questions are: Why have nuclear 
weapons many times failed to produce the outcomes that are supposed to re-
sult from their possession? What role do they play in limited wars involving 

144  Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars
a nuclear-armed and a nonnuclear state? Are nuclear weapons irrelevant in 
strategic interactions between nuclear and nonnuclear states? More specifi-
cally, why would an NNWS initiate military action against an NWS adversary 
even when the possibility of a nuclear response exists?
It seems that the apparent boldness of nonnuclear states in initiating war 
against a nuclear adversary has been partially influenced by the tradition of 
non-use that all nuclear states have thus far observed. Nonnuclear initiators 
seem to believe that the nuclear defender is self-deterred through the opera-
tion of the tradition and other possible political and strategic constraints. The 
presence of the tradition in such contexts can be inferred from the fact that 
there exists no international law or treaty that explicitly bans the use of nu-
clear weapons, and yet nuclear states have refrained from making use of their 
advantages in armed confrontations vis-à-vis nonnuclear states, even when 
some such attacks would have made military sense. In addition, nonnuclear 
initiators did not possess nuclear capabilities so as to deter a potential nuclear 
retaliatory strike by their adversaries. If there existed neither an explicit legal 
ban nor a deterrent capability to prevent possible nuclear retaliation, what else 
could explain the belief among decision makers of nonnuclear states that nu-
clear weapons would not be used against them in their impending conflict?
A nonnuclear initiator could believe that its total obliteration by the nu-
clear state is unlikely to happen, especially in an asymmetric war in which 
combatants fight for limited stakes.2 A nonnuclear state could calculate that 
the nuclear state would be reluctant to use nuclear weapons, as it would be 
breaking the global tradition against nuclear use. Infringing the tradition 
could involve high reputation costs, especially in terms of world public opin-
ion. The key questions that decision makers of a nonnuclear initiator confront 
are: What would prevent the nuclear state from using its atomic weapons to 
obtain tactical and strategic objectives? Under what conditions could the war 
remain limited and nonnuclear?3
Limited Wars: Cases of War Initiation  
by Nonnuclear States
Since the dawn of the nuclear age, a dozen significant wars have occurred 
between nuclear states and their nonnuclear adversaries. The cases of wars 
between nuclear and nonnuclear states are the Korean War (1950–53), the 
Suez Conflict (1956), the Algerian War of Independence (1954–62), the Viet-
nam War (1965–73), the June/Six-Day War (1967), the October/Yom Kippur  

Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars  145
War (1973), the Sino-Vietnamese War (1979), the Afghan War (1979–89), 
the Falklands War (1982), the Lebanese War (1982), the Persian Gulf War 
(1990–91), Afghanistan (2001–), Gulf War II (2003–), and the Israel-Lebanon 
War (2006). Further, several wars and military assaults were initiated by the 
NNWS: the Chinese intervention in Korea against the United States/United 
Nations in 1950, the Vietnamese offensives against the United States in the 
1960s and early 1970s, the Egyptian and Syrian offensives against Israel in 
1973, the Argentine invasion of the British Falkland Islands in 1982, and the 
Iraqi attacks on Israel during the Persian Gulf War of 1991.4 In addition, there 
are several instances of attacks by substate groups on NWS. The Lebanese and 
Palestinian militant groups’ offensives against Israel since the 1970s, the at-
tacks by Sri Lankan Tamil guerillas as well as Kashmiri militants against the 
forces of a presumably nuclear-armed India in the 1980s and since the 1990s, 
respectively, and the Chechen nationalist struggle against Russia since 1994 
are major cases of subnational groups openly and continuously challenging 
nuclear states or undeclared nuclear states. The al-Qaeda strikes on the United 
States on September 11, 2001, were new major assaults on a nuclear state by a 
nonnuclear actor; the attacker in this instance was not a nation-state, but did 
have the active support of the Taliban regime of Afghanistan.
This section explores how the tradition may have affected limited wars 
in regional theaters. Specifically, I examine three cases of war initiation or 
other military assault by nonnuclear states against nuclear-armed adversar-
ies.5 These three cases are selected in order to examine how the tradition of 
non-use comes into play with regard to different types of deterrence, such as 
immediate and general. In one of the cases, the 1973 October/Yom Kippur 
War, the defender, Israel, had included nuclear retaliation in its deterrence 
strategy toward its Arab opponents. In the Falklands case, immediate deter-
rence was not the key element of British strategy vis-à-vis Argentina. But it is 
assumed that the superior nuclear and conventional capability that Britain 
possessed should have had a general deterrent effect, as there existed a pos-
sibility of the defender using such capabilities against the nonnuclear chal-
lenger in a worst-case contingency. In the third case, the Iraqi attack on Israel 
and Saudi Arabia (both directly and indirectly protected by U.S. alliance rela-
tionships), the nuclear factor is crucial as the defenders, Israel and the United 
States, on several occasions implicitly raised the possibility of nuclear retali-
ation, in particular against the use of chemical and biological attacks by the 
Iraqi leader. The strategic and political calculations of the decision makers of 

146  Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars
these states, especially with respect to their adversaries’ possession and likely 
retaliatory use of nuclear weapons, form the main focus of the case studies.
Case I: The 1973 October/Yom Kippur War
The October 1973 October/Yom Kippur War was initiated by two nonnuclear 
states—Egypt and Syria—against Israel, an undeclared nuclear state.6 Accord-
ing to one account, Israel had begun nuclear arms production at the Dimona 
facility in the Negev desert in the second half of the 1960s, and by 1973 it pos-
sessed twenty to twenty-five nuclear weapons. In addition, Israel reportedly 
held three or more operational missile launchers at Hirbat Zachariah, several 
Jericho I mobile missile launchers that were capable of hitting all major Arab 
capitals, and a squadron of nuclear-capable F‑4 fighter aircraft on full alert. 
Israel was also believed to have retained low-yield tactical nuclear weapons 
on artillery for battlefield purposes that were capable of striking targets at a 
twenty-five- to forty-five-mile distance.7 The Israeli leadership had implicitly 
stated this capability as the ultimate deterrent against an Arab attack. Prior to 
the war, leaders such as Moshe Dayan had hinted at the Israeli nuclear deter-
rent and made ambiguous nuclear threats.8
The Israeli Calculations
By 1973, Israeli deterrence calculations were based on the possession of supe-
rior conventional and nuclear capability. The leadership believed that since 
Egypt did not hold sufficient conventional capability to launch a successful at-
tack on Israeli airfields, nor could it match the Israeli preponderance in tanks 
and armored vehicles, it would be deterred from launching an offensive.9 De-
fense Minister Dayan believed that the Arab states would not initiate a war 
before the early 1980s, and until then the Israeli nuclear capability was likely 
to act as a deterrent against a conventional attack. The Arabs would need at 
least ten years to produce their own bomb to neutralize the Israeli nuclear 
capability. Without explicit Soviet cooperation, Egypt would not be in a posi-
tion to neutralize the Israeli nuclear capability. The Israeli leaders assumed 
that President Sadat’s expulsion of Soviet advisers in 1972 would further 
reduce the credibility of any nuclear guarantee that the Soviets might have 
given to Egypt.10 According to one account, Dayan believed that the Israeli 
capability to hit targets in the Soviet Union with nuclear weapons could also 
deter Moscow from supporting an Arab offensive, thereby removing a neces-
sary precondition for military action.11 While the threat of nuclear use is not 
the same as actual use, a threat implies a presumption and willingness to use, 

Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars  147
otherwise it is a meaningless bluff. Threats also “leave something to chance,” 
and it is possible that the threatener will end up in a commitment trap. Ac-
cidental use is another possibility. A nonnuclear opponent has no guarantee 
that nuclear weapons will not be used for these reasons as well as in the more 
significant scenario that the defender loses the conventional battle. It may be 
politically suicidal for the defender to back off in defeat. However, a weaker 
initiator may be willing to take a chance when it initiates a war because of its 
belief that a tradition against nuclear use exists and that the nuclear state will 
not cross the threshold.
The Egyptian leaders, especially Gamal Abdel Nasser and Anwar Sadat, 
were well aware of the Israeli efforts to acquire nuclear weapons. In 1960, 
Nasser had threatened to go to war if Israel acquired nuclear weapons. He 
had warned that Egypt would invade Israel “to destroy the base of aggres-
sion before that base is used against us.”12 Some suggest that the 1967 Egyp-
tian mobilization was partly motivated by a desire to engage in a preventive 
war against Israeli nuclear capability, although the Egyptian leader at the last 
minute had called off such an attack.13 Nasser’s initial response to the Israeli 
nuclear program was that “because of its destructive power, a nuclear weapon 
is not a real weapon that can be used to win regional wars. The Israeli atomic 
bomb, if such [a thing] existed, was therefore irrelevant to the Arab-Israeli 
conflict. Thus the Arabs ought not to be overly concerned about rumors of 
Israeli nuclear weapons, because Israel could not use them even if they had 
them.”14 Even with such a posture, from 1967 to 1973, Arab leaders and the 
media talked continuously of the Israeli nuclear capability and its implica-
tions.15 The Egyptians were also presumed to have received intelligence infor-
mation on the Israeli nuclear weapons and strategy from Soviet spies who had 
penetrated the Israeli defense and intelligence establishments.16
The Egyptian Assessment
The limited available accounts suggest that prior to launching the war in  
1973, the Egyptian leadership’s strategic assessment did take into account the 
Israeli nuclear capability, although outwardly they projected the impression 
that nuclear weapons did not matter in their war plans. To President Sadat 
and his advisors, a limited attack confined to the occupied Sinai would pre-
clude the use of nuclear weapons by Israel. They believed that Israel would 
not use weapons of mass destruction (WMD) in order to protect the Sinai, a 
territory which was not included in the pre-1967 borders of Israel. Unless the 
population in Tel Aviv was attacked and the Israeli heartland was in grave 

148  Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars
danger, the Egyptian leadership calculated that there was little chance that 
Israel would unleash its nuclear weapons.17
Thus the Egyptian leadership calculated that possible Israeli nuclear use 
could be prevented if Egypt engaged in a limited war for limited military 
and political objectives, relying entirely on limited conventional capabilities. 
General Saad el-Shazly, the Egyptian chief of staff in 1973, points out that the 
military leadership adopted a limited-aims strategy as it realized that it was 
impossible for Egypt to “launch a large-scale offensive to destroy the enemy 
concentrations in Sinai or to force enemy withdrawal from Sinai and the Gaza 
strip. All that our capabilities would permit was a limited attack. We could 
aim to cross the Canal, destroy the Bar-Lev line and then take up a defensive 
posture.”18 The Egyptian leadership conceived war as a means to attract super­
power attention to the stalemated dispute. Specifically, it was anticipated that 
a surprise attack, confined to an area of twenty miles on both sides of the Suez 
Canal, and a war fought for three weeks would attract U.S.-Soviet attention 
to the ongoing conflict. The superpower intervention, especially U.S. pres-
sure, would force Israel to come to the negotiating table. The prior contacts by 
President Sadat with U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger suggest that he 
wanted to convey to the United States, and through them to Israel, his limited 
war intentions and thereby restrain Israel from nuclear retaliation.19
In the early 1970s, the Egyptian leadership debated the issue of nuclear 
weapons and the need for Soviet nuclear arms to resist the Israeli threat. One 
group, consisting of Ali Sabri, Muhammed Heikal, General Mohammed 
Sadek, and Ismail Fahmi, demanded either the positioning of Soviet nuclear 
arms and delivery systems in Egypt or at least Soviet guarantees against pos-
sible future Israeli threats. Sadat feared political consequences in such a move. 
The Soviet rejection of the demand made it easier for Sadat to ignore the op-
position to his policy on the Israeli nuclear capability.20
Although the Israeli nuclear capability figured in the Egyptian calcula-
tions, the strategy that the leadership adopted—limited aims/fait accompli—
was expected to circumvent that capability. Nuclear weapons were not viewed 
as deterring a limited conventional war. The tradition of non-use resulting 
from reputational and instrumental considerations that prohibit the use of 
nuclear weapons for anything other than a mortal danger to the existence of 
a nuclear state, in this case Israel, seemed to have given sufficient assurance 
to Egyptian leaders that these weapons would not be used on the battlefield 
for the protection of the occupied Sinai, which Israel was ready to trade off for 

Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars  149
the correct diplomatic and political price. They also calculated that the antici-
pated intervention of the United States and the Soviet Union would act as an 
additional restraint on Israel from escalating the conflict to the nuclear level.
Case II: The 1982 Falklands War
The invasion and occupation of the Falkland Islands by Argentina, a non-
nuclear state, and its determination to wage a war against Britain, a nuclear 
state, in order to maintain its control over the islands, show the relevance and 
application of the tradition of non-use in regional conflicts. It can be argued  
that the British strategy toward Argentina prior to the war did not offer a cred-
ible immediate deterrent threat based on conventional or nuclear capability. 
The Argentine military junta was not given a convincing warning as to the 
seriousness of the British intent to protect the islands militarily. “No strongly 
worded warnings, even private ones, emanated from London until 31 March, 
when the invasion was all but a fait accompli.”21 Despite the lack of warning, 
the Argentine leadership should have pondered the British conventional and 
nuclear capability and its potential to inflict serious damage on Argentina’s 
major population and industrial centers, as it was about to challenge a de-
clared nuclear power and permanent member of the UN Security Council.
British Nuclear Presence
The British nuclear capability included two aircraft carriers—HMS Invinci-
ble and Hermes—with tactical nuclear weapons such as WE177 free-fall and 
depth bombs on board. The delivery systems comprised aircraft such as Buc-
caneer and Sea Harrier, and helicopters such as Sea King and Lynx. The Royal 
Air Force also possessed tactical aircraft such as Vulcan, Jaguar, Buccaneer, 
and Tornado that carried nuclear weapons. Forty of the British destroyers and 
frigates were capable of bearing depth bombs for helicopter delivery.22 The nu-
clear force also included one hundred Polaris missiles, which could have been 
fired on Argentine targets from an appropriate distance in the Atlantic.23
The British apparently brought some of these nuclear arms to the theater 
during the war. Some reports suggested that HMS Sheffield carried nuclear 
weapons and that a few nuclear depth charges were available for use against 
Argentina if necessary. According to one report, the Sheffield brought down 
nuclear weapons when it sank.24 The Sea King helicopters on the aircraft car-
riers reportedly possessed depth charges, while the Harrier jump jets carried 
free-fall bombs.25 There were also reports of Britain sending a Polaris nuclear 

150  Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars
submarine to the South Atlantic following the sinking of Sheffield. The sub-
marine was reportedly sent to the South Atlantic with the instruction “to be 
ready for action if need be.”26
Partial revelations by the British Ministry of Defense (MOD) in December 
2003 confirmed that British ships in the task force that recaptured the Falk-
land Islands in 1982 carried nuclear weapons. The MOD claimed, “there was 
never any intention to use the weapons during the war and that their presence 
did not break any disarmament treaties.” Before the ships reached the com-
bat zone, the weapons were transferred to returning ships and in the process, 
“seven containers were damaged ‘in some way’ when they were transporting 
the weapons on to other ships,” although none of the weapons themselves was 
damaged. “The crippled ship [Sheffield] was towed for six days until it sank.” 
According to the MOD, “the transfers of the WE177 depth charges took place 
at various times during April, May and June 1982, ‘well away from other sea-
going traffic, and the weapons were held in ships with the best protected mag-
azines before being returned to Britain.’ ” However, it was “routine practice for 
British ships to carry nuclear weapons” as part of a policy of refusing “to con-
firm or deny the presence of nuclear weapons at any particular time or place.” 
The MOD admission did not clear the allegation that “nuclear weapons were 
sunk along with the HMS Sheffield after the ship was hit by an Exocet a month 
into the War.”27 The MOD said a “decision not to use the weapons was made 
before the ships left port. But they were kept on board because to remove them 
would take 36 hours, delaying the Royal Navy deployment to the South Atlan-
tic. In fact, the weapons did not reach the combat zone as they were removed 
on the journey and transferred to ships returning to the UK.”28 According to 
earlier estimates, “more than half of Britain’s stock of naval nuclear weapons 
set off to the Falklands war aboard HMS Hermes and HMS Invincible.”29
The MOD later declassified additional information on the nuclear ques-
tion. Documents released in October 2005 revealed that 75 percent of the 
Royal Navy’s nuclear depth charges were on board HMS Hermes and HMS 
Invincible. The papers revealed that British commanders were extremely con-
cerned about the possibility that nuclear “weapons might fall into the hands 
of the Argentines, by salvage, if one of the [Royal Navy] ships had been sunk, 
stranded or captured,” and that the acquisition of nuclear weapons by a non-
nuclear state by this way would have “damaging consequences.”30 The British 
official history of the war contends that the Cabinet ministers wanted to re-
move the weapons from the task force, but the time it required and the pub-
licity it would have received precluded such an action. The study also cites 

Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars  151
earlier internal papers discussing the nuclear option and its deletion from of-
ficial considerations. However, the commander of the task force was willing 
to take nuclear weapons to the Falklands, just in case Russian submarines got 
involved on the Argentine side; the official history also declares that “while 
the main influences on decision-making were essentially logistical and politi-
cal, an admittedly far-fetched operational possibility was also in play.”31 Two 
questions arise: What would have happened had the British suffered heavy 
losses including their warships? In the face of losing the battle, what would 
have been Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher’s response? It still remains at the 
hypothetical realm whether Thatcher would have ordered a nuclear strike or 
threatened to use such weapons against Argentina. Having capabilities in the 
theater gave her options that she would not have had, had the task force un-
loaded its weapons prior to departure. The chance of a nuclear accident also 
looms large in this case, as the Argentine torpedoes could have destroyed one 
or more of the nuclear-carrying British vessels, posing the risk of radiation 
hazards to the region.
The Argentine Calculations
The Argentine calculations prior to the war rested on the premise that Brit-
ain would not use either conventional force or nuclear weapons to protect a 
faraway island group with little direct economic or strategic value. Moreover, 
the Argentine action did not directly challenge the survival of the British is-
lands themselves in any sense.32 The Argentine military and political assump-
tions were based on a limited-aims strategy under which the Argentine forces 
would occupy the islands and pursue negotiations thereafter to gain sover-
eignty over the disputed territories. The main objective of the April 2, 1982, 
invasion was to create a fait accompli which Britain would not be able to alter 
without incurring major political and economic costs. “Occupy to negotiate” 
was the key objective of the invasion.33 Before the Argentine junta ordered the 
invasion, Foreign Minister Nicanor Costa Mendez sought opinion from the 
Argentine missions in London and New York regarding the likely response 
from Britain, and received the advice that the Thatcher government would 
most likely sever diplomatic relations and impose trade and economic sanc-
tions, but would refrain from military counteractions.34 The drastic reduction 
of the Royal Naval Fleet in the Atlantic—especially the decision to remove 
HMS Endurance from South Atlantic waters—and the previous decision to 
evacuate the British Antarctic mission from South Georgia confirmed the 
Junta’s expectation that the British would not “deploy major forces to protect 

152  Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars
the islands.”35 Argentine strategists calculated that with surprise and a favor-
able local balance they could resist an unlikely British counterattack, and a 
force of five thousand men in defensive positions could protect the Islands 
against an attack by a British force three times larger.36
The crucial question for our purposes is the Argentine assessment of Brit-
ain’s nuclear capability and the likelihood of nuclear use. The possibility ex-
isted because if Britain incurred major losses in the war and was still unable 
to dislodge the Argentines, the Thatcher government would have been under 
tremendous pressure to use all available capability to achieve Britain’s stra-
tegic and battlefield objectives. The junta considered the chances of Britain 
using its nuclear forces in the event of its losing the conventional battle and 
discounted such a possibility. It was viewed as highly improbable, as Britain 
would incur the world’s wrath by breaking the tradition of non-use. Addi-
tionally, the United States and the Soviet Union would have prevented the 
British from using nuclear weapons in a small conventional theater like the 
South Atlantic.37 According to two Latin America scholars, “[w]hile Britain 
did possess nuclear weapons, normative inhibitions against the threat of their 
first use were no doubt severely constraining, and there is no evidence of the 
junta being intimidated by this extremely unlikely possibility.”38
Although the initiator in this case did not directly attack the defender’s 
home territory, the British nuclear capability was a factor that the military 
junta seems to have considered prior to their launching of the invasion of the 
Falkland Islands. The Argentine leadership believed that the British would 
not respond militarily, with either conventional or nuclear weapons. Even 
when the British task force, with reports of nuclear weapons aboard its ships, 
began to sail to liberate the islands, the Argentines were convinced that the 
formidable conventional and nuclear capability would not be used to liberate 
the islands or to attack the Argentine mainland. Nuclear retaliation by Brit-
ain was discounted and the tradition of non-use did play a major role in that 
calculation.
Case III: The 1991 Persian Gulf War
A third case under examination here is the 1991 Persian Gulf War, especially 
the Iraqi missile attacks on Israel, an undeclared NWS. The war is significant 
to the extent that Iraq, a nonnuclear state, was fighting a massive coalition led 
by the United States, in which other NWS such as Britain and France were par-
ticipants. The U.S. efforts at compellence during the latter half of 1990 did not 
work, as the regime of Saddam Hussein chose to fight rather than withdraw  

Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars  153
from Kuwait. In addition to its resistance and missile attacks on Israel, Iraq 
also engaged in missile attacks on Saudi Arabia, arguably a state under U.S. 
security protection and an active member of the coalition.
U.S. Calculations
During several phases of the conflict, the allies threatened, implicitly and ex-
plicitly, the possibility of a nuclear strike in retaliation to a chemical or bio-
logical attack by the Iraqi forces. These threats included a letter that President 
George H. W. Bush wrote to Saddam Hussein, which was to be delivered to 
Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz by U.S. Secretary of State James Baker at his 
meeting in Geneva on January 9, 1991, in which he warned against the use of 
chemical or biological weapons by Iraq.39 Bush stated: “the American people 
will demand the strongest possible response. You and your country will pay a 
terrible price if you order unconscionable actions of this sort.”40 On August 14, 
1990, Secretary of Defense Richard Cheney had warned that the United States 
had “a wide range of military capability that would let us respond with over-
whelming force and extract a very high price should he be foolish enough to 
use chemical weapons on American forces.”41 In January Cheney stated: 
Were Saddam Hussein foolish enough to use weapons of mass destruction, the 
US response would be absolutely overwhelming and it would be devastating 
. . . I assume [Saddam] knows that if he were to resort to chemical weapons, 
that would be an escalation to weapons of mass destruction and that the 
possibility then would exist, certainly with respect to the Israelis, for example, 
that they might retaliate with unconventional weapons as well.42
In response to Iraq’s biological weapons, American officials debated the 
best strategy to deal with the threat. Rick Atkinson states that to some U.S. of-
ficials, “detonating a small nuclear warhead may be a legitimate employment 
of one weapon of mass destruction to negate another. Temperatures reaching 
at least twenty thousand degrees Fahrenheit in three seconds were believed 
necessary to ensure that no spores survived an attack.” Brigadier General 
Buster C. Glosson told Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) Chairman Colin Powell: “We 
both know there is one sure way to get the temperature hot enough,” referring 
to thermonuclear weapons. “ ‘Yeah,’ the Chairman replied, ‘but we don’t talk 
about that.’ ”43 Powell also mentions in his memoirs that Cheney asked Pow-
ell about the nuclear option, to which he replied: “Let’s not even think about 
nukes . . . you know we’re not going to let that genie loose.” Cheney said: “Of 
course not . . . But take a look to be thorough and just out of curiosity.” Powell 

154  Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars
formed a small group to study the nuclear options and “the results unnerved” 
him. “To do serious damage to just one armored division dispersed in the des-
ert would require a considerable number of small tactical nuclear weapons. 
I showed this analysis to Cheney and then had it destroyed. If I had had any 
doubts before about the practicality of nukes on the field of battle, this report 
clinched them.”44
The Israeli Response
Although the Israeli government did not make an explicit threat of use of 
nuclear weapons in retaliation to chemical or biological weapons, statements 
they made suggested that the price could be very heavy for such an attack. 
Israeli Prime Minister Yizhak Shamir had warned in December 1990 that Iraq 
“will be harmed in [a] most serious way . . . whoever will dare to attack us will 
be attacked seven times more.”45 Given the Israeli population’s sensi­tivity to 
gas attacks arising out of the Holocaust experience, it was highly likely that 
major casualties arising from an Iraqi chemical attack would have generated 
calls for a nuclear response. During the Iraqi missile attack, the Israelis re-
portedly activated their nuclear capability by bringing nuclear-capable Jericho 
missiles out of their storage facilities, although it was meant more as a warn-
ing to the United States to expedite its supply of Patriot missile batteries than 
as a signal to Hussein.46 The possibility that nuclear weapons could be used 
in the war seems to have entered into the Iraqi leadership’s calculations, but 
from actual behavior it appears that the Iraqis discounted such a use in re-
sponse to a conventional attack.
Iraqi Calculations
From Saddam Hussein’s behavior during the conflict, it can be inferred that 
the Iraqi calculations in 1991 were partially driven by the tradition of non-
use.47 However, it also appears that deterrence was effective in preventing 
Iraqi use of WMD. In August 1995, UN Inspector Rolf Ekeus revealed, quot-
ing Iraqi officials, that in December 1990, on the eve of the war, “they loaded 
three types of biological agents into roughly 200 missile warheads and aircraft 
bombs that were then distributed to airbases and a missile site.” This decision 
was taken after the UN Security Council voted to liberate Kuwait “using all 
necessary means.” Ekeus states that Iraq decided not to use these weapons 
following the ultimatum by Baker at the Geneva conference.48 The decision by 
Saddam not to use chemical or biological weapons against Israel and the Al-
lied forces suggests that he was deterred by the threat of overwhelming retali-
ation (including a possible nuclear attack). Tariq Aziz has acknowledged that 

Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars  155
the Iraqi leadership believed the prewar threat by Baker that an Iraqi WMD 
attack on coalition forces would be met with the “most terrible response,” as 
equivalent to nuclear retaliation.49
In his memoirs, Baker acknowledges that he purposely left the impres-
sion to the Iraqis that the United States might retaliate with tactical nuclear 
weapons in response to their chemical or biological attack on coalition forces, 
even though President Bush had already decided not to resort to nuclear re-
taliation as he thought the best deterrent would be regime removal. To Baker, 
the calculated ambiguity regarding how the United States might act worked 
as a deterrent on Iraq against chemical use.50 Hussein Kamal, cousin and 
son-in-law of Saddam Hussein and Iraq’s minister of defense, who defected 
to Jordan, acknowledged: “Any mistake of using these unconventional weap-
ons will make the major powers use nuclear weapons, which means Iraq will 
be exterminated.”51 The statements by Iraqi officials indicate that the fear of 
nuclear retaliation was part of the reason for Iraq’s not using chemical and 
biological weapons in the war.
But his initial decision to assemble the chemical and biological weapons 
suggests that Saddam Hussein discounted nuclear retaliation by the allies. 
The question also remains as to why he continued the barrage of missile at-
tacks on the Israeli civilian population in the heart of the country, Tel Aviv, 
for over a month and broke the psychological barrier that Israel had created 
since 1969 against an Arab state’s direct attack on Israel proper. During this 
period, Iraq launched eighty-eight Scud missiles on targets in Israel and Saudi 
Arabia, killing about 32 people and wounding 250 or so. It was only under 
intense U.S. pressure and the transfer of U.S. Patriot antimissile batteries that 
Israel decided not to involve itself in the war.52 Some have suggested that in 
addition to fear of retaliation, Hussein did not use nonconventional weapons 
because of their ineffectiveness.53 It was reported that Iraq possessed thirty 
chemical warheads for its al-Husayn missiles, but the warheads were never 
tested and they were supposed to explode on impact and not in the air, sug-
gesting that casualties from the attacks need not have been that high.54
However, these considerations would probably not have prevented Hussein 
from using such weapons if allied forces advanced to Baghdad and engaged 
in an offensive meant to topple him from power. Faced with the near cer-
tainty of death or life imprisonment Saddam Hussein could have unleashed 
his chemical or biological weapons against the advancing troops, a possible 
reason for President Bush to order a halt to the advance after the liberation 
of Kuwait, despite the recommendation by General H. Norman Schwarzkopf, 

156  Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars
commander of the operations, to continue the war. Indeed Hussein had re-
portedly dispersed chemical and biological weapons and predelegated to local 
commanders the authority to retaliate with chemical weapons in the event of 
a U.S. invasion of Baghdad.55 Hussein also warned U.S. Senators at a meeting 
in February 1990 that he had given authority to commanders to use chemical 
and biological attacks on Israel if Israel used atomic weapons on Iraq. A former 
Egyptian army chief states that “If Israel strikes” Iraq with nuclear weapons, 
Baghdad was willing to “strike at it with the binary chemical weapon,” and 
that Saddam Hussein had “given instructions to the commanders of the air 
bases and the missile formations that once they hear Israel has hit any place 
in Iraq with the atomic bomb, they will load the chemical weapon with as 
much as will reach Israel and direct it at its territory.”56 Here Saddam’s threat 
appears to be deterrent, but the expectation was that chemical and biological 
weapons would act as a deterrent against nuclear attack.
The fact that Iraq engaged in several high-risk and high-profile missile at-
tacks on the Israeli heartland and continued doing so for over a month sug-
gests that Saddam Hussein was fairly confident that as long as he refrained 
from using nonconventional weapons, Israel would not retaliate with nuclear 
weapons. His calculation cannot be completely devoid of the tradition of nu-
clear non-use, as he was inferring that nuclear weapons were a special class 
apart and that the United States and Israel would not use these weapons even 
when the state of Israel was under missile attack, generating panic all over 
the country for a month. In his calculations, an Israeli retaliatory attack on 
Iraq could unravel the U.S.-led coalition, as its Arab members could withdraw 
their support for the U.S. war efforts. Saddam was willing to gamble here as he 
was discounting an Israeli nonconventional response in his risk assessment. 
In addition, Saddam burned oil fields in Kuwait, a redline which could have 
resulted in massive U.S. retaliation. The United States had warned of terrible 
consequences if he did burn the oil fields. President Bush had warned that 
three acts by Iraq, use of chemical or biological weapons, support of terror-
ist acts, and the burning of oil fields, were “unconscionable acts” that would 
“demand [the] strongest possible response.”57
Conclusion
In the three asymmetric wars involving a nuclear and a nonnuclear state 
discussed here, the weaker initiator did not expect nuclear retaliation by its 
stronger opponents. The initiator’s limited aims/fait accompli strategy par-
ticularly precluded the possibility of nuclear retaliation by the defender, and  

Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars  157
the tradition of non-use appears to have been a factor in their prewar assess­
ments. The tradition enters the picture in such a way that it undermines the 
prospects of nuclear use and, therefore, deterrence at the substrategic level. 
The stronger nuclear power is often self-deterred from making explicit nu-
clear threats partially due to the tradition of non-use. Nuclear weapons are 
reserved for higher levels of conflict and if a state were to raise the nuclear 
threat, it would suffer reputation costs, as breaking the tradition is not easy in 
the face of limited challenges by a nonnuclear state.
It is arguable that the weaker challenger in at least one of the cases was 
deterred from using chemical and biological weapons against nuclear op-
ponents, fearing nuclear retaliation. Saddam Hussein’s unwillingness to use 
such weapons in both Gulf Wars might have been due to the fear of regime 
survival as well as possible nuclear retaliation. However, the weaker adversary 
in this case might have been self-deterred from using chemical and biological 
weapons because of fear of collateral damage to one’s own population, fear 
of losing international support, fear of losing power, and fear of death if the 
stronger power occupied the state and destroyed the regime. Keeping war 
limited is a prerequisite for a weaker challenger to wage and win politically in 
an asymmetric war involving a larger nuclear power. The tradition appears to 
be part of the mix of reasons for nonnuclear states’ direct military challenge 
to nuclear powers.

158
 8 THE TRADITION AND THE  
NONPROLIFERATION REGIME
in chapt er  7, I discussed the calculations of nonnuclear weapon states 
(NNWS) that confronted nuclear weapon states (NWS) in crises and wars. 
Beyond wars and crises, what role, if any, has the tradition of non-use of nu-
clear weapons played in the calculations of nonnuclear states in their bargain-
ing with nuclear states on the conclusion and the renewal of the Nuclear Non­
proliferation Treaty (NPT) and associated instruments of the nonproliferation 
regime? Although it is rarely stated explicitly, it seems the tradition has had 
an impact on the calculations of a large number of nonnuclear states with re-
spect to their willingness to accede and continuously adhere to the nuclear 
nonproliferation regime. I argue that the presence of the quasi-norm inherent 
in the tradition of non-use has been one of the reasons for many of the tech­no­
logically capable among the 187 states forswearing their nuclear weapons op-
tions and joining the NPT. Their choices in most instances arose from a belief 
that nuclear states are unlikely to attack them with their weapons unless their 
core security interests, including existence as nation-states, are threatened. In 
2008, there were only four key non-NPT states (India, Israel, Pakistan, and 
North Korea) and one other, Iran, which is a signatory but is believed to be vi-
olating its NPT commitments. Although their choices for nuclear acquisition 
have several regional and domestic-level causes, one thing is common to them 
all: these states have good reason not to take for granted the implicit guarantee 
inherent in the NPT on non-use and other associated treaties such as nuclear 
free zones, and the partial negative security assurances made by the NWS.
While most states have conformed to the NPT, there are variations in 
national positions on the question of the significance of non-use guarantees  

The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime  159
implicit and explicit in the promises made by nuclear states. These variations 
in the approaches of different states have been partially a function of their 
particular strategic contexts—that is, are they in a hostile environment, do 
they have nuclear enemies, and are they adversarial to one or more of the nu-
clear powers, especially the United States? Thus, states that would characterize 
their security environment in the affirmative with respect to any one of the 
above questions have often been the most ardent advocates of explicit legal 
commitments by nuclear states in order to prevent the use of nuclear weapons 
against them. But the persistent demands on the part of some of the NNWS 
for legally binding security guarantees illustrate that even those states that do 
not face hostile security environments or adversarial relations with any of the 
nuclear powers are not fully convinced of the robustness of the tradition of 
non-use as a sufficient deterrent against nuclear use against them in all con-
tingencies. Moreover, the efforts at creating nuclear-free zones in different re-
gions of the world with additional protocols—meant for NWS to renounce the 
use or threat of use of nuclear weapons against contracting parties—suggest  
that NNWS are not fully convinced of the robustness of the tradition of non-
use under all circumstances and that they would want to entrench the tradi-
tion in legally binding arrangements.
The efforts by the NNWS to convert the informal norm of the tradition 
of non-use into a codified and legally binding norm are evident in their posi-
tions at the negotiations that led to the conclusion of the NPT in 1968, and the 
several review conferences that followed the Treaty’s commencement, espe-
cially the 1995 conference that resulted in the Treaty’s extension in perpetu-
ity; and, since then, the 2000 and 2005 review conferences. Further, NNWS 
were instrumental in the 1994 UN General Assembly referral to the Interna-
tional Court of Justice (ICJ) about the legality of nuclear weapons use. The 
fact that it was the UN General Assembly (where these states have equal vot-
ing rights with NWS), and not the Security Council, that decided to refer to 
the ICJ the question of the legality of nuclear use, attests to the concerns of 
the nonnuclear powers over the robustness of the quasi-norm. In addition, in 
four regions of the world, states have formed nuclear-free zones which include 
additional protocols to be signed by NWS promising no nuclear attack on 
the member states. These efforts also suggest the role of nonnuclear states as 
reputation intermediaries and norm entrepreneurs and as powerful advocates 
of the tradition of non-use in its creation and persistence.

160  The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime
Except for China, the five nuclear states that are also permanent members 
of the UN Security Council (P-5) have in general opposed offering a compre-
hensive and legally binding treaty or convention on nuclear non-use, largely 
due to their desire to maintain ambiguity surrounding nuclear use to deter 
war against them. Further, to them, much of the compellent value of nuclear 
weapons possession could evaporate if a legally binding non-use treaty exists. 
Moreover, the aura surrounding nuclear weapons and the special status the 
NWS enjoy in the international system as great powers and as P-5 member 
states could be depreciated if they formally gave up their right to use nuclear 
weapons forever.1
The chief venue where the nonnuclear states have tried to erect legal re-
straints on nuclear states regarding the non-use of nuclear weapons has been 
the United Nations.
The United Nations
At the United Nations, the nonnuclear states have made several attempts at 
nuclear disarmament in general and at obtaining a formal commitment on 
non-use of nuclear weapons in particular. These efforts were manifest in the 
debates at the annual First Committee meetings and General Assembly reso-
lutions on nuclear weapons, in holding three special sessions on disarmament 
(1978, 1982, and 1988), and in commissioning studies on the effects of the use 
of nuclear weapons.2 A significant effort by the nonnuclear states was to pass 
a resolution that referred the question of the legality of nuclear use to the ICJ 
in 1994. The history of their efforts needs to be traced back to the early years 
of the nuclear age.
During the 1950s and 1960s, the United Nations General Assembly and its 
disarmament forum—the Eighteen Nation Disarmament Committee (ENDC) 
and its successor, the Geneva Disarmament Conference—were the main ven-
ues for the NNWS campaign for nuclear non-use as well as for nonprolif-
eration. The creation of the nascent tradition appears to have been helped by 
the activism of the nonnuclear states. In this sense, they played a key role of 
norm entrepreneurship along with scientists, strategists, and nongovernmen-
tal organizations such as peace movements. The efforts by nonnuclear states, 
especially those belonging to the nonaligned movement, for a legally binding 
non-use pledge, were most visible in the 1960s during the NPT negotiations 
at the United Nations. From the perspective of the nonaligned states, a ban on 
nuclear testing and eventual nuclear disarmament were very much part of the 

The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime  161
effort to make sure such weapons were never used. During the ENDC’s delib-
erations, many nonaligned countries made attempts to obtain an agreement 
by nuclear states to end nuclear testing, which they viewed as the first step 
toward nuclear disarmament and eventual abolition of the weapon. These ef-
forts were largely the result of the atmospheric nuclear tests conducted by the 
nuclear superpowers in the 1950s, which generated considerable anxiety inter­
nationally about the dangers of nuclear radiation and contamination.
As discussed in Chapter 3, beginning in 1946, the United States con­ducted 
several atmospheric tests over the Bikini Atoll in the Marshall Islands of Mi-
cronesia. The hydrogen bomb Bravo was tested in March 1954 by the United 
States at the Atoll, forcing the islanders to leave their homelands. The im­pact 
of the tests was felt in a large geographical area, and among the cas­ualties 
were several Japanese fishermen in the area, one of whom was killed due to 
radiation poisoning. These tests also resulted in diseases such as thyroid can-
cer, eye cataracts, leukemia, birth defects, and miscarriages among the island 
populations for several years after the explosions.3 This led to worldwide pro-
tests, including intellectuals such as Albert Schweitzer, Betrand Russell, and 
Albert Einstein. In April 1954, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru of India pro-
posed at the United Nations a standstill agreement on nuclear testing as a 
prelude to a ban on nuclear weapons production. In this regard, efforts by the 
Afro-Asian states at the United Nations had an impact, as the superpowers 
began to negotiate a test ban treaty. The Partial Test Ban Treaty (PTBT) was 
signed in 1963, banning nuclear tests in the atmosphere, in outer space, and 
underwater. Underground nuclear explosions were allowed to continue, but 
the eventual goal was stated as the permanent banning of all nuclear tests.4
But success in banning categories of tests was not matched by achieve-
ments in disarmament or legalizing non-use. Prior to the conclusion of the 
NPT, some limited declarations against first use were made both by UN bod-
ies and nuclear states unilaterally; but the objective of a legally binding agree-
ment was not met. In November 1961, the UN General Assembly passed, by 
a margin of fifty-five to twenty, a resolution that declared, “any use of nuclear 
weapons would be a violation of the UN charter and an international war 
crime.”5 The U.S. Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, while opposing the call for 
a conference to draft a treaty to ban nuclear first use, promised that “[t]he 
United States government can and does offer the fullest assurances that it will 
never use any weapon, large or small, with aggressive intent. But the United 
States, like other free nations, must be fully prepared to exercise effectively 

162  The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime
the inherent right of individual and collective self-defense as provided in the 
UN Charter.”6
The issue of no first use would become a major topic as a result of China’s 
nuclear tests in 1964 and the hue and cry it generated in neighboring coun-
tries, especially India. This did not produce any concrete results, however. The 
launching of the negotiations for the NPT provided the nonnuclear states a 
major opportunity to push for effective and verifiable negative an assurance 
by NWS. In 1966, eight nonaligned members of the Geneva Disarmament 
Conference (the successor to ENDC) proposed the “banning of the use of 
nuclear weapons and assurance of the security of non-nuclear weapon states,” 
embodied in a treaty.7 The nonaligned countries continued their efforts at the 
UN General Assembly in the fall of 1966 when forty-six members introduced 
a draft resolution asking the nuclear states “to give an assurance that they 
will not use, or threaten to use, nuclear weapons against non-nuclear weapon 
states.”8 The U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (ACDA) was in 
favor of the United States supporting a resolution that would declare its inten-
tion to refrain from making nuclear threats against a state that was party to 
the NPT that does not “engage in an act of aggression supported by a nuclear 
weapon state.” The U.S. Joint Chiefs opposed such a move, arguing that it 
would create a “new norm limiting nuclear deterrence options.”9
The efforts by the NNWS had some impact on the Soviet Union. In 1966, 
the Russian premier, Alexei Kosygin, made an offer to include a provision 
banning the use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear treaty parties that 
had no nuclear weapons on their territory. The Western countries, led by 
the United States, opposed the proposal, arguing that it would dis­criminate 
against nonnuclear NATO allies that are participants in the al­liance’s defense 
plans and deployments (e.g., West Germany). Most nonaligned members sup-
ported the Kosygin plan, although they were in favor of a blanket undertak-
ing by the nuclear powers never to use or threaten to use nuclear weapons 
against nonnuclear countries.10 However, “the question of security assurances 
continued to be a major pre­occupation of the nonnuclear powers throughout 
all the negotiations.”11
The NPT Bargain
The negotiating position of the NNWS on the non-use issue can be assessed 
by exploring their stated views and bargaining strategies at the diplomatic ne-
gotiations that led to the 1968 NPT, the several five-year review conferences, 

The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime  163
and the Prepcom meetings that preceded the review meetings, especially the 
1995 review conference, which extended the NPT in perpetuity. During all 
these deliberations, a constant theme of many nonaligned NNWS has been 
the acceptance of legally binding negative security assurances, that is, a non-
use pledge, by the NWS.12 This suggests that the tradition of non-use has not 
been perceived by these states to be equal to a full legal commitment or as a 
sufficiently robust legal norm. The assumption here is that it would not be 
easy to break a legal norm, while a nonlegal norm like the tradition of non-
use is breakable, especially if circumstances change and the NWS is under 
pressure to threaten nuclear coercion for compellence purposes or to obtain 
battlefield victory in a war involving a nonnuclear state. A legal norm is also 
breakable, but the threshold for infringement will be increased with legality 
as one more consideration for a nuclear state to take into account in its deci-
sion to use or not use nuclear weapons. It would also strengthen the political 
and moral claim of the target state vis-à-vis a nuclear aggressor.
During negotiations on the NPT in the 1960s, the nonnuclear states fo-
cused on three areas that were expected to improve their security in exchange 
for signing the treaty. First, they attempted to obtain positive reassurances 
from the nuclear powers in the form of credible guarantees “to protect and 
defend them if they are threatened or attacked with nuclear weapons.” Sec-
ond, they sought negative assurances “whereby the nuclear powers undertake 
not to attack or threaten them with nuclear weapons.” Third, they sought to 
enhance their security indirectly by seeking to have the nuclear powers agree 
“to undertake to halt the nuclear arms race and to take concrete measures of 
nuclear disarmament leading eventually to the elimination of nuclear weap-
ons, thus improving the security of the whole world.”13
However, the nuclear states were not prepared to give either positive or 
negative assurances in the form of formal security commitments. All they 
would agree on was the inclusion of Article VI in the NPT, which called upon 
nuclear states to engage in disarmament negotiations in earnest, leading to 
eventual abolition of the bomb.14 Credibility problems plagued the proposals 
for positive security assurances, while military establishments in the NWS 
objected to negative assurances, fearing a loosening of the credibility of their 
deterrence policies if such an assurance was given.15 These establishments 
wanted to keep their options fully open with respect to nuclear weapons so 
that uncertainty could be maintained in the minds of potential aggressors 
when it came to war. Although initially in favor of offering nonnuclear states 
some form of positive security assurances, the NWS, especially the United 

164  The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime
States, eventually balked, as Washington was worried about the impact such 
an undertaking would have on its nuclear commitment to allies.
Positive assurances were hampered by the fact that military action in re-
sponse to a nuclear attack by a nuclear state on an NNWS carried the risk of 
nuclear retaliation against the intervening party, a situation it could not pos-
sibly sustain for both strategic and domestic public opinion reasons. It was 
difficult for an NWS to be willing to risk nuclear attack in order to defend a 
possibly nonallied NNWS. The guarantor of positive security assurances need 
not permanently hold such a policy, as attitudes toward a nonnuclear state 
are not immutable, and declarations without proper alliance commitments 
are not sufficiently reliable. However, positive assurances may have a politi-
cal role, as they could constrain the options of the threatening nuclear power 
under some circumstances; for example, raising uncertainty as to how vital 
the NNWS is for the economic and security calculations of the guarantor in 
this instance.16
The Soviets, through the Kosygin Proposal, were willing to include nega-
tive security assurances in the NPT, which was opposed by the United States. 
Washington’s chief concern was that given NATO’s first-use policy, a nega-
tive security guarantee would have meant no attack on Warsaw Pact states 
that did not possess nuclear weapons.17 States Epstein: “Thus the non-nuclear 
powers, despite their repeated insistence on the need for clear, adequate, and 
credible security guarantees, were left with only the flimsy formula of the Tri-
partite declarations [United States, Soviet Union, and Britain] and Security 
Council Resolution 255.”18 According to this resolution, the Security Council 
and “above all its nuclear-weapon state permanent members would have to 
act immediately to provide assistance, in accordance with their obligations 
under the United Nations Charter” to any NNWS party to the NPT that was 
a “victim of an act or object of a threat of aggression in which nuclear weap-
ons are used.”19 This resolution had no real implementation mechanism, and 
nonnuclear states such as India rejected it as having little value to their secu-
rity. The Conference of Non-Nuclear Weapon States in Geneva in Septem-
ber 1968 considered the security guarantee issue in detail. Of the ninety-two 
states present, eighty-one argued that a UN Security Council guarantee was 
not sufficient, as it was prone to veto by those P-5 states which were also nu-
clear powers. A proposal made by Latin American states on an international 
convention on security guarantees failed, by one vote, to receive a two-thirds 
majority. The conference ended with a declaration that called for undertaking 
further steps for an early solution of the security assurance problem.20 Most 

The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime  165
nonnuclear states agreed to the treaty without formal security guarantees, as 
they thought an imperfect treaty then was better than none and that the NPT 
was the precursor to a larger disarmament treaty, a hope that was belied by 
later events.
The prospects of concluding bilateral security protection agreements were 
hampered as well by the difficulties in implementing them. Most nonaligned, 
nonnuclear states were reluctant to push for this option, which would have 
forced them to accept security protection equivalent to an alliance commit-
ment from one or the other superpowers and the alliances they led, chal-
lenging their nonaligned credentials. They therefore focused on the United 
Nations for a multilateral security guarantee, but this was difficult to obtain 
given the intensity of the Cold War competition during that time.
Thus, efforts by the nonnuclear states to include a negative security assur-
ance clause in the NPT did not succeed in 1968. It seems the politics behind 
the Treaty’s conclusion precluded such an open commitment by the nuclear 
states. However, the nonnuclear states, under the banner of the nonaligned 
movement, continued their efforts at UN forums and NPT review confer-
ences. Despite the absence of formal, legally binding negative or positive secu-
rity guarantees, the NPT became acceptable to a large number of states, and it 
increased its membership to 190 by 2006, a near-universal figure.21 Different 
classes of states accepted the NPT for different reasons, including national 
interests, benign strategic environments, and alliance relationships with one 
or the other superpower. Among the nonnuclear states, at least three types 
of states can be categorized in terms of their position on the NPT. Most of 
the supporters were from status quo-oriented middle powers and allied states 
such as Canada, Australia, Mexico, Sweden, and almost all small states that 
had no chance of obtaining nuclear weapons capability on their own. For 
them, the NPT and the nonproliferation regime offered benefits such as trans-
parency, some amount of security, cost reduction, and other advantages that 
accrued from a multilateral regime that reduced the problems associated with 
collective action.22
However, a number of middle powers—India, Brazil (until 1996), South Af-
rica (until 1991), and Argentina (until 1995)—opposed the NPT for some time: 
they perceived that adherence to this unequal treaty would foreclose their 
nuclear weapons options as well as make them more vulnerable to coercion 
by nuclear weapon states. In addition, it would threaten their potential for 
achieving a systemic leadership role. Some of these states had been engaged in 

166  The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime
enduring conflicts and do not enjoy direct nuclear protection or other forms 
of security guarantees by the major powers.23
A key participant at the NPT deliberations, William Epstein, argues: 
The Treaty would be carried by an overwhelming majority because of the  
tacit alliance that had developed between the nuclear powers and those non-
nuclear powers who had no hope whatsoever of going nuclear for the fore­
seeable future . . . Furthermore, it seemed that while many nations had serious 
reservations about the provisions of the treaty, very few, if any, would vote 
against it; most would confine themselves to abstaining.24
Some with potential capability decided against acquisition of the weapon, as 
they would become targets of nuclear weapon powers and could develop or in-
tensify conflict relationships with their neighbors.25 They, along with UN Sec-
retary General U Thant, saw the NPT as an indispensable first step toward fur-
ther progress on nuclear disarmament.26 The implicit understanding among 
them has been that nuclear weapons are reserved for great-power-controlled 
high politics, as the major powers do not need nuclear weapons to attack, de-
feat, or conquer many of the smaller states. These states have more to worry 
about regarding security relationships with their neighbors than with the great 
powers, unless they challenge a great power frontally as Iraq did in the 1990s.
In the post–Cold War era, the issue of nuclear no first use has emerged 
as a major issue for the nonnuclear states. This is partly due to the changing 
nuclear postures of the United States, Russia, and Britain. These states have 
included deterrence against chemical and biological attacks as a raison d’être 
for their nuclear possession, and have announced plans to engage in preemp-
tive and preventive attacks against so called “rogue states.” The United States 
has also been making off-and-on efforts to develop usable “mini-nukes,” and 
parallel efforts by Russia are probably underway. At the UN meeting to ex-
tend the NPT in 1995, security assurances became a make-or-break issue.
Despite their vociferous demands for binding non-use pledges, non­
nuclear states agreed to the extension of the NPT in perpetuity in 1995, even 
when no legally binding pledges were forthcoming from the NWS.27 How­
ever, in April 1995, prior to the extension, the Security Council adopted Res­
olution 984, which acknowledged the commitments made by nuclear states 
and recognized the “legitimate interest of the non-nuclear states party to the 
Treaty . . . to receive security assurance,” and declared that in the event that 
a nonnuclear state became the “victim of an act of, or object of a threat of,  

The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime  167
aggression in which nuclear weapons are used . . . the Security Council and 
above all its nuclear-weapon-state permanent members [would] act immedi-
ately in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United 
Nations.” It also called upon the Security Council members to “bring the mat-
ter immediately to the attention of the Council and seek Council Action to 
provide, in accordance with the Charter, the necessary assistance to the State 
victim.”28 Negative security assurances from individual nuclear states (most 
of them promised no nuclear attacks on NPT parties in good standing and on 
those NNWS not in alliance with a nuclear power) were also part of the final 
document, titled “Principles and Objectives for Non-Proliferation and Dis­
armament,” approved by the review meeting.29 Since the extension conference, 
to the dismay of NNWS, these commitments have been progressively watered 
down by nuclear states, claiming they made “political” as opposed to “legal” 
commitments, and a binding no-first-use treaty has been as elusive as ever.30
At the 2000 NPT review conference, both nuclear and nonnuclear states 
accepted a Program of 13 Practical Steps for Nuclear Disarmament, proposed 
by the New Agenda Coalition consisting of Brazil, Egypt, Ireland, Mexico, 
New Zealand, South Africa, and Sweden and supported by the Middle Pow-
ers Initiative, a conglomerate of eight nongovernmental organization (NGO) 
groups that work for nuclear disarmament. These steps included agreement 
by NWS to “an unequivocal undertaking to accomplish the total elimination 
of their nuclear arsenals.”31 The conference agreed that “legally binding secu-
rity assurances by the five NWS to the NNWS parties would strengthen the 
regime and called on the PrepCom to make recommendations to the 2005 
Review Conference in this regard. At the 2002 PrepCom meeting, many NPT 
parties stressed that efforts to conclude a universal, unconditional, and legally 
binding instrument on security assurances to NNWS should be pursued as 
a matter of priority,” preferably as an additional protocol to the NPT.32 Since 
then the positions of the nuclear states, especially the United States under the 
George W. Bush administration, have become intransigent on the issue of 
nuclear disarmament.
The 2005 review conference failed to make any concluding statements, as 
the differences between nonnuclear and nuclear states, especially the United 
States, could not be bridged. The latter was unwilling to make any commit-
ments on security guarantees or nuclear disarmament, but wanted the con-
ference to focus exclusively on the nuclear proliferation issue, especially on 
the efforts by Iran and North Korea to acquire nuclear weapons and ways to 
prevent that from happening.33 The United States also seemed to be backing 

168  The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime
off from previous commitments on negative assurances, arguing they were 
political assurances and not legal, and that new political circumstances re-
quired rethinking on such assurances. Since 1992, Washington has changed 
its policy to include nuclear first use against a nonnuclear state that is party 
to the NPT using chemical or biological weapons, in an effort to maintain 
“strategic ambiguity” for a potential attacker.34 The U.S. position is that the 
negative security assurances “are not binding ‘international agreements’ be-
cause the assurances were not adopted domestically in accordance with the 
procedures mandated by the U.S. Constitution.”35 Even NATO, which con-
tained sixteen nonnuclear states, adopted the U.S. approach in May 2000 
that nuclear weapons could be used against states armed with biological or 
chemical weapons “even if they have signed the NPT.”36 In February 2002, 
State Department spokesperson Richard Boucher reaffirmed the U.S. com-
mitment to no first use, but added a proviso: “the policy says that we will do 
whatever is necessary to deter the use of weapons of mass destruction against 
the United States, its allies and its interests. If a weapon of mass destruction 
is used against the United States or its allies, we will not rule out any specific 
type of military response.”37
There thus exists a fundamental dissonance between nuclear and non­
nuclear states, especially with respect to negative security assurances as well 
as to commitment to nuclear disarmament under Article VI of the NPT. De-
spite changes in the policies of nuclear states, especially the United States, it 
may well be argued that the NPT bargain, in particular the implicit and par-
tial promise of non-use against NPT signatories, acts as a partial normative 
restraint on nuclear states from breaking the tradition of non-use. The tradi-
tion itself has been partially strengthened by these commitments and the per-
sistent demands by the nonnuclear states to keep the torch alive in the global 
discourse on nuclear weapons and their potential use. But the future of these 
assurances looks bleak as nuclear states begin to look at their nuclear weapons 
as a usable weapon to prevent weapons of mass destruction (WMD) acquisi-
tion and to preempt WMD use by nonnuclear states and terrorist groups.
The General Assembly Referral  
to the World Court
The NPT forum has been only one of the arenas where NNWS have made 
efforts to obtain security guarantees from nuclear powers. They have con-
sistently made the UN General Assembly a venue for demanding negative  

The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime  169
security guarantees. The most significant efforts in this regard occurred in 
1994, when the nonnuclear states succeeded in having the United Nations ap-
proach the ICJ at the Hague for its advisory opinion on nuclear use.38 General 
Assembly Resolution 49/75K was adopted on December 15, 1994; it mentioned 
the several previous resolutions which had declared that “the use of nuclear 
weapons would be a violation of the Charter and a crime against humanity,” 
and stated that the General Assembly was “convinced that the elimination of 
nuclear weapons is the only guarantee against the threat of nuclear war.” The 
General Assembly resolved, “pursuant to Article 96, paragraph 1, of the Char-
ter of the United Nations, to request the International Court of Justice urgently 
to render its advisory opinion on the following question: Is the threat or use of 
nuclear weapons in any circumstance permitted under international law?”39
During deliberations at the Court, many NNWS presented arguments on 
the illegality of nuclear use. Oral and written statements were made by many 
nuclear and nonnuclear states on the legal validity and utility of the Gen-
eral Assembly’s seeking the ICJ’s advisory opinion. Among the nonnuclear 
states giving written and oral statements were Egypt, India, Ireland, Iran, 
Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, and Sweden. The United States, 
Britain, and France objected to the referral itself. The U.S. statement to the ICJ 
summed up their positions: 
The question presented is vague and abstract, addressing complex issues which 
are the subject of consideration among interested states and within other 
bodies of the United Nations which have an express mandate to address these 
matters. An opinion by the Court in regard to the question presented would 
provide no practical assistance to the General Assembly in carrying out its 
functions under the Charter. Such an opinion has the potential of undermining 
progress already made or being made on this sensitive subject, and, therefore, 
is contrary to the interests of the United Nations organization.40
Some allies of the nuclear powers objected to the referral by contending that 
(a) “there exist[ed] no specific dispute on the subject-matter of the question”; 
(b) “the abstract nature of the question might lead the court to make hypo-
thetical or speculative declarations outside the scope of its judicial functions”; 
(c) the General Assembly had not clarified the precise purposes in seeking the 
advisory; and (d) the Court would be going beyond its judicial role and “taking 
upon itself a law-making capacity.” The ICJ judges rejected these arguments, 
declaring that they had “the authority to deliver an opinion on the question 

170  The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime
posed by the General Assembly, and that there exist[ed] no ‘compelling rea-
sons’ which would lead the Court to exercise its discretion not to do so.”41
In its judgment, delivered on July 8, 1996, although the Court did not un­
equivocally ban the use of nuclear weapons, it suggested that under most inter­
national humanitarian law, the use of nuclear weapons would be prohibited. It 
stated that there existed in either customary or conventional international law 
any “specific authorization” for the use or threat of use or any “comprehensive 
and universal prohibition” against the threat of use or use of nuclear weapons. 
By seven to seven votes (with the president casting his vote to break the tie), 
the court ruled: 
the threat [of use] or use of nuclear weapons would generally be contrary to the 
rules of international law applicable in armed conflict, and in particular the 
principles and rules of humanitarian law. However, in view of the current state 
of international law, and of the elements of fact at its disposal, the court cannot 
conclude definitively whether the threat [of use] or use of nuclear weapons 
would be lawful or unlawful in an extreme circumstance of self-defense, in 
which the very survival of the State would be at stake.42
The ICJ verdict thus did not conclusively end this debate and the nonnuclear 
states seem resigned to the next venue, NPT review conferences, as their best 
option to press for legally binding non-use pledges. As discussed before, these 
efforts have not met much success thus far. The ICJ ruling, however, did make 
it clear that nuclear use for anything other than survival would generally be 
inconsistent with the canons of international law.
The Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zones
Another major instrument for obtaining guarantees of nuclear non-use has 
been nuclear-weapon-free zones. The primary reason for the nonnuclear 
states to propose nuclear-free zones has been to stop the spread of nuclear 
weapons in their regions and to reinforce their nonproliferation credentials. 
A second crucial objective has been to prevent the deployment and use of such 
weapons by nuclear states against states parties to the zone. The zone idea is 
seen as strengthening the nonproliferation regime by erecting ad­ditional legal 
barriers on both nuclear proliferation and potential use or threat of use of 
nuclear weapons.
The key operational nuclear-free zones are the Latin American nuclear- 
free zone, created by the Tlatelolco Treaty of 1967; the South Pacific nuclear-free  

The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime  171
zone, under the Rarotonga Treaty of 1985; the Southeast Asia nuclear-free  
zone, under the Bangkok Treaty of 1995; and the Africa nuclear-free zone, 
under the Treaty of Pelindaba of 1996. There are some country-specific agree­
ments as well. Prominent among these is the 1994 agreement between Ukraine 
and three nuclear states, Russia, the United States, and Britain. In return 
for Kiev’s dismantling its nuclear arsenal, the three nuclear powers agreed 
to honor Ukraine’s existing borders and not to use or threaten to use force, 
particularly with nuclear weapons, or to employ economic sanctions against 
Ukraine.43 Other proposals for nuclear-free zones have been made for the Mid-
dle East, South Asia, Central Asia, and Central Europe, but none has produced 
an agreement.
Latin America
The Tlatelolco Treaty of 1967 created the first major nuclear-weapon-free zone 
in Latin America. The treaty was the result of the urgency felt by Latin Ameri-
can countries in the wake of the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962. These states 
wanted to avoid getting embroiled in the superpower nuclear conflict by pre-
venting a similar future occurrence. The crisis brought home the stark reality 
of a possible nuclear war in their backyard without their approval or involve-
ment. A superpower nuclear conflict over Cuba, even if it remained limited, 
would have profoundly affected the region, especially the neighboring states. 
In view of this consideration, the initial proposal was made as a joint declara-
tion in April 1963 by Latin American presidents from Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, 
and Ecuador. By 2002, all thirty-three countries of Latin America and the 
Caribbean had signed and ratified the treaty.44
For the purposes of this chapter, the crucial issue is the non-use provision 
of the Tlatelolco Treaty. By 1992, the Additional Protocols I and II had been 
signed and ratified by all nuclear states, although with some provisions. These 
protocols make it legally binding on the nuclear weapon powers not to use or 
threaten to use nuclear weapons against states that are parties to the treaty 
and to “undertake to apply the status of denuclearization in respect of warlike 
purposes.”45 In that sense, the Treaty of Tlatelolco has far-reaching implica-
tions for partially legalizing the tradition of non-use, as it is the first treaty in 
which all nuclear weapon powers have agreed to major limitations on their 
nuclear activities in a region. Disarmament expert William Epstein contends: 
“under the Treaty of Tlatelolco the nuclear powers are legally bound in the 
same way that the other parties to the Treaty are: not to test, manufacture, 

172  The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime
produce, deploy, station, use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against the 
parties to the Treaty. In this respect, Tlatelolco goes far beyond the promise 
that nuclear powers made in the NPT in July 1968.”46 However, the qualifica-
tions attached to the signatures of the nuclear weapons states make it a treaty 
applicable only in peacetime. For instance, the Soviet Union signed the proto-
cols with the proviso that if a contracting party commits an “act of aggression 
in support of a nuclear-weapon State or jointly with that State,” it . . . “reserves 
the right to review its obligations under Additional Protocol II.”47 Moreover, 
the Protocol States may denounce the Treaty under circumstances that “affect 
its supreme interests or the peace and security of one or more Contracting 
Parties.”48 Uniquely for a nuclear-weapon-free zone, all NWS have signed and 
ratified Tlatelolco’s non-use protocols.49
South Pacific 
The second major regional zone has been in the South Pacific; the treaty was 
concluded in August 1985 at Rarotonga in the Cook Islands. It entered into 
force in December 1986. Since the dawn of the nuclear age, the South Pa-
cific has become a key area of nuclear activities by the nuclear powers, espe-
cially, the United States, Britain, and France. These activities include testing 
of nuclear and thermonuclear devices (in both underground and atmospheric 
tests), dumping of nuclear waste materials, transiting of warheads and deliv-
ery systems, stationing of nuclear communication facilities in Australia, and 
regular port calls of ships and submarines of the nuclear powers carrying nu-
clear weapons. The Treaty of Rarotonga was the result of the continuing con-
cern of the regional states about French nuclear testing at the Mururoa Atoll 
in French Polynesia. From 1966 until 1992, France conducted more than one 
hundred explosions, of which forty-one were atmospheric tests. The regional 
states were also worried about the transit of nuclear weapons in the pristine 
waters of the South Pacific. Australia and New Zealand took the initiative 
at the South Pacific Forum for the conclusion of the treaty, in order to make 
sure that a modest zone was created so as not to upset their relations with 
the United States. Although the Treaty of Rarotonga has watered-down provi-
sions with respect to the transit and stationing of nuclear weapons in view of 
Australia’s ANZUS (Australia, New Zealand, and United States) Treaty com-
mitments with the United States, it has utility as an instrument against non-
proliferation and non-use by nuclear powers.
According to the provisions of the Treaty of Rarotonga, parties are forbid-
den from several activities. These include: 

The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime  173
developing, manufacturing, or receiving from others any nuclear explo­sive 
devices in the South Pacific or on the territories of the participating countries. 
It stipulates that nuclear activities in the region, including the export of nu­
clear materials, should be conducted under strict safeguards to ensure non-
explosive use. It allows South Pacific countries to retain their unqualified sov­
ereign rights to decide [for] themselves such questions as access to their ports 
and airfields of vessels or aircraft of other countries and respects international 
law regarding the freedom of the seas and verification by international safe­
guards [of] the performance of obligations by the parties.50
However: 
out of the 19 major categories of nuclear activity in the region, the Rarotonga 
Treaty bans only five. They are nuclear weapons acquisitions by signatories, 
nuclear weapon testing, permanent stationing of nuclear weapons on land, 
inland waters or the sea-bed within the territories of the zone member 
countries, the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons against the zone mem­
bers by nu­clear weapon powers and nuclear waste-dumping by the zone ad­
herents themselves.51
In this sense, the treaty envisions the creation of a partial nuclear-free zone in 
the South Pacific.
The Treaty of Rarotonga has three additional protocols. Protocol I calls 
upon nuclear powers with territory in the zone—France, Britain, and the 
United States—to apply the basic provisions of the treaty to their respec-
tive territories. Protocols II and III would make NWS commit not to use or 
threaten to use nuclear explosive devices against any states that are party to 
the treaty or against the territories controlled by nuclear states in the zone. 
France and Britain had signed and ratified all the three protocols by Septem-
ber 1997, while China and the Soviet Union signed and ratified Protocols II 
and III in 1988. The United States signed Protocols I, II, and II in March 1996, 
but has yet to ratify them.52 However, under customary international law, as 
reinforced by the Vienna Convention, the United States is bound to uphold the 
treaty provisions.53 One major constraint with this zone is that Australia and 
New Zealand (with some limitations) are members of the U.S.–led alliance  
ANZUS, and, under the alliance terms, are obliged to come to the defense 
of each other during a conflict. The Treaty of Rarotonga, therefore, does not 
forbid the use of nuclear weapons in the zone by the United States against a 
nonzone member, nor does it place any restrictions on states from the zone 

174  The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime
participating in nuclear exercises along with NWS.54 This has especially be-
come an issue in the context of Australia’s active participation in the U.S.-led 
“war on terror” and the close defense relationship between the two countries 
in the post–September 11, 2001, era.
Southeast Asia 
The third nuclear-weapon-free zone was created in Southeast Asia under the 
Bangkok Treaty, which was signed on December 15, 1995, and which came 
into force in March 1997. This treaty was concluded thanks to efforts by the As­
sociation of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) members to ensure that their 
region would not become a theater for nuclear weapons proliferation and great-
power nuclear competition, especially involving China and the United States. 
The end of the Cold War greatly helped in the conclusion of this treaty.55
According to the Bangkok Treaty, the parties undertake not to develop, 
manufacture, acquire, possess, transport, or test nuclear weapons in the zone’s 
territory. States also undertake not to allow another state to develop, manu-
facture, station, test, or use nuclear weapons on their territory. They are also 
forbidden from dumping or discharging radioactive materials on land and 
in their territories, except in accordance with International Atomic Energy 
Agency (IAEA) standards. However, it gives the right to each state to allow 
visits by nuclear-armed foreign ships and aircraft in territorial waters or air-
space. The treaty has one additional protocol for NWS to sign. The articles of 
the protocol stipulate that each signatory undertakes “not to use or threaten 
to use nuclear weapons against any State Party to the treaty” or “within the 
Southeast Asia nuclear-free-zone.” The protocol will be in force permanently, 
although a party can withdraw “if it decides that extraordinary events, related  
to the subject-matter of this Protocol, have jeopardized its supreme national in-
terests.”56 The treaty came into force in March 1997 when seven ASEAN states  
had ratified it, and by 2001, all ten states of the zone area had signed and rati-
fied the treaty.57 The additional protocol has not been signed or ratified by the 
nuclear states because of their concerns about the “broad definition of the zone” 
and its potential impact on “freedom of navigation.”58 However, reportedly 
both China and India have committed to abide by the additional protocols.59
Africa
Africa has the fourth nuclear-free zone, created by the Pelindaba Treaty of 
April 1996. This treaty came into being as a result of the leading role played 
by South Africa at the end of the apartheid era and the dismantling of its 

The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime  175
own nuclear weapons. The treaty’s origins go back to 1960, when, in response 
to the French nuclear tests in Algerian Sahara, eight African states proposed 
to the United Nations a resolution for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone, which the General Assembly approved in November 1961 as Resolution 
1652(16). In July 1964, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) adopted a 
Declaration on Denuclearization of Africa, which the UN General Assembly 
endorsed in December 1965. Despite these earlier efforts, the proposals stalled 
as the U.S.-Soviet arms race and the South African nuclear program reached 
high gear during the 1970s and 1980s. The big change occurred only in the 
early 1990s, when the Cold War ended and South Africa agreed to dismantle 
its nuclear program and join the NPT. Technical experts began to draft the 
nuclear-free-zone treaty in May 1991, and after five years of considerations by 
different bodies of the OAU, the treaty was adopted at the OAU heads-of-state 
meeting in April 1996.60
The treaty parties undertake not to conduct research, develop, manufac-
ture, acquire, or possess nuclear explosive devices, nor seek or offer assistance 
from or to others, and to prevent the stationing and testing of nuclear weapons 
on their territories, although it allows each state the right to decide whether to 
allow foreign crafts carrying nuclear devices to enter their territories. It also 
prohibits the dumping of radioactive waste anywhere in the zone, while al-
lowing peaceful nuclear activities under IAEA safeguards. Treaty states have 
to conclude a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the IAEA, undertake 
to maintain the security and physical protection of nuclear facilities on their 
territories, and prohibit armed attack on nuclear facilities within the zone.
The Pelindaba Treaty has three additional protocols. Protocol I calls upon 
nuclear powers not to use or threaten to use nuclear explosive devices against 
parties to the treaty or on any territory within the zone which a nuclear state is 
responsible for administering. Under Protocol II, each NWS signatory under­
takes “not to test or assist or encourage the testing of any nuclear explosive de­
vice anywhere within the African nuclear-free-zone.” Protocol III enshrines 
NWS commitments’ application to territories for which they have de jure or 
de facto international responsibility. However, it allows the NWS party to the 
pro­tocols to withdraw from them after giving twelve months’ notice in the 
event that “extra-ordinary events” have “jeopardized its supreme interests.”61 
As of May 2005, forty-nine of the fifty-three African countries had signed and 
twenty had ratified it, although the treaty needs twenty-eight ratifications to 
come into force.62 As of March 2001, Protocols I and II had been signed and  

176  The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime
ratified by China, France, and Britain, while the United States and Russia had 
signed but not ratified them. France had also signed and ratified Protocol III.63
Appraisal
Almost the entire Southern Hemisphere, with nearly 1.5 billion people, is 
covered under a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Although not all nuclear states 
have signed and ratified the protocols of non-use, a zone makes it harder to 
use or threaten to use nuclear weapons against member states in good stand-
ing. In that sense, nuclear-weapon-free zones offer a limited legal basis for 
the tradition of non-use, because in the specific regions, the nuclear states 
have to commit to non-use by signing the additional protocols. The zones 
thus contribute to a “global system of negative security guarantees,” and “as 
long as negotiations about a multilateral treaty concerning security guaran-
tees continue to be uncertain,” the protocols offer a way to make progress in 
this matter.64 However, the reluctance of some of the nuclear states to sign 
and ratify all the additional protocols, as in the cases of the Africa, South 
Pacific, and Southeast Asia nuclear-free zones, implies an unwillingness on 
the part of those states to give up their ultimate right to use nuclear weapons 
against states that are parties to nuclear-free-zone treaties. They also show 
the reluctance of nuclear states to accept legal restrictions on their freedom of 
action. In addition, the commitment to nuclear non-use is more or less a po-
litical commitment, and no effective verification mechanism has been created 
to guarantee that nuclear powers observe their pledges under the protocols, 
especially in the areas of storage and transit of weapons.
Another criticism is that the existing nuclear-free zones are in regions 
with low probability of nuclear attack by nuclear states. They are somewhat 
benign regions where almost all states had already become parties to the NPT 
or some other mechanisms, and this preexisting condition has been crucial 
for the conclusion of the treaties in the four zones. In those regions where 
the proliferation propensity is high and states are in conflict with nuclear  
powers, no nuclear-free zone has been created. Despite many proposals (as 
in the case of Middle East and South Asia), an agreement among the nuclear 
states for a non-use pledge through an additional protocol is not likely, even 
if the regional states created a nuclear-free zone. In fact the real test regions 
for a nuclear-free zone to emerge are where states are in conflict with nuclear 
powers.
Despite these limitations, the nuclear-free-zone concept has been pro-
moted by nonnuclear states in some regions on the basis of the logic that it 

The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime  177
offers a “symbol to be used at the opportune moment.” The nuclear powers,  
if they accede to the protocols, will be under legal and moral pressure to limit 
their nuclear activities in the region concerned. “Although the region cannot 
be completely decoupled from the dynamics of the central balance, even a 
partial decoupling is better than none.”65
Conclusion
This chapter presented the various efforts by nonnuclear states to erect legal 
barriers against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons by nuclear powers. 
These efforts have only met partial success, as nuclear powers have opposed 
a global regime to prevent the use of nuclear weapons or a legal convention 
that bans such use against nonnuclear states that are parties to the NPT and 
regional nuclear-free-zone arrangements. The discussion points to the pow-
erful role nonnuclear states have played as norm entrepreneurs and reputa-
tion intermediaries in this area. The preceding discussion also shows that the 
tradition of non-use is only an informal intermediary norm, and until and 
unless it becomes a legal norm, it may generate questions about its vitality and 
strength in preventing the use of nuclear weapons by those states that possess 
them. A legal regime would raise the bar on nuclear use, although interna-
tional law (or for that matter domestic law as well) offers no iron-clad guar-
antee against violation. The nonnuclear states are only partially convinced of 
the norm’s robustness, and this is evident in their continuing efforts to obtain 
legal status for the tradition of non-use. For these states, the informal norm is 
not a stringent guarantee against nuclear use, but is dependent on the vaga-
ries of world politics and technological changes. However, the fact almost all 
of them have signed onto the NPT even without stringent negative security 
guarantees suggests that they do see value in the informal norm inherent in 
the tradition of non-use. The nonnuclear states’ concern about non-use assur-
ances may be becoming louder with U.S., Russian, French, and British nuclear 
policies changing in response to the threats posed by transnational terrorism 
and new nuclear aspirants in regions of turmoil that are in conflict with the 
United States. Some of the previously nonnuclear states—for example, Iran 
and North Korea—have been pursuing independent nuclear programs, in re-
sponse to these policy changes as well as in keeping with their own regional 
ambitions and domestic political calculations. More states are likely to follow 
their lead in years to come, although an overwhelming majority of nonnuclear 
states would abide by their commitment not to acquire such weapons.

178
 9 CHANGING U.S. POLICIES AND THE TRADITION
t his chapt er  addr esses the state of the tradition of non-use of nuclear 
weapons in the twenty-first century, especially in the context of the changing 
U.S. nuclear policy. The tradition has been under stress since the end of the 
Cold War, and particu­lar­ly since the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on 
U.S. targets. Changes to U.S. nuclear policy have posed one of the major chal-
lenges to the tradition. Similar to the United States, other nuclear powers, in 
particular Russia, Britain, and France, have also expanded the role of nuclear 
weapons in their strategic doctrines to include the use of chemical and bio-
logical weapons by adversaries as a trigger for nuclear response.
At the global level, the stress that the tradition encounters in the early 
twenty-first century arises from the responses of nuclear states to two main 
challengers: regional powers and transnational terrorist networks such as al-
Qaeda. The regional challengers are states in strategically pivotal regional the-
aters that hold revisionist ideologies or territorial ambitions. These states have 
been characterized by the United States as belonging to “the axis of evil” or as 
“rogue states,” although a less pejorative characterization may be “new prolif-
erators.” Iran and North Korea are the two major challengers in this regard, 
but Syria is also considered part of this group, given its chemical weapons pro-
gram and confrontational policies in the Middle East. North Korea is believed 
to have acquired a few rudimentary nuclear weapons and missiles, while Iran 
is presumed to be making efforts at developing nuclear weapons. During the 
1980s and 1990s, two other states, Iraq and Libya, were also pursuing nuclear 
weapons. However, a decade of UN sanctions and the inspection regime that 
followed the 1991 Gulf War largely destroyed Iraq’s nuclear infrastructure, 

Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition  179
which was further decimated during the 2003 Gulf War and the U.S.-led occu-
pation since then. In December 2003, Libya agreed to disavow nuclear weap-
ons in return for economic and diplomatic normalization with the West.1
Other states in the Middle East, such as Syria and Saudi Arabia, may have  
latent nuclear ambitions. They are also believed to be in possession of chemical 
and biological weapons that could be used as a “poor man’s atomic weapon.”2 
Regional states adversarial to the United States have been making sustained 
efforts to bury their weapons and command-and-control centers deep under-
ground, to make it impossible for America to fully destroy their capabilities 
or remove their leaders. These problems have been compounded by the de-
velopment of networks of nuclear transfers involving Pakistan, Iran, North 
Korea, and Libya. These networks have undermined the nonproliferation re-
gime seriously as the transactions have been taking place even when some 
states involved are NPT members.3
The second source of challenge comes from transnational terrorist net-
works. Some such groups have reportedly been seeking chemical, biological, 
and nuclear weapons in order to engage in terrorist attacks that generate mass 
casualties and panic in urban centers. The potential for nuclear terrorism by 
groups against established states has gained greater attention since the Septem-
ber 11, 2001, strikes. Defense planners in nuclear states especially have become 
cognizant of this possibility. In response, nuclear states have begun to relax 
their no-first-use policies to include contingencies in which preventive and pre-
emptive nuclear strikes have become a feasible option. Terrorist groups could 
acquire nuclear weapons or components on the black market, through theft, 
with the blackmailing of weapon storage and transportation facilities, or with 
the support of wayward scientists such as Pakistan’s A. Q. Khan.4 The problem 
of “dirty bombs” has also become a highly salient danger to international secu-
rity. Such bombs can be assembled using nuclear materials in a cocktail fashion 
and then used to attack urban centers or places where large numbers of peo­ple  
assemble in order to cause maximum casualties through radiation effects.5
The most significant response to these twin challenges in terms of poten-
tial nuclear use has come from the United States.
The U.S. Response
In the face of these security challenges, the United States has revised its nu-
clear use policy with the intention of preventing the acquisition of weapons 
of mass destruction (WMD) by regional challengers and terrorist groups and  

180  Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition
preempting their use. This policy potentially includes the use of nuclear 
weapons. Since taking office in January 2001, the Bush administration in  
particular has posed a direct challenge to the long-standing tradition against 
the use of nuclear weapons. This U.S. nuclear policy, which had been evolv-
ing for some time during the presidencies of both George H. W. Bush and 
Bill Clinton, contains two key elements that directly challenge the tradition. 
First, the new U.S. posture allows the use of nuclear weapons preemptively or 
preventively against “rogue states” or terrorist groups that hold any WMD, as 
well as the option of retaliating with nuclear arms if such actors use WMD. 
The preventive aspect of the posture is that the United States could use force, 
including nuclear weapons, in an effort to thwart the development of WMD 
by states that it perceives may use such capabilities once developed. These 
modifications are reflected in the changes to the negative security guaran-
tees that the United States had offered to nonnuclear states. John Bolton, then 
under­secretary of state for Arms Control and International Security, argued 
in 2002 that these decisions were made in a different “geostrategic context,” 
and that they needed to be reviewed in view of today’s changed security en-
vironment.6 And, second, the U.S. administration’s off-and-on efforts at de-
veloping “usable” low-yield nuclear weapons in order to face the challenge of 
regional actors and terrorist groups and to be able to penetrate deeply buried 
bunkers or other underground facilities of regional foes also appear likely to 
adversely affect the tradition.
The Bush Changes
The United States has taken the lead in efforts to water down the tradition 
of non-use in response to pressures emanating from numerous sources: the 
asymmetric threats that Washington has been facing from both state and 
nonstate actors; new technological trends in warfare; and bureaucratic poli-
tics involving scientific laboratories that design and manufacture nuclear 
weapons. For a period of time after September 11, 2001, many of the changes 
in nuclear policy that the administration had initiated went unchallenged. 
Lately, however, a vocal group of Democratic and Republican senators and 
congressmen and nongovernmental organizations have emerged as strong 
opponents of radical changes to the U.S. nuclear policy in this regard. What 
are the manifestations of change in U.S. nuclear policy? What are the sources 
of these changes?
First, U.S. military planners have been considering the possibility of using 
nuclear weapons under certain circumstances against states possessing chem­

Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition  181
ical, biological, and nuclear weapons, as these weapons are believed to have 
spread or are likely to spread to several states and possibly to terrorist groups. 
These modifications in policy come from changes in assessments of the se-
curity challenges facing the United States after the Cold War and from new 
assumptions about the behavior of regional states. As discussed in Chapter 4, 
the George H. W. Bush and Clinton administrations initiated a policy called 
“calculated ambiguity” as a way to deter the use of chemical and biological 
weapons by a regional adversary. These changes were accelerated by the 1991 
Persian Gulf War and by the disclosures about Iraq’s clandestine nuclear 
weapons program during and after the war. During that war, U.S. leaders 
made several implicit references to the possibility of nuclear use in the event 
of Iraq’s using WMD against U.S. troops or allies. In January 1991, when U.S. 
forces were deployed to liberate Kuwait, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney is-
sued the top secret Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy (NUWEP), which 
“formally tasked the military to plan for nuclear operations against nations 
capable of developing WMD. This guidance resulted in Single Integrated Op-
erations Plan (SIOP) 93, the first overall nuclear war plan formally to incorpo-
rate Third World WMD targets.”7 The Clinton administration continued this 
trend toward widening the use of nuclear arms against states that would use 
chemical and biological weapons. Presidential Decision Directive (PDD) 60, 
signed by Clinton in November 1997, permitted U.S. nuclear strikes in retali-
ation to chemical or biological weapons use by enemy states.8
Since taking office in 2001, the George W. Bush administration has en-
larged the potential role for nuclear weapons. Under the ambitious new policy 
guidelines issued by the administration, nuclear weapons have been assigned 
three purposes: to deter; to preempt the use of WMDs, including chemical 
and biological weapons; and to prevent their buildup by additional states. 
The preemptive dimension of the new doctrine implies that the United States 
can use nuclear weapons if it believes that a regional adversary is planning 
to use WMD in the battlefield or against U.S. troops stationed abroad. Un-
like preemption, prevention implies that no imminent attack is likely, but the 
regional adversary is developing the WMD capability with the intention of 
using it against the United States at some future point. The United States per-
ceives that it is in its interests to prevent this contingency by attacking WMD 
facilities early on, before they become a security menace. This idea is driven 
by the assumption that deterrence does not necessarily work against rogue 
states and terrorist organizations.9 If the adversary is hiding WMD in deep 
bunkers or facilities that are not destroyable through conventional strikes, the 

182  Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition
United States would keep open the option of using its capabilities, including 
nuclear weapons.
Thus the George W. Bush administration has ushered in the second nu-
clear age by transforming the utility of nuclear weapons and by widening the 
conditions under which they can be used—the conditions previously consid-
ered as “unworthy” and “unimaginable”—as well as by adding new missions 
for nuclear weapons. In the changed circumstances, the administration has 
refocused the nuclear threat from Russia to the regional states.10 With this 
new policy, the United States has taken a major step toward the “convention-
alization” of nuclear weapons and their potential use against foes that are not 
necessarily nuclear-armed states. The Bush administration made this policy 
more explicit through two documents: The National Security Strategy of the 
United States of America of September 2002, which stated that in order to 
“forestall or prevent . . . [attacks with WMD] by our adversaries, the United 
States will, if necessary, act preemptively,” and the National Strategy to Com-
bat Weapons of Mass Destruction (NSCWMD) of December 2002, which de-
clared: “The United States will continue to make clear that it reserves the right 
to respond with overwhelming force—including through resort to all of our 
options—to the use of WMD against the United States, our forces abroad and 
friends and allies.”11
In a classified document titled “Presidential Directive 17,” signed on Sep-
tember 14, 2002, President George W. Bush authorized the United States to 
“continue to make clear that it reserves the right to respond with overwhelm-
ing force—including potentially nuclear weapons—to the use of [weapons of 
mass destruction] against the United States, our forces abroad, and friends 
and allies.” However, the publicly released version of the NSCWMD docu-
ment replaced the terms, “including potentially nuclear weapons” with “in-
cluding through resort to all of our options.” The document suggests that nu-
clear weapons are very much part of the overwhelming force that the United 
States could use in a regional conflict. There were indications that military 
planning included the use of nuclear weapons under certain circumstances 
if Iraq used chemical and biological weapons in the 2003 war.12 Interestingly, 
such a use would have received strong public support in the United States.13 
The 2002 Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) added several functions to the U.S. 
nuclear capability in terms of regional security, especially in the Middle East 
and the Persian Gulf. They included the defense of Israel against states such as 
Iran and Syria, assurance to regional allies, dissuasion of potential adversaries  

Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition  183
from pursuing nuclear and other WMD capabilities, deterrence against the 
use of WMD against U.S. forces and allies, as well as the defeat of regional 
states bent on aggression.14
The Draft Doctrine for Joint Nuclear Operations prepared by the Penta-
gon in March 2005 incorporated preemption into the U.S. nuclear doctrine. 
It states that “integrating conventional and nuclear attacks will ensure the 
most efficient use of force and provide U.S. leaders with a broader range of 
strike options to address immediate contingencies.”15 The draft doctrine en-
visions “commanders requesting presidential approval to use them [nuclear 
weapons] to preempt an attack by a nation or a terrorist group using weap-
ons of mass destruction.” In addition, the draft talks about the option to use 
nuclear weapons to destroy existing stockpiles of nuclear, chemical, or bio-
logical weapons in regional states.16 To arms control advocates, the draft doc-
trine envisages “nuclear pre-emption, which the new doctrine enshrines into 
official U.S. joint nuclear doctrine for the first time, where the objective no 
longer is deterrence through threatened retaliation but battlefield destruction 
of targets.”17 The underlying structural motivation seems to be attaining over-
whelming nuclear and conventional superiority so that no regional challenger 
or peer great power state will challenge U.S. security interests for a long time 
to come.18 Although the administration appears to have withdrawn the draft, 
its policy contents apparently were not changed.
One assumption running through the calculations of the U.S. administra-
tions has been that the new regional challengers are not as deterrable with 
nuclear capability as the Soviet Union was, and that they may engage in be-
havior that contradicts the rationality assumptions of deterrence theory and 
policy. A former staff member of the George W. Bush administration, Keith 
Payne, captured the belief held by the administration officials that “potential 
U.S. enemies differ from the Cold War-era Soviet Union in that enemy leaders 
now may not value the welfare of their populations or their own survival, and 
may make decisions based on superstition or fanaticism.” Officials also be-
lieve that “the United States might possibly face opponents driven by ‘unques-
tioned adherence to a leader who has a bad dream’ or relies on ‘fortune-telling 
or astrology or all those things that underlie decision-making in many parts 
of the world.” In his view, “interest in research on the new, low-yield nuclear 
weapons comes from a desire for a deterrent that is believable.”19 However, 
critics find problems in this approach toward deterrence. On the one hand, 
the administration believed that a nuclear-armed Iraq would not be bound by 

184  Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition
deterrence, but it also believed that America could be deterred by a nuclear-
armed Iraq.20
During the military buildup prior to the attack on Iraq in March 2003, 
military planners were understood to have studied a list of potential targets 
for the use of tactical nuclear weapons to respond to or to preempt an Iraqi use 
of chemical or biological weapons, or to destroy deeply buried command and 
control facilities. The Theater Nuclear Planning Document, prepared by the 
U.S. Strategic Command, listed several potential targets for a nuclear strike.21 
Apparently referring to Iraq’s use of chemical and biological weapons, De-
fense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld stated: “we will not foreclose the possible 
use of nuclear weapons if attacked,” although “we can do what needs to be 
done using conventional capabilities.”22 Administration officials warned Sad-
dam Hussein’s regime against resorting to any WMD and threatened the use 
of any “means necessary,” without ruling out nuclear retaliation.23 The seri-
ousness of the administration’s nuclear planning was evident in the author-
ity for such nuclear use given to the Omaha-based U.S. Strategic Command 
(STRATCOM), which was earlier focusing on strategic nuclear combat with 
Russia and China. STRATCOM became the single command for the plan-
ning and conduct of the full range of operations to combat terrorist states and 
organizations. The new U.S. policy has thus blurred the distinction between 
nuclear and conventional forces by mixing the two in the structure of military 
bureaucracy and practice.24
In the spring of 2006, a report emerged suggesting how seriously the Bush 
administration had been considering the use of nuclear weapons against re-
gional proliferators. According to an article in the New Yorker magazine by 
veteran journalist Seymour Hersh, the administration had been actively con-
sidering a preventive attack on Iran’s buried nuclear facilities with bunker-
buster tactical nuclear weapons such as B61‑11, as the facilities were beyond 
the reach of existing conventional bombs. Nuclear use, in addition to massive 
conventional bombing, to remove the Iranian regime had been proposed by the 
Defense Science Board, an advisory panel filled (by Defense Secretary Donald 
Rumsfeld) with members who were all known for their hawkishness on the 
question of nuclear use against regional proliferators. Although the Pentagon 
and the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) opposed nuclear use, there is evidence that 
U.S. aircraft from the Arabian Sea had been flying simulated nuclear weapons 
delivery missions within Iranian radar reach. Reputational concerns are part 
of the reasons for the Pentagon’s objection to an attack on Iran. Hersh quoted  

Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition  185
a Pentagon official as saying: “bombing of Iran could provoke ‘a chain re-
action’ of attacks on American facilities and citizens throughout the world. 
‘What will 1.2 billion Muslims think the day we attack Iran?’ ”25 The Pentagon 
initially suggested the nuclear option as the way to guarantee 100 percent re-
moval of Iranian nuclear facilities. However, later the JCS wanted to withdraw 
the option, but the White House would not do so. The problem that is increas-
ingly understood in the Pentagon is the impossibility of achieving a 100 per-
cent removal without massive civilian casualties and radiation contamination 
with the existing bunker-buster nuclear bomb, B61-11. Moreover, the political 
implications of attacking a Muslim country “which is not armed with similar 
weapons and which says it has no intention of making” them, weigh heavily in 
the rethinking.26 Hersh’s implication is that the Pentagon wanted to foreclose 
the idea of attacking Iran at all, and saying nuclear use was the only way to 
guarantee success would remove the attack option from the table, as the mili-
tary expected the administration not to be prepared to resort to nuclear use. 
To a great extent, this confirms the operation of the tradition of non-use. The 
military is confident that the administration will not initiate a war against 
Iran if it implies violating the tradition of non-use.
The plan for the development and potential use of low-yield mini-nukes 
and higher-yield bunker-buster bombs, debated by the administration and the 
Congress, is a second, related, manifestation of change in U.S. nu­clear pol­icy. 
Regional challengers are increasingly building sophisticated command-and-
control and weapons storage facilities buried deep underground. There is a 
type of offense-defense arms race at work here. The building of deep bunkers 
by regional challengers is partially driven by improvements in U.S. interven-
tion capabilities, especially precision-guided mu­ni­tions technologies. More-
over, U.S. conventional superiority is so overwhelming­ly preponderant that 
some regional challengers assume that WMD pos­ses­sion is essential for de-
terring the United States from military intervention or mounting coercive di-
plomacy against them. They are especially worried about U.S. regime-change 
plans. This, in turn, encourages the United States to develop more accurate 
weapons to maintain its preponderance vis-à-vis regional actors. The U.S. 
determination to obtain overwhelming superiority there, in turn, compels 
smaller actors to develop capabilities that are necessary to deter and make 
war costly for the United States, if it occurs. The Robust Nuclear Earth Pen-
etrator (RNEP) that the Pentagon proposed to the House and Senate Armed 
Services Committee in March 2003 has been touted as a “device designed to 

186  Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition
dig into the ground before it explodes and crush any facility buried beneath 
it. Already five times more powerful than the device detonated at Hiroshima, 
the bomb would have an even greater impact because a nuclear weapon’s force 
is multiplied when its shock wave penetrates the rocky crust of the earth.” The 
other weapon that was proposed was a low-yield mini-nuke of .01 kilotons. 
The latter proposal was meant to lift the 1993 Spratt-Furse amendment, which 
restricted development of low-yield warheads, below the 5 kiloton range.27 
Congress, however, after sanctioning research in 2003 and 2004, discontinued 
funding in November 2005.28 This suggests that the majority of congressional 
members oppose diluting the tradition, as they fear the arrival of so-called 
“usable weapons” would adversely affect the tradition.
Supporters of the new weapons argue that the United States needs new 
nuclear weapons programs in order to keep its nuclear scientists and weapon 
designers on the job; these personnel will be able to pass on the technological 
skills to the next generation of weapon designers.29 The weapons labs insist 
that research on low-yield weapons is essential to meet the new threats that 
the United States is facing. Los Alamos weapons analysts Thomas Dowler 
and Joseph Howard II argue that the United States has no proportionate re-
sponse to a rogue dictator who uses chemical or biological weapons against 
U.S. troops. The smallest nuclear weapon in the U.S. arsenal is of Hiroshima-
size yields, which would be so devastating that no U.S. president could use it, 
and, as a result, the United States would be self-deterred. To overcome this 
deficiency, Dowler and Howard argued that the United States should develop 
“mini-nukes” with yields equivalent to .01 kilotons. These low-yield weapons 
could provide an effective response for countering the new enemies in a cri-
sis “while not violating the principle of proportionality.”30 It seems the two 
key makers of nuclear weapons, the Lawrence Livermore and the Los Ala-
mos Laboratories, are keen to continue the research on these weapons with 
the hope of eventual development. Their interest in new weapons stem from 
their concern that most U.S. nuclear weapons were built during the Cold War 
period and that programs such as the Reliable Replacement Warhead (RRW) 
and Stockpile Stewardship Program will not be sufficient to develop nuclear 
weapons that can stay longer in U.S. arsenals and can meet the new security 
challenges.31
The rationale for low-yield weapons offered by Dowler and Howard in 1991 
was given new impetus in American deliberations one decade later, in the new 

Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition  187
strategic environment that emerged after September 11, 2001. Proponents of 
mini-nukes and RNEP bunker-busters argue that the United States needs such 
weapons to deter the use of chemical, biological, and nuclear weap­ons buried 
underground. According to former Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, the 
bunker busters are “needed to deter foes from trying to hide their arsenals in 
deep tunnels.”32 It is contended that the United States will not be “intentionally 
targeting civilians,” but the “aim is to destroy command and control centers, 
leadership targets and key military-industrial assets.” If thousands of “inno-
cent civilians would be harmed in the process, this would be an unintentional 
by-product of the location of targets.”33 Some weapons makers and strategic 
planners argue that since the United States has signed onto the Chemical and 
Biological Weapons Conventions and has destroyed all its biological weapons 
agents, it has no meaningful reply to the threat posed by regional WMD.
The incentive also comes from the persistent dream of some weapon mak-
ers and their supporters to conventionalize nuclear arms and thereby remove 
the normative restraints attached to their use. To some analysts, the avail-
able bunker-buster, B61-11—a modified gravity bomb—cannot do the job, as 
it will not penetrate beyond 20 feet or so. Further, given the massive civilian 
casualties and environmental damage it would cause, a U.S. president would 
be self-deterred from using the weapon. An adversary, knowing these con-
straints, would not be deterred. By reducing the yield of a nuclear weapon 
to one hundredth of a kiloton, the gap between a nuclear and a conventional 
explosive could be bridged, and nuclear use would become more acceptable.34 
By developing new nuclear weapons, administration officials and some sci-
entists in weapons labs hope to reduce the collateral damage, in the form of 
casualties and destruction of property, that characterizes the use of currently 
available nuclear weapons in the U.S. arsenal. The hope is that by removing 
some of the immense destructiveness of nuclear weapons, opposition to the 
use of nuclear weapons would be reduced, if not eliminated.35 The tradition of 
non-use is thus a constraint on nuclear use, and the source of the tradition lies 
in the destructive power of the existing weapons, a confirmation of the model 
presented in Chapter 2.
Other arguments to justify the development of mini-nukes and RNEPs 
have to do with the bureaucratic politics of technological change. They in-
clude: (1) technological imperatives are difficult to arrest; (2) other states will 
develop them anyway; and (3) nuclear weapons cannot be disinvented, but if 

188  Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition
a useful purpose can be found for them, the billions of dollars that the United 
States spends on nuclear arms can be put to better use.36
Criticisms Against the U.S. Policy
The changing U.S. nuclear policy that may allow the use of nuclear arms un-
der certain circumstances has elicited several criticisms. The policy assumes 
that weaker regional challengers, especially hard-core opponents, will not be 
deterred without the United States presenting them with all retaliatory op-
tions, including the possible use of nuclear arms. Conversely, it assumes that 
a weaker challenger will be deterred if it realizes that U.S. nuclear retaliation 
is likely in the event of its using WMD. The assumption is that there are many 
weaker challengers out there who are undeterrable with conventional retalia-
tory threats alone.
Contrary to this assumption, however, in almost all cases, the weaker chal-
lenger may be deterred without the threat of nuclear retaliation, and nuclear 
use may be a highly disproportionate response to those few states or entities 
that would use chemical and biological weapons.37 In the improbable event 
of the use of such weapons by a regional state challenger against the United 
States or its key allies (unlikely because of the near certainty of a powerful 
conventional retaliatory strike that would prove to be suicidal for the chal-
lenger), nuclear retaliation may be an unnecessary option as punishment can 
be achieved through other means. The U.S. conventional arsenal includes the 
BLU-82, a 6,800-kilogram Daisy Cutter bomb (used against Taliban caves in 
Afghanistan) and the more powerful GBU-43/B MOAB (Massive Ordnance 
Air Blast). In March 2003, the United States tested the latter, a 21,000-pound 
precision-guided munition, which is designed: 
to produce a tremendous explosion that would be effective against hard-target 
entrances, soft-to-medium surface targets, and for anti-personnel purposes. 
Because of the size of the explosion, it is also effective at [landing zone] 
clearance and mine and beach obstacle clearance . . . The massive weapon 
provides a capability to perform psychological operations, attack large area 
targets, or hold at-risk threats hidden within tunnels or caves.38
The pure conventional use of nuclear weapons for the demolition of hardened 
targets does not produce much utility for nuclear weapons, as this task can be 
accomplished with the help of new precision-guided munitions. Indeed, in 
March 2007, the head of STRATCOM, General James E. Cartwright, told a 

Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition  189
Congressional committee that the United States has dominant conventional 
capabilities, replacing the need for nuclear use in almost all areas, except to 
“respond promptly to globally dispersed or fleeting threats.” According to 
him, the U.S. Air Force was studying a conventional “precision global strike 
missile,” using available intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).39
Some critics have argued that a low-yield mini-nuke will not accomplish 
the task of destroying all underground bunkers. Such weapons may not fully 
destroy biological and chemical agents buried deep underground or protected 
by water as radiation from nuclear attack would be absorbed by soil, moisture, 
and concrete.40 Further, as a congressionally mandated study in April 2005 
suggested, earth-penetrating nuclear weapons, even if they are able to destroy 
military targets buried deep underground, will inflict “massive casualties at 
ground level.”41 It is likely that regional challengers will make further efforts 
to dig deeper in order to circumvent a U.S. nuclear attack. “Even the most 
powerful weapons cannot destroy bunkers tunneled under just 400 meters of 
granite,” and if a regional challenger finds that it is threatened with a mini-
nuke or a bunker buster, it could deepen the underground facility beyond the 
reach of the weapon.42 In addition, it can develop mobile facilities that are not 
always easy to detect.
U.S. conventional power is so overwhelmingly superior that in almost all 
conflict situations, it can, by itself, deter weaker regional adversaries from the 
use of chemical or biological weapons by it alone. The hard core challengers— 
for example, Iran and North Korea—are unlikely to cross the threshold, 
knowing well that the United States can retaliate with massive conventional 
capabilities. The failure to use chemical or biological weapons by Iraq during 
both the 1991 and 2003 Gulf Wars suggests that the threat of use of WMD by a 
hard-core regional challenger is not always as credible as it appears to be. Even 
in the North Korean case, Pyongyang’s possession of nuclear weapons does 
not imply their use, as the country’s leadership should know that a nuclear at-
tack could invite a massive conventional counterstrike and possibly a nuclear 
counter­attack. Moreover, the North Korean rhetoric about war cannot be 
construed as equivalent to an actual policy, because regional challengers may 
use language akin to compellence or deterrence in order to gain political con-
cessions from stronger powers, but, when push comes to shove, it is not clear 
the North Korean elite would take excessive risks such as the use of WMD.
Proponents of nuclear use against “rogue states” argue that irrational actors 
cannot be deterred by conventional weapons—but this also suggests that they 

190  Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition
may not be easily deterred by nuclear weapons, either. Furthermore, the threat 
of nuclear use may not be credible to a regional challenger, as the tradition of 
non-use itself is a powerful consideration for a regional actor not to concede 
in a conflict with the United States. It is not easy to carry out a nuclear threat 
unless the use is in response to massive casualties inflicted by chemical and 
biological attacks. Similarly, as Scott Sagan argues, the new U.S. nuclear policy 
creates a “commitment trap,” thus forcing the president to use nuclear weapons 
in an “inappropriate manner in a future conflict.” To maintain the president’s 
international and domestic reputation for honoring commitments, he would 
have to use nuclear weapons in response to a chemical or biological attack.43
Using nuclear weapons preemptively or preventively is easier said than 
done. The United States would be committing the same crime that it rightly 
accuses “rogue states” and terrorists of perpetrating—that is, the killing of in-
nocent civilians—if it ever unleashes a nuclear attack on cities or states where 
terrorists have taken refuge or residence. Thus, the victims of rogue rulers—
that is, the population of rogue states—will suffer for crimes that they never 
committed. This is tantamount to crimes against humanity. It would cause 
grave international condemnation. In opposing nuclear use against regional 
states, General Lee Butler, a former commander-in-chief of the U.S. Strate-
gic Air Command (SAC) and now a powerful advocate of nuclear disarma-
ment, put it succinctly: “there are no rogue nations, only rogue leaders.”44 His 
statement captures the fact that actions of leaders who usurp power through 
undemocratic means cannot be responded to by punishing their people, as 
the latter have little control over the selection of the leader or his or her sub-
sequent policy choices. Nuclear retaliation for a chemical or biological attack 
will be highly disproportionate to the pain that chemical and biological attack 
would cause. While it may sound useful for deterrence purposes, a more cred-
ible strategy would be to build and improve defenses against such attacks. It 
is also argued that the U.S. aim should not be to wipe out the population of a 
“rogue” state that ordered chemical or biological use, but the defeat, reform, 
and transformation of that society as a normal member of the international 
system, which may not be achievable with a nuclear attack.45 Regime change 
through a conventional offensive is a preferred option here to the mass de-
struction and killing of several thousand innocent citizens.
The use of nuclear weapons against terrorists is unlikely to succeed if the 
terrorist group in possession of WMD capabilities believes in cataclysmic at-
tacks and does not mind martyrdom for its members and the societies that 

Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition  191
host them. In fact, it is perhaps in the interests of terrorist groups that hold 
millenarian ideologies that the United States use these weapons and thereby 
receive international condemnation and tarnish its image and reputation.
There may well be an argument in favor of the United States using nuclear 
weapons in certain conditions: a terrorist group holding nuclear weapons is 
about to launch an attack; U.S. intelligence has accurate information on this; 
and there is no other way to eliminate that capability quickly and effectively.46 
However, even in this case, nuclear use raises several problems. First, if the 
target is located in a heavily populated area, a nuclear attack could kill a mas-
sive number of civilians who have nothing to do with the terrorists or the 
rogue leaders. Even if it is an unpopulated area, the best weapon may still be 
conventional, as nuclear use need not result in the destruction of the nuclear 
device that the terrorist group holds. Using nuclear weapons against terror-
ists sounds appealing, but this is not all that simple a solution to the complex 
problem posed by transnational terrorism. In the most likely scenario, the ter-
rorists would be smart enough to keep the weapon in a populated area, if they 
can, as the United States would find it difficult to attack with nuclear weapons; 
and if the United States did attack, the terrorists would obtain unparalleled 
publicity for their cause, especially if the intelligence report that formed the 
basis for attack proves to be wrong and the terrorist threat was a hoax.
A second problem with the U.S. strategy of preemptive or preventive nu-
clear use is the political constraint associated with such use and the physi-
cal occupation of the country afterwards. For instance, in 2003, had Saddam 
Hussein used WMD and the United States responded with nuclear weapons, 
such a retaliation would have killed a large number of innocent Iraqi civilians. 
The subsequent occupation and transformation of Iraq in accordance with 
U.S. goals would have become much more difficult as the popular support for 
any U.S.-installed regime would have been even less than it was in 2006. Fur-
ther, the broad Arab public would have become even more inflamed against 
the United States as a result of such killings.
Third, opponents of mini-nukes argue that their development and deploy-
ment would make nuclear use more likely and thereby break the tradition 
of non-use. To them, nuclear weapons should be reserved as a class apart, a 
weapon that should be used only in response to a nuclear attack on the U.S. 
territory itself. This high threshold of nuclear use serves U.S. interests, espe-
cially since the United States holds such an overwhelming conventional su-
periority over regional challengers. The new U.S. nuclear policy “would put 

192  Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition
potential adversaries into a use-or-lose posture with their WMD if a U.S. at-
tack appeared likely.”47
Finally, intelligence failures regarding the capabilities and intentions of a 
regional challenger can have major consequences. It is unlikely that a regional 
power would stockpile its WMD in a single site far from population centers, 
and it is even more unlikely that the United States would receive accurate 
intelligence information in order to justify a preemptive nuclear strike. The 
grossly inaccurate intelligence warnings in 2002–03 on Iraq’s WMD capa-
bilities point to the problems in this area.48 The consequences of nuclear use 
on Iraq in 2003 in response to dubious intelligence reports would have been 
highly negative.49 The “Gulf War syndrome”—supposedly the result of chemi-
cal detonations or contaminated radioactive debris from the use of depleted 
uranium in conventional bombs during the 1991 war—caused enormous 
damage to the health and morale of exposed U.S. troops.50 Operating in a 
nuclear-contaminated environment, the U.S. troops would have found it dif-
ficult to engage in postwar nation building and policing functions.
Political Risks
There are several risks in the United States developing usable mini-nukes 
and RNEP-type nuclear bunker busters, inducting them into its arsenal, and 
transforming its nuclear policy into one that calls for the early use of such 
weapons against nonnuclear states. The two key risks are emulation by other 
nuclear weapons states and the negative impact they will have on the nuclear 
nonproliferation regime.
Emulation Risk  States tend to emulate the defense policies of others, espe-
cially if they find that the leading actors are consistently pursuing a particular 
path. There is considerable fear that if the United States lowers the thresh-
old of nuclear use, it may encourage other nuclear states, including the new 
ones, Israel, India, Pakistan, North Korea, and possibly Iran, to lower their 
threshold of use as well. “Until now the United States has reserved nuclear 
weapons for retaliation against nuclear attacks or immediate threats to na-
tional survival, a standard tacitly but widely accepted around the world.”51 If 
the United States engages in nuclear saber rattling, especially on the basis of 
dubious intelligence (as happened in the case on Iraq’s WMD capabilities), it 
may have a hard time convincing other states to exercise nuclear restraint, 
especially if they perceive an immediate strategic advantage in not doing so. 
The U.S. strategic doctrine of deterrence was emulated by the Soviet Union,  

Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition  193
and, to a lesser extent, by the other NWS. The new U.S. policy of using nuclear 
weapons against chemical and biological weapons use has already been emu-
lated by Russia, Britain, France, and India. A similar emulation could occur 
in the area of nuclear use as well.
Pressures on the Nonproliferation Regime and Increased Horizontal Prolifer-
ation  The use of nuclear weapons by the United States would be likely to 
adversely affect the nonproliferation regime which has been a facilitator of 
the current nuclear status quo. Nonnuclear states, especially those inimical to 
the United States, would learn a powerful lesson that nuclear attack against a 
state occurred because it lacked the capacity to retaliate, and hence it is wise 
to acquire such capabilities in order to deter potential U.S. nuclear attacks.52 
One study concludes: 
Targeting nuclear weapons at regional troublemakers will provide them with a 
justification to acquire nuclear weapons. By using nuclear weapons in this way, 
the United States is sending a message that nuclear weapons are important 
for achieving prestige in world affairs and for accomplishing military and 
political objectives. It also indicates that nuclear powers have no intention of 
eliminating their nuclear arsenals, as required by the NPT.53
Nonnuclear states have assiduously bargained for negative security assur-
ances, and the 1995 extension of the NPT in perpetuity was largely due to 
the partial commitment made by the NWS, including the United States, of 
no first use against nonnuclear signatories to the treaty. Nonnuclear states 
have already expressed their opposition to the new nuclear policies of nuclear 
states by not agreeing to a final statement at the 2005 NPT review conference. 
Further, there is a disjunction between the nuclear policy of the George W. 
Bush administration and its declared “moral rejection of violence against ci-
vilians, and the categorical injunction against ‘weapons of mass terror.’ ”54 The 
hedged no-first-use policy has practically eroded much of the strength of such 
a commitment, to the detriment of nonproliferation goals.55
The policy of nuclear strikes for preventive and preemptive purposes can 
encourage potentially targeted states to vigorously pursue nuclear weapons. 
The U.S. policy of regime removal in those targeted countries has already put 
pressure on such states to pursue nuclear acquisition in the hopes of thwart-
ing potential U.S. military intervention or diplomatic coercion. The incentives 
for nuclear acquisition for Iran and North Korea have increased since the two  

194  Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition
Gulf Wars. North Korea already tested a nuclear device in October 2006, while 
Iran has accelerated its uranium enrichment program. If Iran acquires nu­clear 
weapons, there will be pressure on some Gulf states to go nuclear. There are 
historical examples of U.S. pressure forcing states to acquire nuclear weapons. 
As discussed in Chapter 3, the Eisenhower administration’s nuclear blackmail 
was one of the reasons for China’s launching its nuclear program in 1955 in 
the middle of the Quemoy-Matsu crisis.
Although the technology for functional mini-nukes appears to be several 
years away, it is quite plausible that, if they are developed, the United States 
would deploy such weapons and a president would be tempted to use them 
under circumstances that are tactically driven. The potential test for the non-
use norm would be if leaders use the new weapons despite having other op-
tions at their command, or rather desist from use even when other conven-
tional options are not available. If mini-nukes are used, it would show that 
the non-use tradition is not a deeply embedded norm and that the distinctive 
characteristics of the weapons have had something to do with the observance 
of the norm thus far, as such weapons blur the boundaries between conven-
tional and nuclear arms. The interaction of the material and the moral is thus 
crucial in this case. New ideas tend to arise from material sources, and the 
political elite is not driven purely by existing ideas (i.e., morally and ethically 
appropriate ones) devoid of consideration of the particular military and po-
litical consequences of the instrument of coercion of hand. Once the dispro-
portionate destructive power of nuclear weapons is removed, the temptation 
to use them in battlefield situations could increase.
Reputation Costs  How would the reputational constraints inherent in the 
tradition of non-use of nuclear weapons affect a nuclear attacker? The tradi-
tion against the use of nuclear weapons arose partly because of a realization 
among nuclear states that a nuclear attack could not be contained and that 
the effects of such a use would severely harm their reputation and image na-
tionally and internationally. The use of nuclear weapons by the United States 
could have tremendous consequences for America’s international standing 
and alliance relationships. The reputation considerations that gave rise to the 
tradition will be so high that repairing the damage may not be easy.56 It is 
very unlikely that even its closest allies would support nuclear use absent a 
clear and present danger of nuclear attack. Nuclear retaliation against chemi-
cal and biological attacks (most likely with limited impacts) is also unlikely to 
receive the support of allies.

Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition  195
The 2003 Gulf War offered an indication of the limited allied support and 
generally negative international reaction to a preventive or regime-changing 
war, especially one based on dubious intelligence. If the United States uses nu-
clear weapons, the leadership role of the United States could suffer irreparable 
damage, accentuating the legitimacy deficit for the United States that began 
since the 2003 Gulf War. Notes Quester: “A multinational instinct toward re-
treat would mean less support for Washington as an alliance leader, and it 
might even mean a total termination of some alliances or just an erosion of 
their effectiveness.”57 The use of nuclear weapons in the Middle East by the 
United States against a Muslim country could further embitter America’s rela-
tionship with the states in the region, including its allies.58 In October 2001, in 
the prelude to the Afghan War, U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell stated that 
the United States would not rule out the use of nuclear weapons. This state-
ment evoked the response from Washington’s ally, Pakistan, that it “firmly 
and categorically rejects even the thought of using nuclear weapons tactically 
or otherwise.”59 Nuclear use in Afghanistan would have generated more ter-
rorism as the images of the dead and injured would have propelled even mod-
erate Muslims all over the world to turn against America and Americans.
Conclusion
As the twenty-first century dawned, the tradition of non-use came under 
increased pressure from established nuclear powers, especially the United 
States. Largely in response to asymmetric challenges posed by terrorist groups 
as well as regional states that hold WMD such as chemical and biological 
weapons and aspire to become nuclear states, the United States and other nu-
clear powers have restructured their nuclear doctrines and have tried to find 
new uses for their nuclear weapons. The effort to develop usable mini-nukes 
springs from a desire to redesign the material character of the weapon so as 
to undercut the reputational constraints inherent in the use of any of the cur-
rently available nuclear weapons. But the efforts of the domestic opposition, 
especially a majority in the U.S. Congress, have helped to curtail the develop-
ment of such weapons. This opposition is indeed arising out of fear that if the 
weapons are developed, future leaders may break the tradition of non-use.
The challenge to the tradition is also coming from Russia, France, Britain,  
Israel, and India—the states that, along with the United States, have officially 
expanded nuclear deterrence to include retaliation against chemical and bio-
logical weapons. Meanwhile, China and Pakistan have engaged in activities 

196  Changing U.S. Policies and the tradition
such as nuclear transfers to aspiring states that violate the spirit of the nonpro-
liferation regime and have thereby helped in the diffusion of capabilities that 
may be used by recalcitrant regional powers or disgruntled terrorist groups. 
There is also the question about how deeply ingrained the tradition is among 
the new nuclear states as well as the aspiring ones. Numerous sources, then, 
are presenting the tradition of non-use with some of the most difficult chal-
lenges it has faced in its sixty-three-year history.

197
 10 Conclusions 
t he pr eceding chapt er s discussed the tradition of non-use of nuclear 
weapons that has emerged during the sixty-three years since the first and last 
use of nuclear weapons against Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945. A 
tradition in this respect is a time-honored practice of non-use generating ex-
pectations about the appropriate behavior of nuclear weapon states. I treat the 
normative prohibition inherent in the tradition as informal and intermediate, 
given that it has yet to become a legal or formal norm and that a majority 
of nuclear states retain their option of first use of nuclear arms against non-
nuclear states. In Chapter 2, I argued that the tradition emerged largely due to 
material and reputational factors, that is, the immense destructive character 
of the weapon and the possible adverse reputational impact on nuclear states 
if they used their weapons against nonnuclear states. Moral and legal con-
siderations are subsumed in the reputational variable. Tactical and strategic 
factors are important as well for the non-use of nuclear weapons, but country 
studies in various chapters show that they by themselves cannot fully account 
for the reluctance of nuclear states to resort to nuclear attacks. After 1945, but 
more prominently after the hydrogen bomb tests in the early 1950s, it began 
to dawn on decision makers that the use of nuclear weapons as a battlefield 
option is constrained: nuclear weapons are too destructive to obtain strategic 
and tactical objectives and political purposes without tarnishing the image 
and reputation of the user. The Hiroshima and Nagasaki experiences were 
pivotal in this regard. U.S. atomic scientists proposed international control of 
the atom as a way to prevent their use by aggressive governments. These scien-
tists influenced the Truman administration’s decision on this issue. They were  

198  Conclusions
indeed the first reputation intermediaries or norm entrepreneurs for the non-
use norm; they would then be followed by strategic thinkers, peace move-
ments, and nonaligned developing countries. President Truman also made the 
first formally enshrined distinction between atomic and conventional weap-
ons by placing control of the former in the hands of the civilian leadership.
However, after the Soviets achieved nuclear weapons state (NWS) status in 
1949 and the Cold War competition reached full steam, the issue of complete 
international control of the atom faded. Truman toyed with the idea of waging 
a preventive war against the Soviet Union before it acquired nuclear weap-
ons. His refraining from such a preventive strike on the Soviet Union while 
the United States held an atomic monopoly gave birth to a nascent tradition 
of non-use. The next landmark event was the Korean War (1950–53), when 
the United States considered using nuclear arms to stop Chinese intervention 
and military advances against Allied forces, but Truman chose not to go that 
route and thereby strengthened the tradition. Truman’s successor, Dwight 
Eisenhower, made serious efforts at nuclear brinkmanship with China on 
three major occasions during the 1950s. However, he eventually backed off due 
largely to reputational concerns, that is, fear of intense adverse international 
reaction, especially from Western allies. What is significant is that although 
tactical/strategic considerations were discussed by U.S. officials, in the end, 
reputational concerns appeared to be of higher salience in their calculations, 
as evident in the discussions at the National Security Council (NSC) meetings 
(as presented in Chapter 3) on the question of nuclear use.
The 1954 Bravo atmospheric tests of powerful hydrogen bombs by the 
United States at Bikini Atoll were perhaps the most pivotal events in the 
evolution of the tradition. These tests, and their radiation effects in the Pa-
cific, prompted persistent demands by international protest movements and 
developing countries for a nuclear test ban treaty. The Soviet Union actively 
promoted and supported international peace movements, while projecting 
an image of a supporter of developing countries in the nuclear disarmament 
area. In 1963, the superpowers negotiated the Partial Test Ban Treaty (PTBT) 
as a way to forestall nuclear proliferation and quell international protests over 
nuclear testing; this treaty also helped to strengthen the tradition of non-use. 
The Cuban Missile Crisis, involving the two nuclear-armed superpowers, 
had a major spillover effect on the tradition, as the danger of a nuclear war 
became globally known. The superpowers stepped up their efforts at arms 
control and nonproliferation after the crisis. The fifth nuclear power, China, 
articulated its belief in nuclear non-use, and pledged a no-first-use policy 

Conclusions  199
against both nuclear and nonnuclear states following its nuclear tests in 1964. 
Both Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson considered a preven-
tive strike on China (see Chapter 4) to arrest the Communist regime’s nuclear 
acquisition, but in the end refrained from doing so, partly due to reputation  
considerations.
The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT) of 1968 was critical in partially 
legitimizing the tradition of non-use. Although there were no specific nega-
tive security guarantees in the treaty, the bargaining between nuclear haves 
and have-nots included a tacit understanding that a state in good standing 
with the NPT would not be targeted with nuclear weapons. The negative se-
curity assurances that the nuclear states offered on various occasions in the 
context of the NPT review conferences and the treaty’s renewal provide a lim-
ited legal basis to the tradition. Since these assurances lack the status of a full-
fledged legal treaty or convention, and since the NWS declare that they are 
“political” as opposed to “legal” commitments, they have only partial value. 
However, they do add to the informal non-use norm inherent in the tradition. 
In Chapters 5 and 6, reasonable evidence was provided with respect to the cal-
culations of the other four official NWS (Russia, Britain, France, and China) 
and the three second-generation nuclear powers (Israel, India, and Pakistan) 
on the question of nuclear non-use. These cases also show that differences in 
political systems played hardly any role in the tradition’s emergence and per-
sistence as it has been observed by all nuclear states, especially the Commu-
nist states. The persistent efforts by nonnuclear states to obtain legally binding 
negative security guarantees suggest that they do not yet view the tradition as 
a strong norm, but as an informal norm that needs to be reinforced by legal 
rules and agreements in order to make the barrier for use even higher. How-
ever, nuclear states do not want to trap themselves into legal commitments, 
as they fear that such pledges could further constrain them from resorting 
to nuclear threats for deterrence and compellence purposes. Although legal 
treaties can be violated just like an informal norm, the reluctance on the part 
of the nuclear states and eagerness among the nonnuclear states for such a 
treaty suggest that both view legal arrangements as placing a higher threshold 
on potential nuclear use.
By the late 1960s, the tradition of non-use had become part of the under-
standing of leaders in the United States and elsewhere. A concrete example 
was the statement by President Johnson in September 1964 to the effect that 
he was not willing to use nuclear weapons and break the nineteen-year-old 
tradition that his predecessors had been following. Successive developments 

200  Conclusions
suggest the deepening and broadening of the tradition in U.S. policy over 
time: the Carter administration’s decision to scrap the development of the 
neutron bomb because of the fear of blurring the distinction between con-
ventional and nuclear weapons; the decision by President George H. W. Bush, 
on the eve of the 1991 Persian Gulf War, not to use nuclear weapons even if 
Iraq resorted to chemical and biological weapons; the removal of the nuclear 
option from consideration by Joint Chiefs Chairman General Colin Powell 
during that war; the intense opposition (especially in Congress) to the George 
W. Bush administration’s plans for the development of mini-nukes and high-
yield bunker-buster weapons such as the Robust Nuclear Earth Penetrator 
(RNEP); and the 2006 Pentagon warning that nuclear use would be necessary 
to successfully wage a preventive war against Iran (in an effort to stop an at-
tack, believing that U.S. leaders would be reluctant to use such weapons). At 
the global level, there seems to be a strong understanding of the dangers of 
nuclear war, although a handful of additional states have acquired or are in 
the process of acquiring such weapons as a “great equalizer” as a result of 
their rivalries with the United States and regional neighbors, as well as due 
to domestic considerations. While the tradition has become embedded glob-
ally, official discourses and postures since the end of the Cold War suggest 
that intermittent attempts are being made by nuclear states to alter the value 
of nuclear weapons in order to achieve certain tactical and strategic goals. 
The intense opposition among critics of such policies in the United States and 
elsewhere shows their apprehension that such changes will undermine the 
six-decade-long tradition of non-use.
Efforts to circumvent the tradition of non-use by developing “usable” low-
yield weapons such as mini-nukes have come from the United States, because 
the tradition emerged from an appreciation of the material characteristics of 
the nuclear weapons available, particularly their massive destructiveness and 
collateral damage. Some proponents of low-yield nuclear arms believe that if 
one can limit the damage from a nuclear weapon, then it becomes yet another 
powerful bomb. The character of the weapon that produces the basic incen-
tive for non-use is now being challenged, and the effort is to circumvent the 
tradition by developing a nuclear weapon that may not possess such intrinsic 
destructive characteristics. However, the scientific basis for a “usable” mini-
nuclear weapon, producing minimal collateral damage, does not exist as of 
now. In addition, to many proponents of the tradition of non-use, a nuclear 
weapon is a WMD, whether it is large or small, and it is important not to dis-
tinguish between “usable” and “non-usable” weapons.

Conclusions  201
The tradition, although offering a partial normative restraint on nuclear 
use, is still not a full-fledged taboo, as the military and strategic doctrines of 
nuclear states envision weapons use under certain circumstances. In recent 
years, these circumstances have been broadened from existential threats to 
include lesser threats such as retaliation for chemical and biological weap-
ons attacks on troops or territories of allied states; preventive attacks are now 
more widely considered as well. In that sense, the evolution of the tradition 
has been on a curvilinear path, and the possibility for its infraction has in-
creased, especially in the twenty-first century.
In rhetoric and national planning, the tradition of non-use has been fur-
ther challenged in the strategic environment that has emerged after Septem-
ber 11, 2001. The United States, the nuclear state which first helped to create 
the tradition by abstaining from nuclear use after 1945, has taken the lead in 
lowering the threshold of nuclear use. Russia, the other significant nuclear 
power that helped to shape the tradition, has followed suit. Other democra­
tic nuclear powers—Britain, France, Israel, and India—have changed their 
doctrines to embrace nuclear weapons as a deterrent to counter lower-level 
threats, involving chemical and biological attacks. The established nuclear 
states thus have expanded the conditions under which nuclear weapons would 
be used, and in that process they have also created question marks about the 
vitality of the tradition. Efforts at blurring the distinction between nuclear 
and conventional weapons, by treating the former as just another weapon, 
are not new, as they have existed intermittently in U.S. strategic discourse 
from the beginning of the atomic age.1 Regional powers such as Israel, Paki­
stan, and North Korea have also invoked nuclear use to deter or coerce their 
adversaries to accept their policies on issues other than existential challenge. 
None of this implies the imminent demise of the tradition, but it does suggest 
that the changing policies of nuclear states may damage its strength over the 
long haul.
What are the theoretical and policy implications of the tradition, espe-
cially for deterrence as it exists now?
Implications for Deterrence 
The presence of the tradition has major implications for nuclear deterrence 
theory and policy. The key dimension in this regard is the notion of self- 
deterrence. While proponents of deterrence theory tend to ignore the tradi-
tion in their accounts, critics of the theory have rarely talked about the effect 
the tradition may have on the credibility of deterrent threats between nuclear  

202  Conclusions
and nonnuclear states. However, a tradition of non-use goes to the heart of 
deterrence. Deterrence theory rests on six elements: the presence of a severe 
conflict, the assumption that leaders of the opposing nations are rational, the 
presence of a strong retaliatory capability, the expectation of unacceptable 
damage in case of retaliation, the credibility of threats of retaliation, and fi-
nally, the existence of an adversarial but stable relationship between the par-
ties.2 Among these elements, as far as the relevance of the tradition of non-use 
is concerned, credibility of threat is the most significant one. The credibility 
of a deterrent threat relies on two necessary conditions: the political will to re-
spond militarily and the possession of sufficient military capability to mount 
a retaliatory threat.3 The rational expectation is that the retaliation would be 
so severe that the costs of attack would be immensely higher than the benefits 
that would result from military action. The costs are incredibly high if a par-
ticular hostile action prompts nuclear retaliation. As Morgan states, “credibil-
ity is the quality of being believed . . . it was not a state’s capacity to do harm 
that enabled it to practice deterrence, it was others’ belief that it had such a 
capacity. What deterred was not the threat but that it was believed.”4 It is pre-
cisely on the issue of belief where the tradition of non-use enters the realm of 
decision-makers’ calculations.
Nuclear deterrence theory is purported to allow a state to prevent war as 
well as obtain its political objectives through the strategy of “leaving some-
thing to chance.” This strategy attempts to solve any credibility problem in-
volved in nuclear retaliation by assuming that states do not have complete 
collective control of events.5 Both deterrence by denial and deterrence by pun-
ishment assume that capabilities are the significant component in preventing 
war initiations by challengers. Under the former, deterrence can be achieved 
if the defender has the “capability to deny the other party any gains deriving 
from the move which is to be deterred.” In the latter, deterrence is achieved by 
“posing the prospect of war costs greater than the value of the gain.”6
All of these strands of rational deterrence theory rest strongly on capabil-
ity, to the detriment of a deep analysis of the component of will or resolve. The 
target state should believe that the deterrer has the will, intention, and resolve 
to retaliate. If the challenger is confident that the defender has weak resolve, 
the threat of retaliation will not be credible to the challenger. This is especially 
problematic if the defender has a poor reputation for carrying out previously 
announced threats.7 The American notion of rational behavior may simply be 
inappropriate if an opponent is not acting irrationally but his behavior lacks 

Conclusions  203
reasonableness.8 For example, a highly risk-taking leader such as Iraq’s former 
President Saddam Hussein could believe in the weak resolve of his adversary 
and could engage in a brinkmanship crisis, even in the face of immense dan-
gers to the survival of his country and regime. The tradition of non-use of nu­
clear weapons (i.e., the reputation problem inherent in it) could be one of the 
factors that encourage such leaders to engage in risk-taking behavior.
The tradition of non-use thus raises questions about the political commit-
ment and credibility necessary for successful deterrence in a large number of 
strategic situations. The cases presented in Chapter 7 point to the difficulty in 
translating nuclear capability into credible deterrent threats and the constraints 
on committing one’s capability for anything other than the supreme interests 
of a state such as national survival. But such existential threats are rare in the 
contemporary world. The credibility of declared or tacit commitment is ques-
tioned when a nonnuclear state initiates a war or limited probing action even 
when the adversary possesses weapons of mass destruction. Nuclear retalia-
tion against a weaker challenger, for example against an ally’s attacker, can be 
further constrained by the operation of the tradition of non-use.
More concretely, how does the tradition of non-use affect the credibility of 
deterrent threats?
The Problem of Self-Deterrence
In the nuclear context, both tactical constraints and normative prohibitions 
can act as sources of self-deterrence. The nuclear state can also be self-deterred 
by the fear of consequences, for reputation, image, prestige, power position, 
and general international standing. Similarly, if an actor is deterred from  
using nuclear weapons because of moral considerations, it is self-deterrence, 
given that there are no punishment mechanisms present other than reputation 
costs. In each of these scenarios, fear of other-imposed military costs is not the 
primary reason for the actor’s desisting from executing a threat of retaliation.9 
For instance, Robert Jervis has argued that in the war on Iraq, the United 
States would have been self-deterred from using unlimited force including 
nuclear weapons, because of fear of adverse opinion, domestically and among 
allies; apprehensions of more states acquiring nuclear weapons; and the hatred 
that it would engender in the Arab world, leading to more terrorism. All these 
factors act as inhibitors on U.S. nuclear options in the Middle East.10 These 
are indeed reputation calculations deriving from the tradition of non-use. 
Self-deterrence is also the reason why some U.S. policy makers and scientists  

204  Conclusions
have wanted to develop mini-nukes—and, prior to that, limited nuclear op-
tions and counterforce targeting—as these were seen as less likely to induce 
self-deterrence for the decision makers.
The presence of self-deterrence is not adequately addressed in the deter-
rence literature. This work points out that one of the conditions that affect 
the credibility of retaliatory threat is the informal norm of the tradition of 
non-use. Cost/benefit calculations based on military balance alone would not 
predict sufficiently a challenger’s motives or incentives to launch an attack, 
especially of the limited-aims variety. Deterrence theorists should not only 
specify capability, commitment, and credibility in the abstract, but should 
also enumerate and investigate the key factors that could affect them in actual 
operational contexts.
Moreover, a nuclear-armed defender could face major hurdles in trans-
lating nuclear capability into an effective deterrent in limited war situations. 
These constraints are even larger if the conflict is of an insurgency variety. 
These constraints are not simply the result of tactical/military considerations 
but also of normative and reputational concerns, such as the fear of breaking 
the tradition against nuclear use, and the worry of generating adverse public 
opinion, nationally and internationally. Clearly, along with psychological and 
domestic variables, normative and reputational factors have a place in out-
comes of deterrence failures as well as war initiations, a topic that needs fur-
ther study. The tradition of non-use could generate incentives for rival states 
to engage in low-level military activities, assuming that there will be no puni-
tive strikes on the part of the nuclear state. It could assure leaders that small-
scale harassment or limited probes using asymmetric means would not result 
in any major retaliatory strikes, especially of a nuclear nature. The continued 
Pakistani activities in the Indian side of Kashmir and the raids by Palestinian 
and Islamist groups such as Hezbollah within Israel suggest this emerging 
phenomenon in regional conflict zones.
Similarly, the credibility of extended nuclear deterrence could be affected 
by the tradition of non-use, as a non-nuclear challenger’s attack on an ally 
need not threaten the vital interests of the nuclear defender as much as would 
a direct attack on it. An attack on an ally is not equivalent to an attack on one-
self, however close that ally is.
The case studies in Chapter 7 show that the mere possession of nuclear 
weapons need not deter a nonnuclear state from launching a conventional at-
tack against the nuclear-armed state if the initiator believes that it can wage 

Conclusions  205
a limited war without provoking a nuclear response. Nuclear deterrence may 
be effective in circumstances when the nuclear weapon state’s existence is at 
stake. But such challenges are rare in contemporary international politics, 
due largely to the legal and institutional norms against conquering and per-
manently occupying another state. Additionally, most of the declared nuclear 
states are superior to their actual and potential challengers in terms of ag-
gregate conventional capability. It is therefore difficult to isolate the marginal 
utility added by nuclear weapons. This study reinforces the findings of aggre-
gate studies that question the utility of nuclear weapons in conflicts involving 
nuclear and nonnuclear states.11 Nuclear theorist George Quester acknowl-
edges that the tradition has eroded the deterrent power of nuclear weapons, 
“as the world more and more [has come] to regard nuclear escalation, the 
backbone of ‘extended nuclear deterrence,’ as unthinkable. The erosion has 
been a source of concern for U.S. military strategists.”12
However, exaggerated notions about the restraining power of the tradition 
of non-use could result in military catastrophes. A nuclear-armed state could 
be tempted or pressured to retaliate with nuclear weapons if it fears losing a 
war or its long-term credibility. The reported decisions by Israeli leaders to 
place their nuclear forces on alert during the 1973 October/Yom Kippur War 
and the 1991 Persian Gulf War suggest the dangers of conventional conflicts 
escalating to the nuclear level. A second danger would be pressures on the 
nuclear allies of regional powers to intervene in the protection of their cli-
ent states. The superpower nuclear alert during the October/Yom Kippur War 
was a case in point. In these situations, a weapon of last resort could become a 
weapon of first resort. Even when the nuclear alerts are meant for deterrence 
or compellence efforts, they can result in “commitment traps” as well as cause 
accidents and inadvertent use.
The prospect of biological and chemical weapons use has increased the 
chances of a nuclear weapon state’s breaking the tradition. Biological and 
chemical weapons are believed to be widely available and are supposed to be a 
“poor man’s atomic weapons.” A risk-taking leader can use them or threaten 
to use them to prevent intervention, as the Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein at-
tempted in 1990–91 and 2002–03. Had Hussein used such capabilities against 
invading U.S. forces or American allies in the region such as Israel and Saudi 
Arabia, the deterrent credibility of the United States would have suffered a 
major setback if it had not used nuclear weapons in retaliation. The credibility 
of nuclear deterrence will be further damaged if policy makers pronounce 

206  Conclusions
that all and sundry threats are to be deterred with nuclear weapons. Non-
nuclear states would disregard the threat of nuclear retaliation, thereby rais-
ing credibility questions.13 The credibility problem is even higher for extended 
deterrence, especially for the protection of areas of secondary importance to 
the nuclear state. Thus, even if an ally is part of the U.S. umbrella, it may be-
come extremely difficult to use nuclear weapons against a smaller adversary 
of that ally partially due to the normative inhibitions inherent in the tradi-
tion of non-use. As a result of a realization of this predicament, Washington 
probably would be under tremendous pressure to break the tradition and use 
nuclear weapons once a chemical or biological attack takes place against U.S. 
troops or allies in a theater like the Persian Gulf.
The chapters show the limitations of nuclear weapons as a usable source 
of power, largely because of the difficulty in converting the putative capability 
into actualized power except under rare circumstances such as those involv-
ing existential concerns. In the traditional sense, military power involves the 
ability of states to affect the will and behavior of other states by threatening or 
employing armed coercion. The tradition of non-use thus has ramifications for 
power in the international system. It shows the importance of soft-power vari-
ables in international politics. Analysts, especially realists, tend to denigrate 
soft-power elements such as reputation and image as insignificant or second-
ary in explaining national security choices of states. Based on the historical 
analysis provided in the chapters of this book, soft-power considerations—for 
example, reputation and image—have been dominant factors for the rise and 
observance of the tradition of non-use. Leaders want to look good in the eyes 
of the world and wish to receive favorable domestic opinion. These soft power 
considerations also act as self-deterrents when it comes to the use of nuclear 
weapons.
Compellence/Coercive Diplomacy
Nuclear weapons have been touted as instruments for coercive or compellent 
uses, in addition to deterrence. Unlike deterrence, which is aimed at prevent-
ing an aggressive act, compellence implies that the state has already under-
taken such an action and the aim is to compel it to withdraw or surrender. 
The offensive use of military force is implied in a compellent threat. Coercive 
diplomacy is the simultaneous use of military threats and diplomacy to en-
courage a state to “comply with the demands” of the coercer or “work out 
an acceptable compromise.”14 The existence of the tradition raises a severe 
challenge to both compellence and coercive diplomacy. Similar to deterrence, 

Conclusions  207
compellence operates only when an opponent does something that the threat-
ening state wants him to do on the basis of the threat to use force. Therefore, 
like deterrence, compellence relies upon credibility. Even in the conventional 
realm, compellence is more difficult to achieve than deterrence, as backing 
down under threat of an act already carried out can be politically very costly 
for the target state. With the tradition of non-use in mind, compellence may 
be even more costly, since the threat of nuclear weapons use for anything 
other than supreme national interests may not be credible to a weaker target 
of coercive diplomacy.
Compellence has been considered in the context of stopping nuclear pro-
liferation efforts by regional challengers such as Iraq, Iran, and North Korea. 
In recent years, the United States has sought to change regimes in countries 
that it considers members of the “axis of evil.” In Iraq, this generated a de-
termination on the part of the target state to resist the compellent threats, 
leading to war. In Saddam Hussein’s perceptions, his personal interests in the 
survival of the regime and the supreme national interests of Iraq coincided; 
hence his determination to resist the United States. A leader expecting defeat 
and inevitable death or life imprisonment by invading U.S. forces could opt to 
use chemical or biological weapons even when the United States has a policy 
of nuclear retaliation.15 A leader who believes that the United States is bent 
on regime change and that in the postwar phase Washington would put his 
and his key supporters’ lives in jeopardy may have little incentive not to use 
his capabilities while resisting this intervention. A dictatorial leader may also 
believe that the demand of the superior power is highly illegitimate and that 
that power has no broader world support for its actions.16 This sense of illegiti-
macy could partially be based on expectations regarding the existence of the 
tradition of non-use.
Despite the presence of the tradition of non-use and its relevance for deter-
rence and compellence, in the future, nuclear states may break the tradition 
as changing strategic conditions place considerable stresses and strains on 
their security policies. But by placing nuclear weapons at the center of defense 
policy when security could be achieved by other, less damaging means, the 
chances for nuclear escalation could increase. This has happened before: the 
war in Vietnam was waged by the United States because of profound concerns 
about maintaining deterrent credibility.17 Major powers such as the United 
States could ignore or underplay other policy options such as détente, accom-
modation, conciliation, integration, arms control, and confidence building 
to deal with regional challengers. By exaggerating the threat level, a nuclear 

208  Conclusions
state could create a condition of perpetual conflict, often harming the devel-
opment of poorer societies that need democratic governance and economic 
investment. U.S. regional policies could help to generate nationalism in such 
countries, which would further strengthen ruthless and authoritarian re-
gimes. During the post–September 11 era, U.S. policy toward Iran and North 
Korea, for instance, became belligerent and conflict-ridden, as alternative 
mechanisms of accommodation have been ignored while nuclear preemption, 
prevention, and deterrence have been given prominence. Similarly, trying to 
deter terrorism with nuclear weapons could simply exaggerate the power of 
terrorist groups, and ignore usable approaches such as active policing and 
intelligence operations. Moreover, efforts to place nuclear weapons in a de-
terrent and compellent mode against weaker regional challengers could put 
pressure on such states to obtain their own nuclear capability for mutual de-
terrence or to resort to asymmetric means such as terrorism and insurgency, 
for which the nuclear armed powers have very little answer.
Possible Future Infractions
There is a risk in believing that the tradition of non-use is so well-ingrained 
or embedded in national policies that this norm itself would deter the use of 
nuclear weapons by states. In international politics, it is dangerous to leave 
everything to the operation of a normative force such as the tradition of 
non-use. The discussion so far points out that the tradition is anything but 
a deeply rooted taboo, and there is no guarantee that it will not be broken in 
the future. As noted, there may be strong incentives to break the tradition 
in order to maintain the credibility of nuclear weapons as a deterrent and to 
deal with emerging chemical and biological weapons attacks. Human action 
is needed to maintain the tradition, especially against the potential onslaught 
on it generated by technological innovations, the advent of new weapon sys-
tems, and the onset of complex political changes. It is also a mistake to as-
sume that Western democracies are somehow going to abide by the norm all 
the time. In fact, the major challenge to the tradition today comes from West-
ern powers such as the United States, Britain, and France, which have been 
making loose nuclear threats to confront a variety of asymmetric threats. 
Most Americans seem to want to maintain the tradition of non-use, but they 
also elect leaders who appoint unelected officials, in addition to scientists and 
military planners, who occupy pivotal positions and would be able to craft 
incremental changes, making infractions possible. The norm entrepreneurs 

Conclusions  209
and reputation intermediaries of yesteryear, including scientists, strategists, 
peace movements, and nonnuclear states have quieter voices, especially in the 
post–September 11 world.
Based on this study, two key factors could affect the probability of nuclear 
use and the breaking of the tradition. First, the character of the weapons 
could change; that is, technological breakthroughs could allow the creation 
of a weapon that will have minimum collateral damage and a general recog­
nition that it is the only credible weapon that can destroy a target such as a 
deeply buried nuclear or command facility. Second, reputational costs could 
change, if the reputation for punishment becomes more important for nuclear 
states than the reputation for non-use. Successful chemical or biological attack 
by a weaker adversary could reduce the reputation costs involved in nuclear 
retaliation, at least in terms of domestic public support for nuclear retalia-
tion. Opinion polls before the two Gulf Wars suggested that the majority of 
the American public did not oppose the United States using nuclear weap-
ons if Saddam Hussein engaged in a chemical or biological attack against U.S. 
troops or U.S. allies in the region.
The conditions under which the tradition could be infringed are of special 
significance. If the nuclear state’s vital interests are threatened, for example, 
with the loss of a large portion of territory, nuclear use is a possibility. More-
over, intrawar pressures tend to be high on decision makers, who might be 
tempted to make use of their nuclear capability as a war-terminating device 
before large-scale destruction of their forces or loss of their territory occurs. 
Additionally, a state or an armed force, not fully socialized into the tradition 
of non-use, could use its nuclear capability in the opening phase of a war, dur-
ing a stalemated situation, or when facing military disaster. The further minia­
turization of nuclear weapons with precision-guided applications could also 
provide temptation to break the tradition. Integration of low-yield nuclear 
weapons with conventional weapons could encourage the possessor to use 
them, especially if they became part of operational doctrines. Future research 
could identify (a) the larger implications of the tradition of non-use for deter-
rence theory and policy; (b) the conditions under which it could be broken; 
(c) the risks inherent in wars involving a nuclear and nonnuclear state; and 
(d) the importance of the tradition in preventing the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons to additional countries.
Explicit legal and normative international prohibitions, supported by global 
community threats of collective punishment for transgression, may strengthen  

210  Conclusions
the tradition and prolong the continued non-use of nuclear weapons. Con-
version of the tradition of non-use to an explicit legal understanding is pos-
sible if it continues unbroken for a long time. Many laws of warfare that exist 
today have evolved through centuries of traditions and customs. For critics 
who would argue that international law does not matter because states can 
violate it at their will, the question is why the nuclear weapon states, led by the 
United States, are so hesitant to agree to a legal convention or agreement ban-
ning first use and also offering clear-cut negative security assurances. They 
know that by signing a treaty they are agreeing to raise the barrier for nuclear 
use. They are definitely concerned about harming their reputations even fur-
ther by signing such a treaty and then resorting to nuclear use or threat of use. 
Similarly, if legal commitments do not matter, why is it that nonnuclear states 
have been adamantly pursuing legally binding negative security guarantees? 
These states want to place additional barriers in the way of the nuclear states 
in an effort to embed the norm of non-use.
Nonstate actors pose a major challenge to the preservation of the tradition. 
Groups that believe in suicidal terrorism or cataclysmic terrorism need not 
be bound by normative restraints. Nor would they be deterred by the threat 
of retaliation. This is because disproportionate retaliation by nuclear powers 
would punish the innocent and thereby make the cause of the terrorist groups 
even more popular. The United States, Russia, Britain, France, and India have 
included chemical and biological attacks by state or nonstate actors as reasons 
for nuclear retaliation. But a problem arises if the potential target is a terrorist 
group that does not mind taking high casualties or inflicting great pains upon 
the society where it is located.
This discussion also raises the issue of the socialization of new and aspir-
ing nuclear states into the tradition of non-use. Is the sixty-three-year global 
history of non-use and global understanding sufficient to socialize new actors 
into the tradition of non-use and the informal norm inherent in it? Would a 
new nuclear state be tempted to make use of its nascent capabilities in order 
to pursue an ambitious regional or global agenda? The danger of revision-
ist states acquiring nuclear weapons lies in this problem; the initial period of 
learning and socialization could be one of turbulence, as the recent history of 
South Asia attests. This pattern may recur in the Middle East as well, if and 
when Iran acquires nuclear capability and pursues an active policy of support 
for forces of destabilization in the region, even short of war.

Conclusions  211
Why the Tradition Must Be Preserved
Scholars have argued that breaking the tradition need not be the end of it 
all. The taboo against chemical and biological weapons use and social taboos 
against cannibalism and incest are broken occasionally, but these infractions 
have not resulted in the disappearance of the taboos. Instead, scholars argue 
that an infraction may reinforce or strengthen the tradition and may inten-
sify calls for a legally binding non-use convention. To George Quester, the 
extent of casualties, the target under attack, and the conditions under which 
the attack takes place, will determine the reactions of the world toward nu-
clear use. Cases of accidents will be perceived differently from instances of 
deliberate use of highly destructive escalation, with clear-cut responsibility 
assigned to governments.18 Alternatively, the use of nuclear weapons could 
bring tremendous international pressure for legal sanctification of non-use. If 
the casualties are high and the long-term impact is immense, global disarma-
ment movements could rejuvenate and demands for an international treaty 
banning nuclear use could become vociferous. The tradition need not die, but 
it could become the focal point of international efforts at both nuclear non-
proliferation and disarmament. Similar to the impact that the Chernobyl nu-
clear accident in 1986 exerted on Soviet rethinking under Mikhail Gorbachev, 
nuclear use anywhere in the world may force nations to develop legally robust 
measures to prevent such use and even seek global nuclear disarmament.
However, despite these claims of limited repercussions of nuclear use, we 
simply cannot predict the possible consequences, which may be context de-
pendent. Taking a chance with nuclear attack is very problematic, especially if 
it means the killing of thousands of innocent civilians and grave environmen-
tal disaster. Western democracies ought to have a greater interest in maintain-
ing the tradition than in destroying it, and hence bear a major responsibility 
for its preservation. The use of nuclear weapons could be a precedent-setting 
event, affecting international security and international order negatively. If, 
for instance, the United States uses nuclear weapons in regional theaters, the 
precedent will be set for others, including new nuclear states and aspiring 
ones, that nuclear use is an acceptable response to less-than-existential mili-
tary challenges. Setting a bad precedent would haunt the United States, as its 
condemnation of others’ use would evoke little sympathy. In the worst-case 
scenario, many states that had given up their nuclear options could reconsider 

212  Conclusions
their policies, as national nuclear capabilities would become essential to deter 
possible future use of such weapons against them. Terrorist groups would jus-
tify their killings of innocents by claiming reprisals against the U.S. use of 
nuclear weapons.
The preservation of the tradition is in the national interest of the United 
States as the hegemonic power, as nuclear weapons can constitute a “great 
equalizer” in the hands of its weaker challengers, who may increasingly seek 
these weapons to thwart U.S. intervention. By propagating the virtues of the 
tradition to others, the United States can help legitimize its leadership role in 
the international system and exert considerable pressure on revisionist states 
that may plan to use WMD to advance their politico-military objectives. 
Global norms are important for status quo powers in order to legitimize the 
existing international order and reduce the likelihood that revisionist actors 
will seek to alter it forcefully. The use of WMD against U.S. troops in regional 
theaters does not constitute an existential threat, and so the use of nuclear 
weapons in response would not fall under the last-resort category. Creating 
ambiguity may have benefits in confusing the minds of rogue leaders, but 
what if one such leader calls the bluff? The credibility of the U.S. deterrent 
threat would be at stake, and the president would be compelled to use nuclear 
weapons and thereby break the tradition of non-use, which has served U.S. 
interests for well over half a century. The tradition of non-use is one norm that 
Washington would be well advised to preserve, for once it is broken, it may 
not be easy to resurrect it even if future leaders wished to do so.
These considerations should apply to the other nuclear weapon states as 
well. For instance, Russia’s plans to develop mini-nukes and its expansion of 
threatened nuclear retaliation are not very credible against Chechen rebels. 
No regional state or former republic of the Soviet Union has the capability 
to attack Russia frontally, even with chemical weapons. The main threat to 
Russia comes from subnational groups and nontraditional sources. Similarly, 
for Britain and France, the likely direct threats are not clear. Terrorist groups 
such as the one which perpetrated the London subway attacks in July 2005 are 
not susceptible to deterrence by nuclear threat. France also has enemies who 
are mostly nonstate actors. Iran is perhaps several years away from develop-
ing nuclear weapons, and it is unlikely that mutual deterrence will not work 
against Teheran.19 India has also expanded the possible use of nuclear weap-
ons in response to chemical and biological weapons use by state and nonstate 
actors. A credibility problem abounds in this instance, because the terrorist 

Conclusions  213
groups associated with the Kashmiri insurgency are unlikely to be deterred 
by such threats. Even retaliation against Pakistan for its support of such an 
attack carries grave risks given Pakistan’s possession of nuclear weapons.
The tradition of non-use serves several of the cherished goals of inter-
national community, such as preventing nuclear war, avoiding inadvertent 
escalations, helping to reduce the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and de-
preciating the value of nuclear weapons as a currency of power in the interna-
tional system. In all these respects, the tradition and the normative prohibi-
tion inherent in it ought to be preserved and strengthened. Whatever limited 
value accrues from nuclear use could be nullified by the greater short- and 
long-term impact their use would generate for international order and global 
security.


Reference Matter


217
	
	 Notes
Chapter 1: Introduction
1.  For traditions and their legitimacy, see Max Weber, Economy and Society: An 
Outline of Interpretative Sociology, ed. Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich (New York: 
Bedminster Press, 1968), 216–31.
2.  “Analytical eclecticism” means borrowing explanatory variables and causal 
logic from two or more distinct traditions or approaches in order to gain greater pur-
chase on the cases or issue areas that scholars want to analyze. For this approach, see 
Peter J. Katzenstein and Rudra Sil, “Rethinking Asian Security: A Case for Analyti-
cal Eclecticism,” in Rethinking Security in East Asia, ed. J. J. Suh, Peter J. Katzenstein, 
and Allen Carlson (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2004), 1–33; John A. Hall and 
T. V. Paul, “Preconditions for Prudence: A Sociological Synthesis of Realism and Lib-
eralism,” in International Order and the Future of World Politics, ed. T. V. Paul and 
John A. Hall (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), 67–77; and T. V. Paul, 
Power versus Prudence: Why Nations Forgo Nuclear Weapons (Montreal: McGill- 
Queen’s University Press, 2000), ch. 2. Scholars in International Relations increas­ingly 
favor eclectic approaches. For instance, see Jeffrey W. Legro, Rethinking the World: 
Great Power Strategies and International Order (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
2005); and Norrin M. Ripsman, “Two Stages of Transition From a Region of War to 
a Region of Peace: Realist Transition and Liberal Endurance,” International Studies 
Quarterly 49, no. 4 (December 2005): 669–93. On how moral norms and power con-
siderations intersect, see Ward Thomas, The Ethics of Destruction: Norms and Force in 
International Relations (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2001).
3.  For the distinction and interaction between the logic of consequences and logic 
of appropriateness, see James G. March and Johan P. Olsen, “The Institutional Dy-
namics of International Political Orders,” International Organization 52, no. 4 (Au-
tumn 1998): 943–69.

4.  Paradigms also allow continuity and transformation in research programs, 
measurement of variables deriving from a dominant theory, and criteria for their 
evaluation. On paradigms, see Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962); Imre Lakatos, “Falsification and the 
Methodology of Scientific Research Programs,” in Criticism and the Growth of Knowl-
edge, ed. Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1970), 91–196.
5.  On invented traditions, see Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger, eds., The In-
vention of Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983).
6.  They include both traditional rationalist scholars and Constructivist scholars 
of more recent vintage. For rational/materialist arguments, see Thomas C. Schelling, 
“The Role of Nuclear Weapons,” in Turning Point: The Gulf War and U.S. Military 
Strategy, ed. Benjamin L. Ederington and Michael J. Mazarr (Boulder, CO: Westview 
Press, 1994), 110; Thomas C. Schelling, The Strategy of Conἀict, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1980), 260; Stanley Hoffmann, “Nuclear Proliferation 
and World Politics,” in A World of Nuclear Powers? ed. Alastair Buchan (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1966), 99; and John Lewis Gaddis, “Nuclear Weapons, the 
End of the Cold War, and the Future of the International System,” in Nuclear Weap-
ons in a Changing World, ed. Patrick J. Garrity and Steven A. Maaranen (New York: 
Plenum Press, 1992), 21. For Constructivist views, see Nina Tannenwald, The Nuclear 
Taboo (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007); Nina Tannenwald, “Stig-
matizing the Bomb: Origins of the Nuclear Taboo,” International Security 29, no. 4 
(Spring 2005): 5–49; Nina Tannenwald, “The Nuclear Taboo: The United States and the 
Normative Basis of Nuclear Non-use,” International Organization 53, no. 3 (Summer 
1999): 433–68; Richard Price and Nina Tannenwald, “Norms and Deterrence: The Nu­
clear and Chemical Weapons Taboos,” in The Culture of National Security, ed. Peter J. 
Katzenstein (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996), 137; Peter Gizewski, “From 
Winning Weapon to Destroyer of the World: The Nuclear Taboo in International Pol-
itics,” International Journal 51, no. 2 (Summer 1996): 397–419. I have also used the 
term taboo to describe the tradition of non-use, but in a figurative and less stringent 
manner than Constructivist scholars. See T. V. Paul, “Nuclear Taboo and War Initia-
tion: Nuclear Weapons in Regional Conflicts,” Journal of Conἀict Resolution 39, no. 4 
(December 1995): 696–717.
7.  “Memorandum of Discussion at the 165th NSC Meeting, October 7, 1953,” For-
eign Relations of the United States, 1952–54, vol. 2 (Washington, DC: Department of 
State), 532–33. See also McGeorge Bundy, Danger and Survival (New York: Random 
House, 1988), 249.
8.  George Ball, “The Cosmic Bluff,” New York Review of Books (July 21, 1983): 37.
9.  Schelling, Strategy of Conἀict, 260. For the Brodie argument, see Bernard Brodie,  
ed., The Absolute Weapon: Atomic Power and World Order (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 
1946), chs. 1–2.
218  Notes to chapter 1

10.  Steven P. Lee, Morality, Prudence and Nuclear Weapons (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1993), 320, 324.
11.  Schelling, “The Role of Nuclear Weapons,” 110.
12.  A good example is the incendiary bombings of Tokyo during the waning days 
of World War II, which, during a very short period, killed more than the combined 
totals of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki attacks. Tom McGowen, Air Raid! The Bombing 
Campaigns of World War II (Brookfield, CT: Twenty-First Century Books, 2001), ch. 8.
13.  Hutton Webster, Taboo: A Sociological Study (Stanford: Stanford University 
Press, 1942), 2, 13. 
14.  Ibid., 14, 17.
15.  Sigmund Freud, Totem and Taboo, trans. James Strachey (London: Routledge 
& Kegan Paul, 1950), 22.
16.  Encyclopedia Britannica Online, “Taboo,” http://www.search.eb.com/eb/ 
article-9070845.
17.  For discussions of various social taboos, see James George Frazer, Taboo and 
the Perils of Soul (New York: Macmillan, 1935); Mary Douglas, Purity and Danger: An 
Analysis of the Concepts of Pollution and Taboo (New York: Routledge, 2002); Freud, 
Totem and Taboo; Franz Baermann Steiner, Taboo, Truth, and Religion: Selected Writ-
ings, vol. 1, ed. Jeremy Adler and Richard Fardon (New York: Berghahn Books, 1999).
18.  States Freud: “Anyone who has violated a taboo becomes taboo himself be-
cause he possesses the dangerous quality of tempting others to follow his example . . . 
and for that reason he himself must be shunned.” Freud, Totem and Taboo, 32.
19.  On these taboos, see Arthur P. Wolf and William H. Durham, eds., Inbreed-
ing, Incest, and the Incest Taboo: The State of Knowledge at the Turn of the Century 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2004); Jonathan H. Turner and Alexandra 
Maryanski, Incest: Origins of the Taboo (Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers, 2005); 
Laurence R. Goldman, ed., The Anthropology of Cannibalism (Westport, CT: Bergin 
& Garvey, 1999); Eli Sagan, Cannibalism: Human Aggression and Cultural Form (New 
York: Harper & Row, 1974).
20.  George Quester, “International Safeguards for Eliminating Weapons of Mass 
Destruction” (Occasional Paper no. 31, Henry L. Stimson Center, Washington, DC, 
December 1996): 7–8. To Quester, a taboo “is more than simply something we would 
want to avoid, something that we disapprove of, for we do not hear of a taboo on bank 
robberies or a taboo on murder. The word is distinctive in that it refers to something 
we are not willing even to think about doing. There is no weighing of benefits and 
costs; we simply reject the idea without further thought.” George Quester, Nuclear 
First Strike: Consequences of a Broken Taboo (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 2006), 12.
21.  International Court of Justice, “Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weap-
ons, Advisory Opinion,” I.C.J. Reports 1996 (8 July 1996), 44.
Notes to Chapter 1  219

22.  Richard Falk, “Nuclear Weapons, International Law and the World Court: A 
Historic Encounter,” American Journal of International Law 91, no. 1 (January 1997): 
64–75; see also Siddharth Mallavarapu, Banning the Bomb: The Politics of Norm Cre-
ation (New Delhi: Pearson, 2007).
23.  A somewhat similar taboo exists in the area of chemical weapons. Many ex-
planations of the non-use of chemical weapons by belligerents during World War II, 
despite their possessing huge chemical arsenals, give the taboo against their use a sig-
nificant place. Richard Price, “A Genealogy of the Chemical Weapons Taboo,” Interna-
tional Organization 49, no. 1 (Winter 1995): 73–103; Jeffrey Legro, Cooperation under 
Fire (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1995). The difference, though, is that legal 
prohibitions against acquisition and use of chemical (and biological) weapons have 
developed over time; almost all nuclear states have signed on to these prohibitions.
24.  Harald Mueller, “Constructing a Taboo against Weapons of Mass Destruc-
tion” (unpublished paper, Peace Research Institute, Frankfurt, 2003): 11. 
25.  Scott L. Feld, “On the Emergence of Social Norms,” Contemporary Sociology 31, 
no. 6 (November 2002): 638.
26.  Neil Duxbury, “Signaling and Social Norms,” Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 
21, no. 4 (Winter 2001): 719–36.
27.  Martha Finnemore, National Interests in International Society (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1996): 22.
28.  Stephen J. Toope, “Formality and Informality,” in The Oxford Handbook of 
International Environmental Law, ed. Daniel Bodansky, Jutta Brunnee, and Ellen 
Hey (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007), 108. See also Kenneth W. Abbott and  
Duncan Snidal, “Hard and Soft Law in International Governance,” International Or-
ganization 53, no. 3 (August 2000): 421–56.
29.  Toope, “Formality and Informality,” 118, 121.
30.  Ibid., 122.
31.  Michael Hechter and Karl-Dieter Opp, “Introduction,” in Social Norms, ed. 
Michael Hechter and Karl-Dieter Opp (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2001): xi.
32.  Bruce Russett, “The Real Decline in Nuclear Hegemony,” in Global Changes 
and Theoretical Challenges, ed. Ernst-Otto Czempiel and James N. Rosenau (Lexington,  
MA: Lexington Books, 1989): 185.
33.  According to two strategic analysts, nuclear weapons, especially enhanced 
radiation weapons, might have been useful in Afghanistan destroying rural infra-
structure or fixed Mujahideen strong points. Anthony H. Cordesman and Abraham 
R. Wagner, The Lessons of Modern War, vol. 3, The Afghan and Falklands Conἀicts 
(Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1990), 218–19. 
34.  Cathy Scott-Clark and Adrian Levy, “Spectre Orange,” The Guardian, 
March 29, 2003; United States Department of State, “Case Study: Yellow Rain” (fact 
sheet, Bureau of Verification, Compliance, and Implementation, October 2005), 
http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/57428.pdf.
220  Notes to chapter 1

Chapter 2: Bases of the Tradition of Non-Use
1.  Colin S. Gray, “To Confuse Ourselves: Nuclear Fallacies,” in Alternative Nu-
clear Futures, ed. John Baylis and Robert O’Neill (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2000), 27. Just before the Reagan era, Gray and Keith Payne advocated keeping the 
option of nuclear weapons use open, arguing that victory in nuclear war was pos-
sible. See Colin S. Gray and Keith B. Payne, “Victory is Possible,” Foreign Policy no. 39 
(Summer, 1980): 14–27.
2.  Colin S. Gray, “Nuclear Weapons and the Revolution in Military Affairs,” in 
The Absolute Weapon Revisited: Nuclear Arms and the Emerging International Order, 
ed. T. V. Paul, Richard J. Harknett, and James J. Wirtz (Ann Arbor: The University of 
Michigan Press, 1998), 119. See also Keith B. Payne, Deterrence in the Second Nuclear 
Age (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1996).
3.  For these moderate positions, see Scott D. Sagan, “Realist Perspectives on Ethical 
Norms and Weapons of Mass Destruction,” in Ethics and Weapons of Mass Destruction, 
ed. Sohail H. Hashmi and Steven P. Lee (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 
73–95; Susan B. Martin, “Realism and Weapons of Mass Destruction: A Consequential-
ist Analysis,” in Hashmi and Lee, Ethics and Weapons of Mass Destruction, 76–110.
4.  On Constructivist perspectives, see Martha Finnemore, National Interests in 
International Society (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996), 15; Vincent Pouliot, 
“The Essence of Constructivism,” Journal of International Relations and Development, 
7 no. 3 (September 2004): 319–36.
5.  Richard Price and Nina Tannenwald, “Norms and Deterrence: The Nuclear and 
Chemical Weapons Taboos,” in The Culture of National Security, ed. Peter J. Katzenstein 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1996): 137. See also Richard Price, “A Geneal-
ogy of the Chemical Weapons Taboo,” International Organization 49, no. 1 (Winter 
1995): 73–103. For varieties of Constructivist schools, see Ted Hopf, Social Construc-
tion of International Politics (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2002); Vendulka 
Kubalkova, Nicholas Onuf, and Paul Kowert, eds., International Relations in a Con-
structed World (Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1998); Amitav Acharya, Constructing a Se-
curity Community in Southeast Asia: ASEAN and the Problem of Regional Order (New 
York: Routledge, 2000).
6.  Nina Tannenwald, “Stigmatizing the Bomb: Origins of the Nuclear Taboo,” Inter­
national Security 29, no. 4 (Spring 2005): 5–49.
7.  Nina Tannenwald, The Nuclear Taboo (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2007), 3.
8.  Ibid., 17.
9.  United States Department of State, “Case Study: Yellow Rain” (fact sheet, Bu-
reau of Verification, Compliance, and Implementation, October 2005), http://www 
.state.gov/documents/organization/57428.pdf. I acknowledge that the Soviet use of 
chemical weapons is still not completely verified for accuracy.
Notes to Chapter 2  221

10.  Further, critics themselves have not yet offered a powerful test for their con-
tention of tactical/strategic unsuitability as the source of the continued non-use of 
nuclear weapons. Their “focus on extreme tests assumes in advance that nuclear 
weapons are extreme weapons that could only be used in the direst circumstances. In-
stead, the interesting question is the prior one of how and why this came to be,” since 
the United States has, on many occasions “contemplated the use of nuclear weapons in 
cases of less than vital national interest.” Tannenwald, The Nuclear Taboo, 368.
11.  In recent years, some Constructivists have adopted a rationalist-constructivist  
or structuralist-constructivist approach. For instances, see Alexander Wendt, Social 
Theory of International Politics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999); Eman-
uel Adler, “Seizing the Middle Ground: Constructivism in World Politics,” European 
Journal of International Relations 3, no. 3 (September 1997): 319–63; James G. March 
and Johan P. Olsen, “The Institutional Dynamics of International Political Orders,” 
International Organization 52, no. 4 (Autumn 1998): 943–69; James D. Fearon and 
Alexander Wendt, “Rationalism v. Constructivism: A Skeptical View,” in Handbook 
of International Relations, ed. Walter Carlsnaes, Thomas Risse, and Beth A. Simmons 
(London: Sage, 2002), 52–72; Jeffrey T. Checkel, “International Norms and Domestic 
Politics: Bridging the Rationalist-Constructivist Divide,” European Journal of Inter-
national Relations 3, no. 4 (December 1997): 473–95; Thomas Risse, “Constructivism 
and International Institutions: Towards Conversions across Paradigms,” in Political 
Science: The State of the Discipline, ed. Ira Katzenelson and Helen Milner (New York: 
W. W. Norton, 2002), 597–629.
12.  Democracies are prone to fight high intensity wars with nondemocracies, as 
they tend to consider them as “unreasonable” and “potentially dangerous.” John M. 
Owen, “How Liberalism Produces Democratic Peace,” International Security 19, no. 2 
(Autumn 1994): 87–125; see also Christian Reus-Smit, “Liberal Hierarchy and the Li-
cense to Use Force,” Review of International Studies 31, suppl. S1 (December 2005), 
71–92; Bruce Russett and John Oneal, Triangulating Peace (New York: W. W. Norton, 
2001), 115–16.
13.  In my previous works I attempted to pursue a puzzle-based research agenda. 
See, for instance, T. V. Paul, Asymmetric Conἀicts: War Initiation by Weaker Powers 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994); Paul, Power versus Prudence: Why 
Nations Forgo Nuclear Weapons (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2000).
14.  For the “uncontestable” nature of nuclear weapons, see Richard J. Harknett, 
“State Preferences, Systemic Constraints, and the Absolute Weapon,” in Paul, Harknett, 
and Wirtz, Absolute Weapon Revisited, 53. See also Bernard Brodie, ed., The Absolute 
Weapon: Atomic Power and World Order (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1946).
15.  Thomas C. Schelling, “The Role of Nuclear Weapons,” in Turning Point: The 
Gulf War and U.S. Military Strategy, ed. Benjamin L. Ederington and Michael J. Mazarr 
(Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1994), 110.
222  Notes to chapter 2

16.  Michael Mandelbaum, The Nuclear Question: The United States and Nuclear 
Weapons, 1946–1976 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979), 4.
17.  George Quester, Nuclear First Strike: Consequences of a Broken Taboo (Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006), 102.
18.  On these see Jeffrey W. Legro, “Which Norms Matter? Revisiting the ‘Failure’ 
of Internationalism,” International Organization 51, no. 1 (Winter 1997): 31–61.
19.  John Lewis Gaddis, “Nuclear Weapons, the End of the Cold War, and the  
Future of the International System,” in Nuclear Weapons in a Changing World, ed. 
Patrick J. Garrity and Steven A. Maaranen (New York: Plenum Press, 1992), 21.
20.  Robert Jervis, The Illogic of American Nuclear Strategy (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1984), 23.
21.  Steven P. Lee, Morality, Prudence and Nuclear Weapons (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1993), 18.
22.  Ronald L. Jepperson, Alexander Wendt, and Peter J. Katzenstein, “Norms, 
Identity, and Culture in National Security,” in Culture of National Security, ed. Peter J. 
Katzenstein (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996), 54.
23.  On the self-interest dimension of norms, see Gary Goertz and Paul F. Diehl, 
“International Norms and Power Politics,” in Reconstructing Realpolitik, ed. Frank W. 
Wayman and Paul F. Diehl (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1994), 102.
24.  In the context of international politics, image is the idealized conception of 
a state or its leader held by other members of the international community. Scholars 
of soft power give considerable importance to reputation and image, as these intan-
gible factors are important for states, especially major powers seeking to retain pri-
macy. On this, see Joseph S. Nye, Soft Power: The Means to Success in World Politics 
(New York: Public Affairs, 2004). Image is very much based on what inferences a state 
makes about the likely behavior of another in a given area. On this, see Robert Jervis, 
The Logic of Images in International Relations, 2nd ed. (New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press, 1989). To Schelling, in the deterrence context, image relates to a country’s 
reputation for action. Thomas Schelling, Arms and Inἀuence (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1966), 124.
25.  Thomas Schelling, The Strategy of Conἀict (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1980), 260.
26.  George W. Downs and Michael A. Jones, “Reputation, Compliance, and Inter-
national Law,” Journal of Legal Studies 31, no. 1 (January 2002): S96.
27.  On different approaches to compliance, see Beth A. Simmons, “Compliance 
with International Agreements,” Annual Review of Political Science 1 (1998): 75–93; 
Abram Chayes and Antonia Handler Chayes, The New Sovereignty: Compliance with In-
ternational Regulatory Agreements (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995).
28.  Downs and Jones, “Reputation, Compliance and International Law,” S96  
and S101.
Notes to Chapter 2  223

29.  Beth A. Simmons, “International Law and State Behavior: Commitment and 
Compliance in International Monetary Affairs,” American Political Science Review 94, 
no. 4 (December 2000): 820. An interesting case of the relationship between norms and 
reputation is presented in Audie Klotz, Norms in International Relations: The Strug-
gle against Apartheid (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1995). See also Charles 
Lipson, Reliable Partners: How Democracies Have Made a Separate Peace (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 2003).
30.  Reputation is widely considered as “a mechanism concerning attitude toward 
reciprocity,” especially among firms, and as a “deterrent factor, acting through threat-
ened punishment, or as an incentive entering the agents’ (often the sellers) decision-
making and possibly compensating for any incentive to violate contracts.” Rosaria 
Conte and Mario Paolucci, Reputation in Artificial Societies: Social Beliefs for Social 
Order (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002), 32.
31.  I owe Jeff Knopf for clarifying these dimensions.
32.  Eric Herring, “Double Standards and the Myth of the Third World Nuclear 
Fanatic,” paper presented at the Annual Convention of the American Political Science 
Association, Chicago (September 3–6, 1992): 8. 
33.  Moral concerns could augment reputation considerations. For instance, Cohen 
and Lee argue that nuclear weapons fail to fit either “other-imposed” (e.g., constraints 
caused by limited capabilities and lack of public support) or “self-imposed” (prudential 
and moral) limits on war. Avner Cohen and Steven Lee, “The Nuclear Predicament,” 
in Nuclear Weapons and the Future of Humanity, ed. Avner Cohen and Steven Lee 
(Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Allanheld, 1986), 1–37.
34.  Harold Hongju Koh, “Why do Nations Obey International Law?” The Yale 
Law Journal 106, no. 8 (June 1997): 2609. 
35.  On definitions of legitimacy, see Christopher Gelpi, The Power of Legitimacy: 
Assessing the Role of Norms in Crisis Bargaining (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 2003), 14. See also Maire A. Dugan, “Legitimacy,” Beyond Intractability, Janu-
ary 2004, http://www.beyondintractability.org/essay/legitimacy/.
36.  On exchange power, see Peter M. Blau, Exchange and Power in Social Life 
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1964); David A. Baldwin, “Exchange Theory and Inter­
national Relations,” International Negotiation 3, no. 2 (1998): 139–49. 
37.  On public diplomacy, see Christopher Ross, “Public Diplomacy Comes of 
Age”, Washington Quarterly 25, no. 2 (2002): 75–83; Charles Wolf Jr. and Brian Rosen, 
“Public Diplomacy: How to Think About and Improve It” (Occasional Paper, RAND 
Corporation, Santa Monica, CA, 2004).
38.  Jonathan Mercer defines reputation as “a judgment of someone else’s char-
acter (or disposition) that is then used to predict or explain future behavior.” See his 
Reputation and International Politics (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996), 6.  
224  Notes to chapter 2

Thomas C. Schelling points out the critical role of reputation in deterrence. See 
Schelling’s Arms and Inἀuence.
39.  Mercer, Reputation and International Politics. On the role of costly signals 
for deterrence reputation, see James D. Fearon, “Domestic Political Audiences and 
the Escalation of International Disputes,” American Political Science Review 88, no. 3 
(September 1994): 577–92. For a review, see Paul K. Huth, “Reputations and Deter-
rence: A Theoretical and Empirical Assessment,” Security Studies 7, no. 1 (Autumn 
1997): 72–99. For an opposite view that argues that there exists no relationship be-
tween past decisions to back down and credibility in future crises, see Daryl G. Press, 
Calculating Credibility: How Leaders Assess Military Threats (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2005).
40.  Jervis, Logic of Images, 82.
41.  Credibility is defined as the “perceived likelihood that the threat will be car-
ried out if the conditions that are supposed to trigger it are met.” Press, Calculating 
Credibility, 10.
42.  Kenneth E. Boulding, The Meaning of the Twentieth Century: The Great Tran-
sition (New York: Harper & Row, 1964), 81.
43.  Downs and Jones, “Reputation, Compliance and International Law,” S96.
44.  Robert Axelrod, The Evolution of Cooperation (New York: Basic Books, 1984).
45.  Robert O. Keohane, After Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the World 
Political Economy (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984), 105–6.
46.  Similar processes seem to work in other areas such as human rights. Accord-
ing to one study, “[t]he effectiveness of international and nongovernmental organiza-
tions in promoting human rights is largely based on political and economic elites’ 
sensitivity to the delegitimizing effects of a damaged international image, and the 
belief that a bad reputation may somehow result in sanctioning by other states and 
in a weakened position at home.” Susan Burgerman, Moral Victories: How Activists 
Provoke Multilateral Action (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2001), 15.
47.  Werner Raub and Jeroen Weesie, “Reputation and Efficiency in Social Inter­
actions: An Example of Network Effects,” The American Journal of Sociology 96, no. 3 
(November 1990): 626.
48.  Martha Finnemore and Kathryn Sikkink, “International Norm Dynamics 
and Political Change,” International Organization 52, no. 4 (Autumn 1998): 897.
49.  The literature on norm entrepreneurs includes: Finnemore, National Inter-
ests in International Society; Margaret Keck and Kathryn Sikkink, Activists Beyond 
Borders: Advocacy Networks in International Politics (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1998): Matthew Evangelista, Unarmed Forces: The Transnational Movement to 
End the Cold War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1999); Burgerman, Moral 
Victories; and Ann Marie Clark, Diplomacy of Conscience: Amnesty International and 
Notes to Chapter 2  225

Changing Human Rights Norms (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001). For a 
review of these works, see Richard Price, “Transnational Civil Society and Advocacy 
in World Politics,” World Politics 55, no. 4 (July 2003): 579–606. 
50.  Mandelbaum, The Nuclear Question, 19. Oppenheimer and many other sci-
entists involved in the Manhattan Project did not initially have any doubts about 
their work, but began to feel a considerable ethical dilemma in the immediate post- 
Hiroshima era. They even wanted to share the technology with the Soviets to avoid 
conflict, but Truman was not willing to do so without the development of proper 
mechanisms for cooperation. Gerard J. DeGroot, The Bomb: A Life (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2005), 113–14.
51.  On the role of the scientists in the antinuclear movement, see Alice Kimball 
Smith, A Peril and a Hope: The Scientists’ Movement in America, 1945–47 (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1965); Mandelbaum, The Nuclear Question, 24.
52.  Mandelbaum, The Nuclear Question, 25.
53.  Lawrence S. Wittner, The Struggle Against the Bomb, vol. 1, One World or None 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1993), 60.
54.  DeGroot, The Bomb, 124.
55.  For their influence in the American context, see Jeffrey W. Knopf, Domestic 
Society and International Cooperation: The Impact of Protest on U.S. Arms Control 
Policy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998). 
56.  Lawrence S. Wittner, The Struggle Against the Bomb, vol. 2, Resisting the 
Bomb (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997), 5, 30, 33. See all three volumes of 
Wittner’s Struggle Against the Bomb (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1993–2003) 
for a comprehensive history of the role that different nuclear disarmament groups 
played worldwide. See also Gunter Wernicke, “The Communist-led World Peace 
Council and the Western Peace Movements,” Peace & Change 23, no. 3 (July 1998): 
265–311; Leonard E. Schwartz, “Perspectives on Pugwash,” International Affairs 43, 
no. 3 (July 1967): 498–515.
57.  Brodie, “War in the Atomic Age,” in Brodie, The Absolute Weapon, 52, 28. See 
also Paul, Harknett, and Wirtz, The Absolute Weapon Revisited.
58.  Bernard Brodie, “Implications for Military Policy,” in Brodie, The Absolute 
Weapon, 76. There is evidence that Brodie’s writings influenced General Eisenhower, 
who in 1946, as the U.S. Army Chief of Staff, distributed copies of the volume to his 
staff members. Alfred D. Chandler Jr., and Louis Galambos Jr., eds., The Papers of 
Dwight D. Eisenhower, vol. 7, The Chief of Staff (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 1970), 1196–97.
59.  On the role of this group of strategists and scholars, see Fred Kaplan, The 
Wizards of Armageddon (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983), ch 2. Many strategists 
also focused on how to obtain deterrence through manipulation of extreme risks and 
preparing to wage a nuclear war. Among the second wave of theorists were Thomas 
226  Notes to chapter 2

Schelling, Herman Kahn, Glenn Snyder, and Albert Wohlstetter, who laid the founda-
tions of a threat-based deterrence strategy. Schelling, however, also talked about the 
tradition of non-use in his writings very early on. The third wave of deterrence theo-
rists pointed out the many problems associated with deterrence theory and policy. 
They include Robert Jervis, Alexander George, Janice Stein, Richard Ned Lebow, and 
Patrick Morgan. See Robert Jervis, “Deterrence Theory Revisited,” World Politics 31, 
no. 2 (January 1979): 289–324.
60.  Some of these include Albert Wohlstetter, “The Delicate Balance of Terror,” 
Foreign Affairs, 37, no. 2 (January 1959): 211–34; Herman Kahn, On Thermonuclear 
War, 2nd ed. (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961); Kahn, On Escalation: 
Metaphors and Scenarios (Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1968); Glenn H. Snyder, Deter-
rence and Defense: Toward a Theory of National Security (Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1961); Schelling, Strategy of Conἀict; Schelling, Arms and Inἀuence.
61.  Quoted in Wittner, Resisting the Bomb, 99.
62.  On the role of the non-aligned states in nuclear disarmament campaigns, see 
Alva Myrdal, The Game of Disarmament (New York: Pantheon Books, 1982), 84–89; 
William Epstein, The Last Chance: Nuclear Proliferation and Arms Control (New York:  
The Free Press, 1976); M. A. Husain, “Third World and Disarmament: Shadow and 
Substance,” Third World Quarterly 2, no. 1 (January 1980): 76–99; T. T. Poulose, United 
Nations and Nuclear Proliferation (New Delhi: B. R. Publishing, 1988).
63.  Paul S. Boyer, By the Bomb’s Early Light: American Thought and Culture at 
the Dawn of the Atomic Age (New York: Pantheon, 1985), 353. On the impact of peace 
movements on U.S. nuclear policy under Eisenhower, see Knopf, Domestic Society and 
International Cooperation, chs. 4 and 5.
64.  Jervis, “Deterrence Theory Revisited.”
65.  Boyer, By the Bomb’s Early Light, 353.
66.  On this, see Knopf, Domestic Society and International Cooperation.
67.  Boyer, By the Bomb’s Early Light, 352–67.
Chapter 3: The United States and the Tradition I:  
The Truman and Eisenhower Years (1945–1961)
1.  I acknowledge that only when other nuclear states release their records will we 
know if this assertion is fully accurate or not.
2.  Ronald Takaki, Hiroshima: Why America Dropped the Bomb (Boston: Little, 
Brown, 1995), 47. The impact of the attacks is powerfully attested in the novel by  
Masuji Ibuse, Black Rain, trans. John Bester (Tokyo: Kodansha International,1969). The 
most influential article on the attack was John Hersey, “Hiroshima,” The New Yorker, 
August 31, 1946. See also John Hersey, Hiroshima (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1972);  
Kai Bird and Lawrence Lifschultz, eds., Hiroshima’s Shadow (Stony Creek, CT: The 
Pamphleteer’s Press), 1998.
Notes to Chapter 3R
  227

3.  Harry S. Truman, Memoirs, vol. 1: Year of Decisions, 1945 (Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, 1955), 417. Truman states that he “regarded the bomb as a military weapon 
and never had any doubt that it should be used.” Ibid., 419.
4.  New evidence also suggests that it was Russia’s intervention two days after the 
Hiroshima bombing that convinced the Japanese to surrender. For this, see Tsuyoshi 
Hasegawa, Racing the Enemy: Stalin, Truman, and the Surrender of Japan (Cambridge, 
MA: Belknap Press, 2005); Ward Wilson, “The Winning Weapon? Rethinking Nu-
clear Weapons in Light of Hiroshima,” International Security 31, no. 4 (Spring 2007): 
162–179.
5.  On this, see Gar Alperovitz, The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb and the Archi-
tecture of an American Myth (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1995); Dennis D. Wainstock, 
The Decision to Drop the Atomic Bomb (Wesport, CT: Praeger, 1996); Barton J. Bernstein,  
“Truman and the A-Bomb: Targeting Noncombatants, Using the Bomb, and His De-
fending the Decision,” The Journal of Military History 62, no. 3 (July 1998): 547–70; 
Robert James Maddox, Weapons for Victory: The Hiroshima Decision (Columbia: Uni-
versity of Missouri Press, 1995).
6.  Takaki, Hiroshima, ch. 3. 
7.  Peter R. Beckman et al., The Nuclear Predicament, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992), 12; Arnold A. Offner, Another Such Victory: President Truman 
and the Cold War, 1945–1953 (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2002), 96–99.
8.  This does not mean that U.S. public opinion opposed the use of atomic weapons 
on Japan. A Gallup poll two weeks after the bombings found 85 percent of Americans 
approved the bombing, and it took some years for the human toll that resulted from 
the nuclear attack to come to popular attention. Greg Herken, The Winning Weapon: 
The Atomic Bomb in the Cold War, 1945–1950 (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1980), 311.
9.  Truman, Year of Decisions, 524. Truman might have been influenced by the 
publications that were released after the attacks, especially John Hersey’s New Yorker 
article “Hiroshima,” that created considerable publicity and knowledge on the ill ef-
fects of the atomic attacks on Japan. The article, based on interviews with the sur-
vivors of Hiroshima, covered the entire issue of the August 31, 1946 New Yorker 
magazine. It sold out quickly, was read out by radio stations around the world, and 
was subsequently published as a book which is in print even today. On this, see Steve 
Rothman, “The Publication of ‘Hiroshima’ in The New Yorker” (unpublished paper, 
Harvard University, 1997), http://www.herseyhiroshima.com/hiro.php.
10.  McGeorge Bundy, Danger and Survival (New York: Random House, 1988), 
138–39. A few months after the nuclear bombings of the Japanese cities, Truman met 
with two of his wartime allies, Prime Ministers Clement Attlee of Britain and William 
Lyon Mackenzie King of Canada, to set up a commission under the United Nations 
to make specific proposals to extend the exchange of scientific information for peace-
ful purposes, to eliminate nuclear weapons from national control, and to establish  
228  Notes to chapter 3R

safeguards and inspections to achieve compliance. On this, see “Declaration on 
Atomic Bomb by President Truman and Prime Ministers Attlee and King,” Washing-
ton, DC, November 15, 1945, www.nuclearfiles.org/menu/key-issues/nuclear-energy/
history/dec_truman-attlee-king_1945_11-15.htm. See also Barton J. Bernstein, “The 
Quest for Security: American Foreign Policy and International Control of Atomic En-
ergy, 1942–1946,” The Journal of American History 60, no. 4 (March 1974): 1003–44.
11.  Even before the Hiroshima attack, leading scientists warned of the need to 
develop an international mechanism for control, as they feared the U.S. monopoly 
would not last long and that secrecy could not be maintained indefinitely. Vanne-
var Bush and James B. Conant, “Memorandum to the Secretary of War, on Salient 
Points Concerning Future International Handling of Subject of Atomic Bombs,” Sep-
tember 30, 1944, www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB162/1.pdf. The Franck 
Committee, headed by physicist James Franck and actively influenced by Leo Szilard, 
had recommended the above proposals, but they did not seem to receive much atten-
tion in official policy. Glenn T. Seaborg and Benjamin S. Loeb, Stemming the Tide: 
Arms Control in the Johnson Years (Lexingon, MA: Lexington Books, 1987): 60.
12.  Michael Mandelbaum, The Nuclear Question: The United States and Nuclear 
Weapons, 1946–1976 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979), 25. If the pro-
posals had been accepted, it would have been an “unprecedentedly radical step toward 
a limited world government.” Hans J. Morgenthau, The Purpose of American Politics 
(New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1960): 172–73.
13.  “A Report on the International Control of Atomic Energy,” Washington, DC, 
March 16, 1946, www.learnworld.com/ZNW/LWText.Acheson-Lilienthal.html. The 
plan was heavily influenced by the ideas of Oppenheimer, especially on the proposed 
Atomic Development Authority. Bundy, Danger and Survival, 159.
14.  S. David Broscious, “Longing for International Control, Banking on Ameri-
can Superiority: Harry S. Truman’s Approach to Nuclear Weapons,” in Cold War 
Statesmen Confront the Bomb: Nuclear Diplomacy Since 1945, ed. John Lewis Gaddis 
et al. (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 27.
15.  For the Plan, see New York Times, June 15, 1946:1. See also Herken, The Win-
ning Weapon, ch. 9.
16.  “Statement by the Soviet Representative on the Security Council (Gromyko) 
Concerning the Report of the Atomic Energy Commission, March 5, 1947,” reprinted 
in International Organization 1, no. 2 (June 1947): 395–409; New York Times, June 20, 
1946:1; Offner, Another Such Victory, 149; Herken, The Winning Weapon, 174.
17.  On this duality in Truman’s approach, see Broscious, “Longing for Inter­
national Control,” 15–38.
18.  On these, see Gian P. Gentile, “Planning for Preventive War, 1945–1950,” Joint 
Forces Quarterly, no. 24 (Spring 2000): 68–74; Herken, The Winning Weapon, ch. 11.
19.  Truman had assured the Pentagon that “as much as he would hate to do it, 
he would approve the use of atomic weapons if circumstances warranted it. Soon  
Notes to Chapter 3R
  229

thereafter, the NSC concluded that military planning should proceed on the assump-
tion that atomic weapons would be employed in wartime. Although Truman neither 
approved nor rejected this recommendation, his subordinates thereafter began to in-
stitutionalize the air/atomic strategy into their war plans.” Melvin P. Leffler, A Pre-
ponderance of Power: National Security, The Truman Administration, and the Cold 
War (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1992), 226. For the war plans, see Steven T. 
Ross and David Alan Rosenberg, eds., America’s Plan for War against the Soviet Union 
1945–1950, 15 vols. (New York: Garland Publishing, 1990).
20.  JCS 1844/4, Brief of War Plan “Halfmoon,” May 6, 1948, and Decision on JCS 
1844/4, May 19, 1948, CCS 381 U.S.S.R. 13-2-46, section 12, Papers of the United States 
Joint Chiefs of Staff, cited in David Alan Rosenberg, “American Atomic Strategy and 
the Hydrogen Bomb Decision,” Journal of American History 66, no. 1 (June 1979): 68.
21.  Steven L. Rearden, The Formative Years 1947–1950 (Washington, DC: Histori-
cal Office, Office of the Secretary of Defense, 1984), 434. See also, Richard K. Betts, 
Nuclear Blackmail and Nuclear Balance (Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 
1987): 27.
22.  Quoted in David Lilienthal, The Journals of David E. Lilienthal, vol 2., The 
Atomic Energy Years, 1945–1950 (New York: Harper and Row, 1964), 391.
23.  David Alan Rosenberg, “The Origins of Overkill: Nuclear Weapons and Amer-
ican Strategy, 1945–1960,” International Security 7, no. 4 (Spring 1983): 13.
24.  Walter Millis, ed., The Forrestal Diaries (New York: Viking, 1951), 488.
25.  Ibid., 458. However, months later, at a meeting at the White House of key mili-
tary and civilian officials on September 13, 1948, the issue of nuclear use in an emer-
gency came up. The president answered that he “prayed that he would never have to 
make such a decision, but that if it became necessary, no one need to have a misgiving 
but that he would do so.” Ibid, 487.
26.  Harry S. Truman, Memoirs, vol. 2, Years of Trial and Hope (Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, 1956), 383. See also David Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb (New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press, 1994), 228.
27.  Time, “Pax Americana,” April 5, 1948, http://www.time.com/time/magazine/ 
article/0,9171,798280,00.html. See also Karl P. Mueller et. al., Striking First (Santa 
Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2006), 121–49.
28.  Betts, Nuclear Blackmail, 28.
29.  “Evaluation of Effect on Soviet War Effort Resulting from the Strategic Air Of-
fensive, 12 May 1949,” JCS 1953/1, reprinted in Containment: Documents on American 
Policy and Strategy, ed. Thomas Etzold and John Lewis Gaddis (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1978), 360–64.
30.  Rosenberg, “Origins of Overkill,” 16.
31.  Gerard J. DeGroot, The Bomb: A Life (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2005), 124–25.
230  Notes to chapter 3R

32.  Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb, 229.
33.  On this, see Herbert York, The Advisors: Oppenheimer, Teller, and the Super-
bomb (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1976). Oppenheimer would emerge as a vocal 
opponent of the nuclear bomb and pronuclear culture, leading the AEC to declare him 
a security risk. McCarthy-era anti-Communist witch hunts would silence him fur-
ther. On this, see Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin, American Prometheus: The Triumph 
and Tragedy of J. Robert Oppenheimer (New York: Vintage Books, 2006).
34.  Campbell Craig, Destroying the Village: Eisenhower and Thermonuclear War 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1998), 27. On the story of the development 
of the hydrogen bomb, see Richard Rhodes, Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen 
Bomb (New York: Touchstone, 1995); Rosenberg, “American Atomic Strategy.”
35.  Quoted in John Lewis Gaddis, The Long Peace: Inquiries into the History of the 
Cold War (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987): 114.
36.  “NSC-68: United States Objectives and Programs for National Security,” 
April 14, 1950, reprinted in Etzold and Gaddis, Containment, 385–442.
37.  “Annex No. 7 to NSC-68,” reprinted in SAIS Review 19, no. 1 (Winter/Spring 
1999), 21, quoted in Scott A. Silverstone, Preventive War and American Democracy 
(New York: Routledge, 2007), 70.
38.  The basis of Eisenhower’s massive retaliation is in NSC-100. On this, see 
Herken, The Winning Weapon, 334–36. For the text of NSC-100, see United States De-
partment of State, Foreign Relations of the United States (hereafter FRUS), 1951, vol. 1 
(Washington, DC: United States Government Printing Office, 1979), 7–18.
39.  Leffler, Preponderance of Power, 323.
40.  Harry S. Truman, “Farewell Address,” January 15, 1953, reprinted in Louis 
W. Koening, The Truman Administration: Its Principles and Practice (New York: New 
York University Press, 1956), 287–88.
41.  “Memorandum of Conversation, by the Ambassador at Large (Jessup),” Wash-
ington, June 25, 1950, FRUS, 1950, vol. 7, Korea, 159–60, quoted in Lawrence S. Wittner, 
The Struggle against the Bomb, vol. 1, One World or None (Stanford: Stanford Univer-
sity Press, 1993), 260.
42.  Bruce Cumings, “On the Strategy and Morality of American Nuclear Policy 
in Korea, 1950 to the Present,” Social Science Japan Journal 1, no. 1 (1998): 58. See also 
Cumings, The Origins of the Korean War, vol. 2, The Roaring of the Cataract, 1947–1950 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990), 749–50. Despite this, in July 1950, the 
administration dispatched ten nuclear-configured B-29 aircraft to the Pacific in order 
to show resolve. See Roger Dingman, “Atomic Diplomacy During the Korean War,” 
International Security 13, no. 3 (Winter 1988–1989): 63–64. 
43.  General Maxwell D. Taylor, from his experience as Assistant Chief of Staff for 
Operations and Training, and Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations and Administration,  
argues that there were “cogent military reasons” for refraining from atomic use: a 
Notes to Chapter 3R
  231

small number of weapons, in a time when the key theatre of conflict was Europe; 
limitations imposed by Korea’s mountainous terrain; and fears that an atomic attack 
would reveal unforeseen shortcomings, reducing the credibility of “deterrent effect 
elsewhere.” Taylor, Swords and Plowshares (New York: W. W. Norton, 1972), 134.
44.  Quoted in Betts, Nuclear Blackmail, 37.
45.  New York Times, December 1, 1950:1, 3.
46.  Quoted in Cumings, Origins of the Korean War, 749. Attlee and Truman held 
six rounds of meetings in December 1950 and the communiqué issued at the end of 
the meetings expressed the hope that world conditions would never call for the use of 
the atomic bomb. “Communiqué Issued at the Conclusion of the Truman-Attlee Dis-
cussions,” Washington, December 8, 1950, FRUS 1950, vol. 7, Korea, 1479.
47.  New York Times, December 1, 1950:4.
48.  Cumings, “Strategy and Morality,” 59; Cumings, Origins of the Korean War, 
750. See also Rosemary J. Foot, The Wrong War: American Policy and the Dimensions 
of the Korean Conἀict, 1950–53 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1985), 114–15, 
126–27. However, it is argued that Truman was simply responding to the JCS request 
on possible targets and was not planning to use the weapons. Gaddis, Long Peace, 116.
49.  Quoted in Seaborg and Loeb, Stemming the Tide, 29.
50.  Offner, Another Such Victory, 403; Cumings, “Strategy and Morality,” 750–51.
51.  Cumings, “Strategy and Morality,” 59.
52.  Offner, Another Such Victory, 421. Offner contends that by 1952, Truman “was 
ready to go ‘all out’ against the PRC if it undertook major escalation in Korea, and it 
is not inconceivable that political and military circumstances in an election year—in 
which MacArthur sought the Republican nomination—might have driven or tempted 
a president to an atomic strike.” Ibid., 422.
53.  Dingman, “Atomic Diplomacy,” 74.
54.  Foot, The Wrong War, 105.
55.  “Memorandum of the Planning Adviser, Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs (Emmer-
son) to the Assistant Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs (Rusk)”, Washington, No-
vember 8, 1950, FRUS 1950, vol. 7, Korea, 1098–1100, cited in Gaddis, Long Peace, 118.
56.  Quoted in Gaddis, Long Peace, 119–20.
57.  Truman, Years of Trial and Hope, 395.
58.  John Lewis Gaddis, The Cold War: A New History (New York: The Penguin 
Press, 2005), 55.
59.  Harry S. Truman, “Address in Milwaukee, Wisconsin,” October 14, 1948, http:// 
www.trumanlibrary.org/publicpapers/index.php?pid=1989&st=&st1=.
60.  Gaddis, Long Peace, 108.
61.  For these statistics, see “Korean War Casualty Statistics,” 1999, http://www 
.centurychina.com/history/krwarcost.html.
62.  Andrew P. N. Erdmann, “War No Longer has Any Logic Whatever: Dwight D. 
Eisenhower and the Thermonuclear Revolution,” in Gaddis et al., Cold War Statesmen, 96.
232  Notes to chapter 3R

63.  Dwight D. Eisenhower, The White House Years, vol. 1, Mandate for Change, 
1953–1956 (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1963), 180.
64.  Ibid.
65.  Cited in Seymour M. Hersh, The Price of Power: Kissinger in the Nixon White 
House (New York: Summit Books, 1983), 51.
66.  When asked by Adams what brought the truce in Korea, Eisenhower replied: 
“Danger of an atomic war . . . We told them we could not hold it to a limited war any 
longer if the Communists welched on a treaty of truce. They didn’t want a full-scale 
war or an atomic attack. That kept them under some control.” Sherman Adams, First-
hand Report: The Inside Story of the Eisenhower Administration (London: Hutchinson, 
1962), 55.
67.  Ibid.
68.  Quoted in Edward C. Keefer, “President Dwight D. Eisenhower and the End 
of the Korean War,” Diplomatic History 10, no. 3 (Summer 1986): 280.
69.  On this, see Rosemary J. Foot, “Nuclear Coercion and the Ending of the Ko-
rean Conflict,” International Security 13, no. 3 (Winter 1988–1989): 111.
70.  Richard H. Immerman, John Foster Dulles: Piety, Pragmatism, and Power in 
U.S. Foreign Policy (Washington, DC: Scholarly Resources, 1999), 72.
71.  On this, see Robert R. Bowie and Richard H. Immerman, Waging Peace: How 
Eisenhower Shaped an Enduring Cold War Strategy (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1998), 123–38.
72.  “Memorandum of Discussion at the 165th Meeting of the National Security 
Council,” October 7, 1953, FRUS, 1952–54, vol. 2, 532–33. See also H. W. Brands, Jr., 
“The Age of Vulnerability: Eisenhower and the National Security State,” The Ameri-
can Historical Review 94, no. 4 (October 1989): 971.
73.  “Statement of Policy by the National Security Council,” Washington, n.d. 
(NSC 162/2). FRUS 1952–54 volume 2 part 1, 593. This appears to be an effort by the 
Eisenhower administration to bolster Western deterrence against the Soviet Union.
74.  Ronald H. Spector, Advice and Support: The Early Years, 1941–1960 (Washing-
ton, DC: U.S. Army Center for Military History, 1983), 201.
75.  Cited in Gaddis, Long Peace, 130. See also Bundy, Danger and Survival, 260–70.
76.  “Douglas MacArthur II to Dulles,” Washington, April 7, 1954, FRUS 1952–54, 
vol. 13, 1270–1272, cited in Gaddis, Long Peace, 130.
77.  Stephen E. Ambrose, Eisenhower, vol. 2 (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983), 184. 
78.  Gordon H. Chang, “To the Nuclear Brink: Eisenhower, Dulles, and the Quemoy- 
Matsu Crisis,” International Security 12, no. 4 (Spring 1988): 98.
79.  For both, see Eisenhower, White House Years, 476–77. 
80.  “Memorandum Prepared by the Secretary of State,” Washington, Septem-
ber 12, 1954. FRUS 1952–54, volume 14, 611, quoted in Gaddis, Long Peace, 134.
81.  Joint State Department/US Information Agency Message, 25 February 1955, 
in folder, “Re Atomic Energy, Atomic Weapons and Disarmament,” Box 89, John 
Notes to Chapter 3R
  233

Foster Dulles Papers, Seeley G. Mudd Library, cited in Neal Rosendorf, “John Foster 
Dulles’ Nuclear Schizophrenia,” in Gaddis et al., Cold War Statesmen, 76. 
82.  Quoted in Townsend Hoopes, The Devil and John Foster Dulles (Boston: Little, 
Brown, 1973), 277–78.
83.  Quoted in Ambrose, Eisenhower, 239.
84.  Quoted in Hoopes, Devil and John Foster Dulles, 278.
85.  Quoted in Ambrose, Eisenhower, 239.
86.  “Dulles Memorandum of Conversation with Eisenhower,” March 6, 1955, 
FRUS, 1955–57, vol. 2, 336–37, cited in Gaddis, Long Peace, 136.
87.  National Intelligence Estimate 100-4-55, “Communist Capabilities and Inten-
tions with Respect to the Offshore Islands and Taiwan through 1955,” 379, cited in 
Gaddis, The Long Peace, 137. 
88.  Cited in Gaddis, Long Peace, 138.
89.  H. W. Brands, Jr., “Testing Massive Retaliation: Credibility and Crisis Man-
agement in the Taiwan Strait,” International Security 12, no. 4 (Spring 1988): 124–51.
90.  On this crisis, see Bundy, Danger and Survival, 279–86.
91.  “Memorandum of Discussion at the 277th Meeting of the National Security 
Council,” Washington, February 27, 1956, FRUS, 1955–1957, vol. 19, 204. 
92.  Cited in Wittner, Resisting the Bomb, 173.
93.  “Memorandum of Conversation Between the President and the Secretary of 
State,” Washington, April 11, 1955, FRUS, 1955–1957, vol. 2, 471.
94.  “Memorandum of Discussion at the 285th Meeting of the National Security 
Council,” Washington, May 17, 1956, FRUS, 1955–1957, vol. 19, 307.
95.  “Memorandum of Discussion at the 325th Meeting of the National Security 
Council,” Washington, May 27, 1957, FRUS 1955–1957, vol. 19, 501.
96.  On this, see Rosendorf, “John Foster Dulles’ Nuclear Schizophrenia.”
97.  For a thesis of this nature, see Craig, Destroying the Village, 68–69.
98.  In an April 1957 meeting of the NSC, Dulles stated that “[w]hat worried him 
most in this problem area was the probability that unless the United States, the United 
Kingdom and the USSR found some safe way to stop the building up of nuclear weapon 
stockpiles, other countries would presently begin to fabricate nuclear weapons. Such 
a development would certainly decrease the security of the United States. The Presi-
dent stated his thorough agreement with Secretary Dulles’ position.” “Memorandum 
of Discussion at the 320th Meeting of the National Security Council,” Washington, 
April 17, 1957, FRUS 1955–57, vol. 19, 482.
99.  “Address by President Dwight D. Eisenhower to the United Nations General 
Assembly, 470th Plenary Meeting,” December 8, 1953, reprinted in IAEA Bulletin 45, 
no. 2 (December 2003): 66–67.
100.  On the Eisenhower efforts at nonproliferation, see Shane Maddock, “The 
Fourth Country Problem: Eisenhower’s Nuclear Nonproliferation Policy,” Presiden-
tial Studies Quarterly 28, no. 3 (Summer 1998): 553–72.
234  Notes to chapter 3R

101.  Mitchell Reiss, Without the Bomb: The Politics of Nuclear Nonproliferation 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1988), 11.
102.  Lawrence Scheinman, “Shadow & Substance: Securing the Future of Atoms 
for Peace,” IAEA Bulletin 45, no. 2 (December 2003): 7–9.
103.  Glenn T. Seaborg and Benjamin S. Loeb, Kennedy, Khrushchev and the Test 
Ban (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981), 3–4.
104.  Gaddis, Cold War, 64.
105.  Ibid., 65.
106.  William Burr and Hector L. Montford, “The Making of the Limited Test Ban 
Treaty, 1958–1963” (National Security Archive, Electronic Briefing Book no. 94, Au-
gust 8, 2003): 2.
107.  On this, see Lawrence S. Wittner, The Struggle Against the Bomb, vol. 2, Re-
sisting the Bomb (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997), chs. 1–5.
108.  Burr and Montford, “The Making of the Limited Test Ban Treaty,” 2.
109.  On this, see Maddock, “The Fourth Country Problem,” 555.
110.  “Memorandum of Discussion of the 195th Meeting of the National Security 
Council,” Washington, May 6, 1954, FRUS, 1952–1954, vol. 2, 1426.
111.  “Memorandum of Telephone Conversation Between the Secretary of State 
and the Chairman of the United States Atomic Energy Commission (Strauss),” Wash-
ington, March 29, 1954, FRUS, 1952–54, vol. 2, 1380.
112.  “Memorandum of Discussion at the 195th Meeting of the National Security 
Council,” Thursday, May 6, 1954, FRUS, 1952–1954, vol. 2, 1425, 1427–28. 
113.  “Memorandum of Conversation, Meeting with Disarmament Advisors,” 
April 26, 1958: 1, http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB94/tb04.pdf.
114.  Seaborg and Loeb, Kennedy, Khrushchev and the Test Ban, 1–26.
115.  In addition, it states: “Where the consent of an ally is required for the use 
of these weapons from the U.S. bases on the territory of such ally, the United States 
should promptly obtain the advance consent of such ally for such use. The United 
States should also seek, as and when feasible, the understanding and approval of this 
policy by free nations.” “Statement of Policy by the National Security Council on Basic 
National Security Policy,” 30 October 1953, sec. 39B(1), http://mtholyoke.edu/acad/ 
intrel/pentagon/doc18.htm.
116.  Morton H. Halperin and Madalene O’Donnell, “The Nuclear Fallacy,” Bul-
letin of the Atomic Scientists 44, no. 1. (January/February 1988):8.
117.  National Security Archive, “First Documented Evidence the U.S. Presidents 
Predelegated Nuclear Weapons Release Authority to the Military,” March 20, 1998, 
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/news/19980319.htm. Eisenhower himself was actively 
involved in the drafting of the authority “in order to avoid imprecisely worded instruc-
tions that could permit the reckless or accidental use of nuclear weapons.” William Burr, 
ed., “First Declassification of Eisenhower’s Instructions to Commanders Predelegating 
Notes to Chapter 3R
  235

Nuclear Weapon Use, 1959–1960” (National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book 
no. 45, May 18, 2001), para. 4, http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB45/.
118.  William Burr, ed., “The Creation of SIOP-62: More Evidence on the Origin of 
Overkill” (National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 130, July 13, 2004), 
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv?NSAEBB/NSAEBB130/index.htm.
119.  He stated: “In the councils of Government we must guard against the acquisition 
of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial com-
plex. The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist.” For 
the text of the speech, see http://www.eisenhower.archives.gov/speeches/farewell_address 
.html. See also Ralph Lapp, The Weapons Culture (Baltimore: Penguin Books, 1969), 17.
120.  Mandelbaum, The Nuclear Question, 54.
121.  Lawrence Freedman, The Evolution of Nuclear Strategy (New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1983), 76.
122.  Mandelbaum, The Nuclear Question, 59.
123.  Maddock, “The Fourth Country Problem,” 553–72.
124.  Although Eisenhower initially did not see much difference between nuclear and 
conventional weapons, by 1956 he had begun to realize that a thermonuclear war with the 
Soviets would be catastrophic, diminishing his belief that he could control crisis escalation 
and the actual use of nuclear weapons. Erdmann, “War No Longer Has Any Logic,” 118. It 
is also reported that Eisenhower, as a young officer in Panama, had read Clausewitz’s On 
War and was convinced by his argument that “war was politics by other means” and the 
“means must be proportional to the end.” To Eisenhower, the “nuclear revolution made 
this proportional relationship impossible.” Bowie and Immerman, Waging Peace, 48.
125.  For instance, see Michael Gordon Jackson, “Beyond Brinkmanship: Eisen-
hower, Nuclear Warfighting, and Korea, 1953–1968,” Presidential Studies Quarterly 
35, no. 1 (March 2005): 52–75. See also Craig, Destroying the Village.
126.  John Lewis Gaddis, We Now Know: Rethinking Cold War History (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1997), 233.
127.  Gaddis, Long Peace, 142–43.
128.  “Goodpaster Memorandum, Eisenhower Conversation with John McCone 
and Edward Teller,” August 14, 1958, Eisenhower Papers, Whitman files, Eisenhower 
diary, box 22, Aug 58 staff notes, cited in Gaddis, Long Peace, 144.
Chapter 4: The United States and the Tradition II:  
Kennedy to Clinton (1961–2001)
1.  Morton H. Halperin and Madalene O’Donnell, “The Nuclear Fallacy,” Bulletin 
of the Atomic Scientists 44, no. 1 (January/February 1988): 8.
2.  Fred Kaplan, “JFK’s First-Strike Plan,” Atlantic Monthly, October 2001: 81.
3.  William Burr, ed., “First Strike Options and the Berlin Crisis, September 1961” 
(National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book no. 56, September 25, 2001), http:// 
www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB56/.
236  Notes to chapter 4

4.  Sheldon M. Stern, Averting “the Final Failure”: John F. Kennedy and the Secret 
Cuban Missile Crisis Meetings (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2003), 32; Graham  
Allison and Philip Zelikow, Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis, 
2nd ed. (New York: Addison Wesley Longman, 1999), 357; James G. Blight and David A.  
Welch, eds., Intelligence and the Cuban Missile Crisis (London: Frank Cass, 1998).
5.  McGeorge Bundy, Danger and Survival (New York: Random House, 1988), 461. 
The crisis “enabled them to begin exploring ways of reducing superpower tension, 
improving their ability to communicate, and lowering the risks of future crisis.” Don 
Munton and David A. Welch, The Cuban Missile Crisis: A Concise History (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2007), 99.
6.  Joseph M. Siracusa and David G. Coleman, “Scaling the Nuclear Ladder: Deter-
rence from Truman to Clinton,” Australian Journal of International Affairs 54, no. 3 
(November 2000): 287–88.
7.  Munton and Welch, Cuban Missile Crisis, 94.
8.  Francis J. Gavin, “Blasts from the Past: Proliferation Lessons from the 1960s,” 
International Security 29, no. 3 (Winter 2004–05): 100–35.
9.  Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: John F. Kennedy, 1963 (Wash-
ington, DC: United States Government Printing Office, 1964), 280.
10.  On negotiations that led to the Treaty, see Glenn T. Seaborg and Benjamin S. 
Loeb, Kennedy, Khrushchev and the Test Ban (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1981). The Kennedy era also saw major developments in the arms control area such 
as the creation of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (ACDA) and the es-
tablishment of a hotline between Washington and Moscow. On these, see Michael O. 
Wheeler, “A History of Arms Control,” in Arms Control: Cooperative Security in a 
Changing Environment, ed. Jeffrey A. Larsen (Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2002), 27.
11.  For an extensive analysis on this on the basis of declassified documents, see 
William Burr and Jeffrey T. Richelson, “Whether to ‘Strangle the Baby in the Cradle’: 
The United States and the Chinese Nuclear Program, 1960–64,” International Secu-
rity 25, no. 3 (Winter 2000–01): 54–99. See also Gordon H. Chang, “JFK, China, and the 
Bomb,” The Journal of American History 74, no. 4 (March 1988): 1287–1310. At a meet-
ing of senior advisors of the National Security Council on September 15, 1964, unilat-
eral military action was rejected for the time being, but in any future conflict, military 
action against Chinese nuclear facilities would receive appropriate attention. It was 
agreed that there were possibilities for joint preventive action with the Soviet govern-
ment, and that the secretary of state would explore with Ambassador Dobrynin such 
options as soon as possible. McGeorge Bundy, “Memorandum for the Record,” Septem-
ber 15, 1964, http://www.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB38/China-document16.pdf.
12.  “New Tapes: JFK Questioned Value of Nuclear Build-up,” John F. Kennedy 
Presidential Library and Museum, Boston, February 6, 2002.
13.  “Newly Released Tape Shows Nuclear Weapons Considered as Alternative to 
Ground War in Combating Chinese Aggression,” John F. Kennedy Presidential Library 
Notes to Chapter 4  237

and Museum, Boston, August 25, 2005. See also Anand Giridharadas, “JFK’s Nuclear 
Dilemma over China and India,” International Herald Tribune, August 26, 2005.
14.  Quoted in Bundy, Danger and Survival, 537.
15.  George W. Ball, “Top Secret: The Prophecy the President Rejected: How Valid 
are the Assumptions Underlying Our Vietnam Policies?” (memorandum, October 5, 
1965), reprinted in The Atlantic Monthly 230, no. 1 (July 1972): 41–42.
16.  Nina Tannenwald, The Nuclear Taboo (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2007), 210.
17.  Bundy, Danger and Survival, 536–37.
18.  Lawrence S. Wittner, The Struggle Against the Bomb, vol. 2, Resisting the Bomb 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997), 439.
19.  On this group, see Ann Finkbeiner, The Jasons: The Secret History of Science’s 
Postwar Elite (New York: Penguin, 2007).
20.  F. J. Dyson, R. Gomer, S. Weinberg, and S. C. Wright, “Tactical Weapons in 
Southeast Asia” (Washington, DC: Jasons Division, Institute for Defense Analyses, 
March 1967): 7–8, http://nautilus.org/archives/VietnamFOIA/report/dyson67.pdf. See 
also Peter Hayes and Nina Tannenwald, “Nixing Nukes in Vietnam,” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists 59, no. 3 (May–June 2003): 52–59.
21.  A senior member of the Pentagon-funded Institute for Defense Analysis 
(IDA) at that time, Seymour Deitchman, suggests that the talk of using nuclear weap-
ons stopped after the JASON study was presented to the Secretary of Defense. De-
itchman, “’Essentially Annihilated’: An Insider’s Account,” The Nautilus Institute, 
San Fran­cisco. February 25, 2003, http://www.nautilus.org/archives/VietnamFOIA/ 
report/insider.html.
22.  The Johnson administration explored preventive and preemptive attacks against 
Chinese nuclear facilities in various studies. See “The United States, China and the 
Bomb” (National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book no. 1, n.d.), http://www.gwu 
.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB1/nsaebb1.htm.
23.  Burr and Richelson, “Whether to Strangle the Baby,” 82.
24.  Robert H. Johnson, “The Chinese Communist Nuclear Capability and some 
Unorthodox Approaches to the Problem of Nuclear Proliferation,” Washington, Depart-
ment of State, Policy Planning Council, June 1, 1964, http://www.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/­
NSAEBB38/document13.pdf.
25.  Burr and Richelson, “Whether to Strangle the Baby,” 99.
26.  In a letter to Russian leader Khrushchev on January 18, 1964, Johnson presented 
his arms control agenda in which preventing the spread of nuclear weapons appeared 
as the lead item. Other related objectives included ending production of fissionable ma-
terials, banning all nuclear testing, placing limitations on nuclear weapon systems, and 
reducing the risk of nuclear war by accident or by design. Glenn T. Seaborg and Ben-
jamin S. Loeb, Stemming the Tide: Arms Control in the Johnson Years (Lexington, MA: 
Lexington Books, 1987), 7.
238  Notes to chapter 4

27.  “The United States, China, and the Bomb,” 9; Committee on Nuclear Prolif-
eration, “Report to the President,” Washington, DC, January 21, 1965, www.gwu.edu/ 
~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB1/nhch7_1.htm.
28.  Other developments during the Johnson era included the signing of the Outer 
Space Treaty with Moscow (preventing weapons deployment in outer space) and the 
deployment of a limited ballistic missile system, called Sentinel. Wheeler, “A History 
of Arms Control,” 28.
29. Melvin R. Laird, “Memorandum from Secretary Laird Enclosing Preliminary 
Draft of Potential Military Actions re Vietnam,” March 2, 1969 (declassified docu-
ment, National Security Archives, Washington, DC, National Security Council Files, 
Box 1007, Haig Vietnam Files, vol. 1, January–March 1969).
30.  William Burr and Jeffrey Kimball, “Nixon’s Nuclear Ploy,” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists 59, no. 1 (January/February 2003): 28.
31.  Scott D. Sagan and Seremi Suri, “The Madman Nuclear Alert: Secrecy, Sig-
naling, and Safety in October 1969,” International Security 27, no. 4 (Spring 2003): 
150–83.
32.  Quoted in Seymour M. Hersh, The Price of Power: Kissinger in the Nixon 
White House (New York: Summit Books, 1983), 52.
33.  Quoted in ibid., 53. On the Nixon strategy and its limitations, see Edward 
Rhodes, Power and Madness: The Logic of Nuclear Coercion (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1989), 167.
34.  Hersh, The Price of Power, 120.
35.  Ibid., 126
36.  “Nixon Had Notion to Use Nuclear Bomb in Vietnam,” USA Today, February 28, 
2002, http://www.usatoday.com/news/washington/2002/02/28/nixon-tapes.htm.
37.  Time, “What the President Saw,” July 29, 1985: 53.
38.  Bundy, Danger and Survival, 538–41.
39.  Henry Kissinger, The White House Years (Boston: Little, Brown, 1979): 66–67.
40.  Richard M. Nixon, No More Vietnams (New York: Arbor House, 1985), 102.
41.  White House Tapes, May 5, 1972, quoted in Tannenwald, The Nuclear Taboo, 
237.
42.  Because only 7 percent of the U.S. public supported sending additional troops 
and stepped up fighting, “small wonder that Nixon had shelved Duck Hook.” Robert 
Dallek, Nixon and Kissinger: Partners in Power (New York: HarperCollins, 2007), 183.
43.  On this, see Henry A. Kissinger, Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy (New 
York: Harper & Brothers, 1957).
44.  William Burr, “The Nixon Administration, the ‘Horror Strategy,’ and the 
Search for Limited Nuclear Options, 1969–1972,” Journal of Cold War Studies 7, no. 3 
(2005): 50.
45.  Terry Terriff, The Nixon Administration and the Making of U.S. Nuclear Strat-
egy (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1995), 3–4.
Notes to Chapter 4  239

46.  William Burr, “The Nixon Administration, the SIOP, and the Search for Lim­
ited Nuclear Options, 1969–1974,” (National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book 
no. 173, November 23, 2005), 4, www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB173/index 
.htm.
47.  William Burr, “Looking Back: The Limits of Limited Nuclear War,” Arms Con-
trol Today 36, no. 1 (January/February 2006), http://www.armscontrol.org/act/2006 
_01-02/JANFEB-Lookingback.
48.  Burr, “The Nixon Administration,” 77. Despite his bellicose policy in Vietnam, 
the Nixon years saw his signing of several arms control agreements. They included the 
interim Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT I), which set limits on the number of 
ballistic missile launchers; the Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty, which prevented 
both sides from deploying such missiles for the defense of their territories; the 1971 
Accidents Measures Agreement; the 1972 Seabed Treaty; and the 1973 Prevention of 
Nuclear War Agreement. Talks also began on the Threshold Test Ban Treaty (TTBT). 
Wheeler, “A History of Arms Control,” 29.
49.  Terriff, Nixon Administration, 82. See also Jack Anderson, The Anderson Papers 
(New York: Random House, 1973), 264.
50.  “The Chinese were climbing the walls. We were concerned that the Chinese 
might intervene to stop India. We didn’t learn till later that they didn’t have that kind 
of conventional capability. But if they did step in, and the Soviets reacted, what would 
we do? There was no question what we would have done.” Time, “What the President 
Saw,” 53.
51.  David K. Hall, “The Laotian War of 1962 and the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971,” 
in Force without War: U.S. Armed Forces as a Political Instrument, ed. Barry M. Blech-
man and Stephen S. Kaplan (Washington DC: Brookings Institution, 1978), 178. Ac-
cording to Hall, the United States aimed primarily to compel India to stop the war 
and deter it from invading Pakistan, although a secondary motive was to send a mes-
sage to the Soviet Union and China. Ibid., 189.
52.  Michael Karpin, The Bomb in the Basement (New York: Simon & Schuster, 
2006), 334. See also Michael Brecher with Benjamin Geist, Decisions in Crisis: Israel,  
1967 and 1973 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980), 224–25; Barry M. 
Blechman and Douglas M. Hart, “The Political Utility of Nuclear Weapons: The 1973 
Middle East Crisis,” International Security 7, no. 1 (Summer 1982): 132–56.
53.  Time, “What the President Saw,” 53.
54.  Germany especially opposed the weapon, arguing that its introduction in the 
country, purportedly to stop East German tanks from entering, would make battle-
field use of nuclear weapons more likely, while undermining the political nature of de-
terrence based on mutual retaliation. Alton Frye, “Opinion: Slow Fuse on the Neutron 
Bomb,” Foreign Policy no. 31 (Summer 1978): 100; McGeorge Bundy et al., “Nuclear 
Weapons and the Atlantic Alliance,” Foreign Affairs 60, no. 4 (Spring 1982): 756.
240  Notes to chapter 4

55.  Carter Presidency Project, “Interview with Dr. James Schlesinger” (Miller 
Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia, 2005): 58.
56.  BBC News Online, “1978: Carter Delays N-bomb Production,” n.d., http://news 
.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/april/7/newsid_2523000/2523051.stm.
57.  On the campaign, see Maynard W. Glitman, The Last Battle of the Cold War 
(New York: Palgrave-Macmillan, 2006), 24–25.
58.  Lawrence S. Wittner, The Struggle against the Bomb, vol. 3, Toward Nuclear 
Abolition (Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2003), 48–49.
59.  Thomas C. Schelling, “The Legacy of Hiroshima: A Half Century without 
Nuclear War,” Institute for Philosophy and Public Policy Report 20, no. 2/3 (Summer 
2000), http://www.puaf.umd.edu/IPPP/Summer00/legacy_of_hiroshima.htm. Some 
of these same arguments seem relevant to the debate over mini-nukes in recent years. 
Earlier, the defense secretary under the Johnson administration, Robert McNamara, 
had rejected the development of small nuclear weapons and neutron bombs, arguing, 
“while we may find very low yield weapons and enhanced radiation warheads to be of 
military utility, we should not acquire them simply for the purpose of breaking down 
the distinction between non-nuclear and nuclear warfare.” Robert McNamara, Draft 
Presidential Memorandum, “The Role of Tactical Nuclear Forces in NATO Strategy,” 
January 15, 1965, 35–37, cited in Tannenwald, Nuclear Taboo, 277.
60.  Tannenwald, Nuclear Taboo, 280.
61.  Jimmy Carter, “Presidential Directive/NSC-59,” Washington, July 25, 1980, 
www.jimmycarterlibrary.org/documents/pddirectives/pd59.pdf.
62.  Jimmy Carter, “State of the Union Address 1980,” Washington, January 23, 1980.
63.  There is evidence that Carter administration officials considered using tactical 
nuclear weapons in the event of a Soviet assault on Iran, and the reconnaissance flights 
of B-52s into the Arabian Sea caused the Soviets to take notice of the potential for 
nuclear war. Richard K. Betts, Nuclear Blackmail and Nuclear Balance (Washington, 
DC: The Brookings Institution, 1987), 130–31. Although this episode was an effort at 
extended deterrence, it still raises some interesting questions about Carter’s willing-
ness to raise the nuclear card to obtain political and strategic goals in a theater which 
was not traditionally considered as important as Europe or East Asia.
64.  Lawrence Freedman, The Evolution of Nuclear Strategy (New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1983), 393; Carter, “Presidential Directive/NSC‑59.” 
65.  Fred Kaplan, The Wizards of Armageddon (New York: Simon & Schuster, 
1983), 382.
66.  “Statement of Secretary of State Vance: U.S. Assurance on Non-Use of Nu­
clear Weapons, June 12, 1978,” Department of State Bulletin, August 1978: 52.
67.  John Prados, “Team B: The Trillion Dollar Experiment,” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists 49, no. 3 (April 1993): 23. Even before his election as President, Reagan had ar­
gued his opposition to MAD and advocated a massive military buildup by the United  
Notes to Chapter 4  241

States which the Soviets would not be able match. Paul Lettow, Ronald Reagan and His 
Quest to Abolish Nuclear Weapons (New York: Random House, 2005), 28–29.
68.  Daryl G. Kimball, “The Mixed Arms Control Legacy of Ronald Reagan,” Arms 
Control Today 34, no. 6 (July/August 2004): 45.
69.  William Arkin, “The Buildup That Wasn’t,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 
45, no. 1 (January/February 1989): 6.
70.  On the Reagan strategy, see Barry R. Posen and Stephen Van Evera, “Defense 
Policy and the Reagan Administration: Departure from Containment,” International 
Security 8, no. 1 (Summer 1983): 3–45; Fareed Zakaria, “The Reagan Strategy of Con-
tainment,” Political Science Quarterly 105, no. 3 (Autumn 1990): 373–95.
71.  Jeffrey W. Knopf, Domestic Society and International Cooperation: The Im-
pact of Protest on U.S. Arms Control Policy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1998), ch. 7.
72.  Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States, Ronald Reagan, 1983, bk. 1 
(Washington, DC: United States Government Printing Office, 1984), 443.
73.  Peter R. Beckman et al., The Nuclear Predicament, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992), 108.
74.  See Leon V. Sigal, “Warming to the Freeze,” Foreign Policy no. 48 (Autumn 
1982): 54–65.
75.  Arkin, “The Buildup That Wasn’t,” 7.
76.  According to one study, Reagan became conciliatory to the Soviets in late 
1983, in part because of the Able Archer crisis (a crisis resulting from a ten-day nuclear 
ex­ercise by NATO in November 1983 which provoked the Soviets to go on nucle­ar 
alert) and the resulting increased fear of nuclear war. See Beth A. Fischer, The Reagan 
Rever­sal: Foreign Policy and the End of the Cold War (Columbia: University of Missouri 
Press, 2002), 122–43.
77.  The President told Gorbachev that he “would like to see a world without nu­clear 
missiles,” to which Gorbachev responded that he was “in favor of proposals which were 
aimed at total elimination of nuclear arms, and on the way to this goal there should be 
equality and equal security.” Quoted in Lettow, Ronald Reagan and His Quest, 218.
78.  In one of his personal letters to long-term friend Laurence Beilenson, Reagan 
stated: “We will not allow SDI to become a bargaining chip. My own view is that we 
may be able to develop a defensive shield so effective that we can use it to rid the world 
once and for all of nuclear missiles. Then—since we all know how to make them we 
preserve SDI as we did our gas masks in the event a madman comes along some day 
and secretly puts some together.” “Reagan letter to Lawrence Beilenson,” August 1, 
1986, in Kiron K. Skinner, Annelise Anderson, and Martin Anderson eds., Reagan: 
A Life in Letters (New York: Free Press, 2003), 428. See also Douglas J. Hoekstra,  
“Presidential Beliefs and the Reagan Paradox,” Presidential Studies Quarterly 27, no.3 
(Summer 1997): 429–50.
242  Notes to chapter 4

79.  David B. Cohen, “From START to START II: Dynamism and Pragmatism in 
the Bush Administration’s Nuclear Weapons Policies,” Presidential Studies Quarterly 
27, no. 3 (Summer 1997): 416.
80.  Los Angeles Times, “Text of Bush’s Letter to Saddam Hussein,” January 13, 
1991:A21.
81.  James A. Baker III, The Politics of Diplomacy (New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 
1995), 359.
82.  See George Bush, “The President’s News Conference,” February 5, 1991, www 
.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/print.php?pid=19278; “Excerpts from Talk by Bush on Gulf 
War,” New York Times, February 6, 1991:A10.
83.  Stephen I. Schwartz, “Miscalculated Ambiguity: U.S. Policy on the Use and 
Threat of Use of Nuclear Weapons,” Disarmament Diplomacy no. 23 (February 1998): 
3, http://www.bu.edu/globalbeat/nuclear/schwartz0298.html.
84.  Baker, Politics of Diplomacy, 359.
85.  William M. Arkin, “Calculated Ambiguity: Nuclear Weapons and the Gulf  
War,” The Washington Quarterly 19, no. 4 (Autumn 1996): 4, citing “Desert Storm Weap-
ons,” Air Force News Service, March 25, 1996; Frontline, “Oral History: Norman Schwarz­
kopf,” January 9, 1996, www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/gulf/oral/schwarzkopf/ 
1.html; Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre, It Doesn’t Take a Hero (New York: 
Bantam Books, 1992), 313; Colin L. Powell with Joseph E. Persico, My American Jour-
ney (New York: Random House, 1995), 485–86.
86.  “A Gulf War Exclusive: President Bush Talking with David Frost,” transcript 
No. 51, 16 January 1996, 5, cited in Keith B. Payne, Deterrence in the Second Nuclear 
Age (Lexington: The University Press of Kentucky, 1996), 139.
87.  Catherine Thomasson, “Health Effects of War: Seeking SMART Security” (re-
port, Physicians for Social Responsibility, n.d.), 5, www.oregonpsr.org/Documents/
HEWHandoutSMART.doc. “This guidance resulted in SIOP-93, the first overall nu-
clear war plan formally to incorporate Third World WMD Targets.” USSTRATCOM, 
“Strategic Planning Study” Final Report, 1 October 1993, 3–35, cited in Hans M. Kris-
tensen, “Nuclear Futures: Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction and US Nu-
clear Strategy” (BASIC Research Report 98.2, March 1998): 10.
88.  McGeorge Bundy, “Nuclear Weapons and the Gulf,” Foreign Affairs 70, no. 4 
(Fall 1991): 83.
89.  Ibid., 85.
90.  At the peak of the war, nearly 60 percent of public opinion also favored nu-
clear use in response to Iraqi use of chemical and biological weapons. Tannenwald, 
Nuclear Taboo, chs. 9, 11. This shows a change in the perceptions of the public due 
largely to official propaganda on the possibility of chemical and biological attack by 
Saddam Hussein. It also suggests that the American public was willing to loosen the 
Notes to Chapter 4  243

upper threshold reserved for nuclear response and thereby break the tradition under 
conditions in which supreme national interests were not under threat.
91.  Quoted in Bundy, “Nuclear Weapons and the Gulf,” 83.
92.  Les Aspin, “Counterproliferation Initiative” (remarks to the National Academy 
of Science, December 7, 1993), www.fas.org/irp/offdocs/pdd18.htm; Ashton B. Carter, 
“Counterproliferation Initiative: Managing Three Crises” (remarks prepared for the 
Conference on Nuclear, Biological and Chemical Weapons Proliferation, Washington, 
DC, May 23, 1996), http://www.defenselink.mil/speeches/speech.aspx?speechid=1005.
93.  Hans Kristensen, “Targets of Opportunity,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, 53, 
no. 5 (September/October 1997), 26.
94.  For the Doctrine, see http://www.fas.org/nuke/guide/usa/doctrine/dod/jp3_12 
_1.pdf. In the January 2002 Nuclear Posture Review Report, the administration called 
for developing a broad array of capabilities in order to credibly deter “potential ad-
versaries who have access to modern military technology including NBC weapons 
and the means to deliver them over long distances . . . US nuclear forces still require 
the capability to hold at risk a wide range of target types.” “Nuclear Posture Review 
Report,” Excerpts, January 8, 2002, 2, 3, http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/library/
policy/dod/npr.htm.
95.  Federal News Service, “Hearing of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee,” 
March 28, 1996:121.
96.  Quoted in http://www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/negsec; see also Amy F. 
Woolf, “U.S. Nuclear Weapons: Changes in Policy and Force Structure,” Library of 
Congress, Congressional News Service Report for Congress, January 13, 2005. Harold 
Smith, an assistant to Perry, clarified to reporters that as the United States lacked the 
conventional capability to destroy Libya’s buried facilities, the B61‑11 bunker-buster 
nuclear bomb would be the “weapon of choice” should the United States decide to 
strike at Libya. Art Pine, “Only A‑Bomb Could Destroy Libya Plant, Scientist Says,” 
Los Angeles Times, April 24, 1996:A7.
97.  William M. Arkin, “Those Lovable Little Bombs,” Bulletin of the Atomic Sci-
entists 49, no. 6 (July 1993): 23.
98.  Craig Cerniello, “Clinton Issues New guidelines on Nuclear Weapons Doc-
trine,” Arms Control Today 27, no. 8 (November/December 1997): 23, http://www 
.armscontrol.org/ act/1997_11-12/pdd.asp?print.
99.  R. Jeffrey Smith, “Clinton Directive Changes Strategy on Nuclear Arms,” 
Washington Post, December 7, 1997:A1; see also Kristensen, “Nuclear Futures,” 7.
100.  Quoted in Wade Boese, “Germany Raises No-First Use Issue at NATO Meet-
ing,” Arms Control Today 28, no. 8 (November/December 1998): 24.
101.  Scott A. Silverstone, “The Preventive War Taboo vs. the Anti-Proliferation 
Imperative: Contested Norms and Strategic Responses to Nuclear Proliferation” (pa-
per presented at the Annual Convention of the International Studies Association, San 
Diego, March 22, 2006): 4.
244  Notes to chapter 4

102.  Leon V. Sigal, Disarming Strangers: Nuclear Diplomacy with North Korea 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998), 75–77.
103.  Silverstone, “Preventive War Taboo,” 34.
104.  NBC News, Meet the Press, 3 April 1994, transcript, 7–8, cited in Payne, De-
terrence, 139.
105.  “Statement of Secretary of State Christopher Regarding a Declaration by the 
President of the United States on Security Assurances for Non-nuclear Weapon States 
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons,” United Nations 
Security Council A/50/153, 5/1995/263, April 5, 1995.
106.  Arms Control Association, “U.S. Nuclear Policy: Negative Security Assur-
ances,” March 2002, www.armscontrol.org/factsheets/negsec.asp.
Chapter 5: Russia, Britain, France, China, and the Tradition
1.  This does not mean that the Soviet Union was entirely passive in its nuclear be-
havior vis-à-vis nuclear powers. Soviet attempts at compellence are visible at the Suez 
Crisis in 1956, the Berlin Blockade in 1961, the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962, and the 
Ussuri River border conflict with China in 1969. In addition, in the Middle East, the 
Soviets raised the nuclear threat to a higher level after a similar move by the United 
States in 1973.
2.  See “Statement by the Soviet Representative on the Security Council (Gromyko) 
Concerning the Report of the Atomic Energy Commission, March 5, 1947,” reprinted 
in International Organization 1, no. 2 (June 1947): 395–409.
3.  On the Plan, see Adam Rapacki, “The Polish Plan for a Nuclear-Free Zone Today,” 
International Affairs 39, no. 1 (January 1963): 1–12.
4.  George Quester, The Politics of Nuclear Proliferation (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1973), 33–55.
5.  Lawrence S. Wittner, The Struggle Against the Bomb, vol. 2, Resisting the Bomb 
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1997), 345; Günter Wernicke, “The Communist-
Led World Peace Council and the Western Peace Movements: The Fetters of Bipo-
larity and Some Attempts to Break Them in the Fifties and Early Sixties,” Peace & 
Change 23, no. 3 (1998): 265–311.
6.  Cited in David Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb (New Haven, CT: Yale Univer-
sity Press, 1994), 161–62. For the proposal, see USSR Proposes Disarmament (Moscow: 
Progress Publishers, 1986), 106–107.
7.  For these, see USSR Proposes Disarmament, 113–45.
8.  Peter R. Beckman, Larry Campbell, and Paul W. Crumlish, The Nuclear Pre-
dicament, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992); Holloway, Stalin and 
the Bomb, 271–72.
9.  Holloway, Stalin and the Bomb, 271–72. See also Vladislav M. Zubok, “Stalin and 
the Nuclear Age,” in John Lewis Gaddis et al., eds., Cold War Statesmen Confront the 
Bomb: Nuclear Diplomacy Since 1945 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 39–61.
Notes to Chapter 5  245

10.  Gerard J. DeGroot, The Bomb: A Life (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2005), 133.
11.  Pravda, October 6, 1951, cited in Nikolai Sokov, “Russia’s Approach to Nuclear 
Weapons,” Washington Quarterly 20, no. 3 (Summer 1997): 112.
12.  Fritz W. Ermarth, “Contrast in American and Soviet Strategic Thought,” 
in Soviet Military Thinking, ed. Derek Leebaert (London: George Allen & Unwin, 
1981), 57. Some scholars believe that Soviet statements on war winning were meant to 
sustain the morale of the troops and that Moscow had accepted mutual deterrence by 
early 1970s. Raymond Garthoff, “Mutual Deterrence and Strategic Arms Limitation 
in Soviet Policy,” International Security 3, no. 1 (Summer 1978): 112–47. For an oppo-
site view see Richard Pipes, “Why the Soviet Union Thinks it Could Fight and Win a 
Nuclear War,” Commentary 64, no. 1 (July 1977): 21–34.
13.  Sokov, “Russia’s Approach,” 107.
14.  Beckman, Campbell, and Crumlish, Nuclear Predicament; Robbin F. Laird 
and Dale R. Herspring, The Soviet Union and Strategic Arms (Boulder, CO: Westview 
Press, 1984), 13. 
15.  Beckman, Campbell, and Crumlish, Nuclear Predicament, 131.
16.  Ibid., 132; See also Andrei A. Kokoshin, Soviet Strategic Thought, 1917–91 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998), ch. 2; Vladislav M. Zubok and Hope M. Harrison, 
“The Nuclear Education of Nikita Khrushchev,” in Gaddis et al., Cold War Statesmen, 
141–68.
17.  Zubok and Harrison, “Nuclear Education,” 148.
18.  Quoted in Mohammed Heikal, The Sphinx and the Commissar: The Rise and 
Fall of Soviet Inἀuence in the Arab World (London: Collins, 1978), 129.
19.  Beckman, Campbell, and Crumish, Nuclear Predicament, 131.
20.  Nikita Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers, trans. and ed. Strobe Talbott 
(Boston: Little, Brown, 1970), 518.
21.  Cited in Wittner, Resisting the Bomb, 171.
22.  Ibid.
23.  Christer Jonsson, Soviet Bargaining Behavior: The Nuclear Test Ban Case (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1979), 126.
24.  Benjamin S. Lambeth, “Nuclear Proliferation and Soviet Arms Control Policy,” 
Orbis 14, no. 2 (Summer 1970): 309–11. See also Lorenz M. Luthi, The Sino-Soviet Split 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008).
25.  Raymond L. Garthoff, “Berlin 1961: The Record Corrected,” Foreign Policy no. 84 
(Autumn 1991): 142–56; Hannes Adomeit, Soviet Risk Taking and Crisis Behaviour: A 
Theoretical and Empirical Analysis (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1982), 240–41.
26.  Don Munton and David A. Welch, The Cuban Missile Crisis: A Concise History 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2007), 30.
27.  Zubok and Harrison, “Nuclear Education,” 158–60.
28.  Beckman, Campbell, and Crumlish, Nuclear Predicament, 135–36.
246  Notes to chapter 5

29.  Vojtech Mastny and Malcolm Byrne, eds., A Cardboard Castle? An Inside His-
tory of the Warsaw Pact, 1955–1991 (Budapest: Central European University Press, 
2005).
30.  On the Kosygin Plan, see Mohamed I. Shaker, The Nuclear Nonproliferation 
Treaty: Origins and Implementation 1959–1979, vol. 2 (London: Oceana Publications, 
1980): ch. 8.
31.  USSR Proposes Disarmament, 229. Although the Soviet policy toward the 
nonnuclear states was one of no first use, on two occasions it raised the nuclear alert 
vis-à-vis nuclear states. The first one was in 1969 during the Ussuri River crisis in-
volving China and the second was in 1973 during the Middle East war, in support of 
Egypt. For these, see Elizabeth Wishnick, Mending Fences: The Evolution of Moscow’s 
China Policy from Brezhnev to Yeltsin (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2001); 
Barry M. Blechman and Douglas M. Hart, “The Political Utility of Nuclear Weapons: 
The 1973 Middle East Crisis,” International Security 7, no. 1 (Summer 1982): 132–56.
32.  USSR Proposes Disarmament, 247.
33.  Matthew Evangelista, “Sources of Moderation in Soviet Policy,” in Philip E. 
Tetlock et al., eds., Behavior, Society and Nuclear War, vol. 2 (Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1991), 307–08. For contradictions in the no-first-use policy, see John Van 
Oudenaren, “Deterrence, War-fighting and Soviet Military Doctrine” (Adelphi Paper 
no. 210, London, International Institute for Strategic Studies, Summer 1986), 11.
34.  Evangelista, “Sources of Moderation,” 306–07. 
35.  William Maley, The Afghanistan Wars (New York: Palgrave-Macmillan, 2002), 
61; on the Soviet intervention, see Anthony Arnold, Afghanistan: The Soviet Invasion 
in Perspective (Stanford: Hoover Institution Press, 1981).
36.  Cited in Maley, Afghanistan Wars, 61.
37.  Henry S. Bradsher, Afghanistan and the Soviet Union (Durham, NC: Duke Uni-
versity Press, 1985), 284. See also Anthony H. Cordesman and Abraham R. Wagner, 
The Lessons of Modern War, vol. 3, The Afghanistan and Falklands Conἀicts (Boulder, 
CO: Westview Press, 1990).
38.  On this, see Bradsher, Afghanistan and the Soviet Union, ch. 7.
39.  Gorbachev told the French Parliament in October 1985 that there would be 
“no victors in a nuclear war,” and that during the twenty-first century the world 
should achieve “life without fear of universal death.” Quoted in Lawrence S. Wittner,  
“Gorbachev Wages the Good Fight against WMDs” (Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, Oc-
tober 1, 2004), http://www.wagingpeace.org/articles/2004/10/01_wittner_gorbachev 
-wages-good-fight.htm.
40.  Beckman, Campbell, and Crumlish, Nuclear Predicament, 145.
41.  Vladislav M. Zubok, “Gorbachev’s Nuclear Learning,” Boston Review, April–
May 2000, http://bostonreview.net/BR25.2/zubok.html. Gorbachev told the Politburo 
on July 3, 1986: “For thirty years you scientists, specialists and ministers have been 
telling us that everything was safe. And you think that we will look on you as gods. 
Notes to Chapter 5  247

But now we have ended up with a fiasco . . . Chernobyl made me and my colleagues 
rethink a great many things.” He became convinced that “we had to move perestroika 
forward.” Mikhail Gorbachev, Memoirs (New York: Doubleday, 1995), 191, 193. For 
Gorbachev and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, the cover-up convinced the leader-
ship of the need for more reforms, “the opposite of what the hardliners had hoped for.” 
Robert D. English, “The Road(s) Not Taken: Causality and Contingency in Analysis 
of the Cold War’s End,” in Cold War Endgame, ed. William C. Wohlforth (University 
Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2003), 261. See also Robert D. English, Rus-
sia and the Idea of the West (New York: Columbia University Press, 2000).
42.  On how Gorbachev approached nuclear weapons, see Zubok, “Gorbachev’s 
Nuclear Learning.” Gorbachev is said to have developed a moral revulsion to nuclear 
weapons after he realized that detonation of one tenth of the existing nuclear weap-
ons could result in a nuclear winter and that he would have to sign the decision to 
use nuclear weapons in a crisis situation. Ibid., 2. Those who influenced Gorbach-
ev’s thinking included Western arms control organizations such as the Federation 
of American Scientists, International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War, 
and the National Resources Defense Council. English, “The Road(s) Not Taken,” 259. 
See also Anatoly S. Chernyaev, My Six Years with Gorbachev, trans. and ed. Robert D. 
English and Elizabeth Tucker (University Park: The Pennsylvania University Press, 
2000), 45–47.
43.  On these, see Matthew Evangelista, “Turning Points in Arms Control,” in 
Ending the Cold War, ed. Richard K. Hermann and Richard Ned Lebow (New York: 
Palgrave-Macmillan, 2004), 83–105.
44.  Izvestia, November 18, 1993, quoted in Nikolai Sokov, “Russia’s Approach,” 
113–14. See also Serge Schmemann, “Russia Drops Pledge of No First Use of Atom 
Arms,” New York Times, November 4, 1993:A8.
45.  See George Bunn and Roland M. Timerbaev, “Security Assurances to Non-
Nuclear Weapon States,” The Nonproliferation Review 1, no. 1 (Fall 1993): 15.
46.  “Appendix A: Russian Federation Military Doctrine,” in Alexei Arbatov, “The 
Transformation of Russian Military Doctrine: Lessons Learned from Kosovo and 
Chechnya” (The Marshall Center Papers no. 2, July 2000), http://www.marshallcenter 
.org/site-graphic/lang-en/page-pubs-index-1/static/xdocs/coll/static/mcpapers/ 
mc-paper_2-en.pdf.
47.  Rose Gottemoeller, “Nuclear Necessity in Putin’s Russia,” Arms Control Today 
34, no. 3 (April 2004), http://www.armscontrol.org/act/2004_04/Gottemoeller.asp.
48.  Nikolai Sokov, “An Assessment of the Draft Russian Military Doctrine” (Nu-
clear Threat Initiative, revised ed., July 2004), http://www.nti.org/db/nisprofs/over/
doctrine.htm.
49.  On this, see Arbatov, “Transformation of Russian Military Doctrine.”
50.  Cited in Dimitri Trenin, “Russia’s Nuclear Policy in the 21st Century Envi-
ronment,” (Paris, Institut français des relations internationales, Autumn 2005): 13.
248  Notes to chapter 5

51.  Yuri Fedorov, “Russia’s Doctrine on the Use of Nuclear Weapons,” (working 
paper, Columbia International Affairs Online, November 2002), http://www.ciaonet 
.org/wps/fey02.
52.  Alexei Arbatov, “Russian Military Doctrine and Strategic Nuclear Forces to 
the Year 2000 and Beyond” (paper prepared for the conference “Russian Defense Pol-
icy Towards the Year 2000,” Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, March 26–27, 
1997), http://fas.org/nuke/guide/russia/doctrine/arbatov.htm.
53.  Trenin, “Russia’s Nuclear Policy,” 13.
54.  Vladimir Isachenkov, “U.S. Decision to Develop Nuclear Bunker-buster Irks 
Moscow,” The Gazette (Montreal), November 27, 2003:A22.
55.  Quoted in Gulf News, February 12, 2004.
56.  David S. Yost, “Russia’s Non-strategic Nuclear Forces,” International Affairs 
77, no. 3 (2001): 531–51. Russia is believed to hold about twenty thousand nonstrategic 
or substrategic tactical weapons, while the United States has about fifteen hundred 
and several thousand in storage, including one hundred fifty B61 warheads stored in 
five NATO countries. These “sub-strategic nuclear weapons traditionally have been 
deemed the most dangerous and most destabilizing due to their portability, proximity 
to zones of conflict, lack of strong permissive action links, dangers of pre-delegation, 
and the risk of early, preemptive or accidental use.” Tariq Rauf, “Towards Nuclear 
Disarmament: What Next for the NPT?” Disarmament Forum no. 1 (2000): 44.
57.  Russia, however, fears that new member states would become eligible for 
NATO’s nuclear protection despite NATO’s declarations to the effect that it has no in-
tention to deploy nuclear weapons in the new member states closer to Russia. The lack 
of a legally binding commitment has been part of the Russian concern in this regard. 
Martin Butcher, Otfried Nassauer, and Stephen Young, “Nuclear Futures: Western Eu-
ropean Options for Nuclear Risk Reduction,” (BASIC Research Report 98.6, Decem-
ber 1998), ch. 5, http://www.basicint.org/pubs/Research/1998nuclearfutures6.htm.
58.  DeGroot, The Bomb, 217–18.
59.  Margaret Gowing, Independence and Deterrence: Britain and Atomic Energy, 
1945–1952 (London: Macmillan, 1974), 240–72.
60.  “Memorandum from Richard C. Breithut (special assistant to the Secretary of 
State) to British Representative Robert Murphy,” Washington, Department of State, 
May 8, 1958.
61.  “Record of a Meeting of the Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary with the 
French Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs” London, December 2, 1950, 
Documents on British Policy Overseas, ser. 2 vol. 4, Korea June 1950–April 1951, 232.
62.  Bruce Cumings, The Origins of the Korean War, vol. 2, The Roaring of the Cat-
aract, 1947–1950 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990), 749. 
63.  Rebecca Johnson, “British Perspectives on the Future of Nuclear Weapons” 
(Washington, DC: Henry L. Stimson Center Occasional Paper no. 37, January 1998): 7.
Notes to Chapter 5  249

64.  Cited in Susanna Schrafstetter and Stephen Twigge, Avoiding Armageddon: 
Europe, the United States and the Struggle for Nuclear Non-Proliferation, 1945–1970 
(Westport, CT: Praeger, 2004), 24.
65.  Jonathan Rosenberg, “Before the Bomb and After: Winston Churchill and the 
Use of Force,” in Gaddis et al., Cold War Statesmen, 171–93.
66.  In the aftermath of the Bravo test, Churchill reversed his position, arguing 
that just a few hydrogen bomb explosions could make the British Islands uninhabit-
able. John Lewis Gaddis, The Cold War: A New History (New York: The Penguin Press, 
2005), 65.
67.  Wittner, Resisting the Bomb, 162–63.
68.  Schrafstetter and Twigge, Avoiding Armageddon, 196.
69.  Alistair Horne, Macmillan, vol. 2, 1957–1986 (New York: Viking USA), 325, 
cited in Scrafstetter and Twigge, Avoiding Armageddon, 204. 
70.  Douglas Holdstock and Frank Barnaby, The British Nuclear Weapons Pro-
gramme, 1952–2002 (London: Frank Cass, 2003), 15.
71.  John Baylis and Kristan Stoddart, “Britain and the Chevaline Project: The Hid-
den Nuclear Programme, 1967–82,” Journal of Strategic Studies 26, no.4 (2003): 124–55.
72.  For a discussion of the nuclear dimension, see Lawrence Freedman, The Official 
History of the Falklands Campaign, vol. 2: War and Diplomacy (London: Routledge, 
2005), 57–62.
73.  The revelations were published by Magoudi in his book, Rendez-vous: The 
Psychoanalysis of Mitterrand, excerpts of which were published in the Sunday Times. 
Mitterrand adds: “You can’t win a struggle against the insular syndrome of an un-
bridled Englishwoman. To provoke a nuclear war for small islands inhabited by three 
sheep who are as hairy as they are frozen! Fortunately I yielded to her. Otherwise, I as-
sure you, the metallic index finger of the lady would press the button.” Quoted in John 
Follain, “The Sphinx and the Curious Case of the Iron Lady’s H-bomb,” The Sunday 
Times (London), November 20, 2005, http://www.margaretthatcher.org/commentary/
displaydocument.asp?docid=110663.
74.  “London Declaration on a Transformed North Atlantic Alliance,” reprinted 
in Survival 32, no. 5 (September/October 1990): 469–70.
75.  Johnson, “British Perspectives,” 23.
76.  Peter M. Jones and Gordon Reece, British Public Attitudes to Nuclear Defence 
(Houndsmills, UK: Macmillan, 1990), 1.
77.  Sheila Gunn, “Hurd Sets Rule for Tactical Weapons,” The Times, London, 
January 17, 1991.
78.  Malcolm Chalmers, “Bombs Away? Britain and Nuclear Weapons under New 
Labour,” Security Dialogue 30, no. 1 (1999): 61–74.
79.  Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom), “The Strategic Defence Review” 
(Cm3999, The Stationery Office, July 1998): para. 63.
250  Notes to chapter 5

80.  Michael Clarke, “How Strategic Was the Review?” Disarmament Diplomacy 
no. 28 (July 1998): 3.
81.  BBC News Online, “UK ‘Prepared to Use Nuclear Weapons,’ ” March 20, 2002, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/politics/1883258.stm; Michael Evans and Da-
vid Brown, “Britain’s Nuclear Warning to Saddam,” The Times (London), March 21, 
2002. 
82.  BBC News Online, “UK Restates Nuclear Threat,” February 2, 2003, http://
news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/uk_news/politics/2717939.stm.
83.  In December 2006, the Blair government announced plans to replace cur-
rent Vanguard (Trident) submarines and cut warheads by 20 percent to around one 
hundred sixty in twenty years. Nuclear Threat Initiative Global Security Newswire, 
December 4, 2006.
84.  Ironically, the British possession of nuclear weapons had no effect on its per-
formance in the Suez War where it fought along with France and Israel against Egypt. 
Alfred Grosser, French Foreign Policy under De Gaulle (Boston: Little Brown, 1965), 
100, 103. On the history of the French nuclear program, see Philip Gordon, A Certain 
Idea of France: French Security Policy and the Gaullist Legacy (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1993). 
85.  Pierre Gallois, The Balance of Terror: Strategy for the Nuclear Age (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1961), ch. 3.
86.  Camille Grand, “A French Nuclear Exception?” (Washington DC: Henry L. 
Stimson Center Occasional Paper no. 38, January 1998): 9. See also Carey Sublette, 
“France’s Nuclear Weapons: Origin of the Force de Frappe” (Nuclear Weapon Ar-
chive, May 2001), nuclearweaponarchive.org/France/FranceOrigin.html.
87.  Anand Menon, “Explaining Defence Policy: The Mitterrand Years,” Review of 
International Studies 21, no. 3 (July 1995): 285.
88.  Rebecca Grant, “Dien Bien Phu,” Air Force Magazine Online 87, no. 8 (August 
2004): 14–15. See also Chapter 3 for more details of this incident.
89.  George C. Herring and Richard H. Immerman, “Eisenhower, Dulles and Dien-
bienphu: ‘The Day We Didn’t Go to War’ Revisited,” The Journal of American History 71, 
no. 2 (September 1984): 343–63.
90.  Sublette, “France’s Nuclear Weapons.” 
91.  On the Algerian war of independence and the army insurrection, see Matthew 
Connelly, A Diplomatic Revolution (New York: Oxford University Press, 2002), 237–41.
92.  David S. Yost, “Nuclear Weapons Issues in France.” In Strategic Views from the 
Second Tier: The Nuclear Weapons Policies of France, Britain and China, ed. John C. 
Hopkins and Weixing Hu (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1995), 48–49.
93.  Grand, “French Nuclear Exception,” 11, 15.
94.  Cited in Bruno Tertrais, “Nuclear Policy: France Stands Alone,” Bulletin of 
the Atomic Scientists 60, no. 4 (July/August 2004): 51.
Notes to Chapter 5  251

95.  Letter dated April 6, 1995, to the UN Secretary General, cited in Grand, 
“French Nuclear Exception,” 28.
96.  David S. Yost, “France’s Nuclear Dilemmas,” Foreign Affairs 75, no. 1 (January/ 
February 1996): 115.
97.  Cited in Ibid.
98.  Yost, “France’s Nuclear Dilemmas,” 115.
99.  Grand, “French Nuclear Exception,” 29.
100.  Adam Sage, “Chirac Sets New Terms for Nuclear Weapon Use,” The Times 
(London), October 28, 2003: 13.
101.  John Lichfield, “Chirac Threatens Nuclear Attack on States Sponsoring Ter­
rorism,” The Independent, online ed., January 20, 2006, http://news.independent.co.uk/ 
europe/article339823.ece. Chirac’s successor, Nicolas Sarkozy, announced in March 
2008 that France would reduce its nuclear forces to three hundred warheads from 
double that size during the Cold War era, calling its deterrence a “life insurance pol-
icy” and declaring that the weapons are not “targeted at anybody.” BBC News Online, 
“France to Reduce Nuclear Warheads,” March 21, 2008, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
europe/7308563.stm.
102.  “Chirac’s Atomic Bombshell,” editorial, The Guardian, January 21, 2006:32. 
France has about three hundred fifty nuclear warheads, and their maintenance costs 
3.5 million Euros, or nearly 10 percent of the defense budget per year. Kim Rahir, 
“France Has Nuclear Retaliation Option,” Der Spiegel, January 19, 2006.
103.  Pascal Boniface, “The Future of the French Nuclear Posture,” Strategic Analy­
sis 23, no. 8 (November 1999), http://www.ciaonet.org/olj/sa/sa_99bop01.html. See 
also Pascal Boniface, “France and the Dubious Charms of a Post-Nuclear World,” in 
Pondering NATO’s Nuclear Options, ed. David G. Haglund (Kingston, ON: Queen’s 
Quarterly, 1999), 151–62.
104.  Admiral Marcel Duval, “De la non-proliferation à la contre-proliferation?” 
Défense Nationale (August–September 1995): 37, 39, quoted in David S. Yost, “New 
Approaches to Deterrence in Britain, France, and the United States,” International 
Affairs 81, no. 1 (January 2005): 106.
105.  “Statement of the Government of the People’s Republic of China, October 16, 
1964,” People’s Daily, October 17, 1964, cited in Pan Zhenqiang, “On China’s No First 
Use of Nuclear Weapons” (paper presented at Pugwash Meeting 279, London, No-
vember 15–17, 2002), http://www.pugwash.org/reports/nw/zhenqiang.htm.
106.  Zhenqiang, “China’s No First Use.”
107.  Ibid.
108.  People’s Daily, November 25, 1971, cited in Zhenqiang, “China’s No First Use.”
109.  “China and the World (2),” Beijing Review Foreign Affairs Series, 1982, 20, 
cited in Zhenqiang, “China’s No First Use.”
252  Notes to chapter 5

110.  China’s National Defense in 2002 (Beijing, December 2002), http://www.china 
.org.cn/e-white/20021209/VII.htm.
111.  Cited in Allen S. Whiting, China Crosses the Yalu: The Decision to Enter the 
Korean War (New York: Macmillan, 1960), 135.
112.  On the Maoist approach, see Shu Guang Zhang, “Between ‘Paper’ and ‘Real 
Tigers’: Mao’s View of Nuclear Weapons,” in Gaddis et al., Cold War Statesmen, 
194–215.
113.  Mark A. Ryan, Chinese Attitudes toward Nuclear Weapons (Armonk: M. E. 
Sharpe, 1989), 40.
114.  On this, see John Wilson Lewis and Xue Litai, China Builds the Bomb (Stan-
ford: Stanford University Press, 1988), 24–34. At an April 1956 meeting, Mao argued 
that China would develop nuclear weapons and missiles to avoid being bullied by oth-
ers. Zhang, “Between ‘Paper’ and ‘Real Tigers,’ ” 205.
115.  See Gordon H. Chang, “To the Nuclear Brink: Eisenhower, Dulles, and the 
Quemoy-Matsu Crisis,” International Security 12, no. 4 (Spring 1988): 96–123.
116.  Alastair Iain Johnston, “Prospects for Chinese Nuclear Force Moderniza-
tion: Limited Deterrence Versus Multilateral Arms Control,” The China Quarterly 
no. 146 (June 1996): 552. 
117.  Savita Pande, “Chinese Nuclear Doctrine,” Strategic Analysis 23, no. 12 
(March 2000): 4.
118.  Cited in Alastair Iain Johnston, “China’s New ‘Old Thinking’: The Concept 
of Limited Deterrence,” International Security 20, no. 3 (Winter 1995–96): 18.
119.  “China’s Nuclear Doctrine,” (Center for Nonproliferation Studies, Monterey, 
December 1998), cns.miis.edu/research/china/coxrep/doctrine.htm. See also Litai 
Xue, “Evolution of China’s Nuclear Strategy,” in John C. Hopkins and Weixing Hu, 
Strategic Views from the Second Tier: The Nuclear Weapons Policies of France, Britain 
and China (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1995), 167–89.
120.  Johnston, “China’s New ‘Old Thinking,’ ” 18.
121.  Cited in Ibid., 19.
122.  Zhen Huang, “Whither China’s Strategic Nuclear Posture? An Assessment of 
Existing Constraints and Prospects,” Political Science 53, no. 2 (December 2001): 42; 
Johnston, “China’s New ‘Old Thinking.’ ”
123.  Brad Roberts, Robert A. Manning, and Ronald N. Montaperto, “China: The 
Forgotten Nuclear Power,” Foreign Affairs, 79, no. 4 (July/August 2000): 55. 
124.  Joanne Tompkins, “How U.S. Strategic Policy is Changing China’s Nuclear 
Plans,” Arms Control Today 33, no. 1 (January/February 2003), http://www.armscontrol 
.org/act/2003_01-02/tompkins_janfeb03.asp.
125.  Allen S. Whiting, “China’s Use of Force, 1950–96, and Taiwan,” International 
Security 26, no. 2 (Fall 2001): 120.
Notes to Chapter 5  253

126.  Chris Buckley, “Beijing Leaders Speak of Force to Keep Taiwan ‘Chinese,’ ” 
New York Times, March 8, 2005.
127.  Tai Ming Cheung, “New Bomb Makers,” Far Eastern Economic Review 
(March 16, 1989): 27. See also Swaran Singh, “China’s Nuclear Weapons and Doctrine,” 
in Nuclear India, ed. Jasjit Singh (New Delhi: Knowledge World, July 1998), 152.
128.  Joseph Kahn, “Chinese General Threatens Use of A-bombs if U.S. Intrudes,” 
New York Times, July 15, 2005.
129.  Some Chinese strategists believe that China should abandon its no-first-use 
pledge in the face of major conventional attacks on its key cities such as Beijing and 
Shanghai and against major command and control centers. However, these arguments 
are yet to become dominant in the military’s thinking. Joanne Tompkins, “Influences 
on Chinese Nuclear Planning” (Washington, DC: Henry L. Stimson Center Fellow-
ship in PRC Report, Summer 2002), 18.
130.  There is dispute as to whether these missiles—numbering between one hun-
dred sixty and two hundred deployed by the mid-1990s—have conventional or nu-
clear warheads. Roberts, Manning, and Montaperto, “China: The Forgotten Nuclear 
Power,” 56. 
131.  “China Says It Will Not Use Nuclear Weapons against Taiwan,” New York 
Times, September 3, 1999:A3.
132.  On this, see T. V. Paul, “Chinese/Pakistani Nuclear/Missile Ties and Balance 
of Power Politics,” The Nonproliferation Review 10, no. 2 (Summer 2003): 1–9. 
133.  See Jeffrey Lewis, “The Ambiguous Arsenal,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 
61, no. 3 (May/June 2005): 52–59.
134.  On these, see Zhang Ming, China’s Changing Nuclear Posture (Washington, 
DC: Brookings Institution Press, 1999), 4.
135.  On the suspected missile bases and targets, see Robert S. Norris and Hans M. 
Kristensen, “Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2003,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 59, no. 6 
(November/December 2003): 77–80.
136.  Ibid; Ming, China’s Changing Nuclear Posture, 45. See also Praveen Swami, 
“A Hawkish Line on China,” Frontline, May 23, 1998.
137.  For this, see “Statement by Qian Qichen, Vice Premier and Foreign Minister, 
at the 49th Session of the UN General Assembly,” September 28, 1994, reprinted in 
Beijing Review 37, no. 41 (October 10–16, 1994).
138.  For a restatement of Chinese commitment, see Zhang 'Van, “Statement by 
Zhang 'Van, Head of the Chinese Delegation in the General Debate at the 2005 NPT  
Review Conference” (New York, May 3, 2005), www.un.org/events/npt2005/statements/ 
npt03china.pdf 
139.  Abandoning no first use “would require an immense buildup of Chinese nu-
clear forces in order to reach parity with the US, something China could not afford to 
do.” Tompkins, “Influences on Chinese Nuclear Planning,” 7.
254  Notes to chapter 5

Chapter 6: The Second-Generation Nuclear States
1.  “North Korea—Denuclearization Action Plan” (U.S. Department of State, Feb-
ruary 13, 2007), http://www.state.gov/r/pa/prs/ps/2007/february/80479.htm.
2.  The most recent figures are from The Military Balance 2007 (London: Inter­
national Institute for Strategic Studies, 2007), 228; for a comparison with the size of other 
nuclear forces, see ibid., 111, 148, 195, 346, 315. See also BBC News Online, “Israel May 
Have 200 Nuclear Weapons,” June 2, 2003, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/Li/World/middle_ 
east/892941.stm; Joseph Cirincioni, Jon. B. Wolfstal, and Miriam Rajkumar, Deadly 
Arsenals (Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2002), 221.
3.  The Israeli nuclear ambiguity is characterized by the absence of a nuclear doc-
trine and operational military doctrine, and ambiguity regarding the size and uses of 
actual nuclear capability. On this policy, see Yair Evron, “Opaque Proliferation: The 
Israeli Case,” in Opaque Nuclear Proliferation, ed. Benjamin Frankel (London: Frank 
Cass, 1991), 52. 
4.  On this, see Shai Feldman, Nuclear Weapons and Arms Control in the Middle 
East (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997), 98–99.
5.  Avner Cohen, “The Last Taboo: Israel’s Bomb Revisited,” Current History, 
April 2005: 169–75.
6.  Greg Myre, “In a Slip, Israel’s Leader Appears to Confirm its Nuclear Arsenal,” 
New York Times, December 12, 2006.
7.  In the same breath, they also say Israel will not be the second to introduce 
nuclear weapons either. Yigal Allon, Jewish Observer, December 24, 1964, quoted in 
Ernest W. Lefever, Nuclear Arms in the Third World (Washington, DC: The Brookings 
Institution, 1979), 67.
8.  In July 2000, Israel reportedly began developing a sea-based deterrent based on 
the Dolphin class submarines it has purchased from Germany. “Today it is believed 
that Israel is on its way toward restructuring its nuclear forces into a triad form—with 
potential delivery by aircraft, missile or submarine—assuring the capability to retali-
ate if hit first with WMDs.” Cohen, “The Last Taboo,” 173.
9.  For the history of the Israeli nuclear program, see Michael Karpin, The Bomb in 
the Basement: How Israel Went Nuclear and What that Means for the World (New York: 
Simon & Schuster, 2006).
10.  Cohen, “The Last Taboo,” 171.
11.  Avner Cohen, “Crossing the Threshold: The Untold Nuclear Dimension of the 
1967 Arab-Israeli War and its Contemporary Lessons,” Arms Control Today 37, no. 5 
(June 2007): 15.
12.  Avner Cohen, “Nuclear Arms in Crisis under Secrecy: Israel and the Lessons 
of the 1967 and 1973 Wars,” in Planning the Unthinkable, ed. Peter R. Lavoy, Scott D. 
Sagan, and James J. Wirtz (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2000), 109, 113.
Notes to Chapter 6  255

13.  Karpin, Bomb in the Basement, 268.
14.  Avner Cohen, Israel and the Bomb (New York: Columbia University Press, 
1998), 237.
15.  Ibid., 275–76.
16.  Seymour M. Hersh, The Samson Option: Israel’s Nuclear Arsenal and American 
Foreign Policy (New York: Random House, 1991), 225–26.
17.  Ibid., 227. Hersh’s account has been challenged by Shimon Peres, who con-
firmed that Dayan conducted an operational test of Jericho missiles, but they were not 
made ready or armed. Quoted in Cohen, “Nuclear Arms in Crisis Under Secrecy,” 117.
18.  Richard Sale, “Yom Kippur: Israel’s 1973 Nuclear Alert,” Washington Times, 
September 16, 2002.
19.  Avner Cohen, “The Last Nuclear Moment,” New York Times, October 6,  
2003: A17.
20.  Karpin, Bomb in the Basement, 324.
21.  The reference is to the destruction of the first two temples in Jerusalem by oc-
cupying forces—the Babylonians in the sixth century BC and the Romans in the first 
century AD.
22.  David A. Welch, “The Politics and Psychology of Restraint: Israeli Decision-
making in the Gulf, in Choosing to Cooperate: How States Avoid Loss, ed. Janice Gross 
Stein and Louis W. Pauly (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1993), 149.
23.  Me’ir Stiglitz, “Not to Violate the Nuclear Taboo,” Commentary, Yedi’ot 
Aharonot, August 25, 2002:5.
24.  Asher Arian, “Israeli Public Opinion on National Security, 1998” (Memoran-
dum no. 49, Tel Aviv, Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies, July 1998), http://www.tau 
.ac.il/jcss/memoranda/memo49chp5.html.
25.  Cited in Warner D. Farr, “The Third Temple’s Holy of Holies: Israel’s Nuclear 
Weapons” (The Counter Proliferation Papers, Future Warfare Series No. 2, Maxwell 
Air Force Base, Alabama, September 1999): 18–19.
26.  Scott D. Sagan, “The Commitment Trap: Why the United States Should Not 
Use Nuclear Threats to Deter Biological and Chemical Weapons Attacks,” Inter­national 
Security 24, no. 4 (Spring 2000): 85–115.
27.  On the development of India’s nuclear program, see George Perkovich, India’s 
Nuclear Bomb: The Impact on Global Proliferation (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1990); Itty Abraham, The Making of the Indian Atomic Bomb (London: Zed Books, 
1998). For the view of a participant in the long march toward nuclear acquisition, see 
K. Subrahmanyam, “Indian Nuclear Policy, 1964–98: A Personal Recollection,” in Nu-
clear India, ed. Jasjit Singh (New Delhi: Knowledge World, July 1998), 26–53. See also 
T. V. Paul, “The Systemic Bases of India’s Challenge to the Global Nuclear Order,” The 
Nonproliferation Review 6, no. 1 (Fall 1998): 1–11.
256  Notes to chapter 6

28.  On the ambivalence of Nehru’s approach, see Perkovich, India’s Nuclear 
Bomb, 34–37.
29.  Ibid., 134.
30.  Subrahmanyam, “Indian Nuclear Policy,” 31.
31.  Embassy of India, Washington, DC, “Evolution of India’s Nuclear Policy,” 
May 27, 1998, http://www.indianembassy.org/pic/nuclearpolicy.htm.
32.  “Suo Motu Statement by Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee in the Indian 
Parliament,” New Delhi, May 27, 1998:2.
33.  Ashley J. Tellis, India’s Emerging Nuclear Posture (Santa Monica, CA: RAND 
Corporation, 2001), 267.
34.  “Cabinet Committee on Security Reviews Progress in Operationalizing In-
dia’s Nuclear Doctrine” (Press Information Bureau, Government of India, January 4, 
2003), http://pib.nic.in/archive/Ireleng/lyr2003/rjan2003/04012003/r040120033.html.
35.  C. Raja Mohan, “No First Use and India’s Nuclear Transition” (paper pre­sented 
at Pugwash Meeting 279, London, November 15–17, 2002): 5, http://www.pugwash 
.org/reports/nw/rajamohan.htm.
36.  Cited in Ibid, 4.
37.  Ibid.
38.  On this, see T. V. Paul, “The U.S.-India Nuclear Accord: Implications for the 
Non-Proliferation Regime,” International Journal 62, no. 4 (Autumn, 2007): 845–61.
39.  Vishal Thaper, “Scrap Nuclear No-first-use Policy, Advises Security Panel,” 
Hindustan Times, January 10, 2003.
40.  Tellis, India’s Emerging Nuclear Posture, 304.
41.  Organization of Asia-Pacific News Agencies, “No Change in ‘No First Use of 
Nuclear Weapons,’—Fernandes,” February 7, 2003.
42.  Tellis, India’s Emerging Nuclear Posture, 321.
43.  P.R. Chari, “India’s Nuclear Doctrine: Confused Ambitions,” The Nonprolif-
eration Review 7, no. 3 (Fall/Winter 2000): 132.
44.  Harsh V. Pant, “India’s Nuclear Doctrine and Command Structure: Implica-
tions for India and the World,” Comparative Strategy 24, no.3 (July 2005): 282.
45.  On the dangers of nuclear terrorism in South Asia, see Rajesh M. Basrur, Min-
imum Deterrence and India’s Nuclear Security (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 
2006), ch. 6.
46.  On this, see Subhash Kapila, “India’s New ‘Cold Start’ War Doctrine Strategi-
cally Reviewed” (Paper no. 991, South Asia Analysis Group, May 4, 2004).
47.  Critics point out that the complex regional order could create an escalation 
to nuclear conflict, while if war remains limited it would be a stalemate, not solving 
any of the security problems of the two states. On these and other constraints of the 
limited war option, see Arzan Tarapore, “Holocaust or Hollow Victory: Limited War 
Notes to Chapter 6  257

in Nuclear South Asia” (Research Paper no. 6, Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies, 
New Delhi, February 2005).
48.  Rajesh M. Basrur, “International Relations Theory and Minimum Deterrence,” 
India Review 4, no. 2 (April 2005): 137.
49.  Gurmeet Kanwal, “India’s Nuclear Doctrine and Policy,” Strategic Analysis 26, 
no. 11 (February 2001): 5.
50.  A study contends that the nuclear danger in South Asia is not as frighten-
ing as presented in many Western analyses, largely because India and Pakistan, de-
spite the latter’s first-use policy, treat nuclear weapons as instruments of existential 
deterrence; hence, the probability of nuclear use is extremely limited. See Rajesh  
Rajagopalan, Second Strike: Arguments about Nuclear War in South Asia (New Delhi: 
Penguin-Viking, 2005).
51.  During the Kargil conflict, Pakistan raised the nuclear threat several times, 
in order to make sure India would not escalate the limited war in Kargil to Pakistani-
controlled Kashmir or other parts of its territory. The conflict showed the high risk-
taking propensity of the Pakistani elite, and it disproved a cardinal basis of deterrence 
theory that states with nuclear weapons will not fight each other. Peter R. Lavoy, ed., 
Asymmetric Warfare in South Asia: The Causes and Consequences of the Kargil Con-
ἀict (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming); see also General V.P. 
Malik, Kargil: From Surprise to Victory (New Delhi: HarperCollins, 2006).
52.  On the nuclear dimensions of these crises, see Waheguru Pal Singh Sidhu, 
“India’s Nuclear Use Doctrine,” in Peter R. Lavoy, Scott D. Sagan, and James J. Wirtz, 
eds., Planning the Unthinkable (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2000), 132–145.
53.  Sridhar Krishnaswamy, “N-weapons Not Ruled Out?” The Hindu, October 30, 
2001, http://www.hinduonnet.com/2001/10/30/stories/01300004.htm.
54.  On these problems, see Feroz Hassan Khan, “Command-and-Control Chal-
lenges in New Nuclear States” (paper presented at the Annual Convention of the In-
ternational Studies Association, San Diego, March 23–25, 2006).
55.  On this, see Chaim Braun and Christopher F. Chyba, “Proliferation Rings: 
New Challenges to the Nonproliferation Regime,” International Security 29, no. 2 
(Fall 2004): 5–49.
56.  David Albright, “Al Qaeda’s Nuclear Program: Through the Window of Seized 
Documents” (The Nautilus Institute Policy Forum Online, Special Forum 47, Novem-
ber 6, 2002), http://www.nautilus.org/archives/fora/Special-Policy-Forum/47_Albright 
.html#sect2. See also Kamran Khan and Molly Moore, “2 Nuclear Experts Briefed 
Bin Laden, Pakistanis Say,” Washington Post, December 12, 2001; David Albright and 
Corey Hinderstein, “Unraveling the A. Q. Khan and Future Proliferation Networks,” 
The Washington Quarterly 28, no. 2 (Spring 2005): 111–28.
57.  Samina Ahmed, David Cortright, and Amitabh Mattoo, “Public Opinion and 
Nuclear Options for South Asia,” Asian Survey 38, no. 8 (1998): 737.
258  Notes to chapter 6

58.  Peter R. Lavoy, “Pakistan’s Nuclear Doctrine,” in Prospects for Peace in South 
Asia, ed. Rafiq Dossani and Henry S. Rowen (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 
2005), ch. 11. See also Zafar Iqbal Cheema, “Pakistan’s Nuclear Use Doctrine and Com-
mand and Control,” in Lavoy, Sagan, and Wirtz, Planning the Unthinkable, 158–81.
59.  Sohail Hashmi has identified three viewpoints in the Islamic world on WMD 
which have direct relevance to the Pakistani case. They are Jihadists who believe in 
the acquisition and use of WMD under the right circumstances; WMD terrorists who 
are prepared to use WMD as a first resort; and WMD pacifists who “renounce the 
acquisition and possible use of WMD as contrary to Islamic ethics.” He states, “of 
these three positions, the WMD Jihadists comprise by far the majority of Muslim 
scholars who deal with this issue.” Hashmi, “Islamic Ethics and Weapons of Mass De-
struction,” in Ethics and Weapons of Mass Destruction, ed. Sohail Hashmi and Steven 
P. Lee (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004), 322–23.
60.  Paolo Cotta-Ramusino and Maurizio Martellini, “Nuclear Safety, Nuclear 
Stability and Nuclear Strategy in Pakistan” (report, Landau Network-Centro Volta, 
January 21, 2002): 3, 5–6, http://lxmi.mi.infn.it/~landnet/Doc/pakistan.pdf.
61.  Russell Leng, “Realpolitik and Learning in the India-Pakistan Rivalry,” in The 
India-Pakistan Conἀict: An Enduring Rivalry, ed. T. V. Paul (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2005), 103–30.
62.  Ahmad Faruqui, “Failure in Command: Lessons from Pakistan’s India Wars,” 
Defense Analysis 17, no. 1 (2001): 31–40, cited in Ashley Tellis, C. Christine Fair, and 
Jamison J. Medby, Limited Conἀicts and the Nuclear Umbrella: Indian and Pakistani 
Lessons for the Kargil Crisis (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2002), 81. This 
pattern of decision making was also evident in war decisions in 1965. See T. V. Paul, 
Asymmetric Conἀicts: War Initiation by Weaker Powers (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1994), ch. 6.
63.  On this, see Rajesh Basrur, “Kargil, Terrorism and India’s Strategic Shift,”  
India Review 1, no. 4 (October 2002): 39–56.
Chapter 7: Nonnuclear States, the Tradition, and Limited Wars
1.  This chapter draws from my article “Nuclear Taboo and War Initiation: Nuclear  
Weapons in Regional Conflicts,” Journal of Conἀict Resolution 39, no. 4 (December 
1995): 696–717.
2.  T. V. Paul, Asymmetric Conἀicts: War Initiation by Weaker Powers (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1994), 28.
3.  For these considerations, see Paul, “Nuclear Taboo and War Initiation.”
4.  For some of these cases, see Paul, Asymmetric Conἀicts.
5.  I discussed the Chinese calculations in Korea as well as U.S. nuclear threats in 
various crises in Chapters 3 and 5.
6.  The Israeli calculations are discussed in Chapter 6.
Notes to Chapter 7  259

7.  Seymour M. Hersh, The Samson Option: Israel’s Nuclear Arsenal and American 
Foreign Policy (New York: Random House, 1991), 215–16.
8.  Yair Evron, “Opaque Proliferation: The Israeli Case,” Journal of Strategic Stud-
ies 13, no. 3 (September 1990): 44–63; Shai Feldman, Israeli Nuclear Deterrence (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1982); Lawrence Freedman, “Israel’s Nuclear Policy,” 
Survival 17, no. 3 (May–June 1975): 114–20.
9.  Michael Handel, “Perception, Deception and Surprise: The Case of the Yom 
Kippur War,” Jerusalem Papers on Peace Problems 19 (1976): 49–50; Michael Brecher 
with Benjamin Geist, Decisions in Crisis: Israel, 1967 and 1973 (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1980), 53–54.
10.  Shlomo Aronson, Conἀict and Bargaining in the Middle East (Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1978), 164–65; Aronson, “The Nuclear Dimension 
of the Arab-Israeli Conflict: The Case of the Yom Kippur War,” Jerusalem Journal of 
Inter­national Relations 7, nos. 1–2 (1984): 107–42.
11.  Hersh, Samson Option, 220–21.
12.  “Nasser Threatens Israel on A-Bomb,” New York Times, December 24, 1960:
A1, A2.
13.  On the calculations and miscalculations of both sides, see Michael B. Oren, 
Six Days of War: June 1967 and the Making of the Modern Middle East (New York: 
Presidio Press, 2003).
14.  Ariel E. Levite and Emily B. Landau, Israel’s Nuclear Image: Arab Percep-
tions of Israel’s Nuclear Posture (in Hebrew) (Tel Aviv: Papyrus, 1994), 41–42. See 
also Avner Cohen, “Cairo, Dimona, and the June 1967 War,” Middle East Journal 50, 
no. 2 (Spring 1996): 192. Despite these pronouncements, Dimona was a major target 
of Egyptian military planners, showing the importance they paid to Israeli nuclear 
capability during that time.
15.  Martin Van Creveld, Nuclear Proliferation and the Future of Conἀict (New 
York: The Free Press, 1993), 108–10; Yair Evron, “The Arab Position in the Nuclear 
Field: A Study of Policies up to 1967,” Cooperation and Conἀict 8, no. 1 (1973): 19–31.
16.  Hersh, Samson Option, 219.
17.  Abdul Ghani al-Gamasi (former Egyptian Army Chief of Staff), personal 
com­munication, Cairo, December 14, 1990; Tahseen Basheer (Egyptian government 
spokesman in 1973), personal interview, Cairo, September 19, 1990.
18.  Gen. Saad el-Shazly, The Crossing of the Suez (San Francisco: American Mid-
east Research, 1980), 24–25.
19.  Shlomo Aronson, The Politics and Strategy of Nuclear Weapons in the Middle  
East (Albany: State University of New York Press, 1992), 145. To one scholar, the Egyp-
tian posture toward Israeli nuclear capability was to ignore it, similar to the nonnuclear 
USSR’s confrontation of the United States during the late 1940s. It could also be based 
on a “genuine belief that nuclear weapons are less important in the strategic balance.” 
Yair Evron, Israel’s Nuclear Dilemma (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1994), 75.
260  Notes to chapter 7

20.  Uri Bar-Joseph, “The Hidden Debate: The Formation of Nuclear Doctrines in 
the Middle East,” Journal of Strategic Studies 5, no. 2 (June 1982): 207.
21.  Richard N. Lebow, “Miscalculation in the South Atlantic: The Origins of the 
Falklands War,” in Psychology and Deterrence, ed. Robert Jervis, Richard N. Lebow, 
and Janice Gross Stein (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1985), 110.
22.  Paul Rogers, “Tactical Trident in Historical Context” (paper presented at the 
Annual Meeting of the British International Studies Association, University of York, 
UK, December 1994).
23.  R. S. Norris, A. S. Burrows, and R. W. Fieldhouse, Nuclear Weapons Data-
book, vol. 5, British, French and Chinese Nuclear Weapons (Boulder: Westview Press, 
1994), 64–65.
24.  Latin American Weekly Report (London), November 12, 1982. This was con-
firmed by the International Atomic Energy Agency in a report in September 1991 that 
on May 10, 1982, a nuclear weapon was lost in the South Atlantic when HMS Sheffield 
sank. Rob Edwards, “Nuclear Weapons Lost in Falklands Conflict,” The Guardian, 
September 23, 1991.
25.  The Times (London), November 3, 1982:3a.
26.  According to papers obtained by New Statesman, the Polaris submarine was 
sent to the South Atlantic as far as the South Ascension Island. The Belgrano Papers, 
leaked to parliament member Tam Dalyell and obtained by the newspaper, said that 
“the likely target for a threatened or demonstration nuclear attack was said to be Cor-
doba, northern Argentina. The nuclear threat might have been used if any of the task 
force’s capital ships—one of the carriers, or the troop ship Canberra—had been de-
stroyed in a missile attack. The Polaris deployment was said to have been ordered in 
the wake of the sinking of HMS Sheffield, after ministers had to confront the possibil-
ity that Argentine air superiority and Exocet missiles could mean the military defeat 
of the British task force, and the rapid political extinction of the Thatcher govern-
ment.” The New Statesman, “Falklands: All Out War,” August 24, 1984:8–9. However, 
the official history of the Falklands War rejects this “as a mischievous test of the lat-
ter’s gullibility.” Lawrence Freedman, The Official History of the Falklands Campaign, 
vol. 2, War and Diplomacy (London: Routledge, 2005), 59.
27.  All from Rob Evans and David Leigh, “Falklands Warships Carried Nuclear 
Weapons, MOD Admits,” The Guardian, December 6, 2003.
28.  BBC News Online, “Argentina Seeks Nuclear Apology,” December 7, 2003, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/americas/3297805.stm.
29.  Paul Brown, “UK ‘Cannot Fully Arm Trident Subs,’ ” The Guardian, Novem-
ber 28, 1985.
30.  Rob Evans and Richard Norton-Taylor, “MoD Papers Reveal Falklands Nu-
clear Fear,” The Guardian, October 10, 2005, http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2005/
oct/10/military.falklands.
31.  Freedman, Official History, 59.
Notes to Chapter 7  261

32.  Jonathan Alford, “Conventional Conflicts in a Nuclear Age, Falkland Islands: 
The Limited Use of Limited Power,” Jerusalem Journal of International Relations 7, 
nos. 1–2 (1984): 79–91.
33.  Infrome Rattenbach (Buenos Aires: Ediciones Espartaco, Serie Documentos 
Historicos, 1988), 190. Military action was also conceived of as a means to “maintain 
the international credibility” of Argentina’s claims over the Islands, and to avoid a “de-
finitive freezing” of decade-long negotiations. N. Costa Mendez, “Beyond Deterrence: 
The Malvinas-Falklands Case,” Journal of Social Issues 43, no. 4 (Winter 1987): 119–22.
34.  Arthur Gavshon and Desmond Rice, The Sinking of the Belgrano (London: 
Secker & Warburg, 1984), 21.
35.  Costa Mendez, “Beyond Deterrence.”
36.  Peter Calvert, The Falklands Crisis: The Rights and Wrongs (London: Frances 
Pinter, 1982), 86.
37.  Admiral Carlos Busser (Malvinas Naval Expedition Commander) and General 
Garcia Enciso (Brigadier General in the Army), personal interviews, Buenos Aires, 
May 26, 1990.
38.  John Arquilla and Maria Moyano Rasmussen, “The Origins of the South At-
lantic War,” Journal of Latin American Studies 33, no. 4 (November 2001): 754.
39.  In his memoirs, Baker states that he “purposely” left the impression to Tariq 
Aziz that if Iraq used chemical and biological weapons it “could invite tactical nuclear 
retaliation.” James A. Baker III, The Politics of Diplomacy (New York: G. P. Putnam’s 
Sons, 1995), 359.
40.  Los Angeles Times, “Text of Bush’s Letter to Saddam Hussein,” January 13, 
1991:A21.
41.  Lee May, “Troops Quiz Cheney on Saudi Assignment,” Los Angeles Times, 
August 15, 1990:A7.
42.  Robert C. Toth, “American Support Grows for Use of Nuclear Arms,” Los An-
geles Times, February 3, 1991:A1, cited in Martin Navias, “Non-Conventional Weap-
onry and Ballistic Missiles during the 1991 Gulf War,” in Non-Conventional Weapons 
Proliferation in the Middle East, ed. Efraim Karsh, Martin S. Navias, and Philip Sabin 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993), 62.
43.  Rick Atkinson, Crusade: The Untold Story of the Persian Gulf War (Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1993), 89. See also George C. Wilson, “Worst Case: Iraqi War Goes 
Nuclear,” National Journal 34, no. 41 (October 12, 2002): 2992–3.
44.  Colin L. Powell, My American Journey, (New York: Random House, 1995), 
738. However, it is argued that the commander-in-chief of the U.S.-led coalition 
forces, General H. Norman Schwarzkopf, had asked at the outset of the campaign for 
the use of nuclear weapons to jam Iraqi communication and radar facilities, and that 
the Pentagon had hired consultants to study the option. Newsweek, January 14, 1991, 
cited in Barry R. Posen, “U.S. Security Policy in a Nuclear-Armed World,” Security 
Studies 6, no. 3 (Spring 1997): 20.
262  Notes to chapter 7

45.  Philip Shenon, “Standoff in the Gulf: Pentagon Calls Israel Likely Iraqi Tar-
get,” New York Times, December 27, 1990:A12, cited in Navias, “Non-Conventional 
Weaponry,” 62.
46.  David Welch, “The Politics and Psychology of Restraint: Israeli Decision-
Making in the Gulf War,” International Journal 47, no. 2 (1992): 328–69.
47.  Other calculations could have been the inability to overcome U.S. military 
power and effectively apply chemical weapons, especially after the crippling of the 
Iraqi command, control, and intelligence networks after they were destroyed by the 
coalition attacks. William J. Perry, “Desert Storm and Deterrence in the Future,” in 
After the Storm: Lessons from the Gulf War, ed. Joseph S. Nye and Roger K. Smith 
(Colorado Springs, CO: The Aspen Institute, 1992), 261.
48.  R. Jeffrey Smith, “U.N. Says Iraqis Prepared Germ Weapons in Gulf War; Bagh-
dad Balked, Fearing U.S. Nuclear Retaliation,” Washington Post, August 26, 1995:A1.
49.  Richard Butler, The Greatest Threat: Iraq, Weapons of Mass Destruction, and 
the Crisis of Global Security (New York: Public Affairs, 2000), 37. It is argued that al-
though the Iraqis did not state it in so many words, they “considered the Coalition’s 
greatest technological advantage to be the American nuclear capability.” Ibrahim al-
Marashi, “Saddam’s Iraq and Weapons of Mass Destruction: Iraq as a Case Study of a 
Middle Eastern Proliferant,” Middle East Review of International Affairs 8, no. 3 (Sep-
tember 2004): 88.
50.  Baker, Politics of Diplomacy, 359.
51.  Dean Fischer, “Inside Saddam’s Brutal Regime,” Time, September 18, 1995:82. 
In an interview after the war, Tariq Aziz, on a question why Iraq did not use WMD, 
replied, “it was not wise to use such kind of weapons in such kind of war, with such 
an enemy.” Asked whether he meant an enemy with nuclear weapons, Aziz said: “You 
can . . . make your own conclusions.” Frontline, “Oral History: Norman Schwarzkopf,” 
January 9, 1996, http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/gulf/oral/aziz/2.html. Ac-
cording to General Waffic al-Sammarai, former head of Iraq’s military intelligence, 
Baghdad did not use chemical or biological weapons because “the warning was quite 
severe, and quite effective. The allied troops were certain to use nuclear arms and 
the price will be too dear and too high.” Quoted in Keith B. Payne, “Why We Must 
Sustain Nuclear Deterrence” (National Institute for Public Policy, April 1998), http://
www.nipp.org/Adobe/Op%20Ed%203_20_98.pdf.
52.  Lt. Col. Jeffrey McCausland, “The Gulf Conflict: A Military Analysis,” (Adelphi 
Paper no. 282, International Institute for Strategic Studies, London, November 1993): 
34. It was reported that on January 19, 1991, Israel was about to launch a 100-plane 
counterstrike followed by helicopter and “commando raids through Saudi Arabian air-
space.” Ibid., 33.
53.  According to McCausland, the “Iraqi leadership was deterred from escalating 
the war by fear of retaliation . . . If he had truly wished to involve Israel in the war 
there can be little doubt that the delivery of chemical weapons on Israeli territory by 
Notes to Chapter 7  263

a Scud (or any other system for that matter) would have ensured Israeli intervention 
whether or not any casualties resulted.” Ibid, 36.
54.  Amatzia Baram, “Israeli Deterrence, Iraqi Responses,” Orbis 36, no. 3 (Sum-
mer 1992): 400. After the war, UN inspectors found that the missile modifications 
were unbalanced, explaining the breakup of Scuds before they hit the targets, and that 
chemical weapons would have burned up before impact, thereby depriving them of ef-
fectiveness. Anthony H. Cordesman, Iran and Iraq: The Threat from the Northern Gulf 
(Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1994), 243.
55.  Charles A. Duelfer, “Testimony before the Subcommittee on Emerging Threats 
& Capabilities, Armed Services Committee of the United States Senate” (Washington, 
DC, February 27, 2002), http://bioterrorism.slu.edu/bt/official/congress/duelfer022702 
.pdf. See also Derek D. Smith, Deterring America: Rogue States and the Proliferation 
of Weapons of Mass Destruction (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 
50–51.
56.  Quoted in Timothy V. McCarthy and Jonathan B. Tucker, “Saddam’s Toxic 
Arsenal: Chemical and Biological Weapons in the Gulf War,” in Planning the Un-
thinkable, ed. Peter R. Lavoy, Scott D. Sagan, and James J. Wirtz (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2000), 58; see also Mohamed Heikal, Illusions of Triumph (London: 
HarperCollins, 1992), 131.
57.  Robert M. Norris and Hans M. Kristensen, “U.S. Nuclear Threats: Then and 
Now,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 62, no. 5 (September/October 2006): 69–71.
Chapter 8: The Tradition and the Nonproliferation Regime
1.  On the limitations of nuclear weapons, see T. V. Paul, “Power, Influence and 
Nuclear Weapons: A Reassessment,” in The Absolute Weapon Revisited: Nuclear Arms 
and the Emerging International Order, ed. T. V. Paul, Richard J. Harknett, and James J. 
Wirtz (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998), 19–46.
2.  International Court of Justice (hereafter ICJ), “Legality of the Threat or Use 
of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion,” I.C.J. Reports 1996 (8 July 1996), 11. On the 
question of disarmament in general, the developing countries were active, as evident 
in their supporting or sponsoring over two hundred resolutions on the issue at the 
United Nations as of the late 1970s. See M. A. Husain, “Third World and Disarma-
ment: Shadow and Substance,” Third World Quarterly 2, no. 1 (January 1980): 76.
3.  Jonathan M. Weisgall, Operation Crossroads: The Atomic Tests at Bikini Atoll 
(Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1994); Jack Niedenthal, “A Short History of 
the People of Bikini Atoll,” n.d., http://www.bikiniatoll.com/history.html.
4.  On these, see Alva Myrdal, The Game of Disarmament (New York: Pantheon 
Books, 1982), 84–89; William Epstein, The Last Chance: Nuclear Proliferation and 
Arms Control (New York: The Free Press, 1976), 52–53.
5.  UN General Assembly, “Resolution 1653 (XVI),” November 28, 1961, reprinted 
in U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (hereafter ACDA), Documents on 
264  Notes to chapter 8

Disarmament, 1961, 648, cited in George Bunn, “The Legal Status of U.S. Negative 
Security Assurances to Non-Nuclear Weapon States,” The Nonproliferation Review 4, 
no. 3 (Summer 1997): 2.
6.  “Letter of Secretary Rusk to Acting UN Secretary General U Thant,” June 30 
1962, UN Doc A/5174, annex II, 78–80, reprinted in ACDA, Documents on Disarma-
ment, 1962, 629, 630, cited in Bunn, “Legal Status,” 2.
7.  “Eight Nation Joint Memorandum submitted to the Eighteen Nation Disarma-
ment Committee,” August 19, 1966, UN Doc. ENDC/178, reprinted in ACDA, Docu-
ments on Disarmament, 1966, 576, 578, cited in Bunn, “Legal Status,” 3.
8.  ACDA, International Negotiations on the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nu-
clear Weapons (Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1969), 59, cited in 
Bunn, “Legal Status,” 3.
9.  Bunn, “Legal Status,” 4.
10.  Epstein, Last Chance, 69.
11.  Ibid.
12.  On the several efforts by nonnuclear states in this area, see Programme for 
Promoting Nuclear Non-proliferation, Briefing Book, vol. 1, The Evolution of the Nu-
clear Non-Proliferation Regime, 6th ed. (Southampton, UK: The Mountbatten Center 
for International Studies, 2000), ch. 6.
13.  Epstein, Last Chance, 105.
14.  The Article reads: “Each of the parties to the Treaty undertakes to pursue ne-
gotiations in good faith on effective measures relating to cessation of the nuclear arms 
race at an early date and to nuclear disarmament, and on a treaty on general and com-
plete disarmament under strict and effective international control.” The Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, 1968, www.un.org/events/npt2005/npttreaty.html. 
The nuclear states have, since then, continuously proclaimed their adherence to Arti-
cle VI even when they were engaging in an unbridled arms race during the Cold War 
and, since then, attempting to widen the uses of nuclear weapons. The NPT con­fer­
ences would produce contentious debates about the character and meaning of the arti-
cle, and whether nuclear states have fulfilled their obligations under it or not. The NWS 
perceive the Article as “ancillary” and “subordinate” to the main purpose of the NPT, 
that is, preventing the spread of nuclear weapons to new states. On this, see Steven E. 
Miller, “The Haves and Have Nots: Proliferation, Disarmament, and the Future of the 
NPT System” (paper presented at the Norwegian Institute for International Affairs 
Conference, “Halting Nuclear Proliferation in the 21st Century,” Oslo, October 2005). 
The hypocrisy involved in this is well-captured in Michael Lipson, “Organized Hy-
pocrisy and the NPT” (paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Politi-
cal Science Association Washington, DC, September 1–4, 2005).
15.  One major hurdle that nonnuclear states faced has been that all the nuclear 
states parties to the NPT (except China until 1972) have held veto power in the Se-
curity Council. United Nations approval, let alone sponsorship, of an action against 
Notes to Chapter 8  265

nuclear weapons states thus became a highly improbable event. Myrdal, The Game of 
Disarmament, 172.
16.  On the complexities of positive assurances, see Bruce D. Larkin, Nuclear De-
signs (New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1996), 16–17.
17.  E.L.M. Burns, “The Nonproliferation Treaty: Its Negotiations and Prospects,” 
International Organization 23, no. 4 (Autumn 1969): 788–807.
18.  Epstein, Last Chance, 106.
19.  UN Security Council, “Resolution 255,” 1968, cited in Joseph F. Pilat, “Re­
assess­ing Security Assurances in a Unipolar World,” The Washington Quarterly 28, 
no. 2 (Spring 2005): 160.
20.  Glenn T. Seaborg and Benjamin S. Loeb, Stemming the Tide: Arms Control in 
the Johnson Years (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1987), 382.
21.  The list of signatories is available at the UN Office for Disarmament Affairs, 
“Sta­tus of Multilateral Arms Regulation and Disarmament Agreements—NPT (in 
alphabet­i­cal order),” n.d., http://disarmament.un.org/TreatyStatus.nsf/NPT%20(in%
20alphabetical%20order)?OpenView.
22.  T. V. Paul, “Systemic Conditions and Security Cooperation: Explaining the 
Persistence of the Nuclear Nonproliferation Regime,” Cambridge Review of Interna-
tional Affairs 16, no. 1 (2003): 135–54. See also Christopher Way and Karthika Sasiku-
mar, “Leaders and Laggards: When and Why do Countries Sign the NPT?” (Working 
Paper no. 16, McGill-University of Montreal Research Group in International Security, 
November 2004).
23.  Paul, “Systemic Conditions,” 147.
24.  Epstein, Last Chance, 118–19.
25.  On this, see T. V. Paul, Power versus Prudence: Why Nations Forgo Nuclear 
Weapons (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2000), ch. 2.
26.  Epstein, Last Chance, 124.
27.  Tariq Rauf and Rebecca Johnson, “After the NPT’s Indefinite Extension: The 
Future of the Global Nonproliferation Regime,” Non-Proliferation Review 3, no. 1 (Fall 
1995): 28–41; Paul, “Systemic Conditions,” 148–50; Randy Rydell, “The 1995 Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation Treaty Review and Extension Conference,” Arms Control Today 35, 
no. 3 (April 2005): 47–48.
28.  UN Security Council, “Resolution 984,” 11 April 1995.
29.  Ibid.
30.  The proposals in this regard include a protocol to the NPT, a treaty under the 
auspices of the Conference on Disarmament (CD), strengthened additional protocols 
under the existing nuclear-free-zone treaties, and unilateral security assurances simi-
lar to those offered by nuclear states to Ukraine. On these, see Jean du Preez, “The 2005 
NPT Review Conference: Can it Meet the Nuclear Challenge?” Arms Control Today 35, 
no. 3 (April 2005): 6–12.
266  Notes to chapter 8

31.  Douglas Roche, “Deadly Deadlock” (Middle Powers Initiative Briefing Paper, 
San Francisco, June 2005), 4.
32.  Jean du Preez, “Security Assurances against the Use or Threat of Use of Nu-
clear Weapons: Is Progress Possible at the NPT PrepCom?” (Center for Nonprolif-
eration Studies Reports, Monterey Institute of International Studies, April 24, 2003), 
http://www.cns.miis.edu/research/npt/nptsec.htm.
33.  For an analysis of the 2005 review conference, see Roche, “Deadly Deadlock”; 
David E. Sanger, “Month of Talks Fails to Bolster Nuclear Treaty,” New York Times, 
May 28, 2005.
34.  Arms Control Association, “U.S. ‘Negative Security Assurances’ At a Glance” 
(Arms Control Association Fact Sheet, Washington, DC, January 2008), http://www 
.armscontrol.org/factsheets/negsec.asp.
35.  Leonard Spector and Aubrie Ohlde, “Negative Security Assurances: Revisit­
ing the Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Option,” Arms Control Today 35, no. 3 (April 
2005): 13–17.
36.  The NATO military committee agreed to such a doctrinal change in February 
2000. Karel Koster, “An Uneasy Alliance: NATO Nuclear Doctrine & NPT,” Disarma-
ment Diplomacy, 49, August 2000:10.
37.  U.S. Department of State, “Daily Press Briefing,” February 22, 2002, http://www 
.state.gov/r/pa/prs/dpb/2002/8421.htm.
38.  The World Court Project was actively promoted by a coalition of nongovern-
mental organizations such as The International Association of Lawyers against Nu­
clear Arms (IALANA), the International Peace Bureau (IPB), and the International 
Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War (IPPNW). Siddharth Mallavarapu, Ban-
ning the Bomb: The Politics of Norm Creation (New Delhi: Pearson, 2007), 43.
39.  ICJ, “Legality of the Threat,” 6.
40.  United States of America, Written Statement, cited in ICJ, “Legality of the 
Threat,” 14.
41.  ICJ, “Legality of the Threat,” 15–16.
42.  Ibid., 44.
43.  Sherman W. Garnett, “Ukraine’s Decision to Join the NPT,” Arms Control To-
day 25, no. 1 (January-February 1995): 7–12.
44.  On the genesis of the treaty, see Alfonso Garcia Robles, “Latin American Nu-
clear Weapon Free Zone,” (The Stanley Foundation Occasional Paper no. 19, Musca-
tine, IA, 1979); Monica Serrano, “Latin America—The Treaty of Tlatelolco,” in Nuclear 
Weapons-Free Zones, ed. Ramesh Thakur (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1998), 35–58. 
For the signatory list, see UN Office for Disarmament Affairs, “Status of Multilateral 
Arms Regulation and Disarmament Agreements—Treaty of Tlatelolco (in alphabetical 
order),” n.d., http://disarmament2.un.org/Treatystatus.nsf/Treaty%20of%20Tlatelolco 
%20(in%20alphabetical%20order)?OpenView.
Notes to Chapter 8  267

45.  Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America, Additional Pro-
tocols I and II, 1967, http://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Treaties/tlatelolco 
.html.
46.  William Epstein, “Tlatelolco and a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World,” in Nuclear 
Weapon-free Zones in the 21st Century, ed. Pericles Gasparani Alves and Daiana Belinde 
Cipollone (New York: United Nations, 1997), 25.
47.  For the Soviet statement see http://disarmament.un.org/treatystatus.nsf/ 
faf74ecab0618ca185256cf400806a63/e48b23572ce844198525688f006d2895?OpenDocument.
48.  Cited in Arlene Idol Broadhurst, “Nuclear Weapon-Free Zones: A Compara-
tive Analysis of Theory and Practice” (Aurora Paper no. 5, The Canadian Center for 
Arms Control and Disarmament, Ottawa, 1985): 25.
49.  Spector and Ohlde, “Negative Security Assurances,” 15.
50.  T. V. Paul, “Nuclear Free-zone in the South Pacific: Rhetoric or Reality?” The 
Round Table no. 299 (July 1986): 252–62. For the provisions of the Treaty, see The Aus-
tralian, August 8, 1985.
51.  Michael Hamel-Green, “South Pacific: A Not So Nuclear-Free zone,” Peace 
Studies, November–December 1985: 6–8.
52.  Makurita Baaro, “The South Pacific Nuclear-Free-Zone Treaty (The Treaty of 
Rarotonga)” in Gasparini Alves and Cipollone, Nuclear Weapon-Free Zones, 49–54. 
For the status of the signatory list, see the UN Office for Disarmament Affairs, “Status 
of Multilateral Arms Regulation and Disarmament Agreements—Treaty of Rarotonga 
(in alphabetical order)” http://disarmament.un.org/TreatyStatus.nsf/Treaty%20of 
%20Rarotonga%20(in%20alphabetical%20order)?OpenView.
53.  Spector and Ohlde, “Negative Security Assurances,” 15.
54.  Michael Hamel-Green, “The South Pacific—The Treaty of Rarotonga,” in 
Thakur, Nuclear Weapons-Free Zones, 63–64.
55.  On the history of the Treaty’s rise, see Carolina G. Hernandez, “Southeast 
Asia—The Treaty of Bangkok,” in Thakur, Nuclear Weapons-Free Zones, 81–92.
56.  For these provisions of the Treaty, see its text, Treaty of Bangkok, 1995, http://
www.opanal.org/NWFZ/Bangkok/Bangkok_iT.htm.
57.  See the UN Office for Disarmament Affairs, “Status of Multilateral Arms Regu-
lation and Disarmament Agreements—Bangkok Treaty (in alphabetical order),” http://
disarmament.un.org/TreatyStatus.nsf/Bangkok%20Treaty%20(in%20alphabetical 
%20order)?OpenView.
58.  Spector and Ohlde, “Negative Security Assurances,” 15.
59.  “Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (Treaty of Bangkok).” 
(Center for Nonproliferation Studies, Monterey, 2006), 3, cns.miis.edu/pubs/inven/
pdfs/seanwfz.pdf.
60.  On the origins of the Treaty, see Ruchita Beri, “African Nuclear Weapon-Free 
Zone Treaty,” Strategic Analysis 19, no. 4 (July 1996): 615–624; Oluyemi Adeniji, The 
268  Notes to chapter 8

Treaty of Pelindaba: On the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zone (Geneva: UNIDIR, 
2002). On the position of the ANC, see Stephen F. Burgess, “Nuclear Rollback in Africa: 
The Role of the African National Congress and the ‘Nuclear Taboo’ ” (paper presented 
at the Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, Washington, 
DC, September 2005).
61.  For these provisions of the Treaty, see African Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone 
Treaty (Pelindaba Treaty), 1995, http://www.iaea.org/Publications/Documents/Treaties/ 
pelindaba.html. See also Julius O. Ihonvbere, “Africa—The Treaty of Pelindaba,” in 
Thakur, Nuclear Weapons-Free Zones, 93–119.
62.  African Union, “List of Countries which have Signed, Ratified/Acceded To 
the African Union Convention on African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (The 
Treaty of Pelindaba),” Addis Ababa, June 12, 2007, http://www.africa-union.org/root/
au/Documents/Treaties/List/Pelindaba%20Treaty.pdf.
63.  UN Office for Disarmament Affairs, “Status of Multilateral Arms Regulation 
and Disarmament Agreements—Pelindaba Treaty (Protocols),” http://disarmament 
.un.org/TreatyStatus.nsf/Pelindaba%20Treaty%20(Protocols)?OpenView. Despite 
sign­ing the protocols, the United States made a conditional statement, that “it will 
not limit options available to the United States in response to an attack by [a treaty] 
party using weapons of mass destruction,” implying that the United States could rely 
on the doctrine of “belligerent reprisals” in order to respond with a nuclear attack to a 
chemical or biological attack by a zone member. Federal News Service, “White House 
Briefing,” April 11, 1996, quoted in Mark McDonough, Tracking Nuclear Proliferation 
(Washington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace), Appendix E, 303.
64.  Joelle Bourgois, “The Role Carried out by the Zones Exempt from Nuclear 
Arms,” in Gasparini Alves and Cipollone, Nuclear Weapon Free-Zones, 126.
65.  This logic is provided in the context of the ASEAN Region. See Muthiah 
Alagappa, “Towards a Nuclear-Weapons-Free Zone in Southeast Asia” (Research 
Note, Institute of Strategic and International Studies, Kuala Lumpur, 1987): 7.
Chapter 9: Changing U.S. Policies and the Tradition
1.  The Libyan decision to abandon nuclear weapons is credited to a deft policy 
of coercive diplomacy that the United States has engaged in with the aid of Euro-
pean partners since the days of the George H. W. Bush administration. On this, see 
Bruce W. Jentleson and Christopher A. Whytcock, “Who ‘Won’ Libya: The Force- 
Diplomacy Debate and Its Implications for Theory and Policy,” International Security 
30, no. 3 (Winter 2005–06): 47–86.
2.  To these states, a strong chemical weapons capability is necessary as a deterrent 
against Israel’s nuclear capability. See Eitan Barak, “Where Do We Go from Here? 
Implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention in the Middle East in the Post-
Saddam Era,” Security Studies 13, no. 1 (Autumn 2003): 106–55.
Notes to Chapter 9  269

3.  Chaim Braun and Christopher F. Chyba, “Proliferation Rings: New Challenge to 
the Nuclear Nonproliferation Regime,” International Security 29, no. 2 (Fall 2004): 5–49.
4.  On the activities of the Khan Network, see “A. Q. Khan Nuclear Chronol-
ogy” (Carnegie Endowment for International Peace Issue Brief 8, no. 8, Washing-
ton, DC, September 7, 2005); David Albright and Corey Hinderstein, “Unraveling 
the A. Q. Khan and Future Proliferation Networks,” Washington Quarterly 28, no. 2 
(Spring 2005): 111–28.
5.  Graham Allison, Nuclear Terrorism (New York: Times Books, 2004); Charles D. 
Ferguson and William C. Potter, The Four Faces of Nuclear Proliferation (New York: 
Routledge, 2005), 259–317.
6.  “Expounding Bush’s Approach to U.S. Nuclear Security: An Interview with 
John Bolton,” Arms Control Today 32, no. 2 (March 2002): 3–8. See also Joseph F. 
Pilat, “Reassessing Security Assurances in a Unipolar World,” The Washington Quar-
terly 28, no. 2 (Spring 2005): 159–70.
7.  Cited in Hans M. Kristensen, “Nuclear Futures: Proliferation of Weapons of 
Mass Destruction and US Nuclear Strategy” (British American Security Information 
Council BASIC Research Report 98.2, March 1998): 10.
8.  R. Jeffrey Smith, “Clinton Directive Changes Strategy on Nuclear Arms,” Wash-
ington Post, December 7, 1997:A1.
9.  James J. Wirtz and James A. Russell, “U.S. Policy on Preventive War and Preemp-
tion,” The Nonproliferation Review 10, no. 1 (Spring 2003): 113–23; Charles L. Glaser  
and Steve Fetter, “Counterforce Revisited: Assessing the Nuclear Posture Review’s 
New Missions,” International Security 30, no. 2 (Fall 2005): 84–126.
10.  The administration has signed an arms control agreement with Russia that 
would reduce approximately 6,000 U.S. warheads to 2,200 in a decade, although the 
warheads will not be destroyed but will be placed in storage in case a future contin-
gency arises. See Treaty between the United States of America and the Russian Fed-
eration on Strategic Offensive Reductions, May 24, 2002, http://www.armscontrol.org/
documents/sort.asp?print.
11.  U.S. president, “The National Security Strategy of the United States of America” 
(Washington, DC, September 17, 2002): 15; U.S. White House, “National Strategy to 
Combat Weapons of Mass Destruction” (Washington, DC, December 2002): 3.
12.  Nicholas Kralev, “Bush Approves Nuclear Response,” Washington Times, Jan-
uary 31, 2003.
13.  In a Washington Post-ABC News Poll during the run-up to the War, six in 
ten Americans surveyed found a U.S. nuclear response acceptable “if Hussein orders 
use of chemical or biological weapons on U.S. troops.” Richard Morin, “Most Favor 
Nuclear Option against Iraq,” Washington Post, December 18, 2002:A18.
14.  For these objectives and the problems associated with them, see James A. 
Russell, “Nuclear Strategy and the Modern Middle East,” Middle East Policy 11, no. 3 
(Fall 2004): 98–117.
270  Notes to chapter 9

15.  U.S. Department of Defense, “Doctrine For Joint Nuclear Operations (Draft)” 
(Joint Publication 3–12, Washington, DC, 15 March 2005): xi.
16.  Walter Pincus, “Pentagon Revises Nuclear Strike Plan,” Washington Post, 
September 11, 2005:A1.
17.  Hans M. Kristensen, “The Role of U.S. Nuclear Weapons: New Doctrine Falls 
Short of Bush Pledge,” Arms Control Today 35, no. 7 (September 2005): 13–19.
18.  Keir A. Lieber and Daryl G. Press, “The Rise of U.S. Nuclear Primacy,” Foreign 
Affairs 85, no. 2 (March/April 2006): 42–54.
19.  David Ruppe, “United States I: Former Bush Official Advocates Low-Yield 
Weapon Research,” NTI Global Security Newswire, June 11, 2003, http://www.nti.org/
d_newswire/issues/2003/6/11/6p.html.
20.  See Robert L. Jervis, “The Confrontation between Iraq and the U.S.: Implica-
tions for the Theory and Practice of Deterrence,” European Journal of International 
Relations 9, no. 2 (June 2003): 315–37.
21.  William M. Arkin, “The Nuclear Option in Iraq,” Los Angeles Times, January 26, 
2003, http://www.latimes.com/news/printededition/opinion/la_op_arkin26jan26001512 
.story.
22.  Nicholas D. Kristof, “Flirting with Disaster,” New York Times, February 14, 
2003:A31.
23.  Paul Ritcher, U.S. Weighs Tactical Nuclear Strike on Iraq,” Los Angeles Times, 
January 26, 2003:A1; Reuters, “U.S. Warns Iraq over Using Mass Destruction Arms,” 
January 26, 2003.
24.  William M. Arkin, “The Nuclear Option in Iraq,” Los Angeles Times, Janu-
ary 26, 2003:M1.
25.  Seymour M. Hersh, “The Iran Plans,” The New Yorker, April 17, 2006, http://
www.newyorker.com/printables/fact/060417fa_fact. Hersh identified the proponents of 
nuclear option as members of the Defense Science Board, chairman William Schneider, 
Stephen Hadley, Stephen Cambone, Robert Joseph, and other neoconservative mem-
bers of the Bush administration.
26.  Paul Reynolds, “Iran Attack Debate Raises Nuclear Prospect,” BBC News On-
line, April 10, 2006, http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/middle_east/4895212.stm.
27.  Walter Pincus, “Pentagon Pursues Nuclear Earth Penetrator,” Washington Post, 
March 7, 2003:A25.
28.  James Sterngold, “U.S. Alters Nuclear Weapons Policy,” San Francisco Chronicle, 
November 28, 2005:A1.
29.  Bruce Blair, “We Keep Building Nukes for all the Wrong Reasons,” Washington 
Post, May 25, 2003:B1.
30.  Thomas W. Dowler and Joseph S. Howard II, “Countering the Threat of the 
Well-Armed Tyrant: A Modest Proposal for Small Nuclear Weapons,” Strategic Re-
view 19, no. 4 (Fall 1991): 34–40. See also Robert W. Nelson, “Low-Yield Earth Pen-
etrating Nuclear Weapons,” FAS Public Interest Report 54, no. 1 (January/February  
Notes to Chapter 9  271

2001): www.fas.org/faspir/2001/v54n1/weapons.htm; C. Paul Robinson, “Pursu­ing a 
New Weap­ons Policy for the 21st Century” (Sandia National Laboratories White Pa-
per, Albuquerque, NM, March 22, 2001), http://www.sandia.gov/media/whitepaper/ 
2001-04-Robinson.htm.
31.  ABC News Online (Australia), “Scientists Back New US Nuclear Weapons,” 
June 29, 2005, http://www.abc.net.au/news/newsitems/200506/s1402870.htm.
32.  Quoted in James Sterngold, “Fallout Seen from White House Nuclear Policy,” 
San Francisco Chronicle, March 1, 2003.
33.  George Perkovich, “Bush Doctrine Makes Nuclear Weapons Morally Obso-
lete” (unpublished paper, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Washington, 
DC, June 2003): 1–2.
34.  “Mini-Nukes, Bunker-Busters, and Deterrence: Framing Debate,” (Center for 
Defense Information, Washington, DC, April 26, 2002), http://www.cdi.org/terrorism/ 
mininukes-pr.cfm. The B61-11 was developed by the weapon labs in 1997 “by putting 
the nuclear explosive from an earlier bomb design into a hardened steel casing with a 
new nose cone to provide ground penetration capability.” Nelson, “Low-Yield Earth-
Penetrating Nuclear Weapons.”
35.  Roger Speed and Michael May, “Dangerous Doctrine,” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists 61, no. 2 (March/April 2005): 38–49.
36.  Blair, “We Keep Building Nukes,” B1.
37.  Computer simulations suggest that chemical and biological attacks under most 
scenarios may cause only a limited number of casualties compared to nuclear attack 
on a city or heavily populated area. For instance, see Natural Resources Defense Coun-
cil, “Consequences of Using Weapons of Mass Destruction in a U.S.-Iraqi War” (press 
backgrounder, March 13, 2003), http://www.nrdc.org/media/pressreleases/030313.asp.
38.  GlobalSecurity.org, “GBU-43/B ‘Mother of All Bombs,’ ” n.d., http://www 
.globalsecurity.org/military/systems/munitions/moab.htm.
39.  Walter Pincus, “Nuclear Weapons Rarely Needed, General Says,” Washington 
Post, March 10, 2007:A8.
40.  Ian Hoffman, “Mini Nukes are too Risky, Experts Say,” Oakland Tribune, 
March 5, 2003.
41.  Ann Scott Tyson, ”Bunker Buster Casualty Risk Cited,” Washington Post, 
April 28, 2005:A7; See also Christopher E. Paine, “Countering Proliferation, or Com-
pounding It?” (Natural Resources Defense Council, Washington, DC, May 2003).
42.  Michael A. Levi, “Fire in the Whole: Nuclear and Non-Nuclear Options for 
Counter-Proliferation” (Carnegie Endowment for International Peace Working Paper 
no. 31, Washington, DC, November 2002): 29.
43.  Scott D. Sagan, “The Commitment Trap: Why the United States should Not 
Use Nuclear Threats to Deter Biological and Chemical Weapons Attacks,” Inter­
national Security 24, no. 4 (Spring 2000): 87.
272  Notes to chapter 9

44.  R. Jeffrey Smith, “The Dissenter,” Washington Post, December 7, 1997.
45.  Victor A. Utgoff, “Nuclear Weapons and Deterrence of Biological and Chemi-
cal Warfare” (Henry L. Stimson Center Occasional Paper no. 36, Henry L. Stimson 
Center, Washington, DC, October 1997).
46.  I owe Tariq Rauf of the International Atomic Energy Agency for this point.
47.  Jonathan Medalia, “Nuclear Earth Penetrator Weapons” (Congressional Re-
search Service Report for Congress, Washington, DC, January 27, 2003): 5.
48.  John Holum, “Don’t Make Mini-Nukes,” International Herald Tribune, June 9, 
2003. It has been argued that the overall performance of the CIA in gauging potential 
WMD threats for over a decade has been “dismal.” See Richard L. Russell, “A Weak 
Pillar for American National Security: The CIA’s Dismal Performance against WMD 
Threats,” Intelligence and National Security 20, no. 3 (September 2005): 466–85.
49.  In March 2005, a Presidential Commission appointed by the Bush adminis-
tration reported that the intelligence community was “dead wrong on Iraq’s weapons 
arsenal” and that the “erroneous assumption by intelligence agencies that Saddam 
Hussein possessed deadly chemical and biological weapons had damaged American 
credibility before a world audience, and that the damage would take years to undo.” 
David Stout, “Panel Says ‘Dead Wrong’ Data on Prewar Iraq Demands Overhaul,” 
New York Times, March 31, 2005.
50.  There are those who argue that the syndrome was not caused by the de­pleted 
uranium, but by sporadic chemical weapons use by Saddam’s forces or as a result of 
coalition attacks on Iraq’s chemical weapons dispersed in the theater. The debate 
on the syndrome remains inconclusive. On the issue, see Steve Fetter and Frank N. 
von Hippel, “The Hazard Posed by Depleted Uranium Munitions,” Science & Global 
Security 8, no. 2 (1999): 125–61. See also Jonathan B. Tucker, “Evidence Iraq Used 
Chem­ical Weapons During the 1991 Persian Gulf War,” The Nonproliferation Review 
4, no. 3 (Spring/Summer 1997): 114–22.
51.  Arkin, “Nuclear Option.”
52.  George Quester, Nuclear First Strike: Consequences of a Broken Taboo (Balti-
more, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006), 68.
53.  Kristensen, “Nuclear Futures,” 21.
54.  Perkovich, “Bush Doctrine,” 4.
55.  Harold A. Feiveson and Ernst Jan Hogendoorn, “No First Use of Nuclear 
Weapons,” The Nonproliferation Review 10, no. 2 (Summer 2003): 1–9.
56.  Former Secretary of State General Colin Powell captured the essence of the rep-
utation problem. In an interview during the India-Pakistan standoff of 2002, he stated: 
“The thought of a nuclear conflict in the year 2002—with what that would mean with 
respect to the loss of life, what that would mean with respect to the condemnation, 
the worldwide condemnation, that would come down on whatever nation chose to 
take that course of action, would be such that I can see very little military, political, 
Notes to Chapter 9  273

or any other kind of justification for the use of nuclear weapons.” Online Newshour, 
“Newsmaker: Colin Powell,” May 30, 2002, http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/asia/
jan-june02/powell_5-30.html.
57.  Quester, Nuclear First Strike, 61. On the political problems of nuclear strategy, 
see James A. Russell, “Nuclear Strategy and the Modern Middle East,” Middle East 
Policy 11, no. 3 (Fall 2004): 98–117.
58.  Edward Kennedy, a vehement critic of the Bush administration’s nuclear pol-
icy, told a Senate Arms Services Committee meeting on the eve of the Gulf War II,  
“I am concerned that the use of nuclear weapons in Iraq in the absence of an immi-
nent, overwhelming threat to our national security would bring a near-total break-
down in our relations between the United States and the rest of the world, particularly 
with regard to the Arab world.” He was referring to Defense Secretary Rumsfeld not 
ruling out nuclear use in Iraq under certain circumstances. Will Dunham, “Update 
I—Rumsfeld Won’t Rule Out Nuclear Bomb against Iraq,” Reuters, February 13, 2003.
59.  Sridhar Krishnaswamy, “N-weapons Not Ruled Out?” The Hindu, October 30, 
2001, http://www.hinduonnet.com/2001/10/30/stories/01300004.htm.
Chapter 10: Conclusions
1.  Thomas Schelling criticized the efforts to blur the distinction in the 1960s: 
“It is difficult to imagine that the tacit agreement that nuclear weapons are different 
would be as powerfully present on the occasion of the next limited war after they 
had already been used in one. We can probably not, therefore, ignore the distinction 
and use nuclears in a particular war where their use might be of advantage to us and 
subsequently rely on the distinction in the hope that we and the enemy might both 
abstain. One potential limitation of war will be substantially discredited for all time 
if we shatter the tradition and create a contrary precedent,” The Strategy of Conἀict, 
2nd ed. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980), 265.
2.  On these components, see Patrick M. Morgan, Deterrence Now (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2003), 8.
3.  Richard J. Harknett, “The Logic of Conventional Deterrence and the End of the 
Cold War,” Security Studies 4, no. 1 (Autumn 1994): 89.
4.  Morgan, Deterrence Now, 15.
5.  Robert Powell, Nuclear Deterrence Theory: The Search for Credibility (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990), 110; Schelling, Strategy of Conἀict, 187–203.
6.  Glenn H. Snyder, “Deterrence and Power,” Journal of Conἀict Resolution 4 (1960): 
163; see also Snyder, Deterrence and Defense: Toward a Theory of National Security 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961), 15–16.
7.  Dean Wilkening and Kenneth Watman, Nuclear Deterrence in a Regional Con-
text (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1995), 14.
8.  Colin S. Gray, Maintaining Effective Deterrence (Carlisle, PA: U.S. Army War 
College, Strategic Studies Institute, August 2003), vii.
274  Notes to chapter 10

9.  The term self-deterrence is used prominently in John Lewis Gaddis, The Long 
Peace: Inquiries into the History of the Cold War (New York: Oxford University Press, 
1987), ch. 5.
10.  Robert L. Jervis, “The Confrontation between Iraq and the U.S.: Implications 
for the Theory and Practice of Deterrence,” European Journal of International Rela-
tions 9, no. 2 (June 2003): 329.
11.  Paul K. Huth and Bruce Russett, “General Deterrence Between Enduring Ri-
vals: Testing Three Competing Models,” American Political Science Review 87, no. 1 
(March 1993): 61–73; Dan S. Geller, “Nuclear Weapons, Deterrence, and Crisis Escala-
tion,” Journal of Conἀict Resolution 34, no. 2 (1990): 291–310.
12.  George Quester, Nuclear First Strike: Consequences of a Broken Taboo (Balti­
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2006), 32. A 1993 exercise of selected policy 
makers by the Rand Corporation concluded that “American expressions of reliance 
on nuclear weapons to defend allies, to redress disparities in conventional forces, or 
even to deter nuclear attacks contradict the thrust of our non-proliferation polices.” 
Marc Dean Millot, Roger Molander, and Peter A. Wilson, “The Day After . . .” Study: 
Nuclear Proliferation in the Post-Cold War World, vol. 2 (Santa Monica, CA: RAND 
Corporation, 1993), 69.
13.  This problem is becoming more acute with U.S. nuclear policy as the George W. 
Bush administration, despite the use of ideas like “tailored deterrence,” has widened 
the scope of nuclear retaliation against chemical and biological attacks in both pre-
ventive and preemptive modes. Thus there exists a tension in U.S. policy between 
two strands of reputation, one for resolve and the other for appropriate behavior. The 
character of the weapon concerned is a key factor in the creation of this tension.
14.  For these concepts see, Alexander L. George, “Coercive Diplomacy: Definition 
and Characteristics,” in The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy, ed. Alexander L. George 
and William E. Simons, 2nd ed. (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1994), 7.
15.  On this, see Wilkening and Watman, Nuclear Deterrence, 18–19.
16.  Ibid., 19.
17.  Morgan, Deterrence Now, 40.
18.  Quester, Nuclear First Strike.
19.  Barry Posen, “A Nuclear-Armed Iran: A Difficult but Not Impossible Policy 
Problem” (Century Foundation Report, New York, December 6, 2006).
Notes to Chapter 10  275


277
	
	 Select Bibliography
Abraham, Itty. The Making of the Indian Atomic Bomb. London: Zed Books, 1998.
Acharya, Amitav. Constructing a Security Community in Southeast Asia: ASEAN and 
the Problem of Regional Order. New York: Routledge, 2001.
Adams, Sherman. Firsthand Report: The Inside Story of the Eisenhower Administra-
tion. London: Hutchinson, 1962.
Adeniji, Oluyemi. The Treaty of Pelindaba: On the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zone. 
Geneva: UNIDIR, 2002.
Adler, Emanuel. “Seizing the Middle Ground: Constructivism in World Politics,” Eu-
ropean Journal of International Relations 3(3) (September 1997): 319–63.
Adomeit, Hannes. Soviet Risk Taking and Crisis Behaviour: A Theoretical and Empiri-
cal Analysis. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1982.
Ahmed, Samina, David Cortright, and Amitabh Mattoo. “Public Opinion and Nu-
clear Options for South Asia.” Asian Survey 38(8) (August 1998): 727–44.
Alagappa, Muthiah. “Towards a Nuclear-Weapons-Free Zone in Southeast Asia.” ISIS 
Research Note. Kuala Lumpur: Institute of Strategic and International Studies, 
1987.
Albright, David. “Al Qaeda’s Nuclear Program: Through the Window of Seized Docu-
ments.” The Nautilus Institute Policy Forum Online Special Forum 47 (6 Novem-
ber 2002).
Albright, David, and Corey Hinderstein. “Unraveling the A. Q. Khan and Future Pro-
liferation Networks.” The Washington Quarterly 28(2) (Spring 2005):111–28.
Alford, Jonathan. “Conventional Conflicts in a Nuclear Age, Falkland Islands: The 
Limited Use of Limited Power.” The Jerusalem Journal of International Relations 
7(1/2) (1984): 79–91.
Allison, Graham. Nuclear Terrorism. New York: Times Books, 2004.

278  Select Bibliography
Allison, Graham, and Philip Zelikow. Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Mis-
sile Crisis. Second Edition. New York: Addison Wesley Longman, 1999.
al-Marashi, Ibrahim. “Saddam’s Iraq and Weapons of Mass Destruction: Iraq as a 
Case Study of a Middle Eastern Proliferant.” Middle East Review of International 
Affairs 7(3) (September 2004): 81–90.
Alperovitz, Gar. The Decision to Use the Atomic Bomb and the Architecture of an Amer-
ican Myth. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1995.
Ambrose, Stephen E. Eisenhower. Vol. 2. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983.
Anderson, Jack. The Anderson Papers. New York: Random House, 1973.
Arbatov, Alexei. “Russian Military Doctrine and Strategic Nuclear Forces to the Year 
2000 and Beyond” (Paper Prepared for the Conference “Russian Defense Policy 
Towards the Year 2000,” Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, March 26–27, 
1997),
———. “The Transformation of Russian Military Doctrine: Lessons Learned from 
Kosovo and Chechnya.” (The Marshall Center Papers no. 2, July 2000).
Arian, Asher. “Israeli Public Opinion on National Security, 1998.” Memorandum 49. 
Tel Aviv: Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies, July 1998.
Arkin, William M. “The Buildup That Wasn’t.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 45(1) 
(January/February 1989): 6–10.
———. “Those Lovable Little Bombs.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 49(6) (July 
1993): 22–27.
———. “Calculated Ambiguity: Nuclear Weapons and the Gulf War.” The Washington 
Quarterly 19(4) (Autumn 1996): 3–18.
Arnold, Anthony. Afghanistan: The Soviet Invasion in Perspective. Stanford, CA: 
Hoover Institution Press, 1981.
Aronson, Shlomo. Conἀict and Bargaining in the Middle East. Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1978.
———. “The Nuclear Dimension of the Arab-Israeli Conflict: The Case of the Yom Kip-
pur War.” The Jerusalem Journal of International Relations 7(1/2) (1984): 107–42.
———. The Politics and Strategy of Nuclear Weapons in the Middle East. Albany: State 
University of New York Press, 1992.
Arquilla, John, and Maria Moyano Rasmussen. “The Origins of the South Atlantic 
War.” Journal of Latin American Studies 33(4) (November 2001): 739–75.
Atkinson, Rick. Crusade: The Untold Story of the Persian Gulf War. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin, 1993.
Axelrod, Robert. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books, 1984.
Baaro, Makurita. “The South Pacific Nuclear-Free-Zone Treaty (The Treaty of Raro-
tonga).” In Nuclear Weapon-free Zones in the 21st Century, edited by Pericles Gaspa-
rani Alves and Daiana Belinde Cipollone, 49–54. New York: United Nations, 1997.
Baker, James A., III. The Politics of Diplomacy. New York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1995.

Select Bibliography  279
Baldwin, David A. “Exchange Theory and International Relations.” International Ne-
gotiation 3(2) (1998): 139–49.
Ball, George. “The Cosmic Bluff.” New York Review of Books, 21 July, 1983.
Barak, Eitan. “Where do We Go from Here? Implementation of the Chemical Weap-
ons Convention in the Middle East in the Post-Saddam Era.” Security Studies 13(1) 
(Autumn 2003): 106–55.
Baram, Amatzia. “Israeli Deterrence, Iraqi Responses.” Orbis 36(3) (Summer 1992): 
397–409.
Bar-Joseph, Uri. “The Hidden Debate: The Formation of Nuclear Doctrines in the 
Middle East.” Journal of Strategic Studies 5(2) (June 1982): 205–27.
Basrur, Rajesh. “Kargil, Terrorism and India’s Strategic Shift.” India Review 1(4) (Oc-
tober 2002): 39–56.
———. “International Relations Theory and Minimum Deterrence.” India Review 4(2) 
(April 2005): 125–43.
———. Minimum Deterrence and India’s Nuclear Security. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 2006.
Baylis, John, and Kristan Stoddart. “Britain and the Chevaline Project: The Hidden 
Nuclear Programme, 1967–82.” Journal of Strategic Studies 26(4) (2003): 124–55.
Beckman, Peter R., Larry Campbell, and Paul W. Crumlish. The Nuclear Predicament. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1992.
Beri, Ruchita. “African Nuclear Weapon-Free Zone Treaty.” Strategic Analysis 19(4) 
(July 1996): 615–24.
Bernstein, Barton J. “The Quest for Security: American Foreign Policy and Interna-
tional Control of Atomic Energy, 1942–1946,” The Journal of American History 
60(4) (March 1974): 1003–44.
———. “Truman and the A-Bomb: Targeting Noncombatants, Using the Bomb, and 
His Defending the Decision.” The Journal of Military History 62(3) (July 1998): 
547–70.
Betts, Richard K. Nuclear Blackmail and Nuclear Balance. Washington, DC: The 
Brookings Institution, 1987.
Bird, Kai, and Lawrence Lifschultz, eds. Hiroshima’s Shadow. Stony Creek, CT: The 
Pamphleteer’s Press, 1998.
Bird, Kai, and Martin J. Sherwin. American Prometheus: The Triumph and Tragedy of 
J. Robert Oppenheimer. New York: Vintage Books, 2006.
Blau, Peter M. Exchange and Power in Social Life. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 
1964.
Blechman, Barry M., and Douglas M. Hart. “The Political Utility of Nuclear Weapons: 
The 1973 Middle East Crisis.” International Security 7(1) (Summer 1982):132–56.
Blight, James G., and David A. Welch, eds. Intelligence and the Cuban Missile Crisis. 
London: Frank Cass, 1998.

280  Select Bibliography
Bodansky, Daniel, Jutta Brunnee, and Ellen Hey, eds. The Oxford Handbook of Inter-
national Environmental Law. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Boese, Wade. “Germany Raises No-first Use Issue at NATO Meeting.” Arms Control 
Today 28(8) (November/December 1998): 24.
Boniface, Pascal. “The Future of the French Nuclear Posture.” Strategic Analysis 23(8) 
(November 1999): 1319–32.
———. “France and the Dubious Charms of a Post-Nuclear World.” In Pondering 
NATO’s Nuclear Options, edited by David G. Haglund, 151–62. Kingston, ON: 
Queen’s Quarterly, 1999.
Boulding, Kenneth E. The Meaning of the Twentieth Century: The Great Transition. 
New York: Harper & Row, 1964.
Bourgois, Joelle. “The Role Carried out by the Zones Exempt from Nuclear Arms.” 
In Nuclear Weapon Free-Zones in the 21st Century, edited by Pericles Gasparini 
Alves and Daiana Belinda Cipollone, 123–33. New York: United Nations, 1997.
Boyer, Paul S. By the Bomb’s Early Light: American Thought and Culture at the Dawn 
of the Atomic Age. New York: Pantheon, 1985.
Bowie, Robert R., and Richard H. Immerman. Waging Peace: How Eisenhower Shaped 
an Enduring Cold War Strategy. New York: Oxford University Press, 1998.
Bradsher, Henry S. Afghanistan and the Soviet Union. Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press, 1985.
Brands, H. W. Jr. “Testing Massive Retaliation: Credibility and Crisis Management in 
the Taiwan Strait.” International Security 12(4) (Spring 1988): 124–51.
———. “The Age of Vulnerability: Eisenhower and the National Security State.” The 
American Historical Review 94(4) (October 1989): 963–89.
Braun, Chaim, and Christopher F. Chyba. “Proliferation Rings: New Challenges to 
the Nonproliferation Regime.” International Security 29(2) (Fall 2004): 5–49.
Brecher, Michael, with Benjamin Geist. Decisions in Crisis: Israel, 1967 and 1973. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980.
Broadhurst, Arlene Idol. Nuclear Weapon-Free Zones: A Comparative Analysis of The-
ory and Practice. Aurora Paper No. 5. Ottawa, ON: The Canadian Center for Arms 
Control and Disarmament, 1985.
Brodie, Bernard. “War in the Atomic Age.” In The Absolute Weapon: Atomic Power and 
World Order, edited by Bernard Brodie, 21–69. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1946.
Broscious, S. David. “Longing for International Control, Banking on American Supe-
riority: Harry S. Truman’s Approach to Nuclear Weapons.” In Cold War Statesmen 
Confront the Bomb: Nuclear Diplomacy Since 1945, edited by John Lewis Gaddis, 
Philip H. Gordon, Ernest R. May, and Jonathan Rosenberg, 15–38. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1999.
Bundy, McGeorge. Danger and Survival. New York: Random House, 1988.
———. “Nuclear Weapons and the Gulf.” Foreign Affairs 70(4) (Fall 1991): 83–94.

Select Bibliography  281
Bundy, McGeorge, George F. Kennan, Robert S. McNamara, and Gerard C. Smith. 
“Nuclear Weapons and the Atlantic Alliance.” Foreign Affairs 60(4) (Spring 1982): 
752–68.
Bunn, George. “The Legal Status of U.S. Negative Security Assurances to Non-Nuclear 
Weapon States.” The Nonproliferation Review 4(3) (Spring/Summer 1997): 1–17.
Bunn, George, and Roland M. Timerbaev. “Security Assurances to Non-Nuclear 
Weapon States,” The Nonproliferation Review 1(1) (Fall 1993): 11–20.
Burgerman, Susan. Moral Victories: How Activists Provoke Multilateral Action. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 2001.
Burgess, Stephen F. “Nuclear Rollback in Africa: The Role of the African National Con­
gress and the ‘Nuclear Taboo.’ ” Paper presented at the APSA Convention, Wash-
ington, DC, September 2005.
Burns, E. L. M. “The Nonproliferation Treaty: Its Negotiations and Prospects.” Inter-
national Organization 23(4) (Autumn 1969): 788–807.
Burr, William. “The Nixon Administration, the ‘Horror Strategy,’ and the Search for 
Limited Nuclear Options, 1969–1972.” Journal of Cold War Studies 7(3) (Summer 
2005): 34–78.
———. “Looking Back: The Limits of Limited Nuclear War.” Arms Control Today 36(1) 
(January/February 2006): 45–48.
Burr, William, and Jeffrey T. Richelson. “Whether to Strangle the Baby in the Cradle: 
The United States and the Chinese Nuclear Program, 1960–64.” International Se-
curity 25(3) (Winter 2000–2001): 54–99.
Burr, William, and Jeffrey Kimball. “Nixon’s Nuclear Ploy.” Bulletin of the Atomic Sci-
entists 59(1) (January/February 2003): 28–39.
Butcher, Martin, Otfried Nassauer, and Stephen Young. “Nuclear Futures: Western 
European Options for Nuclear Risk Reduction” (BASIC Research Report (98.6, 
December 1998).
Butler, Richard. The Greatest Threat: Iraq, Weapons of Mass Destruction, and the Crisis 
of Global Security. New York: Public Affairs, 2000.
Calvert, Peter. The Falklands Crisis: The Rights and Wrongs. London: Frances Pinter, 
1982.
Cerniello, Craig. “Clinton Issues New Guidelines on U.S. Nuclear Weapons Doc-
trine.” Arms Control Today 27(8) (November/December 1997): 23.
Chalmers, Malcolm. “Bombs Away? Britain and Nuclear Weapons under New La-
bour.” Security Dialogue 30(1) (March 1999): 61–74.
Chandler, Alfred D., Jr., and Louis Galambos Jr., eds. The Papers of Dwight D. Eisen-
hower Vol. 7: The Chief of Staff. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
1970.
Chang, Gordon H. “JFK, China, and the Bomb.” The Journal of American History 74(4) 
(March 1988): 1287–1310.

282  Select Bibliography
———. “To the Nuclear Brink: Eisenhower, Dulles, and the Quemoy-Matsu Crisis.” 
International Security 12(4) (Spring 1988): 96–123.
Chari, P. R. “India’s Nuclear Doctrine: Confused Ambitions.” The Nonproliferation 
Review 7(3) (Fall/Winter 2000): 123–35.
Chayes, Abram, and Antonia Handler Chayes. The New Sovereignty: Compliance with 
International Regulatory Agreements. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1995.
Checkel, Jeffrey T. “International Norms and Domestic Politics: Bridging the  
Rationalist-Constructivist Divide.” European Journal of International Relations 
3(4) (December 1997): 473–95.
Cheema, Zafar Iqbal. “Pakistan’s Nuclear Use Doctrine and Command and Control.” 
In Planning the Unthinkable, edited by Peter R. Lavoy, Scott D. Sagan, and James 
J. Wirtz, 158–81. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2000.
Chernyaev, Anatoly S. My Six Years with Gorbachev. Translated and edited by Robert 
D. English and Elizabeth Tucker. University Park: The Pennsylvania University 
Press, 2000.
Cheung, Tai Ming. “New Bomb Makers.” Far Eastern Economic Review, March 16, 1989.
Cirincioni, Joseph, Jon B. Wolfstal, and Miriam Rajkumar. Deadly Arsenals. Wash-
ington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2002.
Clark, Ann Marie. Diplomacy of Conscience: Amnesty International and Changing 
Human Rights Norms. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2001.
Clarke, Michael. “How Strategic Was the Review?” Disarmament Diplomacy 28 (July 
1998): 3–5.
Cohen, Avner. “Cairo, Dimona, and the June 1967 War.” Middle East Journal 50(2) 
(Spring 1996): 190–210.
———. Israel and the Bomb. New York: Columbia University Press, 1998.
———. “Nuclear Arms in Crisis under Secrecy: Israel and the Lessons of the 1967 and 
1973 Wars.” In Planning the Unthinkable, edited by Peter R. Lavoy, Scott D. Sagan, 
and James J. Wirtz, 104–24. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2000.
———. “The Last Taboo: Israel’s Bomb Revisited.” Current History (April 2005): 169–75.
———. “Crossing the Threshold: The Untold Nuclear Dimension of the 1967 Arab- 
Israeli War and its Contemporary Lessons,” Arms Control Today 37, no. 5 (June 
2007).
Cohen, Avner, and Steven Lee. “The Nuclear Predicament.” In Nuclear Weapons and 
the Future of Humanity, edited by Avner Cohen and Steven Lee, 1–45. Totowa, NJ: 
Rowman and Allanheld, 1986.
Cohen, David B. “From START to START II: Dynamism and Pragmatism in the Bush 
Administration’s Nuclear Weapons Policies.” Presidential Studies Quarterly 27(3) 
(Summer 1997): 412–28.

Select Bibliography  283
Connelly, Matthew. A Diplomatic Revolution. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2002.
Conte, Rosaria, and Mario Paolucci. Reputation in Artificial Societies: Social Beliefs for 
Social Order. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2002.
Cordesman, Anthony H. Iran and Iraq: The Threat from the Northern Gulf. Boulder, 
CO: Westview Press, 1994.
Cordesman, Anthony H., and Abraham R. Wagner. The Lessons of Modern War Vol. 3: 
The Afghan and Falklands Conἀicts. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1990.
Costa Mendez, N. “Beyond Deterrence: The Malvinas-Falklands Case.” Journal of So-
cial Issues 43(4) (Winter 1987): 119–22.
Cotta-Ramusino, Paolo, and Maurizio Martellini. “Nuclear Safety, Nuclear Stability 
and Nuclear Strategy in Pakistan.” Concise Report of a Visit by Landau Network-
Centro Volta, January 21, 2002.
Craig, Campell. Destroying the Village: Eisenhower and Thermonuclear War. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1998.
Cumings, Bruce. The Origins of the Korean War Vol. 2: The Roaring of the Cataract, 
1947–1950. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1990.
———. “On the Strategy and Morality of American Nuclear Policy in Korea, 1950 to 
the Present.” Social Science Japan Journal 1(1) (April 1998): 57–70.
Dallek, Robert. Nixon and Kissinger: Partners in Power. New York: HarperCollins, 
2007. 
DeGroot, Gerard J. The Bomb: A Life. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2005.
Dingman, Roger. “Atomic Diplomacy During the Korean War.” International Security 
13(3) (Winter 1988/89): 50–89.
Douglas, Mary. Purity and Danger: An Analysis of the Concepts of Pollution and Taboo. 
New York: Routledge, 2002.
Dowler, Thomas W., and Joseph S. Howard, II. “Countering the Threat of the Well-
Armed Tyrant: A Modest Proposal for Small Nuclear Weapons.” Strategic Review 
19(4) (Fall 1991): 34–40.
Downs, George W., and Michael A. Jones. “Reputation, Compliance and International 
Law.” Journal of Legal Studies 31(1) (January 2002): S95–114.
du Preez, Jean. “Security Assurances against the Use or Threat of Use of Nuclear 
Weapons: Is Progress Possible at the NPT PrepCom?” (Center for Nonprolifera-
tion Studies Reports, Monterey Institute of International Studies, April 24, 2003).
———. “The 2005 NPT Review Conference: Can It Meet the Nuclear Challenge?” 
Arms Control Today 35(3) (April 2005): 6.
Duxbury, Neil. “Signaling and Social Norms.” Oxford Journal of Legal Studies 21(4) 
(Winter 2001): 719–36.

284  Select Bibliography
Dyson, F. J., R. Gomer, S. Weinberg, and S. C. Wright. “Tactical Nuclear Weapons in 
Southeast Asia.” Jason’s Division Institute for Defense Analysis, Washington, DC, 
March 1967.
Eisenhower, Dwight D. The White House Years Vol. 1: Mandate for Change, 1953–1956. 
Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1963.
el-Shazly, Saad. General. The Crossing of the Suez. San Francisco, CA: American Mideast  
Research, 1980. 
English, Robert D. Russia and the Idea of the West. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2000.
———. “The Road(s) Not Taken: Causality and Contingency in Analysis of the Cold 
War’s End.” In Cold War Endgame, edited by William C. Wohlforth, 243–72. Uni-
versity Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press, 2003.
Epstein, William. The Last Chance: Nuclear Proliferation and Arms Control. New York: 
The Free Press, 1976.
———. “Tlatelolco and a Nuclear-Weapon-Free World.” In Nuclear Weapon-Free 
Zones in the 21st Century, edited by Pericles Gasparani Alves and Daiana Belinde 
Cipollone, 23–27. New York: United Nations, 1997.
Erdmann, Andrew P. N. “War No Longer Has Any Logic Whatever: Dwight D. Eisen-
hower and the Thermonuclear Revolution.” In Cold War Statesmen Confront the 
Bomb: Nuclear Diplomacy Since 1945, edited by John Lewis Gaddis, Philip H.  
Gordon., Ernest R. May, and Jonathan Rosenberg, 87–119. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1999.
Ermarth, Fritz W. “Contrasts in American and Soviet Strategic Thought.” In Soviet 
Military Thinking, edited by Derek Leebaert, 50–72. London: George Allen & Un-
win, 1981.
Etzold, Thomas, and John Lewis Gaddis, eds. Containment: Documents on American 
Policy and Strategy. New York: Columbia University Press, 1978.
Evangelista, Matthew. “Sources of Moderation in Soviet Security Policy.” In Behavior, 
Society and Nuclear War, edited by Philip E. Tetlock, Jo L. Husbands, Robert Jervis, 
Paul C. Stern, and Charles Tilly, 254–354. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.
———. Unarmed Forces: The Transnational Movement to End the Cold War. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1999.
———. “Turning Points in Arms Control.” In Ending the Cold War: Interpretations, 
Causation, and the Study of International Relations, edited by Richard K. Hermann 
and Richard Ned Lebow, 83–107. New York: Palgrave-Macmillan, 2004.
Evron, Yair. “The Arab Position in the Nuclear Field: A Study of Policies up to 1967.” 
Cooperation and Conἀict 8(1) (1973): 19–31.
———. “Opaque Proliferation: The Israeli Case.” In Opaque Nuclear Proliferation: Meth-
odological and Policy Implications, edited by Benjamin Frankel, 45–64. London: 
Frank Cass, 1991.

Select Bibliography  285
———. Israel’s Nuclear Dilemma. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1994.
Falk, Richard. “Nuclear Weapons, International Law and the World Court: A Historic 
Encounter.” American Journal of International Law 91(1) (January 1997): 64–75.
Farr, Warner D. “The Third Temple’s Holy of Holies: Israel’s Nuclear Weapons,” Fu-
ture Warfare Series No. 2. Maxwell Air Force Base, AL, September 1999.
Faruqui, Ahmad. “Failure in Command: Lessons from Pakistan’s India Wars.” De-
fense Analysis 17(1) (2001): 31–40
Fearon, James D. “Domestic Political Audiences and the Escalation of International 
Disputes.” American Political Science Review 88(3) (September 1994): 577–92.
Fearon, James D., and Alexander Wendt. “Rationalism v. Constructivism: A Skepti-
cal View,” In Handbook of International Relations, edited by Walter Carlsnaes, 
Thomas Risse, and Beth A. Simmons, 52–72. London: Sage, 2002.
Fedorov, Yuri. “Russia’s Doctrine on the Use of Nuclear Weapons” (Working Paper, 
Columbia International Affairs Online, November 2002).
Feiveson, Harold A., and Ernst Jan Hogendoorn. “No First Use of Nuclear Weapons.” 
The Nonproliferation Review 10(2) (Summer 2003): 1–9.
Feld, Scott L. “On the Emergence of Social Norms.” Contemporary Sociology 31(6) 
(November 2002): 638–40.
Feldman, Shai. Israeli Nuclear Deterrence. New York: Columbia University Press, 
1982.
———. Nuclear Weapons and Arms Control in the Middle East. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1997.
Ferguson, Charles D., and William C. Potter. The Four Faces of Nuclear Proliferation. 
New York: Routledge, 2005.
Fetter, Steve, and Frank N. von Hippel. “The Hazard Posed by Depleted Uranium Mu-
nitions.” Science and Global Security 8(2) (1999): 125–61.
Finkbeiner, Ann. The Jasons: The Secret History of Science’s Postwar Elite. New York: 
Penguin, 2007.
Finnemore, Martha. National Interests in International Society. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1996.
Finnemore, Martha, and Kathryn Sikkink. “International Norm Dynamics and Polit-
ical Change.” International Organization 52(4) (Autumn 1998): 887–917.
Fischer, Beth A. The Reagan Reversal: Foreign Policy and the End of the Cold War. 
Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press, 2002.
Fischer, Dean. “Inside Saddam’s Brutal Regime.” Time, September 18, 1995.
Foot, Rosemary J. The Wrong War: American Policy and the Dimensions of the Korean 
Conἀict, 1950–53. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1985.
———. “Nuclear Coercion and the Ending of the Korean Conflict.” International Se-
curity 13(3) (Winter 1988/89): 92–112.
Frazer, James George. Taboo and the Perils of Soul. New York: Macmillan, 1935.

286  Select Bibliography
Freedman, Lawrence. “Israel’s Nuclear Policy.” Survival 17(3) (May–June 1975): 114–20.
———. The Evolution of Nuclear Strategy. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1983.
———. The Official History of the Falklands Campaign Vol. 2: War and Diplomacy. 
London: Routledge, 2005.
Freud, Sigmund. Totem and Taboo. Translated by James Strachey. London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul, 1950.
Frye, Alton. “Opinion: Slow Fuse on the Neutron Bomb.” Foreign Policy 31 (Summer 
1978): 95–103.
Gaddis, John Lewis. The Long Peace: Inquiries into the History of the Cold War. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1987.
———. “Nuclear Weapons, the End of the Cold War, and the Future of the Inter­
national System.” In Nuclear Weapons in a Changing World, edited by Patrick J. 
Garrity and Steven A. Maaranen, 15–31. New York: Plenum Press, 1992.
———. We Now Know: Rethinking Cold War History. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1997.
———. The Cold War: A New History. New York: The Penguin Press, 2005.
Gallois, Pierre. The Balance of Terror: Strategy for the Nuclear Age. Boston, MA: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1961.
Garnett, Sherman W. “Ukraine’s Decision to Join the NPT.” Arms Control Today 25(1) 
(January/February 1995): 7–12.
Garthoff, Raymond. “Mutual Deterrence and Strategic Arms Limitation in Soviet 
Policy.” International Security 3(1) (Summer 1978): 112–47.
———. “Berlin 1961: The Record Corrected.” Foreign Policy 84 (Autumn 1991): 142–56.
Gavin, Francis J. “Blasts from the Past: Proliferation Lessons from the 1960s.” Inter-
national Security 29(3) (Winter 2004–05): 100–35.
Gavshon, Arthur, and Desmond Rice. The Sinking of the Belgrano. London: Secker & 
Warburg, 1984. 
Geller, Dan S. “Nuclear Weapons, Deterrence, and Crisis Escalation.” Journal of Con-
ἀict Resolution 34 (2) (1990): 291–310.
Gelpi, Christopher. The Power of Legitimacy: Assessing the Role of Norms in Crisis Bar-
gaining. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003.
Gentile, Gian P. “Planning for Preventive War, 1945–1950.” Joint Forces Quarterly 24 
(Spring 2000): 68–74.
George, Alexander L. “Coercive Diplomacy: Definition and Characteristics.” In The Lim­
its of Coercive Diplomacy, edited by Alexander L. George and William E. Simons, 
7–11. Boulder: CO: Westview Press, 1994.
Giridharadas, Anand. “JFK’s Nuclear Dilemma over China and India.” International 
Herald Tribune, August 26, 2005.
Gizewski, Peter. “From Winning Weapon to Destroyer of the World: The Nuclear Taboo  
in International Politics.” International Journal 51(2) (Summer 1996): 397–419.

Select Bibliography  287
Glaser, Charles L., and Steve Fetter. “Counterforce Revisited: Assessing the Nuclear 
Posture Review’s New Missions.” International Security 30(2) (Fall 2005): 84–126.
Glitman, Maynard W. The Last Battle of the Cold War. New York: Palgrave-Macmillan, 
2006.
Goertz, Gary, and Paul F. Diehl. “International Norms and Power Politics.” In Recon-
structing Realpolitik, edited by Frank W. Wayman and Paul F. Diehl, 101–22. Ann 
Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 1994.
Goldman, Laurence R., ed. The Anthropology of Cannibalism. Westport, CT: Bergin 
& Garvey, 1999.
Gorbachev, Mikhail. Memoirs. New York: Doubleday, 1995.
Gordon, Philip. A Certain Idea of France: French Security Policy and the Gaullist Legacy. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993.
Gottemoeller, Rose. “Nuclear Necessity in Putin’s Russia.” Arms Control Today 34(3) 
(April 2004): p. 14.
Gowing, Margaret. Independence and Deterrence: Britain and Atomic Energy, 1945–52 
Vol. 1 and Vol. II. London: Palgrave-Macmillan, 1974.
Grand, Camille. “A French Nuclear Exception?” Henry L. Stimson Center Occasional 
Paper No. 38. Washington, DC: Henry L. Stimson Center, January 1998.
Grant, Rebecca. “Dien Bien Phu.” Air Force Magazine Online 87(8) (August 2004): 
78–84.
Gray, Colin S. “Nuclear Weapons and the Revolution in Military Affairs.” In The Abso-
lute Weapon Revisited: Nuclear Arms and the Emerging International Order, edited 
by T. V. Paul, Richard J. Harknett, and James J. Wirtz, 99–134. Ann Arbor: The 
University of Michigan Press, 1998.
———. “To Confuse Ourselves: Nuclear Fallacies.” In Alternative Nuclear Futures, ed-
ited by John Baylis and Robert O’Neill, 4–30. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2000.
———. Maintaining Effective Deterrence. Carlisle, PA: U.S. Army War College, 2003.
Gray, Colin S., and Keith B. Payne, “Victory is Possible.” Foreign Policy no. 39 (Summer, 
1980): 14–27.
Grosser, Alfred. French Foreign Policy under De Gaulle. Boston: Little, Brown, 1965.
Haglund, David G. “Pondering NATO’s Nuclear Options.” Queen’s Quarterly (1999): 
151–62.
Hall, David K. “The Laotian War of 1962 and the Indo-Pakistani War of 1971.” In Force  
Without War: U.S. Armed Forces as a Political Instrument, edited by Barry M. 
Blechman and Stephen S. Kaplan, 135–221. Washington, DC: Brookings Institu­
tion, 1978.
Hall, John A., and T. V. Paul. “Preconditions for Prudence: A Sociological Synthesis of 
Realism and Liberalism.” In International Order and the Future of World Politics, 

288  Select Bibliography
edited by T. V. Paul and John A. Hall, 67–77. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1999.
Halperin, Morton H., and O’Donnell, Madalene, “The Nuclear Fallacy.” Bulletin of the 
Atomic Scientists 44(1) (January/February 1988): 6–11.
Hamel-Green, Michael. “South Pacific: A Not So Nuclear-Free Zone.” Peace Studies 
(November–December 1985): 6–8.
———. “The South Pacific—The Treaty of Rarotonga.” In Nuclear Weapons-Free Zones, 
edited by Ramesh Thakur, 59–80. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1998.
Handel, Michael I. “Perception, Deception and Surprise: The Case of the Yom Kip-
pur War,” Jerusalem Papers on Peace Problems no. 19. Hebrew University of Jeru-
salem, 1976.
Harknett, Richard J. “The Logic of Conventional Deterrence and the End of the Cold 
War.” Security Studies 4(1) (Autumn 1994): 86–114.
———. “State Preferences, Systemic Constraints, and the Absolute Weapon.” In The 
Absolute Weapon Revisited: Nuclear Arms and the Emerging International Order, 
edited by T. V. Paul, Richard J. Harknett, and James J. Wirtz, 47–72. Ann Arbor, 
MI: The University of Michigan Press, 1998.
Harrison, Hope M. “The Nuclear Education of Nikita Khrushchev.” In Cold War 
Statesmen Confront the Bomb: Nuclear Diplomacy Since 1945, edited by John 
Lewis Gaddis, Philip H. Gordon, Ernest R. May, and Jonathan Rosenberg, 141–68.  
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Hasegawa, Tsuyoshi. Racing the Enemy: Stalin, Truman, and the Surrender of Japan. 
Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2005.
Hashmi, Sohail H. “Islamic Ethics and Weapons of Mass Destruction.” In Ethics and 
Weapons of Mass Destruction, edited by Sohail H. Hashmi and Steven P. Lee,  
321–52. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Hayes, Peter, and Nina Tannenwald. “Nixing Nukes in Vietnam.” Bulletin of the Atomic 
Scientists 59(3) (May–June 2003): 52–59.
Hechter, Michael, and Karl-Dieter Opp, eds. Social Norms. New York: Russell Sage 
Foundation, 2001.
Heikal, Mohammed. Illusions of Triumph. London: HarperCollins, 1992.
———. The Sphinx and the Commissar: The Rise and Fall of Soviet Inἀuence in the Arab 
World. London: Collins, 1978.
Herken, Greg. The Winning Weapon: The Atomic Bomb in the Cold War, 1945–1950. 
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1980.
Hernandez, Carolina G. “Southeast Asia—The Treaty of Bangkok.” In Nuclear Weapons- 
Free Zones, edited by Ramesh Thakur, 81–92. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1998.
Herring, Eric. “Double Standards and the Myth of the Third World Nuclear Fanatic.” 
Paper Presented at the American Political Science Association Convention, Chi-
cago, September 3–6, 1992.

Select Bibliography  289
Herring, George C., and Richard H. Immerman. “Eisenhower, Dulles and Dienbienphu: 
‘The Day We Didn’t Go to War’ Revisited.” The Journal of American History 71(2) 
(September 1984): 343–63.
Hersey, John. Hiroshima. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1972.
Hersh, Seymour M. The Price of Power: Kissinger in the Nixon White House. New 
York: Summit Books, 1983.
———. The Samson Option: Israel’s Nuclear Arsenal and American Foreign Policy. New 
York: Random House, 1991.
———. “The Iran Plans.” The New Yorker, April 17, 2006.
Hobsbawm, Eric, and Terence Ranger, eds. The Invention of Tradition. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Hoekstra, Douglas J. “Presidential Beliefs and the Reagan Paradox.” Presidential Stud-
ies Quarterly 27(3) (Summer 1997): 429–50.
Hoffmann, Stanley. “Nuclear Proliferation and World Politics.” In A World of Nuclear 
Powers?, edited by Alastair Buchan, 89–122. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 
1966.
Holdstock, Douglas, and Frank Barnaby. The British Nuclear Weapons Programme 
1952–2002. London: Frank Cass, 2003.
Holloway, David. Stalin and the Bomb. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994.
Hoopes, Townsend. The Devil and John Foster Dulles. Boston: Little, Brown, 1973.
Hopf, Ted. Social Construction of International Politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 2002.
Hopkins, John C., and Weixing Hu, eds. Strategic Views from the Second Tier: The Nu-
clear Weapons Policies of France, Britain and China. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction 
Publishers, 1995.
Huang, Zhen, “Whither China’s Strategic Nuclear Posture? An Assessment of Exist-
ing Constraints and Prospects,” Political Science 53(2) (December 2001): 39–54.
Husain, M. A. “Third World and Disarmament: Shadow and Substance.” Third World 
Quarterly 2(1) (January 1980): 76–99.
Huth, Paul. “Reputations and Deterrence: A Theoretical and Empirical Assessment.” 
Security Studies 7(1) (Autumn 1997): 72–99.
Huth, Paul, and Bruce Russett. “General Deterrence between Enduring Rivals: Test-
ing Three Competing Models.” American Political Science Review 87(1) (March 
1993): 61–73.
Ibuse, Masuji. Black Rain. Trans. John Bester. Tokyo: Kodansha International, 1969.
Ihonvbere, Julius O. “Africa—The Treaty of Pelindaba.” In Nuclear Weapons-Free 
Zones, edited by Ramesh Thakur, 93–120. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1998.
Immerman, Richard H. John Foster Dulles: Piety, Pragmatism, and Power in U.S. For-
eign Policy. Washington, DC: Scholarly Resources, 1999.

290  Select Bibliography
Jackson, Michael Gordon. “Beyond Brinkmanship: Eisenhower, Nuclear Warfighting, 
and Korea, 1953–1968.” Presidential Studies Quarterly 35(1) (March 2005): 52–75.
Jentleson, Bruce W., and Christopher A. Whytcock “Who ‘Won’ Libya: The Force-  
Diplomacy Debate and Its Implications for Theory and Policy.” International Se-
curity 30(3) (Winter 2005–06): 47–86.
Jepperson, Ronald L., Alexander Wendt, and Peter J. Katzenstein. “Norms, Identity, 
and Culture in National Security.” In The Culture of National Security, edited by 
Peter J. Katzenstein, 33–75. New York: Columbia University Press, 1996.
Jervis, Robert. “Deterrence Theory Revisited.” World Politics 31(2) (January 1979): 
289–24.
———. The Illogic of American Nuclear Strategy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1984.
———. The Logic of Images in International Relations. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2nd edition, 1989.
———. “The Confrontation between Iraq and the U.S.: Implications for the Theory 
and Practice of Deterrence.” European Journal of International Relations 9(2) 
(June 2003): 315–37.
Johnson, Rebecca. “British Perspectives on the Future of Nuclear Weapons.” Occa-
sional Paper No. 37. Washington DC: The Henry L. Stimson Center, January 1998.
Johnston, Alastair Iain. “China’s New ‘Old Thinking’: The Concept of Limited Deter-
rence.” International Security 20(3) (Winter 1995–96): 5–42.
———. “Prospects for Chinese Nuclear Force Modernization: Limited Deterrence 
Versus Multilateral Arms Control.” The China Quarterly 146 (June 1996): 548–76.
Jones, Peter M., and Gordon Reece. British Public Attitudes to Nuclear Defence. 
Houndmills, UK: Macmillan, 1990.
Jonsson, Christer. Soviet Bargaining Behavior: The Nuclear Test Ban Case. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1979.
Kahn, Herman. On Thermonuclear War, 2nd edition. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer­
sity Press, 1961
———. On Escalation: Metaphors and Scenarios. Baltimore, MD: Penguin Books, 1968.
Kanwal, Gurmeet. “India’s Nuclear Doctrine and Policy.” Strategic Analysis 26(11) 
(February 2001): 247–64.
Kapila, Subhash. “India’s New ‘Cold Start’ War Doctrine Strategically Reviewed.” 
South Asia Analysis Group Paper (no. 991) May 4, 2004.
Kaplan, Fred. “JFK’s First-Strike Plan.” Atlantic Monthly 288(3) (October 2001): 81–86.
———. The Wizards of Armageddon. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1983.
Karpin, Michael. The Bomb in the Basement: How Israel Went Nuclear and What that 
Means for the World. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2006.
Katzenstein, Peter J., ed. The Culture of National Security. New York: Columbia Uni-
versity Press, 1996.

Select Bibliography  291
Katzenstein, Peter J., and Rudra Sil. “Rethinking Asian Security: A Case for Analyti-
cal Eclecticism.” In Rethinking Security in East Asia, edited by J. J. Suh, Peter J. 
Katzenstein, and Allen Carlson, 1–33. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
2004.
Keck, Margaret, and Kathryn Sikkink. Activists Beyond Borders: Advocacy Networks 
in International Politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998.
Keefer, Edward C. “President Dwight D. Eisenhower and the End of the Korean War.” 
Diplomatic History 10(3) (Summer 1986): 267–89.
Keohane, Robert O. After Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the World Political 
Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984.
Khan, Feroz Hassan. “Command-and-Control Challenges in New Nuclear States.” 
(Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the International Studies Associa-
tion, San Diego, CA, March 23–25, 2006).
Khrushchev, Nikita. Khrushchev Remembers. Translated and edited by Strobe Talbott. 
Boston: Little, Brown, 1970.
Kimball, Daryl G. “The Mixed Arms Control Legacy of Ronald Reagan.” Arms Control 
Today 34(6) (July/August 2004): 44–47.
Kissinger, Henry A. Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy. New York: Harper & Brothers, 
1957.
———. The White House Years. Boston: Little, Brown, 1979.
Klotz, Audie. Norms in International Relations: The Struggle against Apartheid. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1995.
Knopf, Jeffrey W. Domestic Society and International Cooperation: The Impact of Pro-
test on U.S. Arms Control Policy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Koening, Louis W. The Truman Administration: Its Principles and Practice. New York: 
New York University Press, 1956.
Koh, Harold Hongju. “Why do Nations Obey International Law?” The Yale Law Jour-
nal 106(8) (June 1997): 2599-2659.
Kokoshin, Andrei A. Soviet Strategic Thought, 1917–91. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1998.
Koster, Karel. “An Uneasy Alliance: NATO Nuclear Doctrine & NPT.” Disarmament 
Diplomacy 49 (August 2000): 10.
Kristensen, Hans M. “Targets of Opportunity.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 53(5) 
(September/October 1997): 22–28.
———. “Nuclear Futures: Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction and U.S. Nu-
clear Strategy.” BASIC Research Report 98(2) (March 1998).
———. “The Role of U.S. Nuclear Weapons: New Doctrine Falls Short of Bush Pledge.” 
Arms Control Today 35(7) (September 2005): 13.
Kubalkova, Vendulka, Nicholas Onuf, and Paul Kowert, eds. International Relations 
in a Constructed World. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 1998.

292  Select Bibliography
Kuhn, Thomas. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1962.
Laird, Robbin F., and Dale R. Herspring. The Soviet Union and Strategic Arms. Boulder, 
CO: Westview Press, 1984.
Lakatos, Imre. “Falsification and the Methodology of Scientific Research Programs.” 
In Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, edited by Imre Lakatos and Alan  
Musgrave, 91–196. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970.
Lambeth, Benjamin S. “Nuclear Proliferation and Soviet Arms Control Policy.” Orbis 
14(2) (Summer 1970): 298–323.
Lapp, Ralph. The Weapons Culture. Baltimore, MD: Penguin Books, 1969.
Larkin, Bruce D. Nuclear Designs. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1996.
Larsen, Jeffrey A., ed. Arms Control: Cooperative Security in a Changing Environment. 
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2002.
Lavoy, Peter R., ed. Asymmetric Warfare in South Asia: The Causes and Consequences 
of the Kargil Conἀict. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.
———. “Pakistan’s Nuclear Doctrine.” In Prospects for Peace in South Asia, eds. Rafiq 
Dossani and Henry S. Rowen, 280–300. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 
2005.
Lebow, Richard Ned. “Miscalculation in the South Atlantic: The Origins of the Falk-
lands War.” In Psychology and Deterrence, edited by Robert Jervis, Richard N. 
Lebow, and Janice Gross Stein, 89–124. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Press, 1985.
Lee, Steven P. Morality, Prudence and Nuclear Weapons. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1993.
Lefever, Ernest W. Nuclear Arms in the Third World. Washington, DC: The Brookings 
Institution, 1979.
Leffler, Melvin P. A Preponderance of Power: National Security, the Truman Adminis-
tration, and the Cold War. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1992.
Legro, Jeffrey W. Cooperation Under Fire. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1995.
———. “Which Norms Matter? Revisiting the ‘Failure’ of Internationalism.” Inter­
national Organization 51(1) (Winter 1997): 31–61.
———. Rethinking the World: Great Power Strategies and International Order. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 2005.
Leng, Russell. “Realpolitik and Learning in the India-Pakistan Rivalry.” In The India-
Pakistan Conἀict: An Enduring Rivalry, edited by T. V. Paul, 103–30. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Lettow, Paul. Ronald Reagan and His Quest to Abolish Nuclear Weapons. New York: 
Random House, 2005.
Levi, Michael A. “Fire in the Whole: Nuclear and Non-Nuclear Options for Counter- 
Proliferation.” Carnegie Endowment Working Paper no. 31. Washington, DC: 
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, November 2002.

Select Bibliography  293
Levite, Ariel E., and Emily B. Landau. Israel’s Nuclear Image: Arab Perceptions of Israel’s 
Nuclear Posture. In Hebrew. Tel Aviv: Papyrus, 1994.
Lewis, Jeffrey. “The Ambiguous Arsenal.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 61(3) (May/
June 2005): 52–59.
Lewis, John Wilson, and Xue Litai. China Builds the Bomb. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 1988.
Lieber, Keir A., and Daryl G. Press. “The Rise of U.S. Nuclear Primacy.” Foreign Af-
fairs 85(2) (March/April 2006): 42–54.
Lilienthal, David. The Journals of David E. Lilienthal Vol 2: The Atomic Energy Years, 
1945–1950. New York: Harper and Row, 1964.
Lipson, Charles. Reliable Partners: How Democracies Have Made a Separate Peace. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003.
Lipson, Michael. “Organized Hypocrisy and the NPT.” Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the American Political Science Association, Washington, DC, Septem-
ber 1–4, 2005.
Luthi, Lorenz M. The Sino-Soviet Split. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2008.
Maddock, Shane. “The Fourth Country Problem; Eisenhower’s Nuclear Nonprolifera-
tion Policy.” Presidential Studies Quarterly 28(3) (Summer 1998): 553–72.
Maddox, Robert James. Weapons for Victory: The Hiroshima Decision. Columbia: Uni-
versity of Missouri Press, 1995.
Maley, William. The Afghanistan Wars. New York: Palgrave-Macmillan, 2002.
Malik,  General V. P. Kargil: From Surprise to Victory. New Delhi: Harper Collins, 2006.
Mallavarapu, Siddharth. Banning the Bomb: The Politics of Norm Creation. New Delhi: 
Pearson, 2007.
Mandelbaum, Michael. The Nuclear Question: The United States and Nuclear Weap-
ons, 1946–1976. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1979.
March, James G., and Johan P. Olsen. “The Institutional Dynamics of International 
Political Orders.” International Organization 52(4) (Autumn 1998): 943–69.
Martin, Susan B. “Realism and Weapons of Mass Destruction: A Consequentialist 
Analysis.” In Ethics and Weapons of Mass Destruction, edited by Sohail H. Hashmi 
and Steven P. Lee, 96–110. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Mastny, Vojtech, and Malcolm Byrne, eds. A Cardboard Castle? An Inside History of 
the Warsaw Pact, 1955–1991. Budapest: Central European University Press, 2005.
McCarthy, Timothy V., and Jonathan B. Tucker. “Saddam’s Toxic Arsenal: Chemical 
and Biological Weapons in the Gulf War.” In Planning the Unthinkable, edited 
by Peter R. Lavoy, Scott D. Sagan, and James J. Wirtz, 47–78. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2000.
McCausland, Lt. Col. Jeffrey. “The Gulf Conflict: A Military Analysis.” Adelphi Papers 
no. 282. London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, November 1993.

294  Select Bibliography
McDonough, Mark. Tracking Nuclear Proliferation. Washington, DC: Carnegie En-
dowment for International Peace, 1998.
McGowen, Tom. Air Raid! The Bombing Campaigns of World War II. Brookfield, CT: 
Twenty-First Century Books, 2001.
Medalia, Jonathan. “Nuclear Earth Penetrator Weapons.” Congressional Research 
Service Report, Washington, DC, January 27, 2003.
Menon, Anand. “Explaining Defence Policy: The Mitterrand Years.” Review of Inter-
national Studies 21(3) (July 1995): 279–99.
Mercer, Jonathan. Reputation and International Politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 1996.
Miller, Steven E. “The Haves and Have Nots: Proliferation, Disarmament, and the 
Future of the NPT System.” Paper presented at the Norwegian Institute for Inter­
national Affairs Conference on “Halting Nuclear Proliferation in the 21st Cen-
tury,” Oslo, October 2005.
Millis, Walter, ed. The Forrestal Diaries. New York: Viking, 1951.
Millot, Marc Dean, Roger Molander, and Peter A. Wilson. “The Day After . . .” Study: 
Nuclear Proliferation in the Post-Cold War World. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Cor-
poration, 1993.
Ming, Zhang. China’s Changing Nuclear Posture. Washington, DC: Brookings Insti-
tution Press, 1999.
Morgan, Patrick M. Deterrence: A Conceptual Analysis. Beverly Hills: Sage Publica-
tions, 1983.
———. Deterrence Now. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
Morgenthau, Hans J. The Purpose of American Politics. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
1960.
Mueller, Harald. “Constructing a Taboo against Weapons of Mass Destruction” (Un-
published Paper, Peace Research Institute, Frankfurt, 2003).
Mueller, John, and Karl P. Mueller. “The Methodology of Mass Destruction: Assess-
ing Threats in the New World Order.” Journal of Strategic Studies 23(1) (March 
2000): 163–87.
Mueller, Karl P. et al. Striking First (Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2006).
Munton, Don, and David A. Welch. The Cuban Missile Crisis: A Concise History. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Myrdal, Alva. The Game of Disarmament. New York: Pantheon Books, 1982.
Navias, Martin. “Non-Conventional Weaponry and Ballistic Missiles during the 1991 
Gulf War.” In Non-Conventional Weapons Proliferation in the Middle East, edited 
by Efraim Karsh, Martin S. Navias, and Philip Sabin, 49–66. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1993.
Nelson, Robert W. “Low-Yield Earth Penetrating Nuclear Weapons.” FAS Public Inter-
est Report 54(1) (January/February 2001): 1–5.

Select Bibliography  295
Nixon, Richard M. No More Vietnams. New York: Arbor House, 1985.
Norris, Robert S., and Hans M. Kristensen, “Chinese Nuclear Forces, 2003,” Bulletin 
of the Atomic Scientists 59(6) (November/December 2003): 77–80.
———. “U.S. Nuclear Threats: Then and Now,” Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 62(5) 
(September/October 2006): 69–71.
Norris, R. S., A. S. Burrows, and R. W. Fieldhouse. Nuclear Weapons Databook Vol. V: 
British, French and Chinese Nuclear Weapons. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1994.
Nye, Joseph S. Soft Power: The Means to Success in World Politics. New York: Public 
Affairs, 2004.
Offner, Arnold A. Another Such Victory: President Truman and the Cold War, 1945–1953. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2002.
Oren, Michael B. Six Days of War: June 1967 and the Making of the Modern Middle 
East. New York: Presidio Press, 2003.
Owen, John M. “How Liberalism Produces Democratic Peace,” International Security 
19(2) (Autumn 1994): 87–125.
Paine, Christopher E. “Countering Proliferation, or Compounding It?” Washington, 
DC: Natural Resources Defense Council, May 2003.
Pande, Savita. “Chinese Nuclear Doctrine.” Strategic Analysis 23(12) (March 2000): 
2011–35.
Pant, Harsh V. “India’s Nuclear Doctrine and Command Structure: Implications for 
India and the World.” Comparative Strategy 24(3) (July 2005): 277–93.
Paul, T. V. “Nuclear Free-zone in the South Pacific: Rhetoric or Reality?” The Round 
Table 299 (July 1986): 252–62.
———. Asymmetric Conἀicts: War Initiation by Weaker Powers. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1994.
———. “Nuclear Taboo and War Initiation: Nuclear Weapons in Regional Conflicts.” 
Journal of Conἀict Resolution 39(4) (December 1995): 696–717.
———. “Power, Influence and Nuclear Weapons: A Reassessment.” In The Absolute 
Weapon Revisited: Nuclear Arms and the Emerging International Order, edited by 
T. V. Paul, Richard J. Harknett, and James J. Wirtz, 19–46. Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press, 1998.
———. “The Systemic Bases of India’s Challenge to the Global Nuclear Order,” The 
Nonproliferation Review 6(1) (Fall 1998): 1–11.
———. Power versus Prudence: Why Nations Forgo Nuclear Weapons. Montreal, QC: 
McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2000.
———. “Systemic Conditions and Security Cooperation: Explaining the Persistence of 
the Nuclear Nonproliferation Regime.” Cambridge Review of International Affairs 
16(1) (April 2003): 135–54.
———. “Chinese/Pakistani Nuclear/Missile Ties and Balance of Power Politics.” The 
Nonproliferation Review 10(2) (Summer 2003): 1–9.

296  Select Bibliography
———, ed. The India-Pakistan Conἀict: An Enduring Rivalry. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2005.
———. “The US.-India Nuclear Accord: Implications for the Non-Proliferation Re-
gime.” International Journal 62(4) (Autumn 2007): 845–61.
Paul, T. V., and John A. Hall, eds. International Order and the Future of World Politics. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Payne, Keith B. Deterrence in the Second Nuclear Age. Lexington: University Press of 
Kentucky, 1996.
———. “Why We Must Sustain Nuclear Deterrence.” (National Institute for Public 
Policy, April 1998).
Perkovich, George. India’s Nuclear Bomb: The Impact on Global Proliferation. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1990.
———. “Bush Doctrine Makes Nuclear Weapons Morally Obsolete.” Unpublished pa-
per, Carnegie Endowment for International Peace (Washington, DC, June 2003).
Perry, William J. “Desert Storm and Deterrence in the Future.” In After the Storm: 
Lessons from the Gulf War, edited by Joseph S. Nye and Roger K. Smith, 241–64. 
Colorado Springs, CO: The Aspen Institute, 1992.
Pilat, Joseph F. “Reassessing Security Assurances in a Unipolar World.” The Washington 
Quarterly 28(2) (Spring 2005): 159–170.
Pipes, Richard. “Why the Soviet Union Thinks it Could Fight and Win a Nuclear 
War.” Commentary 64(1) (July 1977): 21–34.
Posen, Barry R. “A Nuclear-Armed Iran: A Difficult but Not Impossible Policy Prob-
lem.” New York: The Century Foundation, December 6, 2006.
———. “U.S. Security Policy in a Nuclear-Armed World,” Security Studies 6, no. 3 
(Spring 1997): 1–31.
Posen, Barry R., and Stephen Van Evera. “Defense Policy and the Reagan Administra­
tion: Departure from Containment.” International Security 8(1) (Summer 1983): 3–45.
Pouliot, Vincent. “The Essence of Constructivism.” Journal of International Relations 
and Development 7(3) (September 2004): 319–36.
Poulose, T. T. United Nations and Nuclear Proliferation. New Delhi: B. R. Publish-
ing, 1988.
Powell, Colin L., with Joseph E. Persico. My American Journey. New York: Random 
House, 1995.
Powell, Robert. Nuclear Deterrence Theory: The Search for Credibility. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Prados, John. “Team B: The Trillion Dollar Experiment.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scien-
tists 49(3) (April 1993): 22–31.
Press, Daryl G. Calculating Credibility: How Leaders Assess Military Threats. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 2005.

Select Bibliography  297
Price, Richard. “A Genealogy of the Chemical Weapons Taboo.” International Organi-
zation 49(1) (Winter 1995): 73–103.
———. “Transnational Civil Society and Advocacy in World Politics.” World Politics 
55(4) (July 2003): 579–606.
Price, Richard, and Nina Tannenwald. “Norms and Deterrence: The Nuclear and 
Chemical Weapons Taboos.” In The Culture of National Security, edited by Peter J. 
Katzenstein, 114–52. New York: Columbia University Press, 1996.
Quester, George. The Politics of Nuclear Proliferation. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1973
———. “International Safeguards for Eliminating Weapons of Mass Destruction.” Oc-
casional Paper No. 31. Washington, DC: The Henry L. Stimson Center, Decem-
ber 1996.
———. Nuclear First Strike: Consequences of a Broken Taboo. Baltimore, MD: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 2006.
Raja Mohan, C. “No First Use and India’s Nuclear Transition.” Paper Presented at 
the Pugwash Conference on No First Use of Nuclear Weapons, London, Novem-
ber 15–17, 2002.
Rajagopalan, Rajesh. Second Strike: Arguments about Nuclear War in South Asia. New 
Delhi: Penguin-Viking, 2005.
Rapacki, Adam. “The Polish Plan for a Nuclear-Free Zone Today.” International Af-
fairs 39(1) (January 1963): 1–12.
Raub, Werner, and Jeroen Weesie. “Reputation and Efficiency in Social Interactions: 
An Example of Network Effects.” The American Journal of Sociology 96(3) (No-
vember 1990): 626–54.
Rauf, Tariq. “Towards Nuclear Disarmament: What Next for NPT?” Disarmament 
Forum 2000(1) (2000): 39–50.
Rauf, Tariq, and Rebecca Johnson. “After the NPT’s Indefinite Extension: The Future 
of the Global Nonproliferation Regime.” Nonproliferation Review 3(1) (Fall 1995): 
28–41.
Rearden, Steven L. The Formative Years 1947–1950. Washington DC: Historical Office, 
Office of the Secretary of Defense, 1984.
Reiss, Mitchell. Without the Bomb: The Politics of Nuclear Nonproliferation. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1988.
Reus-Smit, Christian. “Liberal Hierarchy and the License to Use Force.” Review of 
Inter­national Studies 31 (December 2005): 71–92.
Rhodes, Edward. Power and Madness: The Logic of Nuclear Coercion. New York:  
Columbia University Press, 1989.
Rhodes, Richard. Dark Sun: The Making of the Hydrogen Bomb. New York: Touch-
stone, 1995.

298  Select Bibliography
Ripsman, Norrin M. “Two Stages of Transition From a Region of War to a Region of 
Peace: Realist Transition and Liberal Endurance.” International Studies Quarterly 
49(4) (December 2005): 669–93.
Risse-Kappen, Thomas. “Constructivism and International Institutions: Towards Con-
versions Across Paradigms.” In Political Science: The State of the Discipline, edited 
by Ira Katznelson and Helen Milner, 597–629. New York: W. W. Norton, 2002.
Roberts, Brad, Robert A. Manning, and Ronald N. Montaperto. “China: The Forgotten 
Nuclear Power.” Foreign Affairs 79(4) (July–August 2000): 53–63.
Robinson, C. Paul. “Pursuing a New Weapons Policy for the 21st Century” (Sandia 
National Laboratories White Paper, Albuquerque, NM, March 22, 2001).
Robles, Alfonso Garcia. “Latin American Nuclear Weapon Free Zone.” Stanley Foun-
dation Occasional Paper no. 19. Muscatine, IA: The Stanley Foundation, 1979.
Roche, Douglas. “Deadly Deadlock.” Middle Powers Initiative Briefing Paper. San 
Francisco: Middle Powers Initiative, June 2005.
Rogers, Paul. “Tactical Trident in Historical Context.” Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the British International Studies Association, University of York, UK, 
December 1994.
Rosenberg, David Alan. “American Atomic Strategy and the Hydrogen Bomb Deci-
sion.” Journal of American History 66(1) (June 1979): 62–87.
———. “The Origins of Overkill: Nuclear Weapons and American Strategy, 1945–
1960.” International Security 7(4) (Spring 1983): 3–71.
Rosenberg, Jonathan. “Before the Bomb and After: Winston Churchill and the Use 
of Force.” In Cold War Statesmen Confront the Bomb: Nuclear Diplomacy Since 
1945, edited by John Lewis Gaddis, Philip H. Gordon, Ernest R. May, and Jonathan 
Rosenberg, 171–93. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Rosendorf, Neal. “John Foster Dulles’ Nuclear Schizophrenia.” In Cold War Statesmen 
Confront the Bomb: Nuclear Diplomacy Since 1945, edited by John Lewis Gaddis,  
Gordon, Philip H. Gordon, Ernest R. May, and Jonathan Rosenberg, 62–86. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Ross, Christopher. “Public Diplomacy Comes of Age.” Washington Quarterly 25(2) 
(2002): 75–83.
Ross, Steven T., and David Alan Rosenberg, eds. America’s Plans for War against the 
Soviet Union 1945–1950. New York: Garland Publishing, 1990.
Rothman, Steve, “The Publication of ‘Hiroshima’ in The New Yorker” (Unpublished 
Paper, Harvard University, 1997), http://www.herseyhiroshima.com/hiro.php.
Russell, James A. “Nuclear Strategy and the Modern Middle East.” Middle East Policy 
11(3) (Fall 2004): 98–117.
Russell, Richard L. “A Weak Pillar for American National Security: The CIA’s Dis-
mal Performance against WMD Threats.” Intelligence and National Security 20(3) 
(September 2005): 466–85.

Select Bibliography  299
Russett, Bruce. “The Real Decline in Nuclear Hegemony.” In Global Changes and The-
oretical Challenges, edited by Ernst-Otto Czempiel and James N. Rosenau, 177–93. 
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1989.
Russett, Bruce, and John Oneal. Triangulating Peace. New York: W. W. Norton, 2001.
Ryan, Mark A. Chinese Attitudes Toward Nuclear Weapons. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe, 
1989.
Rydell, Randy. “The 1995 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review and Extension 
Conference.” Arms Control Today 35(3) (April 2005): 47–48.
Sagan, Eli. Cannibalism: Human Aggression and Cultural Form. New York: Harper & 
Row, 1974.
Sagan, Scott D. “The Commitment Trap: Why the United States Should Not Use Nu-
clear Threats to Deter Biological and Chemical Weapons Attacks.” International 
Security 24(4) (Spring 2000): 85–115.
———. “Realist Perspectives on Ethical Norms and Weapons of Mass Destruction.” In 
Ethics and Weapons of Mass Destruction, edited by Sohail H. Hashmi and Steven 
P. Lee, 73–95. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Sagan, Scott D., and Seremi Suri. “The Madman Nuclear Alert: Secrecy, Signaling, and 
Safety in October 1969.” International Security 27(4) (Spring 2003): 150–83.
Scheinman, Lawrence. “Shadow & Substance: Securing the Future of Atoms for Peace.” 
IAEA Bulletin 45(2) (December 2003): 7–9.
Schelling, Thomas C. Arms and Inἀuence. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1966.
———. The Strategy of Conἀict, 2nd edition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1980.
———. “The Role of Nuclear Weapons.” In Turning Point: The Gulf War and U.S. Mil-
itary Strategy, edited by Benjamin L. Ederington and Michael J. Mazarr, 105–16. 
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1994.
———. “The Legacy of Hiroshima: A Half Century Without Nuclear War.” Institute 
for Philosophy and Public Policy 20(2/3) (Summer 2000).
Schrafstetter, Susanna, and Stephen Twigge. Avoiding Armageddon: Europe, the United 
States and the Struggle for Nuclear Non-Proliferation, 1945–1970. Westport, CT: 
Praeger, 2004.
Schwartz, Leonard E. “Perspectives on Pugwash.” International Affairs 43(3) (July 
1967): 498–515.
Schwartz, Stephen I. “Miscalculated Ambiguity: U.S. Policy on the Use and Threat of 
Use of Nuclear Weapons.” Disarmament Diplomacy 23 (February 1998).
Schwarzkopf, Norman, with Peter Petre. It Doesn’t Take a Hero. New York: Bantam 
Books, 1992.
Seaborg, Glenn T., and Benjamin S. Loeb. Kennedy, Khrushchev and the Test Ban. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981.

300  Select Bibliography
———. Stemming the Tide: Arms Control in the Johnson Years. Lexingon, MA: Lexing-
ton Books, 1987.
Serrano, Monica. “Latin America—The Treaty of Tlateloco.” In Nuclear Weapons-Free 
Zones, edited by Ramesh Thakur, 35–58. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1998.
Shaker, Mohamed I. The Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty: Origins and Implementa-
tion 1959–1979. Vol. 2. London: Oceana Publications, 1980.
Sidhu, Waheguru Pal Singh. “India’s Nuclear Use Doctrine.” In Planning the Unthink-
able, edited by Peter R. Lavoy, Scott D. Sagan, and James J. Wirtz, 125–57. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 2000.
Sigal, Leon V. “Warming to the Freeze.” Foreign Policy 48 (Autumn 1982): 54–65.
———. Disarming Strangers: Nuclear Diplomacy With North Korea. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1998.
Silverstone, Scott A. Preventive War and American Democracy. New York: Routledge, 
2007.
Simmons, Beth A. “Compliance with International Agreements.” Annual Review of 
Political Science 1 (1998): 75–93.
———. “International Law and State Behavior: Commitment and Compliance in In-
ternational Monetary Affairs.” American Political Science Review 94(4) (Decem-
ber 2000): 819–35.
Singh, Swaran. “China’s Nuclear Weapons and Doctrine.” In Nuclear India, edited by 
Jasjit Singh, 140–56. New Delhi: Knowledge World, 1998.
Siracusa, Joseph M., and David G. Coleman. “Scaling the Nuclear Ladder: Deterrence 
from Truman to Clinton.” Australian Journal of International Affairs 54(3) (Novem-
ber 2000): 277–96.
Skinner, Kiron K., Annelise Anderson, and Martin Anderson, eds. Reagan: A Life in 
Letters. New York: Free Press, 2003.
Smith, Alice Kimball. A Peril and a Hope: The Scientists’ Movement in America, 1945–47. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1965.
Smith, Derek D. Deterring America: Rogue States and the Proliferation of Weapons of 
Mass Destruction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Snyder, Glenn H. “Deterrence and Power.” Journal of Conἀict Resolution 4 (1960): 
163–78.
———. Deterrence and Defense: Toward a Theory of National Security. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1961.
Sokov, Nikolai. “Russia’s Approach to Nuclear Weapons.” The Washington Quarterly. 
20(3) (Summer 1997): 107–14.
———. “An Assessment of the Draft Russian Military Doctrine.” (Nuclear Threat Ini-
tiative, Revised ed., July 2004), http://www.nti.org/db/nisprofs/over/doctrine.htm.
Spector, Leonard, and Aubrie Ohlde. “Negative Security Assurances: Revisiting the  
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Option.” Arms Control Today 35(3) (April 2005): 13–17.

Select Bibliography  301
Spector, Ronald H. Advice and Support: The Early Years, 1941–1960. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Army Center for Military History, 1983.
Speed, Roger, and Michael May. “Dangerous Doctrine.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scien-
tists 61(2) (March/April 2005): 38–49.
Steiner, Franz Baermann. Taboo, Truth, and Religion: Selected Writings Vol. 1, edited 
by Jeremy Adler and Richard Fardon. New York: Berghahn Books, 1999.
Stern, Sheldon M. Averting “the Final Failure”: John F. Kennedy and the Secret Cuban 
Missile Crisis Meetings. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2003.
Subrahmanyam, K. “Indian Nuclear Policy—1964–98: A Personal Recollection,” In 
Nuclear India, edited by Jasjit Singh, 26–53. New Delhi: Knowledge World, 1998.
Swami, Praveen. “A Hawkish Line on China.” Frontline, May 23, 1998.
Takaki, Ronald. Hiroshima: Why America Dropped the Bomb. Boston: Little, Brown, 
1995.
Tannenwald, Nina. “The Nuclear Taboo: The United States and the Normative Basis of 
the Nuclear Non-use.” International Organization 53(3) (Summer 1999): 433–68.
———. “Stigmatizing the Bomb: Origins of the Nuclear Taboo.” International Secu-
rity, 29(4) (Spring 2005): 5–49.
———. The Nuclear Taboo. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Tarapore, Arzan. “Holocaust or Hollow Victory: Limited War in Nuclear South Asia.” 
IPCS Research Paper no. 6. New Delhi: Institute of Peace and Conflict Studies, 
2005.
Taylor, Maxwell D. Swords and Plowshares. New York: W. W. Norton, 1972.
Tellis, Ashley J. India’s Emerging Nuclear Posture. RAND Monograph Report. Santa 
Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2001.
Tellis, Ashley, C., Christine Fair, and Jamison J. Medby. Limited Conἀicts Under the 
Nuclear Umbrella: Indian and Pakistani Lessons for the Kargil Crisis. Santa Monica, 
CA: RAND Corporation, 2002.
Terriff, Terry. The Nixon Administration and the Making of U.S. Nuclear Strategy. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1995.
Tertrais, Bruno. “Nuclear Policy: France Stands Alone.” Bulletin of the Atomic Scien-
tists 60(4) (July/August 2004): 48–55.
Thomas, Ward. The Ethics of Destruction: Norms and Force in International Relations. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2001.
Tompkins, Joanne. “Influences on Chinese Nuclear Planning.” Washington DC: Henry L. 
Stimson Center, 2002.
———. “How U.S. Strategic Policy is Changing Chain’s Nuclear Plans.” Arms Control 
Today 33(1) (January–February 2003): 11.
Toope, Stephen J. “Formality and Informality.” In The Oxford Handbook of Inter­
national Environmental Law, edited by Daniel Bodansky, Jutta Brunnee, and Ellen 
Hey, 107–24. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.

302  Select Bibliography
Trenin, Dimitri. “Russia’s Nuclear Policy in the 21st Century Environment” (Paris, 
Institut français des relations internationales, Autumn 2005).
Truman, Harry S. Memoirs of Harry S. Truman Vol. 1: Year of Decisions, 1945. Garden 
City, NY: Doubleday, 1955.
———. Memoirs Vol. 2, Years of Trial and Hope. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1956.
Tucker, Jonathan B. “Evidence Iraq Used Chemical Weapons During the 1991 Persian 
Gulf War.” The Nonproliferation Review 4(3) (Spring/Summer1997): 114–22.
Turner, Jonathan H., and Alexandra Maryanski. Incest: Origins of the Taboo. Boulder, 
CO: Paradigm Publishers, 2005.
USSR Proposes Disarmament. Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1986.
Utgoff, Victor A. “Nuclear Weapons and Deterrence of Biological and Chemical War-
fare.” Occasional Paper no. 36. Washington, DC: The Henry L. Stimson Center, 
October 1997.
Van Creveld, Martin. Nuclear Proliferation and the Future of Conἀict. New York: The 
Free Press, 1993.
van Oudenaren, John. “Deterrence, War-fighting and Soviet Military Doctrine.” Adel-
phi Papers no. 210. London: International Institute for Strategic Studies, Summer 
1986.
Vasquez, John A. “The Deterrence Myth: Nuclear Weapons and the Prevention of Nu-
clear War.” In The Long Postwar Peace, edited by Charles W. Kegley, 205–23. New 
York: Harper Collins, 1991.
Wainstock, Dennis D. The Decision to Drop the Atomic Bomb. Wesport, CT: Praeger, 
1996.
Way, Christopher, and Karthika Sasikumar. “Leaders and Laggards: When and Why 
do Countries Sign the NPT?” Working Paper No. 16. Montreal: McGill-University 
of Montreal Research Group in International Security (REGIS), 2004.
Weber, Max. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretative Sociology, edited by 
Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich. New York: Bedminster Press, 1968.
Webster, Hutton. Taboo: A Sociological Study. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 1942.
Weisgall, Jonathan M. Operation Crossroads: The Atomic Tests at Bikini Atoll. Annap-
olis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1994.
Welch, David A. “The Politics and Psychology of Restraint: Israeli Decision-making 
in the Gulf.” In Choosing to Cooperate: How States Avoid Loss, edited by Janice 
Gross Stein and Louis W. Pauly, 128–69. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Press, 1993.
Wendt, Alexander. Social Theory of International Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1999.
Wernicke, Günter. “The Communist-led World Peace Council and the Western Peace 
Movements.” Peace & Change 23(3) (July 1998): 265–311.

Select Bibliography  303
Whiting, Allen S. China Crosses the Yalu: The Decision to Enter the Korean War. New 
York: Macmillan, 1960.
———. “China’s Use of Force, 1950–96, and Taiwan.” International Security 26(2) (Fall 
2001): 103–31.
Wheeler, Michael O. “A History of Arms Control.” In Arms Control: Cooperative Secu-
rity in a Changing Environment, edited by Jeffrey A. Larsen, 19–40. Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner, 2002.
Wilkening, Dean, and Kenneth Watman. Nuclear Deterrence in a Regional Context. 
Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 1995.
Wilson, George C. “Worst Case: Iraqi War Goes Nuclear.” National Journal 34(41) 
(October 2002): 2992–93.
Wilson, Ward. “The Winning Weapon? Rethinking Nuclear Weapons in Light of  
Hiroshima,” International Security 31(4) (Spring 2007): 162–79.
Wirtz, James J., and James A. Russell. “U.S. Policy on Preventive War and Preemp-
tion.” The Nonproliferation Review 10(1) (Spring 2003): 113–23.
Wishnick, Elizabeth. Mending Fences: The Evolution of Moscow’s China Policy from 
Brezhnev to Yeltsin. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2001.
Wittner, Lawrence S. The Struggle Against the Bomb, Vol. 1: One World or None. Stan-
ford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1993.
———. The Struggle Against the Bomb, Vol. 2: Resisting the Bomb. Stanford, CA: Stan-
ford University Press, 1997.
———. The Struggle Against the Bomb, Vol. 3: Toward Nuclear Abolition. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press, 2003.
Wohlstetter, Albert. “The Delicate Balance of Terror.” Foreign Affairs 37(2) (January 
1959): 211–34.
Wolf, Arthur P., and William H. Durham, eds. Inbreeding, Incest, and the Incest Taboo: 
The State of Knowledge at the Turn of the Century. Stanford, CA: Stanford Univer-
sity Press, 2004.
Wolf, Charles Jr., and Brian Rosen. “Public Diplomacy: How to Think About and Im-
prove It.” Occasional Paper. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation, 2004.
Xue, Litai. “Evolution of China’s Nuclear Strategy.” In Strategic Views from the Second Tier: 
The Nuclear Weapons Policies of France, Britain and China, edited by John C. Hopkins 
and Weixing Hu, 167–89. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1995.
York, Herbert. The Advisors: Oppenheimer, Teller, and the Superbomb. San Francisco: 
W. H. Freeman, 1976.
Yost, David S. “Nuclear Weapons Issues in France.” In Strategic Views from the Second 
Tier, edited by John C. Hopkins and Weixing Hu, 19–104. New Brunswick, NJ: 
Transaction Publishers, 1995.
———. “France’s Nuclear Dilemmas.” Foreign Affairs 75(1) (January/February 1996): 
108–18.

304  Select Bibliography
———. “Russia’s Non-strategic Nuclear Forces.” International Affairs 77(3) (July 2001): 
531–51.
———. “New Approaches to Deterrence in Britain, France, and the United States.” 
Inter­national Affairs 81(1) (January 2005): 83–114.
Zakaria, Fareed. “The Reagan Strategy of Containment.” Political Science Quarterly 
105(3) (Autumn 1990): 373–95.
Zhang, Shu Guang. “Between ‘Paper’ and ‘Real Tigers’: Mao’s View of Nuclear Weap-
ons.” In Cold War Statesmen Confront the Bomb: Nuclear Diplomacy Since 1945, 
edited by John Lewis Gaddis, Philip H. Gordon, Ernest R. May, and Jonathan 
Rosenberg, 194–215. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Zhenqiang, Pan. “On China’s No First Use of Nuclear Weapons.” Paper Presented at 
Pugwash Meeting 279 (London, November 15–17, 2002).
Zubok, Vladislav M. “Stalin and the Nuclear Age.” In Cold War Statesmen Confront 
the Bomb: Nuclear Diplomacy Since 1945, edited by John Lewis Gaddis, Philip H. 
Gordon, Ernest R. May, and Jonathan Rosenberg, 39–61. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1999.
———. “Gorbachev’s Nuclear Learning.” Boston Review, April–May 2000.
Zubok, Vladislav M., and Hope M. Harrison. “The Nuclear Education of Nikita 
Khrushchev.” In Cold War Statesmen Confront the Bomb: Nuclear Diplomacy 
Since 1945, edited by John Lewis Gaddis, Philip H. Gordon, Ernest R. May, and 
Jonathan Rosenberg, 141–168. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999.

305
	
	 INDEX
Able Archer crisis, 242n76
Accidents Measures Agreement of 1971, 
240n48
Acheson/Lilienthal Report of 1946, 32–33, 
40–41, 229n13
Adams, Sherman, 51
Afghanistan: Soviet war in, 12, 18, 79, 
99–100, 145, 220n33; Taliban in, 137–38, 
145, 188; US/NATO war in, 138, 139, 145, 
188, 195
Africa Nuclear-Free Zone (Pelindaba) Treaty, 
89, 171, 174–76
Afro-Asian Conference of 1955, 34
Algerian War of Independence, 112, 123, 144
ambiguity in nuclear policies: of France, 113, 
114; of Israel, 124, 125, 130, 146, 255n3; 
relationship to deterrence, 11, 91, 160; of 
United States, 36, 83–84, 85, 89, 91, 168, 
181, 212
analytical eclecticism, 13, 18, 21–37, 155, 
217n2
Angola, 100
Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) Treaty, 81, 119, 
240n48
ANZUS Treaty, 172, 173
Argentina: Falklands War, 10, 108–9, 111, 
145, 149–52, 261nn24,26; and NPT, 
165–66
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, 
237n10
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
(ASEAN), 174
Atkinson, Rick, 153
Atoms for Peace proposal, 35, 57–58, 62–63
Attlee, Clement, 46, 48, 106, 107, 228n10, 
232n46
Australia, 165, 172, 173–74
Axelrod, Robert: on cooperation and 
reputation, 31
Aziz, Tariq, 84, 153, 154–55, 262n39, 263n51
Baker, James, 84, 153, 154–55
Ball, George, 67; on use of nuclear weapons, 
5, 68–69
Ballistic Missile Notification Agreement of 
1988, 102
Baltic states, 105
Baluyevsky, Yuri, 104
Bandung Conference of 1955, 34
Bangkok Treaty of 1995, 171, 174
Bangladesh, 76–77, 132, 134
Baruch Plan of 1946, 32–33, 40, 41, 57, 94, 
229n12
Bay of Pigs invasion, 65
Beilenson, Laurence, 242n78
Belarus, 103
Berlin: Blockade of 1948, 42–43, 95; Crisis of 
1958–59, 57; Crisis of 1961, 65, 97, 245n1
Bin Laden, Osama, 138
biological weapons: vs. nuclear weapons, 
4, 179, 220n23, 272n37. See also threats 
to use nuclear weapons, in response to 
chemical/biological attack
Blair, Tony, 251n83; and Strategic Defense 
Review, 110
Bohr, Niels, 32, 33

306  INDEX
Bolivia, 171
Bolte, Charles, 46
Bolton, John, 180
Boniface, Pascal, 115
Boucher, Richard, 168
Boulding, Kenneth E.: on state credibility, 31
Bradley, Omar, 47
Brazil, 171; and NPT, 165–66, 167
Brezhnev, Leonid, 77, 98, 100
Brodie, Bernard: The Absolute Weapon, 34; 
on averting wars, 34; on destructiveness 
of nuclear weapons, 34; influence 
of, 226n58; on nuclear weapons and 
deterrence, 5
Broiler Plan, 41
Bulgaria, 105
Bundy, McGeorge, 4, 15, 22, 66, 69, 75, 85, 
237n11
Burgerman, Susan, 225n46
Burr, William, 71
Burton, Dan, 85
Bush, George H. W.: during Persian Gulf 
war of 1991, 83–84, 153, 155–56, 200; 
policies regarding Libya, 269n1; policies 
regarding nuclear arms control, 83; 
policies regarding use of nuclear 
weapons, 83–86, 91, 153–56, 181, 200; 
threats to use nuclear weapons, 83–84, 
85, 91, 153–55, 180, 181
Bush, George W.: and Draft Doctrine for 
Joint Nuclear Operations, 183; and 
National Security Strategy of the United 
States of America (Sept. 2002), 182; and 
National Strategy to Combat Weapons 
of Mass Destruction (NSCWMD) (Dec. 
2002), 182; and Nuclear Posture Review 
(NPR) of 2002, 119, 182–83; policies 
regarding nuclear arms control, 270n10; 
policies regarding nuclear disarmament, 
167; policies regarding Russia, 182, 
270n10; policies regarding use of nuclear 
weapons, 90, 119, 180, 181–96, 274n58, 
275n13; Presidential Directive 17, 182; and 
Theater Nuclear Planning Document, 184
Bush, Vannevar, 33, 40, 229n11
Butler, Lee, 190
Cambone, Stephen, 271n25
Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament  
(CND), 33
Canada: and NPT, 165; relations with United 
States, 228n10
Carter, Jimmy: and Agreed Framework, 88; 
policies regarding neutron bomb, 78–79, 
90, 200; policies regarding nuclear 
proliferation, 80; policies regarding 
Persian Gulf, 79; policies regarding 
Soviet Union, 78, 79, 90, 241n63; policies 
regarding use of nuclear weapons, 
78–80, 90–91, 200, 241n63; Presidential 
Directive PD-59, 79–80
Cartwright, James E., 188–89
Central Asia, 171
Central Europe, 171
Challe, Maurice, 112
Chechnya, 103, 105, 145, 212
Chemical and Biological Weapons 
Conventions, 187
chemical weapons: Agent Orange, 18; and 
Geneva Convention of 1925, 94; mustard 
gas, 24; napalm, 18; vs. nuclear weapons, 
4, 179, 220n23, 272n37; Soviet use of, 
12, 18; taboo regarding use of, 220n23; 
US use of, 12, 18. See also threats to 
use nuclear weapons, in response to 
chemical/biological attack
Cheney, Dick: as Secretary of Defense, 84, 85, 
153–54, 181
Chernobyl accident, 101, 211, 247n41
Chiang Kai-shek, 53
Chile, 171
China: acquisition of nuclear weapons by, 
58, 66, 67, 70, 72, 97, 108, 116, 117–18, 
131, 162, 194, 199, 237n11, 253n114; and 
Africa Nuclear-Free Zone (Pelindaba) 
Treaty, 176; and Korean War, 18, 45,  
46, 47–48, 49–51, 117, 145, 232n52, 
233n66; limited deterrence strategy  
of, 118–19; minimum deterrence 
strategy of, 118; no-first-use policy of, 
19, 116, 117, 118, 120–22, 132, 198–99, 
254nn129,139; and NPT, 121; policies 
regarding nuclear disarmament, 116–17; 
policies regarding nuclear proliferation, 
121, 122, 195–96; policies regarding use 
of nuclear weapons, 12–13, 19–20, 92, 
116–23, 134, 137, 198–99, 254nn129,139; 
relations with India, 67, 119, 121–22,  
131, 136, 137, 139, 162, 240n50; relations 
with Pakistan, 121; relations with 
Philippines, 122; relations with Russia, 
122; relations with Soviet Union, 66, 96, 
97, 116, 117, 120, 237n11, 240n50, 245n1, 
247n31; relations with United States,  

INDEX  307
18, 45, 46, 47–48, 49–51, 53–55, 56,  
57, 61–62, 66, 116, 117–18, 119, 120–21, 
122, 145, 174, 194, 198, 199, 232n52, 
233n66, 237n11, 238n22; relations with 
Vietnam, 13, 119–20, 122, 145; and 
Southeast Asia nuclear-free zone, 174; 
and South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone, 
173; and Tibet, 122; during Vietnam 
War, 69, 70, 74, 75
Chirac, Jacques, 113, 114–15
Chou En-lai, 55
Churchill, Winston, 58, 107, 250n66
Clausewitz, Carl von, 23, 236n124
Clinton, Bill: policies regarding nuclear 
weapons development, 87, 89; policies 
regarding nuclear proliferation, 86, 
88–89; policies regarding theater missile 
defense system, 86; policies regarding 
use of nuclear weapons, 86–90, 91, 180, 
181, 244n96; Presidential Decision 
Directive (PDD) 60, 87, 181
coercive diplomacy, 14, 29, 140–41, 163, 185, 
201, 206–8; of China, 119; of United 
States, 72–77, 88, 120, 185, 207–8, 269n1. 
See also compellence; threats to use 
nuclear weapons
Cohen, Avner, 125, 126, 127, 224n33, 255n8
Cohen, William, 87–88
Cold War: Cuban Missile Crisis, 33, 35, 64, 
65–66, 97–98, 171, 198, 237n5, 245n1; 
détente during, 66, 99, 100; developing 
countries during, 3, 19, 21, 25, 30, 48, 53, 
68, 72, 81, 93, 96, 100–101, 198, 264n2; 
end of, 14, 83, 102, 113, 123, 174, 175, 178, 
200; mutual assured destruction (MAD) 
during, 35, 64, 65, 82, 241n67; non-use 
of nuclear weapons during, 3, 12, 16, 
19–20, 21, 25, 30, 39–50, 99–101, 105, 
183; nuclear arms race during, 33–34, 
35, 58, 60–61, 66, 81–82, 175, 265n14; 
Washington-Moscow hotline, 237n10
Committee on Present Danger, 80–81
compellence, 55, 107, 160, 163, 189, 206–8, 
245n1; vs. deterrence, 4, 8, 9, 14, 23, 63, 
129, 135–36, 143, 199, 205, 206–7; and 
Indian nuclear policies, 135–36; and U.S. 
nuclear policies, 78, 91, 152–54, 207–8. 
See also coercive diplomacy; threats to 
use nuclear weapons
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT), 89, 
113, 131
Conant, James, 33, 40, 229n11
Conference of Non-Nuclear Weapon States, 
164–65
Constructivist scholars, 222n10; criticisms 
of, 18–22; on nuclear non-use as taboo, 
13, 15, 16–17, 19, 21–22, 218n6; on 
reputation intermediaries, 32
Conte, Rosaria, 224n30
Conventional Armed Forces in Europe treaty 
(CFE), 102
Costa Mendez, Nicanor, 151
Council for a Livable World, 35
Counterproliferation Initiative of 1994, 86
Cousins, Norman, 33
Crankshaft Plan, 41
credibility: defined, 225n41; of nuclear 
threats, 8–9, 25, 30–31, 31, 63, 91, 130, 
146–47, 163, 201–6, 207, 208, 212, 
225n41, 232n43
Cuban Missile Crisis, 33, 35, 64, 65–66, 
97–98, 171, 198, 237n5, 245n1
Cumings, Bruce, 46–47
Cutler, Robert, 51–52
Czechoslovakia, 93; Communist coup in, 42
Daisy Cutter bomb, 188
Dalai Lama, 122
Dalyell, Tam, 261n26
Dayan, Moshe, 127, 128, 129, 146, 256n17
Dean, Gordon, 47
Declaration on Denuclearization of  
Africa, 175
Defense Science Board, 271n25
De Gaulle, Charles, 111, 112
Deitchman, Seymour, 238n21
democracy, 17, 20, 28, 222n12
Deng Xiaoping, 120
deterrence, 17, 34, 38, 43, 46, 104, 109, 113, 
115, 132, 143, 189–90, 226n59, 252n101; 
Brodie on, 5; of chemical/biological 
attacks, 83–84, 91, 110, 130, 153–56,  
181–82, 184, 188, 244n94; vs. compellence, 
4, 8, 9, 14, 23, 63, 129, 135–36, 143, 199, 
205, 206–7; of conventional attacks, 102, 
124, 137, 139–40, 141; and credibility 
of nuclear threats, 8–9, 25, 30–31, 63, 
91, 163, 201–6, 207, 208, 212, 225n41, 
232n43; deterrence by denial, 202; 
deterrence by punishment, 111, 202; 
deterrence reputation vs. non-use 
reputation, 30–31; and doctrine of 
massive retaliation, 61, 231n38; extended 
deterrence, 16, 30, 99, 204, 205, 206,

308  INDEX
deterrence (continued)  
241n63, 275n12; general deterrence, 
145; immediate deterrence, 145; John 
Kennedy on, 67; limited deterrence, 
118–19; min­imum deterrence, 118, 
132, 133; and mini-nuke development, 
183–84; mutual deterrence, 1, 3, 11, 16, 
17, 29, 30, 35, 43, 64, 65, 82, 136, 208, 212, 
241n67, 246n12, 258n51, 269n2, 275n12; 
relationship to ambiguity in nuclear 
policies, 11, 91, 160; self-deterrence, 2, 
11–12, 13, 20, 23, 26, 27, 28, 31, 62–63, 
73, 144, 157, 186, 187, 201, 203–6, 275n9; 
Stalin on, 95. See also threats to use 
nuclear weapons
Dien Bien Phu, 52–53, 111–12
dirty bombs, 126, 135, 138, 141, 179
Dobrynin, Alexei, 237n11
Doctrine for Joint Theater Nuclear 
Operations, 86–87
Dowler, Thomas, 186–87
Downs, George W.: on state reputation, 27
Dulles, John Foster, 17–18; during French 
Indochina War, 112; on nuclear 
proliferation, 234n98; on nuclear test 
moratorium, 59–60; on nuclear vs. 
conventional weapons, 54, 56; during 
Taiwan Straits Crisis of 1954–55, 53–54, 
55; during Taiwan Straits Crisis of 1958, 
55; on use of nuclear weapons, 4–5, 51, 
52, 53–54, 56
East Germany, 93, 240n54
Ecuador, 171
Egypt: and ICJ, 169; 1967 War, 126–27, 144, 
147, 260n14; 1973 War, 72, 77–78, 126, 
127–28, 145, 146–49, 247n31, 260n19; 
and NPT, 167; relations with Iran, 125; 
relations with Soviet Union, 146, 147, 
148, 247n31; relations with United 
States, 148; Suez War of 1956, 107, 111, 
144, 245n1, 251n84
Einstein, Albert, 59, 161
Eisenhower, Dwight: and Brodie, 226n58; 
during French Indochina War, 112; on 
military-industrial complex, 60–61, 
236n119; New Look policy, 55, 61; on 
nuclear vs. conventional weapons, 54; 
policies regarding international control 
of nuclear weapons, 57–58; policies 
regarding nuclear proliferation, 57–62, 
234n98; policies regarding Soviet Union, 
50, 57, 58–59, 59, 60, 236n124; policies 
regarding testing of nuclear weapons, 
58–60, 63, 198; policies regarding 
use of nuclear weapons, 17–18, 38, 
38–39, 50–57, 60, 61–63, 64, 65, 231n38, 
233n66, 233n73, 235n117, 236n124; 
during Taiwan Straits Crisis of 1954–55, 
53–54, 55, 61–62; threats to use nuclear 
weapons, 50–51, 53–55, 57, 61–62, 72, 
73–74, 90, 91, 118, 194, 198
Ekeus, Rolf, 154
Elazar, David, 127, 129
Emmerson, John K., 48
Epstein, William, 164, 166, 171–72
Estonia, 105
Evron, Yair, 260n19
Fahmi, Ismail, 148
Falklands War, 10, 111, 145; British nuclear 
weapons during, 108–9, 149–52, 
261nn24,26
Federation of American Scientists, 248n42
Federation of Atomic Scientists: Bulletin 
of the Atomic Scientists, 33; Doomsday 
Clock of, 33
Fernandes, George, 122
Finnemore, Martha: on norms, 9
flexible response policy, 61, 64
Forrestal, James, 42
Fox, William T. R., 34
France: acquisition of nuclear weapons by, 
58, 71, 111–12; and Africa Nuclear-Free 
Zone (Pelindaba) Treaty, 176; Algerian 
War, 112, 123, 144; and Falklands War, 
108–9; and ICJ, 169; Indochina War,  
52–53, 111–12; and NPT, 112, 113, 
114, 115; number of nuclear weapons 
possessed, 252n102; policies regarding 
nuclear proliferation, 112–13, 114; 
policies regarding use of nuclear 
weapons, 8, 12, 13, 20, 92, 111–16, 
122–23, 177, 178, 193, 195, 199, 201, 208, 
210, 212, 252n101; relations with Israel, 
112–13; relations with Pakistan, 113; 
relations with Soviet Union, 111, 115; 
relations with UK, 112; relations with 
United States, 46, 111–12, 113; and South 
Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone, 172, 173; 
Suez War of 1956, 107, 111, 144, 245n1, 
251n84; testing of nuclear weapons by, 
111, 112, 113, 172, 175; threats to use 
nuclear weapons, 114–16, 208

INDEX  309
Franck Committee, 229n11
Freeze Now, 81, 82, 101
Freud, Sigmund, on taboos, 6, 219n18
future of non-use tradition, 4, 14, 21, 26, 
208–12
Gaddis, John Lewis, 15, 22, 49, 62
Galili, Israel, 127
Gandhi, Indira, 77
Gandhi, Mohandas, 131
Garthoff, Raymond, 246n12
GBU-43/B MOAB (Massive Ordnance Air 
Blast), 188
Geneva Conference on Disarmament, 100, 
113, 160, 162, 266n30
Geneva Convention of 1925, 94
Geneva Eighteen Nation Disarmament 
Committee (ENDC), 94, 160, 162
George, Alexander, 227n59
Gilpatric, Roswell, 71
Gingrich, Newt: on use of nuclear weapons, 
85–86
Giscard d’Estaing, Valéry, 111
Glosson, Buster C., 153
Goldwater, Barry, 68
Gorbachev, Mikhail, 82, 83, 108; and 
Chernobyl, 211, 247n41; Glasnost and 
Perestroika policies of, 101, 247n41; 
on nuclear war, 247n39; and peace 
movements, 33–34, 93, 101, 248n42; 
policies regarding nuclear disarmament, 
101–2, 211, 242n77; at Reykyavik 
summit, 101
Graham, Daniel O., 81
Gray, Colin, 16, 221n1
Greenpeace, 33
Gromyko, Andrei, 94, 98
guerrila war, 12, 18, 99, 105, 112, 145, 204, 
208, 212–13
Hadley, Stephen, 271n25
Haldeman, H. R., 73–74
Harmon Committee, 43
Hashmi, Sohail, 259n59
Heikal, Muhammed, 148
Hersey, John: Hiroshima, 227n2, 228n9
Hersh, Seymour, 127, 184–85, 256n16, 271n25
Hezbollah, 126, 204
Hiroshima and Nagasaki: attitudes 
regarding, 2, 24, 25, 35, 39–40, 41, 46, 58, 
197, 227n2, 228nn8,9; casualties at, 39; 
Hiroshima Maidens, 58; vs. incendiary 
bombings of Tokyo, 219n12; uniqueness 
of, 1, 18, 39, 197
Hoffi, Yitzak, 128
Holloway, David, 95
Hoon, Geoff, 110
Hot Line, 66
Howard, Joseph, II, 186–87
human rights, 225n46
Hussein, Saddam, 203, 209, 243n90, 270n13, 
273n49; during 1991 Gulf War, 83–84, 
85, 86, 91, 110, 129–30, 152–53, 154, 
155–56, 157, 205, 209; during 2003 Gulf 
War, 191, 205, 207, 209. See also Iraq
hydrogen bomb tests of 1950s, 2, 24, 25, 33, 
35, 59, 161, 197, 198; Churchill’s reaction 
to, 58, 107, 250n66
Immerman, Richard, 51
India: acquisition of nuclear weapons by, 
58, 77, 80, 121, 122, 131, 158; Bharatiya 
Janata Party (BJP), 131, 133; Cold Start 
doctrine, 135–36; conventional forces, 
124, 135–36, 137, 139, 140; and ICJ,  
169; Kashmir conflict, 134, 137, 139, 
140, 145, 204, 212–13, 258n51; National 
Security Advisory Board (NSAB), 134; 
no-first-use policy of, 124, 131, 132, 
133, 134–36, 137; and NPT, 108, 131–32, 
133, 141–42, 158, 164, 165–66; policies 
regarding nuclear disarmament, 133, 
141–42, 161–62; policies regarding use  
of nuclear weapons, 12, 13, 36, 124, 
131–37, 141–42, 192, 193, 195, 199, 201, 
204, 212–13; relations with China, 67, 
119, 121–22, 131, 136, 137, 139, 162, 
240n50; relations with Pakistan, 72, 
76–77, 124, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135–36, 
137, 139–41, 142, 204, 213, 258nn50,51, 
273n56; relations with United States, 72, 
76–78, 132, 133–34, 136, 240nn50,51;  
and Southeast Asia nuclear-free zone, 
174; testing of nuclear weapons by,  
131, 132, 133; 2001 attack on parliament, 
134, 136
India-Pakistan war of 1971, 72, 76–78, 
240n50
informal norms, 1–2; defined, 25; vs. legal/
formal norms, 3–4, 7–8, 9–11, 13–14, 
159–60, 163, 177, 197, 199, 211; vs. taboos, 
4–5, 6–10, 20–22, 201, 208
intelligence information, 191, 192, 195, 
273nn48,49

310  INDEX
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty 
(INF), 81–82, 102
International Association of Lawyers against 
Nuclear Arms (IALANA), 267n38
International Court of Justice (ICJ), 7–8, 34, 
159, 160, 168–70
International Peace Bureau (IPB), 267n38
International Physicians for the Prevention 
of Nuclear War (IPPNW), 248n42, 
267n38
international relations: puzzle-driven vs. 
paradigm-driven approach to, 3, 22, 
218n4
Iran: and ICJ, 169; and NPT, 158; nuclear 
program, 36, 85, 125, 126, 130, 138, 142, 
158, 167, 177, 178, 179, 192, 193–94, 207, 
210, 212; policies regarding chemical and 
biological weapons, 126; relations with 
Russia, 105; relations with Soviet Union, 
95; relations with United Kingdom, 110; 
relations with United States, 20, 85, 125, 
178, 182, 184, 189, 200, 208, 241n63, 
271n25
Iraq: chemical and biological weapons of, 36, 
83–84, 85, 91, 110, 129–30, 155–56, 157, 
191, 205, 209; Israeli attack on Osiraq 
reactor, 88; 1991 war, 20, 36, 83–85, 
86, 91, 114, 126, 127, 129–30, 141, 145, 
152–56, 178–79, 181, 189, 192, 194, 205, 
209, 243n90, 262nn39,44, 263nn47,47,53, 
264n54, 273n50; 2003 war, 20, 36, 110, 
126, 127, 130, 145, 179, 182, 184, 189, 191, 
192, 194, 195, 203, 205, 207, 209, 270n13, 
274n58; nuclear weapons program, 83, 
85, 138, 178–79, 181, 207; relations with 
United Kingdom, 110–11; UN sanctions 
on, 178–79
Ireland: and ICJ, 169; and NPT, 167
Israel: acquisition of nuclear weapons by, 58, 
112–13, 126, 146, 158, 269n2; attack on 
Iraq’s Osiraq reactor, 88; conventional 
forces, 126, 128, 129, 146; Dimona 
reactor, 113, 127, 146, 260n14; mini-nuke 
development by, 130; 1967 war, 126–27, 
144, 147, 260n14; 1973 war, 72, 77–78, 
126, 127–29, 130, 144–45, 146–49, 205, 
256n17, 260n19; 1982 Lebanese War, 
145; 1991 Persian Gulf War, 126, 127, 
129–30, 141, 145, 152, 154, 155, 156, 205, 
263nn52,53; and NPT, 125, 148; policies 
regarding use of nuclear weapons, 10, 
12, 13, 20, 36, 124, 125–31, 141, 145, 192, 
195, 199, 201, 204, 205, 255n3; relations 
with Soviet Union, 146, 149; relations 
with United States, 125, 126, 128, 129, 
131, 141, 148, 149, 154, 155, 182, 205; Suez 
War of 1956, 107, 111, 251n84; testing 
of nuclear weapons, 126; threats to use 
nuclear weapons, 10, 20, 128, 129, 130, 
131, 141, 145, 146–47, 154, 201; 2003 Iraq 
War, 126, 130; 2006 Lebanese War, 145
Italy and ICJ, 169
Japan and ICJ, 169
JASON Group, 69–70, 238n21
Jervis, Robert, 203, 227n59
Johnson, Lyndon: policies regarding China, 
66, 67, 70–71, 72, 90, 238n22; policies 
regarding nuclear proliferation, 67, 
70–72, 238n26; policies regarding  
Soviet Union, 72, 90, 239n28; policies 
regarding use of nuclear weapons, 18,  
64, 67, 68–72, 90, 199; during Vietnam 
War, 67, 68–69, 71
Johnson, Robert, 70–71
Joliot-Curie, Irène and Frédéric, 33
Jones, Michael A.: on state reputation, 27
Joseph, Robert, 271n25
Juppé, Alain, 114
Kahn, Herman, 227n59
Kamal, Hussein, 155
Kaplan, Fred, 65
Karpin, Michael, 126
Kashmir, 134, 137, 139, 140, 145, 204, 212–13, 
258n51
Kazakhstan, 103, 105
Kennedy, Edward, 274n58
Kennedy, John: and Berlin Crisis of 
1961, 65; civil defense policies of, 35; 
during Cuban Missile Crisis, 65–66; 
on deterrence and number of nuclear 
weapons, 66–67; policies regarding 
China, 66, 67, 70, 90; policies regarding 
nuclear proliferation, 66; policies 
regarding Soviet Union, 65–66, 90; 
policies regarding testing of nuclear 
weapons, 59; policies regarding use of 
nuclear weapons, 61, 64, 90, 97, 199
Keohane, Robert: on reputation, 31–32
Khan, Abdul Qadeer, 138, 179
Khrushchev, Nikita: during Cuban Missile 
Crisis, 65, 97; and peace movements, 93; 
policies regarding China, 66; policies 

INDEX  311
regarding ICBMs, 96; policies regarding 
nuclear proliferation, 97; policies 
regarding peaceful coexistence, 95–96, 
97; policies regarding use of nuclear 
weapons, 95–96
Kidwai, Khalid, 140
King, William Lyon Mackenzie, 228n10
Kissinger, Henry, 17–18; and limited war, 
76; during Middle East war of 1973, 128, 
148; and Operation Duck Hook, 72, 74; 
during Vietnam War, 72, 74–75
Knopf, Jeff, 224n31
Kohler, Foy, 81
Korea, 10, 86
Korean War, 5, 12, 19, 85, 144, 231n43; and 
China, 18, 45, 46, 47–48, 49–51, 117, 
145, 232n52, 233n66; Eisenhower’s 
threat to use nuclear weapons during, 
50–51, 73–74, 91, 198; end of, 51, 233n66; 
and North Korea, 45, 46, 48, 50; and 
Soviet Union, 45–46, 47, 48, 51; Truman 
policies during, 45–50, 106, 198, 231n42, 
232nn48,52
Kosovo, 103
Kosygin, Alexei, 98, 162, 164
laboratories, scientific, 180, 186, 187
Landau, 140
Latin America, 164; Tlatelolco Treaty of 1967, 
170, 171–72. See also Falklands War
Latvia, 105
Lawrence Livermore, 186
Lebanese War of 1982, 145
Lebow, Richard Ned, 227n59
Lee, Steven, 224n33
Lee Teng-hui, 121
legal considerations: international law, 
7–8, 10–11, 13–14, 17, 18, 26–27, 28–29, 
34, 159, 163, 168–70, 177, 190, 205, 
209–10, 220n23; nuclear-weapon-free 
zones, 34, 89, 93, 113, 117, 122, 158, 159, 
170–77; relationship to reputational 
considerations, 3–4, 22, 197
legal positivists: on international law, 28
Leor, Israel, 127
Libya, 85, 87, 244n96; nuclear weapons 
program, 178, 179, 269n1; relations with 
United Kingdom, 110
limited war: with conventional weapons, 
143–57, 204–5, 257n47, 258n51; with 
nuclear weapons, 55–56, 61, 76, 79–80, 
82, 104, 110; threat of nuclear escalation, 
16, 30–31, 64–65, 72–73, 76, 79, 81, 99, 
128, 205, 207, 213, 257n47
Lithuania, 105
Lodge, Henry Cabot, Jr., 69
logic of appropriateness, 17, 20, 21, 26; March 
and Olsen on, 2–3
logic of consequences, 7, 17, 21, 26, 28, 68; 
March and Olsen on, 2–3
London Suppliers Club, 100
Los Alamos Laboratories, 186
Lown, Bernard, 35
MacArthur, Douglas, 46–48, 232n52
MacArthur, Douglas, II, 53
Macmillan, Harold, 108
Magoudi, Ali, 109, 250n73
Mahmood, Sultan Bashiruddin, 138
Majeed, Chaudiri Abdul, 138
Major, John, 109–10
Malaysia, and ICJ, 169
Malenkov, Georgii, 58, 95, 96
Manchuria, 39, 47
Manhattan Project, 33, 39
Mao Zedong, 51, 117–18, 253n114
March, James G., 2
Marshall Islands, 58, 161
massive retaliation policies, 55, 56, 61, 64, 65, 
231n38
Masuji Ibuse: Black Rain, 227n2
material considerations, 7, 8, 11, 16–17, 
18–19, 20; destructiveness of nuclear 
weapons, 2, 5, 12, 14, 17, 19, 21, 22–25, 
26, 32, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 55, 
58, 62, 68, 91, 186, 187, 191, 194, 195, 197, 
200, 209, 210, 211, 247n39; relationship 
to normative/ideational considerations, 
2, 22–26, 37
Matsu, 53–55, 57, 62, 97, 118, 194
McCausland, Jeffrey, 263nn52,53
McMahon Act of 1946, 33, 43–44, 106
McNamara, Robert, 4, 67, 69, 70, 241n59
Meir, Golda, 127, 128, 129
Mercer, Jonathan, 224n38
Mexico: and ICJ, 169; and NPT, 165, 167
Middle East, 10, 86, 171, 176, 178, 179, 195. 
See also Israel; Saudi Arabia; Syria
Middle Powers Initiative, 167
Mikhailov, Viktor, 104
Missile Technology Control Regime 
(MTCR), 100
Mitterand, François, 108–9, 113, 114, 250n73
Molotov, Vyacheslav, 97

312  INDEX
moral and ethical considerations, 7, 16, 24, 
163, 203; relationship to reputational 
considerations, 3–4, 22, 28, 197, 224n33; 
in United States, 38, 44, 45, 56, 62, 75–76, 
78, 79, 82, 90, 193, 194
Morgan, Patrick, 202, 227n59
Morgenthau, Hans J., 229n12
Morris, Roger, 74
Munton, Don, 237n5
Musharaff, Pervez, 137–38, 140
Nasser, Gamal Abdel, 107, 147
National Committee for a Sane Nuclear 
Policy (SANE), 33, 35
national culture, 18–20, 199
National Resources Defense Council,  
248n42
National Security Decision Memorandum 
(NSDM) 242, 76
NATO, 96, 108, 136, 249n56; Able Archer 
crisis, 242n76; expansion of, 105, 249n57; 
French withdrawal from, 111; and 
Kosovo, 103; policies regarding use of 
nuclear weapons, 98, 102, 109, 164, 168, 
267n36
Nehru, Jawaharlal, 34, 48, 51, 59, 131, 161
neoliberal institutionalist theory: reputation 
in, 31
Nepal, 134
New Agenda Coalition, 167
New Look policy, 55, 61
New Zealand, 172, 173; and ICJ, 169; and 
NPT, 167
Nitze, Paul, 81
Nixon, Richard: during India-Pakistan war 
of 1971, 72, 76–78; during Middle East 
war of 1973, 72, 77, 90, 128; on nuclear 
test moratorium, 59; on nuclear weapons 
as conventional, 54; policies regarding 
China, 74, 75, 240nn50,51; policies 
regarding limited war, 76; policies 
regarding nuclear arms control, 240n48; 
policies regarding Soviet Union, 72, 
73, 75, 76, 77–78, 240nn50,51; policies 
regarding use of nuclear weapons, 17–18, 
36, 90; threats to use nuclear weapons, 
72, 73–74, 76–78, 90; during Vietnam 
War, 72–76, 78, 90, 91, 239n42, 240n48
no-first-use policies: of China, 19, 116, 117, 
118, 120–22, 132, 198–99, 254nn129,139; 
of India, 124, 131, 132, 133, 134–36, 137; 
of Russia, 20, 92–93; of Soviet Union, 19, 
98–99, 105, 247n31; of United Kingdom, 
109–10; of United States, 110, 193
Non-Aligned Movement, 34, 160, 165
nonnuclear weapon states (NNWS): attitudes 
regarding non-use tradition in, 1, 4, 11, 
13–14, 143–49, 152, 154–57, 158–59, 163, 
164–66, 177, 199; developing country 
leaders, 3, 32, 34, 147–48; legally binding 
non-use pledges sought by, 9, 13–14, 34, 
36, 133, 159–62, 163, 164–65, 166–77, 
193, 199, 210; as norm entrepreneurs and 
reputation intermediaries, 159, 160, 177, 
193; and NPT, 4, 9, 11, 13–14, 28–30, 34, 
36, 143, 158, 160–61, 162–68, 177, 199, 
266n30; relations with nuclear weapon 
states, 1, 2, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11–14, 16, 18, 19, 
20, 21, 26, 28–30, 31, 36–37, 38, 39, 41–45, 
53–55, 61, 62, 64, 66, 67, 71, 72–78, 80, 82, 
83, 87, 88–89, 90, 91, 92–93, 98, 99–101, 
102–3, 105, 107, 108–9, 113, 114–17, 122, 
124, 130–32, 133, 134, 136, 143–57, 158, 
159–77, 180, 197, 199, 201–2, 203, 204–6, 
209, 247n31, 265n15, 266n30
Nonproliferation Act of 1978, 80
normative considerations, 18–26; 
Constructivists on, 13, 15, 16–17, 19,  
21–22, 218n6; and norm entrepreneurs, 
20, 23, 26, 32–36, 40, 159, 160, 177,  
197–98, 208–9; realpolitik skeptics on, 
13, 15, 16, 17–18, 21–22; relationship to 
material considerations, 2, 22–26, 37; 
relationship to self-deterrence, 203, 
204, 206. See also informal norms; 
legal considerations; moral and 
ethical considerations; reputational 
considerations
North Korea, 18; and Korean War, 45, 46, 
48, 50; and NPT, 158; nuclear weapons 
program, 36, 88–89, 125, 138, 142, 158, 
167, 177, 178, 179, 192, 193–94, 201, 207; 
relations with United Kingdom, 110; 
relations with United States, 20, 45, 85, 
88–89, 125, 178, 189, 208
NPT. See Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty
nuclear disarmament, 30, 40–41, 42, 59, 
264n2; George W. Bush’s policies 
regarding, 167; Campaign for Nuclear 
Disarmament (CND), 33; Chinese 
policies regarding, 116–17; Eighteen 
Nation Disarmament Committee 
(ENDC), 34, 160, 161, 162; Geneva 
Conference on Disarmament, 100, 113, 

INDEX  313
160, 162, 266n30; Gorbachev’s policies 
regarding, 101–2, 211, 242n77; Indian 
policies regarding, 133, 141–42, 161–62; 
and NPT, 14, 29, 36, 163, 165, 166, 167, 
168, 193, 265n14; Reagan’s attitudes 
toward, 83, 242nn77,78; Soviet policies 
regarding, 93, 94, 101–2, 211, 242n77; 
UK policies regarding, 109, 110
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT),  
172, 175, 176, 179; Article VI, 29, 163, 
168, 265n14; and China, 121; and France, 
112, 113, 114, 115; and India, 108, 131–32, 
133, 141–42, 158, 164, 165–66; and Iran, 
158; and Israel, 125, 158; and NNWS,  
4, 9, 11, 13–14, 28–30, 34, 36, 143, 158, 
160–61, 162–68, 177, 199, 266n30; 
and nuclear disarmament, 14, 29, 36, 
163, 165, 166, 167, 168, 193, 265n14; 
review conference in 2000, 167; review 
conference in 2005, 167–68, 193; and 
Russia, 102, 103; and Soviet Union, 71, 
98, 100, 163, 164; and United Kingdom, 
71, 108; and United States, 66, 67, 80, 87, 
89, 158–59, 163–64, 193
Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) of 1994, 86
Nuclear Posture Review (NPR) of 2002, 
244n94
nuclear power, 35–36
nuclear proliferation, 193–94, 207, 208, 209, 
211–12, 213; Carter administration 
policies regarding, 80; China’s policies 
regarding, 121, 122, 195–96; Clinton 
administration policies regarding, 86, 
88–89; Eisenhower administration 
policies regarding, 35, 57–58, 62–63; 
France’s policies regarding, 112–13, 
114; Johnson administration policies 
regarding, 67, 70–72, 238n26; Kennedy 
administration policies regarding, 66; 
Khrushchev’s policies regarding, 97; 
Pakistan’s policies regarding, 124–25, 138, 
140, 142, 179, 195–96; United Kingdom’s 
policies regarding, 108. See also Nuclear 
Nonproliferation Treaty (NPT)
nuclear taboo, 4–9, 17, 218n6, 220n23,24, 
221n5,6,7; vs. tradition, 6–9
nuclear-weapon-free zones, 34, 89, 93, 113, 
117, 122, 158, 159, 170–77
nuclear weapons: vs. biological weapons, 
4, 179, 220n23, 272n37; vs. chemical 
weapons, 4, 179, 220n23, 272n37; civilian 
control of, 24, 42, 44, 47, 49, 50, 60; 
collateral damage from, 187, 191, 200, 
209, 210, 211; vs. conventional weapons, 
3, 5, 12, 18, 20, 23–24, 36, 49, 54–55, 57, 
58, 60, 61, 79, 92–93, 94–95, 99, 102, 
106–7, 120, 127, 128–29, 181–82, 184, 
187, 188–90, 191–92, 194, 198, 200, 201, 
205, 207, 209, 219n12, 236n124, 241n59, 
274n1; destructiveness of, 2, 5, 12, 14, 17, 
19, 21, 22–25, 26, 32, 34, 35, 37, 38, 39, 
40, 41, 42, 55, 58, 62, 68, 91, 186, 187, 191, 
194, 195, 197, 200, 209, 210, 211, 247n39; 
international control of, 40–41, 42, 
43–44, 44, 49, 56, 57–58, 93, 94, 197–98, 
228n10, 229nn11,12; lack of defense 
against, 40; major power monopoly, 3, 
11, 28–29; nuclear fallout from, 24–25, 
192; testing of, 2, 24, 25, 33, 35, 58, 59,  
60, 61, 63, 66, 93, 97, 107, 111, 112, 113, 
126, 131, 161, 162, 172, 175, 197, 198, 
250n66; uniqueness of, 5, 23–24, 29, 
34, 49, 274n1. See also tactical nuclear 
weapons
Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy 
(NUWEP), 181
Olmert, Ehud, 125
Olsen, Johan P., 2
Operation Duck Hook, 72, 74, 239n42
Operation Hudson Harbor, 48
Operation Vulture, 52, 112
Oppenheimer, J. Robert, 32, 40, 44, 226n50, 
229n13, 231n33
Organization of African Unity (OAU), 175
Outer Space Treaty, 239n28
Owen, John M., 222n12
Pakistan: acquisition of nuclear weapons 
by, 58, 113, 121, 131, 158; conventional 
forces, 134, 137, 141; Inter-Services 
Intelligence (ISI), 135; Kargil offensive, 
134, 137, 141, 258n51; Kashmir conflict, 
134, 137, 139, 140, 141, 145, 204, 212–13, 
258n51; and NPT, 158; nuclear facilities 
in, 138; policies regarding nuclear 
proliferation, 124–25, 138, 140, 142, 179, 
195–96; policies regarding use of nuclear 
weapons, 12, 13, 36, 124–25, 137–41, 
142, 192, 195, 199, 213, 258n50, 259n59; 
relationship with China, 121; relations 
with Afghanistan, 137–38; relations with 
France, 113; relations with India, 72, 
76–77, 124, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135–36, 

314  INDEX
Pakistan: (continued)  
137, 139–41, 142, 204, 213, 258nn50,51, 
273n56; relations with United States, 
137, 138, 139, 195; and Soviet war in 
Afghanistan, 99; threats to use nuclear 
weapons, 137, 201, 258n51
Paolucci, Mario, 224n30
Partial Test Ban Treaty (PTBT), 35, 66,  
161, 198
Payne, Keith, 183, 221n1
peace movements, 167, 211; and neutron 
bomb, 79, 90; and nuclear arms race, 81, 
82, 101; and nuclear testing, 58–59, 66, 
82, 198; as reputation intermediaries, 3, 
32, 33–34, 35, 93, 209; and Soviet Union, 
33–34, 58–59, 93, 101, 105, 198, 248n42; 
in United Kingdom, 106, 107–8; and 
Vietnam War, 74, 75
Pelindaba Treaty of 1996, 89, 171, 174–76, 
269n63
Peres, Shimon, 256n17
Perry, William, 87, 88–89, 244n96
Persian Gulf, 10; and Carter Doctrine, 79
Persian Gulf wars: 1990–91 war, 20, 36,  
83–85, 86, 91, 114, 126, 127, 129–30, 
141, 145, 152–56, 178–79, 181, 189, 192, 
194, 205, 209, 243n90, 262nn39,44, 
263nn47,47,53, 264n54, 273n50; 2003 
war, 20, 36, 110, 126, 127, 130, 145, 179, 
182, 184, 189, 191, 192, 194, 195, 203,  
205, 207, 209, 270n13, 274n58
Physicians for Social Responsibility, 35
Pincher Plan, 41, 42
Pipes, Richard, 81, 246n12
Pleven, René, 48
Poland, 93
Pompidou, Georges, 111
Powell, Colin: as Chairman of JCS, 84, 
153–54, 200; on nuclear war, 273n56; as 
Secretary of State, 195, 273n56
preemptive war, 91, 238n22; use of nuclear 
weapons in, 20, 36, 60, 97–98, 104, 130, 
136, 166, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183, 184, 
190–96, 208, 275n13
Prevention of Nuclear War Agreement of 
1973, 240n48
preventive war, 66, 70–71, 86, 87, 88, 147, 198, 
237n11, 238n22; use of nuclear weapons 
in, 11, 20, 36, 41–43, 44–45, 49, 68, 90, 
91, 104, 107, 114, 130, 166, 179, 180–82, 
184–85, 190–96, 199, 200, 201, 208, 
275n13
Price, Richard, 16–17
Project Solarium, 52
Pugwash movement, 33, 59, 93
Putin, Vladimir, 102
Quemoy, 53–55, 57, 97, 118, 194
Quester, George, 7, 15, 22, 62, 195, 205, 211, 
219n20
Rabinowitch, Eugine, 33
Radford, Arthur, 52, 53, 55, 112
Rail-Mobile Midgetman, 83
Rail-Mobile MX, 83
Rand Corp., 275n12
Rapacki Plan of 1957, 93
Rarotonga Treaty of 1985, 171, 173–74
Rauf, Tariq, 249n56, 273n46
Reagan, Ronald: attitudes regarding nuclear 
disarmament, 83, 242nn77,78; policies 
regarding nuclear arms control, 81–82, 
83; policies regarding Soviet Union, 
80–83, 90, 108, 241n67, 242n76; policies 
regarding use of nuclear weapons, 33, 36, 
80–83, 87, 241n67; at Reykjavik summit, 
101; and Strategic Defense Initiative 
(SDI), 82, 83, 101, 242n78
realpolitik skeptics: criticisms of, 17–18, 
21–22, 206, 222n10; on taboo against 
use of nuclear weapons, 13, 15, 16, 17–18, 
21–22
regime types, 18–20, 199; democracy, 17, 20, 
28, 222n12
Reliable Replacement Warhead (RRW), 186
reputational considerations, 13, 25–36, 144, 
157, 206, 223n24, 224n30; in China, 
122; in Egypt, 148–49; in France, 115; 
future of, 208–10; in India, 136; in Israel, 
130; in Pakistan, 137–38; relationship 
to legal considerations, 3–4, 22, 197; 
relationship to material character of 
nuclear weapons, 22–26, 37; relationship 
to moral considerations, 3–4, 22, 28, 197, 
224n33; and repeated non-use of nuclear 
weapons, 2, 3, 17, 23, 26; reputation 
defined, 224n38; and reputation 
intermediaries, 20, 23, 26, 32–36, 40, 159, 
160, 177, 197–98, 208–9; in Soviet Union, 
93, 99, 100–101, 105; vs. tactical/strategic 
considerations, 197, 198, 204; in United 
Kingdom, 106; in United States, 11–12, 
21, 38, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 48–49, 53, 54–57, 
59–60, 62–63, 67, 68–69, 70, 71, 73, 74, 

INDEX  315
75, 78–79, 82, 86, 90, 91, 117, 184–85, 190, 
194–95, 198, 199, 203–4, 210, 273n56, 
274n58. See also legal considerations; 
moral and ethical considerations
retaliation with nuclear weapons, 8, 25, 60, 
74; delayed second strike (DSS), 116, 
134–35; doctrine of massive retaliation, 
55, 56, 61, 64, 65, 231n38; launch on 
warning (LOW), 118, 119, 136; launch 
under attack (LUA)/launch-through-
attack, 118, 136; in response to chemical/
biological attacks, 9, 83–84, 85, 86–88, 
89, 91, 103, 110, 114, 123, 126, 129, 130, 
131, 132, 134–35, 145, 153–56, 157, 158, 
166, 178, 180–81, 182–83, 184, 186, 187, 
188, 189, 190, 191, 193, 194, 195, 200, 201, 
205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 212, 243n90, 
262n39, 263nn51,53, 269n63, 270n13, 
275n13; in response to conventional 
attacks, 29, 47, 102, 109, 124, 137, 139–40, 
141. See also deterrence; threshold for 
use of nuclear weapons
Richelson, Jeffrey T., 71
Ridgeway, Matthew, 47–48
Robust Nuclear Earth Penetrator (RNEP), 
185–86, 187–88, 192, 200
Romania, 105
Rotblat, Joseph, 33
Rumsfeld, Donald, 184, 187, 274n58
Rusk, Dean, 67, 69, 161–62
Russell, Bertrand, 33, 59, 161
Russia: and Africa Nuclear-Free Zone 
(Pelindaba) Treaty, 176; Chechen 
war, 103, 105, 145, 212; mini-nuke 
development in, 21, 104, 166, 212; and 
NATO expansion, 105, 249n57; no-first-
use policy of, 20, 92–93; and NPT, 102, 
103; policies regarding use of nuclear 
weapons, 8, 12, 13, 21, 92–93, 102–5, 
122–23, 166, 177, 178, 193, 195, 199, 201, 
210, 212, 249n56; relations with Ukraine, 
171; relations with United States, 104–5, 
182, 270n10
Sabri, Ali, 148
Sadat, Anwar, 146, 147–48
Sadek, Mohammed, 148
Sagan, Scott, 131, 190
SALT I arms control treaty, 240n48
SALT II arms control treaty, 80
Sammarai, Waffic al-, 263n51
Sarkozy, Nicholas, 252n101
Saudi Arabia: chemical and biological 
weapons of, 179, 269n2; during Persian 
Gulf War of 1990–91, 145, 153, 155, 205; 
relations with Iran, 125
Schelling, Thomas, 4, 15, 22; on reputation 
and image, 223n24, 225n39; on tradition 
of non-use, 5, 26, 227n59, 274n1; on 
uniqueness of nuclear weapons, 5, 23, 
26, 274n1
Schlesinger, James, 78; Schlesinger  
Doctrine, 76
Schneider, William, 271n25
Schwarzkopf, H. Norman, 84, 155–56, 
262n44
Schweitzer, Albert, 33, 59, 161
scientists, atomic, 39; attitudes regarding 
nuclear weapons among, 3, 32, 40, 44, 
59, 69–70, 160, 197–98, 208–9, 226n50, 
229nn11,13, 231n33
Seabed Treaty of 1972, 240n48
secrecy in nuclear weapons policy, 33
self-interest of states, 19, 21, 23, 25
Sentinel, 239n28
Shamir, Yizhak, 154
Shastri, Lal Bahadur, 108
Shazly, Saad el-, 148
Shevardnadze, Eduard, 248
Simmons, Beth: on state reputation, 27
Singh, Jaswant, 133
Single Integrated Operations Plan (SIOP)-93, 
60, 181, 243n87
Sino-Vietnamese War, 13, 145
Six-Day War of 1967, 126–27, 144, 147, 
260n14
Slovakia, 105
Slovenia, 105
Smith, Harold, 244n96
Snyder, Glenn, 132, 227n59
South Africa, 83, 174–75; and NPT, 167
South Asia, 171, 176, 210
Southeast Asia nuclear-free zone, 171,  
174, 176
South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone, 113, 
170–71, 172–74, 176
South Yemen, 100
Soviet Union: acquisition of nuclear weapons 
by, 94, 95, 107, 198; Afghan war, 12, 18, 
79, 99–100, 145, 220n33; and Baruch 
Plan, 41; collapse of, 83, 102; correlation 
of forces in strategic thinking, 100, 105; 
and French Indochina War, 53; and 
Korean War, 45–46, 47, 48, 51; during 

316  INDEX
Soviet Union: (continued)  
1973 Middle East war, 127, 128; during 
1991 Gulf War, 129–30; no-first-use 
policy of, 19, 98–99, 105, 247n31; and 
NPT, 71, 98, 100, 163, 164; and peace 
movements, 33–34, 58–59, 93, 101, 105, 
198, 248n42; policies regarding nuclear 
disarmament, 93, 94, 101–2, 211, 242n77; 
policies regarding nuclear proliferation, 
97, 100, 108; policies regarding use of 
chemical weapons, 12, 18, 99; policies 
regarding use of nuclear weapons, 3, 
12, 18, 19–20, 21, 33–34, 92–102, 105, 
122–23, 162, 172, 246n12; policy of 
détente, 66; relations with China, 66, 
96, 97, 116, 117, 120, 237n11, 240n50, 
245n1, 247n31; relations with Egypt, 146, 
147, 148, 247n31; relations with United 
Kingdom, 106, 107, 108, 152; and South 
Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone, 173; testing 
of nuclear weapons by, 58; threats to 
use nuclear weapons, 245n1; during 
Vietnam War, 69, 70, 74; during World 
War II, 39, 40, 228n4. See also Cold War; 
Gorbachev, Mikhail
Spratt-Furse amendment, 186
Sri Lanka: Tamil guerrillas in, 145
stability-instability paradox, 141
Stalin, Josef, 51, 94–95
Stassen, Harold, 56
Stein, Janice, 227n59
Stevenson, Adlai, 35, 59
Stimson, Henry, 33, 40, 43
Stockpile Stewardship Program, 186
Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START I), 
81, 83, 102
strategic considerations. See tactical/strategic 
considerations
Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), 82, 83
strategists, nuclear, 3, 32, 34, 160, 197, 208–9, 
226n59
Strauss, Lewis, 59
submarines, 24; submarine-launched 
ballistic missiles (SLBMs), 83; 
submarine-launched cruise missiles 
(SLCMs), 83
Suez War of 1956, 107, 111, 144, 245n1, 
251n84
Sun Yuxi, 121
Sweden: and ICJ, 169; and NPT, 165, 167
Symington, Stuart, 45
Syria, 178, 182; chemical and biological 
weapons of, 179, 269n2; and Yom Kippur 
War of 1973, 126, 127, 128, 145, 146
Szilard, Leo, 32, 35, 229n11
taboos: defined, 5–6, 219n20; Freud on, 6, 
219n18; vs. informal norms, 4–5, 6–10, 
20–22, 201, 208; social, 219nn13, 14, 16, 
18, 19; vs. traditions, 4–5, 6–10
tactical nuclear weapons, 83, 109, 111, 117, 
133; bunker-buster bombs, 21, 87, 104, 
119, 180, 181–82, 183, 184–94, 200, 
209, 244n96, 249n56, 272n34; of Israel, 
146; mini-nukes, 21, 26, 87, 130, 166, 
180, 183, 184–94, 195, 200, 204, 212, 
241n59; neutron bombs, 78–79, 130, 200, 
240n54, 241n59; Robust Nuclear Earth 
Penetrator (RNEP), 185–86, 187–88, 192, 
200; of Russia, 21, 104, 166, 212, 249n56; 
vs. strategic weapons, 26, 54–55, 68; of 
United Kingdom, 149–52; of United 
States, 21, 54–55, 68, 69–70, 104, 119, 
153–54, 166, 180, 183, 184–94, 195, 200, 
204, 241n63, 259n56
tactical/strategic considerations, 2, 16, 18, 
20, 144, 145–46, 200, 203, 207–8, 209, 
222n10; vs. reputational considerations, 
197, 198, 204; in Soviet Union, 93, 99;  
in United States, 11–12, 38, 43, 46, 48, 49, 
50–51, 52–55, 56, 62, 66–67, 68–70, 75, 
78, 88–89, 90, 91, 117, 198
Taiwan Straits Crisis of 1954–55, 53–55, 57, 
61–62, 116, 118, 194
Taiwan Straits Crisis of 1958, 55, 57, 116, 118
Tajikistan, 105
Tannenwald, Nina, 16–17, 19, 222n10
Taylor, Maxwell D., 67, 231n43
technological developments: B61-11, 184, 185, 
187, 244n96, 249n56, 272n34; bunker-
buster bombs, 21, 87, 104, 119, 180, 
181–82, 183, 184–94, 200, 209, 244n96, 
249n56, 272n34; mini-nukes, 21, 26, 87, 
130, 166, 180, 183, 184–94, 195, 200, 204, 
212; precision-guided munitions, 185, 
188–89, 209; relationship to non-use 
tradition, 4, 14, 21, 26, 208, 209; Robust 
Nuclear Earth Penetrator (RNEP), 
185–86, 187–88, 192, 200
terrorism: al-Quaeda, 87, 137, 138, 145, 178; 
dirty bombs, 126, 135, 138, 141, 179; 
September 11th attacks, 14, 90, 110, 114, 

INDEX  317
123, 145, 174, 178, 179, 180, 187, 201,  
208, 209; and use of nuclear weapons,  
14, 20, 87, 104, 114–15, 116, 123, 124–25, 
126, 131, 134, 135, 138, 139, 141, 142,  
168, 177, 179, 180, 181, 184, 187, 190–91, 
195, 196, 208, 210, 212, 259n59
Thatcher, Margaret, 108–9, 151, 250n73
theater missile defense systems, 86, 134
threats to use nuclear weapons, 11, 95, 133, 
162, 163, 199, 201–8; credibility of, 8–9, 
25, 30–31, 31, 63, 91, 130, 146–47, 163, 
201–6, 207, 208, 212, 225n41, 232n43; by 
France, 114–16, 208; and international 
law, 169, 170; by Israel, 10, 20, 128,  
129, 130, 131, 141, 145, 146–47, 154, 201; 
and nuclear-free zones, 171–72, 173, 
174, 175; by Pakistan, 137, 201, 258n51; 
in response to attacks with chemical/
biological weapons, 9, 83–84, 85, 86–88, 
89, 91, 103, 110, 114, 123, 126, 129, 130, 
131, 132, 134–35, 145, 153–56, 157, 158, 
166, 178, 180–81, 182–83, 184, 186, 187, 
188, 189, 190, 191, 193, 194, 195, 200, 201, 
205, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 212, 243n90, 
262n39, 263nn51,53, 269n63, 270n13, 
275n13; by Soviet Union, 245n1; by 
United Kingdom, 20, 108–9, 110–11,  
208; by United States, 10, 20, 50–51,  
53–55, 57, 61–62, 65, 72, 73–74, 76–78, 
83–84, 85, 90, 91, 97, 118, 129, 145, 
153–55, 180, 181, 189, 190, 192, 194, 198, 
208, 245n1, 262n39, 263n51. See also 
deterrence
threshold for use of nuclear weapons: 
survival of nation-states at risk, 4, 7–8, 
12, 24, 31, 32, 125, 126, 127, 128–29, 140, 
148, 158, 170, 192, 203, 205, 206, 212, 
258n50; as weapons of last resort, 12, 
16, 109, 125–26, 127, 128–29, 139–40, 
212. See also ambiguity in nuclear 
policies; preemptive war; preventive 
war; retaliation; threats to use nuclear 
weapons
Threshold Test Ban Treaty (TTBT), 240n48
Tito, Josip Broz, 34
Tlatelolco Treaty of 1967, 170, 171–72
Tompkins, Joanne, 254n129
tradition of non-use, 1–12, 15–37, 197–213; 
challenges, 208–213; defined, 5, 197; vs. 
taboo, 6–9.
Trident missile system, 108, 110, 111, 251n83
Truman, Harry: and atomic scientists, 32–33; 
decision to use atomic weapons against 
Japan, 39; policies during Korean War, 
45–50, 106, 198, 231n42, 232nn48,52; 
policies regarding civilian control of 
nuclear weapons, 24, 42, 47, 49, 50, 
60, 198; policies regarding hydrogen 
bomb project, 44, 49; policies regarding 
international control of nuclear 
weapons, 40–41, 42, 43–44, 49, 197–98, 
228n10; policies regarding preventive 
war, 41–43, 44–45; policies regarding 
Soviet Union, 41–46, 49, 226n50; policies 
regarding use of nuclear weapons, 24, 
32–33, 38–50, 46, 53, 62–63, 64, 106, 198, 
228nn3,9, 229n19, 230n25, 232nn46,48
Ukraine, 89, 101, 103, 171, 266n30
United Kingdom: acquisition of nuclear 
weapons by, 105–6, 107; and Africa 
Nuclear-Free Zone (Pelindaba) Treaty, 
176; antinuclear movement in, 106, 
107–8; and ICJ, 169; and NPT, 71, 108; 
policies regarding nuclear disarmament, 
109, 110; policies regarding nuclear 
proliferation, 108; policies regarding use 
of nuclear weapons, 8, 12, 13, 19, 20, 92, 
105–11, 113, 114, 115, 145, 149–51, 152, 
166, 177, 178, 193, 195, 199, 201, 208, 210, 
212, 250n73; relations with Iraq, 110–11; 
relations with Soviet Union, 106, 107, 
108, 152; relations with Ukraine, 171; 
relations with United States, 33, 40, 43, 
46, 50, 58, 106, 107, 111, 123, 152, 228n10; 
and South Pacific Nuclear-Free Zone, 
172, 173–74; Suez War of 1956, 107, 111, 
144, 245n1, 251n84; testing of nuclear 
weapons by, 58, 107, 172; threats to use 
nuclear weapons, 20, 108–9, 110–11, 208. 
See also Falklands War
United Nations: Atomic Energy Commission 
(UNAEC), 41, 94; Charter, 161–62, 164, 
167, 169; and Comprehensive Test Ban 
Treaty (CTBT), 89, 113, 131; Eighteen 
Nation Disarmament Committee 
(ENDC), 34, 160, 161, 162; General 
Assembly, 13, 80, 94, 98, 116–17, 159–60, 
161–62, 168–70, 185; General Assembly 
Resolution 49/75K, 169; Geneva Con­
ference on Disarmament, 100, 113, 160, 
162, 266n30; International Atomic

318  INDEX
United Nations: (continued)  
Energy Agency (IAEA), 57–58, 134, 174, 
175, 261n24; and International Court  
of Justice, 159, 160; and nonproliferation, 
159–62, 164–65, 168–70; sanctions on  
Iraq, 178–79; Security Council, 11, 
28, 89, 94, 116, 149, 159–60, 164, 166, 
265n15; Security Council Resolution 255, 
164; Security Council Resolution 984, 
166–67
United States: and Africa Nuclear-Free Zone  
(Pelindaba) Treaty, 176; Atomic Energy 
Commission (AEC), 24, 44, 47, 49, 59, 
60, 231n33; and ICJ, 169; Joint Chiefs 
of Staff (JCS), 42, 46, 47, 52, 67, 72, 84, 
86–87, 153, 162, 184–85, 200, 232n48; 
mini-nuke and bunker-buster bomb 
development in, 21, 104, 119, 166, 180, 
183, 184–94, 195, 200, 204; and NPT, 
66, 67, 80, 87, 89, 158–59, 163–64, 193; 
policies regarding biological weapons, 
187; policies regarding nuclear disar­
mament, 167; policies regarding nuclear 
proliferation, 57–62, 66, 67, 70–72, 80, 
86, 88–89, 108, 113, 167–68, 178, 179–80, 
181–88, 193, 234n98, 238n26, 275n12; 
policies regarding use of chemical 
weapons, 12, 18, 187; policies regarding 
use of nuclear weapons, 3, 8, 10, 11–12, 
13, 14, 17–18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 32–33, 36,  
37, 38, 39–63, 64–65, 99, 102, 103, 110, 
111, 113, 114, 115, 122–23, 145, 153–54, 
159, 161–62, 166, 167–68, 177, 178–96, 
201, 203–4, 205, 206, 207–8, 209, 210, 
211–12, 269n63, 270n13, 275n12; 
relations with China, 18, 45, 46, 47–48, 
49–51, 53–55, 56, 57, 61–62, 66, 116,  
117–18, 119, 120–21, 122, 145, 174, 
194, 198, 199, 232n52, 233n66, 237n11, 
238n22; relations with Iran, 20, 85, 125, 
178, 182, 184, 189, 200, 208, 241n63, 
271n25; relations with Israel, 125, 126, 
128, 129, 131, 141, 148, 149, 154, 155, 
182, 205; relations with Pakistan, 137, 
138, 139, 195; relations with Russia, 182; 
relations with Ukraine, 171; relations 
with United Kingdom, 33, 40, 43, 46, 
50, 58, 106, 107, 111, 123, 152, 228n10; 
September 11th attacks, 14, 90, 110, 114, 
123, 145, 174, 178, 179, 180, 187, 201, 
208, 209; and South Pacific Nuclear-
Free Zone, 172, 173; and Soviet war 
in Afghanistan, 99; testing of nuclear 
weapons by, 2, 24, 25, 33, 35, 58, 59, 107, 
161, 172, 197, 198, 250n66; threats to  
use nuclear weapons by, 10, 20, 50–51,  
53–55, 57, 61–62, 65, 72, 73–74, 76–78, 
83–84, 85, 90, 91, 97, 118, 129, 145, 
153–55, 180, 181, 189, 190, 192, 194, 198, 
208, 245n1, 262n39, 263n51. See also 
Bush, George H. W.; Bush, George W.; 
Carter, Jimmy; Clinton, Bill; Cold War; 
Eisenhower, Dwight; Johnson, Lyndon; 
Kennedy, John; Korean War; Nixon, 
Richard; Persian Gulf wars; Reagan, 
Ronald; Truman, Harry; Vietnam War
U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament 
Agency (ACDA), 162
U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, 54–55, 
273n48
U.S. Defense Science Board, 184
U.S. National Security Council, 63, 67,  
198, 230n19, 234n98, 237n11; debates  
on nuclear use in limited wars, 55–56;  
Document 68 (NSC-68), 44, 45; Docu­
ment 100 (NSC-100), 44–45, 231n38; 
Document 162/1 (NSC-162/1), 60,  
235n115; Document 162/2 (NSC-162/2), 
52, 55; Project Solarium, 51–52
U.S. Psychological Warfare Office, 53
U.S. Seventh Fleet, 76–77
U.S. Strategic Air Command (SAC), 190
U.S. Strategic Air Command (STRATCOM), 
47, 85, 184, 188–89; nuclear alert of  
1969, 73
Ussuri River crisis, 245n1, 247n31
U Thant, 166
Vajpayee, Altal Bihari, 132
Van Cleave, William R., 81
Vienna Convention, 173
Vietnam War, 12, 18, 35–36, 85, 144, 145, 207; 
China during, 69, 70, 74, 75; and JASON 
Group report, 69–70, 238n21; Johnson 
during, 67, 68–69, 71; Nixon during, 
72–76, 78, 90, 91, 239n42, 240n48; Paris 
peace negotiations, 72, 74
Viner, Jacob, 34
Vogt, John, 81
weapons of mass destruction (WMD). See 
biological weapons; chemical weapons; 
nuclear weapons
Weiss, Seymour, 81
Welch, David A., 237n5
Welch, Jasper, 81

INDEX  319
West Germany, 93, 98, 162, 240n54
Whalen, Richard J., 73
Wilson, Charles E., 52
Wilson, Harold, 107
Wohlstetter, Albert, 227n59
Wolfe, Thomas W., 81
Wolfers, Arnold, 34
Wolfowitz, Paul, 81
World Court, 13; World Court Project, 
267n38
World Federation of Churches, 33
World Peace Council, 33, 59, 93
Yeltsin, Boris, 102
Yom Kippur War of 1973: Egypt during, 
72, 77–78, 126, 127–28, 145, 146–49, 
247n31, 260n19; Israel during, 72, 77–78, 
126, 127–29, 130, 144–45, 146–49, 205, 
256n17, 260n19; Kissinger during, 128, 
148; Nixon during, 72, 77, 90, 128; Soviet 
Union during, 127, 128; Syria during, 
126, 127, 128, 145, 146
Zhu Chenghu, 120	


