

Editorial
Robert Franek, Editor-in-Chief David Soto, Director of Content Development Kristen O’Toole,
Editorial Director Pia Aliperti, Editor
Stephen Koch, Survey Manager
Penguin Random House
Publishing Team
Tom Russell, VP, Publisher
Alison Stoltzfus, Publishing Director Ellen L. Reed, Production Manager Jake Eldred, Associate
Managing Editor Suzanne Lee, Design
The Princeton Review 555 West 18th Street
New York, NY 10011
E-mail: editorialsupport@review.com
Copyright © 1993, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007,
2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017 by TPR Education IP Holdings, LLC
All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Penguin Random House LLC, New York,
and in Canada by Random House of Canada, a division of Penguin Random House Ltd., Toronto.
This publication is designed to provide accurate information in regard to the subject matter
covered as of the date of publication. Since tax laws, financial aid regulations, and government
regulations change periodically, it is sold with the understanding that neither the publisher nor the
authors are engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional service. If legal advice
or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be
sought.
The draft version of the 2018–2019 FAFSA that appears on this page is for informational purposes
only. It should not be submitted. The U.S. Department of Education did not review or provide any
of the other information contained in this publication.
Source: The EFC figures provided for the case studies on this page are courtesy of the College
Board. College Board, CSS Profile, CSS/Financial Aid PROFILE and the acorn logo are
trademarks of the College Board. All rights reserved.
Trade Paperback ISBN 9781524710699
Ebook ISBN 9781524710859
The Princeton Review is not affiliated with Princeton University.
Cover art by Blend Images / Alamy Stock Photo
Cover design by Suzanne Lee

v4.1
a

FOREWORD
I was the first person in my family to go to college. After completing my
undergraduate studies, I went on to law school, and after that—before I entered
political office—I was a law professor at the University of Arkansas. The time I
spent in the classroom was vital to my professional growth, and I was able to
pursue higher education only because I had the help of scholarships, loans, and
jobs along the way. Though it wasn’t always easy—as an undergrad, I lived on
just a few dollars a week—it was far from impossible, and the investments I
made in both time and money have paid immeasurable returns. My schooling, as
well as the friends I made and the life experience I gained throughout, gave me
opportunities, confidence, and hope for my future.
A college education should never be considered unattainable by any
American. There are many avenues for funding available, but knowing how to
look for assistance, as well as where to find it, is critical. Fortunately, our
country has long recognized the importance of access to higher education. The
land grant college system was established under Abraham Lincoln, the GI Bill
after World War II, and the Pell Grants in the 1970s. My Administration
established the HOPE Scholarship and the Lifetime Learning tax credit, which
together have provided billions of dollars in tax credits to tens of millions of
American families paying for college. We created AmeriCorps, one of my
proudest accomplishments as President, which gave young people the
opportunity to serve their communities while earning money for college. We also
expanded the Federal Work-Study program, cut student fees and interest rates on
all loans, and increased repayment options. Students saved more than $9 billion

during my terms in office through the reductions in loan fees and interest rates.
While it has long been a key source of opportunity, a higher education is a
necessity in today’s world. The challenges of today’s lightning-paced and
information-driven global society mean that investing in the minds of our young
people is the most important thing our nation can do. Every American child,
regardless of race, religion, or income, will need an education to guarantee our
future success as a country and our competitiveness in the world, and I am
committed to inspiring more young people to attend and finish college. Both my
Foundation and the Clinton Global Initiative, along with many other fine public
and private institutions, are working to not only spread the word that the cost of
tuition shouldn’t be an obstacle to attending college, but to also improve access
to education in measurable ways. The good news is that there is more help than
ever before for college-bound students and their families. Paying for College
Without Going Broke is a comprehensive guide to the “ins and outs” of
financing a college education. This straight-talking volume gives much-needed
direction to students and the families who love and support them.
If you invest in your future through education, you’re taking the long view.
Both the efforts and the sacrifices you make today will yield great rewards
tomorrow.
—Bill Clinton

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Geoff Martz and I are most grateful to those who have helped with this and prior
editions of the book. First of all, we wish to thank President Bill Clinton who has
honored our book with his Foreword. Thanks also to Shannon Ashford and
Felton Booker, Domestic Policy Interns with the William J. Clinton Presidential
Foundation during the Summer 2003 Session, for preparing the “Special
Message to First-Generation College Students and Their Parents” that appears in
the beginning of the text.
We would also like to thank Robert Franek and Kristen O′Toole at The
Princeton Review, Scott Harris and his production team at Best Content
Solutions, and Tom Russell and Alison Stoltzfus at Penguin Random House.
Special thanks to Jeanne Krier, our publicist for this book since its inception in
1993. Her understanding of the many complex issues surrounding financial aid
and college funding as well as her keen suggestions for future editions have been
an ongoing source of help and support. Her skill as a public relations expert and
the high regard that many members of media have for her professionalism have
also contributed significantly to the success of this project.
We are also grateful to Victoria Malone, Michele Brown, Anita Gross, Daria
Adams, and Jeanne Saunders at the U.S. Department of Education as well as
Susan McCrackin and Cindy Shelberg at the College Board who have been a
tremendous source of help for many editions of this book.
I would also like to thank Isidore Matalon, my longtime friend and a constant
source of new ideas; Steven Levine of the accounting firm of Lederer & Levine
in Lyndhurst, New Jersey, for his helpful suggestions regarding tax law;
Catherine O′Connor, my associate at Campus Consultants without whom I could
never have managed; my friends Stuart Foisy and John Brubaker for their
assistance with the worksheets at the back of this book; the high school
counselors and independent college consultants who have entrusted students and
their parents to me over the years; and my own parents, who somehow managed
to pay for my college education without the benefit of having read a book like
this.
Last but not least, I would like to thank my clients who have provided me with
the opportunity to prove that financial aid planning really works.

—Kal Chany

CONTENTS
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Foreword
Acknowledgments
A Special Message to First-Generation College Students and Their
Parents
INTRODUCTION
PART ONE
UNDERSTANDING THE PROCESS
CHAPTER ONE
Overview
PART TWO
HOW TO TAKE CONTROL OF THE PROCESS
CHAPTER TWO
Long-Term Strategies for Paying for College
CHAPTER THREE
Short-Term Strategies for Receiving More
Financial Aid
CHAPTER FOUR
How to Pick Colleges
CHAPTER FIVE
What the Student Can Do
CHAPTER SIX
State Aid
PART THREE
FILLING OUT THE STANDARDIZED FORMS
PART FOUR
THE OFFER & OTHER FINANCIAL MATTERS
CHAPTER SEVEN
Innovative Payment Options
CHAPTER EIGHT
Managing Your Debt
CHAPTER NINE
Special Topics
CHAPTER TEN
Less Taxing Matters

CHAPTER ELEVEN
Looking for a Financial Aid Consulting
Service
CHAPTER TWELVE
Looking Ahead
PART FIVE
WORKSHEETS AND FORMS
SAMPLE FORMS
GLOSSARY
INSTITUTIONAL METHODOLOGY COMMENTS AND CASE STUDIES
KEY THINGS TO KNOW ABOUT THE IRS DATA RETRIEVAL TOOL AND THE IRS
TRANSCRIPT VERIFICATION REQUIREMENT
ABOUT THE AUTHORS

A SPECIAL MESSAGE TO FIRST-
GENERATION COLLEGE STUDENTS
AND THEIR PARENTS
by Shannon Ashford and Felton Booker
Paying for college is difficult for everyone these days, but for first-generation
college students and their families, it can be even more of a challenge. In
addition to worrying about coming up with the cash, you also have to deal with a
completely unfamiliar process. You will face decisions, deadlines, and
application requirements that can sometimes seem scarily complicated. This
section is designed to provide first-generation students and their parents with
some basic information regarding college admissions and college funding that
will make the process a little less daunting for you both. It will also dispel some
of the myths about the admission and funding process. Later sections in this
book will discuss in greater detail the various options and strategies covered
here.
PARENTS
For parents of a first-generation college student, the amount of new information
to absorb, financial records to collect, fees to pay, and forms to submit can be
overwhelming. The pressure of feeling that your child’s educational future may
depend on how each admission and aid form is completed doesn’t help.
Here are a few topics some parents may be faced with as they tackle the
college process for the first time.
APPROACHING COLLEGE ADMISSION AND FUNDING AS A COLLABORATIVE
PROCESS

It is ironic that just at the moment when parents are supposed to be giving their
child more autonomy in making his or her own decisions, along comes one of
the most critical and expensive decisions that a young adult will ever have to
make—a decision bound to test the resolve of any parent trying to let go.
The typical response of many parents, understandably so, is to take control.
However, the reality is that many parents are just as much in the dark about the
process of selecting, applying, and paying for college as their sons and
daughters.
We’ve found that the most successful way to approach all this is to view the
college process as a collaborative effort between parents and their college-bound
child, with help from resources such as high school guidance counselors, college
administrators, and reference guides like this one.
In this collaborative process, parents and children serve as reality checks for
each other. Will you be paying for everything, or will your child carry some of
the burden? While you don’t need to go into the minute details of your finances,
it is a good idea to tell your child what you can really afford. As a parent, are
you looking only at schools with very high admission standards? It might be a
good idea to work together to select at least one college with a high acceptance
rate where your student’s standardized test scores and GPA are above the average
for the typically admitted student.
You may also come to realize that you and your child have differing
expectations about college. You might want your son to attend school near home,
while he actually wants to go to school three states away. Your daughter may
want to major in literature, while you’ve always thought she would be an
engineer. Although you may suspect that you know best, please take some extra
time to consider the incredible opportunity—and daunting challenge—that this
period of time presents to your child as a young person on the brink of
adulthood.
DON’T BE PROUD, BE HONEST
Many parents traditionally view their family’s financial information as highly
personal and perceive questions asked in financial aid applications as invasive,
and more plainly, none of the school’s business. As parents, you should be very
proud of your efforts to provide for your family. That pride, however, may often
result in parents being either hesitant to apply for financial aid or

misrepresenting their family’s information when applying. Neither is helpful to
the family’s objective: ensuring that their child is financially able to attend a
school of his or her choice. Therefore, you don’t want to overstate the value of
your income and asset information on the forms. The purpose of these questions
is to determine the accurate level of financial aid that may be available to your
child. Any overstatement of the parent’s wealth or education may prevent your
child from being offered the level of financial aid they are qualified to receive
and may require in order to attend college.
On the other hand, it is never a good idea to exaggerate your family’s need.
Colleges have sophisticated procedures to verify information in order to ensure
that ultimate monetary awards accurately reflect your family’s financial
situation.
Despite the complexity of some forms, it is very important that your financial
information be accurate. Later in this book, you will see how to accurately
represent your situation to your best advantage.
Remember, there is more than $235 billion in financial aid awarded each year,
and millions of students and their parents apply for that aid, so you shouldn’t feel
self-conscious about being one of them. It is understood that a large percentage
of students will not be able to pay for school entirely on their own. That’s why
each school has a financial aid office whose responsibility is to allocate public
and private funds to college students.
FINANCIAL AID MYTHS
You may have heard a lot of myths about financial aid: that you can’t get it if
you own your home, or if you have savings in the bank, or if you make more
than a certain amount of money, or even if you are not working. But as you’ll
learn in this book, none of that is necessarily true. Many financial aid recipients
own their homes and have some savings in the bank. On the other hand, a
number of parents who are unemployed, disabled, or receive only government
benefits are also able to have their children qualify for financial aid.
One commonly accepted myth regarding financial aid is that the best way to
get money for school is to search for little-known awards that go unclaimed each
year. The reality is that such scholarships represent less than 5 percent of all the
aid that is available. The biggest pieces of the financial aid pie come from funds
provided by the federal and state governments as well as the colleges

themselves.
Another myth is that you won’t qualify for aid if you are not a U.S. citizen.
Certain noncitizens—for example, students who are permanent residents and
have a green card—are eligible. In most cases, the parents’ citizenship status is
actually not relevant at all.
Many people also assume that the price of tuition is the same for every
college, but in fact, the range in prices is huge. Some colleges are very expensive
(and unfortunately, these schools tend to get most of the headlines). According to
the College Board, however, only about ten percent of students are enrolled in
colleges with tuitions of more than $40,000. The reality is that the majority of
students attend institutions where the tuition charges are less than $15,000 a
year. And if you look at the community college level, the average tuition is about
a quarter of that amount.
And not everyone pays the same price for a given college. In fact, going to
college is a bit like traveling on an airplane. If you ask the person across the aisle
what fare she paid, it may be completely different from your own. Some people
may be paying the full fare for college while others pay far less, so you should
never initially rule out a school based on “sticker price.”
Yet another big myth students and parents hold is that a student gets the same
aid whether he is looking at a community college or a very expensive private
university. And perhaps the biggest myth of all is that you should wait to apply
for aid until after your child has been accepted to a college. If you do that, you
may well be out of luck. It is crucial to meet financial aid application deadlines
—and these deadlines sometimes precede the deadlines for the actual admission
application to the college.
IS THERE REALLY FINANCIAL AID JUST FOR FIRST-GENERATION STUDENTS?
Yes, there is. A number of state governments and some colleges have specific
financial aid programs that are available only to first-generation college students.
When filling out financial aid forms, mark what describes the highest level of
education completed, not the highest level attempted. For example, if a parent
started college but did not complete an associate’s or bachelor’s degree program,
then the correct response to a question asking for the parents’ educational
attainment would not be “College,” but rather “High School.”

YOU MAY GET MORE AID THAN YOU THINK POSSIBLE
For some families, it may not cost any more to go to a school with a higher
tuition than it would to attend one with a relatively inexpensive stated price.
While it is true that on average the cost of attending a state institution is less than
that of attending a private college or university, depending on a family’s income
and a college’s available aid funds, the cost paid by the family for attending even
the most expensive Ivy League schools may be less than the cost of attending an
in-state public university. The key is to focus not on the “sticker price,” but on
how much the family can pay, how much the student has to borrow, and what
other kinds of tuition help are available.
Investigate the financial aid options at each institution of interest and get a
rough idea of your chances of receiving aid. Of course, a dose of pragmatism
isn’t a bad idea. Your child should apply to at least one school you would be able
to afford with little or no aid.
STUDENTS
While this book may seem geared toward your parents, this particular section is
especially for you. After all, you are the one going to college, and nowhere is
that fact more evident than on the financial aid forms themselves; when you fill
them out, you will notice that you are the applicant for aid, not your parents.
Financially and emotionally, you are the one who, in many cases, will be directly
responsible for the choices you and your parents are about to make.
SO WHY COLLEGE IN THE FIRST PLACE?
Do you find that you are repeating that question silently in your head, but are
apprehensive about saying it aloud? Even if you feel you have nothing in
common with other high school students, this is the one sentiment that binds
students everywhere. Such uncertainty is healthy and normal. If you are
questioning the importance of college, it indicates a few things: (1) college is on
your mind, (2) you’ve devoted time to pondering how it affects your future, and
(3) you exhibit a willingness to invest the time needed to examine the benefits
college offers as well as the preparations needed to attend.

THE PRACTICAL REASONS FOR COLLEGE
Years ago it was possible to find a job with decent wages even if you possessed
only a high school diploma. However, technological progress, the complexity of
modern life, the skills needed to support it, and the importance placed on higher
education by employers has made a college degree almost a necessity. According
to some studies, individuals with a bachelor’s degree will earn on average about
$800,000 more than a high school graduate over their lifetimes. In addition, a
college degree has much more than monetary value. It can open doors to
personal growth, social development, and cultural awareness.
IS COLLEGE REALLY THE NEXT STEP?
While the global marketplace increasingly requires a workforce with some type
of post-secondary education or specialized skill, it should be noted that earning a
degree is a personal decision that should not be made lightly. The process of
getting to that decision can take many forms. You should take your time
exploring the opportunities college presents and the ways you need to go about
researching financial aid options. Reading this book is a good place to start.
Just as the process of searching for the right college and the ways to pay for it
can take many paths, it can also happen in different stages. A student might start
by attending a community college, junior college, or technical school, and then
transfer to a four-year institution. This would enable her to “get her footing” by
saving money or improving her academic transcripts. A student might take a
year off from school before beginning college—to earn money to pay for
college, to travel, or to work in a national community service program like
AmeriCorps.
If your plans to attend a four-year college include taking time off before
enrolling, or attending a smaller school and then transferring, you still should
educate yourself about the details of the process now. More information on such
options is contained in the chapter of this book titled “What the Student Can
Do.” Sit down with your parents, guidance counselor, or mentor. Include them in
your plans, ask them for input, and create a path that will allow you to attain the
goals you have set for yourself. Start as soon as you can, and keep an open mind.
COMMUNICATE

It’s the most critical part of this process. You will need to discuss applying,
attending, and financing college with your parents, guardians, mentors, teachers,
guidance counselors, and anyone else whose role it is to ensure your future well-
being. Difficult as that might seem, it often has side benefits. For example, your
parents may not even know what you want until you tell them. Articulating out
loud to them (and others) what you want may help you to define exactly what
that is. So you should talk often and candidly with your parents about college. It
might even help if you develop some type of check-in or update system that your
parents agree to, so that everyone knows when planned conversations about
college and your progress in applying will occur. And remember to keep the
lines of communication open, even though you may express a different
perspective than your parents. You can agree to disagree sometimes. Try to keep
in mind that you are all working toward the same goal: making the best decisions
for your future.
If throughout the course of these discussions your parents seem unwilling to
accept your point of view, you may want to consider having an outside party join
in your conversations. Another adult family member, or even someone more
familiar with the college process such as a guidance counselor, may be of great
help in such situations. Remember also that people who are most informed about
a subject are more likely to be respected and listened to throughout a
conversation. Do your research. Show your parents and others that you are
serious about this process and that your opinions deserve to be respected. And
bear in mind that no matter how tense your family situation, if you miss a
deadline or ignore a college’s request for more information, you may have your
admissions application rejected or lose your aid eligibility. So stay on top of
those deadlines!
SAFETY IN NUMBERS
It may seem like a challenging process, but millions of students and parents have
successfully gotten through the college decision and financial aid process before.
No matter what you hear about how hard this is, know that there are tools in
place that can make it possible for any student to get a college education. But
you’ll have to work smart, and Paying for College Without Going Broke will
show you how to do just that.

About the Authors of A Special Message to First-
Generation College Students and Their Parents
Shannon Ashford is a native of Columbia, South Carolina, and a graduate of
Stanford University.
Felton Booker, a native of Los Angeles, received a B.A. from Williams College
and a J.D./MBA from Columbia University.
Ashford and Booker participated in the William J. Clinton Presidential
Foundation Intern Program in the 2003 Summer Session.

INTRODUCTION
The college application process has been described as the closest thing America
has to a “savage puberty rite.” In fact, entire books have been written about the
traumatic effect the application process has on students. Much less attention has
been paid to another group of unsung heroes who are going through a similar
ordeal all their own: the parents who are supposed to pay for all this.
If This Is So Good for Me, Why Does It Feel So
Bad?
The cost of a four-year private college education has passed the $250,000 mark
at some schools, which is enough to cause even the most affluent parent to want
to sit down and cry. The public Ivies—state schools with excellent reputations—
have been raising their tuition even faster than the privates. This year, an out-of-
state student will have to pay more than $57,500 to attend the University of
Michigan for one year.
Meanwhile, stagnating university endowments caused by the stock market
slump along with cuts to the education budgets of state governments have
combined to create a crisis in higher education. Some colleges have had to slash
their budgets, lay off professors, even consolidate with other schools. And even
when you factor in the new educational tax benefits, the financial aid available
per student has shrunk as rising tuition has forced more and more parents to
apply for assistance.
The Joy of Aid
If there is a bright side to all this it is that in spite of all the bad news, there is
still a great deal of financial aid available—and we are talking billions of dollars.
At these prices, almost every family now qualifies for some form of assistance.
Many parents don’t believe that a family that makes over $150,000 a year, owns
their own home, and holds substantial assets could possibly receive financial aid.

These days, that family—provided it is presented in the right light—almost
certainly does. Many parents who make $50,000, rent their home, and have no
assets, don’t believe they can afford to send their child to any type of college at
all. They almost certainly can—in fact, they may find to their surprise that with
the financial aid package some schools can put together for them, it may cost
less to attend an “expensive” private school than it would to go to a “cheap”
state school.
Who Gets the Most Financial Aid?
You might think that the families who receive the most financial aid would be
the families with the most need. In fact, this is not necessarily true. The people
who receive the most aid are the people who best understand the aid process.
Some years ago, we had a client who owned a $1 million apartment in New
York City and a stock portfolio with a value in excess of $2 million. Her
daughter attended college—with a $4,000-a-year need-based grant.
Is This Fair?
No. But lots of things in life aren’t fair. In that particular case, we were able to
take advantage of a financial aid loophole involving the way state aid is
computed in New York. There are lots of financial aid loopholes.
Is This Legal?
You bet. All of the strategies we are going to discuss in this book follow the law
to the letter.
Is This Ethical?
Let us put a hypothetical question to you: If your accountant showed you a legal
way to save $4,000 on your income tax this year, would you take it?
The parallels between taxes and financial aid are interesting. Both have
loopholes that regularly get exploited by the people who know about them. But

more important, both also involve adversarial relationships. In the case of your
taxes, the IRS wants as much money from you as it can get. You, in turn, want to
give the IRS as little as possible. This pas de deux is a time-honored tradition, a
system of checks and balances that everyone understands and accepts. And as
long as both sides stick to the rules, the system works as well as anyone can
expect.
In the case of college, it is the job of the financial aid officer (known in
college circles as the FAO) to get as much money from you as he can. In the
pursuit of this task, he will be much more invasive than the IRS ever is,
demanding not just your financial data but intimate details of your personal life
such as medical problems and marital status. He wants to protect the college’s
assets and give away as little money as possible. Let the financial aid officer do
his job—believe us, he’s very good at it. But meantime, you have to do your job
—and your job is to use the rules of financial aid to make your contribution to
college as small as possible.
Parents who understand these rules get the maximum amount of financial aid
they are entitled to under the law. No more, and no less.
Besides, You’ve Already Paid for Financial Aid
Whether you know it or not, you’ve been contributing to financial aid funds for
years. Each April 15, you pay federal taxes, a piece of which goes straight to the
federal student aid programs. You pay state taxes, part of which goes directly to
state schools and to provide grant programs for residents attending college in-
state. You may even make contributions to the alumni fund-raising campaign at
your own college.
Your son or daughter may not go to your alma mater, may not attend a school
in your state, may not even go to college, but you have paid all these years so
that someone’s son or daughter can get a college education.
You may now have need of these funds, and you should not be embarrassed to
ask for them.
Is This Only for Rich People?
Many people think that tax loopholes and financial strategy are only for

millionaires. In some ways, they have a point: certainly it is the rich who can
reap the greatest benefits.
But financial aid strategy is for everyone. Whether you are just getting by or
are reasonably well off, you still want to maximize your aid eligibility.
A College Is a Business
Despite the ivy-covered walls, the slick promotional videos, and a name that
may intimidate you, a college is a business like any other. It provides a service
and must find customers willing to buy that service.
You may have heard of an education scam that’s been cropping up in different
parts of the country in which bogus “trade schools” provide valueless
educational courses to unwary consumers. While not to be confused with
legitimate trade schools that have been providing valuable educational training
to students for years, these so-called “beauty academies”, “computer
programming schools”, “truck driver schools”, etc. talk students into paying for
their “courses” by taking out government-guaranteed student loans. The schools
pocket the money, the student receives very little in the way of education, and
then must spend the next ten years paying off the loan. Or not paying off the
loan, in which case the taxpayer must pick up the tab.
Higher education sometimes seems like a slightly more genteel version of the
bogus “trade school” scam. The colleges need warm bodies to fill their
classrooms. Many of these warm bodies qualify for federal aid (including
student loans), which helps keep the colleges afloat. Meanwhile, the financial aid
officers do their bit by trying to get as much money from the student and her
family as possible.
Indeed, an article in Money magazine some years ago reported that 65% of
private institutions and 27% of public universities now engage in financial aid
leveraging. This is a process used to determine how little aid needs to be
awarded to still get the student to enroll.
The Ivy-Covered Bottom Line
Of course there is a great deal more to college than merely a business selling a
service—there is the value of tradition, the exploration of new ideas, the

opportunity to think about important issues, the chance to develop friendships
that will last for the rest of a student’s life—but do not lose sight of the bottom
line. Colleges stand accused by many experts of wasting a good part of their
endowment through sloppy management, misguided expansion, and wasteful
expenditures. A college tuition would cost much less today if the colleges had
been run in a businesslike manner over the past twenty-five years.
If colleges are in trouble right now, there are many who would say it is their
own doing, and that they will be better off once they have lost some of the
excess fat they allowed themselves to gain during the past few decades.
Certainly it is not your responsibility to pay for their mistakes if you don’t have
to.
But the FAOs have their own bottom line to consider.
An Uneducated Consumer Is Their Best
Customer
It is not in the FAO’s best interest for you to understand the aid process. The
more you know about it, the more aid they will have to give you from the
school’s own coffers. You can almost feel the FAO’s reluctance to let the
consumer know what’s going on when you look at the standardized financial aid
applications (known as need analysis forms), which are constructed in
consultation with the colleges. These forms (unlike the federal tax forms that
allow you to calculate your own taxes) require you to list your information but
do not allow you to calculate the amount of money you will be required to pay to
the college. This calculation is done by the need analysis company. Mere parents
are not allowed to know how the formula is constructed.
We are going to show you that formula and much more.
Understanding and Taking Control of the
Process
In this book we will first give you an overview of the process of applying for
aid, and then show you how to begin to take control of that process. We will
discuss long-term investment strategies for families that have time to plan, and

short-term financial aid strategies for families about to begin the aid process. We
have devoted an entire chapter to a step-by-step guide to filling out the
standardized need analysis forms, because the decisions the colleges will make
on the basis of these forms are crucial to your ability to pay for college. Once
you have received your aid packages from the schools, you will want to compare
them. Part four of this book, “The Offer”, shows you how to do that, as well as
discussing how to negotiate with the colleges for an improved package.
The majority of our readers are parents planning for their children’s education,
but this book is also for older students who are continuing their own studies.
Most of the financial aid strategies to increase your eligibility for aid are
essentially the same.
A Word of Caution
Some of the aid strategies we will discuss in this book are complicated, and
because we do not know the specifics of your financial situation, it is impossible
for us to give anything but general advice. Nor can we cover every eventuality.
We recommend that you consult with a competent professional about your
specific situation before proceeding with a particular strategy. In Chapter 11, we
discuss how to find a good financial aid consulting service.
Unfortunately, because of the volume of correspondence, we can’t answer
individual mail or give specific advice over the telephone. If we did, we’d have
no time for our private clients—or for the daunting task of preparing next year’s
edition of Paying for College Without Going Broke.
Keeping You Up-to-Date
One reason we initially resisted writing this book was our reluctance to put out a
book that might be bought after it was out of date. In the world of financial aid,
things change rapidly. We agreed to do this book only after getting a
commitment from our publisher that there would be a new edition every year.
However, even within the space of a year, things can change: tax laws can be
amended, financial aid rules can be repealed. By consulting our web page
(www.princetonreview.com/​financialaidupdate), you will be able to keep up-to-
date on the very latest changes until the 2019 edition of the book becomes

available in the fall of 2018. In response to many requests from our readers, this
year we have added an index to this book—available online on this same
webpage. If you are not connected to the information superhighway, be aware
that most public libraries and educational institutions offer Internet access.
A Final Thought
Depending on which survey you read, between 70% and 80% of all college-
bound high school students were accepted by their first-choice college last year.
Except for a handful of schools, selectivity has gone by the board. Nowadays,
the problem is not so much how to get into college, but how to pay for it once
you are there.
In the following pages we will show you how to pay for college. This is not
about ripping off the system, or lying to get aid you don’t deserve. This is about
empowering students and parents with the information they need to get the
maximum amount of aid they are entitled to receive under the law and to
minimize their out-of-pocket costs.

PART ONE
 
Understanding the
Process

CHAPTER ONE
Overview

How the Aid Process Works: Paying for College in a
Nutshell
Ideally, you began this process many years ago when your children were quite
small. You started saving, at first in small increments, gradually increasing the
amounts as your children got older and your earning power grew. You put the
money into a mixture of growth investments like stock funds, and conservative
investments like treasury bonds, so that now as the college years are approaching
you are sitting pretty, with a nice fat college fund, a cool drink in your hand, and
enough left over to buy a vacation home in Monte Carlo.
However, if you are like most of us, you probably began thinking seriously
about college only a few years ago. You have not been able to put away large
amounts of money. Important things kept coming up. An opportunity to buy a
home. Taxes. Braces. Soccer camp. Taxes.
If you are foresighted enough to have bought this book while your children
are still young, you will be especially interested in our section on long-term
planning. If your child is already a senior in high school just about to apply for
college, don’t despair. There is a lot you can do to take control of the process.
Most people cannot afford to pay the full cost of four years of college.
Financial aid is designed to bridge the gap between what you can afford to pay
for school and what the school actually costs. Parents who understand the
process come out way ahead. Let’s look at the aid process in a nutshell and see
how it works—or at least how it’s supposed to work. Later on, we will take you
through each step of this process in greater detail.
The Standardized Need Analysis Forms
While students start work on their admissions applications, parents should be
gathering together their records in order to begin applying for financial aid.
At a minimum, you need to fill out a standardized need analysis form called
the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). This form, which is
available in either a paper version, a PDF version, or an online version, can be
filled out only after October 1 of the student’s senior year in high school.

Many private colleges and some state-supported institutions may require you
to electronically complete the CSS/Financial Aid PROFILE Form as well. This
form is developed and processed by the same organization that brings you the
SAT—The College Board.
A few schools will require other forms as well—for example, the selective
private colleges often have their own financial aid forms. For students whose
two biological or adoptive parents are no longer living together, the situation
gets more complicated. (See this page and this page for details.) To find out
which forms are required by a particular college, consult the individual school’s
financial aid office website or printed information. All of the forms ask the same
types of questions.
These questions are invasive and prying. How much did you earn last year?
How much money do you have in the bank? What is your marital status? A
hundred or so questions later, the need analysis company will have a very clear
picture of four things:
1. the parents’ available income
2. the parents’ available assets
3. the student’s available income
4. the student’s available assets
The processor of the FAFSA form uses a federal formula (called the federal
methodology) to decide what portion of your income and assets you get to keep
and what portion you can afford to put toward college tuition this year. This
amount is called the Expected Family Contribution (EFC), and will most likely
be more than you think you can afford.
However, some schools do not feel that the EFC generated by the FAFSA
gives an accurate enough picture of what the family can contribute to college
costs. Using the supplemental information on the PROFILE (which is analyzed
using a formula called the institutional methodology that is developed by the
College Board) and/or using their own individual forms, these institutions
perform a separate need analysis to determine eligibility for aid that those
schools control directly.

A Family’s “Need”
Meanwhile, the admissions offices of the different colleges have been deciding
which students to admit and which to reject. Once they’ve made their decision,
the financial aid officers (known as FAOs) get to work. Their job is to put
together a package of grants, work-study, and loans that will make up the
difference between what they feel you can afford to pay and what the school
actually costs. The total cost of a year at college includes:
tuition and fees
room and board
personal expenses
books and supplies
travel
The difference between what you can afford to pay and the total cost of
college is called your “need.”

In theory, your Expected Family Contribution will be approximately the same
no matter what schools your child applies to. If your EFC is calculated to be
$20,300 and your child is accepted at a state school that costs $25,300, you will
pay about $16,300, and the school will make up the difference—in this case
$5,000—with an aid package. If you apply to a prestigious Ivy League school
that costs $70,000, you will still pay about $20,300 and the school will make up
the difference with an aid package of approximately $49,700.
In theory, the only difference between an expensive school and a cheaper
school (putting aside subjective matters like the quality of education) is the
amount of your need. In some cases, depending on how badly the college wants
the student, parents won’t pay a penny more for an exclusive private college than
they would for a state school.
This is why families should not initially rule out any school as being too
expensive. The “sticker price” doesn’t necessarily matter; it’s the portion of the
sticker price that you have to pay that counts. Parents are often under the
impression that no matter what type of school their child attends—be it a very
expensive private college, an expensive out-of-state public institution, or their
local state university—they will receive the same amount of aid. In fact, as you
saw from the previous example, the amount of aid you get is in part determined
by the cost of the school you choose.
Theory vs. Reality
Of course, the reality is slightly more complicated. Because some schools are
using supplemental data (such as home equity) to determine eligibility for their
private aid, your expected contribution at a more selective university will most
likely be different, and in some cases higher. In later chapters we’ll be talking
about what factors can cause the schools to adjust the EFC calculated under the
federal methodology, and more important, we’ll be showing you how to
minimize the impact of these adjustments.
The Aid Package
About the time your child receives an offer of admission from a particular
college, you will receive an award letter. This letter will tell you what

combination of aid the FAO has put together for you in order to meet your need.
The package will consist of three different types of aid:
Grants and Scholarships—These are the best kinds of aid,
because they don’t have to be paid back. Essentially, a grant is free
money. Some grant money comes from the federal government,
some comes from the state, and some comes from the coffers of the
college itself. Best of all, grant money is almost always tax-free. If
you are in the 35% combined tax bracket, a $5,000 grant is the
equivalent of receiving a raise of $7,692.
Scholarships are also free money, although there may be some
conditions attached (academic excellence, for example). Contrary to
popular wisdom, scholarships are usually awarded by the schools
themselves. The amount of money available from outside
scholarships is actually quite small.
Federal Work-Study (FWS)—The federal government subsidizes
this program, which provides part-time jobs to students. The money
earned is put toward either tuition or living expenses.
Student Loans—These loans, usually taken out by the student
rather than the parents, are often subsidized (and guaranteed) by
state or federal governments. The rates are usually much lower than
regular unsecured loans. In most cases, no interest is charged while
the student is in school, and no repayment is required until the
student has graduated or left college.
Preferential Packaging
The FAOs at the individual colleges have a lot of latitude to make decisions.
After looking at your financial information, for example, they might decide your
EFC should be lower or higher than the need analysis processor computed it
originally.
More important, the package the FAOs put together for a student will often
reflect how badly the admissions office wants that student.
If a school is anxious to have your child in its freshman class, the package you

will be offered will have a larger percentage of grant money, with a much
smaller percentage coming from student loans and work study. If a college is less
interested, the award will not be as attractive.
Your award will also reflect the general financial health of the college you are
applying to. Some schools have large endowments and can afford to be
generous. Other schools are financially strapped, and may be able to offer only
the bare minimum.
If the school is truly anxious to get a particular student, it may also sweeten
the deal by giving a grant or scholarship that isn’t based on need. A non-need
scholarship may actually reduce your family contribution.
Unmet Need
In some cases, you may find that the college tells you that you have “unmet
need.” In other words, they were unable to supply the full difference between the
cost of their school and the amount they feel you can afford to pay. This is bad
news. What the college is telling you is that if your child really wants to attend
this college, you will have to come up with even more money than the college’s
need analysis decided that you could pay.
Usually what this means is that you will have to take on additional debt.
Sometimes the colleges themselves will be willing to lend you the money.
Sometimes you will be able to take advantage of other loan programs such as the
Federal Parent Loans for Undergraduate Students (PLUS), which is a partially-
subsidized loan to parents of college students. The terms are less attractive than
the subsidized student loans but still better than unsecured loans you would get
from banks if you walked in off the street.
Sifting the Offers
The week acceptance and award letters arrive can be very tough, as you are
confronted with the economic realities of the different schools’ offers. The
school your child really wants to attend may have given you an aid package you
cannot accept. The week will be immeasurably easier if you have taken the
financial aid process into account when you were selecting schools to apply to in
the first place.

Just as it is important to select a safety school where your child is likely to be
accepted, it is also important to select what we call a “financial safety school”
that is cheap enough to afford out of your own pocket in the event that the more
expensive schools you applied to do not meet your full need. In some cases, the
admissions safety school and financial safety school may be the same. If a
student is a desirable candidate from an academic standpoint, she is likely to get
a good financial aid package as well. However, you should also consider the
economic health of the schools you are applying to as well as the past history of
financial aid at those schools. This information can be gleaned from many of the
college guides (including The Princeton Review’s The Best 382 Colleges, 2018
edition) available at bookstores and online booksellers.
It is also vital to make sure that there is a reasonable expectation that the
package will be available for the next three years as well. How high do the
student’s grades have to be in order to keep the package intact? Are any of the
grants or scholarships they gave you one-time-only grants? Once you’ve
received an offer, these are questions to ask the FAO.
Negotiating with the FAOs
Even if a school’s award letter has left you with a package you cannot accept—
perhaps the percentage of student loan money in your package is too high; or
perhaps your need was not fully met—you may still be able to negotiate a better
deal.
Over the past few years we have noticed that the initial offer of aid, especially
at some of the more selective schools, seems to have become subject to
adjustment. In many cases, if you just accept the first offer, you will have
accepted an offer that was not as high as the FAO was willing to go.
Many parents feel understandably hesitant to go back to the table. However, if
the aid package is actually too low for you to be able to send your child to that
school, you have little to lose by asking for more. And most FAOs will
appreciate learning that they are about to risk losing a qualified applicant solely
because of money.
The key in these negotiations is to be friendly, firm, and in control. Know
what you want when you talk to the FAO and be able to provide documentation.
In some cases, the FAO will alter the aid package enough to make it possible for
you to afford to send your child to the school.

There is an entire section of this book devoted to the award letter—how to
compare award letters, how to negotiate with FAOs, and how to apply for next
year.
Same Time Next Year
The financial aid package you accept will last only one year. You will have to go
through the financial aid process four separate times, filling out a new need
analysis form each year until your child reaches the senior year of college. If
your financial situation were to stay exactly the same, then next year’s aid
package would probably be very similar to this year’s. We find, however, that
most parents’ situations do change from year to year. In fact, after you finish
reading this book, there may be some specific changes you’ll want to make.
How the Aid Process Really Works
Parents and students who understand how to apply for financial aid get more. It’s
that simple. We aren’t talking about lying, cheating, or beating the system. We’re
talking about understanding the system and taking advantage of the rules to get
the best deal.
In Part 2, you will learn how to take control of the process. For those parents
who are starting early, Chapter 2 covers long-term investment strategies that
minimize taxes and maximize aid eligibility. For those parents who have
children in high school, Chapter 3 through Chapter 6 will show you how to use
the financial aid formulas to save money. We’ll explain in detail how the
different parts of your finances and family situation affect your EFC—and what
adjustments you can make to boost your aid eligibility. In addition, we discuss
how to pick colleges that will give the best aid packages, how to apply for state
aid, and—very important—what the student can do.
In Part 3, we provide step-by-step guidelines for handling the financial aid
application process, along with detailed strategies for completing the two most
commonly used standardized financial aid forms for the 2018–2019 award year.
In Part 4, we discuss the offer. What does an award letter look like? What are
the different types of aid you may receive, in detail? How do you compare award
letters? How do you negotiate with the FAOs to get an improved package?

In Chapter 7, we talk about innovative payment options and in Chapter 8, we
discuss managing student loans during and after school. In Chapter 9, we cover
in more detail some special topics such as divorced and separated parents,
graduate students, minority students, independent students, and other topics that
may be of interest to some of our readers. In Chapter 10, we’ll discuss some
important information involving educational tax benefits. For those who feel
they need individualized guidance, Chapter 11 provides tips on how to find a
good financial aid consultant. In Chapter 12, future trends regarding financial aid
and educational financing are covered, as well as some helpful tips for paying
for college in these tough economic times.
In Part 5, you will find worksheets that will enable you to compute your
expected family contribution for the federal methodology, a version of the 2018–
2019 FAFSA, sample copies of promissory notes for the Stafford and PLUS
loans, and copies of the 2016 U.S. personal income tax forms.

PART TWO
How to Take Control of
the Process

Now that you know how the financial aid process works, it’s time to start
figuring out how to take control of that process—and prevent the process from
taking control of you.
If you have read Part 1 of this book, then you have already taken the first step
toward this goal:
Understanding What’s Going On
The college FAOs don’t really want you to understand all the intricacies of the
financial aid process. If parents don’t know what’s going on, they can’t ask
embarrassing questions, and they will accept whatever the FAOs tell them.
We know of one case in which a financial aid officer from a private college
told a parent who had called asking for an increase in aid, that “our hands are
tied. Federal regulations prevent us from giving you any more money.” The
parent, not knowing any better, accepted this as the truth. In fact, it was a bald-
faced lie. Almost all colleges (and this one was no exception) hand out their own
grants, funded by private funds, which are not regulated by federal law at all.
Another thing parents are often too willing to accept at face value is the initial
financial aid offer by the college. In a recent trend, many schools (particularly
the most competitive) have begun to build some bargaining room into their
initial offers. They expect you to ask for more. In many cases, accepting that first
offer means taking a lower number than the FAO was willing to give. These are
just two examples of the facts you will learn in the next few chapters—facts that
will enable you to understand and begin to take control of the financial aid
process.
Parents whose children are several years away from college will find the next
chapter on long-term planning particularly useful. In it, we will show you how to
begin building a fund for college that will take advantage of both tax law and
financial aid law. Families who are getting ready to apply to college should skip
long-term planning and go directly to Chapter 3 on short-term strategies. There
we will begin to show you how linking your income tax strategies and your
financial aid strategies can save you big bucks. We will show you how the
colleges assess your income, your expenses, your assets, your liabilities, and

how to influence these assessments to your advantage.
A word of caution, before we begin.
Don’t Let the Terminology Intimidate You
In the course of counseling thousands of families, we’ve seen how confusing
financial aid jargon can be to the nonprofessional. Just remember, the FAOs
don’t mind if you are a little confused. In fact, they would prefer it. And since
they have a large influence on the instructions that come with the aid forms you
will have to fill out, it shouldn’t surprise you to learn that the instructions to the
forms are confusing and full of unfamiliar terminology as well. The introduction
to one particularly confusing financial aid form states that some questions are
“self-explanatory, and therefore no instructions are given.”
Don’t worry. By the time you finish reading this book, the jargon will be
second nature. At the back of this book is a comprehensive glossary; feel free to
refer to it at any time.
To avoid confusion, we have taken care to use the same terminology used by
the need analysis companies and the IRS. Even though it seems a little ridiculous
to refer to certain deductions as “unreimbursed employee expenses,” we did so
anyway, just so that you will know what the terms mean once you start
completing the forms and negotiating with the FAOs.

CHAPTER TWO
Long-Term Strategies for
Paying for College

Congratulations! If you are reading this section you’ve had the foresight to begin
planning early for the expense of paying for college. What do we mean by early?
We will be presenting strategies for parents with children who are three years
away, five years away, ten years away, and 15 years away from their first year of
college.
The point of this chapter is not to make specific investment recommendations
or tout individual stocks or investment instruments, but rather to show you the
ways and means to begin a long-term college fund for your children. Our
purpose is not to be your financial planner, for no financial planner could
responsibly set up a 10-year plan without being around to administer it (and
obviously, we can’t do that). Things change. Investment opportunities come up
suddenly. Interest rates go up or they go down. Tax laws are amended; financial
aid laws are revised. We are going to outline some general strategies, but we
advise you to invest cautiously, perhaps with the aid of a financial planner whom
you can consult day to day.
If your child is applying for college next month, we recommend that you skip
this section. It will only depress you. Instead, skip to the next chapter (which
begins on this page), where we begin talking about short-term strategies. We
think you will be pleased.
How Much Should We Save Every Month?
Any realistic long-term plan is more of an educated guess than an exact
prediction. There are so many unknown factors—how much will college cost in
ten years? Or 15 years? What will the inflation rate average over the next
decade? Will stocks continue to be the best long-term investment as they have
for the past 40 years, or will some unforeseen trend make real estate or bonds a
better investment?
Any financial planner who says you have to save exactly $937 per month to
reach your goal is being unrealistic—in part because you don’t even know with
certainty what that goal will be. We think the main thing such pronouncements
do is scare parents into paralysis. “We don’t have that kind of money,” clients
wail to us on the phone after they hear these figures. “What are we supposed to

do?”
The Important Thing Is to Start
It is easy to get so paralyzed by the projection of the total cost of a four-year
college education that you do nothing. The important thing is to begin saving
something as early as possible as regularly as possible. It doesn’t matter if you
can’t contribute large amounts. The earlier you start, the longer you give your
investments to work for you.
If you have not saved the total cost of four years’ tuition at a private college
(and very few parents ever have), all is not lost. That is why there is financial
aid.
So Why Bother to Save at All? If We Don’t Have
Any Money, We’ll Just Get More Financial Aid
This is partly true, but only partly. A poor family without the means to pay for
college will find concerned FAOs ready to look in every corner of their coffers to
come up with the aid necessary to send that family’s child to college. An affluent
family that has lived beyond their means for years and is now looking for the
college to support this lifestyle with financial aid will find the FAOs to be very
unsympathetic and tightfisted.
An honest attempt to save money, and a willingness to make sacrifices can
make a large impression on the FAOs. These men and women have broad
powers to increase or decrease your family contribution; to allocate grants; to
meet your family’s entire need—or just part of it.
Trust us, you will be much happier if you have saved for college. Who can say
whether in five years there will be many colleges left that can afford to continue
“need-blind” admissions policies? Perhaps by the year 2030 virtually no colleges
will be able to meet a family’s full remaining need—meaning that if you are
without resources, your child will simply not be able to attend college at all. If
you still aren’t convinced, think about this: A significant proportion of financial
aid packages comes in the form of loans. You have the choice of saving now and
earning interest, or borrowing later and paying interest. Earning interest is more
fun.

Finally, under the aid formulas, colleges will assess parents’ assets at a top rate
of only 5.65%. In other words, if you have managed to build up a college fund of
say, $40,000, as long as it is in the parents’ name, the colleges will assess up to
approximately five and a half cents of each dollar of that fund each year. We’ll
be discussing the pros and cons of putting money in your child’s name later. You
can certainly spend more if you like, but it is important to understand that having
money in the bank does not mean the colleges get to take it all.
Money in the Bank Gives You Options
A college fund, even a small one, gives you control over your own destiny. What
if the college your child really wants to attend doesn’t fully meet your need?
What if you lose your job just as the college years are approaching? By planning
a little for the future now, you can ensure that you’ll have options when the
college years are upon you.
How Much Will a College Education Cost in X
Years?
Every year, the price of a college education goes up. In the past couple of years
the rate of increase at private colleges has actually slowed, the result in part of
market forces: Families have been turning to state schools in greater numbers,
forcing the private colleges to cut their prices, or at least to slow the increase of
their prices. Partly in response to increased demand and partly because state
budgets have been slashed, the rate of tuition increase at state schools has risen
dramatically—especially for out-of-state students who must pay extra. Will these
trends continue? The best we can do is make broad predictions based on current
trends. Let’s look at some numbers.
The Cost of a Private College
The average cost of a year’s tuition, room and board, and fees at a private
college last year was $45,370 (according to the College Board). Many experts
predict that the cost of private college will increase at a rate of about 3.5% per

year. Here is a chart of what the average cost of a year of private college would
be over the next 15 years, based on 3.5% yearly growth:
Average Annual Cost of a Private College in
2017: $46,958 (today)
2025: $61,835
2018: $48,601
2026: $63,999
2019: $50,303 (2 years)
2027: $66,239 (10 years)
2020: $52,063
2028: $68,557
2021: $53,885
2029: $70,957
2022: $55,771 (5 years)
2030
$73,440
2023: $57,723
2031: $76,010
2024: $59,744
2032: $78,671 (15 years)
Of course, if your child decides on one of the most prestigious private schools,
the cost will be even more. This year, most of the top colleges have crossed the
$65,000-a-year barrier. In five years, at 3.5% growth per year, that will be
approximately $77,200.
The Cost of a Public University
The average cost of a year’s tuition, room and board, and fees at a public
university last year was $20,090 (according to the College Board). Many experts
predict that the cost of public university will also increase at a rate of about 3.5%
per year over the next decade. Here is a chart of what the average cost of a year
of public university could cost over the next 15 years, if the experts are right:
Average Annual Cost of a Public University in
2017: $20,793 (today)
2025: $27,381
2018: $21,521
2026: $28,339
2019: $22,274 (2 years)
2027: $29,331 (10 years)
2020: $23,054
2028: $30,357
2021: $23,860
2029: $31,420
2022: $24,696 (5 years)
2030: $32,520

2023: $25,560
2031: $33,658
2024: $26,455
2032: $34,836 (15 years)
Of course, if you are attending one of the “public Ivies” such as the University
of Michigan as an out-of-state resident, the cost right now is already close to
$57,500. In five years, at a 3.5% growth rate per year, that would be close to
$68,292.
How Much Money Will You Need?
If your child is 15, 10, or even five years away from college, she has probably
not even begun to think about what kind of school she would like to attend.
Since you can’t ask your child, ask yourself: What kind of college could you
picture your son or daughter attending?
If you have picked a private college of average cost, and your child is ten
years away from college, look up the price on the first chart we gave you above.
Rather than concentrating on the cost of freshman year, look at the cost of junior
year, two years further on. Whatever this number is, multiply it by four. This is a
rough approximation of an average college education at that time.
If you picked an average public university, and your child is five years away
from college, look up the price on the second chart above. Count two years more
and multiply that number by four. This is a rough approximation of a college
education at an average public university at that time. Of course, if costs increase
faster than the experts are projecting, the figure could be more.
If you wish to be even more precise, find a guide to colleges and look up the
current price of a particular school you are interested in. Let’s choose Spelman
College, an Historically Black College for women, which has a current price of
about $40,110, and let’s say your daughter is going to be ready to go to college
in five years. Multiply the current price by our assumed rate of increase:
$41,514 × 1.035 = $42,967
The new number is the price of that school next year. To find out the projected
price of Spelman in five years, just repeat this operation four more times
($42,967 × 1.035 = $44,471; $44,471 × 1.035 = $46,027; etc.). For 10 years,
repeat the operation nine more times.

Of course, these will only be rough estimates since no one has a crystal ball. If
your daughter were to start Spelman five years from now, the first year would
cost roughly $49,305. By the time she is a junior, the projected cost would be
$52,817. To figure out the grand total, multiply the cost of junior year by four.
This is a rough projection of the cost of a four-year education. At Spelman five
years from now, a college education will cost about $211,270. At Stanford or
Yale, the bill will most likely exceed $325,000.
Now don’t faint just yet. This is a great deal of money, but first of all, there’s a
lot of financial aid out there—and the majority of this book will be devoted to
showing you how to get that financial aid. Second of all, you still have time to
plan, save, and invest—and because of the joys of compounding, your
investments can grow much faster than you might believe possible. Third, your
earning power will most likely increase over time.
In the rest of this chapter you will find investment strategies for saving money
for college. Try not to obsess about the total projected cost. The important thing
is to begin.
When Do You Begin Saving?
Right now. The more time you give your investments to multiply, the better.
Even if you can manage only a small amount each month, you will be surprised
at how much you have put away by the end of the year, and even more surprised
at how quickly that money multiplies.
The Joys of Compound Interest
Let’s say that you had a pretty good year this year and were able to save $5,000.
Sound like too much? Okay, let’s say $4,000. You invest this money in a high-
yield mutual fund. Some of these funds have been averaging a return of over 8%
a year, but let’s be more conservative and say you get a 7% rate of return, which
you plow back into the fund. Don’t like mutual funds? That’s fine. If you are
uncomfortable with this level of risk, we’ll be discussing other investment
vehicles a little later. This is just an example to show you how investments grow.
The calculation is actually the same one we used to figure out what college
would cost in the future. To find out how much $4,000 would earn in one year at

7%, multiply $4,000 times 1.07.
$4,000 × 1.07 = $4,280
To find the value of the investment over five years, repeat this calculation four
more times ($4,280 × 1.07 = 4,580; $4,580 × 1.07 = $4,900; etc.) In five years,
your original $4,000 will be worth $5,610. In 10 years, it will have grown to
$7,869. Not bad, especially when you consider that this comes from only one
year of saving.
Of course, this example is a little simplified. One or two of those years might
be bad years and the fund might not pay 7%. Other years might be extremely
good years and the yield could be much higher. There are tax implications to
consider as well. However, $7,869 is a reasonable forecast of what one $4,000
investment could be worth in ten years.
And if you continued to invest another $4,000 each year for the next ten years,
with the same rate of return—well, now we’re talking real money. At the end of
ten years, you would have a college fund in excess of $59,134.
A Young Couple Just Starting Out
Let’s take the fictional couple David and Carmen, who have a daughter who is
now seven years old. David and Carmen are pretty young, and they can’t afford
to save much, but they decide they can manage $1,000 a year. They invest the
$1,000 in a mutual fund with an average return of 8%, which they reinvest in the
fund. By the time their daughter is ready to go to college in ten years, that first
$1,000 has become $2,159. Each year, they invest another $1,000. The money
they invest the second year has only nine years to grow, but it is still worth
$1,999 by the time their child is ready for college. The money they invest the
third year has only eight years to grow, but is still worth $1,850.
If Carmen and David invest $1,000 a year in this manner for ten years, they
will have built a college fund of $15,645. Of course this is not enough to pay the
entire cost of college, but there are several factors we haven’t taken into account
yet:
• No one is asking them to pay the entire amount. If David and
Carmen aren’t earning big money by the time the college years

arrive, they may qualify for significant amounts of financial aid.
• David and Carmen might begin earning more money over the
next ten years. Promotions and/or raises could allow them to
save more than $1,000 per year as time goes on.
• The couple may have been able to make other investments as
well (such as buying a house), against which they can borrow
when their daughter is in college.
• During the college years, David and Carmen may be able (in fact
are expected) to pay some of the cost of college from their
current income.
Timing
Because of the way compounding works it would be better, in theory, to make
your largest contributions to a college investment fund in the early years when
the investment has the most time to grow. Unfortunately the reality of the
situation is that a couple just getting started often doesn’t have that kind of
money.
If you get a windfall—an inheritance, a large bonus, a year with a lot of
overtime—by all means put that money to work for you. However, for most
parents, it will be a matter of finding the money to invest here and there.
Many financial advisors recommend an automatic deduction plan, in which a
certain amount of money is automatically deducted from your paycheck or your
bank account each month. Parents often find that if the money simply disappears
before they have time to spend it, the process of saving is less painful.
Should Money Be Put in the Child’s Name?
One of the most important decisions you will have to make is whether to put the
college fund in your own name or in your child’s name.
There are some tax advantages to putting the money in your child’s name, but
there can also be some terrible financial aid disadvantages. Let’s look at the tax
advantages first.

Each year a parent is allowed to make a gift of up to $14,000 per parent per
child. Depending upon the state in which you live, funds in such “custodial
accounts” will be governed by the Uniform Gift to Minors Act (UGMA) or the
Uniform Transfer to Minors Act (UTMA). Thus if you live in a two-parent
household, you can give up to $28,000 per year to your child, without gift-tax
consequences. This is not a $28,000 tax deduction for you, but neither is it
$28,000 in taxable income to the child. You have merely shifted money from
you to your child. From now on, some of the interest that money earns will be
taxed not at the parents’ rate, but at the child’s rate, which is almost always much
lower.
The child is not allowed to have control over the account until the age of 21
(or 18 in some states). By the same token you are not allowed to take that money
back either. The money can be spent only on behalf of the child. You could use
the money to pay for an SAT prep course, or braces, say, but not on the rent or a
vacation to Hawaii—even if you took the child along.
Of course, if this gift is being made as part of a fund for college, this should
be no problem. You don’t plan to touch it until your son or daughter is ready to
enroll anyway. You can shift the money between different investments, or even
give it to a financial planner to invest.
Years ago, many parents and other relatives—especially those in the higher
tax brackets—found it beneficial to shift their funds into a child’s name so that
the unearned income (i.e. interest, dividends, and capital gains) would be taxed
at the child’s presumably lower tax rate. To thwart this income-shifting strategy,
Congress passed legislation which would tax some of this unearned income of
younger children at a parent’s rate, once such unearned income in a given tax
year passed a certain threshold amount (which is $2,100 for the 2017 tax year.)
In the tax years 2006 and 2007, this tax on the unearned income of a minor child
at the parent’s tax rate—often referred to as the “Kiddie Tax”—applied to
children under the age of 18 at the end of the tax year. For a child 18 and older,
none of the money in the custodial account was taxed at the parent’s rate. (Prior
to 2006, age 14 was the magic number. But Congress tinkered with the rules to
prevent more families from shifting unearned income into a lower tax bracket.)
To avoid the kiddie tax rules, many parents invested custodial account money in
growth stocks, which would presumably appreciate in value but pay small
dividends. Then, after the child reached the age when the rules no longer
applied, they would sell the stock and generate a capital gain which would then
be taxed solely at the child’s rate. In years past, this was a very effective strategy

especially since capital gains have been taxed recently at a lower rate than most
other types of income. However when Congress realized that the tax rate on
capital gains (and qualified dividends) would drop to zero in 2008 for those in
the lowest tax bracket, they passed a new (and far more complicated) kiddie tax
in May 2007 that became effective January 1, 2008 in order to close this
loophole. Here are the latest rules:
For a child under the age of 18 at the end of the year: As long as the custodial
account generates less than $1,050 per year in interest or dividend income and
there is no other income, there will be no income tax due at all. As long as the
custodial account generates less than $2,100 in income and there is no other
income, the excess over $1,050 will be taxed at the child’s rate (0% to 10%
federal depending on the type of unearned income). Once the child’s unearned
taxable income exceeds the $2,100 cap, the excess will be taxed at the parents’
higher rate, which can go up as high as 39.6% federal. State and local taxes will
push this even higher.
For a child who is age 18 at the end of the year: The same rules apply as with
younger children, though it is possible to avoid the kiddie tax if the child has
earned income (e.g. wages, salary, income from self-employment) that exceeds
half of her support.
For a child who is age 19 to 23 at the end of the year: If the child is unable to
meet the “more than half support” rule, the kiddie tax will still apply if the child
is a full time student for at least five months during the year. (While there may
still be some clarification before the end of the year about what constitutes a
“month”, other provisions of the tax code related to months of attendance in
school have viewed enrollment for even one day in a particular month to be
considered the same as if the student is enrolled for the entire month.) Given this
increased age limit, it is possible that some students—including younger
graduate students—who escaped the kiddie tax for a few years due to their age
may again be subject to it post-2007. And if the child has not yet reached age 24
by the end of the year, it makes no difference whether the child is claimed as a
dependent or not on a parent’s tax return.
So if you wish to avoid the kiddie tax, you would want to have some
investments generate a little less than $2,100 in income per year, and the
remaining funds allocated to investment instruments that generated little or no
income. For example: if your child’s college fund was paying 4% interest, the
fund could contain $52,500, and the interest the money earned would still be

taxed at the child’s rate. As the fund gets larger than $52,500, some of the
interest would begin to be taxed at your rate. It is important to note that there are
other rules that apply if the child has both earned and unearned income.
Even with these new more restrictive rules, it is still possible to achieve some
tax savings from putting money in the child’s name. Unfortunately, because of
the regulations under which financial aid is dispensed, putting any money in the
kid’s name can be a very expensive mistake.
If You Have Any Hope of Financial Aid, Never
Put Money in the Child’s Name
When you apply for financial aid, you will complete a need analysis form,
which tells the colleges your current income, your child’s income, your assets,
and your child’s assets. The colleges will assess these amounts to decide how
much you can afford to pay for college. Under the federal formula, your income
will be assessed up to 47%. Your assets will be assessed up to 5.65%.
However, your child’s income will be assessed at up to 50% and your child’s
assets will be assessed at a whopping 20%. A college fund of $40,000 under
your name would be assessed (as an asset) for up to $2,260 the first year of
college. That is to say, the college would expect you to put as much as $2,260 of
that money toward the first year of school.
The same fund under your child’s name would be assessed for $8,000.
That’s a big difference. You might say, “Well that money was supposed to be
for college anyway,” and you would be right—but remember, the colleges aren’t
just assessing that money. They will assess 20% of all of the child’s assets, up to
5.65% of the parents’ assets, up to 50% of the child’s income, and up to 47% of
the parents’ income. By putting that money in the child’s name, you just gave
them a lot more money than you had to.
We’ve already noted the similarities between a college financial aid office and
the IRS. Both see it as their duty to use the rules to get as much money as
possible from you. It is up to you to use those same rules to keep as much money
as possible away from them. It is an adversarial relationship, but as long as both
sides stick to the rules, a fair one.
If you are going to qualify for financial aid, you should never, ever put money
in the child’s name. It is like throwing the money away. You’ve worked too hard

to save that money to watch it get swallowed up in four giant gulps. By putting
the money in the parents’ name, you keep control over it. If you choose to, you
can use it all, or not use it all, on your timetable.
The College Board made a number of significant changes to the Institutional
Methodology (IM) starting with the 2000–2001 academic year. The maximum
assessment rates under the IM for the 2017–2018 award year are as follows:
25% of the child’s assets, up to 5% of the parents’ assets, up to 46% of the child’s
income, and up to 46% of the parents’ income. When we went to press, the rates
for 2018–2019 were not available.
What If You’re Pretty Sure You Won’t Qualify for
Aid?
If you are certain you won’t qualify for aid, then you’re free to employ every
tax-reducing strategy your accountant can devise, including putting assets in the
kid’s name. But be very certain. People are often amazed at how much money
you have to make in order NOT to qualify for aid.
In the introduction we told you about a family who received financial aid
despite huge assets. Parents always want to know exactly what the cutoff is.
Unfortunately, it is not as simple as that. Each family is a separate case. Don’t
assume that just because your friend didn’t qualify for aid that you won’t either.
There are so many variables it is impossible to say the cutoff is precisely X
dollars. It just doesn’t work that way.
If you are close to the beginning of the college years and you want to figure
out if you qualify for aid, read the rest of this book and then use the worksheets
in the back to compute your Expected Family Contribution. There is really no
shortcut. We have seen books that give you a simple chart on which you can
look up your EFC. These charts are much too simplistic to be of any real use.
We’ve also seen a number of websites with outdated formulas.
And as you’ll soon discover, there are strategies you can employ to increase
your chances of receiving aid.
What If You Aren’t Sure Whether You’ll Qualify
for Aid?

If your child is a number of years away from the freshman year of college, your
dilemma is much more difficult. How can you predict how much you’ll have in
five years or 15 years? For safety, it would be better to avoid putting large sums
of money in the child’s name until you are sure you won’t be eligible for aid.
Once the money is put into the child’s name it is extremely difficult to put it
back in the parents’ name. If you set up a custodial account sometime in the past
and have come to regret it, consult a very good financial consultant or tax lawyer
who is also knowledgeable about financial aid.
Now that you’ve decided whose name to put the money under, let’s talk about
what kind of investments you can make.
What Types of Investments to Choose for a
College Fund
The key to any investment portfolio is diversity. You will want to spread your
assets among several different types of investments, with varying degrees of risk.
When your child is young, you will probably want to keep a large percentage of
your money in higher-risk investments in order to build the value of the
portfolio. As you get closer to the college years, it is a good idea to shift
gradually into less volatile and more liquid investments. By the time the first
year of college arrives, you should have a high percentage of cash invested in
short-term treasuries, CDs, or money market funds.
To stay ahead of inflation over the long term, there is no choice but to choose
more aggressive investments. Despite the recent declines, most experts still
agree that the stock market is your best bet for long-term high yields. However,
as we saw in late 2008 and early 2009, there can be significant volitility with
stock prices. Yet it is worth noting that over the past 40 years, in spite of various
bear markets, recessions, crashes, and acts of God, stocks have on average
outperformed every other type of investment.
Stock Mutual Funds
Rather than buying individual stocks, you can spread your risk by buying shares
in a mutual fund that manages a portfolio of many different stocks. Most
newspapers and financial magazines give periodic rundowns of the performance

of different mutual funds. In general, we recommend no-load or low-load funds
that charge a sales commission of 4.5% or less. The minimum investment in
mutual funds varies widely, but often you can start with as little as $1,000. Many
of the large mutual fund companies control a few different funds and allow you
to switch from one type of fund to another or even to a regular money market
fund without charge. In this way, you can move in and out of investments as
events change, just by making a phone call.
You can spread your risk even further by purchasing stock mutual funds that
specialize in several different areas. By putting some of your money into a blue-
chip fund and some into whatever you think will soon be hot, you can hedge
your bets.
It should be noted that over the past several years, individuals who never
invested in the stock market before have been putting money into mutual funds
in an effort to earn a higher return than the current rates offered on CDs and
savings accounts. We would just like to add our cautionary voice to the chorus of
experts who have been warning the public that investing in mutual funds is not
the same thing as having money in the bank.
High-Yield Bonds
Another aggressive investment to consider is high-yield bonds. For high yield,
read “junk.” Junk bonds, which pay a high rate of interest because they carry a
high level of risk, helped to bring the boom-boom decade of the 1980s to its
knees. However, if purchased with care, these bonds can get you a very high rate
of return for moderate risk. The best way to participate in this market is to buy
shares in a high-yield bond fund. The bonds are bought by professionals who
presumably know what they are doing, and again, because the fund owns many
different types of bonds, the risk is spread around.
Normal-Yield Bonds
If you want less risk, you might think about buying investment-grade bonds
(rated at least AA) which can be bought so that they mature just as your child is
ready to begin college. If you sell bonds before they mature, the price may vary
quite a bit, but at maturity, bonds pay their full face value and provide the

expected yield, thus guaranteeing you a fixed return. At present, the total annual
return on this type of bond if interest is reinvested can top 4.0%.
One way of avoiding having to reinvest interest income is to buy zero-coupon
bonds. You purchase a zero-coupon at far below its face value. On maturity, it
pays you the full face value of the bond. You receive no interest income from the
bond along the way; instead the interest you would have received is effectively
reinvested at a guaranteed rate of return. You still have to pay tax every year on
the “imputed interest,” but the rate of return on zero-coupons can be substantial.
EE Savings Bonds
If you don’t earn too much money, Series EE Savings Bonds offer an interesting
option for college funds as well. The government a few years ago decided that if
an individual over 24 years of age with low to moderate income purchases EE
Savings Bonds after 1989 with the intention of using them to pay for college, the
interest received at the time of redemption of the bonds will be tax-free. The
interest earned is completely tax-free for a single parent with income up to
$78,150 or a married couple filing jointly with income up to $117,250. Once you
hit those income levels, the benefits are slowly phased out. A single parent with
income above $93,150 or a married couple with income above $147,250 is not
eligible for any tax break. All of these numbers are based on 2017 tax rates and
are subject to an annual adjustment for inflation. EE Savings Bonds are issued
by the federal government, and are as safe as any investment can be. They can
also be purchased in small denominations without paying any sales commission.
However, EE Savings Bonds have several drawbacks. One is their low rate of
return. You might do better with a taxable investment that pays a higher rate,
even after taxes. It is also hard to predict in advance what your income level will
be when you cash in the bonds. If your income has risen past the cutoff level for
the tax break, your effective rate of return on the bonds just plunged into the low
single digits. To make it worse, the IRS adds the interest from the bonds to your
income before they determine whether you qualify for the tax break. Finally,
whether the interest from these bonds is taxed or untaxed, it will still be
considered income by the colleges and will be assessed just like your other
income.

Tax-Free Municipal Bonds
Those families that are in the 25% income tax bracket (or higher) may be
tempted to invest in tax-free municipal bonds. If you factor in the tax savings,
the rate of return can approach 6%. As usual, you can reduce your risk by buying
what is called a tax-free muni fund. These come in different varieties, with
different degrees of risk.
One thing to be aware of is that while the IRS does not tax the income from
these investments, the colleges effectively do. Colleges call tax-exempt interest
income “untaxable income” and assess it just the way they assess taxable
income. If you’re eligible for aid, the real effective yield of munis will be pushed
down by these assessments.
Trusts
Establishing a trust for your child’s education is another way to shift assets and
income to the child. Trusts have all the tax advantages of putting assets in the
child’s name—and then some; they allow more aggressive investment than do
custodial accounts; they also give you much more control over when and how
your child gets the money.
The drawbacks of trusts are that they are initially expensive to set up, costly to
maintain, and very difficult to change—more important, they also jeopardize
your chances of qualifying for financial aid.
If you have no chance of receiving aid, a trust fund can be an excellent way to
provide money for college. There are many different kinds of trusts, but all
involve you (called the grantor) transferring assets to another party (called the
trustee) to manage and invest on behalf of your child (called the beneficiary).
Typically, the trustee is a bank, financial advisor, or a professional organization
chosen by you. You can design the trust so that your child will receive the money
in a lump sum just as she enters college, or so that it is paid out in installments
during college, or so that the child receives only the interest income from the
trust until she reaches an age selected by you. Trusts must be set up with care to
envision all eventualities because once they are in place, they are almost
impossible to change. When you create the trust, you essentially give up the
right to control it.
The tax advantage of a trust over a simple custodial account is that the trust

pays its own separate income tax, at its own tax bracket. Not the child’s bracket.
Not yours. This is especially useful when the child is under the age of 24: A
regular custodial account of any significant size would most likely be taxed at
the parents’ higher rate due to the “kiddie tax”.
The investment advantage of a trust is that there is no limit on the type of
investment instrument that may be used. Unlike custodial accounts, which are
not allowed to invest in certain types of instruments, a trust can dabble in real
estate, junk bonds, or any new-fangled scheme the investment bankers can
invent.
Obviously, trusts must be set up with care, and you have to find a suitable
trustee; someone you can, well, trust. Parents should never try to set up a trust on
their own. If you are considering this strategy, consult a good tax attorney.
Financial Aid and Trusts
For various reasons, financial aid and trusts do not mix. It is partly the “rich kid”
image that trust funds engender in the FAOs, and partly certain intricacies of the
financial aid formulas, which we will describe in more detail in Chapter Three of
this book. A trust of any size may very well nix any chance your family has of
receiving aid.
Qualified State Tuition Programs (529 Plans)
Forty-nine states—all except Wyoming—and the District of Columbia now offer
special programs that are designed to help families plan ahead for college costs.
These Qualified State Tuition Programs, which are more commonly called
Section 529 plans (after the relevant section of the Internal Revenue Code),
come in two basic forms: tuition prepayment plans and tuition savings accounts.
Most states offer one type or the other, but a number of states offer or will soon
offer both. Some plans have residency requirements for the donor and/or
beneficiary. Others (like California) will allow anyone to participate. While
some states limit who can contribute funds to the plan (usually the parents and
grandparents), other states have no such restrictions. And with some plans, it is
possible for the contributor to name herself as the beneficiary as well.
With some states, the buildup in value is partially or entirely free of state

income taxes (provided the beneficiary is a resident of that state.) Most plans
allow you to make payments in a lump sum, or on an installment basis. In some
states these payments can be automatically deducted from your bank account—
or even your paycheck provided your employer agrees to participate. With some
plans, contributions are partially tax-deductible for the donor as well. For
example, New York gives its residents up to a $5,000 deduction (up to $10,000
for joint filers) on the state income tax return for amounts contributed during a
particular tax year. Many states have added some unique features to their plans.
Years ago, the prepaid tuition plans used to be a rotten deal as the funds could
only be used in-state and normally only for public colleges and universities.
Otherwise, you got your money back with little or no interest. But now, many of
these state-sponsored plans have become more flexible, letting you take money
out-of-state or to a private university in your own state. A major benefit of these
prepayment plans is the peace of mind that comes from knowing that no matter
how much tuition inflation there is, you’ve already paid for a certain number of
course credits at the time of purchase. This peace of mind was rather costly
during the Wall Street boom when returns on stocks far exceeded the rate of
tuition inflation. However, given the recent volatility in the stock market and the
reduced rates of return on CDs and bonds, the prepaid plans have regained some
of their luster. So while many investment advisors still tell families they are
better off avoiding these prepaid plans and funding the college nest egg using
other investment vehicles which are likely to earn a higher rate of return, the
prepaid plans are something to consider if the student will start college in the
next few years.
Under the old tax laws, you had to pay federal income taxes on the difference
between the initial investment and the value of the course credits when they
were re-deemed, but such investment income was taxed at the beneficiary’s
presumably lower tax rate. Starting in 2002, there are no longer any federal
income taxes involved provided the funds are used to cover qualified higher
education expenses (i.e. tuition, and fees as well as allowances for room and
board) at a federally accredited school, which includes most U.S.-based four-
year colleges and universities, many two-year programs and vocational schools,
and even some foreign schools.
Note: Given the high rate of tuition inflation at public universities, some
prepaid plans have temporarily stopped accepting contributions or have added a
premium onto the current price for each credit purchased.

Unlike the prepaid plans, the state-sponsored tuition savings accounts do not
guarantee to meet tuition inflation. A major benefit over traditional investment
options is that earnings in these accounts grow tax-deferred from a federal
standpoint. Just as with the prepaid plans, withdrawals from these accounts for
qualified educational expenses are now also completely free of federal income
taxes. (Under the old law, the pro-rated share of the withdrawal that represented
investment income—and not the original investment—was subject to tax at the
beneficiary’s rate.) The funds in these plans are invested by professional
managers. But if you choose to put some or all of the funds into any equity-
based investment option that is offered, you could lose part of your initial
investment. Just as with the prepaid plans, a number of states do not consider
part or all of the earnings as income on a resident beneficiary’s state tax return.
Most of these tuition savings plans offer the choice of an age-based asset
allocation model to determine how your funds will be invested. This means that
the younger the child, the greater the percentage of the principal is invested in
equities. As the child grows older, the percentage of equities falls, and the
percentage of assets in bonds, money markets, and other fixed-income
investments increases. The allocation models can vary tremendously from plan
to plan. Besides the age-based models, most plans have other investment options
that vary in the degrees of risk.
Most prepaid plans and tuition savings accounts allow you to change
beneficiaries—which just means you can switch money you might have
earmarked for one child to another child—or even to another family member.
You’ll need to read the fine print if you envision actually trying this, because
there are tax consequences if the new beneficiary is of a different generation.
With the savings plans, you’ll also want to find out whether or not the asset
allocation model will change to reflect the age of the new beneficiary. For
example, if your oldest child decides not to go to college and you decide to
transfer the funds to her kid brother, you would want to be sure that the mix of
investments will be changed to reflect the age of the younger beneficiary.
Otherwise, your nest egg may be invested mostly in money market funds for a
number of years.
Another benefit of these Section 529 plans, from an estate-planning
standpoint, is that a person can contribute up to $70,000 in one lump sum to any
one beneficiary’s plan, provided you do not make any further gifts to that person
for the next five years (and provided the state’s plan permits contributions of this

size). So, in effect, you are being allowed to use the $14,000 annual gift
allowance for the next five years and accelerate it into one lump sum. This
allows a contributor to remove up to five years’ worth of income and growth on
the contributed funds from her estate. Of course, if the contributor dies before
the five-year period has elapsed, there could be estate tax consequences.
Coverdell ESAs
These special educational savings accounts were originally called Education
IRAs even though they were never really retirement accounts. While
contributions to these accounts (currently up to $2,000 per year per child under
age 18) are not tax deductible, any withdrawals used for post-secondary
education will be totally tax-free. While there are income limits that affect your
ability to contribute to such an account—for 2017, this benefit phases out
between $190,000 and $220,000 for married couples filing jointly, and between
$95,000 and $110,000 for others—the law does not specify that contributions
must be made by the beneficiary’s parents. Other relatives or even friends who
fall below the income cutoffs could presumably contribute. However for 2017,
no child can receive more than $2,000 in deposits to a Coverdell ESA in a given
tax year from all contributors combined. But before you rush to fund one of
these accounts, you should realize that the U.S. Department of Education
currently views such accounts to be the asset of the student if the student is the
owner of the account and also an independent student. In most cases, the parent
will be the owner as long as the beneficiary is a minor, so this will not be a big
problem. However, the situation gets tricky once the student reaches majority.
Unless an election was made to keep the parent as owner after that point, the
fund would then become student-owned, and could be assessed at the 20%
federal financial aid assessment rate if the student is independent. Under the
institutional methodology, any Coverdell owned by the student is considered a
student asset.
Note: The current tax law permits tax-free withdrawals to cover certain
qualified expenses from kindergarten through the senior year of high school
including private school tuition, certain computer equipment and software, as
well as internet access. So if you are otherwise eligible for financial aid for
college, you should consider withdrawing funds from Coverdells to cover these

expenses as well as any qualified higher education expenses if a) the ownership
will soon revert to the student and b) the student is either applying for financial
aid at a school that requires completion of the CSS PROFILE or is an
independent student. (Check with the financial institution where you have the
account if you are not sure who owns the account and when, if ever, the
ownership changed or will change to the student in the future.). In this way,
student assets in the aid formulas will be minimized.
Sunrise…But No Sunset
Coverdell ESAs and Section 529s are wonderful ways to save money for
college, but for years there had been a couple of important question marks about
these programs. This was because some key provisions of the federal tax law
pertaining to these programs had been scheduled to expire—or “sunset” – on
Dec. 31, 2012. The good news is that these uncertainties have gone away as the
American Taxpayer Relief Act, which became law in January 2013, made
permanent some of the enhancements to Coverdells that were made in 2001. So
for the time being, these enhancements will continue to be available:
• The annual contribution limits for Coverdells will continue to be $2000 per
beneficiary per year.
• Withdrawals from Coverdells for certain expenses other than college tuition
and fees (i.e. elementary and secondary school tuition, certain computer-
related expenses, internet access) will continue to be tax-free
• In a given tax year, a child can continue to receive contributions to both a
Coverdell and a 529 plan.
• Any tax-free distribution from a child’s Coverdell will not automatically
eliminate one’s ability to claim certain Federal educational tax credits (i.e. the
American Opportunity Credit, the Hope Credit, or the Lifetime Learning
Credit) for that child in the same tax year. However, in order to be able to
claim the full credit and have all the distributions from a Coverdell and/or
529 plan be tax-free, any funds paid for that child’s tuition for purposes of
claiming the credit cannot be coming from a Coverdell, a 529 plan, or other
tax-advantaged funds used to pay for college. This is because federal tax law
does not currently permit one to claim two or more educational tax benefits
with the same funds used to pay for tuition. So to be able to claim the tax

credit AND have the distributions from a Coverdell and/or a 529 plan be
completely tax-free, some funds to pay for the student’s tuition will have to
come from your cash and/or your checking, savings, and/or money market
account(s) and/or be paid with the proceeds of a loan.
It’s anyone’s guess what will happen in the future—which makes decisions
down the road difficult. For example, if you think the law will change, and
you’re likely to qualify for the American Opportunity Credit (which allows you
to reduce your taxes based on money you’ve spent on college tuition for your
child), then it would not be a good idea to make any more contributions to a
Coverdell. In addition, if you believe the laws will sunset and you want to plan
ahead to reduce any existing funds in a Coverdell, you should then consider
paying for other qualified educational expenses—such as private elementary or
secondary school tuition, computer equipment, etc.—which are currently
permitted.
Because of all the fine print in these plans, and the possibility that the tax law
may change, we suggest you consult with a competent advisor before
contributing any funds to these plans or making any withdrawals.
Look Before You Leap
Even though the tax law did NOT sunset, there are still a number of potential
pitfalls that you should be aware of before you sign up for these plans—or have
any well-intentioned relatives do the same. And unfortunately, while the
brochures for these plans might make you think they are the best things to come
along since white bread, the promotional materials are often light on specifics—
especially the drawbacks.
• THE FINANCIAL AID IMPACT OF THESE PLANS
The Higher Education Reconciliation Act of 2005 (HERA) made a number of
important changes to Federal student aid programs—including the way
Coverdell Education Savings Accounts (ESAs) and Qualified State Tuition
programs (prepaid and savings plans) will be treated in the federal aid formula.
Previously, Coverdells and 529 savings accounts were considered to be the asset
of the owner of the plan. This was not a big problem if the parents were the
owners of the plan; however, if funds were moved from a custodial account into

a 529 savings plan, those funds instead became a “custodial” 529 account, and
were then still considered in the federal methodology to be an asset of the child.
In addition, some Coverdell accounts were set up so that ownership would revert
to the student upon reaching the age of majority. This created the odd situation
where these accounts were considered a parental asset on one year’s version of
the FAFSA, only to become a student asset on subsequent federal aid forms once
the student became a legal adult.
Also, some years ago under the federal aid formula, funds in a state-sponsored
prepaid tuition plan were not considered an asset that needed to be reported on
the FAFSA. That’s because the dollar value of the tuition credits redeemed was
considered a “resource” that reduced your aid eligibility dollar-for-dollar. So if
you weren’t able to save enough to prepay your entire tuition, the prepaid credits
you used each year would reduce your aid eligibility (except for the Pell Grant)
by the dollar amount of the credits redeemed. However, under HERA, prepaid
529 plans will now be treated the same way as 529 savings plans and Coverdells.
Unfortunately, in Congress’s haste to enact this law, they created a terrible
ambiguity: they specified that 529 plans and/or Coverdells owned by a
dependent student would no longer need to be reported on the federal aid form as
a student asset. Yet, they failed to define how these accounts would be assessed.
Would they be parental assets, would they not be required to be reported at all—
or would they be treated in some other way?
For the 2008–2009 FAFSA, the Department of Education took the position
that any of these accounts owned by a student who was required to report
parental information on the FAFSA would not be required to report the value of
the student-owned account as an asset on the FAFSA. However, the College Cost
Reduction and Access Act of 2007 resolved this ambiguity. As such for the
2009–2010 FAFSA and beyond, such student-owned 529 plans or Coverdell
ESAs will be reported as part of the parental investments on the FAFSA.
(However, if the student is not required to report parental information on the
FAFSA, such student-owned funds will need to be reported as a student asset on
the form.)
With this clarification, the federal and the institutional methodologies now
differ in their treatment of student-owned 529 plans and Coverdells. For a
number of years, the College Board had considered student-owned 529s and
Coverdells to be the assets of the parent if parental information needed to be
reported on the PROFILE. However, such student-owned 529s and Coverdells

are now considered to be student assets in all cases. In terms of income, any
qualified tax-free distributions from a 529 or Coverdell owned by the student or
the student’s parent are not considered as untaxed income in both the IM and
FM. Of course, the colleges themselves may decide to assess the value and/or
the distributions of these plans differently than the Department of Education or
the College Board when awarding their own funds.
Accounts owned by individuals other than the student or a parent who must
report their information on the aid form - for example, a grandparent or an aunt -
are a different story. On the FAFSA, the value of such accounts need not be
reported as an asset. While these funds are not considered to be assets in the IM
either, some colleges that require the PROFILE may choose to ask questions
about these plans in the customized, institution-specific question section that can
appear at the end of the form Even if you need not list their value there, you are
not out of the woods yet with such plans. There is still the question of how
distributions from these accounts owned by others will be treated. Since this
issue has not yet been specifically addressed in the financial aid regulations,
there are many in the financial aid community who consider the dollar value of
such distributions to be considered untaxed income for the student due to
wording on the FAFSA regarding “money received, or paid on your behalf…not
reported elsewhere on this form” which appears in the student income section. It
is also important to note that each year more and more schools are asking
questions about the value of and/or distributions from 529s and Coverdells
owned by other individuals.
Under the Institutional Methodology, the College Board currently considers
prepaid plans or tuition savings accounts originally funded and owned by parents
to be parental assets. Of course, the colleges themselves may decide to assess
these plans differently than the Department of Education or the College Board
when awarding their own funds.
The promotional literature for most of these state-sponsored plans glosses
over or puts the best spin possible on the financial aid consequences of these
investments. So you need to take everything they say about this with a bucket
full of salt.
• TAX IMPLICATIONS
If the funds are not used for the child’s education or are withdrawn prematurely,

the portion of the distribution that represents investment earnings will be taxed at
the contributor’s (presumably higher) rate, plus a 10% penalty. So if junior
decides not to go to school, you’d better hope you can find some other qualified
family member who can use the funds for school and take the necessary steps to
change the beneficiary on the account. Otherwise your Uncle Sam is going to get
a nice windfall. (There are exceptions if the beneficiary dies or receives a
scholarship for college.)
You should also realize that both types of 529 plans (as well as Coverdells)
can impact your ability to take advantage of other higher education benefits
(under both the old and new tax laws) which can sometimes be more
advantageous to claim.
Even though Congress a number of years ago voted to permanently extend the
ability to withdraw funds from 529s free of federal income taxes, there are still
some thorny issues regarding state income taxes— especially if you invest in a
529 plan sponsored by a state other than the state in which you (or the student)
live.
Note: A handful of states will now grant a state tax deduction for
contributions made to out-of-state 529 plans. So if you’re choosing between an
in-state and an out-of-state plan, you should see what benefits, if any, that you’re
giving up by choosing an out-of-state program over your home state program.
• LIMITED CONTROL OVER THE FUNDS
As we have just mentioned, once you contribute funds to these state-sponsored
plans there can be sizable penalties if the funds are withdrawn prematurely. With
the state savings plan, after you make your initial contribution you can only
move those funds to another state’s plan or change your investment allocation
plan once every 12 months to avoid any penalties.
If the plan uses an age-based asset allocation model, you may also find your
assets being automatically transferred to fixed-income investments just after a
significant short-term market correction. Any sane money manager would
postpone such a transfer for a few months—but with many of these plans, the
manager may not have that option: the transfer is automatically triggered on a
certain date.
And because you’re tying up your money for a number of years and giving up

control, there are a number of questions you should be asking yourself before
you contribute one penny to one of these plans.
1) Which type of plan are you investing in? Some states offer only
the pre-paid option. Some offer only a tuition savings account.
Others offer both.
2) Is the plan offered in your own state superior to plans available in
other states? Many tuition savings plans will accept contributions
from out-of-state residents and you may prefer another state’s
asset-allocation model to the one in your home state.
3) If you invest in an out-of-state plan, what additional benefits are
you giving up? Funds invested in your home state’s plan may not
impact state-funded financial aid programs and the earnings may
be free of state taxes. A state income tax deduction may be
limited to contributions to your own state’s plan. So, if you invest
out-of-state, you won’t necessarily get a state income tax
deduction. The student may also owe some state income taxes to
his home state when the funds are withdrawn. (He may even owe
some state income taxes to the state whose program was used.)
Funds invested in an out-of-state plan may also hurt your
eligibility for state-based student aid.
4) If you invest in a plan sold to you by a financial advisor or
offered by your employer, is it the best deal around? Your
financial advisor may not even mention the benefits of your own
state’s plan or other more attractive out-of-state plans simply
because she doesn’t sell those plans. In addition, similar 529
plans sold by advisors may carry higher fees than if you
contacted the plan administrators directly. A plan offered through
your job may not be your home state’s plan so be sure to read the
fine print.
5) If you decide to transfer the funds to another state’s plan, are
there any penalties involved? While you may be fine from a
federal tax standpoint, you should understand that many states
have begun to implement their own penalties in response to the

rather liberal federal transfer rules currently in effect. For
example, New York residents who claimed a tax deduction on
their state tax return by contributing to the New York Saves 529
plan will have to recapture (add back) the amount of that
deduction to their state taxable income in the year they transfer
those funds out of the Empire State.
6) Is the plan an approved Section 529 plan? Some states begin
accepting contributions on newly announced plans before the
IRS rules on the matter. You want to be sure that you qualify for
the federal tax-deferred status before you lock up your funds.
7) What asset allocation model are you comfortable with? For
example, in New Hampshire, the age-based plan calls for 95% in
equities for a newborn, versus the New York State plan which
permits you to allocate 50%, 75%, or even 100% in equities for a
similarly aged child depending on your risk tolerance level.
Some states, such as California, let you choose among a number
of investment options, including a social choice equity option.
8) What fees are charged by the investment managers? While you
won’t be sent a bill, such charges can significantly reduce the
return on your investment. Although traditional mutual funds are
required by law to disclose such charges, tuition savings plans
are not—and often bury this information in a thick prospectus
(which you may not even see unless you specifically ask for it).
Fees can vary tremendously from state to state, and are often
much higher than ordinary mutual funds.
9) What happens if you are on the installment plan and can no
longer contribute? For example, if you lost your job and can’t
keep up with the payments, some programs might automatically
cancel the contract and/or impose other penalties as well.
10) What is the likelihood you will move out of the state before
college begins? If you are in a state prepaid program and then
move to another state, most programs will only provide for
tuition credits at the resident rates. You’ll have to come up with

the additional funds to cover the extra tuition charged to out-of-
state students.
11) If you are investing in a prepaid plan, how will the state
determine the amount of funds you’ll receive if the student
attends a college out of state? Some plans will use the dollar
value of the credits at the public university based on the tuition
charges for each academic year. Others simply use the total
dollar value of all the credits at the start of the first academic
year and then allocate one quarter of the value for each of the
four years. In the latter case, your funds for the sophomore,
junior, and senior year will stop increasing in value once the
student begins freshman year, no matter how much tuition
inflation subsequently occurs.
Do You Have a Crystal Ball?
Unless you can predict the future, you should carefully think and rethink any
decision that completely locks yourself and your loved ones into an investment
that will mature so many years into the future. Obviously, these plans make
sense for many people, especially since the new “kiddie tax” rules make
custodial accounts less attractive. But because of all the fine print in each state’s
plan, you should know exactly what you’re getting into and carefully review the
prospectus to make sure it is right for you. Because of the various tax
consequences involved, it would also be a good idea to discuss the plan with
your accountant or financial planner before you make your first contribution as
well.
The following is a listing of states that offer prepaid programs and/or tuition
savings accounts along with telephone numbers. The type of program offered is
indicated by a “P” for prepaid plans and an “S” for savings plans.
State
Program Type
Telephone
Alabama
P*
1-800-252-7228
S
1-334-242-7500
Alaska
S
1-866-277-1005

Arizona
S
1-602-258-2435
Arkansas
S
1-800-587-7301; 1-888-529-9552
California
S
1-800-343-3548; 1-800-544-5248
Colorado
P*
1-800-478-5651
S
1-800-997-4295; 1-800-448-2424
Connecticut
S
1-888-799-2438
Delaware
S
1-800-544-1655
Florida
P
1-800-552-4723
S
1-800-552-4723
Georgia
S
1-877-424-4377
Hawaii
S
1-866-529-3343
Idaho
S
1-866-433-2533
Illinois
P
1-877-877-3724
S
1-877-432-7444
Indiana
S
1-866-485-9415
Iowa
S
1-888-672-9116
Kansas
S
1-800-579-2203; 1-888-903-3863
Kentucky
S
1-877-598-7878
P*
1-888-919-5278
Louisiana
S
1-800-259-5626
Maine
S
1-877-463-9843
Maryland
P
1-888-463-4723
S
1-888-463-4723
Massachusetts
P (U. Plan)
1-800-449-6332
S (U. Fund)
1-800-544-2776
Michigan
P
1-800-638-4543
S
1-877-861-6377
Minnesota
S
1-877-338-4646
Mississippi
P
1-800-987-4450
S
1-800-987-4450
Missouri
S
1-888-414-6678
Montana
S
1-800-888-2723
Nebraska
S
1-888-993-3746

Nevada
P
1-888-477-2667
S
1-800-587-7305; 1-800-235-5829;
1-866-734-4530
New Hampshire
S
1-800-544-1914; 1-800-544-1722
New Jersey
S
1-877-465-2378
New Mexico
S
1-877-337-5268
New York
S
1-877-697-2837
N. Carolina
S
1-800-600-3453
N. Dakota
S
1-866-728-3529
Ohio
S
1-800-233-6734
Oklahoma
S
1-877-654-7284
Oregon
S
1-503-373-1903; 1-866-772-8464
Pennsylvania
S (guaranteed
savings)
1-800-440-4000
S
1-800-294-6195; 1-800-440-4000
Rhode Island
S
1-888-324-5057
S. Carolina
S
1-888-244-5674
P*
1-888-772-4723
S. Dakota
S
1-866-529-7462
Tennessee
P*
1-888-486-2378
S
1-855-386-7827
Texas
P (Tuition
Promise)
1-800-445-4723
P* (Guaranteed
Tuition)
1-800-445-4723
S
1-800-445-4723
Utah
S
1-800-418-2551
Vermont
S
1-800-637-5860
Virginia
P
1-888-567-0540
S
1-888-567-0540
Washington
P
1-800-955-2318
West Virginia
P*
1-866-574-3542
S
1-866-574-3542

Wisconsin
S
1-888-338-3789
S
1-866-677-6933
Wyoming
No plan available
District of
Columbia
S
1-800-987-4859; 1-800-368-2745
* Closed to new enrollment
A Supplementary Form of College Fund: Owning
Your Own Home
If you can swing it, owning your own home is a top priority in any plan for
paying for college. Equally important, building equity in your home provides
you with collateral you can use to help pay for college.
In addition, owning your home provides you with an investment for your own
future, which you should never lose sight of. When the kids rush off to embark
on their own lives, clutching their diplomas, will there be something left for
you? What good is a college education for the child if it puts the parents in the
poorhouse?
The Home as a Credit Line?
No matter how well prepared, many families end up at some point having to
borrow money to pay part of the family contribution. Unfortunately, the financial
aid formula doesn’t recognize most types of debt; that is to say they do not
subtract these liabilities from your assets before they decide how much in assets
you have available to pay for college.
We will be explaining this in great detail in the chapters on financial aid
strategies, but here’s a quick example. Suppose you had $25,000 in assets, but
you also owed $6,000 on a consumer loan. If you asked any accountant in the
world, she would say your total net assets were only $19,000; but as far as the
colleges are concerned, you still have $25,000 available for them to assess.
Many kinds of debt (such as consumer loans and outstanding credit card bills)
don’t make sense during the college years.

However, the more selective colleges that elect to use the institutional
methodology (which looks at home equity) rather than the federal methodology
(which does not) do recognize one kind of debt—mortgages, first and second, on
your home. This means that your home can be a particularly valuable kind of
college fund. Generally, the more equity you have in your home, the more you
can borrow against it. And the best part is that if your child attends a school that
assesses home equity, and you borrow against your home, you reduce your total
assets in the eyes of the FAOs, which can reduce how much you have to pay for
college.
Remember to Invest in Other Things Besides
Your Child’s College Education
Providing a college education for your child is probably not the only ambition
you have in life. During the years you are saving for college you should not
neglect your other goals, particularly in two important areas: owning your own
home (which we have just spoken about) and planning for your retirement.
While the colleges assess your assets and income, they generally don’t assess
retirement provisions such as Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs), 401(k)
plans, Keoghs, tax-deferred annuities, etc. Any money you have managed to
contribute to a retirement provision will be off-limits to the FAOs at most
schools.
Thus contributions to retirement plans will not only help provide for your
future but also will shelter assets (and the income from those assets) from the
FAOs. In addition, many employers will match contributions to 401(k) plans, in
effect doubling your stake. And let’s not forget that, depending on your income
level, part or all of these contributions may be tax-deferred.
Now that you have an overview of some long-term investment strategies, let’s
talk about some specific plans for investing based on how many years away your
child is from college.
If You Have 15 Years…
Because there is so much time, you can afford to choose aggressive investments
of the types we’ve outlined above. We recommend that you invest about 75% of

your fund in these higher-risk investments, and the remaining 25% in
investments that lock in a reliable rate of return. There is little point in keeping
this money in a bank account because the rate of return will probably not even
keep up with inflation. However, as college years get closer, start transferring out
of stock funds into something less subject to temporary setbacks.
If possible, try to invest large amounts in the early years to take advantage of
compounding. When you get closer to the first year of college, take a hard look
at your college fund. You may find that you have already accumulated enough
money to pay for school, in which case you can start investing your money in
other directions. On the other hand, you may find that you need to increase the
amounts you are saving in order to get closer to your goal.
In spite of what you may have heard, as long as you qualify for financial aid it
is better to have two kids in school at the same time. If you are planning on
having another child, but were putting it off to avoid staggering college bills,
reconsider. Whether you have only one child in college, or two or three children
in college at the same time, the parents’ contribution (the amount colleges think
you can afford to pay for college) stays almost the same. Having two kids in
school at the same time is like a two-for-one sale.
With this much time to plan, you should consider long-term ways to increase
your earning power. Perhaps you might go back to school to pick up an
advanced degree. Perhaps if one parent is not working at present you could begin
thinking about a long-term plan for setting up a career for that parent to increase
your family’s earning power.
As you get closer to the college years, you will need to consider other points.
In order not to repeat ourselves too much, we will cover these points below.
Please keep on reading.
If You Have 10 Years…
With 10 years to go, you still have plenty of time to build a sizable college fund.
To build your capital quickly, try to save as much as you can in the first several
years when compounding will help you the most. Aggressive investments will
also help to build your fund quickly. We recommend that with 10 years to go,
you keep 70% of your money in aggressive investments of the type outlined
above. The other 30% can be put into fixed-return investments with limited risk.
As you get closer to the first year of college, you should gradually shift your

fund into investments with more liquidity and no risk.
Because your child’s academic ability will have an important effect not only
on which colleges he can apply to but also on what kind of aid package the
college will offer you, it is vital that you find a good elementary school that
challenges his abilities.
In spite of taxes, braces, and saving for college, do not neglect your own
future. If you have not already bought a home, consider buying one (in a good
school district) if at all possible. Contributions to retirement provisions should
also be made regularly.
Now is also the first time you can realistically speculate about how much
money you might be earning by the time your child is in college. If you believe
you will be earning too much to qualify for aid, it becomes even more important
to build your college fund. If you are not going to qualify for aid, you might
want to put assets into the child’s name.
As you get closer to the college years, you will need to consider other points.
In order not to repeat ourselves too much, we will cover these points below.
Please keep on reading.
If You Have Five Years…
There is still plenty of time to build up a large college fund. Even if it entails a
sacrifice, a large contribution in the first year will help build your investment
faster through the miracle of compounding. In the first year or so, you can still
afford to invest aggressively, although we recommend that you keep only about
50% of your money in aggressive investments, with 30% in limited-risk fixed
rate of return financial instruments, and 20% in liquid accounts that are
completely insured.
With about four years to go, reconsider whether you are going to qualify for
financial aid. You may have received promotions, raises, inheritances, or made
investments that take you out of range of financial aid. In this case, consider
moving assets into the child’s name. On the other hand, you may discover that
you are doing less well than you anticipated, in which case you will want to start
thinking about the strategies that are outlined in the rest of this book.
Find a great high school for your child and try to encourage good study habits.
Good grades will increase your child’s options tremendously. It’s probably too

early to tell, but try to get a sense of what type of school your child will be
applying to, and how much that school will cost.
As you get to the last three years before college, you will need to consider
other points. In order not to repeat ourselves too much, we will cover these
points below. Please keep on reading.
If You Have Three Years…
Parents find that with the specter of college tuition looming imminently, they are
able to save substantial amounts in only two years. After all, many parents are at
the height of their earning power at this time. However, because you will need
the money relatively soon, it is probably better to stay away from high-risk
investments that may suffer a temporary (or permanent) setback just as you need
to write a check.
These next academic years are the most important for your child. Sit down
with him and explain (in as unpressured and nonjudgmental a tone as you can
manage) that because colleges give preferential packaging to good students,
every tenth of a point he adds to his grade point average may save him thousands
of dollars in loans he won’t have to pay back later.
If your child did not score well on the PSAT, consider finding a good test
preparation course for the SAT. Several recent studies have shown that coaching
can raise a student’s score by over 100 points. Again, every ten points your child
raises her score may save your family thousands of dollars—and of course allow
her to apply to more selective colleges. We, of course, are partial to The
Princeton Review SAT course.
If you have any interest in running a business on the side, this may be the
ideal moment to start setting it up. Most businesses show losses during their first
few years of operation. What better time to have losses than during the tax years
that affect your aid eligibility? There are also many tax benefits to this strategy,
but the business cannot exist just on paper. For tax purposes it must be run with
the intention of showing a profit in order not to run afoul of the “hobby loss”
provisions of the tax code. If this seems like it might be for you, please read our
financial aid strategies section, and the section on running your own business in
the chapter “Special Topics.”

Maneuvering
The most important thing to realize is that at this point, you are one year away
from the all-important base income year. Colleges now use the tax year two
years before college begins (from January 1 of the student’s sophomore year of
high school to December 31 of the student’s junior year in high school) as their
basis for deciding what you can afford to pay during freshman year.
Thus you have one year to maneuver before the base income year begins.
Read the financial aid strategies that we outline in the rest of this book extremely
carefully. After you have read these chapters and consulted your accountant or
financial aid consultant, you may want to move some assets around, take capital
gains, take bonuses before the base income year begins, and so on. During the
base income year itself, you may want to make some major expenditures, pay
down your credit card balances, establish a line of credit on your home, and
make the maximum contributions possible to retirement provisions.
Many times, parents come to consult us when their child is just about to fill
out the need analysis forms in the senior year of high school. There is still a lot
we can do to help them qualify for more aid, but we always feel bad for the
family because if only they had come to us before the base income year started,
there would have been so much more that we could have done.
You are in the fortunate position of having that extra year to maneuver. Read
the rest of this book, and enjoy.

CHAPTER THREE
Short-Term Strategies for
Receiving More Financial
Aid

A “Snapshot” of Your Financial Picture
Each year your son or daughter is in college, the school will ask you to fill out a
form reporting income and assets—in effect a snapshot of your overall financial
picture. You’ve probably noticed that snapshots can be very misleading. In one
picture, you may appear youthful and vibrant. In another, you may look terrible,
with a double chin and 20 extra pounds. Perhaps neither photograph is exactly
correct. Of course, when you are deciding which picture to put in the scrapbook,
the choice is easy: throw away the one you don’t like and keep the one you do.
In choosing which financial snapshot to send to the colleges, the object is a
little bit different: send them the worst-looking picture you can find.
To be very blunt, the single most effective way to reduce the family
contribution is to make your income and your assets look as small as possible.
Well, This Is Not Revolutionary Advice
After all, you’ve been trying to do this for years.
We’re sure you and your accountant are generally doing a fine job of keeping
your taxes to a minimum. However, certain long-term tax strategies that
normally make all kinds of sense, can explode in your face during college years.
Neither you nor your accountant may fully grasp how important it is to
understand the ins and outs of the financial aid formulas.
How College Planning Affects Tax Planning
There are two reasons why tax planning has to change during college years.
First, the FAOs (unlike the IRS) are concerned about only four years of your
financial life. Using strategies we will be showing you in the next few chapters,
you may be able to shift income out of those four years, thus increasing your
financial aid.
Second, financial aid formulas differ from the IRS formulas in several key
ways. Certain long-term tax reduction strategies (shifting income to other family

members, for example) can actually increase the amount of college tuition you
will pay. However, astute parents who understand these differences will find that
there are some wonderful, legal, logical alternatives they can explore to change
the four snapshots the college will take of their income and assets.
Tax accountants who do not understand the financial aid process (and in our
experience, this includes most of them) can actually hurt your chances for
financial aid.
The First Base Year Income
Colleges base your ability to pay this year’s tuition not on what you made this
year; not even on what you made last year; they base it on what you made the
year before that. This may seem like ancient history, but the colleges have their
complicated reasons (which we’ll go into later). Thus the first financial aid
scrutiny you will undergo will not be directed at the calendar year during which
your child will start her freshman year of college, but two years before. That year
is called the first base income year and is the crucial one.
The base income year (shaded in the diagram that follows) extends from
January 1 of your child’s sophomore year in high school to December 31 of your
child’s junior year in high school. This is when first impressions are formed. The
college will get an idea of how much you are likely to be able to afford, not just
for the first year of school, but for the remaining years as well. First impressions
are likely to endure and are often very difficult to change. Thus it would be
helpful to remove as much income as possible from this calendar year.

What If I’m Already Past the Base Income Year?
If you are reading this book and your son or daughter is already in the spring
term of junior year in high school, then you have probably missed the chance to
make adjustments to your income for the base income year—but don’t despair.
First of all, there are three other years still to go; the strategies we outline below
can be used to lower the appearance of income in the years to come. And
second, you haven’t missed the chance to make adjustments to your assets. That
snapshot gets taken on the day you fill out the forms. We’ll talk about assets a
little later in this chapter.
What If I’m In the Middle of the Base Income
Year?
If you are reading this book and you are still in the base income year, there are a
bunch of very specific things you can do to minimize the appearance of income.
What If My Income Radically Changes Between
the Base Income Year and When My Daughter
Starts College?
If your income has gone up since the base income year, that’s great. No need to
report the change, unless you are asked to by an individual college. However, if
your income has gone markedly down since the base income year, you can
always write to the colleges and explain. We’ll describe this process, called an
“appeal”, later in this book.
I’m About to Get a Raise. Should I Say No?
It’s easy to get carried away with the concept of reducing income, and it may
appear at first that you would be better off turning down a raise. However, the
short answer to this question is,

“Are you crazy?”
More money is always good. Our discussion here is limited to minimizing the
appearance of more money. Let’s say you get a raise of $3,000 per year. This
will certainly reduce your eligibility for college aid, but will it negate the entire
effect of the raise? Not likely. Let’s say you’re in the 25% federal tax bracket,
your raise is still subject to social security taxes of 7.65%, and your income is
being assessed at the maximum rate possible under the aid formulas. Looking at
the chart that follows, you’ll see that even after taxes and reduced aid eligibility
are taken into account, you will still be $1,170 ahead, though state and local
taxes might reduce this somewhat.
raise of:
$3,000
minus:
federal tax
$750
FICA taxes
$230
reduced aid
$878
what you keep:
$1,170
My Spouse Works. Should He or She Quit?
The same principle applies here. More money is good. Not only are you getting
the advantage of extra income but also under the federal financial aid formula,
for a two-parent family with both parents working, 35% of the first $11,429 the
spouse with the lower income earns is deducted as an “employment allowance”.
(The same deduction is granted for a single parent household if that parent
works.) Even if this increased income decreases your aid eligibility, you will still
be ahead on the income. In addition, you will be creating the impression of a
family with a work ethic, which can be very helpful in negotiating with FAOs
later. FAOs work for their living, and probably earn less than you do. They are
more likely to give additional aid to families who have demonstrated their
willingness to make sacrifices.
Income vs. Assets
Some parents get confused by the differences between what is considered

income and what are considered assets. Assets are the money, property, and other
financial instruments you’ve been able to accumulate over time. Income, on the
other hand, is the money you actually earned or otherwise received during the
past year, including interest and dividends from your assets.
The IRS never asks you to report your assets on your 1040—only the income
you received from these assets. Colleges, on the other hand, are very interested
in your income and your assets. Later in this chapter, there will be an entire
section devoted to strategies for reducing the appearance of your assets. For
now, let’s focus on income.
The colleges decided long ago that income should be assessed much more
heavily than assets. The intention is that when a family is finished paying for
college, there should be something left in the bank. (Don’t start feeling grateful
just yet. This works only as long as the colleges meet a family’s need in full.)
INCOME
When considering their chances for financial aid, many families believe that
the colleges are interested only in how much income you make from work. If
this were the case, the colleges would just be able to look at your W-2 form to
see if you qualified for aid. Unfortunately, life is not so simple. The college’s
complicated formulas make the IRS tax code look like child’s play.
For financial aid purposes, the colleges will be looking at the same income the
IRS does. For most of us, that boils down to line 37 of the 1040 IRS form: the
Adjusted Gross Income or AGI. (By the way, if you use form 1040A, the AGI is
found on line 21; if you use the 1040EZ form, it is on line 4. For simplicity’s
sake, from now on, we will refer just to the 1040 long form and line 37.)
But for those who file a tax return, the colleges also look at certain other types
of income that are not subject to tax, for example, child support, tax-exempt
interest, voluntary contributions to a 401(k) plan or other tax-deferred retirement
plan.
For those who don’t file a return, the colleges will still look at income earned
from work plus other untaxed income.
Before we begin discussing the components of taxable and untaxed income, it
is important to understand that even the decision as to which tax form to file
(1040 long form vs. the 1040EZ or the 1040A) the student’s parents file can

have a significant impact on your eligibility for financial aid.
Not All Tax Returns Are Created Equal
By filing one of the short forms (1040A or 1040EZ), and meeting certain other
requirements, you may be able to have parent and student assets excluded from
the federal financial aid formulas, which could qualify you for increased federal
aid. This is a financial aid loophole known as the “Simplified Needs Test”
(SNT). Here’s the way it works: If the parents have adjusted gross income below
$50,000, (or for non-tax filers, have income from work which for most means
wages reported on a W-2 form below $50,000), and the parent(s) in the
household who file a tax return can use the 1040EZ or the 1040A form (or are
not required to file any personal income tax return), then all your family’s assets
will be excluded from the federal financial aid formulas. This means that
eligibility for the Pell Grant, for undergraduate students, and the subsidized
Stafford loan will be determined without regard to how much money the parent
or the student has in the bank or in a brokerage account.
It can also be vital to parents with large assets but little real earned income.
You can have $49,999 of interest income, and still possibly meet the simplified
needs test—in which case even assets of several million dollars will not be used
in calculating your EFC.

Click here to download a PDF sample of IRS Form 1040.
The above form is a copy of the IRS Form 1040. It is for informational purposes only. Do not send in.
This can be particularly vital to parents with income below $40,000 but who
have significant assets because they now may be able to qualify for the Pell
Grant, which is free money that does not have to be paid back.
Of course, many colleges use the College Board’s institutional methodology

(which does not utilize the simplified needs test) in awarding their own grant
money. However, if you meet the Simplified Needs Test, they cannot use the
family assets in determining eligibility for the Pell Grant, and subsidized
Stafford loans. If you aren’t sure if you can use the short tax forms, consult the
IRS instructions to the forms, or your tax preparer. A few examples of people
who can’t use the short form: a self-employed individual, a partner in a
partnership, a shareholder in an S corporation, a beneficiary of an estate or trust.
In addition, if you had rental or royalty income and expenses, had farm income
and expenses, took certain types of capital gains or losses, received alimony, or
itemized deductions, you will have to file the long form if you are required to
file.
However, for some taxpayers who could itemize deductions, but won’t save
much money by doing so, it may still make sense to file the short form if
otherwise eligible to do so. You’ll pay slightly higher taxes, but this may be
more than offset by a larger aid package. Since this strategy requires a trade-off
between tax benefits and aid benefits, we recommend you consult a competent
advisor.
Unfortunately, even if you fit the simplified needs test, your accountant may
unwittingly blow this lovely loophole for you by insisting on filing the wrong
form.
Not All Accountants Are Created Equal
Many accountants are not aware of the aid laws and will try to talk you into
using the 1040—simply because that is the only form their computer programs
will print out. If you meet the simplified needs test, be prepared to insist that
your tax preparer use the 1040EZ or the 1040A forms. It might not even be a bad
idea to take this book along with you when you go for your annual appointment
with your tax preparer. We have heard of some accountants who tell their clients
that if they file the 1040 without itemizing deductions, it is the same as using the
short forms. Unfortunately, for financial aid purposes, this is not necessarily true.
The federal rules state that you can qualify for the Simplified Needs Test even if
you file a 1040, provided you were eligible to file a 1040A or 1040EZ (or you
are not required to file a personal tax return) and you meet the income
guidelines. However, a representative at the U.S. Department of Education said
that this is a “murky area” and that guidelines are still being developed to advise

FAOs on how to determine if a family that filed a 1040 was eligible to file a
1040A or 1040EZ (or was not required to file a personal tax return). Since you
may have to do a lot of explaining and go through a lot of red tape to convince
the FAO (who is not a CPA) that you could have done the short form or were not
required to file a personal tax return (and you may not be successful), we
recommend that you use the 1040A or 1040EZ if you are eligible to do so (or not
file a return at all if you are not required to do so). For your benefit, we have
listed the headings of the different returns below so you can identify which are
the short forms and which is the long form.
The long form (1040):
Besides the Simplified Needs Test, there is another favorable federal aid
loophole known as…
The Automatic Zero-EFC
The federal government has a great break for parent(s) in the household who 1)
have a 2016 combined adjusted gross income of $25,000 or less (or if non-tax
filers, have combined income from work of $25,000 or less), and 2) can file the
1040A or the 1040EZ tax form (or are not required to file a tax form at all
because they are not required to do so).
Note: Prior to the 2012–2013 award year, the income cut-off was
considerably higher. However, as part of the December 2011 budget deal by
Congress, new legislation reduced the income threshold.

Even if your child has substantial income, or you and your child have substantial
assets, the student’s EFC will be judged to be zero if you meet these
requirements.
Some accountants encourage retired, disabled, unemployed, or low-income
parents to file the long form—which could be troublesome if you otherwise
qualify for this break. Many of these parents could file the short form or may not
be required to file at all, which will make things much easier when dealing with
the FAOs.
Tip #1: There may be some financial aid advantages to filling out
the short forms (the 1040A or the 1040EZ) if the IRS permits you
to do so. And if you are not required to file a personal tax return
but still file a 1040 form, you can still be eligible for the SNT or
Automatic Zero-EFC.
Alternate Ways to Qualify
There is an additional way to qualify for the Simplified Need Test (SNT) or the
Automatic Zero EFC: if, during the base income year, or the year after the base
income year, the student, her parents, or anyone in the parents’ household
receives benefits under a means-tested Federal benefit program (other than
federal student aid), then they qualify for the Automatic Zero EFC and/or the
SNT (provided parental income is below the thresholds mentioned above even if
the IRS 1040 is filed). Such benefit programs normally include food stamps,
supplemental security income, temporary assistance for needy families (TANF),
certain school lunch programs, or certain supplemental nutrition programs for
women, infants, and children (WIC).
A dependent student can also qualify for the SNT or Automatic-Zero EFC
provided a parent who reports his or her financial information on the FAFSA is
considered a “dislocated worker” on the date the FAFSA form is filed (and
provided the parental income for the base income year is below the thresholds
mentioned above even if the IRS 1040 is filed). A parent can normally qualify
for this dislocated worker status by meeting at least one of the following criteria:
being laid-off or receiving a lay-off notice from a job; receiving unemployment

benefits (due to being laid off or losing a job, provided the person is unlikely to
return to their prior occupation); was self-employed but is now unemployed due
to economic conditions or natural disaster; or being a “displaced homemaker”
(i.e. a stay-at-home mother or father who is no longer supported by their spouse,
is unemployed or underemployed, and is having trouble finding or upgrading
employment). The financial aid officer at the school will probably require
additional documentation to prove such dislocated worker status.
Independent students can also qualify for the SNT and the Automatic-Zero
EFC if they meet the same criteria mentioned above, though the Automatic-Zero
EFC is not available to a single student or a married independent student without
dependents other than a spouse.
A Parents’ Step-by-Step Guide to the Federal
Income Tax Form
By reducing your total income (lines 7–21 on the 1040) you can increase your
financial aid, which, you should remember, is largely funded by your tax dollars
anyway. Let’s examine how various items on your tax return can be adjusted to
influence your aid eligibility. The IRS line numbers below refer to the 2016 IRS
1040.
LINE 7—WAGES, SALARIES, TIPS, ETC.
For most parents, there is not much to be done about line 7. Your employers will
send you W-2 forms, and you simply report this income. However, there are a
few points to be made.
Defer Your Bonus
If you are one of the thousands of Americans in the workplace who receive a
bonus, you might discuss with your boss the possibility of moving your bonus
into a non-base income year. For example:
If your child is in the beginning of her sophomore year of high school (in
other words, if the first base income year has not yet begun) and you are due a
year-end bonus, make sure that you collect and deposit the bonus before January

1 of the new year (when the base income year begins). As long as the bonus is
included on your W-2 for the previous year, it will not be considered income on
your aid application.
The money will still appear as part of your assets (provided you haven’t
already spent it). But by shifting the bonus into a non-base income year, you will
avoid having the colleges count your bonus twice—as both asset and income.
If you are due a year-end bonus and your child is starting his junior year of
high school, see if you can arrange to get the bonus held off until after January 1.
Yes, it will show up on next year’s financial aid form, but in the meantime
you’ve had the benefit of financial aid for this year.
Just as important, FAOs make four-year projections based on your first base
income year. Your FAO will have set aside money for you for the next three
years based on the aid your child receives as a freshman in college. Who knows
what might happen next year? You might need that money. If the FAO hasn’t
already set it aside for you, it might not be there when you need it.
Tip #2: Move your bonus into a non-base income year.
If You’ve Had an Unusually Good Year
Maybe you won a retroactive pay increase during the base income year. Or
perhaps you just worked a lot of overtime. If you can arrange to receive payment
during a non-base income year that would, of course, be better, but there are
sometimes compelling reasons for taking the money when it is offered (for
example, you are afraid you might not get it later).
However, unless you explain the details of this windfall to the colleges, they
will be under the impression that this sort of thing happens to you all the time.
If the base income year’s income is really not representative, write to the
financial aid office of each of the colleges your child is applying to, and explain
that this was a once-in-a-lifetime payment, never to be repeated. Include a copy
of your tax return from the year before the base income year, or from the year
after, which more closely reflects your true average income. If helpful to your
cause, you may wish to include a projection of your income for the “current

year” - the calendar year that will end on December 31 in the middle of the
academic year for which you are seeking aid.
Don’t bother sending documentation like this to the companies that process
the standardized analysis forms. They are only interested in crunching the
numbers on the form, and anyway have no power to make decisions about your
aid at specific schools. Documentation regarding a change in circumstances
should never be sent to the processing companies. Send it directly to the schools.
Tip #3: If you’ve had an unusually good year, explain to the
colleges that your average salary is much lower.
Become an Independent Contractor
If you are a full-time employee receiving a W-2 form at the end of the year, you
have significant unreimbursed business expenses, and you are otherwise
ineligible for the SNT or the Automatic Zero-EFC, you might discuss with your
employer the viability of becoming an independent contractor. The advantage to
this is that you can file your income under schedule C of the tax form (“profit or
loss from business”), enabling you to deduct huge amounts of business-related
expenses before line 37, where it will do you some good. Note: if you are
otherwise eligible for the SNT or Automatic Zero-EFC, filing schedule C will
disqualify you from receiving such favorable aid treatment, unless you are not
required to file a tax return or are eligible by meeting at least one of the two
alternate criteria mentioned on this page.
A regular salaried employee is allowed to take an itemized tax deduction for
unreimbursed employee expenses (in excess of 2% of the AGI). Unfortunately,
because this deduction comes after line 37, it will have no effect on reducing
income under the financial aid formula.
An independent contractor, on the other hand, can deduct telephone bills,
business use of the home, dues, business travel, and entertainment—basically
anything that falls under the cost of doing business—and thus lower the adjusted
gross income.
You would have to consult with your accountant to see if the disadvantages

(increased likelihood of an IRS audit, difficulties in rearranging health insurance
and pension plans, possible loss of unemployment benefits, increased social
security tax, etc.) outweigh the advantages. In addition, the IRS has been known
to crack down on employers who classify their workers as independent
contractors when they are really salaried employees. Like all fuzzy areas of the
tax law, this represents an opportunity to be exploited, but requires careful
planning.
Tip #4a: If you have significant unreimbursed employee expenses,
consider becoming an independent contractor so that you can
deduct expenses on schedule C of the 1040. However, be careful if
you are otherwise eligible for the SNT or Automatic Zero-EFC.
Even better, you might suggest to your boss that she cut your pay. No, we
haven’t gone insane. By convincing your employer to reduce your pay by the
amount of your business expenses, and then having her reimburse you directly
for those expenses, you should end up with the same amount of money in your
pocket, but you’ll show a lower AGI and therefore increase your aid eligibility.
Tip #4b: If you have significant unreimbursed employee expenses,
try to get your employer to reimburse these business expenses
directly to you—even if it means taking a corresponding cut in
pay.
If your employer won’t let you pursue either of these options, you should be
sure to explain your unreimbursed employee expenses in a separate letter to the
FAOs.
LINES 8A AND 9A—TAXABLE INTEREST AND DIVIDEND INCOME
If you have interest or dividend income, you have assets. Nothing prompts a
“validation” (financial aid jargon for an audit) faster than listing interest and

dividend income without listing the assets it came from.
For the most part, there is little you can do, or would want to do, to reduce this
income, though we will have a lot to say in later chapters about reducing the
appearance of your assets.
Some parents have suggested taking all their assets and hiding them in a
mattress or dumping them into a checking account that doesn’t earn interest. The
first option is illegal and dumb. The second is just dumb. In both cases, this
would be a bit like turning down a raise. More interest is good. The FAOs won’t
take all of it, and you will need it if you want to have any chance of staying even
with inflation.
The one type of interest income you might want to control comes from Series
E and EE U.S. Savings Bonds. When you buy a U.S. Savings Bond, you don’t
pay the face value of the bond; you buy it for much less. When the bond matures
(in five years, 10 years, or whatever) it is then worth the face value of the bond.
The money you receive from the bond in excess of what you paid for it is called
interest. With Series E and EE Savings Bonds, you have two tax options: you
can report the interest on the bond as it is earned each year on that year’s tax
return, or you can report all the interest in one lump sum the year you cash in the
bond.
By taking the second option, you can in effect hold savings bonds for years
without paying any tax on the interest, because you haven’t cashed them in yet.
However, when you finally do cash them in, you suddenly have to report all the
interest earned over the years to the IRS. If the year that you report that interest
happens to be a base income year, all of the interest will have to be reported on
the aid forms as well. This will almost certainly raise your EFC.
The only exception to this might be Series EE bonds bought after 1989. The
U.S. government decided to give parents who pay for their children’s college
education a tax break: low- or middle-income parents who bought Series EE
bonds after 1989 with the intention of using the bonds to help pay for college
may not have to pay any tax on the interest income at all. The interest earned is
completely tax-free for a single parent making up to $78,150 or a married couple
earning up to $117,250. Once you hit these income levels, the benefits are
slowly phased out. A single parent earning above $93,150 or a married couple
earning above $147,250 becomes ineligible for any tax break. All of these
numbers are based on 2017 tax rates and are subject to an annual adjustment for
inflation.

However, we still recommend that parents who bought these bonds with the
intention of paying for college cash them in after the end of the last base income
year (after January 1 of the student’s sophomore year in college). Whether the
interest from these bonds is taxed or untaxed, the FAOs still consider it income
and assess it just as harshly as your wages.
Thus if at all possible, try to avoid cashing in any and all U.S. Savings Bonds
during any base income year. With Series E or EE bonds, you may be able to roll
over your money into Series H or HH bonds and defer reporting interest until the
college years are over. There is also no law that says you have to cash in a
savings bond when it matures. You can continue to hold the bond, and in some
instances it will continue to earn interest above its face value.
Tip #5: If possible, avoid cashing in U.S. Savings Bonds during a
base income year, unless you’ve been paying taxes on the interest
each year, as it accrued.
If You Have Put Assets in Your Other Children’s
Names
Parents are often told by accountants to transfer their assets into their children’s
name so that the assets will be taxed at the children’s lower rate. While this is a
good tax reduction strategy, it stinks as a financial aid strategy, as you will find
out later in this chapter. However, if this is your situation and you have already
put assets under the student’s younger siblings’ names, there is one small silver
lining in this cloud: The tax laws give most parents with children under age 18
(or under age 24 if the child is a full time student for at least 5 months during the
tax year) the option of reporting their child’s investment income on a separate
tax return or on the parents’ own tax return.
Either way, the family enjoys the benefit of reduced taxes due to the child’s
lower bracket. The principal advantage of reporting the child’s income on the
parents’ return is to save the expense of paying an accountant to do a separate
return.
However, if you are completing your tax returns for a base income year, we

recommend that you do not report any of the student’s or student’s siblings’
investment income (i.e. interest, dividends, and capital gains) on your tax return.
By filing a separate return for those children, you remove that income from your
AGI, and lower your Expected Family Contribution. (We’ll discuss reporting of
the student’s income later in this chapter.)
Tip #6: During base income years, do not report children’s
investment income on the parents’ tax return. File a separate
return for each child.
Leveraged Investments
An important way in which the financial aid formulas differ from the tax code is
in the handling of the income from leveraged investments. You leverage your
investments by borrowing against them. The most common example of leverage
is margin debt. Margin is a loan against the value of your investment portfolio
usually made by a brokerage house so that you can buy more of whatever it is
selling—for example, stock.
Let’s say you had $5,000 in interest and dividend income, but you also had to
pay $2,000 in tax-deductible investment interest on a margin loan. The IRS may
allow you to deduct your investment interest expenses from your investment
income on schedule A. For tax purposes, you may have only $3,000 in net
investment income.
Unfortunately, for financial aid purposes, interest expenses from schedule A
are not taken into account. As far as the colleges are concerned, you had $5,000
in income.
Of course you will be able to subtract the value of your margin debt from the
value of your total assets. However, under the aid formulas, you cannot deduct
the interest on your margin debt from your investment income.
During base income years, you should avoid—or at least minimize—margin
debt because it will inflate your income in the eyes of the FAOs. If there is no
way to avoid leveraging your investments during the college years, you should at
least call the FAO’s attention to the tax-deductible investment interest you are

paying. Be prepared to be surprised at how financially unsavvy your FAO may
turn out to be. He may not understand the concept of margin debt at all, in which
case you will have to educate him. In our experience, we have found that if the
situation is explained, many FAOs will make some allowance for a tax-
deductible investment interest expense.
Tip #7: During base income years, avoid large amounts of margin
debt.
LINE 10—TAXABLE REFUND OF STATE AND LOCAL INCOME
TAXES
Many people see their tax refunds as a kind of Christmas club—a way to save
some money that they would otherwise spend—so they arrange to have far too
much deducted from their paychecks. Any accountant knows that this is actually
incredibly dumb. In effect, you are giving the government the use of your
money, interest-free. If you were to put this money aside during the year in an
account that earned interest, you could make yourself a substantial piece of
change.
So Why Does Your Accountant Encourage a
Refund?
Even so, many accountants go along with the practice for a couple of reasons.
First, they know that their clients are unlikely to go to the bother of setting up an
automatic payroll savings plan at work. Second, they know that clients feel
infinitely better when they walk out of their accountant’s office with money in
their pockets. It tends to offset the large fee the accountant has just charged for
his or her services. Third, a large refund doesn’t affect how much tax you
ultimately pay. Whether you have your company withhold just the right amount,
or way too much, over the years you still end up paying exactly the same amount
in taxes.
So accountants have gotten used to the practice, and yours probably won’t tell

you (or maybe doesn’t know) that a large refund is the very last thing you want
during base income years. Unfortunately, a large refund can seriously undermine
your efforts to get financial aid. Here’s why:
If you itemize deductions and get a refund from state and local taxes, the
following year you’ll have to report the refund as part of your federal adjusted
gross income. Over the years, of course, this will have little or no effect on how
much you pay in taxes, but for aid purposes, you’ve just raised your line 37. This
might not seem like it could make a big difference, but if you collect an average
state and local refund of $1,600 each year over the four college years, you may
have cost yourself as much as $3,000 in grant money.
During college years, it is very important to keep your withholding as close as
possible to the amount you will actually owe in taxes at the end of the year.
Tip #8: If you itemize your deductions, avoid large state and local
tax refunds.
LINE 11—ALIMONY RECEIVED
Even though this may seem like an obvious point, we have found it important to
remind people that the amount you enter on this line is not what you were
supposed to receive in alimony, but the amount you actually got. Please don’t list
alimony payments your ex never made.
In fact, if your ex fell behind in alimony payments, it’s important that you
notify the college financial aid offices that you have received less income this
year than a court of law thought you needed in order to make ends meet.
By the same token, if you received retroactive alimony payments, you would
also want to contact the colleges to let them know that the amount you listed on
this line is larger this year than the amount you normally receive. In a situation
like this, you might be tempted to put down on the financial aid form only the
amount of alimony you were supposed to receive. Please don’t even think about
it. Your need analysis information will be checked against your tax return. By
the time they’ve finished their audit, and you’ve finished explaining that this was
a retroactive payment, all the college’s aid money might be gone.

LINE 12—BUSINESS INCOME
As we mentioned earlier, it can be to your advantage to become an independent
contractor if you have large unreimbursed business expenses. A self-employed
person is allowed to deduct business expenses from gross receipts on schedule
C. This now much smaller number (called net profit or loss) is written down on
line 12 of the 1040 form, thus reducing both taxable income and the family
contribution to college tuition.
We will discuss running your own business in greater detail in the “Special
Topics” chapter of this book; however, a few general points should be made
now.
Many salaried people run their own businesses on the side, which enables
them to earn extra money while deducting a good part of this income as business
expenses. However, before you run out and decide that your stamp collecting
hobby has suddenly become a business, you should be aware that the IRS
auditors are old hands at spotting “dummy” businesses, and the colleges’ FAOs
aren’t far behind.
On the other hand, if you have been planning to start a legitimate business,
then by all means, the time to do it is NOW.
Tip #9: Setting up a legitimate business on the side will enable
you to deduct legitimate business expenses, and may reduce your
AGI.
Just bear in mind that a business must be run with the intention of showing a
profit to avoid running afoul of the IRS “hobby loss” provision. The institutional
methodology now adds back business losses to your AGI.
LINES 13A AND 14—CAPITAL GAINS OR LOSSES, OTHER GAINS OR
LOSSES
When you buy a stock, bond, or any other financial instrument at one price and
then sell it for more than you paid in the first place, the difference between the
two prices is considered a capital gain. If you sold it for less than you paid in the
first place, the difference may be considered a capital loss. We say “may be”

because while you are required to report gains on all transactions, the IRS does
not necessarily recognize losses on all types of investments.
When you sell an asset, your net worth really stays the same; you are merely
converting the asset into the cash it’s worth at that particular instant. However,
for tax and financial aid purposes, a capital gain on the asset is considered
additional income in the year that you sold your asset.
During base income years, you want to avoid capital gains if you can because
they inflate your income. When you sell a stock, not only does the FAO assess
the cash value from the sale of the stock (which is considered an asset) but she
also assesses the capital gain (which is considered income).
If you need cash it is usually better to borrow against your assets rather than to
sell them. Using your stock, or the equity in your house as collateral, you can
take out a loan. This helps you in three ways: you don’t have to report any
capital gains on the financial aid form; your net assets are reduced in the eyes of
the FAO since you now have a debt against that asset; and in some cases, you get
a tax deduction for part of the interest on the loan.
Tip #10: If possible, avoid large capital gains during base income
years.
However, there may be times when it is necessary to take capital gains. Below
you will find some strategies to avoid losing aid because of capital gains. The
following are somewhat aggressive strategies, and each would require you to
consult your accountant and/or stockbroker:
• If you have to take capital gains, at least try to offset them with
losses. Examine your portfolio. If you have been carrying a stock
that’s been a loser for several years, it might be time to admit that it
is never going to be worth what you paid for it, and take the loss.
This will help to cancel your gain.
• You can elect to spread your stock losses and gains over several
years. One example: The IRS allows you to deduct capital losses
directly from capital gains. If your losses exceed your gains, you
can deduct up to $3,000 of the excess from other income—in the

year the loss occurred. However, net losses over $3,000 are carried
over to future years. It might be possible to show net losses during
several of the base income years, and hold off on taking net gains
until after your kids are done with college.
• The institutional methodology does not recognize capital losses that
exceed gains. However, certain kinds of government aid are
awarded without reference to the schools—for example, the Pell
Grant and some state-funded aid programs. Because this aid is
awarded strictly by the numbers, a capital loss can make a big
difference. (Consult your state aid authorities and the individual
schools to see how capital losses will be treated.)
• If you are worried about falling stock prices but don’t want to
report a capital gain, you should consult your stockbroker. There
may be ways to lock in a particular price without selling the stock.
• If you have any atypically large capital gain in a base income year
that you must report on an aid form, you should write to the
colleges explaining that your income is not normally so high.
The Sale of Your Home
The Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 changed the way capital gains from the sale of
a primary residence are treated. For any sale after May 6, 1997 you are permitted
to exclude up to $250,000 in capital gains every two years on the sale of your
home (up to $500,000 for a married couple filing jointly). To qualify, the home
must have been your primary residence that you owned and occupied for at least
two of the last five years prior to the sale. Any gains in excess of the exclusion
limits would, of course, be subject to income taxes.
Representatives at the Department of Education and the College Board have
stated that only gains above the excludable amounts need to be reported on the
aid forms, since they are then part of your Adjusted Gross Income. If you sold
your home and must complete the aid forms before you purchase another
property, you’ll need to report the money you have from the sale as part of your
assets on the aid forms. However, you should be sure to write a letter to the
FAOs explaining that you will no longer have those assets once you purchase

another property, if that is the case.
LINE 15—IRA DISTRIBUTIONS
This line on the 1040 form covers any withdrawals (called “distributions” by the
IRS) made during the year from Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs). Most
financial planning experts advise against early withdrawals before retirement
since one of the biggest benefits of an IRA is the tax-deferred compounding of
investment income while the funds are in the account. In many cases, early
withdrawals will trigger a 10% penalty (if you took out the funds before age 59
1/2) and you’ll have to pay income taxes on part or all of the money withdrawn.
(Which part of the withdrawal will be subject to income taxes will depend on
whether your prior IRA contributions were deductible or not.)
If that is not enough bad news to discourage you, consider the financial aid
implications. Any IRA withdrawal during a base income year will raise your
income in the financial aid formulas thereby reducing aid eligibility. The part of
the withdrawal that is taxable will raise that all-important line 37 on your tax
return; the portion that is tax-free will also affect your EFC, since the aid
formulas assess untaxed income as well.
To demonstrate the negative impact of an early IRA withdrawal, let’s look at
an example of a parent, age 55, who took funds out of an IRA during the first
base income year. The family is in the 25% federal tax bracket and since all prior
IRA contributions were tax deductible, the withdrawal will be fully taxable.
After subtracting the early withdrawal penalties, income taxes, and reduced aid
eligibility, there will be only about 35 cents on the dollar left. Get the point?
Early withdrawals from IRAs should be avoided at all costs.
A legitimate rollover of an IRA (when you move your money from one type of
IRA investment into another within 60 days) is not considered a withdrawal. You
do have to report a rollover to the IRS on the 1040 form, but it is not subject to
penalties (so long as you stick to the IRS guidelines) nor is it considered income
for financial aid purposes.
Tip #11: Try to avoid IRA distributions during base income years.

Parents sometimes ask whether it is possible to borrow against the money in
their IRAs. You are not allowed to borrow against the assets you have in an IRA.
The IRS calls this a “prohibited transaction.”
Note: The Taxpayer Relief Act enacted in August 1997 provides for penalty-
free distributions from IRAs after December 31, 1997 if the funds are used to pay
for qualified educational expenses (tuition, fees, books, supplies, room and
board for the undergraduate or graduate studies of the taxpayer, taxpayer’s
spouse, or taxpayer’s child or grandchild). The words “penalty-free” only apply
to the 10% early withdrawal penalty. As such, you should not assume that you
will not be penalized in the financial aid process or that you will not owe any
income taxes if you withdraw funds for qualified education expenses.
The Act also provides taxpayers the opportunity to convert an existing IRA
into a Roth IRA, provided certain criteria are met. The major benefit of this type
of IRA is the fact that almost all withdrawals from a Roth IRA after age 59 1/2
will be totally tax-free. While the 10 % early withdrawal penalty will not apply
to this conversion, income taxes must be paid on the entire amount converted
unless part of the account represents prior contributions to a non-deductible
IRA. If you converted your IRA into a Roth IRA in 2015 you must report this
conversion as part of line 15a or 15b on the IRS 1040, thereby raising your
income and your EFC in the aid formulas. However, it is important to notify the
financial aid offices about any such conversion since the U.S. Department of
Education has granted colleges the ability to adjust the family contribution for
this unusual transaction. (We’ll discuss the IRAs and Roth IRAs in more detail in
Chapter Ten.)
If You’ve Just Retired
As people wait until later in life to have children, it is becoming more
commonplace to see retirees with children still in college. If you have recently
retired and are being forced to take distributions from traditional IRAs, we
suggest that you pull out the minimum amount possible. The government
computes what this minimum amount should be based on your life expectancy
(the longer you’re expected to live, the longer they are willing to spread out the
payments). Because it turns out that the average American’s life expectancy is
higher at 66 than it is at 65, it pays to get them to recalculate your minimum
distribution for each year your child is in college. Obviously, if you need the

money now, then you should take it. But try to withdraw as little as possible,
since IRA distributions increase your income and thus reduce financial aid.
Note: You are not required to take distributions from Roth IRAs regardless of
your age.
LINE 16—PENSIONS AND ANNUITIES
The same is true of pension distributions. Sometimes it is possible to postpone
retirement pensions or roll them over into an IRA. If you can afford to wait until
your child is through college, you will increase your aid eligibility. The money
isn’t going anywhere, and it’s earning interest.
Note: Any unusually large or early distributions from IRAs or pensions should
be explained to the college financial aid offices. Any “rollovers” should also be
explained when you submit a copy of your taxes to the school. Since you must
include “rollovers” as part of the amount you list on line 15a or 16a of the IRS
1040, some FAOs have been known to incorrectly assume that the family
received the funds, but failed to report this untaxed income on the aid forms. If
they make this error, the EFC they determine will be much higher than it should
be.
LINE 17—RENTS, ROYALTIES, ESTATES, PARTNERSHIPS, TRUSTS,
AND LINE 18—FARM INCOME
Like schedule C income, items coming under these categories are computed by
adding up your gross receipts and then subtracting expenses, repairs, and
depreciation. Be especially thorough about listing all expenses during base
income years.
If you have a summer house or other property, you may have been frustrated
in the past, because costly as it is to operate a second home, you haven’t been
able to deduct any of these expenses. You could consider renting it out while
your son or daughter is in college. The extra income might be offset (perhaps
significantly) by the expenses that you’ll now be legitimately able to subtract
from it. By changing how interest expense and real estate taxes are reflected on
your tax return (from an itemized deduction on schedule A to a reduction of
rental income on line 17) you reduce the magical AGI. There are special tax
considerations for “passive loss” activities and recapture of depreciation, so be

sure to consult your advisor before proceeding with this strategy, and remember
that many private colleges and a few state schools will not recognize losses of
this type when awarding institutional funds since the institutional methodology
adds back losses to income.
LINE 19—UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION
If you are unemployed, benefits received during the base income year are
considered income under the aid formula. However, some special consideration
may be granted to you. We will discuss this in more detail under the “Recently
Unemployed Worker” heading in Chapter Nine.
LINES 20A AND B—SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS
Total social security benefits are listed on line 20a. The taxable portion of those
benefits is listed on line 20b. Whether you have to pay tax on social security
benefits depends on your circumstances. Consult the instructions that come with
your tax return. For some parents who have other income, part of the social
security benefits received may be taxable.
LINE 21—OTHER INCOME
Any miscellaneous income that did not fit into any of the other lines, goes here.
Some examples: money received from jury duty or from proctoring SAT exams,
extra insurance premiums paid by your employer, gambling winnings.
Gambling winnings present their own problem. The IRS allows you to deduct
gambling losses against winnings. However the deduction can, once again, only
be taken as part of your itemized deductions on schedule A. Since this happens
after line 37, it is not a deduction as far as the need analysis computer is
concerned.
Since gambling losses are not likely to provoke much sympathy in the FAOs,
we don’t think there would be any point to writing them a letter about this one.
During the college years, you might just want to curtail gambling.
This is the last type of taxable income on the 1040, but don’t start jumping for
joy yet. The colleges are interested in more than just your taxable income.

Untaxed Income
We’ve just looked at all the types of income that the IRS taxes, and discussed
how the financial aid process impacts on it. There are several other types of
income that the IRS doesn’t bother to tax. Unfortunately, the colleges do not feel
so benevolent. While the IRS allows you to shelter certain types of income, the
colleges will assess this income as well in deciding whether and how much
financial aid you receive.
Here are the other types of income the need analysis forms will ask you to
report, and some strategies.
Untaxed Social Security Benefits
Any social security benefits that are not taxable are defined as “untaxed social
security benefits” in the financial aid regulations. Untaxed social security
benefits (as well as certain other untaxed income items that years ago were
previously assessed as income in the Federal Methodology) do not need to
reported as untaxed income on the FAFSA. Such excluded untaxed social
security benefits could include any untaxed benefits paid for the student
(whether such benefits are paid to the student directly or paid to the parent for
the benefit of the student), untaxed benefits paid to a parent for other children, or
the untaxed portion of any social security benefits paid for the benefit of the
parent(s) themselves. Depending on other income received by the parents during
the year, a parent’s own social security benefits may be fully tax-free or partially
tax-free. Since any taxable social security benefits are part of the Adjusted Gross
Income, they will continue to be assessed in the federal formula and the
institutional formula.
Since the social security benefits for most students normally end before the
student starts college (and are normally tax-free), the Institutional Methodology
has excluded any untaxed social security benefits received for the student from
untaxed income for a number of years. However, untaxed benefits paid to a
parent for children other than the student and/or the untaxed portion of any
social security benefits received by the parent(s) themselves will continue to be
assessed in the IM.
We’ll discuss social security benefits in greater detail in Part Three, “Filling
Out the Standardized Forms.”

Payments Made into IRAs, Keoghs, 401(k)s,
403(b)s, and TDAs
IRAs (Individual Retirement Accounts), Keoghs, 401(k)s, 403(b)s, and TDAs
(short for Tax Deferred Annuities) are all retirement provisions designed to
supplement or take the place of pensions and social security benefits. The tax
benefit of these plans is that in most cases they allow you to defer paying income
tax on contributions until you retire, when presumably your tax bracket will be
lower. The investment income on the funds is also allowed to accumulate tax-
deferred until the time you start to withdraw the funds.
The 401(k) and 403(b) plans are supplemental retirement provisions set up by
your employer in which part of your salary is deducted (at your request) from
your paycheck and placed in a trust account for your benefit when you retire.
Some companies choose to match part of your contributions to the plans. Keoghs
are designed to take the place of an ordinary pension for self-employed
individuals. TDAs fulfill much the same purpose for employees of tax-exempt
religious, charitable, or educational organizations.
IRAs are supplemental retirement provisions for everyone. Contributions to
these plans are tax-deductible in many cases. For example, if an unmarried
individual is not covered by a retirement plan at work or a self-employed
retirement plan, she can make tax-deductible contributions to an IRA of up to
$5,500 (up to $6,500 if age 50 or older) regardless of her income level. If a
person is covered by a retirement plan, his contribution to an IRA may or may
not be tax-deductible, depending on his income level.
Note: The tax bills enacted in August 1997 and June 2001 involve many
changes to the IRA rules. Before making any new contributions, withdrawals, or
changes to an IRA, you should be sure to consult IRS Publication 590 for the
corresponding tax year (it covers the IRA regulations and is free from Uncle
Sam), or seek the advice of a qualified professional who is familiar with the tax
laws as well as the financial aid regulations.
Financial Aid Ramifications of Retirement
Provisions
Retirement provisions are wonderful ways to reduce your current tax burden

while building a large nest egg for your old age—but how do they affect
financial aid?
The intent of current financial aid laws is to protect the money that you have
built up in a retirement provision. Assets that have already been contributed to
IRAs, Keoghs,
401(k)s, and so on by the date you fill out the standardized aid form do not
have to appear on that form. In most cases, the FAOs will never know that this
money exists. Thus loading up on contributions to retirement provisions before
the college years begin makes enormous sense.
However, any tax-deductible contribution that you make into these plans
voluntarily during the base income years is treated just like regular income. The
IRS may be willing to give you a tax break on this income, but the FAOs assess
it just like all the rest of your income, up to a maximum rate of 47%. Deductible
contributions made to retirement provisions during base income years will not
reduce your income under the aid formula. If you can still afford to make them,
fine. Most parents find they need all their available cash just to pay their family
contribution. Contributions to Roth IRAs or non-deductible Traditional IRAs are
not considered untaxed income since they do not reduce your AGI.
These plans remain an excellent way of protecting assets. Try to contribute as
much as you can before the first base income year. Parents sometimes ask us
how colleges will know about their contributions to 401(k) or 403(b) plans, or to
tax-deferred annuities. These contributions usually show up in boxes 12a-d of
your W-2 form, codes D, E, F, G, H, and S. Don’t even think about not listing
them.
A possible exception to this scenario would come up if contributions to these
plans would reduce your income below the $50,000 AGI cut-off for the
simplified needs test. For example, let’s say your total salary from work is
$45,000, your only other income is $7,000 in interest income (from $500,000 in
assets you have parked in Certificates of Deposit) and you don’t itemize your
deductions. By deferring $2,500 for the year into a 401(k) plan, your adjusted
gross income will now be $49,500, and your untaxed income will be $2,500—
making you potentially eligible for the simplified needs test which will exclude
your assets from the federal formula. Had you not made the contribution to the
401(k) plan, your AGI would be $52,000 and your assets would be assessed (at
up to 5.65% per year for parental assets, and 20% per year for student assets).

Tax-Exempt Interest Income
Even though the government is not interested in a piece of your tax-free
investments, the colleges are. Some parents question whether there is any need
to tell the colleges about tax-free income if it does not appear on their federal
income tax return.
In fact, tax-free interest income is supposed to be entered on line 8b of the
1040. This is not an item the IRS tends to flag, but there are excellent reasons
why you should never hide these items. For one thing, tax law changes
constantly. If your particular tax-free investment becomes taxable or reportable
next year, how will you explain the sudden appearance of substantial taxable
interest income? Or what if you need to sell your tax-free investment? You will
then have to report a capital gain, and the FAO will want to know where all the
money came from.
More Untaxed Income
Other untaxed income that is included in the federal financial aid formula
includes but is not limited to the tax-free portion of any pensions or annuities
received (excluding rollovers), the tax-free portion of IRA distributions
(excluding rollovers), child support received, workers’ compensation, veterans
noneducation benefits, the Health Savings Account (HSA) deduction (IRS 1040
Line 25), and living allowances paid to members of the military and clergy.
Some other categories of untaxed income (for example, untaxed disability
benefits) will need to be reported on the FAFSA form as well. There is little to
do about this kind of income except write it down. As with alimony, child
support reported should include only the amount you actually received, not what
you were supposed to receive.
Note: The federal methodology excludes contributions to, or payments from,
flexible spending arrangements. The institutional methodology will consider pre-
tax contributions withheld from wages for dependent care, medical spending,
and HSA accounts as part of untaxed income for the 2018–2019 award year. But
along with the HSA deduction, schools will have the opportunity to exclude
them. The tuition and fees deduction (IRS 1040 line 34, see this page) will still
be considered untaxed income (but only in the institutional methodology). In
addition, the following types of untaxed income (which previously were assessed

in the federal formula, but are now not considered in the FM) will continue to be
considered part of untaxed income in the IM: the earned income credit (IRS
1040 line 66a), the additional child credit (IRS 1040 line 67), welfare benefits,
the credit for federal tax on special fuels, and the foreign income exclusion.
EXPENSES
After adding up all your income, the need analysis formulas provide a deduction
for some types of expenses. A few of these expenses mirror the adjustments to
income section of the 1040 income tax form. Many parents assume that all the
adjustments to income from the IRS form can be counted on the standardized
financial aid forms. Unfortunately this is not the case. Likewise, many parents
assume that all of the itemized tax deductions they take on schedule A will count
on the financial aid forms as well. Almost none of these are included in the
financial aid formula. Let’s look at adjustments to income first.
Expenses According to the IRS: Adjustments to
Income
LINE 23—EDUCATOR EXPENSES
This adjustment to income involves educators in both public and private
elementary and secondary schools who work at least 900 hours during a school
year as a teacher, instructor, counselor, principal, or aide and who have certain
qualifying out-of-pocket expenses. The maximum deduction for this item is
$250 per taxpayer, and there are other criteria you need to meet. Prior to this
item appearing on the 1040 form, educators could only take such expenses as
part of miscellaneous itemized deductions on schedule A of the 1040. If
allowable, it is to your advantage to take the deduction as an adjustment to
income, rather than lump it with all your other miscellaneous deductions on
schedule A. First, because it would reduce your AGI and EFC, and second,
because it would be a sure tax deduction if offered. If your total miscellaneous
deductions do not exceed a certain percentage of your AGI or you do not
itemize, you won’t get a deduction for those expenses at all on your taxes.

LINE 26—MOVING EXPENSES
Job-related moving expenses are deductible as an adjustment to income. Years
ago, these expenses could be taken only as part of your itemized deductions, and
did not affect your aid eligibility. Since this item will both reduce your tax
liability and potentially increase your aid eligibility, you should be sure to
include all allowable moving expenses. There have been some recent changes to
the tax law regarding what constitutes a moving expense (for example, pre-move
house hunting trips are no longer deductible) so be sure to read the IRS
instructions or consult a competent advisor.
LINE 27—DEDUCTIBLE PART OF SELF-EMPLOYMENT TAX
Self-employed individuals can deduct one half of the self-employment taxes they
pay. The federal and institutional formulas take this deduction into account.
LINES 28 AND 32—IRA DEDUCTIONS AND SELF-EMPLOYED SEP,
SIMPLE, AND QUALIFIED PLANS DEDUCTIONS
As we explained above, while these constitute legitimate tax deductions,
contributions to deductible IRAs, SEPs, KEOGHs, and other plans that can be
deducted on Line 28 or Line 32 will not reduce your income under the FM or IM
aid formulas.
However, some forms of state aid (which do not use the federal methodology
employed by the colleges themselves) may be boosted by contributions to
retirement plans that reduce your AGI as some state programs are based solely
on taxable income. We’ll discuss this in detail in Chapter Six, “State Aid.” As
we mentioned earlier, contributions to an IRA could lower your AGI below the
$50,000 cap for the Simplified Needs Test. Individuals who make contributions
to plans that are deducted on Line 28 are either self-employed or a partner and
therefore cannot meet the Simplified Needs Test.
LINE 29—SELF-EMPLOYED HEALTH INSURANCE DEDUCTION
This is another adjustment to income recognized by the FAO. If you are self-
employed or own more than 2% of the shares of an S corporation, there are two
places on the 2015 IRS 1040 form where you may be able to take medical

deductions. On line 29, you can now deduct 100% of your qualifying health
insurance premiums. It is to your advantage to take the deduction here, rather
than lump it with all your other medical expenses on schedule A. First, because
it will reduce your AGI, and second, because it is a sure deduction here. If your
total medical expenses do not add up to a certain percentage of your total
income, you won’t get a deduction for medical expenses at all on your taxes. In
addition, high medical expenses (other than those included here on line 29) are
no longer an automatic deduction in the federal aid formula as they were prior to
the 1993–94 school year. We’ll describe this in detail, under “Medical
Deduction” on this page.
LINE 30—PENALTY ON EARLY WITHDRAWAL OF SAVINGS, AND
LINE 31A—ALIMONY PAID
If you took an early withdrawal of savings before maturity, which incurred a
penalty and/or you paid out alimony, these amounts will be claimed here. The
FM and IM aid formulas grant you a deduction for these two adjustments to
income as well.
LINE 33—STUDENT LOAN INTEREST DEDUCTION
The Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 created this adjustment to income. This can
involve loans used to cover your own post-secondary educational expenses as
well as those of your spouse or any other dependent at the time the loan was
taken out. We’ll discuss more of the fine print in Chapter Ten. You should realize
that any deduction claimed here will reduce your income under both the federal
and the institutional formulas.
LINE 34—TUITION AND FEES DEDUCTION
With this deduction, you may be able to claim up to $4,000 in qualified higher
education expense even if you don’t itemize deductions on your income tax
return provided your income is low enough and you meet other criteria. Be
aware that you can not claim this deduction if you claim the Hope, American
Opportunity, or Lifetime Learning credits (see Chapter Ten) for the same student
in the same tax year. Withdrawals from Coverdell ESAs and Section 529 plans

as well as the claiming of tax-free interest from the sale of U.S. savings bonds
can also affect this deduction so you’ll need to carefully read (or have your
accountant carefully read) the tax return instructions. This deduction would
reduce your income in the federal financial aid formula. For the institutional
formula, this deduction is added back to income as part of your untaxed income.
LINE 
24—CERTAIN 
BUSINESS 
EXPENSES 
OF 
RESERVISTS,
PERFORMING 
ARTISTS, 
AND 
FEE-BASIS 
GOVERNMENT
OFFICIALS; LINE 35—DOMESTIC PRODUCTION ACTIVITIES
DEDUCTION; OTHER WRITE-IN ADJUSTMENTS NOT REPORTED
ON LINES 23-35, BUT INCLUDED AS PART OF LINE 36
While each of these adjustments to income will lower your AGI—and therefore
your EFC—they are not applicable for the vast majority of tax filers.
Other Expenses According to the Financial Aid
Formula
You’ve just seen all the adjustments to income that the IRS allows. The colleges
allow you a deduction for several other types of expenses for financial aid
purposes as well:
Federal Income Tax Paid
The advice we are about to offer may give your accountant a heart attack.
Obviously, you want to pay the lowest taxes possible, but timing can come into
play during the college years. The higher the taxes you pay during a base income
year, the lower your family contribution will be. This is because the federal
income taxes you pay count as an expense item in the aid formula. There are
certain sets of circumstances when it is possible to save money by paying higher
taxes.
The principle here is to end up having paid the same amount of taxes over the
long run, but to concentrate the taxes into the years the colleges are scrutinizing,
thus increasing your aid eligibility.
Let’s look at a hypothetical example. Suppose that you make exactly the same

amount of money in two separate years. You are in the 25% income tax bracket,
and the tax tables don’t change over these two years. Your federal tax turns out
to be $6,000 the first year and $6,000 the second year, for a total tax bill of
$12,000 for the two years.
Let’s also suppose that you decide to make an IRA contribution during only
one of the two years, but you aren’t sure in which year to make the contribution.
You’re married, 52 years old, and neither of you is covered by a pension plan at
work, so you are able to make a tax-deductible IRA contribution of $6,500. This
turns out to reduce your federal taxes by $1,625 for the year in which you make
the contribution. Since, in this case, your tax situation is precisely the same for
both years, it doesn’t make much difference in which year you take the
deduction.
$12,000
total taxes over 2 years
(if no IRA contribution made)
– $ 1,625
tax savings for IRA contribution
$10,375
total taxes for the 2 years
Over the two years, either way, you end up paying a total of about $10,500 in
federal taxes.
It’s All a Matter of Timing
Here’s where timing comes in. What if the second of the two years also happens
to be your first base income year? In this case, you’re much better off making
the contribution during the previous year. By doing so, as we’ve already
explained, you shelter the $6,500 asset from the need analysis formula, and get a
$1,625 tax break in the first year.
But much more important, by making the contribution during the first year,
you choose to pay the higher tax bill in the second year—the base income year—
which in turn lowers your Expected Family Contribution. Over the two years,
you’re still paying close to the same amount in taxes, but you’ve concentrated
the taxes into the base income year where it will do you some good.

Tip #12: Concentrate your federal income taxes into base income
years to lower your Expected Family Contribution.
Obviously, if you can afford to make IRA contributions every year, you should
do so; building a retirement fund is a vital part of any family’s long-term
planning. However, if like many families, you find that you can’t afford to
contribute every year during college years, you can at least use timing to
increase your expenses in the eyes of the FAOs. By loading up on retirement
provision contributions during non-base income years, and avoiding tax-
deductible retirement contributions and other tax-saving measures during base
income years, you can substantially increase your aid eligibility.
The above example assumed that tax rates would be the same from year to
year. Should tax rates change from one year to the next, you will need to balance
your tax planning with your financial aid planning to determine the best course
of action.
Charitable Contributions
Large donations to charity are a wonderful thing, both from a moral standpoint
and a tax standpoint—but not during a base income year. When you lower your
taxes, you raise your family contribution significantly. We aren’t saying you
should stop giving to charity, but we do recommend holding off on large gifts
until after the base income years.
Extra Credits
When you are asked questions about U.S. income taxes paid on the FAFSA,
the government and the colleges are not interested in how much taxes you had
withheld during the year, or whether or not you are entitled to a refund. Instead,
they are interested in your federal income tax liability after certain tax credits are
deducted, which happens to be the amount of line 56 minus line 46 on the 2016
IRS 1040 form. While most tax credits that you claim will eventually reduce
your aid eligibility (since lower taxes mean lower expenses against income in the

formulas), the tax benefits from these credits will be much greater than the
amount of aid that is lost. As such, you should be sure to deduct any and all tax
credits that you are entitled to claim on your tax return.
Be aware that under the federal formula, any education tax credits claimed
(such as the Hope Scholarship Credit and the Lifetime Learning Credit) will not
reduce aid eligibility. While any nonrefundable education credits claimed - for
2017, these would be claimed on line 50 of the IRS Form 1040 - will reduce the
amount of U.S. income taxes paid, they will also be considered an “exclusion
from income”, which in aid speak means a deduction against income. So in
effect, any education credits claimed will reduce expenses and income by an
equal amount, thereby allowing families and students the full benefit of the Hope
Credit, the American Opportunity Credit, or the Lifetime Learning Credit. (Later
in Chapter Ten, we’ll discuss some strategies to insure you get the maximum
credits allowed by law; for now, we just want to focus on their aid impact.)
Unfortunately, the institutional formula has not been as benevolent. Since the
nonrefundable education credits are not considered an exclusion against income,
any amounts nonrefundable credits claimed will partially reduce aid eligibility.
However, the College Board will give colleges the option of having any
refundable education credits added back to the amount of U.S. income taxes
paid, so that any impact on aid will be negligible.
Currently, the Federal Methodology reduces the amount of U.S taxes paid
(reported on Line 56 of the 2016 1040) by the amount of any excess advance
premium tax credit reported on line 46 of the return. And we went to press, the
College Board had not yet decided for the IM if they would use the amount on
line 56 of the 1040 for this item—or if they would mirror the FM and deduct any
amount on line 46 from the line 56 amount. (For the IRS 1040A, the amount of
the taxes paid reported on Line 37 is reduced by line 29.)
Both the FM and IM do not consider any refundable portion of the American
Opportunity Credit to be untaxed income. These would be claimed on Line 68 of
the 2016 IRS 1040 or Line 44 of the 1040A. A nonrefundable credit can only be
claimed if a taxpayer has income tax liability, while a refundable credit can be
claimed even if the taxable income is so low that there is no resulting income tax
liability.
The Alternative Minimum Tax

Until recently, those families who were subject to the Alternative Minimum Tax
were actually penalized in the aid formulas—for while they had to pay the tax,
the formulas did not take this additional tax into account. The Alternative
Minimum Tax (AMT) is an additional tax that is incurred if certain deductions or
tax credits reduce the amount of U.S. income taxes paid below a certain level.
Many of our readers don’t have to worry about the AMT since it usually impacts
more individuals in the top income tax brackets.
But we have good news for those few readers who must pay the AMT. Federal
income taxes paid in the financial aid formulas currently includes any
Alternative Minimum Tax liability. This will generally reduce the EFC in both
the federal and institutional methodologies for those subject to the AMT, since
the amount of federal income taxes paid is a deduction against income in the
formulas.
Deduction for Social Security and Medicare
Taxes
The financial aid formulas give you a deduction for the Medicare and social
security taxes (otherwise known as FICA) that you pay. Parents often ask how
the colleges do this since there doesn’t seem to be a question about social
security taxes on the financial aid forms. The deduction is actually made
automatically by computer, but it is based on two questions on the financial aid
form. These questions are in disguise.
On the FAFSA and the PROFILE, the two questions are “father’s income
earned from work,” and “mother’s income earned from work.” At first glance
these questions appear to be about income. In fact, for tax filers these are
expense questions. If you minimize the amounts you put down here, you may
cost yourself aid.
Therefore, you should be sure to include all sources of income from work on
which you’ve paid FICA or Medicare taxes: wages (box 1 of your W-2), income
from self-employment (line 12 of the 1040), income from partnerships subject to
self-employment taxes (not including income from limited partnerships),
deferred compensation (tax-filers only), and combat pay (for servicemen and
servicewomen).

A Financial Aid Catch-22
Wages that you defer into a 401(k), 403(b), or other retirement plan are not
subject to income tax by the IRS, but you still pay social security taxes and/or
Medicare taxes on them. (For 2017, income above $127,200 is exempt from
FICA. However, there is no income ceiling on Medicare taxes.)
The strange thing is that, while the purpose of the questions regarding income
earned from work on the financial aid forms is to allow the need analysis
companies to calculate the social security and Medicare taxes you paid, the
instructions for the forms don’t tell you to include deferred income. For
example, if your income was $40,000 last year and you deferred $5,000 of it into
a 401(k), the instructions tell you to put down $35,000 as your income from
work.
Welcome to the Wacky World of Financial Aid
The instructions are wrong. It’s just that simple. Other aid professionals agree
with us. So please ignore the instructions. If you contributed any pre-tax wage
income (subject to Social Security and/or Medicare taxes) into tax-deferred
retirement accounts, include it as part of the question on income earned from
work on the FAFSA.
Will this make a real difference to your aid package? It depends on how much
you defer. Say you and your spouse defer $5,000 each, and you are in the 47th
percentile in aid assessment. By including this money as part of income earned
from work, you could increase your aid eligibility by about $380 per year.
This might seem petty, but these small amounts—$380 here, $200 there—can
add up. Put another way, this is $380 a year ($1,520 over four years) that you
may not have to borrow and pay interest on.
Note: There are two situations when you should not include your tax-deferred
contributions to retirement plans as part of income earned from work. If you do
not file a tax return, your income earned from work will be treated as an income
item when the data is processed. Since you must also include such contributions
as untaxed income on the forms, your income will be overstated in this situation.
You should also avoid adding such contributions to your income earned from
work if this would disqualify you from otherwise meeting all the criteria for the
Simplified Needs Test or the Automatic Zero-EFC (see this section).

State and Local Tax Allowance
This is another calculation that is done automatically by the need assessment
computer. The computer takes the sum of your taxable and untaxable income
and multiplies it by a certain percentage based on the state you live in to
determine your deduction. The formula for each state is slightly different. (See
Table 8.)
This works very well for people who live and work in the same state, but
presents real problems for everyone else. If you live in one state but work in
another where the taxes are higher, you may be paying more in taxes than the
formula indicates. The financial need computer isn’t programmed to deal with
situations like this, and people who don’t fit the program get penalized.
The only way to deal with this is to write to the individual colleges’ aid offices
to let them know about your special situation.
Employment Allowance
Under the federal and institutional methodologies, if you are a single parent who
works, or if you are part of a two-parent, two-income family, then you qualify
for the employment allowance. In the 2016 base income year, under the federal
formula married couples will get a deduction of 35% of the lower wage earner’s
income earned from work up to a maximum deduction of $4,000. Single parents
(i.e., separated, divorced, widowed, or never married) will get a deduction of
35% of their income earned from work up to a maximum deduction of $4,000.
The employment allowance is figured out for you automatically by the need
analysis computer based on three questions you answered on the FAFSA—
namely father’s income earned from work, mother’s income earned from work,
and of course, the question about the parent’s marital status.
As we’ve said before, while these questions look like income questions, they
are actually expense questions for tax filers. It is in your interest to make these
figures as big as possible if you will file a tax return. Remember to include all
your sources of income from work. While the College Board will not be
publishing the institutional methodology for 2018–2019, it is expected a similar
deduction will be granted.

The Income Protection Allowance
Most parents find the income protection allowance (formerly known as the
standard maintenance allowance) to be a bad joke. This is the federal financial
aid formula’s idea of how much money your family needs to house, feed, and
clothe itself during one year. According to the formula:
a family of 6 (one in college) can live on $38,880
a family of 5 (one in college) can live on $33,240
a family of 4 (one in college) can live on $28,170
a family of 3 (one in college) can live on $22,810
a family of 2 (one in college) can live on $18.320
The income protection allowance is based solely on the number of family
members currently living in the household and the number of dependent children
in college. It is determined by the U.S. government figures for the poverty line
and does not take into account the cost of living in your part of the country. (See
Table 10.)
Many parents assume that a portion of their monthly mortgage payments will
be deducted from their income on the aid formulas in much the same way as it is
on their taxes. Unfortunately, this is not the case. The income protection
allowance is supposed to include all housing expenses.
We strongly recommend that you sit down and write out a budget of how
much it actually takes to keep your family going, and send it to the individual
colleges. Include everything. In many parts of the country, the income protection
allowance is fairly ludicrous, but it is up to you to show the FAO just how
ludicrous it is in your case.
The institutional methodology uses current consumer expense survey data to
determine this allowance in the formula. While the formula is not available, in
the past the numbers have been somewhat higher than in the federal formula.
Annual Education Savings Allowance
Recognizing the fact that parents should be saving for any younger siblings’
college expenses while simultaneously financing the older child’s college

expenses, the College Board’s IM includes a deduction against income called the
Annual Education Savings Allowance. The PROFILE processor will
automatically calculate the amount of this allowance, which was 1.52% of the
parents’ total income (up to a maximum of $2,770 for the 2010–2011 formula,
which was the last year the IM was published) multiplied by the number of pre-
college children, excluding the student applicant.
Optional Expenses
Under the federal methodology, high unreimbursed medical and dental expenses
as well as elementary/secondary school tuition for the student’s siblings are no
longer automatically deducted from income. However, you are probably going to
have to answer questions about these categories anyway on both the PROFILE
form and the school’s own aid forms—the reason being that under the
institutional methodology or the schools’ own aid policies, these items may be
considered as deductions against income.
Even if you are only completing the FAFSA (which does not ask about these
items) it still makes sense to let the FAOs know about any high expenses they
would not otherwise find out about. As we have already mentioned, information
like this should be sent directly to the schools under separate cover.
Here are some tips on how to answer questions about medical and tuition
expenses.
Medical Deduction
To be able to deduct medical expenses on your federal tax return, you must have
expenses in excess of 10% of your AGI. However, college financial aid
guidelines are not necessarily as strict. Some families who don’t qualify under
federal tax law just assume they won’t qualify under the financial aid rules
either, so they enter “0” for their medical expenses on the aid forms. This can be
a costly mistake.
Here’s a quick example. Let’s say your family’s adjusted gross income is
$50,000, and you had medical expenses of $3,000. As far as the IRS is
concerned, you won’t get a medical deduction this year. Your $3,000 medical
bills fall well short of 10% of $50,000 ($5,000). However, under the financial

aid formulas, you may indeed receive a deduction against income. Under the
federal methodology, the FAOs can use their discretion for this item. Under the
institutional methodology, the rules for this expense category are more defined.
Therefore even if you don’t have enough medical and dental expenses to
qualify under the federal tax law, don’t assume that it would be a waste of time
to disclose these figures. Many colleges are using the institutional methodology
which in the past has granted an allowance for unreimbursed medical expenses
in excess of 3.5% of your income. If you are filling out the PROFILE form, there
is a place on the form to report this information. Many of the schools’ separate
financial aid forms ask for this information as well.
What Constitutes a Medical Expense?
There are more than 100 legitimate medical deductions. Here are just a few:
doctors, dentists, prescription eyeglasses, therapists, after-tax health insurance
premiums that were deducted from your paycheck or that you paid personally,
medical transportation and lodging.
Note: Self-employed individuals and owners of more than 2% of the shares of
a subchapter S corporation are better off deducting their health insurance
premiums on line 29 of the IRS 1040 form.
Whose Medical Expenses Can Be Included?
You should include medical expenses for every single member of your
household, not just the student who is going to college. When families come in
to see us, they inevitably start out by saying that they do not have much in the
way of unreimbursed medical expenses.
However, when we get them to write it all down, it often turns out to be a
hefty sum. Keep careful records and include EVERYTHING. Did you take a cab
to and from the doctor’s office? Did anyone get braces? Did anyone get contact
lenses?
And If We Have Very Low Medical Expenses?

Congratulations, but keep records anyway. The schools who use the PROFILE
form will still see the amount you put down, and you may have to answer
questions about these items on the schools’ own aid forms. You might as well
give the FAOs a realistic sense of what your monthly bills look like.
Last Medical Point
We recommend that if you don’t have medical expenses in excess of 3.5% of
your total taxable and untaxable income each year, you might consider
postponing some discretionary medical procedures and advancing others, in
order to bunch your deductions together and pass the 3.5% mark during one
particular year. This might seem at first to fly in the face of conventional
wisdom. Facing the burden of college, many parents’ first thought would be to
put off braces for a younger child, for example. In fact, if you are in a base
income year, it makes much more sense to get them now. Once you reach the
3.5% threshold, each dollar in excess may increase your aid eligibility by 47
cents.
Finally, if you anticipate large medical bills in the near future, you should
certainly let the colleges know what’s coming up.
Elementary and Secondary School Tuition
If the child going to college will have a younger brother or sister concurrently
attending a private elementary or secondary school, you may be able to get a
deduction for part of the tuition you pay for the private school during the
academicyear. Neither the federal nor the institutional methodologies provide an
automatic deduction, but the PROFILE form and many of the individual college
aid forms do ask questions about this category. The FAOs are supposed to use
their judgment in deciding whether to make any deduction for younger
children’s tuition.
Obviously, you can’t include the private high school tuition of the child who is
now applying to college, because next year the student won’t be there anymore.
You are also not allowed to include the cost of pre-school (unless specified on
the school’s aid form). Nor can you include college tuition of other siblings.
(Don’t worry. If you have more than one child in college at the same time, this

will be taken into account elsewhere.) When you write down the amount you pay
in elementary and secondary school tuition, remember to subtract any
scholarship money you receive.
In past years, the College Board’s IM was interested in payments for siblings
during the calendar year. Beginning with the 2017-2018 version of the
PROFILE, the questions will now pertain to payments made during a particular
academic year.
Keeping Track of Information
What makes all this complicated is that some of the schools you will be applying
to will require just the FAFSA (which does not ask about medical expenses and
siblings’ tuition), others will also require the PROFILE form (which asks about
medical expenses and siblings’ tuition), and others will have their own forms as
well. It’s easy to forget which schools know what information.
If you apply to a school that requires only the FAFSA, they will not see any of
the information you filled out on your PROFILE form. If that school does not
ask questions about items such as unreimbursed medical expenses on their own
aid form, and you consider this information important, you should send it to the
school under separate cover.
In addition, some state grant aid programs will increase award amounts if you
send them proof of high medical expenses.
Good News for a Few Parents
The IRS will not allow you to deduct child support payments from your taxable
income (although they do allow you to deduct alimony payments). However, the
colleges do allow a deduction for the payment of child support, under both the
FM and IM (excluding support paid for children in the household). The same is
true for any part of your taxable income that consists of financial aid received by
a parent in school.
So Far So Good

Now that you’ve given the need analysis people all this information, they will
add up all your taxable and untaxable income and then subtract all the expenses
and adjustments they have decided to allow. What’s left is your available
income.
Available income will be assessed on a sliding scale. If your available income
is zero (or less), the parents’ contribution from income will be zero. If your
available income is greater, the contribution will be greater. The parents’
contribution from income can go only as high as 47% of available income under
the federal formula and as high as 46% under the institutional methodology.
If you are applying to colleges that require the PROFILE form (and thus use
the institutional methodology) the parents’ contribution from income may be
higher or lower than it would be under the federal methodology.
Income and Expenses: How the Methodologies
Differ
FEDERAL METHODOLOGY
• Excludes medical/dental expenses
• Income protection allowance based on poverty line figures from the
1960s, adjusted for inflation
• Excludes all untaxed social security benefits, the earned income
credit, the additional child credit, welfare benefits, the foreign
income exclusion, and the credit for federal tax on special fuels
INSTITUTIONAL METHODOLOGY
• Provides an allowance for unreimbursed medical and dental
expenses in excess of a percentage of income. (Based on historical
data—as the formula is no longer published—which has been 3.5%
for the past few years’ versions of the IM)
• Excludes any untaxed social security benefits received for the
student

• Income protection allowance based on current consumer
expenditure survey data
• Provides a set-aside for younger siblings’ educational costs
• Adds back losses that appear on lines 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, and 21 of
the 2015 IRS 1040
• Considers pre-tax flex-plan contributions for medical spending
accounts and dependent care to be untaxed income. However,
individual schools will have to option to exclude both from income
—as well as deductible contributions to Health Savings Accounts
(IRS 1040 Line 25)
• Gives colleges the option of making an allowance for
elementary/secondary tuition paid for the student’s siblings
• No Automatic Zero-EFC or Simplified Needs Test
• Education tax credits reduce aid eligibility, unless the school
chooses to have them added back to U.S. income taxes paid
• Considers the amount claimed for the tuition and fees deduction as
untaxed income
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES
Now that the need analysis companies know about your available income, they
want to know about your assets and liabilities. On the standardized financial aid
forms, these two items are joined at the hip. Liabilities are subtracted from assets
to determine your net assets. In a nutshell, the strategies you will find in this
section are designed to make the value of your assets look as small as possible,
and the debts against your assets as large as possible.
What Counts as an Asset?
Cash, checking and savings accounts, money market accounts, CDs, U.S.

Savings Bonds, Educational IRAs, stocks, other bonds, mutual funds, trusts,
ownership interests in businesses, and the current market value of real estate
holdings other than your home.
None of these items appear directly on your tax return. However, your tax
return will still provide the colleges with an excellent way to verify these assets.
How? Most assets create income and/or tax deductions, both of which do appear
on your 1040 in the form of capital gains, capital losses, interest, dividends, and
itemized deductions under schedule A.
Assets in insurance policies and retirement provisions such as IRAs, Keoghs,
annuities, and 401(k)s are generally not assessed in the aid formulas (though as
we have already said, voluntary tax-deductible contributions to retirement
provisions made during base income years must be listed as part of untaxed
income). Cars are also excluded from the formula and don’t have to be listed on
the form. Coverdell ESAs (formerly known as Education IRAs) and Section 529
plans have some interesting quirks which we’ll explain shortly.
What About My Home?
Under the federal methodology, the value of your home is not considered part of
your assets. This is great news and will help many families who own their own
home to qualify for a Pell Grant and other federal aid programs. However, many
colleges are using the more stringent institutional methodology to award their
own funds. Under this formula, the value of your home will not be excluded
from your assets.
Which schools will exclude the value of your home? It’s safe to say that most
state schools will do so. If a school asks you to complete the PROFILE form
and/or asks you for the value of your home on their own aid form, then most
likely the value of the home is going to be treated like other assets. You can bet
that the highly selective private colleges that meet a high percentage of their
financial aid students’ need, will be looking closely at home equity. Other private
colleges may or may not.
However, even if you’re considering colleges that have decided to look at
home value, the news is not all bad. Starting with the 2003–2004 award year, 28
highly selective private colleges and universities agreed to cap home value at 2.4
times the parents’ total yearly income. In other words, if you earn $50,000 for
the year, at these schools the value of your home (for assessment purposes) will

be considered to be no more than $120,000 ($50,000 x 2.4)—even if you own a
home worth $200,000.
It appears that the actions by these schools has had a “trickle down” effect as
more and more schools that used to look at the full value of the home have
ceased taking the total home equity into account when awarding their own aid
funds. Some schools, including a number of those 28 schools, have more
recently decided to cap the amount of home equity at two times income, while
others will no longer assess home equity at all or will not assess it if the family’s
income is below a certain level.
One of the questions you may want to ask the FAO at any school you are
considering is the way(s) they will treat home value—not at all, only if the
income exceeds a certain amount, with the value capped at a certain percentage
of income, with the equity capped at a particular percentage of income, or at full
value.
Under the federal methodology, the definition of “home” is the primary
residence. If you own a vacation home in addition to your primary residence, the
vacation home will not be excluded from your assets. If you own a vacation
home, and you rent your primary residence, the value of the vacation home will
still not be excluded under the federal formula—as it is considered “other real
estate.”
What About My Farm?
The value of your farm is not included as an asset under the federal methodology
provided that the family lives on the farm and you can claim on Schedule F of
the IRS 1040 that you “materially participated in the farm’s operation.” The Feds
call this type of farm a “family farm.” We’ll discuss how to handle this situation
in Part Three, “Filling Out the Standardized Forms.” Under the institutional
methodology, the value of any farm property is considered an asset.
How Much Are My Assets Worth?
To repeat, the need analysis form is a snapshot of your financial situation. The
value of most assets (with the exception of money in the bank) changes
constantly, as financial markets rise and fall. The colleges want to know the

value of your assets on the day you fill out the form.
Remember, This is One Snapshot for Which You
Don’t Want to Look Your Best
When people sit down to fill out financial statements they have a tendency to
want to put their best foot forward. After all, most of the time when you fill out
one of these forms it is because you are applying for a credit card, or a bank
loan, or hoping to be accepted by a country club or an exclusive condominium.
Trying to look as fiscally healthy as possible has become almost automatic.
However, you have to remember that in this case you are applying for financial
aid. They aren’t going to give it to you if you don’t let them see the whole
picture, warts and all. On the financial aid form, you don’t want to gloss over
your debts.
What Counts as a Debt?
The only debts that are considered under the financial aid formulas are debts
against the specific assets listed on the aid forms.
For example, you do NOT get credit for: unsecured loans, personal loans,
educational loans like Stafford or PLUS loans for college, consumer debt such as
outstanding credit card balances, or auto loans. If you have any debt of these
types, you should realize that it will NOT be subtracted from your assets under
the financial aid formulas.
It will be to your advantage to minimize these types of debt during the college
years. In fact, you may want to convert these loans into debts that do get credit
under the financial aid formulas.
You DO get credit for: margin loans, passbook loans, as well as home equity
loans, first mortgages, and second mortgages on “other real estate.” Of course,
you will only get credit for debts on your primary residence if the college has
decided to look at your home value.
Tip #13: Convert debts that are not counted by the aid formulas
into types of debt that do count.

Let’s go through the different types of assets you have to report and discuss
strategies for minimizing the appearance of those assets.
Cash, Checking Accounts, Savings Accounts
The need analysis forms ask you to list any money in your accounts on the day
you fill out the forms. However, you can’t list this money if it isn’t there.
We are not counseling you to go on a spending spree, but if you were planning
to make a major purchase in the near future, you might as well make it now. If
roof repairs are looming, if you can prepay your summer vacation, if you were
going to buy a new car sometime in the next year, do it now, and pay cash. You
were going to make these purchases anyway. By speeding up the purchase, you
reduce the appearance of your cash assets.
Tip #14: If you were going to buy soon, buy now and use cash.
Another way to reduce assets in the bank is to use the cash to pay off a
liability that the colleges refuse to look at.
Plastic Debt
If you have credit card debt, your need analysis form won’t give a realistic
picture of your net worth, because as far as the colleges are concerned, plastic
debt doesn’t exist. You could owe thousands of dollars on your VISA card, but
the aid formula does not allow you to subtract this debt from your assets, or to
subtract the interest on the debt from your income.
Any financial advisor will tell you that if you have any money in the bank at
all, it is crazy not to pay off your credit card debt. Recently we had one parent
say to us, “But it makes me feel secure to have $7,000 in the bank. I know I
could pay my $2,000 MasterCard bill, but then I would have only $5,000 left.”
There are three reasons why this is wrong-headed thinking.

First, any way you look at it, that parent really did have only $5,000. It is a
complete illusion to think that you have more money just because you can see it
in your bank account at the moment.
Second, this guy’s $2,000 credit card debt was costing him a lot of money—
12% each year. This was 12% that could not be deducted from income on his
taxes or on his financial aid form. Meanwhile, the $2,000 he was keeping in the
bank because it made him feel better, was earning all of 1% after taxes. He was
being taken to the cleaners.
Third, and most important, by paying off his credit card debt he could reduce
his net assets on the need analysis form, and pick up some more aid.
Tip #15: Use cash in the bank to pay off credit card balances.
This will reduce your assets and thus increase your eligibility for
aid.
Your Tax Bill
If you did not have enough tax withheld from your wages this year, and you will
end up owing the IRS money, consider speeding up the completion of your taxes
so that you can send in your return—with a check—before you complete the
need analysis form.
If you are self-employed, you might consider prepaying your next quarterly
estimate. The IRS is always pleased to receive the money early. You will lose out
on the interest the money would have earned if it had stayed in your account a
little longer, but this will probably be more than offset by your increased aid
eligibility.
Tip #16: Use cash in the bank to pay off tax bills to reduce your
assets and increase your eligibility for aid.
You will notice on the FAFSA that next to the item “cash, savings, and

checking accounts,” there is no mention of debts as there is for the other asset
categories on the form. For the most part, you can’t have debts on these kinds of
assets. There is one exception.

Passbook Loans
With a passbook loan, you use your savings account as collateral for a loan. This
is a legitimate debt against your asset. To get credit for the debt, you should
include your savings account and the debt against it under “investments” (on the
FAFSA) and under “investments” (on the PROFILE form).
IRAs, Keoghs, 401(k)s, 403(b)s
In most cases, money that you contribute to a retirement provision—such as an
IRA, Keogh, 401(k), or 403(b)—before the base income years begin is
completely sheltered from the FAOs. That money isn’t part of the snapshot; they
can’t touch it.
However, as we stated in our section on income, contributions that reduce
your Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) made during base income years are a
different story. While the IRS may allow you to deduct retirement provisions
from your income, the financial aid formula does not. During base income years,
voluntary tax-deductible contributions to these plans will be assessed just like
regular income; they will be considered as part of your untaxed income that will
be added to your AGI to help determine your total income in the aid formulas.
(Note: non-deductible contributions have no impact on aid)
This does not mean that retirement provisions are a complete waste of time
during the college years. To see the big picture, it helps to remember that the aid
formula assesses both your income and your assets. Let’s say a family had
$30,000 in income last year. The FAOs will assess the $30,000 as income. Then,
if any of that $30,000 is left in the bank on the day the family fills out the need
analysis form, it will also be assessed a second time as an asset. However, if that
family had made a contribution to a deductible IRA before filling out the need
analysis form, the contribution would have been assessed at most, only once —
as untaxed income (assuming the contribution reduced your AGI for a base
income year. It would not be required to be listed as part of your assets on the
FAFSA because the funds in retirement accounts are not a reportable asset
category for purposes of that form. And while the CSS does include questions

about the value of tax-deferred retirement accounts, funds in such accounts are
not assessed as an asset in the IM; and the overwhelming majority of schools
that require the PROFILE do not consider such accounts when awarding aid.
A tax deductible contribution to a retirement provision that reduces your AGI
for a base income year will always be assessed as income, but it will never be
assessed as an asset—so long as you make the contribution before you fill out
the need analysis form.
Thus retirement provisions are still a good way to shelter assets while building
your retirement fund and possibly getting a tax deduction all at the same time. If
you can afford to keep contributing during college years, it will be to your
benefit. But when during the year should you make the contribution?
Timing on IRA Contributions
The IRS allows you to make contributions to an IRA from January 1 of one year
through April 15 of the following year. Many people wait until after they’ve
done their taxes in March or April to make a contribution to an IRA for the
preceding year. Unfortunately, if you make the contribution after you fill out the
financial aid form, the money won’t be shielded from the FAOs.
In fact it makes sense to make retirement provisions as soon as possible in a
calendar year. Not only will you shelter the money itself from assessment as an
asset but you will also shelter the interest earned by that money: If you leave that
money in a regular bank account for most of the year, the interest will have to be
reported on the need analysis form as regular income. Your AGI will be larger,
and your financial aid package will be correspondingly smaller. By making the
contribution early in the year, the interest earned by that contribution will be out-
of-bounds to the FAOs. How much money are we talking about? A married
couple that makes an allowable IRA contribution of $6,405 on January 1 of a
base income year instead of April 15 of the next year can increase its aid
eligibility by as much as $400 each year.
Tip #17: Make your contributions to retirement provisions as
early in the year as possible.

Other Retirement Provision Strategies
Let’s say it’s January of a new year. You go to see your accountant and she says,
“You’ve got some extra money. Let’s make an IRA contribution. Which year do
you want to take the contribution in?” Remember, the IRS allows you to make
contributions to an IRA from January 1 (well, realistically January 2; the banks
and brokerage houses are all closed on January 1) all the way through April 15
of the next year. That means there are three and a half months during which you
can contribute to either the preceding year or the year you are in now. In which
year do you make the contribution?
If Possible, Contribute to Both Years
The following section assumes that you have not yet completed the FAFSA form.
Contrary to conventional wisdom, financial aid is not awarded by most schools
and state agencies on a first-come first-serve basis. Later in Part Three of this
book we will explain the optimal time for completing and submitting the forms -
and those particular situations in which you should be filing the FAFSA as soon
as possible once the FAFSA for the next school year becomes available on
October 1st. If any of those specific situations is applicable for the student, then
you should not delay filing the aid forms to be able to implement the strategy
that follows in the next paragraph.
Let’s say this is your child’s senior year in high school. You are just about to fill
out a FAFSA. From January 2 through April 15, you can contribute to the year
that has just ended (in this case, the base income year) and the year that is just
beginning. If you are married, you and your spouse can make an IRA
contribution of up to $11,000 ($13,000 if you and your spouse are both 50 years
of age or older) toward last year, and up to $11,000 ($13,000 if you and your
spouse are both 50 years of age or older) toward the year that has just begun. By
making these contributions before you sign the need analysis form, you can
completely shelter up to $22,000 ($26,000 if you and your spouse are both 50
years of age or older) in assets from the scrutiny of the FAOs. This is such a
good deal that you might even want to consider making an IRA contribution
even if it isn’t tax deductible.

We Don’t Have $22,000. We Might Not Even Have
Enough to Make IRA Contributions Every Year.
Many people don’t contribute the maximum allowed amount into their
retirement accounts every year. Many people don’t contribute anything in a
given year. Sometimes, of course, you just haven’t got it. Other times, it is a
matter of which year it makes the most sense tax-wise to make the contribution:
During College Years, Some Tax Strategies Have
to Change
Why shouldn’t you make retirement contributions based solely on tax
considerations? It’s all in the numbers. Remember our IRA example from the
“Expenses” section of this chapter? Given a choice of making a tax-deductible
contribution to an IRA in a base income year or a non–base income year, you
were better off making the contribution in the non–base income year. Tax-wise,
there was no real difference, but by concentrating your taxes into the base
income year, you effectively raised your expenses during the year the colleges
were looking at it, and thus lowered your expected family contribution.
Parents and accountants find this hard to believe. “How could an IRA
contribution possibly hurt a family’s chances for aid?” they demand.
Federal income tax is an expense that is deducted from your total income
under the aid formula. A tax-deductible retirement provision contribution
reduces your tax. Reduced taxes increase your available income, and thus
increase the amount of money the colleges think you can afford to fork over for
tuition next year.
You’re Saying Parents Should Try to Pay More
Taxes?
Never. But by concentrating your taxes into the base income years, you can end
up paying the same amount in taxes over the course of time while lowering the
amount you have to pay for college.

The Big Picture
Extrapolating from this, if you were to load up on tax-deductible contributions to
retirement provisions over the course of several years prior to the first base
income year, and then avoided contributions to retirement provisions completely
during the base income years, you could end up paying about the same amount
in taxes over the years, but you would have made yourself eligible for far more
financial aid.
Tip #18a: If you can, try to load up your contributions to
retirement provisions in the years prior to base income years.
Let’s take the hypothetical case of Mr. Jones. Mr. Jones is doing pretty well:
He has a substantial regular savings account, and every year he contributes
$1,500 to his 401(k) plan at work. Over the next seven years, he figures he will
be able to contribute $10,500 to the retirement provision. His daughter is
entering college in five years. Before the start of the first base income year, Mr.
Jones will have sheltered only $4,500 in his retirement plan. The FAOs will
assess his entire regular savings account at the maximum asset rate. His pre-tax
$1,500 401(k) contribution that effectively reduces his AGI for that base income
year will lower his taxes a bit (thereby reducing his expenses against income in
the FM and IM, but not his total income for aid purposes since the contribution
is added back to one’s AGI as untaxed income. ) This would mean that his
available income (after expenses and allowances) in those aid formulas will be
just a bit higher, which will raise the EFC.
Consider what would have happened if Mr. Jones had contributed the same
$10,500 to his 401(k) but had arranged to lump it all into the three years before
the first base income year. Over the seven years his total tax bill would turn out
to be about the same as before, but everything else would be very different. Now
he would have $10,500 sheltered in his retirement plan. In order to make the
contributions over only three years, he would probably have to take some money
out of his savings account—but that’s actually good news because it would
reduce his assets in the eyes of the FAOs. During the four base income years,
Mr. Jones wouldn’t have to contribute to his retirement fund at all—this means
that amount of federal income taxes paid (which are an expense item in the FM

and IM aid formulas) would be concentrated into these years that would lower
his EFC.
Mr. Jones had only $10,500 to contribute over seven years. However, by
changing the timing of his contributions, he made them much more valuable.
This strategy will work only if your voluntary contributions to retirement
provisions are tax deductible. If you won’t qualify for the tax break (because you
contribute after-tax funds), you won’t be able to concentrate your taxes into the
base income years. However, the expense item for the amount of federal income
taxes paid won’t be reduced either.
The Big, Big Picture
Mr. Jones (like most of us) could not afford to contribute the maximum amounts
allowed by the law to retirement provisions; therefore it made sense to plan the
timing of the contributions to get the most aid. However, if you can afford to
make maximum contributions to IRAs, Keoghs, 401(k)s, or 401(b)s in every
single year, it is in your interest to do so. This will enable you to shelter the
largest amount of assets, and also build a sizable retirement fund.
However, Before You Frame the Picture
The only reason not to follow the advice we’ve just given you is you Adjusted
Gross Income for a base income year will be just over $50,000 and you are
otherwise eligible to qualify for the Simplified Needs Test (SNT). In this case,
by making tax-deductible and/or pre-tax contributions to retirement provisions
during the base income years, you could lower your AGI to below the $50,000
magic number for the Simplified Needs Test. As we said earlier, anyone who
meets the SNT will have all assets excluded for federal aid purposes. The same
situation applies if such a contribution will lower your AGI below the $25,000
threshold for the Automatic-Zero EFC.
You would have to work out the numbers very closely on this to see if it really
makes sense. Factors to consider: how much you have in the way of assets; does
the school look at your assets anyway in awarding their own aid funds; the
difference in your EFC with the SNT or Automatic-Zero EFC or not qualifying
for those items. Since these factors are all pretty complicated, consider

discussing this with a financial aid consultant.
Tip #18b: If a contribution to a retirement provision will lower
your AGI for a base income to below the income threshold for the
SNT or the Automatic-Zero EFC and you otherwise qualify for the
SNT or the Automatic Zero EFC (see this page), you should load
up your contributions to retirement provisions during that base
income year.
Prying Colleges
Although the FAFSA doesn’t ask questions about the money in parents’
retirement provisions or insurance policies, a few private colleges ask for this
information on their own forms. Short of refusing to apply to these colleges,
there is nothing you can do but supply the information gracefully. Unless you
have several hundreds of thousands of dollars of these assets, however, there
should be little effect on your family contribution. (While the PROFILE now
asks questions regarding retirement accounts, such assets are not assessed in the
IM.)
They Won’t Give Aid to Us—We Own Our Own
Home
One of the biggest myths about financial aid is that parents who own their own
home will not qualify for aid. This is not the case at all. As we have already
mentioned, the federal methodology (used to award Pell Grants and other federal
aid programs) does not look at home equity anymore. While many private
colleges and some state universities continue to use home equity in determining
eligibility for their own aid programs, it has been our experience that most
homeowners—even in this situation—do get aid. In some cases, this will be true
even if they have several properties, if they apply for it in the right way.

Real Estate Strategies
Because we know that many of our readers will be applying to schools that
assess home equity in awarding the funds under their own control, the next few
sections of this chapter will suggest strategies that focus on both your primary
residence and any other real estate you may own.
If none of the schools you are considering assess home equity, then the
following strategies will apply only to your other real estate holdings.
Valuing the Property—Be Realistic
Figuring out the value of your home can be difficult. Is it worth what your
neighbors down the street sold their’s for last week? Is it worth what someone
offered you three years ago? Is it worth the appraised value on your insurance
policy? Figuring out the value of other properties can be even more difficult,
especially if you rarely see them.
You want to try to be as accurate as possible. The temptation to over-represent
the value of your real estate should be firmly controlled. The forms are asking
for the value of the property if you had to sell it right this minute, today—not
what you would get for it if you had a leisurely six months to find a buyer. If you
had to sell it in a hurry—at firesale prices—how much is it worth? Remember
also that there are always attendant costs when you sell a property: painting and
remodeling, possible early payment penalties for liquidating your mortgage, real
estate agent’s commission. If the colleges want to know what your real estate is
worth, these costs should be taken into account. Be realistic. Inflating the price
of your property beyond what it is really worth will reduce your aid eligibility.
At the same time, you don’t want to under-represent the value either. The
colleges have verification procedures to prevent parents from lowballing. One of
the procedures: the PROFILE form asks when you purchased your home and
how much you paid for it. The analysis computer will then feed these numbers
into the Federal Housing Index Multiplier to see whether your current valuation
is within reasonable norms. Some schools have also started to use zillow.com to
value properties.
Equity

Ultimately, what your real estate is worth is much less important than how much
equity you’ve built up in it. Your equity is the current market value of your real
estate minus what you owe on it (mortgages, home equity loan balances, debts
secured by the home). Let’s assume for a moment that two families are looking
at a private college that considers home equity as an asset. All other things being
equal, the family with a $100,000 house fully paid up would probably pay a
higher family contribution to that college than the family with a $300,000 house
with a $250,000 mortgage. Sounds crazy? Not really. The first family has built
up equity of $100,000; the second family has equity of only $50,000.
Parents often don’t remember when they are filling out the need analysis
forms that their first mortgage need not be their only debt against their property.
Did you, for example, borrow money from your parents to make a down
payment? Have you taken out a home improvement loan? Have you borrowed
against a home equity loan line of credit? Is there a sewer assessment? All of
these are also legitimate debts against the value of your real estate.
If you are a part-owner in any property, obviously you should list only your
share of the equity in that property.
The Home Equity Loan: A Possible Triple Play
One of the smarter ways to pay for college is the home equity loan. A home
equity loan is a line of credit, secured, most likely, by the equity in your home.
Of course, it is also possible to get a home equity loan using one of your other
properties as collateral. You draw checks against this line of credit, up to the full
value of the loan, but you pay no interest until you write a check, and you pay
interest only on the amount that you actually borrow.
There are three possible benefits to a home equity loan. First, in most cases
you get a tax deduction for the interest you pay. Few other types of debt are now
tax deductible. Second, you temporarily reduce the equity in your property,
which, in turn, lowers your net assets, which lowers your family contribution—
provided, of course, that the loan is taken against a property that is being
considered an asset by the college. Third, because it is a secured loan, the
interest rates are fairly low. As always, you should consult with your accountant
or financial planner on this.
If you have any outstanding loans that cannot be used as a deduction under the
financial aid formulas (personal loans, car loans, large credit card balances, etc.),

it might make sense to use a home equity line of credit to pay off these other
obligations. The interest rate will probably be lower, you will most likely be able
to deduct the interest payments on your tax return, and the value of one of your
prime assets may look smaller to the FAOs.
Which Property Should I Borrow Against?
If you have only one property, the decision is easy. Borrow against your one
property. You’ll almost certainly get a tax deduction and a low interest rate.
Whether you will reduce your equity in the eyes of the FAOs depends on
whether they have decided to assess the value of the primary residence—and if
so whether they are choosing to assess it at full market value or at a lower rate.
If your college is actually going to follow the federal methodology, a home
equity loan on a primary residence would no longer help you to qualify for more
aid (although the tax and interest savings still may make it a good idea). If you
own two homes, take out the loan on the second residence instead.
If your prospective colleges are using the institutional methodology and
electing to cap home value at 2.4 times income (and a number of private colleges
will be), the effectiveness of our strategy will depend on how much equity you
have in your home. Let’s take a family with income of $60,000 and a home
valued at $200,000, with a $100,000 mortgage. At schools that choose to cap the
home value at 2.4 times income, the maximum value of this family’s home
would be 2.4 times $60,000 or $144,000. The colleges will subtract the $100,000
debt from the $144,000 asset and decree that the family has equity of $44,000 —
which the colleges feel is available to help pay for college, and will assess at a
rate of up to 5% per year. In this case, it would still make sense to take out a
home equity loan of up to $44,000 to reduce the appearance of equity in the
house.
However, let’s take a family with a combined income of $60,000, a home
valued at $300,000 and a mortgage of $200,000. If the schools choose to cap
home value at 2.4 times income, the maximum value for the house (for
assessment purposes) is $144,000. The colleges then subtract the mortgage of
$200,000. In this case, there is, in fact, no equity at all in the home as far as
those colleges are concerned. Thus, if this family took out a home equity loan on
their primary residence, their assets would not be reduced in the eyes of the
colleges (since as far as the colleges are concerned, the family has no equity in

the house in the first place). To reduce the appearance of their assets, this family
could borrow instead against a second home, other real estate, or their stock
portfolio.
If the schools you are considering either use a cap on home value or a cap on
home equity, our tips #2 through #11 (which describe ways to lower the
appearance of your Adjusted Gross Income) become even more important.
Lowering your AGI will keep your capped home value or capped home equity
down, and may thus protect more of the value of your home from the FAOs.
Tip #19a: Take out a home equity loan to pay for college and/or
to consolidate debt not taken into account in the aid formulas.
A home equity loan is not something to be done lightly. Unlike unsecured
loans and credit card balances, a home equity loan uses your real estate as
collateral. If you default, the bank can foreclose. Nonetheless, if you have a low
mortgage to begin with and your income seems stable, this is an excellent
alternative.
A Home Equity Loan vs. a Second Mortgage
When you take out a second mortgage, the bank writes you a check for a fixed
amount, and you begin paying it back immediately with interest. Parents
sometimes ask, “Isn’t a second mortgage just as good as a home equity loan?” It
depends on what you’re going to do with the money you get from the loan. If
you put it in the bank to pay for college bills as they come due, then a second
mortgage is not as good at all. Consider: You are paying interest on the entire
amount of the loan, but you aren’t really using it yet. The money will earn
interest, but it will not earn nearly as much interest as you are paying out. For
financial aid purposes, the interest you earn will be considered income, yet the
interest you are paying on the second mortgage will not be taken into account as
an expense.
Even worse, if the money you received from your second mortgage is just
sitting in the bank, the debt does not reduce your net assets either. The reduced
equity in your house will be offset by the increased money in your bank account.

Under these circumstances, a home equity line of credit loan is a much better
deal. You pay interest only when you withdraw money, and you withdraw only
what you need.
But if the school you select has opted not to look at home equity, then a
second mortgage becomes the worst deal in the world. You will have taken an
asset that the college could not touch and converted it into an asset with no
protection at all. This could actually raise your EFC by several thousand dollars.
Should We Buy a House Now?
We’re all for it if you want to buy a house, but don’t think of it as an automatic
strategy for reducing your assets in the eyes of the FAOs. If the school assesses
home equity, then exchanging the money in your bank account for a down
payment on a house just shifts your assets around, rather than making them
disappear. Your net assets will be exactly the same with or without the house (at
least until the house starts appreciating in value). On top of that, your monthly
housing costs will probably increase. As you may remember from the
“Expenses” section of this chapter, you don’t get credit in the aid formulas for
mortgage payments.
However, if the school uses only the federal methodology or excludes home
equity, then a first-time home purchase could make a lot of sense. You would be
exchanging an unprotected asset for an asset that could not be touched.
By the same token, it might also make sense to prepay or pay down the
mortgage on your primary residence since this will reduce your net assets in the
federal formula. You will need to consider any prepayment penalties you may
incur before you pursue this course of action.
Tip 19b: If the college your child will attend does not look at
home equity, consider buying a primary residence if you currently
rent. If you already own your primary residence, consider
liquidating unprotected assets to prepay your home mortgage.

The Perils of Inheritance and Gifts from
Grandparents
Many accountants suggest that elderly parents put assets in their children’s
name. In this way, the elderly parents more readily qualify for government
benefits such as Medicaid; they avoid having their investments eaten up by
catastrophic illness; and, if they are wealthy, their heirs avoid having their
inheritance eaten up by estate taxes.
If a grandparent is contemplating putting assets in the parents’ name, the
parents should at least consider the possible financial aid consequences before
accepting. Obviously, such a transfer will inflate your assets and possibly your
income as well (the interest on monetary assets could be considerable). In many
cases, while the grandparents may have transferred their assets to the parents, the
parents do not feel that this money really belongs to them yet. When
grandparents decide to move to a nursing home, or need health care not provided
by insurance, the parents often pay the expenses. Since the money is not really
yours to spend, you may feel dismayed when the colleges ask you to pony it up
for tuition.
If it is possible to delay the transfer of assets until you no longer have to
complete aid forms, you might wish to do so. Or perhaps the assets could be put
in the name of another relative who does not have college-age children. If that is
impossible, you should explain to the FAOs that this money really does not yet
belong to you.
An even worse situation arises when grandparents transfer assets to the
grandchild’s name. These assets will be assessed at a much higher rate than those
of the parents (20% versus a maximum of 5.65%). If the only possible choice
left to you is to put the grandparents’ gift in the name of the parent or the child, it
is better to put it in the parents’ name.
Trusts
While trusts have much to recommend them, their effect on the financial aid
formulas can be disastrous. We are not speaking of the general feeling among
FAOs that “trust fund babies don’t need aid” (although this is a pervasive
feeling).

The real problem is that the FAOs assume the entire amount in the trust is
available to be tapped even if the trust has been set up so that the principal can’t
be touched. Let’s see how this works:
Suppose your child Johnny has a $10,000 trust, which has been prudently set
up so that he can’t touch the principal, a common practice. He gets a payment
from the trust every year until he reaches age 25, at which time he gets the
remaining balance in the trust. Parents often set up trusts this way under the
mistaken impression that the colleges will thus never be able to get at the
principal.
However, because the money is in his name, it is assessed for his freshman
year at 20% in the federal formula, or $2,000. Never mind that Johnny can’t get
$2,000 out of the trust. He, or more likely you, will have to come up with the
money from somewhere else.
Next year, the need analysis company looks at the trust again, and sees that it
still contains $10,000. So it gets assessed at 20% again, and again Johnny gets
up to $2,000 less in aid.
If this continues for the four years of college, and it will, Johnny’s $10,000
asset may have cost you $8,000 in aid. The trust may have prevented you from
getting aid entirely, but couldn’t actually be used to pay for college.
Don’t Put Your Trust in Trusts
If you are counting on any kind of financial aid and you have any control over a
trust that is being set up for your child, prevent it from happening. If a
grandparent wants to help pay for schooling, the best way to do this is to wait
until the child has finished college. Then the grandparent can help pay back the
student loans when they become due.
If a trust has to be set up, make sure at least that it is set up so that the
principal money can be withdrawn if necessary. You might also consider setting
the trust up in your own name. Parents’ assets are assessed at the much lower
rate of 5.65% each year.
Setting up a trust that matures just as your child is entering college would at
least ensure that the money could be used to pay for tuition. However, if the trust
is sizable, you may be jeopardizing any chance to receive financial aid.
If Grandmother wants to provide for Johnny’s entire education, but doesn’t

want to wait until after graduation, perhaps a better idea would be for her to take
advantage of one of the prepayment plans being offered by a growing number of
colleges. We generally don’t think a prepayment plan makes economic sense
(see Chapter Seven), but in this one case, it would be infinitely better than a
restrictive trust.
Direct Payments to the School
If you are in the happy position of having a rich uncle who wants to pay for part
of your child’s college education, he can avoid paying gift tax on the money
(even if it is above the $14,000 annual limit) by writing the check directly to the
school. However, he and you should realize that if your uncle is paying less than
the entire amount of the tuition, this won’t necessarily save you any money.
If you are eligible for aid and you receive any money from a third party
toward college, the FAOs will treat this money like a scholarship. They will
simply reduce the amount of aid they were going to give you by the size of your
uncle’s payment. Your family contribution will probably remain exactly the
same.
If your uncle wants to be of maximum help, he could wait until your child is
finished with college and then give you the money. If you were going to qualify
for aid, this would ensure that you actually got it. You can then use your uncle’s
money to pay off any loans you’ve taken out along the way.
Stocks, Bonds, Money Market Accounts, and
CDs
The need analysis forms ask for the value of your assets on the day you fill out
the forms. For stocks and bonds, you can find the prices online or by consulting
your broker. Remember that bonds are not worth their face value until they
mature. Until that time, they are worth only what someone is willing to pay for
them at a given moment.
In the aid formulas, debts against these assets reduce your net assets.
However, the only real debt you can have against these types of assets is a
margin debt.

Many parents shudder when they hear the word margin. “Oh, that’s just for
people who really play the market,” they say. In fact, this is not true at all, and
margin debt may be one of the more sensible approaches to paying for college if
you run out of liquid assets. Here’s how it works:
In most cases, you set up a margin account with a brokerage firm. Using stock
that you own as collateral, they will lend you a certain amount of money.
Traditionally, you would then use this money to buy more stock. However, there
are no rules that say you have to buy stock—these days, the brokerage firms are
just as happy to cut you a check for the full amount of the loan.
Because this is a secured loan based on the value of your stock portfolio, the
interest rates are far superior to unsecured personal loans. You still own the
stock, and it continues to do whatever it was going to do. (Out of all the long-
term investment possibilities, the stock market has been the single best way to
build principal over the past 50 years.) In most cases, you get to deduct the
interest expense against your income on your tax return. And—here’s the beauty
part—you get to deduct the entire loan from your assets on the need analysis
forms.
Margin Can Pay for College
If you own stocks or bonds and you need the money to pay for college, it may
make sense to borrow against these assets rather than to sell them. If you sell the
investment and write the college a check, the money is gone forever. By
borrowing on margin, you can avoid capital gains (which will raise your AGI)
and still retain your assets.
A margin loan is a bet that the value of your stock will increase faster than the
interest you are paying on the loan (and based on long-term past performance,
this is a reasonable bet). Even if you don’t make money on the deal, it will cost
far less than an unsecured personal loan, and your assets will still be there when
your child walks back from the podium with his diploma and tells you he wants
to go to graduate school.
Margin allows you to avoid paying taxes on capital gains, keep your
investment working for you, and reduce your assets in the eyes of the FAOs.
Tip # 20: Use a margin loan to pay for college and reduce the

appearance of your assets.
A major drawback to this type of loan is that if the stock market declines
drastically, you may be asked to put up additional stock as collateral, or even (it
would have to be a very drastic decline) pay back part of the money you
borrowed. If you were unable to put up additional stock or money—or if you
couldn’t make the loan payments—you could lose the stock you put up as
collateral. This is the kind of calculated risk you should discuss with your broker
or accountant before you jump in.
Doesn’t This Margin Strategy Conflict with What
You Said Earlier?
In the “Income” section of this chapter we suggested that you avoid margin debt
as an investment strategy. How then can we turn around now and say it’s a good
strategy for paying for college? Whether margin makes sense for you depends on
what you’re using it for. If you are using it to purchase more stock, this should
be avoided as it will overstate your investment income and therefore your AGI.
On the other hand, if you do not have sufficient income or liquid assets (such
as savings, checking, or money market accounts) to pay the college bills, margin
debt is infinitely preferable to:
(a) borrowing at high rates from loan sources that are not considered debts
under the aid formulas and/or
(b) selling off assets that will generate capital gains during a base income year.
Mortgages Held
This category has nothing to do with the mortgage you have on your house. It
refers to a situation in which you are acting as a bank and someone else is
making monthly payments to you. This situation might have come up if you sold
your house to a person who could not get a mortgage from a bank. If you were
anxious to make the sale, you might agree to act as the banker. You receive an
initial down payment, and then monthly installments until the buyer has paid off

the agreed price of the house plus interest. The exact terminology for this is an
installment or land sale contract.
If you are the holder of a mortgage, the amount owed to you is considered a
part of your assets. However, you should not write down the entire amount that
is owed to you. A mortgage, installment contract, or land sale contract is worth
only what the market will pay for it at any particular moment. If you had to sell
that mortgage right now, it might not be worth its face value. You should consult
a real estate professional or a banker who is familiar with second mortgage
markets (yes, there actually is a market in second mortgages) to find out the
current market value of your investment.
529 Plans (Prepaid Tuition Programs & Tuition
Savings Accounts) and Coverdell ESAs
The recent CCRAA legislation has changed some of the ways these three types
of educational funding vehicles will be treated under the aid formulas, beginning
with the 2009–2010 academic year. Since these are generally long-term planning
options, see this page for more details on how these plans are treated under the
federal and institutional methodologies.
As with the prepaid plans, the tax-free earnings portion of any withdrawal
from a 529 savings plan or a Coverdell ESA for the student will not be
considered income to the student for the purposes of the 2018–2019 aid forms.
What About Contributions from Grandma or
Uncle Joe?
If someone other than a custodial parent or student is the owner of a 529 plan or
Coverdell, then it appears that the account would be completely sheltered as an
asset from the federal formula for the 2018–2019 academic year. However, don’t
jump for joy just yet. For while the assets may be sheltered, the dollar value of
the funds withdrawn or tuition credits redeemed may well be considered untaxed
income that will eventually need to be reported on a subsequent year’s aid form
—thereby raising the base year income for the year when that transaction
occurred. If the student is beneficiary of such an account, there may be strategies

you can follow to minimize the impact of such transactions. Yet, because this
situation is too complicated for us to give general advice, we recommend you
consult with a competent financial advisor who is thoroughly familiar with
financial aid regulations as well as such accounts. For the institutional
methodology, these accounts owned by others will be treated the same way as
they are in the federal formula. However, colleges will have the option of asking
additional questions regarding 529 plans or Coverdells that were funded by
individuals other than the student or the parents. These optional questions will
appear in the Supplemental Questions section of the PROFILE. As we went to
press, it was impossible to determine how many colleges would be exercising
this option.
Warning: with each successive year, more and more colleges are asking
questions about these plans. Who set them up? Who owns them? How much will
be withdrawn or redeemed in a given year? What’s the total value? Because of
this increased scrutiny…because the colleges know these funds are specifically
set up for the student beneficiary’s education…and because the FAOs can choose
to ignore the federal and institutional formulas when awarding the school’s own
money, placing funds in these accounts is increasingly risky if the student is
otherwise eligible for aid—especially for grants awarded by the colleges
themselves. Well-intentioned relatives should be alerted to the possible problems
with these programs as well. Our website (www.princetonreview.com/​
financialaidupdate) will cover any late-breaking developments regarding these
plans, should they occur before the 2019 edition of this book is published in the
fall of 2018.
Ownership of a Business
If you own and control a business with fewer than 101 full-time (or full-time
equivalent) employees, prepare yourself for one of the most amazing new
loopholes we have ever seen—courtesy of the HERA legislation.
Previously, any business equity—that is, the value of the business assets
minus the liabilities—needed to be reported on the FAFSA. However, starting
with the 2006–2007 academic year, the net worth of these small businesses
(which the US Department of Education classifies as “family businesses”) need
no longer be reported as part of business/farm assets on the FAFSA.
However, if your business falls outside this definition (for example if you

have more than 100 full-time employees) you will still need to include the net
worth of the business as part of your assets on the FAFSA, which may very well
increase your federal EFC.
And either way, you will still be required to list ALL of your business assets
and business debts on the PROFILE form—whether yours is a “family business”
or not. This could have a chilling effect on your eligibility for aid from the
schools themselves.
Remember, though, if you need to report the equity of your business on any
aid form, net worth is NOT the same thing as what you would get if you sold the
business. It does not include goodwill; it has nothing to do with gross receipts.
The net worth of a business consists of the cash on hand, receivables,
machinery and equipment, property, and inventory held, minus accounts payable,
debts, and mortgages. In most cases you can find the figures you will need from
the company’s year-end balance sheet, or a partnership or corporate income tax
return (IRS forms 1065, 1120, or 1120S).
The main thing to realize here is that just like when you are assessing the
value of your real estate, there is no point getting carried away with your
valuation of your company. Business owners are rightfully proud of what they
have accomplished, but this is not the time to brag. The higher your net assets,
the worse your chances of receiving aid. The FAOs are interested in only
selected portions of your balance sheet. Don’t look any further than they do.
For example, if your company is part of the service industry, it may have a
very small net worth, even if it is extremely successful. Let’s assume for a
moment that you own a small advertising agency. Like most service industry
companies, you would have no real inventory to speak of, little in the way of
property, and, because you’re putting your profits back into the company, not
much money in the bank. The net worth of this company—even if you were
required to report its equity on an aid form—would be almost nil. This would be
true even if it were one of the most well-respected agencies on Madison Avenue.
Business Footnotes
The government has further clarified the definition of a family business.
Specifically, more than 50 percent of the value of the business must be owned by
the family, which can include relatives by blood (including cousins, nieces,

nephews) or by marriage.
Obviously these rules may well be changed if and when Congress determines
that this new law is being exploited. For example, if too many people start
placing their investments into family partnerships or corporations established
solely to qualify as “family businesses” for aid purposes, Congress may quickly
close this loophole.
Business Assets Are Much Better Than Personal
Assets
Because the FAOs acknowledge that a parent’s business needs working capital to
operate, the net worth of the entity reported on the FAFSA or PROFILE is
assessed much less harshly than the parent’s personal assets. For example, of the
first $130,000 in net worth, the colleges count only 40 cents on the dollar.
So even if you do not “own and control” a business and must report the value
of the business on the FAFSA, all is not lost. As long as you own at least 5% of
the stock in a small corporation, it may be possible to call yourself a part-owner
and list the value of your stock as a business asset on the aid form instead of as a
personal investment. How much difference would this make? If you had $40,000
in stock in a small, privately held corporation, you could find yourself eligible
for up to $1,300 per year in increased aid simply by listing this stock as a
business asset rather than as a personal asset.
Real Estate as Business
Can you turn your various real estate properties into a business? It depends. If
you own several properties, receive a significant portion of your income from
your properties, and spend a significant proportion of your time managing the
real estate, then you probably can.
If you own your own business and the building in which you conduct
business, then you certainly can. If you rent out one or more properties and file
business tax returns, then you perhaps can. Some schools will want to see
extensive documentation before they will buy this strategy. The benefits, of
course, are enormous. Business assets are assessed much less severely by the
formula. Listing your real estate holdings as a business could reduce your

expected family contribution by thousands of dollars—if the FAOs buy it.
Ownership of a Farm
If you live on your farm and can claim on schedule F of your IRS 1040 that you
“materially participated in the farm’s operation,” the equity in the farm will be
protected under the federal methodology. While the federal FAFSA form still
includes a question regarding the net worth of farms, the instructions to the form
tell you not to include “a family farm that you live on and operate.”
Unfortunately, the institutional methodology used by many private colleges
and some state schools will assess your farm equity, regardless of where you
live.
If you are filling out the PROFILE form, be sure not to count the value of
your farmhouse twice. If you list it under “home,” then there is no need to count
it again as part of your farm property.
All of our other strategies for ownership of a business apply to ownership of a
farm as well. And similar to a parent-owned business, a parent’s farm equity
report on the FAFSA or PROFILE will be assesed much less heavily than the
parent’s personal assets.
Limited Partnerships
Under the aid formulas, limited partnerships are also considered assets.
Determining a value for limited partnerships can be difficult. If you can’t sell
your interest in the partnership, and the other general partners are unable to buy
back your shares, then it isn’t worth anything at the moment, and you should list
this worth as “zero.” Again, the FAOs may not buy this strategy, but let them tell
you that you can’t do it.
The Business/Farm Supplement
Some schools ask the owners of businesses and farms to fill out a standardized
form that asks about your business or farm net worth and income in greater
detail. We will discuss this, as well as some more complicated strategies in the

“Special Topics” chapter of this book.
Asset Protection Allowance
After the FAFSA processor has determined your net assets, there is one final
subtraction, called the Asset Protection Allowance.
This number, based on the age of the older custodial parent (or custodial
stepparent), is how much of your net assets can be exempted from the federal
financial aid assessment. The older you are, the more assets are sheltered. Below
is a chart that will give you a rough idea of the asset protection allowance
permitted at various ages under the federal methodology. According to the
Department of Education, this allowance is calculated to yield the same amount
of money as “the present cost of an annuity which, when combined with social
security benefits, would provide at age 65 a moderate level of living for a retired
couple or single person.” Of course, their idea of “a moderate level of living”
probably means a more spartan existence than you had in mind.
ASSET PROTECTION ALLOWANCE (APPROXIMATE)
Age
Two-Parent
Family
One-Parent
Family
34 or less
$10,600
$6,500
35–39
$14,200
$8,600
40–44
$18,500
$11,300
45–49
$20,700
$12,600
50–54
$23,500
$14,100
55–59
$26,800
$15,900
60–64
$30,800
$18,000
65 or more
$33,600
$19,500
After subtracting the asset protection allowance, the remaining assets are
assessed on a sliding scale (depending on income). The maximum assessment on
parents’ assets is 5.65%. In other words, the most you will have to contribute is
slightly more than five and a half cents for each additional dollar of assets.

Parents with few assets worry that the colleges will take what little they have.
In fact, a family with low income and, say, $5,000 in assets would almost
certainly not have to make any contribution from assets at all. If your total net
assets are less than your protection allowance, then your assets will not be
touched by the FAOs. In the federal methodology, the assessment of assets is
related to the parents’ available income. After the asset protection allowance is
subtracted, any remaining assets are then assessed at 12%. The result is then
added to the available income to come up with what is called the adjusted
available income (AAI). Since the maximum assessment rate on the AAI is 47%,
the maximum contribution from assets is therefore approximately 5.65%
(.12 × .47 ≈ .0565 or 5.65%).
College Board Asset Allowances
Starting with the 2000–2001 academic year, the institutional methodology will
no longer contain an asset protection allowance similar to the federal formula.
Since the aid formulas do not assess assets in retirement accounts, the College
Board feels that it is redundant to also protect some non-sheltered assets for
retirement. Instead, the institutional formula has contained three other asset
allowances: The Emergency Reserve Allowance, The Cumulative Education
Savings Allowance, and The Low Income Asset Allowance.
The first allowance recognizes the fact that every family should have some
assets available to handle emergencies, such as illness or unemployment. The
emergency reserve allowance for the 2010–2011 award year was as follows:
$20,330 for a family of two; $24,560 for three; $28,230 for four; $31,620 for
five; $34,450 for six. Above six family members, $2,830 will be granted for
each additional person. (Data for 2016–2017 will not be published by the
College Board. However given low inflation, we expect the numbers will not be
significantly higher.)
The cumulative education savings allowance is granted to shelter those assets
that the family has presumably set aside each year to meet their annual goal for
the educational savings allowance (see this page). For the student applicant and
any other siblings also enrolled in college during the same academic year, the
institutional formula assumes that the savings goal was met for each child for 18
years and that the accumulated savings are then used up during the student’s
college career. For younger siblings, the allowance will be based on the number

of children and their ages. All families received a minimum allowance of
$23,130 in the 2010–2011 version of the institutional formula. Because this
allowance protects assets for each dependent child in the household, any parental
assets held in the names of the student’s siblings will be considered as part of the
parents’ assets.
Lower income families who have negative available income in the
institutional formula will be given a third asset allowance equal to the amount of
the negative available income. This low income asset allowance is granted
because such families generally need to use up some of their assets to cover
those basic expenses in excess of their income.
The emergency reserve allowance, the cumulative education savings
allowance, and the low income asset allowance (if applicable) will automatically
be calculated by the PROFILE processor. These allowances are then subtracted
from the parents’ net assets (the value of the assets less any debts secured by
those assets) to determine the parents’ discretionary net worth. This net worth is
then assessed to calculate the parents’ contribution from assets. Previously the
asset assessment rate was based in part upon the family’s available income, with
higher income families having their assets assessed at a higher rate. Under the
new institutional formula, there is no longer any linkage between income and the
rate of asset assessment. For the 2010–2011 academic year, the first $34,450 of
the parents’ discretionary net assets was assessed at 3%. The next $34,450 was
assessed at 4%. Any assets in excess of $68,900 were assessed at the rate of 5%.
We expect these brackets to widen only marginally in future years. In addition,
families with negative discretionary net worth will not have their available
income reduced in the institutional methodology.
Multiple College Students
After the parents contribution is calculated, it is then adjusted based on the
number of family members in college on at least a half-time basis. Beginning
with the 2000–2001 academic year, the federal formula will no longer recognize
a parent as a family member in college for the purposes of this adjustment—
even if mom is pursuing a Ph.D. The institutional methodology will continue to
only view dependent children as household members in college, so the two
formulas are now alike in this respect. If a parent plans to attend graduate school
during the same academic year as the student seeking aid, it would be a good

idea to explain this situation to the FAO directly, since some may take the
parent’s educational expenses into account on a case-by-case basis.
While the federal formula simply divides the parents’ contribution by the
number in college to arrive at the parents’ contribution per student, the College
Board has used a different formula for multiple students. If there are two in
college, the parents’ contribution for each student has been 60% of the total
parents’ contribution. If there are three in college, 45% will likely be the
applicable rate. If there are four or more in college, 35% of the total parents’
contribution will likely apply to each student in the institutional formula.
Assets and Liabilities: How the Methodologies
Differ
THE FEDERAL METHODOLOGY
• Does not assess home value
• Does not assess farm value provided the family lives on the farm
and can claim on Schedule F of the IRS 1040 that they “materially
participated in the farm’s operation”
• Does not assess business net worth for a “family business”
provided your “family” owns and controls more than 50% of the
business and it has 100 or fewer full-time (or full-time equivalent)
employees
• Asset protection table based on present cost of an annuity
• Provides for exclusion of all assets if you meet the Simplified
Needs Test
• Asset assessment on a sliding scale based in part on income
THE INSTITUTIONAL METHODOLOGY
• Assesses home value, but some colleges will choose to ignore home
equity (though sometimes only if family income is below a certain

threshold) or cap home value at 2.4 times income or cap home
equity at 2 times income
• Assesses all farm equity and all business equity
• All assets are assessed, regardless of whether or not you meet the
simplified needs test
• Asset assessment is unrelated to income, except for those with
negative available income
• Assets held in names of siblings considered as parental assets
• Asset allowances based on emergency reserves, educational
savings, and low-income supplements
STUDENT RESOURCES
Need analysis companies ask precisely the same questions about students’
income and assets that they do about the parents’ income and assets, but there is
one major difference in the way students’ money is treated.
Colleges take a much larger cut of students’ money. In the federal formula
(FM), a student’s assets are assessed at a whopping rate of 20% each year
(versus a ceiling of 5.65% on parents’ assets). In the institutional formula (IM)
for the past few years, the assessment rate has been 25%. A student’s income
under the FM is assessed at up to 50% (versus a ceiling of 47% on parents’
income). For the IM we’ll soon discuss how student income is assessed.
Student Income
Under the federal formula, there is no minimum contribution from student
income, and the first $6,570 (after tax) dollars earned by a dependent student are
excluded.
Thus an incoming freshman can earn about $7,200 before he will be assessed
one penny. Once he crosses the $7,200 threshold, his additional income will
most likely be assessed at a rate of 50%. If he then saves his money, it will also

be assessed as an asset at a rate of 20%. Thus, if he banks his 7,201st dollar, 50
cents of it will be assessed as income and 20 cents of it will be assessed as an
asset. The extra dollar he earned could cost him 70 cents in reduced aid. While
this is much better than the old ridiculous rule under which the same child would
have been assessed $1.05 for each dollar earned over a certain amount, most
students will still be better off devoting their extra time to their studies once they
have hit the $7,200 mark.
And that’s only if the college is using the federal formula. If your child attends
a private college that uses the institutional methodology, she may be responsible
for a minimum freshman year contribution as high as $2,000 ($2,650 as an
upperclassman) and there is no $6,570 income protection allowance. A student at
a private college will owe no more than the minimum contribution as long as she
keeps her income below $4,708 as a freshman and $6,238 as an upperclassman.
Over $4,708, she may be losing 71 cents in aid eligibility on each additional
dollar she earns and saves. Recognizing that a student from a lower income
family may be using their earnings to supplement the parent’s income, the
institutional methodology beginning with the 2008–2009 academic year will be
using a complicated formula for calculating a student’s contribution from
income.
Tip #21a: For a student who hopes to receive aid from a school
using only the federal methodology, it doesn’t make sense to have
income higher than $7,200.
Tip #21b: For a student who hopes to receive aid from a school
using the institutional methodology, it doesn’t make sense to have
income higher than $4,708 as an incoming freshman, or $6,238
as an upperclassman.
The current assessment rates have set up a bizarre situation, in which the best
way a student receiving financial aid can help his parents pay for college is by
not working very much. If your family has no chance of receiving aid, then by
all means encourage your child to make as much money as possible. However,
any student who might qualify for aid will find that most of the money he earns
will just be canceled out by the money he loses from his aid package.

Under current rules, it makes more sense for students receiving financial aid
to earn the minimum amount of money the college will allow, and concentrate
on doing as well as possible in school. Most aid is dependent at least in part on
the student’s grades. A high GPA ensures that the same or better aid package will
be available next year; a good GPA also helps students to find better-paying jobs
when they graduate so they can pay back their student loans.
There is only one type of job that really benefits a student who receives
financial aid:
The Federal Work-Study Program (FWS)/Co-op
Programs
The Federal Work-Study program, funded by Uncle Sam, pays students to work,
perhaps in the college library, the dining hall, even sometimes in nearby off-
campus businesses. Work-study earnings, while subject to income tax, are
excluded from the financial aid formulas and will not decrease your aid. The
money a student earns through work-study goes either toward tuition or toward
the student’s living and travel expenses. It does not count as part of the minimum
contribution from income in the institutional formula that each student is
expected to earn during the summer.
Because they are excluded from the financial aid formula, work-study wages
are in effect worth much more than wages from a regular job. For an
upperclassman receiving aid who has already earned $7,200 from non-FWS
jobs, a work-study job paying minimum wage makes more sense than a $10.00
per hour regular job off-campus. Note: Beginning with the 2010–2011 FAFSA,
earnings from a co-op program will also be excluded.
It’s Too Late. My Daughter Already Earned
$8,500 Last Year!
Earning extra money is not the end of the world. Just remind her that as much as
$570 of that $8,500 will have to go to the college. If she buys a car with it, she—
or you—will have to come up with the money from some other source. You
might also want to remind the colleges that while your daughter managed to earn

$8,500 as a senior in high school, she is unlikely to earn that much again now
that she is in college and has a tough work load. They might bear this in mind
when they are allocating aid for the coming year. Some schools (Cornell is one)
specifically ask you if your child will be earning less money in future years.
Student Income and Taxes: Not Necessarily
Joined at the Hip
When does a student have to file a tax return? Generally, an individual who is
being claimed as an exemption on his parents’ tax return has to file if he has
gross income of over $1,050 and at least $350 of that income is unearned income
(i.e., interest or dividends). If the student has NO unearned income at all, he can
earn up to $6,300 in wages reported on a W-2 form before he is required to file a
federal return. If the student is working as an independent contractor (with
earnings reported to the IRS on a 1099), there are special rules to follow. Ask
your accountant if the student has to file.
The rules used to be more lenient. The IRS is cracking down on parents who
are sheltering assets by putting them in the child’s name. If your child has any
investment income at all, his standard deduction can drop from $6,300 to as low
as $1,050.
A student who cannot be claimed as a dependent on her parents’ taxes can
have income up to $10,350 without needing to file a federal tax return, provided
that she gets no more than $400 net earnings from self-employment.
As long as your children are under 24 years old, and are full-time students,
they can be claimed as dependents on the parents’ tax return, whether they filed
income taxes or not, and regardless of how much money they earned.
You should also realize that the colleges’ criteria for who can be considered an
independent student are much tougher than the IRS’s. A student could have been
filing a separate return for years, taking her own exemption, and paying taxes
like anyone else, but that does not necessarily mean that she will qualify as an
independent under the financial aid formula.
Can My Child Go the Independent Route?

If the colleges decide that a student is no longer a dependent of his parents, then
the colleges won’t assess the parents’ income and assets at all. Since independent
students are often young and don’t earn much money, they get large amounts of
financial aid. The key point to grasp here is that it is the federal government and
the colleges themselves who get to decide who is dependent and who is
independent, and it is obviously in their best interest to decide that the student is
still dependent.
We will discuss the criteria for becoming an independent student in Part
Three, “Filling Out the Standardized Forms,” and in Chapter Nine, “Special
Topics,” but don’t get your hopes up. The rules are tough, and getting tougher all
the time.
Student Assets
Accountants and other financial counselors love to advise parents to “put some
of their assets in the kid’s name.”
As a tax reduction strategy, this may be pretty good advice, since some of the
earned income from the money in your child’s name will almost certainly be
taxed in a lower bracket than yours. Unfortunately, as many parents learn the
hard way, following this advice during college years is virtually economic
suicide.
Parental assets are assessed by the colleges at a top rate of 5.65% each year,
after subtracting your protection allowance. Your child’s assets, on the other
hand, will be hit up for 20% in the federal formula (25% in the institutional
formula) each year, and your child has no protection allowance at all. Any
potential tax benefits of putting assets in the child’s name can be completely
wiped out by the huge reduction you will see in your aid package.
Tip #22: If you think you will qualify for financial aid, do not put
assets in the child’s name.
Even worse, some of the assets in the child’s name can be hit twice each year:
first, colleges take 20% off the top of the entire amount of the asset; second, the
colleges take up to 50 cents out of every dollar in income generated by the asset.

Let’s say a parent puts $10,000 in the child’s name and invests it in a bond
fund that pays 6%. When he fills out the FAFSA form, he enters the $600
interest the fund earned that year as part of the student’s income; because the
$600 was reinvested in the bond fund, the fund now has $10,600 in it, so he
enters $10,600 under the student’s assets. The need analysis company assesses
the $10,600 asset at 20% (in this case $2,120). The need analysis company also
assesses the $600 income at a rate of up to 50% (in this case, $300). Note that
the $600 income got assessed twice—20% as an asset, and 50% as income, for a
total of 70%. That $600 in income may have cost the family $420 in lost aid.
It’s Too Late. I Put Assets in My Son’s Name!
If you have already transferred assets to your child in the form of a custodial
account (such as an UGMA or UTMA) or a trust, you should pause and consider
three things before you strangle your accountant.
1. You may not have been eligible for need-based aid in the first
place. If you weren’t going to qualify for aid anyway, those
assets may be in just the right place, and your accountant is a
genius. However, you should probably contact her to discuss the
“kiddie tax” provisions (See this page).
2. You may have been offered only a subsidized Direct loan. If you
were going to qualify only for minimal need-based aid in the
form of student loans, the tax benefits of keeping assets in the
child’s name may well exceed the aid benefits, and you did just
the right thing.
3. Even if it turns out that putting assets in your child’s name was a
bad mistake, you can’t simply undo the error by pulling the
money out of your child’s account now. When you liquidate a
custodial account, the IRS can disallow the gift, come after you
for back taxes and back interest, and tax the money at the
parents’ tax rate from the time the funds were first transferred to
the child.

Is There Anything We Can Do to Get Assets
Back in Our Name?
There may be, but this situation is much too complicated for us to give general
advice. You should consult with a competent financial advisor who has a sound
understanding of both the tax code and the ins and outs of financial aid.
Student Income and Assets: How the
Methodologies Differ
THE FEDERAL METHODOLOGY
• First $6,570 in student’s after-tax income is sheltered for a dependent student
• No minimum contribution from income
• Asset assessment rate of 20%
THE INSTITUTIONAL METHODOLOGY
• No income protection allowance
• Minimum contribution from income as high as: $2,000 for incoming
freshmen, $2,650 for upperclassmen
• Asset assessment rate of 25%
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Making an Estimate of How Much You Will Be Expected to
Pay
After receiving all your financial data, the need analysis service crunches the
numbers to arrive at your family contribution:

If you have read this book carefully up to now, you know that behind the
apparent simplicity of the chart above lies a wealth of hidden options that can
save—or cost—you money.
By using the worksheet at the back of this book, you can get a rough
approximation of what your Expected Family Contribution will be under both
the federal and the institutional methodology. Bear in mind that it will be just
that—an approximation. Our worksheet uses basically the same formula(s) used
by the need analysis companies, but because you will be estimating many of the
numbers there is little likelihood that it will be exact.
Parents always want the bottom line. “How much will I have to pay?” they
ask, as if there were one number fixed in stone for their family. In fact, you will
see as you begin to play with your numbers that there are numerous ways to
present yourselves to the colleges. By using the strategies we have outlined in
Part Two of this book, you can radically change the financial snapshot that will
determine your Expected Family Contribution.
Your bottom line will also be determined in part by whether you choose
schools that use the federal or the institutional methodology to award
institutional aid. We’ll discuss this in more detail in our chapters on “How to
Pick Colleges” and “The Offer.”
Filling out our worksheet will be a quite different experience from filling out

the need analysis form. The need analysis form asks you for your raw data, but
does not allow you to do the calculations to determine your family contribution.
The FAOs Tinker with the Numbers
You should also bear in mind that the college financial aid officers have a wide
latitude to change the figures the need analysis companies send to them. If a
school wants a particular student badly, the FAO can sweeten the pot. If a school
has a strict policy on business losses, your Expected Family Contribution at that
school may be higher than the Feds said it would be.
It’s as if you submitted your tax return to five different countries. Each of
them will look at you a little differently. One country may allow you to have
capital losses that exceed capital gains. Another country may disallow your
losses.
We know of one parent with unusual circumstances whose need analysis form
generated an Expected Family Contribution of $46,000 but who still ended up
getting $7,000 in financial aid for his son’s freshman year at a $22,000-per-year
school. We know of another couple whose family contribution was calculated to
be $10,000, but who ended up having to pay $15,000 because there was not
much aid money left.
Even if your numbers look high, you should not assume that you won’t
qualify for aid.

CHAPTER FOUR
How to Pick Colleges

How to Pick Colleges—with Financial Aid in Mind
Richard Freedman, a former guidance counselor at prestigious Hunter College
High School in New York City, used to keep a copy of Who’s Who handy in his
office. When parents came in with visions of Ivy dancing in their eyes, he
invited them to look up famous people they admired in Who’s Who. It turned out
that their heroes almost never attended Ivy League schools.
We aren’t suggesting that Ivy League schools are no good, or that your child
should not apply to one of them, but it is worth noting (even as you look at the
$65,000 price tag) that many important, interesting people managed, and are still
managing, to get good educations elsewhere—and for less money.
There are many factors that go into a decision to apply to a particular college,
and one factor that cannot be ignored is money. You and your child are about to
make a business decision, and it’s vital that you keep a clear head. How much
are you willing to pay for what level of quality of education under what
circumstances? It is possible to pay $48,000 per year for a worthless education,
and possible to pay $5,000 per year for an outstanding education. Price is not
always synonymous with quality. The real determining factor in the kind of
education a student comes away with is how seriously the student took the
experience.
This Is a Joint Decision…
Many parents feel that it is somehow their duty to shield their children from the
harsh economic realities of higher education. It is a form of need-blind
application, in which parents do their level best to remain blind to their own
needs. They allow their children to apply to any school they like, without
thinking through the consequences of what an acceptance at that school would
mean. Taking on large amounts of debt should be a rational rather than an
emotional decision, and any important decision like this should involve the
student as well. Especially if money is a concern, your child should be included
in every step of the decision making, from computing a rough estimate of the
expected family contribution to picking colleges with a view toward financial

aid.
…That You Must Make in the Dark
One of the frustrating parts about applying to college is that you have to apply
without really knowing what it is going to cost. Well, of course you do know the
sticker price, but as we’ve already said, the vast majority of families don’t
actually pay the sticker price. The $64,000 question is what kind of aid package
the different schools will give you to reduce that sticker price.
The process has been made even more difficult by a Justice Department
investigation years ago into possible violations of anti-trust law by many of the
highly selective colleges, including the Ivies. Prior to the investigation, the FAOs
from these schools would get together at an annual “overlap” meeting to
compare notes on students who were going to be accepted by more than one of
these colleges. After these meetings, there was usually an amazing similarity
between the financial aid packages offered to an individual student by the
competing colleges. While the Justice Department eventually worked out an
agreement with the colleges on this matter, it remains to be seen to what extent
colleges will be sharing information with each other after this experience.
Therefore, financial aid offers are still likely to differ by many thousands of
dollars. Any counselor who says he can predict the precise amount and type of
aid you will receive at one of these selective schools is lying. Thus applying for
college is something of a financial crapshoot.
Applying to More Schools
Many counselors feel that it is now necessary to apply to more schools than
before, to ensure that one of them will give you a good deal.
One good offer can frequently lead to others. If you have received a nice
package from school A, you can go to a comparable school B that your child is
more interested in, and negotiate an improved package. For the same reason,
even if your child has been accepted “early action” or “early notification” by her
first-choice school, you might want to apply to several other schools as well.
An early action or early notification acceptance (unlike a “restrictive early
decision” acceptance) does not bind the student to go to that school. The college

is just letting you know early on that you have a spot if you want it. Your child
has just been accepted by her first-choice school, which is great news, but you
won’t receive an aid package for several months. If the college knows that you
applied only to one school, they will be under no pressure to come up with a
good aid package. However, if you have received several offers, you may find
that the first choice will be willing to match a rival school’s package.
Students who need financial aid should always apply to a variety of colleges.
Perhaps one or two of these should be “reach” schools at which the student is
less certain of admission; the student should also apply to several schools that
not only fit his academic profile but also have good reputations for meeting
students’ “remaining need”; finally, the student should apply to what we call a
“financial safety school.”
The Financial Safety School
Now it may well be that your child will ultimately get into his or her first choice.
(According to a survey conducted by the Higher Education Research Institute at
UCLA, 77.8% of applicants to colleges in the United States were accepted by
their first-choice school). Just as important, your child’s first choice may even
give you a financial aid package that is acceptable to you. However, part of
picking colleges entails selecting second, third, fourth, and fifth choices as well.
This is an opportunity for your child to get to know several schools better.
Students sometimes seem to pick their first-choice schools out of thin air. We
have often seen students change their minds as they actually go to visit the
schools and read the literature. If money is a consideration, discuss this openly
with your child. Look at the relative merits of the schools as compared to their
price tags, and discuss what sacrifices both the parent and the student would
have to make in order to send the student to one of the more expensive schools if
the aid package you get is low.
At least one of the schools you apply to should be a “financial safety school.”
There are three factors to take into account when picking a financial safety
school. You want to pick a school that…
(A)…THE STUDENT IS PRETTY MUCH GUARANTEED TO GET
INTO.

What is an admissions safety school for one student may be a reach for another.
Force yourself to be dispassionate. A good way to figure out a student’s chances
for admission is to look up the median SAT scores and class ranking of last
year’s freshman class (available in most college guides). A particular college
qualifies as a safety school if the student who is applying is in the top 25% of the
students who were admitted to the college last year.
(B)…YOU CAN AFFORD EVEN IF YOU RECEIVED NO AID AT ALL.
For most families, of course, this means some sort of state or community
college. There are some extremely fine public colleges, whose educational
opportunities rival those of many of the best private colleges.
(C)…THE STUDENT IS WILLING TO ATTEND.
We’ve met some students who freely admit they wouldn’t be caught dead going
to their safety school. As far as we are concerned, these students either haven’t
looked hard enough to find a safety school they would enjoy, or they have
unreasonable expectations about what the experience of college is supposed to
be.
Let’s examine what you might be looking for in a financial safety school
based on a rough approximation of your Expected Family Contribution.
Federal vs. Institutional
In the previous chapters we have constantly referred to the differences between
the federal and the institutional methodologies. By now you have probably
figured out that in many cases the federal methodology is kinder on a parent’s
pocketbook than the institutional methodology. However, before you start
looking only at schools that use the federal methodology, there are a number of
points to be made:
First, a college that uses the institutional methodology must still award federal
money such as the Pell Grant and the subsidized Direct loan using the federal
criteria. Thus, the institutional methodology will only affect funds under the
institution’s direct control—principally, the school’s private grant money.

Second, families may find that the difference in aid packages from two
schools using the different methodologies is actually not very significant.
Families who don’t have a lot of equity built up in their primary residence, who
don’t show business or capital losses, or losses on property rental may not notice
much difference at all.
Third, most of the competitive schools will be using the institutional
methodology this year to award the funds under their control. It would severely
limit your choice of colleges to apply only to schools that use the federal
methodology.
The best way to find out which methodology is being used at a particular
school is to ask an FAO at that school. However, as a rough guide, if the school
wants you to fill out the CSS PROFILE form, then it will most likely be using
the institutional methodology.
Should We Apply Only to Schools that Use the
Federal Methodology?
No. There are so many other factors that determine an aid package—
demographics, special talents, academic performance, just to name a few. Any of
these factors could make an FAO decide to award merit-based aid or to be more
generous in awarding need-based funds. However, if money is a concern, then it
makes sense to apply to a financial safety school.
If You Have Extremely High Need
If your Expected Family Contribution is in the $700 to $5,000 range, a good
safety school would be a public university or community college located in your
own state. This type of school has two advantages. First, the likelihood that you
will be eligible for state aid is extremely good. Second, your child may be able
to live at home and commute, thus saving many of the expenses of room and
board.
However, a student with high need should not neglect to apply to private
colleges as well, preferably colleges where that student will be in demand. If the
student has good grades, or some other desirable attribute, the student may
receive an aid package that makes an expensive private school cheaper to attend

than the local community college. Remember, by good grades we are not
necessarily talking straight As. At many colleges, there are scholarships
available for students with a B average and combined SAT scores of over 1,000
(or the equivalent on the ACT). We’ve sometimes even seen students with C
averages and high need get generous aid packages at some private colleges.
If You Have High Need
We are frequently amazed at how often families with high need choose an out-
of-state public university as their safety school. For most families with an EFC
of between $5,000 and $20,000, an out-of-state public university is the most
expensive option they could possibly choose. Why? First, students from out-of-
state are charged a lot more. Second, much of the financial aid at these schools is
earmarked for in-state students. Third, you will most likely not be able to take
aid from your own state across state lines. Fourth, if the student is likely to fit
into the top half of the entering class, he will probably get a better deal from a
private college.
Families with limited means have difficulty imagining that they could get an
aid package of $40,000 per year or more, but in fact this is not out of the bounds
of reality at all. Choose schools with high endowments where the child will be in
the top quarter of the entering class.
Naturally, you can’t depend on a huge package from a private college, so
again, a financial safety school is a must. For families with high need, the best
financial safety school is probably still an in-state public university or
community college.
If You Have Moderate Need
A family with an expected family contribution of from $20,000 to $35,000 is in a
tough position. This is a lot of money to have to come up with every year,
perhaps more than you feel you can afford. As Jayme Stewart, a counselor at
York Preparatory in New York City, says, “A four-year private school education
is not an inalienable right guaranteed by the Constitution.”
A family with moderate need might want to choose two financial safety
schools consisting of either in-state or out-of-state public universities.

Depending on your circumstances, either choice may actually cost you less than
your EFC.
Financial planning is particularly vital to moderate-need families. The
strategies we have outlined in the previous chapters can make a much bigger
difference in the size of your aid package than you probably think, and may
make it possible for your child to attend a private college. For private colleges,
you should again be looking at several schools where the student will be
considered desirable and stands a good chance of getting institutional grants and
scholarships.
Preferential packaging is particularly important to moderate-need families, as
is the practice of applying to a wide variety of schools. By applying to more
schools, you increase the likelihood that one of the schools will give you a
particularly good package. You can then either accept the offer or use it to try to
get a better deal at another college.
If You Have Low Need
A family with an EFC of between $35,000 and $55,000 (or more) must decide
how much it is willing to pay for what kind of education, and how much debt it
is willing to take on. If you are willing to go into debt, then your financial safety
school becomes merely a regular safety school.
If you are unlikely to get aid, some of the advice we have given in this book to
people who want aid does not apply to you; for example, you might be well
advised to put some assets into the child’s name, you might want to set up a trust
for the child, and the child should be earning as much money as possible in the
years before and during college.
However, even families with low need should apply for aid. For one thing,
with the cost of college being what it is, you may still qualify for some. You also
have to look ahead four years. Perhaps your situation will change; for example,
you might have only one child in college now, but next year you might have two.
Finally, with their high sticker prices, some private colleges are having trouble
filling their classrooms. The FAOs at many of these schools seem to be more and
more willing to play “let’s make a deal.” As a result, a family’s final family
contribution may end up being several thousand dollars less than was calculated
by the need analysis company. If you have used our worksheets in the back of

the book to determine your Expected Family Contribution, you should bear this
in mind before you decide that your EFC is too high to bother applying for aid.
The Public Ivies
Over the past few years, the cost of some of the best public universities has
skyrocketed, to the point at which an out-of-state resident can pay more to attend
a public university than a private college. At the University of Michigan and the
University of California—Berkeley, for example, the cost to an out-of-state
student is over $57,500 per year—hardly a bargain, even if the quality of
education is high. However these and other “public ivies” remain good deals to
in-state residents.
In the past, it was relatively easy to change your state of residence and qualify
for lower tuition and state aid. However, in recent years, it has become almost
impossible for an undergraduate student to pull this off, unless the entire family
moves to that state.
Nevertheless, some of the “public ivies” remain bargains for everyone—for
example, Georgia Tech, University of Wisconsin (Madison) and SUNY
Binghamton are all first-class schools with undervalued price tags.
What to Look for in a Private College
If you are selecting a private college with financial aid in mind, there are some
criteria you should bear in mind as you look at the colleges:
• What is the average percentage of need met? You can find this
statistic in most college guides. A high percentage is a sign that the
school is committed to meeting as much of a student’s “need” as
possible. This statistic should not be misunderstood, however, for it
is based on an average. A school that normally meets only a low
percentage of need may come through with a spectacular offer for a
student the school really wants. Another school that normally meets
a very high percentage of need may make a very poor offer to a
student the school considers marginal.
• Does the student have something this particular school wants? Is

the student a legacy? Is he a track star applying to a school known
for its track stars? Is she a physics genius applying to a school
known for its physics department?
• How does the student compare academically to last year’s incoming
class? If this is a reach school for the student, the aid package may
not be outstanding.
• Some colleges are very open about their academic wants; they
mention right up front in their promotional literature that a student
with SAT scores above x and a GPA of above y will receive a full
scholarship.
• What percentage of gift aid is NOT based on need? If a student has
an excellent academic record, this statistic might give some
indication of whether she will be eligible to receive non-need
scholarships. Of course, this statistic might be misleading for the
same reasons we mentioned above.
• What is the school’s endowment per student? If the school is on its
last legs financially, then it may not be able to offer a great aid
package—to say nothing of whether it will remain open long
enough for the student to graduate. Don’t necessarily be scared if a
small school has a small endowment—take a closer look at what
that actually means. Earlham College in Indiana has a small
endowment compared to, say, Harvard, but it has a very high
endowment per student.
• Will the school use the institutional methodology in awarding aid
under the school’s direct control?
A General Note of Caution
Take the statistics in the college guides with a grain of salt. These statistics may
show general trends, but (like all statistics) they are subject to interpretation.
First of all, the information presented in these books usually comes from the
colleges themselves, and as far as we know, is never checked.

Second, a particularly affluent (or poor) pool of applicants could skew the
statistics. It would be easier for a school to meet a high percentage of need if the
applicants to that school tend to be well off.

CHAPTER FIVE
What the
Student 
Can Do

What the Student Can Do
Until now, most of our discussion has concerned what the parent can do to pay
for college. Income and asset strategies, tax strategies, home equity loans—these
are subjects that have little relevance for high school students. After all, in many
cases, they have no income or assets, pay no taxes, and almost certainly don’t
own their own home. Is there anything the student can do to help pay for
college?
The most obvious idea would seem to be for the student to get a job. However,
under “Student Income and Assets” in Chapter Three we explained that earning
more than a certain dollar amount will decrease a student’s aid faster than the
earnings can be deposited in the student’s bank account. After $7,000, every
dollar a college freshman earns and saves can decrease his aid eligibility by 70
cents in the federal formula. Of course, if his family is not eligible for aid, the
student should be out there earning as much as possible; but if his family stands
a chance of qualifying for aid, the student’s time would be better spent (at least
under the current ridiculous law) by making the most of his educational
opportunities.
There are, however, some very tangible ways a student can help pay for
college. The first of these may make it sound like we’ve been paid off by high
school teachers, but here goes anyway:
Study Like Crazy
It’s the gospel truth. Good grades make a student desirable to the colleges. Yes,
this will help you get in, but in these budget-tight times, good grades also
translate directly into dollars and cents. As we said in Chapter Two, every tenth
of a point a student raises her high school GPA can save her thousands of dollars
in student loans she won’t have to pay back later.
Even at the prestigious Ivy League schools, where students are supposedly
awarded aid based only on their “need,” applicants with high academic
achievement do get preferential packaging—award packages with a higher
percentage of grants and a lower percentage of loans.

If a student’s dream is to attend an expensive private college, it isn’t going too
far to expect the student to contribute to help make that dream a reality. Parents
are about to invest a sizable portion of all the money they have ever been able to
save. It seems only fair that the student should be prepared to invest in his own
future as well. And the single most productive way a student can invest in his
future is by doing as well as possible during high school.
There are some colleges out there who state up front, “If you have a GPA of
more than 3.5 and SATs of 1900 or above, we will offer you a full scholarship.”
There are other schools (more and more in recent years) that give out large
merit-based grants, irrespective of need. These grants are not necessarily just for
geniuses. We know of several colleges that award merit-based grants for students
with B averages.
Take an SAT Review Course
Nothing can change a student’s fortune faster than a big increase on the SAT.
Look at it this way: it takes four years to accumulate your grades from high
school. It takes six weeks to take a prep course. A study by FAIRTEST,
published in The New York Times, showed that students who took these prep
courses had an average improvement of over 100 points.
Every ten points a student can raise his score on the SAT can save his family
thousands of dollars by increasing his desirability in the eyes of the FAOs, and
hence, increasing the size of the aid packages they offer him. This is too
important to leave to chance.
There are many companies that offer test preparation, some affordable and
some quite expensive. We, of course, are partial to The Princeton Review course.
If there are no preparation courses offered in your area, we suggest you at least
buy a book such as The Princeton Review’s 9 Practice Tests for the SAT. Books
such as these will provide the student with actual SAT practice sections. If
money is a consideration, don’t lose heart: The books are available at libraries,
and test prep companies often offer financial aid.
Take AP Courses
Many high schools offer advanced placement (AP) courses. By passing an

advanced placement test at the end of the year, a student can earn college credits
without paying college tuition. Not all schools accept AP credits, but many do,
again enabling a student to save his family literally thousands of dollars. Some
students are able to skip the entire freshman year in this way, thus cutting the
entire cost of their college education by one quarter. Consult with the colleges
you are interested in to see if they accept AP credits, and with your high school
to see which AP courses are offered, and how to sign up.
Saving Money by Earning Credits on the CLEP
Exams
The College Board has developed exams that—like AP tests—allow students
who score high enough to earn college credits. These are offered under the
College-Level Examination Program, more commonly known by its acronym:
CLEP. There are currently 33 different CLEP exams, with at least one of them
currently accepted by 2900 colleges and universities. You earn the same number
of credits you would earn by taking a course—simply by taking a test. This
could potentially save you thousands of dollars in tuition.
Needless to say, this is a great option to explore, but you need to do your
homework first. Some colleges don’t award credits for CLEP exams at all, while
others have fine print. It is up to the individual college to determine which
exams can be taken, the minimum score you need in order to get credit, and the
total number of credits the school is willing to give students for CLEP exams.
Bear in mind that the minimum score needed on one test might be different than
the minimum score on another test. And some colleges might not give you
credit, but will use the test results to allow you to place out of entry-level courses
or to fulfill core distribution requirements. Each test costs $80, and there are
prep books and interactive tutoring websites available. For more information,
visit clep.collegeboard.org
Condense Your College Education
You have to be a little crazy to try this, but for motivated students it is sometimes
possible to complete a four-year education in three years. The family may not
realize big savings on the tuition itself (since some schools charge by the credit)

but there will be savings on room and board, and the student will be able to get
out into the workforce that much sooner.
A more reasonable goal might be to reduce time in college by half a year. By
attending summer school (which is often less expensive than the regular terms) a
student can reduce her time on campus by one full semester.
Even at half a year, this strategy may take its toll on the student. Academics
are only one part of the college experience, and by accelerating the process, a
student may lose out on some of the opportunities and friendships that make the
college years meaningful.
Defer Admission
Many schools allow students to defer admission for a year. If the family is
financially strapped, a student could use this year to earn money. You should
always remember that at least under current law, student earnings above a certain
dollar amount will reduce aid eligibility—thus for many students, this strategy
could backfire. However, if the college the student really wishes to attend
decides the family is not eligible for aid, and the family cannot shoulder the
entire cost of college, this might be the only way the student could make up the
difference. Be extremely careful in making a decision like this. If there is no
reasonable plan for how you can meet the entire four years’ worth of college
bills, it may not make sense to begin the first year.
Go to School Part-Time
Some schools allow students to attend college part-time so that they can earn
money while they are in school. Points to be aware of:
• Student loans become due as early as six months after the student
stops taking classes or goes below half-time status. If the student
takes too much time off between classes, she may have to start
paying off the loans, even though she’s still in school.
• The financial aid available for part-time students is much reduced.
Particularly if the student is attending less than half-time, there will
be little chance of substantial aid.

• Any money the student earns is going to be assessed by the colleges
at a very high rate, thus reducing aid eligibility. You should
consider carefully whether a job will actually help pay for college.
It will depend on whether your family was judged eligible for aid,
and what kind of package you have been offered. If you were not
eligible, or if the aid package left you with a substantial piece of
“unmet need,” then part-time study may make sense. However,
before you take that course of action, ask the FAO what would
happen if the student earned, say, $15,000 after taxes this year.
Would the student’s aid package remain the same, or would the
extra income simply reduce the aid package by $4,000 or more?
Transfer in Later: Option 1
If a family is on a very tight budget, a good way to finance a four-year college
education is to start with a two-year college education. Two-year public
community colleges or junior colleges, where the average in-state tuition for
2016–2017 according to the College Board was just $3,520, represent an
outstanding way to save money. A student with a good academic record at a
community college (perhaps earned while still living at home) can then transfer
to a slightly more expensive state college for two more years to earn a BA. The
total cost would be only a fraction of the cost of a private college, and still
thousands of dollars less than that of a four-year program at the state college.
Transfer in Later: Option 2
If a student really has her heart set on a particular private college but the family
cannot afford the costs of four years’ tuition, there is another option: The student
could go to a public college for the first two years and then transfer into the
private school. The student will get the private college degree at a much more
affordable price. Obviously, the student would have to get accepted by the
private school as a transfer student, and this can be quite difficult. Outstanding
grades are a given. We will go into this strategy in more detail in Chapter Seven,
“Innovative Payment Options.”

Transfer in Later: Option 3 Inexpensive College,
Pricy Graduate School
Extending the previous strategy, a student could attend an in-state public
university during all four of the undergraduate years, and then go to a top-of-the-
line private graduate school. The undergraduate savings would be huge, but
again, whether the student attends a private or a public undergraduate college, a
compelling academic record is always very important to ensure acceptance.
The Senior Year
The family will complete its last standardized need analysis form in the spring of
the student’s junior year of college. Once that form has been filed, there are no
longer any financial aid considerations to worry about. During the summer
between junior and senior year, students who want to help out with the last
year’s tuition can earn unlimited amounts of money without hurting their
eligibility for financial aid.
Of course, if the student goes straight on to graduate school, then the senior
year of college becomes the first base income year for graduate school, and the
process begins again.

CHAPTER SIX
State Aid

States sometimes don’t get the credit they deserve for their most pervasive and
sweeping form of financial aid: an affordable college education for in-state
residents through public state university programs. These programs are still
terrific values (as we explored in Chapter Four, “How to Pick Colleges”) and in
some cases, the quality of education is at least as good as it is at the best private
colleges.
However, it is the other kind of state aid that we are going to discuss here. It
comes in the form of need-based and merit-based grants and loans to qualifying
students who attend public or private colleges and universities within their own
state. All 50 states have need-based financial aid programs for their residents,
and more than 25 states now have merit-based awards as well. While some states
are richer than others, the amount of money available for state aid is substantial;
in some states students can qualify for more than $4,000 each year in grant
money alone.
To qualify for this aid a student must generally attend a public university or
private college within the student’s state of legal residence. A few states have
reciprocal agreements with specific other states that allow you to take aid with
you to another state.
Note: In recent years, some states have eliminated or reduced their state grant
programs as a result of budget deficits in the recent economic downturn. For the
latest information regarding the availability of state aid you should contact the
appropriate state agency (See this page). Be aware that some states (i.e. Alaska,
Illinois, Kentucky, Missouri, Nevada, North Carolina, North Dakota, Oklahoma,
Oregon, South Carolina, Tennessee, Vermont, and Washington) award funds on a
first-come first-served basis.
Even If You Don’t Qualify for Federal Aid, You
May Qualify for State Aid
Because of the differences between the state aid formulas and the federal
formula, it is sometimes easier to qualify for state aid. Federal aid is based on
your adjusted gross income (along with information about your assets). In some
states, however, aid is based solely on your taxable income (the AGI minus

deductions) without reference to your assets.
Thus if you miss out on federal aid because you have been industrious and
managed to save enough to make investments, you may be able to qualify for
state money anyway. In some states, it is possible to own a mansion, a business,
and sizable investments, and—as long as your taxable income is within state
parameters—still qualify for thousands of dollars in aid.
There are too many states with too many different types of programs and
formulas for us to go into each one separately. Suffice it to say that state aid is
one of the more overlooked ways for middle- and upper-middle-class families to
help pay for college. We estimate that thousands of these parents, under the
impression they make too much money, never even apply.
How to Apply for State Aid
Some states use the data you supply on the federal FAFSA form to award their
aid. Other states require you to complete a supplemental aid form that is
processed directly by that state’s higher education agency.
Confused? Your high school guidance counselor should have the correct forms
for your situation. If, for some reason, forms are not available at your high
school, or your guidance counselor doesn’t seem to know what is what, contact
your state agency (a list of all the state agencies with their addresses and phone
numbers is at the end of this chapter).
The only time the forms you find at your high school might not be the right
forms for you is when the student goes to school in one state but lives in another.
If this is the case, again contact your state agency.
If your family is eligible for state financial aid, your state grant will appear as
part of the aid packages you receive from the colleges sometime before April 15.
Obviously, unless your state has reciprocal agreements, the state money will
appear only in the aid packages from colleges in your own state. Families that
are pondering several offers from schools within their own state, sometimes
notice that the amount of state money they were offered at each of the schools
differs. This might be because aid is based not just on need, but also on the size
of tuition at different schools. A more expensive school will often trigger a larger
grant. However, if you applied to two comparably priced schools within your
own state, and one school gives you significantly less state aid than another, then

something is amiss because you should be getting approximately the same
amount of state aid at similarly priced schools.
Alternative State Loans
Some states make guaranteed student loans much like the Stafford loans
provided by the federal government. These are sometimes called “special loans.”
Again, if your state offers these loans and if you qualify, they will appear as part
of your aid package.
Establishing Residency in a State
In-state rates are much cheaper than out-of-state rates at public universities; at
the University of Vermont, for example, an out-of-state student pays over
$23,000 more than an in-state resident. So it should come as no surprise that
students have tried over the years to establish residency in the state of the public
university they were attending. Until recently, it was much easier for a student to
establish residency in a state if he wished to take advantage of the in-state rates.
It has since become much more difficult, with the exception of one or two states.
We will discuss establishing residency in greater detail in the “Special Topics”
chapter.
The State Agencies
Alabama
Alabama Commission on Higher Education P.O. Box 302000
Montgomery, AL 36130-2000
(334) 242-1998
www.ache.state.al.us
Alaska
Alaska Commission on Postsecondary Education P.O. Box 110505
Juneau, AK 99811

(907) 465-2962 or (800) 441-2962
acpe.alaska.gov
Arizona
Commission on Postsecondary Education 2020 N. Central Ave.
Phoenix, AZ 85004
(602) 258-2435
https://azgrants.az.gov
Arkansas
Arkansas Department of Higher Education 423 Main Street, Suite 400
Little Rock, AR 72201
(800) 547-8839, (501) 371-2000
www.adhe.edu
California
California Student Aid Commission Grant Programs–Customer Service P.O. Box
419026
Rancho Cordova, CA 95741-9026
(888) 224-7268
www.csac.ca.gov
Colorado
Colorado Commission on Higher Education 1560 Broadway, Suite 1600
Denver, CO 80202
(303) 862-3001
http://highered.colorado.gov
Connecticut
Connecticut Department of Higher Education 450 Columbus Blvd.
Hartford, CT 06103
(860) 947-1800
www.ctohe.org

Delaware
Delaware Higher Education Office
The Townsend Building
401 Federal Street, Suite 2
Dover, DE 19901
(302) 735-4000
www.doe.k12.de.us
District of Columbia
Office of the State Supt. of Education Division of Higher Education & Financial
Services 810 First Street NE, 9th Floor
Washington, DC 20002
(202) 727-2824 or (877) 485-6751
www.osse.dc.gov
Florida
Florida Department of Education
Office of Student Financial Assistance 325 West Gaines St.
Tallahassee, FL 32399
(850) 245-0505 or (888) 827-2004
www.floridas​tudentfinan​cialaid.org or www.fldoe.org
Georgia
Georgia Student Finance Commission State Loans & Grants Division 2082 East
Exchange Place
Tucker, GA 30084
(800) 505-4732
www.gsfc.org
Hawaii
Hawaii State Postsecondary Education Commission 2444 Dole Street, Room 209
Honolulu, HI 96822
(808) 956-8213

www.hawaii.edu
Idaho
Office of the State Board of Education P.O. Box 83720
Boise, ID 83720-0037
(208) 334-2270
www.boardofed.idaho.gov
Illinois
Illinois Student Assistance Commission 1755 Lake Cook Road
Deerfield, IL 60015-5209
(800) 899-4722
www.isac.org
Indiana
Indiana Commission for Higher Education 101 West Ohio Street, Suite 300
Indianapolis, IN 46204
(888) 528-4719
www.in.gov/​che
Iowa
Iowa College Student Aid Commission 430 East Grand Ave.
3rd Floor
Des Moines, IA 50309
(877) 272-4456 or (515) 725-3400
www.iowacollegeaid.gov
Kansas
Kansas Association of Student Financial Aid Administrators Kansas Board of
Regents 1000 S.W. Jackson Street
Suite 520
Topeka, KS 66612-1368
(785) 430-4255

www.kansasregents.org
Kentucky
Kentucky Higher Education Assistance Authority 100 Airport Road
Frankfort, KY 40602-0798
(800) 928-8926
www.kheaa.com
Louisiana
Louisiana Office of Student Financial Assistance 602 North 5th Street
Baton Rouge, LA 70802
(800) 259-5626
www.osfa.la.gov
Maine
Finance Authority of Maine
Maine Education Assistance Division 5 Community Drive, P.O. Box 949
Augusta, ME 04332-0949
(800) 228-3734
www.famemaine.com
Maryland
Maryland Higher Education Commission Office of Student Financial Assistance
6 North Liberty Street
Ground Suite
Baltimore, MD 21201
(410) 767-3300 or (800) 974-0203
www.mhec.state.md.us
Massachusetts
The Massachusetts Office of Student Financial Assistance 75 Pleasant Street
Malden, MA 02148
(617) 391-6070

www.osfa.mass.edu
Michigan
Michigan Higher Education
Assistance Authority
Office of Scholarships and Grants P.O. Box 30462
Lansing, MI 48909-7962
(888) 447-2687
www.michigan.gov/​mistudentaid
Minnesota
Minnesota Higher Education
Services Office
1450 Energy Park Drive
Suite 350
St. Paul, MN 55108-5227
(800) 657-3866 or (651) 642-0567
www.ohe.state.mn.us
Mississippi
Mississippi Office of State
Student Financial Aid
3825 Ridgewood Road
Jackson, MS 39211
(800) 327-2980 or (601) 432-6997
www.ihl.state.ms.us
Missouri
Missouri Department of Higher Education 205 Jefferson Street
P.O. Box 1469
Jefferson City, MO 65102-1469
(800) 473-6757 or (573) 751-2361
dhe.mo.gov

Montana
Montana Guaranteed
Student Loan Program
P.O.Box 203101
Helena, MT 59620-3101
(800) 537-7508
www.mgslp.org
Nebraska
Coordinating Commission for Postsecondary Education P.O. Box 95005
Lincoln, NE 68509-5005
(402) 471-2847
https://ccpe.nebraska.gov
Nevada
State Department of Education
700 E. Fifth Street
Carson City, NV 89701
(775) 687-9200
www.doe.nv.gov
New Hampshire
New Hampshire Department of Education 101 Pleasant Street
Concord, NH 03301
(603) 271-3494
www.state.nh.us/​postsecondary
New Jersey
HESAA
P.O. Box 545
Trenton, NJ 08625-0545
(800) 792-8670
www.hesaa.org

New Mexico
State of New Mexico
Higher Education Department
2048 Galisteo St.
Santa Fe, NM 87505
(800) 279-9777 or (505) 476-8400
www.hed.state.nm.us
New York
New York State Higher Education Services Corporation 99 Washington Avenue
Albany, NY 12255
(518) 473-1574 or (888) 697-4372
www.hesc.ny.gov
North Carolina
College Foundation of North Carolina P.O. Box 41966
Raleigh, NC 27629-1966
(888) 234-6400
www.cfnc.org
North Dakota
North Dakota University System
Tenth Floor, State Capitol
600 E. Boulevard Avenue-Dept. 215
Bismarck, ND 58505-0230
(701) 328-2960
www.ndus.edu
Ohio
Ohio Dept. of Higher Education
State Grants and Scholarship Dept.
25 South Front Street
Columbus, OH 43215

(614) 466-6000
www.ohiohighered.org
Oklahoma
State Regents for Higher Education 655 Research Parkway
Suite 200
Oklahoma City, OK 73104
(800) 858-1840 or (405) 225-9100
www.okhighered.org/​student-center
Oregon
Oregon Student Access Commission
1500 Valley River Drive
Suite 100
Eugene, OR 97401
(541) 687-7400 or (800) 452-8807
www.osac.state.or.us
Pennsylvania
Pennsylvania Higher Education Assistance Agency P.O. Box 8157
Harrisburg, PA 17105-8157
(800) 692-7392
www.pheaa.org
Rhode Island
Rhode Island Higher Education
Assistance Authority
560 Jefferson Boulevard, Suite 100
Warwick, RI 02886
(800) 922-9855 or (401) 736-1100
www.riheaa.org
South Carolina

South Carolina Higher Education
Tuition Grants Commission
115 Atrium Way, Suite 102
Columbia, SC 29223
(803) 896-1120
www.sctuitiongrants.com
South Dakota
Dept. of Ed. and Cultural Affairs Office of the Secretary
800 Governors Drive
Pierre, SD 57501
(605) 773-3134
www.doe.sd.gov
Tennessee
Tennessee Student
Assistance Corporation (TSAC)
Parkway Towers, Suite 1510
404 James Robertson Parkway
Nashville, TN 37243-0820
(800) 342-1663
(615) 741-1346
www.tn.gov/​collegepays
Texas
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board P.O. Box 12788
Austin, TX 78711-2788
(512) 427-6101
(800) 242-3062
www.thecb.state.tx.us
Utah
Utah State Board of Regents

Board of Regents Building
The Gateway
60 South 400 West
Salt Lake City, UT 84101-1284
(877) 336-7378 or (801) 321-7294
www.uheaa.org
Vermont
Vermont Student
Assistance Corporation
Champlain Mill
P.O. Box 2000
Winooski, VT 05404
(802) 654-3750
(800) 882-4166
www.vsac.org
Virginia
State Council of Higher
Education for Virginia
James Monroe Building
101 North Fourteenth Street
Richmond, VA 23219
(804) 225-2600
www.schev.edu
Washington
Washington State Higher
Education Coordinating Board
917 Lakeridge Way SW
Olympia, WA 98502
(360) 753-7800

www.wsac.wa.gov
West Virginia
West Virginia Higher Education Policy Commission 1018 Kanawha Blvd. East
Charleston, WV 25301
(304) 558-2101
http://wvhepc.edu
Wisconsin
Higher Education Aids Board
PO Box 7885
Madison, WI 53707-7885
(608) 267-2206
www.heab.state.wi.us
Wyoming
University of Wyoming
Student Financial Aid
Dept. 3335
1000 East University Avenue
Laramie, WY 82071-3335
(307) 766-2116
www.uwyo.edu
American Samoa
American Samoa Community
College Board of Higher Education P.O. Box 2609
Pago Pago, AS 96799-2609
(684) 688-9155
www.amsamoa.edu
Guam
University of Guam

Financial Aid Office
University Drive
UOG Station
Mangilao, GU 96923
(671) 735-2288
www.uog.edu
Northern Mariana Islands
Northern Marianas College
P.O. Box 501250
Saipan, MP 96950
(670) 234-5498
www.marianas.edu
Puerto Rico
Council on Higher Education
Box 19900
San Juan, PR 00919-1900
(787) 641-7100
www.ce.pr.gov
Trust Territory of Pacific Islands
Palau Community College P.O. Box 9
Koror, Republic of Palau, 96940
(680) 488-2470
www.pcc.palau.edu
Virgin Islands
Board of Education
Box 11900
60B, 61 & 62 Dronningens Gade St. Thomas, VI 00801
(340) 774-4546

http://myviboe.com

PART THREE
Filling Out the
Standardized Forms

Filling Out the Forms
Any prospective U.S. college student who wants to be considered for financial
aid must complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA). If you
are applying to private colleges (as well as a few state schools) you will probably
also have to complete the College Board’s CSS/Financial Aid PROFILE
Application.
After you finish completing your form or forms, you send the data to the need
analysis company, which then sends out reports to you and the colleges you
designate. Based on the FAFSA data, you will receive a report called the Student
Aid Report or SAR. If you also file the PROFILE form, you will receive an
Acknowledgment/Data Confirmation Report from the College Board which lists
the schools to which your PROFILE was sent and summarizes the data
submitted. In this part of the book, we will give you line-by-line instructions for
filling out the 2018–2019 version of the FAFSA as well as tips for the key
questions on the 2018–2019 PROFILE form.
First Step: Decide Which Form(s) to Fill Out
As your child narrows down his choice of colleges, you should find out which
financial aid forms are required by each of the schools. Don’t rely on the popular
college guides sold in stores for this information. These books sometimes get
their facts wrong, and can contain incorrect or outdated information. You also
shouldn’t rely on information you receive over the telephone from the schools
themselves. We are amazed at how often schools have given us misleading or
wrong information over the telephone. If you must rely on information given
over the telephone, get the name and title of the person you’re talking to. In the
financial aid process, Murphy’s Law is in full effect, and when things do go
wrong, remember it will always be your fault.
The best filing requirement and deadline information comes from the school’s
own financial aid office website. When applying to several schools you should
keep in mind that you are only allowed to file one FAFSA form per student per
year. You don’t have to fill out a separate FAFSA for each college being

considered. The form will have a space where you can list the schools to which
you are applying.
Sometimes the Schools Have Their Own Aid
Applications as Well
To make things even more confusing, some of the schools have supplemental
financial aid forms for you to fill out in addition to the forms we’ve just
mentioned. For example, any undergraduate freshman applying for financial aid
at the University of Pennsylvania must complete the Penn Financial Aid
Supplement in addition to the FAFSA and the PROFILE form. Carefully check
through the admissions applications of the schools to which your child is
applying to see if there are any supplemental aid forms that you need to
complete. Supplemental forms are very important and must be sent directly to
the individual colleges. For now, we are going to talk only about the FAFSA and
the PROFILE form.
Filling Out the Right Form
Make sure you are using the most up-to-date version of the form. Don’t laugh.
We’ve seen parents fill out last year’s form. This can happen because the
processing of the next academic year’s FAFSA form overlaps for nine months
with the processing of the current academic year’s FAFSA form. If you fill out
the wrong form during those nine months, the need analysis company will
assume you are applying for the year already underway and you will be up the
proverbial creek. The FAFSA form you want to file needs to correspond to the
academic year for which you want to receive aid.
Take Your Pick: Three Ways to File the FAFSA
Before you start in on the forms, you have an important choice to make as to
what method you’ll use to file the FAFSA. The Department of Education offers
three options:
A) The FAFSA on the Web (also known as the FOTW)

B) The paper FAFSA—The paper FAFSA form changes color from year to
year. The 2018-2019 paper version is primarily blue with some purple. (The
2017–2018 FAFSA was green and purple.)
C) The Downloadable PDF FAFSA—Instead of using the regular blue and
purple paper version of the 2018–2019 FAFSA, you can also download,
complete, print, and submit a PDF version.
While this choice will not affect how the processor calculates your EFC under
the federal formula, there are a number of advantages to filing the FOTW form
online:
• You can list up to 10 schools to receive your data (compared to only 4 with
the paper or PDF version of the form)
• You don’t need to worry if the post office lost your form or delivered it late.
• The online FAFSA form has an interactive data retrieval tool that takes you to
an IRS website that allows you to transfer some information from your tax
return (provided you’ve already filed for that year) directly onto the FAFSA.
(We’ll explain this in more detail later in the book.)
• Your FAFSA data will be processed faster
• The skip logic built into the online form helps you to avoid providing
inconsistent data.
• You don’t have to worry that some responses on the paper or PDF FAFSA
will be incorrectly inputted by the FAFSA processor.
Details on how to complete the FAFSA on the Web, or how to download the
PDF version, are available on the Department of Education’s FAFSA web page
(www.fafsa.ed.gov). You can obtain a copy of the paper FAFSA form by calling
1 800 4-FED-AID (1 800 433-3243). Be sure to specify which year’s form you
need. The 2018–2019 paper form may not be available until October 1, 2017 or
even a tad later.
If you’re already in college during the 2017–2018 school year and meet
certain requirements, you may also be able to apply for aid for the 2018–2019
academic year using a partially pre-filled FAFSA, which will only be available
online. Regardless of the method you use, each student can only file one version
of the 2018–2019 FAFSA.
Note: While the majority of our readers will be filing the 2018-2019 FAFSA
online, we realize that some of our readers will be using the blue and purple
paper version or the PDF version. Be aware that FOTW utilizes “skip logic”-

which means certain questions may not be asked based on your answers to
previous questions. For example, if the student says he won’t file a tax return,
further questions about his tax return will be omitted. Because of this “skip
logic”, the questions on the online FOTW are not asked in the same (numerical)
order as they are on the paper or PDF version. However in the interest of
clarity, and since some of our readers will be using the paper or PDF version,
our line-by-line tips for completing the FAFSA questions that follow will be done
in numerical order. Regardless of the version you file, the same questions will
have the same question numbers. On the online version, the question number
will appear in the “Help and Hints” area on the top or side of your monitor. By
placing the cursor into the response area, the question number will appear for
the corresponding question. (Key point: for some questions, you may need to
answer the question to see the appropriate “Help and Hints” text and then
change or delete your response due to a quirk with the online FAFSA
application.)
The strategies in this chapter for answering each question on the FAFSA to
the best advantage will apply for any version of the 2018–2019 FAFSA that you
choose to file. A number of the tips in this chapter relating to the completion and
filing of the FAFSA may apply only to the regular printed version or PDF
version. If you prefer to file the FOTW, you should be sure to read our line-by-
line instructions below, since the online “Help and Hints” text from the FOTW
are not as complete as the instructions on the paper and PDF versions which
follow the letter of the law and go through a formal comment period and review
process by the feds. After the FAFSA is processed, the Student Aid Report (SAR)
that is generated will list your data in the same numerical order, regardless of
the method you chose to fill out the form.
Second Step: Know Your Deadlines
Missing a financial aid deadline is worse than missing a mortgage payment.
Your bank will probably give you another chance; the colleges probably will not.
Schools process their financial aid candidates in batches. At most schools,
student aid applications are collected in a pile up until the “priority filing
deadline” (set by the school) and then assessed in one batch. If you send in your
application three weeks early, you will not necessarily be better off than
someone who just makes the deadline. However, if your application arrives a day

late, it could sit unopened in a small pile of late applications until the entire first
batch has been given aid. Then, if there is anything left in their coffers, the FAOs
look at the second batch on a rolling basis.

Click here to download a PDF of the College Deadlines Chart.

Meeting Deadlines
There are so many different deadlines to remember during the process of
applying for college admission and financial aid that the only way to keep
everything straight is to write it all down in one place. We suggest that you use
the chart that appears on the preceding page.
You should realize that the school’s deadline for the FAFSA and (if required
by the school) the PROFILE may be different for a particular school. However
because the filing periods for both forms now begin on October 1 and because
the consistency of your responses to identical questions on both forms is
important for those students who must also file the PROFILE, it is generally a
good idea to submit both the FAFSA and PROFILE at the same time. Keep in
mind that while the information relating to the prior-prior year income will
involve a time period that has long since ended, the asset information and other
demographic details of your situation will be as of the date you submit the form.
Since the majority of students apply only to schools that require the FAFSA
but do not also require the PROFILE form, the strategies for completing both
forms that follow will start with the tips for the FAFSA (so that those readers
who do not need to complete the PROFILE can skip the PROFILE sections).
However, for those students who must complete the PROFILE: it would be best
if possible to complete the PROFILE before the FAFSA (as long as you do not
risk missing any FAFSA deadline for any other non-PROFILE schools or state
aid programs that may require earlier submission than your earliest PROFILE
school’s aid deadlines). This is because the FAFSA is child’s play compared to
the PROFILE—which requires significantly more detailed information than the
federal form. Or as one senior administrator at the College Board once said in
using an analogy to a student’s academic record to compare the two forms:
“FAFSA is to grade point average, as PROFILE is to an academic transcript”. To
help insure that your responses to similar questions on the two forms are
consistent: in the tips for completing the PROFILE that follow, we provide
guidelines to assist you in identifying and matching up your responses to those
similar questions on both forms.
Note: In addition to the schools’ deadlines, some state aid programs or private
scholarship programs may have earlier deadlines than the priority deadlines set

by the particular schools for the FAFSA, PROFILE and/or their own aid form.
And some state agencies awards funds on a first-come, first-serve basis until
their coffers are empty. (See this page and this page.)
There Are Three Types of Financial Aid
Deadlines
1. The school, private scholarship program, or state agency says your
application must be mailed (and postmarked) by a particular date.
If filing a paper version: Send the form by certified mail, return receipt
requested, and make sure the postal worker shows you the postmark on the
envelope before you leave the post office.
2. Your application must be received and “date stamped” by the need analysis
company by a particular date.
In this case, you must factor in delivery time if mailing a paper form.
Again, send the application by certified mail, return receipt requested or
via regular Priority Mail at the post office (provided you can track the
delivery). If you are mailing the standardized form within two weeks of
this type of deadline, use the U.S. Postal Service’s “Express Priority”
service (which assigns a tracking number). You cannot use Federal Express
or any of the other private carriers because standardized forms must be sent
to a post office box. Since the FAFSA processor is located in a somewhat
remote location, it may take two business days for your form to be
delivered via Express Mail.
3. Your standardized application must be processed and the results made
available to the school, private scholarship program, or state agency by a
certain date.
To be on the safe side allow four weeks processing time. If the deadline is
March 1, for example, then you should submit the form (via some method
that provides tracking or confirmation) to the need analysis company by
February 1.
If you are filing a form online, then the first two types of deadlines will be the
same; namely the date you must transmit the completed form to the processor

(since it will be considered received on the date you transmit it). Last minute
filers should be aware that the processors may be located in an earlier time zone
which could affect the official receipt/transmission “date” for your form. So for
example, a filer in Oregon would have to file a form online by 9 p.m. Pacific
Time if the data is sent to a processor that uses Eastern Time for date-stamping
the form. If the form were filed at say 9:04 p.m. Pacific Time it would be
considered as received the next day. If your form must be processed by a certain
date, you should allow 2 to 3 weeks processing time.
Tip #23: Determine early on which forms you must file, and when
they are due.
So When is the Optimal Time to Submit the Aid
Forms?
One of the most difficult things about financial aid is that the answers to most
questions are: “It depends on your situation and other factors”. While
conventional wisdom holds that one should always file “as soon as possible after
a certain date”, the reality is that you should file at the appropriate time when
you will demonstrate the greatest need for aid. So…..
1) If you are applying for aid at one of the few schools (Florida State is one
such school that comes to mind) that still awards financial aid on a first come-
first served (FCFS) basis instead of setting a priority filing date, then you should
file the 2018-2019 aid forms as soon as possible after September 30, 2017. (Be
aware that the overwhelming majority of colleges no longer award funds this
way, as they learned a long time ago it is better for their enrollment goals to
leverage their aid by rationing their funds instead. If a school’s aid requirements
advise you to complete the forms “as soon as possible after X date but before Y
date, then Y is the priority filing deadline and they do not award funds first
come-first served.)
2) If you reside in one of the states that awards state aid on an FCFS basis
until funds run out, then you also want to file the FAFSA and other required
forms ASAP after September 30, 2017. Based on state aid information listed on

this page of the 2018-2019 draft version of the FAFSA, the applicable states are:
Alaska, Illinois, Kentucky, Missouri, Nevada, North Carolina, North Dakota,
Oklahoma, Oregon, South Carolina, Tennessee, Vermont, and Washington. The
other 37 states and the District of Columbia appear to not have such policies
(providing a fixed cut-off deadline to apply), though it is best to contact your
state agency for full details. (See this page for a contact info.)
3) If none of the colleges or your state agency award funds on an FCFS basis,
the earliest school’s deadline by which a standardized need analysis form must
will be sent to or received by the need analysis company becomes your overall
deadline. In this case, you should file the form after October 1 but before your
earliest deadline, during the time period when your family contribution is likely
to be the lowest number. Let’s say your earliest deadline is January 31, 2018 for
the 2018-2019 year, but you will be getting a large bonus check from your
employer right after New Year’s Day for the prior year. You would be better off
filing the form before that the bonus money inflates your assets. Do you make
estimated tax payments? You would be better off making that next payment and
have the payment clear your account before you file so that your reportable
assets are lower at the time you file.
And even though the FAFSA filing period now begins three months earlier,
from what we have heard so far from our contacts in the financial aid trenches it
does not appear that many schools will be moving up their admission or aid
deadlines - at least for applications involving the 2018-2019 school year. So if
you don’t fit into category 1 or 2 above, your aid forms may not be due until
sometime in early 2018 unless the student is applying for admission as an “early
decision” or “early action” candidate.
Once the need analysis company has your numbers, it sends them to all the
schools you designated on that form. If the student subsequently decides to apply
to some additional school(s) after you filed the standardized form(s), you will
need to remember to send the data to the additional school(s). (We’ll advise how
to do this later.)
Regardless of your situation, keep in mind that the instructions for the FAFSA
say that you have until late June 30, 2019 (that is, at end of the academic year for
which you want aid) to fill out the FAFSA. What they mean is that the need
analysis company is willing to accept and process the form until this date, but by
then there will be virtually no money left at almost any college in the land.

The Standardized Form Deadlines May Be
Different from the Individual Aid Form Deadlines
If you are applying to a school that asks you to fill out their own separate
supplemental financial aid form in addition to a standardized form, make sure
you know the deadlines for each form. Unfortunately, these deadlines are usually
different. Even if they are the same, the standardized form may have a postmark
deadline while the college form has a receipt deadline, or vice versa. The only
way to keep all this straight is to read each college’s bulletin carefully and then
use a deadline chart like the one we provide on this page.
Supplemental Forms at the Highly Selective
Colleges
Some Ivy League schools, the “little Ivies,” and many other selective schools
have rather extensive financial aid forms of their own. The quantity of
paperwork may seem daunting at first, but when you start answering the
questions you will begin to notice that many of the questions on the forms are
identical—designed to get more detailed responses to the questions already
asked on the FAFSA and/or the PROFILE form and to discover inconsistencies
in your responses. Individual schools may also ask a few questions that may
strike you as bizarre. This is less Big Brotherish than it sounds. The FAOs are
just trying to find recipients for restricted awards donated by alumni that the aid
office would prefer to award before they tap their unrestricted funds.
Be aware that some schools (Boston University is one that comes to mind)
may establish earlier filing deadlines than their normal deadlines for
prospective students who wish to be considered for special scholarships. So if
your child is an above average candidate for admission at the college, it is best
to review the information on the school’s admission office’s web site regarding
institutional scholarships based on merit or a combination of merit and need to
determine if there are earlier deadlines than the stated deadlines listed on the
college’s aid office web site.
Third Step: Determine if Any of the Colleges You

are Applying to Require the College Board’s
PROFILE Application
Many private colleges and a handful of state schools will require completion of
the CSS/ Financial Aid PROFILE form in addition to the FAFSA if one wishes
to be considered for institutional aid as well as federal aid. While original paper
FAFSA forms are available by calling 1-800-4-FED-AID, the PROFILE form
can only be obtained by first creating an online College Board account at the
Collegeboard.org website. While it’s possible for parents to use the student’s
College Board account to complete the PROFILE, we do not recommend that for
a variety of reasons. For example, if the two biological or adoptive parents are
no longer living together, the noncustodial parent could view all the intimate
financial details of the custodial parent if the student’s College Board account
was used for the PROFILE and the noncustodial parent knew the valid log-in
information for that student account.
For dependent students, parental information is required on the PROFILE just
as it is on the FAFSA. However, unlike the FAFSA, some—but not all—of the
colleges that require the PROFILE will also require information from the non-
custodial parent (that is, a parent with whom the student spends the least amount
of time, or no time-- if both biological or adoptive parents are alive, but no
longer living together.)
There is a $9 PROFILE application fee, as well as a $16 processing fee per
school—for PROFILES submitted by the student and/or the custodial parent(s).
A noncustodial parent will pay a $25 one-time processing fee for their form,
regardless of the number of colleges who need it. Since you will have to pay this
fee using a credit card or an electronic debit when you submit your completed
PROFILE data, you should carefully review each college’s financial aid
requirements in order to determine which ones (if any) need the PROFILE
information. Certain users may be eligible for a fee waiver for up to the first
eight colleges/programs. There are also some private scholarship programs that
require the PROFILE.
Once you log on to the PROFILE application with your College Board
account, user-name and password, further information on completing the
PROFILE will become available. Due to the skip-logic built into the PROFILE
application, you need to carefully follow the instructions and help comments so
that the proper questions will be generated based on your individual situation.

Since the PROFILE is a more detailed form than the FAFSA, it is best for the
custodial parent of a dependent student to complete the PROFILE form instead
of the student to better insure that the proper questions are generated
Not Too Early
While counseling thousands of individual clients over the past 25 years, we’ve
noticed that many families fit into two distinct categories: those who like to do
things right away and those who like to wait until the last minute. When
handling the PROFILE application either course of action could get you into
trouble.
While you can register for, complete, and submit the 2018–2019 PROFILE
anytime on or after October 1, 2017, keep in mind that you will be paying a $16
processing fee for any school or program that you designate to receive your
PROFILE information. So it would make sense to wait a while to submit your
completed PROFILE to the processor until the student has a better idea of their
list of schools. (You might also want to wait until you make any appropriate
changes to your financials that could lower your EFC!) While you can change
the list of schools/programs that you have provided before you submit the form,
you will be charged for any school that you have selected to receive your
PROFILE data at the time you submit your completed application to the
processor. So unless the college requests the completion of the PROFILE form
in the early fall for an Early Decision or Early Action application (see this page),
it is a good idea to wait to submit the PROFILE until you are closer to your
earliest school’s or program’s PROFILE deadline. Otherwise, if you apply too
soon you may be paying a fee for schools to which the child never decides to
apply. Note: once you submit your PROFILE for processing, you can then add
additional schools (at $16 per school) and you will be asked any additional
supplemental questions that are required by the added school(s) but have not
been previously asked. You will also have the opportunity to update any of the
data previously submitted, though such revisions will only be sent to the
additional schools you are adding.
Not Too Late

While you can now set up a free account on the College Board’s website and
then complete and submit the PROFILE in one online session, it is still not a
good idea to wait until right before your earliest school’s PROFILE deadline to
get started. During peak processing periods, the College Board website may run
slowly or be difficult to access. If additional supplements are required, you will
also need some time to complete them and work out the logistics of getting the
data to the appropriate schools by their deadlines.
Fourth Step: Decide Whether You Can Get Your
Taxes Done in Time to Fill Out the FAFSA and/or
the PROFILE Form
Prior to the 2018-2019 FAFSA and PROFILE, most families had to estimate
their base year income on the forms because they needed to file the aid forms
before they could complete their tax returns for the “prior-year”.
However, with the switch to the use of prior-prior year (PPY) data on the
standardized aid forms, most individuals who were required to file a tax return
for the PPY will have done so before they need to file the forms. However, it
would still be much better if you were not reading this chapter on the day of the
deadline, because this is going to take more time than you think—if you want to
maximize your aid. A ten-year-old child can fill out the form, but HOW you fill
it out will determine your aid package. As you will soon find out, the questions
involving PPY income will still only encompass a fraction of the data required to
submit the forms. As such, you should begin gathering together all this
information weeks before you plan to submit the aid forms.
Here are the records you will need:
1. Completed 2016 federal tax return (including all schedules), if filed. (If
2016 return not filed, see below)
2. 2016 W-2 forms
3. Records of 2016 untaxed income (social security payments received,
welfare
payments, tax-exempt interest income, etc.)
4. Bank statements
5. Brokerage statements

6. Mortgage statements (for all properties other than the primary residence)
7. Student’s social security number and driver’s license (if available)
8. If you are an owner of a business, the business’s financial statements or
corporate tax return
9. Other investment statements and records (including any farm you own, but
don’t live on and operate)
10. Records of 2016 child support paid to or received by former spouse And if
you will be filing the PROFILE in addition to the FAFSA, you will also
need:
11. Records of 2016 medical and dental expenses (must have been actually
paid or charged on your credit card during 2016)
12. Records of any post–secondary tuition paid or that will be paid during the
2017-2018 school year
13. Records of any educational loan payments made (or to be made in 2016
and 2017)
14. Mortgage statement(s) for your primary residence
15. The amount of any financial aid awarded for the 2017-2018 school year
(for any household member)
If you have NOT completed your 2016 tax return by the time you need to
complete the aid forms:
Obviously, it will be easier to complete the 2018-2019 standardized aid form
if you first complete your 2016 tax returns and then file the aid forms. However,
if you are applying for aid at the relatively rare school that actually awards aid
funds on a first-come, first-served basis and/or you are a resident of a state that
awards state aid funds on a rolling basis until such funds are depleted, then you
should not delay filing the aid forms. You should simply use your best estimates
for your PPY information and submit the aid forms. (In this case, it would be
helpful to have a copy of your 2015 return as well as a blank copy of the 2016
tax return as the line items on the tax returns can change from year to year.)
However, you will want to file your tax return(s) as soon as possible (if required
to do so), and then revised your estimated information reported on the aid forms
as soon as you are able to do so.
If you are not required to file a U.S. tax return: you should not feel that it is
necessary to do so in order to apply for aid. The financial aid application process
and forms are designed to also accommodate those who do not file a U.S. tax

return (or those who are only required to file a foreign tax return).
A Word About Confidentiality
The information you supply will go directly to the financial aid office and will
stay there. You can trust them to keep information confidential. No one else at
the school will see your personal data. And no one else at the school—not
professors, students, or administrators—will know who is getting financial aid
and who isn’t.
Some parents are reluctant to share intimate details with a stranger. No matter
how spectacular the details of your private life are, the FAOs have seen worse.
And frankly, the FAOs are too busy coping with the needs of thousands of
students to have time to make value judgments.
Currently the only way the IRS can see a copy of your need analysis form is
by getting a subpoena, although the laws could change soon. However, the
Secretary of Education now has the authority to verify the information on the
FAFSA with the IRS.
Practice, Practice, Practice
If you’re completing a paper form: before you even touch the form you are
using, make a photocopy of it. You will use the copy to work on. Once you are
satisfied with all of your entries, you can transfer the information carefully onto
the real form. Only the original green and purple FAFSA form or the PDF
version of the FAFSA will be accepted by the FAFSA processor. When you’ve
finished, make a photocopy of the completed form and put it in a safe place.
If you’re filing a form online: you should fill out a worksheet copy of the form
before you start inputting your responses online. For the FAFSA you could either
print out the worksheet version of the form that is provided online or you could
simply work on a paper version of the form. For the PROFILE you can print out
the worksheet copy provided by the processor.
If you are in the habit of just dumping all of your financial records at your
accountant’s office, change your habits for the next four years. Photocopy every
conceivably relevant document, and then dump them at your accountant’s office.

Read ALL the Instructions
You should read all the instructions on the form before you begin work. In many
cases, these instructions will be sketchy or misleading. Hopefully this book will
clarify what the forms do not.
If you’re completing a paper version of a form: Make sure you use the proper
writing implement. Also, be sure you complete the response areas the proper
way. If they want a 
, don’t give them a 
 instead. Writing in the margins is
forbidden. You are also not allowed to give a range of numbers for a particular
item. For example, you cannot write down $700–$800. It must be $750.
And regardless of the way you file a form: Use whole dollar amounts only. Do
not include cents or decimals. When writing down the numeric equivalent of a
single-digit date, the MMDDYYYY format is usually requested. Thus, January
5, 1995 would look like this: 01 05 1995.
Which Parent(s) Must Report Information on the
FAFSA and PROFILE
Beginning with the 2014-2015 FAFSA, new guidelines for dependent students
were established involving which of the student’s parents’ information will be
required to be reported on the FAFSA. The PROFILE form mirrors these
guidelines as well. Here is the gist of them:
• If the biological and/or adoptive parents of the student are living together,
then information from both parents is required to be reported on the FAFSA
and PROFILE, regardless of their marital status and regardless of their
genders.
• If the biological and/or adoptive parents of the student are living apart (that
is, they are divorced, separated or were never married): then only the parent
with whom the student spent the most time in the 12-month period prior to
completing the FAFSA should report parental information on the FAFSA and
PROFILE. That parent will be known in financial aid circles as the “custodial
parent”. If that amount of time is exactly equal, then the parent who provided
the greater amount of support during the past 12 months (or if no support, the
greater support during the last year when support was provided) will be the
criteria used. So under the current rules, it does not matter which parent

claims the student on their taxes, which parent was awarded custody and/or
which parent is legally responsible to pay for college.
•  If a divorced or widowed parent is remarried (or the student’s parents were
never married, but now the biological or adoptive parent is married to
someone other than the student’s other parent), then the information of the
custodial parent and custodial stepparent is required to be reported.
• If one of the student’s biological or adopted parents is deceased and the
surviving parent is not married, then only the surviving parent’s information
is reported.
Be aware that this determination is made based on the situation on the date the
aid form is completed, not the situation during the prior-prior year. Given all the
fine print, it makes sense to carefully review the applicable parts of the FAFSA
and PROFILE instructions when completing the form.
Don’t Skip
Finally, don’t skip any question unless the instructions specifically tell you that
you can. If you do not own a business, for example, put down “0” for any values
related to a business. If you leave certain items blank on the paper version or
PDF version of the FAFSA, the processor will just send the paper form back to
you to correct. You can’t afford to lose the time that takes.
Getting Started If You Are Filling Out the Online
FAFSA (FOTW)
To find the FAFSA online, go to www.fafsa.ed.gov and click on the “Start a New
FAFSA” tab. If the student has an FSA ID, you’ll be invited to enter it. If you
don’t, you can start by entering the student information instead—but it actually
makes sense to get an FSA ID before you start filling out the FAFSA.
The FSA ID came into being in May 2015—and has been causing mass
confusion ever since among parents, students, guidance counselors, and even
financial aid officers. The FSA ID has several important functions: first, it can

serve as a signature when you submit your FAFSA data. Second, it permits you
to access your processed FAFSA data at a later date, and if necessary revise or
correct it. Third, it permits you to apply for federal education loans online.
Fourth, it allows you to access your federal education loan history via the
National Student Loan Data System (NSLDS). And fifth, it allows you to
complete the Agreement to Serve (ATS) for the federal TEACH grant program.
What it does NOT do, is serve as a “password” for your FOTW application
prior to submission. When you start filling out the FAFSA form, one of the first
things you’ll be asked to do is create a 4 to 8 character, case-sensitive “Save
Key”. If you don’t create and submit the FAFSA in one session (and who does?),
you’ll need this “Save Key” to go back online and access your previously-saved
FOTW data. (Forgot your Save Key? You can enter the zip code that was listed
as part of the student’s address on your saved FAFSA, and you’ll be able to
create a new Save Key.)
To get an FSA ID, go to www.fsaid.ed.gov. On this site, you’ll be asked to
create a user name/password combination. Because the FAFSA of a dependent
student must be signed by both the student and one parent/step-parent whose
information is reported on the FAFSA, both the student and the parent/step-
parent must create their own FSA ID user name and password combination. (The
passwords can be the same for multiple individuals, but each user name created
must be unique.) The user name doesn’t have to be your own name—if fact, it is
probably not a good idea to do that. The 6 to 30 character user name can be any
combination of numbers and/or (non-case sensitive) letters so long as no one has
already taken that exact same user name for their FSA ID. For the 8 to 30
character case-sensitive password, one must use a minimum of three of the
following four items in one’s password: an uppercase letter, a lowercase letter, a
number, a special character (for example: * or #). When creating an FSA ID, the
first requested item is an email address—but we strongly urge that you NOT
supply any email address (it is not required), as it increases the possibility that
hackers could use your email address in an attempt to phish and access your
private information.
You’ll be asked some personal identification information, including your
social security number, and five challenge questions (along the lines of “What
was the name of your first pet?”) Unlike most websites, if you cannot supply the
correct user name and password when asked, and then can’t answer the
challenge questions correctly, you’ll have to create a new FSA ID from scratch.

After you provide all the required data, you’ll hit the Submit tab. It will take
up to 3 business days for your submitted information to be verified with various
government agencies. Once verified, the FSA ID you created can be used to
access all the U.S. Dept. of Education websites that you are likely to need in the
course of obtaining federal aid. However if your FSA ID information has not yet
been verified, a recently-created FSA ID can still be used immediately after it is
created to electronically sign a new FOTW. Be aware that no ID number will be
generated for the FSA ID; the unique user name and case-sensitive password
combination created is the actual FSA ID!
Moving Right Along
You will find a draft version of the 2018–2019 FAFSA on this page. We don’t
anticipate any major changes in the ordering of the questions on the final paper
version of the FAFSA. We will inform you of any significant changes to the
forms 
or 
rules 
regarding 
financial 
aid 
on 
our 
website
(www.princetonreview.com/​financialaidupdate). 
Finally, 
any 
reference 
to
Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) in this part of the book does not include
Education IRAs (which are not retirement accounts and are now more
commonly called Coverdell Education Savings Accounts).
FILLING OUT THE 2018–2019 FAFSA
1–3. Your name. By this, they mean the student’s name. On need analysis
forms, “you” always refers to the student. This name must agree
exactly (down to the middle initial) with the name listed on the
student’s social security card. It should also agree with the name of the
student on the admissions application. If the first name is listed as
Giovanni on the social security card, don’t write down John on the
need analysis form.
If you have two children applying for aid, you must fill out two
separate forms, even though the information will be largely identical.
Do this even if the children are planning to attend the same college.
4–7. Address. Do not use the student’s address at boarding school or any

other temporary address. Much of the mail you will receive from the
colleges will be time sensitive. It’s important that you get it quickly.
When filling out question 6—your home state—be sure to use the
proper abbreviation.
8. Your social security number. By this, they mean the student’s social
security number. These days, all students are required to have one. If
your child does not have one, get one immediately; your form will be
returned unprocessed if you do not complete this item. If you can’t get
a number in time for the deadlines, call the need analysis company. If
your child does have one, be careful copying the social security
number onto the form and make sure it agrees with the number on the
admissions application. At some schools students are still called up on
the computer by social security number. The Department of Education
will now check this number against the social security database. If the
number doesn’t match the name, there will be no aid until the problem
is corrected and it does match.
9. Your date of birth. Again, this is the student’s date of birth. For a
student who was born March 5, 1999, the correct answer should be “03
05 1999” not “3 5 1999.”
10. Your permanent home phone. Remember to include the area code.
11–12. Your driver’s license number and state. This question is presumably
here so that there is some means of tracking the student down later for
student loan payments. When you copy down the license number
itself, do not include dashes or spaces even if you see them on your
license. If the student has no license, leave these two questions blank.
These questions are optional on the online FOTW.
13. Your e-mail address. If you provide an e-mail address, you will only
be able to view your information at a later date via the internet. If you
wish to get a paper version of your SAR (as well as being able to
access it online), you should leave this question blank.
14–15. Are you a U.S. citizen? To get federal aid the student must be either a
U.S. citizen or an eligible noncitizen (in most cases, the holder of a

green card, although there are some exceptions. Consult the
instructions for the FAFSA). If the student will have a green card by
the time she starts school, but doesn’t have one on the day you fill out
the form, you should contact the financial aid offices of the schools she
is interested in for further instructions on how to proceed.
If the student is not a U.S. citizen or eligible noncitizen (or is a U.S.
citizen/eligible noncitizen living overseas), you may also have to
complete special “international student” aid forms. Ask the FAOs for
details at the schools to which you are applying.
16–17. As of today, what is your marital status? This refers to the student’s
marital status, not the parents’. If the student is married, separated,
widowed, or divorced, answer question 17 as well; otherwise, leave it
blank. Note: If you indicate that the student is “married / remarried”,
then all required student income and asset questions for the FAFSA (as
well as the PROFILE, if required) must include information regarding
the student’s spouse as well.
18. Your state of legal residence. This can be quite important if you are
applying to state schools. Be sure to use the proper abbreviation.
19–20. Date you began living in your state of legal residence. This is a
double check to see if you really meet the residency requirements of
the state you put down in question 18. If you answer “no” for question
19, then you must also answer question 20. For a student who became
a legal resident in March, 2016, your answer should be, “03 2016”, not
“3 2016.”
21–22. Are you male or female? Do you give Selective Service permission
to register you? To receive federal aid, males 18 years old and older
are required to register. If the student is male, then you may need to
answer question 22 as well.
You can answer “Register me” for question 22 only if the student is
already 18 (but not yet 26) and has not yet registered. Since few
students are just turning 18 when the FAFSA is completed, it is
probably best to put a reminder in your calendar for your son to go to

the post office and register the week he turns 18. (Since there is no
draft at present, this only involves filling out a form.)
A note for potential conscientious objectors: by registering for the
Selective Service, you are not expressing a willingness to serve. The
first step in the process of achieving conscientious objector status is to
register.
23. Drug conviction information. This is a very important question. If
the student has never been convicted of any illegal drug offense, while
receiving federal student aid, be sure that you enter “No” for the
response. If you file the online version, this question will only be
asked if the student has previously received federal student aid.
24–25. Parents’ education. These questions do not affect federal aid. They
may affect state aid or institutional aid in some cases. These questions
relate to the natural parents of the student—not the stepparents. These
questions refer to the highest level completed, not the highest grade.
Thus, if the student’s father attended only one year of college, use the
response for “High school,” in question 24.
26. High school diploma/GED/homeschooling/other information. This
question refers to the student’s educational status before the first day
of college. For most students, the answer will be “High school
diploma”.
27. Your high school information. Follow the instructions and answer
accordingly. If you are filing the online FOTW, the name of the school
you input will be matched with a database. If you encounter trouble,
ask your high school counselor for the exact way to enter the name.
28. Will you have your first bachelor’s degree before you begin the
2018-2019 school year? For most undergraduate students, of course,
the answer will be no.
29. Your grade level during the 2018–2019 school year? If your child
will be enrolling for the first time as a freshman, use the appropriate
response for “never attended college & 1st year undergraduate” even if

he took college courses while he was in high school. This question is
used to determine annual borrowing limits for student loans and refers
to the student’s academic standing at school, not the number of years
he’s been attending college. Enter the appropriate response for the
grade level the student has attained at the start of the academic year,
rather than the level the student will attain during the year. For
example, a student who in the fall term will be a second semester
sophomore 
should 
use 
the 
response 
“2nd 
year
undergraduate/sophomore” even though she will be a junior by mid-
year.
30. Your degree/certificate code. You should choose the most appropriate
response from the choices provided.
31. Are you interested in being considered for work study? You would
like the colleges to come up with their best offer before you start to
commit yourself. Because of this, we recommend that you indicate you
are interested in work-study. This does not commit you; you can
change your mind later. This question has no effect on grant or
scholarship eligibility.
Now that you’ve completed some basic information regarding the student, it’s
time to move on to the more important questions on the FAFSA. You will notice
that questions 32–45 for the student and questions 80–94 for the parent(s) are
almost identical, though the numbering of the questions is different. Since most
of our readers will be having to complete all of these questions, for simplicity
sake we will be pairing up these questions later in this chapter. To determine for
sure whether or not you’ll need to complete the questions in the purple shaded
areas of the FAFSA, you’ll need to first determine the student’s status. So let’s
skip questions 32–45 for now and go directly to Step Three, questions 46–58.
These questions are here to establish whether a student is independent or
dependent. (A dependent student usually receives financial help from her family.
An independent student does not.) The colleges would prefer that all their
students were dependent. Independent students are much more expensive for a
school since they usually require more financial aid.
Of course it would be wonderful if your child could establish that he is
independent, but there are several tough criteria to meet and they get tougher all

the time. If a student can answer “yes” to any of the questions 46–58, then he is
undoubtedly independent for federal aid purposes for the 2018–2019 academic
year.
46. Were you born before January 1, 1995?
47. As of today, are you married?
48. During the school year 2018–2019, will you be working on a masters or
doctorate program?
49. Are you currently serving on active duty in the U.S. Armed Forces for
purposes other than training?
50. Are you a veteran of the U.S. Armed Forces?
51. Do you have children who will receive more than half of their support from
you between July 1, 2018 and June 30, 2019?
52. Do you have dependents (other than your children or spouse) who live with
you and receive more than half of their support from you, now and through
June 30, 2019?
53. When you were age 13 or older, were both of your parents deceased, were
you in foster care, or were you a dependent/ward of the court?
54. As of today, are you an emancipated minor as determined by a court in
your state of legal residence?
55. As of today, are you in legal guardianship as determined by a court in your
state of legal residence?
56. At any time on or after July 1, 2017, did your high school or school district
homeless liaison determine that you were an unaccompanied youth who
was homeless?
57. At any time on or after July 1, 2017, did the director of an emergency
shelter program funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development determine that you were an unaccompanied youth who was

homeless?
58. At any time on or after July 1, 2017, did the director of a runaway or
homeless youth basic center or transitional living program determine that
you were an unaccompanied youth who was homeless or were self-
supporting and at risk of being homeless?
If you are able to answer “Yes” to any of these questions, according to federal
guidelines, you are an independent student and you can usually skip the parents’
purple-shaded questions on the rest of the form.
Veterans of the financial aid process will notice that there are more ways for a
student to be considered independent for the 2018-2019 academic year than
there were a few years ago. But before you answer “yes” to any of these
questions you should read them carefully. And for questions 49–50, and 53–58,
you should be sure to read the notes regarding them in the FAFSA instructions—
because there is a lot of fine print involved.
If you answer “No” to each of the questions from 46–58, then most likely the
child will be considered a dependent student in which case you get to skip the
independent student questions (95–102) in Step Five of the form.
One exception to these rules would be for certain graduate health profession
students. Graduate students who apply for federal aid from programs under title
VII of the Public Health Service Act may need to give information about their
parents, even if they filled in “yes” to any of the questions in Step Three. In this
instance, we suggest you contact the FAOs at the schools to which you are
applying and inquire about this before you fill out the FAFSA.
A few years ago, claiming that the child was an independent student was a
popular financial aid loophole that many parents took advantage of. The colleges
and the government have since cracked down and every year the rules get more
stringent. If you can go the independent route, be prepared to provide extensive
documentation to the financial aid office—i.e., birth certificate (proving you will
be at least 24 by January 1 of the academic year you are seeking aid), marriage
license, court decisions, discharge papers, etc. You should also be aware that
many schools have even tougher criteria for proving independence than the
federal guidelines. Some colleges require independent students to fill out the
parent information on the FAFSA form even if they do meet the federal
guidelines, and a few will insist that parents are still responsible for some portion
of their child’s tuition.

In very rare circumstances, the FAOs can use their professional judgment to
decide that a student is independent even if the student doesn’t completely fit the
federal criteria.
Now that you’ve completed Step Three on the form, let’s move on to the
financial questions on the form, which are the most important ones. As
mentioned earlier, questions 32–45 for the student and questions 80–94 are very
similar. To simplify matters, we’ll be pairing them up. Thus, for example, we
will address question 36—the adjusted gross income for the student—and
question 85—the adjusted gross income for the parent—simultaneously. Before
you begin writing your responses for these questions, we first recommend that
you read the instructions that appear at the top of these steps of the FAFSA. We
also suggest that you reread Chapter Three of this book.
If you are filing the online version of the FAFSA and the student and/or the
student’s parent(s) have already completed a final version of the 2016 U.S. tax
return and filed it with the IRS: then you may or may not be able to use the “IRS
Data Retrieval Tool” (or DRT) to have your income tax data automatically
transferred from the IRS database onto the form. By using this tool, you also
reduce the chances your application will be subject to additional scrutiny
through a financial aid process known as “Verification” (which we discuss later
in this part of the book and is not nearly as onerous as it sounds).
Given that the 2018-2019 FAFSA will be asking about prior-prior year (2016)
and most individuals will have already completed their 2016 personal return,
more students and their parents will be able to use the IRS DRT when they file
the original 2018-2019 FAFSA compared to older versions of the form—when
prior year data had to be estimated if the tax returns could not be done before the
aid deadlines.
If you are not able to use the IRS DRT for whatever reason—for example, you
have not yet filed the return or the tool is generating some error message—this is
no reason for panic. While use of the IRS DRT is encouraged by the feds and the
colleges, it is not mandatory. And you should not delay filing the FAFSA until
you can get the tool to work, if such a delay could result in a possible reduction
of aid. (See this page for guidelines as to when to file for optimal aid.)
But even if you’re permitted to use the tool (which is recommended), there are
still some glitches that can occur. But more important, there are a few specific
instances where use of the tool can result in a higher EFC figure if you are not
careful. So be sure to read the section entitled “Key Things To Know About the

IRS Data Retrieval Tool and the IRS Transcript Verification Requirement” that
begins on this page before you continue further with completing the FAFSA.
And whether or not you are able to use the IRS DRT, we will still provide
line-by-line tips for each of the remaining question on the FAFSA, which you
should be sure review even if the tool provided the answer. Given that the IRS
tool does not provide pre-filled answers for all the financial questions, we will
also note those that will transfer from the tool with the words “IRS transfer” for
easier identification.
33–35. and
81–83.
Type of U.S. income tax return. (IRS transfer for some of
them, see comments and warning below!) These questions are
being asked to determine if you meet some of the criteria for the
Simplified Needs Test or the Automatic Zero-EFC. Many parents
will probably be using the 1040 form just because their tax
situation is no longer simple. If children can avoid filing a tax
return at all, it may be to the family’s advantage. If your child
must file, use the simplest form possible. If the parents can file
the 1040A or the 1040EZ form (or are not required to file any tax
return), it may be to your advantage in order to qualify for the
Simplified Needs Test (which excludes all assets from the federal
formula) or the Automatic Zero-EFC. If you are going to be
estimating on the FAFSA, you may at least want to figure out
which IRS form, if any, you will eventually be filing. By saying
here on the FAFSA that the parent(s) intend to file the 1040 and
are not eligible or don’t know if they are eligible to file the
1040A or the 1040EZ (or are not required to file any tax return),
you will disqualify yourself from the Simplified Needs Test or
the Automatic Zero-EFC during the initial processing. Even if
they later end up filing the 1040A or the 1040EZ and you qualify
for the Simplified Needs Test or the Automatic Zero-EFC, you
may find that the colleges have given away the bulk of their
available aid and will not be able to increase your package. By
the same token, if you say here that they intend to use the short
form and then eventually file the long form, you may lose your
Simplified Needs Test or the Automatic Zero-EFC status, and
with it, a substantial piece of change in the form of reduced aid

If you have already filed a 1040, but are certain that you were eligible to file a
1040A or 1040EZ (or were not required to file any tax return), you should
answer “Yes” to question 35 if this applies to the student and you should answer
yes to question 83 if it applies to the parent(s). If you have not yet filed, but are
certain you can file a 1040A or a 1040EZ (and you are required to file a return),
if at all possible you should file those forms with the IRS to avoid any confusion
in the financial aid office. You should also reread our section on the Simplified
Needs Test and the Automatic Zero-EFC (see this page).
For Questions 34 and 82 (IRS transfer - eventually): Select from the menu
choices based on the anticipated or actual filing status you will claim on the tax
return. (You will be asked to answer these questions online if you indicate a
return was completed so that the processor can determine if you can use the IRS
DRT. But after you use the IRS DRT, the words, “Transferred from the IRS” will
appear next to these two questions, if applicable.
If you filed, or will file, a foreign tax return, or a tax return for Puerto Rico,
certain U.S. territories (such as Guam, American Samoa, the U.S. Virgin Islands,
Swain’s Island or the Marianas Islands) or one of the freely associated states
(i.e., the Republic of Palau, the Republic of the Marshall Islands or the Federated
States of Micronesia), be sure to read the corresponding Notes in the FAFSA
instructions. Those who file a foreign tax return should also consult this page in
the “Special Topics” chapter of this book.
For Questions 35 and 83. (Warning: we are not sure if the IRS DRT will
generate the correct answers for these questions for those with Adjusted Gross
Incomes below $50,000 on a completed IRS 1040 return.) When we went to
press, a demo version of the online FAFSA was not yet available to the aid
community. For those who file the IRS 1040 (the type of return is asked in
questions 33 and 81, and then the DRT pre-fills the actual response with the IRS
transfer), we are not sure if the IRS Tool will properly diagnose and supply a
“Yes” response for FAFSA 35 or 83 if the tax filer could file a 1040A or 1040EZ
- or if it will diagnose those who had gross income that was below the level
where one is required to file. As such, one should pay attention to any responses
generated by the IRS DRT for questions 35 and 83 if you otherwise qualify for
the Simplified Needs Test or the Automatic-Zero EFC
36 and 85.
Adjusted gross income. (IRS transfer) If you’ve already filed
your taxes: just copy the appropriate line requested from your
federal return if you are not able to use the IRS DRT. For

example, if you filed the 1040, the AGI is on line 37
However, if you filed as married filing jointly for the 2016 tax return, but now
at the time of FAFSA filing are subsequently separated or divorced from the
person with whom you filed jointly:
1) you should not be given the option to use the IRS DRT. If you are given the
option, most likely you answered some prior question incorrectly.
2) You will need to provide the proportionate share of your Adjusted Gross
Income (as well as your proportionate share of U.S. Income Taxes Paid for
FAFSA question 37 or 86). See Item 3 under Worksheet for Calculating the
Expected Family Contribution for a Dependent Student for more details on how
to do this.
The same situation would occur if you are now widowed, but filed a joint
return for 2016 (even if your late spouse passed away before the end of 2016).
Conversely, if you are now married (or remarried) but your current spouse did
not file a joint tax return with you for 2016, then you should not be able to use
the IRS DRT and you will need to add the adjusted gross income of your current
spouse to your AGI to derive your answer to FAFSA 36 or 85. The same is true
for the amount of U.S. Taxes Paid for FAFSA questions 37 or 86.
And finally if you filed jointly in 2016, are no longer married to that other
person, but are now remarried (and/or your current spouse was married to
someone else in 2016 and filed a joint 2016 tax return with that person): you will
need to determine the proportionate share of AGI and the U.S Taxed paid for the
2016 tax return filed with a former spouse, and then combine the appropriate
answers to arrive at the correct amounts to use. In this way, the combined
number will exclude the former spouse(s)’ AGI and U.S Income Taxes Paid.
If you have not yet filed your 2016 taxes: then use the worksheet we provide
at the back of this book (See this page) to derive your best estimate. The 2015
returns can be very helpful in reminding you of all the different kinds of income
and expenses you have had in the past. A blank copy of the 2016 return is
important as IRS line items can change from year to year. The same process
must be duplicated for the student’s income.
37 and 86.
U.S. income tax paid. (IRS transfer) If you have already filed
an income tax return and are not able to use the IRS DRT, you
should write down the total federal income taxes that you paid.
The FAFSA form will tell you where to find this on the 2016 tax
forms. Do not include the self-employment tax.

If you are estimating, remember that this number is not necessarily the same
as the amount your employer withheld. You may have to pay more or less than
your withholdings. Remember also that you paid taxes even if you got a refund.
Every year we see at least one family who, because they received a refund, put
down “0” for their U.S. income tax paid. The amount of federal taxes you paid
will be a deduction in the aid formula, so it is in your interest to report all of it.
Use a draft of the 2016 return and the IRS instructions as well as Table 6 on this
page to assist you. It may be helpful to refer to your 2015 return as well.
The need analysis companies always seem to catch errors in the parents’ favor,
but we cannot remember the last time we saw them notify a parent of an error
that would save the parents money. Chances are if you make an error such as
underreporting your tax bill, your mistake could cost you money for four years.
Self-employed parents, who make quarterly estimated payments to the IRS,
sometimes forget that a large part of the money they send to the IRS is self-
employment tax, which should not be included here. Although this mistake
would be in your favor, the FAOs would almost certainly catch it, causing delays
and frustration.
38 and 87.
Total number of exemptions. (IRS Transfer) Eventually, this
number is going to have to agree with the number of exemptions
you take on your taxes. If you filed or will file an IRS 1040EZ,
consult the FAFSA instructions for guidelines on how to answer
this question.
Even if your child is a millionaire child star, you are allowed to claim him as a
dependent on your tax return until he is 24 years old, provided he is a full-time
student for at least five months (or partial months) in a given tax year. Of course
if he is a millionaire, he will probably want the $4,050 personal exemption for
himself. Since most kids earn less than their parents, most families will be better
off putting “0”s in the child’s exemption box on the aid form (and on his tax
return), and adding his exemption to the parents’ exemption box.
39–40 and
88–89.
Income earned from work. (IRS DRT issue, see comments
below) See this page and this page for suggested strategies.
Parents always ask, “We already gave them our adjusted gross
income. Why do they want to know our income earned from
work?”

Although they don’t look like it, for tax filers these are expense questions, in
which case the only purpose of these questions is to compute how much social
security tax you paid (the computer will subtract this from your income) and to
see whether you qualify for the employment allowance. Therefore, you want
these numbers to be as high as possible.
This is about the time we hear screams of alarm from our clients. “Why are
you including my 401(k) contributions? Whose side are you on?” We know
these questions are in the “income” section of the form, but trust us, these are
expense questions. For most families, the higher this number, the lower your
contribution to college will be. Include everything: wages (line 7 from the 1040
or the W2), business and farm income from Schedules C and F (lines 12 and 18
on the 1040), income from any business partnerships other than limited
partnerships (use the amounts listed on Box 14 of the K-1 for IRS Form 1065 for
the partnership), and—for tax-filers only: contributions to tax-deferred pension
and savings plans such as 401(k) plans, 403(b) plans, or tax-deferred annuities
(which can usually be found in boxes 12a-d of your W-2 form with codes D, E,
F, G, H, and S).
If applicable, include the total amount of combat pay received as a member of
the U.S. Armed Forces.
If you had a loss from business income or from partnerships, don’t subtract
the loss from your total earned income. This will underreport the amount of
social security tax you paid.
Be aware that questions 88 and 89 are not supposed to add up to question 85,
your adjusted gross income. The same holds true for 39 and 40: these should not
necessarily equal 36. The sum of your income earned from work and, if
applicable, your spouse’s income earned from work could be higher or lower
than your AGI.
And if you are able to use the IRS DRT: be aware that the tool will not include
the amount of any contributions to tax-deferred retirement plans found in boxes
12-12d of your 2016 W-2. After your tax information is transferred onto the
FAFSA from the IRS DRT, you will then be asked the applicable income earned
from work question(s). If a number pre-fills while you are answering the income
earned from work question(s), you should amend the dollar amount(s) to include
an individual’s contributions to such retirement plans in your answer. While
overriding other transferred items from the IRS DRT will result in flagging your
application and will insure Verification, this will not occur if you change any

pre-filled responses for the income earned from work questions.
41–43 and
90–92.
The value of your assets. If you meet the requirements of the
Simplified Needs Test (SNT) or the Automatic Zero-EFC, you
may be able to skip these questions if you file the FAFSA online.
If you file the paper version of the FAFSA or download and
complete the PDF version of the FAFSA, the processor will not
assess any assets you list here provided you meet all the SNT
and/or all the Automatic Zero-EFC requirements.
We don’t intend to repeat all the advice we gave under “Assets and
Liabilities” in Chapter Three. Look through that chapter again—it could save
you some serious money. Remember not to list retirement provisions such as
IRA accounts. Under the federal financial aid formulas, assets in retirement
provisions are protected from assessment.
Understand that real estate (other than your home) is considered an
“investment” for purposes of the FAFSA. You should be sure to read the FAFSA
instructions carefully for details about what types of assets to include and what
types you should exclude. You should realize that for the questions relating to
investments, businesses, and investment farms, you are to list their “Net Worth”
which is defined as the current value minus the current debt. If the net worth for
a particular question is a negative number, then list “0” in the far right box.
Veterans of the aid process may recall that years ago you would list the value
and the debt separately. The processor now wants you to do the math. You
should also keep in mind that you are not allowed to deduct credit card debt
from the value of your assets—only debts secured by those assets that are to be
included for these questions.
Be careful not to double-count assets. While the instructions for the FAFSA
may seem confusing, keep in mind that an asset belongs to you or to your child.
Don’t list the same asset twice. If you have set up a bank account “in trust for”
your child, it is legally part of your assets as long as your social security number
is listed as the taxpayer I.D. However, if the asset is under the child’s name (or in
your name “as custodian for” the child—most likely in a regular UTMA or
UGMA account) it will be assessed severely. (Consider consulting a financial
advisor who understands the aid process to discuss your options.) It is important
to note that the reporting requirements for 529 plans, and Coverdell Education

Savings Accounts are now as follows: For a student who does not report parental
information on the FAFSA, such accounts owned by the student—and if
applicable, the student’s spouse—are reported as part of student investments in
question 42. However, for a student who must report parental information on the
form, these student-owned 529s (often referred to as custodial 529 accounts) or
student-owned Coverdell accounts, should be reported as part of parental
investments in question 91, and not as part of student assets.
If you have a passbook loan, remember to include the net worth of the account
(value minus debt) as part of “investments,” instead of as part of “cash, savings,
and checking.”
Do not include your home if it is your primary residence. If you own real
estate but you rent your primary residence, include the real estate as part of
“investments” but remember to subtract any mortgages or other debts secured by
the property from the value of the real estate.
Owners of businesses and farms should also read our advice on this subject (in
the Special Topics chapter on this page) before they answer these questions.
Remember that if you are a part-owner, you should list only your share of the net
worth. Also, if your farm is your primary residence and you can claim on
schedule F of your 1040 form that you “materially participated in the farm’s
operation,” the net worth of the “family farm” should not be included on the
FAFSA.
Note: As we mentioned earlier, the value of any “family business” should not
be included as an asset on the FAFSA. A family business is defined as one with
100 or fewer full time or full time equivalent employees in which the “family”
owns more than 50 percent of the business. The “more than 50 percent” figure
does not apply solely to individuals who must report their financial information
on the FAFSA form. Other relatives by blood or by marriage (e.g. siblings, step-
parents, relatives-in-law, cousins, etc.) with a stake in the business should also
be considered when determining if more than 50 percent is owned by the
“family”.
44 and 93.
Additional Financial Information. (IRS transfer for one item)
For students, the most common item they will report will be
federal work-study income. For parents, the most common items
will probably be the education credits (e.g. Hope Credit and
Lifetime Learning Credit) and child support paid (not received).
These education credits will transfer from the IRS DRT, if used.

Those who had to report a proportionate share of AGI and U.S.
taxes paid on the FAFSA should use the same percentage of AGI
used for those calculations AND then multiply that number by
the total amount of the education credits reported on either IRS
1040 - line 50 or IRS 1040A - line 33. Do not include child
support paid for other family members who are included on the
FAFSA as being part of the household. (We will get to the
household size questions shortly.) Members of the armed forces
who received combat pay or special combat pay should only
report the taxable portion of such pay received, and only if they
included this pay as part of their adjusted gross income on their
tax return. List zero for any category that does not apply.
45 and 94.
Untaxed income. (IRS transfer for some items. See below for
warning about DRT issues) See this page for our suggested
strategies. This is where you must report certain types of income
and benefits that the IRS lets you shelter. Some types of untaxed
income that a few years ago had to be reported on the FAFSA
are no longer considered to be income in the federal
methodology. These items include untaxed social security
benefits, welfare benefits, the earned income credit, the
additional child credit, the foreign income exclusion, and the
credit for federal tax on special fuels. There are some additional
points to keep in mind regarding certain untaxed income
categories:
•
Child support received. As we’ve said before, the amount
you include here should include only the money you actually
received during the year, not what was promised.
•
Deductible IRA contributions. (IRS transfer) As we’ve
mentioned before, IRA contributions are not necessarily
deductible. If you (and your spouse, if married) are not
already an active participant in an employer or self-
employed retirement plan, then for 2016, IRA contributions
are fully deductible up to the $5,500 per person maximum
(up to $6,500 if age 50 or older). If you (or your spouse, if
married) are an active participant in a retirement plan, then
your contribution may be fully or partly deductible,

depending on your income. To determine whether you
qualify for a deduction in 2016, consult your accountant or
the IRS instructions for the 2016 forms.
Realize that nondeductible portions need not be listed. However, the tax-
deductible portion of your retirement contributions is considered untaxed
income. It is that tax-deductible portion of your IRA contribution that must be
included on the FAFSA worksheet. This number should correspond to line 32 on
your 2016 IRS 1040. Contributions to Roth IRA should not be included as part
of your answer, since they do not reduce your Adjusted Gross Income.
You should not include qualified rollovers of IRAs or pension funds into
another plan. This will cause problems if the DRT is used, so here’s our:
IRS DRT warning (2 possible scenarios): First if you have any amounts
reported on lines 15a and/or 16a of the IRS 1040 or on lines 11a or 12a of the
IRS 1040A: the IRS DRT should provide a warning message at some point. This
is because part or the entire amount reported on those lines of the tax return
should NOT be reported on the FAFSA, if there were any rollovers that should
be excluded. The IRS DRT tool takes the total amount (other than zero) from
those lines of the return (if applicable) and subtracts the corresponding taxable
portion (lines 15b and 16b for the IRS 1040 or lines 11b and 12b if the 1040A
was filed, to derive an untaxed amount for transfer to the FAFSA. Because the
IRS DRT cannot detect any rollover, you will have to manually correct any
transferred answer from the DRT for FAFSA 94e or 94f (for the parents) or
FAFSA 45e or 45f (for the student) to exclude any qualified rollover of funds to
any retirement plan from your FAFSA response(s). This will likely lead to
Verification, but that is a small price to pay for not having the rollover amount
considered incorrectly as additional untaxed income. If you need to provide the
school with an IRS transcript as part of the verification process, be sure to write
the word “Rollover” next to the appropriate line on the IRS transcript. You
should also contact the financial aid office(s) to alert them to this issue. Be
prepared to provide third-party documentation of the rollover from your
financial institution that now has your funds after the rollover.
Another IRS DRT issue will occur if there are amount listed on Lines 15b
and/or 16b of the IRS 1040 or lines 11b and/or 12 b of the IRS 1040A - but there
are no dollar amounts reported in 15a and/or 16a of the 1040 OR 11a and/or 12a
on the return (which the IRS DRT will recognize as zero (0). You will then see a
number in red for those IRS items at some point before you transfer your IRS

data to the FAFSA, since a positive number is being subtracted from zero,
resulting in a negative number. Not to worry. The dollar amount in red will
automatically change to zero when the transfer to the FAFSA occurs.
• Combat pay. This item pertains only to servicemen and servicewomen. Any
untaxed combat pay you receive should not be included as part of 45i (if
received by the student or the student’s spouse) or 94i (if received by parent).
It may be tempting to think about not listing untaxed income you are required
to report, but do not give in to temptation. The schools are extremely good at
reading between the lines and IRS reporting requirements change from year to
year. What doesn’t need to be reported this year on a tax return might very well
be reportable next year. You should also bear in mind that the odds of being
selected for “verification” by the colleges and/or the government are much
greater than the odds of being audited by the IRS.
Now that you’ve finished the financial questions on the FAFSA, the hardest
part of completing the form is over. There are still a few more questions that you
will have to answer.
As previously mentioned, if the student is dependent you can skip questions
95–102. If the student is independent, you’ll need to answer them. However,
since the majority of our readers will be completing the FAFSA for dependent
students, we are going to go back and cover the remaining parent questions first
(questions 59–79 and 84). If you are independent, we’ll cover questions 95–102
on this page since these are very similar to a number of the parent questions.
59. What is your parents’ current marital status? Given the state of
modern relationships in this country, this is a complicated question.
For financial aid purposes, “parent” means the person or persons the
child lived with most during the past 12 months—known as the
custodial parent(s). This is not necessarily the same parent who claims
the child on a tax return or the person who was awarded custody by the
courts. If you are divorced or separated, please read Chapter Nine of
this book, “Special Topics.” Also carefully review the FAFSA
instructions as well as the text on this page about which parent(s) and,
if applicable stepparent, must report info on the FAFSA.
And remember that “Marital status” refers to the custodial parents’ status RIGHT
NOW. Here again is a summary:

• Married/Remarried—If the natural parents of the student are still
married, fill in the oval for “Married/Remarried.” If the custodial
parent was divorced or widowed and has since remarried, also fill in
“Married/Remarried.”
• Never married—If the natural or adopted parents of the child never
married each other, or anyone else—ever—this is the oval you fill in
unless one parent is currently living with the other parent, in which
case you should answer “Unmarried and both parents living together”.
• Divorced—If the parent with whom the child lives is divorced, has not
remarried, and is not living with the former spouse, fill in the oval for
“Divorced/Separated.” If the custodial parent was divorced or
widowed, 
got 
married 
and 
divorced 
again, 
fill 
in
“Divorced/Separated.”
• Separated—If the natural parents are separated, fill in the oval for
“Divorced/ Separated.” You do not need to have a legal separation
agreement to be considered separated under the aid formula. If the
custodial parent was divorced or widowed, remarried, and is now
separated again, fill in “Divorced/Separated.”
• Widowed—If the custodial parent is widowed, and has not since
remarried, fill in “Widowed.”
60. Date married, separated, divorced, or widowed. If you answered
“Never married” for question 59, refer to the FAFSA instructions.
Otherwise, you should answer accordingly using two digits for the
month and four digits for the year.
61-68. Parents’ social security numbers, last names, first initials, and
dates of birth. For many years, the Secretary of Education had the
authority to verify the applicable income tax return information
reported on the FAFSA with the Internal Revenue Service, but chose
not to do so. However, such verification can now be done with the IRS
DRT. As such, the parents’ social security numbers, surnames, and first
initials will be needed. These questions refer to the custodial parents
(or custodial parent and stepparent if applicable). The name for a

parent should agree with the name reported on the 2016 tax return and
the individual’s social security card.
If your answer to question 59 was never married, divorced/separated, or
widowed (and you are not living with the other biological or adoptive parent of
the student), you should only be listing this information for one parent on the
paper or PDF version of the FAFSA, leaving the information about the other
parent blank. For the online version, these questions will only be asked of one
parent.
If a custodial parent has remarried, you should be reporting information for
the custodial parent and the stepparent. Since the IRS forms do not require that
the husband be listed first on a joint return, you should be careful writing down
the social security numbers on the FAFSA. Make sure you have the correct
number for the correct parent.
For dates of birth, see this page for our suggested strategies. This is one of the
few times when you don’t want to lie about your age. The purpose of questions
64 and/or 68 is to determine your asset protection allowance.
It is very important that you list the same last name as it appears on the social
security card for questions 61 and 65. Otherwise, there can be processing
problems if the surname reported doesn’t agree exactly with the social security
database.
69. Parents’ e-mail address. Unlike question 13, the listing of an email
address for this question will not prevent the Department of Education
from sending the student a paper version of the Student Aid Report
(SAR).
70. Parents’ state of legal residence. Be sure to use the correct
abbreviation.
71–72. Date parents became legal residents. Use the earliest date that either
of the student’s custodial parents (or stepparent) began living in the
state when answering question 71. Answer question 72, only if your
answer to question 71 is “No”.
73. Number of family members. This question is used to help determine
the income protection allowance. You would like this number to be as

high as possible. The more family members, the higher your
allowance. Include the student whose name is on the FAFSA, custodial
parents (this includes a stepparent as long as he or she is living in the
household), other children (even if they don’t live at home as long as
they are receiving more than half of their support from the custodial
parents or they are not “independent” for federal aid purposes for the
2018–2019 academic year), grandparents or other individuals (if they
live in the household and get more than half support from the custodial
parents and will continue to get this support from July 1, 2018 through
June 30, 2019), and newborn babies (even if they are not yet born
when you are filling out the form).
The number of family members does not have to agree with the number of
exemptions you took on your taxes for the past year—but if it doesn’t, the
colleges will probably ask why. That’s okay. Just be prepared to explain.
74. Number of college students in the household. One of the myths
about college is that it is better not to have two kids in school at the
same time. In fact, if you qualify for aid, the more members of your
household who can attend college at the same time, the better. In
addition to being enrolled at least half-time during 2018–2019 (6
credits or more for at least one term or the equivalent), the other
household member must be enrolled in a degree or certificate program.
The student applying for aid should always be included even if he is
attending college less than half-time.
In theory, the parents’ expected contribution stays the same regardless of how
many students are in school. If you have one daughter in school, you will be
expected to pay the full amount of the parents’ contribution toward her tuition. If
you have two daughters in college at the same time, the two colleges will usually
divide the parents’ contribution between them and make up the difference with a
larger aid package. For example, let’s suppose that Mr. and Mrs. Jones have two
sons, Frank and Tom. Last year, only Frank was attending college. The Joneses’
expected contribution was judged to be $9,000, and they paid the full $9,000 to
Frank’s college. This year both Frank and Tom will be in college, but the
Joneses’ expected contribution is still just $9,000. Each school will receive
$4,500 and will try to make up the difference with additional aid. In effect, the
Joneses are getting two educations for the price of one.

In addition, some parents who might not have qualified for aid with only one
child in college find that with two children in school at the same time, they do
qualify for substantial amounts of aid. This is why it is worth applying for aid
each year, even if you were refused the first time. If one of your children is
trying to decide whether to take a year off from college, this might be a factor
when it comes time to make that decision. You want as much overlap as
possible.
Parents are not to be included as family members in college for the purposes
of this FAFSA question. If a parent is attending college, graduate school, or
some other post-secondary institution, you should be sure to notify the FAOs
directly about this fact, as some schools may take these added family expenses
into account when they are reviewing your application materials.
75–79. In 2016 and/or 2017, did any members of the household receive
certain need-based benefits from the federal government? These
questions are being asked to determine if you meet some of the
alternate criteria for the Simplified Needs Test or the Automatic Zero-
EFC. You need only receive the benefit at some point in 2016 and/or
2017—not necessarily for the entire 24 months. For the online FOTW,
you may need to reply “None of the above” if you did not receive any
of these benefits in 2016 or 2017.
84 and 102. Can you qualify as a dislocated worker? Be sure to carefully read
the Notes in the FAFSA instructions. We’ll discuss this question on this
section as well.
You have to answer questions 95–102 only if you are an independent student.
The strategy for questions 95 and 96 here is virtually the same as it will be for
questions 73 and 74: the more family members the better; the more family
members considered in college the better. Compared to question 73, question 95
has a slightly more rigid definition of which children can be considered to be
members of the household. Therefore, if you are completing Step Five of the
form, be sure to read the FAFSA instructions related to these questions carefully.
Questions 97–101 are the corresponding questions to determine alternate criteria
for SNT or Automatic Zero-EFC eligibility for independent students. Question
102 is similar to question 84 in the parent’s section. Review the corresponding
Notes in the FAFSA instructions and see this page for more details.

103. What college(s) do you plan to attend in 2018–2019?
If you’re completing the paper or the PDF version of the FAFSA: List
all the schools (up to four) to which you want the data sent. List only
one school per line and don’t cross out or skip any lines. You have a
choice of writing in the complete name and address of the school, or of
listing the six-digit code for the school. (The instructions printed above
these questions on the FAFSA tell you how to find the code numbers.)
The feds say that using the codes will speed up processing time. On
the other hand, if you make a mistake when you write down the code,
your information will not be sent to the school you wanted and you
may not find out about the snafu until it is too late. Either way, we
recommend that you take great care in writing down the information
on the FAFSA. If you are applying to a particular branch or division of
a university, be sure to specify that as well or use the correct code for
that branch or division. If you are applying to more than four schools,
you should first list those schools with the earliest FAFSA deadlines.
After your FAFSA has been processed, there are ways you can have
the data sent to the colleges you were not able to list on the FAFSA. (If
you are applying to any schools in your home state, we recommend
that you list at least one of them first here.) At the far right of this
section, you must list the correct housing code for each school. If you
aren’t sure, fill in the “on campus” response oval since the cost of
attendance will be higher if you are living on campus.
If you’re filing the FAFSA online: List the code numbers for all the
schools (up to ten) to which you want the data sent. After you input the
code for a particular school, make sure that the name of the correct
school appears on your screen. You must also select the correct
housing status for each school. If you aren’t sure, use the “on campus”
response since the cost of attendance will be higher if you are living on
campus. If you are applying to more than ten schools, you should first
list those schools with the earliest FAFSA deadlines. After your
FAFSA has been processed, there are ways you can have the data sent
to the colleges you were not able to list on the FAFSA.
Regardless of how you file the FAFSA: If you are applying to any
schools in your home state, we recommend that you list at least one of

them first on the FAFSA.
104–105. Certification. The student’s signature is always required on the form.
If the purple-shaded areas were completed on the form, then one of the
custodial parents’ signatures must appear on the form as well. Simply by
signing the FAFSA, you are applying for all types of federal aid,
including the Pell Grant. When you sign, you are affirming that to the
best of your knowledge, the information you have supplied is true and
complete. An unwitting mistake will not be grounds for electrocution.
However, a deliberate lie is fraud—a federal crime.
You cannot sign, date, or mail in, the 2018-2019 FAFSA until October 1,
2017. Be sure to enter the date and fill in the correct year for question 104. If
you’re filing the FAFSA online, see comments below on how to “sign” the form.
As part of the FAFSA instructions, there is a comment concerning “unusual
circumstances.” With the exception of a family member who recently became
unemployed (also sometimes referred to as a dislocated worker), we have
already discussed these items. Recently unemployed workers will be covered in
the “Special Topics” chapter, as well as in our instructions on how to fill out the
PROFILE form (section PF) which follows.
106–108. FAFSA preparer information. You can skip this section if you are
filling out the FAFSA on your own. The only person who would have to
fill out this section is someone other than the student, the student’s
spouse, or the student’s parents or stepparents. For example, if the form
were filled out by a financial aid consultant, a tax preparer, a high school
guidance counselor, or a financial aid officer, then this person would
have to complete this section and sign off on the form.
Some FAOs have already hinted to parents that the appearance of a preparer’s
name on the form will make the application subject to much closer scrutiny.
Aside from the questionable legality of such a practice by the school, at the time
of this writing the Department of Education had not yet determined if they
would release this information to the schools. In addition, details as to what
constitutes a “preparer” and at what point someone must sign on the form have
not yet been completely clarified.
Note: If you are filing the FAFSA online, you will need to “sign” the form.

This can be done by either printing a signature page and mailing the signed
page to the processor OR by submitting the required signatures electronically
using a FSA ID for each person who is “signing” the form.
It is generally easier to submit your FAFSA after you have the necessary FSA
ID(s). However if you have a deadline looming and you are having difficulty
obtaining the necessary FSA ID(s), you should submit the FAFSA without the
FSA ID(s) and indicate you will sign the form using a signature page. Even
though the FAFSA will not be processed until the form is signed electronically
with the FSA ID(s) or a completed signature page is received by the processor,
your form will still be considered “received” by the processor as of the date you
submit your data. However, once you get the FSA ID, you should then log back
in and “sign” the form. If you have “signed” the form with the FSA ID(s) and
submitted the data, you should click on the “Exit” icon on the Confirmation
page to check your status. You should see a message that indicates all signature
requirements have been met.
That does it for the FAFSA. Congratulations! If none of the schools to which
you are applying require the PROFILE form, skip ahead to this page, “Are You
Done?” Otherwise, let’s go to the PROFILE form.
FILLING OUT THE 2018–2019 PROFILE
FORM
If you are required to fill out the PROFILE as well as the FAFSA, be sure to
carefully read the questions—and any help comments that may appear on the
screen as you complete the form. Be aware that many of the questions on the
PROFILE will correspond exactly to the questions on the FAFSA. However, in
some cases similarly worded questions may require a different response as we
explain in the text that follows.
As we went to press, information regarding the exact questions and the
ordering of the sections for the 2018-2019 PROFILE was not yet available. We
are making an informed guess regarding the data that will required for the
various sections of the form. We have used the same ordering of the sections in
the text that follows that was used with prior editions of the PROFILE. But
because there may be changes to the required data, the ordering of the sections,
and/or other items when the College Board makes the 2018-2019 PROFILE

available online beginning on October 1, 2017, please be sure to visit our online
update page by visiting www.princetonreview.com/​financialaidupdate, in early
to mid October, 2017. Please be aware that this update text will be available to
you before any school’s 2018-2019 PROFILE deadline. In that update, we will
be providing more specifics about the 2018-2019 PROFILE application and
process.
In our comments that follow, we have tried to anticipate the most common
questions you are likely to be asked. But remember that because of the skip logic
built into the form, you very well may not be asked all the questions that we
cover below. For example, if the student’s parents do NOT own their own home,
they will not be asked questions regarding its value or purchase price.
For clarity, on the pages that follow we are boldfacing the references to
particular questions you may be asked in a particular section of the PROFILE.
However, the exact wording of such questions may well differ on the actual
PROFILE form you view online.
Keep in mind that there are some important differences between the PROFILE
and the FAFSA:
1) On the PROFILE form, real estate (other than your primary residence)
should not be included as an “Investment”. It will be listed in a separate
category: “Other real estate”.
2) Regarding certain assets, the PROFILE requires you to list “What is it
worth today” (value) and “What is owed on it” (debt) separately. The
College Board will then do the subtraction for you to determine your net
assets.
3) Even if you can skip the asset questions on the online FAFSA, you must
answer all the asset questions on the PROFILE.
4) Unlike the FAFSA form which only asks for financial information of the
custodial parent (and if applicable, the stepparent residing with the
custodial parent), the PROFILE process provides schools the opportunity
to request information from the noncustodial parent (and if applicable, the
stepparent residing with the noncustodial parent) when the student’s
biological or adoptive parents are no longer living together. However, the
noncustodial parent’s information will go on a separate application. Be

aware that responses provided on the noncustodial parent’s own form will
not correspond to the FAFSA, since the noncustodial parent should never
complete the FAFSA! To avoid any confusion, the custodial parent (who is
the same parent for the PROFILE as the custodial parent listed on the
FAFSA) should begin the PROFILE application process
5) In most cases, students completing the FAFSA who are considered
independent do not need to provide parental financial information on the
FAFSA. However depending on the student’s situation and the school’s aid
policies, an independent student may need to provide parental information
on the PROFILE if the student wishes to be considered for institutional aid.
6) List whole dollar amounts; do not list cents. Do not use the dollar sign—
just list the dollar amount. Do not use commas to separate numbers. For
example, $53,205 should be listed as 53205. Use the minus sign before any
negative numbers; do not use parentheses.
7) Since the overwhelming majority of our readers live in the United States,
the PROFILE tips that follow do not cover the PROFILE questions that
may be asked of international students. Most of these international
questions do not correspond to items on the FAFSA, since only students
classified as international who are U.S. citizens or eligible non-citizens
living outside of the United States or its possessions are normally eligible
for federal student aid programs funded by the U.S. federal government
A note to veterans of the PROFILE process from prior years: If you have any
funds in Coverdell ESAs (formerly known as Education IRAs), or state-
sponsored tuition savings accounts or prepaid tuition plans, you should be sure
to refer to this page. Unlike prior versions of the FAFSA and PROFILE, these
plans are now handled virtually the same way on both forms for such parent-
owned plans. However, the treatment of such student-owned Coverdells/529
plans will be treated differently but only if parental data must be reported on the
PROFILE and FAFSA. You should realize that any comments in this section
regarding the similarity of FAFSA and PROFILE responses will now normally
apply to both forms if you have any parent-owned funds in these special
investments—unless you are required to provide parental information on one
form but not the other.

PROFILE Section—Parents’ Data
When it comes time to list the occupations of the parents, you should try
to be humble. If you put down “CEO, General Motors,” do not expect a
lot of sympathy from the FAOs. You should provide the appropriate
responses for the various types of retirement programs if you will
receive any funds from such programs at some point in the future even
if you are not receiving such funds now. If you have previously
contributed to IRAs, 401(k)s, 403(b)s, a TDA plan and/or other tax-
deferred retirement plans, you should indicate that you have these
retirement plans. You should then list the current value of such plans in
the appropriate response areas. (List zero for these two items if no funds
have ever been contributed to such plans or there are no longer any
funds in these plans.) Be aware that most colleges do not factor such
dollar amounts into account when determining your eligibility for aid.
PROFILE Section—Parents’ Household
Information
For most families the question involving Household size should be answered
with the same response as FAFSA 73. One exception will be for those families
who could include other children in the household solely because they could not
be considered “independent” if they themselves filed a FAFSA. For the
PROFILE, other children are only part of the household if they will receive more
than half of their support from the custodial parent(s) and/or if applicable, the
custodial stepparent.
For the Number in college: if the household size you list on the PROFILE is
the same as FAFSA 73, then this answer should be the same as FAFSA 74.
Parent’s remarriage date. most likely will only be asked if the parent
providing financial information on the PROFILE has remarried.
Parents’ state of legal residence should be the same for the custodial parent
as FAFSA 70. For the Parents’ preferred email address: If applicable and the
student’s parents are separated or divorced, list the email address for the
custodial parent.
Regarding certain benefits received, be aware this PROFILE question

corresponds to FAFSA questions 75–79. Answer “yes” if the parents received at
least one of these benefits at any time in 2016 or 2017. And for the dislocated
worker question, the answer should be the same as FAFSA 84.
If your earliest PROFILE deadline is not until November 1, 2017 at the
earliest (November PROFILE deadlines are most likely to only occur if the
student is applying Early Decision or Early Action to some PROFILE schools
though some schools may also have early deadlines for currently enrolled re-
applying of aid for the 2018-2109 school year) AND you are on extension but
will file your 2016 IRS return(s) before your earliest PROFILE deadline, THEN
you should wait to submit your PROFILE data to the processor until your 2016
return(s) are completed by mid-October. That way you will be able to use
completed tax return data. But if you still have not done your 2016 income tax
returns by the time of your earliest PROFILE deadline, then provide your best
estimates for 2016 data using your 2015 tax return and a draft version of the
2016 IRS form as a guide if you will file a return. If you are not required to file a
return, then use your best estimates about your other income items. Some
questions for the PROFILE that follow may not be asked, based on previous
responses you provided on the PROFILE.
PROFILE Section—Parents’ 2016 Income and
Benefits
For the Total number of exemptions, the response should be the same as
FAFSA 87.
For the questions that ask for dollar amounts reported on various lines of
the 2016 tax return: These questions mimic the line numbers on the federal tax
form so that the colleges can get a more precise picture of your income and tax
situation. If you’ve already done your 2016 taxes or followed our advice and
constructed a draft version of your taxes for the FAFSA, these questions should
be straightforward provided your marital status has not changes since the end of
the 2016 tax year. However, you may need to add some numbers from various
line items on the IRS form(s) together. You should make sure that the sum of the
various income items you list on the PROFILE tax return minus any adjustments
to income (and if applicable, any losses) agree with FAFSA 85 as well as the
Adjusted Gross income figure you report on the PROFILE. Use the minus sign
before any negative numbers.

For U.S. Income tax paid: the response should be the same as FAFSA 86.
For Education Credits: If your tax returns are completed, refer to the
appropriate line on your federal return. If parental information was listed on the
FAFSA, this should be the same as FAFSA 93a. If you did not pay any post-
secondary school tuition during the calendar year 2016, this answer will be 0.
For Itemized Deductions: If you have already completed your 2016 income
taxes, refer to the last line on Schedule A of the IRS 1040 for the answer to this
one. If you did not file a Schedule A and took the standard deduction, enter “0.”
Use your 2015 return as a guide if your 2016 return is not yet completed.
For the Income earned from work: Same as FAFSA 88 and 89.
If applicable, the Combat pay amount will be the same as FAFSA 93e. List 0
(zero) if none received.
Be careful when reporting various Untaxed Income and benefits
information on the PROFILE. For those questions on the PROFILE that are
identical to questions that are part of FAFSA 94, the responses should be
consistent between the two forms. However, there are other untaxed income and
benefit items not required on the FAFSA that may need to be reported on the
PROFILE.
If you paid no post-secondary school expenses in calendar year 2016, then
enter 0 (zero) for the Tuition and fees deduction unless the IRS line item
referenced on the PROFILE shows a dollar amount reported on your 2016 tax
return. This PROFILE section also requires information about pre-tax
contributions to Flexible Spending Accounts for dependent care and medical
spending accounts and/or Health Savings Accounts (HSA) contributions and/or
the HSA deduction claimed on your 2016 return. Do not include deductions for
pre-tax health insurance premiums from your paycheck. On the FAFSA, be
aware that only the HSA deduction claimed on Line 25 of the IRS 1040 was
required to be reported as part of untaxed income.
Here are some additional tips for this section of the PROFILE:
The Earned Income Credit question involves a tax credit given by the IRS to
certain lower income individuals who earn at least some of their income from
work. If you have already completed your 2016 federal income tax return,
simply refer to the IRS line references and answer accordingly. Otherwise,
provide your best estimate. Of course, if your income is too high to qualify for
the credit, write in “0” for this item.
Regarding Social security benefits: This item is not about the social security

tax (FICA) that was paid on your earned income. It is about untaxed social
security benefits you as a parent may have received for yourself and/or untaxed
benefits you as a parent may have received for other family members - excluding
benefits received for the student listed on the PROFILE - during the entire
calendar year. For example, the student has a younger sibling and so since that
child is a minor the benefits are paid to the parent on behalf of the child. This
differs from the treatment of social security benefits for income tax purposes in
which benefits paid to an adult on behalf of a child are reported on a separate
SSA-1099 form with the child’s social security number and are therefore not
reported on the parent’s income tax return.
The institutional methodology excludes social security benefits received for
the student, the question about social security only require you to report those
untaxed social security benefits paid to the parent for themselves or paid to the
parent for all other family members - except the student - in this parent data
section of the PROFILE form. However students who received untaxed social
security benefit or had benefits paid to their parent, may be asked to list such
untaxed benefits paid to the student and/or paid to the parent on behalf of the
student in another section of the PROFILE form.
Part of social security benefits may be taxable depending on the amount of
other income the recipient (and/or the recipient’s spouse) has. If this is true be
sure to subtract the taxable portion of any benefits received from the total benefit
amount for 2016 to come up with the untaxed portion. Be careful not to double
count. The taxable portion was already included as part of your Gross Income.
The Institutional Methodology and the Federal Methodology for the 2018-
2019 award year and beyond will be based on prior-prior year or “PPY”
income. However, the 2018-2019 PROFILE also requires information regarding
the “recent year” (2017) and the “anticipated year” (2018). Yet the questions
involving 2017 and 2018 income will not require nearly as much detail as the
2016 PPY data. Because similar data is required for the 2017 and 2018 income
questions, our tips on how to answer these questions involving 2017 and 2018
income items will be the same in the text that follows.
PROFILE Sections—Parent’s 2017 Income and
Benefits and Parents’ 2018 Expected Income &

Benefits
Since your 2017 income tax returns will likely not be completed until after your
earliest PROFILE deadline- even for regular decision school - there is no
question of getting into trouble if your figures are off a bit. In most cases, the
colleges will be awarding aid using your 2016 PPY income year data rather than
your projections for the PY year and/or the year after the PY year. However,
some schools have been known to reduce aid if income for either year is larger
than income listed for the PPY base income year. Of course, if 2017 and/or 2018
income will be significantly less than 2016 income, you should explain the
situation in the Explanation and Special Circumstances Section (ES) towards the
end of the form. You should also contact the financial aid office directly as well.
If You Are Recently Unemployed
If you have been terminated, laid off, have received notice that you will be laid
off, or are self-employed but out-of-work due to harsh economic conditions or a
natural disaster, then the questions in this section take on added importance.
Using “professional judgment”, the FAOs may ignore the PPY income you
had in the base income year and focus instead on the projections you have made
for the years after the base income year. Since you are unemployed, your
projections will be low. This can save you thousands of dollars.
Anyone who is out of work or even just feeling that her situation is unstable
should read our section about “The Recently Unemployed Worker” in the
“Special Topics” chapter.
Some Pointers for Projecting 2017 and 2018
Income
• Everyone’s impulse is simply to list the same figures listed for 2016.
Our advice is to be conservative. Don’t talk about a raise you are
supposed to get but haven’t yet received. If you are out of work, give
the FAOs the worst-case scenario so that they will be prepared if you
haven’t found work yet by next year.

• If you are self-employed, use your expected NET business income,
not the gross receipts.
• If you just took a job at a lower salary or you know you will have less
overtime or a smaller bonus in the coming year, make sure the figures
reflect this. It is difficult to say how much weight the colleges give the
questions in this section if you are still gainfully employed. If you are
already aware of any extreme changes in your situation compared to
2016, you should probably write to the individual FAOs directly
rather than relying on them to take these projections on the PROFILE
into account.
2017 and 2018 Income earned from work. These sound just like the 2016
income earned from work figures reported on the 2016 income section of the
PROFILE and the FAFSA, but they are not quite the same. For the 2016 PPY
income from work questions, such amounts for tax filers are used to calculate
expense allowances in the aid formulas.. But the questions about 2017 and 2018
income from work on the 2018-2019 PROFILE count as income questions this
time, even for tax-filers. Be careful not to double-count your income. If you
project that you will be contributing to deferred compensation provisions next
year [such as 401(k) or 403(d) plans], you should include the contributions as
part of your regular income earned from work for that year—and exclude them
from the 2017 and 2018 untaxed income and benefits. Do not count them
twice.
For 2017 and 2018 other taxable income make a rough projection of your
other taxable income for the respective years (see this page for our suggested
strategies)—include interest, dividend, real estate income, etc. and subtract any
losses. Use a minus sign if the sum is a negative number.
Despite what the instructions say, do not include deductible IRA and Keogh
contributions or the amount of the tuition and fees deduction as part of untaxed
income as part of 2017 or 2018 income. Because you did not get to deduct these
items in the preceding questions of this section (as you did with your AGI for the
2016 PPY year), there is no need to list them here. Their inclusion would
overstate your income for 2017 and/or 2018. Also, do not include 2017 and/or
2018 taxable combat pay which should be included in as part of your income
from work.
If 2017 or 2018 income will be significantly less than 2016 income and you

are applying to colleges that do not require the PROFILE form, we recommend
that you write the FAO a separate letter explaining your change in
circumstances. Be sure to give them a breakdown of your various income items
utilizing the suggestions above. And even if the school requires the PROFILE,
be prepared to provide documentation for any reduction of income. Most likely
you will need to submit a copy of your 2017 “prior year” tax return.
PROFILE Section—Parents’ Assets
The Cash, savings, and checking accounts should be the same as FAFSA 90.
Total value of sibling assets: Be sure to read the PROFILE instructions for
this question carefully before you answer.
Regarding your investments (if any). With the exception of real estate other
than your home and/or any student-owned Coverdell/529 plans, include the same
investments and debts against investments that you used to calculate FAFSA 91.
However, the “value” minus “owed” answers to this PROFILE question will not
necessarily be the same as FAFSA 91 if the parents own other real estate or if the
student owns any Coverdell/529 plans.
If you are asked questions about your home. Refer to our strategies in Chapter
Three regarding home value and debts on the home (this page). If you rent your
primary residence but own other real estate, most likely you will not be asked
these questions. You will include the value and other information about that
other real estate in other questions in this section of the PROFILE. If parents
own their primary residence, you will be asked to give the year purchased and
the purchase price. This is a check on the value of your home, which is listed on
the PROFILE as well as the debt on it. . By using the Federal Housing Index
Multiplier and other tools, the colleges can see if you have lowballed the value
of your house. If you inherited the house, the purchase price is “0.” If you built
the house yourself, the purchase price is the cost of the house plus the cost of the
land. Be sure to include all debts secured by the home (e.g. first mortgage,
second mortgage, home equity loan
If any real estate other than the primary residence is owned: include the value
of any such property owned by the parent that you included as part of FAFSA 91
and any debts against such property as part of FAFSA 91 for the other real
estate questions on the PROFILE . If you own more than one piece of other real
estate and are asked to provide only one year of purchase and purchase price on

the PROFILE, you should list the appropriate information for one of the
properties. If you do not own any other real estate, list zero for the value, the
debt, and the purchase price if asked.
PROFILE Sections—Business Assets and Farm
Assets
If you do not own a business, a farm, or if you are not self-employed, then most
likely you will not be asked to complete these sections. If you do not own 100%
of the business or farm, list only your share of the assets and liabilities,
In contrast to the FAFSA, farm value for purposes of the PROFILE includes
the value of a “family farm” and business value includes the value of a “family
small business.” In addition, you will list the value and the debt for each entity in
separate responses. Do not include the farmhouse as part of farm assets or farm
debts if it has already been listed in the Parent Asset section. If you indicate
there are more than 100 employees for each and every business entity reported in
this section (if applicable) as well as “no” for not materially participating in the
operation of any and all the farms (if applicable), then the sum of your “asset
value” responses minus the sum of your “owed” responses on the PROFILE (if
you own all or part of any businesses and/or farms) should be the same as
FAFSA 90. (For more details, please refer to this page of this book.)
PROFILE Section—Parents’ Expenses
For this section of the PROFILE form, answer the questions relating to the
calendar years 2016 as well as 2017 if asked. Use annual figures only, and enter
zero whenever appropriate. For child support paid: If your answer for FAFSA
93b is “0,” then list “0” for the 2016 amount (if asked) and provide your
estimated 2017 amount if asked. Otherwise, you should refer to the “child
support you paid…”.in FAFSA 93b. List the same dollar amount for the 2016
figure on the PROFILE. Then, give your best estimate for 2017. Note:
Independent students who were not required to answer the purple-shaded
sections of the FAFSA should refer to the PROFILE instructions for this
question. Regarding the repayment of parents’ educational debt: Be sure to
read the instructions carefully for this type of expense and only include

payments on those types of loans specifically mentioned.
Regarding medical and dental expenses not paid by insurance: be sure to
refer to this page for our suggested strategies. These expenses are among the
most underreported by parents. Use all the IRS allowable expenses. These
include medical or dental expenses you’ve charged on a credit card during the
year, even if you haven’t paid for them yet. We find that many families forget
about health insurance premiums deducted from their paychecks along with
medical-related transportation costs. In addition, many members of organized
labor forget to include the medical portion of their union dues. Many parents
incorrectly assume that if their total gross medical expenses aren’t higher than
10% of their AGI (at which point the expenses above 10% may be deductible if
you itemize your deductions on Schedule A of the IRS 1040) then there is no
point in writing down the figure for unreimbursed medical expenses at all. This
is not true. Even if you don’t qualify for a tax deduction, many schools that
require the PROFILE will grant you a deduction against income in the aid
formulas if such expenses exceed 3.5% of the sum of your AGI and untaxed
income in the IM. Remember, if you are self-employed or own at least 2% of the
shares of an S corporation, you may have already taken the self-employed
medical insurance deduction on line 29 of the 1040 form. Be sure to exclude
those medical insurance premiums if you’ve already deducted them there. After
you have figured out 2016 expenses, estimate 2017 as best you can if final
numbers are not yet available.
For Elementary, junior high, and high school tuition for dependent
children: See this page for our suggested strategies. If asked, be aware that the
PROFILE is asking about academic year payments.
Include only the amount for tuition(s) after any grants or scholarships are
deducted. As the instructions say, you can’t include private school tuition for the
student applicant going to college. You also cannot include money spent on
after-school programs such as Hebrew school or music lessons. If your child is a
music prodigy and you anticipate that the private music lessons will continue
during college, this can be explained in a separate letter to the colleges.
If applicable and you are asked about Parents’ monthly home
mortgage/rental payment: Include the current monthly mortgage payments
(first and second) on the house, condominium, or cooperative apartment, as well
as any home equity loan payments relating to your primary residence only. If
you rent, list the monthly rent that you pay. Not that it will do you much good.

These numbers are not factored into the formula.
If you are asked for information regarding Other Expenses, read the
questions carefully. Be sure to see if monthly or annual amounts are required.
Provide your best estimate and answer accordingly if asked. These questions are
usually only asked of international students or if the family is living outside the
U.S.
PROFILE Section—Information About
Noncustodial Parent
Based on the skip logic build into the PROFILE application and prior responses,
this section will generated for those students whose two biological or adoptive
parents are both alive but no longer living together. Divorced, separated, or
never married parents are always very anxious about this section. “Does this
mean they’re going to track down my ex-wife and ask her to pay for part of our
son’s college bills?” We recommend that you read our section on divorced or
separated parents in Chapter Nine. And be aware that even if this section appears
on the PROFILE, it does not necessarily mean that the noncustodial parent will
need to complete their own aid form. While a fair number of schools will require
a separate application from a noncustodial parent, not all due. And keep in mind
that even if the college requires such financial disclosure from a noncustodial
parent for purposes of awarding institutional aid, federal aid and state aid is
based on only the finances of the custodial parent’s household.
PROFILE Section—Student Data
The questions in this section involving the student’s 2017-2018 school year
information, state of residence, citizenship, and student benefit information are
self-explanatory. Some questions only apply to international students.
Independent student may also be asked the following:
How many people are in the student’s (and student spouse’s, if
applicable) household? If the student is an independent, your answer will be the
same as FAFSA 95.
How many will be in college at least half-time? For independent students,
your response can include your parent(s), if applicable. Be sure to base your

answer on the proper academic year mentioned.
PROFILE Section—Student’s 2016 Income &
Benefits
Many of the questions asked in the section are similar to the FAFSA. And due to
the skip logic for both the online FAFSA and the PROFILE, student who did not
and will not file a 2016 tax return will not be asked questions about 2016 tax
return line items. However if the student did file, these questions will likely be
asked though not necessarily in the same order:
Total number of exemptions: Same as FAFSA 38.
Adjusted Gross Income: Same as FAFSA 36.
U.S. income tax paid: Same as FAFSA 37.
Education tax credits: Same as FAFSA 44a.
Itemized deductions: Most students do not itemize deductions. As such, your
most likely answer for this question will be “0”, if asked. If the student did or
will itemize deductions, your answer to this question will be the same as the
bottom line of schedule A of the 2016 IRS 1040 form.
The question(s) about the student’s (and if applicable, the student’s spouse)
Income earned from work should have the same response as FAFSA 39 and 40
respectively. Non-tax filers will be about this earned income as well as tax-filers.
Taxable combat pay included in Adjusted Gross Income should agree with
FAFSA 44e.
Student dividend and interest income: This question is being asked to detect
the presence of student assets during the base income year. The number here
should agree with dividend and interest income reported to the IRS on 1099
forms.
Other untaxed income and benefits. While the U.S Department of
Education does not require any untaxed social security benefits to be listed on
the FAFSA, some untaxed social security benefits for the student may need to be
listed on the PROFILE. However, such benefits will not affect the family
contribution figure calculated by the PROFILE processor since they will likely
cease before or shortly after the student begins college. Most students will not
have any untaxed income items for this section. But if this is not the case: you

should be aware that some types of untaxed income that were not required to be
reported for FAFSA 45 need to be listed on the PROFILE.
Earnings from Work-Study or other need-based aid, co-op earnings, and
any taxable grant or scholarship aid: If you answered “0” for FAFSA, 44c,
44d, and 44f, then answer “0” for this question as well. Otherwise, add together
your responses for FAFSA 44c, 44d, and 44f and enter the total on the PROFILE
form.
PROFILE Section—Student’s Expected
Resources
Veteran’s benefits: Unlike the FAFSA form, if you receive such benefits you’ll
need to report the amount you receive or expect to receive per month between
July 1, 2018 and June 30, 2019—as well as the number of months you expect to
receive these benefits during that 12-month period.
Student’s Expected Summer/School Year Income: See this page for our
suggested strategies. In light of what we have said in our section on student
income, we suggest you aim for “0” during the school year (remember not to
include work-study earnings in this projection) and as close as possible to the
standard amount the colleges ask you to earn during the summer months under
the institutional methodology ($2,000 for a freshman, $2,650 for an
upperclassman). Always estimate on the low side. Do not include federal work-
study earnings as part of your response. Since these are PROFILE questions,
most likely the school will use the institutional methodology to determine the
student’s contribution from income. Be slightly conservative with your estimates
for the other responses you provide in this section. If the student doesn’t expect
any income other than from work, enter “0” for the applicable questions about
other income. If the student is married or remarried, some additional questions
will likely appear about the spouse’s income.
Outside grants and scholarships, etc. including AmeriCorps benefits: See
this page and this page. When answering this question you should not include
any awards, unless you are absolutely sure you will be receiving the money. If
the student has not received an official notification for any outside organization
at the time you are completing the PROFILE form, then list “0.” Do not include
any awards from the colleges or universities to which you are applying for aid.

Employer/other tuition benefits: If there will be no tuition benefits, enter “0.”
If there will be benefits, but the amount of the benefits will be based upon the
school attended, list the least benefit that you would receive (considering all the
colleges to which you applied that require the PROFILE form). Some questions
apply only to international students. Answer appropriately if asked. Note: U.S.
citizens and eligible noncitizens living abroad should answer “No” to these
questions unless they will be receiving benefits from some government other
than the U.S. federal government.
Contribution from the student’s parent(s): For dependent students, the best
way to answer this question is to use the worksheets at the back of this book to
determine an estimate of the parents’ expected contribution per student under the
federal methodology (Line R on this page) and then understate it by 30%. In the
past, parents who have written down a higher figure on this question than the
amount that was later determined by the need analysis companies to be their
expected contribution were deemed responsible to pay the higher figure.
Independent students should list only a minimal figure if any help is expected;
otherwise list “0.”
Contributions from others: Before answering this question, you should review
the section “Direct Payments to the School” on this page. Be sure to carefully
read the help comments available online before you answer this question.
PROFILE Section—Student’s Assets
Cash, savings, and checking accounts: Your response should be the same as
FAFSA 41, unless you were eligible to skip this question if you filed the FAFSA
on the Web because you met the Simplified Needs Test or the Automatic Zero-
EFC (in which case, you should follow the instructions on the PROFILE to
answer all the questions in this section).
Retirement accounts: Most students don’t have IRAs, Keoghs or other
retirement accounts, so most likely your answer for this will be “0” if asked.
Otherwise, answer accordingly.
Student investments: Instead of asking for the “net worth” as the FAFSA does,
the PROFILE asks you to list the “value” (i.e., what is it worth today) and “what
is owed on it” in separate questions. With the exception of trusts and real estate
(other than the primary residence) include the same investments and debts
against investments which you calculated when you answered FAFSA 42.

(Unlike with the FAFSA, information regarding trusts will be listed separately
from other investments, if applicable.) The difference between your “value” and
“owed” numbers for this PROFILE question will not necessarily be the same as
FAFSA 42, especially if the student owns other real estate or has a trust.
Home: If you are asked any of these questions and the student does not own his
or her primary residence, you should go back and check your prior responses as
you should not be asked these questions. Otherwise, answer accordingly. As we
explained in more detail in our comments regarding a parent’s home, the
questions regarding current value, year of purchase and purchase price also serve
an audit check to be sure you have not lowballed the value of real estate.
Other real estate: Separately, list the value of any real estate owned by the
student that you included as part of FAFSA 42, and any debts against that same
real estate. If the student does not have any trusts or any investments, then most
likely the “other real estate” equity should be the same as FAFSA 42.
Business and Farm: In contrast to the FAFSA, on the PROFILE form farm
value includes the value of a “family farm” and business value includes the
value of a “small family business.” If the student owns any farm property or
business at all, its “value” and “what is owed on it” should be included here.
Other questions about the student’s business may be asked as well.
Is the student living on the farm? If the student does not own any farm
property, leave this question blank if it is asked.
Trust information: If you included the value of any trusts as part of FAFSA 42,
then you should complete these questions. Otherwise, list “0 for the value if
asked. You should realize that when the word trust is used for this question, it is
not referring to a regular type of bank account that is maintained by one person
“in trust for” another person.
PROFILE Section—Student’s 2016 Expenses
Most dependent students will not be asked the questions in this section, which
are primarily for independent students: Child support paid in 2016 should be
the same as FAFSA 44b. And for Student’s medical and dental expenses: If
parents paid the medical and dental expenses for the student, don’t include them
here—do refer to the PROFILE instructions before answering this one.

PROFILE Section—Family Member Listing
Do not include the student or the student’s parents in this section. When you add
the student and the parent(s), and if applicable, stepparent/partner in the
household to the number of people listed in this section, your answer should
agree with the answer you gave for FAFSA 73 if the student is a dependent
student. If applicable, you’ll be asked to provide information about any school
that another family member attended during the 2017–2018 academic year. The
parents’ contribution should include only their part of tuition, and room and
board. This is not an expense question. Don’t include the computer you bought
her or the cash you gave him for spring break. If a family member was not in
school, leave these 2017-2018 items blank if asked.
In this section you’ll also be asked to indicate which of the family members
listed will be attending college (if any) in the 2018-2019 academic year, and if
applicable on what basis (full-time, half-time) as well as the type of college they
will be attending during that period. You will also be asked to provide the name
of the educational institution (school, college or university) each family member
in this section will attend for the 2017-2018 academic year as well as the total
cost of that institution for that year and how much the parents will pay towards
that cost. The status of the college students (full-time, half-time) can have an
effect on state aid.
Note: If a family member other than the student will not be attending college
at least one term on a half-time basis in the 2018–2019 academic year, if asked
you will need to indicate that non-attendance for each applicable family member.
Otherwise, you will most likely receive an error message regarding data
inconsistencies when you attempt to submit your application electronically to the
processor.
PROFILE Section—Explanations and Special
Circumstances
You should provide details regarding any PROFILE items that you are required
to explain. Otherwise, we suggest that you leave this section blank. It is far more
effective to send a separate letter to each college explaining any unusual
circumstances.

That about does it for the main questions you are likely to be asked.
Unfortunately, you may not be finished with the PROFILE form just yet.
Depending on the colleges and the programs you designated when you registered
with the College Board, there may be one or more additional questions that you
have to answer. These will appear in:
PROFILE Section—Supplemental Questions
At the time we went to press, the pool of available questions for this section had
not been finalized. Nor had many individual colleges decided which additional
questions, if any, they would be requiring of PROFILE applicants. As such, it is
impossible for us to give you any specific advice regarding questions that may
appear in this section of your PROFILE form.
It seems a safe bet to assume, however, that the majority of questions in this
part of the PROFILE will either be asking for further details regarding items
previously listed on the PROFILE or about additional assets or resources not
previously reported. After reading Chapter Three and this part of the book, by
now you should have a very good idea of the strategy you should be applying in
order to maximize your aid eligibility. If you also keep the following points in
mind, any questions in this section should not pose too much of a problem for
you:
• Read the questions carefully. Answer them honestly, but do not
disclose more information than required. If a yearly amount is
requested, be sure you provide data for the requested calendar or
academic year.
• Avoid overstating or double-counting assets or income (especially if
you are estimating).
• Remember to include all allowable expenses or debts.
• Keep your responses consistent with other data previously listed on
any form.
• If you are asked to explain any responses in Section ES, be sure to do
so.

Are You Done?
Congratulations! Save your data and/or put your work copy of the forms away
for a day (unless the form is due that day!) You’ve earned a rest. Tomorrow, look
the forms over very carefully. Are you happy with the numbers? If you finished
the PROFILE and saved your PROFILE data online, it would be best to make
sure all the answers are consistent with the answers you gave on the FAFSA? In
addition, do your answers on the PROFILE and the FAFSA agree with any
supplemental aid forms required by the colleges? Check the newspaper today to
see if your stock or bond investments have lost any value. If so, revise your
figures downward.
When you are convinced that everything is ready, carefully review your data
again before you submit any online form or mail/fax/upload any paper aid
document. Date any paper form, sign it, and make photocopies for your records.
When submitting your PROFILE information, be sure you have credit card or
bank account information handy as you will likely be charged a processing fee.
If you are filing a paper FAFSA, send the original form via Express Mail to the
processor. Track delivery with your airbill number.
Your Student Aid Report (SAR) from the government should be available in
three to four weeks (or sooner for online filers). Once you transmit your
PROFILE data, you will be able to print out your PROFILE Acknowledgment.
The SAR Report
If you filed a paper version of the FAFSA and did not provide an e-mail address,
you will receive a blue multi-page form sent by the government called the
Student Aid Report (or SAR) a few weeks after you send in your 2018–2019
FAFSA to the processor. (You can also retrieve the SAR online at fafsa.ed.gov
provided you have a verified FSA ID for the student.) If you filed the FAFSA
and provided a student e-mail address on either the paper or online version, you
will need to retrieve your SAR electronically as no paper SAR will be mailed to
the student. No matter which method you used, check the information on the
SAR carefully to make sure it agrees with the information you entered on the
FAFSA. (Note: If you file the FAFSA online and listed five or more schools in
Step Six of the form, only the first four schools listed in Step Six will appear on
the paper version of the SAR. However depending on the number of schools you

listed on the FAFSA, the 5th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and 10th school will be listed in
the online SAR.) Be sure that the SAR includes the correct names of the colleges
to which you are applying for aid. If you are applying for aid at more colleges
than you could list on the original FAFSA and/or you have decided to add some
additional schools and/or the processor did not list a correct school, you will
need to get the FAFSA data to those additional schools. You should call the
FAOs at each of the schools not listed, explain the situation, and ask them how to
proceed. Be sure to keep a record of the person you spoke with at each college as
well as a summary of what was discussed. They will probably tell you one of
two ways to get the data to them:
1. By sending them a copy of the 2018–2019 SAR. While a number of
schools will accept your data this way, you should be sure to mention
that the school is not listed in Step Six when you call the aid office.
Since you should always have at least one original SAR for your
records, you should call (800) 433-3243 to request a duplicate 2018–
2019 SAR if you received an original orange SAR in the mail.
2. By revising the SAR. Because the online version allows you to
maintain a list of up to ten schools (and only four schools appear on
the paper version of the SAR) it is probably better to revise the list
online (at www.fafsa.ed.gov) since you can list more schools this way.
If you’re sending back a blue SAR to the processor, use certified mail
—return receipt requested. Be sure to carefully follow the instructions
so that the processor will make the necessary corrections. If you
already listed the maximum number of schools on the FAFSA, you
will be substituting the unlisted school(s) for one or more of the
schools previously listed. Before you do this, however, you should
make sure any school you are substituting out has received your
FAFSA information before you remove them. If you are mailing the
SAR back to the processor, make a photocopy for your records.
Within a few weeks after mailing, you will receive a new SAR which
you should again review for accuracy. If you still have not been able
to get all the schools listed after this first round of revising, keep
repeating the process until every school gets the FAFSA data. Of
course, if you have to do the process more than once, you should give
preference on your first revision to those schools with the earliest
deadlines.
Note: If you substitute one school for another, the originally listed

school will no longer receive any revised data that you send back to
the processor. Therefore, if you have to correct or change any items
other than those in Step Six, you may need to put the original
school(s) no longer listed back on the new SAR that is generated and
send it back to the processor.
If you haven’t received a SAR within three weeks of filing, call (800) 433-
3243 during business hours for a status report. Be sure to have the student’s
social security number handy when you call.
Two Moments of Truth
The SAR will tell you if you qualify for a Pell Grant. Don’t panic if the SAR
says you are ineligible. This is a federal grant for lower-income families and
many people do not qualify. Just because you didn’t get a Pell Grant does not
mean you won’t qualify for any aid at all. The Pell is often the toughest type of
aid to get.
The SAR will also tell you your Expected Family Contribution. Below the
date on the front page of Part One of the SAR in small type are three letters
followed by some numbers.
Here’s a sample of what it might look like:
March 1, 2018
EFC: 08920
The EFC is your Expected Family Contribution under the federal
methodology. There is no dollar sign, no explanatory paragraph, nothing to let
you know how significant this number will be to you. In this example, the
Expected Family Contribution for one year of college for one child was judged
by the need analysis company to be $8,920.
Note: If you filed the FAFSA online, your EFC figure may be provided to you
along with your confirmation number right after you submit your FAFSA for
processing.
Counting Chickens
Unfortunately, the federal EFC is not necessarily the number the colleges will

elect to use. Schools that asked you to fill out the PROFILE form will most
likely be using the institutional methodology to determine the family
contribution. This figure could be lower or higher than the federal number. The
institutional EFC is never given to the parents by the PROFILE processor.
The Verification Process
“Verification” is the financial aid version of an audit, although the process is
generally much more benign. In prior years, either the Federal processor or the
colleges themselves could select students for verification, and each college had
to verify a minimum of 30% of their applicants. Beginning with the 2014–2015
FAFSA, only the Federal processor will determine who must be selected for
verification, but schools can also select additional students.
There are certain rules of thumb:
If you estimated your tax information, you’re more likely to be verified. The
lower your EFC, the more likely you are to be verified. If you filled out the
paper version of the FAFSA, you’re more likely to be verified.
If you say you’ve already completed your taxes, but don’t use the online tool
to populate your form from the IRS records—you more than likely will be
selected for verification.
Essentially, a much higher percentage of students (and parents) will be
verified than in years past. However, the process will be more streamlined for
those who use the IRS data retrieval process (automatically pre-populating the
FAFSA form) either when they fill out the form initially, or by later going back
to correct/update the form after they’ve completed their taxes, as they will be
considered to have verified their income.
If you are selected for verification, and you choose not to use (or are unable to
use) the pre-populating IRS tool on the online FAFSA form or you subsequently
correct any of the pre-populated responses that were generated by the IRS tool
(except for the income earned from work questions), you will likely be required
to send the school an official transcript of your return(s). See this page.
The schools may also ask for documentation of social security benefits if you
receive them or information about child support paid or received. You may also
have to fill out a Verification Worksheet so that the colleges can double-check
the number of members in your household as well as other income items.

While the IRS audits a minuscule percentage of taxpayers, financial aid
verification is relatively commonplace. At some schools, 100% of the applicants
are verified. Thus, if you receive a notice of verification, this does not mean that
it is time to book plane tickets to a country that does not have an extradition
treaty with the United States. It is all routine.
Revising Your Information
If the numbers on the SAR are different from the numbers you sent in, you will
probably want to revise them immediately. The SAR gives you instructions on
how to correct errors made either by the processor or by you. You will also want
to revise immediately if you receive any notice stating that your FAFSA could
not be processed, if there are comments on the SAR that there were problems
with the processing, or if you need to change the list of schools.
How to Update Your Estimated Figures
While the instructions to the SAR tell you how to handle revisions, these
instructions may conflict with the procedures many colleges would prefer you to
follow. To find out the correct way to revise your SAR you must call the FAOs at
all of the colleges still under consideration. In general, the FAOs will tell you to
do one of three things:
1. Revise the SAR and send the revisions to the processor. (Most likely
response.)
2. Revise the SAR and send all pages of the SAR directly to the FAO.
3. Send all pages of the unrevised SAR to the FAO; he or she will make
the necessary revisions.
When you call the FAOs, ask when they expect you to send them the original
SAR. See if you can hold off until you know for sure what college the student
will be attending. If you received the blue SAR in the mail and a college requires
a physical copy of the SAR before the student is sure of his educational plans,
you should request a duplicate SAR for your records by calling (800) 433-3243.
The duplicate SARs are free, so we suggest you call for a few duplicate copies

just in case.
The question numbers on the SAR should correspond exactly to the question
numbers on the FAFSA. To help you in your revisions, you can refer to your
photocopy of the FAFSA and your worksheets, as well as to the detailed
instructions we gave for completing each line of the FAFSA form. Most likely,
you will be revising only your income, expense, and tax return information for
the Base Income Year. The SAR processors prefer you to use a dark-ink
ballpoint pen for any revisions on the paper SAR. The asset information should
be the net asset figures at the time you completed the original FAFSA, not the
net asset figures on the day you are revising. You should therefore revise your
asset information only if a mistake was made when the FAFSA was originally
filed. (If using the online IRS Data Retrieval Tool, see this page and our tips for
the FAFSA in Part 3 of this book).
After you send your SAR revisions to the processor, a new version of the SAR
with the revised data will be generated. Look over the new SAR data to make
sure it’s accurate.
The PROFILE Acknowledgement
After you transmit your PROFILE data to the processor you will be able to view
and print out an Acknowledgment that summarizes your responses to most of the
PROFILE questions. Follow the directions regarding revisions, if necessary.
Applying to More PROFILE Schools
If after transmitting the PROFILE data to the processor you decide to apply to
additional schools that require the PROFILE form, you can have the data sent to
the additional schools by accessing your PROFILE record with your College
Board username and password. Details on how to add additional schools will
then be provided. You will also have to get the FAFSA data to these schools by
revising the SAR.
What to Do If You Get a Notice Saying Your Form
Could Not Be Processed

Your need analysis form may get rejected for any number of reasons, but the
most common are forgetting to answer one of the questions or not signing the
form.
If your paper FAFSA is returned to you unprocessed, the main thing is to get it
back to the need analysis company as fast as possible. Even if the screw-up was
your fault, you will minimize the odds of missing out on aid if you snap into
action immediately. The need analysis company will probably send an
incomplete version of their report to all the colleges, so you will still be in the
running. To be on the safe side, contact the individual schools to let them know
what is happening.
In some cases, the need analysis companies or the government will question
specific items because they are unusually low or high for a “typical family” with
your income level. Don’t feel you must change a number if it is really correct.
For example, if you have a negative AGI due to property rental losses, but have
positive income earned from work, the computers will automatically “flag” the
AGI item. If the item is correct, you may need to place a check mark next to it
when revising your SAR.
As always, photocopy any new information you send to the need analysis
company or to the government, and send it certified mail (return receipt
requested) unless you are revising the FAFSA form online. And be sure that you
follow all instructions to the letter.
If Your EFC Is Much Higher than You Expected
Somehow, no matter how prepared you are, seeing the federal EFC in print is
always a shock. Remember that the colleges do not expect you to be able to pay
the entire amount out of current income. If they deem your resources sufficient,
they expect you to liquidate assets each year that your child is in college and
they expect you to have to borrow money on top of that. Your EFC is designed
to include money that you have earned in the past (assets) and money that you
will obtain in the future (loans) as well as the income you are currently earning.
Remember that your family contribution could be lower or higher than the
EFC printed on the SAR. This will be especially true if the school uses the
institutional methodology in awarding their own aid funds. Remember also that
colleges have broad latitude to change the EFC in either direction. This is where
negotiation can come into play. Consult Part Four, “The Offer.” We know of one

case in which the EFC was judged to be $24,000. The school brought the actual
family contribution down to $13,000.
In addition, some state aid formulas differ from the federal formula. We know
of another case in which the EFC was judged to be $99,999, but the family
managed to receive $5,000 a year in state aid because of quirks in the state’s
formula.
If you have used our worksheets to compute your federal Expected Family
Contribution, you should not be surprised by the number on the SAR. If there is
a large discrepancy between what you thought your EFC would be and what the
SAR says it is, then someone may have made a mistake. Go through your
worksheets carefully, and double-check to see that the information on the
FAFSA form you filed agrees with the numbers you used in the worksheets.
Also, make sure that these numbers agree with the numbers on the SAR if you
filed the paper version of the FAFSA. If an error was made on the FAFSA, start
revising.
The Next Step: Supplying Completed Tax
Returns
Some colleges will not give you a financial aid package until they’ve seen your
taxes for the first base income year. Others will give you a “tentative” package,
subject to change when they see the final numbers. And some may want to see
2017 returns too!
It is in your best interest to get your taxes done as fast as possible. Prod your
accountant if he is dragging his heels. Better yet, if you are not reading this book
at the eleventh hour, plan ahead. During the fall of senior year in high school, let
your accountant know that you are going to need your taxes done as soon as
possible this year.
Find out from the colleges that you are interested in whether they really do
want to see your tax return. In many cases, the answer will be yes. In a few cases
(such as New York University), they will not want your tax return unless you are
randomly selected for verification. We recommend that you not send a return
unless it is required. Why give them more information than they need?
The most effective time for negotiation with the FAOs is before May 1, the
Universal Reply Date by which most colleges require you to commit to attend.

Obviously, you will have more bargaining power if you can still decide to go to
another school. The FAOs are much less likely to compromise once you are
committed to their college.
The School’s Own Forms
The standardized need analysis forms are probably not the only financial aid
forms you will have to complete. Many selective colleges have their own forms
as well with deadlines that may differ from those of both the standardized forms
and the admissions applications to the schools themselves. The purpose of these
forms is sometimes difficult to comprehend, since in many cases they ask many
of the same questions you have already answered on the FAFSA or the
PROFILE form all over again. Some counselors suspect this is done for the same
reason police interrogate suspects several times: to look for discrepancies.
More Detailed Information
However, the individual forms do ask for some new information. In general, they
are looking for more specific breakdowns of your income and assets. Exactly
what kind of assets do you have? How liquid are they? In addition, you will
often be asked about your other children’s educational plans for the current year
and the year to come.
While neither the FAFSA nor the PROFILE form ask income and asset
information about noncustodial parents, many of the individual schools will
want to know all the financial details of that parent. Some may ask you to fill out
the standardized, paper CSS/Noncustodial Parent’s Statement or the
Noncustodial PROFILE (which is an online form.) If you own your own
business, you may need to fill out the paper College Board’s Business/Farm
Supplement. We’ll cover both of these situations in more detail in the “Special
Topics” chapter of this book.
The forms may also ask questions to determine eligibility for specific
restricted scholarships and grants. In general, these scholarships are left over
from a different era when private citizens funded weird scholarships in their own
name. The colleges hate administering these restricted scholarships—they would
much rather be allowed to give money to whomever they feel like. However, if

you are a direct blood descendant of a World War I veteran, the University of
Chicago may have some money for you. If you can prove that one of your
ancestors traveled on the Mayflower, Harvard may have some money for you. If
you are of Huguenot ancestry, Bryn Mawr may have some money for you.
Be Careful
Take the time to be consistent. Your answers on this form may be compared to
other information you’ve supplied elsewhere. Small differences, especially if
you are estimating, are acceptable, but anything major will cause serious
problems. Get out your photocopies of any previous aid forms you’ve completed
and make sure you are not diverging.
Much as you may feel that your privacy is being invaded, do not skip any of
the questions. This is the colleges’ game and they get to make the rules. If you
don’t answer, they don’t have to give you any money.
Send these forms to the schools themselves, certified mail, return receipt
requested. If you are sending any supplementary information (such as tax
returns) make sure that the student’s name and his or her college ID # or social
security number are prominently displayed on all documents. This is especially
important if the student’s last name is different from either of his parents’.
The IDOC Service
Some schools may now require you to submit your income tax returns and other
documents to the College Board’s IDOC service. After your documents are
received by the IDOC processor, they will be scanned and then made available
electronically to those schools that require them in this format. If at least one of
your schools is utilizing the IDOC service, you will likely receive an email
notification from the College Board. Required documents can now be either
uploaded online or mailed to the IDOC service. Make sure all required
signatures are provided. Finally, be extra careful that you submit the tax returns
(and w-2s and / or 1099s if requested) for the correct calendar year.

PART FOUR
The Offer & Other
Financial Matters

On the day that the offers from colleges arrive there will be many dilemmas for
parents. One of the most vexing is deciding whether to steam open the letters
from the colleges, or wait until the student gets home from school. We can set
your mind at ease about this dilemma at least. You can usually tell an acceptance
letter from a rejection letter even without opening it—acceptance letters weigh
more. This is because as long as you met your deadlines, you should receive
financial aid packages in the same envelopes the acceptance letters came in.
Most colleges will need a commitment from you before May 1. This gives you
only a few weeks to sift through the offers, compare them, and—if possible—
negotiate with the FAOs to improve them.
The details of an aid package will be spelled out in the award letter. This letter
will tell you the total cost of one year’s attendance at the college, what the
college decided you could afford to pay toward that cost, and what combination
of grants, loans, and work-study the college has provided to meet your “need.”
On the following page you will find a sample award letter from Anytown
University located in Anytown, State.

Click here to download a PDF of a sample offer letter.

Note that in this case, the family contribution was set at $2,780. The total cost
of attendance at Anytown for that year was $36,000. Thus, this family had a
remaining “need” of roughly $33,220 which was—in this case—met in full with
a mixture of grants, loans, and work-study.
The Bloggs were evidently a high-need family, and received an excellent
package: $28,390 in grants (outright gift aid, which did not need to be repaid),
$1,330 in work-study, and $3,500 in loans for the year.
Not all colleges will meet the entire remaining “need” of every student, and
there may have been a number of reasons why the package was so good in the
case of the sample student in the report above. Perhaps Joe Bloggs was a
particularly bright student or the impoverished grandchild of a distinguished
alumnus.
The Different Types of Financial Aid in Detail
Let’s examine the different types of financial aid that you may be offered in the
award letter. An acceptance of the aid package does not commit you to attending
the college, so be sure to respond by the reply date (certified mail, return receipt
requested, as always). You are allowed to accept or reject any part of the
package, but there are some types of aid that should never be rejected.
Grants and Scholarships: These should never be rejected. This
money is almost always tax-free and never has to be repaid. Grants
and scholarships come in different forms.
The Federal Pell Grant: This grant is administered by the federal
government, and like all federal aid, is awarded only to U.S.
citizens or eligible noncitizens. The Pell is primarily for low-
income families. You automatically apply for the Pell Grant when
you fill out the FAFSA. The size of the award is decided by the
federal government and cannot be adjusted by the colleges. If you
qualify, you will receive up to $5,920 per year, based on need.
The Federal Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant or
SEOG: This is a federal grant that is administered by the colleges
themselves. Each year, the schools get a lump sum that they are

allowed to dispense to students at their own discretion. The size of
the award runs from $100 to $4,000 per year per student.
Grants from the Schools Themselves: The colleges themselves
often award grants as well. Since this money comes out of their
own pocketbook, these grants are in effect discounts off the sticker
price. And because this is not taxpayer money, there are no rules
about how it must be dispensed. Some schools say they award
money solely based on need. Many schools also give out merit-
based awards. There is no limit on the size of a grant from an
individual school. It could range from a few dollars to a full
scholarship. Obviously, richer schools have more money to award
to their students than poorer schools.
State Grants: If a student is attending college in his state of legal
residence, or in a state that has a reciprocal agreement with his state
of legal residence, then he may qualify for a state grant as well.
These grants are administered by the states themselves. The grants
are based on need, as well as on the size of tuition at a particular
school. Thus the same student might find that his state grant at the
local state university would be smaller than his state grant at a
private college. These grants vary from state to state but can go as
high as $6,000 per year or more.
Scholarships from the School: Some schools use the words grants
and scholarships more or less interchangeably, and award
scholarships just like grants—in other words, based on need. Other
schools give scholarships in their more traditional sense, based on
merit, either academic, athletic, or artistic. Some schools give
scholarships based on a combination of need and merit.
The only real difference as far as you are concerned is whether the
scholarship is used to meet need or whether it may be used to
reduce your family contribution. If the school wants you badly
enough, you may receive a merit-based scholarship over and above
the amount of your need.
The Teacher Education Assistance for College and Higher

Education (TEACH) Grant Program: This federal grant program
provides grants of up to $4,000 per year to students who intend to
teach full-time in a high need field in a private elementary or
secondary school that serves students from low-income families. To
qualify, you must attend a school that has chosen to participate in
the program and meet certain academic achievement requirements
along with other requirements. It is important to note that failing to
complete all of the service requirements (e.g.. teaching four years
within eight years of completing the program of study for which
you received the grant at designated schools) will result in the
amount of all TEACH grant funds received being converted to a
Federal Direct Unsubsidized Stafford Loan (see this page)
Outside Scholarships: If you have sought out and won a
scholarship from a source not affiliated with the college—a
foundation, say, or a community organization—you are required to
tell the colleges about this money. Often the scholarship donor will
notify the colleges you applied to directly. In most cases, the
schools will thank you politely and then use the outside scholarship
to reduce the amount of grant money they were going to give you.
In other words, winning a scholarship does not mean you will pay
less money for college; your family contribution often stays exactly
the same.
By notifying the colleges about an outside scholarship before
getting your award letter, you ensure that the outside scholarship
will be included as part of your package. This is not very
satisfactory because you have effectively given away an important
bargaining chip.
If you have managed to find and win one of these scholarships, you
may feel that you deserve something more than thanks from the
school for your initiative. By telling the FAO about an outside
scholarship for the first time when you are negotiating an improved
package, you may be able to use the scholarship as a bargaining
chip. Some schools have specific policies on this; others are
prepared to be flexible. In some cases, we have seen FAOs let the
parents use part of that money to reduce the family contribution. In

other cases, FAOs have agreed to use the scholarship to replace loan
or work-study components of the package instead of grants from
the school.
Federal Work-Study: Under this program, students are given part-
time jobs (usually on campus) to help meet the family’s remaining
need. Many parents’ first inclination is to tell the student to reject
the work-study portion of the aid package. They are concerned that
the student won’t have time to do well in class. As we’ve said
earlier, several studies suggest that students who work during
college have as high or higher grade point averages as students who
don’t work.
We counsel that you at least wait to see what sort of work is being
offered. The award letter will probably not specify what kind of
work the student will have to do for this money. You will get
another letter later in the year giving you details. In many cases
these jobs consist of sitting behind a desk at the library doing
homework. Since students can normally back out of work-study
jobs at any time, why not wait to see how onerous the job really is?
(A minuscule number of colleges do have penalties for students
who fail to meet their work-study obligations, so be sure to read the
work-study agreement carefully.)
While work-study wages are usually minimum wage or slightly
higher, they carry the important added benefit of being exempt from
the aid formulas; work-study wages do not count as part of the
student’s income. Other earnings, by contrast, may be assessed at a
rate of up to 50 cents on the dollar. In addition, each dollar your
child earns is a dollar you won’t have to borrow.
Some colleges give you the choice of having the earnings paid in
cash or credited toward the next semester’s bill. If your child is a
spendthrift, you might consider the second option.
Loans: There are many different kinds of college loans, but they
fall into two main categories: need-based loans, which are designed
to help meet part of a family’s remaining need; and non-need-based

loans, which are designed to help pay part of the family
contribution when the family doesn’t have the cash on hand. The
loans that will be offered as part of your aid package in the award
letter are primarily need-based loans.
The best need-based loans (the federally subsidized Perkins and
Stafford loans) are such good deals that we feel families should
always accept them if they are offered. (Both are far below
prevailing interest rates.) In most cases, no interest is charged while
the student is in school, and repayment does not begin on Perkins or
Stafford loans until the student graduates, leaves college, or dips
below half-time status. Even if you have the money in the bank, we
would still counsel your taking the loans. Let your money earn
interest in the bank. When the loans come due, you can pay them
off immediately, in full if you like, without penalty. Most college
loans with the exception of the Perkins loans have some kind of an
origination fee and perhaps an insurance fee as well. These fees are
deducted from the value of the loan itself; you will never have to
pay them out of your pocket.
Here are the different types of loans in order of attractiveness.
Federal Perkins Loans: Formerly known as National Direct
Student Loans (NDSL), these are the best of the federally
subsidized loans. The current fixed interest rate is 5%. The loans
are made only to the student, with no need for the parent to cosign.
Payment begins only after the student graduates, leaves college, or
drops below half-time status. No interest accrues during the college
years, and students have up to ten years to repay. Although the
money comes from the government, these loans are administered
through the college aid office.
The federal government gives the college a lump sum each year, but
the FAO gets to decide which students receive these loans and how
much they receive, based on need. Undergraduates can borrow up
to $5,500 per year, with a cap of $27,500. The amount of money
each school has available to lend out each year depends to some
extent on the vicissitudes of Congress, but also on the default rate

of the school’s former students. If the school’s students have a low
default rate on paying back these loans, there will be more money
available to recycle to new student borrowers. The government also
tends to reward these schools with larger infusions of new loan
capital.
This program faces elimination and only prior borrowers may receive
additional money in future years.
Federal Direct Loans: Formerly known as Stafford Loans, there
are two kinds of Direct loans. The better kind is the subsidized
Direct loan. To get this, a student must be judged to have need by
the college. The federal government then subsidizes the loan by not
charging any interest until after the student graduates, leaves
college, or goes below half-time attendance status.
The second kind of Direct loan is known as unsubsidized and is
not based on need. From the moment a student takes out an
unsubsidized Direct loan, he or she will be charged interest.
Students are given the option of paying the interest while in school,
or deferring the interest payments (which will continue to accrue)
until repayment of principle begins. Virtually all students who fill
out a FAFSA are eligible for these unsubsidized Direct loans.
In both cases, the federal government guarantees the loan, and if
applicable, makes up any difference between the student’s low
interest rate and the prevailing market rate once repayment has
begun. A dependent student may be eligible to borrow up to $5,500
for the freshman year, up to $6,500 for the sophomore year, and up
to $7,500 per year for the remaining undergraduate years. However
for all of these annual limits, at least $2,000 must be unsubsidized
in any year.
An independent undergraduate can borrow up to $9,500 for the
freshman year (of which at least $6,000 must be unsubsidized), up
to $10,500 for the sophomore year (of which at least $6,000 must
be unsubsidized), and up to $12,500 per year for the remaining
undergraduate years (of which at least $7,000 per year must be
unsubsidized).
Beginning with the 2012-2013 academic year, all Stafford Loans

for graduate/professional school students became unsubsidized with
a maximum annual borrowing limit of $20,500 (which is even
higher for certain health profession students.) Any student
contemplating graduate school/professional school in future years
should be sure to refer to Chapter Eight (Managing Your Debt) that
begins on this page.
What happens if an undergraduate student is awarded a
subsidized Direct loan, but the amount is less than the maximum
subsidized amount? In this case, the student can borrow up to the
amount of her need as a subsidized Stafford loan and, if she wants,
she can also take out an unsubsidized Direct loan for the remainder
of the total annual borrowing limit.
Based on a recent deal in Congress, the interest rate for new
Stafford Loans originated on or after July 1, 2013 would now be
pegged to the 10-year Treasury Note rate with the rate fixed for the
life of the loan. Compared to recent years, there will now be
different rates for undergraduate student and graduate/profession
school students. However, unlike the past few years, the fixed rate
will be the same whether the loan is subsidized (available only to
undergrads) or unsubsidized. For loans originated during the 2017-
2018 academic year, this will mean the rate for these new Direct
loans will be fixed at 4.45% for undergraduates and 6.00% for
graduate/professional school students. So the Direct Loan interest
rate for undergrads for loans originated during the 2017-2018
academic year will be less than the interest rate charged on a
Perkins Loan—but the reverse will be true for graduate/professional
school students at least during 2017-2018.
The rates for new Direct loans originated during subsequent
academic years will be based on the last 10-year Treasury Note
auction in May prior to the start of that subsequent academic year.
However, there are interest rate caps for Direct Loans (that would
only apply to newly-originated loans taken out in subsequent
academic years) should the 10-year Treasury Note rate rise
significantly. For undergraduates the cap will be 8.25%—with a
9.5% cap on Direct Loans for graduate/professional school
students.

Because the government guarantees the loans, parents are never
required to cosign a Direct Loan (or Perkins) loan.
Starting in the 1994–95 academic year, under a law proposed by
President Clinton, some of the Stafford loans were funded directly
by the government and administered by the schools—thus
eliminating the role of private lenders such as banks. This program,
referred to as the William D. Ford Federal Direct Loan Program,
co-existed with the Federal Family Education Loan Program
(FFELP) for a number of years. The schools would decide which
program they would have Stafford borrowers use to get their loan
proceeds and the majority of such loans (in terms of loan volume)
were originated with FFELP private lenders as the middleman.
However as part of the Health Care and Education Reconciliation
Act of 2010, all new Stafford loans disbursed after June 30, 2010
would be via the Direct Loan program. Which is why the name
recently changed from a Stafford Loan to a Direct Loan.
Once you have decided on a college and accepted the aid
package, the FAO will tell you how to go about obtaining the loan
funds. You will have to fill out a promissory note, and because the
process can take as long as six weeks, it may be necessary to apply
for the loan by mid-June for the fall term.
The College’s Own Loans: These loans vary widely in
attractiveness. Some are absolutely wonderful: Princeton University
offers special loans for parents at very low rates. Some are on the
edge of sleazy: Numerous colleges have loan programs that require
almost immediate repayment with interest rates that rival VISA and
MasterCard. While these types of loans do not normally appear as
part of an aid package, a few colleges try to pass them off as need-
based aid to unsuspecting students and their parents. Remember
that you are allowed to reject any portion of the aid package. It is a
good idea to examine the terms of loans from the individual
colleges extremely carefully before you accept them.
Financial Sleight of Hand

As we’ve already said, there are two general types of college loans: the need-
based loans (such as the Perkins and the subsidized Direct loans we’ve just been
discussing), are meant to meet a family’s “remaining need”; the other kind of
loan is meant to help when families don’t have the cash to pay the family
contribution itself.
By its very nature this second type of loan should not appear as part of your
aid package. As far as the colleges are concerned, your family contribution is
your business, and they don’t have to help you to pay it. However, a number of
schools do rather unfairly include several types of non-need-based loan in their
aid package, including the unsubsidized Direct loan we just discussed, and the
PLUS (Parent Loans for Undergraduate Students) which is intended to help
those parents who are having trouble paying their family contribution.
Administered by the government, the PLUS loan is made to parents of college
children. Virtually any parent can get a PLUS loan of up to the total cost of
attendance minus any financial aid received—provided the federal government
thinks the parent is a good credit risk.
Thus when a college tries to meet your need with a PLUS loan, the college is
engaging in financial aid sleight of hand, ostensibly meeting your need with a
loan that was not designed for that purpose and which you could have gotten
anyway, as long as your credit held up. If you are offered a PLUS loan as part of
your need-based aid, you should realize that the college has really not met your
need in full. An aid package that includes a PLUS loan is not as valuable as a
package that truly meets a family’s remaining need.
With the PLUS loans, repayment normally begins within 60 days of the date
the loan was made. However, legislation now permits a PLUS loan borrower to
delay repayment on a PLUS loan taken out for a student until that student
graduates, leaves school, or drops below half-time status. You will need to notify
the lender if you wish to defer repayment in such cases.
Non-Need-Based Loans
While the other types of college loans won’t be part of your aid package, this
seems like a good place to describe a few of them, and they are certainly relevant
to this discussion, for as you look at the various offers from the colleges you will
probably be wondering how you are going to pay your family contribution over
the next four years. Most families end up borrowing. There are so many different

loans offered by banks and organizations that it would be impossible to describe
them all. College bulletins usually include information about the types of loans
available at the specific schools, and applications can usually be picked up at the
colleges’ financial aid offices or be filed online. Here’s a sampling of some of
the more mainstream alternatives (we’ll talk about a few of the more offbeat
loans in the next chapter):
PLUS Loans: We’ve already discussed some details of PLUS loans above. As
credit-based loans go, the PLUS is probably the best. Parents can borrow up to
the annual total cost of attendance at the college minus any financial aid
received. With all PLUS loans now disbursed via the Direct Loan Program, you
will apply for the PLUS loan through the financial aid office.
The recent student loan deal has also changed the way the fixed rate on any
new PLUS loans will be calculated, with the new rate also based on the 10-year
Treasury Note rate instead of a legislated rate. For PLUS loans originated during
the 2017-2018 academic year, the interest rate will be 7% —which is less than
the 7.9% rate that had been charged on fixed rate Direct PLUS loans originated
prior to July 1, 2013. For loans originated for the 2013-2014 academic year and
beyond, there is a cap of 10.5% (that would only apply to newly-originated
PLUS loans taken out in subsequent academic years should the 10-year Treasury
Note rate rise significantly).
When we suggest the PLUS loans to some of our clients, their immediate
response is, “There’s no way we’ll qualify; we don’t have a good credit rating!”
Before you automatically assume you won’t qualify, you should realize that the
credit test for the PLUS is not as stringent as it is for most other loans. You don’t
have to have excellent credit to qualify. You just can’t have an “adverse credit
history” (i.e. outstanding judgments, liens, extremely slow payments). Even if
you fail the credit test, you may still be able to secure a PLUS loan provided you
are able to demonstrate extenuating circumstances (determined on a case-by-
case basis by the lender) or you are able to find someone (a friend or relative)
who can pass the credit test, who agrees to endorse (i.e. cosign) the loan, and
who promises to pay it back if you are unable to do so.
In 2014, the Department of Education relaxed the credit requirements
necessary to receive the loan.
If you are rejected for the PLUS loan and are unable to get a
creditworthy endorser, there is still another option available to you.

In this case, dependent students can borrow extra Direct Loan funds
over the normal borrowing limits. First- and second-year students
can get an additional $4,000 per year, while those in the third year
and beyond can get an additional $5,000 per year. In all cases, these
additional Direct Loan funds must be unsubsidized. Obviously, this
approach is going to put the student deeper in debt. However, if you
need to borrow a few thousand dollars to cover the family
contribution and are unable to get credit in your name, this strategy
may be your only option.
State Loans: Some states offer alternative loan programs as well.
The terms vary from state to state; some are available only to
students, others only to parents; many are below market rate.
Unlike state grants, state loans are often available to nonresidents
attending approved colleges in that state.
Lines of Credit: Some banks offer revolving credit loans that do
not start accruing interest until you write a check on the line of
credit.
CitiAssist Loans [www.studentloan.com or (800) 788-3368]:
Sponsored by Citibank, these loans to students do not have any
origination fees. To make up for this, the interest rate is usually
prime plus 0.50% (however this may be lower or higher at some
schools). There is no minimum loan amount required. This is one of
the few loan programs available to foreign students who can borrow
funds by having a credit-worthy cosigner (who must be a U.S.
citizen or permanent resident). Cosigners will also be required for
almost all undergraduates as well as those students who do not have
a positive credit history. Under certain circumstances, the cosigner
can be released from the loan after 48 on-time payments are made.
Sallie Mae Smart Option Student Loans [www.salliemae.com or
(800) 695-3317]: These cosigned private student loans require
payment of interest while the student is in school and during the 6-
month separation period before repayment. Cosigners may not be
required after freshman year. The interest rate is pegged to the
prime rate and will vary depending on the credit rating of the

student (and, if applicable, the cosigner) as well as the school
attended. This program offers a 0.25% interest rate reduction for
students who elect to have their payments made automatically
through their bank and a 0.25% interest rate reduction for students
who receive all servicing communications via a valid e-mail
address.
Collegiate Loans [www.wellsfargo.com or (800) 378-5526]:
Wells Fargo Bank operates this non-need-based program for college
which offers variable interest loans currently based on the prime
rate and your credit history. The student is the borrower, but a
parent and/or another individual usually must cosign. One can
normally borrow up to the cost of education minus any financial
aid.
This is only a partial listing of the different loans available. When choosing
which type of loan to take out, you should consider all of the following
questions:
• What is the interest rate and how is it deternined?
• Is the interest rate fixed or variable, and if variable, is there a cap?
• What are the repayment options? How many years will it take to pay off
the loan? Can you make interest-only payments while the child is in
school? Can you repay the loan early?
• Who is the borrower—the parent or the student?
• Are there origination fees?
• Is a cosigner permitted or required?
• Will having a cosigner affect the interest rate and/or origination fees?
• Is the loan secured or unsecured? The rates on a loan secured by the home
or by securities are generally lower, but you are putting your assets on the
line.

• Is the interest on the loan tax-deductible?
On balance, the PLUS loan is probably the best of all these options. Unless
you are able to secure more favorable terms from a state financing authority’s
alternative education loan program, then the only reasons to consider the other
types of non-need-based loans, besides the PLUS loan, are if you prefer having
the loans in the student’s name or if the student is an independent student.
Should You Turn Down Individual Parts of an Aid
Package?
Some parents worry that by turning down part of the financial aid package they
are endangering future aid. Clearly, by refusing a work-study job or a need-based
loan, you are telling the FAOs that you can find the money elsewhere, and this
could have an impact on the package you are offered next year. In our experience
we can’t remember many times when we thought it was a good idea for a family
to turn down grants, scholarships, need-based loans, or work-study.
Certainly Not Before You Compare All the
Packages
Before you turn down any part of a single financial aid package, you should
compare the packages as a group to determine your options.
The Size of the Package Is Not Important
Families often get swept up by the total value of the aid packages. We’ve heard
parents say, “This school gave us $12,000 in aid, which is much better than the
school that gave us only $7,000.” The real measure of an aid package is how
much YOU will have to end up paying, and how much debt the student will have
to take on. Let’s look at three examples:
School A:
total cost—$30,000

family contribution—$11,000
grants and scholarships—$14,000
need-based loans—$3,000
work-study—$1,000
unmet need (what the parents will have to pay in addition to the family
contribution)—$1,000
value of the aid package—$18,000
money the family will have to spend—$12,000
need-based debt—$3,000
School B:
total cost—$29,000
family contribution—$11,000
grants and scholarships—$17,000
need-based loans—$500
work-study—$500
unmet need—$0
value of the aid package—$18,000
money the family will have to spend—$11,000
need-based debt—$500
School C:
total cost—$25,000
family contribution—$10,500
grants and scholarships—$10,750
need-based loans—$3,250
work-study—$500
unmet need—$0
value of the aid package—$14,500
money the family will have to spend—$10,500
need-based debt—$3,250
School A and school B gave identical total dollar amounts in aid, but the two

packages were very different. School B gave $17,000 in grants (which do not
have to be repaid), while A gave only $14,000. School B would actually cost this
family $11,000 with only $500 in student loans. School A would cost the family
$12,000 with $3,000 in student loans. Leaving aside for the moment subjective
matters such as the academic caliber of the two schools, school B was a better
buy.
School C would cost this family $10,500 in cash. On the other hand, this
school also asked the student to take on the largest amount of debt: $3,250.
You’ve probably noticed that the sticker prices of the three colleges were
almost totally irrelevant to our discussion. After you’ve looked at the bottom line
for each of the colleges that have accepted the student, you should also factor in
the academic quality of the schools; perhaps it is worth a slightly higher price to
send your child to a more prestigious school. You should also look at factors like
location, reputation of the department your child is interested in, and the
student’s own idea of which school would make her happiest. In the end, you’ll
have to choose what price you’re willing to pay for what level of quality.
Is the Package Renewable?
An excellent question, but unfortunately this is a very difficult question to get a
straight answer about. Of course there are some conditions attached to
continuing to receive a good financial aid package. Students must maintain a
minimum grade point average, and generally behave themselves.
It also makes sense to avoid colleges that are on the brink of bankruptcy, since
poor schools may not be able to continue subsidizing students at the same level.
Bait and Switch?
Most reputable colleges don’t indulge in bait-and-switch tactics, whereby
students are lured to the school with a sensational financial aid package that
promptly disappears the next year.
We have found that when parents feel they have been victims of bait and
switch, there has often been a misunderstanding of some kind. This might occur
when parents have two children in school at the same time. If one of the children
graduates, the parents are often surprised when the EFC for the child who

remains in college goes up dramatically. This is not bait and switch. The family
now has more available income and assets to pay for the child who is now in
college alone.
Sometimes, schools minimize work-study hours during the first year so that
students have a chance to get accustomed to college life. Parents are often
shocked when the number of work-study hours is increased the next year, but
again this is not bait and switch. It is reasonable to expect students to work more
hours in their junior and senior years.
Negotiating with the FAOs
Once you’ve compared financial aid packages and the relative merits of the
schools that have said yes, you may want to go back to one or more of the
colleges to try to improve your package.
We are not saying that every family should try to better their deal. If you can
comfortably afford the amount the college says you must pay, then there is little
chance that the college is going to sweeten the deal—it must be pretty good
already. College FAOs know just how fair the package they have put together for
you is. If you are being greedy, you will not get much sympathy. It is also a good
idea to remember that the average FAO is not making a great deal of money.
Parents who whine about how tough it is to survive on $200,000 a year will get
even less sympathy.
However, if you are facing the real prospect of not being able to send your
child to the school she really wants to attend because of money, or if two
similarly ranked colleges have offered radically different packages and your son
really wants to go to the school with the low package, then you should sit down
and map out your strategy.
Negotiate While You Still Have Leverage
After you’ve accepted the college’s offer of admission, the college won’t have
much incentive to sweeten your deal, so you should plan to speak to the FAO
while it is clear that you could still choose to go to another school. Similarly, you
will not have much leverage if you show the FAO a rival offer from a much
inferior college.

Try to make an objective assessment of how badly the college wants you.
Believe us, the FAOs know exactly where each student fits into their scheme of
things. We know of one college that keeps an actual list of prospective students
in order of their desirability, which they refer to when parents call to negotiate. If
a student just barely squeaked into the school, the family will not be likely to
improve the package by negotiating. If a student is a shining star in one area or
another, the FAOs will be much more willing to talk.
In the past few years, colleges—especially the selective ones—have become
more flexible about their initial offer. Now that FAOs from the different colleges
are limited in their ability to sit down together to compare offers to students, the
“fudge factor” by which they are willing to improve an offer has increased. We
heard one FAO urge a group of students to get in touch with her if they were
considering another school. “Perhaps we overlooked something in your
circumstances,” she said. What she meant of course was, “Perhaps we want you
so much we will be willing to increase our offer.” This FAO represented one of
the most selective schools in the country.
Prepare Your Ammunition
Before you call, you should have gathered all the supporting ammunition you
can in front of you. If you’ve received a better offer from a comparable school,
have it in front of you when you call and be prepared to send a copy of the rival
award letter to the school you are negotiating with. (They will probably ask to
see it, which brings up another point: don’t lie!)
If you feel that the school has not understood your financial circumstances, be
ready to explain clearly what those special circumstances are (such as high
margin debts or any other expenses that are not taken into account by the aid
formula, support of an elderly relative, or unusually high unreimbursed business
expenses). Any documentation you can supply will bolster your claim.
If your circumstances have changed since you filled out your need analysis
form (for example, you have recently separated, divorced, been widowed, or lost
your job), you should be frank and let the FAOs know. They will almost
certainly make changes in your aid package.
The Call

Unless you live within driving distance of the school, your best negotiating tool
is the telephone. The FAOs will find it hard to believe that you need more money
if you can afford to fly to their college just to complain to them.
If possible, try to speak with the head FAO or one of the head FAO’s
assistants. Make sure you write down the name of whoever speaks to you. It is
unlikely that he will make a concession on the telephone, so don’t be
disappointed if he says he will have to get back to you or if he asks you to send
him something in writing.
Some telephone tips:
• Be cordial and frank. Like everyone, FAOs do not want to be
yelled at and are much more likely to help you if you are
friendly, businesslike, and organized.
• Have a number in your head. What would you like to get out of
this conversation? If the FAO asks you, “All right, how much can
you afford?” you do not want to hem and haw.
• Be reasonable. If the family contribution you propose has no
relation to your EFC, you will lose most of your credibility with
the FAO.
• Avoid confrontational language. Rather than start off with,
“Match my other offer or else,” just ask if there is anything they
can do to improve the package. Also avoid using words such as
“negotiate” or “bargain”. You’re better off saying you wish to
“appeal” the award and then present your facts. Any new
information not previously presented could bolster your case,
especially if you can provide supporting documentation.
• If you are near a deadline, ask for an extension and be doubly
sure you know the name of the person you are speaking to.
Follow up the phone call with a letter (certified mail, return
receipt requested) reminding the FAO of what was discussed in
the conversation.
• Parents, not students, should negotiate with the FAOs. Some

colleges actually have a question on their own financial aid
forms in which the parents are asked if they will allow the
colleges to speak to the student rather than the parents. Colleges
prefer to speak to students because they are easier to browbeat.
• Read through this book again before you speak to the FAO.
You’ll never know as much about financial aid as she does, but at
least you’ll stand a good chance of knowing if she says
something that isn’t true.
• If you applied “early decision” to a college and that college
accepts you, you are committed to attend, and you won’t have
much bargaining power to improve your aid package. If you
applied and are accepted “early action,” you are not required to
attend that school, and it is in your interest to apply to several
other schools in order to improve your bargaining position. We
discuss both of these options in more detail in the “Special
Topics” chapter.
The Worst They Can Say Is No
You risk nothing by trying to negotiate a better package. No matter how
objectionable you are, the school cannot take back their offer of admission, and
the FAOs cannot take back their aid package unless you have lied about your
financial details.
Accepting an Award
Accepting an award does not commit a student to attending that school. It merely
locks in the award package in the event the student decides to attend that school.
If you haven’t decided between two schools, accept both packages. This will
keep your options open for a little longer. Be careful not to miss the deadline to
respond. Send your acceptance certified mail, return receipt requested, as
always. Above all, don’t reject any award until you have definitely decided
which school the student is going to attend. If a school’s aid package has not
arrived yet, call the college to find out why it’s late.

If you have been awarded state aid as part of the aid package at the school of
your choice, but the award notice you received from the state agency lists the
wrong college, you will have to file a form with the state agency to have the
funds applied to the school you chose.
Now That You Have Chosen a School
By the time you have chosen a college, you will already be halfway through the
second base income year. Now that you understand the ins and outs of financial
aid, you will be able to plan ahead to minimize the apparent size of your income
and assets, and be in an even better position to fill out next year’s need analysis
forms. The first application for financial aid is the hardest, in part because you’re
dealing with a number of different schools, in part because it is a new
experience. From now on, that first application will serve as a kind of template.

CHAPTER SEVEN
Innovative Payment
Options

Innovative Options
We’ve already discussed the mainstream borrowing options and methods for
paying for college. Over the years, colleges, private companies, public
organizations, and smart individuals have come up with some alternative ways to
pay for college. These ideas range from the commonsense to the high-tech, from
good deals for the family to self-serving moneymakers for the colleges and
institutions that came up with them. Here is a sampling.
Transfer in Later
Every year a few parents make an unfortunate decision: they send the student off
to a college that didn’t give them enough aid. After two years of tuition bills,
they’ve spent their life savings, and the banks won’t lend them any more money.
The student is forced to transfer to a public university. The result? A diploma
from the student’s own State U. that could end up costing the family more than
$175,000. The parents paid private school prices for a state school diploma.
What if they had done it the other way around? The student starts out at a state
school, paying low prices. She does extremely well, compiling an outstanding
academic record and soliciting recommendations from her professors. In junior
year she transfers to a prestigious private college. Even if the cost were exactly
the same as in the previous example, she now has a diploma from the prestigious
private school, at a savings of as much as $75,000 over the regular price.
This scenario won’t work without the part about the “outstanding academic
record.” Prestigious private colleges will almost certainly not be interested in a
transfer student with a B average or less. The other thing to bear in mind is that
aid packages to transfer students are generally not as generous as those given to
incoming freshmen.
Both of these points must be factored into a decision to start with a public
college and transfer into a select private college. However, if a student really
wants a diploma from that selective private college, and the family can’t afford
to send her for all four years, then this is a way for her to realize her dream.
Anyone interested in this tactic should be sure to consult the individual schools

to see how many transfer students are accepted per year, what kind of financial
aid is available to them, and how many of the credits earned at the old college
will be accepted by the new college.
Cooperative Education
Over 900 colleges let students combine a college education with a job in their
field. Generally, the students spend alternate terms attending classes full-time
and then working full-time at off-campus jobs with private companies or the
federal government, although some students work and study at the same time.
The students earn money for tuition while getting practical on-the-job experience
in their areas of interest. This program differs from the Federal Work-Study
Program in which the subsidized campus-based jobs are probably not within the
student’s area of interest, and take up only a small number of hours per week.
After graduating, a high percentage of cooperative education students get hired
permanently by the employers they worked for during school. Companies from
every conceivable field participate in this program. The federal government is
the largest employer of cooperative education students.
Getting a degree through the cooperative education program generally takes
about five years, but the students who emerge from this program have a huge
head start over their classmates; they already have valuable experience and a
prospective employer in their field. They owe less money in student loans, and
they are often paid more than a new hiree.
If you are eligible for financial aid, you should contact the financial aid office
at any college you are considering to determine the effect of cooperative
earnings on your financial aid package.
Short-Term Prepayment
Recently, some colleges have been touting tuition prepayment as the answer to
all the ills of higher education. In the short-term version of tuition prepayment,
the parent pays the college the entire four years’ worth of tuition (room and
board are generally excluded) sometime shortly before the student begins
freshman year. The college “locks in” the tuition rate for the entire four years.
Regardless of how much tuition rises during the four years, the parent will not

owe any more toward tuition.
Since most parents don’t have four years of tuition in one lump sum, the
colleges lend it to them. The parents pay back the loan with interest over a time
period set in advance. The colleges love this arrangement, because it allows
them to make a nice profit. If you pay the entire amount without borrowing, the
colleges invest your money in taxable investments, which (because of their tax-
exempt status) they don’t have to pay taxes on. If you borrow the money from
the college, they charge you interest on the money you borrow. Whatever course
you pursue, the revenue the colleges earn from these prepayment plans more
than make up for any tuition increases.
Is Prepayment a Good Idea for the Parent?
While the colleges may tell you that you will save money by avoiding tuition
increases each year, your savings, if any, really depend on what interest rates are
doing. If you would have to borrow the money to make the prepayment, the
question to ask yourself is whether your after-tax cost of borrowing will be less
than the tuition increases over the four years. If so, prepayment may make sense.
If you can afford to write a check for the entire amount of the prepayment, the
question to ask yourself is whether the after-tax rate of return on your
investments is higher than the rate at which tuition is increasing. If so, then
prepayment makes no sense.
Any prepayment plan should be examined carefully. What happens if the
student drops out after one year? What happens if the program is canceled after
only two years? What is the interest rate on the loan you take out? Is the loan
rate fixed or variable, and, if variable, what is the cap? These are a few of the
questions you should ask before you agree to prepayment.
However, unless the interest rates are extremely low—and will remain low
over the four years your child is in college—prepayment may end up costing
you more money than paying as you go.
ROTC and the Service Academies
The Reserve Officer Training Corps has branches at many colleges. To qualify
for ROTC scholarships you generally need to apply to the program early in the

senior year of high school. Competition for these awards is keen, but if a student
is selected he or she will receive a full or partial scholarship plus a $100-per-
month allowance. The catch, of course, is that the student has to join the military
for four years of active duty plus two more years on reserve. While on active
duty, many students are allowed to go to graduate school on full scholarship. A
student can join a ROTC program once he’s entered college, but will not
necessarily get a scholarship.
To qualify for the four-year scholarships, students (male and female) must
have good grades, an SAT score of 1100 (out of 1600) or an ACT score of 24,
they must pass a physical, and they must also impress an interviewer.
The service academies (the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and the U.S.
Naval Academy at Annapolis are probably the best known) are extremely
difficult to get into. Good grades are essential, as is a recommendation from a
senator or a member of Congress. However, all this trouble may be worth it, for
the service academies have a great reputation for the quality of their programs
and they are absolutely free. Again, in exchange for this education, a student
must agree to serve as an officer in the armed forces for several years.
Outside Scholarships
Opinions are divided about outside scholarships. The companies that sell
scholarship databases say there are thousands of unclaimed scholarships
sponsored by foundations, corporations, and other outside organizations just
waiting to be found. Critics charge that very few scholarships actually go
unclaimed each year, and that the database search companies are providing lists
that families could get from government agencies, the local library, or the
internet for free.
Certainly it must be said that many scholarships in the search services’
databases are administered by the colleges themselves. There is almost never a
need to “find” this type of scholarship. The colleges know they have this money
available, and will match up the awards with candidates who meet the
requirements attached to the awards. It is in the colleges’ interest to award these
“restricted” scholarships since this frees up unrestricted funds for other students.
Every year, colleges award virtually all the scholarship money they have at their
disposal.
It must also be pointed out that when you notify a college that you have won

an outside scholarship (and if you are on financial aid you are required to tell the
school how much you won), the college will often say thank you very much and
deduct that amount from the aid package they have put together for you. As far
as the colleges are concerned, your “need” just got smaller. Thus if you hunt
down an obscure scholarship for red-haired flutists, it will often not really do
you any monetary good. Your family contribution (what the colleges think you
can afford to pay) will stay exactly the same. The FAOs will use the outside
scholarship money to reduce your aid (often your grants).
This is not to say that there aren’t circumstances when outside scholarships
can help pay for college, but you must be prepared to fight. If you have found
outside scholarships worth any significant amount, you should talk to the FAO in
person or on the phone and point out that without your initiative, the college
would have had to pay far more. Negotiate with the FAO. He may be willing to
let you use part of the scholarship toward your family contribution, or at least he
may improve your aid package’s percentage of grants versus loans.
We’ve talked to people who’ve had terrible experiences with the scholarship
search companies and we’ve talked to other people who swear by them. Just
keep in mind that this type of aid accounts for less than 5% of the financial aid in
the United States. Of course, 5% of the financial aid available in the United
States is still a lot of money.
We do recommend, however, that you steer clear of any scholarship search
firm that promises you’ll get a scholarship or your fee will be refunded. These
guarantees are not worth the paper they’re printed on. When you read the fine
print, you’ll discover that you need to send them rejection letters from each and
every scholarship source they recommended to you. Many of these donors don’t
have the time or the resources to tell you the bad news, so you’ll never get the
proof you need to claim your refund. The Federal Trade Commission has closed
down a number of these firms after receiving numerous complaints from
students and parents who didn’t get their money back.
Innovative Loans
The very best type of loans, as we’ve said before, are the government-subsidized
student loans. We’ve also already discussed home equity loans and margin loans
(both of which reduce the appearance of your assets) as well as some of the more
popular parent loan programs.

There is one other type of loan that can help you write the checks:
Borrow from Your 401(k) Plan or a Pension Plan
If you are totally without resources, the IRS may allow you to make an early
withdrawal of money without penalty from a 401(k) plan to pay for education.
However, rather than get to this desperate situation (which will increase your
income taxes and raise your income for financial aid purposes), it would make a
lot more sense for you to take out a loan from your 401(k) plan or from your
pension plan.
Not all plans will allow this, but some will let you borrow tax-free as much as
half of the money in your account, up to $50,000. There are no penalties, and
this way you are not irrevocably depleting your retirement fund. You’re merely
borrowing from yourself; in many cases, the interest you pay on the loan actually
goes back into your own account. Generally, the loan must be repaid within five
years. However, if you lose your job or change your employer, this loan will
become due immediately, so you should exercise some caution before you
proceed.
This kind of borrowing will not decrease your assets as far as the FAOs are
concerned because assets in retirement provisions are not assessed anyway.
However, if you’ve come to this point, your non-retirement assets are probably
already fairly depleted.
A self-employed individual can borrow from a Keogh plan, but there will
almost certainly be penalties, and the loan will be treated as a taxable
distribution. Loans against IRAs are not currently permitted.
Loans Forgiven
A few colleges have programs under which some of your student loans may be
forgiven if you meet certain conditions. At Cornell University, for example,
Tradition Fellows, who hold jobs while they are in college, are given awards that
replace their student loans by up to $4,000 per year in acknowledgment of their
work ethic. Even federal loans can be forgiven under certain circumstances.
Head Start, Peace Corps, or VISTA volunteers may not have to repay all of their
federal loans, for example.

Moral Obligation Loans
Here’s a novel idea: the college makes a loan to the student, and the student
agrees to pay back the loan. That’s it. There is no legal obligation to pay back
the money. The student has a moral obligation to repay. Several schools have
decided to try this, and the results, of course, won’t be in for some time. At the
moment, when a student repays the loan, the repayment is considered a tax-
deductible charitable contribution. The IRS will probably have closed that
loophole by the time your child is ready to take advantage of it. Nevertheless,
this is a wonderful deal because it allows the student flexibility in deciding when
to pay the loan back, and does not affect the child’s credit rating. If your college
is offering this option, grab it.
Payment Plans and Financing Options
Many families have difficulty coming up with their Family Contribution in one
lump sum each semester. There are a number of commercial organizations that
will assist you with spreading the payment out over time. Some of these
programs are financing plans that charge interest and involve repayment over a
number of years. Others are simply payment plans in which you make 10 or 12
monthly payments during the year. These plans may require you to begin making
payments in May or June prior to the start of the fall semester. A nominal fee
(about $50) is usually charged for these plans. The two largest organizations that
offer such budgeting plans are: Sallie Mae′s Higher One TuitionPay [(800) 635-
0120]; and Tuition Management Systems (TMS) [(800) 722-4867]. Many
schools have developed their own deferred payment plans as well. These
programs can vary tremendously from college to college.
The college financial aid office or bursar’s office should be able to provide
you with information regarding all your payment options, as well as the names
of those commercial plans (if any) that can be used at their school. Be sure to
read the fine print before you sign up for any of these programs.
Tuition Refund Insurance
Writing that check for the first tuition bill is a sobering experience for most

families. Given the large outlay of funds involved, it may make sense to take out
a tuition refund insurance policy to protect yourself if the student is forced to
withdraw in the middle of a term. Most colleges do give partial refunds when a
student has to withdraw. How much money you get back from the college itself
depends on how far into the term the student is when he/she withdraws, as well
as the policies of the individual school. (There are no federal regulations
governing how much money must be refunded, if any)
Tuition refund insurance—also known as tuition insurance—is designed to
make up the difference. For an insurance premium of normally $150 to $400 per
academic year, you can have peace of mind that any non-refunded payments for
tuition and possibly room & board are not a total loss.
Bear in mind that if the student withdraws midway through the term—
regardless of the reason—the school will probably not permit the student to
finish the coursework after the semester is over. More than likely, the only option
will be to re-enroll for the course in a future term.
For medically-related withdrawals you can often get up to 100% of what the
college doesn’t refund if you have taken out a tuition refund insurance policy.
For mental health issues, you can often get up to 60 or 70%. Some policies also
offer coverage if the student is forced to withdraw for other reasons—such as a
death in the family or an employment-related relocation of the parents). Keep in
mind that as the academic term progresses, you will get back less money from
the school. So if there are issues that make the student’s ability to complete the
term unlikely, it makes sense to make a decision sooner rather than later—and to
notify the school through the proper channels and withdraw relatively quickly.
Of course, if the student is at a lower-priced state school or is getting a lot of
financial aid, tuition refund insurance makes less sense. But at the very least, you
should carefully review the college’s refund policy. And if you are considering
purchasing a policy, you should be sure to read all the fine print since some
refund policies will not pay a benefit if the student withdraws due to a pre-
existing medical condition that was present within a certain time period before
the policy was purchased.
National Service
One of the nontraditional methods of educational financing has been the
AmeriCorps program (www.Americorps.gov). Since it was established in 1994

during the Clinton administration, more than a quarter million individuals have
participated in this national service program designed to encourage young people
to serve in educational, environmental, or police programs or in programs to
assist the elderly or the homeless. In return for taking part in national service, a
participant receives training, a living allowance at the minimum wage, health
insurance, child care, and up to $5,550 per year in educational grants.
While we think this is a generally great idea, the program in its current form
has a few problems from a financial aid standpoint. First, if a student joins this
program after he or she has graduated, the student will not be able to use money
from this program to pay college bills directly. Students would have to come up
with the money in the first place. Only later could AmeriCorps grants be used to
pay back loans that the student had taken out along the way. Second, with a
maximum of only $5,550 per year in grant money, national service may not be
the most economically efficient way for a student to pay back student loans.
Unless national service appeals to you for altruistic reasons, you may be able to
repay loans faster by taking a conventional job and putting yourself on a
minimum wage allowance. Finally, for students who participate in the program
prior to college and who demonstrate need when they apply for financial aid, the
AmeriCorps grants may simply reduce those students’ “need” in the aid formulas
and not the family contribution. This is why many higher education
organizations have criticized references to national service as a student aid
program.
Marketing Gimmicks Arrive on Campus
Some colleges have begun incentives that owe more to the world of retailing
than to the world of the ivory tower. Among the offers you may find:
• discounts for bringing in a friend
• rebates for several family members attending at the same time
• discounts for older students
• reduced prices for the first semester so you can see if you like it
• option of charging your tuition on a credit card

CHAPTER EIGHT
Managing Your Debt

For many people, there is really no choice; if you or your child want a college
education, you have to go into debt. But it turns out that there are a number of
choices to make about how you go into debt and how you eventually pay it off.
Most parents and students assume they have no control over the loan process.
Unfortunately, this assumption may cost them thousands of dollars.
In previous chapters we’ve discussed the different kinds of loans that are
available. Of course, the most common types of loans are Stafford and PLUS
loans.
In this chapter, we’ll provide more information on how to select the best
loans, as well as how to pay off these loans once you are required to do so.
As usual, this advice comes with our standard caveat: We can’t recommend
any specific course of action since we don’t know your specific situation. These
strategies are only meant to steer you in the right direction. Please consult with
your accountant or a financial aid planner.
Before You Borrow
Smart financial planning dictates that you always borrow at the lowest possible
cost. So the first type of loan to consider is usually the federal Perkins loan-- a
5% fixed-interest rate loan made to the student; interest is subsidized while the
student is in school, and during a 9-month grace period after the student leaves
school, graduates or drops below half-time status. (We’ve already given some
details on loans on this page.) The Perkins loan is available to graduate as well
as undergraduate students.
For undergraduate students for the 2017-2018 academic year, an even better
loan is the subsidized Direct Loan. For Direct Loans originated during the 2017-
2018 school year, the rate will be fixed at 4.45% for the life of the loan.
However, depending on the 10-year Treasury Note rate which will now
determine the rate on any Direct Loans originated on or after July 1, 2014, the
rate on the Direct Loan may be higher or lower than the 5% Perkins loan rate for
new Direct Loans originated after the 2014-2015 school year.
Yet even if the Direct Loan rate exceeds the Perkins rate in subsequent years,
it is still a great deal since the government pays the interest on a subsidized

Direct Loans while a student is in school. And if you wish to pay off a
subsidized Direct Loan before the student leaves school, graduate or drops below
half-time enrollment, no interest will be charged at all.
Next in desirability is the unsubsidized Direct Loan. Unlike the Perkins and
the Subsidized Direct Loan, the unsubsidized Direct Loan charges the student
interest from day one. The decision whether or not to take out this type of loan
depends on other factors. For example, let’s say you have funds for school in a
bank account that’s earning 1% in a bank; in that case, it makes no sense to take
out a loan in which you’re paying more interest than you’re earning by keeping
those funds in a bank. Conversely, if you don’t have the funds to pay for school,
and other loans would carry a higher interest rate, then the unsubsidized Direct
Loan makes sense.
And for paying the education expenses of a dependent undergraduate student,
the last federal loan option available is the PLUS loan—in which one of the
student’s parents is the borrower. With interest charged from the time the loan
funds are disbursed at a fixed rate that is higher than the fixed rate for an
unsubsidized Direct Loans, this is the costliest of the federal education loan
options.
There are two other types of loans available which can be broken down into
two categories: the first offered by state educational financing authorities such as
MEFA in Massachusetts or CHESLA in Connecticut. Depending on the
eligibility criteria, some of these loans allow state residents to borrow funds for
schools both in-state and out-of-state. Some also make such loans available if an
out-of-state student is attending a participating school within the state that offers
the loan. Most have a fixed-rate option that is sometimes lower than some
federal loan options. The second category involves private alternative loans,
generally offered by banks or other private lenders. While these mostly variable
rate-loans can start out lower than the Federal options, if interest rates rise
appreciably they can become a very costly. And unlike housing debt, in which
you can convert a variable rate home equity line of credit into a fixed-rate loan
before interest rates start to rise, these education loans normally cannot be
refinanced with another fixed-rate education loan.
But what if you’re an independent undergraduate student? The first three most
attractive options offered above should be considered in the same hierarchy.
Compared to most dependent undergraduate students, independent undergrads
can borrow an additional $4000 for each of the first two years and an additional

$5,000/year for the third year and beyond via the Direct Loan program should
additional funds be needed. But that’s it for federal education loans for
independent undergrads, since there are officially no parents in the picture who
can take out PLUS loans. Even if a parent of an independent undergraduate
wants to take out a PLUS loan for their child, they cannot do so since PLUS
loans are only for parents of dependent students.
What about graduate students? Beginning with the 2012-2013 academic year,
graduate and professional school students are no longer be able to take out
subsidized Direct Loans. They can still take out unsubsidized Direct Loan (up to
$20,500 per year, and possibly even more for health profession students), but the
up-to-$8,500 subsidized Stafford that existed in 2011-2012 and before is no
longer available. However, all unsubsidized Direct Loans for graduate students
will continue to have a fixed-interest rate—albeit at a higher rate than for
undergrads. (6.0% for loans taken out in 2017–2018.)
Graduate School Considerations
Those considering going on to graduate school, which for purposes of this
chapter will include any professional school such as a law school, medical
school, business school (MBA) etc., should consider borrowing the maximum
amount of Perkins and subsidized Direct Loans for which they are eligible as an
undergraduate. This is because unless you’re fortunate enough to get a Perkins
loan (and there’s only a limited amount of this money available to graduate
students) any money you borrow will have interest charged from the get-go. So
you would be better off preserving funds in your nest egg while the student is an
undergraduate, and using them instead in graduate school when the cost of
borrowing is higher.
And what if you’re stopping out for a few years between an undergraduate
program and graduate school? With a subsidized Direct Loan no longer available
to graduate students, one would be better off making minimum payments on
their education loans, possibly by choosing a repayment option other than the
standard one (which we’ll cover shortly). Provided you have the discipline.
When you go back to school, the amount of any subsidized Stafford, Perkins,
and Direct Loans that qualify for an in-school deferment will be frozen at the
amount owed when you return to school until you graduate, leave school, or
drop below half-time status

So you’re better off stockpiling the cash for graduate school, rather than
paying off these loans quickly. For two reasons: one, this will reduce your
overall interest charges. And you’ll also minimize or even avoid origination fees
on new loans by borrowing less for graduate school or not borrowing at all. And
if you are borrowing less for graduate school, the weighted average of all the
loans together will ensure a lower overall rate than if you pay off lower-interest
loans early and then have to take out higher-interest loans such as the 6.0%
unsubsidized Stafford or 7.0% Grad-PLUS loan (which we will soon discuss).
Note: For your prior loans to again qualify for an in-school deferment, you
will have to go back to the holders/servicers of your prior federal education
loans and let them know you’re back in school as well. You will also have to
meet all other criteria based on your enrollment status. Each loan holder/servicer
will send you a form to be completed by the school you will be attending, so that
you’ll again be eligible for the in-school deferment to suspend payments while in
school and so that the government will again pay all the interest on any
subsidized Stafford or Subsidized Direct Loans as well as any Perkins loans
while in school.
Graduate / Professional students are eligible for three federal student loans:
the Perkins loan, the Direct Loan, and the GradPLUS loan (which is a student
loan that works similar to the parent PLUS in that one can borrow the total cost
of attendance minus any other aid received including other student loans.) So if
the Perkins and Direct Loans are not sufficient, graduate students can use the
GradPLUS loans to cover their additional costs. Unlike independent
undergraduate students, graduate and professional students can therefore borrow
their entire cost of attendance via the federal education loan programs if no other
aid is awarded. Note: Similar to a parent taking out a PLUS loan, a student
borrowing through a GradPLUS loan must pass a credit test or have an eligible
credit worthy cosigner to obtain the loan (per this page). Perkins and Direct
Loans do not require any such credit test.
As mentioned earlier, the Perkins loan program may be eliminated or
experience changes that will make it less attractive for new loans.
How to Pay Off Your Loans
As soon as a student graduates, the clock starts ticking. The government gives
you a six-month grace period to find a job and catch your breath—and then the

bills start arriving. You might think that at least this part of the process would be
straightforward: they send you a bill, you pay. But in fact, there are a
bewildering number of repayment options, as well as opportunities, to postpone
and defer payment.
Overriding all of this is one simple maxim: The longer you take to pay, the
more it costs you. Putting it in practical terms, choosing to lower your monthly
payments will stretch out the amount of time you’ll be making these payments,
and ultimately add thousands of dollars in interest to your bill. Sometimes this is
worth it, as we’ll see.
It’s impossible for us to predict exactly what your monthly payments will be,
since everyone owes different amounts, and borrowed on different terms. Just to
give you a ballpark figure, someone who owes $15,000, at an average rate of 8%
would have 120 monthly payments of about $182. Someone who owes $50,000
would have 120 monthly payments of about $607.
The only way to defer these student loan payments long-term is to stay in
school. As long as you are at least a half-time student at an approved post-
secondary school, you can keep those bills at bay forever. If you get a job and
then later decide to go on to graduate school, your loan payments may be
deferred while you are in graduate school, and resume as soon as you get out.
Above All, Avoid Default
When all the loans come due, and a few personal crises loom as well, there’s a
very human urge to shove the bills in a drawer and hope for the best. This is
absolutely the worst possible thing you can do.
The default rate on government guaranteed student loans is still somewhat
high at the moment. This might give you the erroneous impression that a default
is no big deal. You should realize that a large portion of defaulted loans comes
not from college loans, but from loans made to students of “bogus” trade schools
with three initials and two faces. These trade schools are often scam operations
designed to fleece the federal government by preying on immigrants and poor
people. A new arrival to this country may not care about or understand the
importance of his credit rating, but you certainly do.
When people get into economic trouble, they tend to get very reticent, and
often don’t ask for help. Even though you may feel embarrassed, it is much

better to call your lender and explain the situation than to miss a payment with
no explanation.
As you will see, there are so many different payment options, that there is
really no need for anyone ever to go into default. If you lose a job, or “encounter
economic hardship,” you should apply for a temporary deferment (suspension of
principal and interest payments for a specified time) or something called
forbearance, which can include temporary suspension of payments, a time
extension to make payment—even a temporary reduction in the amount of
monthly installments. Many lenders will draw up new repayment plans, or
accept a missed payment as long as you inform them ahead of time.
Work with the lender. Or rather, lenders. If you have loans from more than one
lender (the Perkins loans are administered separately from the Stafford or Direct
Loans), one lender isn’t necessarily going to know what’s happening with the
other, unless you tell them.
It can take years to build up a good credit rating again once you’ve loused it
up. Meanwhile, you may not be able to get credit cards, a mortgage, or a car
loan. And if you’re in default, getting additional loans for graduate school can be
difficult if not impossible.
The Different Payment Plans
If you are repaying Stafford loans, Direct Loans, Supplemental Loans for
Students (SLS), PLUS or Grad PLUS loans, there up to seven repayment options
at present. When you pick an option, it is not for life. You can switch payment
plans at any time. Here is a brief summary of the options. For more details,
contact your lender(s).
Standard repayment: The loans must be repaid in equal installments spread
out over up to 10 years. This is a good plan for people who have relatively little
debt, or have enough income to afford the relatively high payments.
Extended repayment: The loans must be repaid in equal installments over a
period that can extend up to 25 years. The increased time period reduces
monthly payments, but long-term interest expenses go up dramatically.
Graduated repayment: Loan payments start out low and increase over time.

The payments must always at least equal the monthly interest that’s accruing.
This is a good plan for young people whose earnings are low, but are expected to
increase over time. Over the lifetime of the loan, interest expenses are much
higher.
Income-sensitive repayment: This option allows payments that are initially
low, but increase as income rises. The lender works with the borrower to
establish a payment schedule that reflects the borrower’s current income. The
payments are adjusted annually to accommodate changes in the borrower’s
income. This option is available only to borrowers who took out Stafford, PLUS
or Grad PLUS loans from private lenders years ago.
Income contingent repayment: This option is available only to borrowers
with federal Direct Loans, but does not cover parent PLUS loans. In this plan,
the payments are based on a combination of the borrower’s level of debt and
current income. With this (and the following two options), payments can be
lower than the monthly interest accruing (which is called negative amortization).
Of course, this can add substantially to the final cost of long-term interest
expenses. To counter this, at the end of 25 years, the government will forgive
any unpaid balance. But don’t start jumping for joy: the IRS may tax you on this
unpaid balance. Thus, if the government were to forgive a $10,000 remaining
debt, a person in the 25 percent tax bracket would have to come up with at least
$2,500 in additional taxes that year.
Income-based repayment and Pay As You Earn: Under these options, the
required monthly payment will be based on your income during any period when
you have a partial financial hardship. The monthly payment may be adjusted
annually. The maximum repayment period under these plans may exceed 10
years. If you meet certain requirements over a specified period of time, you may
qualify for cancellation of any outstanding balance. The amount of any loan
canceled may be subject to income taxes. Parent PLUS Loans are not eligible.
Only Direct Loans qualify for Pay As You Earn.
Loan Consolidation
Government regulations allow you to consolidate all your education loans from
different sources into one big loan—often with lower monthly payments than

you were making before. As usual, the catch is that the repayment period is
extended, meaning that you end up paying a lot more in interest over the
increased life of the loan. However, you can always prepay your loans without
penalty.
The loans that can be consolidated are: the Stafford, Direct Loans, SLS,
Perkins, PLUS loans, GradPLUS loans, and loans issued by the government’s
programs for health-care professionals. You can’t consolidate private loans from
colleges or other sources in the federal consolidation program.
How It Works
A consolidation loan can be paid back using one of the plans outlined above. In
some cases, loan consolidation doesn’t make sense—for example, if you are
almost done paying off your loans. For the most part, student loans can be
consolidated only once, and in most cases, it would be better to wait to do this
until a student is completely finished with school.
You also don’t have to consolidate all your loans. The rules on how your new
interest rate will be calculated change constantly, so you’ll need to get up-to-date
information from your lender.
Before you consolidate any loans, you should also consider these factors:
• How will the interest rate be calculated?
• Are you better off excluding some loans from consolidation to
get a better rate and/or to prevent the loss of some benefits with
some of your loans?
• Will consolidating your loans later give you a better or a worse
interest rate?
• Can you consolidate your loans(s) more than once?
• Do you have to consolidate your loans with a private lender? Do
you have to consolidate your loans directly with the government?
If you have a choice between the two, which consolidation plan
is the best deal for you?

• If you are consolidating unsubsidized and subsidized loans
together, will this affect your ability to have the government pay
the interest on your subsidized loans should you go back to
school?
Loan Discharge and Cancellation
The Perkins Loan program, and to a lesser extent, the Stafford and PLUS loan
programs have various provisions in which the loan can be discharged or
canceled. While some provisions hopefully do not happen to you in the near
future (e.g. you become permanently disabled or die), loans may also be forgiven
for performing certain types of service (teaching in low-income areas, law
enforcement, nursing, working with disabled or high risk children and their
families in low-income communities, etc.).
One of the provisions of the College Cost Reduction and Access Act has
expanded Direct Stafford loan forgiveness in exchange for public service.
Borrowers who take public sector jobs in the government, the military, certain
non-profit tax-exempt organizations, law enforcement, public health, or
education, may be eligible—after making 120 on-time payments after October 1,
2007—to have the remaining balance of their Direct Loans forgiven.
Those with Stafford loans borrowed through banks (not borrowed through the
Direct Loan program from the government through the financial office of your
school) may be able to take advantage of this new provision by consolidating, or
even re-consolidating, into a Direct Consolidation Loan.
Keep in mind, however, that under the current tax code, the amount of a loan
that is forgiven is considered taxable income in the year in which it is forgiven.
There is some talk in Washington that such public service loan forgiveness may
be made exempt from such taxation through additional legislation. Of course, if
this happens we will cover it in future updates.
The Smartest Loan Strategy: Prepayment
All federally guaranteed education loans can be prepaid without any penalty.
This means that by paying just a little more than your monthly payment each
month, you can pay down the loan much faster than you might have thought

possible, and save yourself a bundle in interest.
Obviously, if you’re going to do this, try to prepay the loans with the highest
interest rates first. It wouldn’t make sense to prepay your 5% Perkins loan if
you’re paying 10% on an unsecured bank loan, or 12% on some huge credit card
bill.

CHAPTER NINE
Special Topics

DIVORCED OR SEPARATED PARENTS
The breakup of a marriage is always painful, and some parents are
understandably reluctant to share their pain with strangers. We know of one set
of parents who went through four years of need analysis forms without ever
telling the college that they were divorced. Unfortunately, by not telling the
schools about the divorce, those parents lost out on a great deal of financial aid,
and put themselves through unnecessary hardships in paying for college.
No matter how painful or bizarre your personal situation is, the FAOs have
heard worse, and you will find that being upfront about such problems as refusal
by a former spouse to pay alimony or to supply needed financial aid data to the
schools, will make the financial aid process easier. While the FAOs are quite
expert at understanding the convoluted and intricate family relationships that
arise out of divorce or separation, you will find that the aid formula itself tries to
fit these complex relationships into a few simple categories. The result is
completely baffling to most parents.
Who Are the Custodial Parents?
The formula doesn’t really care who the biological parents of a student are.
Ultimately, the formula wants to know only whom the student lived with most
during the first base income year. This parent, called the “custodial parent,” gets
the honor of completing the standardized need analysis form. And according to
federal guidelines, it is this parent whose financial information will be used to
determine the parents’ contribution to college.
Soap Opera Digest
Let’s say that Mr. and Mrs. Jackson separated two years ago. Their only daughter
Jill lives now with Mr. Jackson, and will be attending college next year. While
some standardized aid forms may ask a few vague questions about Mrs. Jackson,
as far as the federal financial aid formula is concerned, Mr. Jackson is the sole
custodial parent and the only parent whose income and assets can be requested

and analyzed by the processor. This counts as a family of two under the aid
formula.
Let’s say that Mr. Jackson gets a divorce from Mrs. Jackson and then marries
another woman, Francine. The aid formula will now want to look at the assets
and income of Mr. Jackson and the assets and income of his new wife as well.
The instructions to the need analysis form will tell Mr. Jackson to provide
information about himself as well as Francine, even if he just married her last
week. Francine’s income and assets will be assessed just as heavily as Mr.
Jackson’s, even if she didn’t meet Jill until the day of the wedding, and even if
they signed a prenuptial agreement stating that she would not be responsible for
Jill’s college expenses. This is now a family of three in the eyes of the FAOs.
What if Mr. Jackson’s new wife has a 10-year-old child of her own, Denise,
from a previous marriage, who will also come to live with Mr. Jackson? Now
there is a family of four. Neither of the previous spouses will be considered for
assessment by the federal formula. When it comes time for Denise’s college
education, Mr. Jackson’s assets and income will be assessed just as heavily as
Francine’s.
Let’s suppose that Mr. Jackson also had a son, James, from a much earlier
marriage. The son has never lived with him, but Mr. Jackson provides for more
than half his support. Even though the son has never lived with him, James is
considered part of Mr. Jackson’s “household” by the federal guidelines because
Mr. Jackson provides for more than half his support. We now have a family of
five for aid purposes.
If James were attending college at least half-time in a degree or certificate
program, he would also be included as part of the number of “household”
members attending “college, graduate/professional school, or other post-
secondary school.” This would help to reduce the Jackson’s family contribution
for Jill’s college expenses.
By the way, when James (who lives with his mother, Mr. Jackson’s long-ago
ex) goes to college, his mother will be considered the custodial parent on his aid
application. In effect, James can be claimed as a member of both of his natural
parents’ households, depending on whose aid application is being completed.
By now you may be asking why Denise (you remember Denise—Mr.
Jackson’s stepchild) was included as part of his household without regard to who
provides the majority of her support. Since Denise would not be considered an
independent student if she were to apply for federal student aid, she is

automatically part of Mr. Jackson’s household in the federal formula—whether
or not Denise actually completes a FAFSA form for that academic year, and even
whether or not she lives in the household. Even if Denise’s natural father were
providing all of Denise’s support, Denise would still be considered a part of the
Jackson’s household. While this criteria applies to “other children” for the
purposes of household size in the federal formula, it does not apply to the
institutional formula. Of course, any child support received by Francine would
have to be included as untaxed income on Jill’s aid applications.
Number of Exemptions
As you know from reading the rest of this book, the more family members you
can list on the need analysis form, the lower your family contribution will be.
This number will not necessarily coincide with the number of tax exemptions
you claim. Let’s say you have a son who lives with you, but who receives more
than half support from your ex. This other parent is entitled to take the son’s
income tax exemption, and you are not. You will have one more member of your
family than you have exemptions. The colleges are used to this situation. You
may have to explain, and possibly provide documentation, but they will
understand. The same situation might occur if, as part of a divorce agreement,
your ex is allowed to claim the son as a tax deduction, even though the son lives
with you.
In either case, when it is time for college, you’ll list your son as part of your
household, and your ex will not be assessed by the federal financial aid formula.
A Quick Summary
Because parents find all this so confusing, and because the information they
receive over the telephone from the college aid offices is often contradictory or
misleading, we’re going to summarize the key points:
1. The parent with whom the child resided most during the 12
months prior to completing the aid application is considered the
“custodial parent.” The custodial parent is not necessarily the
parent who was initially awarded custody in the divorce
agreement.

2. Siblings (including stepsiblings and half-siblings) can be
considered part of the custodial parents’ household provided they
a. get more than half support from the custodial parent(s)/
custodial stepparent or
b. cannot be considered independent students under federal aid
guidelines. (Option b does not apply in the institutional
methodology.)
3. A stepparent who resides with the custodial parent will be treated
by the aid formula as if he/she were the natural parent.
4. It currently doesn’t matter who claims a child as a tax exemption;
the number of family members is based on the rules above.
Read the instructions carefully when you complete the aid forms. If a college
challenges your application by trying to disallow some members of your
household, don’t automatically assume that they are right and you are wrong.
When you speak to the FAO, refer to the section in the instructions to the aid
form on which you based your decision.
Will an Ex-Husband or Ex-Wife’s Assets and
Income Ever Be Used to Determine the Family
Contribution?
Parents are always concerned that the colleges will look at at the other biological
or adoptive parent’s income and assets and decide that the student is ineligible
for aid, even if the ex-spouse refuses to help pay for college.
The vast majority of colleges will never even ask to see income or asset
information from a noncustodial parent. The FAFSA has no questions about the
noncustodial parent at all. While the PROFILE form asks a few questions about
the noncustodial parent, the processor does not take this information into account
in providing the Expected Family Contribution, and most colleges will not take
the matter any further. (Of course, if you received alimony or child support from
your ex, this will appear as part of your income.)
However, a few colleges do require that you fill out their own supplemental

forms. Some schools that use the PROFILE form will require that a noncustodial
parent’s information be supplied by the parent with whom the student spent the
least time. The colleges that ask for this information tend to be the most
selective, including all the Ivy League schools. If your child applies to one of
these schools, you may find that your ex-wife’s or ex-husband’s income and
assets will indeed have a bearing on how much a college ultimately decides your
family contribution ought to be.
Even if this is the case, you should not lose heart. Some types of aid must, by
law, be awarded without reference to the noncustodial parent. These include the
Pell Grant, the Direct Loan, and some forms of state aid.
Starting with the 2005–2006 PROFILE, some schools have required an online
Noncustodial PROFILE (NCP). Details about this online form will be provided
at some point at the beginning of the PROFILE process. Other schools may still
choose to accept or require the traditional paper Noncustodial Parent’s Statement
and/or their own noncustodial parent form which, following completion, should
then be sent directly to the financial aid office of any school that requires it.
To find out if you need to submit any of these supplemental forms, consult the
college’s own financial aid instructions.
What If the Ex-Husband or Ex-Wife Refuses to
Fill Out the Form?
The schools that require financial information about former spouses will not
process your application for aid until you have supplied all the information they
requested. If your ex refuses to supply the information you need to apply for aid,
you have two options.
First, try to use reason. Your ex may be worried that merely by filling out the
form, he/she is accepting legal responsibility for paying for college. Point out to
your former spouse that on the form they are to complete, there is a question that
asks, “How much are you willing to pay?” By writing down “0” the parent
expresses a clear desire to be left out of this responsibility.
It is also worth noting that even if a college decides to assess a noncustodial
parent’s income or assets, this does not mean that the noncustodial parent will
ever get a bill from the college. Yes, the family contribution will probably be
larger, but the bill for tuition will go, as always, to the student’s custodial parent.

There is no legal obligation for the ex-husband or ex-wife to help pay for college
unless an agreement was signed beforehand.
The second option, if the ex-spouse refuses to cooperate, is to get a waiver
from the colleges. The FAOs can decide at their discretion not to assess a
noncustodial parent if it is really clear that that individual can never be
persuaded to help. You are going to have to make a strong case to get colleges to
give you that waiver. This is the time to pull out all the dirty laundry—
alcoholism, physical or mental abuse, chemical dependency, abandonment,
chronic unemployment, and so on. Send the FAO a letter presenting your case,
and include any documentation from agencies or third parties (such as an
attorney, guidance counselor, or member of the clergy) that supports your case.
Follow up with a phone call, and do this as soon as possible after you’ve decided
to apply. Any information you supply will be confidential and will not go farther
than the financial aid office. This will not jeopardize your child’s chances for
admission. It may, however, get you the aid you need to send your child to the
school.
Is There an Agreement Specifying a Contribution
from an Ex?
You may find this question included on your need analysis form. Be very careful
how you answer it. If there is an agreement, and you have every reason to expect
that your ex will honor that agreement, then say yes and give the figure.
However, if there is a disagreement as to what your ex originally agreed to
provide, then it would be calamitous to say yes. The colleges will assess your
ability to pay based in part on this figure. If your ex then refused to pay, you
would be in bad shape. If you are not sure you can count on your ex-spouse to
provide the promised money, then write “no” on the form and write a letter
explaining the situation to the various colleges.
The Noncustodial Parent’s Information
You should NEVER send this data to a school unless it is required. Read the
individual college’s financial aid instructions carefully. Some always require it,
while others want it only if you’ve recently divorced or separated, or if your ex

has claimed the child as a tax deduction in the past few years. The information
on this form should agree with that on any other forms that have already been
sent in—the need analysis form and tax returns. If you and your ex still have
assets held in common, make sure that your proportionate shares of these assets
as reported on your need analysis forms add up to the whole. Alimony and child
support figures should also agree.
Remarriage
A stepparent’s income and assets will be assessed by the FAOs just as severely
as if he/she were the natural parent—even if there is a prenuptial agreement to
the contrary. This being the case, it may make sense to postpone marriage plans
until after your child is out of the base income years. A couple that decided just
to live together while their children were in college might easily save enough
money to take a round-the-world honeymoon cruise when it was all over.
Note: a few colleges give you the option of using the financial information of
either your former spouse or your new spouse to determine eligibility for the
school’s own grant money.
The Difference Between Being Divorced, Legally
Separated, or Just Separated
For financial aid purposes, there is absolutely no difference. If you are not
legally separated, you may be asked to provide documentation to show that you
no longer live together.
If You Are in the Process of Separating or
Getting a Divorce
We have actually known of cases in which a couple separated or divorced in
order to get more financial aid. This is taking the pursuit of free money way too
far. We know of another couple that pretended to separate to qualify for more
aid. Aside from the moral implications (you have to wonder what kind of warped
view of life the children will bring away from that experience), this is also

illegal.
However, if your situation has become impossible, and there is absolutely no
choice but to separate, then you should try to take financial aid into account as
you consider your legal options. An agreement by the soon-to-be ex-spouse to
provide for your child’s education could be an expensive mistake.
Let’s say that a father formally agrees to pay $10,000 per college year for his
daughter’s education. Many colleges will say thank you very much and decrease
their aid packages by $10,000. If this is an amicable separation, it might be
better if no agreement were made on paper. The father could then voluntarily gift
money during the year, thus preventing any loss of aid eligibility. If the
separation is not amicable, and the mother is afraid she will never see the money
unless there is an agreement in writing, it would be infinitely better if the father
made one lump-sum payment to the mother toward college. In this way, the
money becomes part of her overall assets, which can be assessed at up to only
5.65% a year.
Avoid Acrimony
A couple in the midst of splitting up is not always in the most rational frame of
mind. It is essential, however, that you try to keep your heads clear, and prevent
the education of your children from becoming one more brickbat to hurl back
and forth.
Cooperation is the most important part of the process. We have seen parents
childishly miss financial aid deadlines just to spite their former spouse. The
person who really loses out when this happens, of course, is the child.
TRANSFER STUDENTS AND GRADUATE
STUDENTS
The process of applying for financial aid as a transfer student or a graduate
student is very similar to applying for aid as a freshman in college. However,
there are a few differences that should be discussed:
• Deadlines for transfer and graduate students are often different
from the deadlines for regular undergrads. Check your

applications carefully for the specific deadlines.
• If you have previously attended any colleges, you may need a
financial aid transcript sent from each one of them to the schools
you are applying to, especially if you are transferring during the
middle of the academic year. A financial aid transcript is not the
same thing as a transcript of your academic record (which you
will probably need as well). You will have to send financial aid
transcripts even if you received no financial aid from the
previous schools.
The colleges want to look at these records in part to see what kind of a deal
you were getting at your previous school, and in part to see how much you’ve
already borrowed, for there are aggregate limits to certain types of aid. For
example, an undergraduate can receive a total of only $27,500 in Perkins loans.
The best way to go about getting financial aid transcripts is to pick up blank
copies from the school to which you are applying, which come already
addressed, ready to be sent back to the school. You can then mail these forms to
the schools you previously attended. You’ll have to keep on top of the process to
make sure the transcripts are sent. The records offices at colleges are often worse
than the motor vehicle bureau.
• Some colleges have separate aid policies for transfer students.
Often, priority is given to students who began as freshmen. This
is particularly true if a student transfers in the middle of the year;
the FAOs will have already committed the bulk of their funds for
that school year.
• It may help if you have some kind of bargaining chip—for
example, if there is another school that is also interested in you.
Your previous school won’t be much of a bargaining chip since
you have probably already given them a compelling reason for
why you wanted to leave.
• It will certainly help if you’ve maintained a high grade point
average. In particular, students who are transferring to a
“designer label” college from a less well-known school will need
good grades and good recommendations.

Graduate and Professional School Financial Aid
Tips
Graduate and professional school aid is parceled out in much the same way as
college aid but the ratio of grants to loans to work-study is unfortunately very
different. Grant money has dried up in the past ten years.
Student loans, on the other hand, are somewhat easier to come by in graduate
school. (For example, if you are attending law school, you can borrow up to the
full cost of attendance without much trouble—which is pretty scary when you
think about it.) For most students, the cap on Direct Loans rises to $20,500 per
year in graduate school, though certain health profession students may be able to
borrow even higher amounts. If you still need additional funds, you can borrow
them using the federal GradPLUS loan or private educational loans.
The paperwork you will be asked to fill out varies widely. All schools require
the FAFSA, but many schools will also require the PROFILE form or some other
aid form, which asks questions similar to the PROFILE form.
Fortunately, all graduate school students will find they now meet the federal
government’s independent student test. If you are a graduate student, you are
independent by definition for federal aid purposes—even if your parents still
claim you as a dependent on their tax returns and you still live at home.
However, a few of the very selective schools will insist on seeing parent
information anyway. The Harvard Law School FAOs, for example, require
parents’ financial data even if the student is 40 years old and the parents have
long since retired to the Sun Belt. Though the schools may refuse to give you
any of their own money, you can still qualify for federal loans since you meet the
federal regulations for independent status.
If the school requires parental information on the PROFILE form, you will
have to find out if they want parental information on the FAFSA as well. If any
one of them requires parental information on the FAFSA, you will have to
complete the blue and purple sections of the 2018–2019 FAFSA.
If you are planning on law school, medical school, or business school, taking
on large amounts of debt is, although unpleasant, at least feasible. However, if
you are planning on, say, a PhD in philosophy, you should be very cautious
about borrowing large amounts of money. An alternative to borrowing is to find
grant money that is not administered by the financial aid office—in graduate
school, some fellowships are administered by department heads instead. In

addition, students sometimes find opportunities to teach or work on professors’
grant projects.
THE COLLEGE’S SPECIAL NEEDS:
ACADEMICALLY GIFTED, MINORITIES,
ATHLETES, LEGACIES
While financial aid is based on your need, it is always wise to remember that it is
also based to some extent on what the colleges need. If you fit a category a
particular college is looking for, your package is going to be much better than if
you don’t.
Preferential packaging comes in many forms. Perhaps the FAO will decide
that your expected family contribution, as computed by the need analysis
computer, is a bit high. Perhaps you will be offered an athletic scholarship or a
non-need-based grant.
Whatever the school chooses to call it, you are being offered a preferential
package—more grant or scholarship money, less loans and work-study.
No Time for Modesty
In many cases, these are not scholarships or grants for which you can apply. The
schools themselves select the recipients, with a keen eye toward enticing high-
caliber students to their programs. It is therefore crucial that the student sell
herself in her application. This is no time for modesty. For example, a promising
student violinist should make sure that one of her application essays is about the
challenge of mastering a difficult instrument. This should be backed up by
recommendations from music teachers, reviews of her performances that have
appeared in newspapers, and a listing of any awards she has won. If a student is
offered one or more of these merit-based grants or scholarships, it is important to
find out if these awards are one-time only or whether they are renewable, based
on performance. If renewable, just how good does the student’s performance
have to be in order to get the same package next year?

Bargaining
Colleges are particularly likely to increase their offer if they really wanted you in
the first place. Students with excellent academic records are in an especially
strong position to bargain. See Part Four, “The Offer,” for more details.
Financial Aid for the Academically Gifted
Some awards come directly as a result of test scores. The National Merit
Scholarship Program gives out about 1,800 nonrenewable scholarships and
2,800 renewable college-sponsored scholarships to students who score extremely
well on the PSAT/NMSQT. Based on their performance on the SAT or the ACT,
120 students are designated Presidential Scholars.
At schools where all aid is based on need, a National Merit finalist will not
necessarily get one penny of aid unless “need” is demonstrated. Other schools,
however, automatically give National Merit finalists a four-year free ride—a full
scholarship.
Some awards come as a result of the student’s performance in college. These
kick in during the sophomore year—an example is the Harry S. Truman
Scholarship.
Merit grants based on academic performance in high school are becoming
more widespread as time goes on. We believe this trend will continue as colleges
begin to compete in earnest for the best students. However, most of the money
awarded to students with high academic performance is less easy to see. It comes
in the form of preferential packaging.
Athletes
In general, it is up to the student to tell the colleges why the student is special
through his or her application.
Athletes, however, should get in touch with the athletic department directly.
When you go to visit the school, make it a point to meet the coach of the team
you are interested in. Do not assume that a school is not interested in you merely
because you have not been approached by a scout during the year. Get your
coach to write letters to the schools you are interested in. Don’t sell yourself

short either—an average football player might not get a scholarship at Notre
Dame, but the same applicant at Columbia might get a preferential package.
Even if the school does not award athletic scholarships per se (Columbia, like
the rest of the Ivy League, does not), many FAOs bend the numbers to come up
with a lower family contribution for an athlete the school particularly wants.
Remember, too, that football is not the only sport in college. Schools also need
swimmers, tennis players, long-distance runners, and the like.
Minorities
Minority students now represent the fastest growing demographic on campuses
across the country. While many college administrators welcome the prospect of a
more diverse student body, this trend poses a challenge for the colleges, since
historically many minority students have required financial aid.
While there are significant scholarship and other financial aid programs
earmarked specifically for minority students, many schools now find themselves
in a quandary. How do they attract and retain what they project to be an
increased number of qualified students needing financial aid at time when
endowments are declining with the stock markets, fundraising campaigns are not
meeting their goals due to a weak economy and financial aid budgets are already
stretched tight?
Because of this anticipated increased demand for aid, it will be more
important than ever for applicants to meet financial aid deadlines, to build a
strong academic record in high school, and to maintain good grades in college to
ensure continued funding.
Fortunately, at most schools, once on campus, students will find resources and
support services designed to help them stay in school—ranging from mentors to
work-study programs. The colleges have made it very clear that they remain
committed to retaining the students they admit—and many will go to
extraordinary lengths to keep them. As with most facets of college life, however,
students who take the initiative will be more likely to get help.
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSIs) are also experiencing challenges meeting their financial
needs. A number of these institutions are among the finest schools in the country.
But minority students with high need applying to these schools need to be aware

that many of them don’t have the financial aid resources of other schools with
larger endowments. In some cases, a minority student with high need may find
that he or she will get a larger aid package elsewhere. As we mentioned earlier
on this page, this page, and this page, it is important for all students to apply to at
least one financial safety school.
Legacies
Many colleges will go out of their way for the children of alumni. If the student’s
parents’ circumstances are such that they cannot pay the entire cost of college,
they should not be embarrassed to ask for help. At many schools it will be
forthcoming.
RUNNING YOUR OWN BUSINESS OR
FARM
As we have already mentioned, the tax benefits of running your own business or
farm are considerable: you are allowed to write off legitimate expenses, put
relatives on your payroll, and possibly claim a percentage of your home for
business use. The financial aid benefits are even better: your business or farm
assets are assessed at a much lower rate than personal assets. This is because the
colleges recognize a business’s need for working capital. Thus a business’s net
worth (assets minus liabilities) of $50,000 will draw roughly the same
assessment as a $20,000 personal asset—or even a zero assessment if it is a
“family business” (see this page).
If you have been planning to start your own business, now might be a good
time!
The Four Types of Business—C Corporation, S
Corporation, General Partnership, Sole
Proprietor
A C corporation’s profits are taxed at the corporate rate. C corporations must

file an IRS 1120 corporate income tax return. The profits from a C corporation
owned by a parent should not be included on the standardized financial aid
forms, but the assets and liabilities may need to be listed. The owner of an S
corporation (short for subchapter S) files an 1120S corporate income tax return,
but also reports profits and losses on his own personal income tax return on
schedule E. On the aid forms, the owner may have to report assets and liabilities
as well as profits (or losses). A parent who is part of a general partnership
reports profits and losses to the IRS on schedule E of the 1040. For aid purposes,
she reports net profits (or losses) and possibly assets and liabilities on the need
analysis form.
A sole proprietor reports profits and losses to the IRS on schedule C of the
1040. Again, profits (or losses) and possibly assets and liabilities must also be
reported on the need analysis form. A farmer is treated like a sole proprietor but
reports profits and losses to the IRS on schedule F of the 1040. On the FAFSA
form, farmers who live primarily on their farm and who can claim on schedule F
of their 1040 that they “materially participated in the farm’s operation” (defined
as a “family farm”) should not include the value of the family farm under assets
and liabilities.
Keep in mind that whatever business arrangement you have, you should never
report your gross revenues on the standardized aid forms. Your net income (or
net loss) is what counts—gross receipts less your deductible business expenses.
Financial Aid Strategies for Business and Farm
Owners
Before the first base income year begins, it would make sense to accelerate
billings, and take in as much cash as possible in advance. Try to defer expenses
into the base income year. The idea, of course, is to minimize your income and
maximize your expenses for the snapshot the college financial offices will be
taking of your business. During the base income year itself, you might decide
finally to do that remodeling or expansion you’ve been thinking about. In the last
base income year, you will want to reverse the process you began before the first
base income year: accelerate expenses and defer income, until after the colleges
have taken their last snapshot.

Starting a Business or Farm
The beginning years of a business are very often slow. Many businesses lose
money in their first couple of years, until they develop their niche and find a
market. Parents who dream of starting their own company often feel that they
should wait until after the kids are done with college before they take on the risk
of an entrepreneurial enterprise. If you always dreamed of starting your own
business, but have decided to wait until after the children are done with college,
think again.
The perfect time to start a business is just before your child starts college.
Consider: you’ll have high start-up costs (which will reduce your assets) and low
sales (which will reduce your income) for the first couple of years. If you time it
right, these years will coincide exactly with the base income years, which means
you will be eligible for substantially increased amounts of financial aid. Any
business assets will also be assessed at a lower rate than personal assets. Like
many businesses, yours may well start to be profitable within four years—just as
your child is finishing college.
In effect, the college will be subsidizing the start-up costs of your business.
This strategy is obviously not for everyone. A business must be run with the
intention of showing a profit or risk running afoul of the IRS. If you are merely
indulging in a hobby, your farm or business losses may be disallowed. In
addition, most schools that use the institutional methodology will disallow losses
when determining eligibility for the school’s own funds.
Any new business contains an element of risk, which should be carefully
considered before you start. On the other hand, if you wait until your children
are done with college, you may not have enough money left to start up a
lemonade stand.
Estimating Your Company’s Assets and
Liabilities on the Aid Form
Owners of businesses sometimes overstate the value of their assets by including
intangibles such as goodwill and location. These are important elements if you
were to sell the company, but irrelevant to the need analysis formula. You are
being asked to list only the total value of cash, receivables, inventory,

investments, and your fixed assets (such as machinery, land, and buildings).
If your net worth is negative, you will list “0” on the FAFSA for that question.
On other forms you should list the total debts even if they exceed the total assets,
but you will find that most colleges will not subtract a negative net worth from
your total assets.
The Business/Farm Supplement
Many schools require the owner of a business or farm to fill out a paper version
of the College Board’s Business/Farm Supplement. Since this statement is not
analyzed by a central processor you can send signed photocopies of the
completed form to any school that requests it. The form more or less mimics the
IRS forms you will probably be sending the colleges anyway. Some other
schools may insist on your completing their own business supplement even
though such forms will look very similar to the College Board’s version. If you
are not the sole owner, be careful to distinguish between questions that ask for
the business’s total income, assets, and liabilities, and questions that ask for your
proportionate share of the business’s income, assets, and liabilities.
High expenses during the base income years will help to maximize financial
aid. However, large business purchases cannot be deducted all at once under IRS
rules. There are several different methods to depreciate your fixed assets. During
the college years, accelerated depreciation probably makes the most sense,
especially during the critical first base income year. As always, however, you
should consult with your accountant, and perhaps a financial aid consultant as
well.
If You Own a Significant Percentage of the Stock
of a Small Company
A parent who owns more than 5% of the stock in a small company could report
this asset on the standardized need analysis form under “other investment,” but it
would be much more beneficial to report it under “business and farm.” If you
own a significant part of a small company, accountants argue that you can be
said to be a part-owner of the company. Most colleges will go along with this.
The advantage, of course, is that the value of the stock will be assessed less

heavily as a business asset than it would have been as a personal asset.
Selling Your Business or Farm
A huge capital gain from the sale of your business or farm will probably wipe
out any chance for financial aid. On the other hand, if you are receiving a huge
capital gain, you don’t need aid. If possible, delay the sale until you are out of
the base income years, but if the offer is good enough, take it and enjoy the
feeling of never having to look at a need analysis form ever again. Oh, yes, and
expect a call almost immediately from the fundraisers at your child’s college. It’s
amazing how fast good news travels.
Putting Your Child on the Payroll
This is a good tax move, since it shifts income to the child, who may pay tax at a
reduced rate. From a financial aid standpoint, however, increasing your child’s
income can backfire. Each year up to 50% of the child’s income gets assessed by
the FAOs. Once the income reaches a certain amount (see this page), it may
disqualify your family from receiving aid, or at least reduce the amount you
receive.
If you are not eligible for aid, by all means consider putting your child on the
payroll. A self-employed parent who hires a son or daughter does not even have
to pay social security taxes on the child’s earnings until the child turns 18.
THE RECENTLY UNEMPLOYED
WORKER
If you have been terminated, or laid off, or if you have received notice that you
will be terminated, or laid off, or if you are a self-employed person who cannot
make a living due to harsh economic conditions, then you should be sure to point
this out to the FAO.
Many schools can use what is called “professional judgment” to increase aid
for the child of a recently unemployed worker. Instead of using the base income
year (when you may have been gainfully employed) they can elect to look at

your projected income for next year. Since you are now unemployed, your
projection will be understandably bleak. Your child’s college will probably want
to see some sort of documentation (e.g., termination letter from your employer,
unemployment benefits certification, etc.). Taking these extra steps could be
worth thousands of dollars in aid. You should also be sure to answer “Yes” to
FAFSA question 84 if you qualify as a dislocated worker.
How Do You Let the Colleges Know Your
Projection for Next Year?
You will be asked on the PROFILE form to project your income for the coming
year. Project conservatively. You may be out of work for a while, so assume the
worst-case scenario. Do not project based on a tentative job offer; if it doesn’t
come through, you will be making much less than the colleges will think based
on your over-optimistic projections.
If all the schools to which you are applying require the PROFILE form, then
the schools will get your projected income from the College Board’s analysis.
Just remember to mention your work status in the “Explanations/Special
Circumstances” section of the form.
Contrary to what the PROFILE instructions say, you should not list any
deferred compensation—401(k), or 403(b)—or contributions to IRAs or Keoghs
as part of your untaxed income in Section PR and PF. Do, however, list your
gross wages, including any deferred compensation as part of your projected
income from work.
The reason you should not include these items as untaxed income is that by
doing so you would be overstating your income. For example, let’s take married
parents with projected gross wages of $30,000 (and no other income) who made
a $4,000 deductible IRA contribution. If this couple followed the instructions,
they would be listing a total income of $34,000 ($30,000 income earned from
work, plus $4,000 untaxed income). Obviously, they should only be reporting
their total income—$30,000.
If your child is applying to schools that do not require the PROFILE form,
then you should send them a separate letter detailing your changed employment
status and a projection of next year’s income. When listing your projections, you
should break them down into separate categories: father’s income from work (if

any), mother’s income from work (if any), income from unemployment benefits,
and all other taxable and untaxable income.
In fact, it wouldn’t be such a bad idea to send copies of this letter even to the
schools that require the PROFILE form, since the FAOs at these schools
sometimes miss comments written in the “Explanations/Special Circumstances”
section of the form.
If You Lose Your Job While Your Child Is in
College
Call or write a letter to the FAO explaining what happened as soon as possible,
and include some form of documentation. It will probably be impossible for the
FAO to revise your aid package for the current semester, but this will give them
warning that you will be needing more aid next semester.
OTHER DISASTERS
If you are a nonworking parent who has been financially abandoned by a spouse,
if you’ve had an accident that cost you a lot of money in unreimbursed medical
expenses, if you lost your second job, if you received a pay cut or reduction in
overtime, if you recently separated from your spouse, if your business lost its
major client, if you became disabled, or had a major casualty or theft loss, you
should be sure to notify the FAO immediately—even if the school year has
already begun. Many schools have emergency aid funds for just these situations.
INDEPENDENT STUDENTS
If a student is judged to be independent, the need analysis companies assess only
the student’s income and assets. The income and assets of the parents do not
even have to be listed on the form. Obviously, this can have a tremendous impact
on financial aid. Most students have limited resources, and so the aid packages
from the colleges have to increase dramatically if they are to meet the student’s
entire “need.”
Parents often erroneously believe that by not claiming the student as a

dependent on taxes, their child will be considered independent for aid purposes
—but this is not the case.
It is in the school’s interest to decide that a student is not independent, since
independent students need so much more aid. In fact, a student is presumed to be
dependent unless he meets certain criteria. The rules change from year to year
(in general going from stringent to more stringent). For the 2018–2019 academic
year, you are considered independent for federal aid purposes if:
A. You were born before January 1, 1995.
B. You are a veteran of the U.S. Armed Services or you are
currently serving on active duty in the U.S. Armed Forces for
purposes other than training.
C. When you are age 13 or older: both of your parents are deceased,
You are/were in foster care, you are/were an orphan or a
ward/dependent of the court, or you were a ward/dependent of
the court until age 18.
D. You have children who will receive more than half their support
from you between July 1, 2018 and June 30, 2019 OR you have
dependents (other than your children or spouse) who live with
you and receive more than half of their support from you, now
and through June 30, 2019.
E. You are a graduate or professional school student in 2018–2019.
F. You are married.
G. As of the day you complete the FAFSA, you are an emancipated
minor or you are in legal guardianship as determined by a court
in your state of legal residence.
H. At any time on or after July 1, 2017 your high school or school
district 
homeless 
liaison 
determine 
that 
you 
are 
an
unaccompanied youth who is homeless, the director of an
emergency shelter program funded by HUD determined you
were an unaccompanied youth who was homeless, or the director
of a runaway or homeless youth basic center or transitional living
program determine that you were an unaccompanied youth who
was homeless or self supporting and at risk of being homeless.
With the exception of certain health profession students whom we discuss in

Part Three (Filling Out the Forms), meeting any one of these conditions makes
you an independent student for federal aid purposes. However, the schools
themselves may have their own, even tougher rules. A few schools (these tend to
be the most expensive private colleges) state flat out that if the student is under
22 years old, he is automatically dependent unless both parents are dead.
These schools and others may insist that the parents fill out the parents’
information section of the PROFILE form and/or the FAFSA, even if the student
meets the federal rules for independence. To find out if this is the case at the
schools you are interested in, consult the individual school bulletins. This will
also give you an early clue as to whether a school uses the federal definition of
independence, or a more rigid definition of their own.
If you don’t meet the rules for independence, but have special circumstances,
the FAOs have the authority to grant independent status on a case-by-case basis.
To convince schools to do this requires extensive documentation. If the student
has been abandoned by his parents, letters from a social service agency, court
papers, or letters from a guidance counselor or member of the clergy acquainted
with the situation may tip the scales.
If You Meet the Federal Requirements, but Not
the School’s Requirements
A student can meet the federal requirements for independence without meeting
the school’s own requirements. In this case, an undergraduate student may
qualify for Pell Grants, Stafford loans, and possibly some state aid based on his
status as an independent student. The school’s own grant money, however, will
be awarded based on his status as a dependent student, taking his parents’
income and assets into account.
Independence and Graduate School
Graduate schools generally have more flexible rules about independence, and
anyway, graduate students are usually no longer minors. Some graduate schools
(particularly law schools and medical schools) will continue to ask for parents’
financial information in awarding their own money. Even if the school will not
grant independent status, virtually all students will meet the federal guidelines

and be eligible for federal aid. The borrowing limits on the Direct Loans rise in
graduate school, making these very worthwhile. Graduate students can borrow
up to $20,500 per year and even more for certain health profession students.
Graduate and professional school students are also able to borrow additional
funds under the federally-sponsored GradPLUS Loan Program. This program
allows such students to borrow the difference between the Cost of Attendance
and any other financial aid (including loans) that have been received. Terms for
the GradPLUS are somewhat similar to the PLUS loan for parents.
ESTABLISHING RESIDENCY IN A STATE
Establishing residency in another state is probably worthwhile only if the school
you want to attend is a public university with lower in-state rates. The difference
between in-state and out-of-state rates can be more than $25,000. It is true that
in-state residents also may qualify for additional state grant aid available for
students who attend public or private colleges, but this will generally be less than
$4,000 a year—sometimes a lot less. In addition, most private colleges that meet
a student’s entire need will replace any money you might have gotten from the
state anyway with their own funds. In this case, changing your state of residence
is not worth the trouble.
Whether you will be able to pull this off at all is another story. Each state has
its own residency requirements and, within those requirements, different rules
that govern your eligibility for state grants and your eligibility for in-state tuition
rates at a public university. These days, the requirements are usually very tough
and they are getting tougher. There are some states, Michigan for example,
where a student cannot be considered an in-state resident unless her parents pay
taxes and maintain a primary residence in that state. Period. To find out about
residency requirements for a school in a particular state, consult the financial aid
office at that school.
Planning Ahead
If you decide you need to do this, you should begin investigating residency
requirements even before you apply to schools. Write to the individual state
universities to ask about their rules, and set about fulfilling them before the

student arrives at college. If the parents live in different states, it might be worth
considering with which parent the child should spend the base income year.
EARLY DECISION, EARLY ACTION,
EARLY NOTIFICATION, EARLY READ
Some colleges allow students to apply early and find out early whether or not
they have been accepted. You are allowed to apply early decision to only one
school, because your application binds both you and the school. If they decide to
admit you, you are committed to attend. The schools like early decision because
it helps them to increase their “yield”—the percentage of students they accept
who ultimately decide to attend. An early decision candidate must apply by as
early as mid-October and will find out if he has been accepted, rejected, or
deferred as early as the first week of December.
Early decision applicants may also need to apply early for aid. You should be
sure to consult the college’s admissions literature for early decision financial aid
filing requirements. Provided that you meet your deadlines, you should receive
an aid package in the same envelope with your acceptance letter.
Early action is an admissions option in which you are notified early of your
acceptance but are not bound to attend the school. You have until the normal
deadline in May to decide whether to attend. The financial aid package,
however, will usually not arrive in your mailbox until April and at many (but not
all) schools you usually file for aid as if you were a regular applicant. (Note:
some colleges refer to this option as non-binding early decision.)
Early notification is offered by many colleges that use rolling admissions. As
the admissions committee makes its decisions, it mails out acceptance letters.
Generally, you still have until the normal deadline to let the colleges know if you
are accepting their offer. You apply for aid as if you were a regular applicant.
Financial aid packages may arrive with acceptances or they may come later.
Some of these schools may try to put pressure on you by giving you an early
deadline to decide if you are coming. If they are just asking you to accept the
financial aid package, that’s fine. An acceptance of the aid package does not
commit you to attend the school. However, if they are trying to force you to
accept their offer of admission before you’ve heard from your other schools,
stall. Call the school and ask for an extension. Make sure you get the name and

title of the person you speak to on the phone, and send a “we spoke and you
agreed” letter via certified mail to confirm.
What Are the Financial Aid Implications of These
Programs?
Early decision: For a high-need or moderate-need family, early decision is a big
gamble, because you are effectively giving up your bargaining position. By
committing to the school before you know what kind of aid package you will
receive, you lose control of the process. It is a bit like agreeing to buy a house
without knowing how much it costs. If the school has a good reputation for
meeting a family’s need in full, then this may be acceptable. However, even if
the aid package they offer meets your need completely, you may not like the
proportion of loans to grants. The school will have little incentive to improve the
aid package since the child is already committed to attending.
If the aid you are offered is insufficient, there is a way to get out of the
agreement, but this will leave you with little time to apply to other schools. We
recommend that any student who applies to one school early decision should
have completely filled out the applications to several other schools in the
meantime. If the student is rejected or deferred by the early decision school—or
if the aid package is insufficient—then there will still be time to apply to other
colleges.
Early action: Even if a student is accepted early action, the student should
probably still apply to several comparable schools. If one of these schools
accepts the student as well, this will provide bargaining leverage with the FAOs,
particularly if the second school’s aid package is superior.
Early notification: The only financial aid implications of early notification
occur if you are being squeezed. If a college is putting pressure on you to accept
an offer of admission before you have heard from other schools, the college is
also taking away your potential to negotiate an improved aid package. Fight
back by asking for an extension.
The Early Read
Some schools say that, as a courtesy, they will figure out your Expected Family

Contribution for you early in the fall if you submit your financial data to them—
even if you aren’t applying to their school. On the face of it, this seems like an
offer too good to pass up.
However, you should understand that by letting them perform this early read,
you are giving up complete control over the aid process. Your financial data is
now set in stone, and if your child applies to that school, there won’t be much
you can do to change it (in any of the ways we have set forth in this book). We
think you are better off figuring out your EFC for yourself using our worksheets,
or hiring a financial aid consultant (see Chapter Eleven). Letting the colleges
figure out your EFC is a bit like letting the IRS figure your taxes.
AID FOR THE OLDER STUDENT
People who go back to school later in life often say they get more out of the
experience the second time. We’ve found that from a financial aid standpoint,
things are actually just about the same. Returnees still have to apply for aid and
demonstrate need just like any incoming freshman. They are awarded aid in the
same fashion.
The major difference is that they were probably employed at a full-time job
during the base income year. If an older student is returning to school full-time,
he should point out to the FAOs that there is no way he can earn as much money
while he is in school. The first base income year is just not very representative in
this case. Older students are probably independent by now, but they should not
be surprised if some schools ask for their parents’ financial information. Old
habits die hard.
Two strategies for older students that should not be overlooked:
1. Let your company pay for it. Many companies have programs
that pick up the cost of adult education.
2. Life credits! Some colleges will give you free credits for your
life experience. We can’t think of a better form of financial aid
than that.
INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS
For students who are not U.S. citizens or eligible noncitizens (see instructions in

the standardized need analysis forms), financial aid possibilities are severely
limited. No federal aid is given to nonresident aliens. However, the schools
themselves are free to give their own grants and scholarships.
You should check with the individual schools to find out their filing
requirements. Many colleges require that you complete special aid forms
designed solely for international students—even if the student is a U.S. citizen or
eligible noncitizen. Some of these colleges will also require a certificate of
finance (which is issued by the family’s bank certifying how much money the
family has) and proof of earnings.
Because you are dealing with the vagaries of two separate postal systems, you
should begin the application process as early as possible.
Note: Beginning with the 2010–2011 version, the CSS PROFILE will have
special questions for international students so many schools may now require
international students to complete the PROFILE form as well.
FOREIGN TAX RETURNS
The standardized need analysis form is not equipped to deal with foreign
currency, so you will have to convert to U.S. dollars, using the exchange rate in
effect on the day you fill out the form. There are special instructions in the forms
that apply if you fit this category. Some colleges will ask to see your actual tax
return, and they will insist that it be translated into English. Believe it or not,
there is someone in your country’s tax service whose job it is to do this, though it
may take a while for you to find him.
Note: The filing of a foreign tax return by the custodial parent(s) will
automatically make a dependent student ineligible for the Simplified Needs Test
or Automatic Zero-EFC (see this page).
STUDY ABROAD
There are two general types of study abroad programs:
1. Programs run by your own college
2. Programs run by someone else
In the former case, there is usually no problem getting your school to give you

the same aid package you would normally receive. While some of these
programs are a bit more expensive than a year on campus, the cost is usually not
that much greater.
In the latter case, you may have more difficulty. At some schools you may be
eligible only for federal aid. To avoid an unpleasant surprise, call on your FAO
to find out what the aid consequences of a year abroad in another school’s
program would be.
TO THE PROFESSIONAL
A word to the guidance counselors, financial planners,
stockbrokers, accountants, tax advisors, and tax preparers who may
read this book:
We spoke recently to a broker from one of the big firms who said, “We don’t
take financial aid into account in our investment advice because . . . well,
frankly, we assume that none of our clients are eligible.”
This is dangerous thinking. These days lots of people are eligible for financial
aid, including (we happen to know) two of his clients. While no one can be an
expert at everything, we think it would be a good thing if brokers, accountants,
tax advisors, tax lawyers, and counselors knew a bit more about financial aid
strategy, or were willing to admit to their client when they didn’t know.
Our intent here was to give the parent and child an understanding of the aid
process and some idea of the possibilities for controlling that process. If you can
use this as a resource tool as well, we are just as happy. We would caution you,
however, that this book is by no means encyclopedic, and the rules change
almost constantly. To be truly on top of the situation you would have to
subscribe to industry newsletters, read the Federal Register, attend the
conventions, develop your own contacts at the colleges, and then take what those
contacts tell you with a large measure of salt.
Or you could just hire a consultant to train you to become a financial aid
consultant and to keep you abreast of the latest developments. For more details
on such training, refer to the “About the Authors” section which follows the
Glossary at the back of this book.

CHAPTER TEN
Less Taxing Matters

The Good News
The Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 and The Economic Growth and Tax Relief
Reconciliation Act of 2001 have given middle-income families some much-
needed help in raising their children and paying for the costs of higher education.
Unfortunately, the regulations are truly complex and some of the goodies are
mutually exclusive. While many provisions did not lapse on January 1, 2013
when they were scheduled to expire, some of these provisions still have not been
made permanent. So if they expire in the future, then the old rules prior to 2002
will go back into effect. The purpose of this section is to provide you with basic
information regarding some of the benefits now available for education and
raising children. For more details, we recommend that you refer to the
appropriate IRS publications or consult with a competent professional.
• Coverdell ESAs (formerly called Education IRAs) received an added boost
under the 2001 law. Previously, the annual contribution per beneficiary
(under the age of 18) was $500 from all sources. Starting in 2002, the
annual limit has been increased to $2,000. Though no tax deduction will be
granted for these contributions (which must be made in cash), the funds
will grow tax-deferred and there will be no taxes owed on withdrawals
used to pay for qualified higher education expenses. (The IRS definition of
qualified expenses differs for each of the various federal tax benefits and
can change from year to year, so be sure to read the fine print.)
Withdrawals from Coverdells can also be made tax-free if the funds are
used to pay for qualified private elementary and secondary school
expenses. Prior to 2002, they could only be used for college or graduate
school. The definition of “education” expenses has also been liberalized, so
that since 2002 funds can be withdrawn to cover computers, internet
access, and some other related expenses. While there are income limits as
to who can contribute to a Coverdell, parents with higher incomes may be
able to take advantage of a loophole in the law. Since the tax code states
that the income limits apply to the “contributor” and does not state that the
parent must be the contributor, families may be able to get someone else
(whose income is below the limits) to fund the account. Prior to 2002, this

benefit phased out between $150,000 and $160,000 for married couples
filing jointly, and between $95,000 and $110,000 for others. Starting in
2002, the phase-out range for couples filing jointly increased to $190,000–
$220,000. (The phase-out range stayed the same for others.)
• Starting in 2002, withdrawals from qualified state tuition programs (i.e.,
Section 529 plans which include both pre-paid plans and tuition savings
accounts run by state governments) are now tax-free if the funds are used
for qualified higher education expenses. This is great news! Prior to
January 1, 2002, the increase in value of the plan from the time of the
original contribution was subject to federal income taxes at the
beneficiary’s rate. The 2001 tax law also eliminates one of the major
drawbacks of the old 529 plans: namely, the lack of control over how the
funds were managed after you contributed to the account. Prior to 2002,
once you’d set up an account, the only way to avoid early-withdrawal
penalties if you wanted out of the plan was to transfer the funds to another
plan AND simultaneously change the beneficiary. You can now switch to
another plan once in every 12-month period.
• Since 2003, the annual tax credit parents can receive for each child under
the age of 17 is $1,000. This benefit phases out gradually for single parents
with an Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) above $75,000 or for married
parents filing jointly with an AGI above $110,000. (For married filing
separately, the threshold is $55,000.) Currently this is a “refundable credit”,
so you may be able to claim this benefit even if you have no federal
income tax liability.
• Since 2009, parents have been eligible for a federal tax credit up to $2,500
per student per calendar year that is known as the American Opportunity
(Tax) Credit or AOTC. (This credit is an expanded and renamed version of
the Hope Credit which had been in existence for many years prior to 2009.)
To qualify for the maximum AOTC, one must pay at least $4,000 towards
qualified expenses as the credit is based on 100% of the first $2,000 in
expenses paid during the tax year plus 25% of the next $2,000 in expenses
paid. Up to $1,000 of the AOTC per student per year can be refundable.
The income phase out ranges for the AOTC are higher than with the prior
Hope Credit. For married couples filing jointly, the AOTC begins to phase
out once the “Modified Adjusted Gross income” crosses the $160,000

threshold and completely phases out at $180,000. For others, the
corresponding income amounts are $80,000 and $90,000 respectively.
(Modified AGI is a taxpayer’s AGI increased by any foreign income that
was excluded.) Be aware that married parents who file separately are not
eligible to claim any of the federal education tax credits which include the
AOTC and the Hope Credit as well as the Lifetime Learning Credit which
will be discussed shortly. The American Opportunity Credit is available for
only the first four years of undergraduate postsecondary education for a
given student (including any years the Hope Credit was claimed for that
same student.) A student who pays for her own educational expenses may
also be eligible for this credit, provided she is not claimed as a dependent
on someone else’s tax return. However, whether you or the student will be
able to claim this credit beyond 2017 will depend if this provision of the
tax code is extended.
• In addition to the AOTC, there is currently another education tax credit
known as the Lifetime Learning Credit or LLC. Starting in 2003, the
amount of this non-refundable credit is equal to 20% of the first $10,000 of
qualified expenses paid each tax year. (Prior to 2003, the Lifetime Learning
Credit was limited to 20% of the first $5,000 of educational expenses paid
each tax year.) For 2016, the LLC phases out gradually for married parents
filing jointly with Modified AGIs between $112,000 and $132,000, and for
others with Modified AGIs between $56,000 and $65,000. (These income
numbers are adjusted annually for inflation.) Unlike the 4-year American
Opportunity Credit, the Lifetime Learning Credit can be claimed for an
unlimited number of tax years provided one meets all the other criteria. It
is therefore possible for a parent to take this credit for a few years,
provided he claims the child as a dependent on his tax return. Years later,
the student herself could claim the Lifetime Learning Credit on her own
tax return if she goes back to school and meets the other criteria for the
credit. In contrast to the AOTC, the Lifetime Learning Credit can also be
used for graduate studies.
Note: For most (but not all) taxpayers, claiming the American Opportunity
Credit will result in a larger tax benefit than claiming the Lifetime Learning
Credit. However, given the fine print and differing eligibility criteria, you (or
your tax preparer) should still do the math and compare the results just to be

sure.
• It is important to note that the above two tax benefits involve tax credits
and not merely deductions against your taxable income. As such, they are
much more valuable since they reduce your tax liability dollar-for-dollar.
While the American Opportunity Credit can be claimed for each qualifying
child in the same tax year, the maximum amount of the Lifetime Learning
Credit you can take each year will not vary based upon the number of
students in college. In determining the size of the credit, qualifying
educational expenses will only represent “out-of-pocket” costs paid. So, for
example, scholarships and grants that are awarded will reduce the amount
of educational expenses used to determine the size of the credit. In many
cases however, expenses paid from the proceeds of a loan will qualify as
out-of-pocket expenses. This is true even if the expenses were “paid” with
a student loan as the regulations focus on the amount of expenses paid but
not necessarily who paid them. Unlike the LLC in which expenses are
limited to tuition and mandatory fees as a condition of enrollment, for the
AOTC expenses can include required “course materials” (i.e. books,
supplies, and equipment) and possibly even a computer if the computer is
needed as a condition of enrollment.
• There is also a waiver of the 10% penalty on withdrawals from regular
IRAs and Roth IRAs prior to age 59 1/2, provided the withdrawals are used
to pay qualified post-secondary education expenses. Withdrawals can cover
your own educational expenses (including grad school) as well as those of
your spouse, child, or grandchild. Withdrawals from traditional IRAs will,
of course, still be considered part of your taxable income. The section of
the tax code pertaining to withdrawals from Roth IRAs is more
complicated. While there are no special provisions regarding higher
education expenses, distributions of the original contributions to Roth
IRAs are not subject to tax or penalty. Distributions involving the earnings
in a Roth IRA are, however, subject to taxes unless other criteria are met.
(For example, the distribution is made five years after the initial
contribution and the taxpayer is at least 59 1/2 years of age.) It is assumed
that the first dollars distributed represent the initial contribution to the Roth
IRA. Because the rules regarding IRAs and Roth IRAs contain so much
fine print, you should consult the appropriate IRS publications or a

professional tax advisor if you are contemplating any distributions from
these plans. And remember, any distributions (other than rollovers) from
retirement accounts are required to be reported as income on the FAFSA
and PROFILE whether taxable or not.
• The 2001 tax law also expanded the availability of the deduction of student
loan interest paid on qualified educational loans. Taxpayers will still not
need to itemize deductions to claim this benefit, which increased to $2,500
in 2002 and beyond. The income limits for the full deduction are currently
$65,000 for single filers and $130,000 for joint returns. The maximum
amount of the deduction will then gradually phase out until the income
reaches the upper limits of $80,000 and $160,000, respectively. (Prior to
2002, the phase-out limits were $40,000 to $55,000 for single filers, and
$60,000 to $75,000 for married filing jointly.) Since 2002, this deduction is
now no longer limited to the first 60 months in which interest payments
were required as it was under the prior law. These changes will mean that
more taxpayers are able to claim this deduction for a longer period of time.
Qualifying educational loans can be those incurred to cover your own post-
secondary expenses, as well as those of your spouse or any other dependent
at the time the loan was taken out. If you are claimed as a dependent on
someone else’s tax return for a particular year, however, you cannot claim
this deduction.
And now…
The Bad News
When the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 was first
enacted, politicians from both sides of the aisle were patting themselves on the
back. But now that the dust has settled, the truth of the matter is that the changes
have been so complicated that many experts have stated that the major
beneficiaries of all these changes are the tax preparers and accountants across the
country.
We used to tell our clients to look before they leapt. Since 2002, we now tell
them to look both ways, since the 2001 tax law and subsequent legislation are
anything but tax simplification. Some of the provisions may still expire in a few

years. And given the constant budget battles in Congress, there is nothing to
prevent new legislation form being introduced that would impact some of these
educational tax benefits.
Note: Unlike many of the other provisions which are scheduled to sunset
sometime in future, legislation was enacted in 2006 to permanently extend the
provisions regarding tax-free distributions from 529 plans, provided the funds
are used for qualified higher education expenses. Recent legislation has also
made many provisions permanent involving Coverdell Education Savings
Accounts.
GOING…
Though the income restrictions on many of these benefits have been liberalized,
many families are going to discover that they still don’t qualify for them. Indeed,
whenever news breaks about new or enhanced education tax breaks, a number of
our clients will call to ask what we think already assuming the increased benefits
will apply to them. We often have to burst their bubbles and tell them they won’t
be able to qualify because their income is too high or they do not meet all the
criteria.
Many families who could qualify may also fail to get the maximum benefits
simply because they don’t understand all the fine print. The regulations are
rather extensive and the timing of certain transactions is very important. For
example, let’s say your child will be graduating at the end of the 2017–2018
academic year. If you’re overly eager and pay the spring 2018 tuition bill as soon
as you get it in mid-December 2017 (instead of waiting until January 10, 2017
when it’s due), you won’t be able to claim the American Opportunity Credit or
Lifetime Learning Credit in 2018 for that child simply because you paid the
money too soon. That mistake might have cost you as much as $2,500 as you
can only claim the credit for the tax year in which you make the payment. If the
college insists on payment before you sing “Auld Lang Syne”, consider going on
a payment plan for the final semester. Installment payments made after the new
tax year begins may allow you to claim the credits for another tax year, provided
you meet all the other criteria.
There’s also the linkage among the different provisions. To prevent some tax-
payers from hitting the jackpot, the benefit you receive from one of the tax

benefits can often eliminate your eligibility for other goodies. For example, you
can’t claim both the American Opportunity Credit and the Lifetime Learning
Credit during the same tax year for educational expenses paid for the same child.
You can, however, claim the American Opportunity Credit for one undergraduate
student and the Lifetime Learning Credit for an older sibling in graduate school
on the same year’s tax return (provided you meet all the other criteria). In
addition for the tax year 2002 and beyond: if you claim the American
Opportunity Credit or the Lifetime Learning Credit for expenses paid with funds
withdrawn from a section 529 plan or Coverdell ESA, part or all of the funds
withdrawn may no longer qualify for tax-free treatment unless you forego
claiming the credit. You can still withdraw funds from these plans and claim an
education tax credit for the same student in the same tax year, but you’ll have to
pay some of the qualified expenses (as defined by the IRS for the credit you are
claiming) with funds from other accounts and/or loans. Finally, many of the
provisions are not available to married couples who file separate returns.
…GOING…
Then there is the impact of these provisions on financial aid. For example, the
Lifetime Learning Credit and any non-refundable portion of the American
Opportunity Credit will reduce your aid eligibility under the institutional
methodology. Since these credits reduce your U.S. income taxes paid (an
expense item in the IM formula), your available income will be higher and so
your IM EFC will go up as well. While the amount of the credit will still be
greater than the amount of aid that is lost, the value to you of those credits is
reduced under the institutional formula for any base income year. The tuition and
fees deduction (see this page) also will not help you in the institutional formula,
since the amount of the deduction will be added back as part of your untaxed
income. In fact, it will even hurt you somewhat since your total income (i.e., the
sum of your AGI plus untaxed income) will remain the same but your tax
liability will decline.
Other provisions are potential financial aid traps. As mentioned earlier in this
book, distributions from IRAs and other retirement accounts (other than
rollovers) boost your income, thereby reducing your aid eligibility. It also
remains to be seen how some IRA withdrawals will impact eligibility. Will a
grandmother’s penalty-free withdrawal from a regular IRA to pay for her

grandson’s education be considered? Will the conversion of a regular IRA to a
Roth IRA be considered a special circumstance taken into account by an FAO
when awarding aid? Because these provisions often change from year to year,
the Department of Education, the College Scholarship Service, and most college
financial aid offices still have not finalized their policies as to how to handle
most of these items. We will of course provide updates on our website
(www.princetonreview.com/​financialaidupdate) 
if 
more 
details 
become
available. In the meantime, we suggest that those families who are interested in
maximizing aid eligibility avoid discretionary withdrawals from retirement
accounts until the rules are clarified or until they are out of the base income
years.
Reminder: Most traditional financial advisors (e.g., accountants, financial
planners, attorneys, stockbrokers, etc.) rarely take financial aid implications into
account when making recommendations. Now more than ever before, you
should investigate how such advice will affect your aid eligibility before you
proceed.
…GONE
Even if you qualify for these benefits and are still ahead of the game after
factoring in the reduced aid, the various tax provisions may still not save you
any money by the ninth inning. For the big question still remains: “Will these tax
benefits save you any money in the long run?” For while many families are
saving money on their taxes, many colleges have realized that fact and have just
raised their tuition even higher to follow suit. So the jury is still out on how
much these provisions will actually help any family or student pay for college.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
Looking for a Financial
Aid Consulting Service

Looking for a Financial Aid Consultant
At this point you may be rubbing your hands together and saying:
“I’m ready. Bring on those need analysis forms!” or you may be saying:
“I’d rather eat cement than ever look at those forms.”
You know quite a lot about the financial aid process and you know how to
take control of that process. You also know yourself, and if you don’t want to get
any more familiar with this subject than you already are, you can hire someone
to do it for you.
What a Financial Aid Consultant Does
A good financial aid consultant will do far more than simply fill out the forms.
Anyone can throw together numbers on a paper. Principally, you hire a
consultant to examine your entire financial situation ahead of time and make
recommendations to increase your aid eligibility. A good consultant will know
the specific rules that govern aid in your state, will be up to date on the
constantly changing regulations that govern tax law and financial aid, and will
assist you to complete the forms to maximize your aid eligibility.
There are several different kinds of professionals who may offer their
services to guide you through the financial aid process: accountants, financial
planners, tax lawyers, tax advisors, and financial aid consultants (who specialize
in this field alone).
Why Your Accountant May Say He Is Willing to
Do the Form Even If He Doesn’t Want To
Accountants want you to come back to see them next year. Even if your
accountant hates preparing need analysis forms and even if he knows very little
about the financial aid process, he will probably tell you that he’ll do the forms
for you. He’s afraid that if he says no, you’ll go to another accountant and he’ll
lose your regular business.

Why You May Not Want to Let Him
At stake are tens of thousands of dollars. You do not want to be your
accountant’s guinea pig. If your need analysis form is his first, or even his tenth,
you may not get the best aid package possible.
Of course there are accountants, tax lawyers, and financial planners who have
made it their business to learn the ins and outs of financial aid. The problem is
finding out whether you are dealing with one of these knowledgeable experts or
a rank beginner before you place your child’s future in his hands. How do you
find a competent person?
Ask Your Friends for Referrals
There is no licensing organization in this field, and asking your local Better
Business Bureau about prospects will only reveal the most egregiously bad
apples. The best way to find a good aid consultant is to ask your friends for a
referral. This is far better than responding to an unsolicited sales pitch you
receive in the mail or by phone. Some questions to ask your friends:
• Did the consultant give them the forms in time to meet deadlines?
• Was he available throughout the year for planning?
• Did he give them an idea of what their Expected Family Contribution
would be, and was it reasonably correct?
• Did he provide them with strategies to maximize aid for the coming year?
It’s always hard to know what kind of packages a family would have received
had they not gone to a professional for help, which makes objective comparison
difficult. However, if your friends came away from the experience feeling that
the professional knew the process inside and out and that they had been well
taken care of, then you are probably in good hands.
Fees can be expensive, but if a professional can find ways to increase your aid
eligibility by thousands of dollars, even a relatively expensive fee is a bargain.
Be cautious with professionals who try to sell you financial products. They
may be more interested in selling you financial investment instruments you may

or may not need than in getting you the most aid. You should also be suspicious
if a consultant promises that you’ll receive a certain amount of aid before
reviewing your situation. And pass immediately on any professional who tries to
steer you toward anything illegal. Please report any unprofessional behavior to
the Better Business Bureau immediately.
Some Questions to Ask the Professional
Before you engage anyone to give you financial aid advice, you might want to
ask a few of the following questions:
• What is the name of the state grants awarded here in
___________?
Any professional who does financial aid consulting should certainly know the
name of the state grants offered by your home state. Each state calls its grants
something else, and each state has its own set of rules as to who qualifies for
these grants. If the professional doesn’t even know the names of the grants, he
probably doesn’t know the rules under which they are dispensed either.
• Should we put assets in the child’s name?
A competent professional should know that student’s assets are assessed at a
much higher rate than parents’ assets. If the family is eligible for aid, putting
money in the child’s name can be a very expensive mistake.
• Which year’s income and assets do the colleges look at?
To determine what a family can afford to pay for college in the academic year
of 2018–2019, for example, the colleges look at the income from the prior-prior
year; in this case, 2016. They look at assets as of the day the need analysis form
is completed.
• What is the difference between a Stafford loan and a PLUS loan?
Both are sponsored by the federal government, but the Stafford loan is made
to students, while the PLUS loan is made to parents.

• Could you explain a couple of terms for us?
Go to the glossary and pick a few terms at random. An experienced
professional should have no difficulty defining those terms.
One Question Not to Ask:
• Could you tell us if we qualify for aid?
Of course this is the one question you really want answered, but no competent
consultant could answer this question without a detailed analysis of your
situation.

CHAPTER TWELVE
Looking Ahead

Future Trends in College Finance
The world of financial aid and college finance is always in flux. Making any
predictions whatsoever is dangerous. However, it is safe to say that college
tuitions will continue to rise at a rate faster than that of overall inflation. And
now more than ever before, there is a huge difference between just applying, and
applying smart. The aid is still available, but the mechanics of securing it will
continue to become more complicated with more hurdles than ever before.
The Prior-Prior Year
One of those hurdles: the decision to change the timing of the all-important
“snapshot” that the FAFSA and if applicable the PROFILE, asks you to take of
your finances. By changing that first snapshot from the year before the student
enters college (known as the “Prior year” or PY) to two years before the student
enters college (known as the “Prior-prior year” or PPY) the U.S. Department of
Education as well as the school and have enhanced their ability to require more
extensive documentation ensuring the validity of student and parent information.
In the past, much work was spent in the aid offices resolving discrepancies
between estimated PY income reported on the aid forms and the actual PY
income figures on completed tax returns. So with this administrative burden
sharply reduced, the U.S. Dept of Education could require college aid officers to
spend more of their time verifying other data elements besides the PPY income
reported on tax returns.
Identity Theft
Another hurdle has occurred due to advances in technology. As the financial
aid forms have moved online (from the paper and snail-mail route), the dangers
of cyber theft and identity theft have greatly increased. Because the aid forms
contain your entire financial history, dates of birth for various and social security
numbers for the student and any custodial parent or stepparent required to report
their finances on the FAFSA, it’s important than ever to take all precautions to

make sure your passwords are robust and that you keep any log-in information
secure. Unfortunately, the Department of Education still uses the student’s social
security number as an identifier for colleges to retrieve students’ processed
FAFSA information. This means that prospective students using the Common
Application for their admissions purposes will need to enter their social security
number on the Common App if they are applying for aid at any school(s) that
accepts that admissions form. Otherwise, such schools will not be able to find
the student’s processed FAFSA data on their system.
Because the aid forms and supporting documents contain social security
number and other valuable information to identity thieves, one cannot be careful
enough. To better protect yourself and your significant others, keep these
following tips in mind:
Do not send copies of tax return files by email. It is more secure to send them
by fax or even postal mail-- unless you are uploading the documents to a school
using their own secured school document system or the school is using a third
party app such as the College Board’s IDOC service.
Remember that neither the government, the College Board, nor the colleges
will EVER ask you to provide a password in response to an email.
The Rise of “Free” Tuition
A few states have offered free tuition for community college for some time—but
in the spring of 2017, New York became the first state to offer free tuition for up
to four years of college (i.e. through the first bachelor’s degree). This is, of
course, great news—and more states may follow. But while these
announcements get a lot of headlines, it is important to understand that going to
these schools is by no means free. For example, in New York, this offer only
covers tuition, not room and board, books, etc. etc. And at most state
universities, it turns out that room and board expenses are higher than the tuition
itself. There may also be bundles of string attached to such awards. So be sure to
read all the fine print about qualifying for such funds and maintaining eligibility,
as well as if there are any requirements that must be met after leaving school.
You should also be aware of the maximum benefit that can be awarded under the
state program.

FM and IM Divergence
Even though federal regulations have become more liberal over the last few
years in terms of defining a student’s “need” (for example, assessing prepaid 529
funds as assets instead of a “resource” that reduced aid dollar-for-dollar by the
amount of the withdrawal, and allowing the protection of assets tied to “family
businesses”), more and more colleges are becoming increasingly conservative
when it comes to awarding their own funds. More and more schools are asking
additional questions about the existence of (and distributions from) 529 plans
that are owned by individuals other than the student’s parents (such as a rich
aunt, or grandparent). Even though such 529 plans do not have to be reported on
the aid form as an asset, colleges want to know about them, taking the position
that a student with a sizable 529 plan funded by Aunt Mary should obviously be
in a position to pay more.
The Importance of Planning Ahead
If history has taught us anything, it is that it is never too early to start planning
ahead for college costs. At whatever stage you are reading this book, there are
some tangible strategies you can use to help take control of the financial aid
process and minimize college costs. The purpose of this book has been to show
you those strategies. We hope they will make the dream of a college education a
reality.
Good luck!
12 TIPS FOR PAYING FOR COLLEGE IN TOUGH
TIMES
1. Start researching aid possibilities sooner rather than later. The competition
for aid increases when the economy is weak. Those who plan ahead for the
aid process will do much better than those who procrastinate and miss
deadlines.
2. Take steps that improve your aid eligibility. For example if you have lost
your job, you should avoid the temptation to spend any assets in your
retirement plan. In addition to the likely early distribution penalties and

additional income taxes, the higher income will reduce your aid eligibility.
3. Apply for financial aid no matter what your circumstances – flush or not.
Applying by the priority deadlines, even if you think you won’t qualify,
will help you if your finances take a turn for the worst. Some schools will
only accept requests for reconsideration due to a decline in income from
those students who filed for aid on time – even if they were turned down
initially.
4. You should still not initially rule out any school as being too expensive.
Many colleges – especially the private ones – have increased their aid
budgets to attract applicants whose families are now more price resistant
given the state of the economy. But have a back-up plan in case the aid is
not enough to attend those pricier schools. Most likely this will mean also
applying to a public institution in your home state and/or any school where
the student can live at home instead of paying for room and board.
5. Pay less for a four-year degree. You can save on costs if the student attends
a community college for two years and then transfers to a pricier school for
his or her remaining two years. However, be sure that the college to which
the student plans to transfer will accept the credits from the community
college.
6. Encourage your student to take as many AP courses as possible and to prep
well for AP exams. High scores on AP exams can save considerably on
college tuition. Many colleges award course credits for them, which can
reduce the amount you need to pay in tuition.
7. Apply strategically to colleges. If you exceed the school’s admission
criteria, you are much more likely to get a better aid package than a
marginal applicant. Be sure to prep for the standardized tests such as the
SAT or ACT, so that the student is more desirable.
8. Be realistic about how much debt the student can incur, given the starting
salaries for his or her probable major and career path.
9. If you have to borrow, pursue federal loans first and avoid having the
student take on private loans at all costs.
10. If your circumstances have a taken a turn for the worst, request additional
aid. But expect that the college may require considerable supporting
documentation.
11. In addition to your aid planning, focus on planning for the various
education tax benefits you can claim. After all, a dollar you can save on

your taxes is worth the same as getting an additional dollar in grant or
scholarship aid.
12. Don’t put tuition on a credit card. This debt is more expensive than ever,
given the recent changes to interest rates and other fees that many card
issuers are now charging. You also want to be sure you avoid maxing out
on your borrowing limit, just in case you need to use the card to pay for an
unexpected emergency.

PART FIVE
Worksheets and Forms

Calculating Your Expected Family Contribution
We realize that the pages of worksheets and tables that follow may seem a little
intimidating. There are some books out there that claim you can calculate your
EFC by consulting a single table that has been prepared by the book’s author.
Unfortunately, these tables ask for such vague information from the parent that
they do not provide an accurate estimation in the end. The calculators on various
websites are all too frequently out-of-date or use flawed logic and result in a case
of “garbage in-garbage out”.
When you fill out your need analysis form, you provide the processor with
very specific information, but you will not be required to complete a worksheet
such as this. The processor simply plugs your information into a computer
program that automatically does all the calculations we are about to show you.
So Why Should You Bother to Go Through
These Worksheets at All?
There are two excellent reasons.
First, by making the calculations yourself, you will be able to see how the
process works; it is amazing how small changes in the way you list your
financial information can produce big changes in the final result.
Second, by having an accurate idea of what your Expected Family
Contribution will be, you can make informed decisions about which schools to
apply to, how to answer questions on the individual school aid forms like, “How
much do you think you can afford to pay for college?,” and what early steps you
can take for next year.
Ughhhh
If these worksheets fill you with dread, you can always hire an independent
financial aid consultant to do these calculations for you. Details on how to find
one are in Chapter Eleven.

The Standard Disclaimer
While we believe that these worksheets and tables are accurate, they have not
been approved by the U.S. Department of Education. In addition, the worksheets
and tables regarding calculation of income have not been approved by the IRS
and should not be used to calculate your tax liability for your income tax return.
Worksheet for Calculating the Expected Family
Contribution for a Dependent Student
Please note that by TAXABLE INCOME, we mean income that the IRS
considers subject to possible taxation, even if the IRS does not require that a tax
return be filed because the income is below a minimum level determined by
them. As such, it is possible to pay no tax on a small amount of taxable income.
UNTAXED INCOME or NONTAXABLE INCOME refers to income that is
never subject to income tax. Some income items, such as social security benefits,
can be considered either taxable income or untaxed income, depending on the
taxpayer’s total income.
Unless otherwise indicated, all references in this worksheet to specific IRS
line numbers relate to those lines of the 2016 IRS 1040 form. To avoid
confusion, we suggest that you refer to Chapter Three for more detailed
descriptions of these various items. If the student’s biological or adoptive parents
are living apart, please consult this page and this page if you are unsure whose
income should be listed on this worksheet.
The worksheets and tables that follow are based on the current formula for
calculating the EFC for the 2018–2019 academic year.
If you meet all of the criteria for the Simplified Needs Test (see this page),
you can calculate your EFC under the simplified formula by listing zero on Line
O of the Parents’ Worksheet and on Line GG of the Student’s Worksheet.
However, we recommend that you also calculate your EFC using asset
information since some schools do not use the simplified formula when
awarding their own aid funds.
Some helpful tips for completing the worksheets:
1. Round off all figures to the nearest dollar.

2. All income/expense items relate to yearly amounts. Do not use monthly or
weekly figures. All asset/liability items relate to current amounts.
3. Since the 2018-2019 EFC will be using “prior-prior-year” income (see this
page), all references to income on the Tables and Worksheets that follow
should be completed using 2016 income amounts. Most likely by the time
you are completing these Tables, you will have already completed the 2016
Federal income tax returns if required to file a return. If that is the case for
the student’s parents (or parent and stepparent) required to report
information on the FAFSA, then most likely you can skip the calculations
for Tables 3 and 6. Simply go to the last line of that respective Table and
just list the dollar amount reported on the corresponding line of your U.S.
individual income tax return(s). If separate returns were filed for 2016 by
the custodial parent(s) – or the custodial parent and stepparent – reporting
information on the FAFSA, list the combined dollar amounts from both
adults’ tax returns (See this page if you are unsure which parent(s)’
information is to be reported on the FAFSA.) And please remember that
one’s marital status for purposes of the FAFSA is the status as the date the
FAFSA is filed, not the status at any time during the prior-prior year or
prior year.
Exception: If 2016 federal tax individual income tax returns were
completed as married filing jointly and the custodial parent is now
separated, divorced or widowed from that other adult, then the entire Table
3 should be completed using only the custodial parent’s share of the
respective items to determine the custodial parent’s share of the Adjusted
Gross Income (AGI). To calculate the last line for Table 6: use the
proportionate share of the AGI that you listed on line C of Table 3. Divide
that number by the joint AGI figure reported on the actual tax return. The
number you have just calculated should then by multiplied by the
combined amount of U.S. Taxes paid on the joint return (using the
applicable IRS line item referenced for the last line of Table 6) to
determine the custodial parent’s share of the U.S. taxes paid that you will
list on the last line of Table 6.
4. Tables 1 through 7 as well as Table 9 and Table 11 (if applicable) must be
completed (in order) before you can begin work on the Parents’ Expected
Contribution worksheet. The bottom lines from Tables 5 through 7 as well
as Table 9 and 11 will be entered on the appropriate section of that
worksheet. Table 8, Table 10, Table 12, and Table 13 should be utilized as

you are completing that worksheet. Table 14 should be completed before
you begin work on the Student’s Expected Contribution worksheet.
5. When completing Tables 1 and 2, be sure to enter the appropriate amounts
under the proper column. Do not combine the amounts into one column, as
this will give you an incorrect estimate of your Family Contribution.
6. Any number listed in parentheses should be subtracted from the number in
the same column above it.
7. The earnings portion of any qualified withdrawals from Coverdell ESAs
(Education IRAs) and Section 529 state savings accounts as well as the
increase in the value of any tuition credits redeemed since the time of
purchase for Section 529 prepaid plans will not be considered as part of the
student’s or parent’s non-taxable income. Therefore, do not include any
“earnings” from these accounts as part of your untaxed income in Table 4
or as part of “All other income of student and spouse” on the Student’s
Expected Contribution Worksheet.
8. We suggest that you check your math. Even better, you should consider
having another family member review your completed tables and
worksheets for accuracy. Even if your family contribution figures are
higher than the cost of attendance, you should still consider applying for
aid since the FAOs may take other factors into account, you may be
eligible for state aid benefits not based on these formulas, and/or you may
have made an error in your calculations when doing these worksheets.
9. Prior to the 2011 edition, we always included worksheets to calculate the
expected family contribution (EFC) under both the Institutional
Methodology (IM) as well as the Federal Methodology (FM). However, in
a change of policy, the College Board is no longer providing anyone with
the tables and formulas to calculate the EFC under the IM. However, they
have agreed to provide us with calculations of the EFC using the IM for
some sample case studies along with the impact that some institutional
options involving the home can have on the basic IM EFC number. A
comparative calculation of the EFC in the federal methodology is provided
as well. However, keep in mind that small changes to one’s situation can
result in significant changes to the EFC in either formula. As such, these
case studies should be used for informational purposes only. The EFC
figures provided should not be relied on as an exact number of what your
EFC will be, even if you believe your own situation is rather similar. These

sample case studies and some additional comments regarding the IM
appear on this page.
Analyzing Your Numbers
Instead of thinking of the EFC as a definitive number for the amount you will be
expected to pay towards college in a given year, you should think of the Parent’s
Expected Contribution on Line R (this page) and the Student’s Expected
Contribution on Line JJ (this page) as rough approximations for financial aid
planning purposes. Until you receive a finalized award package from a school, it
is impossible to know for certain the final number for what you will need to
contribute. So instead of thinking of absolutes, it would be better to think in
terms or probabilities. For example, if the EFC you calculate is quite a bit lower
than the Cost of Attendance for the applicable school(s) under consideration, it
would be better to focus on using those applicable strategies outlined earlier in
the book to lower your EFC and complete the aid forms. This will increase the
probability of your receiving more aid and will be more beneficial than trying to
figure out exactly how much aid you will receive before admission and aid
decisions are known. Similarly, if your EFC is significantly higher than the cost
of attendance for all schools under consideration, then it is unlikely – though not
certain – that you will not receive any need-based funds in a given year. While
you should still apply for aid (as strange things sometimes can happen with the
aid process), you should also have a back-up plan (i.e. applying to lower cost
schools and/or to schools where there is a high probability the student will
receive merit-based aid). And if in future years there will be an increase or
decrease in the number of family members in college, then you should take
subsequent years’ aid probabilities into account based on the differing number of
students attending college.

Click here to download a PDF of Table 1.

Notes for servicemen and servicewomen who receive combat pay
If you receive combat pay, you should be sure that the total amount of any combat pay received is included
as part of the Total Income Earned From Work (Line F), if such pay is included in Box 3 or 5 of the W-2
form.
If you filed or will file a tax return: Include any taxable combat pay as part of your Adjusted Gross
Income (Table 3). Include any such taxable pay that is part of your AGI on the applicable line on Table 5A.
If you will not file a tax return: Do not include any combat pay in Table 4.
Do not include any untaxed combat pay reported on the W-2 form in Box 12, Code Q on any Table.

Click here to download a PDF of Table 2.

Click here to download a PDF of Table 3.


Click here to download a PDF of Table 4.

Do not include extended foster care benefits, student aid, earned income credit,
additional child tax credit, welfare payments, untaxed Social Security benefits,
Supplemental Security Income, Workforce Investment Act educational benefits,

on-base military housing or a military housing allowance, combat pay, benefits
from flexible spending arrangements (e.g., cafeteria plans), foreign income
exclusion or credit for federal tax on special fuels.

Click here to download a PDF of Table 5-Table 5A.

Click here to download a PDF of Table 6.


Click here to download a PDF of Table 7.
An additional .9 percent (i.e. nine tenths of one percent) Medicare tax is assessed on high earning
households. This additional tax will be assessed on earned income above $200,000 for individuals and
above $250,000 for married couples filing jointly. As we went to press, it was still unclear if the federal
methodology will be adjusted to reflect these additional taxes paid. However, given the fact that such high
earners typically do not qualify for Pell Grants or demonstrate much, if any, need for other federal need-

based aid programs, there is a feeling among many in the aid community that the U.S. Department of
Education (DOE) will not make any adjustments to the formula to reflect the additional Medicare taxes one
may be paying. As such, you should use the table above to calculate the amount of taxes paid for the
purposes of these worksheets. We will, of course, post any change on our update page
(www.princetonreview.com/​financialaidupdate) should the DOE change their policy.

Click here to download a PDF of Table 8.


Click here to download a PDF of Table 9 and Table 10.

Click here to download a PDF of Table 11.

Click here to download a PDF of Table 12 and Table 13.



Click here to download a PDF of Table 14.




Sample Forms

Click here to download a PDF of the Draft 2018-2019 FAFSA.
The above is a reprint of a draft of the 2018–2019 FAFSA. It is for information purposes only. Do not send
in.

The above is a reprint of a draft of the 2018–2019 FAFSA. It is for information purposes only. Do not send
in.

The above is a reprint of a draft of the 2018–2019 FAFSA. It is for information purposes only. Do not send
in.

The above is a reprint of a draft of the 2018–2019 FAFSA. It is for information purposes only. Do not send
in.

The above is a reprint of a draft of the 2018–2019 FAFSA. It is for information purposes only. Do not send
in.

The above is a reprint of a draft of the 2018–2019 FAFSA. It is for information purposes only. Do not send
in.

Click here to download a PDF sample of IRS Form 1040.
The above form is a copy of the IRS Form 1040. It is for information purposes only. Do not send in.

The above form is a copy of the IRS Form 1040. It is for information purposes only. Do not send in.

Click here to download a PDF of the 2016 1040A Tax Form.
The above form is a copy of the IRS Form 1040A. It is for information purposes only. Do not send in.

The above form is a copy of the IRS Form 1040A. It is for information purposes only. Do not send in.

Click here to download a PDF of the 2016 1040EZ Tax Form.
The above form is a copy of the IRS Form 1040EZ. It is for information purposes only. Do not send in.

Click here to download a PDF of the Direct Loans Promissory Note.
The above form is a draft version. It is for information purposes only. Do not send in.

Glossary

GLOSSARY
ACADEMIC YEAR: A measure of academic work to be performed by the
student, subject to definition by the school.
AGI: Adjusted gross income. In 2016, the AGI is listed on line 37 of the IRS
1040; line 21 of the IRS 1040A and line 4 of the IRS 1040EZ.
AMERICAN COLLEGE TESTING PROGRAM (ACT): The administrator
of a group of standardized tests in English, mathematics, reading, and science
reasoning.
BASE INCOME YEAR (also known as the BASE YEAR): The second
calendar year preceding the academic year for which aid is being sought. 2016
will be the base income year for the 2018–2019 award year.
BUSINESS/FARM SUPPLEMENT: A supplemental aid application required
by a few colleges for aid applicants whose parents own businesses or farms or
who are self-employed. The individual school’s aid policy will determine if this
form must be completed.
CAMPUS-BASED PROGRAMS: Three federal student aid programs that are
administered directly by the school’s financial aid office (the Perkins Loan, the
Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant, and the Federal Work-Study
program).
COLLEGE BOARD: A nonprofit association that writes and processes the
CSS/Financial Aid PROFILE form.
COOPERATIVE EDUCATION: A college program offered at many schools
that combines periods of academic study with periods of paid employment
related to the student’s field of study. In most cases, participation will extend the
time required to obtain a bachelor’s degree to five years.
COST OF ATTENDANCE: A figure, estimated by the school, that includes the
cost of tuition, fees, room, board, books, and supplies as well as an allowance for

transportation and personal expenses. This figure is compared to the Expected
Family Contribution to determine a student’s aid eligibility. Also known as the
student budget.
CSS/FINANCIAL AID PROFILE: a need analysis application created and
processed by the College Board. Also known as the CSS PROFILE or the
PROFILE form.
DEFAULT: Failure to repay a loan according to the terms of the promissory
note.
DEPENDENT STUDENT: A classification for aid purposes for a student who
is considered to be dependent upon his or her parent(s) for financial support.
DIRECT LOAN PROGRAM: Formerly known as the Stafford Student Loan
program, this federally funded program provides low-interest loans to
undergraduate and graduate students. In most cases, repayment does not begin
until six months after the student graduates or leaves school and there are no
interest charges while the student is in school. For new loans disbursed after
June 30, 2006, the interest rate is fixed. (Prior loans had variable rates.) There
are two types of Direct loans: subsidized and unsubsidized. The subsidized
Direct loan is need-based and the government pays the interest while the student
is in school. The unsubsidized Direct loan is non-need-based and can be taken
out by virtually all students. In many cases, students can elect to let the interest
accumulate until after they graduate.
EDUCATIONAL TESTING SERVICE: The organization that writes the SAT
exam.
EMPLOYMENT ALLOWANCE: A deduction against income in the federal
and institutional methodologies for two-parent families in which both parents
work or a single-parent family in which that parent works.
EXPECTED FAMILY CONTRIBUTION (EFC): The amount of money the
family is expected to contribute for the year toward the student’s cost of
attendance. This figure is compared to the Cost of Attendance to determine a
student’s aid eligibility.

FAFSA: See Free Application for Federal Student Aid.
FAMILY CONTRIBUTION: Another name used to refer to the Expected
Family Contribution.
FAO: See Financial Aid Officer.
FEDERAL METHODOLOGY: The generally accepted method used to
calculate the family’s expected contribution to college costs for federal aid
purposes. Depending on the individual college’s policy, the federal methodology
may also be used to determine eligibility for money under the school’s control.
FEDERAL WORK-STUDY (FWS): A federally funded aid program that
provides jobs for students. Eligibility is based on need.
FINANCIAL AID: A general term used to refer to a variety of programs funded
by the federal and state governments as well as the individual schools to assist
students with their educational costs. While the names may vary, financial aid
comes in three basic forms: (1) gift aid (grants and scholarships) that does not
have to be paid back (2) student loans, and (3) work-study jobs.
FINANCIAL AID OFFICER: An administrator at each school who determines
whether a student is eligible for aid and if so, the types of aid to be awarded.
FREE APPLICATION FOR FEDERAL STUDENT AID (FAFSA): The
need analysis document written by the U.S. Department of Education. This form
is required for virtually all students seeking financial aid including the
unsubsidized Stafford loan.
FSA ID: A new personal identification system for use with U.S. Department of
Education websites including the online FAFSA.
FOTW: FAFSA on the Web, the online version of the FAFSA.
401(k), 403(b): The names of two of the more popular tax-deferred retirement
plans in which employees elect to defer part of their earnings until a later date.
GIFT AID: Financial aid, usually a grant or scholarship, that does not have to
be paid back and that does not involve employment.

GRADPLUS LOANS: A federally sponsored educational loan program in
which graduate or professional school students can borrow up to the total cost of
attendance minus any financial aid received. Eligibility is not based on need.
GRANTS: Gift aid that is generally based on need. The programs can be funded
by the federal and state governments as well as the individual schools.
HALF-TIME STATUS: Refers to students taking at least 6 credits per semester,
or the equivalent.
INDEPENDENT STUDENT: A student who, for financial aid purposes, is not
considered dependent on his or her parent(s) for support. Also known as a self-
supporting student.
INCOME PROTECTION ALLOWANCE: A deduction against income in
both the federal and the institutional methodologies.
INSTITUTIONAL FORMS: Supplemental forms required by the individual
schools to determine aid eligibility.
INSTITUTIONAL METHODOLOGY: An alternative method used to
calculate the family’s expected contribution to college costs. This methodology
is generally used by private and a few state schools to determine eligibility for
aid funds under the school’s direct control. Colleges that use the institutional
methodology usually require completion of the PROFILE form.
LONG FORM: This generally refers to the IRS 1040 form.
NEED: The amount of aid a student is eligible to receive. This figure is
calculated by subtracting the Expected Family Contribution from the Cost of
Attendance.
NEED ANALYSIS: The process of analyzing the information on the aid form to
calculate the amount of money the student and parent(s) can be expected to
contribute toward educational costs.
NEED ANALYSIS FORMS: Aid applications used to calculate the expected
family contribution. The most common need analysis forms are: the Free
Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) and the CSS/Financial Aid

PROFILE form. Consult the individual school’s financial aid filing requirements
to determine which form(s) are required for that particular school.
NONCUSTODIAL 
PARENT’S 
STATEMENT: 
A 
supplemental 
aid
application required by a few colleges for aid applicants whose parents are
separated or divorced or who never married. The individual school’s aid policy
will determine if this form must be completed. If required, this form will be
completed by the noncustodial parent. This is generally the parent with whom
the child spent the least amount of time in the preceding 12 months prior to
completion of the form.
PARENTS’ CONTRIBUTION: The amount of money the parent(s) are
expected to contribute for the year toward the student’s Cost of Attendance.
PARENT LOANS FOR UNDERGRADUATE STUDENTS (PLUS): A
federally sponsored educational loan program in which parents can borrow up to
the total cost of attendance minus any financial aid received for each child in an
undergraduate program. Eligibility is not based on need.
PELL GRANT: A federally funded need-based grant program for first-time
undergraduate students (i.e., the student has not as yet earned a bachelor’s or first
professional degree). Funds from this program are generally awarded to lower-
and lower-middle-income families. Years ago, this program was called the Basic
Educational Opportunity Grant (BEOG).
PERKINS LOAN PROGRAM: This federally funded need-based program
provides low interest loans to undergraduate and graduate students and is
administered by the school’s financial aid office. In most cases, repayment does
not begin until nine months after the student graduates or leaves school and there
are no interest charges while the student is in school. The fixed interest rate is
currently 5%.
PHEAA: The Pennsylvania Higher Education Assistance Agency.
PLUS LOANS: See Parent Loans for Undergraduate Students.
PREFERENTIAL PACKAGING: The situation in which the more desired aid
applicants get better aid packages, which are larger in total dollar amount and/or

contain a higher percentage of grants versus loans.
PROFILE FORM: A need analysis document written and processed by the
College Board.
PROMISSORY NOTE: The legal document which the borrower signs to obtain
the loan proceeds and which specifies the terms of the loan, the interest rate, and
the repayment provisions.
ROTC: The Reserve Officer Training Corps programs that are coordinated at
many college campuses by the U.S. Army, Navy, and Air Force.
SAT: An exam, administered by the College Board, which has critical reading,
math, and writing sections.
SAR: See Student Aid Report.
SCHOLARSHIPS: Gift aid that is usually based on merit or a combination of
need and merit.
SELF-HELP: The portion of the aid package relating to student loans and/or
work-study.
SEOG: See Supplemental Educational Opportunity Grant.
SHORT FORMS: This generally refers to the IRS 1040A or the 1040EZ forms.
SIMPLIFIED NEEDS TEST: An alternative method used to calculate the
family’s expected contribution to college costs for federal aid purposes, in which
all assets are excluded from the federal aid formula.
STANDARDIZED FORMS: The generic term used in this book when referring
to any of the need analysis forms that must be sent to a processing service. The
two most commonly used standardized forms are the U.S. Department of
Education’s Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) and the College
Board’s CSS/Financial Aid PROFILE form.
STUDENT AID REPORT (SAR): The multipage report that is issued to
students who have filed a completed FAFSA.

STUDENT BUDGET: See Cost of Attendance.
STUDENT’S CONTRIBUTION: The amount of money the student is
expected to contribute for the year toward his or her cost of attendance.
SUBSIDIZED DIRECT LOAN: See Direct Loan program.
SUPPLEMENTAL EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY GRANT (SEOG): A
federally funded need-based grant program for undergraduate students that is
awarded by the school’s financial aid office.
UNSUBSIDIZED DIRECT LOAN: See Direct Loan program.
VERIFICATION: A process in which the financial aid office requires
additional documentation to verify the accuracy of the information reported on
the aid applications.
WORK-STUDY: See Federal Work-Study.

INSTITUTIONAL METHODOLOGY
COMMENTS AND CASE STUDIES
Prior to the 2011 edition, we included worksheets to calculate the expected
family contribution (EFC) under both the Institutional Methodology (IM) as well
as the Federal Methodology (FM). Beginning with the 2011–2012 award year, as
a change of policy the College Board is no longer providing anyone with their
proprietary tables and formulas to calculate the IM EFC. However, they have
agreed to provide us with EFC amounts for the IM under some common
scenarios. But before we get to those case studies, there are some additional
items to note regarding the IM:
While there have been adjustments for inflation and other minor changes, we
assume there have not been significant changes in the standard IM for 2018–
2019.
Many colleges that use the institutional methodology often tweak the formula,
for example making adjustments for the cost of living for those families residing
in high cost areas. So even though one used to be able to calculate an IM EFC,
that number was never written in stone—and could differ considerably from
school to school. In recent years, we have found that the packages from
individual schools using the institutional methodology are varying wildly based
on the ways their aid policies deviate from the standard formula. As such in the
past few years, the standard IM formula had been less reliable as a tool for
predicting one’s EFC at schools that use the IM than it had been in the distant
past.
Websites that say they will give you a calculation of your EFC under the
institutional methodology have not been very reliable in the recent past—and
will be even less reliable this year.
For students whose parents are divorced, separated, or were never married:
many schools that use the IM assess a contribution from both parents. This can
result in a significantly higher family contribution than under the federal
methodology which only considers the finances of the custodial parent who
resides with the student.
So what’s a family to do? The basic strategies outlined in Chapter 3 still apply

full force; for example, high medical expenses will continue to reduce your IM
EFC. At the end of this section, you will find a number of typical family
situations. The College Board was kind enough to calculate the expected family
contribution using the standard 2018–2019 institutional methodology for a
number of common scenarios, along with a somewhat common institutional
option for how home equity is treated. Along with the points below, this should
give you a rough idea of what the IM EFC could be under these circumstances.
Item One: Additional Data Elements Considered
As Income
The institutional methodology includes many untaxed income elements that are
not assessed in the federal formula. See this page. However except for the
Earned Income Credit, pre-tax contributions withheld from wages for HSA
accounts as well as for dependent care and medical spending accounts, and
untaxed social security benefits for family members other than the student, most
of these additional untaxed income items under the IM do not apply to most
families.
Item Two: Losses Claimed on Income Tax Return
Families who have significant losses claimed on their personal IRS 1040 tax
return (for example: losses from property rental, S-corporations or partnerships,
farming operations, or capital losses; or losses claimed on schedule C from self-
employment) will find that their family contribution in the institutional
methodology may be more than under the federal formula. Such losses can be a
double-edged sword. For while these losses boost your income in the IM
(compared to the FM), they also reduce the amount of U.S. taxes paid—which
are a deduction under the formula.
Item Three: Higher Allowances Against Income
In years past, for most families, the income protection allowance under the
institutional formula has been greater than under the federal formula. The same

is true for the deduction for state and local taxes—which has been based on a
higher percentage of one’s income. Combined with a somewhat higher
maximum employment allowance as well as the granting of an Annual
Education Saving Allowance, the IM’s higher allowances will normally result in
a smaller contribution from income for most families than under the federal
formula. Except, of course, for family situations when Item One and/or Item
Two above apply.
Item Four: Additional Assets Assessed
The IM assesses certain assets that are excluded in the FM. For most families,
this means the primary residence (i.e. your home). Yet while the standard
institutional methodology considers the full equity in the home as an asset, in the
past few years more and more schools have been treating one’s home equity in a
wide variety of ways. While some still assess the full equity, others will only
consider it if your income exceeds a certain amounts (in some cases, $150,000).
Other schools that use the CSS PROFILE (Hamilton College and Bard
College come to mind) exclude home equity entirely. Still others view home
equity on a case-by-case basis. For example, if you bought your home recently
with a large down payment, some colleges might arrive at a higher family
contribution than if you bought your home 25 years ago at a modest price but
have since experienced significant increases in value that cannot be readily
accessed.
So having significant equity in the home can be the “wild card” in how
schools using the IM calculate your EFC. Your IM EFC may be less than the
federal methodology or it could be significantly more, depending on a school’s
policy. In the case studies that follow, we provide the IM EFC under two
common ways that equity in one’s primary residence is treated: a) with the full
equity considered and b) with the home equity capped at two times income.
Another difference between the institutional and federal methodology is that
the equity in all businesses and farms is assessed in the IM, while any “family
business” or “family farm” are excluded under the Federal methodology.
For the case studies that follow, the EFCs is first calculated when only one
child is in college as a freshman. The changes to the EFCs when a second child
is in college are also provided.

Case One
Typical family of four; a two-parent household living in Los Angeles, California,
daughter starting freshman year, with a younger sibling age 15. The older parent
is 55 years old. Both parents work. Their adjusted combined gross income is
$175,000. The father’s income from work is $75,000; the mother’s $105,000.
U.S. income tax paid in the base year: $22,850. The parents contribute $9,000 to
a 401(k) plan plus $4,000 contributed pre-tax to medical spending accounts.
There is no other untaxed income, and the family shows no losses on their tax
return. They own a home valued at $600,000 with a mortgage of $150,000, so
equity is $450,000. Excluding retirement accounts, the family has assets of
$60,000 in cash, savings, checking and other investments. The family’s medical
expenses are $9,000 for the year. The student earned $8,000 in the base income
year and has no other income. She pays $170 in U.S. income taxes, and has
$1500 in a savings account.
Results for Case One
EFC Federal methodology:
$43,448 from parents (PC) + $384 from student (SC) =
$43,832 FM EFC
EFC Institutional methodology with full home equity considered:
$55,685 from parents + $3,749 from the student = $59,434 IM
EFC
EFC Institutional methodology with home equity capped at two
times income:
$51,985 from parents + $3,749 from the student = $55,734 IM
EFC
EFC for an upperclassman with another sibling in college with full
home equity considered:
PC FM: $22,466; PC IM: $34,933. (Same SC as above for FM
and IM)
PC IM with home equity capped at two times income: $32,713 (2 in
college)

Case Two
Father, aged 48, is a single parent; mother is deceased. His son is starting
freshman year. There is another sibling, age 16, one year behind. They currently
live in Baltimore, MD. The father’s income from work is $90,000. His AGI is
$87,000. U.S. income taxes paid this year is $8,200. He contributes $4000 to a
401(k) and $2,000 pre-tax to a medical spending account. The father pays
$3,750 for the family’s medical expenses for the year. He receives $8400 per
year in social security benefits per child because of the mother’s death. There is
no other untaxed income. Father has home equity of $260,000 ($350,000 value
less $90,000 debt) and $25,000 in financial assets other than his retirement
accounts. His son has no income, but has $500 in a savings account.
Results for Case Two
EFC Federal methodology:
$14,170 from parent (PC)+ $100 from student (SC) = $14,270
FM EFC
EFC Institutional methodology with full home equity considered:
$22,044 from parent + $2,175 from the student = $24,219 IM
EFC
EFC Institutional methodology with home equity capped at two
times income:
$19,184 from parents + $2,175 from the student = $21,359 IM
EFC
EFC for an upperclassman with another sibling in college with full
home equity considered:
PC FM: $7,732; PC IM: $14,027 (FM SC: $100; IM SC:
$2,875)
PC IM for an upperclassman with another sibling in college with
home equity capped at two times income: $12,311
Case Three
Two parent household in Brooklyn, NY. Daughter is starting freshman year, has
two siblings age 14 and 10. Father is self-employed and his income from work is

$130,000. Mother works part-time for someone else and earns $10,000 in salary.
Mother is 49 years old, father is 46. Their AGI is $106,400. Father contributes
$6,000 to a traditional deductible IRA, with no other retirement contributions
made by the family. Parents’ U.S. taxes paid figure is $6,200. Home equity is
$700,000 ($900,000 value less $200,000 debt). They also own a second piece of
real estate with $200,000 in equity ($275,000 value less $75,000 debt) that
generates a property rental loss of $5,000 in the base income year. They also
claim a $3000 capital loss on their tax return. The parents have $10,000 in cash
and investment equity; father has $150,000 equity in his Schedule C business
(sole proprietorship). Family has medical expenses of $10,500 (not including the
self-employed health insurance deduction). The student earned $4,000 and had
no other income. Therefore, there are no U.S. income taxes paid. Student’s assets
consist of $1,000 in a non-interest bearing checking account.
Results for Case Three
EFC Federal methodology:
$27,806 from parents (PC)+ $200 from student (SC) =
$28,006 FM EFC
EFC Institutional methodology with full home equity considered:
$55,455 from parents + $2,300 from the student = $57,755 IM
EFC
EFC Institutional methodology with home equity capped at two
times income:
$32,495 from parents + $2,300 from the student = $34,795 IM
EFC
EFC for an upperclassman with another sibling in college with full
home equity considered:
PC FM: $13,695; PC IM: $34,047 (FM SC: $200; IM SC:
$3,000)
PC IM for an upperclassman with another sibling in college with
home equity capped at two times income: $20,271

KEY THINGS TO KNOW ABOUT THE IRS
DATA RETRIEVAL TOOL AND THE IRS
TRANSCRIPT VERIFICATION
REQUIREMENT
If you’ve already filed a 2016 personal income tax return with the IRS (i.e. IRS
form 1040, 1040A or 1040EZ), the online 2018-2019 FAFSA form, known as
FAFSA On The Web (FOTW), may allow you to transfer some of your financial
information directly from an IRS database using an option called the IRS Data
Retrieval Tool (DRT).
While this tool has been billed as a way to simplify the FAFSA, some in the
aid community believe its real purpose is to more accurately verify FAFSA
information and prevent fraud. The DRT can be used when you complete the
original FOTW or when you’re revising your FAFSA data – known as FAFSA
Corrections - after your tax return has been filed. Since the DRT can be used
after filing an original FAFSA, you should NEVER miss a FAFSA or other aid
deadline if your taxes aren’t done or you are unable to use the DRT. Be aware
that it will take a number of weeks - at least three if the return was filed
electronically and up to 11 if the return was mailed - before the DRT can be
used.
Determining if You Can Use the IRS Retrieval
Tool
When using the interactive FOTW, the skip-logic built into the form may
automatically disqualify you from using the DRT—for example if your marital
status recently changed. Or (even more obviously), if your taxes aren’t yet filed
or you’re not even required to file a return. This is no cause for alarm. Later in
this section, we’ll explain what to do if you’re ineligible or unable to use the
DRT.
But even when the FOTW tells you that you may be able to use the DRT,
you’ll still have a few additional hoops to jump through. Once you click

“Already Completed” for FOTW questions 32 or 80, then several “yes or no”
questions may appear on your screen to further determine if the DRT can be
used. A “Yes” response to any of these questions will disqualify you from using
the tool at that time. (If not enough time has elapsed after filing the return, you
can of course try again at a later date.)
But even if you answer “no” to all these questions and can use the DRT, there
is one specific scenario when you should be extremely careful, if using the DRT.
Namely, if you had a qualified rollover of funds from one retirement account
into another (see this page and this page). In this case, using the tool could
significantly reduce your aid eligibility as income NOT REQUIRED to be
reported would transfer onto the FOTW. So if you have a qualified rollover, you
will want to reduce the amount transferred by the DRT by the amount of any
such rollovers. (See this page)
If You Decide to Use the IRS Retrieval Tool
If you’ve gotten this far and decided it is in your best interest to use the DRT, the
first step is to get directed to an IRS database by using your DOE FSA ID (see
this page) and then inputting your address and other information listed on your
most recent tax return.
After all that, you’ll be given information on how to transfer some of your tax
return data that appears on a screen onto the FOTW. Unfortunately, it is at this
stage that many of our clients have reported they’ve had problems. So don’t be
surprised if the DRT doesn’t work at first asking.
If you’re having trouble with the DRT, here are some troubleshooting tips:
1) If you see an error message that there is no record of your tax return, it may
mean not enough time has yet elapsed. In this case, first check to be sure the
return was actually filed. This is particularly applicable if you used a
professional preparer. Also, IRS processing can also be delayed if you owed
taxes to the IRS when you filed or were a victim of identity theft.
2) Check that the pre-populated data on the screen is correct. For example, if
you have an extremely long surname, the maximum number of characters
listed for FAFSA 62 or 66 (which pre-populate on the DRT screen) are less
than the number you can use on that screen – so add the additional characters.
If there’s any mismatch with IRS data, you may not be allowed to proceed.
3) While you will told to use the address as it appears on the return, this may not

work—since the retrieval tool uses the address in the IRS’ database. “First
Avenue” could easily be entered by an IRS clerk as “1st Ave”. There can also
to be problems if you recently switched accountants or started using new tax
software and changed the way you list your address.
4) If you live in an apartment, there is a specific question on the DRT about an
apartment number on your return. But if the apartment number appears as
part of your street address and not in a separate apt. # response area, entering
it in the apt # response area on the DRT – instead of as a part of your street
address - will likely cause problems.
5) You may think you know the city in which you dwell, but alternate names
used on your return can cause a mismatch with your IRS information. Also if
the U.S. Post Office (USPS) recently changed your zip code without your
moving, try the new zip code even if the old code is still on your return. (For
help with the proper city and zip code, the zip code tool at www.usps.com
will tell you how the feds know your city and zip code.)
6) Every character of your data must agree exactly with the IRS database.
Exceptions: the symbol # and any dash in your address cannot be used.
7) If you filed a joint return with your spouse, are required to report both
individual’s information from the return on the FAFSA and are having trouble
with the DRT: try using the other individual’s FSA ID to access the tool.
Unfortunately with most of issues above, the DRT won’t tell you which data
element you entered is the problem. So you may need to keep trying multiple
combinations of data.
And even if you do get the retrieval tool to work, it will not answer all the
income questions on the FOTW. So you’ll need to go back and answer those
FOTW income questions that do not pre-populate. Be especially careful with
FAFSA questions 44, 45, 93, and 94, since not all sub-parts of these questions
pre-populate. Be aware that the “Income earned from work” amount that may
appear on a screen prior to your transferring data onto the FOTW often is not
correct. Refer to Part Three of this book as well the FOTW instructions for
guidance when answering these questions on the FAFSA.
If You Are Unable to Use the Tool…
…DON’T PANIC. You’ll just have to use plan B. Here’s what to do:
Go back to the FAFSA form, answering the questions based on your tax return

and our line-by-line comments in Part Three, as well as information that appears
on the screen. Most likely the instructions for the FOTW will tell you which
specific IRS line number from your tax return correlates with a particular
FAFSA question.
Interplay between the DRT and Verification
If your aid application is selected for Verification (see this page), then federal
regulations now require all tax filers whose information is reported on the
FAFSA to provide the financial aid office with an official IRS Return Transcript
- a document generated by the IRS which summarizes your federal tax return
information. (Sending the aid office photocopies of your tax returns will no
longer be acceptable for Verification as it was years ago.) Federal regulations
further stipulate that the IRS Transcript requirement can be fulfilled by using the
DRT. So for tax filers, the use of the DRT when you complete the original
FOTW or submit a FAFSA Correction will be much simpler and more efficient
than requesting an IRS transcript. Be aware, however, that some financial aid
offices may still require an official IRS transcript even if the DRT was used.
If you are not able to– or choose not to – use the DRT, you can obtain an IRS
Transcript by requesting one online at www.irs.gov or calling the IRS at 800
908-9946. Be sure you request the “return” transcript for the appropriate tax year
– and not your IRS “account” transcript. It will take a number of days before you
receive the transcript in the mail. If you had a rollover of retirement assets, be
sure to write the word “Rollover” next to the applicable line on the transcript and
provide the FAO(s) with supporting documentation regarding the amount rolled
over.
As with the DRT, you’ll need to wait the same number of weeks after filing
your return before you can request a transcript. An even longer time period will
apply if an amended return was filed.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
KALMAN A. CHANY is the founder and president of Campus Consultants
Inc., (www.CampusConsultants.com) a New York City–based firm that guides
parents and students through the financial aid process. In addition to counseling
thousands of families on the aid process, he has conducted workshops for
corporations, schools, and other organizations. He also trains financial
professionals regarding financial aid consulting. Kal is a frequent guest on
television and radio shows across the country.
GEOFF MARTZ is a writer living in New York City.

What’s next on
your reading list?
Discover your next
great read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.
Sign up now.

