 
 
 
 
 
 
PAYPAL 
LIMITED
NEVER 
AGAIN! 
SECRETS
UNVEILED
 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

LEGAL DISCLAIMER 
 
This e-book is provided as-is with no representations or 
warranties, either express or implied, including, but not limited 
to, implied warranties of merchantability, fitness for a particular 
purpose 
and 
noninfringement. 
You 
assume 
complete 
responsibility and risk for use of any of the information made 
available in this book and any and all related or advertised 
services. 
Some juristictions do not allow the exclusions of implied 
warranties, so the above exlusion may not apply to you. 
The author of this book, its agents, representatives and 
employees are neither responsible nor liable for any direct, 
indirect, incidental, consequential, special, exemplary, punitive, 
or other damages arising out of or relating in any way to this 
book and/or its content or information contained within it. 
By using the information made available in this book you agree to 
take full responsibility of your actions. You also agree to use the 
forementioned information according to the laws and regulations 
of your juristiction. 
This book, including any part of its content, must not be 
produced, reproduced, copied or passed on without the prior 
written consent of the author. The book ships with absolutely no 
Private Label Rights or Master Reless Rights and is licensed for 
personal use by the person whose name appears on the receipt. 
 
 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

INTRODUCTION 
 
Hello there! 
I’m very glad you have decided to purchase this book. 
If you’ve been active in the Internet Marketing field for a while 
then chances are that at some point one of your PayPal accounts 
has been limited, your funds have been frozen and you’ve had to 
jump through various hoops to get everything return to normal. 
Even if this isn’t the case, I bet that you’ve been worried that it 
may happen. This report will show you the top tactics used to 
avoid PayPal limitation and how to go through the process quickly 
and painlessly in case it still happens. From now on, your money 
is YOUR’s and PayPal won’t touch it! 
Another aspect that I will deal with is chargebacks – if you’ve sold 
your products and services and accepted payments via PayPal 
then I bet you know what I’m talking about. Chargebacks and 
disputes are a major issue – not only does it cost you money, but 
a fact that many people don’t know is that too many disputes is 
actually one of the easiest ways to get the PayPal account limited! 
In the second half of the book, I will teach you some neat tricks 
about how to avoid chargebacks, keep your money and never 
have to fight with PayPal. 
So let’s get down to business, shall we? :-) 
 
 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

PART 1. WHAT IS ACCOUNT LIMITATION? 
 
Even thouguh you’re probably already familiar with the topic 
(otherwise you wouldn’t have bought the report), I’ll still cover it 
quickly. 
So what does „getting your PayPal account limited“ exactly 
mean? It’s actually pretty simple. If your account gets limited 
then you are unable to withdraw or send any money until the 
limitation is removed. So simply put – you can still receive funds 
but you can’t cash them out or otherwise spend them, meaning 
that all the money in your account is completely useless. Until 
you meet the requirements that PayPal has set you, that is. 
Those requirements vary but usually include the following: 
• Copy of your Identification Document (Passport or ID) 
• An address proof (Utility bill) 
• Proof of shipping documents (if dealing with goods) 
• (Sometimes) Authorized Credit Card Statement 
• (Sometimes) A Bank Account Statement 
In reality, the list goes on and on and the exact requirements 
depend largely on the reason why your account was limited. But 
in this report, we will concentrate on the most common limitation 
reasons and learn how to avoid them / how to deal with them. 
 
 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

PART 2. HOW TO AVOID GETTING LIMITED? 
In order to learn to avoid PayPal limitations, you need to first 
understand what causes it. The list of things that can cause a 
PayPal account to get limited is an extremely long one, but a 
simple rule of thumb applies: 
Any out-of-ordinary or suspicious account activity may get 
your account limited. 
It’s important to understand this concept and keep it in mind at 
all times. Your job here is to make everything you do look as legit 
and ordinary as possible, and if you do just that then you’re on 
the safe site. The good news here is that almost everything 
PayPal does is automated – and it’s far easier to trick a computer 
than it is to trick a human being :-) 
But before we dive into specific techniques and things to do, let’s 
see a few examples of reasons and account can get limited: 
• Suspicious change in activity – for example, having sold only 
$7 products before, you suddenly make a sale for $600. 
• Quick withdrawal to zero – for instance, you make 20 sales 
worth $30 each during one day and decide to withdraw the 
whole $600 immediately, on the same day. 
• Being linked to a suspicious account or using the same IP 
address / computer to log in to two or more different 
accounts. 
Those are simply the most common reasons – as I said before, 
the reasons vary and you can get limited for almost anything 
that’s even a little bit out of the ordinary. 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

But enough of the fluff – let’s see what YOU can do to avoid this 
happening! 
Precaution #1 – Never Use Untrusted Virtual Credit Cards 
This is the first precaution for a reason. If you have used a shady 
VCC (virtual credit card) to verify your PayPal account then 
chances are that your account will get limited sooner or later – 
i.e. as soon as PayPal finds out that the credit card is not real. 
Therefore, I suggest you to NEVER use virtual credit cards to 
verify your accounts – instead, you can use prepaid credit cards 
that can be retreived from many shops (if you’re in US) and even 
ordered online from reputable sites such as EntroPay and EcoCard 
(for non-US residents). 
Alternatively, you are always free to use proxies to open as many 
accounts as you need and simply throw them away as soon as 
the withdrawal limits are reached. 
 
Precaution #2 – Keep Your PayPal Accounts Separate 
This is another VERY important precaution because failing to do 
this properly may result in ALL of your PayPal accounts (given 
that you have more than one) getting limited and the funds 
frozen. 
I will go quite a bit into detail when talking about this step, both 
because of its importance and because its fair complexity. 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

There are several things to keep in mind when trying to make 
sure that no two accounts get linked to each other – the main 
ones being: 
IP Address – You need to be absolutely certain to NEVER log in 
to two PayPal accounts from the same IP address or your 
accounts will get linked almost instantly. In order to achieve this, 
I suggest you to either use private proxies (I say private proxies 
because using open, free proxies will get your accoutn limited as 
soon as PayPal discovers that your IP belongs to a proxy!) or 
alternatively you can simply go into bars/cafes offering free WiFi 
and use one cafe for each of your PayPal accounts. 
Cookies – But IP address isn’t all you need to be worried about. 
Every time you log in to your PayPal account, it stores 
information about your account on your computer’s hard drive – 
and surprise, surprise, it can read this information next time you 
log in! 
Because of this, you need to make sure to clear the cookies (both 
regular and Flash cookies) every single time before logging in to 
your PayPal account. Removing regular cookies is rather simple 
and chances are that you know how to do it (if you don’t, then 
simply Google for it and you will come across browser-specific 
details in a couple of seconds) but PayPal also uses what’s called 
Flash Cookies, which is a rather new concept. 
In order to get rid of Flash Cookies, I suggest you to use Mozilla 
Firefox together with a plugin called BetterPrivacy (you can get it 
from https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/6623). This 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

way, you can get rid of absolutely all the information websites 
store about you on your hard drive and worry no more. 
Account Details – Even though this should be rather obvious, 
there are still people out there who register more than one PayPal 
account using the same details. Avoid making this mistake at any 
cost and ALWAYS make sure that none of the following would 
match any information you may have attached to one of your 
previous accounts: 
• Your name (NB! Using John M. Smith or Smith John when 
your other account is registered for John Michael Smith does 
NOT help you) 
• Your adderess (For best results, use an ENTIRELY different 
address for each account – I’m talking different street, 
different zip code and even different city!) 
• Your phone number – NEVER attach the same phone 
number to two accounts. You can get unique phone 
numbers for free (Google for „free VOIP number“ so this 
shouldn’t be an issue. 
• ANY banking info – Do not use the same credit card or bank 
account details on more than one PayPal accounts. This is a 
very quick way to get your accoutns linked and limited. 
 
 
 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

Precaution #3 – DO NOT Lie About Your Country! 
Quite frankly, it amazes me how many people sign up to PayPal 
and lie about their country for one reason or another. DO NOT 
DO IT! Even though there may be some benefits having a US 
PayPal account while not based there, this is a very quick way of 
getting limited! PayPal WILL discover you, unless you do a perfect 
job hiding your tracks, and this includes: 
• ONLY using an IP address that belongs to the country you 
say you are from; 
• Providing realistic address and telephone number details; 
• Using a credit card that is issued in this particular country; 
And even then it’s risky so unless you have a very good reason, 
do not do it! 
 
Precaution #4 – Make Your Account Look Legit 
This is one of the most difficult precautions, simply because 
there’s only so much you can do on your own. 
However, there are a few things that you can (and should) do to 
make your PayPal accounts look legit. 
The most important thing to keep in mind is to use all of your 
PayPal accounts for both selling AND buying. Most PayPal users 
make purchases using their account and you should do the same! 
Chances are that you make PayPal purchases anyway – but don’t 
do it only from your main account! Share those purchases 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

between your accounts and you will come off looking far more 
legit than you would otherwise! 
The second suggestion is rather easy – NEVER withdraw your 
account to zero. I have done business with PayPal a lot and and 
have noticed that PayPal is very eager to limit accounts that tend 
to make full withdrawals – and it makes complete sense: 
withdrawing all the funds you have on your account means that 
there will be nothing left for PayPal to cover any possible 
disputes! Simply leave a small amount on your PayPal account at 
all times and you should be fine. Note though that the definition 
of „small“ depends largely on the average cost of what you’re 
selling: 
If the product you’re selling costs $7 a piece then leaving $25 to 
your account will probably serve you fine. However, if you’re 
selling $500 products then the $25 won’t go far. 
 
Precaution #5 – Get the Money Out Wisely 
This is the final (and the most important) precaution this report 
gives you – it’s a method that is not at all widely known (and I 
would certainly appreciate if you wouldn’t share it!) and it has 
served me exceptionally well for over 2 years! 
Simply put – the VERY WORST THING you can do with your 
PayPal accounts is transferring funds from your fake accounts to 
your main (verified) account to withdraw them from there. 
Believe me when I say that this will get your accounts - 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

INCLUDING YOUR VALUABLE MAIN ACCOUNT – limited very 
fast and all your funds will be frozen for good! 
But luckily, I’m going to give you a trick that allows you to get as 
much money out of your phony accounts as you damn well please 
:-) 
And the secret is ... (drum-roll please)........... 
USING FREELANCING SITES! 
That’s right. You’ll be using Freelancer websites (such as 
GetaFreelancer.com, RentaCoder.com, eLance.com and countless 
others) to get the money out. 
The process itself is incredibly simple, and to make it even 
simpler, here’s a Step by Step guide for you: 
 
Step 1 
Create an account at one of the popular freelancing sites and use 
the name and details that you have used on the PayPal account 
that you want to get the money out from. 
*IMPORTANT* Make sure that the freelancing site you choose to 
use has an Escrow service. 
(Escrow service means that the money paid for services will be 
first paid to the account of the site, and only once the service has 
been completed it will be released to the worker.) 
 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

Step 2 
Using this account, post a Job Request (task to be done) asking 
for a service that would usually cost close to the amount of 
money you want to ’clean up’. Make this job offer look legit and 
watch the countless number of freelancers offer you their 
services. 
 
Step 3 
Sign up on the same freelancing site, using a different IP (an 
open proxy or a WiFi hotspot is perfectly fine year) and you real 
name and PayPal information. 
 
Step 4 
Use the newly created account and make a bid on your own 
job offer – as if you would want to do the job. 
 
Step 5 
A few days later, return to the freelancing site with the first 
account you created, accept the bid that your second account 
made and pay the money to the freelancing site. 
 
 
 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

Step 6 
After a couple of more days, log in again, claim that the work has 
been done (notifying the freelancing site that the payment can be 
released) and enjoy nice clean funds on your main PayPal 
account, ready to be withdrawn! 
 
Conclusion 
This method has been working wonders for both me and a few of 
my close friends I have decided to share it with. The reason 
behind it is simple – PayPal has ABSOLUTELY NO WAY of 
finding out on which account did the money you sent ended up! 
This is especially true if the sum is, for example, $200 and the 
freelancing site is popular as there are tens if not thousands of 
similar transfers done every single day. 
 
 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

PART 3. WHAT TO DO IF IT STILL HAPPENS? 
 
Ok, let’s move on to how to act when it still happens and you’ll 
wake up one morning finding (one of your) account(s) limited. 
First of all – most of the limitations are rather easy to handle. 
Once you log in to your limited account and check the „Resolution 
Centre“ section, you will see certain „Tasks“ needed to be done in 
order to lift the limitation. 
While the exact task vary, in most cases PayPal simply requires 
you to prove your identity (send them a copy of your ID or 
passport) and address (send them a scanned version of a utility 
bill). 
If your account was opened using legit details then there’s 
absolutely nothing to worry about. Simply send PayPal what they 
want and the limitation will be lifted in a matter of days – (yeah, 
they’re pretty quick when it comes to dealing with limited 
accoutns!). However, if you’ve used fake details to register your 
account then you have quite a bit more to worry about. Basically, 
you have two options: 
Option 1 – (not recommended) – Fake the documents 
First of all I need to say that this option is to be used at your own 
risk. Faking identification documents is illegal in most countries 
and therefore I suggest you to familiarize yourself with your local 
laws and regulations before doing it. 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

However, if you do choose to go with this then it’s actually pretty 
simple. 
There are A LOT of great graphic designers over at DigitalPoint, 
and posting a simple thread in the „Buy Sell Trade > Design“ 
section (you can write something general, such as „Designer 
needed to modify a few images“ will result in quite a few 
messages in your PM box – all from people who are willing to do 
the trick for as little as $10. 
Then, you can simply take your own ID (or Google for somebody 
else’s one) and utility bill, pass it over to the designer, specifying 
the details you have attached to your PayPal account and asking 
him to change the name/birth date/address for you. 
There’s A LOT of designers who are capable of doing it flawlessly! 
NB! Note that even though this is illegal (in many juristictions, 
not all), there is almost NO WAY PayPal can find out that the 
documents you’ve sent them aren’t real (unless they are 
OBVIOUSLY fake in which case you should not send them to 
PayPal in the first place) – simply because PayPal is not a 
financial institution, meaning that they have no authority what so 
ever over checking whether identification documents are legit or 
not. The only thing they can do if they think that you’ve provided 
them with fake documents is file a report with a police station, 
but a company such as PayPal would NEVER waste their time on 
anything like this, unless there are tens of thousands of dollars 
locked in your account. 
 
 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

Option 2 – Wait for 180 days 
That’s right – if you’re willing to wait for half a year to get your 
funds released then you don’t have to do anything at all. In 
order to complty with the laws & regulations, PayPal has 
implemented a system where they hold the funds of limited 
accounts for 180 days, after which they release the money either 
via cheque or via bank transfer. 
Your best bet is to always go with the bank transfer as you may 
have major problems cashing in a cheque that isn’t on your own 
name. 
 
 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

PART 4. CHARGEBACKS/DISPUTES AND AVOIDING THEM 
 
In the final chapter of this report, I’m going to tell you a little bit about 
chargebacks and disputes. 
If you’ve been in the IM business for long enough, and especially if 
you’re dealing with info-product sales (e-books, videos), you have 
probably encountered A LOT of people buying your product and then 
either threatening to file a dispute or actually filing it – even though 
you have delivered them the product. 
Just so you know - in case someone files a dispute against you, the 
funds will automatically be frozen until the dispute is resolved – 
meaning that the process is exhausting even if you end up winning the 
dispute! But luckily, there’s quite a few things to do in order to avoid 
disputes being filed: 
1. Always Try to Avoid Disputes 
Unless you have a flawless reputation, it is always a good idea to try 
and resolve all problems before the buyer files a dispute. Always be 
nice with your customers, answer their e-mails and provide them with 
the assistance they need – this will save you from a lot of disputes 
already. 
Apart from that, you will most definitely come across buyers who 
simply shoot you with a „refund or dispute“ type of an ultimatum. 
Once again, if you have a flawless reputation (which I do so don't even 
think about trying to threaten me that you’ll file a dispute against the 
$7 you paid for this report ;) then you can simply tell them to „Go 
ahead!“ and chances are that the dispute will be resolved to your 
favour. 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

If you’re using a fake account or already have a load of dispute in your 
accounts, then your best option is to swallow it and refund the money 
voluntarily. It sucks, I know, but in the long run it saves you from a lot 
of hassle (remember when I said earlier that having too many disputes 
– even if you’ve won them all – is one way to get your account 
limited?) 
2. Escalate the Disputes by Yourself 
According to PayPal’s procedure, each and every dispute is kept in the 
„Open“ status for either 20 days, until it has been resolved or until 
either of the parties has chosen to escalate the dispute to PayPal so 
that they would take a look at it and decide who will get the money. 
Keep in mind that your money will be blocked for the whole 20 days 
plus any time PayPal will take to go over the dispute (usually a month 
or more!). For this reason, it is almost always a good idea to go ahead 
and escalate the dispute to PayPal by yourself. The only exception 
to this is if you seriously think that the dispute can be resolved by 
talking to the buyer, but 98% of the times this isn’t the case. 
There are two things that can happen if you choose to escalate the 
dispute: 
• It gets redirected to PayPal’s personnel who will review the case 
and make their decision. It doesn’t matter if the decision is in 
your favour or not – you have still won 20 days by escalating it! 
• More importantly – many disputes that are filed for digital items 
get resolved automatically – and the fun part is that they get 
resolved in the seller’s (your) favour! ;-) 
 
 
 
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

3. NEVER Sell Anything Using Manual Payments 
This is a VERY important pointer - I can’t stress it enough. Every time 
you sell something, go ahead and generate a „Buy Now“ button. It’s 
free and it’s easy! Just go to the „Merchant“ section of PayPal and you 
will get detailed instructions on how to do it! 
The reason for this is simple – with a „Buy Now“ button you get to 
specify that the payments you are about to receive are for SERVICES. 
Otherwise, you can (and will!) come accross people who send you the 
money as if it was for „goods“, attach their shipping address and later 
on file a dispute claiming that you never shipped the goods. If this 
happens, you can consider yourself to have automatically LOST 
the dispute and your money – it’s as simple as that! 
4. Avoid Scammers and Account Thieves! 
This is the fourth and the last pointer I give you. If you’re selling 
information products that you deliver via e-mail then ALWAYS make 
sure that you send the product ONLY to the e-mail address that you 
received the payment from! 
There’s A LOT of people out there who have access to stolen PayPal 
accounts and they use this access to buy infoproducts – obviously, as 
soon as the true accoutn holder discovers it, they will dispute the 
payment and you can say bye-bye to your money! 
That’s it. 
Hopefully you’ll find the information useful and won’t face a limitation 
ever again! 
 
George
Never Pay for things like this, all common sense  -- My365Host.com :: 12/7

