PLUS All This Inside: Just Flight’s de Havilland Canada DHC-3 Otter, Orbx 
Bilbao Airport, Aerobask Velocity V-Twin, Pilot2ATC, FSUIPC, 787 Immersion. 
Tutorials: A Beginner’s Guide to Airliner Simulation, Back to Basics, Challenging 
Airports, Virtual Airlines and much more…
January/February 2018 
Number:113 UK £4.99  
FSX/P3D vs 
X-PLANE
www.pcpilot.net
QualityWings’ 
Ultimate 787
Just Flight’s PA-28R Arrow 
III variants compared
Deadstick
REMEX Software’s
Downloads
Videos and 
Freeware
See Page 8
Quality 
Control
Exclusive interviews 
with three new 
developers
Cleared for
Take-Off!
Exclusive i
ve i
with three
ree
Exclusive
Flight Simulation - Your complete guide
EXCLUSIVE  Interviews with three new developers

/FLIGHTSIMWORLD
WWW.FLIGHTSIMWORLD.COM
@FLTSIMWORLD
…yes! It’s the Curtiss P-40F Warhawk!
The team at BlueSky Flight Simulations have developed this beautiful fighter bomber 
especially for Flight Sim World from the manufacturer’s performance charts along with 
notes from actual P-40F pilots. This means that she handles just like the real thing, so be 
sure to hang on to your hats!
Fitted with a Supercharged Packard Merlin 1650-1, the P-40F was capable of producing 
nearly 1400hp, with a top speed of over 360mph. Also capable of carrying 2000lbs of 
stores, she was effective against air, land, and sea targets making her a vital tool in the 
offensive against Axis forces until the end of World War II.
What are you waiting for, chaps? Tally ho! 
© 2017 Dovetail Games, a trading name of RailSimulator.com Limited (“DTG”). All rights reserved. “Flight Sim World” is a trademark or registered trademark of RailSimulator.com Limited. “Dovetail Games” is a trademark or registered trademark of Dovetail Games Limited. Autodesk® 
Scaleform® software, © 2017 Autodesk, Inc. All rights reserved. Portions of this software utilize trueSKY technology (© 2007-2017 Simul Software Ltd, all rights reserved.) All other copyrights or trademarks are the property of their respective owners. All rights reserved. Developed and 
published by DTG. This product is strictly for entertainment purposes only.
It’s a bird!
It’s a plane...

EDITORIAL
Cleared for Take-oﬀ !
Follow us
facebook.com/pcpilot
Visit us
www.pcpilot.net
PCPilot
Flight Simulation – Your Complete Guide
S
Subscribe to PC Pilot and 
make great savings on cover 
price! See pages 18-19 for 
details.
SUBSCRIBE
AND SAVE!
3
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
eason’s greetings 
and welcome to 
another edition of PC 
Pilot. This issue is 
particularly special because it 
features exclusive interviews with 
three newcomers to the flight 
sim industry: REMEX Software, 
BlueSky Flight Simulations 
and Honeycomb Aeronautical. 
The former two companies are 
focused on software, while the 
third specialises in hardware in 
the form of flight sim controllers. 
After reading through the 
individual interviews, the one 
thing that seems to be common 
to all three companies is the 
desire to bring something new 
and innovative to the industry. 
This is exemplified by the 
following comments - extracted 
from each of the interviews. 
Firstly, Honeycomb Aeronautical: 
“What we represent is a breath 
of fresh air and a company that 
cares about the quality and 
innovation…” Next, REMEX 
Software: “I’ve always felt that 
while we’ve seen incredible 
improvements in aircraft realism 
and fidelity, the core flight sim 
formula has remained unchanged 
since its inception. I’m really 
keen to challenge that and 
would love to redefine people’s 
perceptions of just what a flight 
simulator is.” And finally BlueSky 
Flight Simulations: “When you 
have a passion for what you do, 
it really shows in the module. 
Our ultimate objective is to 
make professional-level aircraft 
that the community will enjoy 
flying forever, as we do.” 
As BlueSky quite rightly stated: 
“When you have a passion for 
what you do, it really shows…” 
And ‘passion’ is something that 
all three companies will definitely 
bring to this exciting hobby.
Happy flight simming!
Derek Davis, Editor
derek@pcpilot.net
ISSN-1468-5132. The combined 
print and digital average sale for 
the period Jan-Dec 2016 was 
10,948 copies bi-monthly.
EDITORIAL
Editor: Derek Davis (derek@pcpilot.net)
Group Editor: Nigel Price
Technical Editor: Richard Benedikz 
Contributors to this issue:
Joe Lavery, Peter Stark, Chris Frishmuth and 
Jessica Bannister-Pearce
Production Editor: Sarah Robinson
Chief Designer: Steve Donovan
Designers: Lee Howson and Tom Bagley
SUBSCRIPTIONS
Tel: +44 (0)1780 480404
Fax: +44 (0)1780 757812 
Email: subs@keypublishing.com
EDITORIAL CONTACT
PC Pilot, Key Publishing Ltd, PO Box 100, 
Stamford, Lincs, PE9 1XQ, UK
Email: mail@pcpilot.net
Website: www.pcpilot.net
BUSINESS AND MANAGEMENT
Commercial Director: Ann Saundry
Group Advertisement Manager: Brodie Baxter
Advertisement Manager: Sarah Jarman
Advertising Production Manager: Debi McGowan
MARKETING
Group Marketing Manager: Martin Steele
Production Manager: Janet Watkins
Marketing Manager: Shaun Binnington
MANAGING DIRECTOR AND PUBLISHER
Adrian Cox
EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN
Richard Cox
SUBMISSIONS
We will gladly accept and review for publication 
any letters, articles, photographs or other 
contributions. We cannot guarantee publication 
nor, regrettably, return items sent to us or 
be responsible for their loss. We will try and 
reply where possible. Any letters are assumed 
suitable for publication unless we are otherwise 
notiﬁ ed. All items submitted for publication 
are subject to our terms and conditions. These 
are regularly updated without prior notice and 
are freely available from Key Publishing Ltd or 
downloadable from www.keypublishing.com.
Distributed by Seymour Distribution Ltd, 2 
Poultry Avenue, London, EC1A 9PP 
Tel: 020 7429 4000
Postmaster: Send address corrections to 
PC Pilot, Key Publishing Ltd, C/O 3390 Rand 
Road, South Plainﬁ eld NJ 07080.
Printed by Warners (Midland) plc, Bourne, Lincs.
Repro by Key Publishing Ltd and AT Graphics 
(Peterborough)
PC Pilot is published bi-monthly by Key 
Publishing Ltd, PO Box 100, Stamford, Lincs, 
PE9 1XQ, UK. Tel: 01780 755131
PC Pilot is distributed in the USA by UKP 
Worldwide, 3390 Rand Road, South Plainﬁ eld, 
NJ 07080.  Periodicals postage paid at South 
Plainﬁ eld, NJ.
The entire contents of PC Pilot is © 2017 and 
no part of it may be reproduced in any form or 
stored on any form of retrieval system without 
the prior permission of the publisher.
Key Publishing Ltd takes considerable care 
to ensure the accuracy of the information 
published in PC Pilot, including the contents of 
all ﬁ les downloaded from our PC Pilot website, 
however, we cannot be held liable for any loss 
or damage resulting either directly or indirectly 
from any error or omission including any loss or 
damage arising out of the use of any including 
the contents of all ﬁ les downloaded from our 
PC Pilot website.  We are pleased to recognise 
all trademark and copyright holders and try to 
where possible. If we have omitted this then 
please let us know and we will correct in the 
next issue. 
Readers in USA can place subscriptions by 
visiting www.pcpilot.net or by calling toll free 
800-428-3003 or fax 757-428-6253 or 
by writing to PC Pilot, 3300 Paciﬁ c Ave, 
Ste 500, Virginia Beach, VA23451-9828.
We are unable to guarantee the bonaﬁ des of 
any of our advertisers.  Readers are strongly 
recommended to take their own precautions 
before parting with any information or item 
of value, including, but not limited to, money, 
manuscripts, photographs or personnel 
information in response to any advertisements 
within this publication.

CONTENTS
Contents
52
Regulars
03 Editorial
06 News
08 Downloads
76 Letters
80 FS Q&A
Reviews
12 QualityWings' Ultimate 787 
Collection
16 FSFX's Immersion Effects
28 Just Flight’s de Havilland 
Canada DHC-3 Otter
32 Orbx Simulations' Bilbao 
(LEBB)
36 Aerobask's Velocity V-Twin
40 Pilot2ATC
Features
20 FSX/Prepar3D and X-Plane 
compared
 
Chris Frishmuth uses Just Flight’s 
multi-platform PA-28R Arrow III to 
answer the question: What is the 
difference between FSX/
Prepar3D and X-Plane?
24 REMEX Software’s Deadstick
 
We have an interview with REMEX 
Software, a newcomer to the flight 
sim industry, in which we find out 
about the company and its first 
standalone simulation - ‘Deadstick’.
48 Challenging Airports: 
Narsarsuaq, Greenland (BGBW)
 
Whether you are flying scheduled airline 
routes to Narsarsuaq or utilising it as a 
4
/ PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
CONTENTS
mid-trip fuel stop on a longer journey, 
operating to the airport requires careful 
consideration and preparation due to 
the extremes of distance, weather and 
geography that the area features.
52 BlueSky Flight Simulations’ 
Curtiss P-40F Warhawk
 
Another newcomer to the flight sim 
industry is BlueSky FS, whose first 
release, the Curtiss P-40F Warhawk, 
has been designed for Dovetail’s FSW. 
In this exclusive interview we discuss 
both the company and the product.
64 Virtual Airlines: 
myAustrian Virtual
 
 This issue, our Virtual Airline of choice 
is something a little different from what 
we’re used to. For a change, Jessica 
Bannister-Pearce looks at a VA set 
up to follow its real life counterpart.
68 FSUIPC
 
Flight Simulator Universal Inter Process 
Communication or FSUIPC is the work 
of flight sim legend Pete Dowson and 
is one of the few absolutely essential 
programs that every FSX/P3D pilot 
needs in their sim. But what does 
it really do? We take a look at the 
basics and a little of its history.
72 Honeycomb Aeronautical 
Interview
 
Honeycomb Aeronautical, a new 
hardware developer in the flight 
sim industry, has announced 
two new products: the Alpha 
Flight Control yoke and the Bravo 
Throttle quadrant. In this exclusive 
interview we find out more about the 
company and its plans for the future.
lot
s
e
o
ve
t the
ture.
72

24
48	 Challenging Airports: Narsarsuaq
Tutorials
44	 Airliner Simulation: 
Part 3 - Preparing at the gate
	
Following on from our previous issue, 
where we had a look at the building 
blocks of a flight plan, Richard 
Benedikz goes through the tasks 
that need to be completed before 
pushing back from the gate.
56	 GA Back to Basics: 
More demanding manoeuvres
	
In this edition of our GA series, 
Peter Stark introduces some more 
demanding manoeuvres to keep 
you working hard at perfecting your 
flying techniques, while continuing to 
develop your theoretical knowledge.
60	 Flight Adventure: 
The world’s busiest routes
	
The world’s top 15 busiest air routes 
are all outside the US, with all of the 
top 10 in the Asia/Pacific region. 
This issue, we fly the top two on the 
list – located in Korea and Japan.
The Next Issue of PC Pilot (Issue 114) will 
be on sale in UK shops on February 15
Next Month
12
5
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
20	 FSX/Prepar3D and X-Plane

6
/ PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
NEWS 
Introducing the MilViz FG-1D Corsair
One of the most iconic aircraft from the Pacific 
theatre of World War Two, the Chance Vought 
Corsair was also arguably one of the best 
performing. Deployed primarily with the US 
Marines, the aircraft achieved a staggering 
2,140 air combat victories against 189 
aerial losses - an overall kill ratio of 11:1.
Created exclusively for Prepar3D (versions 
2, 3 and 4), MilViz’s FG-1D Corsair features 
an intricate flight model, in-depth system 
simulation, high definition textures and a 
highly detailed 3D model. Incidentally, during 
the war, demand for this aircraft increased, 
outstripping Chance-Vought’s supply capacity, 
so rival manufacturers Brewster and Goodyear 
were tasked with meeting the shortfall. The 
designation ‘FG-1D’ identifies the MilViz Corsair 
as a Goodyear-built aircraft. MilViz’s Corsair 
is based on an FG-1D that was produced too 
late for active service in World War Two.
The MilViz package comes with six HD 
liveries, detailed textures and precise 3D 
modelling both inside and out, while the 
cockpit features custom 3D gauges.
In addition, the powerplant is modelled 
in detail including the water injection and 
manually operated two-stage supercharger as 
well as the fuel system, electrics pilot oxygen, 
and undercarriage dive braking - using the 
main wheels in a trailing position. Additional 
systems include comprehensive avionics, gun 
charging and armament (via TacPack). The 
FG-1D is also ready for carrier operations with 
folding wings and a working arrestor hook.
The flight dynamics have been modelled 
to closely perform like the real aircraft, so 
proper technique is required to recover 
from stalls, as well as for performing 
safe landings and take-offs.
The MilViz Aircraft Management System 
(MVAMS) is included with this release, which 
allows for easy set-up of the aircraft, including 
configuring the default start-up state, radio 
frequencies, as well as enabling the setup 
of a joystick axis for the supercharger.
The package is TacPack-compatible, enabling 
you to operate the Mark 8 illuminated gunsight, 
fire guns, drop bombs or launch rockets 
from your now-armed-to-the-teeth Corsair. 
However, Vertical Reality Simulations’ TacPack 
software is not included with the product, but 
is not required for the operation of any other 
portion of the aircraft. For more information, 
visit: www.milviz.com/flight/products/FG1D/
DCS: AV-8B Night Attack V/STOL
RAZBAM has announced that its DCS: 
AV-8B Night Attack V/STOL is now available 
as an open beta. The package is based 
on the AV-8B N/A Bu No’s 163853 and 
up - the latest variant of the AV-8B. 
The AV-8B project was introduced to 
address the operational inadequacies of the 
AV-8A first generation Harrier. It made its 
maiden flight in 1981 and entered service 
with the US Marine Corps in January 1985. 
It later evolved into the AV-8B N/A (Night 
Attack) and AV-8B Harrier II Plus. The AV-8B 
N/A variant (originally known as the AV-8D) 
had its first operational development in 1984.
Key highlights of RAZBAM’s AV-8B N/A 
variant include an advanced flight model 
with accurate Vertical Take-Off and Landing 
(VTOL) characteristics, a detailed external 
3D model while the 6-DOF cockpit features 
high-resolution textures, specular and bump 
mapping and mouse-interactive controls.
All systems have been realistically 
modelled including the electrical, fuel, 
hydraulics, lighting, engine and navigation.
Other features: 
•	Air-to-air and air-to-ground GAU-12
	 Equalizer 25mm (0.984 in) five-barrelled 
	 Rotary cannon pod 
•	Under-wing pylon stations holding up to 
	 9,200lb (4,200kg) of payload for a multitude 
	 of both air-to-air and air-to-ground ordnance 
•	Operational manual and pocket guide 
•	Instant action, single and training missions 
•	Detailed representation of the USS 
	 Tarawa (LHA-1), lead ship of her class.
For more information and to view 
the promotional trailer, visit: www.
digitalcombatsimulator.com/en/products/planes

7
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
Follow us 
facebook.com/pcpilot
Visit us
www.pcpilot.net
The producer of IL-2 Sturmovik, Jason 
Williams, has revealed the future roadmap 
for the modern IL-2 Sturmovik product 
line. Included in a very detailed statement, 
among other things and of particular note, 
was the announcement of two titles: ‘Battle 
of Bodenplatte’ and ‘Flying Circus’.
Battle of Bodenplatte
Operation Bodenplatte was an attempt 
by the Luftwaffe to cripple Allied air 
forces located in the Low Countries. This 
was a surprise attack on Allied airfields, 
which took place on January 1, 1945. 
Although it was an ‘operation’, according 
to the developer: “For continuity’s sake, 
this package is being called a battle. 
Battle of Bodenplatte will explore the 
air war near the end of 1944 and into 
1945. This late-war setting offers a wide 
variety of classic fighters and fighter-
bombers for you to fly including some of 
the hottest piston-powered aeroplanes 
to ever grace the skies. In addition, 
we’ll introduce our first jet aircraft.”
Planned flyable aircraft and content in 
Battle of Bodenplatte includes: Bf 109G-
14, Bf 109K-4, Fw 190A-8, Me 262, 
P-51D, P-47D, Spitfire Mk.IX, Tempest 
Mk.V, Fw 190D-9 (Collector), P-38L 
(Collector), B-25 (AI), European Low-
Countries Map (Final size TBD) (Parts of 
the Netherlands, Belgium and Germany). 
Plus, many Allied and Axis airfields, 
cities, towns and villages and winter and 
summer textures, as well as new Allied 
and Axis ground units and scenery.
You can pre-order Battle of Bodenplatte 
from the IL-2 Sturmovik store at https://
il2sturmovik.com/store/battle-of-bodenplatte/. 
As always this will give you access to early 
access and a Pre-Order discount. The 
pre-order price is $69.99 (£52 approx). 
Flying Circus – Volume I
As part of the IL-2 Sturmovik roadmap, 
producer Jason Williams also gave details 
about ‘Flying Circus’, which, he said, 'will 
finally give Rise of Flight customers a new 
way forward into the future.' He added, 'The 
eventual goal is to essentially re-build ROF 
inside of the Sturmovik universe and give 
World War One all the latest technology like 
VR, 64-bit, DX11 and improved visuals.' They 
will start by focusing on re-furbishing ten 
of their existing World War One aircraft and 
provide a partial map of France to fly and 
fight over. Subsequent Flying Circus products 
will further expand content and they will be 
working to integrate Flying Circus into the 
Campaign and Career systems over time. 
Volume I is the first step. If Flying Circus 
proves popular, the developers say they will 
eventually start producing new aircraft.
Planned flyable aircraft and content (which 
the publisher states is a tentative list), will 
include: SPAD 13 C.1, Sopwith Dolphin, 
Sopwith Camel, RAF S.E.5a, Bristol 
Fighter, Albatros D.Va, Fokker Dr.1, Fokker 
D.VII, Pfalz D.IIIa and Halberstadt CL.II. 
Additional features will include: a France 
map (100 x 100km approx), several detailed 
airfields, cities, towns and villages, summer 
textures, No man’s land, and Entente 
and Central Powers ground units.
Pre-Orders for Flying Circus will be 
available during the first half of 2018.
IL2 Sturmovik: Cliffs of Dover - Blitz Edition
In December 2016, Team Fusion Simulations 
announced an agreement in principle with 
the owners of the software, 1C, to restart 
development of IL2 Sturmovik: Cliffs of Dover 
and begin a whole new chapter for this Battle 
of Britain flight simulation. This deal allows 
the team to use the source code and thereby 
actually fix issues (and create new features) 
from within the software itself. Since 1C 
Game Studios gave Team Fusion Simulations 
(TFS) access to the Source Code, TFS have 
been fixing bugs, adding new content and 
preparing the software for re-release on 
Steam. According to the developer, a massive 
amount of features have been added including 
three new flyable aircraft (at time of writing 
one is likely to be the Beaufighter), as-well as 
effects, new landscape textures, re-written 
flight models and atmospheric effects.
The culmination of their hard work is IL2 
Sturmovik: Cliffs of Dover - Blitz Edition - the 
new name for Cliffs of Dover with the v4.5 
TFS update included. This will be free for 
those who have bought Cliffs of Dover and 
will be included with any purchase of Cliffs 
of Dover after it is re-released. It is hoped 
this will be available on Steam in December 
2017, but at time of writing the release date 
had not been confirmed. Here’s a link to a 
specially created video showcasing many 
of the new and improved features: www.
youtube.com/watch?v=U8kZSqQ4ql0
Battle of Bodenplatte and Flying Circus

8
/ PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
DOWNLOADS
CD Contents now 
available via download
The PC Pilot downloads are available to our 
print and digital readers via our website.
These are offered as individual files, 
or as one single combined zip file. 
To gain access to the files just go 
to www.pcpilot.net. Click on the 
‘Online Content’ button located on 
the right-hand side of the page. 
Input the following code: 7238-843112
Virtual Airlines
We have some interesting newcomers to 
our VA and flying club listing for you. Take a 
look to see if there is one to suit your taste. 
The experience and fun of being part of a 
virtual club or airline are second to none.
PC Pilot Index
Looking for a review on a particular product, 
feature or tutorial? Then look no further. 
Our regularly updated PC Pilot Index 
includes references (with accompanying 
issue and page numbers) to all our past 
reviews of software and hardware as 
well as features, tutorials and more. 
Now you can find that elusive 
article you’ve been looking for.
Utilities
You’ll need WinZip and Acrobat 
Reader for reading PDF documents 
and opening Zip files.
pcpilot.net/online-content
Specially selected 
demos, videos 
and flight sim 
products
Movies
Downloads
We have seven videos for 
you this issue covering a wide 
variety of subjects.
Our detailed review of this highly anticipated airliner starts on page 12 of this issue. 
This atmospheric trailer highlights many of the simulation’s unique features. 
Our detailed review of this highly anticipated airliner starts on page 12 of this issue
Quality Wings 787 – Official Trailer
FSFX Packages  
787 Immersion - 
Official Trailer
787 Immersion is an effects package that 
takes the Quality Wings 787 to a whole new 
level by providing an ultra-realistic set of 
natural, weather-induced effects for your 
787. This stunning package is shown off to 
good effect (pardon the pun), in this video.  
Just Flight 
PA-28R Arrow III 
for FSX & P3D
When we heard that Just Flight had 
released its PA-28R Arrow III for Prepar3D, 
we thought it would be useful to compare 
this product with the FSX version. Our 
comparison starts on page 20. This video 
showcases the simulation’s key features. 
Deadstick Bush 
Flight Simulator at 
FlightSim2017 - 
RAF Cosford
At Flight Sim 2017, REMEX Software presented 
its first simulation – ‘Deadstick’. This is a video 
of that presentation by owner Chris Cheetham.  

9
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
To help give our readers a better appreciation of the products 
reviewed in this issue, we have compiled the screenshots 
accompanying some of the articles into a series of galleries.
Reviews - 
Screenshot Galleries
Flight Adventure. The 
World’s Busiest Routes
To accompany our Flight Adventure, starting 
on page 60, full details of the scenery used 
are provided and can be found in the Pilot’s 
Notes in this issue’s download section at www.
pcpilot.net, along with flight plans, charts and 
where to get the liveries used in this Adventure. 
We have provided notes on both RNAV routes 
for those flying aircraft equipped with FMCs, 
plus radio navaid routes for those without.
Just Flight’s DHC-3 
Otter for FSX & P3D v1-4
Just Flight’s new Otter, developed by 
Aeroplane Heaven, simulates a classic 
and popular aircraft. This evocative video 
highlights the aircraft’s versatility. 
Aerobask Velocity 
V-Twin for X-Plane 11
Aerobask Velocity V-Twin, a review for which 
starts on page 36, is a stunning-looking aircraft 
and Aerobask has done it full justice as you’ll 
see from this video.
P-40 Warhawk - 
First Look Dev Diary
BlueSky’s new P-40 Warhawk (the Q&A 
starts on page 52) has been designed for 
Dovetail’s FSW and is the host software’s 
first military add-on. In this video, members 
of both companies discuss this add-on and 
its overall importance to the franchise.

/ PC PILOT #113
10 / PC PILOT #112
www.pcpilot.net
DOWNLOADS
Star Performers from the Internet
1: Vinh Airport (VVVH)
Vinh airport is located in Vinh city of Nghệ a 
Province in northern Vietnam. It is a mixed 
military/civil airport and used to be one of 
the two major military airbases in Vietnam 
besides Gia Lam Airbase in Hanoi. It is 
designed by the Vietnamese Aviation Group.
Author: Vietnamese Aviation
Platform: FSX
2: Handley Page - HP45
The HP-45 has been referred to as the 
Concorde of the 1930s, when it took the 
nce again, our featured file 
is from a group of talented 
freeware designers that includes 
Milton Shupe, Scott Thomas, 
Urs Burkhardt and Damian Radice. In 
this instance they’ve turned their creative 
talents to an aircraft that hails back to 
the 1930s, the Spartan 7W Executive. 
It’s an unusual aircraft, with an executive-
class cabin monoplane construction and 
an equally unusual history. The Spartan 
started life as the brainchild of company-
founder William G Skelly of Skelly Oil, who 
O
Featured Download
Spartan 7W Executive
Once again we have a collection of high quality freeware files for 
you to enjoy, these aircraft, scenery and utilities easily compare with 
many commercial products but don’t forget, if you’ve enjoyed a 
particular file please let the author know. It’s their only payback! By 
the same token we’re always interested to hear from you if you’ve 
downloaded or designed a file that you think is worth sharing.
By Joe Lavery
For its time, it was quite an aerodynamic aircraft.
experience of commercial flight to 
a whole new level. It’s another fine 
model for X-Plane from Ron Norvelle.
Author: Ron Norvelle
Platform: X-Plane 11
3: Jim Hamilton-LB    
Owens Airport
This scenery depicts Jim Hamilton-
LB Owens Airport in South 
Carolina. It features custom 
models for all airport buildings, 
dynamic reflections, custom high-
resolution ground textures, HDR 
night lighting and animated vehicles 
designed by Justin Kissling.
Author: Justin Kissling
Platform: X-Plane 11
1
4
2
3

#113 PC PILOT / 11
#112 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
PERMISSION
Although the authors of these files have very kindly given us 
their permission to include them on our website, they still 
remain the property and copyright of the authors. You are 
free to enjoy them for you own use, but they must not in any 
circumstances be distributed, copied, uploaded to any other 
websites or disassembled in any way whatsoever.
short-lived and the aircraft was eventually 
reverted to a stock model and sold to 
aviatrix Arlene Davis, who entered the 
Executive in the 1939 Bendix Air Races.     
The aircraft designed by Milton and his 
team is a conversion and update to an 
original FS2004 version. It is typical of their 
work with superb textures and a highly 
detailed airframe. On board, the cockpit 
is fully modelled, with custom gauges 
and operational elements that work as 
expected. It’s also relatively easy to fly 
with no surprises for experienced pilots.
Authors: Milton Shupe, Scott Thomas, 
Urs Burkhardt, Damian Radice
Platform: FSX, FSX: Steam 
Edition and Prepar3D
wanted a fast, comfortable aircraft befitting 
his status and to impress his colleagues 
with. Just a few years later, the then 
Spartan Aircraft Company was taken over 
by the famously reclusive J Paul Getty.
The original 7X model was fitted with a 
Jacobs L-5 radial engine, whereas the later 
7W version was equipped with a more 
powerful Pratt & Whitney Wasp 400 SB 
radial engine. One of the earlier models 
was modified into a military demonstrator, 
with two .30 calibre machine guns mounted 
on the port side near the firewall, firing 
through the propeller. It also has a gunner’s 
station at the dorsal hatch and under-
wing bomb racks. This experiment was 
Lots of detail and a 
fully-animated cockpit.
There are three liveries included.
Below: The external modelling is superb.
4: Bergamo Orio al Serio  
(LIME)
Bergamo Orio al Serio Airport is an 
international hub located in the municipal 
territory of Orio al Serio, two nautical 
miles southeast of Bergamo in Italy. The 
nicely detailed version depicted here 
was designed by Andrea Nardi.
Author: Andrea Nardi.
Platform: FS2004
5: Percival D1 Gull Four 
Percival 
Designed by Keith Paine, this model of the 
Percival D1 Gull was manufactured by George 
Parnall & Co, Yate, Nr Bristol under contract to 
Edgar Percival. A more detailed history of this 
aircraft can be found at: www.goodall.com.au.
Author: Keith Paine.
Platform: FSX/FS2004
6: Rajkot VARK Airport 
Rajkot is a small regional airport near the 
city of Rajkot in Gujarat province, India. 
The scenery is very accurate according 
to the latest charts and satellite images, 
designed for P3D vy Dmitriy Kozyrev.
Author: Dmitriy Kozyrev
Platform: FSX, FSX: Steam Edition & Prepar3D
7: Biarritz Airport Area 
I used this airport scenery as the 
departure in my review of Orbx Bilbao. I 
was so impressed with the quality that I 
asked the author if we could include it in 
our download section. See what you think 
of Gontzal Sagarna’s excellent handiwork.
Author: Gontzal Sagarna
Platform: Prepar3D
8: Spitfire F.21
The F.21 Spitfire had new, stronger 
blunt-tipped wings and redesigned 
ailerons, allowing the installation of 
four 20mm cannons. It was also the 
first model to feature fully covered 
undercarriage doors. Yet another 
design by the prolific AF Scrub.
Author: A.F Scrub
Platform: FSX/FS2004
5
7
6
8

12 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
REVIEW         AIRCRAFT ADD-ON FOR FSX AND FSX: STEAM EDITION
fter several years in development, 
the team at QualityWings has 
released the highly-anticipated 
Ultimate 787 Collection. Based 
on Boeing’s latest high-tech flagship, the 
project can only be described as ambitious.
In terms of technological innovation, the 
Dreamliner is a ground-breaking aircraft. 
Made from more than 50% composite 
materials to save weight, many of the systems 
that traditionally use bleed air have been 
replaced with an electrical architecture, 
including engine start, wing ice protection 
and the hydraulic system.  Rather than taking 
bleed air from the engines to pressurise 
the cabin, the 787 uses electrically-driven 
compressors. In fact, the only bleed system 
on the aircraft is anti-ice for the engine 
inlets. Boeing claims that using electrical 
architecture has reduced the load on 
engines by up to 35%. To meet the demand 
for increased electrical output, the 787 is 
equipped with six 250kW generators – two 
per engine and two on the APU (Auxiliary 
Power Unit). The generators also function 
as starter motors further reducing weight. In 
fact, the Dreamliner can produce 1.45MW of 
electricity, enough to power 400 homes.
System requirements
FSX with SP2 or Acceleration, FSX: Steam 
Edition. Operating system: Windows 7 or higher, 
recommend 64-bit. CPU 3.0GHz Quad Core. 
RAM: 3GB, recommend 6GB or higher. VRAM: 
1GB, recommend 2GB or higher. Internet access is 
required for installation/reinstallation.
QualityWings
Ultimate 787 
A
Above: It is possible to conﬁ gure the MFDs (Multi-
Function Displays) to display electronic checklists, 
navigation or the systems status etc. All the MFDs are 
available as 2D pop-up panels.

PCPilot
CLASSIC
AWARD
13
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
Walkaround
The Ultimate 787 Collection includes the 787-8 
and the stretched -9, while the longest member 
of the family, the -10 is not yet included in the 
package. According to QualityWings, it will be 
available for free in a future release. The real 
787-10 is scheduled for delivery to Singapore 
Airlines in the first half of 2018, so perhaps we 
will see the QualityWings example around that 
time. Like the real Dreamliner, the QualityWings 
787 comes with two engine options: the 
General Electric (GE) GEnx and the Rolls Royce 
(RR) Trent 1000, with the different engine 
indications for each powerplant being modelled.
Externally, the aircraft is made to an excellent 
standard.  From the raked wingtips to the 
massive powerplants and streamlined fuselage, 
the textures are sharp with oil and exhaust 
stains around the flaps and engines, while 
details such as linkages and brake lines on 
the undercarriage have been recreated.
The exterior features over 100 custom 
animations, from wing flex to 
realistically animated 
control 
surfaces – the outboard spoilers even move 
with the ailerons for improved roll control 
and they droop when extending the flaps as 
in the real example. When firing up the APU, 
a small inlet door on the tail section opens, 
the gear compresses when braking and 
the passenger/cargo doors are animated. 
To operate the doors and hook up ground 
equipment, the 787 comes with a pop-up 
panel that can be opened using the Shift + 2 
key combination. The passenger cabin has 
been modelled, however unlike the rest of the 
aircraft, it is very basic with low resolution 
textures. Differences between the -8 and -9 
have been replicated with subtle differences 
in the undercarriage and flap settings being 
modelled. The -9 has three additional flap 
settings (10, 17 and 18) or nine positions in 
total, while the 787-8 has six.
Lighting and sound
QualityWings has included custom sounds 
for both the Rolls Royce and General 
Electric powerplants and each engine type 
sounds distinctive. On the flight deck, 
clickable switches and system sounds have 
been modelled including aural warnings 
such as TCAS (Traffic Collision Avoidance 
System), fire/overheat test, take-off config 
warning, autopilot disconnects etc.
Cockpit lighting consists of a mix of 
dome lights and instrument backlighting, 
which does a good job at lighting up 
the flight deck. There is also an option 
to use limited night lighting to reduce 
memory. We can even set mood lighting 
in the cabin with a choice of six colours 
to create the perfect ambience.
Collection
The 
Electric 
Jet
Above: Systems on the overhead panel have been 
faithfully recreated.  Right: QualityWings has done an 
excellent job on the exterior modeling.

14 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
Flight deck and systems
Up front, the 787 features a state-of-the-art 
flight deck, incorporating massive 15in MFDs 
(Multi-Functional Displays), two HUDs (Head-
Up Displays), EFB (Electronic Flight Bag) and 
an advanced fly-by-wire control system.
The PFDs are on dedicated displays but 
rather than having the Navigation Display 
(NDs) and EICAS on separate screens 
as on previous Boeings, they have been 
combined on split-screen MFDs. The 
inboard and outboard half of each MFD can 
bring up a view of the Navigation Display, 
systems pages, CDU (Control Display Unit), 
Comms or electronic checklists and each 
MFD can display any combination of the 
above, so the layout is extremely flexible.
The NDs can be viewed as split screen or 
they can be set to full screen mode. Apart 
from displaying route information, they can 
also draw terrain and weather information, 
although you need Active Sky Next or Active 
Sky 2016 for the weather radar to work.
At selected airports, you can zoom in to 
view an airport diagram on the ND so you 
can see taxiways and parking positions, 
which is a great feature to help you find 
your way around unfamiliar airports. More 
than 140 airports have been included and 
additional ones can be created using Airport 
Design Editor from Scruffyduck (www.
scruffyduck.org). Instructions on how to do 
this are included in the Quick Start guide.
Moving to the overhead, we start entering 
more familiar territory as the layout has a 
lot in common with the 777.  All the panels 
are well rendered and the text is easy to 
read. On the centre console, the avionics 
have been upgraded with Tuning Control 
Panels, which combines several functions 
on one unit such as VHF radios, GPWS 
(Ground Proximity Warning System), WXR 
(Weather Radar) and TPDR (Transponder). 
Finally, we have a HUD (Heads-Up Display) 
with normal and decluttered modes. The 
HUD is an excellent aid to handfly more 
accurately, particularly when shooting an 
ILS, however it has a tendency to jump 
around in turbulence, making tracking the 
FPV (Flight Path Vector) somewhat difficult.
QualityWings has included interactive 
electronic checklists for normal operating 
procedures and the systems are simulated, 
enabling you to perform cold and dark 
starts. Systems interaction is good and if 
you disable part of the system, it is reflected 
on the relevant status page. Other system 
tests are also functional such as oxygen 
test, battery charge, etc. The yoke can be 
dropped down to give a clear view of the 
instrument panel and the speed brake lever 
can be lowered to give a better view of 
the CDU, all of which are nice touches.
Overall, the functionality on the flight 
deck is very good, although the text is a 
bit on the small side and can be difficult to 
read at low levels of zoom, but otherwise 
QualityWings has captured the look and 
feel of the Dreamliner flight deck.
FMC
The traditional push-button CDUs have 
Availability
The Ultimate 787 is currently available for FSX 
and FSX: Steam Edition. QualityWings is working 
on a Prepar3D version, but no release date has 
been announced.
REVIEW         AIRCRAFT ADD-ON FOR FSX AND FSX: STEAM EDITION
Left: Performance parameters for take-off and landing can be entered on the EFB (Electronic Flight Book). 
Below: Details around the undercarriage and ﬂ aps mechanism have been recreated.

15
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
PCPilot
CLASSIC
AWARD
been replaced with a trackball and 
button interface, which we operate using 
the computer mouse. For data entry, 
we still have an alphanumeric keypad, 
although we can use direct keyboard 
entry if we want to speed things up. 
The functionality of the CDU is a mixed 
bag. It is detailed enough to simulate 
normal procedures, so we can enter a 
route, SIDs/STARs, performance data and 
so on. It has some advanced features such 
as the ability to enter custom waypoints, 
lat/long coordinates and we don’t have 
to specify exit waypoints for each airway 
when entering the route. Like on the real 
aircraft, the ND can zoom out to 1280nm 
compared with 640nm on other Boeings.
However, there is some functionality that 
has been left out, such as the ability to 
enter forecast data, average winds aloft 
and ISA temperature deviation. Also, while 
suitable alternates are listed, it is not 
possible to program in a diversion via the 
CDU. These are all features that would 
really complete the package in my opinion.
We can also customise various 
parameters such as switching between 
metric and imperial weights, setting IRS 
alignment times and configuring QWPAS 
(Passenger Announcement System) and 
QWCAS (QualityWings Crew Alerting 
System). QWPAS is a new feature that 
plays passenger announcements during 
the flight, while QWCAS consists of calls 
from the pilot flying and pilot monitoring 
during different stages of flight.
Variables such as altitude callouts can 
be customised, and you can pick up 
ATIS information from IVAO and VATSIM 
servers. Other intuitive features include the 
QualityWings JumpAhead feature, which 
enables you to jump ahead to waypoints on 
the flight plan, while ApproachConfig can be 
used to position the aircraft on a selected 
approach – perfect for practising landings.
EFB
A very useful feature is the onboard EFB 
(Electronic Flight Bag), which can be used to 
calculate take-off and landing performance.
Data is copied from the CDU and we can 
set parameters such as runway in use, flap 
settings and weather conditions etc. The 
EFB will then work out the Vspeeds and 
landing distance required and we can then 
copy the updated data back into the CDU.
It is also possible to display SIDs and STARs 
of your departure and arrival airports based 
on the data in the FMC (Flight Management 
Computer). The charts are slightly basic but 
it is possible to add your own. There are a 
lot of blank options on the EFB, which is 
hopefully an indication that we will see more 
functionality added with later updates.
Performance
One area in which this model of the 787 
excelled was performance. Frame rates 
were very good, with average values ranging 
between 50 and 25FPS at dense airports. 
VAS (Virtual Address Space) usage was 
generally low for such a complex aircraft, 
although at some very complex airports 
memory usage sometimes approached the 
90% mark, so staying away from OOM (Out 
of Memory) territory should be achievable 
but you still need to watch what scenery you 
fly over. QualityWings has included a VAS 
monitor on the PFD, so you can see if you 
are straying too close to the VAS envelope.
Installation and documentation
The 787 Ultimate Collection is available 
via Flight1’s store and is activated via the 
Flight1 product wrapper. The installation 
process is fairly straightforward. After 
downloading the setup file, you simply 
run the installer, enter your licence 
information and you are ready to roll.
The package comes with a good selection 
of documentation including a 17-page Quick 
Start guide with an overview of the aircraft. 
A 393-page user manual covers the flight 
deck and systems in detail, along with a 
history of the Dreamliner. Finally, a tutorial 
takes us through a flight from Seattle to 
San Francisco, from a cold and dark state 
to shutting down at the gate at the other 
end. Both the tutorial and manuals are well 
written and will provide you with a solid 
foundation on operating the aircraft.
A QualityWings Dispatcher can be used 
for installing liveries and there is a generous 
selection of real-world liveries available 
from the QualityWings website. Fuel and 
payload is also set from here, although it 
is necessary to set this before loading the 
aircraft in FSX.  In my opinion, it would 
be a more elegant solution to be able to 
set this via the CDU rather than updating 
the CFG file before loading the aircraft.
Conclusion
Overall, QualityWings has done a good 
job with the 787.  Visually, this rendition 
is superb both inside and out. The flight 
dynamics are stable and predictable, which 
you would expect of an aircraft fitted with 
fly-by-wire controls. It is, however, a great 
aircraft to fly manually, although, like the real 
787, it is very ‘slippery’, so slowing it down 
to flaps-down speeds takes some planning.
The systems simulation is good enough 
to follow normal operating procedures 
and there is a nice balance between 
systems depth and usability.
We have already seen two hotfixes and 
there is also a service pack in the works, so 
I can only see this simulation becoming even 
better with time. 
By Richard Benedikz
PC Pilot Verdict
At a glance: QualityWings has done a great 
job in capturing the Boeing 787 Dreamliner. The 
Ultimate 787 Collection strikes a good balance 
between systems simulation and functionality.
Developer & Publisher:  QualityWings
Price: £57.34
Website: www.qualitywingssim.com
Flight Model: Stable and predictable.
Graphics: The Ultimate 787 is made to 
a high standard, both inside and out.
Documentation: Excellent
Systems: Good
Review Score:
90
Retro liveries such as this Star Wars example from ANA 
can be downloaded from the QualityWings website.
The ﬂ ight deck is dominated by ﬁ ve 
massive 15in LCD displays.
PCP

16 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
REVIEW         EFFECTS ADD-ON FOR QUALITYWINGS’ ULTIMATE 787
n aviation, weather can create 
stunning visual effects.  There is 
nothing like the drama of an airliner 
arriving in heavy fog surrounded by 
condensation, with vortices trailing from the 
wingtips, while the landing lights burn a hole 
through the haze.  These effects are caused 
as the air temperature and dewpoint start 
coming closer together. When they meet, the 
air becomes saturated and fog starts forming.
With aircraft this can happen before the 
air reaches saturation.  As air flows over 
the wing, it speeds up, resulting in a drop 
in pressure and temperature. This can be 
sufficient to push the air past its saturation 
point, causing condensation to form on 
top of the wings. Effects such as flap and 
wingtip vortices can occur on other parts of 
the airframe and even the engine intakes can 
fill with condensation. So far, these effects 
have been missing in flight simulation.
Introducing FSFX Packages
This brings us to FSFX Packages, a brand of 
OldProp Solutions. It is a recent arrival on the 
flight simulation scene, making its debut in 
2014 with PrecipitFX, which introduced realistic 
rain and snow effects for FSX and Prepar3D. 
Since then, FSFX has expanded its product 
range with the Immersion series, adding custom 
weather and lighting effects for specific aircraft 
add-ons. So far, it has released Immersion 
packages for the PMDG 737NGX and 777, the 
Majestic Dash 8 Q400, Aerosoft’s A320 Family 
and the FlySimWare Learjet 35A.  The latest 
addition is for the QualityWings 787 Ultimate 
Collection, covered in the previous pages.
787 Immersion
The 787 Immersion package adds weather 
and lighting effects tailored exclusively for 
Effects for the QualityWings Ultimate 787
787 Immersion
Getting started
After purchasing the 787 Immersion pack, you need 
to create an account on the FSFX website and install a 
small control panel called VFXCentral. This is essentially 
a utility for managing several Immersion packages from 
one application. After logging on to VFXCentral, simply 
enter the serial number and the product will be auto-
matically downloaded and added to the aircraft.  Any 
updates are also applied automatically. The manual 
covers the installation in detail and has instructions on 
how to set the optimum weather conditions to see the 
effects. In addition, the package works with PrecipitFX 
and is compatible with all weather add-ons.
I
787 Immersion in full glory.  Despite 
the awesome effects, there was no 
noticeable drop in performance.
Below: You will truly appreciate the 
theatre of a large aircraft touching 
down in thick fog. Right: Volumetric 
lighting brings the 787 to life.

17
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
PCPilot
PLATINUM
AWARD
the QualityWings Ultimate 787. For example, 
condensation can form on top of the wings, 
or when deploying the flaps vortices are 
generated, which extend from the trailing 
edge of the wing. These effects only occur in 
the right atmospheric conditions and vary in 
intensity depending on factors such as angle 
of attack, wind speed and temperature. These 
effects also extend to the powerplants.  
Condensation can form in the engine intakes 
when the pressure drop is sufficient to 
saturate the air and the effect becomes more 
pronounced at high power settings. In wet 
conditions, spooling up the engines can result 
in the formation of waterspouts or vortices 
underneath the massive turbines. On a cold 
day, starting an engine can result in a cloud 
of unburned fuel and condensation emitting 
from the back of the engine. The package 
also features three-dimensional contrails 
adding another dimension to high altitude 
flying and like the other effects, the formation 
depends on atmospheric conditions. This 
usually occurs when the OAT (Outside Air 
Temperature) is below -25⁰C, although 
in some cases, contrails can form at low 
altitude in saturated air. As the temperature 
drops further, the contrails become denser 
– this typically happens around -35⁰C.
When taxiing on a wet surface, water is 
sprayed off the undercarriage, while jet 
wash from the powerful turbofans blast an 
impressive cloud of moisture from the back of 
the aircraft. On landing, smoke will come off 
the main gear when it makes contact with the 
runway, and in the wet, water is blown around 
the engines when reverse thrust is engaged. 
You will even see brake dust coming off 
the undercarriage when it is retracted.
Finally, 3D volumetric external lights are 
modelled. The lights illuminate the aircraft 
and the surrounding area, which is particularly 
impressive in low visibility conditions at 
night. As the visibility drops, the lights 
reflect off the fog and they fade in when 
turned on or off, and they fade in or out as 
they do on the real aircraft. Flying through 
rain or clouds in low visibility really gives 
you a sense of flying in bad weather.
Conclusion
Overall, the quality of the effects created by 
this program is superb. When conditions 
are right for the full effects to come into 
play, the visual theatre is simply stunning.  
Everything from wingtip vortices, 3D contrails 
to condensation and volumetric lighting 
adds another dimension to the 787.
Additionally, I found that the Immersion pack 
had no noticeable impact on frame rates, while 
Virtual Address Space (VAS) usage was also 
very low; FSFX Packages stated a footprint 
as low as 5MB. VFX Central has options 
to disable individual effects to balance off 
performance and level of detail, but I found 
it worked very well straight out of the box.
Most of the effects, apart from the taxi and 
landing lights, are not visible from the cockpit 
and a lot of the more dramatic effects take 
place during take-off and landing when your 
focus is on flying the aircraft, so to get a 
full appreciation of the show, recording the 
flight is probably the way to go. If you enjoy 
the full glory of visual effects, you will not be 
disappointed by the 787 Immersion pack.   
By Richard Benedikz
PC Pilot Verdict
At a glance:  The 787 Immersion package 
introduces stunning visual effects for the 
QualityWings 787 Collection, which bring the 
aircraft to life.
Publisher: Old Prop Solutions
Developer: FSFX Packages
Price: $27 (£21 approx)
Website: www.fsfxpackages.com
PC Pilot Score: 
95
System requirements
QualityWings 787 Ultimate Collection. Windows 
7 or above (32- or 64-bit). FSX, FSX: Steam 
Edition, .NET Framework 4.5.2 or above. FSUIPC 
(free or paid version). Internet connection.
Effects
The 787 Immersion includes the following effects:
volumetric rain and external lights, wing conden-
sation, flaps vortices, contrails, engine con-
densation, engine jet wash on water and snow, 
wheel spray from water and snow, brake dust, 
touchdown smoke from the tyres, and engine 
cold-start smoke.
Instant replay
It's important to note that the effects are not vis-
ible during instant replay, due to limitations in the 
FSX replay system. FSFX Packages recommends 
using FSRecorder with the smoke replay option 
turned off to capture the full effects during replay.
PCP
Condensation on the air intakes on the massive turbofans is an impressive sight to behold; you might even 
notice the waterspout underneath the engine nacelle.
The most dramatic effects are 
seen during take-off and landing.

Subscribe at: 
www.pcpilot.net
UK 01780 480404 
OVERSEAS +44 1780 480404
Monday to Friday 
9.00am until 5.30pm
Fax UK 01780 757812 
Overseas +44 1780 757812
Complete the form and post to: 
PC Pilot, 
Key Publishing Ltd, 
PO Box 300, Stamford, 
Lincs, PE9 1NA, 
United Kingdom 
ONLINE
PHONE
POST
WHEN YOU TAKE OUT A 2-YEAR OR 
DIRECT DEBIT SUBSCRIPTION TO

6
5
8
9
6
0
INSTRUCTION TO YOUR BANK OR BUILDING SOCIETY TO PAY BY DIRECT DEBIT
 DELIVERY DETAILS  (IF DIFFERENT)
Title 
      First name 
                        Surname
Address
Postcode                               Country
Email address
 PAYER’S DETAILS
Title 
      First name 
                        Surname
Address
Postcode                               Country
Email address
Please complete to receive your subscription gift download code (if applicable), and for news, updates and 
offers from us by email.     Please send gift card 
Direct Debit UK only. If paying by Direct Debit please send in form. 
Payments are accepted by Direct Debit, cheque, Postal Order, Credit Card and US Dollar check. Payments by credit or debit card will be shown on your statement 
as Key Publishing Ltd. Key Publishing will hold your details to process and fulﬁ l your subscription order. Occasionally we may wish to contact you to notify you 
of special oﬀ ers on products or events. If you do not wish to receive this information please tick here  or mention when calling. Gift subject to change. Any 
alternative gift will be of equal or higher value. Should you cancel your subscription earlier then an invoice will be raised for the full price of the gift.
Please tick:
UK Direct  Debit
1230/17
Signature ....................................................................................................................................................Today’s date ..................................................
 SPECIAL OFFER  (PLEASE TICK)
Expiry date                 Security Code (3 digit code on reverse of card)  
I enclose a cheque for £/$ ................................. made payable to Key Publishing Ltd
Please debit my Mastercard      Visa    for £/$ ...............
 PAYMENT DETAILS
OFFER CLOSE DATE: 28 FEBRUARY 2018   PLEASE QUOTE: PCP0218
Annually  £23.95
Gift choice for 2 year pre-pay or annual direct debit only:  (please tick)
 MANCHESTER X     FOKKER F27 FRIENDSHIP      FLYING CLUB ARCHER III
X-PLANE 
USERS 
PLEASE CALL 
FOR GIFT 
DETAILS
 
 Number 
of Issues 
 Subscription
 UK
 EU
US
 ROW

3
 6 Months
£9.99
£14.99
$17.99
£14.99

6
 1 Year
£24.95
£32.50
$40.99
£35.00
 
 12
 2 Years
 £44.00
 £54.99
$67.49 
 £60.00
  YES, I would like to subscribe to PC Pilot
MAKE HUGE SAVINGS 
when you pay by easy Direct Debit – just £23.95 annually plus FREE Download Code
Readers in the USA may place orders by telephone 
toll-free 800-428-3003 or by writing to 
PC Pilot, 3330 Pacific Ave, Ste 500, 
Virginia Beach, VA 23451-2983  
Alternatively, order online at 
www.imsnews.com/pcpilot quoting/entering PCP0218
1230/17
AMERICAN READERS
Y
O
U
R
 
C
O
M
P
L
E
T
E
 
G
U
I
D
E
 
T
O
 
F
L
I
G
H
T
 
S
I
M
U
L
A
T
I
O
N
W
O
R
L
D
’
S
 
B
I
G
G
E
S
T
 
S
E
L
L
I
N
G
 
F
L
I
G
H
T
 
S
I
M
 
M
A
G
A
Z
I
N
E
W
O
L
L
I
N
G
F
I
N
E

20 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
o, here at PC Pilot we are often 
asked “What is the difference 
between FSX/Prepar3D and 
X-Plane?” While our writers 
have written many articles on the various 
iterations of both X-Plane and Microsoft’s 
Flight Simulator over the years (including 
variants such as the Steam Edition and 
Lockheed Martin’s Prepar3D versions), we 
thought it would be interesting to illustrate 
some of the differences of the simulation 
platforms using essentially the same product. 
For this purpose, we’ve enlisted the help of 
Just Flight’s fantastic PA-28R Arrow III, which 
is available for both X-Plane and FSX/P3D. 
Twins that don’t share a 
birthday
The Just Flight PA-28R Arrow III for FSX/P3D 
was released in late February 2017, while the 
X-Plane 11 version (developed in partnership 
with Thranda Design) was released in late 
October. Fans of X-Plane might recognise 
Thranda Design, the development house of 
X-Plane aircraft designer Dan Klaue who has, 
in addition to bringing his own creations to 
X-Plane, also ported over to X-Plane many 
of the most popular FSX/P3D designs from 
one of the largest and most popular FSX/
P3D development studios - Carenado/Alabeo. 
While I don’t claim to know much about how 
the process of bringing an FSX/P3D model 
into the world of X-Plane works, I do know 
enough to assert that it is no simple task and 
requires deep knowledge of X-Plane-specific 
programming and artistic techniques. X-Plane 
PA-28R Arrow III
Just Flight's
FSX/Prepar3D and X-Plane variants compared
FEATURE       JUST FLIGHT ARROW III: FSX/P3D VS. X-PLANE
S

21
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
also offers developers the chance to expand 
on the original product feature set and provide 
some additional capability owing to the greater 
flexibility that the X-Plane simulator offers.
Obvious differences
The easy-to-spot differences between the FSX/
P3D and X-Plane 11 versions of the Arrow are 
mostly to do with some of the graphics options 
that are either programmed into the models 
or are accentuated by the underlying graphics 
capabilities of the simulation platform. Both 
versions are accurately modelled in 3D to a high 
and beautiful level of detail. When viewing them 
in the sim, however, X-Plane does have the 
advantage of additional reflective and lighting 
properties known as PBR (Physically Based 
Rendering) which more accurately models the 
reflective qualities of the aircraft skin and paint. 
You can readily see this in external views when 
the aircraft is taxiing where the markings on the 
pavement are subtly reflected off the aircraft 
surfaces. This is also apparent when airborne as 
well, as the terrain and sky depicted reflects off 
the surfaces of the aircraft in X-Plane. FSX also 
has gloss and reflections, but they are generic 
in presentation and aren’t a true reflection of the 
environment around the aircraft. P3D v4 has the 
capability of real-time reflections but they do 
incur a significant frame rate penalty. 
Left: The shadows and overall lighting improvements 
of P3D v4 bring the Arrow III closer to the quality of 
lighting we see in X-Plane.
Below: The X-Plane Arrow allows a different level of 
interior wear and tear to be associated with different 
paint schemes.
Left: It is hard to overstate how much the PBR 
effects add to the look of the Arrow in X-Plane. The 
specular and diffuse reﬂ ections are simply gorgeous.
Below: The X-Plane Arrow uses X-Plane’s ability to 
reﬂ ect real-time environments such as the reﬂ ection 
of the paint on the ramp on the bottom of the wing.

22 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
FEATURE       JUST FLIGHT ARROW III: FSX/P3D VS. X-PLANE
These lighting differences extend to the cockpit 
as well. Dynamic windshield reflections, real-time 
reflections from instrument glass and rheostat 
adjustable lighting are some of the features 
that X-Plane users of the Arrow benefit from.
In the cockpit, X-Plane users see a panel-
mounted native GNS 530 that has excellent 
default functionality, while FSX/P3D users will 
get a more authentic-looking but somewhat 
less functional panel-mounted Garmin GPS-
100 unit that utilises the default FSX pop-up 
GPS. It is worth mentioning that the FSX/P3D 
version of the Arrow offers compatibility and 
integration with the Flight1 GTN 650-750 or 
GNS 430-530. Other differences in the X-Plane 
Arrow cockpit include a pop-up autopilot 
window, animated toe brakes, pop-up sound 
mixing panel and variations in cockpit wear 
(such as worn and chipping paint) that are 
tied to various liveries. Another nifty feature 
of the X-Plane model is that the cabin door 
responds to G-forces and air loads, realistically 
trailing to the nearly closed condition if it 
is left open and the plane is accelerated.
Under the hood
Less obvious, but arguably more important, 
are those features that control the underlying 
systems of the aircraft. Both aircraft feature 
custom-coded fuel and electrical systems 
that include fuel tank switching and functional 
circuit breakers. Interactive engine pop-up 
information windows display fuel quantities, oil 
temperature, oil pressure and battery voltage. 
X-Plane comes with additional information 
on spark plug fouling conditions and vapour 
lock which helps identify and remedy those 
problems before they affect engine operation, 
although both versions simulate the occurrence 
of spark plug fouling and vapour lock. The FSX/
P3D version has the extra feature of simulating 
oil quantity and the possibility of engine failure if 
it is not monitored and serviced. Going the extra 
mile, the X-Plane version adds a functional ELT 
(Emergency Locator Transmitter), simulated 
fan and vent motors that are linked to circuit 
breakers and the ability to change liveries on 
the fly without having to reload the aircraft. 
Sound
While both aircraft versions have authentic sound 
sets, X-Plane has the ability to further refine the 
sound physics to allow for more immersive 3D 
audio effects and more obvious positional sound 
realism. For instance, moving your head in the 
cockpit or sliding backwards towards a different 
seat will change the sound characteristics based 
on the distance from the sound source and 
angle. It is a subtle, but noticeable difference.
Flight model
Of course, all of the bells and whistles, 
graphics and systems modelling don’t 
count for much if the underlying flight model 
isn’t realistic. Fortunately, the Arrow sports 
fantastic flight dynamics across the board 
for FSX, P3D and X-Plane users alike. Both 
Just Flight and Thranda have extensive 
experience in developing flight models, so 
accuracy and authenticity should come as 
no surprise. When compared with the flight 
manual, both the FSX/P3D and X-Plane 
models match up closely with regard to 
cruise power settings, fuel burns and other 
factors that can be measured quantitatively. 
When it gets to feel – well, this is an area 
that has long been an extremely subjective 
topic between X-Plane and FSX/P3D loyalists. 
Having flown the Arrow extensively in both FSX/
P3D and X-Plane for this article, I definitely 
have my preference - the X-Plane version. 
Surprisingly though, it has less to do with the 
feel of the flight model rather than the totality 
of the overall completeness of the package -  
due to the aforementioned additional features 
that the X-Plane developers were able to 
include on an already fantastic add-on. But 
getting back to the flight model, I feel that both 
versions handle the 98th percentile of ‘normal’ 
operations to good effect. I tend to get higher 
framerates using X-Plane than with FSX/P3D 
on my system, which provides an additional 
fluidity of motion that definitely has an impact 
on how one feels the flight model is performing. 
In its own literature, Just Flight does note the 
difference for X-Plane is that flight dynamics 
“are based on X-Plane’s Blade Element Theory 
system, which calculates interaction between 
the airframe and air molecules in real-time.” 
The physics behind how X-Plane turns 
programming into simulated flight is beyond 
my level of comprehension, but as a flight 
instructor in real life and a professional pilot, 
I’ve always felt that X-Plane excels at the point 
of interaction between the flight controls and 
aircraft response. Playing to that strength, it 
is no wonder that flight in the X-Plane version 
of the Arrow does feel more realistic, fluid and 
dynamic. Stall breaks are a bit more abrupt, 
slow flight feels a bit more like ploughing 
through an airmass and it is impossible to 
ignore the authentic and dynamic nature of the 
ground/air interaction on take-offs and landing 
that the X-Plane Arrow exhibits. As a bit of 
an experiment, I accelerated both versions 
of the Arrow to near take-off speed, then 
Above: The FSX/P3D Arrow has a gorgeous cockpit with as much detailing as the X-Plane version, although the 
X-Plane lighting and shadowing give a bit of extra feel of realism to the Arrow.
Flight physics for the Arrow in both X-Plane and P3D are good, although I would argue that the X-Plane flight model does feel a bit more dynamic than the FSX/P3D version.

23
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
fully deflected the ailerons in both directions. 
The FSX/P3D Arrow barely budges in roll, 
while the X-Plane version responds very 
differently with the wing feeling alternately 
loaded and unloaded and transferring that 
load to the landing gear. I don’t know if this 
behaviour is due to the Blade Element Theory 
system that X-Plane uses but it feels good.
Documentation and liveries
Both versions of the Arrow come with excellent 
manuals that cover the operation of the aircraft 
and systems specific to the platforms they 
were developed for. The X-Plane manual has 
80 pages, while the FSX/P3D manual consists 
of 88 pages. A 32-page performance manual 
with take-off, cruise, landing and other charts 
is included with both versions. Both aircraft 
come with about a dozen high quality paint 
schemes along with paint kits for both versions. 
Conclusion
It is important to remember that no add-
on exists in a vacuum. Realism, authenticity 
and features of both versions of the Just 
Flight Arrow III still have to interact with the 
environment that the base program features. 
Scenery and weather add-ons, graphics card 
capabilities and hardware (such as virtual 
reality headsets and controllers), all combine 
to provide the total user experience and are 
worth considering when weighing one module 
against another. The good news is, regardless 
of which Just Flight Arrow III you choose, 
you are guaranteed to have one of the most 
realistic and detailed simulations of the 
aircraft available on the market today. 
Finally, all versions of Just Flight’s PA-28R 
Arrow III (FSX, Prepar3D and X-Plane) are 
priced at £27.99, and can be purchased 
via download from Just Flight’s website at 
www.justflight.com. 
By Chris Frishmuth
Above: With regard to ﬂ ight model, both the X-Plane and FSX/P3D versions are fantastic in that each closely 
replicate the actual published ﬂ ight manual performance. Below: FSX/P3D lighting tends to be all or nothing, 
whereas the rheostats in the X-Plane versions allow for variations on illumination levels.
Unlike the X-Plane version, the FSX/P3D Arrow provides 
the option to check and service the engine oil.
PCP

24 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
FEATURE       REMEX SOFTWARE INTERVIEW
ne of the highlights of Flight Sim 
2017, held at the RAF Museum, 
Cosford, in October, was the 
announcement and presentation 
of an exciting new flight sim, aptly named 
‘Deadstick’. I met the founder, Chris Cheetham 
at the Deadstick stand and was able to try 
out a very early build of this new ‘bush flying’ 
simulator. To say I was impressed would be an 
understatement. So, knowing that our readers 
would want to know about this new entry into 
the flight sim market, I invited Chris to take part 
in a Q&A, which he kindly agreed to do.
PC Pilot: Hi Chris, can you start by telling 
our readers a little about REMEX Software 
and how and why it came into being?
Chris Cheetham: The company came into 
being almost by accident in 2013. After looking 
for ways to combine my skills as a game 
developer and my love of flying as a private 
pilot, I created a hobby project to allow other 
developers to integrate accurate flight dynamics 
into their games. To my surprise this proved 
popular enough to allow me to form REMEX 
and in the years that followed we have created 
high fidelity simulation solutions for a number 
of clients including a high profile British racing 
team. With an itch to create Deadstick that 
just wouldn’t go away, and after several small 
prototypes, in January 2017 we decided to 
focus all of our efforts on creating the flight 
simulator I have always wanted to play.
PC Pilot: How did ‘Deadstick’ come about?
Chris Cheetham: While undertaking my 
PPL I was amazed to learn how much more 
there was to being a pilot than simply flying an 
aeroplane. Good judgement, self-discipline and 
risk evaluation are just some of the skills required 
to make a great pilot. In poor conditions often 
the best decision a pilot can make is to simply 
not fly at all, but with commercial pressures this 
can sometimes be the hardest. Modern flight 
simulators do a fantastic job of replicating the 
look and feel of aircraft, but I’ve never felt that 
any of them capture what it is to truly be a pilot – 
Deadstick
A new company - a new flight sim
O
REMEX Software’s
The striking Deadstick logo.

25
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
this is something I was really keen to explore.
PC Pilot: Tell us about ‘Deadstick’ and the 
concept behind this simulation.
Chris Cheetham: With Deadstick we’ve 
tried to push this idea of exploring what it 
takes to be a great pilot to its limits by pitting 
the player against the elements - with all of 
the pressure and challenges experienced 
by a real pilot on a daily basis. You are a 
bush pilot tasked with trying to deliver cargo 
around remote and inhospitable terrain in 
order to earn a living while upgrading and 
maintaining your aircraft as you do. There 
are no autopilots, no de-icing systems, little 
navigation aids and limited instruments. 
Players must learn the true art of piloting in 
order to succeed.  
PC Pilot: What would you say are the unique 
elements found in Deadstick that differentiate it 
from other flight sims currently on the market?
Chris Cheetham: We knew from day one that 
in order to deliver the experience of truly being a 
pilot we would have to break any assumptions 
of what a flight simulator is and build Deadstick 
from the ground up. The immediate difference 
players will notice is that Deadstick is a ‘First 
Person Flight Simulator’ - meaning that they are 
free to jump in and out of their aircraft at any 
point they please. Performing full walk arounds 
and pre-flight checks, manually loading and 
unloading cargo and upgrading and maintaining 
the aircraft are critical to succeeding and surviving 
as a bush pilot. Equally noticeable is that in 
Deadstick players always have a purpose. There 
is always cargo that needs to be delivered and 
with constantly evolving, and often unpredictable 
weather, it is up to the pilot to decide when to 
brave the elements and when to sit it out.
PC Pilot: What aircraft will be included in 
Deadstick and to what level of fidelity will they 
be modelled in terms of functionality and flight 
dynamics?
Chris Cheetham: As damage and failures 
are a core part of Deadstick and with aircraft 
manufacturers understandably not keen to see 
their 3D counterparts regularly falling out of the 
virtual sky, we took it upon ourselves to design 
our own bush aircraft, the Steed Aviation STOL. 
What initially seemed like a simple solution, 
however, quickly became a huge undertaking 
as we had to design, build and virtually test-
fly our new aircraft. From painstakingly testing 
and selecting different aerofoil configurations 
for best performance, to ensuring correct circuit 
breaker usage for our simulated electrical 
The remote and often improvised nature of landing areas in Deadstick means that strips are unmanned, 
requiring only blind calls from visiting pilots notifying others of their intentions.
Here we see Deadstick’s hangar from where you can 
access different parts of the simulation.
Attention to detail 
is paramount in this 
product and REMEX 
Software has aimed to 
breathe every ounce 
of life into the aircraft.
The ﬁ rst thing players will notice when climbing aboard 
the aircraft is all of the scratches and scrapes inside the 
cockpit.

26 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
loads, all systems within Deadstick are fully 
simulated to study level. Internally, all cockpit 
buttons and gauges are fully interactive and 
externally advanced flight model effects such 
as prop-wash, torque and P-factor are faithfully 
recreated. This has all been supported through 
real world flight testing with comparable aircraft.
PC Pilot: In terms of ‘feel’, how will aircraft in 
Deadstick differ, if at all, from other simulated 
aircraft?
Chris Cheetham: The first thing players will 
notice when climbing aboard our aircraft is all 
of the scratches and scrapes inside the cockpit 
- these machines are workhorses. Wear and 
tear, dirt and damage are persistent and will 
have a lifetime effect on the aircraft, meaning 
players must take care to nurture and maintain 
their aircraft to avoid expensive maintenance or 
worse. Attention to detail is paramount and we 
have tried to breathe every ounce of life into the 
aircraft from the keyring swinging around as you 
taxi over uneven terrain, to fuel accurately flowing 
in sight gauges as you yank and bank in flight.
PC Pilot: On the audio side, can you tell us 
about the work that has been put into this 
aspect of the simulation?
Chris Cheetham: Audio is fundamental 
to delivering an accurate and immersive 
experience both in and out of the cockpit. Pilots 
often say how their aircraft ‘talk’ to them while 
flying and this is something we are very keen 
to recreate with the same attention to detail as 
our flight model. We’ve enlisted the help of a 
very talented audio and recording engineer and 
will be strapping him into an aircraft early in the 
New Year to capture every detail.
PC Pilot: In terms of the simulated world, will 
this be based on real locations? 
Chris Cheetham: Deadstick is set in a 
fictional location drawing heavily from real world 
environments such as Idaho and Alaska. Our 
goal is not to recreate the world, but rather 
create a highly detailed, immersive and imposing 
environment for pilots to explore and master. 
Developing from the ground up with Bush Flying 
in mind has allowed us to create unmatched 
detail when flying low and slow. Dense vegetation, 
foliage, fallen trees, rocks and debris are all now 
obstacles that must be avoided when flying. This 
is something we’re very excited to share.
PC Pilot: Do you have a particular target 
market in mind with this product?
Chris Cheetham: 
Deadstick was 
born out of a desire to create a simulator that I 
always hoped existed but never did, so in that 
sense I suppose the target market is myself. 
That said, I’m hoping that anyone with a passion 
for Bush flight or wanting a bit more purpose to 
their flying will like what we have on offer. We 
have tried to make Deadstick as accessible as 
possible, and so while the aircraft is study level, it 
is forgiving enough that newcomers to simulation 
can turn the mags and firewall the throttle to get 
airborne with little other experience. The short 
hop nature of the cargo flights also make it easy 
to drop in and out of quick sessions for those 
with limited time on their hands, although while 
testing I often find myself saying: “Just one more 
flight,” time and time again.
PC Pilot: Does Deadstick include any missions 
or career modules?
Chris Cheetham: Deadstick is built around 
a sandbox career mode which is core to the 
experience as a pilot within the game. Each 
day cargo needs transporting and it is up to the 
player to decide which jobs to take on to earn 
their living. Do you risk skud running (staying 
clear of weather by keeping below clouds 
and flying with visual, rather than instrument, 
references) in poor weather to get your pay 
check, or sit it out for a few days while waiting 
for the weather to pass? The outcome of each 
job is tracked through our reputation system 
and will in turn drive how willing others are to 
entrust their valued cargo with you. 
PC Pilot: Will Deadstick include a weather 
engine?
Chris Cheetham: There are actually three 
separate weather models working together in 
Deadstick. The global weather model drives the 
overall conditions and forecasts within the world. 
Frontal activity, cloud base, precipitation and 
visibility are constantly changing and mean that 
no two flying days are the same. 
The local weather 
model 
FEATURE       REMEX SOFTWARE INTERVIEW
REMEX decided to design its own bush 
aircraft: the Steed Aviation STOL.
Below: Dense vegetation, foliage, fallen trees, 
rocks and debris are all now obstacles that 
must be avoided when ﬂ ying.

27
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
simulates local effects acting on the aircraft, 
including windshear, icing, rotor and downdrafts 
over terrain - presenting a constant risk to the 
player. Finally, the visual weather model takes 
inputs from the other two models to accurately 
render the atmosphere with physically correct 
atmospheric scattering, volumetric clouds, 
haze and rain. We really want inadvertent IMC 
(Instrument Meteorological Conditions) and risk 
of icing to be something that is feared.
PC Pilot: Do you intend to include ATC in the 
simulation?
Chris Cheetham: The remote and often 
improvised nature of landing areas in Deadstick 
means that strips are unmanned, requiring only 
blind calls from visiting 
pilots notifying 
others of their intentions. With that in mind 
we have opted against developing an AI ATC. 
Aircraft radios and nav aids are simulated, 
however we see this really coming into its own 
with multiplayer later down the line.
PC Pilot: Will AI aircraft and traffic be included?
Chris Cheetham: As with ATC, given the 
remote nature of the terrain we’ve made 
a conscious decision to avoid AI aircraft 
altogether. Instead, the long-term goal is for 
players to share the sky with fellow pilots via 
multiplayer which is something we will be 
focusing our efforts on after initial launch.
PC Pilot: Can you tell us a little more about 
your plans for multiplayer?
Chris Cheetham: Multiplayer has always been 
a driving force behind Deadstick and we see 
huge potential for it within the Deadstick world. 
That said, doing it well is hard and is something 
we are really keen to take the time to get right. 
We’re developing with multiplayer in mind and, 
along with VR support, is something we will be 
turning our attention to post initial release.
PC Pilot: Given the current crop of flight sims, 
where do you see Deadstick positioned in 
relation to those other products?
Chris Cheetham: We’re hoping that Deadstick 
will complement the existing line-up well by 
providing a new avenue and purpose of flying 
for those keen to explore the backcountry not 
previously available. Our sights are set high and 
while we’re a very small team, we hope that 
through smart design decisions we can deliver 
a high fidelity study-level simulator to rival the 
best currently available on the market.
PC Pilot: What would you say you are 
ultimately hoping to achieve with Deadstick? 
Chris Cheetham: I’ve always felt that while 
we’ve seen incredible improvements in aircraft 
realism and fidelity; the core flight sim formula 
has remained unchanged since its inception. 
I’m really keen to challenge that and would love 
to redefine people’s perceptions of just what a 
flight simulator is and can be in some small way. 
Our primary goal is to provide a compelling pilot 
experience, however beyond that we’re really 
keen to engage with the community to shape 
and grow Deadstick as a platform with their help.
PC Pilot: When do you hope to release 
Deadstick and where will it be available?
Chris Cheetham: Deadstick will be initially 
launching on PC via Steam in late summer 2018.
PC Pilot: Thanks for taking part in this 
interview. We wish you and your team all the 
very best of luck for the future.
By Derek Davis
Frontal activity, 
cloud base, 
precipitation 
and visibility are 
constantly changing.
Performing full walk arounds and pre-ﬂ ight 
checks, manually loading and unloading cargo, 
and upgrading and maintaining the aircraft, are 
critical features of this simulation.
PCP

28 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
he de Havilland Canada DHC-3 
Otter is something of a classic, 
which, like the Dakota DC-3, has 
become a long-lived workhorse 
that is very popular with the pilots who fly it, 
mainly because of its rugged construction 
and reliability in harsh conditions.
It started life as a King Beaver (the original 
prototype name). This designation came 
about when de Havilland attempted to extend 
its line of STOL aircraft that began with the 
DHC-2 Beaver. It is considerably larger than 
the Beaver but still able to perform the same 
functions. Consequently it was advertised as 
the airborne equivalent of the ‘One-Ton Truck’.
Power is supplied by a Pratt & Whitney 
R-1340-S1H-G Wasp nine-cylinder 
radial engine, although Stolairus Aviation 
Inc. of Kelowna BC, developed many 
modifications for the DHC-3, which 
included several different power plants.
The Otter received its certification in November 
1952 and entered service the following year. 
It served a number of air forces around the 
world in many military roles including search 
and rescue, parachute training and supply 
drops. A total of 466 were manufactured and 
a great many of these are still flying today.
Just Flight’s Otter
This product from Just Flight was developed 
by Aeroplane Heaven, a group which has 
PC System used for review
Intel i7 4790K 4.20GHz Processor. 16GB DDR3 
1600MHz RAM. EVGA GTX 1050Ti, 4GB GDDR5 
Video card. 2 x 240GB Kingston SSD. 2 x 1.5 
Terrabyte Samsung Hard Drives.
De Havilland 
Canada 
DHC-3 Otter
A flying Otter... whatever next!
REVIEW         ADD-ON FOR FSX, FSX: STEAM EDITION AND PREPAR3D
T
Just 
Flight's
You get a 
GPS and 
autopilot in 
the modern 
cockpit.
There are two cockpit styles included, 
this is the modern variant.

29
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
PCPilot
CLASSIC
AWARD
been responsible for many fine FS aircraft. The 
package includes 11 different variants of the 
Otter, all with very smart liveries depicting a 
typical selection of carriers, who have or still 
are operating the aircraft. The quality of these 
liveries is outstanding, to the point where a 
screen shot could be mistaken for the real thing. 
I was particularly impressed by the US Navy 
and US Army aircraft, where the beautifully 
produced paintwork is distressed with spattered 
flecks of oil, scuff marks and the natural wear 
and tear you’d expect to find... it’s just brilliant.
There’s also some very nice detailing throughout 
the airframe from the well defined panel work to 
smaller details including the rivets and rubber 
seals around the windows. Incidentally, these 
are not just holes punched into the fuselage, 
they have an inner and outer skin with a bezel 
to hold the glass. The flap and elevator surfaces 
are corrugated as well, not simply painted to 
look like they are. It’s this finer detail that gives 
an overall impression of realism to the aircraft. 
I do quite a bit of technical drawing, so I enjoy 
looking for these little extras, which some would 
say are superfluous. Another example is the 
superb detailing of the Otter engine, which 
extends to the nuts and bolts and pressure pipes 
inside the cowling - even the maker’s registration 
plate. This clearly shows the name and type 
although I couldn’t quite read the serial number. 
While I’m on the subject, I have to mention 
the propeller, which is modelled to perfection 
with proper blade pitch rotation. It also has 
typically worn paintwork on the leading edges.
Cockpit
Because Just Flight has included a number 
of different variants in this package, quite 
naturally there are a few cockpit layouts 
to match. These don’t vary a great deal in 
the earlier variants. Yet as the aircraft were 
updated and in some cases entered passenger 
service, things like a GPS, digital radio suite 
and a autopilot were added. These options 
are also provided in the Just Flight aircraft, 
where some variants are available with both 
the classic and modern configurations. 
Both types of cockpit also feature an optional 
hand-crank engine start. This allows you to 
start the engine using a crank handle stowed 
on the control column. You simply left-click 
on the handle to move it from the stowed 
position. A second left-click starts the cranking 
procedure. It takes approximately 30 seconds 
from starting the rotation, during which 
time you also have to engage the clutch.  
The only instrument mapped to the usual 
Shift+Number keys, is the GPS on Shift+1. 
Consequently, to navigate around the cockpit I 
would highly recommend using either a TrackIR 
or similar device or one of the keyboard 
mapping programs such as EZDok Camera. In 
fairness, the designers have mapped the most 
important positions on to the usual ‘A’ key, 
which cycles through the preset viewpoints.
The instruments are easy to read with 
faceplates that stay sharp however close you 
get. They are fully three-dimensional but don’t 
have any glazed reflective qualities. This doesn’t 
of course make them any less effective but it 
does give them a somewhat artificial quality. 
However the overall 3D construction 
and texturing of the cockpits is excellent 
and like the eternal paintwork, it shows 
the typical amount of wear and tear 
that you would find on a real aircraft.
Flight and performance
Sadly I’ve never flown an Otter, so I can’t really 
comment on the authenticity of the performance 
of the Just Flight Otter. What I can say is that 
the characteristics are what I would expect 
from the type. It’s a stable platform that climbs 
into the air with a satisfying confidence. It 
doesn’t charge but it gets there just the same. 
Once trimmed out you can practically read a 
book; the aircraft goes where you point it and 
to some extent it’s not affected by anything 
less than a hurricane... I jest of course. 
It’s noisy!
I don’t often make comments about the sounds 
of flight sim aircraft, mainly because they are 
not usually very noteworthy. Yet the Pratt & 
Whitney radial engine sounds from the Just 
The propeller is accurately 
modelled, including the 
blade pitch rotation.
Here we see the ﬂ oatplane version. Note the boat strapped to the side.
A close-up of the throttle, 
prop and mixture controls.

30 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
REVIEW
Flight Otter are very realistic. On start-up it has 
that unmistakable cough and splutter before 
spewing out clouds of smoke and roaring into 
life like a Massey Ferguson tractor on steroids. 
Once in flight however it settles into more of a 
throaty purr, as you might get from a contented 
lion. Of course the outside views produce a 
totally different set of sounds. Scrolling around 
the aircraft in flight, the sound changes from a 
buzz saw at the front to that of a warbling hippo 
from the rear. Colourful descriptions I agree, but 
the best I can come up with in a printed form, 
so I suggest you have a look at the video on 
our PC Pilot website and see what you think.
Extras
As I mentioned earlier, the Just Flight Otter 
is supplied in a number of different variants, 
ranging from private civilian aircraft to air cargo, 
passenger carriers, military and some with 
skis. Many of these are equipped with and 
without floats, some even have skis mounted, 
so essentially they cover just about every 
possible utility combination. Some of them are 
depicted carrying usable cargo. This is just 
another little extra that Just Flight provides to 
make your simulated flights more interesting.
For example, one of the float variants comes 
with a deployable canoe that can be winched 
down on its frame using a switch in the 
cockpit. Another one has a jet-ski on board 
that you can deploy in the same manner. 
The snow ski variant has a fully operational 
and authentic pump-operated control unit 
in the cockpit for the skis. It also carries a 
snowmobile on board which can be deployed 
to sit in the snow alongside the aircraft. Finally, 
the wheeled variant is loaded with a pair of off-
road dirt bikes... sorry you can’t ride them!
Documentation
As far as documentation is concerned Just 
Flight is a lot better than most. Its manuals are 
comprehensive in detail and do not assume 
that every reader is an expert pilot. This may 
not be an important factor for experienced flight 
simmers, but it certainly is for someone who has 
never flown or even set foot in an aircraft before. 
The manual provided with the Otter 
carries on this tradition, with nearly 40 
pages of clear and concise data covering 
every aspect of the aircraft. It opens with a 
description (with images) of all the models 
in the package, followed by the installation 
data for the different platforms it supports. 
Next, you get a comprehensive introduction 
to the cockpit, initially with an annotated 
image showing the name and location 
of every instrument in the panel. Once 
again this is followed by a more in-depth 
look at each of the electronic navigation 
instruments on board. I could go on but 
suffice to say that the manual is excellent and 
assumes no knowledge from the reader. 
Conclusion
I have enjoyed flying and reviewing the Just 
Flight Otter. It has given me a chance to 
experience another aircraft I could never 
hope to fly in the real world. It’s also a 
realistic simulation that’s both easy to fly and 
performs as advertised. If you fancy flying a 
classic utility workhorse, look no further!
By Joe Lavery
PC Pilot Verdict
At a glance: The DHC-3 Otter is another fine 
aircraft from Just Flight/Aeroplane Heaven, 
which is great for exploring the more remote 
places of our planet.
Publisher: Just Flight 
Developer:  Aeroplane Heaven
Price: £24.99 by direct download
Website: www.justflight.com
Flight Model: Good
Graphics: Very good
Documentation: Excellent 
Systems: Good
PC Pilot Score: 
90
System 
requirements
Flight Simulator X (SP2, 
Acceleration or Gold),  
FSX: Steam Edition, 
Prepar3D v1/v2/v3/v4
2.0GHz or any Dual Core 
processor. 2.0GB RAM. 
1GB graphics card. 
Windows 10 / 8 / 7 /  
Vista / XP (32-bit or 64-bit). 
2GB hard drive space.
Recommended: 3.6GHz 
processor (Quad Core 
processor or higher system). 
8GB RAM. 3D Graphics 
Card with a minimum of 
4GB RAM. SSD hard drive.
PCP
There are 11 
variants in the 
package. This 
example sports 
the US Army 
livery.
Lovely 
paintwork 
on all the 
variants, 
which also 
shows a 
realistic 
level of wear 
and tear.
A close-up shot - revealing 
some of the external modelling.


32
www.pcpilot.net
/ PC PILOT #113
REVIEW
hose of us who live in the UK are 
blessed with beautiful countryside 
that owes much of its lush greenery 
to the relatively high rainfall we 
enjoy (although I’m not sure ‘enjoy’ is the 
most appropriate description). Consequently, 
many of us take our holidays abroad and for 
many years the most popular destinations 
were located on the southern coast of Spain. 
Popular, I imagine, because of the short 
flight needed to get there, although more 
importantly for us webbed-feet Brits was 
the pretty much guaranteed sunshine.
Yet what most of us have overlooked (myself 
included) was the closer proximity of the 
northern coast of Spain, where resorts such 
as Asturias, Santander, Santiago and Bilbao 
have been catering for those looking for a 
more authentic Spanish holiday for years. Set 
in the Basque region, these places are more 
picturesque in terms of scenery, without the 
sheer volume and occasional ‘lager’ culture 
that seems to typify the southern beaches. 
It’s also a good deal greener due to the 
higher level of rainfall they get in the north.
So, as you’ve probably guessed by now, this 
review looks towards northern Spain, with the 
latest product from Orbx which depicts Bilbao 
Airport. One of the most popular resorts 
in the region, it has an international airport 
served by 19 different airlines, which together 
handle over four million passengers a year.
Bilbao Airport
Bilbao is the largest and most important 
airport in the Basque region. It’s located in 
the municipality of Loiu, in Biscay, roughly five 
miles to the north of the city it serves. It has 
two runways designated 12/30, (incidentally 
T
Bilbao (LEBB)
La Paloma (‘The Dove’)
                        ADD-ON FOR FSX, FSX: STEAM EDITION AND PREPAR3D
Orbx Simulations

33
www.pcpilot.net
#113 PC PILOT /
PCPilot
CLASSIC
AWARD
the same as my home airport of Cardiff) and 
10/28. This is an unusual arrangement, where 
the runway headings are so close to each 
other. Most airports with two runways are laid 
out in a cross pattern providing alternative 
landing directions to suit the prevailing 
wind conditions or like Heathrow’s parallel 
runways, for example, simply designed to 
cope with the sheer volume of traffic.
Orbx Bilbao
This rendition of Bilbao was created by 
Marcus Nyberg and Phillip Schall, the 
team responsible for many other Orbx 
products including Stockholm-Arlanda and 
Valdez Pioneer field in Southern Alaska. 
Once again they have produced an 
outstanding product, resplendent with all 
the detail that makes for a realistic airport.
Bilbao has just one terminal which was 
designed by Santiago Calatrava and built in 
2000. It’s a very futuristic-looking building, 
designed in the shape of two wings with 
an upward sweeping point at its centre. 
The whole thing is constructed using white 
concrete and glass which has earned it 
the nickname of La Paloma (‘The Dove’). 
Personally, I think it looks more like a 
homage to our now defunct Concorde.
The ground textures around the apron are 
very well presented, showing a restraint 
in colour that gives them a used (not fresh 
painted) look. They nonetheless have 
super crisp lines and lettering and more 
importantly are easily readable. The same 
applies to the signage both in and around 
the airport. As usual with Orbx, there’s plenty 
of animated traffic and PeopleFlow activity 
going on throughout the whole area.
While Orbx is renowned for the super 
detailing it adds to all its airports, in many 
cases (unlike some) it extends this influence 
way beyond the airport boundaries. With 
Bilbao it has included an area covering the 
city, the harbour, and extends to the coastline 
in both directions. We haven’t been given the 
actual dimensions but to be honest, with the 
Global base installed it’s difficult to tell where 
the dividing line is anyway. Moreover, the craft 
of object placement within the scenery gets 
better with each release, so you don’t get 
much disparity between the photo texture base 
layer and the buildings that sit on top of it.
The different approaches  
to Bilbao
Due to its proximity to the French border, 
I decided on an initial approach along the 
Atlantic coast from Biarritz airport. As it 
Get the full Orbx experience 
In order to see Bilbao as the authors intended, 
you’ll need to have FTX Global Base installed first 
or the airport will not blend with the photoreal 
textures upon which it sits. What’s more, you will 
not see any trees around the airport either. In fact 
the manual mentions that to get the full effect 
you’ll need to have OpenLC Europe installed 
as well. This introduces even more elements 
to increase the realism, such as more accurate 
line features and even better integration with the 
surrounding areas.  
System 
requirements
Flight Simulator X,  
or FSX: Steam Edition,  
Lockheed Martin  
Prepar3D v1, 2, 3 or 4.
Microsoft Windows, 
Vista or Windows 7, 8, 
10 (XP is not  
supported).
Processor: 2.4Ghz  
(or higher).
RAM: 2GB (4GB  
recommended).
Video Card: 1GB. 
DirectX 9 compatible 
(2GB or more  
recommended).
Microsoft .Net  
Framework 4.5 or higher
Left: On finals for Runway 30 at Bilbao.
Above: Climbing to 4,000ft to clear the high ground.
Right: The airport is served by 19 different airlines.
Below: As usual Orbx includes all the elements 
you’d expect to find.

34
www.pcpilot.net
REVIEW
/ PC PILOT #113
happens, I didn’t 
have a depiction of 
Biarritz installed and 
the default version 
is pretty abysmal. 
So, to make the trip 
more enjoyable, I 
carried out a quick 
internet search 
and downloaded a 
very nice freeware 
version from the 
Simzaleak website. 
This is quite a find 
because it’s very well 
designed and full of all the enhancements 
you would normally get in a commercial 
product, so it’s certainly a team to watch out 
for. If you want to have a closer look yourself 
or perhaps follow the route I took, with kind 
permission from the author, we’ve added the 
file to our download section for this issue.
It’s only a short (74-mile) trip, so I chose to 
fly Carenado’s A36 Bonanza which I reviewed 
some time ago. The Bonanza is more than 
adequate for the trip. It’s also equipped with 
an autopilot, so I thought I’d have a better 
chance to enjoy the scenery on the way. 
Taking off from Runway 27, I climbed to 
3,000ft. Once levelled off, I set the autopilot 
to a heading of 240 which took me along the 
north Atlantic coast. Within a few minutes I 
was passing the airport of San Sebastián. 
Moments later I sited the town itself, which 
is draped around the unmistakable sight of 
La Concha (‘The Shell Bay’), so named for 
its resemblance to the shape of a scallop 
shell. I noticed that the little island of Santa 
Clara set inside the bay is also depicted. A 
few miles to the west and just east of the 
little town of Zarautz is the mouth of the 
Oria River. From there the same heading 
took me inland towards the higher ground 
of the Pagoetako Parke Naturala, which I 
must say is beautifully depicted in the Orbx 
Global scenery. As some of these peaks 
were a bit too close for comfort, I climbed to 
4,000ft to maintain a safe clearance level.
Once clear of the largest peaks, I set Nav 1 
to 110.3MHz for the Bilbao ILS and the needle 
immediately came alive showing that I was 
then on an almost perfect interception course 
for an approach to Runway 30. I therefore 
turned on to that heading and started a 
slow descent to capture the glideslope. As 
I tend to fly in good weather (I don’t like low 
cloud and rain in a real aircraft either), the 
airport was fairly easy to spot, so it was 
simply a matter of getting lined up while 
continuing the descent on to the runway.
I, like most of you, fly a lot of varied routes, 
but this was a particularly pleasant flight, 
where the quality of the scenery had me 
constantly hitting the pause button to look 
around. Quite honestly that’s not something 
I normally do, unless of course I’m taking 
screen shots, which unfortunately as static 
images don’t really do justice to the product.  
Performance
As the performance levels of computers 
and graphic cards get more and more 
powerful, the frame rate issues we have 
traditionally suffered from are less of a 
problem. I have recently upgraded my 
graphics with a new GTX 1050Ti, 4GB 
GDDR5 video card, which I have to say has 
made an unremarkable difference from my 
previous card but every little helps I guess.
Nevertheless I didn’t get any performance 
degradation during the review and my 
frame rates rarely dropped below 45 
frames a second. The only exception was 
when I was taxiing to the stand, where I 
got 35-38 frames a second and that was 
with five AI aircraft parked close by.
Conclusion
This is yet another superb scenery package 
from Orbx that has introduced me to a new 
area to explore. It’s everything we’ve come to 
expect from an Orbx product which, combined 
with the required Global Base, provides a 
real insight to the reality it depicts. 
By Joe Lavery
PCP
PC Pilot Verdict
At a glance: Another fine product from Orbx 
that provides another destination for our 
simulated journeys.
Publisher: Orbx Simulations
Developers: Marcus Nyberg and Phillip Schall
Price: Download $39.95 AUD (£23 approx)
Website: https://orbxdirect.com/product/lebb
3D Modelling: Very good 
Graphics: Very good
Documentation: Very good 
Performance: Very little impact 
on frame rates
PC Pilot Score: 
90
PC System 
used for 
review
Intel i7 4790K 
4.20GHz Processor
16GB DDR3 1600MHz 
RAM
EVGA GTX 1050Ti, 
4GB GDDR5  
Video card
2 x 240GB Kingston 
SSD
2 x 1.5 Terrabyte  
Samsung Hard Drives.
The very futuristic terminal at Bilbao.
The port at Bilbao.
Lots of activity around the apron.
The modelling and ground textures are superb.


36
www.pcpilot.net
/ PC PILOT #113
REVIEW
AIRCRAFT ADD-ON FOR X-PLANE 11
ith X-Plane 11 gobbling up a 
significant amount of market 
share in recent years, it is 
interesting to see developers 
new and old embrace the platform and 
explore the capabilities the simulator 
allows for. Aerobask was an early entrant 
into X-Plane development and has been 
building a solid reputation for turning out 
unique aircraft that take full advantage of 
the X-Plane engine. With recent hits such 
as the Eclipse 550NG and Epic E1000 
Skyview among others, the crew at Aerobask 
has turned its attention to a twin-engine 
piston aircraft with a futuristic design that 
has garnered attention for its advertised 
safety and efficiency: the Velocity V-Twin.
Package and externals
The Velocity V-Twin was the result of a natural 
evolution of several iterations of aircraft 
developed by Velocity Aircraft dating back 
to 1985. The DNA of the Long-EZ design is 
readily apparent three decades later in the 
V-Twin with the telltale swept wing design 
led by the forward canard. The V-Twin adds 
a second engine, both faired into the trailing 
edge of the wing in a pusher configuration, 
while the cabin has been elongated, flattened 
and widened to accommodate four luxurious 
seats and a small cargo area. The Aerobask 
representation is sleek and gorgeously 
constructed with impossible geometry that 
makes me wonder if any polygons were used 
to make the 3D model. The old cliché of an 
aircraft looking fast even while sitting on the 
ramp rings true with the V-Twin. X-Plane’s 
reflection and lighting capabilities are taken 
full advantage of with the V-Twin, giving 
stunning views from all external aspects.
The package ships with seven beautiful paint 
schemes that range from subtle to flashy. A 
menu system can be popped up that allows 
for control over sim-specific items. The fuel/
passenger configuration and ground objects 
menus are superbly functional, allowing for 
rapid loading of four different passenger or 
pilot characters into whatever seat you prefer. 
Placing a check mark next to their name and 
icon places them in the aircraft, along with 
any baggage you’ve selected. Similarly, fuel 
can be adjusted via buttons or by sliding the 
fuel level up or down. On the ground menu, 
chocks, doors and a ground power unit can be 
selected as well as the ability to fill the oxygen 
W
Aerobask
Velocity V-Twin
The V-Twin has a slippery shape, cruising 
along at around 200 knots TAS.
Above: The Dynon Skyview can be popped up to a 
2D presentation. The deeply modelled system is one 
of the most intricate and functional navigation suites 
we’ve seen in an X-Plane product.  
Below: The weight and fuel and ground menus 
provide for instant loading and adjustment of 
passengers, fuel, control over doors, filling oxygen 
and ground service options such as chocks and a 
ground power unit.

MDA, CRS, HDG, ALT, VS, IAS, DIM) and it 
does take some practice getting quick with 
changing those mode selections if you need 
to address multiple issues simultaneously.
Tying it all together are the touchscreen 
Garmin 750/650 systems. The Garmin 750 
allows for radio tuning, TCAS settings, terrain 
display, map, weather, airport database 
information (frequencies, runways, navaids, 
etc.), flightplan entry, approach procedure 
entry, nearest airport/navaid pages, timers 
and wind readouts. The bottom Garmin 650 
allows for the same information, in a more 
compact footprint, but adds the ‘Otto Pilot’ 
page which provides for all of the autopilot 
and flight director settings. I found the most 
convenient layout for me was to have the 
primary flight display and engine gauges on 
the left Skyview, the terrain map on the Garmin 
750, the autopilot on the Garmin 650 and the 
combined map and flight plan on the right 
Skyview. This seemed to give me the maximum 
information and functionality. Of considerable 
importance and convenience is that all of the 
displays can be popped up to full resolution 
2D presentations, which is a welcome feature.
System 
requirements
X-Plane 11, Windows, 
Mac, or Linux, 2GB 
VRAM Minimum, 4GB 
VRAM Recommended.
www.pcpilot.net
37
PCPilot
PLATINUM
AWARD
system. Documentation is nicely written with 
excellent graphics and extensive explanation 
of the Skyview system. Some performance 
charts would have been a nice addition.
Cockpit and systems
Moving into the cockpit, you are presented 
with a clean and futuristic panel layout that 
looks more like a spaceship than a general 
aviation aircraft. Bringing the aircraft to life 
from the cold and dark state requires only a 
few checklist items to be completed. Switches 
are uniformly arranged on the overhead panel 
and although they are modern in design 
and layout, the aircraft is still controlled like 
any piston aircraft with magnetos, starters, 
alternators and avionics switches.
Once the engines are on and the avionics 
come to life, all similarity with most piston 
general aviation twins ceases as your jaw 
hits the floor with the presentation of the 
gorgeous dual Dynon Skyview Touch displays 
flanking the centre Garmin 750/650 stack. It is 
a stunning array of instrumentation with deep 
custom functionality created by Aerobask. The 
Skyview Touch screens can be tailored to your 
individual tastes with varying degrees of clutter 
and information. Both the pilot and co-pilot 
sides can be configured to display primary 
flight instrumentation, engine readouts, map 
or flight plan panes. Deeper menu selections 
allow for setting up bearing pointers, TCAS, 
autopilot, transponder, communications 
displays and even changes to the primary 
flight display data capabilities. There is a ton 
of functionality and depth to the Skyview 
system. The left and right knobs at the bottom 
of each Skyview serve up to eight functions 
depending on what you have selected (BARO, 
#113 PC PILOT /
Above: The modern, 
custom-coded Dynon 
SkyView and Garmin 
750/650 avionics are a 
masterpiece of form and 
function.
Left: The V-Twin has a 
distinctive planform with 
beautiful swept wings and 
blended engine nacelles.

38
www.pcpilot.net
/ PC PILOT #113
REVIEW
The Garmin 750 is superbly impressive 
with the functionality of the flight planning 
pages, SID/STAR capability, Jet and Victor 
airways and instrument procedures all able 
to be loaded and edited on the fly. It is 
truly a great replica of the Garmin 750 and 
I should know as I use one in the Citation 
Ultra I fly in my real job. Autopilot tracking 
was perfect on both ILS approaches 
and RNAV approaches using VNAV.
Though the focus of the cockpit is 
undoubtedly the Skyviews and Garmins, 
the rest of the cockpit is nicely modelled 
with additional panel-mounted oil PSI/TEMP 
gauges, a standby airspeed indicator and a 
standby altimeter. I did, however, find it odd 
that a standby peanut gyro/attitude indicator 
wasn’t included in the standby steam gauges. 
EFIS and windshield reflections can be toggled 
on and off, and as usual, the night lighting 
options are fantastic and very customisable. 
Flight model
One of the strongest selling points of the 
V-Twin is the safety aspect of the leading 
canard design which provides protection 
against the most dangerous aspect of light 
twin aircraft emergencies – single engine loss 
of control. The canard is designed with 3.5° 
more angle of incidence than the main wings, 
thus, the canard reaches the critical angle 
of attack before the wings do, resulting in a 
stalled canard, a nose drop and an automatic 
reduction in main wing angle of attack so that 
it never reaches the stall angle of attack. Also, 
the pusher props are mounted as close to the 
centreline as possible, reducing asymmetric 
thrust and lowering the minimum controllable 
airspeed below the aircraft’s stall speed. 
Putting this to the test in the sim, I found the 
aircraft to be quite controllable when eased 
into the stall with one engine shut down, 
although there wasn’t really a distinct dropping 
of the nose. With a very aggressive pull through 
the stall, it is possible to get a Vmca roll off but 
you have to really man-handle the controls to 
get that to happen. Generally, with full power 
on the operating engine, the aircraft will mush 
ahead at 60 knots in a significant nose up pitch 
attitude but remains controllable with a good 
amount of rudder. When properly flown during 
an engine-out procedure, at the 97 knot Vyse 
speed at maximum take-off weight, with a bit 
of bank into the good engine and a half a ball 
out, the aircraft climbs at an impressive 470ft 
per minute. With both engines operating and 
holding Vy of 103 knots (best rate of climb) at 
maximum gross weight, the aircraft climbs at 
1,650ft per minute. The aircraft has no flaps 
and does not need them with stall speeds on 
landing approach hovering around 65 knots. 
Low take-off and landing speeds combine 
to keep take-off and landing field distances 
below 1,500ft even at maximum weights. 
The engines are normally aspirated IO-320s 
(160HP) and not turbo-charged, so you will 
be somewhat altitude-limited by engine 
performance. If you do choose to wander 
above 12,500ft, there is an option for the pilots 
and passengers to don oxygen masks and 
the system will deplete based on the number 
of occupants breathing O2. You can refill the 
oxygen when you land at an airport. At 10,000ft 
and near maximum gross weight, the high 
speed cruise came in at 200 knots pulling 
21.6” of manifold pressure, turning 2,500RPM 
while burning 10 gallons/hr per engine. Pulling 
the engine back to the economy range of 
15.3”MP netted a true airspeed of 160 knots 
while burning just 6 gallons/hr per engine. 
Taking the aircraft higher would improve 
those numbers a fair bit more, but it isn’t hard 
to see that the max range numbers for this 
aircraft, listed at 1,400nm, are within reach. 
Conclusion
The Aerobask V-Twin is an exceptionally 
well modelled aircraft for X-Plane 11. The 
avionics alone could be used as a Garmin 750 
trainer and the overall avionics functionality 
provides for a true simulation platform. 
By Chris Frishmuth
PC Pilot Verdict
At a glance: A gorgeous interior/exterior model 
with an impressive avionics suite and great 
flight model.
Developer: Aerobask
Publisher: X-Plane.org
Download Price: $34.95 (£26 approx)
Website: www.aerobask.com
Flight Model: Excellent 
Graphics: Internal excellent / 
External excellent
Documentation: Very Good 
Systems: Excellent
PC Pilot Score: 
95
PCP
Top: With take-off and landing distances of only 
around 1,500ft, the V-Twin can operate from even the 
smallest general aviation strips.
Above: The custom-coded GTN 750 and GTN 650 
feature touchscreen functionality and scroll wheel 
support, offering an insane amount of options and 
configuration settings.
Below: The V-Twin has impressive single engine 
performance, climbing at nearly 500ft per minute at 
max gross weight when properly flown.


40 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
REVIEW         UTILITY ADD-ON FOR FSX, PREPAR3D AND X-PLANE
ast issue I looked at ATC for various 
sims. One of the programs I looked 
at was Pilot2ATC. This is a huge 
program and I felt after writing the 
previous article that it warranted a feature of 
its own. So, let’s take a look at this fascinating 
software and see what it really does.
More than just ATC
Pilot2ATC is best known for its replacement 
of the standard ATC systems of both FSX/
Prepar3D as well as X-Plane. To do this 
you’ll need a copy of FSUIPC for FSX/P3D 
or a copy of XUIPC for X-Plane. Having 
installed the software, you’ll find this is so 
much more than a replacement for ATC. 
Alongside ATC there’s a flight planner, radio 
stack, multifunction display showing heading, 
frequencies, transponder and more, a chart 
viewer, a moving map, airport editor and radio 
trainer. Confused? I’ll admit it’s daunting at 
first glance. There’s a lot to do just to get set 
up. The developer acknowledges this and 
new users will find both a quick start guide 
alongside a comprehensive manual. In addition 
to this, there are plenty of tutorials produced 
by the developer that explain everything in 
clear language. That’s something I’m really 
happy to see. Let’s break the software 
down and look at how well it all works. 
Flight planning 
Much of the program window is occupied by 
the map, but to the right are all the controls 
to plan a flight. Combining the two we can 
plan all sorts of flights. You can plan both 
VFR and IFR flights here and I must say that 
the user interface is impressive. Let’s say I 
want to fly from my home airport in Vienna to 
Innsbruck. To get the planning started I just 
System requirements
Windows PC running FSX, Prepar3D or X-Plane. 
FSUIPC or XUIPC. 
More than just an ATC program
L
Route plan 
installed and 
displayed on 
the map.
Pilot2ATC

41
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
PCPilot
CLASSIC
AWARD
need to zoom in on the map to LOWW. There 
are various map types by the way, including 
a satellite, terrain, street maps and two maps 
with high-level jetways and low-level airways 
overlaid on the screen; that’s a very nice 
touch. If you subscribe to Navigraph’s charts 
viewer, these can be displayed as well.
Once I’ve moved in on my airport, all I need 
do is right-click and instruct the program that 
I want to start my flight here. To the right, the 
airport is now added. I can do the same for 
Innsbruck, telling the software I want this to 
be my destination. Straight away, the map 
draws a direct line between the two. Before 
I do anything else, I need to set a few flight 
profile settings. These are found above the 
plan on the top-right. I set the altitude to 
24,000ft and GS (Ground Speed) to 400. Now 
I have a choice. I can either continue planning 
my route or I can hit ‘auto plan’ and Pilot2ATC 
does the hard work for me. Auto route does 
a pretty nice job of things, including sorting 
my SID and STAR out for me. If I don’t like 
either of those though, I can click on the SID 
or STAR buttons at the bottom of the flight 
plan and change them. Doing that brings up 
a fresh window where every departure or 
arrival listed for that airport is visible - all in 
separate colours and overlaid on a map. That 
is a great feature. The auto route function 
even adds in the missed approach procedure. 
If for whatever reason you don’t want to 
plan your route with Pilot2ATC, there are 
several important functions you can use to 
load a flight plan. FlightAware, PFPX, SimBrief 
and the real world flight plan database are 
all supported. All you need do is copy and 
paste the text of the route and add in the 
start and destination airfields. The program 
does the rest. Finally, you can always just 
load in a standard FS/XP flightplan. If you 
like the route you’ve planned, you can 
also export that route to FS/XP as well. 
With the plan sorted and your aircraft at 
the gate, you can connect Pilot2ATC to 
the sim and your aircraft will be shown 
on the map. Here, with the addition of the 
program’s built-in ATC, things get even 
better. If you’ve contacted ATC and have 
your taxi clearance, clicking on ‘Taxi’ on the 
map will bring up your taxi route and show 
you where you need to go. This is a feature 
that is often worth its weight in gold. In the 
past I’ve used charts and Aerosoft’s FS 
Commander to display taxiways but this the 
first program I’ve seen that shows you the 
route you need to take. It’s a brilliant idea. 
In flight entertainment 
Away from the Flight Planner, there are a few 
other functions that help you keep an eye on 
things when you’re flying. At the very top of the 
program is the MFD or multi-function display. 
This shows me lots of things. When flying it 
displays the next waypoint, track, distance 
to destination, ETA to destination and much 
more. In the far right corner it also shows the 
status of your transponder. Clicking on ‘mode’ 
changes it from standby to active, to test, 
to off and back again. You can also set your 
transponder code by clicking on the number. 
This opens up a calculator-like window that 
allows you to type in the new number. The 
bar is designed to show you everything you 
need quickly and if you disable the map, the 
MFD can be combined with the radio stack 
below, making it less intrusive on your screen.  
Following on from the transponder, the far-
right button section contains more toys in 
addition to the flight plan buttons. Click on an 
airport in your flight plan and then click ‘Info’ 
to bring up a pop-up window with a map 
of the airport. That would be a fine thing by 
itself, but included in the pop-up is the airport 
elevation, magnetic variance, all the available 
radio frequencies and more.  
The main 
screen is 
dominated by 
the map.
Above: The configuration screen contains all the 
settings you need to get Pilot2ATC running nicely.
Below: Need to know where to park or check your 
frequencies? The Airport information screen will 
answer your questions.

42 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
Clicking on the runways and gates 
section shows you all the available gates 
and runways along with the aerodrome 
circuit information. Finally, you can 
also access the current weather. 
The ‘TERPs’ button brings up a PDF chart 
viewer. You need to add charts to this 
manually but it’s a nice feature to have. 
‘Auto’ brings up the autopilot window. Just 
like in the sim, you can set all the autopilot 
functions you want and then some. 
Finally, and this is one of the most 
interesting functions, there’s the ‘Taxi 
Maint’ button. Clicking this opens up a new 
window displaying your selected airport. 
Now you can add, take away or generally 
edit the taxiways, gates and runways to 
fix errors. While this is a nice feature, I’m 
not sure digging around in airport data is 
a good idea. If you are happy to do that 
though, this is a very powerful feature.  
Now we’re talking!
Finally we come to the radio section. Pilot2ATC 
offers a great radio stack interface that’s as 
simple as the rest of the program. Where things 
get interesting of course is the speech interface. 
The ability to talk to ATC is a real game changer 
for any flight sim pilot. Talking to another 
person, even if it’s the computer, lifts the realism 
up a notch or two. Using Microsoft’s own built-
in speech recognition software, Pilot2ATC can 
act as ATC along your entire journey. It’s fully 
customisable with the ability to use many third-
party voices to add greater variety in the ATC 
voices. The power in the system lies in the 
integration with all the features I’ve mentioned 
above. Create or load a flight plan, then click 
validate. If the plan is good, the box turns green, 
then all you have to do is file it. The ATC system 
now sees the plan and will act accordingly. 
For new users, talking to ATC can seem 
intimidating, but Pilot2ATC has a specific 
training section that helps you learn the 
grammar and pronunciation of various radio 
calls. The ‘grammar helper’ is incredibly useful 
even for experienced pilots. It lets you select 
from a multitude of phrases, all sorted into 
categories such as clearance delivery or radar 
director. In use, the speech engine could use 
a little tweak here and there - I had an issue 
which revolved around Windows’ inability 
to understand a Welsh accent (difficult at 
the best of times) with a hint of Austrian. 
Conclusion
Pilot2ATC is one of the most feature-rich 
programs I’ve come across. As a flight planner 
it’s damn good, as a sim controls interface it’s 
very nice and as an upgrade from the default 
ATC systems it’s a wise investment. As all 
three, well it can often feel a little confused. 
It is most certainly greater than the sum of its 
parts, although I’m not sure all the parts need 
to be there. The ability to make changes to 
gates and taxiways is perhaps a feature too far 
for me. There’s no doubting that Pilot2ATC is a 
good thing though. The only downside is  
the need to keep it on the screen if you’re 
doing anything with it during a flight. This is a 
second monitor/second PC kind of program 
that’s for sure, but it’s a fantastic flight sim 
companion to have. 
By Jessica Bannister-Pearce
PC Pilot Verdict
At a glance:  A mix of fantastic features that is 
definitely greater than the sum of its parts. In 
practice Pilot2ATC offers you a control over your 
sim, though it’s best used on a second PC.
Publisher: Pilot2ATC
Price: $59.95 (£45.63 approx)
Website: www.pilot2atc.com
Interface: Very good
Graphics: Good
Documentation: Very good 
Features: Excellent
PC Pilot Score: 
90
Above: One feature too far? The gate and taxiway maintenance section.
REVIEW         UTILITY ADD-ON FOR FSX, PREPAR3D AND X-PLANE
Above: Building your own route is easy.
PCP


44 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
FEATURE       A GUIDE TO AIRLINER SIMULATION – PART THREE
ollowing on from our previous 
issue where we had a look at 
the building blocks of a flight 
plan, this time we are going to 
go through the tasks that need completing 
before pushing back from the gate.
The paperwork
First, we need to get the paperwork 
ready and generate what is known as an 
Operational Flight Plan (OFP). We can use 
several flight planning utilities to create 
an OFP (see the previous tutorial in issue 
112), but for this article I used SimBrief (www.
simbrief.com). You can find a copy of the OFP 
on the download section of the PC Pilot website 
(www.pcpilot.net/the-magazine/online-content).
The OFP contains navigation and performance 
data, which we need in order to programme 
the Flight Management Computer (FMC). This 
includes the departure/destination ICAO codes, 
route and cruise level. For performance, we 
need the Zero Fuel Weight (ZFW) and block fuel 
– this is the total amount needed for the trip, 
including taxi, trip, alternate and reserve fuel.
We also need to get the weather for the 
destination and departure airports along 
with temperature and winds at our cruise 
level. We usually refer to temperature as 
International Standard Atmospheres (ISA) 
temperature deviation. This tells us how 
much the temperature differs from the ISA 
standard lapse rate and is used to calculate 
performance parameters of the aircraft such 
as fuel consumption, cruise speed and 
freezing level in case we are likely to bump into 
icing. SimBrief hooks into real weather and 
generates forecast data as part of the OFP.
Airliner Sim
Above: Fig 1: Most of 
the data required to 
programme the FMC (Flight 
Management Computer) can 
be found on the ﬁ rst page of 
the Operational Flight Plan 
(OFP). Right: Fig 2: We can 
pick the route up from the 
second page of the OFP, 
including the alternate, in 
case we need to divert.
F
Preparing the 
aircraft at the gate 
involves several 
steps, such as setting 
up the systems, 
programming the 
Flight Management 
Computer and 
requesting clearance 
if we are using ATC.

45
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
For this flight, we are doing a hop from 
Heathrow (EGLL) to Schiphol (EHAM). From 
the OFP (Fig 1), we can see our cruise altitude 
is FL270 and we have a ZFW of 56,367kg 
(56.4t). The block fuel is 4831kg (4.8t). The 
route is: EGLL 27R BPK7F BPK Q295 CLN 
L620 REDFA REDF1A EHAM/22 (Fig 2). For 
the departure, we have been given Runway 
27R and the BPK7F SID, while on the arrival 
side we have the REDF1A STAR for Runway 
22. We would normally be given the runways 
in use and the SID when we request the 
clearance, but for clarity we have included it 
here.  Finally, we have the average winds aloft 
or in this case 276/65 (from 276 degrees at 
65 knots) and the ISA deviation is minus 3.
METARS
It is also a good idea to check out the weather 
at our departure and destination airports.  Unlike 
TAFs, which are long-term forecasts, METARS 
are issued every hour and contain information 
on the current weather conditions. Sometimes 
a short-term forecast may be added at the end 
of the METAR, particularly if the weather starts 
becoming ‘interesting’. Information in these 
reports can be exhaustive and it is beyond the 
scope of this article to cover them in detail, but 
here is a snippet from the report for Schiphol.
EHAM 271055 25016KT 9999 
FEW017 10/08 Q1008
This tells us the weather for EHAM (Schiphol, 
Amsterdam), taken on the 27th day of the 
month at 1055Z (UTC time). Wind is from 
250 degrees at 16kts, visibility is greater 
Preparing 
at the gate
MCDU
Although the Airbus MCDU uses a diﬀ erent 
methodology from Boeing, the data we need 
to input is similar. Essentially it is broken down 
into the following sections: INIT sets the arrival 
and departure airports, ﬂ ight level and weights. 
F-PLN sets the route and SIDs/STARs along with 
the runway in use. PERF sets the ﬂ aps settings, 
FLEX and thrust reduction/acceleration altitude.
ulation
Before powering up the aircraft, 
we need to complete the cockpit 
preparation checks to make sure 
the aircraft is in a safe state.

FEATURE
46 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
than 10km and clouds are few at 1700ft. 
Temperature is 10⁰C and dewpoint 8⁰C. 
QNH (altimeter setting) is 1008Mb.  
Not a bad day. If you want to learn more 
on decoding METAR reports, a good source 
can be found on the following website: 
www.weatherfaqs.org.uk/node/197.
Cockpit preparation
With the paperwork out of the way, we can 
board the aircraft and start preparing for 
pushback. We start with a cockpit safety or 
pre-flight check, to make sure the aircraft is in 
a safe state before powering up the systems. 
This involves making sure the gear handle is 
down and locked, the flaps are up and the 
spoilers are down. We then do a scan of the 
overhead panel and make sure hydraulics and 
fuel switches are off, pressurisation is set, the 
fuel control switches are off and the thrust levers 
are at idle. Once we are happy the aircraft is 
in a safe state, we can start powering it up. 
This would be a good time to hook up to a 
ground power source before flicking the master 
switch on, arming the emergency lights and 
checking the bus ties are closed. The navigation 
lights then come on so ground crew know 
the aircraft is ‘live’. At this stage I wait for the 
displays to power up and all the systems to 
complete self-tests before aligning the Inertia 
Reference System (IRS). In real aircraft, this 
takes around 10 minutes, but we can set it in 
the simulator to align instantly or in real time.
While the IRSs are aligning, we can tune 
to the ATIS (Automatic Terminal Information 
Service) for the latest weather. If it is the first 
flight of the day, we may also have to run 
tests such as fire detection and suppression 
for the engines, APU and cargo bays, and 
verify the warning lights and audible warnings 
are functioning, such as the TCAS and 
stall warning/sticker shaker. Now we can 
start turning our attention to the FMC.
Programming the FMC
The FMC is arguably the biggest hurdle 
faced by budding virtual airline pilots. First, 
a quick recap, the Flight Management 
Computer (FMC) houses the Flight 
Management System (FMS) and we input 
data via the Control Display Unit (CDU).
Think of the FMS as a flowchart, where 
we start at the top with the IDENT page, 
then the POS INIT section, followed by 
flight planning and then the performance 
section. Once we have completed all the 
sections, the CDU pre-flight is complete 
and we can proceed to the next step.
We can jump between different pages using 
the INT REF or Index page, but in the following 
example we will use a typical flow used to 
programme the FMC. It also has several in-flight 
pages, which we will cover in a later tutorial.
IDENT 
The IDENT page contains information 
on the aircraft type and engine rating. It 
also displays the version of the AIRAC 
navigational database currently loaded, 
so we can verify it is up-to-date.
POS INIT
This sets the initial position of the 
aircraft. During the alignment phase, we 
enter the ICAO code of the departure 
airport. We can sometimes enter a gate 
number for a more accurate position, 
however, this only works at airports where 
gates are in the AIRAC database.
We set the initial aircraft position by copying 
the long/lat coordinates from the left-hand 
GPS to the scratchpad (this is an area on the 
CDU where we copy and paste data) and 
paste it to the ‘Set Inertial Position’ on LSK 
(Line Select Key) 6R. We can use any GPS 
or IRS sensor to set the initial position, but 
many real-world operators use the left GPS in 
their Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs). 
After setting the initial position, check the GPS 
and IRS coordinates match and that these 
correspond to the gate and/or airport position.
RTE 
There are two ways to programme the route. 
One method is to use a CO ROUTE (Company 
Route) and the second is manual entry. I 
would recommend starting with the manual 
method. It is often necessary to manipulate 
routes in-flight, for example going direct to 
waypoint or closing discontinuities (a break 
in the route) and manual entry will give you 
a better understanding of how to do this.
The route section consists of two parts (or 
pages). On the first one, we enter the departure 
and destination ICAO codes along with the 
flight number. The second page is where we 
enter the airways and waypoints. Think of it 
as being broken down into two columns. On 
the left we have the airways (entered using 
the left LSK keys) and on the right, we have 
the waypoints (added using the right LSK 
keys). Let’s look at the route: EGLL BPK7F 
BPK Q295 CLN L620 REDFA REDF1A EHAM
EGLL is our departure airport and we 
follow the BPK7F SID to BPK. This is the 
last waypoint on the SID and entry point to 
the Q295 airway. On the other end, REDFA 
is the last point on the L620 airway and 
the entry point to the REDFA1A STAR. So, 
our actual route that needs to go in the 
CDU is: BPK Q295 CLN L620 REDFA
BPK is the first waypoint to go in on LSK 
1R (Line Select Key 1R – top right), then we 
insert the Q295 airway on LSK 2L. The next 
waypoint is CLN (LSK 2R) where we join L629 
(LSK 3L) until REDFA which goes in LSK 3R.
This is a relatively short sector, so the route 
After aligning the IRS, 
the main Primary Flight 
Displays (PFD) and 
Navigation Displays (ND) 
will come online.
The engines can be derated 
during take-off. In this example, we 
have selected 10% thrust reduction.

47
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
fits on the second page. For longer hops, 
new pages are automatically appended, so 
for example on a long-haul flight, we might 
have several pages in the RTE section.
The second method is to import a company 
route via the RTE page. Most flight planners 
can export the route to a data file, which we 
can import for a specific add-on aircraft. The 
naming convention for company routes is 
the departure ICAO, followed immediately 
by the destination ICAO and a version 
number, or in this case, EGLLEHAM01.
TOP TIP:  Rather than entering the waypoints 
after each airway, we can simply add the 
airways using the left LSKs and the FMC will 
automatically add each exit waypoint. For 
example, after BPK we only need to enter 
Q295 on LSK2 and L620 on LSK 3 and the 
FMC will automatically add CLN. We do 
however need to add the last waypoint on 
the route (REDFA in this case). This is a great 
time-saving feature for longer routes, but you 
still need to verify each entry; sometimes 
the FMC will pick the wrong exit waypoint.
DEPARR – Departure and Arrival
The last part of the route section is the SID 
and departure runway, entered via the DEPARR 
page. We will also enter the arrival data from 
here once we are enroute. In this case we 
have the BPK7F SID, which we select on the 
left LSK, and Runway 27R selected via the 
right LSK. This will basically inject the SID 
between Runway 27R and the BPK waypoint.
Perf Init
Next up, the performance section - where we 
enter the ZFW, cruise altitude, the centre of 
gravity and fuel, including reserves. We can 
also enter the CI (Cost Index) here. This is a 
number used to optimise the ratio between the 
cost of time and fuel to set the most efficient 
cruise speed. Some flight planners will work 
out a cost index, which you can pick up from 
the OFP, but I usually set it to around 100 
– we are not paying for the fuel after all.
THRUST LIM
The thrust limit page is where we input the 
thrust limits for the take-off and climb segment. 
Airliners are very overpowered, so operators 
commonly use reduced thrust during take-
off to increase engine life and save fuel. 
There are two methods used for reduced 
thrust take-offs. The first method is to derate 
the engines or set them to less power than 
they can generate. Smaller engines generate 
less asymmetric thrust in case of engine 
failure, so we can use a lower Vmc (minimum 
controllable speed with an engine out). This is 
particularly useful on slippery runways where 
lateral control is reduced.  So, we can increase 
the take-off weight by using less power.
The second method is to use an assumed 
temperature. In this case, we tell the engines 
the ambient temperature is higher than the 
actual outside air temperature. Jet engines 
generate less thrust as the outside air 
temperature increases, which results in a 
reduced power setting. By entering a higher 
assumed temperature, we can use reduced 
thrust. We can command full power from 
the engine if needed, but the downside 
is we cannot take advantage of the lower 
Vmc, for example on slippery runways. In 
Airbus aircraft, this is known as FLEX.
 
TAKEOFF REF
Finally, we have the take-off reference page 
which we use to set the take-off configuration, 
including the flap and trim settings, thrust 
reduction altitude and acceleration height. The 
final step is to confirm the Vspeeds, V1 (decision 
speed) Vr (rotate) and V2 (take-off safety speed). 
That is pretty much it for programming the FMC; 
the CDU pre-flight is complete and we can  
set the Mode Control Panel (MCP) with the  
initial climb-out altitude (6,000ft in our case),  
set the heading bug to the runway heading  
(271 for Runway 27R), and the speed window 
would be set to V2. We are now ready to push 
back and start the engines, which we will cover 
next time.   
By Richard Benedikz
We should check the 
route for any errors 
such as discontinuities 
or incorrect waypoints.
Above: Once we have completed data entry on the CDU (Control Display Unit), we can push back from the 
gate and start the engines.
PCP

S
48 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
TUTORIAL     CHALLENGING AIRPORTS
ituated about one-third of the way 
across the North Atlantic, Greenland, 
along with Iceland, has long been 
a regular stop on the hop, skip and 
jump flight across ‘The Pond’ to and from 
Europe. The route is often used by aircraft with 
shorter fuel endurance that require breaking 
the trans-Atlantic journey into stages. One 
such popular refuelling stop is in Narsarsuaq, 
Greenland (BGBW) at a World War Two-era 
airstrip buried 50 miles deep in a fjord on 
the southern tip of the massive landmass. 
Constructed by the War Department of the 
United States in 1941, the field was then known 
by its codename, Bluie West One and was a 
base of operations for allied convoy escorts and 
anti-submarine missions. The airfield was also 
a frequent stopover point for wartime aircraft 
transiting to and from Europe. In the decades 
following the war, the airfield facilities have 
been improved and civil aviation traffic serving 
tourists and residents has slowly increased. 
Whether you are flying scheduled airline 
routes to Narsarsuaq, or utilising it as a mid-
trip fuel stop on a longer journey, operating to 
the airport requires careful consideration and 
preparation due to the extremes of distance, 
weather and geography that the area features. 
Location and climate
In 1942, famed pilot and aviation author Ernest 
Gann, piloting a DC-3 to Narsarsuaq, recalled 
in his book ‘Fate Is the Hunter’ that he was 
briefed “there are three fjords… you will notice 
that all three look exactly alike but only one 
is the right fjord which leads to the field. The 
others are dead ends and you are advised 
to stay out of them unless you have learned 
how to back up an airplane.” Approaching 
Narsarsuaq, Gann was forced ever lower by 
overcast ceilings until he was just 50ft above 
the water. He finally spied the wreckage of 
the SS Montrose, a supply ship wrecked on 
a cliff in the fjord leading to the airfield. He 
wrote “no woman was ever ravished with 
such affectionate eyes as this pitiable hulk.” 
Though afforded better navigation, weather 
information and communications equipment 
Narsarsuaq
Greenland (BGBW)
Above: The rapidly rising terrain in all quadrants means you must maintain situational awareness at all times 
and be aware of aircraft performance such as climb gradient requirements during any missed approach 
procedure. Insert: With terrain rising to over 3,000ft within a few miles of the airport, a terrain awareness 
system or topo display is a valuable tool for situational awareness. Below: Due to the slope of the runway, most 
departures use the downhill advantage of Runway 24 regardless of wind direction.

49
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
than aircrews of 1942, modern day ferry 
pilots, stretched to their range on fuel, no 
doubt share Captain Gann’s relief on finally 
laying eyes on the runway at Narsarsuaq.
Ferry aircraft will often arrive to Narsarsuaq 
after departing from Goose Bay (CYYR) in 
the Canadian province of Newfoundland 
and Labrador, an extended flight over open 
water of 676 nautical miles, which is often 
near the maximum range of the general 
aviation aircraft embarking on the journey. 
Extended range fuel tanks are often 
fitted to aircraft and cold water 
survival equipment is required 
due to the exposed nature 
of the route. The next 
nearest viable alternate/
diversion airport is 
Nuuk (BGGH), a 
not insignificant 
distance of 
nearly 251 
nautical 
miles 
northwest of Narsarsuaq and an airport that, 
in its own right, qualifies as a ‘Challenging 
Airport’, thus making it a bit of a concern as 
an alternate. Even scheduled air carriers flying 
to Narsarsuaq have to keep a close eye on the 
weather, approach minimums and alternate 
weather conditions as they evolve in order to 
make prudent go/no-go decisions. The south 
of Greenland is classified as 
a subarctic climate and 
is quite exposed to 
the regular train of 
Atlantic storms 
which tend to 
run up the 
east coast of 
the United 
States before 
moving 
eastward 
across the 
northern 
Atlantic. 
Average 
temperatures 
remain below 
freezing for all 
but five months of the year and the high 
latitude means that daylight is reduced to 
as little as six hours in the dead of winter. 
Obviously cold temperatures, snow, ice 
and contaminated runways are also factors 
that must be taken into consideration 
when operating to Narsarsuaq. 
As mentioned previously, the airfield is at 
the end of the 50-mile long Tunuliarfik fjord 
with nearby peaks soaring to over 5,000ft. 
Familiarisation with the similarly oriented 
nearby fjords is essential in preventing the 
disaster that Gann alluded to by turning into 
a dead-end arm of one of the many fjords 
along the coast. The field was constructed 
on the flattest land available near the outlet 
of a glacier-fed river and is surrounded by 
high terrain in all quadrants, necessitating 
adherence to instrument procedures or solid 
visual conditions to avoid getting into trouble.
Runway
The 6,004ft concrete Runway 06/24 is unique 
in that it has a severe uphill slope landing to 
the northeast. The beginning of the runway, 
closest to the water, sits at an elevation of 
11ft, while the far end rises at a 1.68% slope 
How to Fly to Narsarsuaq
Flights to Narsarsuaq Airport can be replicated 
using any X-Plane or FSX aircraft that is suitably 
equipped to ﬂ y combined IFR/VFR approaches 
to a runway length of 6,004ft. The largest aircraft 
that historically operated to Narsarsuaq were 
Boeing 757s and DC-8s. 
While stock X-Plane and FSX/P3D airports can 
be used, I’d recommend enhancing the experi-
ence with custom scenery packages. X-Plane 
users can use Trevor ‘tdg’ Guest’s Narsarsuaq 
scenery (donationware) available at X-Plane.org. 
FSX/P3D users can use FlightSim Greenland’s 
scenery located at www.ﬂ ightsim.gl
Approach plates for the entirety of Greenland 
can be found at https://aim.naviair.dk/ under AIP 
Grønland.
In the late ‘60s and ‘70s, some airlines operated their DC-8s to Narsarsuaq, 
one of the largest aircraft to land on the 6,004ft runway.

50 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
TUTORIAL
to 112ft. For obvious reasons, regardless of 
wind direction, most landings are made uphill 
to take advantage of the steep gradient, and 
most take-offs are made downhill. While 6,004ft 
of runway isn’t a vast amount of pavement, the 
slope on landing uphill significantly reduces 
landing rollout, allowing for aircraft as large 
as Boeing 757s and DC-8s to operate to 
the relatively short field. With regard to the 
downhill slope for departing aircraft, while it is 
true that it assists in reaching rotation speed 
faster, the gradient can significantly reduce 
the balanced field V1 take-off decision speed 
since an aborted take-off after heading down 
the hill will require an enormous amount of 
stopping distance, particularly if the runway 
has snow or ice contaminants present. The 
runway is lit with high intensity lights and 
Runway 6 has a 3.5° PAPI. A notation indicates 
that the PAPI to Runway 6 should only be 
used within 2nm of the threshold, since an 
extension of that approach path does not 
meet obstacle clearance requirements. 
Approaches
Arrivals into Narsarsuaq can expect to shoot 
one of a variety of non-precision approaches, 
all of which have high minimums that should be 
given consideration if weather is forecast to be 
a factor. Approaches include NDB, NDB-DME 
and straight-in and circling RNAV approaches. 
The absolute lowest published minimums of 
1,240ft MSL (1,229ft AGL) are for Category 
A aircraft performing the RNAV Z RWY 06 
approach that are capable of a 5% missed 
approach climb gradient. Minimums for many of 
the approaches are further broken down based 
on aircraft climb performance during the missed 
approach segment. Better performing aircraft 
capable of higher percentage climb gradients 
are allowed to descend further ‘into the hole’ 
so to speak. There is also a VMC arrival chart 
Above: Narsarsuaq is a common stopover point for aircraft with limited range that are ferrying across the 
Atlantic. Below: A situation you don’t want to see when arriving in the Narsarsuaq area is valleys ﬁ lled with low 
cloud and mountain tops poking through the undercast.

51
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
that can be used in conjunction with the other 
instrument approach procedures that depicts 
the racetrack pattern to be flown west of the 
airfield over the waters of the fjord, remaining 
within about 3 DME from NQ (111.85). All of 
the approaches can be considered instrument 
segments leading to a visual approach, so 
manoeuvring of some sort or another is likely 
to be required to get lined up on Runway 6. All 
of the approaches are annotated that they may 
only be used during daylight and civil twilight. 
Additionally, all four RNAV approaches must 
be altitude-corrected for low temperatures. 
Many of the approach charts for Narsarsuaq 
have multiple warnings, notations and 
restrictions printed on them that require careful 
study. Examples of these include warnings that 
the approach course is offset 15°, warnings 
that turbulence can be expected and notations 
that missed approach procedure turns must 
be flown at a maximum of 130 knots to ensure 
the turn radius complies with terrain and 
obstruction clearance. There are also aircraft 
performance considerations that should be 
addressed by the pilot prior to commencing 
the approach. For instance, is your aircraft 
capable of making a greater than standard 
descent rate upon breaking out of the clouds 
on an approach or do you risk a circling 
approach where sky, clouds and terrain may 
all blend together in a perfect recipe for spatial 
disorientation? If you miss the approach due to 
weather, do you have fuel to proceed to your 
alternate (and how is the weather there?) or are 
you committed to flying multiple approaches 
until you either land or exhaust your fuel?
Departures
Once you’ve grabbed some fuel or spent some 
time visiting the glaciers around Narsarsuaq, 
it is time to head to North America, Europe 
or other airports in Greenland or Iceland. The 
published Standard Instrument Departure 
(SID) consists of a take-off from Runway 
24 followed by a circling climb in visual 
conditions over the water remaining within 
3 DME from NQ until reaching 1,200ft, then 
proceeding outbound on the 277° magnetic 
bearing from the Narsarsuaq NDB (359) while 
climbing above the minimum sector altitude of 
7,100ft. The climb gradient for the procedure 
is not very restrictive at the standard 200ft 
per nautical mile. Cautions in the aerodrome 
notes warn that aircraft may experience ATC 
delays and to not start aircraft engines until 
an ATC clearance is obtained. The notes 
also mention several fixes that pilots are 
encouraged to file when arriving and departing 
from Narsarsuaq to maximise ATC flight 
level and route availability. It would be wise 
to study all of the airport notes, procedural 
notes and perhaps do a bit of internet 
research for tips and tricks to ferrying through 
Narsarsuaq prior to embarking on such a trip. 
Conclusion
Flying to Narsarsuaq is a journey that varies 
between the norm, for those air carriers that 
routinely make the trip from shorter distances, 
and the extreme, for those ferry pilots who 
barely have enough fuel to make it. Though 
the open ocean between distant landmasses 
is featureless, the visual reward upon reaching 
Greenland is worth the monotony of the middle 
of the trip.  
By Chris Frishmuth
Left: Helicopter and military trafﬁ c makes up a fair portion of Narsarsuaq’s activity.
Below: The sub-Arctic climate, coupled with southern Greenland jutting out into the North Atlantic, means 
contaminated runways are very likely.
Above: Terrain that lurks in the darkness can 
be revealed with synthetic vision or night vision 
equipment. Below: Narsarsuaq’s high latitude means 
that at the height of winter, there may only be around 
six hours of daylight.
PCP

52 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
FEATURE       INTERVIEW WITH BLUESKY FLIGHT SIMULATIONS
light Sim 2017, held at the RAF 
Museum, Cosford in October, saw 
the announcement of two new 
exciting products from two new 
companies: ‘Deadstick’, produced by REMEX 
Software (read interview starting on page 24) 
and BlueSky Flight Simulations’ Curtiss P-40F 
Warhawk – an add-on for Dovetail’s Flight 
Sim World. Eager to find out more about this 
new military aircraft for FSW, we invited Chris 
Ellis co-founder of BlueSky FS to tell us more 
about the company and its P-40F Warhawk. 
PC Pilot: Thanks for agreeing to take 
part in this Q&A. May I start by asking 
you to tell our readers how and why 
BlueSky Flight Simulations was formed?
Chris Ellis: Many thanks to PC 
Pilot for the Q&A and your continued 
support over the years.
BlueSky was formed recently to specifically 
develop add-on aircraft and solutions for 
Flight Sim World (FSW) and the wider 
Microsoft Flight Sim-based platforms. 
The team is made up of very talented 
artists renowned for their work in the flight 
simulator community including 3D modellers, 
texture artists and flight model engineers.
PC Pilot: Tell us a little about the team 
members – particularly with respect to 
their professional backgrounds.
Chris Ellis: My background in flight 
simulations started many years ago 
developing modules for Lock-On right 
through to current DCS World modules. 
I’ve also been extensively involved in 
some military projects using Prepar3D.
We have some team members that started 
out in the aerobatic flight sim community that 
Curtiss P-40F W
Flight Sim World gets a new fighter and developer
BlueSky Flight 
Simulations
Every switch, lever 
and gauge does what 
it’s supposed to do 
with great accuracy.
F

53
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
are exceptional at what they do in terms of 
developing aircraft for their hobbies and have 
brought their talents into the consumer market.
Other team members such as Gibbage, 
renowned for his IL-2 work and exceptionally 
detailed cockpit textures, are professional 
developers. Some are developers for multiple 
flight sim platforms which lend themselves very 
nicely to the products and solutions we make.
PC Pilot: What would you say is 
the company’s underlying philosophy 
and ultimate objective?
Chris Ellis: Our philosophy is to enjoy 
making aircraft that we, as hobbyists, would 
also love to fly in modern-day flight sims.
The level of detail our team get into is 
amazing. Every nut, bolt and screw is perfectly 
positioned and textured as in the real aircraft. 
Every switch, lever and gauge does what 
it’s supposed to do with great accuracy.
When you have a passion for what you 
do it really shows in the module.
Our ultimate objective is to make 
professional-level aircraft that the community 
will enjoy flying forever, as we do.
PC Pilot: Your first project under the brand 
label BlueSky FS is the Curtiss P-40F Warhawk. 
How did this project come into being and 
why was this particular aircraft chosen?
Chris Ellis: The P-40F is being 
developed by our sister company for 
another platform in conjunction with 
the one we are developing for FSW.
It was a logical choice for us to look 
at other platforms in the marketplace 
and see where we think it would best sit 
given the sim’s development pattern and 
aircraft already in development for it.
The assets used to make the aircraft module 
were easily transferable to other platforms, 
with some specific tweaks of course.
PC Pilot: Why did BlueSky decide to produce 
a P-40F for FSW rather than any other platform?
Chris Ellis: Although FSW is a new sim on 
the marketplace, we felt that we could partner 
with Dovetail Games to develop add-on 
content for its platform. The Flight team there 
has the same passion, drive and excellence 
that we have in terms of giving the community 
the best aircraft and platform that again, 
we as simmers, would want to fly in.
The P-40F is the newest and fastest 
aircraft in the FSW stable to date and 
will give the community partly what they 
have asked for in faster/different aircraft.
Its systems, like hydraulics, are unique and 
will give the study-level simmers what they are 
looking for - something different to GA aircraft.
PC Pilot: Tell us a little about the research and 
work that has gone into this project with respect 
to the internal and external 3D modelling.
Chris Ellis: The amount of research that 
goes into the level of detail that we wanted 
to achieve is insane. Many days and months 
were spent crawling over actual aircraft 
scrutinising every inch of the airframe. 
Huge numbers of photos were taken to 
again get every level of detail required, right 
down to painted-over rust. Our photo library 
is well into the thousands just for the P-40F.
Flight manuals were reviewed and 
ground engineers were talked to about 
the little dents and nicks and how 
they came to be on the aircraft.
This allows the 3D artists to meticulously 
recreate the virtual representation with 
unparalleled detail, dents and all.
It also helps that we have some World 
War Two aircraft ‘nuts’ working on the team 
whose knowledge is also invaluable.
PC Pilot: Will your P-40F have 
a fully interactive cockpit?
Chris Ellis: Yes, it certainly will. Again 
based on the research we have gathered, 
pilot manual, pilot notes, talking to engineers 
and the actual pilots who fly the aircraft, 
we have been able to faithfully recreate the 
cockpit environment and functionality you 
would find if you flew the real aircraft.
Some more advanced features such 
as GPS navigation and advanced radio 
Warhawk
The P-40F variant 
BlueSky have modelled 
was powered by the 
Rolls-Royce Merlin 
V-1650-1 engine.

54 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
FEATURE       INTERVIEW WITH BLUESKY FLIGHT SIMULATIONS
stacks will be added in after release, 
however the default in-sim Garmin system 
has been included by pressing Shift+2.
PC Pilot: When it comes to the flight 
modelling, can you describe the work 
and process involved in developing 
this aspect of the simulation? 
Chris Ellis: We take the aircraft performance 
data from the flight manual and any pilot 
feedback, as not every aircraft flies the same, 
and plot those graphs and details into our tools, 
which produces the simulated flight model.
This is then tested and tweaked based on the 
in-sim debug graphs which allows us to check 
actual performance data vs in-sim flight profile.
FSW has some fantastic debug tools 
which makes our job a lot easier when 
checking parameters. The flight modelling 
also includes ground handling so you’ll see 
the suspension and torque effects as you 
power up the aircraft to taxi out or take-off.
PC Pilot: In terms of the systems modelling, 
what level of fidelity have you aimed for? 
In addition, will the user be able to do 
a full start-up from ‘cold and dark’?
Chris Ellis: We’ve aimed for it to be as 
realistic as possible within the sim. Dovetail 
has helped us immensely with the hydraulics 
system in particular as we’ve mentioned. 
This allows simple keyboard controls, 
such as F and G, and the Saitek panels 
integrated into FSW to be used and of 
course a fully realistic clickable or keyboard/
joystick binding for the hydraulic system. 
We’ve extended the Cold and Dark 
checklist on the P-40F to include pre-start, 
engine start and post-start checklist items 
realistic to starting the actual aircraft.
When the core sim is updated to enable 
more advanced checklists such as 
take-off and landing, we will of course 
update ours to include these items.
BlueSky’s P-40F comes 
with both real life and 
custom artistic liveries.
The P-40F is the newest 
and fastest aircraft in the 
FSW stable to date.

55
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
PC Pilot: The P-40F was powered by 
the Allison engine. How did you go about 
replicating its distinctive sound?
Chris Ellis: Actually the version of our 
P-40F that we have modelled has the Rolls-
Royce Merlin V-1650-1 engine in it. 
You’ll notice that there is no intake on the top 
of the engine which is typical with the Allison.
This particular engine type saw combat in major 
theatres such as the Mediterranean in 1943 with 
the Free French Air Force and Operation Torch in 
the South-West Pacific theatre.   
The actual aircraft we had access to had 
a lot of historical data about the engine 
and its performance which we have 
re-created in the flight model, let alone 
the distinctive Merlin sounds which are 
amazing inside and outside of the cockpit.
These later variants of the P-40F typically 
known as Kittyhawk to the British, fulfilled the 
wish to fit a Merlin engine in the P-40F which 
ultimately led to the development of the P-51.
The sounds were professionally recorded by 
our sound engineer using omni-directional mics 
and then processed for use within the simulator.
We think users will absolutely love the unique 
sounds we have added, such as rough running 
and engine cut-out when flying inverted or 
pushing negative-G for a period of time, along 
with the main engine sounds of course.
PC Pilot: What aspects of this project 
did you find most challenging?
Chris Ellis: I’d say the most challenging 
aspect was the coding for the sim as 
the team was not used to this method 
of scripting the systems logic.
The Dovetail team has been instrumental 
in helping with this along with an excellent 
SDK and in-sim tools to allow for the 
advanced features required for the P-40F.
We’re always thinking of ways to improve 
the user experience while maintaining 
accuracy of the real aircraft systems.
The other challenging aspect is actual 
development because we love flying her in 
FSW for hours so much that we often get 
lost in what we need to work on next!
PC Pilot: In the process of creating 
this simulation, what did you discover 
about the aircraft in terms of its 
operational and handling qualities?
Chris Ellis: She’s certainly a heavy bird and 
takes a little while to climb up to altitude, 
however she is more than capable of cruising at 
a good speed high up. With her weight, she can 
dive exceptionally fast and is very manoeuvrable 
compared with other fighters of her time.
The P-40F usually had an advantage 
over the Bf-109 in horizontal manoeuvres 
(turning), dive speed and structural strength 
and was roughly equal in firepower.
She was, however, slightly inferior in 
speed and outclassed in rate of climb and 
operational ceiling, but was certainly quite 
effective against Axis aircraft and contributed 
to a slight shift in the Allies’ favour.
It was also considered to be superior to 
the Hurricane, which it replaced as the 
primary fighter of the Desert Air Force.
PC Pilot: Will the package include a 
choice of liveries, and if so, which ones?
Chris Ellis: Yes, it will. We have some real 
life liveries and some custom artistic liveries.
We have the following real life ones: Trixie, Miss 
Alma, Rozanoff and 209, which are all uniquely 
different and have a vast history behind them.  
We also have an all-metal skin which really 
shows off the work our texture and model artists 
have done for PBR (Physically Based Rendering) 
2.0 in FSW, along with a custom-made skin 
called Aimee, or Little Bear as I call her.
PC Pilot: Finally, when do you hope 
to release your P-40F Warhawk?
Chris Ellis: We are aiming for release 
by the end of November 2017.
PC Pilot: Thanks for taking the time to take 
part in this interview and we wish you all the 
best of luck with this release.  
By Derek Davis
Above: Huge numbers of photos were taken to get every level of detail required. Below: With her weight, she 
can dive exceptionally fast and is very manoeuvrable compared to other fighters of her time.
The Cold and Dark checklist on the P-40F includes 
pre-start, engine start and post-start checklist items 
realistic to starting the actual aircraft.
PCP

56
www.pcpilot.net
/ PC PILOT #113
TUTORIAL
e are now getting to the 
business end of this series, 
so we will introduce some 
more demanding manoeuvres 
to keep you working hard at perfecting 
your flying techniques while continuing 
to develop your theoretical knowledge.
Going around
One of the first things you probably noticed 
when flying in a congested circuit is that 
you are sometimes required to execute a 
go-around because the preceding aircraft 
has not cleared the runway. Or possibly you 
have made a dreadful approach or even a 
bounced landing and you feel it prudent to 
go around and try again. At first glance this 
appears rather simple and easy to do as one 
thing most flight simulators aren’t good at 
is replicating the actual control forces you 
experience. We continually trim these forces 
away and we certainly would do so during 
final approach as we lower our flaps. As we 
lower each stage, the increased wing area 
and lift will initially make the nose rise but we 
can’t allow this to happen as our airspeed 
will erode and that is the last thing we want 
at low airspeed and close to the ground. We 
must therefore physically hold the nose in 
the correct attitude to maintain our preferred 
rate of descent and airspeed as we trim 
these now quite significant forces away.
As we continue our final approach, we would 
expect the flaps to be in their landing position 
and nicely trimmed well before 200ft AGL. 
So if we must go around at a low altitude 
we must know what to expect so we can 
safely control the aircraft while dealing with 
these forces. The very first thing we must 
do when a go around is initiated is to close 
the carburettor heat fully (I hope you hadn’t 
forgotten about that!) and apply full power. We 
do not want to raise the nose just yet because 
as we apply full power, the increased thrust 
and the fact that we have a large area of flaps 
exposed will make the nose want to pitch up 
with a surprising amount of force on the yoke. 
Again the ‘low airspeed, low altitude’ danger 
warning should be echoing in your brain!
Once we have full power and have arrested 
our descent, we can then raise our flaps 
to perhaps 20° or possibly 10°, in stages. 
This partial raising of the flaps should result 
in a slight increase in airspeed so you can 
allow the nose to gently rise and the aircraft 
W
Stage 1 – Lesson 8.
By Peter Stark
Back to Basics
Fig 1 - If you have to go around,  
track off the centreline to 
minimise any conflicts.

57
www.pcpilot.net
#113 PC PILOT /
Best Angle of Climb (Vx)
Best Rate of Climb (Vy)
avoid a mishap. For this exercise, choose 
a small dirt or grass runway with perhaps 
some trees at the end as extra incentive. As 
we won’t be flying near any large cities in 
this exercise, this is your chance to crank up 
your autogen sliders so that there are lots of 
obstacles in your vicinity. The accompanying 
screenshots were taken at the wonderfully 
named Bear Gulch-Hoodsport/WA38 with 
Orbx NA Pacific North West. Some other 
suitable examples are Lignite (11Z) and 
Stampede (Z90), both in Alaska and both 
with one ‘reasonable’ take-off and approach 
run and the other being more ‘hostile’!
We continue to use the A2A Simulation GA 
aircraft for this series due to their exemplary 
realism and a check of their Cessna C172 
Pilot’s Operating Manual reveals a Short 
Field Takeoff Distance chart. Conveniently, 
this table also tells us just how to go about 
a short-field take-off! For example, the 
assumptions are that we will use 10° flap, 
apply full throttle before brake release on a 
dry, paved runway in nil wind. Some other 
notes tell us exactly how to apply some 
variations for different wind and runway 
conditions. By selecting mild weather at 
20°C, we can see the table in Figure 2 tells 
us that we will need 980ft of runway to lift 
off, or 1745ft to clear a 50ft high obstacle in 
our path. If using a dry grass strip like Bear 
Gulch, the notes also tell us to add 15% to 
those distances which brings our ground 
roll to 1127ft. So we are good for take-off – 
just - from Bear Gulch with its 1300ft strip.
While our manual has told us to use 
Fig 3 - Don’t confuse your Vy and Vx.
Above: Fig 2 - A check of the A2A C172 manual 
reassures us that we have sufﬁ cient runway for take-off.
enter a gentle climb. Don’t be tempted to 
raise the flaps entirely in one hit as our 
stall speed will increase commensurately 
and we don’t have a great deal of margin 
at this stage! Now you can trim out the 
forces and start to track just off the right 
hand side of the runway so that you have 
an unimpeded view of the runway and any 
aircraft operating on it (Figure 1). Check local 
procedures if you are operating on parallel 
runways - you don’t want to drift over the 
adjoining runway! Once past 200ft AGL and 
safely climbing, you can retract the flaps 
fully and complete your circuit as normal.
Short-field take-offs
Most trainee pilots are fortunate enough 
to operate out of luxuriously long runways 
with a nearby coffee shop or burger bar. In 
some parts of the world however, every take-
off is out of a short, dusty airstrip and this 
type of operation certainly requires some 
additional skills and an understanding of 
what the dangers are if you are to safely 
Always overﬂ y your short ﬁ eld to look for 
hazards and plan your approach.

58
www.pcpilot.net
/ PC PILOT #113
TUTORIAL
10° flap, this does vary from 10° to 25° 
depending on the aircraft. The reason for 
using flaps is that they will provide more lift 
and hence lower the stall speed, allowing 
you to climb out at your best angle of climb 
speed (see next section) with a lower nose 
attitude than would otherwise be possible.
Do a full run-up to ensure there are no 
mechanical issues such as a faulty magneto 
that may interfere with having full power 
available to you when you need it. This 
becomes really important if flying A2A 
Simulations aircraft where fouled plugs are 
simulated. Line up on the end of the runway 
as close to the threshold as possible so 
no runway length is wasted. Stand on the 
brakes until we have full power confirmed 
and then release the brakes. Make gentle 
control inputs to remain in the centre of the 
airstrip. You should accelerate smoothly 
and rotate normally at the C172 prescribed 
short-field liftoff speed at 51 knots. It is 
extremely dangerous lifting off early as you 
will be decreasing the margin between your 
speed and the aircraft stall speed. Once 
you have successfully left the ground, don’t 
be misled into thinking your job is over. The 
actual take-off is only one consideration. 
We now need to manage the initial climb 
out to avoid any obstacles such as trees, 
power lines etc. The first stage of this is to 
accelerate to 57 knots by the time you are at 
just 50ft, ie quite a flat climb, until we have 
achieved this magical number. From here, we 
need to have made an earlier decision – to 
climb out at our best angle or our best rate 
– and it is critical to know the difference.
Best rate of climb - Vy
In a nutshell, this refers to how quickly we 
may reach our cruise altitude. It is usually 
measured in vertical ‘feet per minute’ and as 
that term suggests, it is more concerned with 
your climb over TIME rather than your climb 
over DISTANCE. The Vy for the A2A Cessna 
172 at sea level is 79 knots. (Incidentally, one 
of the records for the best rate of climb is 
held by the Sukhoi Su-27 at 64,000ft/min!)
Best angle of climb - Vx
So unless you are flying an Su-27, you may 
need to read this section. By contrast, our 
best angle of climb tells us at what angle we 
must climb to avoid obstacles in the vicinity 
as it is purely concerned with achieving 
the highest altitude in the shortest possible 
distance over the ground. The aviation term 
for best angle of climb is ‘Vx’ and again, this 
should appear in your aircraft manual. Vx 
for the A2A Cessna 172 is 60 knots, some 
19 knots below our Vy. So passing 57 knots 
after liftoff, we must raise the nose to a much 
higher nose attitude than normal to maintain 
our Vx of 60 knots. Maintain Vx until you have 
cleared all those obstacles before lowering the 
nose gently to allow the aircraft to accelerate 
to your best rate of climb speed of 79 knots, 
as you start to clean up by retracting the flaps 
and continue with your planned climb. Figure 
3 demonstrates why we need to consider 
which speed to use, especially after a short-
field take-off with nearby obstructions.
Vx
Vy
Above: Comparing the nose attitudes at Vx (10° flap) 
and Vy.
Keep the weight off the nose wheel during 
short-field operations and always plan ahead.
Fig 4 - If you have obstructions in your go-around path, plan your ‘bug out’ point before making your approach.

59
www.pcpilot.net
#113 PC PILOT /
Short-field landings
There will be situations, like landing back 
at the airport that just required a short-field 
take-off, where you will need to complete 
a short-field landing. Perhaps a more apt 
description is a short-field approach and 
landing! It isn’t just a matter of pulling the 
aircraft up quickly, but being prepared 
during the entire approach with full flaps, 
at the relevant speed and glide slope to 
clear any obstacles before touching down. 
Use the same airfield we just used for our 
short-field take-off and fly over the airfield 
looking not only for obstructions such as 
trees and power lines, but also considering 
your ‘bug out point’ and escape route. 
Should the approach be towards hills 
or high trees that prevent successful a 
go-around from late finals, you will need 
to plan this bug out point at which you will 
make your go-around decision (Figure 4).
Once satisfied, you have completed a circuit 
to the point of just becoming established on 
final approach. Under normal circumstances 
we fly finals at around 70 knots with full flaps 
in the A2A C172. In our short-field approach 
however, we would like to continue our 
approach at full flaps at our full flap ‘short-
field approach speed’ of 62 knots. Also, 
as we may have obstacles such as trees in 
our normal approach path, we may need to 
modify our approach so that the latter part 
is much steeper than normal (Figure 5), but 
while still holding 62 knots. The trick here 
is to point the aircraft at the threshold and 
regulate airspeed with throttle. As soon as 
you are sure you will reach the runway, close 
the throttle to reduce our speed and flare and 
touchdown firmly as close to the threshold 
as possible. You certainly don’t want to be 
floating down a short airstrip with obstacles 
at the far end. If runway length is still a 
concern, get your nose wheel on the ground 
and simultaneously raise the flaps. Brake 
firmly without locking the wheels up and pull 
the yoke fully back until you have come to a 
standstill. We raise the flaps to decrease lift 
and transfer weight to the wheels, making the 
braking more effective. Pulling the yoke back 
helps take some forces off the nose wheel 
which is an important consideration when 
operating out of a soft, or gravel airfield.
If you chose to try these techniques at the 
airports suggested above, you probably didn’t 
have too much trouble in touching down close 
to the threshold and pulling up before the 
runway ran out. Now try taking off and landing 
on the reciprocal runways. If you have your 
autogen set high, the trees near the threshold 
will provide a physical barrier and prevent you 
from touching down on the threshold. You 
will have to use your short-field technique 
with quite a steep descent which means you 
will be using less power - if any. Remember 
that the aim isn’t to fly between the trees but 
over them, touch down as soon as possible 
and pull up before the end of the runway.
Finally, a couple of airmanship issues with 
short-field landings. They are by their nature, 
riskier manoeuvres than standard landings as 
you are operating at low airspeeds. If the wind 
conditions are gusty, you should consider 
using less flap and a higher approach speed. 
If the conditions are really that difficult, 
divert to a more suitable airport!
Next time
To hone your skills, head to Alaska and 
explore the back country by visiting some of 
the large number of short airstrips there are to 
choose from. Next time around we’ll continue 
some advanced techniques such as glide 
approaches and forced or unplanned landings. 
PCP
Fortunately, not all airstrips require you to 
take-off and land over a wooden bridge.
Flying into short airstrips can 
open up a new aspect and detailed 
world to your flight simulation.
Fig 5 - Hazards near the threshold mean you may need to fly a much steeper approach path than usual.

60 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
TUTORIAL
f you were asked what the 
world’s busiest air routes are, 
your thoughts may shift to North 
America. The fact is, the top 15 
are all outside the US with all of the top 10 
in the Asia/Pacific region. This issue we fly 
the top two on the list in Korea and Japan.
Flight planning
Both routes will be flown using Boeing 
737 aircraft using the PMDG 737-800WL 
in Jeju Air livery and the PMDG 737-
700 in All Nippon Airways livery for the 
Japanese leg. You may of course choose 
any similar aircraft in your hangar. 
Both South Korea and Japan have strong 
flight simulation communities and there 
are many file libraries that contain scenery 
downloads for FS2004, FSX, P3D and X-Plane. 
In addition to this, we have used FTX Global 
and FTX Vector for additional realism. 
Full details of the scenery used can be found 
in the Pilot’s Notes in this issue’s download 
section at www.pcpilot.net, along with flight 
plans, route charts and where to get the liveries 
used in this Flight Adventure. We have provided 
notes on both RNAV routes for those flying 
aircraft equipped with FMCs, plus radio navaid 
routes for those without. Accordingly, there 
may be subtle differences, but our narrative will 
ensure you successfully complete your flights! 
As you might expect with high density routes, 
there are a number of altitude/speed restrictions 
in the vicinity of some of these airports, but 
all required charts are freely available online. 
#1: Seoul/RKSS to Jeju/RKPC
Seoul sits on the Han River just 35 miles from 
the Demilitarised Zone with North Korea. It is 
a vibrant city with a population density second 
only to Tokyo and keeps visitors entertained 
with its history, national parks, great food and 
the world’s fastest internet speeds! So perhaps 
it shouldn’t be a total surprise that it features 
as a port in the busiest air route in the world.
Recent figures reveal this route annually flies 
an astonishing 6,500,000 passengers per 
year between Seoul’s Gimpo Airport and the 
resort island of Jeju – and that’s each way. 
Flights leave on this route more than five times 
every hour, so it isn’t hard to catch a flight. If 
you add in passengers arriving in Jeju from 
I
                        FLIGHT ADVENTURE
The World’s  
 Busiest Routes
Be sure not to wander west of the approach path into Jeju 
or you may get tangled in the Hallasan volcano.
Above: The standard arrivals into Haneda 
take you high over Chiba prefecture before 
making your final approach over Tokyo Bay.

61
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
other Asian airports, total passenger numbers 
pass 26 million per year. Originally founded 
in 2005, Jeju Air started operations as a low-
cost carrier using a fleet of Boeing 737-800 
aircraft and so the 737 in Jeju Air livery is a 
perfect match for our flight. The main runway 
at Jeju is a very generous 10,433ft, so you can 
select almost any other aircraft if you prefer.
The December surface winds in this part of 
Asia are usually light north westerlies, so you 
can plan on departing Gimpo via Runway 
32L/R. Your FMC route for this relatively 
short 260nm route is RKSS – SOT1X – SOT 
(or OSN) – KWA – IPDAS – IPDAS3P - RKPC. 
Your alternative route if flying with just VOR 
navaids is:  RKSS – SE - OSN – KWA – RKPC.
If using an FMC, fly the SOT1X SID to 
Songtan/SOT, while those using radio nav aids 
should follow the procedure below, which very 
closely matches the SOT1X SID. After take-off, 
maintain runway heading as you clean up until 
you pass the SE NDB (219KHz) before turning 
left to 233°. Hold this heading as you climb out 
until you can intercept the 151 radial inbound 
of the Osan VOR (114.7MHz) and track directly 
to Osan while climbing to your cruise level of 
FL260. If by chance you have looked at your 
FSX/P3D maps during your flight preparation, 
you may have found that Songtan does not 
exist. Fear not as Osan/OSN VOR is at the 
same location and substitutes for Songtan.
Above: Jeju Air is a low-cost carrier that ﬂ ies frequently from Gimpo to Jeju.
The world’s two 
busiest air routes – 
both in Asia.

62 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
TUTORIAL
Once overhead Osan/OSN, track directly to 
Gwangju VOR (114.4MHz) on the 192 radial. As 
this route is quite short, you will need to start 
planning your descent as soon as you reach 
your cruise level. From Gwangju, you will track 
directly towards Jeju/RKPC and this is usually 
the perfect place to start your descent. As in 
Gimpo, the winds at Jeju are most likely to be 
light and from the north west, which usually 
favours Runway 06. If using an FMC, track 
from Gwangju to IPDAS intersection where you 
can intercept the IPDAS 3P STAR which will 
take you straight to the MAMMY intersection, 
conveniently the initial approach fix for either 
the Runway 06 RNAV or ILS approach.
If using radio nav aids, you can closely 
approximate this STAR by tracking directly from 
Gwangju to the Jeju/YDM VOR (109.0MHz) until 
you get to 14DME, when you should fly the arc 
counter clockwise while descending to 3,400ft. 
This will lead you to a nice intercept of the  
Runway 06 ILS (109.9MHz). Either way, 
take care with your radio channels 
as the Jeju VOR and Runway 06 ILS 
frequencies are almost identical.
As you will be approaching from the 
north, your only terrain issues will be if you 
overshoot the 14DME arc and end up to 
the east of the localiser where you may 
find you get up close and personal with 
the 6,398ft volcano cone at Hallasan.
Now, why are all these people flying to Jeju? 
Jeju is a volcanic island formed from lava 
flow about two million years ago and is a 
World Heritage-listed site. The climate is quite 
mild compared to mainland Korea with the 
temperature almost never going below zero and 
this appeals to tourists and couples on their 
honeymoon as they climb the volcano, explore 
lava tubes, relax in spa resorts or, ahem, visiting 
the famous Loveland outdoor sculpture park. 
#2: Sapporo/RJCC to Tokyo 
Haneda/RJTT
Not far behind the #1 on the world’s busiest 
route is the Japanese route between Sapporo 
and Tokyo with 6.2 million passengers flying 
the route each year. Sapporo is the capital 
of Japan’s northern island of Hokkaido 
and this large island attracts visitors for 
snow skiing in winter and the mountainous 
countryside in summer. Having hosted 
a Winter Olympic Games, Sapporo also 
hosts the annual Yuki Matsuri, or snow 
festival, where hundreds of spectacular ice 
and snow sculptures adorn the streets. 
As in Korea, the December winds are more 
likely to be from the northwest and so our 
route notes generally reflect this. Your route 
for this leg is:  RKSS – GEFFY1 - HWE – MRE 
– FKE – STONE (or TLE, see note below) – 
CACAO STAR - RJTT. If equipped, you can fly 
the GEFFY 1 departure from Chitose, or after 
take-off, simply track via the Chitose/CHE 
(116.9MHz) and Hakodate/HWE (112.3MHz) 
VORs before proceeding on your planned route 
while climbing to your cruise level of FL380. 
The route notes below use the enroute VORs 
as the principal navigation aids, but users 
of FMCs will be flying an identical route until 
we start our standard arrival into Haneda.
From Hakodate VOR, track 194° to the 
AomorI/MRE VOR on 114.1MHz. In northern 
Honshu, it can be as little as 120km from the 
west coast to the east, so it shouldn’t be a 
surprise that on most clear days you can see 
east-west across the country from FL380 with 
the central mountain range clearly visible. 
From Aomori, track 192° to Fukushima/FKE 
VOR (113.45MHz). While Fukushima’s terrain 
                        FLIGHT ADVENTURE
Passing into Japan’s main 
island of Honshu. On a good 
day, you’ll be able to see right 
across the country during 
your route southwards.
So congested is the Jeju International Airport, that an additional 
airport is being developed on the island’s south coast.
The records keep coming with the greater Tokyo 
area also being the most populous city worldwide.

63
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
ranges from a mountainous interior, it is quite 
flat nearer the coast. It hit the headlines in 
2011 when a devastating tsunami swept 
along the adjoining coastal areas resulting 
in many lives being lost and the melt-down 
of reactors at a nuclear power plant.
Once overhead Fukushima, track 197° towards 
the Ami/TLE VOR (116.0MHz). Note that this 
VOR is co-located with the STONE intersection. 
This is quite handy as we start our descent 
into Haneda as STONE/TLE is the start of 
quite complex instructions. This is because the 
current flight rules don’t allow you to fly over the 
large city of Chiba or over Tokyo CBD at lower 
altitudes. All arrival routes instead keep you 
quite high over Chiba Prefecture before allowing 
you to finally track to Haneda over Tokyo Bay. 
Our notes will guide you to a Runway 34L/R 
RNAV or VOR/ILS approach. If you use real 
world weather and the winds do not favour 
34L/R, be aware that the approaches to all 
other runways still fly over Chiba Prefecture 
and Tokyo Bay to avoid noise pollution in 
urban areas. Some, such as Runway 16L/R 
then require a short visual approach during 
the final stages. Also, Runways 05/06 
would not normally be used for landings as 
it would require a low approach over the 
adjacent Kawasaki Petroluem Combinat 
plant. So, if you’re up for an extra challenge, 
download the entire 103 pages of Haneda 
charts and knock your socks off.
RNAV CACAO Arrival
After passing Fukushima, select the CACAO 
arrival for Runway 34R. This will direct you 
from the STONE intersection at 11,000ft to 
the south as you descend over eastern Chiba 
Prefecture. The approach then turns you north 
west to the CACAO intersection. From there 
you can choose to intercept either the Runway 
34L/R RNAV approach, the Runway 34L ILS on 
111.7MHz or the 34R ILS on 108.9MHz. Easy!
VOR arrival
Perhaps as a legacy to older aircraft without 
FMCs, Haneda still offers an arrival that only 
requires a single VOR. Your plan here, just as 
with the RNAV approach, is to arrive at the 
TLE VOR (116.0MHz) at 11,000ft and less than 
250 knots. Then continue your descent as 
you track directly to towards the Haneda/HNE 
VOR (112.2MHz) on the 216° radial inbound, 
noting that you must still be above 8,000ft 
at 28DME. As you approach 24DME, turn 
left and intercept the 22DME arc. Follow the 
arc to the south as you descend to no less 
than 5,000ft until less than 20DME inbound 
when you can start slowing to 180 knots as 
you approach the 147° radial (327° inbound). 
This is your cue to now start your turn on 
to 307° to intercept either the Runway 34L 
or 34R ILS using the frequencies above.
Welcome to Tokyo
There are plenty of things to explore in 
Tokyo for both the tourist and the flight sim 
enthusiast. The Pilot Notes available in this 
issue’s download section at www.pcpilot.
net will give you some suggestions. Oh, for 
the record, the next two busiest air routes 
are, at #3: Japan’s Fukuoka to Tokyo route 
and at #4: Australia’s Melbourne to Sydney 
route. Next time around, as the northern 
hemisphere is in the depths of winter, 
we will head south and explore northern 
Australia’s tropical Torres Strait Islands while 
we learn about an iconic workhorse.
By Peter Stark
PCP
If the RNAV approaches are a 
bit too challenging, try the simpler 
SINGO arrival using the Haneda VOR.
Touching down at Tokyo’s Haneda Airport where 8,600 passengers 
per hour are processed – the ﬁ fth busiest on the planet!
Climbing out with the Han River 
winding its way to the Yellow Sea.

64 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
FEATURE       VIRTUAL AIRLINES
his issue, our Virtual Airline of 
choice is something a little different 
from what we’re used to. For a 
change, I’m looking at a VA set 
up to follow its real-life counterpart. There 
are no weird routes, odd aircraft choices or 
strange group events. After nearly 20 years 
of service to its members, this VA shows it’s 
not always about the wacky and wonderful. 
It’s often more difficult to pin down that 
special something. Or maybe it isn’t. Either 
way, it’s time to look at an airline from my 
new home: say “hi” to myAustrian Virtual.  
Twenty  years is a long time for anything, 
so it shouldn’t be surprising to learn that 
myAustrian Virtual has a pretty interesting 
history. The airline started on December 1, 
1998 as Austrian Virtual Airlines by Michael 
Mrak. In those days though, running a VA 
was, let’s say, difficult. Good third-party 
aircraft were thin on the ground and routes 
were few and far between. Flights were 
recorded by a simple text message on the 
original website. Even the first long-haul 
route from Vienna to New York required the 
admin team to manually check and confirm 
each PIREP (Pilot Report of actual weather 
conditions encountered by an aircraft in flight). 
Speaking of websites, in 1998, websites were 
basic and there wasn’t even an active forum 
myAustrian Vi
A VA filled with Austrian charm
T
Above: The A320 is available to all trainees. Top: This shot shows the blue underbelly of the old livery.

65
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
for pilots and crew to talk. Instead, the whole 
group was run via a Yahoo mailing list. To 
quote Monty Python’s ‘Five Yorkshiremen’ 
sketch: “But you try and tell the young 
people today that... and they won’t believe 
ya.” It would be five years before the website 
gained its own forum and the mailing lists 
were done away with. Before the forum 
and website got updated though, the first 
issue to be tackled was the flight reporting 
system. As is often the case with great VAs, a 
member comes along with a particular set of 
skills that make them an asset for VAs such 
as myAustrian Virtual. Franz Sauer was just 
such a member. An experienced programmer, 
he developed a software package called 
FlyAVA. It soon became the core of Austrian 
Virtual Airlines. Not only did it track a pilot’s 
flight, getting rid of the need to manually 
report a flight, it also offered pilots a built-
in logbook to track their career. It even 
simplified things on the admin side, allowing 
flights to be automatically validated and 
logged. In 1999, this was pretty innovative 
stuff and made AVA unique among VAs. 
The great VAs never rest on their laurels 
and reinvention is inevitable. In 2003, the 
website was redesigned, forums added and 
then Flight Sim 2004 arrived, scuppering the 
FlyAVA software. Once again, up popped 
a member at just the right time. Rainer 
Meisel took over development of the ACARS 
software, keeping it working until 2009. Rainer 
even planned to release a newer version that 
was compatible with FSX, but in the end 
FlyAVA was retired after 10 years of service. 
Around the same time, Austrian Virtual 
added both Tyrolean and Lauda Air 
routes for pilots to fly, prompting Austrian 
Virtual Airlines to become the Austrian 
Virtual Airlines Group or AVAG.
June 2009 saw the introduction of the 
new flight recording software, named 
‘Headquarter’. Rainer Meisel and Michael 
Mrak along with a host of others produced 
Headquarter to bring the whole VA up to 
date. For pilots, Headquarter introduced 
support for two new ACARS clients, FS Flight 
Keeper and XACARS. With XACARS, Austrian 
Virtual became open to X-Plane pilots.
Development continues to this day, with 
Headquarter becoming Headquarters in 2015, 
along with the VA becoming a registered 
association under Austrian law, ‘Austrian 
Virtual Airlines - Verein zum Betrieb virtueller 
Fluglinien.’ Which became ‘myAustrian’ 
in line with its real-life counterpart?  
 Modern times
Today, myAustrian Virtual offers pilots 
plenty. The route network stretches across 
the globe and thanks to myAustrian’s 
code-share flights, there are hundreds of 
destinations that Austrian doesn’t serve 
but which pilots can book flights to. 
Speaking of pilots, myAustrian Virtual, 
in common with most mature VAs, has a 
large group of registered pilots. At present, 
more than 1,000 pilots are members of 
myAustrian Virtual, though oddly, only 180 
active pilots are registered every month. 
myAustrian Virtual’s Chief Administrative 
Officer Dimitris thinks it’s a bug with the server 
as the number never goes up or down. 
With a large pilot base, it shouldn’t be a 
surprise to discover that the VA’s forums 
are incredibly active. While German is the 
main language, all are welcome. Alongside 
the virtual pilots are more than a few real life 
Austrian crew members; some retired, some 
still active. There’s also a smattering of real 
life controllers from AustroControl, Dimitris 
among them. In the past, members have even 
met up at Vienna International where there 
are tours of the apron, or as Dimitris tells me, 
even a private tour of Austrian’s maintenance 
hangar. A group of 20 members had a tour 
which included a look inside one of the aircraft. 
These days, meet-ups are less frequent, 
partially due to busy lives and partially down 
to just three members running the admin 
side of the airline, but changes are coming.
rtual
Above: The bulk of the ﬂ eet is made up from the Airbus A320 Family. Below: Vienna International offers pilots a 
great base from which to ﬂ y.

66 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
Events are another area that the VA is 
keen to improve upon. As mentioned earlier, 
reinvention is needed to all VAs if they hope 
to survive and the website infrastructure 
is starting to creek a bit with old age. One 
of its current limitations is the inability to 
create events easily. Dimitris explains that 
the software is hard-coded making the 
creation of new events incredibly difficult. 
The new updates will not only allow for new 
events to be added, but for the VA to join 
in with its VATSIM partners Vacc Austria to 
provide events to a wider audience. 	
That’s not to say events don’t happen. 
The VA lists a whole bunch of events in 
the ‘Events’ section. However, they’re 
all taking place on December 31, 2017, 
so yes, it looks like there are issues.
Joining the fun
Joining the VA is fairly straightforward: just fill 
in your name, add a VATSIM or IVAO member 
number and tell them a little about yourself 
and you’re all set. All pilots join as trainees. 
Originally trainees were only able to fly the 
Fokker fleet or the Dash-8 fleet, at least until 
they garnered enough hours to move on. 
With the imminent retirement of the Fokkers 
and issues with Majestic’s fantastic Dash-
8 and certain ACARS clients, the admin 
guys made the A320 fleet available to the 
trainees. Alongside the Embraers, that’s 
a great starting point for all new pilots. 
Once you’ve joined, there’s plenty to see 
that will help you get ‘up and running’. For 
new pilots there’s an excellent Wiki section 
that details all that myAustrian Virtual has 
to offer, as well as offering links to flight 
planning information and much more 
besides. It’s a great introduction and will 
help get pilots in the air quickly. Best of 
all, the information is updated regularly.
Fleet-wise, myAustrian Virtual operates a 
diverse fleet of the usual Airbus and Boeings, 
along with the Embraer 195s, Dash-8 Q400s and 
the soon-to-be-retired Fokker F100.  However, 
moving to one of the hundreds of code-share 
flights, pilots will find plenty of aircraft not in the 
Austrian Fleet, such as the 737 and 747. I think 
this is a cracking idea as there are always pilots 
who miss certain types not flown by the airline in 
real life. Providing a diverse selection of aircraft is 
a huge plus point for me. To keep life interesting, 
myAustrian Virtual offers pilots a chance to see 
how much revenue they earn for each flight. 
I’ve always found this a little ‘gimmicky’, but it’s 
a neat little feature. Alongside this are awards. 
These are very much like the little badges you 
earn via a Steam game or from FSX in the old 
days. (Who remembers getting their 100-hour 
badge?) Pilots get badges for all sorts of things 
at the VA. A first flight in a new type, a promotion 
or the challenging ‘All rounder’ award for flying 
every type in the fleet. It’s nice to have these 
little goals to make life a bit more interesting. 
Conclusion
It’s often difficult for VAs to stand the test of 
time. Technology changes, members move 
on and sometimes enthusiasm dries up. 
myAustrian Virtual has weathered all of that and 
as it approaches its 20th year, it still manages 
to attract new members. With new innovations 
being worked on, the team is doing a fantastic 
job of preparing for the next 20 years. 
 For pilots, myAustrian Virtual offers you some 
of the most beautiful scenery to fly through and 
being in the heart of Europe, most major cities 
are just a two-hour flight away, making Vienna 
perfect for that quick flight in the evening. 
Couple that with a great association with 
VATSIM and you have the opportunity to hone 
your skills with professional-level staff and 
controllers - what’s not to like. There really is 
something for everyone here, so if the fresh 
Alpine air calls to you, then grab a glass of 
Grüner Veltliner, pack a picnic and come join 
a VA filled with Austrian charm.   
By Jessica Bannister-Pearce
FEATURE       VIRTUAL AIRLINES
Lauda Air 
may be no 
more, but 
their 767s still 
see regular 
service with 
myAustrian 
Virtual.
Above: At the gate and ready to go. Below: The ability 
to enjoy the scenery is welcome.
PCP

Jet-VR Cockpit
...for the REAL PC Pilot
RC SIMULATIONS LTD
Innovation in Simulation - The Dual A.C.E Cockpit 
This could be your New oﬃ  ce for Virtual reality 
Ring for further details
RC SIMULATIONS LTD
Fromeforde House, Suite C14 Church Road, Yate, BS37 5JB
www.rcsimulations.co.uk  •  sales@rcsimulations.co.uk
Ring 01454 315002 and speak to Carol or Bob
« X-Plane 11 on DVD £59.95 including postage
« TrackIR bundle (in stock)  £169.95 plus £4.99 postage
« New Panel Builder 2.99 ( The cockpit builders choice) Download Version £44.95
« Go-Flight Simulation Avionics, Radios and Auto Pilot etc ( mostly in stock) ring
« Tough GRP
«Inexpensive
«D-Box Motion options
«Heavy Duty Dual
Controls
«Rudder pedal option.
«Ideal for S.T.E.M. And  
 Schools 
STOP PRESS
«Single seat options
Colours:
«Red
«Aviation Grey
«White
New Release
VoxATC 7 for Microsoft Flight Simulator X and.Prepar3D Try Demo
When you really need a cockpit talk to us or view our Facebook page: 
        RC Simulations
        
Your Complete Guide to Flight Simulation
ADVERTISE YOUR SERVICES 
IN THE NEXT ISSUE OF 
PC PILOT...
For more information contact 
Tom Lunn
on
01780 755131
or
tom.lunn@keypublishing.com
Follow us
facebook.com/pcpilot
Visit us
www.pcpilot.net
TrackHat head trackers brings great, 
low cost head trackers to your 
favourite games. A fantastic TrackIR 
alternative, we have the largest range 
of head trackers out there! There is a 
head tracker for everyone. Our head 
tracking peripherals also work with 
TrackIR sensors.
Track
Wireless TrackHat Clip Plus
from £24.99
sors.
TrackHat
from £39.99
Compatible Games...
trackhat
@trackhat
www.
 .org
email: store@flightsimstore.com
phone: +61 2 4296 1641
fax: +61 2 8572 8203
www.flightsimstore.com
The FlightSim Store’s top quality service, competitive prices 
and extensive range are just some of the things that set us 
ahead of the rest, and our online store offers a smooth, worry 
free shopping experience from start to finish.
For a completely immersive and exceptionally enjoyable flight 
For a completely immersive and exceptionally enjoyable flight 
simulation experience pay us a visit online today and see for 
yourself how The FlightSim Store is your best choice for all of 
your flight simulation software and hardware needs.
We Deliver Worldwide!
• Flight Simulators • Add-on Aircraft • Add-on 
Scenery • Flight Controls • Headsets • Books & 
Guides • DVD’s • Boxed Titles • Instant Downloads 
• and much more..

68 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
FEATURE       FSUIPC 
ood things come in small 
packages, they say. They may 
have a point. Most FSX/P3D 
users will be familiar with the 
wonderful acronym, FSUIPC or its full title 
Flight Simulator Universal Inter Process 
Communication. Let’s stick with FSUIPC. 
It’s the work of flight sim legend Pete 
You have control!
FSUIPC
Dowson and is one of the few absolutely 
essential programs that every FSX/P3D pilot 
needs in their sim. No ‘ifs, ands or buts’. 
What does it really do though? Let’s take a 
look at the basics and a little of its history. 
Are you the gatekeeper? 
FSUIPC sprang to life with FS98. It served 
as a way of accessing functions within 
the sim that were either hidden or worse, 
undocumented. Since then it has grown with 
each sim, and Version 4 became a familiar 
program for me. Today, its fifth version 
now supports Prepar3D v4 and just like in 
FS98, it gives us access to functions that 
are hidden in the sim. I find it indispensable 
and I’m certain I barely scratch the surface 
of what the software is capable of doing. 
Axes, profiles and more
The single most important area for most flight 
simmers is the setting up of your controls. 
With either sim’s built-in controller settings 
you can set your throttles, yoke and rudder 
pedals with no issue. This is fine if you plan 
to fly just a single type of aircraft, such as the 
Boeing 737. Suppose you want to switch to 
the A2A Comanche though. Now you have 
G

69
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
to reassign your throttles to use mixture and 
prop feathering. Plus what about the buttons? 
FSUIPC offers a very comprehensive set of 
options for axis assignment and does away 
with the need to use the sim’s own controller 
interface. The first thing to note is that FSUIPC 
can set individual aircraft profiles. So when 
you load the 737, your controls are preset to 
the 737. Change to the Comanche and the 
same controls are ready to go again. It’s no 
fuss. That’s just the tip of the iceberg. The 
axis assignment window let’s you choose 
to use the internal FSX/Prepar3D calibration 
settings or you can switch to FSUIPC’s own 
control calibration system. Using the FSX/
P3D settings doesn’t mean you need to have 
‘controllers enabled’ in the standard sim 
settings. FSUIPC overrides it and you can 
safely disable the default controls. Using 
‘send to FS normal axis’ allows you to assign 
any axis to any axis FS uses. As a quick tip, 
you can set your ‘pan view’ controls here 
as the hat switch is counted as an axis. 
If you want to go beyond the FS calibration 
standards, you can select ‘send direct to 
FSUIPC calibration’. This bypasses the 
Windows calibration settings and allows 
you to tune your axis precisely. First, you 
need to select the required function from 
the drop-down menu. You’ll notice the 
choice of controls is more limited than 
the FS standard. This is just the main 
aircraft controls. Selecting the throttle, for 
example, tells FSUIPC that it’ll be dealing 
with the calibration. That leads to another 
window which I’ll cover in a moment. 
A third option allows you to set an 
axis for a specific offset. It’s not a 
really well-used option and is best 
left for the really advanced users.
Right of the axis options is another section 
that lets you set up to 10 different actions 
along an axis. You could use this to set flap 
detents or for something more elaborate. 
It also includes options for actions to start 
at position ‘x’, then either repeat, or once the 
axis moves from position ‘x’, change what 
happens. The easiest example would be a 
gear lever. With the axis at ‘x’ the gear would 
be up, at position ‘y’ the gear would be off 
Left and below: You can tune your controls 
incredibly precisely using the ‘Slope’ options.
Right: 
When it 
comes to 
joystick 
calibration, 
FSUIPC 
has a huge 
selection of 
options.
Left: Buttons 
are easily 
assigned to 
various FS 
controls.

FEATURE
70 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
(if flying a Boeing) and position ‘z’ would 
be gear down. When the level leaves ‘Y’ for 
‘Z’ the gear comes down. Really the only 
limit is what you want to use that axis for. 
Calibration 
Once you’ve decided what FSUIPC deals with, 
you need to get calibrating. The calibration 
window offers 12 pages of options, each 
containing four specific axis areas to set. 
Page 1 deals with the basics such as ailerons, 
elevator, rudder and throttles; the rest contain 
brake pedals, mixture and prop settings, plus 
much more. With the engine controls you 
also have options for either a single throttle 
control for up to four individual engines. 
So the 747 or DC-6 is well catered for.
 There’s plenty of power in these settings 
as well. Here you can calibrate each control 
surface, engine and brake settings. Most 
axes operate along a set resistance level. 
This is measured as -16380 to 16380 with 
0 being centre. So, for example, if you find 
the top end of the axis is wearing out or 
becoming 'noisy', with FSUIPC you can set 
the maximum setting to below the trouble 
point, so 14000 not 16380. It really helps even 
out your controls until you can replace them. 
Finally, you can tune the response of an 
individual axis by adjusting the ‘slope’. 
By default all axes work in a straight line. 
Using the slope you can adjust that line to 
provide an axis with different responses. 
So, for example, say you had a steering 
tiller but it was too sensitive. You can adjust 
the slope to make the smaller adjustments 
less sensitive, while leaving the rest of the 
axis as normal. That level of detail allows 
you to really tune your controls to suit you 
and just like setting the axis above, you can 
assign these changes to a single profile. 
	
Buttons and keys 
Axis assignment isn’t the only area you can 
set things just the way you like it. Buttons can 
also be assigned to specific aircraft profiles. 
There are lots of ways to do this. The simplest 
way is to use the buttons setting. First, click 
the button or switch you want to assign. 
You’ll see the joystick ID and the Button ID 
appear; for example, Joystick 1 button 10. 
Now you can decide what that button does. 
If it’s a standard FS command, check the 
FS command box and then pick the one you 
want from the drop-down menu. You can 
search quickly by typing the first letter of the 
command you want and the list will head 
to the first instance of that letter. If you’re 
setting something like elevator trim, you can 
tell FSUIPC to repeat the input if you still have 
your finger on the button. For switches that 
lock, such as landing gear, for example, you 
can also set what happens when the switch 
releases back to the off position. So, while the 
switch is engaged the gear is up. Switch the 
switch to the off position and the gear comes 
back down. You can also set a command 
to repeat when the button is continually 
pressed, so it’s ideal for the elevator trim. 
It’s not just buttons that benefit from 
this. You can also set keyboard keys to 
specific controls and just like the buttons, 
you can set any command you like and 
how that command is delivered. Speaking 
of commands (with respect to the list 
of things you can assign), the choice is 
bewildering. FSUIPC provides a backdoor 
to every command Flight Simulator has, 
including a few that aren’t normally visible. 
For cockpit builders this is a godsend. If 
you’re making a glass cockpit then all the 
functions of the default G1000 are available 
to be set. Radio nav options are also 
available, so tuning the VOR or ADF gauges 
is made simple. In short, there’s very little 
you can’t connect a switch or button to. 
Miscellaneous
Beyond the control interfacing, FSUIPC 
has a host of other features going on to 
aid a sim pilot. Autosave makes sure that 
if the sim falls over you can resume your 
flight from a save point. There are also 
options to feed an external GPS. A few 
Garmin GPS units can be plugged in and 
FSUIPC can provide all the data required 
to drive the real thing in your cockpit. 
For troubleshooting, FSUIPC can also 
produce a live log via a console window that 
shows you exactly what’s going on within 
the sim in real time. In the past I’ve used this 
to find a rogue input that was flooding the 
sim. Every button push and every command 
can be monitored and outputted to a log for 
reading later. For FSX users you can even 
set the sim to display the amount of VAS 
(Virtual Address Space) in real time. That 
was always very handy when using a PMDG-
level aircraft into an Orbx-level region. 
Conclusion
This article really only scratches the 
surface of FSUIPC. There’s so much going 
on behind the scenes. Programming via 
offsets and Lua (a powerful embeddable 
scripting language) helps drive things such 
as external gauges or even interfacing with 
PMDG aircraft - areas I could fill a page with 
by themselves. The manual lists hundreds 
of options and then some. FSUIPC is very 
much the looking glass to the FS Alice. 
It opens up the sim in a way no other 
add-on does and provides the user with 
so much power it’s corrupting. Come 
to the FSUIPC side and your journey to 
the dark side will be complete. 
By Jessica Bannister-Pearce
Right: Hot keys can be set to provide shortcuts to sim 
functions. Below: Setting up an axis is both simple yet 
very powerful.
Left & below: If you’re having problems ‘in-sim’, the 
‘Logging’ section offers you plenty of options to 
explore what’s going on.
PCP

Available every 2nd Wednesday of the month from  
  and other leading newsagents  
or online at www.keypublishing.com/shop
Requirements for app: registered iTunes account on Apple iPhone, iPad or iPod Touch. Internet connection required for initial download. 
Published by Key Publishing Ltd. The entire contents of these titles are © copyright 2017/2018. All rights reserved. App prices subject to change. Prices correct at time of going to press.
THE GLOBAL AIRLINE SCENE
FREE APP
with  sampl e  i s s u e
SEARCH AIRLINER WORLD
DOWNLOAD NOW
AVAILABLE ON:
iTunes
ALSO AVAILABLE IN DIGITAL FORMAT:
A
1232/17
PC, Mac & 
Windows 10
AVAILABLE FROM
JANUARY ISSUE OUT NOW:
AND MUCH MORE!
 
2018 Year Planner
       THIS ISSUE ALSO FEATURES:
 
 SURVIVAL THROUGH ADVERSITY
Pakistan International Airlines (PIA) has endured a 
rather turbulent 50-year history, but plans for a part-
privatisation could offer the carrier renewed hope 
for its future.
 
 SINGAPORE’S ‘SUITE’ NEW OFFERING
Singapore Airlines has moved to reafﬁ rm its 
position as one of the world’s leading carriers with 
the launch of much-anticipated new cabin products 
for its Airbus A380s.
 SERVING THE PEARL OF AFRICA
Wildlife commentaries from the pilots and sweets 
passed round the cabin – AeroLink Uganda plays 
a quirky yet important role in connecting its home 
market.
 A350 GOES LONG
Behind the scenes with launch customer Qatar 
Airways as it prepares to take delivery of its ﬁ rst 
Airbus A350-1000.
JUST
£4.95

72 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
FEATURE       INTERVIEW WITH HONEYCOMB
  
AERONAUTICAL
n flight simulation, advances in 
hardware generally move at a 
much slower pace compared 
with software development. So, when a 
new arrival on the flight simulation scene, 
Honeycomb Aeronautical, announced two 
new products, the Alpha Flight Control Yoke 
and the Bravo Throttle System, it marked 
a significant milestone in the industry.
With both products due to go on sale early 
next year, we took the opportunity to speak 
to the CEO of Honeycomb Aeronautical, 
Nicki Repenning to find out more about 
the company and its plans for the future.
PC Pilot: Hi Nicki and thanks for speaking 
to us. Can you start by giving us a bit of a 
background to Honeycomb Aeronautical, 
how the company started and why you 
decided to build flight simulation hardware?
Nicki: It really all started over five years ago, 
while I was still running Saitek in North America. 
Saitek, at the time, was under the umbrella of 
Mad Catz Corporation which was a mainstream 
video game company. I didn’t feel that the 
flight sim category was really understood by 
corporate management and that the brand was 
going in the right direction. I decided to work 
on a business plan for a flight sim hardware 
brand of my own and was just about to start 
the company, when Snakebyte Group offered 
me an opportunity that I couldn’t resist and I put 
the Honeycomb on hold for almost four years. 
But finally, last year, it was possible to dust off 
the plans and get started again, and while the 
product development has not moved along as 
fast as I could have hoped, I’m still really excited 
about what we have achieved so far and the 
products that we are about to bring to market.
PC Pilot: Who are the people behind 
the Honeycomb Aeronautical and 
do any of them have a background 
in aviation or flight simulation?
Nicki: Well first and foremost, I started 
the company in partnership with snakebyte 
Group, of which I still run the US division. 
I have over 10 years of experience in the 
flight sim industry as well as holding a single 
engine pilot’s licence, so when it comes to 
specs, features and feel, I would say that I 
have a fair amount of experience.  I’m not an 
industrial designer or a mechanical engineer 
myself, so when it came to the technical 
aspect of the product, I wanted to work with 
people who were experts in their field.
For all the mechanical parts and electronics, I 
contacted Mike Altman who is CEO of Precision 
Flight Controls (PFC) to see if they were 
interested in partnering with us on the project. 
Luckily for me, they were and they began to 
work on the internal components of the Alpha 
Flight Controls. Working with a company that 
has almost 30 years of experience in making 
FAA-approved cockpit solutions is incredible 
and the solution they have come up with is 
just brilliant. It’s based on the same technology 
they use in their full motion cockpits but scaled 
down to fit in a consumer product while still 
as durable as what you’ll find in a $100,000 
Precision Flight Controls, FAA-approved cockpit.
On the industrial design part, I worked with 
David Morelock of Southern California Design 
Honeycomb 
Aeronautical
An exclusive interview with a new hardware developer
I
CEO of Honeycomb 
Aeronautical, Nicki 
Repenning.

73
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
Company.  David had previously designed 
the Microsoft Surface as well and a wide 
range of consumer electronics and in addition 
had an aerospace degree, so he was perfect 
for the job. We spent a lot of time on the 
ergonomics to make sure that not only did it 
feel great, but it would also cater to any kind 
of aircraft, from single engine to airliner.
PC Pilot: Can you give us an overview 
of the product range you are introducing, 
for example, are they aimed at GA 
(General Aviation) or airliners?
Nicki: Our first two products are the Alpha 
Flight Controls and Bravo Throttle System. 
We very much focused on creating a hybrid 
that would work for any type of aircraft. On 
the yoke, we took elements from both general 
aviation aircraft and private jets, as well as 
commercial jets, to make it feel familiar no 
matter what aeroplane you prefer to fly. There 
are of course always compromises to be 
made when you don’t make a replica product, 
but our general product philosophy is that it 
should work with anything that flies using a 
yoke. That philosophy is also apparent with the 
Bravo Throttle System. What’s unique about 
the quadrant is that it comes with two sets of 
handles: one for general aviation and one for 
commercial aircraft. This enables the customer 
to set the quadrant up for multiple aircraft 
including single- and multi-engine general 
aviation types as well as two- and four-engine 
commercial jets. On the commercial handles, 
there are also functional thrust reversers as 
well as spoilers and flaps. We wanted to give 
our customers as much value as possible and 
minimise the number of components needed, 
so we added a lot of additional features 
to the product including a gear lever, GA 
flaps lever, autopilot and annunciator panel. 
Some people will say it doesn’t look 100% 
realistic but that’s the price you unfortunately 
pay when you try to please everyone.
PC Pilot: What is your target market? Are 
the controllers aimed mainly at enthusiasts 
or are you also speaking to commercial 
operators?  And what level of feedback or 
interest have you received from either sector?
Nicki: Our market is 100% for home use. It 
will be perfectly suitable for student pilots who 
want to train at home or private pilots working 
on their currency, but we’re not planning to 
target flight training facilities or programmes. 
The feedback from the community so far has 
been overwhelmingly positive and I don’t think 
we could have asked for a better reception. It 
just shows that there is a great need for new 
products and innovation in this category.
PC Pilot: How closely will the controls 
replicate the look and feel of those in real 
aircraft and what testing procedures do 
you have in place to achieve this goal?
Nicki: Very close. The yoke is similar to 
those found in GA aircraft so it won’t have 
the rocking motion of, for example, a 737 
yoke, but I’m really happy with how it feels. 
PFC has managed to design a mechanical 
movement without any dead zones or spring 
loading and I’m really, really excited about 
the solution they have come up with. We’ll 
get first customer feedback at FS weekend, 
but I’m positive that people will like it.
The Alpha Yoke features the 
same technology as used in 
the full motion cockpits made 
by Precision Flight Controls, 
but scaled down to ﬁ t into a 
consumer product.
When set up for jets, the 
Bravo Throttle System 
comes with functional 
thrust reversers as well as 
spoilers and ﬂ aps.
Honeycomb Aeronautical is focused on creating hybrid 
controllers that work for any type of aircraft.

74 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
PC Pilot: For the layout of the buttons 
and switches, will they match those 
of real aircraft, for example, elevator 
trim, autopilot disconnects, PTT etc 
or will they be more generic?
Nicki: It is a hybrid, but definitely with elements 
and inspiration taken from real aircraft. On the 
yoke for example, the avionics switches are 
very similar to a piston engine Cessna, while 
the buttons and switches on the handle look 
somewhat similar to a Citation X.  People familiar 
with Genesys Aerosystems will recognise 
elements of the autopilot and so on. You could 
call our products the Frankenstein of flight 
sim controls, but the marketing department 
prefers the term hybrid - not sure why…
PC Pilot: Will the products have any software 
configuration tools such as calibration, sensitivity 
adjustments, button assignments etc, and will 
the controllers be compatible with FSUIPC?
Nicki: Funny that you would mention 
FSUIPC as I’ve had discussions with Peter 
Dowson to see if he would help us on the 
project. Unfortunately, he didn’t have the 
time but we are working with both internal 
and external software engineers to ensure 
full compatibility. I’ve told Peter that I would 
be happy to send him a sample when ready, 
so hopefully he’ll provide some feedback.
PC Pilot: In terms of compatibility, 
will the controllers work with any flight 
simulator platform and can they be used 
with hardware from other developers?
Nicki: Our plan is to be compatible with 
as many platforms as possible. You can 
never promise 100% compatibility, but 
we are testing with FSX, X-Plane and 
Prepar3D and are creating drivers for both 
Mac and PC, so we are doing everything 
we can to cater to every customer.
PC Pilot: What sort of after-sales 
support and warranty will you provide?
Nicki: We offer a five-year warranty and 
lifetime tech support on all our products.  
In Europe, the tech support is handled by 
Aerosoft, which has an expert team available 
to help with every problem there might 
be.  For the rest of the world we will handle 
tech support internally.  You can’t outsource 
tech support on a category like this and 
expect to provide good customer service.
PC Pilot: What, in your opinion, 
makes your controllers different from 
other products currently available?
Nicki: It’s been over 10 years since anything 
new has come out in the price range that 
we’re operating in. A lot has happened in 
10 years. What we represent is a breath of 
fresh air and a company that cares about 
the quality and innovation and not just 
about mass producing products that should 
have been updated a long time ago.
PC Pilot: What does the future hold 
for Honeycomb Aeronautical? Are there 
any other projects in the pipeline?
Nicki: We have a 36-month product road 
map planned but I’m afraid I can’t tell you 
too much at this point.  What I can tell you 
is that we are planning to add components 
that contribute to the two existing products in 
creating a complete modular cockpit solution.
PC Pilot: Finally, when and where 
will the products be available and do 
you have any pricing information?
Nicki: Launch of both the Alpha Flight 
Controls and the Bravo Throttle System is 
planned for Q1 2018, but we will not rush the 
products to market, so it’s ready when we’re 
happy with the end result, even if it means 
delays.  Pricing will be $199.99/€199.99 
(£151 approx) each for both products.
PC Pilot: Many thanks for taking the time to 
speak to us. We wish you the best of luck for 
the future. 
By Richard Benedikz
The mechanical parts and 
electronics are designed by 
Precision Flight Controls.
FEATURE       INTERVIEW WITH HONEYCOMB AERONAUTICAL
Launch of both 
the Alpha Flight 
Controls and the 
Bravo Throttle 
System is planned 
for Q1 2018.  
Pricing will be 
$199.99/€199.99 
(£151 approx) 
each for both 
products.
The quadrant comes with two sets of handles, so it can 
be set up for general aviation and commercial aircraft.
The yoke has also been 
designed to suit both general 
aviation and commercial 
aircraft.
Information
For more information on Honeycomb 
Aeronautical, visit www.ﬂ yhoneycomb.com
PCP


76 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
COMMS
Controls for military sims

77
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
Follow us 
facebook.com/pcpilot
Visit us
www.pcpilot.net
Contact us
mail@pcpilot.net
Dear PC Pilot
This is a plea for help, for which I 
have searched in vain far and wide 
across the ‘land of Google’. 
There are many examples of ready-to-buy, 
plug ‘n’ play throttles for the 737 in all its 
flavours, together with Airbus ‘Noise Levers’, 
but there is a complete lack of anything for 
more senior in years. Anything for single-
engine warbirds? Nada. Nothing. Zilch. Zip. 
With the fantastic range of piston-engined 
World War Two-era models on the market, 
such as the P-40 from A2A, RealAir’s 
Spitfire and AF Scrubs’ Seafire and Spitfire 
examples as freeware, often featured in PC 
Pilot, you’d expect there to be something 
out there, but no (except for the excellent 
sims pit stuff, well out of my range). 
I get that it’s a niche market that probably 
won’t appeal to big manufacturers, but there 
isn’t anything to even help with the basics of 
building a throttle/mixture/pitch control. What I’m 
after is a simple, no frills instruction to help with 
what I need to connect rotary potentiometers 
to FSX: Steam Edition. The actual form of the 
handles isn’t important, as that can vary from 
aircraft to aircraft, and once connected to the 
spindles, they should operate like any throttle, 
but what do I need in between that and the 
USB port on my PC? I’m not after anything 
complicated like a full-scale cockpit, such as 
the magnificent example you’re constructing, 
but perhaps a very short article on “This is what 
to Google (or even ask a real person for!), this 
is what you need to solder to these sticky-up 
prong things, this is how to connect it to your 
PC, this is how to get it to work in FSUIPC”. It’s 
a nightmare trying to negotiate 1000 different 
subjects in a myriad of forums, but any help in 
this direction would be very much appreciated.
Regards, Steve
South West Flight Simulator Group
We are based at Ipplepen Village Hall, 
Devon, TQ12 5SB and hold monthly 
meetings on Sundays 09:00 - 15:00.
The next meetings are January 
14, February 18 and March 18.
We have a full range of interests, 
skills and hardware and new 
members are very welcome.
South West Flight Simulation run two 
ATC-led online flights each week with 
worldwide destinations and diverse flight 
types including airliner and GA events.
Fly with us to find out why we are 
consistently the busiest FS host group.
You can find details of SWFSG 
meetings, News, NOTAMS, and our 
24/7 SWFS server and TeamSpeak 3 
servers on http://swfsg.blogspot.co.uk/
PC Pilot
Hi Steve,
Thanks for your email. I can understand 
your frustration with respect to the lack of 
choice when it comes to hardware support 
for World War Two-era aircraft for the flight 
simmer. We will certainly look into doing 
an article on the subject in the future.
In the meantime, one unit I can highly 
recommend for vintage warbirds, of 
which I am a fan (but may or may not be 
within your budget), is Thrustmaster’s 
Hotas Warthog Joystick and Throttle. 
It fulfils every military flight simmer’s 
needs. Although it was initially designed 
with the DCS A-10 Warthog simulation 
in mind, it can be used with any military 
aircraft you can think of. It comprises a 
multitude of switches, buttons and levers, 
which can be assigned to any function 
you desire. I tend to split functions 
between the throttle quadrant and the 
stick. So functions such as flap and 
undercarriage deployment, for example, 
are assigned to the throttle quadrant, 
while guns, cannons, trim and brakes 
are allocated to the stick. Of particular 
note is the fact that it comes with two 
levers on the throttle quadrant which 
can be used as one axis, or be split, by 
disengaging a small bolt, and used as two. 
So, for example, you can assign one 
to the throttle and the other to the prop 
pitch. It’s also well built and very robust. 
The simulations I’m currently flying are 
the DCS Spitfire LF Mk.IX and the new 
FG-1D Corsair from MilViz (see our 
news section for details on the latter).
I hope this is of help.
Cheers, Derek

78 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
COMMS
Dear PC Pilot
I have been a subscriber of PC Pilot for almost 
two decades and never had any regrets. As I 
was mostly flying with a version of Microsoft 
Flight Simulator, I had no problem with the fact 
that 80-90% of the contents of the magazine 
dealt with products made for FS2004 and 
FSX. I always enjoyed the stuff you published 
and it felt good to be informed at an early 
stage about what the market was offering.
However, many things have happened over  
the last year. The upgrade of Prepar3D to 
64-bit, Flight Sim World and Aerofly FS 2 
opened new possibilities. Great new things 
were introduced but I’m sorry to say, in my 
opinion not always for the better so far. So I 
started looking around and found another party 
in this field offering the same good things that I 
used to find in the Microsoft range: X-Plane 11. 
I more or less converted to X-Plane from the 
day version 11 came out. It's very strange, 
because although, apart from the programs 
I have mentioned, I also bought X-Plane 8, 
9 and 10, I was never satisfied with those 
versions. That was mainly because I thought it 
was too inaccessible for me - so many buttons 
to choose from and so little understanding 
of what they all meant. It was so user-
unfriendly, I just couldn’t get the hang of it.
X-Plane 11 changed all that. The program 
had a new user interface and the more 
I delved into it, the more I was sold.
I can understand that it is much easier to 
follow the new products in the market which 
are created for the old Microsoft system, while 
the number of commercial products for X-Plane 
is, in comparison, incredibly low, but on the 
other hand, what a wealth of free add-ons 
(plug-ins) there are to cover for a magazine and 
they are all for free. There is a lively community 
of people producing very smart plug-ins to 
populate the program, but even without them, 
X-Plane is a beautiful program to use. I mostly 
fly airliners and discovered someone called 
ZIBO, who is changing the FMC of the default 
Boeing 737-800 in a way that it is beginning 
to look like a PMDG product. Also, other 
plug-ins are really worthwhile looking at.
Anyway, what I am trying to say is that I 
would like to see more articles related to 
X-Plane. Not only about what the various 
companies have produced, like you have so 
successfully done over the years, but also 
about the free products made for X-Plane 
and how to use them. In spite of the new 
interface, I have spent a lot of time to get it 
where I want it and I wonder if it would not 
be a great idea for the magazine to write 
a series of articles on how to get X-Plane 
going. I’m sure a lot of readers would 
be grateful. The program deserves it.
All the best with the magazine, 
Ab Hoving
Joe Lavery's 
custom-made 
Instrument Panel
Joe Lavery, our longest-serving contributor 
on PC Pilot, recently sent me the following 
email in which he describes his fabulous 
custom-made instrument panel. I wanted 
to share this with our readers as I thought 
it would be of great use and interest. 
“Hi Derek, I thought you might be 
interested in my latest development. It took 
me two days to make and will fulfill a need 
for some serious flying until my 737 deck, 
which I’m currently working on, is finished. 
It’s simply a monitor placed behind a 
sheet of aluminium which has cut-outs to 
display the instruments, which incidentally 
are all freeware. They use FSUIPC to pick 
up the data from either FSX or Prepar3D. 
The GoFlight radio kit was left over 
when I updated my 737 deck.” 
Cheers, Joe
X-Plane
PC Pilot
Hi Ab,
Thanks for your email. In response, I 
agree, X-Plane 11 is much more user-
friendly and accessible than its previous 
incarnations. We have been endeavouring 
to include more articles on X-Plane in the 
magazine over the past months and we 
will continue to do so. I like your idea of 
reviewing more X-Plane freeware, so we 
will look into doing that in the future.
Cheers, Derek

Call UK 01780 480404
Overseas +44 1780 480404 
Lines open 9.00am - 5.30pm GMT
OR
Order online with FREE P&P* at 
www.keypublishing.com/shop
*Free 2nd class P&P on all UK & BFPO orders. Overseas charges apply. 
Postage charges vary depending on total order value.
1213/17
Also available on
Search: 
Railways Illustrated
also available for PC, 
MAC & Kindle Fire from
iTunes
ALTERNATIVELY, ORDER DIRECT: 
Available now from 
 and all other leading newsagents
AND MUCH MORE!
ILLUSTRATED
JANUARY
ISSUE
OUT NOW
ONLY
£4.60
 JANUARY FEATURES INCLUDE:
FREE RAIL SIMS GUIDE        
 INCLUDING:
INTRODUCING TRAIN 
SIMULATOR 2018
Jane Whittaker provides a 
guide to the amazing world of 
rail simulation, as close to the 
real thing as you can get.
CHOOSING YOUR SCENARIO
After a quick overview of Train 
Simulator, the time has come 
to drill down into the detail of 
using the simulation.
ROUTES AND ROLLING STOCK
Recommendations from the 
multitude of routes and locos 
available for Train Simulator 
2018.
COMPETITION
Your chance to win 1 of 10 
copies of Train Simulator 2018. 

80 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
HINTS & TIPS
Flight Sim Q&A
You've got the questions? We've got the answers!
By Richard Benedikz
Simulator software 
and hardware for 
instrument training
Dear PC Pilot
I liked the Reality Check article printed in your 
previous issue but would like to obtain some 
more information and I would be most grateful 
if you would point me in the right direction.
I am a SEL (Single Engine Land) commercial, 
instrument-rated pilot with an expired CFI 
(Certified Flight Instructor) and CFII. I am 
just getting back into flying after a hiatus 
of almost a decade. I recently finished a 
bi-annual check in a Cessna 172, have 
a fresh physical and I am flying small 
Cessnas VFR again. Next up is working 
towards and passing an Instrument 
Proficiency Check (IPC), and renewing my 
CFI and CFII, as I really enjoy teaching.
To get back into instrument flying I expect 
it would be helpful to spend some time 
on a home simulator setup, especially if 
it could include flying in a simulated ATC 
environment such as is provided by VATSIM.
I would also like to move from my old way 
of flying (paper charts in the cockpit) to an 
Electronic Flight Bag (EFB). For an EFB I am 
leaning towards WingX Pro7 as it appears 
to be compatible with FSX and X-Plane.  
I would like to use this for my flight planning, 
moving map etc, while something like 
VATSIM will provide the ATC environment.
It would also be nice if my home 
simulator was similar to a commercial, 
low-end, FAA-approved sim setup, used 
by schools such as American Flyers.
Primarily, I just need to see the instruments 
and some rough outside stuff and have the 
sim connected to my EFB and to the ATC 
network. Because I spend the winters in 
Hawaii and travel a fair amount, I only have 
a laptop computer, although I do have large 
monitors at home. Currently I have a four-
year-old HP Pavilion dv4 laptop with an Nvidia 
GT 630M 2GB, so it is time to upgrade to 
a new system with an SSD. It needs to be 
small and lightweight. I will probably also 
purchase an iPad or Android for my EFB.
Investing in the appropriate software 
(flight simulator and EFB) and a new laptop 
represents a significant financial investment, 
but more importantly, a considerable 
amount of learning time, so I want to make 
good choices that suit my requirements. 
Suggestions as to what might work well for 
my situation would be greatly appreciated.
Cheers, 
Russ
Above: Thanks to fluid instrumentation and realistic weather, X-Plane can be an excellent training platform for 
flying in IFR (Instrument Flight Rules) conditions.

81
#113 PC PILOT /
www.pcpilot.net
Follow us 
facebook.com/pcpilot
Visit us
www.pcpilot.net
Hi Russ,
X-Plane and FSX/Prepar3D have their 
own strengths and weaknesses, it is 
not really a question of which is better. 
However, for practising raw data IFR, I 
find X-Plane has advantages. The refresh 
rate on the instruments is far superior and 
the navaids behave more realistically: for 
example, a DME will give the distance to 
the actual ground station rather than to 
the centre of the runway as in FSX. The 
default Skyhawk in X-Plane is also pretty 
good and it comes with a realistic GNS530 
GPS. However, on the flipside, FSX also 
has some benefits, mostly due to a very 
strong add-on industry.  For example, a 
company called A2A (www.a2asimulations.
com) makes an excellent Skyhawk, so if 
you want to practice procedures, that is 
one to consider. One other thing to bear 
in mind is FSX is almost 11 years old now, 
so it is starting to date.  Lockheed Martin 
took over the professional licence of the 
franchise and currently develops a platform 
called Prepar3D, which is aimed at training 
(www.prepar3d.com). It is based on the 
FSX engine but has been updated to take 
advantage of current hardware. Most third-
party software for FSX also has a Prepar3D 
version. So FSX/P3D with the right add-ons 
can still provide a solid training platform.
You might want to consider PilotEdge 
for ATC. It is run by professional air 
traffic controllers and will provide a full 
service when online, so you will get the 
correct ATC structure at airports (such as 
clearance, ground, tower etc). PilotEdge 
is available in a limited geographical 
area and you have to pay to use the 
service. A two-week free trial is available, 
so you can try it before purchasing. 
Check it out here: www.pilotedge.net.
I find it more practical to use a tablet for the 
EFB rather than running it on the flight sim 
PC, simply because it gets in the way. There 
is quite a good selection of EFBs available, 
so it is really a question of finding one that 
will suit your needs. Others you might want 
to consider are FSWidgets (www.fswidgets.
com) and Aivlasoft (www.aivlasoft.com) is 
very popular, although I don’t believe it is 
compatible with X-Plane. You might also want 
to have a look at Navigraph (www.navigraph.
com). With this, you basically get access to 
a world-wide selection of Jeppesen charts, 
which work on several different platforms 
including PC, Mac and Android/Apple tablets. 
They also offer a free trial.  Finally, I should 
mention Sky Vector (www.skyvector.com). It 
consists of aeronautical charts and online 
maps that can be used for flight planning. 
You can bring up high or low altitude airways 
or VFR maps and make flight plans from 
scratch. It is aimed at real aviation rather 
than flight simulation but I find it to be an 
excellent tool, particularly for VFR and 
flight planning. It is not an EFB per se, but 
I find it is a very useful tool and it is free.
Hardware technology in PCs and laptops 
has moved on in leaps and bounds, so 
you can buy a laptop that will easily run 
any simulator out there. Personally, I would 
recommend a system with a mobile version 
of the GTX 1060 with 6GB of VRAM and 8GB 
of system RAM. Ideally aim for the i7 7700 
but you can go with an i5; it all depends 
on your budget. For a storage device, I 
would recommend an SSD. I tend to use 
a 512GB if possible, but a 256GB will do - 
you just need to be more mindful of space.
Finally, for the cockpit hardware, there 
are some options. For full professional 
FAA-approved controllers, Precision Flight 
Controls (www.flypfc.com) is ‘top dog’ and 
you can purchase a plethora of instrument 
panels and controllers (www.flypfc.com). 
They make very good products but at a 
cost. Another company called GoFlight 
(www.goflightinc.com) also makes solid, 
good-quality controllers ranging from rudder 
pedals and throttle quadrants to radio 
stacks. Obviously by this stage the price 
starts going up significantly, but it does 
offset the cost of real world flight training. 
Cheers,  
Richard
PC Pilot
Above: An EFB (Electronic Flight Bag) is a very useful tool for flight planning and displaying charts.  
Photo FSWidgets
Full-blown fight simulation 
cockpits, while expensive, 
can potentially reduce the 
amount of training time 
in a real aircraft. Photo 
Precision Flight Controls

82 / PC PILOT #113
www.pcpilot.net
HINTS & TIPS
FSX Acceleration Activation
Dear PC Pilot
I recently upgraded to a new 500GB SSD 
and Windows 10. I installed FSX on the 
new SSD and entered the product key 
without any issues. However, when it came 
to installing FSX Acceleration, it loaded, 
but didn’t ask for the product key. When 
I started FSX, I got an error message 
related to the product registration.
After a few hours of researching 
the problem, I managed to narrow it 
down to an entry in the registry.
1. In Windows, click Start, click 
Run, type ‘regedit’ and then OK. 
2. Expand the following registry key:
HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\SYSTEM\
CURRENTCONTROLSET\CONTROL\CLASS\
{4D36E967-E325-11CE-BFC1-08002BE10318}
3. After you find the folder, double-
click Upperfilters on the right side
4. Change the value from 0 to PartMgr, 
and then click OK. (Mine said CLEANBOOT 
on one line and PartMgr on the next; 
just remove one line leaving PartMgr as 
the value.)  Make sure you change it to 
PartMgr’ (upper case), rather than ‘partmgr’ 
as registry entries are case-sensitive.
5. Close Registry Editor and reboot and 
then try to use the activation wizard.
Cheers, Mark
Above: Due to the age of FSX, we are starting to  
see more compatibility issues such as activation 
errors when installing the DVD version of FSX on 
Windows 10.
Hi Mark,
Thanks for sharing this with us. I have 
included your letter in this FS Q&A 
section for the benefit of other readers 
who might have the same problem.
I would however like to highlight that 
you should not change registry entries 
unless you know what you are doing 
and always make a backup. It is also 
worth noting that FSX: Steam Edition 
comes with the Acceleration pack and 
is compatible with Windows 10.
Cheers, 
Richard
PC Pilot
Dear PC Pilot
I love to improve FSX with some of the 
best commercial add-ons and I am very 
satisfied by the visual effects, but I am 
beginning to experience FSX crashes 
due to VAS Out of Memory errors.
I would like to ask you if upgrading 
my graphics card to the new Nvidia 
GTX 1000 series, such as the 1060, 
1070 or 1080 may reduce this error.
My hardware is:  
CPU: INTEL i7-4790 4.0GHz
Motherboard: MSI Z97 PC Gaming
RAM: Kingston DDR3 16GB 1600MHz
GPU: MSI GTX 960 2GB GDDR5.
FSX display settings are medium-
to-high and I use add-ons such as 
Mega Airport with some add-ons, like 
Manhattan X and New York Airports 
X, along with PMDG airliners
Best Regards, 
Maurizio
FSX and Out of Memory Error
Hi Maurizio,
Unfortunately upgrading the graphics card 
will not help reduce VAS (Virtual Address 
Space) errors. This is a limitation of the 
32-bit address space in FSX, which means 
it can only access 4GB of memory, even if 
you have more RAM physically installed.
The more complex the add-ons, the greater 
the memory usage. Mega Airports, together 
with complex airliners, compound this 
problem even further, which is why you are 
experiencing OOMS (Out of Memory Errors).
You have two choices. Firstly, you can 
reduce memory usage in FSX by turning down 
the sliders in the display settings, or secondly 
reduce AI traffic and autogen density.
If you have a registered version of FSUIPC, 
you can set it to display how much memory 
the simulator is using, which is displayed 
in the top-left corner of the FSX window. 
It will not fix the problem, but you can see 
when you are getting low on memory. 
Other things that might help are: in the FSX.
CFG file, try setting the LOD_RADIUS entry 
no higher than 4.5 and the texture_max_
load to 1024. Also make sure you have the 
‘Highmemfix=1’ in the [GRAPHICS] section. 
This corrects memory addressing during 
texture loading and can reduce OOM errors. 
I have also found Scenery Config Editor 
invaluable in alleviating this problem  
(www.sourceforge.net/projects/fs-sceditor). 
This program enables you to quickly and 
easily load the airports you plan to use 
before each flight. You will find this to 
be a good workaround to avoid loading 
unnecessary scenery into memory.
The second option is to consider 
upgrading to Prepar3D version 4. It is 
64-bit so it solves the memory issue, 
but it would mean you would have to 
reinvest in a lot of flight sim software.
Cheers, Richard
PC Pilot
Right: Detailed airports along with high-fidelity 
aircraft can take their toll on memory usage 
in FSX, which is the leading cause of Out of 
Memory Errors (OOMs).

www.aerosoft.com
17 AIRCRAFT TO CHOOSE FROM
OUT NOW AT:
AEROSOFT.COM
MORE THAN 200 DETAILED AIRPORTS 
ON THE WEST COAST OF THE US
VERY REALISTIC FLIGHT PHYSICS
VARIOUS ADD-ONS AVAILABLE
SUPPORT FOR VR GLASSES AND TRACK IR
EXTENSIVE MODDING SUPPORT

©2017 Just Flight. All rights reserved. Just Flight and the Just Flight logo are trademarks of JustFlight London Limited. All trademarks and brand names are trademarks or registered trademarks of the respective owners and their use herein does not imply any association or endorsement by any third party.
A MERRY CHRISTMAS AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR 
TO ALL PC PILOT READERS.
 FROM THE JUST FLIGHT CREW.
Follow us on Facebook:
facebook.com/justflight
Follow us on Twitter:
twitter.com/justflight
JANUARY
FEBRUARY
JULY
MAY
JULY
AUGUST
OCTOBER
SEPTEMBER
NOVEMBER
DECEMBER
DECEMBER
HERE’S 
TO AN 
EVEN 
BUSIER 
2018!
www.justflight.com
OUR PRODUCT LINE-UP FROM 2017

