Making Everything Easier!™
Nancy Muir
Pick the task,
Find it fast,
Get it DONE!
PCs
2nd Edition

access point: A device used to set up a 
wireless network.
attribute: Characteristics of a 
file, including Read-Only, Hidden, 
Compressed, or Encrypted.
browser: A software program, such 
as Internet Explorer, that you use to 
navigate the World Wide Web.
desktop: The main view of Windows 
Vista, containing shortcuts to various 
programs and files on your computer as 
well as on the Windows Vista taskbar and 
Start menu.
device driver: The software that enables 
peripheral devices, such as a printer or 
modem, to interact with the operating 
system.
driver: A storage area on a computer 
CPU or on external media (such as a 
CD-ROM or DVD) designated with a drive 
letter (such as C or F).
Ethernet: A wired cable connection 
used to set up a network between two or 
more computers.
firewall: A software program that 
protects your computer by preventing 
Cool PCs Lingo
unauthorized online access to your 
system.
flash drive: A storage device that 
connects to your computer via a USB 
port. Also referred to as a USB stick. See 
also USB.
network: A group of computers and 
other devices that are connected via 
a wired or wireless connection so that 
they can interact with one another and 
exchange or share data.
operating system: A software program, 
such as Windows Vista or Linux, that 
enables your PC to run software 
programs and hardware devices.
peripheral: A hardware device attached 
to a computer, such as a printer, monitor, 
or scanner. Peripherals are controlled by 
the computer to which they are attached.
Plug and Play: A set of specifications 
that enables peripherals to be instantly 
recognized and configured when 
connected to a computer.
restore point: A moment in time 
when all settings and configurations on 
your computer are saved. You can use 
a restore point to put your computer 
settings back to the way they were 
at that point in time in order to fix a 
problem introduced by a change in 
settings. See also System Restore.
screen resolution: The amount of data 
displayed on your monitor. Resolution 
is measured in pixels. Common settings 
include 1024 x 768 and 1280 x 800 pixels. 
You set the screen resolution in the 
Windows Control Panel.
System Restore: The Windows Vista 
feature used to keep track of changes on 
your computer by creating restore points 
either automatically or manually. See also 
restore point.
USB (Universal Serial Bus) port: A 
type of port on your computer used to 
connect Plug and Play devices, such as 
printers and digital cameras, or Flash 
drives. See also flash drive.
wireless: Use of infrared light or wireless 
technology such as Bluetooth to transmit 
data between computers and other 
devices without the need for plugging in 
cables.

by Nancy Muir
PCs Just the Steps
™
FOR
DUMmIES
‰
2ND EDITION

PCs Just the Steps™ For Dummies®, 2nd Edition
Published by
Wiley Publishing, Inc.
111 River Street
Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774
www.wiley.com
Copyright © 2009 by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published by Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording, scanning or otherwise, except as permitted under Sections 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without
either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance
Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or
online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Trademarks: Wiley, the Wiley Publishing logo, For Dummies, the Dummies Man logo, A Reference for the Rest of Us!, The Dummies Way,
Dummies Daily, The Fun and Easy Way, Dummies.com, Just the Steps, Making Everything Easier, and related trade dress are trademarks or registered
trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries, and may not be used without written permis-
sion. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. Wiley Publishing, Inc., is not associated with any product or vendor men-
tioned in this book.
LIMIT OF LIABILITY/DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY: THE PUBLISHER AND THE AUTHOR MAKE NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES
WITH RESPECT TO THE ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS OF THE CONTENTS OF THIS WORK AND SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIM ALL WAR-
RANTIES, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION WARRANTIES OF FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. NO WARRANTY MAY BE CREATED
OR EXTENDED BY SALES OR PROMOTIONAL MATERIALS. THE ADVICE AND STRATEGIES CONTAINED HEREIN MAY NOT BE SUITABLE
FOR EVERY SITUATION. THIS WORK IS SOLD WITH THE UNDERSTANDING THAT THE PUBLISHER IS NOT ENGAGED IN RENDERING
LEGAL, ACCOUNTING, OR OTHER PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. IF PROFESSIONAL ASSISTANCE IS REQUIRED, THE SERVICES OF A COM-
PETENT PROFESSIONAL PERSON SHOULD BE SOUGHT. NEITHER THE PUBLISHER NOR THE AUTHOR SHALL BE LIABLE FOR DAMAGES
ARISING HEREFROM. THE FACT THAT AN ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE IS REFERRED TO IN THIS WORK AS A CITATION AND/OR A
POTENTIAL SOURCE OF FURTHER INFORMATION DOES NOT MEAN THAT THE AUTHOR OR THE PUBLISHER ENDORSES THE INFOR-
MATION THE ORGANIZATION OR WEBSITE MAY PROVIDE OR RECOMMENDATIONS IT MAY MAKE. FURTHER, READERS SHOULD BE
AWARE THAT INTERNET WEBSITES LISTED IN THIS WORK MAY HAVE CHANGED OR DISAPPEARED BETWEEN WHEN THIS WORK WAS
WRITTEN AND WHEN IT IS READ.
For general information on our other products and services, please contact our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, out-
side the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or fax 317-572-4002.
For technical support, please visit www.wiley.com/techsupport.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in electronic books.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2009920035
ISBN: 978-0-470-40692-2
Manufactured in the United States of America
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1

About the Author
Nancy Muir has written over 50 books on technology
and business topics including Microsoft Office Project
2007 For Dummies and Staying Safe Online For Seniors
For Dummies (both by Wiley Publishing, Inc.). Nancy
has taught Internet safety and technical writing at the
university level and holds a certificate in distance learn-
ing design from The University of Washington. She is
currently the Director of Content Development for
LOOKBOTHWAYS, Inc., an Internet safety company.
Dedication
To my fantastic husband Earl for all his love and sup-
port. And to my late father-in-law Dick Boysen, who
was a wonderful example of how to live life to the
fullest.
Author’s Acknowledgments
I want to thank Greg Croy for entrusting me with
many book projects over the years. Happy retirement!
And thanks to my editor Blair Pottenger. (You’re the
best.) Thanks also to Virginia Sanders for copyediting
my words so they make sense and to Lee Musick for a
great technical edit.

Acquisitions and Editorial
Project Editor: Blair J. Pottenger
Executive Acquisitions Editor: Greg Croy
Copy Editor: Virginia Sanders
Technical Editor: Lee Musick
Editorial Manager: Kevin Kirschner
Editorial Assistant: Amanda Foxworth
Sr. Editorial Assistant: Cherie Case
Cartoons: Rich Tennant (www.the5thwave.com)
Composition Services
Project Coordinator: Katie Key
Layout and Graphics: Carl Byers, Carrie A. Cesavice,
Jennifer Mayberry, Jill A. Proll, Christine Williams
Proofreaders: Laura Albert, Cindy Lee Ballew/Precisely Write
Indexer: Broccoli Information Management
Publisher’s Acknowledgments
We’re proud of this book; please send us your comments through our online registration form located at http://dummies.custhelp.com.
For other comments, please contact our Customer Care Department within the U.S. at 877-762-2974, outside the U.S. at 317-572-3993, or
fax 317-572-4002.
Some of the people who helped bring this book to market include the following:
Publishing and Editorial for Technology Dummies
Richard Swadley, Vice President and Executive Group Publisher
Andy Cummings, Vice President and Publisher
Mary Bednarek, Executive Acquisitions Director
Mary C. Corder, Editorial Director
Publishing for Consumer Dummies
Diane Graves Steele, Vice President and Publisher
Composition Services
Gerry Fahey, Vice President of Production Services
Debbie Stailey, Director of Composition Services

Introduction............................................1
Part I: Setting Up Your Computer.............5
Chapter 1: Getting to Know Computer Basics ..............................7
Chapter 2: Your PC Out of the Box .............................................15
Chapter 3: Using Discs and Drives...............................................21
Chapter 4: Setting Up Your Display .............................................31
Chapter 5: Setting Up Input Devices ...........................................37
Chapter 6: Setting Up Accessibility Features ...............................43
Part II: Getting to Know Windows..........55
Chapter 7: Adjusting Windows Settings ......................................57
Chapter 8: Getting Around the Windows Desktop.....................65
Chapter 9: Customize the Look of Windows..............................79
Part III: Getting to Work .......................87
Chapter 10: Working with Files and Folders ...............................89
Chapter 11: Working with Software ...........................................103
Chapter 12: Working with Networks..........................................115
Chapter 13: Having Fun with Photos and Movies ...................123
Chapter 14: Working with Sound and Music ...........................133
Chapter 15: Working with Printers, Faxes, and Scanners.........143
Part IV: Going Online ..........................157
Chapter 16: Internet Basics.........................................................159
Chapter 17: Using E-Mail...........................................................179
Chapter 18: Connecting with Others ........................................197
Part V: Computer Maintenance and
Security..............................................203
Chapter 19: Computer Maintenance .........................................205
Chapter 20: Protecting Windows ................................................211
Index..................................................223
Contents at a Glance


C
omputers have come a long way in just 20 years or so. They’re now at
the heart of the way many people communicate, shop, and learn. They
provide useful tools for tracking information, organizing finances, and being
creative. 
Whether you’re a young person just getting your first computer, or a senior
who is finally getting around to discovering all that computers can enable
you to do, or anybody in between, this book will ease you into the world of
computers quickly and painlessly.
About This Book
This book is for people who are new to using a computer and want to dis-
cover the basics of making settings, working with files and folders, getting
on the Internet, and maintaining and protecting a Windows Vista–based
computer. Just the Steps books provide just that: just the steps you need to
complete common computer procedures quickly without a lot of explana-
tion to slow you down.
Foolish Assumptions 
This book is organized by sets of tasks. These tasks start from the very begin-
ning, assuming you know little about computers, and they guide you
through from the most basic steps in easy-to-understand language. Because I
assume you’re new to computers, the book provides explanations or defini-
tions of technical terms to help you out.
Conventions used
in this book 
➟When you have to type something in a text
box, I put it in bold type. Whenever I mention
a Web site address, I put it in another font,
like this.
➟For menu commands, I use the ➪symbol to
separate menu choices. For example, choose
Tools➪Internet Options. The ➪symbol is just
my way of saying “Open the Tools menu and
then click Internet Options.”
➟Callouts for figures draw your attention to an
action you need to perform. In some cases,
points of interest in a figure might be circled.
The text tells you what to look for, the circle
makes it easy to find.
This icon points out insights or helpful
suggestions related to the tasks in the
step list. 
➟
Introduction

All computers are run by software called an operating system,
such as Windows. Because Microsoft Windows–based per-
sonal computers (PCs) are the most common type, the book
focuses mostly on Windows functionality and specifically on
the latest version of Windows, Windows Vista.
Why You Need This Book
Working with computers can be a daunting prospect to peo-
ple who have little experience with them. One-thousand-page
reference books could send you running for the hills.
However, with the simple step-by-step approach of this book,
you can get up to speed with computers and overcome any
technophobia you might have experienced.
You can work through this book from beginning to end or
simply open up a chapter to solve a problem or help you
learn a new skill whenever you need it. The steps in each task
get you where you want to go quickly, without a lot of techni-
cal explanation. In no time, you’ll start picking up the skills
you need to become a confident computer user.
After you’ve finished this book, you’ll know your way around
a PC and you’ll probably want to start using some specific
applications. For that, I recommend other For Dummies books
such as Word 2007 For Dummies by Dan Gookin, Microsoft
Office Project 2007 For Dummies (by yours truly), or Quicken
2009 For Dummies by Stephen L. Nelson (all by Wiley
Publishing, Inc.).
How This Book Is Organized
This book is conveniently divided into several handy parts to
help you find what you need.
➟
Part I: Setting Up Your Computer: If you need to get
started with the basics of using a computer, this part is
for you. These chapters help you understand all the
parts and technologies that make up your computer,
and explore how to set up your computer out of the
box, including hooking it up to devices such as a
printer and working with settings for input devices like
your mouse and keyboard. These chapters provide
information for exploring the Windows desktop when
you first turn on your computer, and working with your
mouse, keyboard, monitor, and disc drives. Finally, I
provide information on setting up accessibility features
that help you if you need to adapt Windows to work
better for you if you have a visual, hearing, or hand
strength issue (like arthritis).
➟
Part II: Getting to Know Windows: Here’s where you
start working with the Windows Vista operating system.
You deal with basic settings such as your computer’s
date and time setting, set up a password to protect your
data, explore the Windows desktop, and discover how
to get help when you need it. This is also the part
where you find out how to customize the look of
Windows.
➟
2
Introduction

➟
Part III: Getting to Work: Windows allows you to
organize the data you create in files and folders, and
the first chapter in this part gets you up to speed on file
and folder management. Next you explore the world of
software, even practicing a bit with some built-in
Windows software to write a document and edit a pic-
ture. This is the part where you find out about network
basics, in case you want to set up your own home net-
work to enable two or more computers to access
devices such as a printer or to get on the Internet.
Chapters in this part also introduce you to some multi-
media devices and settings so you can work with
sounds and images, and set up peripherals — devices
such as printers, scanners, and faxes that help you share
information in your computer with others.
➟
Part IV: Going Online: It’s time to get online! The
chapters in this part help you understand what the
Internet is and what tools and functions it makes avail-
able to you. Find out how to explore the Internet with
a Web browser; how to stay in touch with people via
e-mail, instant messaging, chat, blogs; and even how to
make Internet phone calls.
➟
Part V: Computer Maintenance and Security: Now
that you have a computer, you have certain responsibil-
ities towards it (just like having a child or puppy!). In
this case, you need to protect the data on your com-
puter, which you can do using a program called
Windows Defender. In addition, you need to perform
some routine maintenance tasks to keep your hard
drive uncluttered and virus free.
Get Going!
Whether you need to start from square one and set up your
computer or you’re ready to just start enjoying the tools and
toys your current computer makes available, it’s time to get
going, get online, and get computer savvy.
➟
3
Introduction

➟
4
Introduction

Part I
Setting Up 
Your Computer

Chapter 4: Setting Up Your Display . . . . . . . . . . . . . .31
Enable a Monitor.....................................................32
Update Your Monitor Driver...................................33
Install a New Graphics Card...................................34
Adjust Your Computer’s Refresh Rate.....................35
Change the DPI Setting...........................................36
Chapter 5: Setting Up Input Devices  . . . . . . . . . . . . .37
Identify Different Types of Input Devices..............38
Customize the Mouse Settings................................39
Set Up Your Keyboard .............................................40
Configure Game Controllers...................................41
Chapter 6: Setting Up Accessibility Features  . . . . . . .43
Make the Keyboard Easier to Use...........................44
Use the On-Screen Keyboard ..................................46
Make the Mouse Easier to Use................................47
Optimize the Screen for Maximum Visibility........48
Set Up Speech Recognition .....................................50
Replace Sounds with Visual Cues...........................52
Let Windows Suggest Accessibility Settings............53
Chapter 1: Getting to Know Computer Basics  . . . . . . .7
Examine Your Hard Drive .........................................8
Understand Operating Systems ................................9
Choose the Right Computer ...................................10
Look at Wireless Capabilities ..................................11
Select a Monitor.......................................................12
Understand Data Storage ........................................13
Understand Microprocessors ..................................14
Chapter 2: Your PC Out of the Box  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .15
Locate Switches and Plug In Things .......................16
Turn On Your Computer and Log On to 
Windows ................................................................17
Work with the Start Menu.......................................18
Navigate the Windows Desktop..............................19
Turn Off Your Computer.........................................20
Chapter 3: Using Discs and Drives  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .21
View Files with Windows Explorer.........................22
Insert and Eject a CD or DVD.................................23
Insert and Remove a USB Flash Drive....................24
Check Installed Memory .........................................25
Add Memory ............................................................26
Add a Desktop Shortcut to a Removable 
Storage Device .......................................................28
Initialize a New Hard Drive....................................29
Partition a Disk........................................................30

Getting to Know
Computer Basics
U
sing a computer is actually pretty simple, but understanding the vari-
ous technologies that make up a computer is a little harder. You don’t
have to know how to build a computer, but to choose the right computer for
your needs or talk intelligently with the clerk in the computer store or tech-
nical support, it helps to have a basic understanding.
In this chapter, you educate yourself about
➟
How data is stored on your hard drive
➟
What an operating system does
➟
Various computer configurations available such as desktops and 
laptops
➟
The value of wireless capability in your computer to keep you 
connected
➟
The various features offered in monitors that may make your comput-
ing life easier on the eyes
➟
Various options for storing your data
➟
What, exactly, a microprocessor is and which is the best one for you
1
Get ready to . . .
➟Examine Your Hard Drive ............................8
➟Understand Operating Systems ....................9
➟Choose the Right Computer........................10
➟Look at Wireless Capabilities ......................11
➟Select a Monitor ........................................12
➟Understand Data Storage ..........................13
➟Understand Microprocessors ......................14
➟
Chapter

Examine Your Hard Drive
Your computer can have several drives. All but the hard drive
are external and typically plug into your computer via a USB
port. The hard drive is also called a hard disk. It’s essentially a
platter inside your computer where your computer stores pro-
grams and data.
Here are some important-to-know facts about your hard drive:
➟
A hard drive uses magnetic recording to store data.
This is similar to old-style recording tape. You can write
data to your hard drive as a series of bytes, use that data,
and erase it. However, be aware that the magnetic pat-
tern on your hard drive can retain erased data even after
you’ve erased it.
➟
Your hard drive is divided into sectors that include
several tracks. Every sector contains a set number of
bytes. Typical sectors are 256 or 512 bytes. Formatting a
hard drive creates this sector and track structure, along
with a file allocation table that helps your computer
retrieve data.
➟
Similar to an old record player’s stylus, a computer
hard drive works with an arm containing read/write
heads. These heads move over the hard drive as it spins
to locate various bytes of information.
➟
Hard drives come with different capacities for storing
data. Today most are measured in gigabytes (GB). The
higher the gigabytes, the more data your computer can
store, so check computer manufacturer specs (see 
Figure 1-1) before you buy.
Figure 1-1: Manufacturer specs for memory and hard drive capacity
If you’re not sure what capacity your hard drive has you can check your
computer manufacturer’s specifications. You’ll find these in your user
manual or go to the manufacturer’s Web site and search for your model.
You can also choose Start➪Control Panel➪System and Maintenance
and click the View Amount of RAM and Processor Speed link to see your
model name, RAM, and processor speed.
➟
8
Chapter 1: Getting to Know Computer Basics

Understand Operating Systems
Operating systems (OSes) are software programs, such as
Windows or the Macintosh OS, that run your computer. Your
computer comes with an operating system pre-installed. An
operating system runs your applications and allows you to
manage files on your computer and protect your data.
Here are some things you should know about operating 
systems:
➟
Tools: Operating systems often come with extra tools
and features to help you get your work done, such as
calculators (see Figure 1-2), games, tools to help users
with vision or hearing disabilities, and programs to pro-
tect your computer from viruses.
➟
Incompatibilities: Today, many operating systems allow
you to use files created with other operating systems
seamlessly, but there are still some incompatibilities.
You may need to download converters to be able to
open files created on a computer using one operating
system on a computer using another.
➟
Upgrades: Over time new operating systems come out
and you may reach a point where you want to upgrade
your OS. Most offer frequent interim updates you can
download for free, but when a new version of the prod-
uct is released, you’ll have to buy an upgrade package to
begin using the newest features.
Figure 1-2: Windows´ Calculator
Security features of operating systems such as Windows Defender are
getting more and more robust, and it’s important that you take advan-
tage of them to protect your data. However in many cases you have to
enable these features for them to do any good. See Chapter 20 for more
about computer security.
➟
9
Understand Operating Systems

Choose the Right Computer
There are different styles of computers available. To help you
choose the best computer for your needs, here are some styles
to consider:
➟
A desktop computer (see Figure 1-3) is meant to stay at
one location. It can take the form of a tower that you
place on your desk or the floor with a separate monitor.
Other models are designed so the monitor contains the
guts of the computer, as with some Macintosh models.
➟
A laptop or notebook computer (see Figure 1-4) is
more portable than a desktop, though these currently
run the gamut from four pounds or so to heftier desk-
top models weighing in at nine pounds or more. With a
laptop, the monitor is built into a chassis that also con-
tains the keyboard and a built-in mouse that usually
takes the form of a touch pad or touch button.
➟
A Tablet PC is a Windows computer that allows you to
interact with the computer by “writing” on the screen or
making choices using a stylus. Tablet PCs can lay flat,
allowing you to use them like a pad or tablet.
Netbooks are like laptops, except that they have limited function-
ality. Essentially they allow you to surf the Internet and retrieve
e-mail but not run other software programs. Because of their lim-
ited feature set, they aren’t really considered PCs.
Figure 1-3: Desktops take up more space
Figure 1-4: Laptops are portable
➟
10
Chapter 1: Getting to Know Computer Basics

Look at Wireless Capabilities
If you own a computer with wireless capabilities, you can con-
nect to the Internet without plugging your computer into a
cable connection or phone line. You can go online using a
wireless card or device in your computer and an Internet
access point in your home network or even use access points
in many public locations such as airports and hotels.
Here are the basics about wireless connections:
➟
Subscriptions: You can subscribe to a Wireless Wide
Area Network offered by companies such as Verizon (see
Figure 1-5) and then pick up their signal as you move
around.
➟
Hotspots: You can pick up public connections called
hotspots (see Figure 1-6) at locations such as hotels and
coffee shops. Some public locations charge a fee, but
many others offer a wireless connection (also called Wi-
Fi) for free.
➟
Wireless home networks: You can set up a wireless net-
work in your home and access it from several computers
located throughout your house after you’ve configured
them to access the network.
➟
Wireless protocols: Check your computer’s specifica-
tions to see what wireless protocol it uses. A popular
wireless protocol is Bluetooth, referred to as 802.11,
which you’ll see associated with letters such as a, b, g,
and n. Wireless version n is the latest and boosts your
reception range significantly over earlier versions.
Figure 1-5: Verizon’s broadband access map
Figure 1-6: Find directories of hotspots online
➟
11
Look at Wireless Capabilities

Select a Monitor
Your monitor displays your operating system environment,
online documents, files and folders, and various applications
you use to get your work done. Because you may look at your
monitor many hours a day, it’s important that you understand
how monitor size and display quality affect your viewing 
experience.
➟
Sizes: Monitors come in sizes ranging from very small
8.6-inch netbooks (see Figure 1-7) to huge 24-inch
desktop models (see Figure 1-8).
➟
Displays: Monitor displays use various technologies that
afford different image quality. Some monitors use LCD
(liquid crystal display) technologies and others use TFT
(thin film transfer) liquid crystal display. One of the
variables in display quality is how well it keeps crisp
images no matter what the lighting around it.
➟
Screen resolutions: Screen resolution relates to the
crispness of the image on your monitor screen. The
higher the resolution numbers, the sharper your display
image.
The monitor you choose depends on the type of computer you get
(laptop where smaller size may be important for portability versus
desktop); what activities you use your computer for (if you use lots
of graphics applications or games, you might prefer a monitor with
a higher-end graphics card); and any vision challenges you may
face (in which case you might want a larger monitor).
Figure 1-7: Portable computers may sport very small monitors
Figure 1-8: A large display helps with games and graphics applications
➟
12
Chapter 1: Getting to Know Computer Basics

Understand Data Storage
You can store data to your computer hard drive or store it on
other media. In fact, it’s a good idea to keep a copy of your
important files on other media in case your computer hard
drive gets damaged or wears out. Here are several types of data
storage:
➟
CDs and DVDS are hard plastic disks that you can use
to store data and read it. Your computer has a CD/DVD
drive which looks like a slot that you slip the disk into.
➟
Flash drives are sticks, about the dimensions of a very
thick piece of gum (see Figure 1-9), that slide into a
USB (universal serial bus) slot. These have capacities up
to and exceeding 8 gigabytes, so they can hold lots of
files.
➟
External hard drives (see Figure 1-10) usually plug into
a USB port in your computer. They range in size from a
bit larger than a deck of cards to a paperback book, and
essentially they give you a second hard drive to back 
up to.
Netbooks, which are very small laptops that are becoming popular
for their portability, don’t have CD/DVD drives. To access CD/DVD
content for these consider downloading software from the Internet,
sharing a CD/DVD drive of a larger computer over a network, or
getting an external CD/DVD drive.
Figure 1-9: A USB stick
Figure 1-10: An external hard drive
➟
13
Understand Data Storage

Understand Microprocessors
Microprocessors, also simply called processors, are what enable
your computer to run and process data. Microprocessors are
computer chips which include integrated circuits.
Here are some things to consider about microprocessors when
you’re buying a new computer:
➟
Brand: The two key players in manufacturing processors
today are Intel (see Figure 1-11) and AMD. When you
buy a computer and you prefer one brand to another,
check the models to see which they use.
➟
Speed: Microprocessor clock speed ratings, given in
gigahertz, determine how fast your computer runs.
You’ll pay more for a faster microprocessor, but if you
use your computer quite a bit, especially for applica-
tions such as graphics and games, the speed may be
worth the price.
➟
Power management: Laptop computers have power man-
agement issues that make the choice of processor even
more important. For example, the Core 2 Duo processor
from Intel uses less power than its predecessors.
One other thing to think about is chip cores. In the latest chips the
processor ‘brain’ is divided up into different logic sectors called
cores. This helps speed up your computer by allowing it to perform
multiple tasks at the same time. For example, you might buy a lap-
top Core2 Duo processor, which has two cores, or spring for a high
end desktop with a Quad Core chip (4 cores).
Figure 1-11: Intel’s processors
➟
14
Chapter 1: Getting to Know Computer Basics

Your PC Out 
of the Box
Your desktop computer might be housed in a big metal container (called
a tower) that you keep on the floor under your desk, or it might be a
single unit built into your monitor or even a portable laptop. It is likely to
have multiple slots and places to plug in things (these are called ports) as
well as indicator lights that tell you things like when the power is on or off.
When you get your PC and take it out of the box, there’s likely to be a handy
piece of paper that tells you what to plug in where so you can connect your
monitor, keyboard, and mouse. Most computers come with color-coded
plugs to make it easy to spot where a particular item plugs in. Still, a basic
overview of what’s on your PC, how you turn your computer on and off,
and how you get around the Windows Vista desktop (the central command
center of Windows) may be helpful.
Although computer models differ somewhat, the information and illustra-
tions in this chapter can help you locate various switches and connectors on
your own computer.
If you’ve never worked with a PC before, use the tasks in this chapter to do
the following:
➟
Locate connections on the front and back of your computer: You
use these connections to attach a power plug, your monitor, printer,
mouse, keyboard, and more to your central processing unit (CPU in
computer speak).
➟
Turn on your computer, work with the Start menu, get around the
Windows Vista desktop, and turn off your computer: This is your
first introduction to booting up, using, and logging off of your 
computer.
2
Get ready to . . .
➟Locate Switches and Plug In Things ............16
➟Turn On Your Computer and Log On to
Windows....................................................17
➟Work with the Start Menu ..........................18
➟Navigate the Windows Desktop ..................19
➟Turn Off Your Computer ............................20
➟
Chapter

Locate Switches and Plug In Things
Use this table in tandem with Figure 2-1 to locate device-to-
PC connector ports. Note that many devices use a USB con-
nector these days; so, for example, if you have a mouse with a
USB connector, just plug it into one of your USB ports.
Connection
Location
What It’s Good For
Mouse
1
Connect your wired mouse
Video Connection
2
Connect your non-USB monitor
Keyboard
3
Connect your wired keyboard
USB ports
4
Connect any USB device
Parallel port
5
Connect to a non-USB printer
Audio
6
Connect speakers
Not every computer will have the same number or type of ports.
For example, newer computers use USB ports for connecting a wide
variety of devices, from printers to digital cameras or a wireless
mouse. Older computers have fewer USB ports available, but newer
ones are likely to offer 4 or 5. 
Figure 2-1: Various places to plug things into your PC
Note that some monitors and laptop computers have built-in speakers 
so you don’t have to connect separate speakers through the audio 
port. Discover more about working with sound settings in Chapter 14.
PRINTER
1
COM2
COM1
USB
3
4
2
5
6
➟
16
Chapter 2: Your PC Out of the Box

Turn On Your Computer and 
Log On to Windows
1.
With your computer set up, you’re ready to turn it on.
Start by pressing the power button on your computer to
begin the Windows Vista start-up sequence.
2.
If this is the first time you’ve started your computer, you
see a screen that guides you through initial setup, which
usually includes items such as specifying your country,
date and time, and username. Also, your computer man-
ufacturer might have added further setup steps, such as
registering your computer via the Internet.
3.
In the following Windows Vista Welcome screen, all
user accounts are represented by labeled picture icons.
Click the account you want to access.
4.
In the following screen, enter your password if you have
assigned one and then click the arrow button (or click
the Switch User button to return to the previous screen
and choose another user to log on as). Windows Vista
verifies your password and displays the Windows Vista
desktop, as shown in Figure 2-2.
If you haven’t set up the password protection feature when you
click an account icon on the Welcome screen, you’re taken directly
to the Windows Vista desktop. You can find out more about adding
and changing passwords in Chapter 7.
Figure 2-2: The Windows Vista desktop
To log out from one user account and log in with another, choose
Start➪Log Off. This takes you to the Log Off screen, where you can click
any other user’s icon to log on through that account.
If this is the very first time you’ve turned on a new computer, your man-
ufacturer may have included an introductory series of screens to make
certain settings for how your computer will work. See your computer
documentation for an explanation of these options.
➟
17
Turn On Your Computer and Log On to Windows

Work with the Start Menu
1.
One of the ways you can locate and work with installed
software and files is through the Start menu. Press the
Windows key on your keyboard or click the Start button on
the desktop to display the Start menu.
2.
From the Start menu, you can do any of the following:
• Click the Recent Items choice on the right of the Start
menu to see files you’ve worked with most recently. (See
Figure 2-3.)
• Click All Programs to display a list of all software
installed on your computer. You can click any program
in the list to open it or click a program folder to see
more options.
• Click any category in the upper-right section of the Start
menu to display a Windows Explorer window with
related folders and files (such as the Music folder shown
in Figure 2-4).
• Click the Power Button icon to put the computer to
sleep but keep current programs running, or click the
Lock icon to go to the log on screen; if your account
requires a password to open it, only somebody who
knows the password can now open Windows.
• Click the arrow next to the Lock icon to display a menu of
choices for shutting down or restarting your computer, for
logging off, or for logging in as a different user.
3.
When you move your cursor away from the Start menu and
click your mouse or press Esc on your keyboard, the menu
disappears.
If you open the Start menu and right-click in a blank area of the menu, a
shortcut menu pops up. Choose Properties to display the Taskbar and Start
Menu Properties dialog box, where you can customize the Start menu
behavior. If you would rather use the look and feel of the Start menu in
older versions of Windows, select Classic Start Menu in the Taskbar and
Start Menu Properties dialog box and then click OK. (Note that this book
deals only with the Windows Vista–style Start menu features.)
Figure 2-3: The Start menu
Figure 2-4: Windows Explorer
➟
18
Chapter 2: Your PC Out of the Box

Navigate the Windows Desktop
1.
With the Windows Vista desktop displayed (see 
Figure 2-5) do any of the following:
• Double-click a shortcut icon to open that program,
folder, or document.
• Right-click an item to display a shortcut menu (see
Figure 2-6) for commonly performed tasks such as
Open, Send To, or Copy.
2.
Move your mouse to the bottom of the screen to display
the Windows Vista taskbar if it’s not already displayed.
Do any of the following:
• Click a window button for a running application to
maximize it.
• Click items in the notification area (on the right side
of the taskbar) to see the current date and time, or to
access other special Windows Vista programs. Some
items here just display information when you hover
your mouse over them; others can be double-clicked
to open a window with more options or information.
• Click a button on the Quick Launch bar (on the left
side of the taskbar) to quickly start various programs.
3.
Click the Start button to open the Start menu (see the
previous task for more information).
Windows Vista has some preset desktop icons, such as the Recycle
Bin (the place where Windows places deleted files and folders), and
your computer manufacturer probably placed several icons on the
desktop for preinstalled programs and tools. You can also create
your own shortcuts; see Chapter 8 for more about this procedure.
Figure 2-5: The Windows Vista desktop
Figure 2-6: A shortcut menu
➟
19
Navigate the Windows Desktop

Turn Off Your Computer
1.
To turn off your computer, you should initiate a shut
down sequence in your operating system rather than
simply turning off the power. Click the Start button.
2.
In the bottom-right corner of the Start menu, click the
arrow to the right of the button with a lock on it.
3.
In the resulting sub-menu, as shown in Figure 2-7,
choose Shut Down. Windows Vista closes, and the com-
puter turns off. Turning off your computer through the
shut down process helps your computer close out of any
processes it’s doing behind the scenes so you don’t lose
data or settings.
You can also choose Restart to turn off and then immediately turn
on your computer. You would use this setting if your computer is
having problems and you want your system to reset or if you install
new software or make new settings and are instructed to restart
your computer.
The Sleep option on the shortcut menu in Step 2 is like letting your
computer take a nap. The screen goes dark, and in the case of lap-
tops, power consumption lowers. By clicking your mouse button or
pressing Enter on your keyboard, you can wake up your computer
again with everything just as you left it.
Figure 2-7: Various options for shutting down your computer
When you turn off your computer, peripherals such as your
monitor or printer don’t turn off automatically. You have to
press their power buttons to turn each off manually.
➟
20
Chapter 2: Your PC Out of the Box

Using Discs 
and Drives
T
he motherboard of your computer is where all the circuitry for your PC
lives. The motherboard also contains the processor chip that runs your
computer. Your hard drive is connected to the motherboard. This hard drive
(typically designated as the C drive) is the main physical storage area for
your PC.
You can also use removable media drives — such a CD-ROM drive, a DVD
drive, or a flash drive — to give your computer access to additional data and
storage. Your computer can then read files from that media as well as write
files to it, if the media is formatted as writable. CDs and DVDs are flat discs
that slide into a slim drawer somewhere on your computer; flash drives are
small “sticks” that slot into any USB drive.
Of course, you need a way to view and work with all that data, wherever it’s
stored. In this chapter, you explore your drives, including the following:
➟
Locating files with Windows Explorer
➟
Inserting and ejecting various types of storage media
➟
Checking the memory on a drive
➟
Adding memory
➟
Placing a drive icon on the desktop for ease of access
➟
Initializing a new hard drive
➟
Partitioning a hard drive
3
Get ready to . . . 
➟View Files with Windows Explorer ..............22
➟Insert or Eject a CD or DVD ........................23
➟Insert and Remove a USB Flash Drive ........24
➟Check Installed Memory ............................25
➟Add Memory..............................................26
➟Add a Desktop Shortcut to a Removable
Storage Device ..........................................28
➟Initialize a New Hard Drive........................29
➟Partition a Hard Drive................................30
➟
Chapter

View Files with Windows Explorer
1.
Windows Explorer is a program you can use to find a
file or folder on any drive by navigating through an out-
line of folders and subfolders. To get started, right-click
the Start menu and choose Explore.
2.
In the resulting Windows Explorer window, shown in
Figure 3-1, double-click a folder in the Folders list on
the left to open the folder.
3.
The folder’s contents are displayed in a pane on the
right side of the window. If necessary, open a series of
folders in this right pane until you locate the file you
want.
4.
When the file you want appears in the list of items in
the Name column in the right pane, double-click its
icon to open it.
To see different perspectives and information about files in
Windows Explorer, click the arrow on the Views button at the top (it
looks like a series of columns) and choose one of the following
menu options: Extra Large, Large, Medium, or Small Icons for
graphical displays; Details to show details such as Date Modified
and Size; and Tiles to show the file/folder name, type, and size. If
you’re working with a folder containing graphics files, the graphics
automatically display as thumbnails unless you choose Details.
Figure 3-1: Finding files and folders in Windows Explorer 
You can open commonly used folders from the Start menu,
including Documents, Pictures, and Music. Click one of these,
and Windows Explorer opens that particular window.
➟
22
Chapter 3: Using Discs and Drives

Insert and Eject a CD or DVD
1.
Locate your CD/DVD drive. You usually open the drive
by pressing a button on the front of the drive and close
it again by pressing the same button.
2.
A dialog box appears (see Figure 3-2), offering different
options for working with the files on the disc. To view
the files on the disc, click Open Folder to View Files.
3.
In the resulting Windows Explorer window (see Figure
3-3), you can double-click files to open them or save
files to the disc. (See Chapter 11 for more about backing
up files to disc.)
4.
When you’re finished with the disc, right-click the drive
name on the list on the left side of the Windows
Explorer window and choose Eject to eject it.
Ejecting works a bit differently on a Mac. Click the Finder icon to
open the Finder. Click on the disc name on the left side of this win-
dow, and then click File➪Eject “File Name”.
Figure 3-2: The AutoPlay menu 
Figure 3-3: An overview of all the disc contents
➟
23
Insert and Eject a CD or DVD

Insert and Remove 
a USB Flash Drive
1.
Locate an unused USB slot on your computer. (On desk-
top towers, this slot might be in the front or back; in
laptops, it’s usually on the sides or back.)
2.
Slip the flash drive into the USB slot. A dialog box
appears, offering different options for working with the
files on the disc. To view the files on the flash drive,
click Open Folder to View Files.
3.
In the resulting Windows Explorer window (see Figure
3-4), you can double-click files to open them or save
files to the flash drive. (See Chapter 11 for more about
backing up files.) 
4.
When you’ve finished with the flash drive, click the
taskbar icon labeled Safely Eject Hardware and choose
the flash drive on the pop-up list that appears. A win-
dow appears, telling you it’s okay to remove the flash
drive (see Figure 3-5). Pull it out of the slot gently and
tuck it in a safe place.
If you have trouble inserting the flash drive into a USB port try
turning it over — it only goes in with the contacts pointing up.
Figure 3-4: Windows Explorer showing all files and folders on a flash drive
Figure 3-5: Removing a flash drive safely
➟
24
Chapter 3: Using Discs and Drives

Check Installed Memory
1.
Choose Start➪Computer.
2.
In the resulting Computer window, right-click the C:
disk icon to open a shortcut menu (see Figure 3-6) and
then choose Properties.
3.
In the resulting Local Disk (C:) Properties dialog box,
click the General tab to view the total memory (see
Figure 3-7).
4.
Click the Close button to close the dialog box.
When you purchase a computer you will find hard drive capacities
such as 120 GB, 250 GB, and 320 GB. GB stands for gigabytes,
which represents 1 billion bytes of computer storage. It wasn’t that
long ago that computer hard drives were measured in kilobytes (1
thousand bytes) so today’s extra large hard drives are likely to pro-
vide plenty of space for all your computer activities to run.
Figure 3-6: Right-click the C: disk icon
Figure 3-7: The System Properties dialog box
➟
25
Check Installed Memory

Add Memory
1.
To install a memory module, turn off your desktop
computer and disconnect all power and other cables
from it.
2.
Open the PC chassis (see Figure 3-8). Check your user’s
manual for this procedure, which usually involves
removing a few screws and popping the cover off your
tower.
3.
Touch a metal object with your hand to discharge any
static before you reach inside the computer.
4.
Locate the slots for memory modules. There are typi-
cally three or four in a group. Again, check your manual
for the exact location in your PC.
There are different models of memory modules. Dual Inline
Memory Modules (DIMM) are a common type of memory module,
and they come with many recent PCs. Check your manufacturer’s
documentation for your computer to be sure which type of memory
module you should be using.
Figure 3-8: Opening your computer
➟
26
Chapter 3: Using Discs and Drives

5.
If you’re replacing an old memory module with a new
one, remove the old module first. If your system has
clips at either end of the slot, move them to the
unlocked position first. If you’re adding a memory
module, you can simply use an empty slot. See your
user’s manual to determine which slots make sense for
the size of the memory module you’re inserting.
6.
Remove the new memory module from its sealed bag.
Handling the module by its edges, line it up with the
slot and insert it firmly but gently (see Figure 3-9). If
your computer model requires it, snap the clips in place
to hold the module in.
7.
Make sure that you didn’t disconnect any wires or leave
any loose screws inside the PC chassis. Then replace the
computer cover and reinsert the screws.
8.
Plug the computer in and turn it on. Your computer
should sense the new memory when it starts up.
Warning: Never force any memory module into a slot. Doing so
can damage the module or your PC. If the module won’t insert eas-
ily, you might be holding it the wrong way. Try reversing it, and
insert it again.
Figure 3-9: A memory module slot
1 
2 
1 
3 
➟
27
Add Memory

Add a Desktop Shortcut to a
Removable Storage Device
1.
You may want to frequently access contents of a remov-
able flash drive or DVD, so you may want to create a
shortcut for one of these drives on your desktop.
Choose Start➪Computer.
2.
In the resulting Computer window, right-click the
removable storage drive you want and choose Create
Shortcut from the menu that appears (see Figure 3-10).
The shortcut is created and placed on the desktop.
If you like to play audio DVDs frequently, one option is to put a
shortcut for the DVD drive on your desktop. However, most modern
keyboards offer you keys to start, stop, pause, and even skip to
other tracks of your audio DVD. On laptops, these may be function
keys that require you to press an fn key and then a function key.
On larger keyboards, there may be dedicated keys for controlling
audio playback.
If you use a flash drive all the time to store files, sort of like a sec-
ond hard drive, it might be a good idea to put that drive icon on
your desktop so you can quickly access frequently used files.
Figure 3-10: Create a shortcut for a removable disc
➟
28
Chapter 3: Using Discs and Drives

Initialize a New Hard Drive
1.
After installing a new hard drive (see your user’s manual
for instructions, which will vary by system), choose
Start➪Control Panel➪System and Maintenance.
2.
In the resulting System and Maintenance window click
Administrative Tools. In the resulting Administrative
Tools windows double-click Computer Management,
and then click Disk Management in the Computer
Management window that appears.
3.
In the resulting Disk Management window (see Figure
3-11), right-click the new drive and then choose
Initialize Disk.
4.
In the resulting Initialize Disk dialog box select the disk
to initialize and click OK.
After you initialize a new hard drive, you should also follow the pro-
cedure to partition it (see the following task). The New Partition
Wizard you access for that task takes you through partitioning and
formatting the drive. For your hard drive, during that procedure,
you should format the drive as the primary partition and use all the
space on the drive.
Figure 3-11: The Disk Management window
➟
29
Initialize a New Hard Drive

Partition a Disk
1.
Choose Start➪Control Panel➪System and Maintenance➪
Administrative Tools.
2.
In the resulting Administrative Tools window, double-
click the Computer Management link.
3.
In the resulting Computer Management window (as
shown in Figure 3-12), click Disk Management in the
left pane, right-click a basic disk in the right pane (this
is usually your hard drive) that isn’t allocated, and then
choose New Partition.
4.
Follow the steps in the New Partition Wizard to create
the new partition.
A new partition can free up some memory and make your system
utilize memory more efficiently. But just so you know, you have 
to be logged on as a system administrator to complete the steps
listed here. If you are an individual desktop user, check settings
under User Accounts in the Control Panel to set up administrator
status. If you’re on a network, ask your network administrator
about these rights.
Figure 3-12: The Computer Management window
➟
30
Chapter 3: Using Discs and Drives

Setting Up Your
Display
Your monitor is your window into the world of your computer. It’s
where you view all the data and images your PC stores and manipu-
lates. Essentially three elements are involved in what you see on your moni-
tor screen: the monitor itself, the graphics card installed in your CPU, and
the driver (that is, software) that controls your monitor.
In addition to these three items, it’s important to know how to make set-
tings to fine-tune your display so it’s easy on your eyes, especially if you
work on your computer many hours every day.
To customize your display, you can do the following:
➟
Adjust settings for your monitor and display. Windows Vista provides
settings that you can use to enable your monitor and control the
driver.
➟
Add a new graphics card to provide up-to-date capabilities for your
display.
➟
Control various features, such as how often the screen image refreshes.
4
Get ready to . . .
➟Enable a Monitor ......................................32
➟Update Your Monitor Driver ......................33
➟Install a New Graphics Card........................34
➟Adjust Your Computer’s Refresh Rate..........35
➟Change the DPI Setting..............................36
➟
Chapter

Enable a Monitor
1.
If you want to, you can switch monitors and enable one
that’s currently disabled (for example, to use a larger
desktop monitor with your laptop). Connect the moni-
tor to your computer. Right-click the desktop and
choose Personalize from the resulting menu.
2.
In the Personalization dialog box that appears, click the
Display Settings link.
3.
In the Display Settings dialog box that appears, click the
Advanced Settings button.
4.
In the Advanced dialog box (see Figure 4-1), click the
Monitor tab and then click the Properties button.
5.
On the Driver tab of the Monitor Properties dialog box
(see Figure 4-2), click the Enable button.
6.
Click OK three times to close all dialog boxes and save
the new setting.
A monitor should be disabled only if it’s causing system problems.
A Plug and Play monitor should be enabled automatically when you
install its driver and plug it in. If you have cause to disable the mon-
itor, you can use this procedure to enable it again.
Figure 4-1: The Advanced Monitor Settings dialog box
Figure 4-2: The Monitor Properties dialog box
➟
32
Chapter 4: Setting Up Your Display

Update Your Monitor Driver
1.
Right-click the desktop and choose Personalize from the
resulting menu.
2.
In the Personalization dialog box that appears, click the
Display Settings link.
3.
In the Display dialog box that appears, click the
Advanced Settings button.
4.
In the Advanced Settings dialog box, click the Monitor
tab and then click the Properties button.
5.
On the Driver tab (see Figure 4-3) of the resulting
Monitor Properties dialog box, click the Update Driver
button.
6.
In the Update Driver Software dialog box that appears
(see Figure 4-4), choose Search Automatically for
Updated Driver Software. This feature searches your
computer for any drivers in Windows or on disk and
then searches the manufacturer’s Web site for updated
drivers.
7.
The resulting dialog box shows a progress bar indicating
that your computer is searching for updated software.
8.
In the final window that appears, you’re told either that
your existing driver is the most current or than an
updated driver exists. Click Close.
9.
Click OK three times to close all other dialog boxes and
save the new setting.
Figure 4-3: The Driver tab of the Monitor Properties dialog box
Figure 4-4: The Update Driver Software dialog box
➟
33
Update Your Monitor Driver

Install a New Graphics Card
1.
First, uninstall the existing graphics card driver by using
the Uninstall a Program link in the Control Panel. (See
Chapter 11 for more about removing software.)
2.
Shut off your computer and unplug it. Also shut off any
peripherals attached to it, such as a printer, and discon-
nect your monitor from the CPU (computer body).
3.
Remove your CPU cover following the directions in 
your computer manual. Before touching anything inside
the CPU, touch a piece of metal to get rid of any static
discharge.
4.
Locate the current graphics card (using your manual if
necessary) and remove it (see Figure 4-5). This might
involve unscrewing the card with a Philips screwdriver.
5.
Position the new graphics card over the slot and insert it
firmly but gently (see Figure 4-6). If you removed a
card-holder screw in Step 4, replace it.
6.
Replace the computer cover and plug your monitor back
in. Turn on your monitor and then your computer. Your
computer automatically detects the new card and dis-
plays the Found New Hardware Wizard. Follow its direc-
tions to install the new driver.
Whenever you open your computer case, be very careful about
static discharge, which can harm you and the delicate electronics in
your computer. Consider wearing an antistatic wristband, which you
can get at most electronics stores. Also, to cut down on static, stand
on a rubber mat rather than on shag carpet. Finally, occasionally
touch a piece of metal to discharge any static in your body.
Figure 4-5: Removing a graphics card
Figure 4-6: Inserting a new graphics card
➟
34
Chapter 4: Setting Up Your Display

Adjust Your Computer’s Refresh Rate
1.
Right-click the desktop and choose Personalize from the
resulting menu.
2.
In the Personalization window dialog box that appears,
click the Display Settings link.
3.
In the Display Settings dialog box that appears, click the
Monitor tab (see Figure 4-7).
4.
Click the DPI Setting arrow and select Normal Size or
Large Size.
5.
A message box appears, explaining that any changes to
fonts will appear after they are installed and the com-
puter is restarted. Click OK to close the message.
6.
Click OK to save the setting and close the dialog box.
The Refresh Rate list includes all settings available for your partic-
ular monitor. Using a larger setting causes your monitor to have
less flicker, which is an effect that’s more visible when the refresh
happens less frequently.
Figure 4-7: The Monitor tab of the Display Settings dialog box
➟
35
Adjust Your Computer’s Refresh Rate

Change the DPI Setting
1.
Right-click the desktop and choose Personalize from the
resulting menu.
2.
In the Control Panel click the Adjust Font Size link on
the left of the window.
3.
In the DPI Settings dialog box (see Figure 4-8), click the
DPI setting you want, or click the Custom DPI button
and choose your setting from a drop-down list (see
Figure 4-9) and clicking OK to save the setting. Click OK
to save any custom DPI settings.
4.
Click the Apply button. A message box appears, stating
that your new settings will take effect after you restart
your computer. Click Restart Now or Restart Later if you
don’t want to restart the computer at that time.
DPI stands for dots per inch. The DPI Setting list includes all DPI set-
tings available for your particular monitor. Using a larger DPI set-
ting (more dots per inch) makes everything you see on your screen
larger. Changing your screen resolution has a similar effect.
Figure 4-8: The DPI Settings dialog box
Figure 4-9: The Custom DPI dialog box
➟
36
Chapter 4: Setting Up Your Display

Setting Up Input
Devices
A
ll the data and images stored on your computer drives are dandy, but
unless you can manipulate them, they won’t do you much good. That’s
where input devices come in. You plug input devices into your PC (or, with
a wireless device, plug in a USB transmitter) and then use them to add text
and images, edit, and generally work with electronic files. You can even use
some input devices to play games. You’re likely to use a few different types
of input devices, so I cover the most common ones in this chapter, including
the following:
➟
Keyboard: As with typewriters of old, you type on a keyboard to enter
text in a document, which might be anything from a word-processed
letter or spreadsheet to an e-mail message or a slide presentation. But
computer keyboards go further than a typewriter because you can use
certain key combinations — called keystroke shortcuts — to take a
wide variety of editing and formatting actions such as cutting and
pasting objects or text or modifying the appearance of text.
➟
Mouse: A mouse is a more tactile kind of input device. Whether it
comes in the form of a laptop touchpad you slide your finger around,
a mouse you move around your desk, or a mouse with a trackball that
you roll with your finger, the basic purpose of a mouse is to move an
on-screen cursor that allows you to select objects or text, click and
drag objects within a document or between documents, or right-click
to display shortcut menus.
➟
Game controller: Some models are referred to as joysticks, and some
are game pads. Whatever the name or design, the sole purpose of
these little guys is to allow you to interact with computer games, mov-
ing among space aliens, blitzing bad guys into the ether, and the like.
5
Get ready to . . .
➟Identify Different Types of Input Devices ....38
➟Customize the Mouse Settings ....................39
➟Set Up Your Keyboard................................40
➟Configure Game Controllers........................41
➟
Chapter

Identify Different Types 
of Input Devices
Use this table in tandem with Figure 5-1 and 5-2 to identify
different types of input devices.
Device
What It’s Used For
Mouse
Select text and objects, double-click to open programs or files, click
and drag to move things, quickly scroll through a document, and 
display shortcut menus
Keyboard
Enter and edit text and numbers, use shortcuts for common actions
Game controller
Maneuver around games, shoot bad guys
Some PC devices, such as the Tablet PC, also accept input through a
touch screen. By using a small, pen-like device called a stylus, you
can tap to make selections or write directly on the screen. If you’re
lucky enough to have one of these fun gadgets, beware: Use only
the stylus that came with the device, or you could damage the
screen!
Wireless devices should just about all be Plug and Play these days,
which means that Windows Vista can detect and set them up for you
as soon as you plug the wireless receiver into a USB port. If the
device isn’t detected or set up automatically, you may need to
install associated software first. See Chapter 19 for information
about troubleshooting hardware issues.
Figure 5-1: The standard PC mouse
Figure 5-2: An average 104-key keyboard
A 
S 
D 
F 
G 
H 
J 
K 
L 
: 
 
; 
Enter 
Z 
X 
C 
V 
B 
N 
M 
< 
 
, 
> 
 
. 
? 
 
/ 
" 
 
' 
Shift 
Esc 
F1 
F2 
F3 
F4 
F5 
F6 
F7 
F8 
F9 
F10 
F11 
F12 
Prnt 
Scrn 
SysRq 
Scroll 
Lock 
Pause 
 
Break 
~ 
 
` 
! 
 
1 
@ 
 
2 
# 
 
3 
$ 
 
4 
% 
 
5 
^ 
 
6 
& 
 
7 
* 
 
8 
( 
 
9 
) 
 
0 
_ 
 
- 
+ 
 
= 
| 
 
\ 
Insert 
Home 
Page 
Up 
Num 
Lock 
/ 
* 
- 
Tab 
Q 
W 
E 
R 
T 
Y 
U 
I 
O 
P 
{ 
 
[ 
} 
 
] 
Delete 
End 
Page 
Down 
7 
 
Home 
8 
9 
 
PgUp 
+ 
Caps 
Lock 
4 
5 
6 
Shift 
1 
 
End 
2 
3 
 
PgDn 
Crtl 
Alt 
 
Alt 
Ctrl 
0 
 
Ins 
. 
 
Del 
Enter 
Num 
Lock 
Caps 
Lock 
Scroll 
Lock 
➟
38
Chapter 5: Setting Up Input Devices

Customize the Mouse Settings
1.
With your mouse plugged into the correct port, it
should work with no further settings required on your
part. If you’d like to customize the way your mouse
works, choose Start➪Control Panel➪Hardware and
Sound. In the resulting Hardware and Sound window,
shown in Figure 5-3, click the Mouse link.
2.
In the resulting Mouse Properties dialog box, click the
Pointer Options tab, as shown in Figure 5-4. Then do
any of the following:
• Click and drag the Select a Pointer Speed slider to
adjust how quickly the mouse cursor moves across
your computer screen.
• Select the Automatically Move Pointer to the Default
Button in a Dialog Box check box to enable or dis-
able the Snap To feature.
• Select the Display Pointer Trails check box to activate
this feature and drag the slider to set the cursor trail
style; these are essentially shadows that follow your
cursor as it moves across the screen. You can choose
to hide the cursor while you’re typing.
3.
Click OK to apply your changes and close the dialog box.
Use the Buttons tab of the Mouse Properties dialog box to change
the functionality of each mouse button. This is especially useful if
you’re left-handed and would like to switch the functionality of the
left and right mouse buttons.
Figure 5-3: The Hardware and Sound window of the Control Panel
Figure 5-4: The Mouse Properties dialog box
➟
39
Customize the Mouse Settings

Set Up Your Keyboard
1.
Adjusting your keyboard settings might make it easier
for you to type, and some of the available settings can
be helpful to people with dexterity challenges. To see
your options, choose Start➪Control Panel➪Hardware
and Sound. In the resulting Hardware and Sound win-
dow, click the Keyboard link.
2.
In the Keyboard Properties dialog box that appears, click
the Speed tab (see Figure 5-5) and drag the sliders to
adjust the two Character Repeat settings, which do the
following:
• Repeat Delay: Affects the amount of time it takes
before a typed character is typed again when you
hold down a key.
• Repeat Rate: Adjusts how quickly a character repeats
when you hold down a key after the first repeat char-
acter appears.
3.
Drag the slider in the Cursor Blink Rate section. This
affects cursors, such as the insertion line that appears 
in text.
4.
Click OK to save and apply changes and close the 
dialog box.
If you want to see how the Character Repeat rate settings work in
action, click in the text box below the two settings and hold down a
key to see a demonstration.
Figure 5-5: The Keyboard Properties dialog box
If you have trouble with motion (for example, because of
arthritis or carpal tunnel syndrome), you might find that
you can adjust certain settings to make it easier for you to
get your work done. For example, if you can’t pick up your
finger quickly from a key, a slower repeat rate might save
you from typing more instances of a character than you’d
intended.
➟
40
Chapter 5: Setting Up Input Devices

Configure Game Controllers
1.
Choose Start➪Control Panel➪Hardware and Sound.
2.
In the resulting Hardware and Sound window, click the
Game Controllers link. (You may have to scroll down to
see this link.) The Game Controllers dialog box, as
shown in Figure 5-6, appears.
3.
In the resulting list of controllers (see Figure 5-7), click
the device you want to configure, and then click
Properties.
4.
On the Test tab of the resulting Properties dialog box
move your controller’s buttons. The responses in the
corresponding areas should match. For example, if you
move up the X Axis button on your controller, the +
symbol on the X Axis field in the dialog box should
move up.
5.
If any settings seem inappropriate, you can click the
Settings tab and use the Calibrate feature to recalibrate
the controller.
6.
When you’re done testing, click OK to close the 
dialog box.
If you’re not sure how to modify your device settings, try the Reset
to Default button on the Settings tab of the Game Controller
Properties dialog box. This resets your device to its factory settings,
which in most cases are the most appropriate settings to use.
Calibrating a game controller helps you to make sure that buttons
and features are working correctly. For example, when you recali-
brate, you can fine-tune functions such as the sensitivity of your
controller to movement and the distance you move a joystick
before an action registers.
Figure 5-6: The Game Controller dialog box
Figure 5-7: The list of available game controllers
➟
41
Configure Game Controllers

➟
42
Chapter 5: Setting Up Input Devices

Setting Up
Accessibility 
Features
T
ake it from somebody who spends many hours in front of a computer:
Customizing the way you interact with Windows pays off by making
your computer easier to use as well as decreasing eye or hand strain.
You can set up the way your keyboard and mouse work and turn on accessibil-
ity features that help you if you have vision, hearing, or mobility challenges.
To customize Windows Vista for better accessibility, you can do the following:
➟
Modify the way the mouse works for left-handed use, change the cur-
sor to sport a certain look, or make the cursor easier to view as it
moves around your screen.
➟
Work with keyboard settings that make typing and choosing computer
commands easier for people who are challenged by physical condi-
tions, such as carpal tunnel syndrome or arthritis.
➟
Set up your screen so it’s easier to see if you have difficulty reading it.
➟
You can even use a Speech Recognition feature that enables the com-
puter to type what you say so you can avoid using a keyboard or
mouse (almost) entirely.
➟
If you’re not sure which features will work for you, you can use an
accessibility wizard to let Windows suggest accessibility settings for
your particular needs.
6
Get ready to . . .
➟Make the Keyboard Easier to Use ..............44
➟Use the On-Screen Keyboard......................46
➟Make the Mouse Easier to Use....................47
➟Optimize the Screen for Maximum 
Visibility ....................................................48
➟Set Up Speech Recognition ........................50
➟Replace Sounds with Visual Cues ................52
➟Let Windows Suggest Accessibility 
Settings ....................................................53
➟
Chapter

Make the Keyboard Easier to Use
1.
You can modify your keyboard so it’s easier to use if
your fingers aren’t as nimble as you’d like. To find these
settings, choose Start➪Control Panel➪Ease of Access
and then, in the Ease of Access window that appears
(see Figure 6-1), click the Change How Your Keyboard
Works link.
2.
In the resulting Make the Keyboard Easier to Use win-
dow (see Figure 6-2), select any of these settings by
selecting a check box:
• Select the Turn on Mouse Keys check box to control
your mouse by keyboard commands. If you turn on
this setting, click the Set Up Mouse Keys link to spec-
ify settings for this feature. These settings include
whether a message or sound notifies you that the fea-
ture has been turned on, and the pointer speed that’s
best for you when controlling mouse functions from
your keyboard.
• Select the Turn on Sticky Keys check box to set up
keystroke combinations to be pressed one at a time,
rather than in combination. For example, a popular
keyboard shortcut is the copy command, which you
can perform by pressing the Ctrl key at the same time
as you press the C key. Using sticky fingers, you can
press first one key and then the other; this might be
easier for slow typists or those with hand injuries or
arthritis. (See Chapters 10 and 11 for more on copy-
ing files and similar commands.)
Figure 6-1: The Ease of Access window
There is setting at the top of the Ease of Access Center that enables fea-
tures that read the accessibility list to you every time you enter the
Center, or scan the section. Scanning the section reads the features to
you one after the other until you stop it by turning off the scanning or
clicking on a feature to select it.
➟
44
Chapter 6: Setting Up Accessibility Features

• If you select the Turn on Toggle Keys check box,
Windows Vista plays a sound when you press Caps
Lock, Num Lock, or Scroll Lock (which I do all the
time by mistake!). 
• If you sometimes press a key very lightly by accident
or press it so hard it activates twice, you can select the
Turn on Filter Keys check box to adjust repeat rates (or
how rapidly a repeated touch on a key should be
taken to invoke a second use of that key rather than a
lengthy first press of the key). Use the Set Up Filter
Keys link to fine-tune settings in the Set Up Filter
Keys dialog box if you make this choice.
• To have Windows Vista underline keyboard shortcuts
and access keys (you see access keys as underlined let-
ters in menu commands; you can press those letters
to choose the command from that menu) wherever
these shortcuts appear, select the Underline Keyboard
Shortcuts and Access Keys check box (you may have
to scroll down to find this option).
3.
To save the new settings, click Apply, and then if you’re
happy with your settings, click the Close button to close
the dialog box.
Figure 6-2: The Make the Keyboard Easier to Use window
Each keyboard has its own unique feel. If your keyboard isn’t respon-
sive and you have stiff fingers or a medical condition that makes using
the keyboard challenging, you might also try different keyboards to see
whether one works better for you than another.
➟
45
Make the Keyboard Easier to Use

Use the On-Screen Keyboard
1.
If you find it easier to click buttons with a mouse than
to press keys using your fingers, you might prefer the
On-Screen Keyboard. Choose Start➪Control Panel➪
Ease of Access to display the Ease of Access window and
then click the Ease of Access Center link.
2.
In the resulting Ease of Access Center window (see
Figure 6-3), click the Start On-Screen Keyboard link. The
On-Screen Keyboard appears. 
3.
Open a document in any application where you can
enter text and then click the keys on the On-Screen
Keyboard shown in Figure 6-4 to make entries.
4.
To change settings, such as how you select keys (Typing
Mode) or the font used to label keys (Font), choose
Settings and then choose one of four options:
• Choose Always on Top to keep the keyboard on top
of applications
• Choose Use Click Sound if you want to hear a plas-
tic “click” whenever you press a key.
• If you choose the Typing Mode, a dialog box appears
where you can choose to select objects by hovering
over them rather than clicking. 
• If you choose the Font option, a dialog box appears
allowing you to format the font used when you type
with the On-Screen Keyboard. For this and the previ-
ous bullet, make settings and then click OK to close
the dialog box.
5.
Click the Close button to stop using the On-Screen
Keyboard.
Figure 6-3: The Ease of Access Center
Figure 6-4: The On Screen Keyboard
To use keystroke combinations (such as Ctrl+Z to undo your last action),
click the first key (in this case, Ctrl) and then click the second key (Z). You
don’t have to hold down the first key as you do with a regular keyboard.
You can set up the Hover typing mode to activate a key after you place
your mouse over it for a predefined period of time (x number of sec-
onds). If you have arthritis or some other condition that makes clicking
with your mouse difficult, this option can help you enter text. Choose
Settings➪Typing Mode➪Hover to Select to activate the Hover mode.
➟
46
Chapter 6: Setting Up Accessibility Features

Make the Mouse Easier to Use
1.
Choose Start➪Control Panel➪Ease of Access to display
the Ease of Access window and then click the Change
How Your Mouse Works link. The Make the Mouse
Easier to Use window opens (see Figure 6-5).
2.
Click an item in the Mouse Pointers display to select a
different style of mouse pointer.
3.
If you want to use the numeric keypad to move your
mouse cursor on your screen, select the Turn on Mouse
Keys check box. If you turn on this feature, click the Set
Up Mouse Keys link to fine-tune its behavior. In the dia-
log box that appears, adjust settings for keyboard short-
cuts to turn this feature on and off, and settings that
control the speed with which you can type mouse com-
mands. Click OK to save these settings and return to the
Make the Mouse Easier to Use dialog box.
4.
Select the Activate a Window by Hovering Over It 
with the Mouse check box to enable this (pretty self-
explanatory!) feature.
5.
Click Save to save the new settings.
You can swap the functionality of the left and right mouse buttons.
This can be useful if you’re left-handed or if you want to change
hands occasionally, which helps you avoid wrist injuries from repet-
itive motion with one hand. Open the Control Panel and click the
Mouse link to display the Mouse Properties dialog box. On the
Buttons tab, use the Switch Primary and Secondary Buttons feature
to make the right mouse button handle all the usual left button
functions, such as clicking and dragging, and the left button handle
the typical right-hand functions, such as displaying shortcut menus. 
Figure 6-5: The Make the Mouse Easier to Use window
If you have difficulty seeing the cursor on-screen, experiment with the
Windows Vista color scheme, discussed in Chapter 9, to see whether
another setting makes your cursor stand out better against the back-
ground. 
➟
47
Make the Mouse Easier to Use

Optimize the Screen for 
Maximum Visibility
1.
Windows Vista has a useful tool that helps improve the
visibility of the screen for people who have poor eyesight
or who suffer from frequent eyestrain. To see what this
feature can do for you, begin by choosing Start➪Control
Panel.
2.
In the resulting Control Panel window, click the
Optimize Visual Display link under the Ease of Access
tools.
3.
In the resulting Make the Computer Easier to See win-
dow (as shown in Figure 6-6), select the check boxes for
features you want to use: 
• High Contrast: Make settings for using greater con-
trast on screen elements.
• Hear Text and Descriptions Read Aloud: You can
use these settings to either have the text that appears
on your screen read aloud, or hear descriptions of
what’s happening on your screen (though these are
available only with a few selected actions).
Figure 6-6: The Make the Computer Easier to See window
➟
48
Chapter 6: Setting Up Accessibility Features

• Make Things on the Screen Larger: If you select the
Turn on Magnifier check box, you have two cursors
on-screen. One cursor appears in the Magnifier win-
dow where everything is shown enlarged, and one
appears in whatever environment you’re working
with on your computer (for example, your desktop or
an open application). You can maneuver either cur-
sor to work in your document, and the other cursor
reflects your move. (They’re both active, so it does
take some getting used to.)
• Make Things on the Screen Easier to See: Here’s
where you make settings that adjust on-screen con-
trast to make things easier to see, enlarge the size 
of the blinking mouse cursor, and get rid of distract-
ing animations and backgrounds. You can also make
the rectangle that appears show the movement of a
window when you drag it thicker, which can help
your eyes track it more easily. (This is called a focus
rectangle.)
4.
When you finish changing settings, click Save to apply
them.
To magnify more of the text, place the mouse cursor at the bottom of
the Magnifier window (the mouse cursor changes to a line with an arrow
at each end) and drag the cursor down. The size of the Magnifier win-
dow increases.
To close the Magnifier window, press Alt+Tab and select the Magnifier
item from the list of open programs. In the Magnifier dialog box, click
the Close button.
➟
49
Optimize the Screen for Maximum Visibility

Set Up Speech Recognition
1.
Speech Recognition allows you to speak commands and
text into a microphone rather than clicking and typing.
You have to set it up to recognize your unique speech
inflections and accent. Plug a desktop microphone or
headset into your computer (the hole to plug into is
typically labeled with a little headphone symbol) and
choose Start➪Control Panel➪Ease of Access➪Start
Speech Recognition.
2.
The Set Up Speech Recognition message appears; click
Next to continue. (Note: If you’ve used Speech
Recognition before, this message doesn’t appear.)
3.
In the resulting Set Up Speech Recognition dialog box
(as shown in Figure 6-7), select the type of microphone
that you’re using and then click Next. The next screen
tells you how to place and use the microphone for opti-
mum results. Click Next.
4.
In the following dialog box (see Figure 6-8), read the
sample sentence aloud. When you’re done, click Next. 
If your voice didn’t come through loud and clear, the
next dialog box asks you to check the microphone con-
nections and try again. If it did come through you see
the Microphone Is Now Set Up window. Click Next to
proceed.
During the Speech Recognition setup procedure, you’re given the
option of printing out commonly used commands. It’s a good idea
to do this because speech commands aren’t always second nature!
Figure 6-7: The Select the Type of Microphone You Would Like to Use dialog box
➟
50
Chapter 6: Setting Up Accessibility Features

5.
In the resulting dialog box, choose whether to enable or
disable document view. Document view allows
Windows Vista to review your documents and e-mail to
help it recognize your speech patterns. After you’ve
made your choice, click Next.
6.
In the resulting dialog box, if you want to view and/or
print a list of speech recognition commands, click the
View Reference Sheet button, and then click the Close
button to close that window. Click Next to proceed.
7.
In the resulting dialog box, either deselect the Run
Speech Recognition at Startup check box to disable this
feature or leave the default setting. Click Next. The final
dialog box informs you that you can now control the
computer by voice, and it offers you a Start Tutorial but-
ton to help you practice voice commands. Click that
button to start the tutorial or click Cancel to skip the
tutorial and leave the Speech Recognition setup.
8.
The Speech Recognition control panel appears (see
Figure 6-9). Say, “Start listening” to activate the feature
and begin using spoken commands to work with your
computer.
To stop Speech Recognition, click the Close button on the Speech
Recognition control panel window. To start the Speech Recognition
feature again, choose Start➪Control Panel➪Ease of Access and
then click the Start Speech Recognition link. To find out more about
Speech Recognition commands, click the Speech Recognition
Options link in the Ease of Access window and then click the Take
Speech Tutorials link in the Speech Recognition Options window.
Figure 6-8: The Adjust the Microphone Volume dialog box
Figure 6-9: The Speech Recognition control panel
➟
51
Set Up Speech Recognition

Replace Sounds with Visual Cues
1.
Windows plays sounds to signify some events, such as
the appearance of a warning message or the closing of a
program. If you’re hard of hearing and want an alterna-
tive way for Windows to notify you of these events, you
can change your computer settings to give you visual
clues. To access these settings, choose Start➪Control
Panel➪Ease of Access.
2.
Click the Replace Sounds with Visual Cues link.
3.
In the resulting Use Text or Visual Alternatives for
Sounds window (see Figure 6-10), adjust any of the fol-
lowing settings: 
• If you select the Turn on Visual Notifications for
Sounds (Sound Sentry) check box, Windows Vista
will play sounds along with a display of visual cues.
• Select a setting for visual warnings. These warnings
essentially flash a portion of your screen to alert you
to an event.
• To have Windows display text captions whenever a
sound occurs, select the Turn on Text Captions for
Spoken Dialog (When Available) check box.
4.
To save the new settings, click Save.
This might seem obvious, but if you’re hard of hearing, you might
want to simply increase the volume for your speakers. You can do
this by using the volume adjustment in a program such as Windows
Media Player (see Chapter 13). Alternatively, you can modify your
system volume by choosing Hardware and Sound in the Control
Panel and then clicking the Adjust System Volume Click and drag
the slider controls in the resulting dialog box to adjust the volume.
Figure 6-10: The Use Text or Visual Alternatives for Sounds window
Visual cues are useful if you’re hard of hearing and don’t
always pick up system sounds alerting you to error mes-
sages or a device disconnect. After the setting is turned on,
it’s active until you go back to the Use Text or Visual
Alternatives for Sounds dialog box and turn it off.
➟
52
Chapter 6: Setting Up Accessibility Features

Let Windows Suggest 
Accessibility Settings
1.
Windows can suggest the best settings for you based on
a series of answers you provide to questions about your
vision, hearing, or hand dexterity. Choose Start➪
Control Panel.
2.
Click the Let Windows Suggest Settings link.
3.
In the resulting Get Recommendations to Make Your
Computer Easier to Use dialog box (see Figure 6-11),
click in any checkbox that applies to your vision and
then click Next.
4.
Continue to select appropriate checkboxes in the fol-
lowing dialog boxes: Dexterity, Hearing, Speech, and
Reasoning, and then click Done.
5.
In the resulting Recommended Settings dialog box (see
Figure 6-12), select the checkbox for any setting you
wish to turn on. Click the Apply button to activate
selected features.
6.
Click the Close button to close the dialog box.
Not every accessibility feature in the world is built into Windows
Vista. To find others, scroll to the bottom of the Recommended
Settings dialog box and click the Learn about Additional Assistive
Technologies Online link to view assistive technologies you can pur-
chase from third parties in the Windows Marketplace.
Figure 6-11: Get Recommendations to Make Your Computer Easier to Use dialog box
Figure 6-12: Recommended Settings dialog box
➟
53
Let Windows Suggest Accessibility Settings

➟
54
Chapter 6: Setting Up Accessibility Features

Part II
Getting to Know 
Windows

Chapter 7: Adjusting Windows Settings  . . . . . . . . . .57
Set Up a Windows Password...................................58
Set Up Additional User Accounts ...........................59
Change Your User Account Picture.........................60
Set the Date and Time .............................................61
Set Up Windows Update to Run Automatically ....62
Run Windows Update .............................................63
Chapter 8: Getting Around the Windows Desktop  . . .65
Customize the Quick Launch Bar...........................66
Arrange Icons on the Desktop ................................67
Create a Desktop Shortcut ......................................68
Empty the Recycle Bin.............................................69
Set Up Windows Vista Sidebar................................70
Resize a Window......................................................72
Customize the Start Menu ......................................73
Get Help...................................................................74
Search Help..............................................................75
Connect to Remote Assistance................................76
Chapter 9: Customize the Look of Windows  . . . . . . .79
Set Up Your Screen Resolution ...............................80
Choose a Desktop Theme .......................................81
Change the Desktop Background...........................82
Set Up a Screen Saver ..............................................84
Change Your Color Scheme....................................85
Manage Control Panel Appearance........................86

Adjusting Windows
Settings
W
indows includes several settings that you can use to keep your data
safe, enable different users to have accounts on your computer, or
control your computer clock. You can also set up how Windows software
receives updates that may help keep your computer secure.
In this chapter, you discover how to make the following settings:
➟
You can set up a password that you have to enter when you want to
use Windows. Setting up a password keeps others from accessing your
data, which includes not only files on your computer, but also any
browser settings you’ve made to save passwords for online accounts.
➟
You can create several Windows user accounts on your computer.
When you create a user account several settings and files for that user
are kept unique from other users.
➟
Your computer date and time feature can be modified to reflect your
current location. If you use a laptop or move to a new location you
might want to modify your date and time settings so Windows runs
automated features at the time you want and features such as inserting
a date in a word processed program work accurately.
➟
Windows Update is a tool you can use to make sure your computer
has the most up-to-date files and security measures in place. When a
new operating system like Windows Vista is released, it has been thor-
oughly tested; however, when the product is in general use, the manu-
facturer begins to find a few problems or security gaps that it couldn’t
anticipate. For that reason, companies such as Microsoft release
updates to their software, both to fix those problems and deal with
new threats to computers that appeared after the software release. You
can install these automatically or manually.
7
Get ready to . . .
➟Set Up a Windows Password ......................58
➟Set Up Additional User Accounts ................59
➟Change Your User Account Picture ..............60
➟Set the Date and Time................................61
➟Set Up Windows Update to 
Run Automatically......................................62
➟Run Windows Update ................................63
➟
Chapter

Set Up a Windows Password
1.
You can assign a password to any account to keep others
from being able to log on without your permission.
Choose Start➪Control Panel➪User Accounts and Family
Safety.
2.
In the resulting window, click the Change Your
Windows Password link. Then, if you have more than
one user account, click the account you want to add the
password to. Click the Create a Password for Your
Account link, shown in Figure 7-1.
3.
In the Create a Password for Your Account screen,
shown in Figure 7-2, enter a password, confirm it, and
add a password hint.
4.
Click the Create Password button. Note if you have pre-
viously set a password this button will be labeled
Change Password.
5.
You see the Make Changes to Your User Account window
again. If you want to remove your password at some
point, you can click the Remove Your Password link.
6.
Click the Close button to close the User Accounts window.
Anybody can change the password for his or her own account, but
only an account with administrator privileges can change passwords
for others’ accounts.
After you create a password, you can go to the User Accounts and
Family Safety window and change it at any time by clicking the
Change Your Windows Password link. You can also change the name
on your user account by clicking the Change Your Account Name
link in the User Accounts and Family Safety window.
Figure 7-1: The User Accounts and Family Safety dialog box
Figure 7-2: The Create Your Password dialog box
➟
58
Chapter 7: Adjusting Windows Settings

Set Up Additional User Accounts
1.
When you set up your computer, you create your user
account. If you want to create additional accounts make
sure your account has administrator privileges and then
you can follow these steps. Choose Start➪Control Panel.
2.
In the resulting Control Panel window, click the Add or
Remove User Accounts link.
3.
In the resulting Manage Accounts window, shown in
Figure 7-3, click the Create a New Account link.
4.
In the Manage Accounts window that appears, shown in
Figure 7-4, enter an account name and then select the
type of account you want to create:
• Standard User, who can’t do the tasks an administra-
tor can.
• Administrator, who can do things like create and
change accounts and install programs. Typically, it’s a
good idea to allow only one person to have adminis-
trator privileges to avoid confusion.
5.
Click the Create Account button and then close the
Control Panel.
After you create an account, you can make changes to it, such 
as assigning a password or changing the account type, by double-
clicking it in the Manage Accounts window you reached in Step 4 of
the preceding step list and following the links listed there.
Figure 7-3: The Manage Accounts window
Figure 7-4: The Create New Account window
➟
59
Set Up Additional User Accounts

Change Your User Account Picture
1.
If you don’t like the picture associated with your user
account, you can change it. Choose Start➪Control
Panel➪Add or Remove User Accounts.
2.
In the resulting Manage Accounts window, shown in
Figure 7-5, click the account you want to change.
3.
Click the Change Your Picture link and in the resulting
window, shown in Figure 7-6, click another picture (or
browse to see more picture choices) to select it.
4.
Click the Change Picture button; the dialog box closes.
Figure 7-5: The Manage Accounts window
Figure 7-6: The Change Your Picture window
➟
60
Chapter 7: Adjusting Windows Settings

Set the Date and Time
1.
The date and clock on your computer keep good time,
but you might have to provide the correct date and time
for your location. To get started, press the Windows key
on your keyboard to display the taskbar if it isn’t visible.
2.
Right-click the Date/Time display on the far right of the
taskbar and then choose Adjust Date/Time from the
shortcut menu that appears.
3.
In the Date and Time dialog box that appears (see
Figure 7-7), click the Change Date and Time button.
4.
In the Date and Time Settings dialog box that appears
(see Figure 7-8), click a new date in the Date calendar.
Enter a new time in the Time text box to change the
time or use the spinner arrows to choose a different
time.
5.
Click OK twice to apply the new settings and close the
dialog boxes.
If you don’t want your computer to adjust for Daylight Saving Time,
click the Change Time Zone button and deselect the Automatically
Adjust Clock for Daylight Saving Time check box to turn off this 
feature.
Another option for displaying the time or date is to add the Clock 
or Calendar gadget to the Windows Sidebar. You can also drag
gadgets right onto your desktop if you prefer not to leave the
Sidebar displayed. See Chapter 5 for more about using the Sidebar
and gadgets.
Figure 7-7: The Date and Time dialog box
Figure 7-8: The Date and Time Settings dialog box
➟
61
Set the Date and Time

Set Up Windows Update to Run
Automatically
1.
You can set Windows Update to work in a few different
ways by choosing Start➪All Programs➪Windows Update
and clicking the Change Settings link on the left side of
the Windows Update window that appears.
2.
In the resulting window (see Figure 7-9), you find these
settings:
• Install Updates Automatically: With this setting,
Windows Update starts at a time of day you specify,
but your computer must be on for it to work. If
you’ve turned off your computer, the automatic
update will start when you next turn on your com-
puter, and it might shut down your computer in the
middle of your work to complete the installation.
• Download Updates But Let Me Choose Whether to
Install Them: You can set up Windows Update to
download updates and have Windows notify you
(through a little pop-up message on your taskbar)
when they’re available, but you get to decide when
the updates are installed and when your computer
reboots (turns off and then on) to complete the
installation. This is my preferred setting because I
have control and won’t be caught unaware by a com-
puter reboot.
• Check for Updates But Let Me Choose Whether to
Download and Install Them: With this setting, you
neither download nor install updates until you say
so, but Windows notifies you that new updates are
available.
• Never Check for Updates: You can stop Windows
from checking for updates and check for them your-
self, manually (see the following task). This puts
your computer at a bit more risk, but it’s useful
for you to know how to perform a manual
update if you discover a new update is available
that you need to proceed with a task (such as
getting updated drivers or a language pack).
3.
Click Install Updates Automatically and click the
Day and Time boxes and select a day and time
when the update should run.
4.
Click OK to close the dialog box and save the new
settings.
Windows updates are helpful in keeping your computer
secure, because many updates address newly found security
gaps in the operating system. See Chapter 20 for more
about Windows security features and settings.
Figure 7-9: The Windows Update Change Settings window
➟
62
Chapter 7: Adjusting Windows Settings

Run Windows Update
1.
No matter which Windows Update setting you choose
(see the preceding task) you can run a manual update 
at any time. To do so, choose Start➪All Programs➪
Windows Update.
2.
In the resulting Windows Update window, click Check
for Updates. Windows thinks about this for a while, 
so feel free to page through a magazine for a minute 
or two.
3.
In the resulting window, as shown in Figure 7-10, click
the View Available Updates link.
4.
In the following window, which shows the available
updates (see Figure 7-11), select check boxes for the
updates that you want to install. (It usually doesn’t hurt
to just accept all updates, if you have the time to down-
load them all). Then click the Install button.
5.
A window appears, showing the progress of your instal-
lation. When the installation is complete, you might get
a message telling you that it’s a good idea to restart your
computer to complete the installation. Click the Restart
Now button.
You can set up Windows Update to run at the same time every day.
Click the Change Settings link in the left pane of the Windows
Update window and choose the frequency (such as every day) and
time of day to check for and install updates.
If you set Windows Update to run automatically, be forewarned that
when it runs it might also automatically restart your computer to
finish the update installation sequence. Although it displays a pop-
up message warning that it’s about to do this, it’s easy to miss. Then
you might be startled to find that whatever you’re working on shuts
down and your computer restarts when you least expect it.
Figure 7-10: The Windows Update window
Figure 7-11: The View Available Updates window
➟
63
Run Windows Update

➟
64
Chapter 7: Adjusting Windows Settings

Getting Around the
Windows Desktop
Just as your desk is the central area from which you do all kinds of work,
the Windows Vista desktop is a command center for organizing your
computer work. The desktop appears when you log on to a Windows Vista
computer. The Start menu is located on the desktop; you use this menu to
access your computer settings, files, folders, and software. On the desktop
there is also a taskbar that offers settings, such as your computer’s date and
time, as well as shortcuts to your most frequently accessed programs or files.
This chapter is an introduction to all the things you can do via the desktop.
Along the way, you discover the Recycle Bin, where you place deleted files
and folders, and the Quick Launch bar, which allows quick access to com-
monly used programs. You also find out how to work with application win-
dows, create a desktop shortcut, and get help.
8
Get ready to . . .
➟Customize the Quick Launch Bar ................66
➟Arrange Icons on the Desktop ....................67
➟Create a Desktop Shortcut..........................68
➟Empty the Recycle Bin................................69
➟Set Up Windows Vista Sidebar ....................70
➟Resize a Window........................................72
➟Customize the Start Menu ..........................73
➟Get Help....................................................74
➟Search Help ..............................................75
➟Connect to Remote Assistance ....................76
➟
Chapter

Customize the Quick Launch Bar
1.
The Quick Launch bar can be a handy tool for starting
programs, and you can customize it to contain the pro-
grams you use most often. Locate the Quick Launch bar
on the taskbar just to the right of the Start button; if it’s
not visible, right-click the taskbar and choose
Toolbars➪Quick Launch from the shortcut menu (see
Figure 8-1).
2.
To place any application on the Quick Launch bar,
right-click that application in the Start menu or on the
Desktop (as shown in Figure 8-2) and then choose Add
to Quick Launch. You can also click an icon, and while
keeping the mouse button pressed, drag that icon to the
Quick Launch bar.
If you have more programs in this area than can be shown on the
taskbar, click the arrows to the right of the Quick Launch bar; a
shortcut menu of programs appears. However, don’t create too
much clutter on your Quick Launch bar; if you do, it can become
unwieldy. Logical candidates to place here are your Internet
browser, your e-mail program, and programs that you use every
day, such as a word processor or calendar program.
When the Quick Launch bar is displayed, the Show Desktop button
is available. When you click this button, all open applications are
reduced to taskbar icons. It’s a quick way to view your desktop —
or hide what you’re up to!
Figure 8-1: Displaying the Quick Launch bar
Figure 8-2: Adding programs to the Quick Launch bar
➟
66
Chapter 8: Getting Around the Windows Desktop

Arrange Icons on the Desktop
1.
To avoid icon clutter, you can sort the shortcut icons on
your desktop in neat rows based on a criterion, such as
the most recently used to the least recently used. First,
right-click the desktop and choose View in the resulting
shortcut menu; be sure that Auto Arrange isn’t selected,
as shown in Figure 8-3. (If it is selected, deselect it
before proceeding to the next step.)
2.
Right-click the Windows Vista desktop. In the resulting
shortcut menu, choose Sort By and then choose the cri-
terion for sorting your desktop icons (see Figure 8-4).
For example, you can arrange them alphabetically by
name or from smallest file to the largest file.
3.
You can also click any desktop icon and drag it to
another location on the desktop — for example, to sepa-
rate it from other desktop icons so you can find it easily.
If you’ve sorted or manually rearranged your desktop by moving
items hither, thither, and yon and you want to instantly move your
icons into orderly rows along the left side of your desktop, snap
them into place with the Auto Arrange feature. Right-click the desk-
top and then choose View➪Auto Arrange.
Figure 8-3: Deselecting AutoArrange 
Figure 8-4: A menu of criteria for sorting your icons
➟
67
Arrange Icons on the Desktop

Create a Desktop Shortcut
1.
Shortcuts are a useful way to quickly access items you
use on a frequent basis. To create a new shortcut, first
choose Start➪All Programs and locate the program on
the menu that appears.
2.
Right-click an item — FreeCell, for example — and
choose Send To➪Desktop (Create Shortcut),  as shown
in Figure 8-5.
3.
The shortcut appears on the desktop (see Figure 8-6).
Double-click the shortcut icon to open the application.
You can create a shortcut for items other than applications by right-
clicking the desktop, choosing New, and then choosing an item to
place there, such as a text document, bitmap image, or contact.
Then double-click the shortcut that appears and begin working on
the file in the associated application.
Occasionally, Windows Vista offers to delete desktop icons that you
haven’t used in a long time. Let it. The desktop should be reserved
for frequently used programs, files, and folders. You can always re-
create shortcuts easily if you need them again. To clean up your
desktop manually, right-click the desktop and choose Personalize.
In the Personalization window that appears, click the Change
Desktop Icons link in the Tasks list on the left. In the Desktop Icons
setting dialog box that appears, click the Restore Default button,
which restores the original desktop shortcuts that were set up on
your computer.
Figure 8-5: Using the Send To command to create a shortcut
Figure 8-6: Shortcut icons on the desktop
➟
68
Chapter 8: Getting Around the Windows Desktop

Empty the Recycle Bin
1.
Files that you place in the Windows Recycle Bin stay
there until you empty it or until it reaches its size limit
and Windows dumps a few files. To empty the trash
yourself, right-click the Recycle Bin icon on the
Windows Vista desktop and choose Empty Recycle Bin
from the shortcut menu that appears (see Figure 8-7).
2.
In the confirmation dialog box that appears, click Yes to
confirm that you want to delete the items. A progress
dialog box appears indicating the contents are being
deleted. Remember that after you empty the Recycle Bin,
all files previously in it are unavailable to you. Chapter
10 has more details about deleting files.
Up until the moment you permanently delete items by performing
the preceding steps or until Windows deletes files because the
Recycle Bin has reached its capacity, you can retrieve items in the
Recycle Bin. Start by right-clicking the desktop icon and choosing
Open. Select the item you want to retrieve and then click the
Restore This Item link near the top of the Recycle Bin window.
You can modify the Recycle Bin properties by right-clicking it and
choosing Properties. In the dialog box that appears, you can change
the maximum size for the Recycle Bin and change where it should
be stored on your hard drive. You can also deselect the option of
having a confirmation dialog box appear when you delete Recycle
Bin contents.
Figure 8-7: Emptying the Recycle Bin 
➟
69
Empty the Recycle Bin

Set Up Windows Vista Sidebar
1.
To get started with the Sidebar and the useful gadgets
that it holds, choose Start➪Control Panel➪Appearance
and Personalization. Choose whether to Keep Sidebar
on Top of Other Windows (in the Windows Sidebar
Properties category) to open the Windows Sidebar
Properties dialog box.
2.
Select the Start Sidebar When Windows Starts option to
ensure that the Sidebar always displays when you start
your computer.
3.
If you want to, select the Sidebar Is Always on Top of
Other Windows check box if you want other applica-
tions to be behind the Sidebar. 
4.
Click OK and then click the Close button to close the
Control Panel window. The Sidebar appears, as shown
in Figure 8-8. (Note that you can also click the Sidebar
icon on the Windows Notification Area to instantly dis-
play the Sidebar at any time).
If you’re left-handed or have some other propensity for things on
the left, you can choose to have the Sidebar displayed on the left
side of the screen by selecting the Left radio button in the Windows
Sidebar Properties dialog box.
Figure 8-8: The sidebar contains whatever gadgets you place on it
➟
70
Chapter 8: Getting Around the Windows Desktop

5.
Click a displayed gadget and drag it to the desktop if
you want it to stay there even after the Sidebar is closed.
6.
To display more gadgets, click the Gadgets symbol (a
plus sign) at the top of the Sidebar.
7.
In the resulting Add Gadgets dialog box (see Figure
8-9), double-click a gadget (or click and drag it to the
Sidebar). If you need to view additional gadgets, click
the Get More Gadgets Online link in the lower-right cor-
ner of the dialog box.
8.
Click the Close button to close the dialog box.
If you display gadgets and then click and drag them onto the desk-
top, even if you close the Sidebar, they stay visible. So if you want
to save desktop space, find the gadgets you like, plop them on your
desktop, and hide the Sidebar!
Figure 8-9: The Add Gadgets dialog box
➟
71
Set Up Windows Vista Sidebar

Resize a Window
1.
You can make application windows bigger or smaller to
focus on the one you’re working in or to see more than
one at a time. One way to resize windows is to click the
Restore Down button (the icon showing two overlap-
ping windows) in the top-right corner of a program
window. The window reduces in size.
2.
To enlarge a window that has been restored down to
again fill the screen, click the Maximize button (see
Figure 8-10). (Note: This button is in the same location
as the Restore Down button; this button toggles to one
or the other, depending on whether you have the screen
reduced in size or maximized. A ScreenTip identifies the
button when you pass your mouse over it.)
3.
To size a window more precisely, click and drag any cor-
ner of a reduced window. By doing this, you can resize it
manually.
With a window maximized, you can’t move the window. If you
reduce a window in size, you can then click and hold the title bar to
drag the window around the desktop, which is one way to view
more than one window on your screen at the same time.
Figure 8-10: Toggle between Maximize and Restore Down 
➟
72
Chapter 8: Getting Around the Windows Desktop

Customize the Start Menu
1.
Press the Windows key on your keyboard to display the
Start menu. Right-click anywhere on an empty part of
the Start menu and choose Properties.
2.
In the resulting Taskbar and Start Menu Properties dia-
log box, click the Customize button to display the
Customize Start Menu dialog box, as shown in Figure
8-11. You can do the following:
• Click to set standard or large icon size.
• Click the up or down arrows on the Number of
Programs on Start Menu text box to display more or
fewer of your frequently used programs.
• Use the lists of alternate Internet and e-mail pro-
grams to select different applications to appear on
the Start menu.
3.
Scroll down the list of computer features and use the
radio buttons to select how features, such as Search (see
Figure 8-12) will work.
4.
After you finish making selections, click OK to save the
new settings. Your Start menu reflects your changes,
showing items for accessing and running programs and
features.
Right-click the list of programs in the Start menu and choose Sort
By Name to alphabetize the list. Folders get reordered to appear
first, followed by individual programs.
Figure 8-11: The Customize Start Menu dialog box
Figure 8-12: Settings for Windows Search
➟
73
Customize the Start Menu

Get Help
1.
You can browse Help by topic. Choose Start➪Help and
Support to open the Windows Help and Support win-
dow. Note: If your copy of Windows came built into
your computer, some computer manufacturers (such as
Hewlett-Packard) customize this center to add informa-
tion that’s specific to your computer system, making it
slightly different than my instructions here indicate.
2.
Click the Browse Help icon in the upper-right corner or
the Table of Contents icon to display a list of topics.
3.
In the new screen that appears as shown in Figure 8-13,
click any of the topics to see a list of subtopics. For
example, you might click the Security and Privacy topic,
then on Windows Firewall (the blue box to the left of
that topic tells you there are additional subtopics here)
and then click Using Windows Firewall. Eventually, you
get down to the deepest level of detailed subtopics (in
this example, a subtopic article would be Turn Windows
Firewall On and Off); these have question mark icons
next to them, as shown in Figure 8-14.
4.
Click a subtopic to read its contents. Some subtopics
contain blue links that lead to related topics. Links with
a green arrow next to them perform an action when
clicked, such as opening a dialog box so you can com-
plete a task.
5.
Click any word in green to view a definition of that
term. Click outside the definition to close it.
6.
When you finish reading a help topic, click the Close
button to close the Help and Support window. 
Figure 8-13: A list of help topics
Figure 8-14: Drill down through topics and subtopics to find info
➟
74
Chapter 8: Getting Around the Windows Desktop

Search Help
1.
If you don’t find what you need by using the Table of
Contents (for instance, say you wanted help using your
mouse but didn’t realize that’s listed under the topic
Getting Started), you might want to use the help search
feature to find what you need by entering keywords
such as mouse or input. Choose Start➪Help and Support
to open the Help and Support window.
2.
Enter a search term (such as “input devices”) in the
Search Help text box and then click the Search Help
button (the little magnifying glass icon on the right of
the search box). The top search results, such as those
shown in Figure 8-15, appear.
3.
Click one of the numbered results to view a detailed
article. Use the links listed under In This Article to jump
to a section of the article that’s of interest.
4.
In some cases, these articles have links to other topics or
subtopics (see Figure 8-16). Click any link under the See
Also list at the bottom of the topic or a link within the
article to go to related topics.
5.
If the subtopic doesn’t do the trick, click the Back arrow
in the top-left corner to go back to the list of search
results and click another one. If you still have no luck,
try entering a different search term in the Search text
box and clicking Search Help again.
If you don’t find what you need with Search, consider clicking the
Browse Help button (the icon that looks like a little blue book) in
the top-right corner of the Windows Help and Support window to
display a list of major topics. The topics might also give you some
ideas for good search terms to continue your search. 
Figure 8-15: Top search results
Figure 8-16: An article with links to more articles
➟
75
Search Help

Connect to Remote Assistance
1.
Remote Assistance allows you to permit somebody else
to view or take control of your computer using the
Internet to help fix a problem. Be aware that by doing
so you give the person access to all your files, so be sure
this is somebody you trust. To use Remote Assistance,
you and the other person have to have Windows Vista
and an Internet connection.
2.
First enable Remote Assistance by choosing Start➪
Control Panel➪System and Maintenance ➪ Allow
Remote Access.
3.
On the Remote tab of the resulting Systems Properties
dialog box, as shown in Figure 8-17, select the Allow
Remote Assistance Connections to This Computer check
box and then click OK.
4.
Choose Start➪Help and Support to open the Help and
Support window. Click the Windows Remote Assistance
link in the Ask Someone area.
5.
In the resulting Windows Remote Assistance dialog box,
as shown in Figure 8-18, click the Invite Someone You
Trust to Help You link.
6.
On the page that appears, choose an e-mail method to
notify somebody that you want help depending on
whether you have e-mail set up on your computer or
not. You can find more details about using e-mail in
Chapter 17. Assuming you have e-mail set up, click Save
this Invitation as a File.
Figure 8-17: Getting help from others by using remote assistance
Figure 8-18: Sending an invitation to ask for help 
➟
76
Chapter 8: Getting Around the Windows Desktop

7.
Enter and retype a password which your helper must
enter to access your computer and click Finish. (The
password must be at least six characters long.)
8.
Your default e-mail program opens with an invitation
message prepared. Fill in your helper’s e-mail address in
the To field. (The address will look something like
Chris@yahoo.com, with the @ sign and the period
separating the different parts of the address.) If you like,
add a personal message at the end of the automatically
generated invitation. (However for security reasons, it’s
better to call the person to give him the password than
to put a password in the e-mail message.) Click Send.
9.
The Windows Remote Assistance window appears, as
shown in Figure 8-19, and it awaits an external connec-
tion; your remote helper now can connect and view and
navigate around your computer in a window on his or
her own computer. When an incoming connection is
made, you and your helper can use the tools here to do
the following:
• Chat: Use this feature to enter messages and chat via
text with your helper; if you prefer, you can just get on
the phone with the person to have a live conversation.
• Send file: You might want to send a file, for example,
if you’re having trouble opening a file and want your
helper to see whether it’s corrupted, or if you down-
loaded a help article that you think your helper
should read.
• Pause, cancel, or stop sharing: At any time, you can
pause your sharing to take away access to your com-
puter, cancel the session entirely, or just stop sharing
with that individual.
10.
When you’re finished, click the Close button to close
the Windows Remote Assistance window.
Figure 8-19: The Windows Remote Assistance window
Remember that it’s up to you to let the recipient know the password —
it isn’t included in your e-mail unless you add it (which I advise against
because e-mail isn’t secure). Although using a password used to be
optional in Windows XP, it’s mandatory in Windows Vista.
➟
77
Connect to Remote Assistance

➟
78
Chapter 8: Getting Around the Windows Desktop

Customize the 
Look of Windows
T
ake it from somebody who spends many hours in front of a computer:
Customizing the way Windows looks and feels pays off by making your
computer easier to use as well as decreasing eyestrain. In addition, you get a
computer that looks the way you want it to.
To customize how Windows Vista appears, you can do the following:
➟
Change the desktop background to show different colors or images.
You can even pick a preset theme that combines a color scheme and
desktop background image in pleasing combinations.
➟
Set up the sharpness with which Windows Vista displays images and
colors.
➟
Use screen saver settings to display the photo from your bike trip
through France or an interesting animation. You can set a screen saver
to appear when you stop using your computer for a certain period 
of time, which is useful to keep whatever project you’re working on
private.
➟
Change the color scheme Windows uses for various on-screen 
elements.
9
Get ready to . . .
➟Set Up Your Screen Resolution....................80
➟Choose a Desktop Theme ..........................81
➟Change the Desktop Background................82
➟Set Up a Screen Saver................................84
➟Change Your Color Scheme ........................85
➟Manage Control Panel Appearance ............86
➟
Chapter

Set Up Your Screen Resolution
1.
Right-click the desktop to display a shortcut menu and
then choose Personalize.
2.
In the resulting Personalization window, click the
Display Settings link.
3.
In the Display Settings dialog box that appears (as
shown in Figure 9-1), move the Resolution slider to a
higher or lower resolution. You can also choose how
many colors your computer uses for display by making
a choice in the Colors drop-down list.
4.
Click OK to accept the new screen resolution.
Higher resolutions, such as 1400 x 1250, produce smaller, crisper
images. Lower resolutions, such as 800 x 600, produce larger,
somewhat jagged images. The upside of higher resolution is that
more fits on your screen; the downside is that words and graphics
can be too small to see easily.
The Colors setting of the Display Properties dialog box offers two
settings. The lower color quality is 16-bit; the highest is 32-bit.
Essentially, the higher the bits, the more color definition you get.
Remember that you can also use your View settings in most soft-
ware programs to get a larger or smaller view of your documents
without having to change your screen’s resolution. Most applications
provide a View menu; click it to access commands such as Zoom.
Microsoft Office products have not only a View menu, but an easy
to use zoom slider in the bottom right corner you can use to
instantly shrink or enlarge a document on screen.
Figure 9-1: Use the slider to change the resolution
➟
80
Chapter 9: Customize the Look of Windows

Choose a Desktop Theme
1.
To apply a predesigned theme that controls your desk-
top appearance, first right-click the desktop and choose
Personalize. The Personalization window opens. Click
the Theme link.
2.
In the resulting Theme Settings dialog box, shown in
Figure 9-2, select a theme from the Theme drop-down
list. You have the following options:
• Windows Vista offers up a beautiful lake and moun-
tains against a blue sky. The color scheme that this
theme uses for various on-screen elements, such as
window title bars, relies heavily on grays, blues, 
and reds.
• Windows Classic sports a plain blue background
with silvery-blue and gray colors for screen elements.
• My Current Theme uses whatever settings you have
and saves them with that name.
• Browse takes you to the Program Files folder of
Windows, where you can look for any files with the
.theme extension. It’s not that Windows Vista
comes with a lot of these waiting in this folder for
you to use, but if you like, you can buy themes from
third-party companies at sites such as www.my
vistathemes.com and www.vista-themes.
net. 
3.
Click OK to apply the selected theme.
Figure 9-2: Choosing a theme in the Theme Settings dialog box
If you apply a theme and then make changes to your colors or back-
ground, you can save it as a custom theme. Just click the Save As but-
ton in the Theme Settings dialog box discussed in the step above to keep
your new theme for future use.
➟
81
Choose a Desktop Theme

Change the Desktop Background
1.
The desktop background can consist of a solid color or
a photo or graphical image. Right-click the desktop and
choose Personalize from the shortcut menu.
2.
In the resulting Personalization window, click the
Desktop Background link to display the Desktop
Background window, as shown in Figure 9-3.
3.
Select a category of desktop background options from
the Location drop-down list to display previews of cer-
tain types of images:
• Windows Wallpapers are photos and graphical back-
grounds Microsoft has built into Windows Vista.
• Pictures opens your Pictures folder, allowing you 
to use one of your own images as your desktop 
background. In Figure 9-4, I’ve chosen a photo as a
background.
• Sample Pictures allows you to choose from samples
included in your Sample Pictures folder, which is
located in your Pictures folder.
• Public Pictures allows you to browse to locate any
image on your computer or computer network in the
Public folder.
• Solid Colors allows you to choose from a palette of
preselected colors.
Figure 9-3: The Display Background window
Try uploading pictures from your digital camera into your Pictures
folder. You can then use the procedure described here to make any
photo your desktop background. You can also download free images
from the Internet to your Pictures folder and use them in the same way.
➟
82
Chapter 9: Customize the Look of Windows

4.
Click the image you want to use. The background is pre-
viewed on your desktop.
5.
If you select an option other than Solid Colors, you can
also control whether one large image or several smaller
images appear and whether the image is centered. From
the positioning options at the bottom of the dialog box,
select one of the following:
• Fit to Screen: This option stretches one copy of the
image to fill the screen, covering any background
color completely.
• Tile: This choice displays multiple copies of the
image filling the desktop. The number of images
depends on the size and resolution of the original
graphic.
• Center: Quite logically, this option centers the image
on a colored background so that you can see a solid
border around its edges. The background photo in
Figure 9-4 is centered.
6.
Click OK to apply the settings and close the dialog box.
If you apply a desktop theme (see more about this in the previous
task), you overwrite whatever desktop settings you’ve made in this
task. If you apply a desktop theme and then go back and make
desktop settings, you replace the theme’s settings. However, mak-
ing changes is easy and keeps your desktop interesting, so play
around with themes and desktop backgrounds all you like!
Figure 9-4: A centered photo serves as the desktop background
➟
83
Change the Desktop Background

Set Up a Screen Saver
1.
If you choose to use a screen saver, you can set how
long your computer is inactive before that screen saver
appears. Right-click the desktop and choose Personalize.
In the resulting Personalization window, click the Screen
Saver link to display the Screen Saver Settings dialog box
(see Figure 9-5).
2.
Click the downward-pointing triangle to open the
Screen Saver drop-down list and then choose a screen
saver from the list. If you want to use the photos in your
own Picture folder, choose the Photos option. Other
choices are a mixture of purely graphical animations
and short movies such as Nature; just pick the one that
appeals to you.
3.
Use the arrows in the Wait xx Minutes text box to set the
number of inactivity minutes that Windows Vista waits
before displaying the screen saver.
4.
Click the Preview button to take a peek at your screen
saver of choice (see Figure 9-6). The new selection pre-
views in a full screen view for a few moments and then
disappears and continues to preview in the small screen
window in the dialog box.
5.
When you’re happy with your settings, click OK.
If you decide that you don’t want a screen saver to appear, choose
None from the Screen Saver drop-down list in the Screen Saver
Settings dialog box.
Figure 9-5: The Screen Saver Settings dialog box
Figure 9-6: Previewing your screen saver 
➟
84
Chapter 9: Customize the Look of Windows

Change Your Color Scheme
1.
Right-click the desktop and choose Personalize.
2.
In the resulting Personalization window, click the
Window Color and Appearance link to display the
Appearance Settings dialog box (see Figure 9-7).
3.
Click a color scheme and make settings for transparency
and color intensity.
4.
To customize the selected preset color scheme, click the
Advanced button.
5.
In the resulting Advanced Appearance dialog box, as
shown in Figure 9-8, select a screen element from the
Item drop-down list and then adjust settings for size,
color, font, or effects such as bold; repeat this for each
screen element you want to change.
6.
Click OK to close the Advanced Appearance dialog box
and apply all changes.
If you want to set specific colors in the Advanced Appearance dia-
log box and you know the Red/Green/Blue value for those colors,
in the Color drop-down lists click Other and enter specific values for
Red, Green, and Blue. Click OK to save the changes.
Some colors are easier on the eyes than others. For example, green
is more restful to look at than orange. Choose a color scheme that’s
pleasant to look at and easy on the eyes!
Figure 9-7: Selecting a color scheme 
Figure 9-8: The Advanced Appearance dialog box
➟
85
Change Your Color Scheme

Manage Control Panel Appearance
1.
Windows Vista allows you to change your Control Panel
options to look like earlier versions of Windows. If you
feel comfortable with a previous version’s look and feel
choose Start➪Control Panel.
2.
In the result Control Panel window (see Figure 9-9)
click the Classic View link on the left. The panel changes
to the classic look (see Figure 9-10).
3.
To return to the Windows Visa Control Panel click the
Control Panel Home link on the left.
To use the Windows Vista Control Panel settings you click on various
links; major categories typically have subcategory links so you can
jump more directly to what you need. The Classic View offers indi-
vidual icons for tasks rather than hierarchal links. You can double-
click any of those icons to move to the next step, which is often a
dialog box you can use to make settings.
Figure 9-9: Windows Vista Control Panel
Figure 9-10: Windows Classic View
➟
86
Chapter 9: Customize the Look of Windows

Part III
Getting to Work

Chapter 13: Having Fun with Photos and Movies  . . .123
Play Movies with Windows Media Player............124
Create a New Project in Windows Movie 
Maker ...................................................................125
Add Video Effects to a Movie................................126
Upload Photos from Your Digital Camera..........127
View a Digital Image in Windows Photo 
Gallery..................................................................128
Fix a Photo.............................................................129
Burn Photos to a CD or DVD ...............................131
Chapter 14: Working with Sound and Music  . . . . . .133
Set Up a Sound Card.............................................134
Set Up Speakers .....................................................135
Configure Audio Volume ......................................136
Adjust Your Sound Scheme...................................137
Download a Sound File ........................................138
Play Music with Windows Media Player..............139
Create a Playlist .....................................................140
Listen to Online Radio ..........................................141
Record with Windows Sound Recorder................142
Chapter 15: Working with Printers, Faxes, and 
Scanners  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .143
Install a Printer ......................................................144
Set Printer Preferences...........................................146
Print a File..............................................................147
View Currently Installed Printers .........................148
Make a Printer the Default....................................149
Remove a Printer....................................................150
Rename a Printer....................................................151
Install a Scanner ....................................................152
Modify Scanner Settings........................................154
Set Up a Fax ...........................................................155
Send a Fax ..............................................................156
Chapter 10: Working with Files and Folders  . . . . . . .89
Find and Open Files and Folders with
Windows Explorer.................................................90
Choose a File or Folder View ..................................91
Launch a Recently Used File ...................................92
Create a New Folder ................................................93
Rename a File or Folder ..........................................94
Search for a File .......................................................95
Add a File or Folder to Your Favorites List.............96
Copy a File or Folder...............................................97
Move a File or Folder...............................................98
Create a Compressed File or Folder .......................99
Delete a File or Folder ...........................................100
Back Up Files to a Writable CD or DVD...............101
Chapter 11: Working with Software . . . . . . . . . . . .103
Install Software.......................................................104
Uninstall Software..................................................105
Start a Program.......................................................106
Switch between Open Programs ...........................107
Close a Program.....................................................108
Set Up Windows Sidebar.......................................109
Add Gadgets to the Sidebar ...................................110
Create and Format a Document in WordPad .......111
Edit a Picture in Paint............................................112
Enter Information in the Windows Contacts.......113
Chapter 12: Working with Networks  . . . . . . . . . . .115
Set Up a Wired Ethernet Network.........................116
Connect to a Network............................................117
Change a Computer’s Network Name..................118
Join a Workgroup...................................................119
Work with Wireless Networks...............................120

Working with Files
and Folders
P
eople have been using folders to store paperwork for years. When com-
puters came into common use, some clever person adopted this model
for the way that a computer stores. Files are the individual documents that
you create and save from within applications, such as Word and Excel. When
you save a computer file, you can store it in a folder to organize your work
logically. You can create folders and even subfolders and give them names,
such as Household Inventory or Vacation Plans, to organize your files by
project or topic.
You can also move files and folders around after you create them if you find
you need to reorganize them, just as you might shuffle papers to different
folders in the real world.
In this chapter, you find out how to organize and work with files and fold-
ers, including
➟
Finding your way around files and folders: This includes tasks such
as locating and opening files and folders.
➟
Manipulating files and folders: These tasks cover moving, renaming,
and deleting a file.
➟
Compressing a file: This squeezes a file’s contents to make larger files
more manageable.
10
Get ready to . . . 
➟Find and Open Files and Folders with 
Windows Explorer......................................90
➟Choose a File or Folder View ......................91
➟Launch a Recently Used File ......................92
➟Create a New Folder ..................................93
➟Rename a File or Folder ............................94
➟Search for a File ........................................95
➟Add a File or Folder to Your Favorites List ....96
➟Copy a File or Folder..................................97
➟Move a File or Folder ................................98
➟Create a Compressed File or Folder ............99
➟Delete a File or Folder ............................100
➟Back Up Files to a Writable CD or DVD ....101
➟
Chapter

Find and Open Files and Folders
with Windows Explorer
1.
To find and open a file, you use Windows Explorer, a
feature of Windows that helps you locate files and fold-
ers stored on your computer or discs. (Windows
Explorer is introduced in Chapter 3.) To open Windows
Explorer, move your mouse pointer over the Start but-
ton and right-click. In the menu that appears, click
Explore.
2.
In the resulting Windows Explorer window, click the
arrow to the left of any folder to display its contents in
the left panel. This changes the arrow to point down-
ward and reveals an outline of the hierarchy of folders,
subfolders, and files. You can click the arrow again to
hide the folder contents.
3.
Click a subfolder in the left pane, as shown in Figure
10-1, and the subfolder opens to reveal its contents in
the main display to the right.
4.
If necessary, follow the procedure in Step 3 to open a
series of folders until you locate the file you want.
5.
When you find the file you want, double-click it, and it
opens within the program used to create it.
Figure 10-1: Folders, subfolders, and files
The Start menu includes some shortcuts to commonly used
folders, including Documents, Pictures, and Music. Click one
of these, and Windows Explorer opens with the contents of
that particular folder displayed and ready for you to get to
work.
➟
90
Chapter 10: Working with Files and Folders

Choose a File or Folder View
1.
You can use the Views menu to see different perspectives
and information about files in Windows Explorer. For
example, you can see a simple list or view files and fold-
ers as graphical icons. First open Windows Explorer.
(See the preceding task for an explanation of how to 
do this.)
2.
Click the arrow on the Views button to display the
menu, as shown in Figure 10-2, and choose one of the
following menu options:
• Extra Large, Large, Medium, or Small Icons displays
a graphical symbol for each item.
• List displays a list of folder and file names with no
further information.
• Details shows a list of folders and files that shows
information such as Date Modified and Size (see
Figure 10-3).
• Tiles shows the file/folder name, dimensions, and
size.
If you’re working with a folder containing graphics files, the graph-
ics automatically display as thumbnails unless you choose Details.
Thumbnails are small renditions of the actual graphic image con-
tained in the file.
Figure 10-2: Choose the view that works best for you
Figure 10-3: The Details view with, er, details about files and folders ➟
91
Choose a File or Folder View

Launch a Recently Used File
1.
Windows provides a shortcut to opening files you
worked with recently. It provides a listing of the most
recently used files that you access through the Start
menu. Right-click the Start button and choose
Properties from the resulting shortcut menu.
2.
In the Taskbar and Start Menu Properties dialog box
that appears, click the Start Menu tab (if that tab isn’t
already displayed).
3.
Make sure that the Store and Display a List of Recently
Opened Files check box is selected (see Figure 10-4) and
then click OK.
4.
Choose Start➪Recent Items and then choose a file from
the resulting submenu (see Figure 10-5) to open it.
If a file in the Recent Items list can be opened with more than one
application — for example, a graphics file that you might open
with Paint or in the Windows Picture and Fax Viewer — you can
right-click the file and use the Open With command to control which
application is used to open the file.
If you open a new or recently used file and make changes, you
should save the file. 
Figure 10-4: Activating the recently opened files feature
Figure 10-5: The submenu of recently used files
➟
92
Chapter 10: Working with Files and Folders

Create a New Folder
1.
Creating your own folders helps you organize your files
exactly as you want them. To begin creating a new
folder from within Windows Explorer, first right-click
the Start button and choose Explore.
2.
In the Windows Explorer window that appears, notice
the Folders list on the left. Click the folder in which you
want to create a new folder. For example, the Music
folder.
3.
On the Explorer toolbar, click Organize (near the top-
left of the window) and click New Folder in the menu.
A new folder appears in the list of file/folder names,
with the default name of New Folder. The folder name
is highlighted, indicating that the name is open for you
to edit with your specific folder name (see Figure 10-6).
4.
Type a folder name; the words New Folder are replaced
with the name you type. Click anywhere outside the
folder name to save it.
If you happen to click outside the folder name before you start Step
4 or if you want to rename a folder at some later time, simply per-
form the steps in the following task, “Rename a File or Folder.”
Figure 10-6: Name your new folder with a relevant title
➟
93
Create a New Folder

Rename a File or Folder
1.
As you work with your computer and add more and
more files, you may find that you want to rename a file.
For example you may have named a file “Taxes” but the
next year you realize that you would be better off with a
“2008 Taxes” and “2009 Taxes” folder. To rename a file
or folder, open Windows Explorer by right-clicking Start
and choosing Explore.
2.
In Windows Explorer, locate the file or folder that you
want to rename. (The task “Find and Open Files and
Folders with Windows Explorer,” earlier in this chapter,
explains how.)
3.
Right-click a file or folder in any pane and choose
Rename (see Figure 10-7).
4.
The file/folder name is now highlighted, indicating that
it is available for editing. Type a new name and then
click anywhere outside the file/folder name to save the
new name.
You can’t rename a file to have the same name as another file of
the same format located in the same folder. For example, you can’t
have two .doc files (which are word processed documents) of the
same name in the same folder. Subfolders can’t have the same
name either.
Figure 10-7: Choose Rename and give your file a new name
➟
94
Chapter 10: Working with Files and Folders

Search for a File
1.
Even if you’ve proven to be a whiz at organizing files
within folders, there will be times when you can’t locate
a file because you forgot the name or where you saved
it. To find a file, choose Start.
2.
In the Start Search field in the bottom-left corner of the
Start menu, enter a search term. By default, all criteria
for files are searched. In this example, I searched music,
so any file with music in fields such as the filename,
folder name, artist, album, or file type would be
returned. The search begins, and the Start menu displays
the results (see Figure 10-8). Windows searches only
your computer by default — Windows won’t search the
Internet unless you click the Search the Internet link at
the bottom of the results window.
3.
To open a file at this point, you can simply click it.
4.
If you want to search the Internet, click the Search the
Internet link. Search results from Google appear in your
default browser window (see Figure 10-9).
5.
Click any search result item to go to that Web site. 
If you don’t need the more advanced search features, you can also
simply click Start and type your search term into the Start Search
field at the bottom of the Start menu.
Figure 10-8: The Start menu with search results displayed
Figure 10-9: The results of searching the Internet from the Start menu ➟
95
Search for a File

Add a File or Folder to Your
Favorites List
1.
The Windows Start menu offers a list of Favorites; these
are Web sites, files, or folders that you like to work with
often. Web sites are placed here when you add them as
Favorites in Internet Explorer, which you read about in
Chapter 16. To add files and folders to Favorites so you
can access them quickly, first open Windows Explorer by
right-clicking Start and choosing Explore.
2.
In the resulting Windows Explorer window, locate the
Web site, file, or folder that you want to make a Favorite.
(The task “Find and Open Files and Folders with
Windows Explorer,” earlier in this chapter, explains how.)
3.
Click the file or folder and hold down the mouse but-
ton as you drag it to the Favorites folder in the Folders
list on the left (see Figure 10-10). You may have to scroll
down the Folders list to find the Favorites folder. A copy
of the item is placed in the Favorites folder.
4.
To see a list of your Favorites, choose Start➪Favorites.
5.
In the resulting submenu (see Figure 10-11), click an
item to open it.
If the Favorites item doesn’t display on your Start menu, right-click
the Start menu and choose Properties. On the Start Menu tab, select
the Start Menu radio button, and then click the Customize button.
In the list in the Customize Start Menu dialog box that appears,
make sure that Favorites Menu check box is selected, and then click
OK twice to save the setting.
Figure 10-10: Adding a file to the Favorites folder
Figure 10-11: The Favorites submenu
➟
96
Chapter 10: Working with Files and Folders

Copy a File or Folder
1.
You might want to create a copy of a file to save a
backup of it in case the first file is damaged, to use it in
another project, or to provide the copy to somebody
else. To locate a file or folder to copy, right-click the
Start button and choose Explore.
2.
In the resulting Windows Explorer window, in the
Folders list on the left, click the folder where the file
you want to copy is located. If the file or folder you
want is in a subfolder, click that folder to access it.
3.
When you locate the file or folder you want to copy,
right-click it and choose Copy from the shortcut menu
that appears (see Figure 10-12).
4.
Navigate to the folder where you want to copy the file
or folder (for example, a different folder in the Folder
list).
5.
Right-click in the Windows Explorer pane that lists files
and folders and choose Paste (see Figure 10-13). A copy
of the file is pasted into that location.
You can also select a file and then, using the Explorer toolbar,
choose Organize➪Copy to perform the copy function and
Organize➪Paste to perform the paste function.
Figure 10-12: Choose Copy from the shortcut menu
Figure 10-13: Paste your copied item into another folder ➟
97
Copy a File or Folder

Move a File or Folder
1.
If you decide a file or folder should be stored in another
location, you can simply move it. To get started, right-
click the Start button and choose Explore.
2.
In the resulting Windows Explorer window (see Figure
10-14), click a folder or series of folders to locate the file
that you want to move.
3.
Click the file and hold down the mouse button as you
drag the file to another folder in the Folders list on the
left side of the window. If you right-click and drag the
item to a new location, when you release the mouse
button, you’re offered the options of moving or copying
the item when you place it via a shortcut menu that
appears.
4.
Click the Close button in the upper-right corner of the
Windows Explorer window to close it.
If you change your mind about moving an item using the right-
click-and-drag method, you can click Cancel on the shortcut menu
that appears.
Figure 10-14: Locate the file or folder that you want to move
➟
98
Chapter 10: Working with Files and Folders

Create a Compressed File or Folder
1.
To make a large file more manageable, you can com-
press it (much like using a trash compactor to minimize
your trash). Open Windows Explorer by right-clicking
Start and choosing Explore.
2.
In the resulting Windows Explorer window, locate the
files or folders that you want to compress. (The task
“Find and Open Files and Folders with Windows
Explorer,” earlier in this chapter, explains how.)
3.
Now you need to select what you want to compress. For
this step, you can do either of the following: 
• Select a series of files or folders: Click a file or
folder, press and hold the Shift key, and then click
another file or folder to select a series of items listed
consecutively. The first and last items and all items in
between are selected.
• Select nonconsecutive items (as shown in Figure
10-15): Press and hold the Ctrl key and click each
item you want to include. All the individual items
you clicked are selected.
4.
Right-click any one of the selected items. In the resulting
shortcut menu (see Figure 10-16), choose Send To➪
Compressed (Zipped) Folder. A new compressed folder
appears. The folder icon is named after the last file you
selected in the series, and the name of the folder is left
open for you to edit. 
5.
To rename your brand-new compressed file, just type a
new name and then click outside of the filename area.
(To rename the file at a later time, see the task “Rename
a File or Folder,” earlier in this chapter.)
Figure 10-15: Several nonconsecutive items are selected
Figure 10-16: Sending the selected items to a compressed folder ➟
99
Create a Compressed File or Folder

Delete a File or Folder
1.
Just as you sometimes clean out your closet of clothes
you no longer wear, there’s just no good reason to keep
old, unused files or folders around. To delete files or
folders, start by right-clicking the Start button and
choosing Explore.
2.
In the resulting Windows Explorer window, locate the
file or folder you want to delete. (The task “Find and
Open Files and Folders with Windows Explorer”
explains how.)
3.
Right-click the file or folder to open a shortcut menu
(see Figure 10-17) and then choose Delete.
4.
The resulting dialog box asks whether you’re sure you
want to delete the file. Click Yes to confirm the deletion.
When you delete a file or folder in Windows Vista, it’s not really
gone. It’s moved to the Recycle Bin folder. Windows Vista periodi-
cally purges older files from this folder when it gets too full, but you
might still be able to retrieve recently deleted files and folders from
it. To try to restore a deleted file or folder, double-click the Recycle
Bin icon on the desktop. Right-click the file or folder and choose
Restore. Windows Vista restores the file to wherever it was when
you deleted it.
Figure 10-17: Delete files and folders you no longer need
➟
100
Chapter 10: Working with Files and Folders

Back Up Files to a Writable 
CD or DVD
1.
To begin actually creating your backup, place a blank
writable CD-R/RW (read/writable) or DVD-R/RW in
your CD-ROM or DVD-ROM drive. You usually open
the drive by pressing a button on the front of the drive
and close it again by pushing the drive back in.
Alternatively, you can insert a USB flash drive to back up
to (see Chapter 3 for more details).
2.
Choose Start➪Documents.
3.
In the resulting Documents window, select all the files
that you want to copy to disc by clicking one and then,
while holding down the Ctrl key, clicking all other files
one by one (see Figure 10-18).
4.
Click the Burn button.
5.
In the Burn a Disc dialog box that appears, enter a disc
title and click Next.
6.
A pop-up appears near the taskbar (see Figure 10-19),
indicating that you have files waiting to be burned. Click
it and a window appears. Click the Burn to Disc button.
When the files have been copied, click the Close button
to close the CD-R/RW-ROM or DVD-ROM window.
If you want to back up the entire contents of a folder, such as the
Document folder, you can just click the Documents folder itself in
Step 2.
Figure 10-18: Sending files to be backed up on a disc
Figure 10-19: Burning files to a disc
➟
101
Back Up Files to a Writable CD or DVD

➟
102
Chapter 10: Working with Files and Folders

Working with
Software
T
he whole point of that computer sitting on your desk (or floor, or lap) is
to run software programs. Software ranges from the coolest new game
with wow graphics to get-down-to-business spreadsheet or word-processing
programs. However, all software programs have some things in common.
First, unless a program comes already loaded on your computer, you have to
install it. Conversely, if there is software on your computer you don’t need
(you know, like that tax program you used in 2000 that’s been hanging
around for years), you can remove it. Then you should master features in
Windows for starting, closing, and switching between running programs.
Windows Vista is software, too (software that runs your other software,
among other things). You can take advantage of several pieces of software
that you get with Windows to work with words, pictures, contacts, or little
tools called gadgets that are part of Windows Sidebar.
11
Get ready to . . .
➟Install Software........................................104
➟Uninstall Software....................................105
➟Start a Program ......................................106
➟Switch between Open Programs................107
➟Close a Program......................................108
➟Set Up Windows Sidebar ..........................109
➟Add Gadgets to the Sidebar......................110
➟Create and Format a Document 
in WordPad..............................................111
➟Edit a Picture in Paint ..............................112
➟Enter Information in the Windows 
Contacts ..................................................113
➟
Chapter

Install Software
1.
Insert a software CD/DVD into your computer’s CD
drive or DVD drive.
2.
Follow the instructions that appear on-screen (see
Figure 11-1) to begin the installation. Typically you
would click on an option to Run the setup.exe file,
which is the software installation file, though some soft-
ware will display a proprietary dialog box for running
its software installation.
3.
If a prompt appears asking for permission to run the
program, click Allow.
4.
An installation wizard may appear (see Figure 11-2) ask-
ing you to respond to certain questions about the instal-
lation, or a progress dialog box may appear showing
that the installation has begun without any input from
you. In some cases you will be asked to agree to terms
and conditions before being allowed to proceed with
the installation.
5.
When you’re notified that the installation is complete,
click the appropriate button (usually labeled something
like Finish, OK, or Done).
If the installation doesn’t proceed along the lines described here,
you may have to do a manual install. Check the documentation for
the software to see how to do this. It usually involves finding a file
named Setup.exe on the CD/DVD provided by the software manu-
facturer and double-clicking it to being the installation.
Figure 11-1: Choose to run the setup file
Figure 11-2: Follow instructions to begin installation
➟
104
Chapter 11: Working with Software

Uninstall Software
1.
Your computer comes to you with certain programs pre-
installed, either by the manufacturer or a previous user.
You won’t necessarily want to keep every program and
you’ll want to install others that are useful to you, so it’s
handy to know how to uninstall unwanted software
applications. Choose Start➪Control Panel➪Uninstall a
Program (under the Programs category).
2.
In the resulting Uninstall or Change a Program window,
as shown in Figure 11-3, select the program that you
want to get rid of.
3.
Click the Uninstall or Uninstall/Change button. (The but-
ton you have to click will vary somewhat depending on
the program you select.) Although some programs dis-
play their own uninstall screens that give you instructions
to follow for how to remove the program, in most cases,
a confirmation dialog box appears (see Figure 11-4).
4.
If you’re sure that you want to remove the program,
click Yes in the confirmation dialog box. A dialog box
shows the progress of the procedure; it disappears when
the program has been uninstalled.
5.
Click the Close button to close the Uninstall or Change
a Program window.
With some programs that include multiple applications, such as
Microsoft Office, you might want to remove only one program, not
the whole shooting match. For example, you might decide that you
have no earthly use for Access but can’t let a day go by without
using Excel and Word — so why not free up some hard drive space
and send Access packing? If you have a program that you can mod-
ify in this way, you see a Change button in Step 2 of this task in
addition to the Uninstall button. Click Change. A dialog box appears
to allow you to select the programs that you want to install or unin-
stall; in some cases, Windows might open the original installation
screen from your software program. 
Figure 11-3: The Uninstall or Change a Program window
Figure 11-4: Confirm the uninstall
Warning: If you click the Uninstall button, some programs are simply
removed with no further input from you. Be really sure that you don’t
need a program before you remove it or that you have the original soft-
ware on a CD or DVD so you can reinstall it should you need it again.
➟
105
Uninstall Software

Start a Program
1.
Before you can use a program you have to start it (also
called launching a program). Launch a program by using
any of the following four methods:
• Press the Windows key on your keyboard and choose
All Programs. Locate the program name in the All
Programs list that appears and click it. Clicking an
item with a folder icon displays a list of programs
within it; just click the program on that sublist to
open it (as shown in Figure 11-5).
• Double-click a program shortcut icon on the desktop
(see Figure 11-6).
• Click a program icon on the Quick Launch bar,
located on the taskbar. The taskbar should display by
default; if it doesn’t, press the Windows key (on your
keyboard) to display it, and then click an icon on the
Quick Launch bar, just to the right of the Start but-
ton. If the Quick Launch bar is not displayed, see the
task on customizing the Quick Launch bar in Chapter
8 for details.
• If you used the program recently and saved a docu-
ment, choose Recent Items from the Start menu.
Then click a document created in that program from
the list that displays. (See Chapter 10 for information
about displaying recently used files on the Start
menu.)
2.
When the application opens, if it’s a game, play it; if it’s
a spreadsheet, enter numbers into it; if it’s your e-mail
program, start deleting junk mail . . . you get the idea.
Figure 11-5: Choose a program from the Start menu
Figure 11-6: Desktop shortcuts
➟
106
Chapter 11: Working with Software

Switch between Open Programs
1.
You can have two or more programs, or two or more
windows in a single program, open on your desktop.
The last program that you worked in is the active pro-
gram. To switch between open programs easily, hold
down the Alt key and then press Tab.
2.
A small box opens, as shown in Figure 11-7, revealing
all opened programs.
3.
Release the Tab key but keep Alt pressed down. Press
Tab to cycle through the icons representing open 
programs.
4.
When you release the Alt key, Windows Vista switches to
whichever program is selected. To switch back to the last
program that was active, simply press Alt+Tab, and that
program becomes the active program once again.
Figure 11-7: Press Tab to move among open programs
All open programs also appear as items on the Windows Vista taskbar.
Just click any running program on the taskbar to display that window
and make it the active program. If the taskbar isn’t visible, press the
Windows key on your keyboard to display the taskbar.
➟
107
Switch between Open Programs

Close a Program
1.
When you’re done with a program, you might as well
close it. With an application open, first save any open
documents and then close the application by using one
of these methods:
• Click the Close button in the upper-right corner of
the window. If two or more instances of the program
are open in separate windows, this closes the docu-
ment and its current window but not the application.
• Choose File➪Exit (see Figure 11-8). Note that if
you’re using a Microsoft Office 2007 program you
click the Office button and then click the Exit [Name
of Application] button.
2.
The application closes. If you haven’t saved any docu-
ments before trying to close the application, you see a
dialog box asking whether you want to save the docu-
ment. Click Yes or No, depending on whether you want
to save your changes.
Note that choosing File➪Exit closes all open documents in an appli-
cation as well as the application. Choose File➪Close to close only
the currently active document and keep the application and any
other open documents open.
Figure 11-8: Using the File menu to exit a program
To save a document before closing an application, choose File➪Save
and use settings in the Save As dialog box that appears to name the file
and also specify which folder to save it to.
➟
108
Chapter 11: Working with Software

Set Up Windows Sidebar
1.
To get started with the Sidebar and the useful gadgets
that it holds, click the Sidebar icon on the Windows
taskbar to instantly display the Sidebar at any time.
2.
If the icon doesn’t appear on the taskbar, choose
Start➪Control Panel➪Appearance and
Personalization➪Choose whether to Keep Sidebar on
Top of Other Windows (in the Windows Sidebar
Properties category) to open the Windows Sidebar
Properties dialog box (see Figure 11-9).
3.
Select the Sidebar Is Always on Top of Other Windows
check box. If you like, you can also enable the Start
Sidebar When Windows Starts option to ensure that the
Sidebar always displays when you start your computer.
4.
Click OK and the Control Panel window closes. The
Sidebar appears, as shown in Figure 11-10.
5.
Click a displayed gadget and drag it to the desktop if
you want it to stay there even when the Sidebar is
closed.
If you’re left-handed or have some other propensity for things on
the left, you can choose to have the Sidebar displayed on the left
side of the screen by selecting the Left radio button in the Windows
Sidebar Properties dialog box.
Figure 11-9: The Windows Sidebar Properties dialog box
Figure 11-10: The Windows Sidebar
➟
109
Set Up Windows Sidebar

Add Gadgets to the Sidebar
1.
To display more gadgets, click the Gadgets symbol (a
plus sign) at the top of the Sidebar.
2.
In the resulting Add Gadgets dialog box (see Figure
11-11), double-click a gadget (or click and drag it to the
Sidebar). If you need to view additional gadgets, click
the Get More Gadgets Online link in the lower-right cor-
ner of the dialog box.
3.
Click the Close button to close the dialog box.
If you display gadgets and then click and drag them onto the desk-
top, even if you close the Sidebar, they stay visible. So if you want
to save desktop space, find the gadgets you like, plop them on your
desktop, and hide the Sidebar! To close the Sidebar, right-click any-
where in it and choose Close Sidebar.
If you add more gadgets than can be shown in the single Sidebar,
use the Previous and Next arrows at the top of the Sidebar to move
from one set of gadgets to the next. 
Figure 11-11: The Add Gadgets dialog box
➟
110
Chapter 11: Working with Software

Create and Format a Document 
in WordPad
1.
Choose Start➪All Programs➪Accessories➪WordPad.
2.
Enter text in the blank document, as shown in Figure
11-12. (Note: Press Enter to create blank lines between
paragraphs.)
3.
Click and drag over text to select it and then choose
Format➪Font.
4.
In the resulting Font dialog box (see Figure 11-13),
adjust the settings for Font, Font Style, or Size; apply
strikeout (strikethrough) or underline effects by select-
ing those check boxes. You can also modify the font
color. Click OK to apply the settings.
5.
Select text and click various other tools (such as the
alignment buttons or the bullet style button) on the
toolbar to format selected text.
6.
When your document is complete, choose File➪Save. In
the Save As dialog box, enter a name in the File Name
text box, select a file location from the Save In drop-
down list, and then click Save.
E-mailing a copy of your WordPad document to a friend is simple.
Just choose File➪Send, and an e-mail form appears from your
default e-mail program with the file already attached. Just enter a
recipient’s address and message and then click Send. It’s on its way!
Figure 11-12: The Windows WordPad window
Figure 11-13: The WordPad Font dialog box
➟
111
Create and Format a Document in WordPad

Edit a Picture in Paint
1.
Choose Start➪All Programs➪Accessories➪Paint.
2.
In the resulting Paint window, choose File➪Open.
Locate a picture file that you want to edit (as in Figure
11-14), select it, and then click Open. A pretty picture of
my cats is shown in the Paint window in Figure 11-15.
3.
Now you can edit the picture in any number of ways:
• Edit colors. Choose a color from the color palette in
the bottom-left corner and use various tools (such as
an Airbrush, Brush, Fill With Color, or the Color
Dropper tools) to apply color to the image or
selected objects such as rectangles.
• Select areas. Select the Free-Form Select and Select
tools and then click and drag on the image to select a
portion of the picture. You can then crop out your
selected element by choosing Edit➪Cut.
• Add Text. Select the Text Tool and then click and drag
on the image to create a text box in which you can
enter and format text.
• Draw objects. Select the Rectangle, Rounded
Rectangle, Polygon, or Ellipse tool, and then click
and drag the image to draw objects.
• Modify the image. Use the commands on the Image
menu to change the colors and stretch out, flip
around, or change the size of the image.
4.
Choose File➪Save to save your masterpiece; choose
File➪Print to print it, or choose File➪Send to send it by
e-mail.
Figure 11-14: Choosing a file to open
Figure 11-15: A picture open in Paint
➟
112
Chapter 11: Working with Software

Enter Information in the 
Windows Contacts
1.
Choose Start➪All Programs➪Windows Contacts. You
might get a dialog box asking whether you want to
make this your default vCard (an electronic business
card) viewer. Click Yes or No depending on your 
preference.
2.
In the Contact Properties dialog box that appears (see
Figure 11-16) enter information in various fields, click-
ing other tabs to add more details. For some fields, such
as E-Mail Address, you must enter information and then
click the Add button to add it to your contact properties.
3.
When you finish entering information, click OK.
If the contact has more than one e-mail address, select the one you
want to most often send e-mail to and then click the Set as Default
button. This is the address any e-mails to that contact will be
addressed to.
To quickly search your Contacts, choose Start and enter the contact
name in the Search Field. The contact name appears in the Start
menu. Click it to open the contact Properties form.
Figure 11-16: The Contact Properties dialog box
➟
113
Enter Information in the Windows Contacts

➟
114
Chapter 11: Working with Software

Working with
Networks
S
etting up a network among two or more computers can make your life
much easier because after you set up that network, you can use the con-
nection to share files, folders, printers, and access to the Internet among the
connected computers.
One common way to connect a network is to use a wired Ethernet connec-
tion, involving cables and equipment, referred to as a hub or switch. Check
the back of your PC. You should see what looks like a very large phone con-
nector jack. This is the Ethernet connector.
After you connect the necessary cables and equipment, most newer comput-
ers already have network drivers installed, so Windows Vista is capable of
recognizing the connection. With simple-to-use wizards, little input on your
part is required to set up a network.
You can also set up a connection through a wireless access point (which you
set up according to the instructions that come with the wireless router) with
an adapter that you either install in your CPU in the form of a PCI adapter
or plug into your PC by using a USB (Universal Serial Bus) port.
In this chapter, you explore the following tasks:
➟
Setting up a wired Ethernet connection
➟
Setting up a wireless access point and configuring a wireless network
using the Wireless Network Setup Wizard
➟
Making various settings to networked computers such as changing a
computer’s network name and joining a network workgroup
12
Get ready to . . .
➟Set Up a Wired Ethernet Network ............116
➟Connect to a Network ..............................117
➟Change a Computer’s Network Name........118
➟Join a Workgroup....................................119
➟Work with Wireless Networks ..................120
➟
Chapter

Set Up a Wired Ethernet Network
1.
Obtain a Cat 5 or Cat 5e Ethernet cable for every 
computer you want to connect to the network (see
Figure 12-1).
2.
Purchase a hub or switch with enough ports for each
computer you want to connect (see Figure 12-2).
3.
Turn off all computers as well as the switch or hub. Plug
one end of the Ethernet cable into the switch or hub
and the other end into the network adapter in your PC.
4.
Repeat Step 3 for each computer you want to include in
the network.
5.
Turn on the switch or hub and then turn on the com-
puters. You can now use the Network Setup Wizard to
set up the network. (Choose Start➪Network, and then
click the Network and Sharing Center button. In the
resulting Network and Sharing Center window, click the
Set Up a Connection or Network link.)
Switches make for a speedier network, although they cost a little
more than a hub. However, in most cases, it’s better to invest a few
dollars more for the extra performance of a switch. If you want to
get very sophisticated — for example, on a company network —
you could use a router, which helps you track various people on the
network.
Cat 5 is a kind of cable used for data transfer. If your home is wired
for high-speed access, you may have Cat 5 cable in your walls. You
can find the kind of Cat 5 cable referred to in this task at your local
computer or office supply store with connectors for plugging into
your computer and hub.
Figure 12-1: An Ethernet connector
Figure 12-2: A switch with ports
➟
116
Chapter 12: Working with Networks

Connect to a Network
1.
Once you’ve set up your network, to connect a com-
puter with appropriate permissions, click the Windows
key and then right-click the Networks icon in the System
tray of the taskbar and choose Connect to a Network.
2.
In the resulting Connect to a Network window (see
Figure 12-3), click the network name and then click
Connect.
3.
At this point, you have two options:
• If the network is unsecured, you see a message like
the one shown in Figure 12-4 that warns you that the
network is unsecured and you can click Connect
Anyway to proceed. 
• If the network is security-enabled, you see a win-
dow asking you to enter the security key or
passphrase. Enter the key or passphrase and click
Connect. A window appears to tell you that you have
successfully connected to the network.
Occasionally you’ll see a message that you can’t connect to a net-
work at this time. This can be caused by a few different conditions.
First, the network signal may be too weak for some reason. Second,
the network server might be experiencing some problems. In some
cases, moving your computer closer to the network router in your
home might help, or you can simply wait a while and try the con-
nection again. There are also wireless boosters you can buy that you
can place between the wireless router and a PC to boost the signal.
Figure 12-3: The Connect to a Network window
Figure 12-4: A warning that a network is unsecured
➟
117
Connect to a Network

Change a Computer’s Network Name
1.
If you like, you can change your computer’s name on a
network. Choose Start➪Control Panel➪System and
Maintenance and then click the System link.
2.
In the resulting System window, as shown in Figure
12-5, click the Change Settings link.
3.
On the Computer Name tab of the resulting System
Properties dialog box, as shown in Figure 12-6, replace
the current name in the Computer Description text box
with another network name and then click OK to save
the new name.
4.
Click the Close button to close the System Properties
dialog box.
Two computers on the same network cannot have the same name.
Therefore, you may want to modify computer names before you
start setting up your network so that they’re unique. Choose
Start➪Control Panel➪System and Maintenance and click the
System link. In the System dialog box click Advanced System
Settings, and then display the Computer Name tab. Enter the name
in the Computer Description field. Making the computer name
descriptive is useful. Simple names such as John’s Computer and
Basement PC help everybody on the network know which is which.
Figure 12-5: The System window
Figure 12-6: The Computer Name tab of the System Properties dialog box
➟
118
Chapter 12: Working with Networks

Join a Workgroup
1.
For computers on a network to recognize each other,
they need to belong to the same workgroup. To change
a workgroup association, choose Start➪Control Panel➪
System and Maintenance and then click the System
Link.
2.
In the resulting System dialog box, click the Change
Settings link.
3.
On the Computer Name tab of the resulting System
Properties dialog box, shown in Figure 12-7, click the
Change button.
4.
The Computer Name Changes dialog box appears (see
Figure 12-8). In the Workgroup field, enter or edit the
name for your workgroup with no spaces between 
letters.
5.
Click OK to close the dialog box and then click OK
again to close the System Properties dialog box. If
prompted, restart Windows Vista.
A workgroup is essentially a set of computers on a network. On a
large network, breaking computers down into these groups so they
can easily work with each other makes sense. In a smaller, home
network, you will probably just create one workgroup to allow all
your computers to easily access each other.
One task that becomes easier when your computer is part of a
workgroup is sharing files. If you locate a file or folder on your
computer and right-click it, you can choose to share it on the net-
work. When you do, only people using computers that are in your
workgroup will be able to access this shared file or folder.
Figure 12-7: The System Properties dialog box
Figure 12-8: The Computer Name Changes dialog box
➟
119
Join a Workgroup

Work with Wireless Networks
1.
Turn on each PC that you have attached to the network.
2.
On the PC that will share its Internet connection, log on
to the Internet.
3.
On the Internet-connected PC, choose Start➪Network
and then click the Network and Sharing Center button.
4.
In the resulting Network and Sharing Center window,
click the Set Up a Connection or Network link.
5.
In the resulting Choose a Connection Option window
(see Figure 12-9), choose the Set Up a Wireless Router
or Access Point option and then click Next. The next
window describes what the wizard will do; click Next.
If you don’t have all the PCs to be networked available, you can
add a computer to the network at a later time by running this pro-
cedure again. Or, you can use the settings you save to a flash drive
(see following steps) to set up a single computer at a later time.
Figure12-9: The Choose a Connection Option window
➟
120
Chapter 12: Working with Networks

6.
A progress window displays (see Figure 12-10) while
Windows Vista detects your hardware settings. You have
a few options at this point:
• Windows Vista detects your hardware and configures
it automatically; you’re done.
• Windows Vista detects your hardware but requires
you to configure it manually. In this case, select the
Configure This Device Manually option and com-
plete the required information to finish the setup.
• If you have a Flash drive connected via a USB port,
connect the drive and click the Create Wireless
Network Settings and Save to a USB Flash Drive
option. Enter a name for your network on the follow-
ing screen and then follow the directions, which
involve disconnecting the Flash drive and plugging it
into a wireless access point. You can then use the
drive to configure each computer on the network as
directed.
7.
On the final wizard screen that appears, click Finish.
One great feature of using a network is that you can share things.
You can share files and folders, and you can even share your
CD/DVD drive for little laptops that don’t have those drives
installed. 
Figure 12-10: A Windows progress window
➟
121
Work with Wireless Networks

➟
122
Chapter 12: Working with Networks

Having Fun with
Photos and Movies
T
he ability to manipulate images and work with movies provides a won-
derful way to entertain and communicate. Your computer makes it possi-
ble for you to watch movies, create your own movies, and view and
manipulate photos using built-in Windows applications.
You discover a variety of multimedia-related tasks in this chapter, including
➟
Playing movies with Windows Media Player
➟
Working with movies in Windows Movie Maker
➟
Uploading photos from your digital camera
➟
Using Windows Photo Gallery for viewing and editing photos
➟
Burning photos to a CD or DVD
13
Get ready to . . .
➟Play Movies with Windows Media 
Player ....................................................124
➟Create a New Project in Windows 
Movie Maker ..........................................125
➟Add Video Effects to a Movie....................126
➟Upload Photos from Your Digital 
Camera ..................................................127
➟View a Digital Image in Windows 
Photo Gallery ..........................................128
➟Fix a Photo..............................................129
➟Burn Photos to a CD or DVD ....................131
➟
Chapter

Play Movies with Windows 
Media Player
1.
To open Windows Media Player and begin working 
with movie files, choose Start➪All Programs➪
Windows Media Player.
2.
Click the Maximize button in the resulting Media Player
window. (Maximize is in the upper-right corner of the
window, next to the X-shaped Close button, sporting
two square icons.) 
3.
Click the arrow on the bottom of the Library button at
the top of the window and click Video.
4.
In the window listing video files that appear, click the
Library folder that contains the movie you want to play
(as shown in Figure 13-1).
5.
Double-click a file to begin the playback (see Figure
13-2). Use tools at the bottom of the screen to do the
following:
• Adjust the volume of any sound track by clicking and
dragging the slider left (to make it softer) or right (to
make it louder). Click the megaphone-shaped vol-
ume icon to mute the sound (and click it again to
turn the sound back on).
• Pause the playback by clicking the round Pause but-
ton in the center of the toolbar.
• Stop the playback by clicking the square-shaped Stop
button toward the left.
• Skip to the next or previous movie by clicking the
arrow buttons to the left or right of the Pause button.
6.
Click the Close button to close Media Player.
Figure 13-1: The Library folder containing videos for playback
Figure 13-2: The video playback window
➟
124
Chapter 13: Having Fun with Photos and Movies

Create a New Project in 
Windows Movie Maker
1.
Choose Start➪All Programs➪Windows Movie Maker to
open the Movie Maker window.
2.
Choose File➪New Project to open a new blank Movie
Maker file.
3.
Click the Import Media button to open the Import
Media Items dialog box.
4.
Use the Look In drop-down list to locate the folder
where the movie file you want to open is saved.
5.
Click the file and then click Import to open the file in
the Movie Maker window, as shown in Figure 13-3.
(Note: You can repeat this procedure to open more than
one movie file in a project.)
6.
Click clips displayed in the Collection pane and drag
them down to the storyboard along the bottom of the
window, as shown in Figure 13-4.
7.
Choose File➪Save Project. In the Save Project As dialog
box, enter a filename in the File Name text box and
then click Save.
After you create a project, what can you actually do with it? When
you’ve created a project and imported movies into it, you can use
various features of Movie Maker to edit, reorganize, and playback
movies. With more than one movie imported into a project, for
example, you could pick and choose clips from each of them and
organize them to create your own unique movie.
Another nice feature when playing back movies in Windows Movie
Maker is the ability to view movies with the full screen by clicking
the Full Screen button. Press Esc to exit the Full Screen mode.
Figure 13-3: The Windows Movie Maker window
Figure 13-4: Movie clips on the storyboard
➟
125
Create a New Project in Windows Movie Maker

Add Video Effects to a Movie
1.
With a movie open in Movie Maker, choose
Tools➪Effects.
2.
In the Effects pane, as shown in Figure 13-5, click an
effect and drag it to a clip in your movie on the story-
board or timeline. A star appears on a clip to indicate
that it has an effect applied.
3.
To add several affects to a selected clip at once, choose
Clip➪Video➪Effects.
4.
In the Add or Remove Effects dialog box, as shown in
Figure 13-6, click any effect in the list on the left and
then click Add. To remove an effect, click any effect in
the list on the right and then click Remove.
5.
When you’re finished, click OK. When you click the Play
button to play the video, you can view your stunning
effects.
Note that some of the effects are available only if you purchase
Microsoft Plus! If you select one of those effects, a window pops up
informing you of this and providing a link to a Web site where you
can purchase this software to download or ship to you for about
$20. Microsoft Plus! includes various media-enhancing tools and
clips.
Figure 13-5: The Effects pane
Figure 13-6: The Add or Remove Effects dialog box
➟
126
Chapter 13: Having Fun with Photos and Movies

Upload Photos from Your 
Digital Camera
Uploading photos from a camera to your computer is a very
simple process, but it helps to understand what’s involved.
(This is similar to the process you can use to upload movies
from a camcorder — in both cases, check your manual for
details.) Here are some highlights:
➟
Making the connection: Uploading photos from a digi-
tal camera to a computer requires that you connect the
camera to a USB port on your computer using a USB
cable, which typically comes with the camera. When
you make this connection you’ll see a dialog box like
the one shown in Figure 13-7.
➟
Installing software: Digital cameras also typically come
with software that makes uploading photos to your
computer easy. Install the software and then follow the
easy-to-use interface to upload photos. If you’re missing
such software, you can simply connect your camera to
your computer and use Windows Explorer to locate the
camera device on your computer and copy and paste
photo files into a folder on your hard drive. (Chapter 3
tells you how to use Windows Explorer.)
➟
Printing straight from the camera: Some cameras save
photos onto a memory card, and many printers include
a slot where you can insert the memory card from the
camera and print directly from it without having to first
upload pictures (see Figure 13-8). Some cameras also
connect directly to printers. However, if you want to
keep a copy of the photo and clear up space in your
camera’s memory, you should upload it to your com-
puter, even if you can print without uploading.
Figure 13-7: Importing pictures from a camera
Figure 13-8: A printer with slots for printing photos
➟
127
Upload Photos from Your Digital Camera

View a Digital Image in 
Windows Photo Gallery
1.
After you upload your photos to your computer, you
can view them on-screen. To begin, choose Start➪
All Programs➪Windows Photo Gallery.
2.
In the resulting Windows Photo Gallery window, as
shown in Figure 13-9, click any of the items in the
Navigation pane on the left to choose which images to
display (such as those saved in a certain folder).
3.
In the main area of the window, double-click an image
to display it. Then use the tools at the bottom of the
window (see Figure 13-10) to do any of the following:
• The large rectangular icon in the middle is the Play
Slide Show button. Click it to begin a slide show of
your photos, played one after the other.
• The Display Size icon, a little magnifying glass, dis-
plays a slider you can click and drag to change the
size of the image thumbnails.
• The Actual Size/Fit In Window icon, a small rectan-
gle with four arrows around it’s corners, allows you to
toggle between the photo’s actual dimensions and fit-
ting the full photo within the viewing space.
• The Next and Previous icons move to a previous or
next image in the same folder.
• The Rotate Clockwise and Rotate Counterclockwise
icons spin the image 90 degrees at a time.
• The Delete button deletes the selected image.
4.
When you finish viewing images, click the Close button
in the top-right corner to close the Photo Gallery.
Figure 13-9: Windows Photo Gallery
Figure 13-10: The tools let you work with the displayed image
➟
128
Chapter 13: Having Fun with Photos and Movies

Fix a Photo
Photo Gallery has tools for editing a photo, adjusting settings
such as the photo brightness, and cropping to a portion of the
image. If you use any of these tools and then change your
mind about the edit, use the Undo tool at the bottom of the
Fix pane. (If you change your mind again, use the Redo tool.)
However, after you close the Fix pane, any changes you made
and haven’t undone are saved permanently.
1.
With the Photo Gallery open, display a photo by locat-
ing it with the Navigation pane. (See the task “View a
Digital Image in Windows Photo Gallery,” earlier in this
chapter, for detailed steps if you need them.) Then click
the thumbnail to select it.
2.
Click the Fix button at the top of the Photo Gallery
Window. The Fix window appears, as shown in Figure
13-11.
3.
Click Auto Adjust to let Photo Gallery fix the photo or
use any of the following tools. Click the tool name once
to display options and click it again to close that tool.
• Click Adjust Exposure and use the sliders to adjust
brightness and contrast.
The Undo feature in this window allows you to pick the action you
want to undo, unlike many Undo features that force you to undo all
the actions leading back to the action you want to undo. Click the
arrow on the Undo button under the tools, rather than on the set of
buttons along the bottom, to use this feature.
Figure 13-11: The Fix window of Windows Photo Gallery
➟
129
Fix a Photo

• Click Adjust Color and use the sliders (see Figure
13-12) to adjust temperature, tint, and saturation.
• Click Crop Picture and use the handles on the rec-
tangle that appears to enlarge or shrink the area on
the photo to be cropped. Alternatively, click the rec-
tangle and drag it around your picture to crop to
another location on it. Click the Apply button to
apply the cropping.
• If your picture contains a face with red, glowing eyes,
click the Fix Red Eye tool and then click and drag
around the eye you want to fix in your image to
adjust it.
4.
You can use the navigation tools at the bottom to zoom
in or out, fit the image to the window, move to the next
image, undo or redo actions, or delete the picture. When
you’re finished, click the Back to Gallery button. All
changes are saved permanently.
If you want to keep both the original version of your photo and the
one to which you’ve applied effects, be sure to save the photo with
a different name before using the Effects feature of Windows Photo
Gallery.
Figure 13-12: The Adjust Color tool of Windows Photo Gallery
➟
130
Chapter 13: Having Fun with Photos and Movies

Burn Photos 
to a CD or DVD
1.
Insert a writable CD or DVD into your disc drive. (Discs
come in read and write versions; you need a writable
disc to save data to it and not just read data from it. See
Chapter 3 for more about working with discs.)
2.
With the Windows Media Player open, display a photo
or music file by locating it with the Navigation pane.
3.
Click the Burn button at the top of the application win-
dow, and then choose Audio CD or Data CD or DVD
from the menu that appears, depending on whether
you’re burning music or video.
4.
In the Disc pane that appears on the right (see Figure
13-13), drag items to burn to the CD or DVD into the
pane.
5.
Click Start Burn.
6.
When the files have been burned to the disc, a confir-
mation dialog box appears, and your disc drawer opens.
Click Finish to complete the process and close the 
wizard.
Figure 13-13: The Disc pane appears on the right
In the confirmation dialog box that appears in Step 7, you can select the
Yes, Burn These Files to Another Disc check box if you want to make
another copy of the same files.
➟
131
Burn Photos to a CD or DVD

➟
132
Chapter 13: Having Fun with Photos and Movies

Working with Sound
and Music
W
ho doesn’t love to hear music? It soothes the savage beast and gets
you dancing and singing. To spice up the sometimes-tedious time
you spend working on your PC, add a dash of music! You can play music —
or for that matter, any kind of audio file — from your computer and forget
the iPod.
Your computer can play, record, and download music as well as tap into
Internet radio stations with ease. With a sound card installed and speakers
attached, you have a hi-tech desktop boombox. By using Windows Vista
media programs, you can create playlists and even listen to your favorite
radio station while working or playing on your desktop or laptop PC.
When you feel the need for sound, here’s what your PC lets you do:
➟
Set up your sound card.
➟
Set up speakers.
➟
Set up your Windows Vista sound scheme.
➟
Download and play audio files.
➟
Create a playlist in Windows Media Player.
➟
Record music with Windows Sound Recorder.
14
Get ready to . . .
➟Set Up a Sound Card................................134
➟Set Up Speakers ......................................135
➟Configure Audio Volume ..........................136
➟Adjust Your Sound Scheme ......................137
➟Download a Sound File ............................138
➟Play Music with Windows Media Player......139
➟Create a Playlist ......................................140
➟Listen to Online Radio..............................141
➟Record with Windows Sound Recorder ......142
➟
Chapter

Set Up a Sound Card
1.
Choose Start➪Control Panel➪Hardware and Sound,
and then click the Manage Audio Devices link.
2.
In the resulting Sound dialog box, which opens with the
Playback tab sheet displayed, click the sound card that
you want to modify and then click the Properties button
(see Figure 14-1).
3.
In the resulting Output Properties dialog box, as shown
in Figure 14-2, click the arrow on the Device Usage
drop-down list and choose the Use This Device (Enable)
setting if it isn’t already selected.
4.
If you want to make sure you have the most current
driver, click the Properties button and then, in the
resulting dialog box on the Driver tab, click the Update
Driver button.
5.
When you’re done making settings, click OK.
Read your user’s manual before doing this procedure. Some sound
cards are built into the motherboard, but others require that you
take some steps to disable the old card before installing the new.
The Sound Troubleshooter, which you can access from the Windows
Help and Support Troubleshooting system, takes you through test-
ing your sound card step by step and isolating various problems.
But remember the basics: You have to have speakers connected to
your computer, and the volume setting on your computer can’t be
muted. If you neglect to properly set either of these two vital
requirements, don’t be ashamed — just about everyone has done
it, myself included!
Figure 14-1: The Playback tab of the Sound dialog box
Figure 14-2: The General tab of the Output Properties dialog box
➟
134
Chapter 14: Working with Sound and Music

Set Up Speakers
1.
Attach speakers to your computer by plugging them into
the appropriate connection (often labeled with a little
megaphone or speaker symbol) on your central process-
ing unit (CPU) or monitor.
2.
Choose Start➪Control Panel➪Hardware and Sound; in
the Hardware and Sound window that appears, click the
Manage Audio Devices link (under Sound).
3.
In the resulting Sound dialog box, on the Playback tab
(see Figure 14-3), double-click the Speakers item.
4.
In the resulting Speakers Properties dialog box, click the
Levels tab, as shown in Figure 14-4, and then click and
drag the Speakers slider to adjust the speaker volume.
Dragging the slider to the left lowers the volume; drag-
ging to the right raises the volume. Note: If there’s a
small red x on the speaker button, click it to activate the
speakers.
5.
Click the Balance button. In the resulting Balance dialog
box, use the L(eft) and R(ight) sliders to adjust the bal-
ance of sounds between the two speakers.
6.
Click OK three times to close all the open dialog boxes
and save the new settings.
You can easily test your speakers. On the Advanced tab of the
Speakers Properties dialog box, choose your speaker configuration
and then click the Test button. This feature tests first one speaker
and then the other to help you pinpoint whether one of your speak-
ers is having problems or whether you should adjust the balance
between the speakers for better sound.
Figure 14-3: The Playback tab of the Sound dialog box
Figure 14-4: The Level tab of the Sound Properties dialog box ➟
135
Set Up Speakers

Configure Audio Volume
1.
Choose Start➪Control Panel➪Hardware and Sound,
and then click the Adjust System Volume link to display
the Volume Mixer dialog box, as shown in Figure 14-5.
2.
Under the Device volume section, adjust any of the fol-
lowing settings:
• Volume sliders: Move these to adjust the volume up
and down for applications (such as Windows Media
Player) or Windows Sounds (such as the little sounds
you hear when you get an error message or take cer-
tain actions in Windows).
• Balance slider: If you have a stereo device, use this
slider to adjust sound between right and left speakers.
(The Balance slider is not shown in Figure 14-5.)
• Mute buttons: To mute a device, click the Mute but-
ton; a small red circle with a line through the middle
appears next to the Mute button (see Figure 14-6).
3.
Click the Close button and then click OK to close the
Volume Mixer dialog box.
A handy shortcut exists for adjusting the volume of your default
sound devices. Click the Volume button (which looks like a little
gray speaker) on the right side of the Windows Vista taskbar. Use
the slider on the Volume pop-up that appears to adjust the volume
or, if you want, click the Mute button to turn sounds off.
Figure 14-5: The Master Volume dialog box
Figure 14-6: The Mute feature activated
➟
136
Chapter 14: Working with Sound and Music

Adjust Your Sound Scheme
1.
Choose Start➪Control Panel➪Hardware and Sound.
2.
In the resulting Hardware and Sound window, as shown
in Figure 14-7, click the Change System Sounds link.
3.
In the Sound dialog box that appears, click to display
the Sounds tab, if it’s not already displayed (see 
Figure 14-8).
4.
Click to display the Sound Scheme drop-down list and
choose the sound scheme you prefer:
• Windows Default uses the sound scheme that came
installed with Windows Vista.
• No Sounds turns off all sounds associated with
Windows events.
5.
Click OK to save the new settings.
If you want to change individual sounds associated with Windows
events, such as exiting Windows, you can click an individual event
in the Program list and then choose a new setting from the Sounds
drop-down list. You can also click Browse to display the Browse for
New Sound dialog box. When you finish, click the Save As button to
save the new Sound Scheme.
Figure 14-7: The Hardware and Sound window
Figure 14-8: The Sounds tab of the Sound dialog box
➟
137
Adjust Your Sound Scheme

Download a Sound File
1.
Depending on how the Web site you’re visiting has set
things up, you do one of the following actions to down-
load a sound file:
• Click a download button or link and follow the
instructions for selecting a destination location on
your hard drive to download the file to.
• Click the sound file link and choose Save. In the Save
As dialog box that appears (see Figure 14-9), use the
Save In drop-down list to locate a place to save the
file, enter a File Name, and click Save. A dialog box
shows the download progress; when it’s completed,
click the Open button. A player that the sound file is
associated with, such as MusicMatch Jukebox or
Windows Media Player, opens and plays the file.
• Click the sound file link, and a download dialog box
opens. Follow the steps in the previous option to
select a download location, name the file, and pro-
ceed with the download.
2.
When the file finishes downloading, it might open and
play automatically in a media player, such as Windows
Media Player, as shown in Figure 14-10. If it doesn’t,
you have to take one of the following actions:
• You can locate the saved file by using Windows
Explorer; then double-click the file to play it.
• One final option is to open Windows Media Player,
choose File➪Open, locate the file, and open it. Then
use the player’s tools to play the file.
Figure 14-9: Saving a sound file
Figure 14-10: A downloaded file opened in Windows Media Player
➟
138
Chapter 14: Working with Sound and Music

Play Music with Windows 
Media Player
1.
To open Windows Media Player and begin working 
with music files, choose Start➪All Programs➪
Windows Media Player.
2.
Click the Maximize button in the resulting Media Player
window. (Maximize is in the upper-right corner of the
window, next to the X-shaped Close button, sporting
two square icons.) 
3.
Click the arrow on the bottom of the Library button at
the top of the window and click Music.
4.
In the window listing music files that appears, click the
Library folder that contains the music you want to play
(as shown in Figure 14-11).
5.
Double-click a file to begin the playback (see Figure
14-12). Use tools at the bottom of the screen to do the
following:
• Adjust the volume by clicking and dragging the slider
left (to make it softer) or right (to make it louder).
Click the megaphone-shaped volume icon to mute the
sound (and click it again to turn the sound back on).
• Pause the playback by clicking the round Pause but-
ton in the center of the toolbar.
• Stop the playback by clicking the square-shaped Stop
button toward the left.
• Skip to the next or previous track by clicking the
arrow buttons to the left or right of the Pause button.
6.
Click the Close button to close Media Player.
Figure 14-11: The Library folder containing videos for playback
Figure 14-12: The video playback window
➟
139
Play Music with Windows Media Player

Create a Playlist
1.
Choose Start➪Windows Media Player. (If Windows
Media Player doesn’t appear on your main Start menu,
choose All Programs➪Accessories to locate it.)
2.
Click the Create Playlist link. The field opens for editing
with the words New Playlist displayed (see Figure 14-13).
3.
Enter a name for the playlist and press Enter. The
Playlist panel appears on the right.
4.
Locate the sound files you want to place in the playlist
and click and drag them to the Playlist panel.
5.
Click the Save Playlist button (see Figure 14-14). The
playlist appears under Playlists in the left pane. When
you click the playlist, all titles in the playlist appear in
the list on the right. Double-click any item in the
playlist to play it.
You can rename or delete a playlist. Right-click the list under the
Playlists category in the left pane and then choose Rename or
Delete, respectively.
Figure 14-13: A new blank playlist
Figure 14-14: Saving a playlist
➟
140
Chapter 14: Working with Sound and Music

Listen to Online Radio
1.
With Windows Media Player open, click the Media
Guide tab. The WindowsMedia.com page appears (see
Figure 14-15).
2.
Click on the Internet Radio link and then click on a fea-
tured station. You can also click on the right-facing
arrow sign next to a music category such as Top 40 to
locate a station.
3.
Click the arrow to the left of a station to display addi-
tional information about it (see Figure 4-16).
4.
Click the station you want to listen to and then click the
Play link; the station plays. You can use the controls at
the bottom left of the screen to stop, pause, play, or
move forward or backward in the radio programming.
5.
When you are done listening, click the Close button in
Windows Media Player to close it.
Some radio stations require that you pay for a subscription so it will
cost you to get your music. One cue to a station that asks that you
pay are the words “Try it free today,” which suggests tomorrow
may not be!
Figure 14-15: The WindowsMedia.com page
Figure 14-16: Stations in the Jazz category
➟
141
Listen to Online Radio

Record with Windows 
Sound Recorder
1.
Attach a microphone to your computer. (See your com-
puter manual for how to do this.)
2.
Choose Start➪All Programs➪Accessories➪
Entertainment➪Sound Recorder.
3.
In the resulting Sound Recorder window (see Figure
14-17), click the Start Recording button.
4.
The Position and Length boxes begin to record the num-
ber of seconds of your recording, and the slider begins
to move to the right. Click the Stop Recording button
shown in Figure 14-18 to stop the recording. The Save
As dialog box appears. Enter a File name and click the
Save button.
5.
To play back the recording, locate the file you saved and
double-click it. Windows Media Player opens, playing
the file.
6.
Click Close to close the Windows Media Player window.
Figure 14-17: The Sound Recorder window ready to record
Figure 14-18: A recording in progress
While playing back a recording, you can rewind or fast forward either
by clicking and dragging the slider bar backward or forward or by click-
ing the Rewind button (two left-facing arrows) or the Forward button
(two right-facing arrows).
➟
142
Chapter 14: Working with Sound and Music

Working with
Printers, Faxes, 
and Scanners
A
computer is a great storehouse for data, images, and other digital
information, but sometimes you need ways to turn printed documents
into electronic files you can work with on your computer, or print hard copies
(a fancy term for paper printouts) of electronic documents and images. Here
are a few key ways to do just that:
➟
Printers allow you to create hard copies of your files on paper, trans-
parencies, or whatever stock your printer can accommodate. To use a
printer, you have to have software installed — a print driver — and use
certain settings to tell your computer how to find the printer and what
to print.
➟
You use a scanner to create electronic files — pictures, essentially —
from hard copies of documents, pictures, or whatever will fit into/
onto your scanner. You can then work with the files, fax or e-mail
them, or print them. Scanners also require that you install a driver
that comes with your machine.
➟
Fax machines let you send an electronic version of documents over
your dial-up (phone line), broadband, or wireless Internet connec-
tion. The image received on the other end is an electronic version. For
some fax machines, to use them you insert a hard copy, enter a phone
number, and send it on its way. However, if your computer is con-
nected to the Internet, you can also fax an electronic document
directly from your computer using a built-in feature in Windows Vista.
Depending on your recipient’s fax machine setup, either a printed fax
or electronic file will be received.
15
Get ready to . . .
➟Install a Printer........................................144
➟Set Printer Preferences ............................146
➟Print a File ..............................................147
➟View Currently Installed Printers ..............148
➟Make a Printer the Default ......................149
➟Remove a Printer ....................................150
➟Rename a Printer ....................................151
➟Install a Scanner......................................152
➟Modify Scanner Settings ..........................154
➟Set Up a Fax............................................155
➟Send a Fax..............................................156
➟
Chapter

Install a Printer
1.
A printer driver is the software your computer needs in
order to communicate with your printer. After plugging
your printer into your computer, read and follow the
instructions that came with the printer. Some printers
require that you install software before connecting
them, but others can be connected right away.
2.
Turn on your computer and then follow the option that
fits your needs:
• If your printer is a Plug and Play device, Windows
will be able to detect it and install the appropriate
driver without you doing a thing. Connect the printer
to your computer using the appropriate cable;
Windows installs what it needs automatically and
you’re done with this step list.
• If your printer came with a disc, insert the CD or
DVD into the drive and follow the on-screen instruc-
tions. When you finish the instructions, your printer
should be installed and ready to use, and you’re done
with this step list. 
• If neither of the preceding bullets applies to you,
choose Start➪Control Panel➪Printer; in the Printers
window that appears, click Add a Printer to start the
Add Printer Wizard. If this is the option that you’re
following, proceed to the next step in this list.
3.
If you choose the third option in Step 2, in the Add
Printer Wizard, select the Add a Local Printer option
(see Figure 15-1). Click Next.
4.
In the resulting wizard screen (the Choose a Printer Port
screen, as shown in Figure 15-2), you need to specify
which slot (called a port) on your computer you
Figure 15-1: Click on Add a Local Printer
Figure 15-2: The default port is usually the correct setting
➟
144
Chapter 15: Working with Printers, Faxes, and Scanners

plugged your printer into. Click the down arrow on the
Use an Existing Port field and select a port. It’s probably
safe just to use the recommended port setting that
Windows selects for you. Click Next.
5.
In the next wizard screen (the Install the Printer Driver
screen; see Figure 15-3), choose the manufacturer of
your printer and then choose a printer. Click Next.
6.
In the resulting Type a Printer Name screen (see Figure
15-4), enter a printer name. If you don’t want this to be
your default printer (the one your computer automati-
cally selects to print), deselect the Set As the Default
Printer option. Click Next.
7.
In the resulting screen, click Finish to complete the Add
Printer Wizard.
You can install as many printers as you like. For example, you
might have a color laser printer for higher end jobs and a less high
quality deskjet for everyday printing. Whichever printer you use
most often should be your default so you don’t have to select it
every time you print. See the task later in this chapter titled Make
A Printer the Default for more about how to do this.
Figure 15-3: The Install the Printer Driver screen
Figure 15-4: Naming the printer
➟
145
Install a Printer

Set Printer Preferences
1.
Your printer might have capabilities such as being able
to print in color or black and white, or print in draft
quality (which uses less ink) or high quality (which pro-
duces a darker, crisper image). To modify these settings
for all documents you print, choose Start➪Control
Panel➪Printer (in the Hardware and Sound group).
2.
In the resulting Printers window, any printers you have
installed are listed. Click a printer to select it and then
click the Select Printing Preferences link.
3.
In the Printing Preferences dialog box that appears (as
shown in Figure 15-5), click any of the tabs to display
various settings, such as Color (see Figure 15-6). Note
that different printers might display different choices
and different tabs in this dialog box.
4.
Click OK to close the dialog box and save settings and
then click the Close button to close other open Control
Panel windows.
.
Figure 15-5: The Printing Preferences dialog box
Figure 15-6: The Color tab 
➟
146
Chapter 15: Working with Printers, Faxes, and Scanners

Print a File
1.
When you have your printer all set up and you’re ready
to print a file, first open the file in the application in
which it was created. (You can find the steps for starting
a program in Chapter 11 and for opening files in
Chapter 10.)
2.
Choose File➪Print. Note that if you’re working with a
Microsoft Office 2007 program, the procedure to print
involves clicking the Microsoft Office button and then
choosing Print.
3.
In the resulting Print dialog box (see Figure 15-7), select
what to print from the Page Range section. The options
in this dialog box might vary but generally include the
following:
• All prints all pages in the document.
• Current Page prints whatever page your cursor is
active in at the moment.
• Selection prints any text or objects that you have
selected within the file when you choose the Print
command.
• Pages prints a page range (two numbers separated by
a hyphen) and/or series of pages (different page
numbers separated by commas) that you enter in the
field. For example, enter 3–11 to print pages 3
through 11; or enter 3, 7, 10–12 to print pages 3, 7,
and 10 through 12.
4.
In the Number of Copies field, click the up or down
arrow to set the number of copies to make; if you want
multiple copies collated (printed in page order), select
the Collate check box.
5.
Click OK to proceed with printing.
Figure 15-7: The Print dialog box
You can use the Page Setup dialog box prior to printing to specify set-
tings such as printing in landscape or portrait orientation (that is, with
the long side of the paper across the top of your document or along the
side); modify the document margins (how much white space to leave
around the edge of the document); or print headers or footers (text you
want to appear either on the top or bottom of every page, such as a
page number or document title. To make these settings, choose
File➪Page Setup to display the Page Setup dialog box.
Different applications might offer different options in the Print dialog
box. For example, PowerPoint offers several options for what to print,
including slides, handouts, and the presentation outline, and Outlook
allows you to print e-mails in table or in memo style.
➟
147
Print a File

View Currently Installed Printers
1.
Over time, you might install multiple printers, in which
case you might want to remind yourself of the capabili-
ties of each or view the documents you’ve sent to be
printed. To view the printers you have installed and
view or cancel any documents currently in line for print-
ing, choose Start➪Control Panel➪Printer.
2.
In the resulting Printers window (see Figure 15-8), a list
of installed printers and fax machines appears. If a
printer has documents in its print queue, the number of
documents is listed under the printer name. If you want
more detail about the documents or want to cancel a
print job, select the printer and click the See What’s
Printing button. In the window that appears, you can
click a document and choose Document➪Cancel to
stop the printing, if you want. Click the Close button to
return to the Printers window.
3.
You can right-click any printer and then choose
Properties to see details about it (see Figure 15-9), such
as which port it’s plugged into or whether it can print
color copies.
4.
Click the Close button (the red X in the upper-right cor-
ner) to close the window.
When you click a printer in the list, a list of Printer Tasks appears to
the left. You can use links in this list to view current print jobs for
that printer, pause printing in progress, or set printer properties.
See the task “Set Printer Preferences,” earlier in this chapter, for
more about this last procedure.
Figure 15-8: The Printers window
Figure 15-9: The Properties dialog box for a printer
➟
148
Chapter 15: Working with Printers, Faxes, and Scanners

Make a Printer the Default
1.
If you install a new printer, you might want to make it
the default printer so it’s always used, unless you specify
otherwise when printing a document. To make a printer
the default, choose Start➪Control Panel➪Printer (in the
Hardware and Sound group).
2.
In the resulting Printers window (as shown in Figure
15-10), the current default printer is indicated by a
check mark.
3.
Click any printer that isn’t set as the default and click
the Set as Default button, which appears at the top of
the window, as shown in Figure 15-11. (If you click the
printer that is already set as the default, the Set as
Default command isn’t available.)
4.
Click the Close button in the Printers window to save
the new settings and exit the window.
Figure 15-10: The default printer has the green check mark
Figure 15-11: Click Set as Default 
➟
149
Make a Printer the Default

Remove a Printer
1.
Over time, you might upgrade to a new printer and toss
the old one. When you do, you might want to also
remove the older printer driver from your computer so
your Printers window isn’t cluttered with printers you
don’t need anymore. To remove a printer, choose
Start➪Control Panel➪Printer (in the Hardware and
Sound group).
2.
In the resulting Printers window (see Figure 15-12),
click a printer to choose it.
3.
Click the Delete This Printer button on the toolbar. (If
this command isn’t visible, click the double-arrow icon
on the right side to see more commands.)
4.
In the Printers dialog box that appears, click Yes; the
Printers window closes, and your printer is removed
from the printer list.
If you remove a printer, it’s removed from the list of installed print-
ers, and if it was the default printer, Windows makes another
printer you have installed the default printer. You can no longer
print to the deleted printer unless you install it again. See the task,
“Install a Printer,” if you decide you want to use that printer again.
Figure 15-12: Getting rid of old printers to remove clutter
➟
150
Chapter 15: Working with Printers, Faxes, and Scanners

Rename a Printer
1.
Choose Start➪Control Panel and click the Printers link
under the Hardware and Sound category.
2.
In the resulting Printers window, right-click a printer in
the list and choose Rename.
3.
The printer name is now available to edit (see Figure
15-13); type a new name and then click outside the
printer to save the new name.
4.
Click the Close button to close the Printers window.
Renaming printers can come in handy, especially if you have set up
a computer network and various people access different on it. For
example, name your two printers Color Printer in Den and B&W
Printer in Basement and there will be no doubt where your docu-
ment will be printing to!
Figure 15-13: The Printer window
➟
151
Rename a Printer

Install a Scanner
1.
Before you can scan documents into your computer
with a scanner, you need to install the scanner driver so
your scanner and computer can communicate. Start by
connecting the scanner to your computer’s USB or paral-
lel port (a slot on your computer you plug a cable into
as shown in Figure 15-13), depending on your scanner
connection (see your scanner manual for information
about how it connects to your computer).
2.
Some scanners use Plug and Play, a technology that
Windows uses to recognize equipment and automati-
cally install and set it up. If your scanner is Plug and
Play enabled, Windows Vista shows a Found New
Hardware message in the Task Bar notification area (in
the lower-right corner). Most Plug and Play devices will
then automatically install; the message changes to verify
the installation is complete, and that’s all you have to
do. If that doesn’t happen, you’re not using a Plug and
Play device, so you should click the Found New
Hardware message to proceed. 
3.
In the resulting Found New Hardware Wizard (this
starts only if you don’t permit Windows Vista to auto-
matically connect to Windows Update), click Yes, This
Time Only, and then click Next.
Figure 15-14: USB ports
To be sure your hardware is compatible with Windows Vista
check your manufacturer’s specifications on their Web site, 
or visit this Microsoft site for advice: http://
technet.microsoft.com/en-us/
windows/aa905090.aspx.
➟
152
Chapter 15: Working with Printers, Faxes, and Scanners

4.
If you have an installation CD for the scanner, insert it
in your CD drive and click Next. Windows Vista
searches for your scanner driver software and installs it.
5.
Choose Start➪Control Panel➪Hardware and
Sound➪Scanners and Cameras.
6.
In the resulting Scanners and Camera dialog box, click
the Add Device button.
7.
In the resulting Scanner and Camera Installation
Wizard, click Next. In the next screen of the wizard (see
Figure 15-15), click a Manufacturer in the list on the left
and then click a model in the list on the right.
8.
Follow the wizard directions based on the model of
scanner you choose in Step 6 and whether you have a
manufacturer’s disc (a CD- or DVD-ROM). If you don’t
have a disc, Windows will help you download software
from the Internet. When you reach the end of the wiz-
ard, click Finish to complete the installation.
Figure 15-15: Selecting your scanner 
➟
153
Install a Scanner

Modify Scanner Settings
1.
After you install a scanner, you might want to take a
look at or change its default settings. To do so, choose
Start➪Control Panel➪Hardware and Sound.
2.
In the resulting Hardware and Sound window, click
Scanners and Cameras.
3.
In the resulting Scanners and Cameras dialog box, a list
of installed scanners appears (see Figure 15-16). Click
any scanner in the Scanners and Cameras area and then
click the Scan Profiles button.
4.
In the resulting Profiles dialog box, select a scanner and
click Edit. In the Edit Profile dialog box (see Figure
15-17), review the settings, which might include
(depending on your scanner model) color management
for fine-tuning the way colors are scanned and resolu-
tion settings that control how detailed a scan is per-
formed. (The higher the resolution is, the crisper and
cleaner your electronic document will be, but the more
time it might take to scan.)
5.
Click Save Profile to return to the Properties dialog box
and then click the Close button twice to close the Edit
Profiles and Scanners and Cameras dialog boxes.
When you’re ready to run a scan, place the item to be scanned in
your scanner. Depending on your model, you may place the item on
a flat “bed” with a hinged cover or you may feed it through a tray.
Check your scanner manual for the specific procedure to initiate a
scan (for example, pressing a Scan or Start button). After you begin
the scan, your computer automatically detects it and displays a dia-
log box showing you the scan progress and allowing you to view
and save the scanned item. 
Figure 15-16: The Scanners and Cameras dialog box
Figure 15-17: Modifying settings in the Edit Profile dialog box
➟
154
Chapter 15: Working with Printers, Faxes, and Scanners

Set Up a Fax
1.
After you’ve connected a fax machine to your computer,
if you want to modify the machine’s settings, choose
Start➪Control Panel➪Printer (in the Hardware and
Sound group).
2.
In the resulting Printers window, as shown in Figure
15-18, click a fax in the list and then click the Select
Printing Preferences button.
3.
In the Fax Printing Preferences dialog box that appears
(see Figure 15-19), make any of the following settings.
Note: These settings might vary slightly, depending on
your fax model.
• The default paper size is probably fine for more of
your faxes, but if not, click the arrow for the Paper
Size drop-down list and choose another paper size.
Alternatively, type standard paper dimensions in the
two fields below, such as 8 1⁄2 x 14 for legal size paper.
• On the right, under the Click for Orientation label,
you can click the image to change orientation
between landscape and portrait. Landscape prints
with the long side of the paper across the top and
portrait prints with the long side of the paper along
the side.
• Make settings for image quality, if available, to spec-
ify how high quality a printing setting you want. (My
fax, shown in Figure 15-18, doesn’t have this setting.)
4.
Click OK to close the dialog box and then click OK to
close the Printers window.
Figure 15-18: Choose your fax in this window
Figure 15-19: Set up fax properties here
➟
155
Set Up a Fax

Send a Fax
1.
To send a fax, you use the Print dialog box. With an
application open, choose File (or the Microsoft Office
button in Office 2007 products)➪Print.
2.
In the Print dialog box that appears (see Figure 15-20),
click the arrow on the Name drop-down list and select
your fax device or program. 
If you chose not to change any default settings after
installing your fax (as explained in the previous task),
the Fax Setup Wizard might appear. Click the Connect
to a Fax Modem link and then follow instructions to set
up the connection.
3.
When you finish the setup wizard, a new fax cover page
form is displayed (see Figure 15-21).
4.
Enter the recipient’s information (this must be a contact
you have saved with a fax number) and subject, as well
as any message you want to include. 
5.
Click the Send button on the toolbar to send the fax.
If you have a scanner, you can scan images into your computer and
then send them as attachments to an e-mail, which is covered in
Chapter 18. If the person you’re trying to communicate with can’t
receive a fax, consider this alternative.
Figure 15-20: Choosing to print to a fax machine
Figure 15-21: Modifying the cover page before sending
➟
156
Chapter 15: Working with Printers, Faxes, and Scanners

Part IV
Going Online

Add Stationery .......................................................186
Read a Message ......................................................187
Reply to a Message.................................................188
Send an Attachment ..............................................189
Forward E-Mail ......................................................190
Create Message Folders..........................................191
Organize Messages in Folders...............................192
Add Contacts to the Address Book.......................193
Create and Add a Signature ..................................194
Create Mail Rules...................................................195
Send E-Mail to Groups Safely...............................196
Chapter 18: Connecting with Others  . . . . . . . . . . . .197
Use Instant Messaging to Send a Message ...........198
Make a VoIP Phone Call .......................................199
Post to a Discussion Board ...................................200
Participate in a Chat ..............................................201
Set Up a Blog .........................................................202
Chapter 16: Internet Basics  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .159
Set Up Your Internet Connection.........................160
Disconnect an Internet Connection .....................161
Repair a Connection..............................................162
Navigate the Web...................................................163
Use Tabs in Internet Explorer ...............................165
Set Up a Home Page..............................................166
Search the Web ......................................................167
Find Content on a Web Page................................168
View Your Browsing History .................................169
Add a Web Site to Favorites...................................170
Organize Favorites..................................................171
Download Files......................................................172
Change Privacy Settings ........................................173
Customize Internet Explorer.................................174
Enable Content Advisor ........................................175
Print a Web Page....................................................177
Chapter 17: Using E-Mail  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .179
Set Up Your E-Mail Account on Windows Mail ....180
Manage E-Mail Accounts.......................................182
Create and Send E-Mail.........................................183
Format an E-Mail Message....................................185

Internet Basics
F
or many people, going online might be the major reason to buy a com-
puter. You can use the Internet to check stock quotes, play interactive
games with others, and file your taxes, for example. The Internet can provide
wonderful ways to keep in touch with family and friends located around the
country or on the other side of the world via e-mail or instant messaging.
You can share photos or connect with others who share your hobbies or
interests.
But before you begin all those wonderful activities, it helps to understand
some basics about the Internet and how it works and to master the art of
getting around the online environment.
This chapter helps you to set up an Internet connection, discover how to
browse the Web, search for the information you need, and organize your
online experience for ease of use using the Favorites feature. Finally, you
learn how to download files so you can buy software, music, movies, and
more all from your computer, to use Content Advisor to avoid unsavory
sites, and to print the contents of a Web page.
16
Get ready to . . . 
➟Set Up Your Internet Connection ..............160
➟Disconnect an Internet Connection............161
➟Repair a Connection ................................162
➟Navigate the Web....................................163
➟Use Tabs in Internet Explorer ..................165
➟Set Up a Home Page................................166
➟Search the Web........................................167
➟Find Content on a Web Page ....................168
➟View Your Browsing History......................169
➟Add a Web Site to Favorites......................170
➟Organize Favorites ..................................171
➟Download Files ........................................172
➟Change Privacy Settings ..........................173
➟Customize Internet Explorer ....................174
➟Enable Content Advisor ............................175
➟Print a Web Page ....................................177
➟
Chapter

Set Up Your Internet Connection
1.
Today it makes sense to use a broadband connection if
you’re planning on connecting to the Internet on a regu-
lar basis and can afford the monthly fee. To set up your
computer for broadband access, you can start by choos-
ing Start➪Network.
2.
In the resulting window, click Network and Sharing
Center.
3.
In the resulting Network and Sharing Center window
(see Figure 16-1), click the Set Up a Connection or
Network link.
4.
In the Choose a Connection dialog box, accept the
default option Connect to the Internet by clicking Next.
5.
In the resulting dialog box, click your connection type.
(These steps follow the selection of Broadband.) If you
have a current connection, a window appears and asks
whether you want to use a current connection. Click Set
Up a New Connection.
6.
In the resulting dialog box, shown in Figure 16-2, enter
the username and password your Internet Service
Provider (ISP) gave you, enter a connection name of
your choosing (if you want to assign one), and then
click Connect. Windows automatically detects the con-
nection, and the Network and Sharing Center window
appears with your connection listed.
7.
Click the Close button to close the dialog box.
In many cases, if you have a CD from your ISP, you don’t need to
follow the preceding steps. Just pop that CD into your CD-ROM
drive, and instructions for setting up your account appear.
Figure 16-1: The Network and Sharing Center window
Figure 16-2: The Connect to the Internet dialog box
➟
160
Chapter 16: Internet Basics

Disconnect an Internet Connection
1.
Choose Start➪Control Panel.
2.
In the Control Panel window, click the Network and
Internet link.
3.
In the Network and Internet window (refer to Figure
16-3), click the Connect to a Network link.
4.
In the resulting Connect to a Network dialog box (see
Figure 16-4), click on the active connection and then
click the Disconnect button.
5.
Click the Close button to close the dialog box.
If you have a Network icon displayed in the Notification Area of the
taskbar, you can right-click and choose Disconnect from and click on
the active connection you want to disconnect.
Figure 16-3: The Network and Internet window
Figure 16-4: The Connect to a Network dialog box
➟
161
Disconnect an Internet Connection

Repair a Connection
1.
Choose Start➪Network.
2.
In the Network window, click the Network and Sharing
Center link.
3.
In the Network and Sharing Center window, click
Diagnose and Repair.
4.
A progress window appears telling you that Windows is
checking your connection (see Figure 16-5).
Sometimes repairing a connection doesn’t do the trick. In that case,
it’s best to delete the connection and just create it again by clicking
the Create a New Connection link in the Network Connections win-
dow and then entering the correct settings.
Figure 16-5: The Network Diagnostics window
➟
162
Chapter 16: Internet Basics

Navigate the Web
1.
After you’ve connected to the Internet, you’re ready to
step foot into the virtual world. The first thing you
should know is how to navigate the Web by using a
browser. Internet Explorer (also called simply IE) from
Microsoft is probably built into your Windows-based
computer, so it’s a good place to start. Open Internet
Explorer by clicking its icon on the Quick Launch bar
located on the Windows Vista taskbar.
2.
Enter a Web site address in the Address bar, as shown in
Figure 16-6, and then press Enter. If you don’t know any
URLs, just type www.understandingnano.com to visit
one of my Web sites.
3.
On the resulting Web site, you’ll notice different areas of
content on the page, including a navigation bar that
includes text or graphics you can click to visit various
pages on the site, as well as content in the form of text
and graphics. Usually, the browser window doesn’t dis-
play a whole page. To display the rest of the page, click
the arrow at the bottom of the scroll bar on the right
side of the window scroll down the page. Or press the
Page Down key on your keyboard.
The Refresh and Stop buttons on the right end of the Address bar
are useful for navigating sites. Click Refresh to redisplay the current
page. This is especially useful if a page updates information fre-
quently (such as on a stock market site) or if a page doesn’t load
correctly; it might load correctly when refreshed. If you made a
mistake entering the address or if the page is taking longer than
you’d like to load, click Stop to halt the process.
Figure 16-6: Entering an address in the address bar
➟
163
Navigate the Web

4.
When you want to go somewhere else, either click a link
(which might jump you to another page on the current
site or to another site) or enter another address in the
address bar to jump to a different site. Note that you
can also use tab features in many browsers to open mul-
tiple sites on different tabs. See the next task for more
about tabs.
5.
Click the Back button to move back to the previous
page that you visited. Click the Forward button to go
forward to the page that you visited before you clicked
the Back button.
6.
Click the down-pointing arrow at the far right of the
address bar to display a list of sites that you visited
recently, as shown in Figure 16-7. Click a site in this list
to go there.
A pop-up is a small window that might open from time to time as
you browse the Web, and it contains annoying advertisements. You
can use the Pop-Up Blocker to stop pop-up ads from appearing.
Choose Tools➪Pop-Up Blocker➪Turn On Pop-Up Blocker to acti-
vate this feature. You can also use the Pop-Up Blocker Settings com-
mand on this same menu to specify sites on which you want to allow
pop-ups. For details, see Chapter 17, which explains how you set
privacy settings.
Figure 16-7: Choosing a site from your browser history list
➟
164
Chapter 16: Internet Basics

Use Tabs in Internet Explorer
Internet Explorer (IE) and several other browsing programs,
such as Opera, offer a feature called tabbed browsing. In addi-
tion to opening multiple home pages on tabs, you can open
new tabs as you browse the Web (see Figure 16-8). You can
then click tabs to jump to other sites you have displayed on
those tabs without having to navigate backwards or forwards
in a single window to sites you’ve previously visited.
Here’s how to use tabbed browsing for maximum efficiency in
Internet Explorer:
➟
Click the New Tab button (this is the small tab to the
right of any open tabs with a small page icon on it) to
open a new, blank tab. The new tab now appears above
the body of the tab area to the right of any other open
tabs. Enter an address in the address bar and press
Enter; the site appears in your newly displayed tab.
➟
Click another tab to jump to another site.
➟
Click the New Tab button again to add another tab for
browsing.
➟
Click the Close button on any active tab to close it.
You can open a linked page in a new tab quickly by right-clicking
the link and choosing Open in New Tab. A new tab opens with the
page displayed.
Figure 16-8: Tabs in a browser
➟
165
Use Tabs in Internet Explorer

Set Up a Home Page
1.
If you find yourself going to one page often — for
example, your e-mail page or the local weather — you
can set one or more home pages. Whenever you open
your browser, home pages display on tabs automatically.
Open IE and choose Tools➪Internet Options.
2.
In the resulting Internet Options dialog box, on the
General tab, enter a Web site address to use as your home
page, as shown in Figure 16-9. Note that you can enter
multiple home pages that will appear on different tabs
every time you open IE. Alternatively, click one of the fol-
lowing preset option buttons, as shown in Figure 16-9:
• Use Current: Sets whatever page is currently dis-
played in the browser window as your home page.
• Use Default: This setting makes the MSN Web page
your home page.
• Use Blank: If you’re a minimalist, this setting is for
you. No Web page displays; you just see a blank area.
3.
Click OK to save your setting and close the dialog box.
4.
Back in Internet Explorer, click the Home icon (it looks
like a house) to go to your home page.
If you want to have more than one home page, you can create mul-
tiple home page tabs that will display when you click the Home
icon. Click the arrow next to the Home icon and choose Add or
Change Home Page. In the Add or Change Home Page dialog box
that appears, select Add This Webpage to Your Home Page Tabs
radio button and then click Yes. Display other sites and repeat this
procedure for all the home page tabs you want.
Figure 16-9: The Internet Options dialog box
To remove a home page you have set up, click the arrow next to the
Home icon and choose Remove. In the submenu that appears, choose a
particular home page or choose Remove All.
➟
166
Chapter 16: Internet Basics

Search the Web
1.
Simple-to-use programs called search engines make it
easy to find information on the Internet — probably
more information than you ever wanted! To use Internet
Explorer’s search feature, open IE and click in the Search
text box in the top-right corner on the toolbar. The
default search engine is Windows Live Search.
2.
Enter a search term in the text box and then click Search.
A search term is simply a word or phrase that relates to
the results you seek. For example, if you want informa-
tion about astronomy, enter the word astronomy or the
phrase black holes and then press Enter.
3.
In the resulting list of links (see Figure 16-10), click a
link to go that Web page.
4.
If you don’t see the link that you need, click and drag
the scrollbar downward to view more results. 
Note that browsers often return sponsored links at the top or side
of the search results page. These are sites that pay to have their
information included. You can click them, but remember that they
are paid advertisers, and there’s a greater risk of downloading dan-
gerous software to your computer if you click a sponsored link. 
Figure 16-10: Search results in a browser
Knowing how search engines work can save you time. For example, if
you search by entering golden retriever, you typically get sites that con-
tain both words or either word. If you put a plus sign between these two
keywords, golden+retriever, you get only sites that contain both words. 
➟
167
Search the Web

Find Content on a Web Page
1.
With IE open and the Web page that you want to search
displayed, choose Edit➪Find On This Page.
2.
In the resulting dialog box, as shown in Figure 16-11,
enter the word that you want to search for. Use the fol-
lowing options to narrow your results:
• Match Whole Word Only: Select this option if you
want to find only the whole word (for example, if
you enter cat and want to find only cat and not cata-
tonic or catastrophe).
• Match Case: Select this option if you want to match
the case (for example, if you enter Catholic and want
to find only the always-capitalized religion and not
the adjective catholic).
3.
In the Direction area, select Up if you want to search the
beginning of the page first; select Down if you want the
end of the page to be searched first.
4.
Click the Find Next button. The first instance of the
word is highlighted on the page (see Figure 16-12). If
you want to find another instance, click the Find Next
button again.
5.
When you’re done searching, click the Close button in
the Find dialog box.
Many Web sites, such as www.amazon.com, have a Search
feature that allows you to search not only the displayed Web page
but all Web pages on the Web site. Look for a Search text box or
link and make sure that it searches the site and not the entire
Internet.
Figure 16-11: The Find dialog box
Figure 16-12: A found word highlighted on a Web page
➟
168
Chapter 16: Internet Basics

View Your Browsing History
1.
Choose View➪Explorer Bar➪History to display sites
you’ve visited previously.
2.
In the resulting History pane, click the arrow on the
View button to show all viewing options. (The default
view is By Date.)
3.
With By Date view selected (as shown in Figure 16-13),
click one of the folders in the list to display all sites in a
particular time period, such as Last Week or 2 Weeks
Ago. If you want to revisit a site in the list, click it, and
you’re there.
To clear the IE History feature, choose Tools➪Internet Options. On
the General tab, click the Clear History button. To change how many
days of searching the History feature saves, on the General tab,
change the Days to Keep Pages in History setting by clicking the up
or down spinner arrow. You can also delete a single site or folder
from the History pane by right-clicking it and choosing Delete.
You can quickly add a site you view in the History pane to your
Favorites. Right-click on the site in the History pane and choose Add
to Favorites. That’s it! 
Figure 16-13: The History pane
➟
169
View Your Browsing History

Add a Web Site to Favorites
1.
Open IE, enter the URL of a Web site that you want to
add to your Favorites list, and then press Enter.
2.
Click the Add to Favorites button and then choose Add
to Favorites.
3.
In the resulting Add a Favorite dialog box, as shown in
Figure 16-14, modify the name of the Favorite listing to
something easily recognizable.
4.
If you want, choose another folder to store the favorite
in by clicking the arrow on the Create In field. You can
also create a folder to store the favorite in by clicking
the New Folder button, entering the folder name in the
Create a Folder dialog box that appears, and clicking the
Create button. Placing favorites in different folders
(such as a Finances folder and a Hobbies folder) helps
you organize them and find the favorite you need faster.
5.
Click Add to add the site to your Favorites list.
6.
When you want to return to the site you’ve saved as a
favorite, click the Favorites Center button and then click
the name of the site from the list that’s displayed (see
Figure 16-15).
Regularly cleaning out your Favorites list is a good idea — after
all, do you really need the sites that you used to plan last year’s
vacation? With the Favorites Center displayed, right-click any item
and then choose Delete or Rename to modify the Favorite listing.
You can keep the Favorites Center displayed as a side pane in
Internet Explorer by displaying it and then clicking the Pin the
Favorites Center button (which has a left-facing green arrow on it
and is located to the right of the History button).
Figure 16-14: The Add a Favorite dialog box
Figure 16-15: The Favorites list
➟
170
Chapter 16: Internet Basics

Organize Favorites
1.
As you add favorites, they can become jumbled, and it’s
helpful to tidy them up into folders or otherwise organ-
ize them. With Internet Explorer open, click the Add to
Favorites button and then choose Organize Favorites.
2.
In the resulting Organize Favorites dialog box (see
Figure 16-16), click a favorite and then click the New
Folder, Move, Rename, or Delete buttons to organize
your favorites.
3.
When you finish organizing your Favorites, click Close. 
If you create new folders in the preeceding steps, you have to 
manually transfer files into those folders. To do this, just display 
the Favorites Center and click and drag files listed there on top of
folders.
I recommend you go through your Favorites folder a couple of
times a year and delete items that are no longer of interest so you
don’t have to scroll through a huge Favorites list. Trust me, those
sites that meant a lot to you when you were doing that research on
poison ivy after last summer’s camping trip won’t mean much come
Christmas. 
Figure 16-16: The Organize Favorites dialog box
➟
171
Organize Favorites

Download Files
1.
As you browse the Web, you might find files you want
to download, such as music files or movie files you buy
from an online store or which are free. Open a Web site
that offers files you want to download. Typically Web
sites offer a Download button or link that initiates a file
download.
2.
Click the appropriate link to proceed. Windows Vista
might display a dialog box asking your permission to
proceed with the download; click Yes.
3.
In the resulting File Download dialog box, as shown in
Figure 16-17, choose either option:
• Click Open or Run (this choice depends on the
type of file you are downloading) to download to a
temporary folder. You can run an installation pro-
gram for software, for example. However, beware: If
you run a program directly from the Internet, you
might be introducing dangerous viruses to your sys-
tem. You should buy and follow the software manu-
facturer’s instructions to install and set up an
antivirus program such as McAfee or Norton
Antivirus to scan files before downloading them.
• Click Save to save the file to your hard drive. In the
Save As dialog box, select the folder on your com-
puter or removable storage media (a CD-ROM, for
example) where you want to save the file. If you’re
downloading software, you need to locate the down-
loaded file and click it to run the installation.
Figure 16-17: The File Download dialog box
If a particular file will take a long time to download (I’ve had some big
ones take over 20 hours!), you might have to babysit it. If your com-
puter goes into standby, it might pause the download. Check in periodi-
cally to keep things moving along.
➟
172
Chapter 16: Internet Basics

Change Privacy Settings
1.
With IE open, choose Tools➪Internet Options and click
the Privacy tab, as shown in Figure 16-18.
2.
Click the slider and drag it up or down to make differ-
ent levels of security settings.
3.
Read the choices and select a setting that suits you. Click
OK to save it.
The default Privacy setting — Medium — is probably a good bet
for most people. To restore the default setting, click the Default but-
ton in the Internet Options dialog box Privacy sheet or use the slider
to move back to Medium.
Figure 16-18: The Privacy tab of the Internet Options dialog box
➟
173
Change Privacy Settings

Customize Internet Explorer
1.
Open IE.
2.
In the resulting home page, customize settings as follows:
• Select text size. Choose View➪Text Size (see Figure
16-19) and select the size text you want displayed.
• Personalize the Explorer bar. Choose View➪
Explorer Bar and click an item from the list that you
want to include in the Explorer Bar area on the left
side of the IE screen.
• Add toolbars. Choose View➪Toolbars. Try out all the
toolbars in the list to see which ones you want to dis-
play. (Figure 16-20 shows several toolbars displayed.
Note that you can also include any third-party tool-
bars you might have added. For example, if you run
Norton Antivirus the Norton toolbar is displayed,
and you can add the Google toolbar to IE by down-
loading it from www.google.com.)
Displaying the History pane in the Explorer bar is useful, but here’s
a shortcut for visiting recently viewed sites: You can find Web pages
that you’ve visited (up to nine of them) by clicking the arrow to the
side of the Back button and choosing one from the list that’s 
displayed.
You can resize the various panes of Internet Explorer, such as the
main Web page view pane and Explorer bar. Move your mouse over
the vertical divider between panes until the cursor becomes a line
with arrows on both sides; then click and drag the divider to enlarge
or shrink a pane.
Figure 16-19: Changing text size
Figure 16-20: Several toolbars displayed
➟
174
Chapter 16: Internet Basics

Enable Content Advisor
1.
With IE open, choose Tools➪Internet Options.
2.
In the resulting Internet Options dialog box, click the
Content tab to display it.
3.
Click the Enable button. (Note: If there is no Enable
button but Disable and Settings buttons instead,
Content Advisor is already enabled. Click the Settings
button to see the options and make changes if you
wish.)
4.
On the Ratings tab of the Content Advisor dialog box
(see Figure 16-21), click one of the four options:
Language, Nudity, Sex, or Violence. Use the slider to set
the site-screening level that’s appropriate for you.
5.
Repeat Step 4 for each of the categories.
Figure 16-21: The Content Advisor dialog box
➟
175
Enable Content Advisor

6.
Click the Approved Sites tab (see Figure 16-22) and
enter the name of a specific site that you want to control
access to. Then click either of the following options:
• Always: Allows users to view the site, even if it’s
included in the Content Advisor screening level
you’ve set.
• Never: Means that nobody can visit the site even if
it’s acceptable to Content Advisor.
7.
When you finish making your settings, click OK twice to
save them.
If you want to view sites that you don’t want others to see, you can
do that, too. On the General tab of the Content Advisor dialog box,
make sure that the Supervisor Can Type a Password to Allow
Viewers to View Restricted Content check box is selected. Then click
Create Password. In the dialog box that appears, enter the pass-
word, confirm it, enter a hint, and click OK. Now if you’re logged
on as the system administrator, you can get to any restricted site by
using this password.
Figure 16-22: The Approved Sites tab of the Content Advisor 
➟
176
Chapter 16: Internet Basics

Print a Web Page
1.
If a Web page includes a link or button to print or dis-
play a print version of a page, click that and follow the
instructions.
2.
If the page doesn’t include a link for printing, simply
press Ctrl+P.
3.
In the resulting Print dialog box, decide how much of the
document you want to print and click one of the options
in the Page Range area, as shown in Figure 16-23.
4.
Click the up arrow in the Number of Copies text box to
print multiple copies. If you want multiple copies col-
lated, select the Collate check box.
5.
Click the Options tab and change settings related to
printing frames and links for the page.
6.
When you’ve adjusted all settings, click Print.
Choosing Current Page or entering page numbers in the Pages text
box of the Print dialog box doesn’t mean much when printing a Web
page; the whole document might print anyway because Web pages
aren’t divided into pages the way word processor documents are.
Figure 16-23: The Print dialog box
Another option for printing a page that doesn’t offer a print version link
is to right-click anywhere on the page and choose Print from the short-
cut menu that appears.
➟
177
Print a Web Page

➟
178
Chapter 16: Internet Basics

Using E-Mail
A
n e-mail program is a tool you can use to send text messages to others
over the Internet. These messages are delivered to their e-mail inboxes,
usually within seconds. You can attach files to e-mail and even put graphic
images within the message body. You can get an e-mail account through
your Internet provider or through sites such as Yahoo! or Microsoft Live
Hotmail. These accounts are typically free. 
When you have an e-mail account, you can send and receive e-mail through
the account provider’s e-mail program online, or you can set up a program
called an e-mail client to access that account on your computer. A couple of
well-known e-mail clients are Microsoft Outlook, which comes with
Microsoft Office, and Windows Mail, which is built into Windows. These
programs typically offer more robust e-mail and contact management fea-
tures than the programs that providers such as Yahoo! offer.
This chapter takes a look at these tasks:
➟
Manage your e-mail account. Set up an e-mail account in Windows
Mail and then create, modify, and add rules for your account to oper-
ate by.
➟
Receive, send, and forward messages. Deal with the ins and outs of
receiving and sending e-mail. Use the formatting tools that Windows
Mail provides to make your messages pretty.
➟
Add information into the Address Book. You can quickly and easily
manage your contacts as well as organize the messages you save in
e-mail folders.
➟
Set up the layout of all Windows Mail features. Add a signature to
all messages, create rules for how incoming messages are handled, and
send e-mails to large groups in a way that keeps their identities safe.
17
Get ready to . . .
➟Set Up an E-Mail Account on 
Windows Mail ..........................................180
➟Manage E-Mail Accounts ..........................182
➟Create and Send E-Mail............................183
➟Format an E-Mail Message ......................185
➟Add Stationery ........................................186
➟Read a Message ......................................187
➟Reply to a Message..................................188
➟Send an Attachment ................................189
➟Forward E-Mail........................................190
➟Create Message Folders............................191
➟Organize Messages in Folders ..................192
➟Add Contacts to the Address Book ............193
➟Create and Add a Signature ....................194
➟Create Mail Rules ....................................195
➟Send E-Mail to Groups Safely ..................196
➟
Chapter

Set Up Your E-Mail Account 
on Windows Mail
1.
You can set up Windows Mail to access one or more
e-mail accounts so you can manage your mail from one
location. Find out from your e-mail account provider
what type of account you have (IMAP or POP3, typi-
cally) and then follow these steps to set up your
account. Choose Start➪All Programs➪Windows Mail. In
the Windows Mail main window that appears, choose
Tools➪Accounts.
2.
In the resulting Internet Accounts dialog box, as shown
in Figure 17-1, click Add.
3.
In the resulting Internet Connection Wizard (see Figure
17-2), click E-Mail Account and click Next.
4.
In the following screen, enter the Display Name that you
want to appear on your outgoing e-mails. You might
want your full name or initials, for example. Click Next.
Often email programs allow you to forward e-mail from one
account to another. If you have set up one account to forward all
messages to another, and you create accounts for both in Windows
Mail, you will see both sets of messages. You might consider remov-
ing the forwarding setting from the one account now that you are
pulling all messages into a central e-mail client.
Figure 17-1: The Internet Accounts dialog box
Figure 17-2: The Internet Connection wizard
➟
180
Chapter 17: Using E-Mail

5.
In the Internet E-Mail Address window that appears,
enter the e-mail address that you got from your account
provider, such as XYZ@aol.com (see Figure 17-3). Click
Next.
6.
In the Set Up E-Mail Servers window that appears, click
the Incoming E-Mail Server Type drop-down list and
choose the format: POP3 or IMAP. (Note that though
HTTP is still listed, if you select it, Windows Mail tells
you it no longer supports HTTP.) If you’re not sure
about this, check with your e-mail account provider.
7.
Enter the Incoming Mail Server and Outgoing Mail
Server information in those two fields (see Figure 17-4).
Again, you must get this information from your e-mail
provider. Click Next.
8.
In the Internet Mail Logon window that appears, enter
your E-Mail Username and Password in those fields and
click Next. In the Congratulations window that appears,
click the Finish button to save your account settings and
download your e-mail.
Figure 17-3: The Internet E-mail Address window
Figure 17-4: The Set-up E-mail Servers window
➟
181
Set Up Your E-Mail Account on Windows Mail

Manage E-Mail Accounts
1.
You can set up more than one e-mail account in
Windows Mail (for example, if you and your spouse
each have your own account). If you have more than
one account, you can choose to make one the default
account that Windows Mail will use when you create a
new message. You can also decide to delete an old
account if you sign up for a different service. Choose
Start➪All Programs➪Windows Mail. In the Windows
Mail main window that appears, choose
Tools➪Accounts.
2.
In the resulting Internet Accounts dialog box, select an
account on the left (refer to Figure 17-5) and do either
of the following:
• To remove an account, click the Remove button on
any of the tabs. A confirming message appears. To
delete the account, click Yes.
• Select an account and click the Set as Default button
to make it the account that Windows connects you to
when you go online. The word default now appears
in parentheses after that account (see Figure 17-6). In
the case of the mail server, the default is the one that
is used to send any message.
3.
Click Close to close the dialog box.
4.
When you finish setting up accounts, click the Close
button to close the Internet Accounts dialog box.
The Internet Connection Wizard often requires that you provide cer-
tain information about your Internet service provider (ISP), such as
its mail server or connection method. Keep this information handy!
Figure 17-5: The Internet Accounts dialog box
Figure 17-6: Specifying the default e-mail account
➟
182
Chapter 17: Using E-Mail

Create and Send E-Mail
1.
When you want to send a message to somebody else,
you open a new e-mail form, address it, enter a subject
line and your message, and then send it on its way.
Choose Start➪All Programs➪Windows Mail.
2.
Click the Create Mail button on the Windows Mail tool-
bar to create a new, blank e-mail form (see Figure 17-7).
3.
Type one or more e-mail addresses of the recipient(s) in
the To text box. You can also type an address in the Cc
text box to send a copy of the message to somebody
else.
4.
Click in the Subject text box and type a concise yet
descriptive subject such as Club Meeting or Holiday
Visit.
5.
Click in the message text area and type your message
(see Figure 17-8).
E-mail messages may be read in many different programs, such as
MSN, Yahoo, and PeoplePC. These programs have different capa-
bilities for displaying text, and what you format and send on its way
may not appear quite the same depending on the program used to
read it.
When creating an e-mail, you can address it to a stored address by
using the Address Book feature. (See “Add Contacts to the Address
Book” later in this chapter.) Just begin to type a stored contact in
an address field (To or Cc), and it fills in likely options while you
type. When it fills in the correct name, just press Enter to select it.
Figure 17-7: Creating a new e-mail message
Figure 17-8: Entering the text of your message
➟
183
Create and Send E-Mail

6.
When you finish typing your message, spell-check it
(unless you’re the regional state spelling champ). Click
the Spelling button; possibly misspelled words get high-
lighted, and the Spelling dialog box appears (see Figure
17-9). At this point, you have some choices:
• Click the Ignore button to ignore this instance of the
misspelling.
• Click the Ignore All button to ignore all instances.
• Choose a suggested alternative spelling and click 
the Change button to change that instance; or, 
click the Change All button to change all instances
of the word. If you wish to enter your own alternate
spelling if none of the suggestions are correct, enter
the new word in the Change To box.
• Click the Add button to add the current spelling of
the word to the Spelling feature’s dictionary so it’s
never questioned again.
7.
After you make one of the choices in Step 6, the Spell
Check moves on to the next questionable word, if any,
and you can make a new choice. When a window
appears telling you the check is complete, click OK to
close the Spelling dialog box.
8.
Click the Send button. The message is on its way!
Don’t press Enter at the end of a line. Windows Mail has an auto-
matic text wrap feature that bumps the cursor to the next line for
you. Also, keep e-mail etiquette in mind as you type. For example,
don’t type in ALL CAPITAL LETTERS. This is called shouting, which is
considered rude.
Figure 17-9: Spelling dialog box
E-mail does involve some etiquette. Do be polite even if you’re really,
really angry. Your message could be forwarded to just about anybody,
just about anywhere, and you don’t want to get a reputation as a hot-
head. Also, be concise because most people don’t really like reading long
messages on-screen. (It hurts the eyes.) If you have lots to say, consider
sending a letter by snail mail (regular mail) or overnight delivery.
You can also insert a picture in an e-mail. With the e-mail form open,
choose Insert➪Picture. Locate a picture in the Picture window that
appears and click Open. The picture fills the background of the e-mail
message area.
➟
184
Chapter 17: Using E-Mail

Format an E-Mail Message
1.
Create a new e-mail message or open a message and
click Reply or Forward.
2.
Select (highlight) the text that you want to format (see
Figure 17-10).
3.
Use any of the following options to make changes to
the font. (See the toolbar containing these tools in
Figure 17-10, and a message with various formats
applied in Figure 17-11.)
• Font drop-down list: Select an option from this list
to apply it to the text.
• Font Size drop-down list: Change the font size here.
• Paragraph Style button: Apply a preset style, such as
Heading 1 or Address.
• Bold, Italic, or Underline buttons: Apply styles to
selected text.
• Font Color button: Display a color palette and click
a color to apply it to selected text.
• Formatting Numbers or Formatting Bullets but-
tons: Apply numbering order to lists or precede each
item with a round bullet.
• Align Left, Center, Align Right, or Justify buttons:
Adjust the alignment of the text.
• Increase Indentation or Decrease Indentation 
button: Indent a paragraph to the right or move it 
to the left.
• Insert Horizontal Line button: Add a line to your
message.
Figure 17-10: Text selected for formatting
Figure 17-11: A variety of formats applied to an e-mail message ➟
185
Format an E-Mail Message

Add Stationery
1.
Click the arrow on the Create Mail button in the
Windows Mail main window and select a stationery
option listed in the menu that appears, or choose the
Select Stationery command to get more choices.
2.
In the Select Stationery dialog box that appears (see
Figure 17-12), select a stationery from the list.
3.
Click OK to apply the stationery to the new message.
4.
With a new, reply, or forwarded message open, you can
also apply stationery by choosing Format➪Apply
Stationery and then click a stationery to apply (see
Figure 17-13).
You can edit stationary, for example to add or delete a graphic ele-
ment. In the Select Stationery dialog box, click on the stationery
you want to change and click the Edit button. The stationery opens
in a Word document that offers various tools you can use to insert
and format text or pictures.
If you apply stationery and decide that you don’t want to use it any-
more, just click the arrow on the Create button and select No
Stationery from the drop-down list.
Figure 17-12: The Select Stationery dialog box
Figure 17-13: Selecting stationery from the Format menu in an e-mail message
➟
186
Chapter 17: Using E-Mail

Read a Message
1.
In your Inbox, unread messages sport an icon of an
unopened envelope to the left of the message subject.
Click an e-mail message in your Inbox or double-click it
to open it in a separate window.
2.
Use the scrollbars in the message window to scroll down
through the message and read it (see Figure 17-14).
3.
If the message has an attachment, a paper clip symbol is
displayed next to the message in your Inbox; attach-
ments are listed in the Attach box in the open message.
To open an attachment, double-click it in the Attach box.
4.
In the resulting Mail Attachment dialog box, click the
Open button. The attachment opens in whatever pro-
gram is associated with it (such as the Windows Photo
Gallery for a graphics file) or the program it was created
in (such as Microsoft Word).
Instead of opening an attachment, you can save it directly to a
removable storage disk or your hard drive. To do so, right-click the
attachment name in the Attach field and choose Save As. In the
Save As dialog box that appears, choose a location and provide a
name for the file; then click Save.
Warning: E-mail attachments can be dangerous. They might contain
viruses or other kinds of malicious software (called malware).
Never open attachments from somebody you don’t know. See
Chapter 20 for more information about how to avoid malware.
Figure 17-14: Reading an e-mail message
➟
187
Read a Message

Reply to a Message
1.
Open the message to which you want to reply and 
then click one of the following buttons, as shown in
Figure 17-15:
• Reply: Send the reply to only the author.
• Reply All: Send a reply to the author as well as every-
one who received the original message.
2.
In the resulting e-mail form, enter any additional recipi-
ent(s) in the To and/or Cc text boxes and type your mes-
sage in the message window area.
3.
Click the Send button to send the reply.
If you don’t want to include the original message in your reply,
choose Tools➪Options and click the Send tab. Deselect the Include
Message in Reply check box and then click OK. Note that when you
reply any attachments are not included with the reply.
Figure 17-15: Reply options
➟
188
Chapter 17: Using E-Mail

Send an Attachment
1.
You can attach any file to your e-mail to send a docu-
ment or picture along with your message. Create a new
e-mail message, address it, and enter a subject.
2.
Click the Attach File to Message button.
3.
In the Open dialog box that appears (see Figure 17-16),
locate the document or graphics file that you want and
then click Open.
4.
With the name of the attached file now in the Attach
text box (see Figure 17-17), type a message (or not —
after all, a picture is worth a thousand words).
5.
Click the Send button to send.
Figure 17-16: The Open dialog box
Figure 17-17: The Attach field text box
➟
189
Send an Attachment

Forward E-Mail
1.
You might get a message that’s just too good not to pass
on. Passing on, or forwarding, e-mail to others is what
sends jokes flying around the Internet in droves. Open
the e-mail message that you want to forward.
2.
Click the Forward button on the toolbar.
3.
In the message that appears with Fw added to the begin-
ning of the subject line, enter a new recipient(s) in the
To or Cc fields and then enter any message that you
want to include in the message window area, as shown
in the example in Figure 17-18. If you want to add a
BCC (blind carbon copy, invisible to all recipients),
click either the To or Cc buttons to display a Select
Recipients dialog box.
4.
Click Send to forward the message.
Warning: It’s actually dangerous to forward chain mail–type e-mail
messages — you know, the ones that say pass this on to ten of
your friends. Spammers may end up on those lists of addresses and
they may take the entire list of people’s e-mail addresses and take
advantage of those people in some way. The safest thing if you
truly want to forward the contents of such a message is to cut and
paste the message into a new message form and address it your-
self, putting multiple addresses into the Bcc field rather than the To
field so they are invisible to all recipients. You should also make
sure there are no list of e-mails within the forwarded message itself
to give people’s identity away.
Figure 17-18: A forwarded message.
➟
190
Chapter 17: Using E-Mail

Create Message Folders
1.
Being able to organize the messages you receive and
even copies of messages you send is useful. Windows
Mail allows you to use existing folders or create new
folders that you can move messages into to find them
more easily. Choose View➪Layout to open the Window
Layout Properties dialog box.
2.
Select check boxes to display the Folders list and Folder
bar and then click OK.
3.
In the Folders list, click any folder to display its contents.
4.
Choose File➪New➪Folder (see Figure 17-19).
5.
In the resulting Create Folder dialog box (see Figure
17-20), select the folder that you want the new folder to
be created in and then enter a new folder name.
6.
Click OK.
Typically, you select the Local Folders item in Step 5 so that the new
folder is at the same level as the Inbox, Outbox, and so on.
Alternatively, you can select the Inbox item to place the new folder
within the Inbox folder.
Figure 17-19: Creating a new folder
Figure 17-20: The Create Folder dialog box
➟
191
Create Message Folders

Organize Messages in Folders
1.
In the Folders list, click a folder to display its contents
(see Figure 17-21).
2.
To place a message in a folder, you can do one of these
actions:
• Click and drag. With a folder (such as the Inbox)
displayed, click a message and drag it into a folder in
the Folders list.
• Move an open message. With an e-mail message
open, choose File➪Move to Folder or Copy to Folder.
In the Move dialog box that appears (see Figure
17-22), select the appropriate folder and click OK.
• Move a closed message. Right-click a message in a
displayed folder and choose Move to Folder or Copy
to Folder. In the dialog box that appears, select the
appropriate folder and click OK.
3.
To delete a message, display the folder it’s saved in,
select the message and then either click the Delete but-
ton or press Delete on the keyboard.
If you try to delete a message from your Deleted Items folder, a
message appears asking whether you really want to delete this
message permanently. That’s because when you delete a message
from another folder, it’s really not deleted — it’s simply placed in
the Deleted Items folder. To send it into oblivion, you have to delete
it from the Deleted Items folder, confirming your deletion so that
Outlook Express is really convinced that you mean what you say.
Figure 17-21: Files in an e-mail folder
Figure 17-22: The Move dialog box
➟
192
Chapter 17: Using E-Mail

Add Contacts to the Address Book
1.
Windows Mail (like most e-mail programs) contains an
Address Book feature where you store information about
your contacts. Contacts allow you to quickly address
e-mail messages using stored e-mail addresses. In the
Windows Mail main window, click the Contacts button
to open your Contacts window (see Figure 17-23).
2.
Double-click a contact to view or edit information.
3.
In the resulting Properties dialog box, as shown in
Figure 17-24, go to the following tabs to enter contact
information:
• Name and E-Mail: Enter the person’s name and
e-mail address. (This is the only information you
must enter to create a contact.)
• Home: Enter the person’s home and Web site addresses
as well as phone, fax, and cell phone numbers.
• Work: Enter information about the company that the
person works for as well as his job title and pager
number. You can even add a map to help you find
his or her office.
• Family: Enter the person’s family members’ names, as
well as his or her gender, birthday, and anniversary.
• Notes: Enter notes in the form on this tab.
• IDs: Ensure secure communications. Digital IDs are
certificates that you can use to verify the identity of
the person with whom you’re communicating. If
somebody has provided you with a digital ID, you
can store that information here so you can look it up
when opening messages from that person.
4.
Click OK to save your new contact information and
then close the Contacts window.
Figure 17-23: The Contacts window
Figure 17-24: The Properties dialog box
➟
193
Add Contacts to the Address Book

Create and Add a Signature
1.
Just as you sign a letter Sincerely yours, followed by your
name, you can add a signature to your e-mail messages.
A signature might contain your full name and phone
number or even your favorite saying. In Windows Mail,
choose Tools➪Options to open the Options dialog box.
Click the Signatures tab (see Figure 17-25).
2.
Click the New button to create a new signature and then
enter your Signatures text.
3.
Select the Add Signatures to All Outgoing Messages
check box and make sure that the signature is selected
as the default. (Note: Select the Don’t Add Signatures to
Replies and Forwards check box if you want to add your
signature only occasionally.)
4.
Click OK to save the signature.
5.
To manually add a signature to an open e-mail message,
choose Insert➪Signature and select a signature from the
list that appears to insert it (see Figure 17-26).
If you intend to use the signature on every e-mail, be careful that you
don’t include information you don’t want everybody to know, such as
your home address. Signatures aren’t intended to be novellas —
keep it short. Include contact information you want everybody to
have; your affiliation (such as Pastor, Unitarian Church); or your
thought for the day.
Figure 17-25: The Signatures tab of the Options dialog box
Figure 17-26: Inserting a signature manually
➟
194
Chapter 17: Using E-Mail

Create Mail Rules
1.
You can create rules for how Windows Mail handles
messages. For example, you can create a rule that all
messages from your grandchildren be automatically
placed in your Grandchildren folder. Choose
Tools➪Message Rules➪Mail.
2.
In the resulting New Mail Rule dialog box (see Figure
17-27), select a check box in the Select the Conditions
for Your Rule area to set a Condition for the rule. For
example, if you want all messages that contain the word
Sale in the subject line to be moved to a Junk Mail
folder, select the Where the Subject Line Contains
Specific Words option.
3.
Mark the Select the Actions for Your Rule check boxes to
choose rule actions. In the example in Step 2, for
instance, you would select the Move It to the Specified
Folder option.
4.
In the Rule Description area, click a link (the colored
text). To continue the example shown in Figure 17-28,
you click the phrase Contains Specific Words. Fill in the
specific information for the rule in the dialog box that
appears (see Figure 17-28 for an example). For the sec-
ond item in this example, click the word specified and
select a folder for matching messages to be moved to.
5.
Click OK to return to the New Mail Rule dialog box. Fill
in the Name of the Rule text box with a name that you
can recognize and then click OK.
After you create a rule, open the Message Rules dialog box (choose
Tools➪Message Rules➪Mail) and then click the Modify button in
the Message dialog box to make changes to the rule, or click the
Remove button to delete it.
Figure 17-27: The New Mail Rule dialog box
Figure 17-28: Creating a Rule description
➟
195
Create Mail Rules

Send E-Mail to Groups Safely
1.
Spammers can co-opt recipient addresses from e-mails
and are especially attracted to e-mails with multiple
addresses. To protect your friends’ privacy, follow this
procedure for addressing e-mails to groups. Choose
Start➪All Programs➪Windows Mail.
2.
Click the Create Mail button on the Windows Mail tool-
bar to create a new, blank e-mail form.
3.
Click the To: or CC: link. This displays the Select
Recipients dialog box for entering recipients’ addresses
(see Figure 17-29). Enter all recipient addresses in the
Bcc field. Doing so keeps all addresses private from the
entire group of recipients. Click OK when you’ve
entered all addresses.
4.
Click in the Subject text box and type a concise yet
descriptive subject such as Club Meeting or Holiday
Visit.
5.
Click in the message text area and type your message.
6.
Click the Send button. The message will be sent, and
privacy has been protected.
Figure 17-29: Entering Cc and Bcc addresses
➟
196
Chapter 17: Using E-Mail

Connecting with
Others
You may have grown up in a world where people held conversations in
person, by writing letters back and forth, or over the phone, but the
Internet has revolutionized the way people connect. Today, people can com-
municate over the Internet in many ways. You can interact using a variety of
technologies and with a variety of devices. You can enter text messages into
your computer or cell phone that people receive immediately or whenever
they get around to checking for messages. You can post an online journal
called a blog (which stands for Web log) or read others’ blogs. You can find
people with like interests in a huge number of topics ranging from geneal-
ogy to investing to online gaming. When face-to-face communication just
isn’t possible, you will find the Internet a wonderful way to share ideas,
information, and support.
In this chapter, you get advice about the following ways to interact with 
others online:
➟
Communicate via text messages and Internet phone calls. 
➟
Post your thoughts to a discussion board or chat in real time in a 
chat room.
➟
Create your own online journal, called a blog, for others to visit.
18
Get ready to . . .
➟Use Instant Messaging to Send 
a Message ..............................................198
➟Make a VoIP Phone Call ..........................199
➟Post to a Discussion Board........................200
➟Participate in a Chat ................................201
➟Set Up a Blog ..........................................202
➟
Chapter

Use Instant Messaging to Send 
a Message
1.
One way to connect directly with people who are online
at the same time as you is by using an instant messaging
(IM) program such as Windows Live Messenger, Yahoo!
IM, or AIM, AOL’s instant messaging program. First
open a messaging program such as Windows Live
Messenger. You can download this program from
http://get.live.com.
2.
Choose Start➪All Programs➪Windows Live➪Windows
Live Messenger. In the resulting window (see Figure
18-1) you can do any of the following:
Button
Location
What It’s Good For
Add a Contact
1
Click this button to create a list of people with
whom you want to connect. This list is called a
buddy list or contact list. When you sign in to
your IM program and your instant messaging
window appears, it lets you know who’s online. If
any of your buddies are online, you can then
send text messages back forth to each other.
Share
2
In addition to text messages, you can share links
to journal entries and photos in Windows Live
Spaces.
See Who Is Online 
3
Click this button to see any contacts you’ve 
Right Now
added who are online at the moment.
Send a Message to 
4
This allows you to send a message to a mobile 
a Mobile Device
device.
Figure 18-1: Windows Live Messenger
Carefully consider who you allow on your IM contact list. Whoever is on
that list knows every time you go online. Stick to friends and family and
people you want to chat with on a regular basis.
1 2 3
4
➟
198
Chapter 18: Connecting with Others

Make a VoIP Phone Call
VoIP stands for Voice over Internet Protocol. You can use this
technology to make calls to anywhere in the world from your
computer. You can also use a webcam along with VoIP to cre-
ate a video phone system.
Here are the basic steps you should know for using VoIP:
➟
There are various VoIP providers, such as Skype and
Vonage. Costs for signing up with these providers vary
but are often much lower than paying a traditional
phone company. Because there’s no per call or per
minute charge, the basic fee is usually paid for by your
savings on long distance.
➟
When you sign up with a provider, you’ll have to down-
load software and make a test call using a microphone
you connect to your computer.
➟
To use a VoIP service, you enter a list of contacts just as
you do for instant messaging or e-mail. When you want
to make a call, you choose a contact and click a button.
➟
You can make calls to other’s computers equipped with
VoIP or to a regular handheld or cell phone.
➟
VoIP services also offer features such as voicemail, caller
ID, and call forwarding. If you don’t want to be dis-
turbed while working on your computer, you can block
calls temporarily.
➟
Several sites, such as http://voipreview.org, can
help you compare services before you sign up (see
Figure 18-2).
Figure 18-2: Finding the right VoIP service for you
Is your daughter living in another country? Check your provider’s cov-
erage area. Many allow international calls for no additional charges.
➟
199
Making a VoIP Phone Call

Post to a Discussion Board
A mainstay of online communication is discussion boards. A
discussion board is a place where you can post written mes-
sages on a topic, and others can reply to you, or you can reply
to their postings (and the postings might stay up there for
years). Discussion boards are asynchronous, which means that
you post a message (just as you might on a public bulletin
board) and wait for a response. Somebody might read your
message that hour or ten days or ten weeks after you post it. In
other words, the response isn’t instantaneous. The advantages
of discussion boards are
➟
They allow you to give thought to your posting and
spend time considering replies that others post to your
discussion.
➟
They’re organized in easy-to-follow threads, which
organize postings and replies in an outline-like structure
(see Figure 18-3), and you can review the comments of
various participants as they add their ideas to the entire
discussion.
If pure text bores you, consider going to a video sharing site such
as YouTube. Here people post videos instead of text, and you can
comment on their postings. Another option is to include a link to a
video in your discussion posting, which others in the discussion can
click on to go to a posted video on a video sharing site.
Figure 18-3: Following threads in a discussion
➟
200
Chapter 18: Connecting with Others

Participate in a Chat
A chat is an online space where people can talk back and forth
via text; when the chat is over, unless you save a copy, the text
is gone. With chat, the interaction is in real time (synchro-
nous) and resembles a conversation in text. Chat takes place
in virtual spaces called chat rooms.
Chat has these advantages:
➟
You can interact with others right away by typing your
message and sending it. However, chat messages are
usually rather brief to keep the conversation flowing
(see Figure 18-4).
➟
Several people can interact at once, though this can take
getting used to as you try to follow what others are say-
ing and jump in with your own quickly typed messages.
➟
You can usually invite others to enter a private chat
room, which keeps the rest of the folks who wandered
into the chat room out of your conversation.
An alternative to a chat room is using programs such as Skype to
talk in real time over an Internet connection just as you would in a
phone call, and even set up webcams so participants can see each
other. Visit www.skype.com for more about their service.
Figure 18-4: Exchanging comments with others in a chat room
➟
201
Participate in a Chat

Set Up a Blog
The term blog comes from the phrase Web log. Blogs are essen-
tially online journals or diaries in which people share their
ideas and thoughts and others can comment on them. Both
companies and individuals can create blogs. Figure 18-5
shows a blog at www.look-both-ways.com, which dis-
cusses how to stay safe online.
Here’s some general advice about how to begin to explore the
world of blogging:
➟
Getting your own blog: You can get a blog space from
several sources, including your e-mail program such as
Windows Live Hotmail or from a blog space service
such as www.blogger.com. Creating a blog (see
Figure 18-6) space is usually free and the sign up
process is simple.
➟
Considering your access options: Be aware of the set-
tings you make when creating a blog. Allowing public
access to the blog means that anybody can listen in to
your thoughts and emotions and pick up private informa-
tion about you from your blog entries. You might be safer
setting up to provide access only to those you know. Even
if you post blog entries anonymously, some folks have
figured out how to find out your real name, so limiting
access to your blog entries is the safest approach.
➟
Designing your blog’s appearance: Blog sites typically
provide tools to help you easily design your space. You
can choose whether to post a picture of yourself and what
colors and fonts to use. You can also organize the layout
of postings, archives of older postings, and responses.
➟
Interacting with the blogging community: You can
search blog sites to find people with like interests. If
another person’s blog is open to the public, you can
read and respond to comments posted there.
Figure 18-5: A popular blog on Internet safety
Figure 18-6: Creating a blog on www.blogger.com
➟
202
Chapter 18: Connecting with Others

Part V
Computer Maintenance
and Security

Chapter 19: Computer Maintenance  . . . . . . . . . . . .205
Defragment a Hard Drive......................................206
Free Up Disk Space................................................207
Use the Troubleshooter Tools...............................208
Create a System Restore Point...............................209
Restore the Windows System.................................210
Chapter 20: Protecting Windows  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .211
Understand Computer Security ............................212
Understand Windows Update Options................214
Run Windows Update............................................215
Enable the Windows Firewall................................216
Run a Windows Defender Scan.............................217
Set Up Windows Defender to Run 
Automatically.......................................................218
Require Logon to Close Screen Saver ...................219
Enable Shared Folders...........................................220
Set Up Trusted and Restricted Web Sites ..............221

Computer
Maintenance
T
his chapter covers tasks that are about as much fun as cleaning out your
refrigerator. The fact is that computer maintenance might not be a barrel
of laughs, but it keeps your computer running, so it has to be done. These
are the types of tasks that help you keep your computer organized, in shape,
and performing at its best.
The tasks in this chapter fall into two categories: 
➟
Performing basic maintenance: These tasks help you keep your
Windows house in order. To keep your system in shape, you can
defragment your hard drive (take small fragments of files and consoli-
date them to make accessing them more efficient) or free up space on
the drive. These tasks optimize how files are stored on your hard drive
to make sure that you get the best performance from your computer.
➟
Fixing common problems: Windows has built-in features that help
you troubleshoot hardware and software problems. The Hardware
Troubleshooter takes you through a series of steps to isolate hardware
malfunctions caused by hardware drivers, and the System Restore
allows you to turn back the clock to a time when your software was
working properly. By returning to a system restore point, you may
undo newer settings that caused your system to act up or crash.
19
Get ready to . . .
➟Defragment a Hard Drive ........................206
➟Free Up Disk Space..................................207
➟Use the Troubleshooter Tools....................208
➟Create a System Restore Point..................209
➟Restore the Windows System....................210
➟
Chapter

Defragment a Hard Drive
1.
Defragmenting reassembles data on your hard drive to
use the space more efficiently. Many people recommend
defragmenting your hard drive on a regular basis to
keep your computer performing at its best. Choose
Start➪Control Panel➪System and Maintenance and
then click Defragment Your Hard Drive (in the
Administrative Tools section).
2.
In the resulting Disk Defragmenter window (see Figure
19-1), to the left of the Defragment Now button is a
note about whether your system requires defragmenting
or if regular defragmenting is set up to run automatically.
To defragment now, click the Defragment Now button.
3.
In the following Defragment Now dialog box (see
Figure 19-2), select the drives to defragment and click
OK. The message that appears tells you that Windows is
defragmenting your drive and that it might take up to a
few hours to complete. Windows shows you a progress
window while you wait.
4.
When the defragmenting process is complete, the Disk
Defragmenter window shows that your drive no longer
requires defragmenting. Click Close (the X in the upper
right) to close the window.
To keep defragmenting from interfering with your work, try run-
ning it overnight while you’re happily dreaming of much more
interesting things. You can also set up the procedure to run auto-
matically at a preset period of time, such as once every two weeks,
by selecting the Run On a Schedule check box in the Disk
Defragmenter window. A default schedule appears; to change it,
click the Modify Schedule button and choose how often, what day,
and what time to run the procedure. Of course, your computer has
to be turned on for the scheduled defragmenting to occur.
Figure 19-1: The Disk Defragmenter window
Figure 19-2: Choosing which drives to defragment
Remember: Disk defragmenting can take a while. If you have energy-
saving features active (such as a screen saver), they might cause the
defragmenter to stop or delay, so you might want to turn off the screen
saver feature. (Choose Start➪Control Panel➪Appearance and
Personalization and click the Change Screen Saver link.)
➟
206
Chapter 19: Computer Maintenance

Free Up Disk Space
1.
With all the little bits of data saved around your hard
drive, there are some pieces that have become useless
(little bits of files you deleted three years ago, for exam-
ple). You can use a Windows tool to clean up your drive
to remove that debris, which improves your computer’s
performance. Choose Start➪Control Panel➪System and
Maintenance and then click Free Up Disk Space in the
Administrative Tools.
2.
In the dialog box that appears (see Figure 19-3), click the
icon next to the kind of files you want to clean up. If you
choose Files from All Users on This Computer, go to
Step 3. If you choose My Files Only, choose the drives
you want to scan from the Disk Cleanup: Drive Selection
dialog box that appears and then proceed to Step 3.
3.
The resulting dialog box shown in Figure 19-4 tells you
that Disk Cleanup has calculated how much space can
be cleared on your hard drive, and you also see a list of
the suggested files to delete. (Those to be deleted have a
check mark.) If you want to select additional files in the
list to delete, click to place a check mark next to them,
or deselected files if you want to keep them around. In
most cases, whatever Windows proposes to delete is
probably safe to delete, including fragments of long
gone files and otherwise corrupted data you haven’t
accessed in a long time.
4.
After you select all the files to delete (or accept the sug-
gested files, which is probably just fine in most cases),
click OK. The selected files are deleted. 
Click the View Files button in the Disk Cleanup dialog box to see
more details about the files that Windows proposes to delete,
including the size of the files and when they were created or last
accessed.
Figure 19-3: A Disk Cleanup dialog box
Figure 19-4: Viewing how much disk space can be freed by Disk Cleanup
Though the Disk Cleanup process is pretty safe, if your computer starts
behaving strangely after the cleanup, you might want to create a
System Restore point before you run it. This feature saves periodic back-
ups of your system, and you can use it to restore your computer to an
earlier time. If Disk Cleanup causes any problems, choose Start➪
Control Panel➪Restore Files from Backup and then click the Restore
Files button. Follow the wizard screens that appear to restore files to the
restore point you created before you ran Disk Cleanup. ➟
207
Free Up Disk Space

Use the Troubleshooter Tools
1.
Choose Start➪Help and Support➪Troubleshooting
Tools.
2.
In the resulting Troubleshooting Tools window (see
Figure 19-5), scroll down and click the appropriate link
for any problem you’re experiencing.
3.
Follow the instructions that relate to your problem.
(Figure 19-6 shows the results of using the System
Information troubleshooting tool, as an example.)
4.
After you solve the problem, click the Close button to
close the Troubleshooting window. If you don’t find a
solution, consider using the Remote Assistance feature
to get one-on-one help. (See Chapter 8 for more about
this feature).
You might also find help with the hardware drivers by going to the
Device Manager (Start➪Control Panel➪Hardware and
Sounds➪Device Manager) and right-clicking a device. Choose
Properties and then display the Driver tab to update or test a driver.
Individual computer manufacturers may customize the help system
so that your troubleshooting options and tools may differ depend-
ing on the computer you’re using.
Figure 19-5: The Troubleshooting Tools window
Figure 19-6: System information and tools to help you solve your problem
➟
208
Chapter 19: Computer Maintenance

Create a System Restore Point
1.
Choose Start➪Control Panel➪Backup Your Computer
(under System and Maintenance).
2.
In the Backup and Restore Center window, click Create a
Restore Point or Change Settings under Tasks. The User
Account Control might display a dialog box asking for
your permission to continue; if so, click Continue.
3.
On the System Protection tab of the System Properties
dialog box that appears (see Figure 19-7), click Create.
4.
In the resulting Create a Restore Point dialog box (see
Figure 19-8), enter a description; this description is
helpful if you create multiple restore points and want to
identify the correct one. The current date is a logical
option.
5.
Click the Create button, and the system restore point is
created and is available to you when you run a System
Restore (see the following task for more about this.)
6.
In the dialog box that appears telling you the restore
point was created successfully, click OK and then click
OK again to close the Control Panel.
Before you install some software or make some new settings in
Windows, create a system restore point. It’s good computer practice,
just like backing up your files, only you’re backing up settings that
work before you change them.
A more drastic option than System Restore is to run the system
recovery disc that probably came with your computer or that you
created using discs you provided. However, system recovery essen-
tially puts your computer right back to the configuration it had
when it was carried out of the factory. That means you lose any
software you’ve installed and documents you’ve created since you
began to use it. A good argument for creating system restore points
on a regular basis, don’t you think?
Figure 19-7: The System Properties dialog box
Figure 19-8: The Create a Restore Point dialog box
➟
209
Create a System Restore Point

Restore the Windows System
1.
Choose Start➪Control Panel➪Back Up Your Computer
(under System and Maintenance).
2.
In the Backup and Restore Center window, click Repair
Windows Using System Restore in the Tasks list.
3.
In the resulting System Restore dialog box (see Figure
19-9), click Next to use the suggested restore point; or
click Choose a Different Restore Point and click Next,
select a restore point, and click Next again.
4.
In the next window that appears, click Finish to confirm
the system restore point.
5.
A dialog box confirms that you want to run System
Restore. Click Yes.
6.
The system goes through a shutdown and restart
sequence, and then displays a dialog box that informs
you that the System Restore has occurred.
7.
Click OK to close the dialog box.
System Restore doesn’t get rid of files that you’ve saved, so you
won’t lose your Ph.D dissertation. System Restore simply reverts to
Windows settings as of the restore point. This can help if you or
some piece of installed software made a setting that is causing some
conflict in Windows that makes your computer sluggish or prone to
crashes.
Figure 19-9: The System Restore dialog box
Another cause of slow downs in your system could be malware that has
downloaded to your computer. This type of software, which might be a
virus or spyware, for example, can be detected and blocked by using
antivirus and antispyware programs such as MacAfee, Spyware
Terminator, or Windows Defender. See Chapter 20 for more about using
Windows Defender.
➟
210
Chapter 19: Computer Maintenance

Protecting Windows
Your computer contains software and files that can be damaged in sev-
eral different ways. One major source of damage is from malicious
attacks that are delivered via the Internet:
➟
Some people create damaging programs called viruses specifically
designed to get into your computer hard drive and destroy or scram-
ble data.
➟
Companies might download adware on your computer, which causes
pop-up ads to appear, slowing down your computer’s performance.
➟
Spyware is another form of malicious software that you might down-
load by clicking a link or opening a file attachment. Spyware sits on
your computer and tracks your activities, whether for use by a legiti-
mate company in selling you products or by a criminal element to
steal your identity.
Microsoft provides security features within Windows Vista that help to keep
your computer and information safe, whether you’re at home or travelling
with a laptop computer.
In this chapter, I introduce you to the major concepts of computer security
and cover Windows Vista security features.
20
Get ready to . . .
➟Understand Computer Security ................212
➟Understand Windows Update Options ......214
➟Run Windows Update ..............................215
➟Enable the Windows Firewall....................216
➟Run a Windows Defender Scan ................217
➟Set Up Windows Defender to Run 
Automatically ..........................................218
➟Require Logon to Close Screen Saver........219
➟Enable Shared Folders..............................220
➟Set Up Trusted and Restricted Web Sites ....221
➟
Chapter

Understand Computer Security
When you buy a car, it has certain safety features built in. After
you drive it off the lot, you might find that the manufacturer
slipped up and either recalls your car or requests that you go
to the dealer’s service department to get a faulty part replaced.
In addition, you need to drive defensively to keep your car
from being damaged in daily use.
Your computer is similar to your car in terms of the need for
safety. It comes with an operating system (such as Microsoft
Windows) built in, and that operating system has security fea-
tures. Sometimes that operating system has flaws, and you
need to get an update to keep it secure. And as you use your
computer, you’re exposing it to dangerous conditions and situ-
ations that you have to guard against.
Threats to your computer security can come from a file you
copy from a disc you insert into your computer, but most of
the time the danger is from a program that you downloaded
from the Internet. These downloads can happen when you
click a link, open an attachment in an e-mail, or download
one piece of software without realizing that the malware is
attached to it.
You need to be aware of the three main types of dangerous
programs (called malware):
➟
A virus is a little program that some nasty person
thought up to spread around the Internet and infect
computers. A virus can do a variety of things, but typi-
cally it attacks your data, deleting files, scrambling data,
or making changes to your system settings that cause
your computer to grind to a halt.
➟
Spyware consists of programs whose main purpose
in life is to track what you do with your computer.
Some spyware simply helps companies you do
business with track your activities so they can figure
out how to sell you things; other spyware is used
for more insidious purposes, such as stealing your
passwords. 
➟
Adware is the computer equivalent of telemarketing
phone calls at dinner time. Once adware gets down-
loaded onto your computer, you’ll get annoying
pop-up windows trying to sell you things all day
long. Beyond the annoyance, adware can quickly
clog up your computer, so its performance slows
down, and it’s hard to get anything done at all.
➟
212
Chapter 20: Protecting Windows

To protect your information and your computer from these
various types of malware, you can do several things:
➟
You can buy and install an antivirus, antispyware, or
antiadware program. Programs such as McAfee
Antivirus, Norton Internet Security from Symantec (see
Figure 20-1), or the freely downloadable AVG Free from
Grisoft can help stop the downloading of malicious
files, and they can detect files that have somehow gotten
through and delete them for you. Remember that after
you install such a program, you have to get regular
updates to it to handle new threats, and you need to run
scans on your system to catch items that might have
snuck through. Many antivirus programs are purchased
by yearly subscription, which gives you access to
updated virus definitions that the company constantly
gathers throughout the year.
➟
Some other programs such as Spyware Doctor from
PC Tools combine tools for detecting adware and spy-
ware. Windows Vista has a built-in program, Windows
Defender, that includes an antispyware feature. Windows
Defender tools are covered later in this chapter.
➟
You can use Windows tools to keep Windows up-to-
date with security features and fixes to security prob-
lems. You can also turn on a firewall, which is a feature
that stops other people or programs from accessing your
computer without your permission. These two features
are covered in this chapter.
Figure 20-1: Norton Internet Security
➟
213
Understand Computer Security

Understand Windows Update
Options
When a new operating system like Windows Vista is released,
it has been thoroughly tested; however, when the product is in
general use, the manufacturer begins to find a few problems
or security gaps that it couldn’t anticipate. For that reason,
companies such as Microsoft release updates to their software,
both to fix those problems and deal with new threats to com-
puters that appeared after the software release.
Windows Update is a tool you can use to make sure your com-
puter has the most up-to-date security measures in place. You
can set Windows Update to work in a few different ways by
choosing Start➪All Programs➪Windows Update and clicking
the Change Settings link on the left side of the Windows
Update window that appears. In the resulting dialog box (see
Figure 17-2), you find these settings:
➟
Install Updates Automatically: With this setting,
Windows Update starts at a time of day you specify, but
your computer must be on for it to work. If you’ve
turned off your computer, the automatic update will
start when you next turn on your computer, and it
might shut down your computer in the middle of your
work to complete the installation.
➟
Download Updates But Let Me Choose Whether to
Install Them: You can set up Windows Update to down-
load updates and have Windows notify you (through a
little pop-up message on your taskbar) when they’re
available, but you get to decide when the updates are
installed and when your computer reboots (turns off
and then on) to complete the installation. This is my
preferred setting because I have control and won’t be
caught unaware by a computer reboot.
➟
Check for Updates But Let Me Choose Whether
to Download and Install Them: With this setting,
you neither download nor install updates until you
say so, but Windows notifies you that new updates
are available.
➟
Never Check for Updates: You can stop Windows
from checking for updates and check for them
yourself, manually (see the following task). This
puts your computer at a bit more risk, but it’s use-
ful for you to know how to perform a manual
update if you discover a new update is available
that you need to proceed with a task (such as get-
ting updated drivers or a language pack).
Figure 20-2: The Windows Update dialog box
➟
214
Chapter 20: Protecting Windows

Run Windows Update
1.
No matter which Windows Update setting you choose
(see the preceding task), you can run a manual update
at any time. To do so, make sure you have an active
Internet connection, and then choose Start➪All
Programs➪Windows Update.
2.
In the resulting Windows Update window, click Check
for Updates. Windows thinks about this for a while, so
feel free to page through a magazine for a minute or two.
3.
In the resulting window, as shown in Figure 20-3, click
the View Available Updates link.
4.
In the following window, which shows the available
updates (see Figure 20-4), select the check boxes for the
updates you want to install. (It usually doesn’t hurt to
just accept all updates, if you have the time to download
them all.) Then click the Install button.
5.
A window appears, showing the progress of your instal-
lation. When the installation is complete, you might get
a message telling you that it’s a good idea to restart your
computer to complete the installation. Click the Restart
Now button.
If you set Windows Update to run automatically, be forewarned that
when it runs it might also automatically restart your computer to
finish the update installation sequence. Although it displays a pop-
up message warning that it’s about to do this, it’s easy to miss. Then
you might be startled to find that whatever you’re working on shuts
down and your computer restarts when you least expect it.
Figure 20-3: The View Available Updates link
Figure 20-4: Check the updates you want to install
➟
215
Run Windows Update

Enable the Windows Firewall
1.
A firewall is a program that protects your computer from
the outside world, preventing others from accessing
your computer and stopping the downloading of dan-
gerous programs such as viruses. With a firewall on, if
you try to access sites or download software, you’re
asked whether you want to allow such access. Be aware,
however, that you must turn on your firewall before you
connect to the Internet for it to be effective. To turn on
your firewall, choose Start➪Control Panel➪Check This
Computer’s Security Status.
2.
In the Windows Security Center window that appears
(see Figure 20-5), verify that the Windows Firewall is
marked as On. If it isn’t, click the Windows Firewall link
in the left pane of the window and then click the
Change Settings link in the resulting dialog box.
3.
In the resulting Windows Firewall Settings dialog box (see
Figure 20-6), select the On option and then click OK.
4.
Click the Close button to close Windows Security Center
and the Control Panel. Your firewall is now enabled and
should stay enabled unless you go in and change the
setting.
Antivirus and security software programs might offer their own fire-
wall protection and might display a message asking whether you
want to switch. Check their features against the Windows Firewall
features and then decide, but usually most firewall features are
comparable. The important thing is to have one activated.
Figure 20-5: The Windows Security Center window
Figure 20-6: The Windows Firewall Settings dialog box
➟
216
Chapter 20: Protecting Windows

Run a Windows Defender Scan
1.
If you use Windows Defender to detect spyware, you
must run a scan of your computer system on a regular
basis, which searches your computer for any problem
files. You can run scans by setting up an automatic scan
or by manually running a scan at any time. To make
these settings choose Start➪All Programs➪Windows
Defender.
2.
In the resulting Windows Defender window, click the
down-pointing arrow on the Scan button (see Figure
20-7). 
• Quick Scan: This runs a scan of the likeliest spots on
your computer where spyware might lurk. 
• Full Scan: This scan checks every single file and
folder on your computer and gives any currently run-
ning programs the once-over. However, be aware that
during a Full Scan your computer might run a little
more slowly.
• Custom Scan: This scan allows you to customize
where to scan. This is helpful if you suspect that a
particular drive or folder is harboring a problem.
3.
If you choose Quick Scan or Full Scan, the scan begins
immediately. If you choose Custom Scan, you can click
the Select button in the Select Scan Options dialog box
that appears (see Figure 20-8). Then, in the Select Drives
and Folders to Scan dialog box, select drives, files, and
folders to scan. Click OK. Back in the Select Scan
Options dialog box, click Scan Now.
4.
When a scan is complete, a dialog box appears, listing
any instances of spyware that were found and deleted or
informing you that no spyware was found. Click the
Close button to close the Windows Defender window.
.
Figure 20-7: The Windows Defender window
Figure 20-8: The Select Scan Options dialog box
➟
217
Run a Windows Defender Scan

Set Up Windows Defender 
to Run Automatically
1.
If you prefer to have Windows Defender run on its own
so you never miss a scan (a good idea, by the way), you
can set it up to do so. Choose Start➪All Programs➪
Windows Defender.
2.
In the resulting Windows Defender window, choose
Tools➪Options. In the Options dialog box that appears
(see Figure 20-9), select the Automatically Scan My
Computer check box if it’s not already selected and then
choose the frequency, time of day, and type of scan
from the drop-down lists.
3.
To ensure that your scan uses the latest definitions for
malware (a kind of spyware with malicious intent),
select the Check for Updated Definitions before
Scanning check box.
4.
Scroll down to the bottom of the Options dialog box
(see Figure 20-10) and make sure that the Use Windows
Defender check box is enabled (selected) to activate the
program.
5.
Click Save to save your settings.
If you want to exclude certain files or locations from the regular
scans, you can use the Advanced Options in the Windows Defender
dialog box. Click the Add button and browse for the location or file
you want to exclude.
Figure 20-9: The Options dialog box
Figure 20-10: The Windows Defender check box selected
➟
218
Chapter 20: Protecting Windows

Require Logon to Close Screen Saver
1.
Choose Start➪Control Panel; click the Appearance and
Personalization link (see Figure 20-11), and click
Change Screen Saver.
2.
In the resulting Screen Saver Settings dialog box (see
Figure 20-12), select the On Resume, Display Logon
Screen checkbox.
3.
Click OK to save the new setting and close the dialog box.
You can change settings for your screen saver by clicking the
Settings button in the Screen Saver Settings dialog box. In the
resulting dialog box, you can modify the style of the screen saver
objects, the color scheme, and the size and resolution of the image.
If you don’t have a Windows Vista password set and you activate
the Display Logon Screen feature nobody can turn off the screen
saver without the password. But keep in mind, logon only requires
a password only if one is set up for Windows Vista. Otherwise, you
simply click your user name at the logon screen and disable the
screen saver.
Figure 20-11: The Appearance and Personalization dialog box
Figure 20-12: The Screen Saver Settings dialog box
➟
219
Require Logon to Close Screen Saver

Enable Shared Folders
1.
You can allow other people on your network to view
shared folders and files; first you have to enable this fea-
ture. Choose Start➪Network (see Figure 20-13) and
click the Network and Sharing Center.
2.
Click the arrow to the right of the Public Folder Sharing
option in the Sharing and Discovery area of this dialog
box (see Figure 20-14).
3.
Click the radio button labeled Turn On Sharing So
Anyone With Network Access Can Open Files.
4.
Click Apply, and then click the Close button to close the
dialog box.
To find out more about using Windows Explorer to locate and work
with files, see Chapter 8.
You can right-click a file or folder, choose Share, and then click the
Share button in the resulting dialog box to share it with others on
the network. Only shared folders and files will be available to oth-
ers once you have made the settings in this task.
Figure 20-13: The Network and Sharing dialog box
Figure 20-14: The File Sharing settings
➟
220
Chapter 20: Protecting Windows

Set Up Trusted and Restricted 
Web Sites
1.
Choose Start➪Control Panel➪Security.
2.
In the resulting Security dialog box, click the Internet
Options link.
3.
In the resulting Internet Options dialog box, click the
Security tab (see Figure 20-15) and then click the Trust
Sites icon.
4.
Click the Sites button; in the resulting Trusted Sites dia-
log box (see Figure 20-16) enter a URL for a trusted Web
site in the Add This Web Site to the Zone text box.
5.
Click Add to add the site to the list of Web sites.
6.
Repeat Steps 5–6 to add more trusted sites. Note that if
you choose Restricted Sites in Step 4, you use a similar
procedure to add sites you do not trust.
7.
When you’re done, click OK twice to close the dialog
boxes.
Note that if the Require Server Verification (https:) for All Sites In
This Zone check box is selected in the Trusted Sites dialog box, any
Trusted site you add must use the https prefix, which indicates
that the site has a secure connection.
You can establish a Privacy setting on the Privacy tab of the Internet
Options dialog box to control which sites are allowed to download
cookies to your computer. Cookies, tiny files that are used to track
your online activity, recognize you when you return to a source site.
Trusted sites are the ones that you allow to download cookies to your
computer even though the privacy setting you have made might not
allow any other sites to do so. Restricted sites can never download
cookies to your computer, no matter what your privacy setting is.
Figure 20-15: The Internet Options dialog box, Security tab
Figure 20-16: The Trusted Sites dialog box
➟
221
Set Up Trusted and Restricted Web Sites

➟
222
Chapter 20: Protecting Windows

➟
Index
➟
Index
• A •
access keys, 45
access point, 120–121
accessibility features
keyboard, 44–45
mouse, 47
on-screen keyboard, 46
screen visibility, 48–49
speech recognition, 50–51
visual cues, 52
Windows recommended settings, 53
Add a Favorite dialog box, 170
Add Gadgets dialog box, 110
Add or Remove Effects dialog box, 126
Add Printer Wizard, 144–145
address bar, 163
Address Book, 193
Adjust Color (Photo Gallery), 130
Adjust Exposure (Photo Gallery), 129
Administrative Tool window, 29
Administrator account, 59
Advanced Appearance dialog box, 85
Advanced Monitor Settings dialog box, 32
adware, 212
All Programs, 18
Amazon.com, 168
antiadware, 213
antispyware, 213
antistatic wristband, 34
antivirus, 213
Appearance Settings dialog box, 85
Attach File to Message button, 189
audio
balance slider, 136
muting, 136
replacing with visual cues, 52
volume slider, 136
Auto Adjust (Photo Gallery), 129
AVG Free (antivirus), 217
• B •
background, 82–83
Backup and Restore Center window, 209–210
backups, 101
Balance dialog box, 135
Balance slider, 136
blind carbon copy (BCC) field (e-mail), 190
Blogger.com, 201

blogs, 202
Bluetooth, 11
Browse Help icon, 74
browser
address bar, 163
browsing history, 169
customizing, 174
home page, 166
pop-up blocker, 164
privacy settings, 172
search engine, 167
tabs, 165
burning to CD or DVD, 131
• C •
Calendar gadget, 61
calibrating game controller, 41
camera, uploading photos from, 127
Cat 5 cable, 116
Cc field (e-mail), 190
CD/DVD drive
desktop shortcut, 28
opening, 23
overview, 13
CDs
backing up to, 101
burning photos to, 131
inserting/ejecting, 23
overview, 13
writable, 102
chain mail, 190
Change Time Zone button, 61
Change Your Picture window, 60
chassis, opening, 26
chat, 201
chat rooms, 201
Choose a Connection Option window, 120
Clock gadget, 61
color scheme, 85
Colors setting, 80
communications, online. See online
communications
compressed files/folders, 99
computer. See also accessibility features; computer
maintenance; computer security
connectors, 16
data storage, 13
desktop, 10
display, 31–36
hard drive, 8
input devices, 37–41
laptop, 10
memory, 25–27
microprocessors, 14
monitor, 12
operating system, 9
tablet PC, 10
turning off, 20
turning on, 17
computer maintenance
defragmenting hard drive, 206
disk space, freeing up, 207
firewall, 216
overview, 205
restoring Windows System, 209
➟
224
PCs Just the Steps For Dummies, 2nd Edition

System Restore Point, creating, 209
troubleshooter tools, 208
Computer Management window, 29, 30
Computer Name Changes dialog box, 119
Computer Name tab, 117
computer security
adware, 212
antiadware, 213
antispyware, 213
antivirus, 213
firewall, 216
overview, 211–212
screen saver settings, 219
shared folders, enabling, 220
spyware, 212
virus, 212
Windows Defender, 217–218
Windows Update, 214–215
Connect to a Network window, 117, 161
Connect to the Internet dialog box, 160
connectors, 16
Contacts Properties dialog box, 113
Content Advisor, 175–176
Control Panel, 86
cookies, 221
copying files or folders, 97
Core2 Duo processor, 14
Create a Restore Point dialog box, 209
Create New Account window, 59
Create Your Password dialog box, 58
cropping picture, 130
Custom DPI dialog box, 36
Customize Start Menu dialog box, 73
• D •
data storage, 13
date, setting, 57, 61
Date and Time dialog box, 61
Date and Time Settings dialog box, 61
default printer, 149
defragmenting, 206
deleting files/folders, 100
desktop
background, 82–83
color scheme, 85
Control Panel, 86
creating shortcuts, 68
customizing, 79
Help and Support window, 74
icons, 67
overview, 19, 65
Quick Launch bar, 66
Recycle Bin, 69
Remote Assistance, 76–77
resizing window, 72
screen saver, 84
Search Help, 75
shortcuts, 28
Sidebar, 70–71
Start menu, 73
theme, 81
desktop computer, 10
digital camera, uploading photos from, 127
DIMM (Dual Inline Memory Modules), 26
Disc pane, 131
➟
225
Index

discussion boards, 200
Disk Cleanup, 207
Disk Defragmenter window, 206
Disk Management window, 29
display
customizing, 31
DPI setting, 36
enabling monitor, 32
installing new graphics card, 34
maximum visibility, 48–49
refresh rate, 35
screen resolution, 80
updating monitor driver, 33
Display Logon Screen feature, 219
Display Properties dialog box, 80
Display Settings dialog box, 35
documents, creating and formatting, 111
dots per inch (DPI), 36
downloading, 136, 172
DPI Setting dialog box, 36
driver, monitor, 33
Dual Inline Memory Modules (DIMM), 26
DVD drive
desktop shortcut, 28
opening, 23
overview, 13
DVDs
backing up to, 101
burning photos to, 131
inserting/ejecting, 23
overview, 13
writable, 102
• E •
Ease of Access Center, 46
Ease of Access window, 44
e-mail
attachments, 187, 189
bold text, 185
contacts, adding to Address Book, 193
creating, 183–184
folders, 191–192
fonts, 185
formatting message, 185
forwarding, 190
groups, sending to, 196
italic text, 185
managing accounts, 182
overview, 179
paragraph indentation, 185
paragraph style, 185
reading, 187
recipients, 196
replying to message, 188
rules, 195
sending, 184
signature, 194
stationery, adding, 186
text alignment, 185
underlined text, 185
Windows Mail, setting up account on, 180–181
Ethernet connector, 115–116
Explorer bar, 174
external hard drive, 13
➟
226
PCs Just the Steps For Dummies, 2nd Edition

• F •
Favorites list
adding file or folder to, 96
adding web sites to, 170
organizing, 171
fax machines
image quality, 155
overview, 143
paper orientation, 155
paper size, 155
sending fax, 156
setting up, 155
Fax Printing Preferences dialog box, 155
File Download dialog box, 172
File Sharing settings, 220
files
adding to Favorites list, 96
backing up, 101
compressing, 99
copying, 97
deleting, 100
finding and opening, 90
moving, 98
overview, 89
printing, 147
recently used, 92
renaming, 94
searching for, 95
sharing, 220
viewing, 23, 91
firewall, 213, 216
Fix Red Eye tool (Photo Gallery), 130
flash drives
desktop shortcut, 28
inserting and removing, 24
overview, 13
folders
adding to Favorites list, 96
compressing, 99
copying, 97
creating, 93
deleting, 100
e-mail, 191–192
finding and opening, 90
moving, 98
naming, 93
overview, 89
renaming, 94
sharing, 220
viewing options, 91
fonts, 111, 185
forwarding e-mail, 190
Found New Hardware Wizard, 152
Free-Form Select tool (Paint), 112
• G •
gadgets, 71, 110
game controller, 37, 41
Google toolbar, 174
graphics card, installing, 34
➟
227
Index

• H •
hard drives
capacities, 8, 25
data storage, 8
defragmenting, 206
external, 13
freeing up disk space, 207
initializing, 29
overview, 8
partitioning, 29
read/write heads, 8
sectors, 8
Help and Support window, 74
History pane, 169, 174
home page (browser), setting up, 166
hotspots, 11
Hover typing mode, 46
hub, 115–116
• I •
icons
arranging, 67
files, 91
folders, 91
shortcut, 68
IMAP, 181
Import Media Items dialog box, 125
Initialize Disk dialog box, 29
input devices, 37–41. See also keyboard; mouse
installing
graphics card, 34
printer, 144–145
program, 104
scanner, 152–153
instant messaging, 198
Intel, 14
Internet. See also browser; networks; online
communications
disconnecting from, 161
downloading files, 172
navigating, 163–164
repairing connection, 162
search engines, 167
setting up connection, 160
trusted Web sites, 221
Internet Accounts dialog box, 180
Internet Connection wizard, 180
Internet E-mail Address window, 181
Internet Explorer
address bar, 163
browser, 163–164
browsing history, 169
Content Advisor, 175–176
customizing, 174
Explorer bar, 174
finding content on Web page, 168
History pane, 169, 174
home page, 166
pop-up blocker, 164
privacy settings, 173
restricted Web sites, 221
search engine, 167
tabs, 165
text size, 174
toolbars, 174
Internet Mail Logon window, 181
➟
228
PCs Just the Steps For Dummies, 2nd Edition

Internet Options dialog box, 221
Internet radio, 141
Internet Service Provider (ISP), 160
• K •
keyboard
functions, 37
making easier to use, 44–45
on-screen, 46
overview, 37
port, 16
setting up, 40
shortcuts, 45
sticky keys, 44
Keyboard Properties dialog box, 40
• L •
laptop, 10
LCD (liquid crystal display), 12
Local Disk (C:) Properties dialog box, 25
Look-Both-Ways.com, 202
• M •
Magnifier window, 49
Mail Attachment dialog box, 187
maintenance. See computer maintenance
Make the Keyboard Easier to Use window, 45
Make the Mouse Easier to Use window, 47
malware, 187, 212
Manage Accounts window, 59–60
Master Volume dialog box, 136
maximizing windows, 72
McAfee Antivirus, 217
Media Player, 124, 139
memory
adding, 26–27
checking, 25
modules, 26–27
slot, 27
mice. See mouse
microphone, 142
microprocessors, 14
Microsoft Plus!, 126
Monitor Properties dialog box, 32–33, 35
monitors. See also display
disabling, 32
displays, 12
enabling, 32
plug-and-play, 32
refresh rate, 35
sizes, 12
updating driver, 33
mouse
controlling by keyboard commands, 44
custom settings, 39
functions, 37
making easier to use, 47
overview, 37
port, 16
Mouse Properties dialog box, 39
Movie Maker, 125
movies
adding video effects to, 126
playing, 124
moving files or folder, 98
➟
229
Index

music
downloading, 138
online radio, 141
playing, 139
playlist, 140
Mute button, 136
My Current Theme, 81
• N •
netbooks, 13
Network and Internet window, 161
Network and Sharing Center window, 116, 160, 220
Network Diagnostics window, 162
Network Setup Wizard, 116
networks
changing computer’s network name, 118
connecting to, 117
hub, 115–116
overview, 115
security-enabled, 117
switch, 115–116
unsecured, 117
wired Ethernet, 116
wireless, 120–121
workgroup, 119
New Mail Rule dialog box, 195
New Partition Wizard, 30
Norton Internet Security, 217
notebook computer, 10
• O •
objects, drawing, 112
online communications
blogs, 201
chat, 201
discussion boards, 200
instant messaging, 198
VoIP phone call, 199
online radio, 141
on-screen keyboard, 46
Open With command, 92
Opera browser, 165
operating systems, 9
Organize Favorites dialog box, 171
Output Properties dialog box, 134
• P •
Paint, 112
parallel port, 16
password, 58
PC chassis, 26–27
Personalization window, 80
Photo Gallery, 128–130
photos
actual size, 128
auto adjust, 129
burning to CD or DVD, 131
color, adjusting, 130
cropping, 130
deleting, 128
as desktop background, 82–83
display size, 128
editing, 112
exposure, adjusting, 129
fixing, 129
➟
230
PCs Just the Steps For Dummies, 2nd Edition

red eye, fixing, 130
rotating clockwise/counterclockwise, 128
selecting areas, 112
text, adding to, 112
uploading from digital camera, 127
viewing, 128
playlist, 140
Plug and Play devices, 144, 152
POP3, 181
pop-up blocker, 164
ports, 16
Power Button icon, 18
Print dialog box, 147, 177
printer
currently installed, 148
default, 149
installing, 144–145
naming, 145
overview, 143
port, 16
removing, 150
renaming, 151
setting preferences, 146
printing
all pages in document, 147
from camera, 127
current page, 147
page range, 147
selected text or objects, 147
Web page, 177
Printing Preference dialog box, 146
Privacy tab, 172, 221
processors, 14
program
adding to Quick Launch, 66
closing, 108
installing, 104
starting, 106
switching between, 107
uninstalling, 105
• Q •
Quad Core chip, 14
Quick Launch bar, 19, 66, 106
• R •
read/write heads, 8
Recent Items list, 18, 92
recently used files, 92
Recommended Settings dialog box, 53
recording sound, 142
Recycle Bin, 69
refresh rate, 35
Remote Assistance, 76–77
renaming files or folders, 94
repeat rate, 45
Replace Sounds with Visual Cues link, 52
Replay All button, 188
Reply button, 188
resolution, screen, 80
Resolution slider, 80
Restart command, 20
Restore Down button, 72
restricted Web sites, 221
router, 120–121
➟
231
Index

• S •
scanner
installing, 152–153
overview, 143
settings, 154
Scanners and Cameras dialog box, 154
screen
optimizing for maximum visibility, 48–49
resolution, 80
screen saver, 84, 219
Screen Saver Settings dialog box, 219
ScreenTip, 72
Search Automatically for Updated Driver Software
feature, 33
search engines, 167
Search Help, 75
search term, 167
sectors (hard drive), 8
security. See computer security
security-enabled network, 117
Select Recipients dialog box, 196
Select Stationery dialog box, 186
Select tool (Paint), 112
Send To command, 68
Set-up E-Mail Servers window, 181
setup.exe file, 104
shared folders, 220
shortcuts, 45, 68
Shut Down command, 20
Sidebar
adding gadgets to, 110
setting up, 70–71, 109
signature, 194
Skype, 201
Sleep option, 20
software. See program
sound card, setting up, 134
Sound dialog box, 134–135, 137
sound file
downloading, 138
playing, 139
playlist, 140
Sound Recorder window, 142
sound scheme, 137
Sound Troubleshooter, 134
sounds
balance slider, 136
muting, 136
recording, 142
replacing with visual cues, 52
volume slider, 136
Speaker Properties dialog box, 135
speakers, setting up, 134
speech recognition, setting up, 50–51
Spelling dialog box, 184
spyware, 212
Spyware Doctor, 213
Standard User account, 59
Start menu, 18, 73
Start Search field, 95
static discharge, 34
sticky keys, 44
storage. See also hard drives
CDs, 13, 101–102, 131
desktop shortcut, 28
DVDs, 13, 101–102, 131
➟
232
PCs Just the Steps For Dummies, 2nd Edition

external hard drives, 13
flash drives, 13
stylus, 38
switches, 115–116
System Properties dialog box, 25, 209
System Protection tab, 209
system recovery disc, 209
System Restore, 209–210
• T •
tabbed browsing, 165
tablet PC, 10
text captions, displaying, 52
Text tool (Paint), 112
Theme Settings dialog box, 81
thin film transfer (TFT), 12
thumbnails, 91
time, setting, 57, 61
toggle keys, 45
touch screen, 38
tower, 15
Troubleshooting Tools window, 208
Trusted Sites dialog box, 221
trusted Web sites, 221
turning off, 20
turning on, 16
• U •
Uniform Resource Locators (URLs), 163
Uninstall or Change or Program window, 105
universal serial bus (USB) ports, 13, 16, 127. See also
flash drives
unsecured network, 117
Update Driver Software dialog box, 33
Use Text or Visual Alternatives for Sounds 
window, 52
user accounts
Administrator, 59
creating, 59
overview, 57
picture, 60
Standard User, 59
User Accounts and Family Safety dialog box, 58
• V •
video connector, 16
video files, playing back, 124
video sharing sites, 200
View Available Updates link, 215
viewing files, 23
virus, 212
visual cues, 52
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), 199
Volume Mixer dialog box, 136
Volume slider, 136
• W •
wallpapers, 82–83
Web logs, 202
Web page
finding content on, 168
navigating, 163–164
printing, 177
➟
233
Index

Web sites
adding to Favorites list, 170
address, 163
downloading files from, 172
home page, 166
navigating, 163–164
restricted, 221
search feature, 168
trusted, 221
visited, 169
window, resizing, 72
Windows Classic, 81, 86
Windows Contacts, 113
Windows Defender
custom scan, 217
full scan, 217
overview, 213
quick scan, 217
running automatically, 218
Windows Explorer
displaying, 18
finding and opening files with, 90
viewing files with, 23
Windows Firewall, 74, 216
Windows Live Messenger, 198
Windows Live Search, 167
Windows Mail, 180–181
Windows Media Player, 124, 139
Windows Movie Maker, 125
Windows Photo Gallery, 128
Windows Search, 73
Windows Security Center window, 216
Windows settings
date, 57, 61
overview, 57
password, 58
time, 57, 61
user accounts, 57, 59–60
Windows Update
options, 214
overview, 57
running, 63, 215
setting up to run automatically, 62
Windows Vista. See also desktop
customizing accessibility of, 43
logging on to, 17
Sidebar, 70–71, 109–110
Start menu, 18
WindowsMedia.com, 141
wired Ethernet network, 116
wireless connections, 11
wireless networks, 120–121
wireless router, 120–121
WordPad, 111
workgroup, joining, 119
writable CD/DVD, backing up to, 101
• Y •
YouTube, 200
• Z •
zipped files/folders, 99
➟
234
PCs Just the Steps For Dummies, 2nd Edition

What Do You Want to Do? 
Try This Task 
Find It Here
Set Up Your PC 
Turn On Your PC 
   17
 
Work with the Start Menu 
   18
 
View Files with Windows Explorer  
   22
 
Let Windows Suggest Accessibility Settings  
   53
Get to Know Windows 
Set Up a Password 
   58
 
Set the Date and Time 
   61
 
Create a Desktop Shortcut 
   68
Start to Work 
Find and Open a File 
   90
 
Choose a File or Folder View 
   91
 
Play Movies with Windows Media Player 
124
 
Control the System Volume 
136
Explore the Internet 
Set Up Your Internet Connection 
160
 
Navigate the Web 
163
 
Create and Send E-Mail 
183
 
Use Instant Messaging 
198
Maintain and Secure Your PC 
Troubleshoot Hardware Problems 
208
 
Create a System Restore Point  
209
 
Run Windows Update 
215
Hundreds of tasks including:

                   Easy steps to 
learning Vista, getting online, 
       and networking
Simple steps...
...for great results
Hardware/PCs
Concise, step-by-step instructions
“Get in, get out” information
Easy-to-recognize tasks and topics
Quick solutions to get it done
A dash of humor and fun
$16.99 US    
$19.99 CAN    
£12.99 UK
978-0-470-40692-2
Open the book 
and find:
•  Tips for picking the right 
computer
•  How to set up your computer 
•  Vista system tips
•  How to work with multimedia
•  Organizational secrets 
•  How to browse the Web and 
send e-mail
•  Security and maintenance 
advice
•  Ways to connect with others
View a Digital Image in Windows Photo Gallery
 1.  After you upload your photos to your computer, you 
can view them on-screen. To begin, choose Start➪All 
Programs➪Windows Photo Gallery.
 2.  In the resulting Windows Photo Gallery window, as 
shown in Figure 13-9, click any of the items in the 
Navigation pane on the left to choose which images 
to display (such as those taken in a certain year or 
saved in a certain folder).
The Undo feature in this window allows you to pick the 
action you want to undo, unlike many Undo features that 
force you to undo all the actions leading back to the action 
you want to undo.
    Go to 
dummies.com®
               for more!

