JANUARY 2018
INSIDE: AMAZON ECHO PLUS REVIEW
Qualcomm puts smartphone
brains into Windows PCs
LAPTOP 
REVOLUTION

Stand Up To Cancer is a division of the Entertainment Industry Foundation, a 501(c)(3) organization. 
American Airlines and the Flight Symbol logo are marks of American Airlines, Inc. © 2017 American Airlines, Inc. All rights reserved.
Offer valid on contributions made online at www.SU2C.org/americanairlines. Minimum $25 donation required. For charitable deduction purposes, each mile is valued at 3 cents per mile. The receipt of  
miles may reduce the tax deductibility of your donation. Mileage cap for a 12-month period is 600,000. Bonus miles do not count toward elite-status qualiﬁcation. Please allow up to eight weeks for the  
bonus miles to be posted to your account. Donations can only be accepted in U.S. dollars. Donations made in connection with AAdvantage® bonus miles program are not refundable.
Pictured:   Stand Up To Cancer Ambassador, Bradley Cooper 
along with American Airlines team members currently  
ﬁghting, surviving and co-surviving cancer.
Stand Up with us
Support Stand Up To Cancer today to help 
cancer patients become cancer survivors.
Give $25 or more to Stand Up To Cancer through the Miles To Stand Up program and 
you’ll receive 10 American Airlines AAdvantage® miles for every dollar donated.
Donate and earn at standuptocancer.org/americanairlines

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   3
CONTENTS
» DEPARTMENTS
ƶƼ Reviews & Ratings
ƴƴƸ Here’s How 
» FEATURES
ƴƶƷ Tech Spotlight
ƴƳƳ Build a Raspberry Pi retrogaming emulation console
ƻƼ Meet Radeon Software Adrenalin Edition
ƺ News
JANUARY 2018

4   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
MASTHEAD
EDITORIAL DIRECTOR Matt Egan
EDITOR IN CHIEF, CONSUMER BRANDS Jon Phillips
DESIGN DIRECTOR Robert Schultz
EDITORIAL
EXECUTIVE EDITORS Melissa Riofrio, Gordon Mah Ung
SENIOR EDITORS Michael Brown, Brad Chacos, Mark Hachman
COPY EDITOR Sue Voelkel
DESIGN
DESIGNER Rob Woodcock
ADVERTISING SALES
SALES MANAGER Duane Hampson  (415/978-3133) 
FOUNDERS
FOUNDER David Bunnell 
FOUNDING EDITOR Andrew Fluegelman
INTERNATIONAL DATA GROUP, INC.
CHAIRMAN OF THE BOARD Walter Boyd
CEO, IDG COMMUNICATIONS Michael Friedenberg

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   5
REPRINTS AND PERMISSIONS
You must have permission before reproducing any material from PCWorld. Send email requests to 
permissions@pcworld.com; please include a phone number in your message.
BACK ISSUES
PCWorld back issues can be downloaded in digital format from www.zinio.com  
at $6.99 per issue.
SUBSCRIPTION SERVICES
Access your subscription account online—24 hours a day, 7 days a week. You can use online 
subscription services to view your account status, change your address, pay your bill, renew your 
subscription, get the answers to frequently asked questions, and more.
WEB pcworld.com/customer
EMAIL pcworld@emailcustomerservice.com 
(Send your full name and the address at which you subscribe; do not send attachments.)
PHONE In the U.S. and Canada: 800/234-3498
QUESTIONS AND COLUMNS
Send material electronically to the appropriate online address listed below,  
or mail it to PCWorld. We reserve the right to edit letters. 
ANSWER LINE answer@pcworld.com
MAILING LISTS
Occasionally we make our magazine subscribers’ names available to other ﬁrms whose  
products may interest you. To have your name excluded from these mailings, send a request  
and your email address to PCWorld Subscriber  Services at maghelp@pcworld.com.
CONTACT
PHONE 415/243-0500; FAX 415/442-1891
MAIL Editorial: 501 Second Street #600, San Francisco, CA 94107
STAFF ADDRESS To contact any PCWorld staﬀ member, simply format the address as follows: 
ﬁrstinitiallastname@idgcsmb.com
PUBLICATION INFORMATION
Volume 36, number 1 PCWorld™ (ISSN 0737-8939) is published monthly at $24.95 for one year (12 
issues) by IDG Consumer & SMB, Inc. Copyright 2018,  IDG Consumer & SMB, Inc. All rights reserved.  
PC World and Consumer Watch are registered trademarks of International Data Group, Inc., and used 
under license  by IDG Consumer & SMB, Inc. Published in the United States.

Stand Up To Cancer is a division of the Entertainment Industry Foundation (EIF), a 501(c)(3) charitable organization.
This Public Service Announcement was made possible by a charitable contribution from  
Jimmy Smits, SU2C Ambassador
Photo By: Timothy White
Your immune system may be the key to beating cancer.
lmmunotherapy, a new approach to cancer treatment, is bringing hope 
to cancer survivors everywhere. lmmunotherapy works by empowering 
your body’s own immune system to correctly identify and eradicate 
cancer cells. This approach has been used to effectively ﬁ ght many 
types of cancer, with new research leading to greater hope each day. 
Speak with your doctor and visit standuptocancer.org/immunotherapy 
to learn if immunotherapy may be right for you.
YOUR BODY
      YOUR HOPE

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   7
News
TECH NEWS AND TRENDS THAT WILL 
AFFECT YOU TODAY AND BEYOND.
Qualcomm invades Intel’s turf 
with Snapdragon PCs that push 
battery life over performance 
Qualcomm showed Snapdragon PCs from Asus and HP that promise two-day battery 
life and always-on connections. BY MARK HACHMAN  
ualcomm is invading Intel’s turf, 
announcing Windows PCs that 
use the same Snapdragon 
chips as your phone, with 
battery life that can last well into 
a second day of use. 
At its recent Snapdragon Technology 
Forum, Qualcomm showed off its 
Snapdragon 835 Mobile PC Platform on an 
HP Envy x2 tablet and an Asus NovaGo 
IMAGE: QUALCOMM
Q

8   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
QUALCOMM INVADES INTEL’S TURF
ultrabook. (A third PC, from Lenovo, will be 
announced at CES in Las Vegas.) Both run on 
the company’s Snapdragon 835—yes, the 
same processor (and cellular modem) 
inside popular phones like the Samsung 
Galaxy Note 8. Qualcomm uses its success 
with smartphones to justify its foray into PCs. 
You demand all-day performance from your 
phone, while it’s constantly connected to the 
Internet. Why shouldn’t your PC deliver the 
same?
Let’s clear up one concern right away: 
Qualcomm’s Windows PCs are running 
Windows 10, not the abandoned Windows RT 
variant that only ran Microsoft’s UWP apps. 
However, these PCs emulate non-UWP apps, 
slowing performance. Qualcomm hopes 
you’ll be willing to trade some speed for the 
promise that the Snapdragon Mobile PC 
platform will deliver 14 to 24 hours of 
constant use, interspersed with idle periods 
of “connected standby” time. 
What this will mean for you: At some point, 
the performance of your phone, tablet, or PC 
exceeds your demands—what we call “good-
enough” computing. Qualcomm’s betting 
we’re already there, at least for a chunk of 
potential users, and it’s focusing on basic 
productivity, always-on (cellular) connectivity, 
and battery life.
Many questions hang in the air: Is “good-
enough” computing good enough for you? 
How well does a Snapdragon PC perform on 
everyday apps that are emulated, such as 
Google Chrome? How close to reality are 
these battery life claims? Will customers want 
to pay for an additional cellular plan? If 
Qualcomm can deliver on its claims and 
offer (affordable) always-on WWAN 
connectivity, a little competition for Intel is 
always good news for consumers.
POWER, NOT 
PERFORMANCE
Keep in mind that chip makers like Intel—and, 
to a lesser extent, AMD—are interested in 
selling you chips that offer the highest 
performance possible for the lowest price. 
That’s not Qualcomm’s priority. 
“Most people working in these form 
factors are interested in the connectivity 
piece, and things like music, email, some 
productivity, shopping—it’s mostly an 
extension to a phone,” said Miguel Nunes, 
senior director of product management for 
Qualcomm. “We don’t see people using 
heavy workloads, like graphic design. If they 
Many questions hang in the  
air: Is “good-enough” 
computing good enough for 
you? How well does a 
Snapdragon PC perform on 
everyday apps that are 
emulated, such as Google 
Chrome? 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   9
The Asus NovaGo ultr
powered by a Qualcomm Snapdr
 
processor.
do, they shy away from these form factors.”
“I’ve been using one of these [Snapdragon-
powered] devices for several months,” Nunes 
added. “It’s replaced my Surface Pro device, 
and I go multiple days without charging.” 
Nunes was referring to a Snapdragon-
powered version of one of the devices, the HP 
Envy x2. PCWorld reviewed a similar tablet, the 
HP Elite x2 (go.pcworld.com/hpx2), which 
includes an Intel Core m chip inside. The Elite 
x2 delivered over seven hours of battery life 
under our tests, which included constant video 
rundown. Qualcomm claims that same tablet 
will deliver 20 hours of battery life with a 
Snapdragon inside of it.
Put another way, Qualcomm believes 
that a device with a 48 watt-hour battery—
basically the battery within the latest Microsoft 
Surface Pro—will last 21.2 hours when 
looping 1080p video. (For reference, the 
Surface Pro lasted about 8.5 hours 
before running out of battery in our tests.) 
Qualcomm also released a partial list of 
the specs of each machine, in part to reassure 
potential customers that they were getting a 
“true” PC, with support for the various 
peripherals and other components that 
make up a PC.
Asus NovaGo
Display: 13.3-inch, 1920x1080 LED-lit panel
CPU: Qualcomm Snapdragon 835 Mobile 
PC Platform
Memory: Up to 8GB
Storage: Up to 256GB UFS 2.0
Connectivity: Qualcomm X16 modem (4x4 
MIMO); 802.11ac (2x2 MIMO) 
Input: Stylus, two USB 3.1 Type-A ports
OS: Windows 10 S
Put another way, Qualcomm 
EHOLHYHVWKDWbDGHYLFHZLWKD 
ZDWWKRXUEDWWHU\ŜEDVLFDOO\
the battery within the latest 
0LFURVRIW6XUIDFH3URŜZLOO 
last 21.2 hours when looping 
1080p video.

10   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
QUALCOMM INVADES INTEL’S TURF
The HP Envy x2 will be  
one of the first to include a 
Qualcomm Snapdragon chip inside.
Dimensions: 12.4 x 8.7 x 0.59 inches, 3.06 
pounds
Price: $599 for 4GB RAM/64GB storage; 
$799 for 8GB RAM/256GB of storage
Ship date: Undisclosed
HP Envy x2
Display: 12.3-inch WUXGA+ (1920x1200) 
panel
CPU: Qualcomm Snapdragon 835 Mobile PC 
Platform
Memory: 8GB LPDDR4
Storage: Up to 256GB
Connectivity: Snapdragon X16 LTE modem
OS: Windows 10 S
Price: Undisclosed
Ship date: Undisclosed
Qualcomm executives declined to reveal 
details of the Lenovo Snapdragon device, 
which will be announced at CES in Las Vegas. 
Interestingly, both the HP Envy x2 and the 
Asus NovaGo use Windows 10 S. That’s 
important because in our tests, using 
Windows 10 Pro significantly reduced the 
battery life. Testing the Microsoft Surface 
Book running Windows 10 S yielded a 
whopping 765 minutes of battery life. 
“Upgrading” to Windows 10 Pro cut the 
battery life to 654 minutes, a decrease of 14.5 
percent. Qualcomm’s coming out strong, 
with a long list of PC partners. Terry Myerson, 
the corporate vice president in charge of 
Microsoft’s operating systems division, 
revealed that hundreds of Qualcomm-
powered devices had been in use on the 
Microsoft campus for months, a fact 
confirmed by other Microsoft attendees.
Myerson also said on stage that he didn’t 
plug in his device in a week of use, although it 
was unknown how he used it. 
SNAPDRAGON PCS 
WILL BE SLOWER, 
BUT DOES IT MATTER?
To its credit, Qualcomm admits that the 
performance of a Snapdragon PC will be 
slower than what you get from its Intel- or 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   11
AMD-based competition. In part, that’s 
because the Snapdragon chips aren’t 
designed to process the code natively. 
Instead, the Snapdragon 835 passes the 
code through some intermediary steps, 
including an abstraction layer and emulator. 
This was a step that 
Windows RT 
devices, and the 
ARM chips they ran 
on, left out. 
Fortunately, that 
emulated code is 
then cached, so if 
it’s re-run the 
performance will 
be at or near native.
As a result, 
Windows UWP 
apps (Mail, 
Calendar, Edge, plus native Skype apps like 
Twitter, Spotify, and the like) will always run at 
the chip’s maximum performance. A whole 
host of traditional .EXE apps, including most 
games, browsers like Chrome and Firefox, 
and synthetic benchmarks, simply won’t 
run as fast. 
There are 
also a few 
additional 
wrinkles that 
emerged after 
the Windows-
on-Snapdragon 
announcement. 
For one thing, 
64-bit apps 
aren’t sup-
ported at all, at 
least not yet. 
Qualcomm breaks down the estimated battery life of its Qualcomm Snapdragon 
835 PCs here...
...and here, with a more detailed breakdown of the Qualcomm Snapdragon 
835’s power consumption.

12   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
QUALCOMM INVADES INTEL’S TURF
“We are working on an ARM64 SDK that will 
enable developers to author applications for 
ARM64 and we’ll have more news to share in 
the future,” a Microsoft spokeswoman said in 
an email.
Second, the emulation technology 
doesn’t support applications that require 
kernel-mode drivers, such as some 
antivirus applications. That will leave 
Snapdragon PC users largely dependent 
on the Windows Defender antivirus 
software built into Windows 10. 
Finally, Microsoft executives at the 
Snapdragon Summit acknowledged that 
apps with high CPU usage would suffer a 
greater performance penalty, so that gaming 
really won’t be a focus of these devices. 
Naturally, Qualcomm is downplaying 
any impact. Any application is dependent 
upon a combination of CPU, GPU, 
memory, and storage, Nunes said. “You will 
see a few differences here and there…but 
it’s nothing that’s going to impact the 
user experience.”
“You may see something launch in 1 
second, on the other platform it launches 
on 1.4 seconds,” Nunes explained. “That’s 
40 percent slower, but really, that doesn’t 
matter.”
Nunes instead emphasized the power 
efficiency of the Snapdragon 835 Mobile PC 
Platform. “It’s better to address the battery 
These are the “performance” metrics Qualcomm wants you to think about when considering 
Snapdragon 835 Mobile PCs.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   13
life, as that’s what most people care about.”
When asked to define the performance 
penalty that emulation would cost, Nunes 
again demurred. “Really, it depends on the 
app,” he said.
Fortunately, it seems like some of  
these concerns may be overblown. Pat 
Moorhead, a former AMD employee and 
now an independent analyst, told PCWorld 
that he had used a Qualcomm-powered 
product for several days and that Chrome 
performed acceptably—“better than I 
expected,” he said. 
Qualcomm feels it can make up some of 
that gap as more powerful CPUs throttle 
themselves, reducing the clock speed under 
load to control heat output. But executives 
admit you’ll notice differences between 
native and emulated apps. In part, that’s due 
to a design quirk in the ARM architecture that 
underlies the Snapdragon chip: ARM uses a 
combination of “big,” powerful cores 
together with more power-efficient “little” 
cores. It’s these little cores that help provide 
the long battery life, but can’t quite keep up 
when under load.
SNAPDRAGON PCS WILL 
TEST OUR TASTE FOR 
‘GOOD-ENOUGH’
For the average user, the Snapdragon 835 
Mobile PC Platform’s strengths and 
weaknesses play into how the PCs will be 
marketed. When Asus and HP ship the new 
Qualcomm-powered devices, the companies 
will emphasize “user experience” metrics like 
how fast apps will open, rather than synthetic 
benchmarks like Cinebench or PCMark. 
Also, the apps you use will matter. “You 
can run Chrome on it. Edge is significantly 
more optimized, but Chrome will work,” 
Nunes said.
If Qualcomm’s Snapdragon 835 Platform 
Mobile PCs are to take off, consumers are 
going to have to accept PCs “good-
enough” performance in exchange for two 
days or so of battery life and pervasive 
WWAN connectivity. So far, we’ve had two 
architectures try that argument on for size: 
Intel’s Core m and Atom chips. Intel’s Core 
m arguably succeeded. The Atom did not, 
offering a sluggish computing experience 
often compounded by anemic storage 
and memory. 
For years, however, consumers have 
pleaded with smartphone makers to increase 
the battery life. Now Qualcomm has the 
opportunity to help PC makers do the same. 
Will they succeed? As soon as we can get 
devices in our hands, we’ll tell you. 
For the average user, the 
Snapdragon 835 Mobile PC 
Platform’s strengths and 
weaknesses play into how the 
PCs will be marketed. 

14   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
4XDOFRPPŞV6QDSGUDJRQƻƷƸ
will bring speed, security and 
smarts to high-end phones 
Android phones using Snapdragon 845 will ship next year,  
Qualcomm said. BY MARK HACHMAN
I
n early December, Qualcomm 
revealed its first concrete details of the 
Snapdragon 845, the next-generation 
mobile chip that stands a good chance 
of being in your next smartphone. The 845 
will ship in early 2018, and appear in phones 
sometime after that.
Qualcomm calls the Snapdragon 845 a 
chip to improve both artificial intelligence and 
immersion, blending the future of smart 
devices with the past. At its heart lies the Kryo 
385, the semi-custom, upgraded CPU. It’s still 
an eight-core device, with four performance 
cores running at 2.8GHz and four energy-
efficient cores running at 1.8GHz. That 
represents a 25- to 30-percent improvement 
IMAGE: QUALCOMM

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   15
on the existing Snapdragon 
835 in the performance 
cores, and a 15-percent 
improvement in the smaller, 
energy-efficient cores. 
Phones that use the new 
Snapdragon 845 will be 
able to loop more than 20 
hours of continuous HD 
video before expiring, 
executives said. Those 
phones will also be able to 
capture four hours of 
continuous video playback, or play VR games 
for over three hours. Talk time, using what 
Qualcomm calls Ultra HD Voice, will last over 
two days, the company said.
Qualcomm believes in “heterogeneous” 
computing, a fancy name for designing 
specific parts of the chip for specific tasks. 
With the Snapdragon 845, Qualcomm has 
focused on five different areas: “immersion,” 
AI, security, connectivity, and performance. 
IMMERSION: CAMERAS 
WITH BETTER BRAINS
Immersion is seamlessly capturing the world 
around you, said Tim Leland, vice president of 
product management for Qualcomm. The 
845 improves in two different areas: 
capturing the world around you, and 
improving on those experiences.
The key to Qualcomm-powered cameras 
is the Spectre 280, the image signal 
processor that’s designed to deliver best-in 
class image quality even when there’s a lot of 
movement or not a lot of light. Previous 
Snapdragons—the Snapdragon 820, for 
example—focused on 4K playback at 60 
frames per second. The key feature for the 
Snapdragon 845 is to capture Ultra HD 
Premium content at 60 fps—that’s the 4K 
standard that includes 10-bit color depths as 
well as Rec. 2020 color space representation. 
According to Leland, your smartphone videos 
will look more lifelike than ever before.
Qualcomm also believes that 
845-powered smartphones can break the 100 
mark in DXomark, generally considered the 
standard for image quality in smartphones.
Camera phone resolutions have settled 
into the 12- to 16-megapixel range, so chip 
makers like Qualcomm are moving to other 
aspects, such as color quality. (The 
Shapdragon 845 supports up to 32MP 
While speeds and feeds may not be as important in the mobile space, 
the Kryo core inside the Snapdragon 845 still matters.

16   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
QUALCOMM SNAPDRAGON 845
cameras with no shutter lag, at 30 fps, 
executives said.)
Color volume will increase, including 
color depths, which will help reduce 
banding in skies and other backgrounds. The 
Spectre 280 will improve the color gamut—
the range of colors that the image signal 
processor can support. The Snapdragon 845 
will be able to encode to the Rec. 2020 color 
gamut, offering significantly higher color 
quality than the existing Rec. 720 color 
gamut. The Spectre 280 will also support 
the Rec. 2020 range in luminance, improving 
the quality of HDR shots.
“We think consumers will be amazed at 
just how high the quality of video is with 
the Snapdragon 845,” Leland said.
One of its coolest features is a twist on 
computational photography—what 
Qualcomm calls a “real-time cinemagraph.” 
With this feature, you’ll be able to record a 
scene as video, then composite it over the 
same scene, recorded as a photo. The end 
result will be that part of a scene will be 
recorded as a video, such as a fish swimming 
in a fishtank. The remainder of the scene will 
appear as a photo. It’s an effect you’ll need to 
see to believe. 
Other features that the Spectre 280 core 
will support include image compositing and 
slo-mo video at 720p HDR10, and at 480 
fps. Motion-compensation temporal filtering 
Cameras powered by the Qualcomm Snapdragon chips have steadily improved. With the Snapdragon 
845, Qualcomm is supporting higher-quality images.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   17
and accelerated image stabilization will use 
video from adjacent video frames to 
improve the quality.
The Spectre 280 will also include features 
designed for machine vision, such as depth 
sensing. Computer vision will be used to 
apply bokeh filters, as well as to analyze faces.
XR is Qualcomm’s umbrella term for the 
combination of augmented and virtual reality. 
XR has been improving every generation, 
Leland said. For example, the Snapdragon 
835 introduced six degrees of freedom, as 
well as 1.5K x 1.5K at 60-fps resolution. With 
the 845, Qualcomm is adding room-scale, 
six-degrees-of-freedom SLAM (simultaneous 
localization and mapping). Snapdragon 
845-powered devices will track your hands, 
too, working with accessory makers to 
make sure their products are tuned for the 
Snapdragon 845 chip.
Another key part 
of the Snapdragon 
845 is the Adreno 
630 graphics core, 
used for gaming 
and applications like 
XR. The Adreno 
630 will boast 30 
percent faster 
graphics, and 30 
percent better 
battery efficiency, 
Leland said. The 
Adreno 630 will also 
be smarter, using features like foveated 
rendering to detect what you’re looking at, 
applying the highest-resolution details to 
where your attention is focused. Otherwise, it 
dials down the detail. Multiview rendering, 
another new feature, plays into this: A 
scene is rendered once for one eye, then 
automatically offset for the other eye. 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE: 
SNAPDRAGON 845 
POWERS NEW DIGITAL 
ASSISTANTS
The Snapdragon 845 was designed to 
address a shift in AI, according to Gary 
Brodman, director of product management at 
Qualcomm. Consumers aren’t willing to wait 
for data to be transferred to the cloud, acted 
upon, then sent back down to the device. 
Instead, they want the smarts right within the 
The Qualcomm Snapdragon 845 also includes mixed-reality or XR capabilities.

18   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
QUALCOMM SNAPDRAGON 845
device itself.
Qualcomm calls the 845 its third-
generation mobile AI platform. Additions 
such as core optimizations make on-device 
machine learning more efficient and powerful, 
Brodman explained, such as working with 
other cores on the device to help them 
recognize objects. In general, the 845 is 10 
percent more energy-efficient and offers 10 
percent more performance, Broadman said. 
Neural-network performance has improved 
by a factor of three times over the 
Snapdragon 835.
Broadman outlined a few ways AI will 
benefit consumers: applying visual themes 
(think Van Gogh’s Starry Night) to video as it’s 
being shot, for instance, or using a “deep 
portrait” feature to apply bokeh with just a 
single camera lens. And, of course, there’s 
Face ID, a way to unlock your phone when it 
recognizes you. 
SECURITY: ADDING A 
DIGITAL VAULT TO 
SNAPDRAGON 845
With the Snapdragon 845, Qualcomm built 
what it calls a “secure vault” right in the heart 
of the platform, according to Sy Choudhury, 
the senior director of product management 
for Qualcomm. Trusted computing 
environments are being hacked, and state-
sponsored agencies are in play. “Even 
though we felt we had a high level of 
security, we felt we needed to raise the bar,” 
Choudhury said.
The Secure Processing Unit is its 
own separate, isolated core, with its own 
CPU, crypto engine, and memory, as 
well as its own 
random number 
generator and 
even a power 
supply. Within 
the Snapdragon 
845, all of the 
authentication 
takes place 
within the Secure 
Processing Unit, 
and all of the 
biometric 
information is 
stored there.
Some of the detail Qualcomm offered on its new security vault. Naturally, it wasn’t 
willing to reveal too many details to educate the bad guys.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   19
“The reality is that when you’re saving 
your files, those files are encrypted with a 
digital key—within Android Oreo and 
Windows 10, each file is encrypted with a 
unique key. That’s really good security,” 
Choudhury said.
With this new security model, what were 
previously discrete components on a board 
can now be integrated within the processor, 
Choudhury said.
CONNECTIVITY: FASTER 
DATA MAKES THE 
SNAPDRAGON 845 A 
BETTER CHIP
Qualcomm’s wireless business is eager to 
push the world toward 5G connectivity, and 
the new Snapdragon X20 modem is the 
company’s second gigabit modem. It’s 20 
percent faster on average than the previous 
X16 modem, with 1.2Gbps sustained 
speeds. It’s aided by 5X carrier 
aggregation, receiving up to 5 separate 
radio channels on your device with four 
separate antennas (4x4 MIMO).
Anecdotally, Qualcomm calls this 
“wireless fiber,” according to Peter Carson, 
senior director of product marketing. The x20 
also supports dual-SIM and dual voice-over-
LTE technologies on both SIMs, giving more 
robust voice quality on either SIM. (Dual-SIM 
devices are normally sold in regions where 
users travel frequently from country to 
country, like Europe.)
Increased connectivity is a key part of the Snapdragon 845 and the new X20 modem. 

20   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
QUALCOMM SNAPDRAGON 845
The 845 includes multi-gigabit Wi-Fi, with 
802.11ad baseband that can switch among 
separate modules within a phone to give you 
better reception. The 845 also boasts a set of 
Wi-Fi protocol enhancements—fast initial 
setup—that will improve the Wi-Fi setup time 
by 16 times, adding 30 percent more 
effective capacity. All that means, Carson said, 
is that you’ll be able to go to a conference or 
an airport and have a better chance of 
connecting to congested Wi-Fi networks than 
before.
Advanced Bluetooth TrueWireless is 
Qualcomm’s name for broadcasting 
HD-quality music to several headsets—
allowing you to share music from a single 
phone to several nearby friends. Bluetooth 
TrueWireless uses Bluetooth headsets as a 
mesh network of sorts, routing audio from 
headset to headset. The upshot? Up to 50 
percent battery savings compared to the 
Snapdragon 835, Carson said.
“It’s a big step toward the 5G 
experience,” Carson said.
BATTERY LIFE:  
CUTTING POWER IN 
SNAPDRAGON 845
Qualcomm’s research shows that battery life is 
the number-one smartphone purchase 
criteria, said Travis Lanier, senior director of 
product management for Qualcomm. “At the 
end, battery life is one of the determinants for 
the satisfaction of a smartphone,” Lanier said. 
“We’re listening.”
With the Snapdragon 845, Qualcomm is 
offering more than 20 hours of continuous 
video playback, or capture of over four hours 
of continuous HD video. VR gameplay will be 
possible for over three hours of continuous 
gameplay. With Ultra HD Voice, you’ll be able 
to talk for more than two days continuously, 
Carson said.
The 845 also supports QuickCharge 4, 
which will charge your devices from 0 to 50 
percent in 15 minutes. It’s already supported 
by 160 devices, Carson said, and is a superset 
of the related USB-PD charging standard.
According to Lanier, battery life 
improvements are made possible by 
heterogeneous computing—a fancy name 
for parts of the chip that are optimized for 
specific tasks. One challenge is artificial 
intelligence, where the whole chip is 
involved. Fetching data can cost power, so 
Qualcomm added a 3MB cache to improve 
performance.
SNAPDRAGON 845 IS 
COMING IN 2018 
Qualcomm believes the Snapdragon 845 
is ready for a multitude of different 
applications, keeping you connected while 
your phone helps you take sophisticated 
video and plan your next lunch meeting. 
Qualcomm’s Snapdragon 845 chip is 
scheduled to appear in high-end phones 
beginning in 2018. 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   21
Titan V revealed: Nvidia’s 
monstrous Volta GPU finally 
comes to PCs 
But the wait continues for PC gamers. BY BRAD CHACOS 
N
vidia’s cutting-edge Volta GPU 
architecture has finally come to 
desktops. Recently, Nvidia 
launched the monstrous, golden 
Titan V, a $3,000 graphics card (go.pcworld.
com/gold) with 12GB of HBM2 memory and 
over a thousand more CUDA cores than the 
game-slaying Titan Xp (go.pcworld.com/ttxp). 
But this beast isn’t made for gaming—though 
it’d no doubt be very good at it.
IMAGE: NVIDIA

22   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
TITAN V REVEALED
Instead, Nvidia says this card “transforms 
the PC into an AI supercomputer.” While the 
still-available Titan Xp (go.pcworld.com/titn) 
was theoretically a compute card, but better 
suited as a best-in-class gaming card, the Titan 
V doubles down on data crunching. Nvidia is 
giving Titan V owners free access to AI, deep-
learning, and high-performance computing 
software via the Nvidia GPU cloud (go.
pcworld.com/gpuc). To boost the hardware’s 
machine learning capabilities, the card is 
equipped with the same “tensor cores” 
found in the Volta-packing Tesla V100 (go.
pcworld.com/v100) that launched in May.
In fact, the Titan V’s core specs are very 
similar to the Tesla V100’s configuration, but 
the desktop card’s HBM2 runs slightly 
slower—and there’s 4GB less of it. Nvidia says 
the Titan V delivers up to 110 teraflops of 
power in AI calculations, “9X that of its 
predecessor,” thanks to the introduction of 
the tensor cores.
NVIDIA TITAN V SPECS, 
FEATURES, AND PRICE
Transistors: 21.1 billion
CUDA cores: 5,120
Tensor cores: 640
GPU clock speed: 1200MHz base, 
1455MHz boost
Memory capacity: 12GB HBM2
Memory clock: 850MHz
Memory interface: 3,072-bit
Total memory bandwidth: 652.8GBps
Texture units: 320
Power: 250W TDP via 1x 6-pin and 1x 8-pin 
power connectors
Ports: 3x DisplayPort, 1x HDMI
Price: $3,000 on Nvidia.com  
(go.pcworld.com/gold)
Considering how massive (go.pcworld.
com/ma55) the Tesla V100’s GPU/HBM 
combo wound up being, it’s very impressive 
indeed that Nvidia managed to cram this 
much power into a dual-slot desktop 
graphics card. To see how the new Volta 
GPU architecture compares to the Pascal 
architecture used by current Nvidia 
consumer cards like the GeForce GTX 1080 
Ti, head over to our explainer on what PC 
gamers need to know about Volta (go.
pcworld.com/v0lt).
But the most important thing gamers need 
to know about Volta is that we’re still waiting 
for it in consumer graphics cards, seven long 
months after the architecture’s original reveal. 
While the Titan V would likely crush modern 
games, this monster is squarely focused on 
machine learning. Don’t spend $3,000 on a 
highly specialized compute GPU just to play 
Witcher 3. Read PCWorld’s best graphics 
card guide (go.pcworld.com/bgcg) to find 
the perfect fit for your budget instead, or sit 
tight and wait for Volta to come to the 
GeForce lineup. Who knows, maybe it’ll 
appear at CES in January. Volta has to come to 
consumer graphics cards sometime, right? 
Right? 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   23
Google’s new data-tracking  
app could save money on your 
mobile bill 
Shut down apps that are gobbling up your data. BY MICHAEL SIMON
G
oogle’s newest Android app 
might be its most useful of all. 
It’s called Datally (go.pcworld.
com/dty), and it has one 
function: to stop apps from gobbling up your 
precious gigabytes of data.
The simple, intuitive app is designed to 
help you get a handle on your mobile data 
usage and stop rogue apps from 
surreptitiously using it up. So, if you get a 
message from your carrier about using an 
abnormal amount of data, you can use 
IMAGE: GOOGLE

24   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
GOOGLE’S DATA-TRACKING APP
Datally to pinpoint the app that’s doing the 
most damage and shut it down.
There’s nothing necessarily new in 
Datally—data trackers have been built into 
Android for a while—but never has it been 
presented in such a user-friendly way. Many 
Android users don’t know to venture deep 
into the Settings app to see their mobile 
usage, so Datally pulls those features out of 
Settings > Network & Internet > Mobile 
Network, and presents it in an easy-to-
understand way.
After a brief setup, where you’ll need to 
allow Datally access to a VPN in order for it to 
work, you’ll be taken to a screen that clearly 
shows how much data you’ve used today. 
From there, you can dial into your weekly or 
monthly usage (via the Manage Data button), 
set up threshold alerts, and control which 
apps have access to your mobile data. There’s 
also a Data Saver kill switch that 
will shut down all mobile data 
at a tap.
But the coolest feature 
might be its Wi-Fi tracker. Tap 
the Find Wi-Fi button and 
Datally will retrieve a list of 
nearby places that offer public 
Wi-Fi networks. You can even 
get directions via Maps and 
rate the quality to help other 
users in the area.
Google says it has been 
testing Datally in the Philippines 
over the past few months and it has saved 
people up to 30 percent in their data. The 
app is available in the Play Store (go.pcworld.
com/pstr) for phones running Android 5.0 
and above. 
Why this matters: Whether you’re bumping up 
against monthly caps or trying to stop your 
carrier from throttling your speeds, we all need 
to be mindful of how much data we’re using. A 
rogue app or two could make a big difference. 
And it’s not just data—Datally could save your 
phone’s battery life, too, by identifying apps that 
are doing too much when you’re not using 
them. Datally is such a simple, useful tool that I 
wouldn’t be surprised to see Google bundle it 
into Android P, whether as a stand-alone app or 
a settings menu. As a part-time iPhone user, I’d 
love to see it show up in the App Store one day 
too (but I’m not holding my breath). 
Data trackers have been built into Android for a while, but Datally 
makes it drop-dead easy to use them.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   25
:LQGRZVƴƳŞVIXWXUHORRNFRXOG
EH6HWVDWDEEHGDSSLQWHUIDFH
0LFURVRIWZLOOVWDUWWHVWLQJ
Sets combines the apps and files you need to complete a task in a tabbed window— 
even ones you worked on weeks ago. BY MARK HACHMAN
M
icrosoft said recently that it 
plans to overhaul Windows 
10 with a browser-like, 
tabbed application view 
dubbed “Sets” that groups apps and files by 
project. The changes will roll out over a 
period of months, if not years—but an upstart 
competitor already has a similar idea.
Think of Sets as a mashup of existing and 
emerging Windows 10 technologies. Take 
Windows Explorer and the little-used Task 
View within Windows 10, mix in the newer 
“Pick up where you left off” and Timeline 
features, and wrap it all into a single-window 
experience. The idea is that every task 
requires a set of apps—Mail, a browser, 
IMAGE: MICROSOFT

26   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
WINDOWS 10’S FUTURE
PowerPoint, even Win32 apps like Photoshop— 
and those apps will be optionally organized 
as tabs along a single window.
But that’s not all. Microsoft knows that one 
of the most difficult things to remember isn’t 
what you were working on a week or so 
ago—browser histories help with that. It’s 
remembering all of the associated apps and 
documents that went with it: a particular 
PowerPoint document, that budget 
spreadsheet, the context an Edge tab 
provided. The idea is that the delayed 
Timeline feature (go.pcworld.com/time) will 
eventually group and associate all of these 
into a Set, so that when you open one, 
Windows will suggest the others, too. 
It’s a complex concept, with a complex 
tag line: Sets is a way to “organize and 
resume multi-faceted tasks,” according to 
Microsoft.
Sets will first make its way to Windows 
Insiders for feedback on the new UI. Microsoft 
will also seek out support for the Sets concept 
from developers across the board, from 
Adobe to Salesforce.
Meanwhile, Stardock, which has provided 
its own UI tweaks to Windows for years, has 
struck first, releasing a product, Groupy (go.
pcworld.com/grup), that reproduces some of 
the basic changes Sets provides.
What the future holds: This new look and 
feel for Windows is being rolled out for Insider 
beta testers first, and then later to standard 
Windows users. The question is when: 
Microsoft releases major updates to Windows 
in the spring and fall, 
but with the timeline 
Microsoft is talking, it 
could be literally 
years before Sets 
reaches your 
desktop. (Microsoft 
might not keep the 
“Sets” name, either.)
Microsoft is 
making clear that this 
is an optional feature, 
so if you prefer to 
work within a 
traditional Windows 
environment, 
Though Timeline will also be enabled via Task View, you should also be able 
to access it via the icon in the upper left. This is not a web browser or a web 
version of Word; it uses the new Sets model. Note the new tab icon to the right.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   27
rearranging windows and using features like 
Snap, you’ll still be able to. 
SETS: WHEN WINDOWS 10 
APPS BECOME TABS
The concept includes two major components: 
the organization of the different app windows 
into Sets; and the longer-term evolution of how 
Windows intelligently recognizes how Sets 
should be formed, which is part of the rollout 
and evolution of Timeline. Timeline will be 
rolled out almost immediately to Insiders, 
followed shortly by Sets.
You’ll see changes to the Windows 
interface with both aspects. With Sets, users 
will have the option to add apps to tabs, in 
much the same way Edge or Chrome works. 
Don’t be fooled—these aren’t web apps 
you’re looking at! Essentially, Microsoft is 
reworking the Desktop Windows Manager 
within Windows 10 to enable app switching 
via tabs, versus more traditional windows.
The Timeline changes will also eventually 
roll out as part of another, neglected portion 
of the Windows UI: Task View (go.pcworld.
com/task), the icon that’s right next to the 
Cortana search bar on the Windows 10 
taskbar. 
Normally, a student writing a term paper 
would launch several apps at once: a 
OneNote class notebook to pull from, 
additional research tabs within Edge, as well 
as the actual paper within Word. All of these 
apps rarely interact. There’s also the problem 
This is the traditional (and effective) way of working with multiple documents within Windows 10: Snap 
View. Sets would slim this down to just one window.

28   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
WINDOWS 10’S FUTURE
of what might be 
called “browser tab 
bloat:” Within a 
browser, users keep 
adding tabs, only 
some of which may 
be relevant to the task 
at hand. Sets, and 
later Timeline, will 
associate only the 
relevant apps and 
browser tabs with one 
another.
Microsoft thinks 
that it has built 
mechanisms in place 
that either automatically, or with a slight 
change to user behavior, get the right things 
grouped together, within a Sets window. So 
while you have 32 
tabs open in your 
browser, the two tabs 
you were using 
together with your 
homework are now 
with your homework.
The early vision of 
Sets looked a lot like a 
browser: links in the 
Mail app opened in 
Calendar, right next to 
each other, and each 
tab could be dragged 
and rearranged. 
Searches for documents in a shared OneDrive 
were downloaded and opened as new tabs. 
UWP apps and traditional Win32 apps mixed 
Opening a new tab will bring up this new tab page, which looks a lot like a 
web browser—except that Office documents are highlighted.
Interestingly, the new tab page within Sets also includes a search bar, which 
searches the web as well as your PC, just like Cortana.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   29
together, each with their own tab.
Naturally, it’s all keyed to your Windows 
account. In another scenario, a student 
saved her work on one machine and 
resumed on another. Once she signed in, 
Sets either suggested the group of app tabs 
she was working on previously, or just 
opened them automatically, picking up 
where she left off. 
The Settings menu attached to Sets is 
designed so that the new interface is entirely 
optional, and can be toggled on and off. 
Microsoft also plans to make apps Sets-
compatible on a per-app basis, so while 
Word and Mail could be tabbed, you could 
ensure Photoshop never is. 
WINDOWS 10 SETS WILL 
ROLL OUT SLOWLY
Sets may have started rolling out by the time 
you read this, but it won’t roll out quickly. 
You might not get it, even if you’re a 
member of the Windows 10 Insider program. 
Part of the testing process involves rolling 
out Sets to a limited group—including a 
“control group” of users who won’t get it, 
and can provide contrasting feedback. 
Sets will also be restricted initially to 
UWP apps, such as Mail and Calendar. In the 
version of Sets rolling out to Insiders, you’ll 
be able to create simple Sets, such as 
receiving an email about an event, opening 
the Calendar app in a tab to reserve the 
date, then finding the location on the 
Windows 10 Maps app. Over time, simple, 
traditional Win32 (.EXE) files will be 
supported, too, but only those that don’t 
modify the title bar. Those apps may be 
added to Sets by the end of 2017, but most 
likely will appear early next year.
From there, the plan is to add the more 
complex Win32 apps that modify the title bar. 
The most important of these? Office 365 
apps. Traditional Office 365 apps like Word, 
with support for Sets, will be added 
sometime in 2018.
From there, Microsoft has a choice: 
Either work with developers like Adobe to 
code Sets support into apps, or do it 
independently. It appears Microsoft will try 
the former path. 
Sets meets the “Pick up where you left off” 
feature, offering to open up all of the prior app 
tabs at once.

30   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
WINDOWS 10’S FUTURE
At some point, everybody will get Sets, 
Microsoft says. But it will take months.
WANT SETS RIGHT NOW? 
TRY STARDOCK’S GROUPY.
But what if you could get something like Sets 
right now? There’s an alternative: Stardock’s 
Groupy app (go.pcworld.com/grup), which 
recently debuted as a beta for Windows 10. 
Groupy (currently part of the $30 Object 
Desktop Suite [go.pcworld.com/30ob]) 
does quite a bit of what Sets promises: It 
groups apps together as a series of tabs, 
allowing you to hide applications 
underneath one another without losing 
them. New apps can be collected and 
added to the Groupy window (which, at 
this point, isn’t really resizable like a true 
window) or pulled out from a Groupy 
group and left as separate windows. What 
can’t be done, right now, is 
for those Groupy groups to 
be “archived,” as Windows 
Timeline will do. You can 
also end up with two rows 
of tabs, when a row of 
browser tabs appears 
underneath the Groupy 
group’s app tabs.
Naturally, Groupy is 
more of a custom interface 
than a built-in part of 
Windows. But it’s still a good 
start. You can pay $30 now 
for the suite, or $10 for the stand-alone 
version of the app Stardock is set to release in 
December. 
TIMELINE: PICK UP  
WHERE YOU LEFT OFF,  
EVEN WEEKS AGO
In some ways, Sets follows the same “from 
many, one” maxim that some of its more recent 
products embody: Delve’s ability to find 
relevant documents, Outlook Groups, the 
shared workflow in Teams, collaboration within 
Office documents. Sets applies that to your 
own workflow, with the idea that Windows will 
know all of the various documents you used to 
create a presentation, for example.
We can already see the first glimpses of 
Sets with Edge’s ability to “share” documents 
from Android or iOS to Windows 10 PCs, and 
with Cortana’s ability to suggest the apps you 
The Groupy settings menu offers a variety of options for configuring 
the tabbed groups of apps.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   31
were using on another PC. Timeline sort of fell 
into place as a related technology, while the 
little-used Task View fell out of favor.
Timeline will log your activities to the 
cloud, allowing those users signed in with a 
Microsoft account to roam from PC to PC. 
According to the early build PCWorld.com 
saw, Timeline dominated the space normally 
dedicated to the virtual desktops within Task 
View. Because of the relatively low amount of 
data needed to record Timeline, there was 
really no practical limit to how far Timeline’s 
history could go.
One thing Timeline won’t be used for—at 
least not now—is versioning. If you have a 
budget spreadsheet you altered a month 
ago, you won’t be able to call that version up, 
at least not within Timeline.
Naturally, Microsoft is also working through 
how it implements Sets and Timeline within 
mobile apps—especially as, for all intents and 
purposes, Microsoft has decided not to 
develop new mobile operating systems. While 
Sets might be impractical within the constraints 
of the mobile phone, Timeline might be 
feasible, or at least a version of Timeline that’s 
aware of what your phone was doing before 
you sat down at your PC.  
All that, though, remains part of the 
very murky future for Sets and Timeline. It 
could be the end of 2018 or even early 2019 
before general Windows 10 users have 
access to both, and much could change in 
the interim. 
An old version of Timeline that Microsoft showed off at its Build conference.

32   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
+'0,ƵƴUHOHDVHGƴƳ.
UHVROXWLRQG\QDPLF+'5DQG
)UHH6\QFOLNHJDPHVPRRWKLQJ
Goodies for gamers and media enthusiasts. BY BRAD CHACOS
T
he next generation of HDMI is 
here, and it holds some major 
benefits for PC gamers and 
media buffs alike. The HDMI 2.1 
standard, released recently by the HDMI 
Forum after being announced at CES 2017 
(go.pcworld.com/cs17), supports higher 
resolutions, new HDR features, and game-
smoothing variable refresh rates, among 
other features.
HDMI 2.1 delivers massively more 
bandwidth than HDMI 2.0—a whopping 
48Gb/s compared to the 18Gb/s 
achieved by today’s technology. That 
allows HDMI 2.1 to hit much higher 
resolutions and refresh rates. 
IMAGE: MELISSA RIOFRIO

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   33
The new 
spec supports 8K and 
even 10K resolutions, 
but those are better 
thought of as future-proofing or targeted 
toward commercial applications. Modern 
gamers will appreciate the introduction of 
4K/120Hz display support, though. Today’s 
4K monitors are limited to 60Hz and the 
GeForce GTX 1080 Ti (go.pcworld.com/
Ti80) and Titan XP (go.pcworld.com/ttxp) 
graphics cards can already max those out in 
modern games. But 120Hz-plus displays are 
already coming in the first quarter of 2018 in 
the form of glorious G-Sync HDR monitors 
(go.pcworld.com/gsnc) by Asus and Acer, 
and Nvidia’s next generation of graphics 
cards (go.pcworld.com/v0lt)—hopefully due 
sooner than later—will presumably have the 
power to drive such demanding displays.
HDMI also formalizes support for variable 
refresh rates. Variable refresh rates are the 
secret sauce behind Nvidia’s G-Sync and 
AMD’s FreeSync displays (go.pcworld.com/
dspl), synchronizing the refresh rate of your 
monitor to your graphics card for buttery-
smooth tearing- and stutter-free gameplay. 
AMD already has its 
FreeSync technology 
working over HDMI (go.
pcworld.com/fr33) in 
some monitors but 
HDMI 2.1 bakes VRR 
into the standard—a 
welcome change as VRR 
has largely been limited to 
DisplayPort connections, 
and those aren’t often found in 
budget displays. HDMI is practically universal.
HDMI 2.1 also introduces Quick Frame 
Transport, which “reduces latency for 
smoother no-lag gaming, and real-time 
interactive virtual reality.” Smoother gaming 
seems to be a big push for the new standard.
Videos also get a boost, mostly due to 
dynamic HDR, which allows a video to send 
high-dynamic range metadata to your HDR 
television on a scene-by-scene or even 
frame-by-frame basis, rather than simply at 
the start of a video. That creates a better-
tuned, more vibrant image throughout. 
Dolby HDR currently supports dynamic 
metadata, and it’s being (slowly) added to 
+'0,DOVRLQWURGXFHV4XLFN
)UDPH7UDQVSRUWZKLFK
ŠUHGXFHVODWHQF\IRUVPRRWKHU
QRODJJDPLQJDQGUHDOWLPH
LQWHUDFWLYHYLUWXDOUHDOLW\š

34   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
HDMI 2.1 RELEASED
the rival HDR10 format.
Quick Media Switching aims to end 
jarring black screens when videos switch, and 
eARC lets HDMI’s audio return channel 
handle lossless audio. Our sister site TechHive 
has a deeper look at the home theater-
boosting features in HDMI 2.1 (go.pcworld.
com/thtr).
You’ll need a new high-bandwidth 
HDMI 2.1 cable to support the fresh 
features, but fear not: Such a cable is also 
backward-compatible with existing HDMI 
implementations. Don’t expect to see these 
on the streets in the near future, though, as 
the HDMI Forum says the HDMI 2.1 
Compliance Test Specification will be 
published in stages between the first and 
third quarters of 2018. 
SDR
Static HDR
Dynamic HDR

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   35
HP patches hundreds of laptops 
to remove hidden keylogger  
Your touchpad can listen to your keyboard. BY BRAD CHACOS
I
f you bought an HP laptop anytime in 
the last five years, it could be tracking 
your every keystroke. Over the 
weekend HP revealed that nearly 
500 of its notebooks dating as far back as 
2012 shipped with a secret keylogger 
installed. Alongside the announcement, 
HP released driver updates to eradicate 
the software on affected laptops. 
Security researcher Michael Myng (go.
pcworld.com/hpky) discovered the 
keylogger when probing the Synaptics 
touchpad software on an HP laptop. HP’s 
security bulletin says the “potential security 
vulnerability” affects all laptops with “certain 
versions of Synaptics touchpad drivers”—not 
necessarily just HP models.
The keylogger is disabled by default, 
however. “A party would need administrative 
privileges in order to take advantage of the 
vulnerability,” the bulletin states. “Neither 
Synaptics nor HP has access to customer data 
as a result of this issue.” HP told Myng that the 
keylogger was a debugging tool.
IMAGE: GORDON MAH UNG

36   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
NEWS
HP’S LAPTOP PATCH
HOW TO REMOVE THE 
KEYLOGGER IN HP LAPTOPS
The same security bulletin (go.pcworld.com/
scty) includes separate software update links 
for every HP laptop loaded with the 
keylogger. HP says you should install those 
updates “as soon as possible.” CSO (go.
pcworld.com/keyl) counted them all up and 
found a total of 475 affected laptops, with 
303 being consumer laptops. Spectre, Envy, 
Pavilion, Omen, Compaq—they all contain 
the keylogger. 
You’ll need to know your laptop’s model 
number to download the correct software 
package. You can find HP laptop model 
numbers by looking for the information on a 
sticker on the bottom of the machine. If you 
don’t see the sticker, you can press Fn + Esc 
simultaneously to summon HP’s System 
Information window. You’re looking for the 
“product name” entry. Once you know it, 
head to HP’s security bulletin, press Ctrl + F, 
and type in your laptop’s details to quickly 
find the correct update for your system. You 
don’t want to sift through all 475 listings 
individually to find the right one! 
This isn’t the first time HP has run into 
keylogging trouble in 2017. In May (go.
pcworld.com/ptch), HP patched 30 laptops 
after a diagnostic update to the audio drivers 
accidentally resulted in capturing every 
keystroke and saving it to a local file. We’re 
leaving superb systems like the HP Spectre 
x360 (go.pcworld.com/x360) on PCWorld’s 
list of the best laptops (go.pcworld.com/
best) because the actions weren’t nefarious, 
but here’s hoping the company steps up its 
software quality assurance going forward. 

6$9($/,)('21·7'5,9(+20(%8==('
%8==(''5,9,1*,6'581.'5,9,1*

  AMERICA,
 LET’S DO LUNCH 
TM
Julius Gaines, SINCE 1933. He’s got a curious intellect that can’t be satiated. 
Now, he and 1 in 6 seniors face the threat of hunger and millions more  
live in isolation. So pop by, drop off a hot meal and say a warm hello.  
Volunteer for Meals on Wheels at AmericaLetsDoLunch.org

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   39
Reviews & Ratings
TESTED IN PCWORLD LABS
WE PUT HARDWARE & SOFTWARE 
THROUGH RIGOROUS TESTING
0LFURVRIW6XUIDFH%RRNƵ7KH
ultimate laptop improves in 
every way but one
An under-the-hood power issue with the Surface Dock, a USB-C port, and the charger is 
the only flaw in Microsoft’s new convertible tablet laptop. BY MARK HACHMAN
M
icrosoft’s Surface Book 2 
solves a big problem for 
Microsoft: How do you 
market the Surface Book as a 
performance notebook when it’s two years 
out of date? As our review shows, by making 
it bigger and faster, with longer battery life. 
Only a power problem slows it down.
With the Surface Book 2, Microsoft brings 
8th-generation Intel Core processors and 
IMAGE: MARK HACHMAN

40   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
MICROSOFT SURFACE BOOK 2
powerful, discrete 
Nvidia GPUs with 
enough horsepower 
to start thinking of the 
Surface Book 2 as a 
graphics workstation. 
But Microsoft’s big 
October surprise (go.
pcworld.com/surp) 
was the debut of not 
one, but two Surface 
Book 2 devices: a 
13.5-inch and a new 
15-inch model (we 
reviewed the latter). Neither is a simple 
clamshell notebook, though calling them 
convertible 2-in-1s instead seems like we’re 
selling them short.
As our review of the 15-inch Surface Book 
2 shows, however, the new generation isn’t 
perfect. An ambitious decision to use a USB-C 
port has ripple effects for expansion 
capabilities. There’s a power issue. And then 
there’s the price: up to almost $3,300! 
Should you buy it? Yes, there’s reason to look 
elsewhere. But none of its flaws are 
deal-breakers.
BASIC SPECS
You’d think that Microsoft’s Surface Laptop 
(go.pcworld.com/5urf), given its name, 
would be the company’s flagship notebook. 
But it’s not. The Book is. I very rarely 
ever undocked either the first- or second- 
generation Surface Book, and the 
combination of a sturdy construction, full-
sized ports, terrific battery life, and excellent 
performance makes the Surface Book 2 the 
undisputed star of Microsoft’s mobile lineup. 
Compare it to Apple’s MacBook Pro (go.
pcworld.com/mcbp), if you’d like: On paper, 
the Surface Book 2 tops it.
If you already own a Surface Book, you 
know what the Surface Book 2 looks like: It’s 
virtually identical. But now it has a bigger 
sibling, as the Surface Book 2 ships in either a 
13.5-inch or a 15-inch form factor. The 
cheapest Surface Book 2 is priced at $1,499 
(with a 10 percent discount for military, 
students, faculty and even parents of K-12 or 
higher-ed students). Though it uses a 7th-gen 
Intel Core i5-7300U with an integrated GPU, 
the other models will ship with the 8th-gen 
Core i7-8650U.
The 15-inch Surface Book 2 (left) sits next to the original 13.5-inch Surface 
Book, which otherwise looks nearly identical. 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   41
We tested the priciest Surface Book 2 
available: the $3,299 15-inch model.
Here are the basic specifications of the 
Surface Book 2:
CPU: Core i5-7300U (dual-core, 2.6GHz-
3.5GHz); Core i7-8650U (quad-core, 
1.9GHz-4.2GHz)
RAM: 8GB or 16GB 1,866MHz DDR3
GPU: Intel HD Graphics 620; Nvidia 
GeForce GTX 1050/2GB GDDR5 (13.5-
inch); Nvidia GeForce GTX 1060/6GB 
GDDR5
Display: 13.5-inch PixelSense (3,000 x 
2,000, 267 PPI); 15-inch PixelSense (3,240 x 
2,160 (260 PPI) 
Storage: 256GB/512GB/1TB NVMe SSD
Ports: Two USB 3.0 (Type A), one USB-C, 
two Surface Connect (one user-accessible)
Weight: 4.18 pounds (5 pounds with 
power brick)
Dimensions: 12.3 x 9.14 x 0.51-0.90 
inches (13.5-inch); 13.5 x 9.87 x 0.59-0.90 in. 
(15-inch)
Chassis material: Magnesium
Microsoft has a new digital stylus—what it 
calls a Next Generation Surface Pen (go.
pcworld.com/spen)—as well as the Surface 
Precision Mouse (go.pcworld.com/mose). 
Neither ships with the Surface Book 2, and 
neither is required. Our Book 2 shipped with 
the Windows 10 Creators Update, and not the 
Fall Creators Update—possibly due to a bug 
in the FCU that essentially turns off the Pen 
(go.pcworld.com/pbug). 
DISPLAY AND CHASSIS
Microsoft’s Surface Book has always 
reminded me somewhat of an answer to 
Lenovo’s classic ThinkPad, replacing the 
classic black bento box with a nearly 
uniform silver slab. Unlike the Surface Pro 
and the Surface Laptop, there are no color 
options, and the only adornment is the 
Windows logo on the outer casing. Raise 
the display into a laptop configuration, and 
the keyboard’s backlighting is the only 
visual cue that the Surface Book 2 is awake 
and active.
Microsoft Surface Book 2
PROS
• Top-notch, all-day battery life
• Excellent performance, particularly in graphics
•  Stellar display, complete with extra visual modes
CONS
•  Premium notebook, premium price
•  Underpowered Dock makes multi-monitor support 
problematic
BOTTOM LINE
Microsoft adds to its “ultimate laptop,” the Surface 
Book 2, by increasing the performance, battery life, 
and display size. 
$3,299
0LFURVRIWKDVDQHZGLJLWDO
VW\OXVŜZKDWLWFDOOVD1H[W
*HQHUDWLRQ6XUIDFH3HQŜDVZHOO
DVWKH6XUIDFH3UHFLVLRQ0RXVH

42   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
MICROSOFT SURFACE BOOK 2
Your eyes, therefore, are sucked toward 
the big, bright, vibrant screen. Our Surface 
Book 2’s display pumped out 412 nits, more 
than enough. And while a 3.2K IPS display 
might not quite reach that magic 4K 
milestone, the superb visual quality lives up to 
the Surface brand. More pixels would have 
negatively affected performance and battery 
life. It’s a good trade-off. 
Though Microsoft doesn’t tout the 
Surface Book 2 as a content-creation 
machine as it does the Surface Studio, the 
Book 2 does include both of its color 
profiles: standard RGB, and its “enhanced” 
profile, which makes colors a bit more vivid. 
If you’d like, you can also use the Surface Dial 
peripheral on the ten-point touchscreen. 
While docked, the Surface Book 2 reclines 
to about the same 50-degree angle as the 
original Book, not nearly flat enough to let 
the Dial rest without sliding to the ground. 
While undocked in tablet mode, though, the 
Surface Dial works fine.
Though the Surface Book’s weight climbs 
toward four pounds, the incredibly long 
battery life means you can leave your charger 
at home. (If you’re an acolyte of the Microsoft 
ecosystem, you probably already own a 
Surface Dock [go.pcworld.com/dock] for 
expansion and charging, anyway.) Still, it’s no 
wonder why Microsoft’s device chief Panos 
Panay refers to the Surface Book 2 as 
essentially a desktop, as the device is big and 
bulky, though not especially heavy. 
The Surface Book 2 is a 2-in-1 convertible. 
Though it lacks the 360-degree hinge of most 
such models, the display can be flipped over 
and reattached into a tent mode for viewing 
videos, or detached to function as a 
conventional tablet. Press a button on the 
keyboard, and after a second or two the 
“muscle wire” retracts, and the tablet 
The Surface Book 2, reclined, together with the USB 3.0 ports and the card reader on the left side. The 
accordion hinge looks very similar to the original Surface Book’s.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   43
disconnects from the base. 
Microsoft claims the tablet disconnects 
more quickly than in the previous Surface 
Book, though in testing both, I couldn’t see 
much difference. After a second or two, the 
Surface Book 2 releases the tablet, and you 
can lift it free. This is no Amazon Kindle, 
though: Undocked, the 15-inch tablet is 
almost ludicrously huge, and unless you’re 
in the NBA, I doubt one hand will have 
enough breadth to hold it comfortably. By 
itself, the tablet weighs 1.8 pounds, 
surprisingly light for something so big, but 
it’s still awkward. Once detached, it feels 
like it needs a Surface Pro-like kickstand. The 
tablet is multi-touch, with the standard ten 
points of contact.
(Undocked, you’ll discover that a Surface 
connector provides the data 
interface between the base 
and tablet. Though you can 
connect a charger or Surface 
Dock to this port, there’s very 
little point in doing so.)
The silvery metallic 
exterior of the Surface Book 
and Surface Book 2 both 
exude an almost military-like 
solidity. In a year or so of using 
the original Surface Book as a 
daily driver, it became slightly 
dented in places from normal 
wear and tear within a 
sometimes crowded 
backpack, and suffered a larger divot from a 
Kinect that plunged from the top of my rolltop 
desk as it lay, closed, on my desk. Neither 
affected its performance. That’s a good 
indicator that the Surface Book 2 will be 
equally durable.
Piling an additional notebook or two on 
top of the Book never damaged its iconic, 
accordion “dynamic fulcrum” hinge, which 
remains within the Surface Book 2. When 
the Book 2 is closed—now with a more 
authoritative click—a small gap remains 
near the hinge. While that space may still 
be oddly frustrating to some, it doesn’t 
affect performance and seems as 
structurally rigid as before. The tablet does 
wobble when you jiggle the base, though 
not as much as with the original Surface 
Detached, the Surface Book 2 tablet is large and bulky, though not 
especially heavy.

44   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
MICROSOFT SURFACE BOOK 2
Book. It’s a reminder, though, that this isn’t 
a true notebook.
Perhaps the most surprising thing about 
the Surface Book 2, though, is simply how 
quiet it is. Microsoft uses a passive cooling 
system to cool the clipboard or tablet portion 
of the Surface Book 2, forgoing the fan 
entirely. Yes, it’s a fanless Core i7!
THE KEYBOARD, AND THE 
PORT/POWER DEBACLE
The Surface Book 2 didn’t mess too much 
with one good thing: Its keyboard feels 
essentially unchanged from the first 
iteration. Note, however, that it follows the 
Surface Laptop’s layout, rather than the 
original Book’s: Microsoft eliminated the 
“Insert” key, and added a separate key for 
toggling through various backlight 
controls. Otherwise, a wider bezel 
surrounds the keyboard on the 15-inch 
model, really emphasizing how vast the 
available space is. 
I’ve always found the Surface Book’s 
keyboard quite comfortable to type upon, 
with a firm response and good key travel. The 
Surface Book 2 keyboard felt ever so slightly 
stiffer, with response that felt a tad shallower. 
The trackpad feels identical: slick, smooth, 
and responsive. 
The Surface Book 2 also includes 
802.11ac for wireless connectivity, which 
connected satisfactorily as I roamed around 
my home and office. Bluetooth 4.1 Low 
Energy is also built in, which avoids collisions 
with the Wi-Fi signal. Finally, there’s a bonus 
for gamers: Xbox Wireless is built into the 
15-inch version, meaning you can connect 
your wireless Xbox One controller for gaming 
on the go.
Microsoft did mess with the port 
allotment, however, and it’s one area where I 
feel the Surface Book 2 takes a step back.
The left side of the Surface Book 2 
base should look familiar to Surface Book 
owners: with two USB 3.0 Type A 
connectors, plus a UHS-II SDXC card 
reader. Microsoft even preserved the 
The “hinge gap” remains on the Surface Book 2.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   45
other devices. But Microsoft’s implementation 
also lacks the Thunderbolt I/O implementa-
tion, part and parcel of Apple’s MacBook Pro 
and an easy way to connect multiple displays 
to a device that supports it.
That means connections to external 
monitors are somewhat limited. Officially, the 
Surface Book 2 can drive two 4K monitors at 
30Hz either via the USB-C port or the Surface 
Dock. Alternatively, either the Dock or the 
USB-C port can power a single 4K monitor at 
60Hz. (If you try simultaneously to connect a 
monitor via USB-C and a second monitor 
over the Dock, only the Dock-connected 
monitor will light up, Microsoft says.) We 
successfully connected the Book 2 to a 
conventional 1080p monitor at full frame 
rate, but managed only 30 frames per 
second on a 120Hz 4K HDTV.
Microsoft’s traditional solution for multi-
monitor setup has been the Surface Dock, 
which allows you to 
connect up to two 
external displays via a 
pair of Mini DisplayPort 
connectors. But that has 
a problem, too: The 
144-watt Dock doesn’t 
supply as much power as 
the Surface Book 2’s 
180-watt native charger. 
Microsoft says that, 
under load, a Surface 
Book 2 powered by the 
3.5mm headphone jack.
Along the right side, though, things 
change: Alongside the expected Surface 
connector, there’s a USB-C connector—and 
that’s it. 
Previously, Surface Books included a Mini 
DisplayPort connector, a simple way to 
connect to a single monitor by way of a Mini 
DP–to–HDMI cable. To connect to multiple 
monitors, you used the Surface Dock (go.
pcworld.com/sfdo), a $200 hub with two 
additional Mini DP connections. 
With the Surface Book 2, the Mini DP 
connector is gone. Instead, you’ll need to 
invest in new infrastructure, beginning with a 
new adapter—a USB-C–to–HDMI cable (go.
pcworld.com/u2hd), perhaps—that will cost 
you about $20. Theoretically, the USB-C 
connector also anticipates a future where 
you’ll be able to connect the Surface Book 2 
to an ecosystem of external hard drives and 
The Surface Book 2’s USB-C port breaks with tradition.

46   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
MICROSOFT SURFACE BOOK 2
Dock may use up so much power that it will 
drain the battery and enter sleep mode.
During testing, I played a few 3D-intensive 
games for nearly an hour, while using the 
Dock, as well as an additional 15 minutes or 
so while completely undocked. During that 
time, the battery decreased to about 65 
percent overall. During ordinary use—web 
browsing, office work, et cetera—the Dock 
supplied sufficient power without issue. And if 
the Surface Book 2 is connected to its 
charger, as well as to a single monitor via a 
USB-C–to–HDMI cable, the Book 2 should 
operate normally.
Though we tested the Surface Book 2 by 
itself, with no external monitor attached, 
additional testing revealed an unexpected 
issue: undocked, while playing a 3D game, 
the Windows 10 power slider remains at its 
most conservative setting, clocking the GPU 
down somewhat beneath its full potential. If 
you dial it up to Best Performance mode, the 
battery begins to discharge, as our separate 
testing shows (go.pcworld.com/gmng).
Interestingly, the Surface Book 2 battery 
won’t discharge completely. In fact, over 
time, the GPU seems to throttle itself to bring 
the power consumption down—but this 
lowers the performance, too. Microsoft’s 
explanation is that the Surface Book 2 is a 
content-creation machine for STEM users in 
the sciences and education, not a gaming 
platform. This smells like a bit of PR spin to us.
Meanwhile, Microsoft claims that the 
Book 2 will charge from any USB-C PD3.0-
compliant charger from 7.5W to 95W, with a 
60W to 95W USB-C charger powering the 
Surface Book 2 to 80 percent charged in 1.5 
hours time. I didn’t have enough time to 
confirm the latter claim, but as for the former, 
our Surface Book 2’s USB-C port didn’t 
accept power from a few random external 
chargers or battery packs. (And no, you can’t 
charge the Surface Book 2 from the USB-C 
and Surface ports, simultaneously—we 
asked.)
All of this talk of ports and power sparked 
a somewhat lively internal debate. How 
many people actually connect more than 
one monitor to a laptop? How many buy a 
Surface Book 2 for gaming, and how many of 
those will be unhappy with a GPU that 
throttles itself over time to prevent the 
battery from discharging—and isn’t fully 
throttled up in the first place? Our initial 
review factored in the Dock issues. We don’t 
consider the additional power issues a 
reason not to buy the Surface Book 2, 
especially if you do plan to use it as a 
content-creation machine, not as a gaming 
:HGRQŞWFRQVLGHUWKHDGGLWLRQDO
power issues a reason not to 
EX\WKH6XUIDFH%RRN
HVSHFLDOO\LI\RXGRSODQWRXVHLW
DVDFRQWHQWFUHDWLRQPDFKLQH
QRWDVDJDPLQJSODWIRUP

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   47
platform. But if gaming is your 
thing, consider one of these, the 
best gaming laptops, instead (go.
pcworld.com/sept). 
SPEAKERS, CAMERAS, 
THE PEN AND THE 
PRECISION MOUSE
Like the original Surface Book, the 
Book 2 sports both front (5MP, 
1080-capable) and rear (8MP 
autofocus, 1080p-capable) cameras that 
take serviceable pictures and enable 
Windows Hello’s biometric logins. Normally, 
few people would care about a tablet 
camera. But the Windows 10 Fall Creators 
Update that’s rolling out now includes such 
fun utilities as the Mixed Reality Viewer (go.
pcworld.com/mirv), where you can snap a 
photo with the rear camera and drop in a 
computer-generated dinosaur, giant taco, or 
bug right into the scene. Our review unit 
shipped with the older Creators Update, 
however.
The Surface Book 2 continues the 
Surface Book tradition of decent audio, 
accompanied by Dolby Audio processing. 
Though it supplies an adequate range of 
sound, you’d still be better off routing 
Spotify through headphones or an 
accompanying Invoke speaker for better 
bass response. The speakers are mounted 
inside the tablet, unlike the Surface 
Laptop’s base-mounted speakers.
Microsoft also provided what it calls a 
“next-generation” Surface Pen for review. To 
be honest, the increasing levels of 
sensitivity—4,096 in this version—have 
moved beyond our ability to test. Microsoft’s 
new Pen looks nice, writes smoothly, and is 
powered by a replaceable AAAA battery. 
That’s enough.
We didn’t receive Microsoft’s new 
Precision Mouse in time for review, but we 
were quite impressed in the short hands-on 
time we had earlier (go.pcworld.com/hnds).
PERFORMANCE
We expect an Nvidia GTX 1060-powered 
system (go.pcworld.com/1o6o) such as the 
Surface Book 2 to perform well. Microsoft 
created extra pressure, however, by claiming 
the Surface Book 2 would perform three to 
four times better than the original Surface 
Books. In our performance charts, you’ll see 
us compare the Surface Book 2 to its 
predecessor, as well as some recent laptops 
Microsoft’s new Surface Pen ships in a variety of colors.

48   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
MICROSOFT SURFACE BOOK 2
we’ve reviewed that have 
discrete graphics: Dell’s 
XPS 15 (go.pcworld.com/
dx15), Lenovo’s Yoga 720 
(go.pcworld.com/y0ga), 
and Samsung’s Notebook 
9 Pro (go.pcworld.
com/9pro).
We threw both 
mainstream and gaming 
benchmarks at the 
Surface Book 2. 
Somewhat surprisingly, 
the Surface Book 2 
doesn’t necessarily top 
the heap in general 
productivity performance, 
but as a graphics 
workstation it’s among 
the very best.
Our first test is PCMark 
Work 8 Conventional, 
which simulates everyday 
activities like web 
browsing, video chat, and 
document editing. It’s a 
good test for isolating the 
CPU’s role in everyday use. 
Any machine scoring 
2,000 or above will sail 
along smoothly during 
these low-intensity tasks. 
The Surface Book 2 lands 
square in the middle: a little 
Dell XPS 15
(Core i7-7700HQ)
Samsung Notebook 9 Pro
(Core i7-7500U) 
Lenovo Yoga 720 15in
(Core i7-7700HQ) 
Microsoft Surface Book 2
(Core i7-8650U)
Microsoft Surface Laptop
(Core i5-7200U)
Microsoft Surface Book
(Core i5-6300U)
Microsoft Surface Book
(Core i7-6600U)
HP Spectre x360
(Core i7-7500U)
PCMark 8 Work 2.0
Conventional Native Resolution
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
3,163
2,744
3,486
3,117
2,706
2,901
3,362
2,826
Dell XPS 15
(Core i7-7700HQ)
Samsung Notebook 9 Pro
(Core i7-7500U)
Lenovo Yoga 720 15in
(Core i7-7700HQ) 
Microsoft Surface Book 2
(Core i7-8650U)
Microsoft Surface Book
(Core i5-6300U)
Microsoft Surface Book
(Core i7-6600U)
Microsoft Surface Laptop
(Core i5-7200U)
HP Spectre x360
(Core i7-7500U)
PCMark 8 Home 2.0
Conventional Native Resolution
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
3,360
2,714
3,489
2,974
2,429
2,826
3,362
2,744

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   49
faster than its predecessors, but a little slower 
than the trio of recent competitors.
The Home and Creative broaden the 
scope somewhat, adding light gaming, 
photo editing, and finally some image and 
video processing. In general, how the 
Surface Book 2 compares against the 
Surface Book most likely ties into the base 
processor clocks of both chips: 2.6GHz for 
the original Book, 1.9GHz for the Surface 
Book 2. When needed, the Book 2 can 
boost up to 4.2GHz—but in these tests, it 
doesn’t need to. As with the Work 
Conventional test, it scores below similar 
laptops with discrete GPU.
Remember, the eighth-generation Core 
chips use four cores and eight processing 
threads. Applications that take advantage of 
all of them perform better than the earlier 
dual-core Core chips. Maxon’s Cinebench 
benchmark takes advantage of this, with 
benchmarks that exercise all available cores. 
Here, the Surface Book 2 is in the middle of 
the quad-core leading edge, while all the 
dual-core systems fall into place behind them.
We ran HandBrake, a prolonged test that 
converts a Hollywood movie into a format 
suitable for an Android tablet. One of the 
advantages of Windows 10 and the new Core 
chips is that they’re 
optimized for video 
playback. Still, the test is 
both a good workout as 
well as a real-world 
application, especially if 
you’re preparing some 
in-flight entertainment for 
your kids. Here, Microsoft’s 
Surface Book 2 is the 
slowest of the quad-cores, 
possibly because it throttles 
its fanless Core i7 chip 
under prolonged load. 
The Surface Book 2 
differs slightly from gaming 
machines in that it’s more 
Dell XPS 15
(Core i7-7700HQ)
Microsoft Surface Book 2
(Core i7-8650U) 
Lenovo Yoga 720 15in
(Core i7-7700HQ) 
Samsung Notebook 9 Pro
(Core i7-7500U)
Microsoft Surface Laptop
(Core i5-7200U)
HP Spectre x360
(Core i7-7500U)
Microsoft Surface Book
(Core i7-6600U)
Microsoft Surface Book
(Core i5-6300U)
Cinebench R15
(All Threads)
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
614
320
735
339
302
327
665
320
5HPHPEHUWKHHLJKWKJHQHUDWLRQ
&RUHFKLSVXVHIRXUFRUHVDQG
HLJKWSURFHVVLQJWKUHDGV

50   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
MICROSOFT SURFACE BOOK 2
of a general-purpose 
performance notebook. If 
you’d like, you can 
download a Play Anywhere 
title for the Xbox, like Gears 
of War 4, and fire it up on 
the Surface Book 2. 
Conversely, Microsoft also 
offers a complimentary 
three months of Adobe 
Creative Cloud—check the 
installed Surface app for 
the offer—as 
encouragement to use it 
for more traditional creative 
pursuits. Either way, it’s 
hard to go wrong.
Here, we tested using 
the 3DMark Sky Diver 
benchmark, where the 
Surface Book 2 really 
begins to strut its stuff, 
outpacing all comers. 
Compared to the prior-
generation Surface Book 
with discrete GPU, 
Microsoft’s claim of a 3X to 
4X performance difference 
is proven out.
I also played around 
with performance-hungry 
games from yesteryear, like 
Crysis 2, and maxed it out 
on my 1080p monitor at 
Dell XPS 15
(Core i7-7700HQ)
Lenovo Yoga 720 15in
(Core i7-7700HQ)
Microsoft Surface Book 2
(Core i7-8650U)
Samsung Notebook 9 Pro
(Core i7-7500U) 
Microsoft Surface Laptop
(Core i5-7200U)
Microsoft Surface Book
(Core i7-6600U)
Microsoft Surface Book
(Core i5-6300U)
HP Spectre x360
(Core i7-7500U)
HandBrake Encode 0.99
(seconds)
SHORTER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
3,963
6,482
2,743
4,363
6,638
6,353
3,391
6,360
Microsoft Surface Book 2
(Core i7-8650U)
Dell XPS 15
(Core i7-7700HQ)
Lenovo Yoga 720 15in
(Core i7-7700HQ) 
Samsung Notebook 9 Pro
(Core i7-7500U)
Microsoft Surface Book
(Core i7-6600U
Microsoft Surface Laptop
(Core i5-7200U)
HP Spectre x360
(Core i7-7500U)
Microsoft Surface Book
(Core i5-6300U)
3DMark Sky Driver 1.0
Overall
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
15,325
3,704
19,190
8,863
3,658
6,220
17,174
3,841

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   51
Ultimate performance levels. Modern games, 
such as Watch_Dogs 2, also rendered 
smoothly at High and Very High settings. Just 
for fun, I tried Far Cry 3 on the Surface Book 
2’s native tablet settings. It didn’t quite deliver 
playable frame rates, though the detail was 
amazing. 
Finally, there’s battery life—a traditional 
strength of the Surface Book, and one that 
carries over here. We gauge a laptop’s 
stamina with our video rundown test. We first 
charge the laptop to 100 
percent, then set its screen 
between 250 and 260 nits 
to simulate the brightness 
level you’d use in an office. 
With a pair of earbuds 
plugged in and the volume 
set to 50 percent, we run a 
4K video file (the open-
source Tears of Steel) on 
continuous loop in 
Windows 10’s Movies & TV 
app until the laptop shuts 
itself off.
Over time, we’ve 
expanded the notion of 
“all-day battery life” from a 
generous six hours to more 
than eight hours and 
above. The Surface Book 2 
carves out new territory at 
the high end, pushing past 
a whopping 13 hours with 
ease. Microsoft’s Surface Book 2 includes two 
different batteries: a 23.2 Watt-hour battery in 
the tablet, and a separate 62.2 Wh battery in 
the base. (Interestingly, those are the design 
capacities, as measured by Windows; the 
batteries actually charged to 23.6Wh and 
65.6Wh, respectively.)
Sure, 13 hours is far less than the 17 
hours at which Microsoft rates the Surface 
Book 2. But Microsoft typically dials down 
the brightness to below the levels at 
Microsoft Surface Book 2
(Core i7-8650U)
Microsoft Surface Laptop
(Core i5-7200U)
Microsoft Surface Book
(Core i5-6300U)
Microsoft Surface Book
(Core i7-6600U)
Samsung Notebook 9 Pro
(Core i7-7500U)
HP Spectre x360
(Core i7-7500U)
Lenovo Yoga 720 15in
(Core i7-7700HQ)
Dell XPS 15
(Core i7-7700HQ)
Battery life 
(minutes)
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
637
426
819
605
331
590
765
429
2YHUWLPHZHŞYHH[SDQGHGWKHQRWLRQRIŠDOO
GD\EDWWHU\OLIHšIURPDJHQHURXVVL[KRXUVWR
PRUHWKDQHLJKWKRXUVDQGDERYH

52   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
MICROSOFT SURFACE BOOK 2
which we test. On the other hand, our 
tests didn’t take advantage of the 
Windows 10 Fall Creators Update’s ability 
to prolong battery life (go.pcworld.com/
btry) by playing back video at a lower 
resolution, or running entirely in battery-
saver mode. As our previous tests showed, 
aggressively managing battery life can tack 
on as much as 30 percent more runtime—
enough to match up with Microsoft’s own 
numbers.
VERDICT
Reports of the PC’s death have ushered in a 
renaissance of sorts, producing marvelous 
designs from Microsoft, HP, Lenovo, and 
others. I used the original Surface Book as a 
daily driver for months, if not years, and I’m an 
unabashed fan of that original—and now, the 
Surface Book 2.
The trap that Microsoft sets, though, 
is not unlike Apple’s: The company tacitly 
encourages you to think within its 
ecosystem and only its ecosystem, rather 
than its competition. Once you begin 
looking elsewhere, options like the Lenovo 
Yoga 720 (go.pcworld.com/y0ga) begin to 
look more attractive, and at possibly 
cheaper prices, too. Other alternatives 
include the Dell XPS 15, which tops the 
performance charts, above—save for 
battery life, where it finishes at the bottom. 
Otherwise, what’s a few thousand dollars 
between friends?
There’s one question we can’t answer: 
stability. One of the unfortunate legacies of 
the Surface products is a shakedown period 
of a few months where some early models 
suffered anything from “hot bag” refusals to 
enter a sleep state (go.pcworld.com/slep), to 
screen flickering. Our Surface Book 2 
exhibited a strange buzzing noise (a short? a 
speaker flaw?) almost immediately, which 
persisted for about an hour or so, then 
vanished completely. We experienced no 
other glitches.
The bottom line? If you can afford a 
Surface Book 2, we’d recommend it. So 
many of its attributes are simply fantastic, 
including its graphics performance and 
stellar battery life. If Microsoft had avoided 
all of the complications associated with its 
decision to incorporate USB-C (omitting 
Thunderbolt, upgrading the Dock), as well 
as the power issues, we’d be hard-pressed 
to find anything wrong with the Surface 
Book 2 at all. Microsoft has made its 
“ultimate laptop” even better, in many 
ways. Just not all of them. 
7KHWUDSWKDW0LFURVRIWVHWV
WKRXJKLVbQRWXQOLNH$SSOHŞV
7KHFRPSDQ\WDFLWO\HQFRXU
DJHV\RXWRWKLQNZLWKLQLWV
HFRV\VWHPDQGRQO\LWV
HFRV\VWHPUDWKHUWKDQLWV
FRPSHWLWLRQ

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   53
'HOO;36ƴƶƵƳƴƺ 
,QWHOŞVƻWKJHQ&38PDNHV 
DJUHDWODSWRSHYHQJUHDWHU
Quad-core performance in a tiny laptop is a big deal. BY GORDON MAH UNG
F
orgive us if you’ve heard this one 
before (go.pcworld.com/befr) 
but Dell’s latest XPS 13 is truly the 
best one yet. Seriously.
Newly upgraded with Intel’s 
8th-generation CPUs, the XPS 13 offers 
unheard-of performance in an ultra-portable 
laptop. By “unheard-of,” we mean the XPS 13 
offers performance approaching and 
occasionally surpassing that of much larger 
and much heavier powerhouse laptops.
Granted, it hasn’t changed much on the 
outside. As we go through the features and 
specs, though, you’ll see the significant 
changes happening on the inside. 
PRICES, SPECS 
AND FEATURES
Prices: Our review unit currently sells for 
$1,300 from Dell’s website (go.pcworld.
IMAGE: DELL

54   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
DELL XPS 13 (2017)
com/dlwb). Other SKUs from Dell’s site 
range from the lowest-end $800 
version, with a 7th-generation Core 
i3-7100UCPU, 4GB of RAM, and a 128GB 
SSD; and the top-of-the-line $1,750 model 
with the same 8th-generation Core i7-8550U 
and 256GB SSD.as our unite, but its memory 
is boosted to 16GB. 
CPU: The star of the show is Intel’s new 
8th-generation Core i7-8550U. Based 
on the same basic 
microarchitecture as 
CPUs used in older 
versions of the XPS 13, 
the 8th-gen chip’s 
secret sauce is 
doubling the CPU cores (read our in-depth 
review (go.pcworld.com/coi7) of the 8th-gen 
CPU for all the details). Up to now, most 
mainstream laptops have stuck to dual-core 
CPUs because quad-core CPUs would have 
required more cooling and bigger, heavier 
shells to handle the heat. Not anymore. It’s 
truly exciting to see quad-core power fitting 
into thin and light laptops
RAM: 8GB of LPDDR3/1866. The low-
power version of DDR3 doesn’t allow for the 
use of expansion slots, so the RAM is 
soldered to the motherboard. The good 
news is Dell used a pair of modules to enjoy 
the greater bandwidth of dual-channel mode, 
rather than use a single module that would 
give you only half the bandwidth.
GPU: There’s room for a quad-core chip 
but not for discrete graphics, so what you get 
is Intel UHD 620. You might think the “U” 
means something special, but from a 
performance point there really ain’t none.
Display: You pretty much get the same 
1920x1080 matte screen with “Infinity” bezel 
on the XPS 13 that we’ve seen since the first 
model was introduced in 2015. The one in 
our unit puts out very decent 400 nits (much 
like the prior version). While it doesn’t have 
the pizzazz of a “glossy” screen (which Dell 
The XPS 13 hasn’t changed much on the outside, but this 8th generation 
upgrade is worth it for performance fiends.
<RXSUHWW\PXFKJHWWKHVDPH
[PDWWHVFUHHQZLWK
Š,QILQLW\šEH]HORQWKH;36
WKDWZHŞYHVHHQVLQFHWKHILUVW
PRGHOZDVLQWURGXFHGLQ

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   55
offers in the touch-screen version) it does a 
great job of reducing glare.
Storage: A 256GB Toshiba M.2 NVMe 
SSD handles the storage, and if you’re willing 
to risk opening up the XPS 13, you should be 
able to swap in a larger drive.
Ports: For connectivity, you get two USB 
3.0 (5Gbps) Type A ports, an SD card reader, 
combo audio and a single Thunderbolt 3 
port. That Thunderbolt 3 port is a two-lane 
implementation rather than four-lane, so 
maximum throughput is less than what you’d 
get with some competing laptops. There’s 
also a square lock port supporting Noble 
locking cables.
The XPS 13 supports (and ships with) a 
standard barrel charger, but you could also 
charge via the Thunderbolt 3 / USB-C port. 
While having a dedicated charging port 
means the Thunderbolt 3 / USB-C is available 
for other uses, we hope the next version will 
offer two Thunderbolt 3 ports and a USB-C 
charger in the box.
Weight: The non-touch version we tested 
weighs in at a barely-there 2 pounds, 12 
ounces. 
Dimensions: The size of the XPS 13 
remains the same at 11.98 x 7.88 x 0.33 
inches. It has a much smaller footprint than a 
MacBook Air 13, but it’s thicker than HP’s 
Spectre X360 13T. Think of it as “stout.”
In practical terms, this XPS 13 hasn’t 
changed much from the prior (2016) version 
using 6th-gen CPUs. That’s actually been one 
of the complaints about the XPS 13: It hasn’t 
had a major redesign since this generation 
made its debut in 2015.
You know what? We’re OK with it. Why 
should Dell mess with success? Apple, for 
example, hasn’t really made major exterior 
changes to its popular MacBook Air 13 since, 
2011 or maybe 2010. We, frankly, can’t tell.
The XPS 13 still wins on size and 
portability. We still love the trackpad. We 
think the keyboard is a little small (but still 
good), and we still think the webcam is really 
awkwardly placed along the bottom of the 
display bezel. 
Dell XPS 13 (2017)
PROS
•  Quad-core CPU delivers impressive performance 
in most tasks
•  More than 12 hours of battery life
•  Nearly flawless thin-and-light design
CONS
•  Integrated graphics restricts it to mainstream apps
•  Webcam is awkwardly placed at the bottom of the 
screen
$1,199
The right side of the XPS 13 has the SD card reader, one of its two USB-A ports, and the Noble lock port. 

56   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
DELL XPS 13 (2017)
The real change here is inside, 
and it’s all about performance.
PERFORMANCE: 
WHAT A DIFFERENCE 
8TH-GEN MAKES
When Intel announcedd he 
8th-gen Core CPU,  it it had 
successfully squeezed quad-core 
performance into places it couldn’t 
before, we were highly skeptical of 
how much actual practical 
performance you could wring out 
of a tiny laptop, when all quad-
core laptops before it weighed 
usually twice as much.
We tested the 8th-gen XPS 13 
against two predecessors: a 
7th-gen Core i7 XPS 13 and a 
5th-gen Core i7 XPS 13. We also 
roped in two much larger XPS 15 
laptops with quad-core chips—
6th-gen Skylake and 7th-gen Kaby 
Lake chips, specifically.
The results thoroughly surprised 
us. For example, using Maxon’s 
Cinebench R15, we can gauge the 
relative performance of the 8th-gen 
Core i7 XPS 13 vs. a 7th-gen Core 
i7 XPS 13. As you can see, the XPS 
13 destroys its dual-core 7th-gen 
predecessor and runs up very close 
to the XPS 15s on multi-threaded 
workloads. Impressive.
Dell XPS 15 9560
Core i7-7700HQ
Dell XPS 15 9550
Core i7-6700HQ  
Dell XPS 13 9360
Core i7-8550U  
Dell XPS 13 9360
Core i7-7500U
Dell XPS 13 9343
Core i5-5200U
Cinebench R15.038
Multi-core performance
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
611
714
333
248
675
Dell XPS 13 9360
Core i7-8550U 
Dell XPS 15 9560
Core i7-7700HQ 
Dell XPS 15 9550
Core i7-6700HQ  
Dell XPS 13 9360
Core i7-7500U
Dell XPS 13 9343
Core i5-5200U
Cinebench R15.038
Single-core performance
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
139
157
136
108
147
Dell XPS 15 9560
Core i7-7700HQ 
Dell XPS 15 9550
Core i7-6700HQ 
Dell XPS 13 9360
Core i7-8550U  
Dell XPS 13 9360
Core i7-7500U
Dell XPS 13 9343
Core i5-5200U
Handbrake 0.9.9 
Encode (sec)
SHORTER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
3,567
2,743
5,876
7,934
3,033

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   57
Cinebench also allows you to run a 
single-thread test, which means the laptop’s 
running on a single core. Running the five 
laptops through the same test, the 8th-gen 
XPS 13 actually outperforms the 7th-gen XPS 
15. No, that’s not a typo: The tiny XPS 13 can 
outshine the beefier XPS 15 in some single-
threaded tasks.
Mind you, the performance is all relatively 
close. Because the vast majority of programs 
people run typically use only a single CPU 
core, however, this speaks well of the new 
XPS 13’s capabilities.
One question we wanted to know was 
how well the XPS 13 and its 15-watt 
quad-core CPU would hold up on 
longer, harsher loads when 
compared to a larger XPS 15 and 
its 45-watt quad-core CPU. We 
suspected performance would 
drop off a cliff once you subjected 
the CPU to a really heavy load.
The intensive HandBrake test 
can take 90 minutes or more on 
many dual-core laptops. The XPS 
15 with its 7th-gen Kaby Lake 
quad-cores comes out in front by a 
very healthy margin, as does the 
XPS 15 with its 6th-gen Skylake 
quad-core. But that tiny XPS 13 
turns in a very respectable score. 
Again, we’re talking about a 
laptop that’s almost half the weight 
of its bigger cousins.
GRAPHICS PERFORMANCE
Moving on to graphics, we compared the 
three generations of XPS 13 we had on hand 
(using the latest drivers) on 3DMark’s Skydiver 
graphics test. We didn’t include the XPS 15, in 
this comparison, because clearly the larger 
laptop’s discrete graphics chip would destroy 
the XPS 13.
Looking at the results of the 7th-gen and 
the 8th-gen XPS 13 laptops, the 8th-gen is in 
front by a tiny margin—after all, they both 
have the same Intel UHD 620 integrated 
graphics. Both are basically fine for low-
ambition or entry-level gaming tasks, but 
Dell XPS 13 9360
Core i7-8550U 
Dell XPS 13 9360
Core i7-7500U 
Dell XPS 13 9343
Core i5-5200U
3DMark Skydiver 1.0
Graphics
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
3,321
4,297
4,019
Dell XPS 13 9343
Core i5-5200U 
Dell XPS 13 9360
Core i7-7500U 
Dell XPS 15 9550
Core i7-6700HQ  
Dell XPS 15 9560
Core i7-7700HQ 
Dell XPS 13 9360
Core i7-8550U 
PCMark 8 Work 2.0 
Conventional
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
3,350
2,835
3,594
3,608
3,329

58   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
DELL XPS 13 (2017)
nothing to text home about. If you 
want more of a gaming experience, 
look for a laptop with discrete 
graphics.
To gauge performance in 
everyday tasks, we use PCMark 8 
Work Conventional. The 8th-gen XPS 
13 ties with the 7th-Gen XPS 15, but 
all contenders—even the dual-core, 
5th-gen XPS 13—stick pretty close. 
The lesson here: If all you do is 
browse the Internet and run 
Microsoft Office you don’t need a 
quad-core CPU, so don’t put out 
money for a feature you won’t use.
BATTERY LIFE
Our last test is probably the most critical for a 
portable laptop: battery life. For that we loop 
a 4K video using Windows’ built-in Movies & 
TV player, with the laptop in Airplane mode 
and with earbuds in place (and audio cranked 
to about 50 percent). We set the screen to a 
relatively bright 250 to 260 nits and let the 
laptop run from a full charge until it dies. 
We compared the 8th-gen, quad-core 
XPS 13 to an even broader swath of its 
forbears. We were very curious to see 
whether the quad-core CPU would take down 
the battery.
The answer is no. First, video playback 
today, using a modern, efficient media player, 
resides almost entirely in the domain of the 
graphics chip.
But the winner is...the original XPS 13 with 
a 5th-gen Core i5-5200U, which pounds out 
almost 14 hours of playback—and this despite 
having a smaller battery. We think it helps that 
it has a low-power SATA SSD and also its 4GB 
of RAM vs the 8GB of RAM (more RAM uses 
more power).
Coming in second with a very decent 
12-plus hours of battery run time is the the 
8th-Gen XPS 13. That’s good performance.
The worst performance comes from Dell’s 
high-resolution XPS 13 models with 
touchscreens. Feeding all of those pixels 
takes power, so be ready to pay for it in 
battery life.
Basically, expect very good battery life 
on the XPS 13 for video playback, though 
it will certainly drop on more intensive 
tasks. Read our deep dive on another 
Dell XPS 13
Core i5-5200U 
Dell XPS 13
Core i7-8550U 
Dell XPS 13
Core i7-7200U  
Dell XPS 13 2-in-1
Core i7-7Y75
Dell XPS 13
Core i5-6200U
Dell XPS 13
Core i7-7500U
Dell XPS 13
Core i7-6560U
4K Video Run Down 
(minutes)
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
681
828
638
431
595
361
751

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   59
VERDICT
In the end, color us impressed. We fully 
expected the XPS 13 with its quad-core CPU 
to offer only marginal improvements at best, 
but the performance results were amazing. 
For those who do CPU-intensive tasks, 
the XPS 13 can truly hang with laptops that 
weigh almost twice as much. It’s close 
enough that some might even consider 
skipping big laptops for the XPS 13. Not 
all, of course. Those who need more RAM 
or far more graphics grunt still have 
nowhere else to turn—though recent 
innovations like Nvidia’s Max-Q (go.
pcworld.com/maxq) and the upcoming 
Intel/AMD Radeon partnership (go.
pcworld.com/amrd) could change that. 
But let’s not diminish the fact that you can 
now get quad-core performance in a 2.5-
pound laptop. As we said, this Dell XPS 13 
is truly the best one yet. 
laptop’s battery performance to get more 
information on how battery life can vary 
(go.pcworld.com/batt).
Price: Of course, the most important 
“spec” is probably the price. As reviewed, 
the XPS 13 with the 8th gen CPU, 8GB of 
RAM, 256GB SSD and touch screen came 
in at $1,299 (although we swore it was 
originally $1,199 when we looked initially.) 
With the Black Friday season upon us 
though, Dell had cut the price of it to $999. 
That’s a hell of a deal, frankly for the 
performance you’re getting.
Dell offers one step up in the form of the 
XPS 13 with a quad HD or 3200x1800 
resolution touch screen. Internally, it’s the 
same CPU but Dell ups the RAM to 16GB of 
LPDDR3/1866 and larger SSD options up to 
1TB. The base touch screen QHD version 
with a 256GB SSD pushes the price up to 
$1,749, with recent Black Friday prices 
lowering it to $1,549. That isn’t quite the 
steal the FHD version is and you’ll likely 
take a battery life hit.
7KHZRUVWSHUIRUPDQFHFRPHV
IURP'HOOŞVKLJKUHVROXWLRQ;36
PRGHOVZLWKWRXFKVFUHHQV
)HHGLQJDOORIWKRVHSL[HOVWDNHV
SRZHUVREHUHDG\WRSD\IRULW
LQEDWWHU\OLIH

60   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
$OLHQZDUHƴƸ,WŞVEXLOWOLNHD
WDQN\RXFDQDFWXDOO\FDUU\
Some gaming laptops aren’t truly portable, but the Alienware 15  
won’t break your back. BY HAYDEN DINGMAN 
H
ow much does two inches 
matter? You wouldn’t think it 
wouldd be a huge factor, but 
when I reviewed the Alienware 
17 (go.pcworld.com/al17) I called it 
“staggeringly huge” and said it was “time to 
hit the gym” if you wanted to carry one 
around. Since then, I’ve spent a few weeks 
using the Alienware 15—a laptop with the 
potential to be just as powerful, but in a 
slightly lighter package. 
And it turns out that’s good enough.
IMAGE: ADAM PATRICK MURRAY

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   61
THIS ONE IS JUST RIGHT
Don’t get me wrong: The Alienware 15 is still 
a massive laptop, especially if you put it up 
against competing 15-inchers. This isn’t a 
Razer Blade-style device, and portability 
suffers. Alienware could really use a 
lightweight line as an alternative—and maybe 
we’ll start seeing those soon, as the line 
between Alienware and Dell begins to blur.
But I felt like the Alienware 17 was 
completely unmanageable. It was a set-it-and-
forget-it laptop, one you plop on the desk 
and then never move. With the Alienware 15 
you might want to bulk up your back muscles, 
but carrying it is definitely doable.
How do I know? I gave the Alienware 15 
the full backpacker treatment, using it as my 
main machine for three weeks or so while I 
was on vacation and hauling it between hotel 
rooms, packing and unpacking it from my 
bag, putting it in the bin for airport security 
screening, and even reviewing games on it in 
the late-night hours.
So yeah, I wouldn’t call it easy per se, but 
it was certainly doable. When I brought the 
Alienware 17 on the road (for a much shorter 
trip, I might add) I struggled daily. The 
Alienware 15 was a welcome companion, 
powerful enough to game on by night 
without throwing out my back by day.
Would I accept slightly worse 
performance for a thinner laptop? Absolutely. 
For those who need true desktop power on 
the road, two inches can make one hell of a 
difference, though.
And that’s really the only difference. The 
Alienware 15 measures 15.3 x 12 inches, is an 
inch thick when closed, and weighs in at 7.6 
pounds (compared to 9.6 for the Alienware 
17). The power adapter is also smaller, 
measuring probably half the thickness and 
weighing 1.8 pounds instead of 2.5 for the 
Alienware 17’s brick.
Other than that, the Alienware 15 and 17 
are twins. Both sport the same 1080p display 
running at 120Hz. The speed is a welcome 
feature, though colors wash out at full 
Alienware 15
PROS
•  Fits into a normal size backpack—sort-of.
•  Desktop level performance in a laptop
•  120 Hz screen great for gaming
CONS
•  Still much larger than other 15-inch laptops
•  Hinge is an inconvenient eyesore
BOTTOM LINE
It’s still huge, still loud, and still has that enormous 
(and ugly) hinge on the back, but the Alienware 15 is 
much more manageable and roadworthy than its 
17-inch sibling. This is the size to get. 
$1,999
7KH$OLHQZDUHPHDVXUHV
[LQFKHVLVDQLQFKWKLFN
ZKHQFORVHGDQGZHLJKVLQDW
SRXQGVFRPSDUHGWRIRU
WKH$OLHQZDUH

62   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
ALIENWARE 15
brightness and 
viewing angles are a 
bit narrow—same as 
the 17, though it’s 
mercifully less 
noticeable on the 15’s 
smaller screen.
The whole thing is 
encased in a chrome 
and black chassis, 
emblazoned with the 
Alienware logo on the 
outside and the sleek 
typelogo under the 
display. Alienware’s 
lighting is just as 
impressive and over-the-top on the 15, with 
RGB light channels running down each side 
of the display, on the lid, and even 
underneath the trackpad. That last has grown 
on me during my time with first the 17 and 
now the 15, and I’ve come to find it almost as 
useful as keyboard backlighting at night.
My biggest complaint with the 15 is the 
same as with the 17: The hinge. Rather than 
joining at the rear, the monitor is instead set 
forward about an inch. That leaves a hunk of 
plastic sticking out behind the monitor, which 
is where most of the fans vent.
The Alienware 15’s hinge is 
proportionately smaller than the 17’s, but it’s 
still an eyesore. It’s also just annoying, 
especially on a plane or in similarly tight 
quarters where the hinge takes up much-
needed desk space.
The hinge hassle is compounded by the 
fact that the laptop’s ports are almost all 
located in the rear: Power, HDMI out, 
ethernet, USB-C, and Alienware’s proprietary 
Graphics Amplifier port. Not only is it hard to 
plug in the laptop in when you can’t see the 
port, its rear location also further limits how 
close you can set the Alienware 15 to a wall, 
because the cable sticks out at least another 
two inches.
Putting ports on the rear of a laptop isn’t 
unique to Alienware. It’s not a very 
7KH$OLHQZDUHŞVKLQJHLV
SURSRUWLRQDWHO\VPDOOHUWKDQWKH
ŞVEXWLWŞVVWLOODQH\HVRUH

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   63
user-friendly design, 
though, and it doesn’t 
take portability into 
account at all—
underscoring the 
reality that these are 
more “Desktop 
Replacements” than 
laptops. 
The benefits: It’s 
sturdy, for one. Also, 
you can lay the display 
completely 
180-degrees flat, 
though I can’t imagine 
a situation when you’d 
want or need to do so.
Unfortunately, having the fans vent behind 
the screen doesn’t cut down on noise as 
much as I expected. I thought that might be 
one reason for the design, but like its larger 
sibling, the Alienware 15’s fans are 
distractingly loud at full load, whether hidden 
behind the display or not.
SMALL PACKAGES
Those looking for portable desktop power 
are well served by the Alienware 15. Not only 
is it a more portable device than its 17-inch 
peer, it can pack just as much power inside. 
The Alienware 17 we looked at was outfitted 
with an Intel Core i7-7820HK and an Nvidia 
GeForce GTX 1080. With deep pockets you 
can put the same configuration into the 
Alienware 15.
Our Alienware 15 was one step down, 
both in price and power, with an Intel Core 
i7-7700HQ, a GTX 1070, and 16 GB of DDR4 
RAM. Storage took the form of a 512GB SSD 
and a 1TB hard drive.
Not too shabby. As I said, I did multiple 
game reviews on the Alienware 15 and it ran 
without a hitch, usually on a mix of High and 
Very High settings. Digging into our tried-
and-true benchmarks, you can see that the 
Alienware 15 managed 93.9 frames per 
second in Rise of the Tomb Raider at 
1920x1080 on Very High, and 130.9 frames 
per second in Middle Earth: Shadow of 
Mordor at 1920x1080 on Ultra with the 4K 
texture pack installed.
That compares favorably with other 

64   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
ALIENWARE 15
1070-equipped laptops as well as slower 
1060 units. The HP Omen 17, for instance, 
scored 95.5 and 118.9 respectively on the 
same benchmarks with an i7-6700HQ and a 
GTX 1070.
As for how it stacks up against the likes of 
a 1080-equipped Alienware 17, you’re 
looking at 102.2 and 154.9 frames per 
second in Tomb Raider and 
Shadow of Mordor— definitely a 
gap, though not a huge one.
The Alienware 15 even stacks 
up favorably against 1080 Max-Q 
laptops, which is to be expected—
our testing has generally shown a 
Max-Q 1080 puts out performance 
comparable to that of a well-
vented 1070. This pattern doesn’t 
really show up in gaming 
benchmarks, mostly because 
gaming benchmarks tend to be 
only a few minutes long. Thus, the 
Asus ROG Zephyrus GX501 
scored 104.8 in Rise of the Tomb 
Raider and 136.8 in Shadow of 
Mordor, comparable to the 
Alienware 17.
If we jump over to 3DMark, 
though, where the tests tend to be 
longer, we see that the Alienware 
15 scored a 4,097 in FireStrike 
Ultra. Compare that to 4,091 for 
the GX501 and you can see that as 
heat builds up, the Max-Q 1080 
throttles at right around the same 
performance level as the Alienware 15’s 
better-vented GTX 1070—and the Alienware 
15 is less expensive. Impressive. The HP 
Omen 17 scored a 3,837 and the Alienware 
17 posted 4,960, for the curious.
As for the CPU, the Core i7-7700HQ 
performance is pretty standard. That’s a very 
Alienware 15 R4
Core i7/GTX 1070
Gigabyte Aero 15X
Core i7/GTX 1070 Max-Q
Gigabyte Aero 15
Core i7/GTX 1060 
Dell Inspiron 15 7000
Core i5/GTX 1060 Max-Q
Dell Inspiron 15 7000
Core i5/GTX 1050 Ti
Dell XPS 15
Core i7/GTX 1050
Rise of the Tomb Raider
Very High Quality 1920x1080 (fps)
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
65.3
93.9
61
44.6
32.6
90
Alienware 15 R4
Core i7/GTX 1070
Gigabyte Aero 15X
Core i7/GTX 1070 Max-Q
Gigabyte Aero 15
Core i7/GTX 1060 
Dell Inspiron 15 7000
Core i5/GTX 1060 Max-Q
Dell Inspiron 15 7000
Core i5/GTX 1050 Ti
Dell XPS 15
Core i7/GTX 1050
Shadow of Mordor
Ultra Quality 4K Textures (fps)
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
86.7
130.9
83.8
56.8
42
117

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   65
the job in a little over 38 minutes.)
It’s a very solid laptop. The one weak 
point is the battery, coming in at an ever-so-
average 3 hours and 45 minutes in our 
standard rundown test, where we set the 
laptop’s display to 250-260 nits in brightness 
and loop a 4K video until the battery goes 
dead. Lifespan is even worse while gaming: 
Expect 1.5 to 2 hours in that 
scenario, or even less.
Hey, as I said earlier: At least 
the power adapter’s smaller for the 
1070 model.
VERDICT
Two inches makes a world of 
difference, though. I couldn’t see 
using the Alienware 17 as my 
day-to-day laptop. All 17-inch 
machines are huge, but a 17-inch 
machine that’s still over an inch 
thick and weighs 9.5 pounds? 
No way.
The Alienware 15 probably 
wouldn’t be my first choice, but 
it puts out incredible, desktop-
level performance. Even with a 
GTX 1070 the Alienware 15 
handled everything I threw at it 
with aplomb, and did it while still 
fitting inside a normal-size 
backpack. Barely fitting, but 
come on—I’m trying to be 
charitable here. 
popular laptop part, and indeed in our 
Handbrake test (where we convert a 30GB 
MKV file to the Android Tablet preset) the 
Alienware 15’s 45 minutes and 43 seconds 
comes in right in line with the GX501’s 46 
minutes and 23 seconds, the Gigabyte Aero 
15’s 46 minutes and 15 seconds, and so on. (By 
comparison, the Alienware 17’s i7-7820HK did 
Alienware 15 R4
Core i7/GTX 1070
Gigabyte Aero 15
Core i7/GTX 1060 
Gigabyte Aero 15X
Core i7/GTX 1070 Max-Q 
Dell XPS 15
Core i7/GTX 1050
Dell Inspiron 15 7000
Core i5/GTX 1060 Max-Q
Dell Inspiron 15 7000
Core i5/GTX 1050 Ti
Handbrake
Encode (sec)
SHORTER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
2,800
2,743
3,033
3,921
3,960
2,775
Gigabyte Aero 15X
Core i7/GTX 1070 Max-Q
Dell Inspiron 15 7000
Core i5/GTX 1050 Ti
Gigabyte Aero 15
Core i7/GTX 1060 
Alienware 15 R4
Core i7/GTX 1070
Dell XPS 15
Core i7/GTX 1050
Dell Inspiron 15 7000
Core i5/GTX 1060 Max-Q
Battery life
Playing 4K video (minutes)
LONGER BARS INDICATE BET TER PERFORMANCE
410
477
340
331
326
472

66   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
06,7ULGHQWƶ$UFWLF/RRNVOLNH
DFRQVROHUXQVOLNHDKLJKHQG
GHVNWRS
If only this had been around for all our ‘90s LAN parties. BY HAYDEN DINGMAN 
A
maller form-factor PCs typically 
go one of two ways: First, you 
can prioritize the small part of 
the equation. This leaves you 
with something beautifully tiny, but at the cost 
of future upgrades—space-saving comes with 
the caveat of proprietary and non-replaceable 
parts. (See: Alienware Alpha (go.pcworld.
com/alfa).) Or you can prioritize future 
upgrades, which typically means a larger and 
less aesthetically pleasing machine.
The MSI Trident 3 is the rare machine that 
can do both—at least to some extent.
MSI TRIDENT 3 VS. 
CONSOLES
It really is tiny. Scale can be tough to judge in 
photographs, but at 13.6 by 9.2 by 2.8 
inches, the Trident is so small it’s hard to 
believe there’s a full-size PC inside. It’s smaller 
than my launch-version Xbox One for 
instance, and quite nearly smaller than the 
IMAGE: ADAM PATRICK MURRAY

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   67
new Xbox One X (go.pcworld.com/xb0x). 
(It’s smaller depth, but the Trident is about an 
inch longer and maybe half an inch taller.) The 
Trident sits comfortably in “console-sized” 
territory, in any case.
And it seems even smaller than it is. The 
Xbox One’s blunt VCR-like chassis looks every 
inch its size. The Trident’s canted angles are 
needlessly flashy perhaps, but also slimming.
Speaking of flashy: I could do without the 
RGB lighting. That’s the one aspect I think 
detracts from the design, if only because it’s 
distracting. Given the small size of the Trident 
I assume most people will place it on 
something, be it a media center shelf, a desk, 
whatever. Having an RGB-lit “Y” shape on the 
front panel ensures the Trident won’t simply 
blend into the background, instead blink-
blink-blinking away at you all night long.
It won’t bother everyone, and it’s also 
customizable—you can hop into MSI’s 
settings panel and turn the lighting off, 
“solving” the problem. There’s just not much 
point to it being there at all on a machine 
seemingly so suited for living room use, 
though.
I love the choice of white for the chassis, 
though. Most of MSI’s Trident models come 
in the company’s standard black-and-red 
color scheme—as “generic gaming machine” 
as you can get. The model we looked at 
comes in “Arctic White” though, with a red 
MSI badge and red labels on the front ports. 
It’s slick. I tend to prefer black boxes—I feel 
they hold up better over time—but there’s no 
denying that fresh out of the box the white 
Trident is an eye-catcher. Bonus: Less 
noticeable dust.
The front panel is laden with ports, which 
also behooves living room use. Most 
noteworthy is a front-facing HDMI port, which 
MSI intends for easy VR usage. I haven’t had 
much reason to use my HTC Vive (go.
pcworld.com/htcv) with the Trident, but I 
appreciate the gesture. At the moment, 
plugging in a VR headset means crawling 
behind my tower PC. Front-facing I/O is 
MSI Trident 3 Arctic
PROS
•  Approximately the size of the Xbox One X/
PlayStation 4 Pro
•  Easy access to internal components, and relatively 
upgradeable
CONS
•  Swapping out the hard drive is arduous
•  Accessing the internals voids your warranty
BOTTOM LINE
The MSI Trident V3 is quiet, easily upgraded, and 
packs a GTX 1070 inside a chassis the size of the 
Xbox One X. Pretty incredible. 
$1,499
6SHDNLQJRIIODVK\,FRXOGGR
ZLWKRXWWKH5*%OLJKWLQJ7KDWŞV
WKHRQHDVSHFW,WKLQNGHWUDFWV
IURPWKHGHVLJQLIRQO\EHFDXVH
LWŞVGLVWUDFWLQJ

68   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
MSI TRIDENT 3 ARCTIC
certainly more convenient.
You’ll also find 3.5mm headphone and 
microphone ports on the front, plus one 
USB-C and two USB 3.1 jacks. And despite 
the machine’s small size, the rear also features 
a surprising number of ports—two more 
HDMI ports on the motherboard itself, five 
USB ports, gigabit Ethernet, power, Line-In, 
Line-Out/headphones, and microphone. 
Then there’s the graphics card, which features 
an additional two HDMI ports (for a total of 
five on the machine), two DisplayPorts, and 
one DVI.
Wrapping up the design, I’ll note that the 
Trident also comes with a stand, allowing you 
to run the machine vertically. This is the 
weakest part of the package though, with the 
stand apparently more concerned with 
aesthetics than keeping your PC intact. The 
stand neither snaps onto the machine nor 
screws into it, relying instead on the Trident’s 
weight and four tiny rubber pads to keep it 
upright. If you plan to toss the Trident onto a 
shelf? It might be enough. But if you have an 
unstable desk, pets, children, or are maybe 
just clumsy? I wouldn’t recommend running it 
vertical. Even a moderate nudge could send it 
teetering and (if you’re unlucky) toppling over.
SPECS, PRICE, AND 
PERFORMANCE
Okay, so it’s console-sized. Now how does it 
stack up? And the answer: Pretty damn good. 
Actually, the Trident we looked at was loaded, 
for a machine this small.
Most Trident setups run with an Nvidia 
GeForce GTX 1060, which is a perfectly 
serviceable card. (Actually, that puts it about 
on par with the Xbox One 
X.) The $1,450 model we 
looked at though takes the 
next step, somehow 
packing an 8GB GTX 1070, 
plus an Intel Core i7-7700 
clocked at 3.6 GHz, 16GB 
of DDR4 RAM, and both a 
256GB SSD and a 1TB hard 
drive. Again, that’s into a 
machine smaller than the 
original Xbox One.
It’s incredible. Sure, 
you’re not going to get the 
same performance as a full 
The Xbox One X (left) and Trident (right), as seen from above.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   69
tower with a GTX 1080 Ti (go.pcworld.com/
nvti) inside, but in a machine this size? Wow. 
As I said, even the Xbox One X tops out at 
GTX 1060 levels of power, which makes the 
Trident V3 more powerful than even the most 
powerful console on the market today. We ran 
the Trident through our usual battery of 
benchmarks, with impressive results—
impressive if only because something this 
small put up scores similar to full-sized towers.
For instance, in Rise of the Tomb Raider at 
1080p with settings on Very High, the Trident 
3 averaged 107.9 frames per second. That’s 
right in line with other 1070-equipped 
machines like a 1070-equipped Gigabyte PC 
that we’ve looked at, which averaged 107.8 
frames per second. The same goes for 
Shadow of Mordor with the 4K texture pack 
installed—130.2 frames per second for the 
Trident V3, 129.2 for the Gigabyte machine.
The Trident 3 even holds 
its own in lengthier 
benchmarks. That’s 
impressive. In-game 
benchmarks are usually only 
a few minutes long at best, 
so you don’t really see 
thermal throttling because 
the hardware doesn’t heat 
up enough for it to matter. 
But in one of 3DMark’s 
lengthier tests or our CPU-
centric Handbrake encode 
you sometimes see heat 
dispersion problems you might’ve otherwise 
overlooked.
Not here. In 3DMark’s FireStrike Extreme 
test the Trident put up a score of 7828, which 
compares favorably to the Gigabyte 
machine’s 8313. And in our Handbrake test, 
where we transcode a 30GB MKV file down 
to the Android Tablet preset, the Trident 3 did 
it in about 38 minutes and 46 seconds—only 
16 seconds longer than the Gigabyte. All 
evidence points to there being no significant 
thermal issues. The machine gets hot for sure, 
but as far as I can tell it’s not significantly 
affecting performance.
“Okay, so then noise is an issue right? If it’s 
moving that much heat, obviously the fans 
must be distracting.” Nope! Surprisingly it’s 
both relatively cool and quiet. Not whisper-
silent, to be sure, but at even moderate 
volumes my sound system drowned out the 
It’s not illuminated here, but that odd “Y” shape on the corner is the 
RGB LED zone.

70   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
MSI TRIDENT 3 ARCTIC
Trident’s fans—and that was with it on my 
desk. If you placed it across the room, you’d 
probably never hear it. It’s certainly quieter 
than 2013’s Xbox One model, and about on 
par with the new Xbox One X.
UPGRADEABILITY
But the most important aspect of the Trident 
3: It’s not only small, but upgradeable. 
Properly upgradeable, mostly thanks to the 
aforementioned GTX 1070. See, most Trident 
models ship with a GTX 1060—a low-power 
card. As such, they get away with running on 
a 230 watt power brick.
That’s fine, as long as you only ever plan to 
replace the 1060 with an equivalent card, but 
even upgrading to a 1070 would likely cause 
problems under load with that diminutive a 
power supply.
Since our model 
ships with a 1070 
though, it also packs 
a 330 watt supply. 
That’s not much more 
than the baseline 
Trident, and it still 
comes in ugly power 
brick form so you’ll 
have to find some 
extra room to stash it, 
but you might have a 
bit of headroom for 
overclocking if you’re 
careful. The GPU is 
also easily accessed, and can be swapped 
out for any other small form-factor card as 
long as you keep the power restrictions in 
mind. Three or four years down the line you 
should be able to plop in a GTX 1470 or 
whatever and be good to go.
The GPU isn’t the only part that’s 
upgradeable though. Two screws gets you 
into the case, which is enough to replace the 
RAM immediately. The CPU would take more 
doing, but you can dismantle the cooling 
system and swap it out if desired. That 
would only be in the event of complete 
failure though—the motherboard is 
proprietary, and given Intel’s fondness for 
switching CPU sockets lately you’re 
probably not going to be able to drop in 
a new-generation processor later.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   71
of failure too. That’s 
better than a lot of 
machines its size (not to 
mention gaming 
consoles).
VERDICT
The MSI Trident 3 
Arctic offers the power 
of an upper-mid tier PC 
in a chassis the size of 
the new Xbox One 
X—and with the ability 
to upgrade it even 
further in a few years 
with a hypothetical GTX 1470 or whatever. It’s 
attractive, it’s small, it’s (mostly) discreet, and 
it’s also surprisingly inexpensive. The 
1070-equipped model we looked at retails for 
a mere $1,450 on Amazon. Doing some 
rough back-of-napkin math, I estimate you’d 
only save maybe $200 or $300 on a bare 
bones Mini-ITX build of your own, and while 
you’d gain some additional room for 
upgrades later it definitely wouldn’t turn out 
this sleek, nor manage heat this efficiently.
Whether you’re looking for a living room 
machine, a dorm-room PC, or something 
convenient to take to those LAN parties you 
and your friends are still (in 2017!) having, the 
Trident 3 is definitely worth a look—
specifically this GTX 1070 model. The 1060 
units? Eh, I’d probably give those a pass. But 
this is one hell of a deal. 
I only have a couple complaints. 
Accessing the hard drives is a royal pain, 
requiring you to flip the machine over and 
remove the entire bottom panel. It’d be easier 
to just use an external drive (go.pcworld.
com/exdr) I guess, but it’s annoying given the 
Trident’s 1TB drive. First thing I’d want to do is 
upgrade that, and it’s harder than it needs to 
be. More annoyingly, you void your warranty 
by tinkering. That’s not too uncommon with 
prebuilts, but there is indeed a sticker over 
one of the screws as you head inside.
If you want to really tinker? Sure, get a full 
tower or build your own. Still, if you want a 
small machine that remains a decent 
investment three or four years down the line? 
The Trident 3 gives you enough runway to 
upgrade the most important components a 
few times, and replace the most likely points 
RAM and CPU on the left, GPU on the right.

72   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
:'%OXHƶ'1$1'6$7$66'
2QHRIWKHIDVWHVW7/&GULYHV
you can buy 
TLC NAND has been a performance drag, until now. BY JON L. JACOBI
A
maller form-factor means a 
larger and less aesthetically 
pleasing machine.
The WD Blue 3D SSD is a 
SATA SSD with a not-so-secret twin: Sandisk’s 
Ultra 3D SSD. They are in fact the same drive 
with different labels, WD owning Sandisk and 
all that. The ‘3D’ term means the drives use 
stacked (layered, vertical, etc.) NAND. 
Practically speaking, that means more storage 
in less horizontal space.
The only real differences between the 
drives are the outward appearance, the 
marketing, and the fact that the WD Blue 3D 
ships in the M.2 form factor, while the Ultra 
3D does not.  Beyond that, they’re peas in a 
pod. Given their superior performance 
compared to other TLC NAND drives—that’s 
a really good thing.
DESIGN AND CAPACITY
Though available in the 2.5-inch form factor, 
WD sent us the M.2 2280 (22mm 
wide/80mm long) Blue 3D, which is handy 
for upgrading laptops or desktops that 
feature an M.2 slot. It’s SATA, not NVMe—just 
to be clear. Be sure to check which flavor your 
M.2 slot is before you buy. Just FYI, NVMe 
(go.pcworld.com/n4me) is a lot faster.
The Blue 3D is available in 250GB, 
500GB, 1TB (the size we tested), and 2TB 
capacities, which sell for $95, $165, $310, 
IMAGES: WD

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   73
and $620 respectively. Those are the prices 
from WD’s site—you may find them cheaper 
at Amazon, Newegg, or the like.
The Blue 3D is warrantied for three years 
and rated for 100TBW for every 250GB. That 
means WD expects you can write 100 
terabytes to the drive before experiencing 
any loss of capacity due to wear and tear on 
the cells. If you do the math, that’s actually a 
heck of a lot of writes. Probably more than 10 
years’ worth for most users. And TBW 
estimates are generally very conservative.
Note that the 250GB version is rated 
slightly slower than the other capacities. 
That’s common with most drives of 250GB or 
less, which most often have fewer chips to 
spread data across.
SURPRISINGLY GOOD 
PERFORMANCE
We test SSDs using both artificial 
benchmarks, primarily AS SSD and 
CrystalDiskMark, and real-world copy tests. 
We’re happy to report that somehow, to 
the benefit of users everywhere, WD/Sandisk 
has managed to create a TLC drive that can 
sustain 450MBps performance during long 
writes. Up until now, about the fastest 
sustained write speed we’ve seen out of a TLC 
drive after it oversteps it’s cache is 300MBps. 
Indeed, after testing with our usual 20GB data 
set, we threw 320GB at the Blue 3D, and it 
just soldiered on at a steady 450MBps. There 
may be a point at which the drive will slow 
down, but we didn’t see it.
By way of comparison, the Samsung 750 
EVO (go.pcworld.com/s750) drops to 
300MBps when it runs out of cache, was 
Blue 3D NAND SATA SSD 
PROS
•  No loss of sustained write speed as with other TLC 
SSDs
•  Excellent price per gigabyte
CONS
•  Boring label design could turn off PC enthusiasts 
who like to show off their hardware
BOTTOM LINE
The Blue 3D SSD is the first TLC NAND drive whose 
sustained write performance nearly matches that of 
MLC NAND drives. Along with its Sandisk 3D 
Extreme sibling, by far the best bang for your buck in 
a SATA SSD.  
$304

74   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
WD BLUE 3D NAND SATA SSD
considered good. Some drives, such as 
OCZ’s Trion 100 (go.pcworld.com/t100) 
and even Toshiba’s latest TR200 (go.
pcworld.com/t200), drop to around 
100MBps—slower than hard drive speeds. 
Yowser.
CrystalDiskMark tests the SSD with all 
caching engaged and is generally a 
good indicator of real life performance. 
We run the test with 1GB, 5GB, and 
32GB data sets.
Note that the Crucial BX300 (go.
pcworld.com/cbx3) is an MLC NAND-
based drive, from which we nearly always 
see 450MBps to 500MBps writing simply 
because writing MLC’s two bits takes less 
time than TLC’s three bits. At least until 
now. The WD Blue 3D and Sandisk Ultra 
3D keep up with it nicely.
The AS SSD benchmark issues the FUA 
(Force Unit Access—disabling caching in 
units that acknowledge the command) and 
is especially useful in determining the 
bare-knuckle performance of the controller 
and NAND. We run both AS SSD’s 1GB 
and 10GB tests, quoting the 10GB test 
results. As you can see in the chart shown 
above, the WD Blue 3D and its Sandisk 
Ultra 3D twin mirror each other closely, and 
keep up with the Crucial BX300. They all 
make the well-regarded (but pricey) Samsung 
EVO 750 SSD look slow. 
Our real-world tests consist of reading and 
writing both a 20GB single compressed 
Write
Read
CrystalDiskMark 5
Sequential performance (MBps)
485
524
494
525
491
515
CRUCIAL BX300
WD BLUE 3D
SANDISK ULTR A 3D
Write
Read
AS SSD Sequential 
througput
10GB (MBps)
489
516
485
502
407
505 
481
516
SANDISK ULTR A 3D
WD BLUE 3D
SAMSUNG EVO 750
CRUCIAL BX300
archive and a 20GB set of small- to mid-sized 
files and folders, with the majority of the files 
being compressed types such as WMV, MP3, 
and JPG. The real-world copies can, and have, 
revealed issues like the slow sustained write 
speed of TLC that synthetic benchmarks can 
sometimes miss.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   75
For us, the great thing about the 
evolution of TLC performance is that 
once again, we can recommend on 
price without constant disclaimers 
concerning poor sustained write 
performance. For the consumer, it 
means large-capacity 2TB SSDs with 
great all-around performance.
VERDICT
We have nothing negative to say about 
the WD Blue 3D. Okay, the label is 
boring, which isn’t trivial if you’re 
building your own PC and want to show 
off all your hardware finery through the 
tempered-glass, LED-lit side of your 
case. But it’s fast, affordable, and 
available in up to 2TB capacities, and 
we’re impressed with whatever trick 
Sandisk/WD used to eliminate the 
MLC/TLC performance gap. 
20GB folder write
20GB write
20GB folder read
20GB read
AS SSD Sequential  
througput
10GB (MBps)
68
44
89
44
88
61
92
44
74
45
100 
45 
71
44
96
SANDISK ULTR A 3D
WD BLUE 3D
SAMSUNG EVO 750
CRUCIAL BX300

76   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
'HVWLQ\Ƶ*DPLQJMXQNIRRG
WKDWZHFDQŞWSXWGRZQ
Delicious, mindless fun filled with some empty calories. BY HAYDEN DINGMAN
T
his weekend I finished Destiny 2’s 
campaign for the third time. I’ve 
hit the (soft) level cap with all 
three classes, collected around a 
dozen exotic weapons, completed most of 
the Strikes, played some player-versus-player 
Crucible matches, shot thousands of 
enemies, killed off Emperor Calus to 
complete the raid (twice), and even spent two 
hours running up and down a hallway to 
exploit some bad code on Bungie’s part.
I’m still not sure why Destiny 2 keeps me 
coming back for more, the digital equivalent 
of an irresistible bag of chips. But I’ve officially 
run out of reasons to procrastinate writing this 
review—just in time for the first expansion to 
drop next week.
STARTING OVER  
FROM ZERO
Yes, next week. Despite Destiny 2 only 
releasing a month ago on PC, the Curse of 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   77
Osiris DLC will soon be upon us as part of a 
simultaneous release with the longer-lived 
console versions of the game. It’s timed 
alongside an update for the base game in 
which Bungie’s basically promised the world 
(go.pcworld.com/wrld).
It’s tricky sometimes to review video 
games nowadays. No sooner have you 
pinned down their 
structure than 
everything 
changes. But even 
in that 
environment, 
reviewing Destiny 2 
is a bit like trying to 
hit a moving target 
while riding a train 
in the opposite 
direction. Making 
the whole endeavor doubly intimidating is 
Destiny’s reliance on jargon—if you 
understood even half the opening paragraph, 
chances are you already played Destiny 2. It’s 
that type of game.
But I’ll do my best regardless.
Starting with the basics: Destiny is a 
shooter. There are MMO elements running 
parallel, and we’ll get to those, but at the 
end of the day it’s a shooter. And it’s very 
good at it.
Plenty of video games have guns. Few 
have guns that roar like Destiny 2’s revolvers, 
or fliiit like Destiny 2 ’s assault rifles, or tch-tch-
tch like Destiny 2’s semi-autos. Doom is 
probably the only other game in recent 
memory to imbue firearms with such terrifying 
power. Maybe Battlefield. Maybe.
Add in a variety of mobility options 
(pseudo-jetpacks, triple jump) and you’ve got 
an excellent core. Seriously, I’ve spent hours 
compulsively playing Destiny 2 even with 
Destiny 2 
PROS
•  Shooting. Every. Gun. Is. Excellent.
•  The loot grind up to 265 can be addictive
CONS
•  Some side activities rendered completely useless 
early on in the level grind
•  Campaign starts strong but doesn’t go anywhere
BOTTOM LINE
Destiny 2 is mechanically a fantastic shooter, but a 
threadbare plot and some odd choices after the 
campaign wraps up make it more of a foundation to 
build on. Expect it to take a year for Bungie to polish 
this one up again.  
$59

78   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
DESTINY 2
nothing much to do, just tooling around the 
open-world areas shooting random enemies. 
The moment-to-moment action feels that 
damned good.
Which I guess brings me to the next point: 
Destiny 2 is sort of a singleplayer shooter, but 
not really. There’s a campaign, and from what 
I’ve heard the story this time around is more 
coherent than the previous game. But...well, 
let’s just say the original Destiny must have 
been terrible.
The opening is solid. We’ve covered it a 
few times now, both in our E3 preview (go.
pcworld.com/e3pr) and our initial review 
impressions (go.pcworld.com/1mpr). 
Basically, Earth is invaded by an alien race 
known as the Cabal—specifically a military 
subset known as the Red Legion. They steal 
your powers away and drive humanity into 
exile. It’s evocative.
And then it goes nowhere.
What’s frustrating about Destiny 2’s 
campaign is that it should be great. It’s space 
opera on a grand scale, with half a dozen 
alien races, one of which (“The Traveler”) is 
literally the size of a small moon. There’s a 
mysterious magical energy called “Light” that 
imbues you with incredible powers, and a 
spaceship that literally uses Mercury for fuel. 
Not the metal mercury, lower-case, but the 
planet Mercury, capitalized. It grinds Mercury 
to dust in order to—get this—blow up the sun.
I. Should. Be. Jumping. Out. Of. My. Seat. 
Come on—a planet-eating ship that’s 
preparing to blow up the sun! That’s amazing!
And it is, sort of. Destiny 2 is great at 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   79
dumping you into memorable set piece 
moments. Somehow none of it feels as 
impactful as it should though. Maybe I just lack 
knowledge of the Destiny universe, but 
enemies are mostly faceless and inter-
changeable, even when they’re different alien 
civilizations entirely. And what little plot is 
spoon fed to you often comes across as sterile 
and lifeless, with plot twists materializing out of 
thin air by characters you’ve barely met and will 
soon abandon. There’s never any real tension, 
no stakes to it. You and your little band of 
heroes make a plan, you execute on the plan, 
the plan works. Rinse and repeat for seven or 
eight hours.
To add insult to injury, you have to endure 
the campaign for each character you make to 
unlock all the locations and activities. Destiny 
has three main classes: Warlock, Titan, and 
Hunter. A fair number of people will 
undoubtedly pick one and stick to it, but this 
being a pseudo-MMO, those who want to be 
more versatile in group events will end up 
running two or even all three classes, and 
doing so involves grinding through the same 
dozen or so bland missions again.
So let’s talk about the pseudo-MMO 
aspects of Destiny 2 because the campaign’s 
really not worth any more words. It exists, it’s 
a bit bloated even the first time through, and 
any further runs involve mashing the Escape 
key at every cutscene.
This is a cliché but I’m saying it anyway 
because it’s true: Once the campaign ends, 
that’s when Destiny 2 properly begins. At that 
point you’ll be the maximum level (20) with 
access to a whole host of character abilities 
and a “Power Level” around 200. This 
number is a summary of your character’s 
gear—for instance, you might have an assault 
rifle rated 205, a helmet rated 195, and so on. 
As of writing, the “soft cap” is commonly 
considered 265, meaning it’s pretty easy to 
get to that point. The “hard cap” is 305, 
meaning all your 
gear needs to be 
the maximum 
power rating of 
305 at the same 
time. (The 
upcoming 
expansion will raise 
both these 
numbers, 
presumably.)
The end game 

80   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
DESTINY 2
revolves around 
driving this number 
up. I’ll skimp on the 
details here, but 
basically: Any 
activity you partake 
in has a chance to 
drive your Power 
Level up to 265 by 
rewarding you with 
higher-power gear. 
You can join with 
other players in one of the open-world areas to 
take down a powerful enemy or hold off waves 
of invaders—these “Public Events” reward loot 
up to a certain level. You can play multiplayer 
matches, with each match granting loot too. 
Or complete weekly challenges.
The choice is yours, and it’s this grind from 
200 to 265 that feels most satisfying—there’s 
a lot for you to tackle, and it isn’t tied to the 
lackluster campaign.
Past level 265 you enter the real end-
game and it becomes much, much harder to 
get loot. At this point you’ll find yourself 
doing only select activities, mostly ones that 
are refreshed on a weekly basis as those are 
the only ones that consistently dole out 
decent gear. The Leviathan raid, a six-person 
co-op event that takes an hour or two even 
when you know what you’re doing, is one 
such event. Ditto Nightfall Strikes, which are 
smaller co-op instances where you have to 
blitz through rooms of enemies and take 
down a powerful boss at the end.
Apologies—if this section seems dry and 
mechanics-heavy, it’s because mechanics are 
all there is to talk about. I mean, there are bits 
of story tied to all this, but it’s mostly inane 
radio chatter that’s easily ignored the first time 
you hear it and becomes more and more 
banal the longer you play. Stuff like “The 
Cabal are setting up a mining drill, Guardian. 
Hold them off for [BLANK] minutes until they 
go away and a treasure chest pops out!”
Think of it like going to a diner and there’s 
parsley on your plate—you’re not supposed 
to eat it. It’s just there so someone can 
pretend you’ve consumed something high-
class instead of Grade B hamburger with 
some frozen fries. That’s the “story” in the 
late-game.
Destiny 2 is junk food. It really is. If I’ve 
procrastinated writing this review, it’s because 
I’ve never felt more conflicted about a game. 
It’s oftentimes not very good. 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   81
Player-versus-player modes are complete 
trash, for instance—horribly balanced, with 
what feels like pretty middling netcode and a 
whole host of baffling decisions (like 
defaulting team chat to “Off”). Actually, chat is 
a mode-spanning issue, with players unable 
to even talk to each other in group hubs.
And yet I’ve put a ton of hours into Destiny 
2  PvP this past week thanks to a limited-time 
“Iron Banner” event. My reward? A helmet 
with horns coming out of the side, and also 
some armor with wolves on the shoulders. I 
was excited.
This duality, this push-pull, has me 
completely torn. The Leviathan raid is another 
instance—the raid is made up of four (or five, if 
we count the hub) distinct segments, with at 
least two of them being absolutely dreadful to 
play. And yet both times I’ve killed Emperor 
Callus and finished the raid for the week I’ve 
signed off with “Cool, see you all back here 
next week then?”
End game content is lacking in general, 
actually. The game does open up substantially 
after you finish the campaign, but as I said it 
then ratchets back down a few hours later 
once most activities stop being rewarding. 
The Leviathan raid is the closest you’ll get to a 
proper “storyline” post-campaign, and there 
are some jaw-dropping moments your first 
time through, but if you run it weekly you’ll 
soon tire of the same four rooms on rotation.
I expect that like the original Destiny, it’ll 
take Destiny 2 probably a year to hit its stride—
though next week’s expansion and 
December’s quality of life updates might help.
Or maybe it won’t. It doesn’t matter. I’ll 
probably be there regardless, because that core, 

82   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
DESTINY 2
the part where you click and your gun fires and 
then the numbers go up—that part of Destiny 2 is 
so damn satisfying. Mindless, for sure, but I keep 
coming back to it. Night after night I wrap up 
playing “Serious Video Games” or whatever and 
then I end up staring at Battle.net, thinking about 
popping open Destiny 2 for a bit.
I’ve sunk a stupid number of hours into 
Destiny 2. A lot of it was done while listening 
to podcasts or even watching TV on my 
second monitor—it’s that type of game, and 
demands precisely that much attention (which 
is to say: often less than half). I know that, and 
yet I keep coming back.
Why? I don’t know.
VERDICT
And maybe that’s really why I’ve put off 
writing this review so long. Normally I’d like 
you to come away from a review with some 
insight, some inkling of why I’d recommend 
a game or (probably more often) not 
recommend it. Destiny 2 has me baffled 
though. I’m spinning my wheels in it, 
grinding my way to 305 before next week’s 
expansion, and I don’t really know why.
Except that the shooting part is great. And 
the wolf armor is cool. That’s kept me 
entertained for upwards of 60 hours now, 
mindless though it might be. Destiny 2 has 
mastered the “Filling Up Bars” psychology of 
game design, even if those bars aren’t very 
interesting once filled. It’s gaming junk food.
Not exactly a glimpse into some 
shrouded corner of the human condition, 
but it’ll have to do. Bungie now offers an 
expansive free trial with the first two planets 
and access to the Quickplay playlist in 
Crucible multiplayer so you can see if Destiny 
2 meets your tastes, too. 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   83
Amazon Echo Plus:  
Not plus enough  
Amazon’s mid-range smart speaker comes up just a little short. BY MICHAEL BROWN
T
he “plus” in the Amazon Echo 
Plus is an integrated ZigBee 
smart-home hub. It’s a feature 
that boosts this smart speaker’s 
price tag by a third compared to the $100 
second-generation Echo (go.pcworld.
com/2nde), and by a factor of three 
compared to the $50 second-generation 
Echo Dot. Having one smart appliance do 
the job of two sounds like a good idea, but 
most people will be happier with a more 
powerful smart-home hub that works in 
conjunction with Alexa, even if the 
combination costs more.
Don’t get me wrong. Amazon is way out 
in front when it comes to enabling voice 
control of the smart home, thanks to 
partnerships with all the major players—DIY 
platforms like Samsung SmartThings (go.
pcworld.com/smth) and the Wink Hub 2 (go.
pcworld.com/hub2) as well as big installers 
such as Vivint Smart Home (go.pcworld.com/
vivi) and ADT Pulse (go.pcworld.com/
adtp)—and a deep commitment to helping 
IMAGE: AMAZON

84   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
AMAZON ECHO PLUS
any and every interested third-party 
manufacturer tap into its Amazon Voice 
Service (i.e., its Alexa digital assistant). I can 
recommend any Echo model—except this 
one. That’s because Amazon built only half of 
a smart home hub into the Echo Plus—it didn’t 
include support for the other very popular 
smart home protocol: Z-Wave.
IS THE ECHO PLUS A GOOD 
SMART HOME HUB?
ZigBee is strong, and you’ll find it in lots of 
products, including the ever-popular 
Philips Hue smart bulbs (go.pcworld.com/
phil). (And as I was writing this story, 
Amazon was tossing Echo Plus buyers a free 
Hue white LED bulb). But most stand-alone 
smart-home hubs—including the two DIY 
platforms I just 
mentioned—support 
both protocols to 
not limit their 
customers’ choices.
Amazon’s effort to 
build its own smart-
home hub seems 
half-hearted in other 
ways, too. Take that 
Philips bulb it comes 
with: You can ask 
Alexa to turn it on and 
off or dim it to a 
percentage, but you 
can’t tie it to a motion 
or door/window sensor that will turn it on 
when a person walks into a room or when a 
door opens. And while you can establish 
rules that will turn the bulb on according to a 
rigid schedule—on every day at 4:00 p.m., 
for example—you’ll need to create an entirely 
separate rule to turn it off again. That’s just 
tedious. There are also no provisions for 
staggering the on/off times slightly to make 
the behavior look more human to a burglar 
who might be casing your house. And since 
you can’t create schedules based on sunset 
and sunrise, you’ll need to adjust schedules 
for daylight savings time twice a year.
Getting started with the Echo Plus and a 
Philips Hue bulb is as easy as can be, 
although I had a strange experience when I 
first set up the Echo Plus itself. Every other 
The Echo Plus restores the elegant volume control ring from the original Echo.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   85
Echo I’ve configured lit up as soon as I 
plugged in its power supply. When I plugged 
in this Echo Plus, I got nothing—no lights, no 
sounds, nothing. I unplugged it and moved it 
to another outlet, just in case there was 
something wrong with the first one, and I got 
the same result.
I assumed the hardware was DOA and sent 
my PR contact a note to that effect, but I left the 
speaker plugged in. About an hour later, I 
heard the characteristic Echo chord and 
Alexa’s voice greeted me with her cheerful 
“Hello!” After another 20 minutes or so, Alexa 
automatically installed a firmware update and 
restarted the Echo—and it’s been working ever 
since. I’m still waiting to hear from my contact if 
this is the expected behavior, but I’d be 
surprised if it was. People are conditioned to 
hardware doing something—anything—when 
they plug it into the wall.
Anyway, back to the Philips Hue 
installation. All you need to do is screw the 
bulb into a socket and supply power to the 
socket. Ask Alexa to discover devices, and 
she’ll find the bulb and assign it a name—“first 
light” in my case—but you can change that 
name to anything you want as long as each 
smart device has a unique name. As a 
practical matter, once you’ve named 
something, stick with it. You don’t want to go 
back through and edit all the scenes and 
routines you’ll set up later.
Now if you want to take advantage of 
other features that Philips offers with its Hue 
Amazon Echo Plus
PROS
•  Built-in ZigBee radio
•  Restores volume-control ring from the original 
Echo
CONS
•  Doesn’t allow sensors to trigger lights
•  No support for Z-Wave smart home devices
•  Not a great loudspeaker
BOTTOM LINE
The presence of a ZigBee radio isn’t enough for us to 
recommend the Echo Plus over any of Amazon’s 
other Echo smart speakers, regardless of price. 
$119
The Echo Plus is the only one of Amazon’s smart 
speakers that can directly control ZigBee devices, 
but it’s very limited as to what it can do with them. 

86   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
REVIEWS
AMAZON ECHO PLUS
line—more sophisticated schedules, 
synching your lights to music, or 
changing the color of color Hue 
bulbs—you’ll need to buy a Philips 
Hue hub anyway.
On the bright side, provided all 
your ZigBee smart-home devices are 
within range of the Echo Plus, you’ll 
need only one Echo Plus to control all 
of them. Utter a relevant voice 
command to any Echo (or Echo clone, 
such as the Fabriq Chorus (go.
pcworld.com/chrs)), and that 
command will be relayed to the 
ZigBee radio in the Echo Plus over Wi-Fi. 
Scatter inexpensive Echo Dots all around the 
house, and you’ll never need to yell to control 
your smart home.
IS THE ECHO PLUS A  
GOOD SPEAKER?
If you want an Alexa-powered smart speaker 
that sounds great, buy the Alexa-powered 
Sonos One (go.pcworld.com/sone) or pair 
the far-less-expensive Echo Dot with 
hardwired or Bluetooth speakers. The Echo 
Plus has somewhat beefier speakers, it 
delivers a better sonic performance than the 
second-generation Echo, and it retains the 
elegant volume-control ring from the original 
Echo. But the Echo Plus is not as pleasing to 
my ears as the pricier Echo Show. That said, 
my strong recommendation of the more-
expensive Echo Show is based on its 7-inch 
display, not its musicality. Sonically speaking, 
in fact, none of Amazon’s Echos are superior 
loudspeakers to the Sonos One.
The Echo Plus sounds slightly better than 
the second-generation Echo, but it doesn’t 
hold a candle to the Alexa-powered Sonos 
One smart speaker. 
The bottom line—at least for today—is 
that the Echo Plus is better as a voice-
recognition adjunct to a smart home system 
than it is as a smart home system that has 
voice recognition built in. Amazon might 
add more native smart-home features to the 
Echo Plus down the road, but it will always 
be limited to supporting only ZigBee 
devices. And in the case of the ZigBee-
based Philips Hue bulbs, that support is 
relatively weak. There’s just not a lot here to 
recommend the Echo Plus over either its 
cheaper or more expensive stablemates. 
The Echo Plus sounds slightly better than the second-
generation Echo, but it doesn’t hold a candle to the 
Alexa-powered Sonos One smart speaker.  


 a hairbrush.
Recycle me.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   89
MEET: AMD 
Radeon Software 
Adrenaline Edition
IMAGE: AMD
FEATURE
AMD’s Radeon Software Adrenalin Edition update puts 
more power at your fingertips. BY BRAD CHACOS

90   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
MEET RADEON SOFTWARE ADRENALIN EDITION
FEATURE
I
t hasn’t been true for years now, but 
people still say AMD’s drivers suck. 
Radeon Software Adrenalin Edition 
(go.pcworld.com/rsae) definitively 
proves them wrong.
The latest in a series of massive annual 
Radeon Software feature updates, Adrenalin 
builds on the success of Catalyst Omega (go.
pcworld.com/cato), Crimson (go.pcworld.
com/crim), ReLive (go.pcworld.com/relv), 
and ReLive 17.7.2 (go.pcworld.com/r172) 
before it, polishing up existing tools like 
WattMan and Radeon Chill while adding in 
the most-requested features of Radeon users. 
But more notably, Adrenalin adds a new 
on-screen overlay and AMD Link mobile app 
to make it easier than ever to fine-tune your 
game settings or keep an eye on your PC’s 
performance.
What you won’t find are gargantuan 
performance updates. Some reports written 
when AMD teased the Adrenalin name 
suggested this new Radeon 
Software could supercharge 
your frame rate. Nope. This 
doesn’t unlock any new 
Vega features. AMD 
constantly releases new 
drivers throughout the year 
as games are released, and 
those are where you’ll find 
performance bumps. Sure, 
you might see some nice 
cumulative gains if you 
haven’t updated your drivers since last year’s 
milestone ReLive launch, but these annual 
releases focus on adding in new features. 
Adrenalin sure delivers on that part.
RADEON OVERLAY
Let’s start with the flashiest features before 
diving deep into the bountiful quality-of-life 
updates. Before Adrenalin, adjusting the 
software options for your Radeon graphics 
card (go.pcworld.com/rgrc) required exiting 
your games and diving into the Radeon 
Settings app. The new Radeon Overlay lets 
you tune some of your Radeon Settings 
in-game and constantly monitor your PC’s 
performance.
Pressing Alt + R with Radeon Software 
Adrenalin Edition installed summons the 
Radeon Overlay, a slick interface that pops in 
from the right side of your screen. You’ll see 
several different settings available: ReLive, 
Performance, Chill, FRTC, FreeSync, and 
Meet the Radeon Overlay.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   91
Color options. Some of 
these may be missing if 
you open the Radeon 
Overlay outside of a 
game—I didn’t see the 
Performance or FreeSync 
options when I opened 
the Overlay on the 
Windows desktop, as 
you can see in the 
Radeon Overlay image.
Let’s go through 
them one-by-one. 
The ReLive tab includes all the options 
previously found in the ReLive pop-up toolbar. 
If you want to record, stream, or screenshot 
your gameplay, this is the place to be. You 
can also adjust your microphone volume if 
you’re doing voice-overs. Helpfully, keyboard 
shortcuts for the tools in the ReLive tab are 
listed underneath each option, so you can 
avoid having to navigate through the Radeon 
Overlay to quickly activate or deactivate 
ReLive features.
The Performance tab lets you enable a 
separate performance monitor overlay that 
shows your system performance, similar to the 
on-screen displays found in overclocking 
software like EVGA’s Precision XOC and MSI’s 
Afterburner. AMD’s version gives you 
abundant control over how the performance 
monitor behaves, though. It doesn’t appear 
in these screenshots for some reason, but it’s 
a tiny black box with a column of data in a 
white font.
The Select Metrics section of Radeon 
Overlay’s Performance tab lets you pick and 
choose which data you’re interested in. FPS 
(frames per second) is a no-brainer, but you 
can also track GPU utilization, GPU engine 
clock, GPU memory clock, GPU temperature, 
GPU power, GPU fan speed, CPU utilization, 
and system RAM utilization. Snazzy! You can 
decide which corner of the screen houses the 
performance monitor, and the Metrics 
Options section lets you dictate how often 
Radeon Software checks for performance 
information (the default is every two seconds) 
or even select a file location to log your 
performance data.
That’s all incredibly useful for PC 
enthusiasts. While GeForce Experience 
pumps up the fun with Ansel and ShadowPlay 
Highlights (go.pcworld.com/hili), Nvidia’s 
software contains nothing that rivals AMD’s 
The Radeon Overlay’s Select Metrics options.

92   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
MEET RADEON SOFTWARE ADRENALIN EDITION
FEATURE
performance monitor. One bummer: The 
performance monitor disappears every time 
you exit a game, so you need to reactivate 
manually every time you load into a game. I’d 
love to see a future update add an option to 
keep it persistent.
Next up is the Chill tab, 
which lets you enable or 
disable AMD’s power-
saving, temperature-
lowering Radeon Chill 
feature (go.pcworld.com/
rach). The tab lets you 
enable Chill globally or just 
for the game you’re 
currently playing, as well as 
set the minimum and 
maximum frame rates you want Chill to work 
inside. Try it out, especially if you’ve got a 
power-hungry Vega 64 graphics card (go.
pcworld.com/ve64). AMD made some big 
changes to Chill in Radeon Software 
The Radeon Overlay’s Chill tab.
FRTC in Adrenalin’s Radeon Overlay.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   93
Adrenalin Edition, which we’ll address more 
directly later.
Frame Rate Target Control (FRTC; 
go.pcworld.com/frme) puts a cap on your 
maximum frame rate to keep your GPU from 
working harder than it needs to, and thus 
keep power draw and temperatures lower. 
Why let your Radeon RX 580 scream at 200 
fps when you’re using a 60Hz monitor? The 
Radeon Overlay lets you activate the feature 
and specify your FPS cap, though you’ll need 
to restart your game for it to kick in.
Likewise, the very simple FreeSync tab 
lets you manually enable or disable AMD’s 
screen- and tearing-killing FreeSync feature 
(go.pcworld.com/frsy) if you have a 
compatible monitor, like the stellar Nixeus 
EDG 27 ($410 on Amazon; go.pcworld.
com/nixe).
Finally, the Color section adjusts your 
display’s color temperature, brightness, 
hue, contrast, and saturation on the fly. If 
you’re running multiple 
displays, you can fine-
tune each one.
All in all, the Radeon 
Overlay puts a lot of 
information and 
performance at your 
fingertips that used to 
require leaving your game 
or downloading a third-
party monitoring tool. It’s 
fast and responsive, too. 
Color me a fan—but that isn’t the only way 
Radeon Software Adrenalin Edition gives you 
more control over the way you play.
AMD LINK MOBILE APP
The new AMD Link mobile app is launching as 
a complement to Adrenalin, with both iOS 
and Android apps available. AMD Link 
intertwines with your Radeon-powered 
gaming PC, giving you access to performance 
monitoring, ReLive functionality, and AMD 
news from your phone or tablet.
Connecting AMD Link to your gaming PC 
couldn’t be easier, though both devices need 
to be on the same network. Clicking Add A 
PC will walk you through the straightforward 
process, which involves enabling the AMD 
Link server in the Radeon Settings on your PC 
and connecting it to your phone using a QR 
code or on-screen code. You’ll be up and 
running in no time.
Signing back into the app is a little trickier. 
You’ll need to activate the AMD Link Server in the new AMD Link portion 
of Radeon Settings on your desktop.

94   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
MEET RADEON SOFTWARE ADRENALIN EDITION
FEATURE
The connection between your 
devices gets severed when 
you turn off your PC. Launching 
AMD Link again returns you to 
the Add A PC interface on the 
home screen. Repeating the 
process reconnects everything 
but seems like unnecessary 
busywork. I asked AMD about 
it, and a representative 
informed me that you can 
reconnect AMD Link to your 
PC by heading into the Link 
app’s Settings tab, finding the 
name of your previously 
connected PC, and checking 
the box next to it. Indeed, 
doing so worked—but it’s 
clunky and unintuitive. AMD 
software head Terry Makedon 
told me they’ll improve 
discoverability in future 
versions of the app.
The core AMD Link 
experience is superb, though. 
For me, the star of the show is 
performance monitoring. That 
tab shows you exactly how 
your PC is performing in real 
time, sliced three different 
ways depending on how you 
want your data. A current 
performance sub-tab gives you 
a snapshot of, well, your PC’s 
The Current Performance section of AMD Link, and some of the 
metrics you can select.
The FPS and Timeline views in AMD Link’s performance monitoring.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   95
current performance. You can 
use the settings gear at the top 
of the screen to fine-tune 
what’s being monitored—I 
disabled memory clock and 
system RAM usage to watch 
GPU temperatures and 
graphics card VRAM usage 
instead, for instance.
The performance 
monitoring section also offers a 
Timeline tab that shows 
performance over time, and 
yes, you can customize those 
metrics, too. Finally, a 
dedicated FPS tab goes deep 
on frame rate information, 
showing your current, average, 
minimum, and maximum frames per second, 
along with the total time elapsed during your 
monitoring session.
AMD Link keeps the screen active while 
it’s open. As a person who dislikes cluttering 
up my gaming experiences with overlays, 
I’ve found it useful to plug my phone into a 
USB port and just lean it against my monitor 
while I play, using AMD Link to keep an eye 
on PC metrics.
AMD Link’s ReLive functionality is just as 
useful—perhaps even more so if you routinely 
stream or record your gameplay. AMD Link is 
basically a ReLive remote control; you can use 
it to activate all of the feature’s streaming, 
video recording, and screenshot capabilities 
right from your phone. You can also browse 
through a gallery of any media you’ve 
captured using ReLive.
Finally, there’s also a news feed that shows 
content from AMD’s various social accounts. I 
don’t expect it to get much action.
RADEON SOFTWARE 
ADRENALIN UPGRADES: 
WATTMAN, RELIVE, RADEON 
CHILL, ENHANCED SYNC, 
AND MORE
After all these words we’re only just now 
getting to the improvements inside the core 
Radeon Settings app itself. Radeon Software 
Adrenalin addition has something for 
everybody, with across the board upgrades for 
AMD Link’s news feed and app settings screens.

96   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
MEET RADEON SOFTWARE ADRENALIN EDITION
FEATURE
WattMan, Enhanced 
Sync, Radeon Chill, 
ReLive, FreeSync, and 
more.
Most notably, 
Adrenalin adds a new 
central Connect tab to 
Radeon Settings. The 
biggest draw here is a 
Gallery section that 
serves as a hub for all 
the screenshots and 
videos you capture 
with ReLive. You’re 
able to sort through 
media types to quickly 
find the file you’re 
looking for, and upload 
your eye candy to 
various social services. 
Like YouTube, Twitch, 
Facebook, Twitter, et 
cetera.
To facilitate that 
sharing, the Connect 
tab’s Accounts section 
ties Radeon Software to 
your social networks.
Resource Center, 
the final section in the 
Connect tab, serves as 
a fountain of 
knowledge for Radeon 
products, brimming 
The Connect gallery in Radeon Software Adrenalin.
The Connect accounts in Radeon Software Adrenalin.
The Connect tab’s Resource Center in Radeon Software Adrenalin.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   97
with how-to guides and links to news on the 
Radeon website. AMD software head Terry 
Makedon says there are no plans to include 
ads or promotions in the Resource Center. 
(You can already find those on the Radeon 
Settings home screen.)
You may have noticed the Connect tab 
intertwines heavily with AMD’s ReLive tools, 
and ReLive itself sees some substantial quality-
of-life improvements in Adrenalin—especially 
if you’re a streamer or video producer.
ReLive now supports Chroma keys for 
webcams, so you can make the room behind 
you disappear if you have a green screen. A 
new chat integration overlay lets you show 
viewer discussions directly in your video feed. 
Display compatibility gets an upgrade too, 
with borderless region capture and support 
for games stretched across multi-monitor 
Eyefinity setups. Separate audio tracks for 
your mic and your game can help you step up 
your audio game.
On the 
performance side, 
ReLive now supports 
Vulkan-based games, 
and AMD has 
optimized ReLive’s 
already-sterling 
performance to reduce 
its minimal effect on 
in-game frame rates 
even further.
AMD’s Radeon Chill 
(go.pcworld.com/rach), the nifty technology 
that reduces your PC’s heat output and power 
draw by intelligently scaling down GPU usage 
when it isn’t needed, gets a massive shot in the 
arm with Radeon Software Adrenalin Edition. 
Previously, game support for Chill worked on a 
whitelist-style system: Only games that AMD 
tested and confirmed to work with the 
technology could use it. In Adrenalin, that shifts 
to a blacklist instead. Radeon Chill can be used 
with any Vulkan, DirectX 9, DX11, or DX12 game 
now, and AMD will ban a game only if it proves 
incompatible with the technology.
Huzzah! Chill works well, with little to no 
visual or responsiveness degradation in the 
games I’ve tried. Expanding its support from a 
few dozen popular games to the vast expanse 
of the PC gaming universe is welcome 
indeed, especially if you’re running a power-
hungry card like Vega 64 (go.pcworld.com/
ve64) or a wildly overclocked Radeon RX 580 
The ReLive global settings now includes borderless region capture and the 
ability to toggle region hotkeys for streaming and recording.

98   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
MEET RADEON SOFTWARE ADRENALIN EDITION
FEATURE
(go.pcworld.com/r580).
You still need to manually enable Chill in 
the global settings portion of Radeon Settings’ 
Gaming tab to use it. Afterward, you can head 
into individual game profiles in Radeon 
Settings—or use the Radeon Overlay—to 
enable or disable it for specific games, as well 
as set the minimum and maximum FPS 
boundaries for Chill in each game.
You can also enable or disable AMD’s 
FreeSync technology (go.pcworld.com/frsy) 
in specific games now, if you have a FreeSync-
compatible monitor. I have no idea why you’d 
ever want to turn off FreeSync—the 
technology synchronizes the refresh rate of 
your graphics card and display to erase 
stuttering and tearing for buttery-smooth 
gameplay—but hey, you can now if you’re 
battling bizarre performance problems.
Enhanced Sync (go.pcworld.com/r172) 
was introduced in Radeon Crimson ReLive 
17.7.2 over the summer. It minimizes screen 
tearing and increases 
responsiveness when 
you’re playing games—
probably e-sports games 
like CounterStrike: 
Global Offensive—at 
ultra-fast refresh rates, 
similar to Nvidia’s rival 
Fast Sync. At launch, 
Enhanced Sync only 
worked with Radeon RX 
400- and 500-series 
graphics cards. Adrenalin expands that to all 
GCN-based Radeon graphics cards (read: most 
Radeon cards going back to the HD 7000 
series era in 2012). But that’s not all: Enhanced 
Sync now plays nice with Vulkan games, mobile 
Radeon GPUs, multi-GPU configurations (go.
pcworld.com/mgpu), and multi-monitor 
Eyefinity setups.
Adrenalin also adds the much-needed 
ability to save and load custom Radeon 
WattMan (go.pcworld.com/wtmn) 
overclocking profiles, including profiles 
created by the community. Be careful with 
shared profiles, though: If you accidentally 
Radeon Software Adrenalin lets you enable FreeSync on a per-game basis.
Adrenalin also adds the much-
needed ability to save and load 
custom Radeon WattMan 
overclocking profiles, including 
profiles created by the 
community. 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   99
crank up your entry-level Radeon RX 550 with 
an overclocked Radeon Vega 64 profile, bad 
things could happen.
Other little niceties round out the 
package. They include:
• Borderless windowed mode support in 
multi-GPU configurations
• Vulkan support for FRTC; optimized 
compute profiles if you’re into data-crunching 
or GPU cryptocurrency mining
• Radeon Software for Linux improvements
• A star icon in the title bar that brings 
you to a Radeon Settings feedback page 
where you can voice your opinions or vote 
on new features
• Three new interface themes if the stock 
Radeon Settings colors fail to tickle your fancy.
BOTTOM LINE
Add it all up and there’s a lot for Radeon 
graphics card owners to like. This update 
polishes the already-gleaming core of 
Radeon Settings and puts more control and 
information into the hands of gamers, 
without even the need to exit your game. 
Between Radeon Software Adrenalin Edition 
(go.pcworld.com/rsae) and the Red Team’s 
rapid-fire driver releases in recent years, 
AMD’s software missteps of the past are 
firmly in the grave. This is good stuff. 
Saving and loading WattMan overclocking profiles comes in Radeon Software Adrenalin.

100   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
FEATURE
How to build 
a Raspberry 
Pi retrogaming 
emulation console
IMAGE: iSTOCK
Assemble a simple, inexpensive console to  
play all your favorite classic games.  
By Benj Edwards
FEATURE

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   101
F
or the past 20 years, retrogaming 
enthusiasts have dreamed of 
building a “universal game 
console” capable of playing 
games from dozens of different systems. 
Their ideal was inexpensive, easy to control 
with a gamepad, and capable of hooking 
into a TV set.  
Thanks to the Raspberry Pi 3 hobbyist 
platform and the RetroPie software 
distribution (go.pcworld.com/rtpi), that 
dream is finally possible. For under $110, you 
can build a very nice emulation system that 
can play tens of thousands of retro games for 
systems such as the NES, Atari 2600, Sega 
Genesis, Super NES, Game Boy, and even 
the PlayStation.
All you need to do is buy a handful of 
components, put them together, and 
configure some software. You’ll also have 
to provide the games, but we’ll talk about 
that later.
THE PLAN
To make our “ultimate console,” 
we’re going to run software 
emulators and video game 
ROM files on a single-board 
computer: the Raspberry Pi 
3—an inexpensive computer 
designed for hobbyist and 
educational use. 
To make this process easy, 
retrogaming enthusiasts have 
combined all the software programs we need 
into a free software package called RetroPie. 
RetroPie includes (among other programs) a 
Linux operating system, a large suite of game 
system emulators, and an interface that makes 
it easy to use. 
For people who aren’t familiar with 
emulation, here’s a brief rundown: An 
emulator, for our purposes, is software that’s 
been programmed to behave in almost the 
exact same manner as the hardware of an 
older video game system. It simulates the 
original console circuitry in software.
Since most computers lack a slot to read 
data from old video game cartridges, 
hobbyists have copied video game data into 
software files called ROM images. (In the case 
of home PC emulators, such as the Apple II, 
you may also encounter disk images, which 
are copies of an entire floppy disk’s contents 
combined into a single computer file.)
You don’t need one of these classic consoles to enjoy their games. 

102   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
BUILD A RETROGAMING CONSOLE
FEATURE
A front-end interface is a program that 
displays a graphical menu that lists available 
games on the system, lets the user select the 
game of their choosing with a game 
controller, and then run the game on the 
appropriate emulator automatically. In this 
case, the front-end program included in 
RetroPie is called EmulationStation.
WHAT CONSOLES ARE 
SUPPORTED?
Here’s a noncomprehensive list of some of the 
most popular classic game consoles that 
RetroPie can emulate very well:
•  Atari 2600
•  Atari 7800
•  Atari Lynx
•  GCE Vectrex
•  NEC TurboGrafx-16
•  Nintendo 64
•  Nintendo Entertainment System
•  Nintendo Super NES
•  Nintendo Game Boy
•  Nintendo Game Boy Color
•  Nintendo Game Boy Advance
•  Nintendo Virtual Boy
•  Sega 32X
•  Sega CD
•  Sega Master System
•  Sega Genesis
•  Sega Game Gear
•  Sega Saturn
•  SNK Neo Geo
•  SNK Neo Geo Pocket Color
•  Sony PlayStation
•  Sony PSP
RetroPie supports many more platforms 
with varying levels of compatibility and user 
experience. You can find a full list of 
supported systems on the official RetroPie 
Wiki (go.pcworld.com/rpwk).
The easiest-to-use emulators are part of an 
emulation system called RetroArch, which 
combines many emulation engines (called 
“cores”) into one program with a unified 
interface.
The other, stand-alone emulators included 
with the RetroPie package produce mixed 
results that can be frustrating to configure. If 
you stick to the platforms we listed, you’re 
sure to have a good time.
STEP 1: BUY THE HARDWARE
Now that you know what we’re going to do, 
it’s time to buy the necessary hardware. 
Below is a rough breakdown of the cost of a 
RetroPie system as of April 2017. These prices 
come from Amazon.com, so they can vary 
considerably over time. The actual cost of this 
system depends on how much gear you bring 
with you.
BASIC REQUIRED 
COMPONENTS
You need the computer itself, a case so it 
doesn’t get damaged, and a power supply. 
The basic “official” Raspberry Pi case does the 
job very nicely for a low cost. 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   103
Regarding power, even though the 
Raspberry Pi 3 is powered through a micro 
USB port, it requires a 2.5 amp power supply. 
That much current is not supplied by most 
computer USB ports or adapters, so I 
consider it necessary to buy a special adapter 
for this purpose, and Amazon sells a good 
one from CanaKit.
•  Raspberry Pi 3 Model B (go.pcworld.com/
pi3b): $38
•  Official Raspberry Pi 3 Case (black/gray) 
(go.pcworld.com/pi3c): $10.98 
•  CanaKit 5V 2.5A Raspberry Pi 3 Power 
Supply (go.pcworld.com/pi3p): $9.99 
Obviously, you also need a TV to display 
the games and an HDMI cable to hook the Pi 
3 to the TV set. If you don’t have a spare 
HDMI cable, buy one (such as this 6-foot 
AmazonBasics High-Speed HDMI Cable for 
$7.09, go.pcworld.com/cabl).
To set up RetroPie, you’ll also need 
another computer system (Windows or Mac) 
that can write to SD cards.
Pick up a storage option
This SD card will hold the operating system, 
emulators, and game files. A bigger card 
means more room for games. If you already 
have a spare 8GB or larger microSD card, 
you’ll save yourself some money. If not, here 
These are the hardware ingredients for a RetroPi computer. 

104   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
BUILD A RETROGAMING CONSOLE
FEATURE
are some good candidates:
•  SanDisk Ultra 32GB microSDHC UHS-I Card 
(go.pcworld.com/ul32): $13.27 
•  Samsung SDXC 64GB Class 10 UHS-1 Card 
(go.pcworld.com/ul64): $25
Pick a keyboard option
You’re going to need a basic USB keyboard 
during the initial setup. After that, if you stick 
to console games, you won’t need it 
anymore—unless you want to change some 
advanced options in the future. 
If you want to go wireless, the Rii Mini is 
a very nice pocket-sized keyboard that can 
make changing system settings easy from a 
living room couch if you need to do so in 
the future.
•  HP K1500 Wired USB Keyboard (go.
pcworld.com/k150): $8.13
•  Rii Mini Wireless 2.4GHz Keyboard with 
Touchpad (go.pcworld.com/rimi): $17.99
Pick a controller option
You’re going to need a multipurpose 
controller to play games from many different 
classic systems. The Pi 3 has Bluetooth built 
in, so wireless controllers are a good option, 
although they are tougher to set up.
A versatile option is the 8Bitdo NES30, a 
wireless Bluetooth controller with NES-
stylings, dual analog sticks, and four shoulder 
buttons. 
Alternately, the DualShock 4 works 
wonderfully for retro games because it has a 
very good D-pad, is wireless, and is 
comfortable to hold. With its analog sticks, it 
also can do double duty for more modern 
consoles such as the Nintendo 64 and the 
PlayStation.
• Buffalo Classic USB Gamepad for PC 
(go.pcworld.com/gapd): $19
• 8bitdo NES30 Controller (go.pcworld.
com/ns30): $34.99
• 8bitdo NES30 Pro Controller (go.
pcworld.com/30pr): $42.99
• Sony DualShock 4 Wireless Controller 
(go.pcworld.com/ds4c): $47.79 
SAMPLE RETROPIE BUILDS
With those options in mind, let’s build out 
two sample systems.
Bare-minimum build
This is the least expensive complete option, 
with just 16GB of SD card storage, a cheap 
USB keyboard (which you will technically only 
need during setup), and a lower-cost, but still 
good, wired USB game controller. Again, 
prices are based on Amazon listings as of 
If you want to go wireless, the 
Rii Mini is a very nice pocket-
sized keyboard that can make 
changing system settings easy 
from a living room couch if you 
need to do so in the future.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   105
April 2017. Prices may 
change.
• Raspberry Pi 3 
Model B (go.pcworld.
com/pi3b): $38
• Official Raspberry 
Pi 3 Case (black/gray) 
(go.pcworld.com/pi3c): 
$10.98 
• CanaKit 5V 2.5A 
Raspberry Pi 3 Power 
Supply (go.pcworld.
com/pi3p): $9.99   
• SanDisk Ultra 16GB 
Ultra Micro SDHC Card 
(go.pcworld.com/ul16): $8.99
• Buffalo Classic USB Gamepad for PC 
(go.pcworld.com/gapd): $19
• HP K1500 Wired USB Keyboard (go.
pcworld.com/k150): $8.13
• AmazonBasics High-Speed HDMI Cable 
(go.pcworld.com/cabl): $7.09
Total: $102.18
If you have a little more money to spend, 
try this build that I use for a more comfortable 
setup:
Benj’s recommended build:
With a 64GB SD card (32GB is fine as well), 
you have room for many more game ROMs 
(especially newer games that take up much 
more space), and with a wireless DualShock 
4 and a miniature wireless keyboard, you have 
a complete wireless living room experience. 
• Raspberry Pi 3 Model B (go.pcworld.
com/pi3b): $38
• Official Raspberry Pi 3 Case (black/gray) 
(go.pcworld.com/pi3c): $10.98  
• CanaKit 5V 2.5A Raspberry Pi 3 Power 
Supply (go.pcworld.com/pi3p): $9.99 
• Samsung SDXC 64GB Class 10 UHS-1 
Card (go.pcworld.com/ul64): $25
• Sony DualShock 4 Wireless Controller 
(go.pcworld.com/ds4c): $47.79 
• AmazonBasics High-Speed HDMI Cable 
(go.pcworld.com/cabl): $7.09
• Rii Mini Wireless 2.4GHz Keyboard with 
Touchpad (go.pcworld.com/rimi): $17.99
Total: $153.31
Not too shabby. If you had told me a 
decade ago that I’d be able to build 
something like this for under $200, I would 
have been flabbergasted.
My recommended build (see parts list below).

106   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
BUILD A RETROGAMING CONSOLE
FEATURE
STEP 2: DOWNLOAD THE 
SOFTWARE
Of course, the fact that all of the software we’ll 
be using is available to download for free, 
also helps keep this build so affordable.
Software you will need:
•  The RetroPie distribution disk image
•  An SD card image writing tool for Windows 
or Mac
Download RetroPie
To get RetroPie, visit the official RetroPie 
download page (go.pcworld.com/pdow).
Click the giant red download button for 
“Raspberry Pi 2/3,” and you’ll save a file 
named something like “retropie-x.x-rpi2_
rpi3.img.gz,” where x.x is the current version 
number of RetroPie. Put this file somewhere 
you can easily find it, such as on your desktop.
This file is a disk image that contains all the 
software (including OS, emulators, etc.) you 
need to run our RetroPie setup on a Raspberry 
Pi 3. In a moment, we will be writing it to a 
microSD card using a special tool.
Download an SD card image writing tool
Next we need to download a software tool 
that will write the RetroPie software disk 
image to an SD card. We need this tool 
because the file system used by RetroPie is 
not the same as the ones used by Windows 
machines or Macs, so it’s not as easy as 
copying the files directly to the SD card. What 
we’re doing is writing an already configured 
Linux OS installation directly to the SD card.
If you have Windows, download Win32 
Disk Imager (go.pcworld.com/dski).
If you have a Mac, download ApplePi 
Baker (go.pcworld.com/appi).
If you have Linux, I seriously doubt you 
need this tutorial!
STEP 3: WRITE THE 
SOFTWARE TO THE SD CARD 
The RetroPie disk image we just downloaded 
is compressed. If you’re on a Mac, chances 
are that OS X already uncompressed the 
image into a .img file automatically after it 
downloaded.
If you’re on Windows and you can’t 
extract a .gz file, download 7-Zip (go.
pcworld.com/7z1p), a versatile and free 
compression tool that will let you extract it. 
Next, you need to run the installation 
program for the SD card image writer tool you 
downloaded. Install it. Run the tool—either 
Win3 2Disk Imager or ApplePi Baker.
For Win32 Disk Imager: Under the 
Device section of the program, select the 
Win32 Disk Imager. 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   107
drive letter for your SD 
card. Make absolutely 
sure it’s the right one, 
because if you pick the 
wrong drive, this 
program could erase 
all of its data.
Click on the folder 
icon next to the Image 
File box in the 
program. Select the 
“retropie-x.x-rpi2_
rpi3.img” file we 
downloaded and decompressed earlier.
Assuming you’re absolutely sure you 
have the correct drive selected, click the 
Write button and wait. It will be done in a 
few minutes.
For ApplePi Baker: First, under the 
Pi-Crust section of the program, select the SD 
card drive you want to write to. It will say 
something like “/dev/sda3”.
Then under the Pi-Ingredients section of 
the program, click on the [...] button next to 
the white box and select the “retropie-x.x-
rpi2_rpi3.img” file we downloaded earlier.
Finally, click the Restore Backup button, 
and the image will write to the SD card.
Now you have the software on the card 
and you’re ready for the next step.
STEP 4: ASSEMBLE THE 
HARDWARE
Assemble the case with the Raspberry  
Pi in it
If you happen to have aluminum heat sinks 
(optional) as part of a kit you purchased, now 
is the time to affix those to the tops of the two 
main black chips on the Pi board.
Then open up the Raspberry Pi Official 
Case bag and lay its plastic pieces on a table. 
Carefully insert the Pi into the case and close 
it. Then attach the self-adhesive rubber feet to 
the bottom of the case.
Remove the microSD card from the 
computer you used to write the images.
Insert the microSD card carefully into the 
If you happen to have aluminum 
heat sinks (optional) as part of a 
kit you purchased, now is the 
time to affix those to the tops of 
the two main black chips on the 
Pi board.
ApplePi Baker. 

108   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
BUILD A RETROGAMING CONSOLE
FEATURE
SD card slot on the bottom of the 
Pi. The Pi 3 has a friction-fit SD card 
slot (previous models had a 
click-in-place slot), so push it in 
slowly. The SD card label should 
be facing outward, away from 
Raspberry Pi board.
Plug everything in 
Before starting up the system by plugging it in 
(the Pi has no on/off switch, so it will be on as 
long as it is plugged in), hook the HDMI cable 
to the Pi and to a TV set or monitor.
Also, plug in your USB keyboard or USB 
keyboard wireless dongle. Then plug in a USB 
gamepad, if you have one. If you’re using a 
wireless pad, you don’t have to do anything 
with it yet.
If you’re using a wired Internet connection 
instead of Wi-Fi, plug a properly wired 
ethernet cable into the side of the Pi.
Now’s the time to unwrap your handy 2.5 
amp power adapter and plug it into an AC 
outlet. Carefully plug the micro USB 
connector into the side of the Raspberry Pi. 
The unit will power up.
STEP 5: CONFIGURE THE 
SOFTWARE 
If everything went as planned when writing 
the RetroPie software to the SD card, upon 
first plugging in your Raspberry Pi, you will 
see a colorful RetroPie splash screen and a 
long crawl of text messages whizzing by. 
These are Linux boot messages useful for 
troubleshooting if something goes wrong. In 
general, you can ignore them.
After a few moments, the Emulation-
Station front end will start up. You will see 
a white/gray screen that says: “WELCOME. 
No gamepads detected. Hold a button on 
your device to configure it. Press F4 to quit at 
any time.”
What you do next depends on whether 
you have a wired or wireless game controller.
If you’re using a wired USB gamepad:
Hold down a button on the controller until 
EmulationStation detects it. Then it will ask 
you a long list of questions that let you assign 
buttons to controls (i.e. Up, Down, A, B, X 
buttons, etc.). Don’t mess this up, or you’ll 
have to unplug the Pi and start over.
Once that’s working, you will see a menu 
called RetroPie. It contains a list of shortcuts to 
set various settings. It’s a convenient way to 
configure the system without having to drop 
to a Linux command prompt.
Using your controller, select RASPI-CONFIG 
You’re in. Just follow the prompts. 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   109
from the list and hit the 
primary selection button on 
the controller. Then skip to 
the “Configure system-wide 
settings” section in this 
tutorial below.
If you’re using a wireless 
gamepad:
If you would like to use a 
Bluetooth gamepad like the 
DualShock 4 or the NES30 
Pro, you have a lot more work ahead of you.
First, hit F4 on the USB keyboard, and 
EmulationStation will quit. You will see a black 
screen with text in the upper left corner. You 
are now at a Linux command prompt.
Don’t panic. Type this exactly, case 
sensitive: sudo ~/RetroPie-S etup/
retropie-setup.sh
Then hit enter. This is the RetroPie setup 
program, a blue menu with lots of text 
options. Using the keyboard, find the 
Bluetooth option and select it.
You’ll have to switch the controller into 
discovery mode—for the DualShock 4, 
hold down the Share and the PlayStation 
button at the same time until its light blinks. 
For the NES30, hold down the power 
button on the front left of the controller 
until it turns on. Then you can search for it 
using the Bluetooth utility and sync with it 
(hit the second option for the DualShock 4 
after it syncs).
After that, restart 
your Raspberry Pi. To 
do this, exit the 
config program and 
type this into the 
command prompt: 
sudo shutdown 
-r now
The system will 
reboot. After a few 
moments, 
It’s not as scary as it looks.
Select Bluetooth.

110   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
BUILD A RETROGAMING CONSOLE
FEATURE
Emulation Station will start up again. You will 
see the screen that says: “WELCOME. No 
gamepads detected ….”
This time, instead of hitting F4, tap a 
button on your Bluetooth gamepad until it 
syncs up with the Pi.
Then hold down a button on the 
gamepad until EmulationStation detects 
it. It will ask you a long list of questions that 
let you assign which button goes to which 
control (i.e. Up, Down, A, B, X buttons, 
etc.). Don’t mess this up, or you may have 
to unplug the Pi and start the button 
assignments over again.
Once that’s working, you will see a menu 
called RetroPie. It contains a list of shortcuts to 
set various settings. It’s a convenient way to 
configure the system without having to drop 
to a Linux command prompt.
Using your controller, select RASPI-
CONFIG and hit the primary selection button 
on the controller.
Configure system-wide settings
If you did what I wrote above, either wired or 
wireless, you should now be in the Raspberry 
Pi system settings program. It’s a blue screen 
with text-based menus.
You’ll probably want to change a few 
settings here. The first is Localisation 
Options (note UK spelling)—which you’ll 
want to configure if you don’t live in the 
UK. The Pi and RetroPie were developed in 
the UK, and they use a different keyboard 
layout there than we do in the U.S. It is 
worth setting up an American keyboard 
layout and setting your time zone, because 
those will help if you need to make 
advanced configuration changes in the 
future.
The second thing to change is under 
Advanced Options and then Overscan. 
When it asks you if you would like to 
enable compensation for displays with 
overscan, select No if you’re hooked up to 
an HDMI TV or monitor. Overscan 
compensation makes the image smaller so 
System settings. 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   111
you don’t lose information off the sides of 
the screen if you’re using an old-style TV 
set. The only time you’d want to hit Yes 
here is if you are using a composite TV set 
with a special cable.
After you’re done setting that up, back 
out of those menus and select Finish. Then 
restart your Raspberry Pi. If you have a USB 
controller, hit the start button and choose 
Restart. If you’re at a text prompt, type: 
sudo shutdown -r now and the system 
will reboot.
Configure Wi-Fi
If you’ve got a wired ethernet connection, 
you can skip this step. If not, it’s time to use 
your gamepad to navigate to the RetroPie 
menu in EmulationStation, then select the 
Wi-Fi option at the bottom.
This will bring up a text-based Wi-Fi 
configuration program. Do what it says—
search for your access point, and enter your 
password. Then you should be up and 
running with an Internet connection.
STEP 6: COPY GAME FILES 
TO THE RASPBERRY PI
So you’ve set up the hardware and the 
software, but you still need game files to 
have fun with this tiny beast. So let’s copy 
some over. First, I’d like to share a few 
thoughts on the ethical nature of what 
we’re doing.
Currently, it is not legal in the United 
Digital works are fragile things, 
and the emulation community 
has done an incalculable public 
good by encouraging people to 
play and preserve classic video 
games. 
States to possess and play copies of games 
you have not bought or have not 
licensed for play, but I personally believe 
(speaking on behalf of myself and not 
this publication) that playing older game 
ROMS with emulators is ethical when done 
in moderation. (It is also possible to run 
legally licensed or purchased ROM files, 
but that is beyond the scope of this article.)
Digital works are fragile things, and the 
emulation community has done an 
incalculable public good by encouraging 
people to play and preserve classic video 
games. Nothing less than our cultural 
legacy is at stake. So partake, my friends, in 
your shared cultural heritage. And don’t 
feel bad about it. We all have the right to 
enjoy the fundamental cultural ingredients 
that came together to make us who we are 
today. Don’t let anyone try to keep that 
from you.
Hopefully, this reality will some day 
become reflected properly in law, but until 
then, we’re left building awesome, tiny 
emulation boxes and rationalizing it however 
we can.

112   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
BUILD A RETROGAMING CONSOLE
FEATURE
Copy ROM files via Samba network  
file sharing
With that disclaimer out of the way, here’s 
how you copy game files easily over to the 
Raspberry Pi. There are several ways to do it, 
but I think the easiest method is to use 
Windows file sharing—called “Samba” in the 
Linux world. You can do this whether you 
have a Mac or a Windows Machine.
On Windows: Open up a new Explorer 
window and type \\retropie into the 
location bar at the top.
On a Mac: Open Finder, select Go from 
the menu at the top of the window, then 
select Connect To Server. In that box, type 
smb://retropie and click on Connect.
If for some reason you changed the 
system’s hostname in the settings, you’ll need 
to type that above in place of retropie.
Now that you’ve connected to the Pi via 
file sharing, you can 
click on the roms shared 
folder. You will see a big 
list of folders named 
after various game 
platforms like 
“atari2600” and 
“genesis.”
Drag-and-drop 
whatever ROM files or 
disk images you have 
into the proper 
platform-named 
directories on the Pi. For 
example, .NES ROM files should go in the nes 
directory on the Pi, and .SMC Super NES 
ROM files should go in the snes directory.
After you’ve copied everything, restart 
your Raspberry Pi through the 
EmulationStation Start button menu, and all 
the games will be recognized automatically. 
Then you can select whichever one you want 
and have a blast!
STEP 7: PLAY AND ENJOY
Wow, you’ve done quite a lot. Now is the 
time to sit back, relax, and enjoy the fruits of 
your labor. Play whatever you want, whenever 
you want, with ease. If you’re a 30-something, 
or older like me, you’ll be amazed at how little 
time you have to play these games compared 
to when you were a kid. Just remember to 
take breaks every once and a while to sleep, 
eat, and feed your kids. 
The payoff. 

'DUHWRŵQGDFDUHHUZKHUH\RXFDQWUXO\PDNHDGLIIHUHQFH
<RXUVNLOOVDQGWDOHQWVFRXOGEHH[DFWO\ZKDWZHQHHGWR
EXLOGWKHQH[WJHQHUDWLRQRIJUHDWWHDFKHUV*HWUHVRXUFHV
WRH[SORUHZKHWKHUWHDFKLQJLVULJKWIRU\RXDWteach.org.

News, tips, and reviews about smart homes,
home security, and home entertainment.
TechHive helps you find your  
tech sweet spot. 
We steer you to smart-home tech products you’ll love 
and show you how to get the most out of them. 
www.techhive.com  |  Follow us

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   115
Here’s How
HOW TO BUILD, MAINTAIN,  
AND FIX YOUR TECH GEAR
Five hidden features of Android 
ƻƳ2UHR\RXVKRXOGEHXVLQJ
Not all the cool features get top billing. BY RYAN WHITWAM
G
oogle is pushing Android 
8.0 Oreo to Nexus and Pixel 
devices as device makers 
scramble to get their phones 
updated. Google’s devices will be the only 
ones running the new software, at least for a 
while. What’s this Oreo update all about, 
anyway? Everyone knows about the big stuff, 
like picture-in-picture and autofill apps, but a 
lot more is going on if you dig deeper. Here 
are six awesome hidden Oreo features to get 
you started. 
IMAGE: RYAN WHITWAM

116   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
HERE’S HOW
HIDDEN ANDROID OREO FEATURES
1. WIDGETS VIA APP 
SHORTCUTS
Google has changed the location and 
appearance of the home screen widget 
picker several times, and Oreo brings yet 
another alteration. This one might make using 
widgets much easier, though. All of an app’s 
widgets are accessible with a long-press on 
the app icon. This works in the app drawer as 
well as on the home screen.
The long-press menu is the same one 
that shows pending notifications via 
notification dots, one of the high-
profile changes to Android 8.0. Less 
well-known is the icon that looks like 
four small squares. That’s the widget 
shortcut. It’s at the top of the pop-up 
for apps that have launcher shortcuts, 
but it has a full line with a label on 
those that do not. Tap the icon 
(wherever it may be), and a panel 
appears at the bottom of the screen 
with just the widget or widgets for that app. 
You can long-press and drag any of them 
onto your home screen.
2. ENFORCE BACKGROUND 
LIMITS ON APPS
Android 8.0 comes with a new raft of tweaks 
to background processes that prevents apps 
from bleeding your battery dry. There’s a big 
catch, though: These background limits are 
enforced only on apps that target the new API 
level in Oreo. You can force an older app to 
abide by the new background limits, however.
To make this change, open your system 
settings and go to Apps & Notifications > 
App Info. Find the app you want to modify. 
On the Info screen is a link to battery usage. 
Tap that, and you can turn off the toggle for 
Background Activity. Keep in mind, apps that 
aren’t set up to use the job scheduler 
correctly will have delayed notifications and 
other bugs when not allowed to run 
continuously in the background.
1.
2.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   117
3. SNOOZE NOTIFICATIONS
Android is great at delivering a ton of 
information in notifications, but you don’t 
always want to pay attention to a notification 
immediately. In Android 8.0 Oreo, you can 
snooze notifications until later. You don’t have 
to dig into any menus to set this up, but it’s 
still somewhat hidden.
When you get a notification you want to 
snooze, slide it left or right, but don’t swipe it 
away. Tap the clock icon next to the 
notification, and it will be snoozed for one 
hour. At that time, the notification pops up 
again. You can also change the hour timer to 
15 minutes, 30 minutes, or two hours by 
hitting the drop-down next to 
the hour snooze indicator.
4. GRANULAR 
CONTROL OVER 
SIDELOADING 
APPS
In past versions of Android, 
the “unknown sources” 
permission was all or nothing. Either every 
app on your phone could install apps as 
sideloaded APKs, or none of them could. 
Android 8.0 changes that to make 
sideloading a per-app setting. It’s safer, sure, 
but it’s also a bit of a pain to manage.
If you download or access an APK with 
the intention of installing it in Oreo, the 
phone will give you an error and send you 
off to a menu to change your settings. You 
can find this menu in Apps & Notifications > 
Special Access Apps > Install unknown 
Apps. Apps that have tried to open APKs will 
appear here. Each one has a settings screen 
where you can toggle unknown sources on 
and off. If you aren’t going to 
install APKs from an app, make 
sure it stays off. This prevents 
rogue apps from trying to 
sneakily install APKs by 
hijacking your taps.
5. CUSTOMIZE 
NOTIFICATIONS
Oreo includes several changes 
3.
4.

118   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
HERE’S HOW
HIDDEN ANDROID OREO FEATURES
to notifications, including notification dots 
and notification channels. If you want to filter 
out some of the noise, both these features 
include some handy customization options.
Notification dots are straightforward. 
When an app has a pending notification, its 
icon gets a colored dot. Long-press and the 
notification appears in a pop-up in addition 
to the notification shade. Not everyone 
wants the extra clutter, though. Dots can be 
disabled by opening the settings to Apps & 
Notifications > App Info > [App Name] > 
App Notifications. Turn off the toggle for 
notification dots, and they’ll never trouble 
you again.
The above notification menu is also where 
you’ll find channel controls. It can be 
accessed via the menu, or you can wait for a 
notification to pop up and move it aside (just 
like accessing the snooze option above) and 
tap the settings icon. You can turn off the 
channel that notification belongs to right from 
there, or tap All Categories to open the App 
Notifications menu. All the channels have on/
off toggles and separate settings for 
notification importance and sound. You have 
a lot of control over what apps can bug you 
about, but these settings are available only for 
apps that target Android 8.0. 
Oreo has plenty to keep you busy 
when you factor in all the hidden features. 
Keep all these tips in mind when you pick 
up your Oreo device, and you’ll master it 
in no time. 
5.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   119
How to fix your Wi-Fi network  
Wi-Fi trouble? The tips and tricks in our troubleshooting guide will help solve your 
problems. BY GLENN FLEISHMAN 
W
i-Fi is everywhere and built 
into everything. It’s like 
oxygen for Internet access, 
media streaming, gaming, 
and all types of networking. And it should just 
work all the time—right? If you’ve had an 
average experience with Wi-Fi on mobile 
devices, laptops, game systems, and more, 
you know that while a solid Wi-Fi connection 
might be the norm, those times when it’s not 
can leave you tearing your hair out.
Here, I look at a number of common 
scenarios that cause Wi-Fi problems and 
how to solve them, whether you’re running 
your own network or trying to connect to 
someone else’s using any platform. 
IMAGE: THINKSTOCK

120   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
HERE’S HOW
FIX YOUR WI-FI NETWORK
WI-FI BASICS
Before we get started, a very quick primer on 
a few Wi-Fi terms I’ll bring up repeatedly.
802.11: the name of the IEEE engineering 
trade group’s working group for wireless local 
area networks (WLANs). WLANs began in 
earnest with 802.11b in 1999 (802.11a came 
out at the same time, but had less traction), 
and the group is all the way up to 802.11ac 
and 802.11ad today. We expect to see 
802.11ax gear announced at CES. These 
specs define how data is encoded into radio 
transmissions and exchanged among devices.
Wi-Fi: a trademarked name used to cover 
network adapters that have passed a 
certification test to work with each other using 
various 802.11 specifications.
Frequency bands: Wi-Fi networks use two 
unlicensed frequency bands: 2.4 gigahertz 
(GHz) and 5GHz. Many Wi-Fi routers and 
most modern mobile and desktop devices 
can create networks or connect over either 
band—these are “dual-band” base stations or 
adapters. 802.11b and g exclusively use the 
2.4GHz band. 802.11a and ac exclusively use 
5GHz. 802.11n works over either band.
Channels: Frequency bands are divided into 
numbered channels. In the U.S., 2.4GHz has 
11 available overlapping channels numbered 
1 to 11, while 5GHz has about two dozen 
scattered across a broader range from 36 to 
165. They run in groups for historic reasons in 
how the bandwidth was granted for unlicensed 
use to everyone. (5GHz channels are 
numbered at least four apart, as in 149, 153, 
and 157, for reasons too involved to explain.)
CAN’T SEE A NETWORK 
YOU KNOW IS AVAILABLE
You know a network should be reachable 
from where you’re at, but it doesn’t show up 
in your list of available networks to which you 
can connect. Try these possibilities:
Check whether you disabled Wi-Fi without 
realizing it. Some Windows laptops and 
other devices have hardware Wi-Fi switches 
or buttons that you can press by accident. In 
Windows 10, the network icon will show a red 
X through the Wi-Fi in the taskbar. In macOS, 
the Wi-Fi “fan” in the system menu bar will be 
an empty outline.
The Wi-Fi Alliance awards this logo to products 
that meet its interoperability standards, but its 
absence on a product’s packaging could just 
mean the manufacturer didn’t want to pay for the 
testing and certification. 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   121
Cycle your Wi-Fi adapter. On many devices, 
you can choose a software setting to 
disable the Wi-Fi radio temporarily. Airplane 
Mode is the simplest way in operating 
systems that offer it, though using it disrupts 
cellular and Bluetooth connections on your 
device as well.
Out of range. Wi-Fi doesn’t have a hard cutoff 
as to when it will work and when it won’t. 
Sometimes you can get perfect reception in 
one place and then later not. That’s because 
the radio signals bounce off surfaces, pass 
through walls, and can be absorbed by 
people and materials. Move around and see if 
the network shows up.
Check your band. While many user devices 
can connect using either frequency band, you 
can still find modern hardware that can only 
connect via 2.4GHz. If 
you happen to be in a 
place where the only 
available signal that 
reaches is a 5GHz 
network, all your dual-
band hardware will 
connect just fine, but 
single-band 2.4GHz 
gear won’t. Because of 
the different 
characteristics of the 
band, it’s possible to be 
in a room in a house, 
office, or public space where a 2.4GHz signal 
doesn’t reach, but the same base station’s 
5GHz signal is crisp and clear. The Apple 
Watch in all its versions supports only 2.4GHz 
Wi-Fi. Older and inexpensive smartphones 
and tables may lack 5GHz radios, too, and 
many smart home products have only 
2.4GHz support.
It’s a closed network. While it’s never been 
a truly valid way of improving security, some 
networks are set up so that they don’t 
broadcast their name. In that case, if you 
don’t have a connection profile stored, you 
must use the method in the operating 
system to join a network manually, often 
listed as “Other” in a menu. You’ll need to 
enter the name precisely and, if it’s using 
encryption, choose its security method and 
enter the password.
Some computers have buttons that can turn the onboard Wi-Fi adapter on 
and off. 

122   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
HERE’S HOW
FIX YOUR WI-FI NETWORK
The network is down. Check from multiple 
devices or ask other people using the 
network. A router may need to be rebooted—
or replaced.
CONNECTED, BUT NO 
INTERNET ACCESS
Wi-Fi is just a radio technology, which 
means you can have a perfectly strong 
signal and a valid connection, but still lack 
network access.
Start by checking your network address 
and see if it’s in the “self-assigned” range. If 
there’s something wrong with the way the 
local network assigns out addresses to 
devices as they attach, your computer or 
mobile device will create a self-assigned 
address, which can’t route data elsewhere. In 
some cases, small networks can run out of 
addresses to assign! Some operating systems 
provide a clue that there’s a problem, like the 
Wi-Fi signal adapter showing an exclamation 
point in it. In others, you’ll need to drill into 
network status or settings.
In Android: Settings > About Phone > Status.
In iOS: Settings > Wi-Fi, then tap the “i” info 
button.
In Windows: Settings > Network & Internet, 
and then choose the Wi-Fi adapter.
In macOS: Open the 
Network system 
preference pane, select 
the Wi-Fi adapter, click 
Advanced, and click the 
TCP/IP tab.
If the IP address on 
your device for IPv4 
networking (a set of four 
numbers separated by 
periods) starts with 
169.254, then it’s a 
self-assigned address, 
Check the IP address assigned to your device to ensure that it has an 
address assigned by your router. 
Wi-Fi is just a radio technology, 
which means you can have a 
perfectly strong signal and a 
valid connection, but still lack 
network access.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   123
which indicates your OS 
couldn’t receive an assignment 
from the local network’s DHCP 
(Dynamic Host Configuration 
Protocol) server. (Some work 
and academic networks might 
require entering a static set of 
values, but you should know if 
you’re on one of those.)
Before assuming the 
network is at fault, however, 
check your firewall settings, if 
you have one installed or are 
using tools built into the OS. 
Some firewalls prevent 
connecting to new networks and routing 
traffic over them without an explicit entry. In 
most cases, you should receive a prompt that 
warns you about a new network and asks you 
to approve it. But depending on your 
configuration, it’s possible the network 
routing has been blocked silently.
Once you eliminate the firewall or other 
filters, you can be sure it’s the network that’s 
the trouble. If you’re not the person who kicks 
routers when they misbehave, you’ll need to 
find someone who is.
THE IP ADDRESS IS VALID, 
BUT NOTHING LOADS
If you’re using a public hotspot at a café, 
airport, conference center, or elsewhere, 
you might have run afoul of a portal or login 
page without realizing it. Most operating 
systems’ last several versions understand 
that you might encounter a portal and act 
accordingly. Until you answer the right 
questions or click the right buttons, 
Internet access is locked away.
With a portal page, the hotspot effectively 
hijacks domain name service (DNS) lookups, 
so that everywhere you’re trying to go 
redirects to the portal. Apple’s macOS and 
iOS recognize this behavior, and pop up a 
modal dialog that displays the portal 
webpage. Once access successfully starts, 
the OS can tell that DNS is working properly 
and dismisses itself or shows a Done button 
that can be tapped or clicked.
Sometimes portals are wonky or, due to 
firewall or other filtering software, your system 
doesn’t trust these redirections. This would 
prevent the portal page from appearing.
Speed-test tools like Ookla’s Speedtest.net can measure the 
speed your broadband ISP is providing, but you should test with a 
hardwired connection whenever possible.

124   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
HERE’S HOW
FIX YOUR WI-FI NETWORK
Open a browser and try to load any page, 
like cnn.com, and see what happens. If you 
see loading and redirection start—look at the 
Location field in your browser and see if the 
domain or IP addresses change—it’s likely 
something on your system that’s blocking 
completion.
If nothing ever loads in the browser, 
consult with the venue. You may need to 
obtain a password, pay, or use a special 
configuration.
YOUR NETWORK 
CONNECTIONS ARE 
INCONSISTENT
There are four main culprits in inconsistent 
Wi-Fi performance and network access: an 
erratic broadband connection, distance from 
a base station, the wrong base station in a set 
selected, and a congested local networking 
environment.
Broadband. The first is hard to test unless you 
can plug an ethernet cable into the router and 
use a bandwidth tester, like one from Ookla, 
or a network monitor that shows you 
performance over time. If you can, however, 
eliminate that as a possibility before you move 
forward.
Distance. This seems like an easy one, too: 
move closer! But if you don’t know where 
the Wi-Fi base stations are located or you’re 
in rooms away from those in which they’re 
placed, “closer” may be hard to figure out. 
Because of signal reflection and absorption, 
it’s not always obvious where to move your 
own base stations for better coverage. 
NetSpot ($49 from go.pcworld.com/ntsp, 
for the Pro version for Windows and 
macOS; there’s also a feature-limited free 
version) can help you visualize your 
coverage area by building a heat map as 
you walk around. There’s also a free version 
of Ekehau’s Heatmapper that provides 
similar features.
Wrong base station. A network of identically 
named Wi-Fi routers with the same security 
settings lets you roam, whether in a million-
square-foot office tower or across rooms in 
your house. The device you’re carrying, 
however, doesn’t always make the right 
choice about the strongest signal. In my small 
house, we have three base stations due to 
thick walls. Laptops and mobiles routinely 
stay connected to a router in the basement 
when they’re within feet of one upstairs. You 
can pick which base station to join when 
they’re all named the same, but cycling your 
Because of signal reflection  
and absorption, it’s not always 
obvious where to move your 
own base stations for better 
coverage. 

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   125
Wi-Fi adapter from on to off to on typically 
causes it to make a better choice.
Congested local network. If you’re at home 
or in an office where you run the gear, you 
may be able to improve the Wi-Fi situation 
around you. Outside of mesh networking 
ecosystems, you can typically connect to a 
Wi-Fi router and switch from the default 
automatic channel assignment in each 
band to choosing a channel. A little secret 
about Wi-Fi is that while the signal levels 
have a single maximum for all channels in 
2.4GHz, the 5GHz band is divided into 
three major pieces, and until 2014, each of 
them had a different maximum signal limit. 
The lowest channel range (36, 40, 44, and 
48) could only operate at no more than five 
percent of the maximum of the highest 
channel range (149, 153, 157, and 161, 
typically). Setting your 5GHz band to 
channel 149 solves that if you have 
equipment that wasn’t revised to reflect the 
new rules, which is the vast majority of 
base stations that are at least two years old. 
(You can use a tool like WiFi Explorer [$20 
from go.pcworld.com/wfex] to examine 
what’s in use around you.)
It’s a good idea to use a complex password, but they can be difficult to communicate to others. Many 
modern routers, including the Linksys Velop router shown here, let you share them via text message.

126   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
HERE’S HOW
FIX YOUR WI-FI NETWORK
One extra tip: Force 5GHz. Many base 
stations default to naming the separate 
2.4GHz and 5GHz networks the same to 
ease roaming. Most of them, however, also 
let you choose a separate name for each. If 
you want to ensure the fastest connection 
with the highest signal strength, having 
separate 2.4GHz and 5GHz network names 
helps alleviate the inconsistency you might 
experience as a result of connecting to the 
crowded 2.4GHz band.
CORRECT PASSWORD, NO 
CONNECTION
A network that requires either a password or a 
username and password will reject your 
device if you enter it improperly. But what if 
you’re positive you’re entering the password 
or username and password correctly?
•  Check whether you were given the 
password with correct capitalization, 
which counts in Wi-Fi passwords as in 
others. Spaces can be part of WPA2 
passphrases, but spaces are hard to 
indicate when written down. Confirm 
you’re not missing a space.
•  Make sure you’ve selected the correct 
network. In some places, you’ll be 
contending with dozens or more separately 
named networks, and you may have 
selected one named similarly to the one you 
want. Some businesses and hotspots run 
guest networks named only slightly 
differently than their internal, private 
networks.
•  Overloaded networks and routers with 
firmware that’s malfunctioning might reject a 
connection, even when you’ve entered the 
password properly. Consult with the 
network’s operator—if that’s you, reboot the 
router!
YOUR DEVICE REPEATEDLY 
REJOINS THE WRONG 
NETWORK
Most modern operating systems retain a  
list of every network to which you’ve 
connected ever. My Mac has entries that 
date back several years across several 
machine migrations. Some ecosystems sync 
access, too, so when you join the network 
on one device, all your other phones, 
tablets, and computers now can join 
without additional effort.
If you want to ensure the fastest 
connection with the highest 
signal strength, having 
separate 2.4GHz and 5GHz 
network names helps alleviate 
the inconsistency you might 
experience as a result of 
connecting to the crowded 
2.4GHz band.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   127
If you find a flaky network in a place you 
work or visit routinely that you’ve joined once, 
you might have tried to forget it, but it 
remains. I’ve seen this and heard from readers 
that deleting a network connection doesn’t 
fully remove it, because a synced copy 
elsewhere gets copied back to your device! 
The trick is persistence: keep deleting it from 
every device you’re using so the syncing 
finally syncs up.
You can manage networks in each OS 
after navigating to these locations:
Android: Settings > Wi-Fi, tap the Customize 
button and choose Saved Network.
iOS: In Settings > Wi-Fi, you can only forget 
the currently connected network.
Windows: Click the Network icon, choose 
Manage Wi-Fi Settings, and then choose 
Manage Known Networks.
macOS: Open the Network system 
preference pane, click the Wi-Fi adapter in 
the list at left, click Advanced, and then click 
the Wi-Fi tab.
YOUR ADAPTER COULD  
JUST BE DEAD
Wi-Fi adapters can just die, no matter what 
kind of device they’re embedded in. Before 
giving up, reinstalling the OS can be a final 
ditch way to see if it’s a corrupted driver rather 
than broken hardware. 
With a computer, you can purchase a 
cheap USB nub that plugs in and offers 
compatible service. With mobile phones 
and tablets, they may be unrepairable. As I 
was writing this article, a friend had just 
returned from the Apple Store with a phone 
that had its Wi-Fi access go flaky and then 
fail: the store said it couldn’t be fixed, only 
replaced. 
Windows 10’s Manage Known Networks setting 
will show you every network your computer has 
ever joined (unless you’ve told it to forget some of 
them). If you know there are networks you’ll never 
need to connect to again, click on each one and 
select Forget.

128   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
HERE’S HOW
([FHOIXQFWLRQVƹZD\VWRXVH
7H[WIXQFWLRQVWRPDQDJHGDWD
How to replace words; extract first and last words, matched or a specific word  
in a string of text. BY JD SARTAIN 
E
xcel’s Text functions are a major 
time-saver if your job entails 
managing massive data, 
especially data that’s imported 
from other sources. Fortunately, all ASCII data 
is easily imported, but the format of that 
imported data can vary drastically from one 
source to another. 
For example, fields may be delimited, 
such as with tabs, spaces, commas, or 
periods. Any other characters are all 
preferable to spaces. That’s because spaces 
not only exist in between fields, they also 
separate words within the fields, which makes 
sorting out the fields a real challenge. That’s 
where the following Text functions are helpful.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   129
1. USE THE SUBSTITUTE
FUNCTION TO REPLACE
ONE STRING OF TEXT
WITH ANOTHER
Function syntax: The syntax (or sentence 
structure) of the SUBSTITUTE function is this:
=SUBSTITUTE(text, old text, new text, 
[Instance Num])
Note: If you don’t specify an Instance 
Num, every occurrence of the Old Text is 
changed to the New Text. If you specify the 
Instance Num, only that occurrence of the 
Old Text is replaced. For example, entering 
the number ‘1’ means you want to change 
only the first occurrence of that word in the 
string.  
1. Enter some phrases in column A (from A2 
through A13).
2. Enter the word or phrase you want 
changed in column B.
3. Enter the word or phrase you want to 
replace the old text with in column C.
4. Enter the following formula in cells D2 
through D7 (or half the database): 
=SUBSTITUTE(A2, B2,C2,1)
This changes/replaces only the first 
occurrence of the Old Text to New Text.
5. Next, enter this formula in the remaining 
cells (in our case, D8 through D13): 
=SUBSTITUTE(A2, B2,C2). This changes/
replaces all occurrences of the Old Text to 
New Text.
Note: This function is case-sensitive, so if 
your results aren’t working, change the text to 
all the same case.
2. EXTRACT THE LAST
WORD IN A STRING OF
TEXT USING TRIM, RIGHT,
AND SUBSTITUTE
For this example, the object is to extract the 
last word—that is, the last name, from a string 
of text (the full names of a list of clients).
Use the SUBSTITUTE function to replace one string 
of text with another. 
1.

130   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
HERE’S HOW
EXCEL’S TEXT FUNCTIONS
1. Enter some names in column A: first, last, 
and middle names or initials.
2. Enter this formula in B2: 
=TRIM(RIGHT(SUBSTITUTE(A2,” “,REPT(“ 
“,50)),50))
3. Copy the formula from B2, down to B3 
through B1000 (or the end of your database). 
For this example, we’re assuming your 
database has 1,000 records.
4. This formula works because the 
SUBSTITUTE function locates all the spaces in 
the string of text, and then replaces each 
single space with 50 spaces. The RIGHT 
function removes 50 characters (from right to 
left), and the TRIM function deletes all the 
excess leading spaces leaving just the single, 
last word. If you have longer strings of text, try 
substituting 100 or more for the 50 values in 
the above formula.
3. EXTRACT THE FIRST 
WORD/NAME IN A STRING 
OF TEXT USING LEFT AND 
SEARCH
This formula works when you need to 
separate the first name from the middle and 
last name of a list of clients.
1. Enter some names in column A (or use the 
same names from the previous exercise).
2. Enter this formula in B2 through B1000: 
=LEFT(A2,SEARCH(“ “,A2)-1) to extract the 
first name of each client into a separate 
column.
Use the SUBSTITUTE function to replace one string 
of text with another. 
Extract the first word/name in a string of text. 
2.
3.

JANUARY 2018   PCWorld   131
4. EXTRACT EVERYTHING 
EXCEPT THE FIRST WORD IN 
A STRING OF TEXT USING 
TRIM, RIGHT, REPT, AND 
SUBSTITUTE
The purpose of this exercise is to remove the 
honorifics from a list of client names. These 
clients are providing confidential survey 
information, so the company does not want 
the titles and salutations of each individual to 
influence the surveyors.
1. Enter some more names in column A (or 
use the same names from the previous 
exercise). Enter some honorifics before each 
name; for example, Mr., Miss, Ms., Mrs., Dr., 
Sir, Lord, Lady, Capt., etc.
2. Enter this formula in B2 through B1000: 
=TRIM(RIGHT(SUBSTITUTE(TRIM(A2),” 
“,REPT(“ “,60)),180)) to extract the full names 
of all the clients minus the honorifics.
3. And, if you wanted to extract the honorifics 
(for some reason), enter this formula in C2 
through C1000: =LEFT(A2,SEARCH(“ 
“,A2)-1).
5. EXTRACT NAMES FROM 
EMAIL ADDRESSES USING 
LEFT, FIND, AND 
SUBSTITUTE
The worst job of the day is to spend hours 
manually retyping client names or domain 
names from email 
addresses, especially 
when the list is over 5,000 
names. Use the following 
formulas to complete this 
task in minutes.
1. Enter some email 
addresses in column A.
2. Enter this formula in B2 
through B5000: 
=LEFT(A2,FIND(“@”,a2)-1) 
to extract the full names of 
all the clients.
3. Enter this formula in C2 
through C5000 to remove 
the underscore between 
the first and last name: 
Extract everything EXCEPT the first word in a string of text. 
4.

132   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018
HERE’S HOW
EXCEL’S TEXT FUNCTIONS
=SUBSTITUTE(B2,” “,”_”).
4. Move to cell F2. Select 
Formulas > Text. Type C2 in 
the Text field box on the 
Functions Arguments dialog 
screen, or click cell C2, and 
then click OK. This formula 
converts the names to 
Proper Case (that is, first 
letter of the first and last 
name capitalized, all other 
letters in lowercase).
5. Copy the formula in F2 to 
F3 through F5000 and 
press Enter.
6. EXTRACT 
DOMAINS FROM 
EMAIL ADDRESSES 
USING TRIM, LEFT, 
SUBSTITUTE, MID, 
FIND, LEN & REPT
1. Enter this formula in D2 
through D5000 to extract the 
domain names from the email 
addresses:
=TRIM(LEFT(SUBSTITUTE 
(MID(A2,FIND(“@”,A2), 
LEN(A2)),” “,REPT(“ “,100)),100)) 
2. And last, enter this formula in 
E2 through E5000 to remove the 
@ signs from the extracted 
domain names: =SUBSTITUTE 
(D2,”@”,””) 
Extract domains from email addresses. 
6.
Extract names from email addresses. 
5.

Experience the world’s most amazing animals 
in one app. WWF TOGETHER – the new free app 
from World Wildlife Fund. Download it today. 
worldwildlife.org/together
THE CLOSER WE GET, THE MORE WE SEE

134   PCWorld   MONTH 2017
Huawei 
Mate 10 Pro 
Review
Tech Spotlight
A video showcase 
of the latest trends  
≥ The Huawei Mate 10 Pro is the kind 
of flagship phone you’d expect from 
Samsung and Google, packed with 
premium features, and oozing power. 
While it will no doubt struggle to 
compete with the likes of the Galaxy Note 8 and Google 
Pixel 2 XL once it releases in the U.S. (mainly due to a lack of 
carrier support), Huawei has nonetheless proven that it’s 
worthy of its No. 2 position on the smartphone charts. 
Watch the 
video at
go.pcworld.
com/hm10
134   PCWorld   JANUARY 2018

