The Adobe PDF workflow:
Saving time and money with 
PDF in print
Executive summary
Today’s creative professional demands faster turnaround, cheaper prices, and higher quality. 
The promises of technology make these demands seem reasonable, because Internet print ser­
vices, high-bandwidth delivery mechanisms, and digital presses allow much faster output with 
no loss of quality. However, that increase in efficiency requires that the creative professional be 
ever more diligent in creating files that will image correctly the first time.
A PDF workflow is the right tool to deliver that efficiency. In a PDF workflow, all of the com­
ponents of a print job are captured into a single file. This approach makes it possible to proof, 
deliver, and print from the same, compact Adobe® PDF file. Preflight tools contained within 
Adobe Acrobat® 6.0 Professional assure the designer and the print provider that the project will 
produce the excellent results expected.
Furthermore, Adobe Acrobat 6.0 Professional offers a suite of tools that improve any print 
workflow. Review and Comment tools allow designers to communicate directly with custom­
ers during the proofing cycle. The built-in preflight and verification tools provide proof that a 
PDF meets the specifications for a particular print vendor. Last, the on-board color separation 
engine can take the job all the way to imaging for final output on press.
WHITE PAPER
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1 
Executive summary
2 
Print today
5 
Using a PDF workflow
8 
Other ways to leverage PDF in a 
print workflow
10 Conclusion
  
  
   
   
 	 
 
 	 


 


A PDF workflow
With the Adobe Creative Suite, you 
can create assemble and deliver 
your projects. With Adobe PDF, you 
can deliver that project with confi­
dence that it will print correctly.

2
The Adobe® PDF Workflow
Print today
Printing has changed dramatically since the introduction of the computer to the workflow. It 
has put powerful design tools into the hands of more people, sped the process of preparing jobs 
for print, and provided cheaper options for creating the final, printed piece. However, compe­
tition among those people creating for print and those who produce the printed material in­
creases as more people become able to provide cheaper, faster, and better service. Staying ahead 
in print today means creating a workflow that leverages the advantage of a digital workflow 
while avoiding the pitfalls.  
It’s about money and time
When digital prepress first made its debut in the mid-eighties, a promise was made that it save 
money and time when compared with traditional methods of publishing. However, the reality 
is often the reverse. As digital, creative tools become easier to use, more people are building files 
intended for professional-level printing. However, designers and printers approach the process 
from different perspectives and have different goals. These differences cause miscommunica­
tion in the delivery of work, which results in significant losses of both money and time.
For example, mistakes in the delivery of a project may stop it completely:
• Missing linked graphic elements
• Missing linked text elements
• Missing font files used in the layout or in a graphic
• Unknown page size information
• Unsupported native application files
Furthermore, mistakes in the project may not become obvious until the job is imaged:
• Low-resolution pixel-based graphics
• Incorrect color modes
• Hidden problems in linked graphic files
• Unintended spot colors that require additional printing plates
• Overprinting errors
All of these (and many more) problems require some sort of intervention. Someone has to 
diagnose and correct them, adding an unplanned expense to the job. If the creative professional 
has to do it, then the lost time may cause the job to miss a deadline. In either case, a customer 
becomes more likely to look for another vendor. Since maintaining existing customers is far less 
expensive than developing new ones, this is a bad situation.
It’s about process
A project moves through several stages in a print design workflow. Both designers and print­
ers need to find ways to speed things up so that they can adhere to short timelines and tight 
budgets. Since the cost of labor, ink, paper, and equipment can only be controlled so much, the 
process itself has to be explored for savings.
Preflight is a necessity in today’s workflow. If implemented correctly, preflight catches problems 
at a stage when they can be fixed at much less cost than after the job has gone to print. However, 

3
The Adobe® PDF Workflow
an ad hoc preflight system that is designed to work with any incoming file format is very com­
plex and requires highly trained personnel. When the need is to speed the movement of projects 
along in the workflow, both the designer and the printer need standard ways of working that 
allow them to automate as much of the process as possible. Without that standardization, jobs 
continue to reach a bottleneck at the preflight phase.
Furthermore, a certain number of steps cannot be avoided. Imposition, trapping, and imaging 
are all still necessities in the process of printing. Print vendors are looking for ways to stan­
dardize and automate that aspect of their businesses. The end goal is to remove as many of the 
human-touch steps as possible from the print-production workflow. By accepting a wide variety 
of file formats, print vendors must continue to have a person work on the files. However, by ac­
cepting work in only a limited number of source file formats, print vendors exclude potentially 
lucrative customers. Printers are seeking ways to allow customers the creative freedom to use 
the tools they like, while enabling an automated workflow. If successful, an automated workflow 
will return real dollars and cents to the designer in the form of reduced printing costs. Mean­
while, the printer can increase profitability and create a healthier business.
It’s about creative flexibility
Not all design is done with a single desktop application used on a single operating system. As 
more people enter the world of print design, as more design is created for non-paper media, and 
as systems become less expensive, the possibilities have grown. There are tools dedicated to pro­
ducing design solely for use in a Web and multimedia project. However, the same design for a 
Web project may need to be used in a print project. Although it is better to use a toolset like the 
Adobe Creative Suite, which allows creation of a variety of media types in a more fluid way, it is 
sometimes necessary to work from an application that was created for a specific type of media. 
The output from such applications must frequently be used for a variety of purposes.
Moreover, there are many tools on the market today that are built specifically for print design, 
and each has its own set of strengths and weaknesses. Not all them work the same way or pro­
vide the quality of output required by a printer’s high-end equipment. Designers may not have 
the option of moving to another package (especially in the short term), yet they need to be able 
to submit work from those applications to a print workflow. Such designers are often left with 
few print vendors from which to choose.
It’s a competitive world
All of this is made worse by the fact that margins are tight in the print world, and design cus­
tomers have ever increasing needs for fast turnaround of material. They, too, have been sold on 
the concept of faster, better, and cheaper in the print world. Somehow, creative professionals 
need to be able to create files for the print shop with confidence that they are built correctly, 
have been validated for a particular workflow, and will image correctly.
A PDF workflow
A PDF workflow allows the standardization required to take full advantage of a digital work­
flow for print. PDF is uniquely suited to the task of collecting the many pieces of a print project, 
delivering those pieces, and acting as a vehicle for creating the final printed work.

4
The Adobe® PDF Workflow
The source-application workflow
In a source-application workflow, several files are collected into a folder, compressed into a 
package, and then sent to the print vendor. The printer then decompresses the file set, collects 
and distributes the pieces, preflights those pieces, and then moves to the next step of the pro­
cess. Each file type needs a somewhat unique workflow to address or diagnose problems specific 
to that file type.
Once the file moves into production, the process repeats itself. Each different file type has a 
specific set of needs and challenges to address. Although each application may be excellent for 
its design capability, keeping up with the various file formats and versions of those file formats 
is a constant strain on resources within the print shop.
An Adobe PDF workflow
A PDF workflow addresses and eliminates these problems. In a PDF workflow, the creative 
professional converts all of the various source files, fonts, and graphics into a single, widely ac­
cepted Adobe PDF file.
   
   	
  
 	 
  



A PDF workflow
By combining all of the various 
source files into a single, compact 
Adobe PDF file, errors are reduced
Using a PDF workflow offers the following benefits:
• The conversion process essentially tests the files. Since creating a PDF is similar to printing a 
file, problems can be spotted before the file is sent to a print vendor.
• The file is complete. An Adobe PDF file is an all-inclusive file. It contains all of the fonts, 
graphics, and specifications necessary for printing.
• The file is compressed. Adobe PDF offers a variety of compression options, so that the file will 
be smaller than the collection of files used in a source-application workflow.
• An Adobe PDF file can be created with particular Adobe PDF settings and then validated as 
proof that it meets the specifications of a particular vendor.
• Adobe PDF is a common platform that enables a standardized workflow within the
print shop.
By accepting Adobe PDF files, printers can begin to make assumptions about the project file. If 
a designer produces a file that adheres to the correct specifications, and can be validated as do­
ing so, then that file can move very quickly through the preproduction process and get to press 
more quickly. In a perfect workflow, an Adobe PDF can bypass all of the preflight and quality-
assurance steps and go directly to press.

5
The Adobe® PDF Workflow
Using a PDF workflow
A basic PDF workflow takes these four steps:
 
1. Preflight the project.
 
2. Properly create the Adobe PDF.
 
3. Preflight and validate that PDF.
 
4. Submit the file.
The end result is a file that the printer will trust and feel comfortable accepting.
Preflight the project
Although a PDF workflow will improve a print project’s likelihood of succeeding, it is still im­
portant to be sure that the source files are built correctly. Preflight is a process of methodically 
checking a project to look for problems. This process is especially important in a PDF workflow, 
because some problems, like low-resolution graphics, cannot be resolved by simply converting 
the project to PDF. By preflighting the project before creating the PDF, such issues are resolved 
long before the press deadline looms or intervention charges begin to mount.
There are a number of preflight options if your tool does not offer built-in preflighting, such 
as the functionality in Adobe InDesign. However, preflight can also be as simple as creating a 
checklist and examining the file set in a structured way.
Things to examine:
• Font files. Make sure they can be embedded into a PDF file.
• Linked graphics. Be sure all links are up-to-date.
• Embedded graphics. Make sure all graphic files are linked instead of embedded.
• Resolution. Make sure pixel-based graphic files have enough resolution to print correctly.
• Scaled or rotated graphics. Applying these effects may create problems during imaging.
• Color mode. Use CMYK or Spot color unless you are in a color-managed workflow.
• Number of plates. Check the number of plates that the project will require.
• Bleeds. Make sure that elements that abut the edge of the page bleed correctly.
• Page size. Set the pages size(s) correctly for the printed job.
• Overprinting objects. Look at objects that overlap to see that they interact correctly.
A simple checklist is a good start to be sure that any hidden problems in the files are spotted and 
corrected. The exact tool doesn’t matter, as long as the files are examined consistently. A prob­
lem report is also useful to help plan future projects by capturing and learning from mistakes.
Properly create the Adobe PDF
There are two ways to create files for an Adobe PDF workflow. The first is to produce a Post­
Script file and hand it to Adobe Acrobat Distiller® 6.0 for conversion to PDF. Because PDF is a 
flexible file format, the settings for creating the file are important. In most cases, print vendors 
will determine their specific needs and supply an Adobe PDF Settings file, also known as a job 
options file. This file automatically configures Adobe Acrobat Distiller 6.0 to meet certain needs 
How PDF files are created
There are seemingly many ways to 
create PDF files, such as using PDF 
Maker in Word or choosing File: 
Print and selecting Acrobat PDF as 
a printer. However, these actually 
do create PostScript and hand it to 
Distiller. It just happens in the back­
ground. It is still important to use 
the correct settings to produce PDF.

6
The Adobe® PDF Workflow
within the workflow. For example, a PDF file for printing should not use JPEG compression for 
photographic images, and so a set of Adobe PDF settings for print would not use JPEG compres­
sion on any images in the file.
The second method for generating Adobe PDF is to export it directly from an Adobe application 
such as InDesign or Illustrator. In either case, the end result is a PDF file that conforms exactly 
to the specifications for the PDF file format. Again, the flexibility of PDF requires the PDF file to 
match the needs of a particular print vendor. 
Although either method of creating an Adobe PDF will work, a discussion with the print vendor 
is paramount to a successful PDF workflow. If for no other reason than to assure the print ven­
dor that the files are being created in a consistent workflow, the discussion should occur before 
any PDF files are created. Some print vendors, for example, may require Adobe Acrobat Distiller 
6.0-generated PDF files that are compatible with a certain version of Acrobat. Producing PDF 
files outside of that specification will cause them to fail in the print shop, damaging the process.
PDF Transit
Using Adobe PDF settings in Adobe Acrobat 6.0 is an easy way to produce Adobe PDF files that 
conform to a specification. However, some printers have begun to offer an easier method for 
their clients to create Adobe PDF files for a specific workflow right from the Print menu of their 
design applications. PDF Transit installs as a small software package that gives a computer the 
ability to work in the following workflow:
 
1. The client select the PDF Transit printer driver as if it were any other printer.
 
2. PDF Transit creates a PDF file based on specific, vendor-driven specifications.
 
3. PDF Transit launches a Web browser connected to the vendor’s server.
 
4. PDF Transit allows internal proofing at the client site as a first step.
For more information
about PDF Transit
See the PDF Transit Web page: 
www.adobe.com/products/
pdftransit/main.html
PDF settings
Allow you to determine that you are 
creating the correct Adobe PDF for 
your needs.

7
The Adobe® PDF Workflow
 
5. The client fills out the job ticket online and submits the file.
 
6. The print vendor verifies the receipt of the file with an e-mail response.
 
7. The print vendor prints and delivers job.
This direct connection is especially appropriate for many direct-from-digital printing solu­
tions, because they are often used in a fast-turnaround situation. Adobe PDF in this situation 
allows for high quality in that fast-turnaround setting.
Clone PDF
There are a number of options from vendors other than Adobe for creating PDF. These creation 
options may be appropriate for some uses of PDF, such as files meant for quick delivery, but they 
may not be good for a print workflow. For example, Mac OS X can produce a PDF file without 
Adobe Acrobat Distiller. That PDF file may work well for sharing a memo or letter. However, 
Adobe PDF is borne of more than twenty years of expertise and history in creating tools for the 
creative and print professional. Adobe strongly recommends that PDF files in a professional 
print workflow be created with Adobe Acrobat Distiller 6.0 or directly from other Adobe ap­
plications.
Preflight and validation
In order to submit a PDF file to a print workflow, a designer needs to be able to demonstrate that 
the file was created correctly. It isn’t enough to create the file with a certain style or set of Adobe 
PDF settings and then offer verbal assurance that this was done. In some formal way, a print 
vendor has to know that the file will image correctly.
In Adobe Acrobat 6.0 Professional, the preflight functionality provides that assurance. After us­
ing the preflight tool on a PDF file, the file can be validated with a stamp to indicate that it con­
forms to a specific profile. The profile, much like a PDF style or Adobe PDF setting, represents 
a particular vendor’s workflow needs and is usually created by that vendor. Since any change to 
the file will flag the validation, a printer can rest assured that an incoming file with the correct 
validation will print correctly.
Preflight validation
Validation allows you to know that 
the file will print correctly.

8
The Adobe® PDF Workflow
PDF/X
PDF/X is a subset of the PDF file format that helps remove the guesswork from PDF-for-print 
creation. It offers both creative and print professionals a way to settle on a standard group of 
PDF settings. One of the advantages of PDF/X is that it is a true standard, described by the ISO. 
As such, it is a specification that can be used by a variety of different applications and vendors 
without requiring any one vendor’s toolset. This flexibility makes it attractive to those seeking 
an open, standard method of working.
PDF/X comes in two flavors that are in use today. PDF/X-1a and PDF/X-3 are similar but offer 
slight differences, and so they can represent the wide variety of possible workflows. Adobe Ac­
robat Distiller 6.0 can create a PDF that conforms to either version of the standard, and Adobe 
Acrobat 6.0 Professional can convert a PDF file to conform to the standard and then validate 
that it does.
Other ways to leverage PDF in a print workflow
Creating Adobe PDF for final output is one way to save time and money in a PDF workflow, but 
it is not the only way. By converting files to PDF, you can take advantage of the format in three 
other ways:
 
1. Proofing
 
2. Internet delivery
 
3. Archiving
 
4. Security
Proofing
Adobe PDF is a great option for proofing, because it eliminates the need for interim proofs 
on paper. Adobe Acrobat 6.0 Professional has many new features that automate the proofing 
process and make it easier and faster to move a document through the proofing cycle. To start, 
Adobe Acrobat 6.0 and Adobe PDF allow for a faster, cheaper method for concept and layout ap­
proval. With an e-mail-based review, a designer can send an Adobe PDF across town or across 
the country in a matter of minutes. With the Commenting tools in Adobe Acrobat 6.0, a client 
can add feedback directly to the Adobe PDF file and then send it back to the designer with the 
click of a button. Once all of the comments have been returned, the designer can reject or accept 
them, sort them, filter them, and then store them as a record of the changes requested.
Proofing
The Commenting tools in Adobe 
Acrobat 6.0 Professional make the 
review and comment process easier, 
faster, and cheaper.

9
The Adobe® PDF Workflow
Adobe Acrobat 6.0 Professional and Adobe PDF can also be used to proof for color. In a color-
managed workflow, management profiles can be attached to the elements in the authoring 
application, such as Adobe Photoshop®, Illustrator®, or InDesign®. These profiles, called ICC 
profiles, ensure that the color is seen and printed consistently across a variety of devices. Adobe 
Acrobat Distiller 6.0 retains ICC profiles that are attached to elements in a design project, so 
that color management works with the resulting Adobe PDF file. If such profiles are missing in 
a project, Adobe Acrobat Distiller 6.0 can be configured to add them as the PDF file is created, 
thus providing color management for such projects.
Those who use the tools in Adobe Creative Suite have an added advantage, because Adobe Acro­
bat 6.0 uses the same color engine as the rest of Adobe Creative Suite. Design elements look the 
same during creation, during layout, in a PDF for proofing, and in the print-ready PDF. Add to 
that the fact that Adobe Acrobat 6.0 has digital signature functionality built into it, and the en­
tire proofing and approval process can be moved to a PDF workflow. These advantages represent 
significant cost-savings over a traditional, paper-based proofing workflow.
Internet delivery
One way many organizations are looking to reduce costs is to provide more material directly to 
the public through the Web. Adobe PDF gives the ability to convert projects directly from the 
print-ready version to a Web version of the same content. In Adobe Acrobat 6.0 Professional, 
the PDF Optimizer tool converts a print project directly to a compressed version appropriate for 
posting to the Internet or sending through e-mail. The need to produce several different ver­
sions of the same project is reduced or eliminated entirely.
Because Adobe PDF can contain multimedia content such as movie files, Flash files, and sound 
files, print projects can go a step further when delivered as Adobe PDF files. With these ele­
ments, a file created for print becomes more engaging and dynamic. The ability of an Adobe 
PDF file to connect to a server for updated, dynamic content helps keep material up-to-date and 
relevant.
Archiving
Adobe Acrobat 6.0 Professional has tremendous searching capabilities built into it, making 
Adobe PDF an excellent option for archiving complete projects or revisions of a project in an 
electronic format. Because the PDF file format is a de facto standard, with actual ISO standards 
based on it, it is a reliable and durable way to store documents. Information in a PDF file is ac­
cessible, can be searched with the Google search engine, and will maintain the quality of design 
that went into the file when it was created. Since it’s electronic, backing up the file is as easy as 
copying it from server to server.
Security
An Adobe PDF file is a secure way to share and transmit work. With Adobe Acrobat 6.0 Profes­
sional, adding security to the file is easy to do and makes it less risky to share files. A PDF file 
can be either locked to prevent it from being opened or set so that changes, printing, or copying 
of content is disallowed.

Conclusion
The end result of using Adobe PDF is a more competitive workflow that allows both the designer 
and the print vendor to offer a high quality of work at a lower cost to customers. In today’s 
cost-conscious world, that can mean the difference between success and failure. Adobe PDF and 
Adobe Acrobat 6.0 Professional enable such a workflow by providing the tools to make it a real­
ity. For the creative professional, Adobe PDF is a way to capture all of the aspects of a project in 
a single file for submission to a print vendor. By creating an Adobe PDF file with specific Adobe 
PDF settings, verifying those settings with the preflight tools in Adobe Acrobat 6.0 Professional, 
and sending that file to a print vendor, the designer submits a job with the confidence that the 
job will print correctly the first time. After submitting the job as an Adobe PDF, the designer 
can then repurpose the same file for use with an alternate delivery vehicle such as the Internet. 
A print vendor who accepts Adobe PDF files also has the confidence that the file is constructed 
to meet the requirements of a particular workflow. In both cases, the time and cost of the job 
are dramatically reduced because entire steps are eliminated from the print process.
FOR MORE INFORMATION
For a comprehensive 
overview of Adobe Acrobat 6.0 
Professional, see the Adobe Acrobat 
page at www.adobe.com/Acrobat 
Adobe Systems Incorporated • 345 Park Avenue, San Jose, CA 95110-2704 USA • www.adobe.com
Adobe, the Adobe logo, Acrobat, Clearly Adobe Imaging, the Clearly Adobe Imaging logo, Illustrator, ImageReady, Photoshop, and PostScript are either 
registered trademarks or trademarks of Adobe Systems Incorporated in the United States and/or other countries. Mac and Macintosh are trademarks 
of Apple Computer, Inc., registered in the United States and other countries. PowerPC is a registered trademark of IBM Corporation in the United States. 
Intel and Pentium are trademarks or registered trademarks of Intel Corporation or its subsidiaries in the United States and other countries. Microsoft, 
Windows, and Windows NT are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries. All other 
trademarks are the property of their respective owners. 
© 2003 Adobe Systems Incorporated. All rights reserved. Printed in the USA. 
10/03

