
International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science
Volume 160
Series Editor:
Frederick S. Hillier
Stanford University, CA, USA
Special Editorial Consultant:
Camille C. Price
Stephen F. Austin State University, TX, USA
For further volumes:
http://www.springer.com/series/6161


Steven Nahmias
Perishable Inventory
Systems

Steven Nahmias
Santa Clara University
OMIS Department
Santa Clara, California
USA
snahmias@scu.edu
ISSN 0884-8289
ISBN 978-1-4419-7998-8
e-ISBN 978-1-4419-7999-5
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5
Springer New York Dordrecht Heidelberg London
Library of Congress Control Number: 2011928073
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
All rights reserved. This work may not be translated or copied in whole or in part without the written
permission of the publisher (Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, 233 Spring Street, New York,
NY 10013, USA), except for brief excerpts in connection with reviews or scholarly analysis. Use in
connection with any form of information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software,
or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed is forbidden.
The use in this publication of trade names, trademarks, service marks, and similar terms, even if they are
not identiﬁed as such, is not to be taken as an expression of opinion as to whether or not they are subject
to proprietary rights.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer is part of Springer Science+Business Media (www.springer.com)

For Bill Pierskalla, who opened the door


Preface
Inventory control has emerged as a leading application of operations research. The
Survey of Current Business reported that the dollar value of inventories in the USA
alone exceeded $1.3 trillion at the end of 2010. Cost-effective control of inventories
can cut costs signiﬁcantly, and contribute to the efﬁcient ﬂow of goods and services
in the economy. Many techniques can be brought to bear on the inventory manage-
ment problem. Linear and nonlinear programing, queueing, and network ﬂow
models, are some examples. However, most inventory control packages are based
on the methodology of inventory theory. Inventory theory is an important subﬁeld
of operations research that addresses the speciﬁc questions: when should an order
be placed, and for how much?
Inventory theory had its roots in the well-known EOQ formula, ﬁrst discovered
by Ford Harris nearly 100 years ago (Harris 1915). Harris, working as a young
engineer at the Westinghouse Corporation in Pittsburgh, was able to see that a
simple formula for an optimal production batch size could be obtained by properly
balancing holding and set-up costs. The EOQ formula, ﬁrst derived by Harris, is
amazingly robust – it still serves as an effective approximation for much more
complex models. After Harris’s work, the development of inventory theory was
largely stalled until after World War II. The success of operations research in
supporting the war effort was the spur needed to get the ﬁeld off the ground. It
seems that the newsvendor model of inventory choice under uncertainty was
developed around this time, although it appears that the fundamental approach of
balancing overage and underage costs under uncertainty was really ﬁrst derived by
Edgeworth (1888) in the context of banking.
Serious research into stochastic inventory models began around 1950. An early
landmark paper was Arrow, Harris, and Marschak (1951). They were the ﬁrst
researchers to provide a rigorous analysis of a multiperiod stochastic inventory
problem. Three signiﬁcant books on the theory stimulated substantial interest in
inventory theory research: Whitin (1957), Arrow, Karlin, and Scarf (1958), and
Hadley and Whitin (1963). The 1960s saw an explosion of papers in inventory theory.
vii

None of the books or hundreds of papers on inventory control written up to this
time addressed an important class of problems. In every case, a tacit assumption
was made that items stored in inventory had an inﬁnite lifetime and unchanging
utility. That is, once placed into stock, items would continue to have the same value
in the marketplace in perpetuity. In truth, there is a very large class of inventories
for which this assumption is wrong. These include inventories subject to decay,
obsolescence, or perishability.
Let us deﬁne our terms. Decay (or exponential decay) means that a ﬁxed fraction
of the inventory is lost every planning period (this has also been referred to as age
independent perishability). In continuous time, this translates to the size of the
inventory decreasing at an exponential rate. Very few real systems are accurately
described by exponential decay. For example, suppose the local grocery store
discards an average of 10% of its production each day due to spoilage. In actuality
though, some days it will not have to discard any product and some days it will have
to discard much more than 10%. Assuming a 10% loss each day is a convenient
approximation of a more complex process. Exponential decay has been proposed as
a model for evaporation of volatile liquids, such as alcohol and gasoline. But how
often are these substances stored in open containers, so that they would be subject to
evaporation? Radioactive substances (such as radioactive drugs) are one example of
true exponential decay. However, inventory management of radioactive substances
is a rather specialized narrow problem. While exponential decay has been proposed
as an approximation for ﬁxed life perishables, there are better approximations.
A related problem is that of managing inventory subject to obsolescence. What
distinguishes obsolescence from perishability is the following. Obsolescence typi-
cally occurs when an item has been superseded by a better version. Electronic
components, maps, and cameras are examples of items that become obsolete.
Notice that in each case, the items themselves do not change. What changes is
the environment around them. As a result of the changing environment, the utility
of the item has declined. In some cases, the utility goes to zero, and unsold items are
salvaged or discarded. However, it is often the case that utility does not decrease to
zero. Declining utility can result in declining demand and/or decreasing prices. For
example, older electronic items, such as a prior generation of PDAs or hard drives,
continue to be available for some time, but are typically sold at reduced prices.
From a modeling perspective, the point at which an item becomes obsolete cannot
be predicted in advance. Hence, obsolescence is characterized by uncertainty in the
useful lifetime of the product.
Finally, we come to perishability. We assume the following deﬁnition of perish-
ability throughout this monograph. A perishable item is one that has constant utility
up until an expiration date (which may be known or uncertain), at which point the
utility drops to zero. This includes many types of packaged foods, such as milk,
cheese, processed meats, and canned goods. It also includes virtually all pharma-
ceuticals and photographic ﬁlm. This writer’s interest in this area was originally
sparked by blood bank management. Whole blood has a legal lifetime of 21 days,
after which time it must be discarded due to the buildup of contaminants. When
uncertainty of the product lifetime is assumed, the class of items one can model is
viii
Preface

substantially larger. For example, perishable inventory with an uncertain lifetime
can accurately describe many types of obsolescence.
Considering the large number of perishable items in the economy, why was this
important class of problems ignored for so long? The short answer is that the
problems are difﬁcult to analyze. Interestingly, Pete Veinott, a major ﬁgure in
inventory theory, wrote his doctoral thesis (in the early 1960s) on various deter-
ministic models for ordering and issuing perishable inventories, but never published
this work. When this writer inquired why, he said that the notation was so complex
and awkward, and he preferred putting the work aside and move on to other
problems (Veinott 1978). Van Zyl’s (1964) important work on the two period
lifetime case with uncertain demand remained largely unknown, as it was never
published in the open literature. (This author became aware of Van Zyl’s work after
completing his doctoral thesis on the subject).
Preface
ix


Contents
1
Preliminaries...............................................................
1
1.1
Deterministic Demand ................................................
1
1.2
Periodic Review Versus Continuous Review.........................
2
1.3
Periodic Review Preliminaries........................................
3
1.4
A One Period Newsvendor Perishable Inventory Model.............
6
2
The Basic Multiperiod Dynamic Model .................................
9
2.1
The Functional Equations for the General Dynamic Problem .....
10
3
Extensions of the Basic Multiperiod Dynamic Model .................
15
3.1
Random Lifetime....................................................
15
3.2
Inclusion of a Set-Up Cost..........................................
19
3.3
Multiproduct Models of Perishables................................
20
4
Continuous Review Perishable Inventory Models .....................
25
4.1
One for One (S1, S) Policies......................................
26
4.2
Continuous Review Models with Zero Lead Time.................
29
4.3
Optimal (Q, r) Policies with Positive Lead Time ..................
29
4.4
An Alternative Approach ...........................................
31
5
Approximate Order Policies.............................................
33
5.1
Forms of Approximate Policies.....................................
33
5.2
S Policy Approximations............................................
34
5.3
Higher Order Approximations ......................................
38
5.4
Fixed Order Quantity Approximation ..............................
39
6
Inventory Depletion Management ......................................
41
6.1
Preliminaries ........................................................
41
6.2
Deterministic Field Life Functions .................................
42
6.3
Stochastic Field Life Functions.....................................
47
xi

7
Deterministic Models.....................................................
49
7.1
The Basic EOQ Model with Perishability ..........................
49
7.2
Dynamic Deterministic Model with Perishability..................
50
8
Decaying Inventories .....................................................
55
8.1
EOQ Models with Decay ...........................................
56
8.2
Uncertain Demand ..................................................
59
9
Queues with Impatient Customers ......................................
61
10
Blood Bank Inventory Control ..........................................
65
11
Afterword .................................................................
71
References ......................................................................
73
About the Author ..............................................................
77
Index ............................................................................
79
xii
Contents


Chapter 1
Preliminaries
Contents
1.1
Deterministic Demand ...................................................................
1
1.2
Periodic Review Versus Continuous Review ...........................................
2
1.3
Periodic Review Preliminaries ...........................................................
3
1.4
A One Period Newsvendor Perishable Inventory Model ...............................
6
1.1
Deterministic Demand
When demand is known with certainty, the problem of managing perishables is
straightforward for the most part. Consider ﬁrst the basic EOQ model. Suppose the
demand rate is l, the ﬁxed cost of placing new orders is K, and the holding cost per
unit time is h. Then, it is well known that the optimal order size is
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2Kl
h
r
and the optimal time between placement of orders is T ¼ Q=l. Suppose now
that the item has a usable lifetime of m. All deliveries are assumed to be of fresh
units only. Then, there are two cases: (a) T  m and (b) T > m. In case (a) the
optimal policy remains the same, since in each order cycle, all units are consumed by
demand before they expire. However, in case (b) if Q is ordered at the beginning of
the cycle, there will be positive inventory on hand at time m, which will have
outdated and must be discarded, and a new order placed at that time. Notice,
however, that if we reduce the order quantity from Q ¼ lT to Q ¼ lm < Q,
then the cycle length will remain at m, no units will expire and holding costs will
be reduced, since average inventory will be reduced from Q=2 to Q=2: Hence, the
modiﬁcation of the standard EOQ model to include perishability is straightforward.
However, not all deterministic perishable inventory problems are solved so
easily. In particular, consider the deterministic nonstationary production planning
S. Nahmias, Perishable Inventory Systems, International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science 160, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5_1,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
1

problem. Demands over an n period planning horizon are known constants, say
ðr1; r2; . . . ; rnÞ. Costs include holding, hi, set-up, Ki, and marginal production cost,
Ci in each period. Then, Wagner and Whitin (1958) showed (in the inﬁnite lifetime
case) that an optimal policy has the following structure. If starting inventory is zero,
then the order quantity in each period is either zero or exact requirements – namely,
the sum of requirements in the current to some future period. Furthermore, an
optimal policy only orders in periods when the starting inventory is zero. As a
consequence of this result, one only needs to determine the periods in which
ordering takes place, thus reducing the calculations signiﬁcantly.
It turns out that an exact requirements policy may not be optimal when perish-
ability is introduced. A counterexample is presented in Chap. 7, and methods for
resolving this problem is discussed there. When demand is nonstationary, ﬁnding
optimal order policies for a ﬁxed life inventory is not trivial. However, the vast
majority of the research on ordering policies for perishables has focused on
stochastic demand – a signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult problem.
1.2
Periodic Review Versus Continuous Review
Demand uncertainty and (ﬁxed life) perishability combine to result in challenging
and complex problems. Stochastic perishable inventory problems fall into one of
the two basic categories: periodic review or continuous review.
Most of the research in inventory theory assumes inventory levels are reviewed
periodically. This means that the state of the system (on hand inventory) is known
only at discrete points in time. This assumption is appropriate, for example, if
inventory levels are checked once a day, once a week, etc. The landmark collection
of Arrow et al. (1958) assumed periodic review in every case considered, and set the
stage for much of the subsequent research on inventories. From a practice point of
view, it is probably true that most inventory systems were periodic review 50 years
ago. Today, however, point-of-sale scanners and automated inventory control
systems have made true continuous review more common.
There are two reasons why continuous review has grown in importance. First,
with automated inventory control systems computers can automatically trigger
orders when inventory levels hit predetermined levels. Second, continuous review
models often are able to provide simple approximations to complex problems that
are difﬁcult to solve with periodic review formulations.
Perishable inventory research has also evolved along the two separate tracks of
periodic review and continuous review. The periodic review track generalizes the
kind of models considered by Arrow et al. (1958), among many others, to incorpo-
rate perishability. The continuous review track is largely an outgrowth of the theory
of queues with impatient servers. An impatient customer is one who leaves the
queue if they have not been served by a ﬁxed time. Queueing models with impatient
customers are discussed in detail in Chap. 9.
2
1
Preliminaries

1.3
Periodic Review Preliminaries
As noted earlier, we assume that the on hand inventory level is known only at
discrete points in time, which are labeled periods. Assume that periods are
numbered 1, 2, . . . . Demands in successive periods are not known, but are assumed
to be random variables, D1; D2; . . . with a known probability distribution. For
convenience, assume that the demand distribution is continuous with cumulative
distribution function (CDF) F(x) and probability density function (PDF) f(x). (Note
that basic results have been shown to carry over to the discrete demand case as well.
Also, virtually all of the results carry over to nonstationary demand. Stationarity of
the demand distribution is assumed for notational convenience.)
Assume that new orders are always of fresh units that have a usable lifetime of
m periods. A little reﬂection should convince the reader that it is necessary to track the
entire age distribution of the on hand inventory in order to determine outdates each
period. Hence, the system state is described by a vector x ¼ ðxm1; xm2; . . . ; x1Þ
where xi is the number of units on hand with i useful periods of life remaining. Note
that there are many notation options for the state vector. The state could be deﬁned in
terms of age rather than remaining lifetime and the vector could be numbered in order
of oldest to youngest rather than vice versa, as we have done. This convention was
chosen to reﬂect that aging occurs in the direction left to right, like the ﬂow of the
English language, and that the decision variable, y, can be equated to xm and placed
in the proper position in the vector. Note that x0 would represent the number of units
on hand that have just expired or outdated. We do not need to carry x0 in the state
vector since outdated units are assumed to leave the system. We use the convention
throughout that boldface x is the vector of on hand inventories of each age level,
and x ¼ P
m1
i¼1
xi is a scalar quantity representing the total on hand inventory.
The necessity to deﬁne a vector valued state variable is only one of the things
that separate the perishable inventory problem from the conventional nonperish-
able problem. As we see, several other concerns arise as a result of perishability.
One is the sequence that items are issued to meet demand. Note that there is a
substantial literature on optimal issuing policies independent of the ordering
problem. The appropriate assumption concerning issuing policies depends on
whether the producer or consumer chooses which items satisfy demand. If the
producer determines the issuing policy, it is clearly in his interest to issue items on
an oldest ﬁrst basis (known in accounting parlance as FIFO for ﬁrst in ﬁrst out). If
the consumer determines the issuing policy, it is likely that the consumer will
choose the freshest items, resulting in units issued in last in ﬁrst out (LIFO)
sequence. The vast majority of the perishable inventory literature assumes FIFO
issuing, and we do so as well unless stated otherwise. Clearly, FIFO is most cost-
efﬁcient and results in minimum outdating. (A third alternative, which might be
appropriate in some contexts, is to issue the items in a random order. To our
knowledge, random issuing policies have not been considered in the context of
optimal ordering policies for perishables.)
1.3
Periodic Review Preliminaries
3

If items are issued according to FIFO, then the aging and demand processes
travel in opposite directions. To see what this means, consider the representation of
the system state in Fig. 1.1. Bins are labeled m1, m2, . . ., 1, where the contents
of bin i are the number of units on hand with i useful periods of life remaining.
At the end of each period, all contents of a bin are moved to the next lower bin, and
the contents of bin 1 outdate and must be discarded (or salvaged). Because of the
FIFO assumption, demand depletes ﬁrst from bin 1, then from bin 2, etc. Excess
demands may be lost or backordered. If excess demands are backordered, then this
is reﬂected in a negative value of xm1.
Consider now the ordering policy. The optimal number of units to order each
period is function of the state vector, x. We represent this function as y(x). As we
see, y(x) is a complex nonlinear function of the state variable x. We assume that
costs are assessed in the usual way for ﬁnite horizon periodic review inventory
systems. At the end of each period, the total inventory is determined. If it is positive,
assess a holding cost of h per unit held per period. If it is negative (which occurs
when excess demands are backordered), assess a cost of p per unit of unsatisﬁed
demand. Furthermore, we assume a marginal order cost only. That is, there is a cost
of c per unit ordered. For now, assume that there is no ﬁxed order cost. Finally, we
come to the issue of how to assess the cost for items that must be discarded due to
outdating. Let y be the cost of disposing of outdated units. If D is the demand in a
period, then the number of units outdating at the end of the period when starting
inventories are x, is maxðx1  D; 0Þ, which we represent as ðx1  DÞþ.
We now face the ﬁrst issue. The astute reader will notice that the outdating cost,
yEðx1  DÞþ, is independent of the decision variable y. That means that any single
period model ignores the effects of outdating. In fact, one would need to churn
through at least m periods of a dynamic programing formulation before the
outdating penalties of over ordering would be reﬂected in the optimal order policy.
(This was, in fact, the approach taken in Fries 1975.)
Suppose, however, that one were interested in constructing a one period model
that reﬂected the outdating penalties of over ordering. How could this be done? Let
D1; D2; . . . represent demands in successive periods, starting with the current
period. Then, the current order, y, would not outdate until m periods into the future,
if it had not been consumed by demand by that time. Consider how one would
determine the expected outdating of the current order y, m periods into the future.
Fig. 1.1 The ﬂow of demand
and product in an FIFO
ﬁxed life perishable inventory
system
4
1
Preliminaries

Deﬁne the following sequence of random variables:
R1 ¼ y þ
X
m1
i¼1
xi
R2 ¼ ½y þ
X
m1
i¼2
xi  ðD1  x1Þþþ
R3 ¼ ½y þ
X
m1
i¼3
xi  ðD2 þ ðD1  x1Þþ  x2Þþþ
etc.
Then, Ri represents the amount of the current inventory on hand i periods into the
future, assuming we start with x and order y. Each value of Ri is a random variable,
since it is a function of the future demands. Note the use of the imbedded + functions
are necessary to keep track of units lost due to outdating.
To simplify the notation, deﬁne the following sequence of random variables
recursively:
B0 ¼ 0
B1 ¼ ðD1  x1Þþ
..
.
Bj ¼ ðDj þ Bj1  xjÞþ for 1  j  m  1:
Interpret the random variable Bj as the total unsatisﬁed demand in period j after
depleting the on hand inventory that would have outdated in period j. It follows that
Rm ¼ ½y  ðDm þ Bm1Þþ
represents the amount of the current order y, that outdates in m periods.
The goal of the analysis is to compute the expected value of Rm and incorporate
this into the one period model.
Deﬁne Gnðt; wn1Þ ¼ PfDn þ Bn1  tÞ where wi ¼ ðxi; xi1; . . . ; x1Þ: Note that
wm1 ¼ x.
We present the ﬁrst result without proof, which is based on a standard induction
argument. Details can be found in Nahmias (1972).
Theorem 1.1. Gnðt; wn1Þ ¼
Ðt
0
Gn1ðv þ xn1; wn2Þfðt  vÞdv.
Theorem 1.2. EðRmÞ ¼
Ðy
0
Gmðt; xÞdt
Proof. It is well known that for any nonnegative random variable, X, the expecta-
tion may be computed two ways:
EðXÞ ¼
ð1
0
xfðxÞdx ¼
ð1
0
½1  FðxÞdx:
1.3
Periodic Review Preliminaries
5

We have PfRm  tg ¼ Pfy  ðDm þ Bm1Þ  tg ¼ 1  Gmðy  t; xÞ for t  0
Since Rm is a nonnegative random variable, the result follows from the second
representation of the expected value above (after a change of variable).
☐
1.4
A One Period Newsvendor Perishable Inventory Model
Most readers should be familiar with the classic newsvendor model. A newsvendor
must decide at the beginning of each day how many newspapers to purchase. Daily
demand is not known, but is assumed to follow a known probability distribution.
Let y be the number of newspapers purchased and D the demand. There are two
penalties: overage (ordering too much) and underage (ordering too little).
Now, let us consider the perishable inventory model. The penalty for ordering
too much is the future penalty of outdating, at y per unit, and the penalty for
ordering too little is penalty cost for excess demand, at p per unit. Hence, a sensible
expected one period cost function for the perishable inventory problem is:
Lðx; yÞ ¼ p
ð1
xþy
½t  ðx þ yÞ fðtÞdt þ y
ðy
0
Gmðt; xÞdt:
It is easy to show that Lðx; yÞ is convex in y (and is strictly convex as long
fðtÞ > 0 for all t > 0: Hence, the optimal order quantity, y, for this simple model
satisﬁes:
@Lðx; yÞ
@y
¼ pð1  Fðx þ yÞÞ þ yGmðy; xÞ ¼ 0:
The optimal one period solution, say yðxÞ; is a nonlinear function of the entire
state vector, x. In this case, yðxÞ > 0 for all positive real vectors x. In addition, as
we see in the analysis of the dynamic problem, yðxÞ is decreasing in each
component of the state vector, x, but at less than unit rate.
Somewhat sharper results can be obtained when we add holding and marginal
order costs.
Theorem 1.3. Suppose that in addition to penalty and outdate costs, we also
include marginal order cost at c per unit ordered, and a unit holding cost, h, charged
against each unit on hand at the end of the period. Then, the optimal solution has
the following form: If x < x order yðxÞ solving
c þ hFðx þ yÞ þ pð1  Fðx þ yÞÞ þ yGmðy; xÞ ¼ 0
where x solves
c þ hFðxÞ  pð1  FðxÞÞ ¼ 0:
If x  x, no order is placed.
6
1
Preliminaries

Proof. The expected one period cost function is now:
Lðx;yÞ ¼ cyþh
ð
xþy
0
ðxþytÞfðtÞdtþp
ð1
xþy
ðtðxþyÞÞfðtÞdtþy
ðy
0
Gmðt; xÞdt:
Convexity in y is easy to show so that the minimizing value of y occurs, where the
partial derivative of Lðx; yÞ vanishes. The partial derivative is given by:
@L x; y
ð
Þ
@y
¼ c þ hFðx þ yÞ  pð1  Fðx þ yÞÞ þ yGmðy; xÞ
thus giving the deﬁnition of the optimal ordering quantity. Notice that
If x < x; @L x; y
ð
Þ
@y

y¼0 < 0 and if x  x; @L x; y
ð
Þ
@y

y¼0  0, thus establishing that yðxÞ is
positive in the region x < x and zero in the region x  x.
☐
In the next chapter, we extend this approach to a multiperiod dynamic model.
1.4
A One Period Newsvendor Perishable Inventory Model
7


Chapter 2
The Basic Multiperiod Dynamic Model
Content
2.1
The Functional Equations for the General Dynamic Problem ............................
10
Chapter 1 outlined an approach for constructing a single-period newsvendor-type
model that explicitly accounts for future outdating of the current order. In this
chapter, we present the extension of this one-period model to a ﬁnite horizon
dynamic model. We present only the general m-period lifetime case, but the reader
may be interested in reviewing the simpler case for m ¼ 2, as this requires only a
single-dimensional state variable.
The problem dynamics are described by the one-period transfer function. Given
the current state of the system, x, the quantity of fresh product ordered, y, and the
realization of demand t, the transfer function, s(y, x, t), gives the vector of starting
inventories of the next period. The logic behind the transfer function dynamics is
very similar to the logic required to derive the expected outdating function
Ðy
0
Gmðt; xÞdt. The one-period transfer function is:
siðy; x; tÞ ¼ ½xiþ1  ðt 
X
i
j¼1
xjÞþþ
and
sm1ðy; x; tÞ ¼
y  ðt  xÞþ
if excess demand is backordered,
½y  ðt  xÞþþ
if excess demand is lost:
(
Note the similarity of the form of the transfer function to the deﬁnition of the
sequence of random variables B0; B1; :::; deﬁned in the previous chapter. This is,
of course, not coincidental. In fact, both are just two different ways of showing the
system dynamics. This is shown precisely in the following result which is central
to the analysis of the dynamic problem.
S. Nahmias, Perishable Inventory Systems, International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science 160, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5_2,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
9

Theorem 2.1. Gnðy; wn1Þ ¼
Ð1
0
Gn1½sðy; wn1; tÞfðtÞdt:
Proof. The proof is somewhat tedious, but conceptually straightforward. Note that
by deﬁning G0ðtÞ ¼ 1 for all t, the theorem easily holds for n ¼ 1. One proceeds by
induction, assuming that the theorem is true for n  1 and showing that this leads to
the theorem for n. Again, the details appear in Nahmias (1972).
2.1
The Functional Equations for the General
Dynamic Problem
Following the usual approach for dynamic programming analysis, deﬁne CnðxÞ as
the minimum expected discounted cost when n periods remain. Then CnðxÞ satisﬁes
the following system of functional equations:
CnðxÞ ¼ min
y0
Lðx; yÞ þ a
ð1
0
Cn1ðsðy; x; tÞfðtÞdt
8
<
:
9
=
;;
which we write as
CnðxÞ ¼ min
y0 fBnðx; yÞg:
In order to establish the existence and to deﬁne the properties of an optimal
policy, the key result we need to establish is the convexity of Bnðx; yÞ in y for every
set of starting inventories x. In addition, the main theorem describes several
important properties of the optimal order function, ynðxÞ, when n periods remain
in planning horizon. The main theorem requires 17 steps and is proven via a
complex induction argument.
We will not present the proof of the main theorem here, but the interested reader
can refer to Nahmias (1974) for an outline of the proof or Nahmias (1972) for a
detailed exposition.
It is interesting to note that the traditional approach to proving convexity of
Bnðx; yÞ for the standard nonperishable problem breaks down in this case. Typi-
cally, one shows that CnðxÞ is convex in x, that convexity is preserved via the
transfer function, and sums of convex functions are convex, thus easily giving
the required convexity of Bnðx; yÞ in the decision variable, y.
Unfortunately, this straightforward approach does not work for the perish-
able inventory problem. Consider the case of m ¼ 2. Here, the decision variable
has only a single dimension. A necessary and sufﬁcient conditions for CnðxÞ to
be convex are that Cn00ðxÞ  0 for all x  0. We can demonstrate that, in fact,
10
2
The Basic Multiperiod Dynamic Model

C100ðxÞ < 0 for some value of x. As is shown in Nahmias and Pierskalla
(1973) (and Nahmias 1972),
C1
0ðxÞ ¼ yFðxÞFðy1ðxÞÞ
giving
C1
00ðxÞ ¼ yFðy1ðxÞÞf ðxÞ  fðy1ðxÞÞFðxÞy1
0ðxÞ;
where y1ðxÞ is the optimal order quantity when x is the (one period old) on-hand
inventory, and one planning period remains in the horizon. Note that the sign of
C100ðxÞ is not obvious, since y10ðxÞ < 0. Consider, however, the following special
case. Let us assume that the periodic demand follows the negative exponential
distribution with parameter l. That is fðxÞ ¼ lelx and FðxÞ ¼ 1  elt. Since
y1ð0Þ > 0 and the function y1ðxÞ is continuous, there must exist at least one value
of x, say ~x > 0, such that y1ð~xÞ > ~x. Because the exponential density is monotonically
decreasing in the region x  0 and the cumulative distribution function
for the exponential is monotonically increasing in this same region, we have
that Fðy1ð~xÞÞ > Fð~xÞ and fðy1ð~xÞÞ < fð~xÞ. In addition, it has been shown that y10 
ð~xÞ  1: Combining these results gives C100ð~xÞ < 0. Hence, we conclude that
C1ðxÞ is not convex in x. However, it turns out that the degree of nonconvexity
(as measured by a lower bound on C100ðxÞ) is not very great, and we can show that
B2ðx; yÞ ¼ Lðx; yÞ þ a
Ð1
0
C1ðsðy; x; tÞfðtÞdt is convex in y. That is, the nonconvexity
of C1ðxÞ is more than compensated for by the convexity of Lðx; yÞ. For the general
m-period problem, it is the convexity of Bnðx, y) in y that allows us to establish the
existence and basic properties of the optimal order function, ynðxÞ.
We will assume the following notational convention. For any vector valued
function, g(x), gðiÞðxÞ is the ﬁrst partial derivative of g with respect to the ith
variable, and gði; jÞðxÞ is the second partial derivative with respect to the ith and
jth variables, respectively.
In the general m-period lifetime problem, the key result that allows us to prove
convexity of Bn(x, y) is Cnð1;1ÞðxÞ  yGm1ð1ÞðxÞ (where the differentiation is
done with respect to the ﬁrst variable in the vector x, which is xm1). Establishing
the validity of this lower bound via induction is extremely complex, requiring a
network of inequalities on the ﬁrst and second partial derivatives of the optimal
return functions, Cn(x). To provide the reader with an appreciation of the complex-
ity of this problem, we provide a complete statement of the theorem required to
prove convexity. As noted, the proof will not be presented here.
Theorem 2.2. Assume that demands in each period form a sequence of indepen-
dent identically distributed random variables (although the theorem also holds for
nonstationary demands) and that:
(a) The demand distribution, F, possesses a bounded continuous density f with the
property that f(t) > 0 if t > 0 and f(t) ¼ 0 if t < 0.
2.1
The Functional Equations for the General Dynamic Problem
11

(b) Future costs are discounted by a discount factor a, where 0 < a < 1. Then:
1. Bnðx; yÞ is convex in y for all x 2 Rm1 and is strictly convex in a neighbor-
hood of the global minimum.
2. lim
y!0
@Bnðx;yÞ
@y
< 0 and lim
y!1
@Bnðx;yÞ
@y
> 0 for all x.
3. There is a unique function ynðxÞ given as the solution to @Bnðx;yÞ
@y

y¼ynðxÞ ¼ 0
and 0 < ynðxÞ < 1. In addition ynðiÞðxÞ exists and is continuous for all x;
1  i  m  1.
4. CðiÞ
n ðxÞ ¼ y
X
i
j¼1
GmjðxðmjÞÞHjðynðxÞ;xðmjÞÞþa
X
mi
j¼1
ðwj
wj1
fCðiþ1Þ
n1 ½zjðtÞ
Cð1Þ
n1½zjðtÞgf ðtÞdtþa
X
m1
j¼miþ1
ðwj
wj1
fCmjþ1
n1
½zjðtÞCð1Þ
n1½zjðtÞgfðtÞdt;
where zjðtÞ ¼ ðy;xm1;:::;xjþ1;P
j
i¼1
xi t;0;:::0Þ and wj ¼
X
j
i¼1
xi, and CðmÞ
n ðxÞ  0.
The result holds for 1  i  m1.
5.  1  yð1Þ
n ðxÞ  yð2Þ
n ðxÞ      ym1
n
ðxÞ < 0.
6. (a) Cði;kÞ
n
ðxÞ exists and is continuous for all x 2 Rm1 and 1  k, i  m  1.
However, Cð1;1Þ
n
ðt; xðm  2ÞÞ will be discontinuous at t ¼ 0 whenever
f(t) is discontinuous at t ¼ 0.
(b) Ci
n½xðm  iÞ; 0  Ci1
n ½xðm  iÞ; 0 ¼ 0 for 2  i  m  1. The notation
is meant to be interpreted as the last mi components being zeros.
7. (a) Cð1; jÞ
n
ðxÞ  yGð jÞ
m1ðxÞ
1  j  m1:
(b) Cði; jÞ
n
ðxÞ  Cði1; jÞ
n
ðxÞ  yGð jþiþ1Þ
mi
ðxðm  iÞÞ½1 
X
i1
k¼1
Hk ðxmiþk0; . . . ;
xmiþ1Þ
for m  1  j  i  1:
(c) Cð1;iÞ
n
ðxÞ  Cð1;i1Þ
n
ðxÞ  y½Gði1Þ
m1 ðxÞ  GðiÞ
m1ðxÞ for m  1  i  2:
(d) ½Cði;jÞ
n
ðxÞCði1;jÞ
n
ðxÞ½Cði;j1Þ
n
ðxÞCði1;j1
n
ðxÞ  y½GðjiÞ
mi ðxðmiÞÞ
Gðjiþ1Þ
mi
ðxðmiÞÞ½1
X
i1
k¼1
Hkðxmiþk;...;xmiþ1Þ
for m1 j>i  2:
8. (a) y
X
i
j¼1
GmjðxðmjÞÞ½1
X
j1
k¼1
Hkðxmjþk;...;xmjþ1Þ  CðiÞ
n ðxÞ  0
for 1  i  m1 and for all x:
(b) CðiÞ
n ðxÞ  CðjÞ
n ðxÞ  y
X
i
k¼jþ1
Gmkðxðm  kÞÞ
½
X
k1
q¼kj
Hqðxmkþq; . . . ; xmkþ1Þ for 1  j<i  m  1 and for all x:
12
2
The Basic Multiperiod Dynamic Model

(c) CðiÞ
n ðxÞCðjÞ
n ðxÞ  y
X
i
k¼jþ1
GmkðxðmkÞÞ½1
X
k1
q¼1
Hqðxmkþq;...;xmkþ1Þ
for 1  j<i  m1 and for all x:
(d) CðiÞ
n ðxÞ ¼ 0
for x ¼ ðxm1; 0Þ and xm1  0:
9. (a)
lim
xi!1 ynðxÞ ¼ 0
1  i  m  1:
(b)
lim
xj!1 CðiÞ
n ðxÞ ¼ 0
1  i; j  m  1:
Note that the functions Hk referred to in steps 7 and 8 are used as a convenience
for representing derivatives of the outdating function, Gm. As they add nothing to
the exposition, we will not discuss them further here. Aside from all of the
machinery involving the derivatives of the optimal value functions, what does
the theorem tell us about the behavior of the optimal policy function? The key
piece of information we obtain from the theorem is step 5:  1  ynð1ÞðxÞ  ynð2Þ
ðxÞ      ynðm1ÞðxÞ < 0. This says two things. First, since all partial derivatives
are negative, the optimal order quantity decreases as starting inventories increase.
More importantly, it characterizes the sensitivity to starting stocks of different ages.
The larger the derivative of yn(x) in absolute value, the greater the sensitivity of the
optimal order function to changes in starting stock. This means that increasing
the on-hand quantity of newer stock has a larger effect on optimal order quantities
than increasing the on-hand quantity of older stock.
This is a fundamental property of perishable inventory systems that separates
such systems from traditional nonperishable systems. One is concerned not only
with the amounts of on-hand inventory, but also their ages as well. Because the
dimension of the state variable is proportional to the lifetime of the stock in
periods, computing an optimal policy is feasible only for relatively short lifetimes.
One quickly faces the “curse of dimensionality” that plagues many dynamic
programming formulations. For product lifetimes much more than two or three
periods, it is unlikely one would use optimal policies. Also, implementation of
optimal policies would be complicated by the fact that one needs to keep track of
the age distribution of stock. Approximations that depend only on the total stock on-
hand are of interest as they are easy to compute and easy to implement. Methods of
ﬁnding simple approximations for the periodic review problem will be the subject
of the next chapter.
An interesting question is whether or not these results hold when demand is
discrete rather than continuous, as is assumed in Theorem 2.2. To try to prove
convexity of the functions Bn(x, y) directly under discrete demand would be
extremely tedious, if even possible. To circumvent these difﬁculties, Nahmias
and Schmidt (1986) considered a very novel approach to the discrete demand
problem. They considered an inﬁnite sequence of continuous demand distributions,
F1, F2,. . ., that converged weakly to the discrete distribution of demand, F. We
know all of the results of Theorem 2.2 hold for each of the continuous distributions
F1, F2,. . .. Without going into the mathematical details, the authors show that the
essential results of Theorem 2.2 carry over in the limit for the discrete case. We do
2.1
The Functional Equations for the General Dynamic Problem
13

not believe that this approach has been used before or since in the context of a
dynamic inventory problem.
It should be noted before closing this section that Fries (1975) also provided
a rigorous analysis of the perishable inventory problem, but did not work with
the outdate function Gm(y, x). Instead, he developed a straightforward dynamic
programming formulation that required m periods before the effects of outdating
appeared in the optimal order function. This approach is equally valid as ours
outlined here, and preferred for computing optimal policies, as the functional
equations are somewhat simpler. As Nahmias (1977a) shows, the two methods
give the same policy if one is sufﬁciently far from the end of the planning horizon,
and the discount factor is adjusted in a suitable fashion.
14
2
The Basic Multiperiod Dynamic Model

Chapter 3
Extensions of the Basic Multiperiod
Dynamic Model
Contents
3.1
Random Lifetime ...........................................................................
15
3.2
Inclusion of a Set-Up Cost .................................................................
19
3.3
Multiproduct Models of Perishables .......................................................
20
The basic model treated in Chap. 2 is the building block for several extensions.
In many cases, these extensions are suggested by speciﬁc applications. Other
extensions provide a wide range of applications of the basic theory.
3.1
Random Lifetime
A natural extension of the basic model is to allow for uncertainty in the product
lifetime. The basic model is applicable for products with a known expiration date,
since the time of outdating is known in advance. However, there are many classes of
items whose useful lifetime cannot be predicted in advance. Fresh produce, meat,
fowl, and ﬁsh would fall into this category. Even in blood banking, local blood
banks may receive transfers from other banks that are not completely fresh, making
the remaining lifetime uncertain. Perishable inventory models with uncertainty in
the product lifetime could be used to model some classes of items subject to
obsolescence as well.
Providing an accurate model of lead time uncertainty has long been difﬁcult
problem in inventory management (see Hadley and Whitin (1963), pp. 200–204, for
a discussion of the issues involved.) The main issue is order crossing. That is, are
orders placed on Tuesday allowed to arrive before orders placed on Monday?
If successive lead times are independent random variables, then order crossing is
inevitable. However, if one is placing orders with the same supplier, then order
crossing does not make sense. If we do not allow order crossing, then successive
lead times are dependent random variables, making the analysis very complex.
S. Nahmias, Perishable Inventory Systems, International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science 160, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5_3,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
15

The simpler results for (Q,R) models with stochastic lead times (such as the formula
presented in Hadley and Whitin on page 153), are based on simultaneously assum-
ing independence of lead times and no order crossing.
As noted, if lead times are random and orders do not cross, then successive lead
times are dependent random variables. Allowing for dependency is difﬁcult, and is
rare in operations research. A very innovative approach to this problem was
developed by Kaplan (1970). Let A1; A2; . . . be a sequence of IID discrete random
variables deﬁned on the set f1; 2; . . . ; tg where t is the maximum value of the lead
time in any period. In any period, when the event {Ai ¼ k} is realized, all orders k
or more old periods arrive in the next period.
Nahmias (1977c) adapted this approach to the perishable inventory problem.
Here, one assumes that if {Ai ¼ k} is realized, then all on hand inventory remaining
in stock (after satisfying demand) that is at least k periods old at the end of period i
will outdate at that time. The random variables A1; A2; . . . are not realizations of
the lifetimes of successive orders, but the lifetime distribution can be derived
from them.
Suppose that Pk ¼ PfAn ¼ kg independent of n. If the event fAn ¼ kg is
realized, then the one-period transfer function sðy; x; t; kÞ ¼ ðsm1ðy; x; t; kÞ; . . . ;
s1ðy; x; t; kÞÞ is:
for k ¼ 1:
sjðy; x; t; 1Þ ¼ 0
if 1  j  m  2
sm1ðy; x; t; 1Þ ¼ ðt  x  yÞþ
and for 2  k  m:
sjðy; x; t; kÞ ¼
0
if 1  j  m  k
ðxjþ1  ðt  wjÞþÞþ
if m  k þ 1  j  m  1
y  ðt  xÞþ
if j ¼ m  1
8
>
<
>
:
where wj ¼ P
j
i¼1
xi; x ¼ P
m1
i¼1
xi:
The sequence of events in a period is given as follows. First, the current state
is observed, and based on that an order is placed for fresh stock. After the order
arrives, the demand for the current period is realized, which then is satisﬁed to the
extent possible on an FIFO basis. After demand is either satisﬁed or backordered
(or lost), the aging process random variable, An is realized, and outdating determined.
To understand the mechanics of the transfer function, consider the following example.
Fix the current period at period 10. Suppose that m ¼ 4, and the starting state in
period 10 is x ¼ ð18; 12; 20Þ (i.e., 18 units remain from the order delivered one
period ago, 12 units remain from the order delivered two periods ago, and 20 units
remain from the order delivered three periods ago). Assume that the order quantity
of fresh stock in period 10 is 23 units and the realization of demand is 28 units.
16
3
Extensions of the Basic Multiperiod Dynamic Model

Consider how the system state evolves given all of the possible realizations of the
aging process random variable, A10. By FIFO, all of the 20 units are consumed ﬁrst,
followed by 8 units of the 12 units of two-period old stock. The vector of on hand
inventories in period 10 after the arrival of fresh stock and the realization of the
demand is (23, 18, 4, 0). If A10 ¼ 4, there is no outdating, since all inventories
of age 4 was depleted by demand, and the starting state in period 11 is (23, 18, 4).
If A10 ¼ 3, then the on hand inventory ordered three periods ago will outdate
(4 units), and the starting state in period 11 is (23, 18, 0). If A10 ¼ 2, then there
will be 18 + 4 ¼ 22 units outdating at the end of period 10, and the starting state in
period 11 is (23, 0, 0), and ﬁnally if A10 ¼ 1 is realized all 45 units on hand outdate,
and period 11 starts with zero inventory.
The functional equations deﬁning an optimal policy are similar to those in Chap. 2,
and are now given by:
CnðxÞ ¼ min
y0 fcy þ Lðx þ yÞ þ y
X
m
k¼1
Pk
ð
wmkþ1
0
ðwmkþ1  tÞf ðtÞdt
þ a
X
m
k¼1
Pk
ð1
0
Cn1 sðy; x; t; kÞfðtÞdtg:
The optimal policy when n periods remain in the horizon, ynðxÞ, possesses
virtually all of the same properties of the optimal policy discussed in Chap. 2 for
the deterministic problem. The full statement of the appropriate theorem for
analyzing the optimal policy can be found in Nahmias (1977c). Note that these
functional equations charge the outdating cost in the current period rather than
m periods into the future when the current order outdates (similar to Fries 1975).
This was done to make the dynamic problem tractable, for as we see, computing the
expected outdating of the current order is a very complex problem in itself.
If the lifetime of successive orders were independent, it would not be possible to
compute the expected outdating of the current order, since future orders could
outdate before the current order. However, due to our assumption that orders
outdate in the same sequence that they enter stock, we are guaranteed that this
will not occur. Hence, given a current order y and state vector x, it should be
possible to determine the expected outdating of the current order (which could
be 1, 2,. . ., m periods into the future).
To understand the mechanics of the outdating process when the product lifetime
is uncertain, consider another simple example. Let j1; j2; . . . correspond to succes-
sive realizations of the lifetime process, An. Suppose that m ¼ 5; j1 ¼ 4; j2 ¼ 4;
j3 ¼ 2; and the starting state in period 1 is ðx4; x3; x2; x1Þ. The goal is to compute
the expected outdating of the order placed in period 1, y. Based on the realizations
of the aging process, the remaining amounts of x1 and x2 (after satisfying demand in
period 1) outdate at the end of period 1. The remaining amount of x3 on hand at the
end of period 2 after satisfying demand outdates at that time, and the remaining
3.1
Random Lifetime
17

amounts of y and x4 outdate at the end of period 3. The expected amount of y þ x4
outdating at the end of period 3 is given by
R
yþx4
0
G3ðu; x3; x1 þ x2Þdu so that the
expected outdating of y only at the end of period 3 is
R
yþx4
0
G3ðu; x3; x1 þ x2Þdu 
Rx4
0
G3ðu; x3; x1 þ x2Þdu ¼
R
yþx4
x4
G3ðu; x3; x1 þ x2Þdu. This simple example should
give the reader a glimpse of the complexities in the general calculation.
Deﬁne rk ¼ P
k
i¼1
Pi. Then, it can be shown that the expected outdating of the
current order for y units is
X
m
k¼1
rk
X
m
j1¼2
  
X
m
jk1¼k
Y
k1
i¼1
Pji
ðyþvk
vk
Gkðu; vðk  1ÞÞdu;
where the vector terms vðk  1Þ are appropriate partial sums of the state vector x
based on the realizations of the aging process, An. This is a very tedious calculation
and it is unlikely that one would resort to trying to ﬁnd an optimal policy except for
small values of m. However, an explicit representation of the expected outdating of
the current order can be used to construct simple approximations, similar to the
manner that approximations were constructed for the deterministic lifetime
problem.
The essence of the calculation is to ﬁnd an expression for the unconditional
probability that any new order has a lifetime of exactly k periods for all 1  k  m.
We call this probability qk. Based on the deﬁnition of the aging process, it
follows that
qk ¼
X
m
k¼1
rk
X
m
j1¼2
  
X
m
jk1¼k
Y
k1
i¼1
Pji:
It is not difﬁcult to show that this expression can be simpliﬁed to:
qk ¼ rk
Y
k1
i¼1
ð1  riÞ:
The idea is to use an approximate expression for the expected outdating of the
current order, y, and utilize this expression to approximate the expected one-period
cost function as well as the one-period transfer function, much as was done in
Chap. 3 for the ﬁxed life case. Again, one can use either the Nahmias’s bounds or
the Chazan and Gal bounds. Calculations reported in Nahmias (1977c) indicate
that the Chazan and Gal bounds give slightly better results, and appear to improve
as m increases while Nahmias’s bounds degrade as m increases.
18
3
Extensions of the Basic Multiperiod Dynamic Model

Using the Chazan and Gal bounds, the myopic expected one-period cost function
one obtains is:
WðzÞ ¼ cð1  aÞz þ LðzÞ þ
X
m
k¼1
qkðak1y þ acÞmkðzÞ:
Since W(z) is quasi-convex in z, the minimizing value occurs where the ﬁrst
derivative is zero so that z* satisﬁes:
cð1  aÞ þ L0ðzÞ þ
X
m
k¼1
qkðak1y þ acÞ Fðz=kÞ þ FkðzÞ
2k


¼ 0:
Comparisons of this approximation with the optimal policy for lifetimes of 2 and
3 periods, and a variety of costs and demand distributions shows close agreement
with the optimal.
3.2
Inclusion of a Set-Up Cost
All of the work reviewed thus far on the periodic review perishable inventory
problem assumes there is no ﬁxed cost (set-up cost) for placing an order. Fixed
order costs can rarely be ignored in practice. In rare occasions, when deliveries are
pre-scheduled on a daily or weekly basis, ﬁxed order costs are sunk costs. However,
it is more common that ﬁxed costs determine the optimal frequency of orders,
and cannot be ignored.
The results of this section are based on Nahmias (1978). Both optimal and
approximate ordering policies are considered. The optimal policy is derived only
for the one-period problem, but it is likely the multiperiod version possesses the
same policy structure. The optimal policy requires calculation of two functions
of the starting state, sðxÞ and yðxÞ with sðxÞ  yðxÞ. These functions determine
the optimal policy as follows: if sðxÞ>0, the optimal policy is to place an order
for yðxÞ, and if sðxÞ  0, then no order should be placed. As in the case of no
set-up cost, yðxÞ minimizes the expected one-period cost function, Bðx; yÞ. The
function sðxÞ solves Bðx; sðxÞÞ ¼ Bðx; yðxÞÞ þ K, and sðxÞ  yðxÞ. Since Bðx; yÞ is
convex in y, these equations uniquely deﬁne sðxÞ. Note that Nahmias is able to
derive only ﬁrst period results, but given the fact that the structure of the optimal
policy is the same for the ﬁrst period problem as the multiperiod problem when
there is no set-up cost present, it is reasonable to speculate that this is the case
here as well.
Except for product lifetimes of two or three periods, the optimal policy is too
complex to be practical. Hence, approximations are of particular interest. The
natural form of an approximate policy is ðs; SÞ, since this policy is known to be
3.2
Inclusion of a Set-Up Cost
19

optimal for the nonperishable problem, and is easy to implement in practice.
(An ðs; SÞ policy is one in which an order is placed up to S if and only if the starting
inventory position is less than s.) The approach to constructing an approximation
follows closely the method outlined in Chap. 3 for the case of K ¼ 0. That is, the
expected outdate function is approximated by a function of the total on hand
inventory using either the Nahmias or Chazan and Gal bounds, and this approxima-
tion is then used to construct a surrogate problem whose optimal solution is used to
approximate the original problem. The surrogate problem has only a single dimen-
sional state variable, and is solved by dynamic programing.
Extensive computations reported in Nahmias (1978) indicate that the approxi-
mation generally gives costs within 1% of the optimal, although because of the
difﬁculty of computing an optimal policy, the comparisons were done for m ¼ 2
only. However, the results would seem to indicate that this is a valid approach for
approximating this problem.
3.3
Multiproduct Models of Perishables
Blood bank applications, in particular, have given rise to several multiproduct
perishable inventory models. The earliest was explored by Nahmias and Pierskalla
(1976). Blood banks store both whole blood and frozen packed red blood cells.
Since frozen red blood cells have a lifetime of a year or longer, one can assume
that the usable lifetime of frozen blood is inﬁnite. Although frozen blood can be
used in place of fresh blood when necessary, one would only want to use the frozen
blood as a last resort. This is because the cost of extracting the red blood cells,
freezing them, and then subsequently thawing them and combining them with
plasma is considerably more expensive than the cost of extracting and storing
fresh blood.
The model developed is a direct extension of the approach applied by Nahmias
(1975a). Assume that at the beginning of each planning period prior to the
realization of demand, orders for both product 1 (the perishable product) and
product 2 (the nonperishable product) must be placed. There is a single demand
source that depletes ﬁrst from product 1 according to FIFO, and then product 2 until
the demand is either satisﬁed or backordered. (Note: in the context of blood banking,
it is probably more accurate to assume that excess demand is lost rather
than backordered. This would mean that excess demand is made up by emergency
shipments from other blood banks. The backorder assumption is not crucial to
the analysis.)
Costs are charged separately for holding at h1 for product 1 and h2 for product 2.
Outdating of product 1 is charged at y and there is a penalty cost of p for
unsatisﬁed demand. Let x, x, and y be deﬁned as earlier for the single product
case. Deﬁne x2 as the on hand inventory of product 2 at the start of any period,
and let z be the on hand inventory of product 2 after ordering in any period so that
20
3
Extensions of the Basic Multiperiod Dynamic Model

the order quantity of product 2 is z  x2. Then, the one-period expected cost
function has the form:
Lðx; y; zÞ ¼ c1y þ h1
ð
xþy
0
ðx þ y  tÞfðtÞdt þ y
ðy
0
Gmðu; xÞdu þ c2ðz  x2Þ
þ h2zFðx þ yÞ þ h2
ð
xþyþz
xþy
ðx þ y þ z  tÞfðtÞdt þ p
ð1
xþyþz
ðt  x  y  zÞfðtÞdt:
Assume the following relationships among the cost parameters:
(i)
0  h2  h1
(ii)
0 < c1 < c2
(iii)
p > ð1  aÞc2
(iv)
0  ð1  aÞðc2  c1Þ þ ðh2  h1Þ < y:
The rationale for these assumptions is given as follows. Assumption (1) says
that the cost of storing the nonperishable product is at least as large as the cost of
storing the perishable product. Assumption (2) says that the cost of acquiring the
nonperishable product exceeds the cost of acquiring the perishable product.
Assumption (3) is common for single product inventory systems. It says that the
unit cost of excess demand exceeds the one-period discounted cost of acquiring new
nonperishable product. This guarantees that it is not more economical to incur
stockouts than purchase new stock – otherwise, there would be no motivation to
operate the system. The expression in the ﬁnal case corresponds to the cost of
acquiring one unit of product 2 and salvaging it one period later minus the cost of
acquiring one unit of product 1 and salvaging it one period later plus the difference in
the holding costs. If this term were negative, one would never order product 1. If this
term exceeded the outdate cost, it would never be optimal to order product 2.
The functional equations deﬁning an optimal policy for the multiperiod version
of the problem are
Cnðx; x2Þ ¼
min
y0; zx2
Lðx; y; zÞ  c2x2 þ a
ð1
0
Cn1ðs1ðx; y; tÞ; s2ðx þ y; z; tÞÞfðtÞdt
8
<
:
9
=
;:
In this case, the transfer function is m dimensional. The ﬁrst m  1 components,
s1ðx; y; tÞ, are essentially the same as the single product form. The mth component
is s2ðx þ y; z; tÞ ¼ z  ðt  ðx þ yÞÞþ in the backorder case and s2ðx þ y; z; tÞ ¼
½z  ðt  ðx þ yÞÞþþ in the lost sales case.
The structure of the optimal policy is shown in Fig. 3.1. When m ¼ 2, the state
vector is two dimensional, so the optimal policy can be represented graphically.
3.3
Multiproduct Models of Perishables
21

Note that ﬁgure includes two cases: (a) where ac1  h2 < c1 and (b) where
ac1  h2  c1. The structure of the optimal policy is essentially the same in both
cases, but the boundary between Regions II and III differ slightly. Region I
corresponds to ordering both the perishable and nonperishable products. In Region II,
one orders only the perishable product, and in Region III, one does not order.
Note that in Region I, one orders so that the total stock on hand after ordering is u
where
u ¼ F1 p  c2ð1  aÞ
p þ h2


:
What is unusual is that the line x þ x2 ¼ u lies completely outside of Region I.
Typically, when there are ordering regions in a multiproduct inventory problem,
one orders to the boundary of the region. In Region I, however, one orders to the
Fig. 3.1 The optimal ordering regions for a two-product perishable/nonperishable problem
22
3
Extensions of the Basic Multiperiod Dynamic Model

interior of Region II. Just the opposite is true in Region II. When ordering only the
perishable product, one orders so that one remains short of the boundary between
Regions II and III. This unusual behavior of the optimal policy is a direct result
of the perishability of product 2. If both products were nonperishable, then the
boundary between Regions I and II would be the line x þ x2 ¼ u. However, the
perishability adds a penalty to orders of product 2, which has the effect of tightening
the boundary between Regions I and II. In the same way, when one is in Region II,
the additional penalty of perishability results in a decreased order size so that one
does not order to the boundary of Regions II and III. Note that there an apparent
instability in Region II. Since one orders short of the boundary, it implies that
one would want to order again, since after ordering the total stock on hand still lies
within Region II. However, note that this is not exactly the case, since the
state consists of one-period old inventory, and the order quantity consists of
fresh inventory.
Note that Nahmias (1982) shows how the approximation techniques discussed in
Chap. 3 can be applied to this problem. Although these approximations have never
been tested, the success of the approximations in the single product case suggests
that this approximation should be effective as well.
Deuermeyer (1979) considered a multiproduct perishable inventory model also
suggested by a blood banking application. Consider two production processes,
A and B. Process A produces two products (1 and 2) while Process B produces
only product 2. Both products are perishable, and both face independent stochastic
demands. In the blood banking application, product 1 is platelets (a blood compo-
nent) and product 2 is whole blood. Process A separates some of the whole blood
into platelets and packed red cells while Process B just produces whole blood.
Suppose that the lifetime of product 1 is m periods and the lifetime of product 2
is l periods. The state vector consists of the starting stocks of each product at each
age level, represented as ðx; wÞ having dimension ðm  1Þ þ ðl  1Þ. The decision
variable is the pair (a, b), which corresponds to the production quantities for
Process A and Process B, respectively. Assume that a units of Type A production
yields 1a of product 1 and 2a of product 2 while b units of Type B produc-
tion yield b units of Product 2.
Deuermeyer develops a one-period model using the expected future outdating of
both products in the one-period cost function as we did in Chap. 2. This makes it
likely that the structure of the optimal one-period policy is the same as the structure
of the optimal multiperiod policy. (Unfortunately, due to the complexity of the
problem, he was able to obtain ﬁrst period results only.)
The optimal policy structure is pictured in Fig. 3.2 when m ¼ l ¼ 2. The policy
is deﬁned by four regions in the ðx; wÞ space. In Region I, both processes are
used. The graph pictures the increase in the inventories of both products ﬁrst due
to Process A and then the increase in product 2 inventory due to Process B.
In Region II, one only applies Process A (which increases the inventories of both
products) while in Region III one applies only Process B so that only product 2
inventory is increased. Finally, in Region IV, neither process is applied.
3.3
Multiproduct Models of Perishables
23

Deuermeyer (1980) considers a system consisting of n products all of which are
perishable with respective lifetimes of li for 1  i  n, and assumes that the system
has the substitution property. That is, the order quantity of each product is a
nonincreasing function of the on hand inventories of the other products. Again,
he is able to characterize the optimal policy for a single-period problem only.
Fig. 3.2 Characterization of the optimal policy for the Devermeger two-product model
24
3
Extensions of the Basic Multiperiod Dynamic Model

Chapter 4
Continuous Review Perishable Inventory Models
Contents
4.1
One for One (S–1, S) Policies ..............................................................
26
4.2
Continuous Review Models with Zero Lead Time ........................................
29
4.3
Optimal (Q, r) Policies with Positive Lead Time .........................................
29
4.4
An Alternative Approach ...................................................................
31
Continuous review means that the state of the inventory system is known at all
times, as opposed to periodic review where the state of the system is known only at
discrete points in time labeled periods. Surprisingly, very little is known about
optimal ordering policies for ﬁxed life perishables under continuous review. The
difﬁculty is that when an order lead time is present, aging is applied only to the units
on hand, and not to the units on order. Furthermore, since units may be ordered at
any point in time, there is no limit to the number of different orders that comprise
the on-hand inventory at any point in time. Hence, the vector describing the
on-hand inventory of each age level has an unlimited number of dimensions.
One way to circumvent this problem is to assume zero order lead time. We
brieﬂy review the two papers that take this approach. Before doing so, note that we
believe that the simultaneous assumptions of continuous review and zero order lead
time are unrealistic, and it is likely that these models have little practical use. There
is a big difference between assuming zero order lead time in periodic review
systems and in continuous review systems. In the former case, it only means that
the lead time is less than a review period, as orders are assumed to be placed at
the beginning of the planning period, and are assumed to arrive at the end of the
planning period. In the case of continuous review, it means that orders arrive
instantaneously. For that reason, the policies obtained are not likely to be useful
in a practical setting.
It is worth noting that the primary driver of the continuous review heuristic
(Q, R) inventory models that form the basis for most commercial inventory control
systems is uncertainty of demand over the replenishment lead time. Where lead
S. Nahmias, Perishable Inventory Systems, International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science 160, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5_4,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
25

times reduced to zero, optimal order quantities would collapse to the simple
EOQ formula and reorder levels would be zero. (See Nahmias (2009), Chap. 5,
for example).
When there is a positive lead time for ordering, the form of an optimal order
policy for perishables under continuous review is not known. Part of the problem is
deﬁning the state of the system. As noted above, the state could be an inﬁnite
dimensional vector of all previous orders placed and their ages. Given the com-
plexity of the continuous review problem, a reasonable starting point is to ﬁnd the
best policy from a prespeciﬁed class of policies.
4.1
One for One (S–1, S) Policies
The only rigorous analysis of a continuous review perishable inventory system with
positive order lead time of which we are aware is Schmidt and Nahmias (1985) (and
an extension by Perry and Posner (1998)). They assumed the so-called (S1, S)
policy in which the inventory position (stock on hand plus stock on order) is
maintained at a ﬁxed level S. Assume that demands occur one-at-a-time, which
would be the case, for example, if demands were generated by a stationary Poisson
process. For nonperishables, a (S1, S) policy places an order for one unit at each
occurrence of a demand. With perishability, orders are placed at both the occur-
rence of demands and outdating. (S1, S) policies are optimal for very high value
items, and are common in military resupply and repair systems. See Nahmias
(1981) for a review of models for repairable item systems. A more comprehensive
and up-to-date discussion of these systems can be found in Muckstadt (2005)). It is
common in both military and civilian applications that equipment goes in for
maintenance either when the equipment fails, or at ﬁxed intervals, whichever
comes ﬁrst. Since unplanned failures occur at random, these can be modeled as a
stochastic process, and may be labeled the demand process. If an item reaches age m
and has not failed (i.e., been demanded), the system for routine maintenance is
taken out, and thus “outdates.” Hence, the extension of traditional (S1, S) policies
to the case of ﬁxed life perishable inventories, is potentially a very useful extension
for modeling maintenance systems.
As noted above, what makes the problem difﬁcult is the interaction of perish-
ability and the order lead time. Assume that demands, (i.e., failures), occur one-at-
a-time completely at random according to a stationary Poisson process with rate l.
Costs are charged in the usual way against proportional ordering at c per unit,
holding at h per unit held per unit time, outdating at y per unit, and lost sales at p per
unit of unsatisﬁed demand. Assume a positive order lead time of t.
Deﬁne the multidimensional stochastic process xðtÞ ¼ ðx1ðtÞ; x2ðtÞ; :::; xSðtÞÞ as
the amount of time elapsed since the last S orders were placed. That is, xSðtÞ is the
elapsed time since the last order was placed, xS1ðtÞ is the elapsed time since the
second to last order was placed, etc. This process is the superposition of the demand
and outdating processes. The approach is to derive the stationary distribution of xðtÞ
26
4
Continuous Review Perishable Inventory Models

and use that to develop an explicit expression for the expected system cost rate as a
function of S.
Let pðt; x1; x2; :::; xSÞ be the probability density of xðtÞ. Utilizing the partial
differential equations of the process, the authors show that
lim pðt; x1; x2; :::; xSÞ ¼
Kelt for x1<t
Kelx1 for x1  t
(
Where
K ¼
elttS=S! þ
ðtþm
t
x1
S1elx1=ðS  1Þ!


dx1

1
:
From these results one can derive the steady state distribution of the on-hand
inventory at a random point in time, say ðP0; P1; :::; PSÞ:. The expected cost rate as a
function of S is:
CðSÞ ¼ cl þ ðp  cÞlP0 þ h
X
S
j¼1
jPj þ ðc þ yÞp;
Where p is the expected outdating rate given by:
p ¼ KelðtþmÞðt þ mÞS1=ðS  1Þ!:
Although these equations appear straightforward, computation of the stationary
state probabilities, ðP0; P1; :::; PSÞ is complex, requiring numerical integration.
Although the authors were unable to prove convexity of C(S), numerical tests
suggested that it is at least quasi-convex.
One of the interesting aspects of the problem revealed by numerical tests is the
relationship between S and m. One would expect that S would be an increasing
function of m. That is, as the lifetime of the product increases, the optimal stocking
level would also increase, since the penalty for outdating decreases as m increases.
Consider the following case: Fix t ¼ 1; y ¼ 100; p ¼ 600 and l ¼ 50: The optimal
values of S and the optimal expected cost, C(S) for various values of m observed in
this case are:
m
S*
C(S*)
0.005
0
30.00
0.007
7
29.98
0.008
25
29.62
0.009
38
29.01
0.01
47
28.30
0.02
72
21.79
(continued)
4.1
One for One (S–1, S) Policies
27

m
S*
C(S*)
0.03
73
17.92
0.04
71
15.49
0.05
70
13.82
0.08
66
10.95
0.10
64
9.86
0.30
62
6.45
0.50
64
5.71
0.80
68
5.45
1.00
68
5.43
As one would expect, the expected cost rate decreases as the product lifetime
increases. However, note the unusual behavior of S* as m increases. The reason that
S* is 0 when the product lifetime is very small is that at this value of m, it is more
economical not to run the system at all, since virtually all new items outdate before
being able to satisfy demand. As m increases, the likelihood that a unit is able to
satisfy demand before outdating increases, and so it becomes economical to hold
positive stock. Because we chose a very high stockout penalty cost, it is desirable to
maintain a larger inventory to decrease the likelihood of stockouts when m has a
moderately low value. The value of S* reaches a maximum in this case when
m ¼ 0.03. As m continues to increase, the likelihood of outdating decreases, so less
stock is needed to maintain the same risk of stocking out. Note that for m ¼ 1, the
lifetime is essentially inﬁnite, and the solution coincides with the optimal value of
S for the nonperishable problem.
Perry and Posner (1998) developed the following extension of this model.
Suppose that customers arriving to the system when it is out of stock are willing
to wait a random amount of time Y for the next arrival of a unit. The rationale for
this extension is that one can keep track of the times of orders, so one can determine
the instance of the next arrival. If this is imminent, it makes sense that a customer
would wait rather than leave the system unsatisﬁed.
As an example, suppose that H is the CDF of Y. They suggest the following
form for H:
HðyÞ ¼ q þ p1fytg
Where 1fytg is the indicator function of the event fy  tg. This means that a
customer is willing to wait for t units of time for the next arrival (which must come
within that time) with probability p. Since HðyÞ ¼ q for y  t, Y has mass q at 0 so
that Pf0 < Y  tg ¼ p). The authors also consider several other forms of H.
Their analysis is based on computing the joint distribution of the process W
given by
W ¼ fW1ðtÞ; W2ðtÞ; :::; WSðtÞ : t  0g
where WiðtÞ is time to outdate the ith youngest item if the demand process were
stopped at time t. While this extension is interesting, and could be potentially useful
(continued)
28
4
Continuous Review Perishable Inventory Models

in some circumstances, the authors do not provide any calculations to compare the
results of their model to those of Schmidt and Nahmias (1985). Until that is done,
there is no way to tell if their extension leads to policies that differ signiﬁcantly from
those computed assuming customers do not wait when the system is out of stock.
4.2
Continuous Review Models with Zero Lead Time
As noted above, we feel the simultaneous assumptions of continuous review and
zero lead time are unrealistic. Nevertheless, we brieﬂy review the major results in
this area. The ﬁrst to look at this problem was Weiss (1980). Weiss assumed that
demands are generated by a stationary Poisson process with ﬁxed rate l. His main
result is that, in the case of lost sales, the form of the optimal policy is to either
never order, or to order to a ﬁxed level S when the inventory level drops to zero.
Notice that the issue of perishability never really comes up, as order cycles are
completely independent. One simply waits until the inventory level drops to zero
(whether through demand or outdating) and replenishes to a ﬁxed level (much as
one does in the simple EOQ model).
Weiss’s results were generalized by Liu and Lian (1999). They assumed full
backordering of demand and generalized from a Poisson demand process to a
stationary renewal process. They showed that the form of the optimal policy is
(s, S) with s 1, and provide explicit formulas for computing the optimal policy
parameters. (A correction of their results appears in Gurler and Ozkaya (2003).)
Gurler and Ozkaya (2008) extended their model to the case where the lifetime of a
batch is a random variable. Note that for all of these models, the form of the optimal
policy (namely that one only orders when the system is backordered), depends
heavily on the assumption that order lead times are zero. It is unlikely that one
would use such a policy in the real world, where order lead times are always
positive. Hence, it would appear that these results do not provide much insight
into the general continuous review perishable inventory problem.
4.3
Optimal (Q, r) Policies with Positive Lead Time
Short of ﬁnding optimal policies, a common method in inventory control is to
determine the best policy from a class of policies. This is the approach taken by
Berk and Gurler (2008). It is well known that for many nonperishable continuous
review systems, the optimal policy is a (Q, r) policy. That is, when the inventory
position hits r, an order for size Q is placed. As the form of the optimal policy is not
known, it would seem natural to consider the best (Q, r) policy in the perishable
inventory setting. In this version, the authors assume that r<Q, which means that
there is at most a single order outstanding. (Future work considers the generalization to
the case where multiple orders are outstanding.) They also assume throughout that
4.3
Optimal (Q, r) Policies with Positive Lead Time
29

demands are generated from a stationary Poisson process, thus allowing them to make
use of the memoryless property of the exponential interarrival time distribution.
Because items can perish, a slight modiﬁcation of the standard policy is required.
In nonperishable continuous review systems, one is guaranteed that an order can be
placed at the instant the inventory level (or inventory position when more than one
outstanding order is allowed) hits the reorder point, r. However, if only a single
order is in inventory, the entire order will perish at the same instant, thus dropping
the inventory level immediately to zero. Hence, the policy must be modiﬁed to: One
orders Q units whenever the inventory level hits r or zero, whichever comes ﬁrst.
This modiﬁcation points out the inadequacy of this policy, however. Consider a
blood bank storing a rare form of blood (AB negative, for example). The lead time
for replenishment is three weeks owing to the difﬁculty of ﬁnding donors with this
blood type. Suppose that there is a substantial amount of AB negative blood on
hand due to outdate in one day. According to this policy, the blood bank would sit
on their current supply until it outdates the next day, dropping their inventory to
zero. During the three week lead time, there would be no AB negative blood
available, precipitating a crisis situation. (Note that this problem does not arise in
the model considered by Schmidt and Nahmias (1985), since all orders are for size
one only, so the on-hand inventory level can only drop by one unit at a time
independent of whether the drop is due to outdating or ﬁlling demand.)
Clearly, perishability fundamentally changes the form of the optimal policy. The
blood bank seeing the supply of this rare blood type would soon expire and would
take steps to replenish the inventory far in advance of the outdating. Hence, this
type of (Q, r) policy does not make sense in this context. Before one can consider
effective heuristics for this problem, a better understanding of the nature of the
optimal policy is required.
A modiﬁcation of the (Q, R) policy which ameliorates this problem to some
extent is considered by Tekin et al. (2001). They suggest a (Q, R, T) policy. The
policy is implemented in the following way: A replenishment order of size Q is
placed whenever the on-hand inventory level drops to r, or when T units of time have
elapsed since the last instance at which the inventory level hit Q, whichever occurs
ﬁrst. For this policy to make sense, they require the unusual assumption that the
aging of items in a batch begins only after all of the units of the previous batch are
exhausted either by demand or outdating. It seems likely that this would be true only
in rare circumstances. With this assumption, epochs at which the inventory hits Q are
regeneration points of the system. The analysis can then proceed using renewal
reward processes. Their main ﬁnding is that when service levels are high, the value
of r is not increased as much as it would be in an ordinary (Q, r) system. This policy
only makes sense when their assumption about aging is accurate, however.
30
4
Continuous Review Perishable Inventory Models

4.4
An Alternative Approach
As noted above, the difﬁculty with trying to characterize the optimal policy for a
continuous review perishable inventory system is properly deﬁning the state vari-
able. If the state is deﬁned in terms of on-hand inventory (as is almost always done
in inventory modeling), then the optimal solution would be a function of an inﬁnite
dimensional state variable. This would correspond to all of the on-hand orders and
their ages. An interesting question is whether or not there is a single dimensional
surrogate variable that might provide reasonable operating policies. We speculate
that there is such a surrogate variable. It is the expected remaining lifetime or
virtual lifetime of the on-hand inventory. That is, given all of the on-hand orders
and their ages, and knowledge of the demand process, what is the expected time that
this inventory will be depleted either by demand or by outdating?
Consider the following two scenarios. Product lifetime is 10 days, and expected
inter-demand time is 1 day. In case one, assume that there are 100 units of 9-day-old
inventory on hand, and in case two, there are 100 units of 1-day-old inventory on
hand. The expected remaining lifetime of the on-hand stock in the ﬁrst case is
essentially one day, and in the second case it is slightly less than 9 days (since it is
possible for 100 demands to occur before the nine days have elapsed). The expected
remaining lifetime measure is far more useful than just knowing the number of units
on hand, and a policy based on its value should perform reasonably well. The policy
we suggest is the following: Let E(L) be the expected remaining lifetime of the
current on-hand inventory. Place an order for Q units at the ﬁrst instance that E(L)
drops below a trigger level, r. (This policy assumes only one outstanding order. If
multiple orders are outstanding, the form of the policy would have to be modiﬁed to
take into account unit on order as well as on hand.)
A problem with this idea is that computation of the expected remaining lifetime
for an arbitrary stockpile of items appears to be very difﬁcult. An alternative
approach would be to use some type of virtual lifetime measure. This would operate
much like the virtual waiting time in queueing theory. At each arrival of new stock,
the virtual lifetime process would jump upward by an amount related to the size of
the order, the lifetime of the product, and the demand process. One would reorder
when the virtual lifetime crossed a critical threshold. Conceptually, this is similar to
the suggestion above to base the reorder decision on the expected remaining
lifetime in the stockpile, but could be easier to compute and implement.
We are not aware of any work that has explored these ideas, but they could provide
a way of obtaining reasonable control policies for perishables in a continuous review
environment.
4.4
An Alternative Approach
31


Chapter 5
Approximate Order Policies
Contents
5.1
Forms of Approximate Policies ............................................................
33
5.2
S Policy Approximations ...................................................................
34
5.3
Higher Order Approximations .............................................................
38
5.4
Fixed Order Quantity Approximation .....................................................
39
Because optimal policies require the solution of an m – 1 dimensional dynamic
program, ﬁnding optimal policies is feasible only for moderately small values of m.
For that reason, approximate policies are of particular interest. The ﬁrst issue to
be addressed when trying to ﬁnd approximations is the form of the approximate
policy. When perishability is not present, we know that an optimal policy is a
function of the total inventory on hand. A reasonable starting point is to restrict
attention to policies that are only a function of the total starting stock in any period,
independent of the age distribution of stock. (As we see, this approach has pitfalls
as well.)
5.1
Forms of Approximate Policies
The obvious choice for an approximation based only on total starting inventory is
the simple order-up-to or S policy. That is, if x is the starting inventory in any
period, the optimal order quantity is maxðS  x; 0Þ. However, there are other
choices as well. Nahmias (1975b) compared the performance of three simple
approximations all based on total inventory, x. These are the S-type policy deﬁned
above (called the critical number policy in the reference), the linear policy and
the modiﬁed critical number policy. Notice that in addition to the fact that all three
approximations are based on x, they all require determination of a single parameter
value: x for the critical number policy, b for the linear policy, and w for the
S. Nahmias, Perishable Inventory Systems, International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science 160, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5_5,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
33

modiﬁed critical number policy. The latter two policies are suggested by the form
of the optimal policy.
Extensive comparisons of these three policies were done via simulation for a
product lifetime of two periods. The main result was that policies 1 and 2 were
competitive, with no signiﬁcant cost difference observed at the 5% level of sig-
niﬁcance in most cases tested, and policy 3 performed signiﬁcantly more poorly
in most cases tested. These results suggest that the S policy should be a good
approximation in most circumstances. We also discuss a ﬁxed order quantity approxi-
mation, suggested by the operation of a blood bank. Fixed order quantity policies
are not cost-efﬁcient, as they do not respond to demand ﬂuctuations (as does
an S policy).
5.2
S Policy Approximations
Having identiﬁed the S policy as a suitable form for an approximation, one would
like to be able to ﬁnd the optimal S policy. Finding optimal S policies was
considered by Van Zyl (1964) for the case of m ¼ 2 and for arbitrary m > 2 by
Cohen (1976).
The basis of the analysis is to show that the state (that is, the vector of inventories
of each age level) under a stationary S policy is a Markov chain. Hence, there exists
a stationary or invariant distribution for the system state. When m ¼ 2, Van Zyl
showed that the stationary distribution of the system state, say G(y), is
GðyÞ ¼ FðyÞ½1  FðS  yÞ=½1  FðyÞFðS  yÞ:
Given an explicit form of G, ﬁnding the optimal S is straightforward. While this
is a useful result, the reader should keep in mind that when m ¼ 2, the dynamic
program deﬁning an optimal policy only has a single dimensional state variable so
that calculating a true optimal policy in this case is also straightforward. It is more
desirable to use an optimal policy than to use the best S policy, which is known to
be suboptimal.
The real question is whether this method provides easily computable S policies
for larger values of m. Unfortunately, Cohen was not able to obtain explicit
results for the stationary distribution of the starting state when m > 2. He suggests
using successive approximations to ﬁnd the stationary distribution, but this is
comparable to the difﬁculty of ﬁnding a true optimal solution, so is of questionable
practical value.
Hence, there is value to considering simpler methods for computing approx-
imate S policies. One of the key advantages of our approach of ﬁrst develop-
ing a meaningful one period model is that this approach is more convenient for
constructing approximations. Nahmias (1976) developed a unique approach for
34
5
Approximate Order Policies

ﬁnding approximate order policies for the perishable inventory problem that
requires essentially the same computational effort for any value of m. In Chap. 2,
we observed that there are two reasons why a simple critical number order policy
is not optimal: the outdating function,Gmðt; xÞ, and the one period transfer function,
s(y,x,t), are functions of the entire state vector, x, and not simply the total inven-
tory, x. Nahmias’s approach requires ﬁnding approximations of both the expected
outdating and the one-period transfer function that depend only on x only through x.
It turns out that either of two sets of bounds for the expected outdating can
be used to construct the approximation. The ﬁrst, below in Lemma 1, are due
to Nahmias.
Lemma 1.
Ð y
0 FmðtÞdt 
Ð y
0 Gmðt; xÞdt 
Ð y
0 Fmðt þ xÞ, where Fm is the m-fold
convolution of the one period demand distribution.
Proof. In Chap. 2, we have that Gmðt; xÞ ¼ PfDm þ Bm1  tg where the random
variables B0; B1; ::: follow the recursion Bj ¼ ðDj þ Bj1  xjÞþ for 1  j  m  1.
Using the fact that for any function wþ ¼ maxðw; 0Þ  w, it follows that Dmþ
Bm1 ¼ Dm þðDm1 þBm2 xm1Þþ  Dm þDm1 þBm2 xm1  :::  P
m
i¼1
Di  P
m1
i¼1
xi,
which gives the right hand side of the Lemma. The left hand side of the Lemma is
obtained by noting that FmðtÞ ¼ Gmðt;0Þ  Gmðt;xÞ for any vector x  0:
Note that the lower bound is independent of x. Since the expected outdating is an
increasing function of the state vector, the upper bound is likely to be more
accurate. An entirely different approach to bounding the expected outdating was
developed by Chazan and Gal (1977). Like Cohen, they assume that a stationary S
policy is followed in each period so that the system state evolves according to a
Markov chain. Their bounds are based on the following observation. Suppose that
the demand per period is bounded above by S=m (where m is the product lifetime).
Let D be a random variable representing one period demand and m the mean
demand. In this case, the outdating of each period has expectation S=m  m:
Why? Consider the following simple example. Suppose m ¼ 2, S ¼ 10, and
suppose the initial state vector is (5, 5). (Note that here the state vector is of
dimension m since we track both fresh and one period old inventory.) Then by
assumption, demand is bounded above by S/m ¼ 5. It follows that demand depletes
from the oldest inventory ﬁrst, and the outdating in period 1 is simply 5 – D1.
The order quantity is 5, and the state returns to (5, 5). The expected outdating of
each period is thus 5  EðDÞ. As another example, suppose the starting state is
(10, 0), the demand is ﬁxed at one unit each period. Then, the reader should check
that the outdating in successive periods follows the pattern 0, 8, 0, 8,. . . and the
average outdating per period is 4 ¼ 5  EðDÞ.
When demand is not bounded above by S/m, this argument provides an upper
bound on the expected outdating per period. The lower bound is obtained as
follows: Let D be the average demand over m periods and DT the average demand
5.2
S Policy Approximations
35

over m periods truncated at S=m. That is, DT ¼ minð D; S=mÞ. Then, the lower
bound on the expected outdating per period is given by S=m  Eð DTÞ. A proof of
the validity of the lower bound appears in Chazan and Gal (1977). We do not
present it here, but note that their main result is:
Lemma 2. If one orders to S each period, then the expected outdating per period,
say E(O), is bounded by:
S=m  Eð DTÞ  EðOÞ  S=m  EðDTÞ:
Chazan and Gal (1977) also develop bounds in the special case where daily
demands follow a Poisson distribution. The Poisson case provides a tighter lower
bound than the one indicated in Lemma 2.
Chazan and Gal do not consider the problem of optimizing the value of S,
the order up to point. However, the methods developed by Nahmias (1976) can
be utilized to ﬁnd S using either the bounds in Lemma 1 or Lemma 2. Suppose
we use the upper bound in Lemma 1. Then, one replaces the one period outdate
function as follows:
ðy
0
Gmðu; xÞdx 
ðy
0
Fmðu þ xÞdu ¼ Hðx þ yÞ  HðxÞ
where HðtÞ ¼
Ðt
0
FmðuÞdu so that the one period expected cost function is now
expressed in the form:
Lðx; zÞ ¼ cðz  xÞ þ LðzÞ þ yHðzÞ  yHðxÞ
and
z ¼ x þ y:
The approximation technique is based on the approach developed by Veinott
(1965). Veinott observed that under reasonably general circumstances, when there
is no ﬁxed order cost, the expected cost function for the standard multiproduct,
multiperiod, dynamic inventory problem can be decomposed into the sum of N
independent one period cost functions, and the optimal solution has the property of
being “myopic.”
Suppose we approximate the one period transfer function, sðy; x; tÞ, with the
simpler form sðz; tÞ. Then, the total discounted n period cost can be represented in
the form P
N
n¼1
an1EðWðznÞÞ  cx1  yHðx1Þ, where a is the one period discount
factor. The optimal policy for this modiﬁed model is to order up to S each period,
where S minimizes WðzÞ. It was Veinott’s observation that the traditional backward
36
5
Approximate Order Policies

dynamic programing approach could be replaced by this much simpler forward
approach under the right circumstances. As the N period model is decomposed into
N one period models, one needs only look forward one period to achieve an optimal
policy. Hence, the term “myopic” describes these policies.
To utilize the myopic approach to constructing approximations, it was indicated
that both the one period expected cost function and the transfer function need to be
approximated by functions of z ¼ x + y, and x. The approximate transfer function
takes the form
sðz; tÞ ¼ z  t  HðzÞ þ Hðz  tÞ
based on the following argument: if the total on-hand inventory in the current
period is z and the demand realization is t, then the total inventory on-hand
one period hence is z – t – the amount of inventory outdating at the end of the
current period. The expected outdating is approximated by the ﬁnal two terms using
arguments similar to the above.
Utilizing this approximate transfer function and approximate one period cost
function, we obtain the following for the myopic one period expected cost function:
WðzÞ ¼ ð1  aÞcz þ LðzÞ þ ðy þ acÞHðzÞ  aðy þ cÞ
ðz
0
Hðz  tÞfðtÞdt:
The ease of optimizing WðzÞ depends of course, on it shape. Nahmias (1976)
showed that when the demand density is a PF2 density (Polya Frequency function of
order 2), that this form of W(z) is quasi convex in z, and is thus easily minimized by
binary gradient search. (More speciﬁcally, he showed that W0ðzÞ changes sign once
from minus to plus as z increases from 0.) The class of PF2 densities is large,
including the exponential, gamma, normal, truncated normal, and lognormal to
name a few. Computations reported in Nahmias (1976) for a variety of parameter
settings resulted in cost errors of under 1% in most cases tested. Tested cases
included lifetimes of two and three periods and exponential and Erlang-2 demands.
Because of the difﬁculty of determining an optimal policy, the accuracy of the
approximation for longer lifetimes is difﬁcult to determine.
As indicated earlier, the same approach can be applied to the Chazan and
Gal bounds in Lemma 2. We can express the bounds in Lemma 2. as S/m – a(S)
and S/m – b(S) where
aðSÞ ¼
ð
S=m
0
mxf mðmxÞdx þ ðz=kÞð1  FmðSÞÞ
bðSÞ ¼
ð
S=m
0
xfðxÞdx þ ðS=mÞð1  FðS=mÞÞ
5.2
S Policy Approximations
37

Since we have no reason to believe that either the lower or upper bound is more
accurate, a reasonable approximation for the expected outdating based on these
bounds is simply the average of the upper and lower bounds. That means we would
approximate the outdating function as:
OðzÞ ¼ z=m  0:5ðaðzÞ þ bðzÞÞ
Using this bound, and the same logic described above using Lemma 1 bounds,
we obtain the following form for W(z):
WðzÞ ¼ cð1  aÞ þ LðzÞ þ ðam1y þ acÞOðzÞ:
As with the other form of W(z) using the Nahmias approximation, the
minimizing value of W(z) is also easy to ﬁnd. Calculations reported in Nahmias
(1977c) for a more general version of the problem, indicate that the Chazan and Gal
bounds provide more accurate results, especially for larger values of m. This
approach should provide very accurate S policy approximations for ordering
perishables.
S type approximations were also considered by Nandakumar and Morton (1993)
and Cooper (2001). Nandakumar and Morton (1993) applied methods developed by
the second author for approximating the standard lead time lost sales problem to the
perishable inventory problem. Their approach is relatively simple, and considers
bounds on the optimal policy obtained if one considers an inﬁnite lifetime and
if one considers a very short lifetime with high likelihood of perishing. They
compared the performance of their heuristic to those of Nahmias (1976) described
in detail above, and the approximation obtained using Chazan and Gal bounds, also
described above. Their computational results indicated virtually no difference in
performance between the three methods. We speculate that their parameter set was
in too narrow a range to distinguish the methods. Based on this writer’s experience,
we speculate that the method described above using Chazan and Gal’s bounds
would perform best in a more extensive numerical test.
Cooper (2001) considered an extensive analysis of the stochastic process that
generates outdates and was able to obtain a slightly tighter lower bound on outdates
than prior bounds. However, the improvement in expected costs his method resulted
in was very small, and the expressions he obtained were quite complex. In the
opinion of this writer, the beneﬁt was not justiﬁed by the additional complexity of
his heuristic.
5.3
Higher Order Approximations
While an S policy based only on total starting stock each period might be adequate
for many applications, it is important to remember that it is suboptimal, and ignores
the age distribution of starting stock. This can cause serious problems in some
38
5
Approximate Order Policies

situations. For example, consider the blood bank application. Whole blood has a
legal lifetime of 21 days. Suppose a large supply of 20-day-old blood is available
for a particular blood type, and no other blood of this type is available at the blood
bank. An approximation based only on total stock on hand would indicate that there
are sufﬁcient stocks in the system, and the recommended order quantity would
likely be small. However, on-hand inventories would go to zero one day later due to
outdating. Hence, such approximations must always be viewed in the context of
the application. If there is a substantial lead time for new procurements (as there
would be in the blood bank setting), this could lead to a disastrous situation. One
might want to use an optimal policy in this situation. However, an optimal policy
requires a state variable with 20 dimensions, so is not really feasible. However,
there is a middle ground between an optimal policy and a simple approximation,
such as an S type policy, based only on total stock.
This issue was addressed in Nahmias (1977b). The basic idea is to
approximate an m period lifetime problem with a k period lifetime problem,
where k < m. He suggests collapsing the state vector from ðxm1; xm2; :::; x1Þ to
ðxm1; xm2; :::; xkþ1; P
k
i¼1
xiÞ based on the fact that the optimal policy is more sensi-
tive to changes in newer rather than older inventory. He then proceeds to show how
one can construct a dynamic program with dimensionality k as an approximation to
the original problem. For large values of m, other aggregation schemes might make
more sense. For example, in the case of the blood bank, we might deﬁne a two
dimensional state variable, ðx1; x2Þ where x1 is the on-hand inventory of age 5 days
or less, and x2 is the on-hand inventory of age 6–20 days. Another alternative,
described in Nahmias (1975b) is to use a multiple critical number policy, where
each critical number would correspond to the on-hand inventory of a particular
age grouping. For example, in the blood bank case, one critical number would
correspond to the inventory of age 5 days or less, and another of age 6 to 20 days.
Still another approach would be to simply change the deﬁned length of a period.
In the blood bank example, if a period were deﬁned as a week instead of a day, the
lifetime would be three periods, and it would be feasible to compute an optimal
policy, as the state variable would have dimension 2.
5.4
Fixed Order Quantity Approximation
Consider a system where a ﬁxed quantity of fresh product is added to the inventory
each period. This approach was suggested by Brodheim et al. (1975) to model the
operation of a blood bank. In the blood banking context, a ﬁxed replenish-
ment policy assumption might be reasonable if the bank has a relatively constant
pool of donors. However, ﬁxed order quantity policies are likely to be inferior to
S policies in terms of cost performance, since they do not respond to demand. Since
an S policy orders exactly the previous period’s demand, it is responsive to highs
and lows in the pattern of demand realizations.
5.4
Fixed Order Quantity Approximation
39

However, the analysis is signiﬁcantly simpliﬁed under a ﬁxed order quantity
policy. Suppose q units are brought into the system each period. Then, the age
distribution of on-hand inventory is of the form (q, q, q,. . ., r, 0, 0,. . ., 0) where
0  r  q. Notice that this means that knowing only the total stock on hand
uniquely deﬁnes the state vector. If the product lifetime is m periods, and the
total inventory on hand starting any period is i, then every age category will
contain exactly q units up until age category ½i=m, which will contain exactly
r ¼ i  ½i=mq units. Interpret ½x as the largest integer less than or equal to x.
(Note that the original article contained several typos in this part of the
description.)
This means that knowing only the total inventory on hand provides a complete
description of the system state, and the total starting stock forms a Markov chain
of one dimension. This obviates the need to keep track of the age distribution
of stock, and signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes the analysis. The range of possible values
of state is 0 to qm. Since under reasonable assumptions, the resulting Markov chain
is recurrent, there exists a stationary distribution p ¼ ðp1; p2; :::; pqmÞ satisfying
p P ¼ p , where P is the one step transition matrix for the chain.
Even though the state is only one dimensional, the number of states is likely to
be large for most applications. In the blood banking application, m ¼ 21, and for a
value of q of 100 the resulting chain has 2,100 states. As this is a bit unwieldy,
approximations are considered which provide reasonably tight bounds on the prob-
ability of shortage and the expected daily outdating. The authors do not consider
the problem of optimizing the value of q. While potentially useful in the right
environment, this approach is of limited interest (as noted above) due to the fact that
a ﬁxed order quantity policy does not respond to demand ﬂuctuations. In the blood
banking context, a sudden surge in demand brought on by a catastrophe would
certainly be caused to seek larger supplies of fresh blood.
40
5
Approximate Order Policies

Chapter 6
Inventory Depletion Management
Contents
6.1
Preliminaries ................................................................................
41
6.2
Deterministic Field Life Functions ........................................................
42
6.3
Stochastic Field Life Functions ............................................................
47
6.1
Preliminaries
The inventory depletion management problem is discussed in this chapter. Items are
stored in a stockpile for the purpose of serving a demand in the ﬁeld. Items typically
age at different rates in the stockpile and in the ﬁeld. The stockpile may or may not
be replenished, and there may be different costs to replenish the stockpile and make
emergency replacements in the ﬁeld. The vast majority of the analysis on this
problem is to determine conditions under which either FIFO (i.e., issuing the oldest
item next) or LIFO (issuing the newest item next) is optimal.
How does this problem relate to the problem of ordering perishable inventory,
which is the primary topic of this monograph? The problems are similar in that they
both deal with optimal management of perishable inventory. But that is where the
similarity ends. In the basic perishable inventory problem, items are assumed to be
of uniform utility to the ﬁeld irregardless of their ages at issue, as long they have not
expired in inventory. This means that from the inventory management point of
view, it is optimal to issue the items in FIFO order. The classic inventory depletion
problem is static in most cases: most of the research assumes a ﬁxed stockpile of
items with no opportunity for replenishment. There is also no external demand,
other than the “ﬁeld.” Items are simply issued on a one-at-a-time basis as they die in
the ﬁeld. For the ordering problem, once items are “issued” (i.e., leave inventory to
satisfy demand) they leave the system. One is not concerned with how long these
items last in the ﬁeld. In the inventory depletion management problem, the key
driver is the relative rates of aging in the stockpile and in the ﬁeld.
S. Nahmias, Perishable Inventory Systems, International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science 160, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5_6,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
41

Hence there is little, if any, crossover between the two problems. It is clear that
there is a large body of real problems accurately described by the perishable
inventory problem. Many products are stamped with an expiration date. An item
is considered acceptable as long as the expiration date has not been reached, and
useless on or after the expiration date. The inventory depletion problem is much
more specialized, and would appear to have limited applicability in the real world.
6.2
Deterministic Field Life Functions
Irregardless, there is a fairly large body of research on the depletion problem.
The ﬁrst published work on the depletion problem was Greenwood (1955).
Greenwood’s interest in the problem clearly arose from military applications. As
he notes in his introduction, the prevailing thinking of the time was that FIFO was
the preferred issuing order, but that LIFO might be a better choice in many cases.
Greenwood notes that the basic trade-off is that under FIFO, issuing occurs
frequently, but fewer items expire in the stockpile, while under LIFO, one observes
longer ﬁeld lives, but many items might expire in storage. Greenwood’s basic
observation is that if the ﬁeld life function is linearly decreasing with slope one,
both LIFO and FIFO are optimal, but if the ﬁeld life function is convex, LIFO is
optimal and if it is concave FIFO is optimal. He notes that when the ﬁeld life
function is convex and decreasing, FIFO requires substantially more replenishment
of the stockpile. Formal proofs of these results were not provided.
Derman and Klein (1958) considered a rigorous analysis of a more narrowly
deﬁned problem. Virtually, all of the research that followed is based on Derman and
Klein’s formulation, which is as follows: Assume a ﬁxed stockpile of n items of
varying ages, say ðS1; S2; :::; SnÞ. Items are issued one-at-a-time to the ﬁeld upon
expiration of the previously issued item. An item issued at age S has a ﬁeld life of
L(S), where L(S) is a known function (later extensions would consider the case
where ﬁeld life is a random variable). The objective is to determine the sequence in
which to issue the items so as to maximize the total ﬁeld life (or total expected ﬁeld
life) of the stockpile. While Greenwood (1955) considered only simple linear forms
for L(S), he raised some interesting questions that do not appear to have been
considered again in the operations research literature. For example, one can con-
sider a model in which there are relative costs of failure in the stockpile versus
failure in the ﬁeld. It is likely that failure in the ﬁeld is far more costly in most
applications. Another aspect of the problem considered by Greenwood is to incor-
porate ongoing replenishment of the stockpile. Greenwood assumed that new items
replenish the stockpile at a steady rate of y units per unit time. An interesting
question would be to consider optimization of y, or to allow for more complex
replenishment mechanisms.
To understand how the problem might arise in the real world, consider the
following. Most portable electronic items, such as digital cameras, mp3 players,
and ﬂashlights use disposable batteries. As batteries fail, they are replaced.
42
6
Inventory Depletion Management

Batteries age in storage, but much more slowly than while in use. Given a stockpile
of batteries of varying ages, in what order should the batteries be issued to
maximize the total useful lifetime of the stockpile?
As noted above, in the case of the standard perishable inventory ordering
problem, the issue of ﬁeld life never arises. Items are assumed to age at unit
rate while in storage, but once issued to meet demand, they leave the system.
In the basic perishable inventory model, a new item with remaining lifetime m
has the same utility to the buyer as an item with one unit of time remaining in its
lifetime. To this writer’s knowledge, the only study which considers both ordering
and issuing of perishable items is the unpublished work of Veinott (1960), but as
noted in an earlier chapter, only deterministic demand was considered in this study.
It seems likely that a stochastic model which treats both ordering and issuing would
be very difﬁcult to analyze.
Consider the ﬁeld life function, which deﬁnes the relative rates of aging in the
stockpile and in the ﬁeld. The simplest assumption is that items age at the same
rate in the ﬁeld as in the stockpile. This would correspond to a ﬁeld life function of
the form LðSÞ ¼ m  S, where m is the useful lifetime of a new item. Note that in
this case, we would require that LðSÞ ¼ 0 for S > m: As we see, this is a trivial case
in which all issuing policies are optimal. However, if items age at different rates in
the stockpile and in the ﬁeld, the ﬁeld life function will not have unit slope.
Suppose, for example, that items in the stockpile are refrigerated and age at exactly
half the rate of items in the ﬁeld. In this case, the appropriate ﬁeld life function is
LðSÞ ¼ 0:5ðm  SÞ, where m should be interpreted as the lifetime of a new item that
remains in the stockpile until it expires. We would expect that many real cases can
be expressed in the form LðSÞ¼bðm  SÞ, where the slope term b indicates the
relative rate of aging of items in the stockpile and the ﬁeld. In virtually all of the real
world applications, we can envision 0  b  1 implying that items age more
quickly in the ﬁeld than in the stockpile.
One can also envision cases where the ﬁeld life function is nonlinear. For
example, automobile batteries age relatively slowly when not in use. Suppose a
brand new battery can be expected to last 5 years. A battery which has been stored
for 1 year lasts 4.5 years, and one which has been stored 2 years lasts 4.25 years.
This would give rise to a convex decreasing ﬁeld life function with the property that
L0ðSÞ > 1. In fact, one can envision ﬁeld life functions that are nonlinear and
nonmonotonic. Consider a family that consumes wines one bottle at a time from
their cellar. It is well known that many wines improve with age. Suppose that there
is an optimal time, say t at which a bottle should be decanted. If L(S) measures the
utility of a bottle of wine decanted at age S, the ﬁeld life function would be concave
with the maximum occurring at t.
Consider once more the case of a linear ﬁeld life function with slope1. This
means that
LðSÞ ¼ m  S for 0  S  m
LðSÞ ¼ 0 for S  m:
6.2
Deterministic Field Life Functions
43

In this case, all issuing policies yield exactly the same ﬁeld life for the stockpile.
As a simple example, consider a stockpile of ﬁve items, labeled 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 with
initial ages 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Suppose that each item has a useful lifetime of m ¼ 10. It is
easy to show that in this example, no matter what order one issues the items, the
total ﬁeld life of the stockpile is 9. If the items are issued in LIFO order, then item 1
is issued ﬁrst and lasts 9 units of time in the ﬁeld. By this point, the other four items
in the stockpile have expired, so the total ﬁeld life of the stockpile is 9. If the items
are issued in FIFO order, then the ﬁrst item issued (item 5) would have a ﬁeld life of
5 units, and each of the remaining four items would have a ﬁeld life of exactly one
unit, thus totaling 9 units again. One can easily check that issuing the items in a
random order also gives a total ﬁeld life of the stockpile of 9 units.
Hence, when items age at the same rate in the stockpile as in the ﬁeld, all issuing
policies are optimal. However, we know that FIFO minimizes outdating in the
standard perishable inventory problem. Hence, these two problems have a funda-
mentally different structure, and the results from one do not necessarily carry over
to the other.
Consider another example. Suppose that items age twice as fast in the ﬁeld as
they do in the stockpile. As noted earlier, the ﬁeld life function for this case is
LðSÞ ¼ 0:5ðm  SÞ for 0  S  m
LðSÞ ¼ 0 for S  m:
In this case, the order of issue makes a difference. Again, suppose that the
stockpile consists of ﬁve items of ages 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and assume m ¼ 10. Issuing
the newest ﬁrst (LIFO) results in the following: Item 1 at age one issued at time
0 has ﬁeld life of 4.5. Item 2 at that point has age 6.5 (and remaining lifetime 3.5)
and hence has ﬁeld life of 1.75 and expire at time 6.25. Item 3 is then 9.25 units old
and has ﬁeld life of 0.375. Items 4 and 5 expire by this point, thus giving a total ﬁeld
life of 6.625 for LIFO.
Consider now issuing the items according to FIFO. Item 5 issued at time zero has
ﬁeld life of 2.5. At this point, item 4 has age 6.5 and ﬁeld life of 1.75. Item 4 expires
at time 4.25. Thus, item 3 has age 7.25 at issue and has ﬁeld life of 1.375 taking us
to time 5.625. Item 2 has age 7.625 and ﬁeld life of 1.1875 taking us to time 6.8125,
and ﬁnally the remaining ﬁeld life of item 1 is L(7.8125) ¼ 1.09375, giving a total
ﬁeld life of the stockpile from FIFO of 7.90625. In this case, FIFO is optimal.
Although increasing ﬁeld life functions have also been treated in the literature, it
would seem that there are few real world applications of this case. In most contexts,
we think of items deteriorating as they age rather than improving with age.
Greenwood only considered ﬁeld life functions of the form LðSÞ ¼ kðm  SÞ
for k > 0. If 0 < k < 1, then items age more slowly in the stockpile than in the
ﬁeld, and if k > 1, then items age more quickly in the stockpile than in the ﬁeld.
However, Greenwood also assumed that new items are added to the stockpile at a
constant rate of y. He derives several measures of system performance under this
scenario, including average age of items at the time they are sent to the
ﬁeld, number of items that die in the ﬁeld per unit time, average age of items in
44
6
Inventory Depletion Management

the ﬁeld, average number of items maintained in storage, rate of items dying in
storage per unit time, and average age of stored items. Expressions are derived
for the various measures of system performance as functions of several input
parameter values.
As noted earlier, Derman and Klein deﬁned the problem more narrowly than
Greenwood. This allowed them to develop rigorous proofs of their results for more
general forms of L(S). Their paper was signiﬁcant in several respects. One was their
problem deﬁnition. More importantly, they discovered what would become the
standard approach for analyzing the issuing problem – namely, an induction argu-
ment on n, the number of items in the stockpile. Derman and Klein’s main result is:
Theorem 6.1. If
1. LðSÞis a positive convex function and
2. LIFO is optimal when n ¼ 2,
then LIFO is optimal when n  3:
Proof. The proof is by induction on n, the number of items in the stockpile. The total
ﬁeld life of the stockpile may be written in the form QðxÞ ¼ x þ Lðx þ SÞ, where x
is the total ﬁeld life from the ﬁrst n  1 items and S is the initial age of the last (n-th)
item issued. Since Q is the sum of a convex function and a linear function, it is also
convex. The objective is to maximize Q. It is well known that the maximum of a
convex function over a convex set occurs at the extreme points of that set. Hence, Q
(x) is maximized at either x ¼ 0 or x ¼ its maximum value. Clearly the ﬁrst case,
x ¼ 0, is suboptimal – that would mean never issuing the ﬁrst n – 1 items. But the
induction assumption says that x is maximized by an LIFO policy on the ﬁrst n – 1
items issued. That said, either the last item issued is the oldest item in the stockpile or
not. If it is not, then it must be younger than the next to the last item issued. But that
contradicts assumption (1) which says that for any two items, LIFO is optimal.
Hence, by switching the order of the last two items, the total ﬁeld life can be
increased. Hence, LIFO must be optimal for the entire stockpile.
Zehna (1962) points out that one must qualify the assumptions of this theorem.
It is untrue, for example, if L(S) is an increasing function, or is not monotone.
As noted earlier, this is unlikely to occur in the real world, as it implies that items
improve in the ﬁeld. He also points out that the assumption made by Derman and
Klein that issuing a single item is never optimal may, in fact, not be true in all
circumstances. Zehna provides a proof of the slightly modiﬁed theorem that does
not require this assumption. It is:
Theorem. If L(S) is a convex, nonincreasing function and LIFO is optimal for
n ¼ 2, then LIFO is optimal for all n  2:
In order for this result to be useful, one still needs to determine those convex
functions for which LIFO is optimal when n ¼ 2. Two examples presented by
Derman and Klein are (a) LðSÞ ¼ a=ðb þ SÞ for a > 0; b  0 and (b) LðSÞ ¼ ceks
ðc; k>0Þ. (Note that the ﬁrst case was misprinted in the original as LðSÞ ¼
ða=b þ SÞ). In both cases, the ﬁeld life function is monotonically decreasing,
so they do correspond to perishable items. Both functions are also nonlinear.
6.2
Deterministic Field Life Functions
45

In a follow-up note to their original paper, Derman and Klein (1959), show that
no matter what the form of the ﬁeld life function, the issuing problem can be
formulated and solved as an assignment problem. Since algorithms for the assign-
ment problem are very efﬁcient, this implies that any real problem can easily be
solved if the exact form of the ﬁeld life function is known. From a practical
standpoint, this obviates much of the need for further theoretical results for the
deterministic problem, although the advantage of their earlier results is that one can
determine optimality of LIFO or FIFO only knowing the shape of the ﬁeld life
function, and not necessarily having to know its exact form.
The ﬁrst extension of the Derman and Klein work was due to Lieberman (1958)
who showed that if L0ðSÞ  1 and LIFO is optimal for n ¼ 2, then LIFO is
optimal for n > 2, and if FIFO is optimal for n ¼ 2, then FIFO is optimal for n > 2.
Zehna also provided several extensions of Derman and Klein’s and Lieberman’s
results. He considers cases where L0ðSÞ<  1 and shows that LIFO is optimal in
both cases where L is convex or concave. However, this is an unlikely case, as it
implies that items age faster in stockpile than in the ﬁeld. Zehna was also the ﬁrst to
consider stochastic ﬁeld life functions, but obtained few results for this case.
As noted earlier, Derman and Klein’s original work sparked a series of papers.
In the opinion of this writer, most of these are of limited practical interest because
of Derman and Klein’s earlier result that if the form of the ﬁeld life function is
known, all inventory problems can be solved as assignment problems. One of these
minor extensions was due to Bomberger (1961), who extended Derman and Klein’s
results based on the properties of the inverse function L1ðSÞ.
Eilon (1961) focused on the problem of whether LIFO or FIFO is optimal for the
case n ¼ 2: This is of interest since most of the earlier work used the Derman and
Klein induction argument, which requires one to assume that LIFO or FIFO is
optimal for n ¼ 2: One interesting idea was that if one expressed the ﬁeld life
function as a power series expansion, one can ﬁnd conditions for the optimality of
LIFO or FIFO for two items based on these expansions. In a later work, Eilon
(1963) focused on the problem of providing closed form expressions for the total
ﬁeld life of a stockpile under several circumstances. He considered cases of
identical items, and nonidentical items. He also considered the case where items
ﬂow into the stockpile at a constant rate. The replenishments could be of identical or
nonidentical items.
Pierskalla (1967a) considered several extensions of earlier work. In particular,
he considered the case where there are multiple demand sources that draw from the
stockpile. He focused attention on the case where the ﬁeld life function, L(S), is a
continuous nonincreasing function, and considers primarily FIFO issuing for the
demand sources. Unfortunately, because of the complexity of the problem, he is
able to prove the optimality of FIFO only in special cases. He also considers the
addition of penalty costs – namely, there is a penalty cost incurred each time an item
is issued from the stockpile. Again, the analysis focuses on cases where FIFO
issuing is optimal. Finally, he treats S-shaped ﬁeld life functions. Such functions are
neither convex nor concave, so do not fall into categories previously studied.
46
6
Inventory Depletion Management

6.3
Stochastic Field Life Functions
An extension to the basic issuing problem is the case where the ﬁeld life is uncertain.
The problem is easy to state. As in the deterministic case, assume a stockpile
of n items with varying ages. An item of age S issued to the ﬁeld has a ﬁeld life
L(S) that is a random variable whose distribution depends on S. When an item
expires, another is issued from the stockpile until it is depleted. The goal is to
maximize the total expected ﬁeld life of the stockpile. Although easy to state, this
problem is essentially unsolved. The difﬁculty lies in the fact that when items
are issued one-at-a-time, the age of an item issued to the ﬁeld depends on the
realizations of the lifetimes of the previous items issued. Hence, successive lifetimes
of items issued to the ﬁeld are dependent random variables, whose distributions are
very difﬁcult to ﬁnd. For this reason, researchers have been able to obtain results in
special cases only.
The ﬁrst to consider stochastic ﬁeld lives was Zehna (1962). For the general
problem, he was only able to obtain very limited results. He claimed that under the
general assumption that L(S) has an expectation that is a decreasing function of S,
there is very little one can say about the optimality of any issuing policy. He did
note, however, that in the case where EðLðSÞÞ ¼ a þ bS with a; b > 0, FIFO is
optimal. Of course, this case is not very interesting, as one would almost always
expect that EðLðSÞÞ is decreasing in S. He also obtained explicit results for the case
where items are issued on a ﬁxed schedule, rather than upon expiration of the
previously issued item, and also where there are only two items in the stockpile.
Neither case is very interesting from a practical point of view.
The next to consider stochastic ﬁeld lives was Pierskalla (1967b). He assumes
that there is a family of ﬁeld life functions of the form LiðSÞ ¼ aiS þ bi, where
ai < 0; and bi > 0 such that LiðS0Þ ¼ 0 for all values of i. That is, each ﬁeld life
function is a decreasing linear function with the same truncation point. He then
assumes that upon issue an item of age S has ﬁeld life LiðSÞ with probability pi. This
is, of course, a very restrictive assumption, but it overcomes the difﬁculties that
Zehna had dealing with truncation points. Pierskalla goes on to show that FIFO is
optimal under such a setting. He extends his results to the case of multiple item
demands on the stockpile.
While Pierskalla’s model allows him to obtain explicit results, it contradicts
the purpose of assuming uncertainty in the ﬁeld lives. Assuming all items die at the
same age is a very restrictive assumption. One would think that the purpose of
considering uncertainty in this context would be to allow different items to have
different lifetimes when issued at the same age.
An entirely different approach was taken by Nahmias (1974), which was based
on the concept of stochastic ordering. Consider two random variables, X and Y.
Then, X is said to be stochastically smaller than Y (written X  Y) if and only if
FXðtÞ  FYðtÞ for all t  0, where FXðtÞ and FYðtÞ are the cumulative distribution
functions of the random variables X and Y, respectively. Nahmias deﬁnes a new
criterion based this concept.
6.3
Stochastic Field Life Functions
47

Let p(n) be a permutation of the integers {1, 2,. . ., n}. Without the loss
of generality, assume that the n items in the stockpile are arranged such
that 0 < S1 < S2 < ::: < Sn, and let pLðnÞ ¼ f1; 2; 3; :::; ng and pFðnÞ ¼ fn; n  1;
n  2; :::; 1g so that these represent LIFO and FIFO issuing policies, respectively.
Furthermore, let ZðpðnÞÞ be the ﬁeld life of the stockpile when issued in the order p
(n). He assumes that ZðpðnÞÞ is a random variable with an arbitrary distribution. We
say that an issuing policy pðnÞ is strongly optimal if ZðpðnÞÞ  ZðpðnÞÞ for
all issuing policies p(n). Nahmias shows that if either FIFO or LIFO is strongly
optimal for n ¼ 2, then under fairly general assumptions, it will be strongly optimal
for n > 2. The proof follows the logic of Derman and Klein’s original proof.
He then considers two speciﬁc cases. Let X be a nonnegative random variable
whose range is restricted to the interval ð0; S0Þ. Suppose that XðSÞ is the ﬁeld life of
an item issued at age S. Then, deﬁne XðSÞ ¼ max½X  hðSÞ; 0, where h(S) is a
known function deﬁning the rate of deterioration. In this scenario, the realization of
a single random variable determines the lifetimes of all of the items in the stockpile.
He considers two versions of this scenario, and is able to show that when h(S) ¼ S
(i.e., items age at the same rate in the ﬁeld as in the stockpile) then both LIFO and
FIFO are strongly optimal. In a modiﬁcation of this model to guarantee items do not
die in the stockpile, he shows that only FIFO is strongly optimal. Other forms of
h(S) are not considered.
While Nahmias’s approach skirts some of the problems with models of Zehna
and Pierskalla, it does bring up a host of other issues. Are there common cases
where either LIFO or FIFO are strongly optimal for n ¼ 2? And what results
can one obtain for more general forms of h(S) in the simpler case, where the
lifetimes of all of the items in the stockpile are determined by the realization of a
single random variable?
Albright (1976) approaches the problem differently. As noted above, the
difﬁculty with this problem is that if items are issued one-at-a-time upon the
death of the previously issued item, successive ﬁeld lives are dependent random
variables. Albright avoids this problem by assuming that items are issued at
random times independent of the realizations of successive ﬁeld lives. This is
essentially a different problem. Perhaps this would be appropriate if the stockpile
were to serve a large number of distinct customers. In this case, the failure process
is the superposition of a large number of failure processes, and might look like an
independent renewal process. For this case (which he calls the independent case),
he is able to obtain interesting results assuming increasing failure rate (IFR)
distributions, and a deterministic mechanism that measures aging in storage
relative to aging in the ﬁeld. He does consider the dependent case, but was able
to obtain results here only for n ¼ 2 items.
48
6
Inventory Depletion Management

Chapter 7
Deterministic Models
Contents
7.1
The Basic EOQ Model with Perishability .................................................
49
7.2
Dynamic Deterministic Model with Perishability .........................................
50
7.1
The Basic EOQ Model with Perishability
As we have seen, managing perishables when demand is uncertain is a challenging
problem. When demand is known, one can always ﬁnd an ordering rule that
guarantees no outdating. Hence, at ﬁrst glance, it would appear that the deterministic
demand case is trivial. However, this is not the true when demand is nonstationary.
Consider ﬁrst the stationary demand case (namely, the basic EOQ model). In this
case, incorporating perishability is straightforward. We follow the notation from
Nahmias (2009). It is well known that in the EOQ setting, the optimal number of
units to order each cycle is given by the formula
Q ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2Kl
h
r
;
where K is the ﬁxed order cost, h is the holding cost measured on a unit per unit time
basis, and l is the ﬁxed rate of consumption also in units per unit time. The cycle
time, T, is the time between placement of orders, given by
T ¼ Q=l ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K
lh
r
:
The model is based on the assumption that goods are durable (i.e., have an inﬁnite
lifetime). Now, let us suppose that new orders have a lifetime of m units of time.
If T  m, there is no modiﬁcation of the policy required. All units are consumed by
demand prior to outdating. Consider the case T > m. Here, all units on hand at time
S. Nahmias, Perishable Inventory Systems, International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science 160, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5_7,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
49

m (which will be Q  lm) expire, and one must immediately reorder to avoid
shortages. It is obvious that in this situation, reducing the order size from Q to lm
eliminates outdating and reduces the holding cost and marginal order cost and has no
effect on ﬁxed costs. Hence, the optimal policy is to order minðQ; lmÞ.
It follows that in the EOQ environment one orders so that outdating never
occurs. It appears safe to assume that this property of an optimal solution carries
over to all deterministic perishable inventory problems. This includes problems
with nonstationary costs, capacity restrictions, etc.
7.2
Dynamic Deterministic Model with Perishability
In what has become a seminal paper, Wagner and Whitin (1958) provided the ﬁrst
analysis of the economic lot scheduling (ELS) problem. Consider a set of known
requirements over N planning periods, say r ¼ ðr1; r2; :::rNÞ. They assumed station-
ary only ﬁxed order costs and holding costs, and furthermore that these costs are
not changing with time. The key result which allowed them to construct an efﬁ-
cient solution algorithm was that an optimal policy only ordered in periods
where starting inventory was zero. (We refer to this as the zero inventory property.)
This means that if starting inventory at the beginning of the planning horizon
is assumed to be zero, an optimal policy is completely speciﬁed by knowing the
periods in which ordering occurs. It also means that every order quantity is the
sum of requirements for some set of future periods (this is known as an exact
requirements policy). Because of this result, the problem can be formulated as a
shortest path through an N node network and solved efﬁciently either by forward or
backward dynamic programing. Their paper sparked a great deal of interest among
researchers, and led to several generalizations. It has become known as the ELS
problem.
Consider the extension of the Wagner Whitin ELS problem, but assume that the
usable lifetime of the product is m periods. Clearly, it is now optimal to restrict
attention to policies that allow no outdating. Suppose that y ¼ ðy1; y2; :::; yNÞare the
production (or purchase) quantities over the N period planning horizon, and further
suppose that the order quantity yi results in outdating of k units in period i + m.
Then, replacing yi with yi0 ¼ yi  k must result in costs less than or equal to those
incurred by ordering yi, since (as with the EOQ model) ﬁxed order costs
are unaffected, but both holding costs and marginal order costs as well as outdate
costs, are reduced. Hence, one might think that this implies that the ELS problem
with perishability is uninteresting. This is certainly not the case, however.
The ﬁrst to consider the extension of the ELS problem to the case of perishable
inventory appears to have been Smith (1975). Smith assumed that the zero inven-
tory property carried over to the perishable case (which is not true). He also seems
to have ignored the property that (in the ﬁxed life case) an optimal policy always
has zero outdating.
50
7
Deterministic Models

Friedman and Hoch (1978) noted that Smith’s algorithm was ﬂawed, since it was
based on incorrect assumptions. They provided the following example to show that
when ﬁxed life perishability is included, the zero inventory property does not
always hold. Consider a problem with a three period planning horizon, and nonsta-
tionary costs. Suppose that requirements in each period are for one unit, set-up costs
are 0.5 each period, holding costs are $1 per unit held each period, and marginal
production (or order) costs are respectively 8, 10, and 12. Furthermore, suppose that
the product lifetime is two periods. The optimal solution to this problem is to order
two units in period 1 and one unit in period 2. The cost of this policy is the
following: $1 for setting up in two periods, $2 for holding since there is one unit
on hand at the end of periods 1 and 2, and marginal production costs of $16 + $10,
for a total cost of $29 over the three period planning horizon. Since this policy never
orders more than two periods of demand, no units outdate. The key point is that this
policy results in placing an order in period 2 when the entering inventory is one unit.
Hence, the zero inventory property is violated. (Notice, that if we removed the
two period lifetime restriction, the optimal policy would call for ordering 3 units in
period 1.)
The stochastic problem is difﬁcult for several reasons. One is that it is neces-
sary to deﬁne a multidimensional state variable to keep track of the on hand
inventories of each age level. This is not necessary in the deterministic case,
however. Friedman and Hoch discovered a very clever way to track the age of the
inventory without having to employ a multidimensional state variable. If one
keeps track of both the period in which production (or ordering) occurs for a unit,
and the period in which that unit is used to satisfy demand, then one can easily ﬁnd
the age of the unit in every period it is stored in the system. In this way, one
can compute the total cost associated with that unit during its lifetime in the
system. This cost matrix (which excludes ﬁxed costs) is the main driver of the
computational algorithm.
They assume on hand inventory of each age level is subject to decay at the end of
each period. That is, if there are I units on hand of age i at the end of a period (after
satisfying demand in that period), then only riI units will be available at the start of
the next period, where 0  ri  1. On the surface, this looks like simple exponen-
tial decay. However, because decay constants are age dependent, it is in fact much
more general. As they note, their model includes ﬁxed life perishability as a special
case by deﬁning ri ¼ 1 for 1  i  m, and ri ¼ 0 for i > m.
The input to the algorithm is the cost matrix having elements, ajt deﬁned
as the holding and marginal production cost of meeting one unit of demand in
period t from production in period
j, where 1  j  t. It follows that
ajt ¼ cj
Q
tj
k¼1
rk

1
þ P
t1
i¼j
ht
Q
tj
k¼ijþ1
rk
 
!1
for j < t. The idea behind the ﬁrst term
is the following. If a unit is produced in period j and held until period t, it will have
decayed in the intervening periods to Q
tj
k¼1
rk, which means one will have had to have
produced the inverse of this quantity in period j. By applying the decay factor in
7.2
Dynamic Deterministic Model with Perishability
51

each of the intervening periods between periods j and t, one determines the holding
cost in those intervening periods, thus accounting for the second term. Based on
this cost matrix, the authors develop a dynamic programing algorithm for solving
the problem. The cost matrix only includes marginal production costs and holding
costs. Fixed production costs are treated separately.
While the authors show that it is not necessarily true that ordering only occurs in
periods in which starting inventory is zero, they did correctly state that all of the
demand in a period is completely satisﬁed by production in a single prior
(or current) period only. This observation is an important feature of their solution
algorithm.
Friedman and Hoch’s results were extended by Hsu (2000). Hsu deﬁned the
following:
zit ¼ the amount of the demand from period t to be satisﬁed from production in
period i.
yit ¼ the amount produced in period i and held at the beginning of period t which
excludes the amount zit used to satisfy the demand in period t.
HitðyitÞ ¼ the cost of holding yit units of inventory in period t, which are produced
in period i.
ait ¼ the fraction of yit which is lost during period t.
Hsu’s development is easier to follow, as he clearly deﬁnes the state variables.
He generalizes the aging mechanism deﬁned by Friedman and Hoch. Note the
variable ait depends on both the age of the inventory and the period in which aging
occurs. This allows for different rates of aging based not only on the age of the
inventory, but also based on the time of year. For example, one might expect food
products to age more quickly in hot weather than in cool weather. This would be
reﬂected by larger values of ait in summer months.
Hsu assumes a more general cost structure than Friedman and Hoch. In particu-
lar, both the production and holding cost functions are assumed to be nondecreasing
concave functions. He makes the following assumptions:
For 1  i  j  t  n:
Assumption 1. ait  ajt
Assumption 2. HitðyÞ  HjtðyÞ for y  0:
Note that by the way the aging mechanism is deﬁned, the age of an item in period
t that is produced in period i is the difference t – i. It follows that since j  i,
t  j  t  i. Therefore, Assumption 1 says that older items age deteriorate at least
as fast as younger items. Assumption 2 says that as items age, the cost of holding
older items is at least as high as the cost of holding younger items. Part of the
justiﬁcation for Assumption 2 is that the holding cost term may also include a
disposal cost for perishable items. Note that Hsu’s formulation uses exactly the
same mechanism for tracking the age of items as that developed by Friedman
and Hoch.
52
7
Deterministic Models

The optimization problem is then stated as
Minimize
X
n
t¼1
½CtðxtÞþ
X
t
i¼1
HitðyitÞ
subject to: xt  ztt ¼ ytt
1  t  n
ð1  ai;t1Þyi;t1  zit ¼ yit
1  i < t  n
X
t
i¼1
zit ¼ dt;
1  t  n
xt;yit;zit  0
1  i  t  n
He assumes that both the order cost functions CtðxtÞ and the holding cost
functions HitðyitÞ are concave nondecreasing functions, generalizing Friedman
and Hoch’s assumptions that these were linear. Hsu shows that the solution of
this generalized version of Friedman and Hoch’s model is equivalent to a minimum
cost network ﬂow problem on a specially constructed network with ﬂow loss.
Hsu shows that for every t, 1  t  n; there is a unique i, 1  i  t; such that
zit ¼ dt. This means that at an optimal solution, every demand is satisﬁed completely
by production in a single prior period. Note that the production quantity must be
inﬂated by the decay losses as was noted by Friedman and Hoch. A second structural
result (which we do not quote here) is then used to construct the solution algorithm.
Hsu notes the result obtained by Friedman and Hoch that the zero inventory property
(namely that an optimal solution only produces when starting inventory is zero) does
not necessarily hold when perishability is present. In fact, even when perishability is
not present, nonstationary costs could result in this property failing to hold. The
solution algorithm developed for solving the problem is similar to the one developed
by Friedman and Hoch. However, because Hsu allows for nonlinear costs, the cost
matrix approach of Friedman and Hoch is no longer possible. In summary, Hsu
generalizes Friedman and Hoch’s results in two ways: one is allowing for the decay
variables to depend on both the age of the inventory and the planning period, and the
other is allowing for more general holding and ordering cost functions.
An extension of these results to allow for backorders is considered in Hsu
(2003). In this paper, Hsu essentially combines the results for Hsu (2000) and
Hsu and Lowe (2001), which did not deal with perishables, but considered the ELS
problem with backorders and age-dependent backorder costs. The idea is to allow
for backorder costs to depend on both the period in which the backorder occurs and
the period in which an item is produced to meet that backorder. We do not review
these papers in detail, but note that the earlier Hsu and Lowe paper built a solution
algorithm based on properties similar to those discovered by Hsu (2000) when
generalizing Friedman and Hoch’s model.
An extension of Hsu (2000) was considered by Chu et al. (2005). The model is
identical to Hsu (2000), except that the order cost function, CtðÞ is generalized to
the so-called economies of scale function.
7.2
Dynamic Deterministic Model with Perishability
53

A cost function, FðXÞ, deﬁned on ½0; 1 is called an economies of scale
function if:
1. Fð0Þ ¼ 0:
2. FðXÞ is nondecreasing on ½0; 1.
3. The average cost function deﬁned as
FðXÞ ¼ FðXÞ=X for X>0, is a
nonincreasing function on ð0; 1Þ.
The idea behind the economies of scale function is that it includes many types of
discount schedules not captured by the simpler concave nonincreasing function
assumed in Hsu (2000). Because there is no requirement that the economies of scale
function be continuous or have continuous derivatives, it includes incremental, all
units, and carload discount schedules. Except for that, the assumptions and structure
of the model are the same as Hsu (2000). The problem is that the important property
of an optimal solution under the simpler cost structure that demand in a period is
completely ﬁlled by production in a single prior period no longer holds. Hence, the
algorithm developed in Hsu (2000) no longer holds. It turns out that ﬁnding an
optimal solution to this problem is NP hard, so the authors consider approximations.
They suggest an approximation which has properties similar to the optimal
solution structure in Hsu (2000). Their main result is that this approximation results
in a cost that is no higher than ð4
ﬃﬃﬃ
2
p
þ 5Þ=7 (1.5224) times the optimal solution,
and this bound is tight. Unfortunately, this means the cost error can be more than
50%, making the value of this approximation questionable. Note that even though
the general problem is NP hard, it does not mean that most reasonable sized
problems cannot be solved for an optimal solution by dynamic programing.
54
7
Deterministic Models

Chapter 8
Decaying Inventories
Contents
8.1
EOQ Models with Decay ...................................................................
56
8.2
Uncertain Demand ..........................................................................
59
Decay differs fundamentally from ﬁxed life perishability. Decay means that the
amount of loss due to outdating is a function of the amount of on hand inventory.
The most common case is exponential decay, which means that a ﬁxed fraction of
the inventory is lost each unit of time. Decay has been studied in both continuous
review and periodic review settings.
There is a substantial literature on the decay problem. Raafat (1991) lists 70
references, and a more recent review by Goyal and Giri (2001) has 130 references,
almost all since Raafat’s review. Undoubtedly, the number is in the several
hundreds at the time of this publication. One might think that this implies a large
number of real-world applications. However, this is not the case. Few products age
in this way. Certainly, exponential decay is clearly not appropriate for modeling
ﬁxed life inventories. The aging process in these cases is described by the ﬁxed
life models treated in earlier chapters of this monograph.
One might conjecture that exponential decay would be a reasonable model of
the aging process for fresh produce or other fresh food items. A little reﬂection
quickly reveals this not to be the case, however. For example, suppose a shipment
of bananas arrives at a grocery store. When placed on the shelves, they are likely to
be either green (unripe) or nearly ripe. At this point, one would expect the loss due
to spoilage to be virtually zero. As the batch ages, the rate of spoilage increases,
until it eventually reaches 100%, as all of the unsold bananas become overripe.
Exponential decay would posit that some ﬁxed percentage, say 10%, of the bananas
would spoil each period.
One might argue that if the bananas are replenished on a daily basis, there would
always be a mix of old and new bananas in stock, and therefore assuming some
S. Nahmias, Perishable Inventory Systems, International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science 160, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5_8,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
55

ﬁxed fraction spoils each period would be reasonable. However, the fraction of the
on hand stock spoiling each period would not be ﬁxed. It varies depending on many
factors, including the realization of demand, the age of the bananas when they
arrive in stock, the manner in which the bananas are stored, etc.
Volatile liquids, such as alcohol and gasoline, have been suggested as examples
of exponential decay. However, these products are virtually always stored in
sealed containers, thus making the volatility a nonissue. One might then ask what
real situations are accurately described by exponential decay. Radioactive decay is
perhaps the one case accurately modeled in this way. Even in this case, it is only
the level of radioactivity that is subject to decay, not the quantity of inventory
on hand. The interesting application study of Emmons (1968) is perhaps one of the
few examples of true exponential decay. Why then, one might ask, is there such
a voluminous literature on decaying inventory models? This writer speculates that
the reason is that these problems are mathematically tractable, thus affording
opportunities for publication. While many of these papers are mathematically
interesting, their real-world applicability is suspect at best.
One might justify studying decaying inventories because they provide a reason-
able approximation to ﬁxed life inventories. However, this does not appear to be
true. Tests which have compared various approximation schemes for ordering ﬁxed
life inventories show that exponential decay does not provide a very accurate
approximation (Nahmias 1975b). Why, then, is there a chapter devoted to this
topic here? Decaying inventories are of theoretical interest, even if they are of
limited practical value. And, in the opinion of this writer, this monograph would not
be complete if this topic were ignored, especially in light of the very substantial
literature on the problem.
8.1
EOQ Models with Decay
The earliest work on exponential decay in the context of inventory management
seems to be that of Ghare and Schrader (1963). Their approach was to analyze the
differential equations resulting from incorporating continuous exponential decay
into the standard EOQ model. Consider a system in which the loss due to decay is
assumed to be y units per unit time. Then, temporarily ignoring losses due to
demand, the on hand inventory level function, say IðtÞ, declines according to an
exponential function, which can be represented in the form
Iðt þ dtÞ ¼ IðtÞeydt:
It follows that the loss due to decay during the interval ðt; t þ dtÞ is
IðtÞ  Iðt þ dtÞ ¼ IðtÞð1  eydtÞ:
56
8
Decaying Inventories

Now, suppose that the demand rate at time t is given by the continuous
function DðtÞ: The differential in the decline in the inventory due to both demand
and decay is given by
dI ¼ IðtÞð1  eytÞ  DðtÞ dt:
Using the fact that eydt  1  y dt, one obtains the following differential
equation for the decline in on hand inventory due to both demand and decay:
dIðtÞ
dt
¼ yIðtÞ  DðtÞ:
One can derive the solution of this differential equation in terms of the integral of
the function DðtÞ: When DðtÞ ¼ l, the model reduces to the standard EOQ with
decay. The analysis leads to a transcendental equation (which has no explicit
algebraic solution). To avoid this problem, the authors suggest in most practical
cases of interest it is likely true that the life period, 1=y, is much larger than the
cycle time, T. In that case, one can approximate the resulting exponential with
the ﬁrst two terms of the Taylor series expansion.
that is eyT  1 þ yT þ y2T2
2


.
Doing so gives the following expression for the cycle time, T:
T ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
K
lyc
2 þ lhc þ lhcyT
v
u
u
t
;
where c is the unit purchase cost, K the ﬁxed set up cost, and h the unit holding cost.
Note that this is equivalent to a cubic equation in T, which can be seen most easily
by squaring both sides of the equation. Ghare and Schrader suggest an iterative
scheme for ﬁnding the optimal cycle time, T. Given the optimal T, say T, the
optimal order quantity is Q ¼ lT þ lyT2
2
. We present Ghare and Schrader’s
model in detail because it does appear to be the ﬁrst inventory study of exponential
decay. The approach is based on several approximations whose accuracy would
have to be veriﬁed in any particular application.
Ghare and Schrader’s model was ﬁrst extended by Covert and Philip (1973).
The analysis and the model were similar to Ghare and Schrader’s, except that
Covert and Philip assumed that the instantaneous deterioration followed a Weibull
distribution rather than an exponential distribution. It is well known that the
Weibull distribution plays an important role in reliability theory. It accurately
describes the aging of many types of electrical components. One can envision
the following scenario where the Covert and Philip model might be applied.
8.1
EOQ Models with Decay
57

Consider a collection of items, such as automobile batteries, that are stored and
issued to the ﬁeld as required. Suppose that the batteries age in storage according to
a Weibull distribution. Assume batteries are ordered in ﬁxed lot sizes only when
the entire stockpile is depleted and delivery of fresh batteries is instantaneous.
(This assumption is easily relaxed by placing the order prior to the end of the cycle
as is done with the simple EOQ model.) The demand rate is a known constant.
Because the shipment of new batteries occurs only when the previous batch has
been used up, either by demand or failure, one never mixes items of different ages.
Hence, the instantaneous rate of decay is the same for the entire batch. Covert and
Philip followed a similar method of analysis to that of Ghare and Schrader. In this
case, one writes the differential decline of the inventory, dI, as
dI ¼ IðtÞZðtÞ dt þ l dt;
where the instantaneous decay rate of the inventory is given by
ZðtÞ ¼ abtb1:
(note that the original article had several typos in these expressions). This leads
to the differential equation of the system
dI
dt þ abtb1IðtÞ ¼ l:
It is easy to ﬁnd the optimal order quantity, Q, in terms of the cycle time, T. It is
Q ¼
ðT
0
R expðatbÞ dt:
The difﬁcult part of the analysis is to ﬁnd an expression for the cycle time, T.
Without presenting all of the details, by using a Taylor series expansion of the
exponential, they obtain the following implicit equation for the cycle time, T:
cl
X
1
n¼1
½annbTðnb1Þ=½ðnb þ 1Þn! þ hl expðaTbÞ=2  K=T2 ¼ 0:
The authors suggest a simple gradient search to ﬁnd the optimal value of T.
Cohen (1977) considered an extension of the basic Ghare and Schrader model to
include price as well as inventory level as a decision variable. Assume that
the demand rate, DðpÞ, is a function of the price p. If one holds the price ﬁxed,
Cohen shows that the cycle time, Tp can be approximated by the simple formula
Tp ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2K
DðpÞðcl þ hÞ
r
where K is the ﬁxed set up cost per order, c is the unit cost per
58
8
Decaying Inventories

item ordered, and h is the holding cost. This expression results from approximating
the exponential with the ﬁrst two terms of the Taylor Series expansion, as previous
authors have done. Deﬁne the proﬁt function,
pðT; pÞ ¼ pDðpÞ  cDðpÞ  K=T  ðcl þ hÞDðpÞT=2:
For a given value of p, the proﬁt function is maximized at Tp: Therefore, the
problem reduces ﬁnding the solution to
max
p0 pðTp; pÞ:
Cohen shows that this function achieves its maximum value at p>c, where p
could be inﬁnite. One numerical example suggests that the optimal price is rela-
tively insensitive to the decay rate, l. The model is extended to allow for complete
backlogging of excess demand.
8.2
Uncertain Demand
If one assumes ﬁxed lifetime, the memoryless property of the exponential distribution
is lost. However, exponential decay is a memoryless process, thus allowing for
Markovian analysis. One example of a case where Markovian analysis has been
applied is due to Kalpakam and Sapna (1996) who consider a system in which
orders are placed on a one-for-one basis (i.e., an (S1, S) system). They assume that
lead times are exponential, demands are generated by a renewal process, and the
inventory is subject to exponential decay. While it would seem unlikely that these
assumptions would hold in any real world scenario, the model is interesting in that
it does lead to a tractable analysis of the system.
The authors show that under their particular assumptions, the joint process
ðI; TÞ ¼ fIn; Tn : n ¼ 0; 1; 2; :::g is a Markov Renewal Process, where I is the
inventory level and T is the times of demand epochs. Using the theory of Markov
renewal processes, they obtain expressions of the various system measures in
terms of the steady state distribution of the inventory level. Explicit results are
obtained only in the case, where the demand process is assumed to be a memoryless
(that is, Poisson) process.
There is a large body of literature on decay models with uncertain demand,
but virtually all of these assume zero order lead time or in a few cases, exponential
lead time. Few real scenarios would appear to be accurately described by an
exponential lead time distribution, and the simultaneous assumptions of continuous
demand and zero lead time are even more unrealistic (this was discussed in Chap. 4
in the context of ﬁxed life inventories.)
Periodic review models with zero lead time are useful when lead times are
relatively small. When lead times are assumed to be zero, exponential decay is
8.2
Uncertain Demand
59

easily incorporated into the standard periodic review models. Consider ﬁrst the case
where there is no order lead time and excess demand is lost. In this case, it is well
known that the one period transfer function is
sðy; tÞ ¼ ðy  tÞþ
where y is the on hand inventory in the previous period after ordering and t is the
realization of demand in the current period. Interpret sðy; tÞ as the starting stock in
the current period. Recall that xþ ¼ maxðx; 0Þ:
Now, suppose that a ﬁxed fraction of the on hand inventory is lost each period
due to decay. Suppose that y represents the fraction of inventory surviving from
one period to the next (i.e., 1  y is the decay rate). Then, again assuming zero lead
time and lost sales, the one period transfer function now becomes
sðy; tÞ ¼ yðy  tÞþ:
Clearly, the addition of decay in this context has no effect on the form of an
optimal policy (which is well known to be an order up to policy, or S policy). Now,
consider the case of full backlogging of demand. This case is slightly more
complex, since decay can only be applied to the on hand inventory and not to the
backlogged inventory. In this case, we obtain
sðy; tÞ ¼
yðy  tÞ if y  t
t  y
if y < t:
(
The optimal policy is still an order up to policy in every period.
If a positive order lead time is present, the problem is much more complex.
The problem is that the decay can only be applied to the inventory on hand and not
to the inventory on order. Hence, one cannot collapse the state vector into the
inventory position (i.e., total stock on hand and on order). The state vector must
include each outstanding order as a separate state variable. (The same issue arises
in the analysis of the lead time, lost sales problem.)
The only study known to this writer that considers decay in the context of
stochastic demand and positive lead times is that of Nahmias and Wang (1979).
The authors’ approach was to modify the well-known heuristic (Q, R) model
developed by Hadley and Whitin (1963) for the no-decay case, and modify it to
account for exponential decay. The resulting heuristic was tested against the
optimal (Q, R) policy found by simulation for a variety of demand variance to
mean ratios and parameter values. The simulated and heuristic (Q, R) values agreed
well in most cases, resulting in a worst case performance for the heuristic of 2.77%
cost error. Note that the heuristic performed better than the simulated policy in
several test cases due to the high variance in the simulated cost making it difﬁcult
to reliably search for the optimal (Q, R) in the simulation.
60
8
Decaying Inventories

Chapter 9
Queues with Impatient Customers
Consider the following queueing scenario: Customers arrive one-at-a-time to a
single server and are served in a ﬁrst-come–ﬁrst-served sequence (FIFO). However,
customers are impatient in that if they have not completed service by a ﬁxed time,
say m, they leave the system. There is an obvious analogy with the perishable
inventory problem. Identify the queue with the on hand inventory, completion of
service with occurrences of demand, and the impatience time with the lifetime
of the product. Hence, it is possible that such queueing models could be useful for
describing some types of perishable inventory systems.
However, there are also fundamental differences between the queueing scenario
and the inventory management scenario. For one, in the queueing scenario, one
assumes that arrival rates and service rates are ﬁxed and known. Hence, one does
not reorder units in response to demand. The replenishment process (i.e., the arrival
process) is outside the control of the user. Even if one treats the arrival rate as a
control variable, arrivals still occur according to a random process. Another issue is
what happens when the queue is empty. In queueing, service is suspended when the
queue is empty, but in the inventory context demands continues to occur when
the system is out of stock. For these reasons, this analogy has limited utility in the
context of perishable inventory management.
However, one important real world problem that could be accurately described
by a queuing model is blood banking. Units of fresh blood “arrive” to a blood bank
via donations, which are likely to occur one-at-a-time according to some random
process. One might affect the arrival rate by using Bloodmobiles, advertising,
company-wide donation programs, etc. Since blood banks rarely stock out, the
issue of what happens when the queue is empty is moot.
For the most part, queueing models are descriptive rather than proscriptive. That
is, given a set of parameters and assumptions about the system, the goal of queueing
analysis is to describe various measures of the system. Inventory models are
proscriptive in that a solution involves optimizing the replenishment policy.
There is a very substantial literature on queues with impatient customers.
Because these models only have limited applicability to perishable inventory
management, we only brieﬂy review this literature. The ﬁrst study of queues with
S. Nahmias, Perishable Inventory Systems, International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science 160, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5_9,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
61

impatient customers appears to be that of Barrer (1957). Barrer generalized the
standard M/M/1 queueing analysis to the case of impatient customers. He consid-
ered both the cases, where the customer leaves the system if service has not begun
by time m, and where the customer leaves the system if service is not completed by
time m. The latter assumption would appear to be most appropriate for describing
perishable inventories.
In an M/M/1 queue, arrivals occur according to a simple Poisson process and
service times are independent exponential random variables. The traditional
method of analysis is birth and death analysis, with the state being the number of
customers in the system (i.e., the number in the queue plus the number in service).
Birth and death analysis is based on the fact that the number of customers in the
system is a Markov process. However, a little reﬂection reveals the fact that the
number of customers in the system is not Markovian when customer impatience is
introduced. To determine if a customer leaves the queue before completing service,
one must keep track of the elapsed time that customer has been in the queue. Hence,
it would appear that Barrer’s analysis, which uses birth and death analysis, is ﬂawed
in principle as was pointed out by Gnedenko and Kovalenko (1968). However,
it does appear that his results were correct.
The proper way to analyze a queueing model with impatience is via the virtual
waiting time process, and a closely related process, that of the oldest unit in the
queue. Gnedenko and Kovalenko analyze the queue with impatient customers in
this fashion assuming multiple servers. In the inventory context, the appropriate
assumption is a single server.
The ﬁrst to use a queueing model in the context of controlling perishable
inventories appears to be Nahmias (1982). Assume that customers arrive to the
queue at a rate of l and service occurs at a rate m. Customers whose service is not
completed by time m leave the system. Let the trafﬁc intensity be r ¼ l=m, and
deﬁne a ¼ mm. Furthermore, assume that there are two costs incurred. When the
system is empty, there is a stockout cost of p per unit per unit time and outdating
costs are incurred at y per unit. Then, Nahmias shows that the expected cost rate as a
function of the trafﬁc intensity is
GðrÞ ¼
ðr  1Þm
reaðr1Þ  1 ðryeaðr1Þ þ pÞ if r 6¼ 1;
and
GðrÞ ¼
m
a þ 1 ðy þ pÞ if r ¼ 1:
The goal of the analysis is to ﬁnd the value of the trafﬁc intensity that minimizes
GðrÞ: Note that if demand rate, m, is known, this is equivalent to optimizing the
arrival rate l. Nahmias was unable to prove that GðrÞ is a convex function.
However, numerical tests showed that G0ðrÞ appeared to follow sign pattern
minus/plus, implying a unique solution to the equation G0ðrÞ ¼ 0: The solution is
easily found by numerical methods.
62
9
Queues with Impatient Customers

Graves (1982) was the next to consider the application of queueing models for
controlling perishable inventories. Graves considered a different model from
Nahmias and a different mode of analysis. He assumes that production occurred
at a constant rate of c units per unit time. This would be appropriate, for example,
if one is considering a chemical processing plant with continuous production.
Furthermore, the demand process was assumed to be a compound process. That
is, demand occurrences followed a Poisson process with rate m, and the size of
individual demands follows an exponential distribution with rate g. Inventory is
issued to meet demand on an oldest ﬁrst basis (FIFO), backorders are not permitted,
and inventory that reaches age m before being consumed by demand is outdated
and leaves the system.
Graves’ approach bypasses the (apparently incorrect) birth and death analysis
used by Barrer, and instead focuses on the process A(t) ¼ age of the oldest unit in
inventory at time t. Interestingly, the process A(t) is Markovian. It is, in a sense, the
dual of the virtual waiting time process (which would be m – A(t)). Although
Graves does not consider optimizing the production rate, he does derive simple
expressions for the expected outdates per unit time, expected shortages per unit
time, the expected age of the oldest unit supplied to satisfy demand, and the
expected inventory level. He also considers a model with unit demands occurring
according to a Poisson process. In this case, only approximate results are obtained,
however.
Kaspi and Perry (1983) is the ﬁrst in a long series of research papers by the
second author. These papers are studies of queues with impatient customers,
although their titles would indicate otherwise. They are typical of queueing papers
in that they do not treat issues of optimization, but only consider various descriptive
measures of the system under speciﬁc assumptions about the arrival and service
processes. The extent to which these models can be applied to perishable inventory
control is unclear. The key result in this paper is that the process of deaths (that is,
outdating) is a delayed renewal process when the input process is a Poisson pro-
cess and services are exponentially distributed. We do not review this stream of
research here.
Several authors have considered variations of the basic queueing model sugges-
tion speciﬁcally by blood banking applications. One such study is due to Goh et al.
(1993). They considered a blood banking system with Poisson input and two classes
of age category: new and old. New blood (typically 10 days old or newer) is
reserved for special applications, such as heart transplants and neonatal procedures.
They consider two issuing policies: one where the stock of newer blood is reserved
only for the use of these critical procedures. In the second case, new blood may be
used to satisfy demand if the stock of older blood is zero. The analysis is based on
identifying ﬁrst and second moments of time between successive outdate epochs.
The expressions are complex functions of the various system parameters. Simpler
approximations are also considered and tested via simulation.
In a more recent study suggested by the same application, Deniz and Scheller-
Wolf (2007) also consider the case, where customers demand items of different
ages. As with Goh et al. (1993) only two age categories are allowed. However, this
study differs from that of Goh et al. in that replenishment policies are considered.
9
Queues with Impatient Customers
63

The authors consider two heuristic ordering policies. They are labeled TIS and
NIS. The TIS policy is what we previously referred to as an order-up-to-policy or
an S policy. The NIS policy is what we previously referred to as ﬁxed order quantity
policy: one orders S units of new stock independent of the inventory position.
A unique aspect of this study is the assumptions made regarding upward and
downward substitution. First, suppose there are given fractions of customers
denoted 0  pD  1 and 0  pU  1 that are willing to accept downward and
upward substitution, respectively. Downward substitution means that new product
is sold to a customer that requests old stock, and upward substitution is the opposite.
The authors examine the following four scenarios: no substitution, downward
substitution only, upward substitution only, and both downward and upward substi-
tution. What makes this study interesting and unique is the consideration of
four distinct issuing policies. The vast majority of the perishable inventory literature
assumes FIFO issuing; and a few studies assume LIFO issuing. The primary focus of
this research is to determine under what conditions one of these four issuing rules is
preferred given the replenishment policy. In particular, they delineate ten scenarios
involving relationships among the costs and substitution parameters resulting in a
preferred issuing policy.
64
9
Queues with Impatient Customers

Chapter 10
Blood Bank Inventory Control
As noted earlier, many of the models reviewed in this monograph were motivated
by the problem of optimally storing and issuing whole blood. However, actual
blood banking applications have features too complex to include in the mathe-
matical models. In this chapter, we brieﬂy review the signiﬁcant papers in the
management science literature aimed speciﬁcally at blood banking that incorporate
these features.
The earliest theoretical work on perishables appeared in the literature in the 1970s.
Even earlier than that, researchers began to consider blood banking applications.
The ﬁeld of blood banking is very large, with dedicated journals on the subject
(notably, Transfusion). This chapter treats only mathematical and computer simula-
tion models aimed at improving inventory management of blood banks.
The ﬁrst quantitative analysis of inventory management of blood banks is due to
Elston and Pickerel (1963, 1965). Their earlier paper considers the distribution
blood usage in the hospital. Let Y be a random variable representing the demand
for blood of a speciﬁc type at a hospital blood bank. They show that under
certain assumptions about the frequency of demands for blood, and the size of
each request, the distribution of Y follows a negative binomial distribution with
parameters p and k, where the parameters depend on the blood type, the day of the
week, and possibly other factors. The form of the distribution is
PðyÞ ¼ ðy  k  1Þ!
y!ðk  1Þ! p yð1  pÞk;
y ¼ 0; 1; 2; :::
They claimed that this distribution also describes input and usage. Note that
the negative binomial distribution is the result of assuming that the number of
patients requiring transfusions is a Poisson random variable, and the size of each
transfusion is a logarithmic random variable. The authors raised several issues here
and in Elston and Pickerel (1970) that were later considered in much more detail by
other researchers. These included a comparison of outdates when using the freshest
S. Nahmias, Perishable Inventory Systems, International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science 160, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5_10,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
65

(LIFO) verses the oldest (FIFO) blood as well as simulating the operation of the
blood bank assuming various S type order up to policies.
Jennings (1973) followed up on the work of Elston and Pickerel with a simula-
tion study of S type policies. Jennings noted that there were several special features
of blood banking management not considered in the theoretical models discussed
in this monograph. For one, blood is crossmatched and assigned prior to use.
Consider a physician making a request for four units of blood prior to a surgery.
The correct blood type is removed from the hospital blood bank and tested against
the patient’s blood to make sure that it is a match. Then, the blood is assigned for
the surgery, and is not available for any other use between the time it is assigned
and the surgery occurs. Typically, the surgeon requests more blood than he or she
expects to use. The unused units are then returned to the unassigned inventory,
assuming that they have not outdated.
Jennings notes that dynamic programing models of blood inventory are imprac-
tical, owing to the large dimension of the state variable. (At the time, blood had
a legal lifetime of 21 days, resulting in a 20 dimensional state vector. Today,
it appears that it has been extended under certain circumstances to longer periods,
perhaps as much as 35 days.) Jennings assumed an S-type order policy and analyzed
the problem via Monte Carlo simulation. He assumed that the hospital blood bank
can raise its total inventory of a blood type to a desired level S at the start of each
day. (This ignores real issues of supply uncertainty.) Jennings’ analysis focused on
the trade-off is between shortages and outdates. As the value of S increases,
shortages decline, but outdates increase. He represents both shortages and outdates
as percentages of the annual number of pints transfused. This obviates the problem
of assigning costs to these measures. He constructs a shortage/outdating trade-off
curve, where each point on the curve is generated by a different value of S.
The shortage outdating curve can potentially be a useful tool for managers
seeking the most effective inventory level. He also develops a family of curves for
regional systems consisting two, ﬁve, and twenty bank systems. He considers the
cases where the system operates using a common inventory policy (which means,
the regional system operates as if it were a single hospital) versus a threshold transfer
policy, which deﬁnes how units are transferred from one hospital to another.
Pegels and Jelmart (1970) present a Markov chain formulation of the blood-
banking problem that, at ﬁrst blush, appears to provide insight into the problem.
However, Jennings and Kolesar (1973) note that there are several problems with
the approach. For one, Jennings notes that it would be almost impossible to ﬁnd
the transition probabilities in a real-world setting. Furthermore, Kolesar points
out that their construction is not even a Markov chain (that is, it does not satisfy
the memoryless property required of Markov chains).
Cumming et al. (1976) consider alternatives for collection policies to improve
system wide efﬁciency. They note that requirements for blood do not appear to be
seasonal, but do exhibit a fair amount of variation over days of the week. Based on
their data, usage rates are highest on Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday and lowest
on weekends and holidays.
66
10
Blood Bank Inventory Control

They considered several models of issuing policies based on age. The random
draw model, for example, assumed that any age of blood was equally likely to be
transfused. Since most hospitals follow FIFO issuing to some extent, this is clearly
not an accurate descriptor of reality. A better model of age at issue that they
discovered is the following. Let
pjt ¼ gð21jÞp21;t
where pjt is the probability that a unit of blood having a remaining life of j days
is transfused on day t, and g is a constant that speciﬁes the preference for older or
fresher blood. In most cases, one would expect that g < 1, which implies a type
of FIFO policy. Based on actual data, the authors discovered that g was typically in
the range of 1.05–1.10.
Cohen and Pierskalla (1979) follow-up on the work of Jennings (1973). They
treat the trade-off of shortages and outdating in terms of costs rather than as a
percentage of annual demand. They approached the problem in terms of developing
a decision rule that speciﬁes the order-up-to-level S as a function of various key
parameters of the system. Parameter values are optimized via linear regression.
Using this approach, they obtained the following decision rule:
ln S ¼ 1:7967 þ 0:7604 lnðdMÞ þ 0:1216 lnðpÞ  0:0677 lnðDÞ
which is a result of taking natural logs of both sides of the multiplicative equation
S ¼ 6:03ðdMÞ0:7604p0:1216D0:0677;
where dM is the mean daily demand for a blood type, p is the average transfusion to
crossmatch ratio (i.e., the proportion of crossmatched blood actually transfused),
and D is the crossmatch release period (i.e., the amount of time that elapses from the
point the blood is ordered until it is ready for transfusion or is returned to the
inventory).
The idea of a multiplicative decision rule has been used before in other inventory
planning models, but Cohen and Pierskalla were the ﬁrst to apply it in the blood-
banking context.
Several researchers considered improving the efﬁciency of regional blood
distribution systems via rotation policies among the hospitals in a region. This
approach was ﬁrst considered by Brodheim and Prastacos (1979a, b). In the second
reference, they formulate the problem as a mathematical program which is executed
parametrically. The algorithm was successful in providing rotation policies in the
Long Island region. The technical details of the algorithm are presented in Prastacos
and Brodheim (1980). Kendall and Lee (1980) also suggest a mathematical
programing model of regional redistribution and illustrate their method with data
from a Midwest regional blood system. Their method does not appear to have been
implemented, however.
10
Blood Bank Inventory Control
67

An improvement in the standard crossmatching policy was considered by Dumas
and Rabinowitz (1977). Because crossmatching and assigning blood means that this
blood is effectively removed from the system, and often 50% or more of assigned
blood comes back to the bank, their concept was that efﬁciencies could be obtained
by double-crossmatching. That is, assigning units of blood to two patients rather
than one, thus increasing the probability that a larger portion of the assigned blood
would be used. To show why signiﬁcant wastage occurs, they quote the experience
at Mount Sinai hospital in New York City. First, half of the original reservation
requests are cancelled on average. Of those requests not cancelled, on average two
thirds of the assigned units are transfused, and one third returned to the blood bank.
That means that typically only one third of the originally requested units are
actually used. Now, suppose that p is the probability that an assigned unit is
transfused, and suppose the unit is shared by two patients, each having the same
probability of usage. The unit will be used if either or both of the patients require it.
The problem can be modeled with a binomial distribution with n ¼ 2 and p as the
probability of success. The probability of at least one success in two trials is easily
seen to be 2pð1  pÞ þ p2 ¼ pð2  pÞ > p, which means the probability of usage
increases with the double crossmatching. Of course, actually implementing such a
policy has many complications (involving reservation cancellations, valid and
invalid blood type substitutions, using triple rather than double crossmatching,
etc.) We do not go into these details here. It does not appear that anyone has ever
attempted to implement a double crossmatching policy, so its effectiveness has not
been tested in the ﬁeld.
Pegels et al. (1977) consider a variety of policy changes that could improve
blood banking effectiveness. The four policy alternatives they consider are
1. Utilizing frozen red cells
2. Increasing the legal shelf life of whole blood
3. Rescheduling blood collection operations
4. Improving inventory control
Since they made these suggestions, it appears that the use of frozen red cells
has increased substantially. Also, they suggest that increasing the legal shelf life
from 21 to 28 days. In some circumstances, blood over 30 days old has been used.
In order to evaluate the effect of these policy changes, they used an empirical
database consisting of six months of data from a Midwest blood region that collects
50,000 units annually and seeks to maintain 2,000 units in inventory at all times.
Using this database, they simulated the operation of the system under the various
policy scenarios above. We do not go into their results in detail, but provide only a
brief summary of their ﬁndings. For one, they found that increasing the use of
frozen red blood cells smoothed out the ﬂuctuations in inventory, but increased the
operating cost of the system.
A simulation of the system was developed to test the effect of increasing the legal
lifetime from 21 to 28 days. Their results were surprising. They found that the
average age at transfusion increased from 9.53 to 13.50 days (implying the quality of
the transfused blood decreased), but the decrease in units wasted per day improved
only minimally (from 19.4 to 18.9). The percent wastage only declined by 0.2%.
68
10
Blood Bank Inventory Control

They also considered smoothing out the collections process. They noted that
the recruitment of donors and actual collections were poorly distributed over time
and over geographic locations. They found that changing the schedule of the
bloodmobile was effective in smoothing out the variations in the inventory levels.
Finally, they considered increasing the FIFO-ness of transfusions. This means
increasing the adherence to using an FIFO issuing policy, and using the older blood
ﬁrst as often as possible. This issue is not so simple, however. Surgeons insist on the
use of fresher blood for certain critical procedures, such as organ transplants, and
the process of crossmatching and assigning often means that it can be very difﬁcult
to use the oldest blood for a procedure.
Virtually all of the studies discussed which attempt to compare shortages and
outdating for various values of stocking levels employ computer simulation.
As noted, the issue of crossmatching signiﬁcantly complicates the problem, thus
making mathematical modeling difﬁcult. The only study this writer is aware of that
considers a purely mathematical model for this tradeoff is Jagannathan and Sen
(1991). Suppose that the lifetime of blood is L and the crossmatch release period
is d. (This is the time between the point that the blood is crossmatched and tested for
compatibility and it is released or made available for either transfusion or returned
to inventory.) As a rule, a signiﬁcantly larger amount of blood is ordered by the
surgeon than is expected to allow for unforeseen contingencies. Thus, the propor-
tion of crossmatched blood that is actually transfused is less than one. Typically,
these ratios vary from 0.27 to 0.67. This is known as the transfusion-crossmatch
ratio, denoted by p. Crossmatched demand is denoted by d, and is assumed to be
normally distributed. One interesting result they obtain is that if the crossmatch
demand d is constant, the mean daily outdating is given by
o ¼ pdð1  pÞn
1  ð1  pÞn
where n ¼ L=d: The authors obtain analytical expressions for several other measures
of system performance, and show by a comparison with simulated results that they
provide accurate estimates of shortages and outdating for various stocking levels.
10
Blood Bank Inventory Control
69


Chapter 11
Afterword
The purpose of this monograph has been to provide a reasonably comprehensive
summary of the theory of inventory management of perishables. Admittedly, much
of the focus has been on my own work. However, I have tried to cover the primary
developments in the ﬁeld as I see them. As the ﬁeld has grown enormously since
I did the formative work on my doctoral dissertation some 40 years ago, I have
undoubtedly omitted citing some signiﬁcant references. I apologize in advance for
this. While I expect there to be errors of omission, I hope there are few errors of
commission.
My hope in writing this monograph was to create a springboard for aspiring
researchers. Given the now large body of work on perishables, it is a daunting task
try to familiarize oneself with the literature, which is certainly required before
embarking on a research program. While much work has been done, I believe that
there are substantial opportunities for additional contributions. I look forward to
seeing these contributions in the literature over the coming years.
S. Nahmias, Perishable Inventory Systems, International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science 160, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5_11,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
71


References
Albright SC (1976) Optimal stock depletion policies with stochastic ﬁeld lives. Management
Science 22:852–857
Arrow KA, Harris TE, Marschak T (1951) Optimal inventory policy. Econometrica 19:38–39
Arrow KA, Karlin S, Scarf HE (eds) (1958) Studies in the mathematical theory of inventory and
production. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA
Barrer DY (1957) Queueing with impatient customers and ordered service. Operations Research
5:650–656
Berk E, Gurler U (2008) Analysis of the (Q, r) inventory model for perishables with positive lead
times and lost sales. Operations Research 56:1238–1246
Bomberger EE (1961) Optimal inventory depletion policies. Management Science 7:294–303
Brodheim E, Prastacos G (1979a) A regional blood management system with pre-scheduled
deliveries. Transfusion 19: 455–466
Brodheim E, Prastacos G (1979b) The Long Island blood distribution system as a prototype for
regional blood management. Interfaces 9:3–20
Brodheim E, Derman C, Prastacos G (1975) On the evaluation of a class of inventory policies for
perishable products such as blood. Management Science 21:1320–1325
Chazan D, Gal S (1977) A markovian model for a perishable product inventory. Management
Science 23:512–521
Chu LY, Hsu VN, Shen M (2005) An economic lot-sizing problem with perishable inventory and
economies of scale costs: approximation solutions and worst case analysis. Naval Research
Logistics 52:536–548
Cohen MA (1976) Analysis of single critical order policies in perishable inventory theory.
Operations Research 24:726–741
Cohen MA (1977) Joint pricing and ordering policy for exponentially decaying inventory with
known demand. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 24:257–268
Cohen MA, Pierskalla WP (1979) Target inventory levels for a hospital blood bank or a
decentralized regional blood banking system. Transfusion 19:444–454
Cooper WL (2001) Pathwise properties and performance bounds for a perishable inventory
system. Operations Research 49:4555–466
Covert RP, Philip GC (1973) An EOQ model for items with weibull distribution deterioration.
AIIE Transactions 5:323–326
Cumming PD et al. (1976) A collections planning model for regional blood suppliers: description
and validation. Management Science 22:962–971
Deniz, Karaesmen, and Scheller-Wolf (2007) Managing inventories of perishable goods: the effect
of substitution. Unpublished manuscript, 34 pages
Derman C, Klein M (1958) Inventory depletion management. Management Science 4:450–456
S. Nahmias, Perishable Inventory Systems, International Series in Operations
Research & Management Science 160, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4419-7999-5,
# Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011
73

Derman C, Klein M (1959) Discussion: a note on the optimal depletion of inventory. Management
Science 5:210–213
Deuermeyer B (1979) A multi-type production system for perishable inventories. Operations
Research 27:935–943
Deuermeyer B (1980) A single period model for a multiproduct perishable inventory system with
economic substitution. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 27:177–185
Dumas MB, Rabinowitz M (1977) Policies for reducing blood wastage in hospital blood banks.
Management Science 23:1124–1132
Edgeworth FY (1888) The mathematical theory of banking. Journal of Royal Statistical Society
51:113–27
Eilon S (1961) FIFO and LIFO policies in inventory management. Management Science
7:304–315
Eilon S (1963) Obsolescence of commodities which are subject to deterioration in store. Manage-
ment Science 9:623–642
Elston RC, Pickerel JC (1963) A statistical approach to ordering and usage policies for a hospital
blood bank. Transfusion 3:41–47
Elston RC, Pickerel JC (1965) Guides to inventory levels for a hospital blood bank determined by
electronic computer simulation. Transfusion 5:465–470
Elston RC, Pickerel JC (1970). Blood bank inventories. CRC Critical reviews in Clinical Laboratory
Sciences 8:527–545
Emmons H (1968) A replenishment model for radioactive nuclide generators. Management
Science 11:263–273
Friedman Y, Hoch Y (1978) A dynamic lot size model with inventory deterioration. INFOR
16:183–188
Fries BE (1975) Optimal order policy for a perishable commodity with ﬁxed lifetime. Operations
Research 23:46–61
Ghare PM, Schrader GF (1963) A model for an exponentially decaying inventory. The Journal of
Industrial Engineering 14:238–243
Gnedenko B, Kovalenko IN (1968) Introduction to queueing theory. Israel Program for Scientiﬁc
Translation
Goh C, Greenberg BS, Matsuo H (1993) Two stage perishable inventory models. Management
Science 39:633–649
Goyal SK, Giri BC (2001) Recent trends in modeling of deteriorating inventory. European Journal
of Operational Research 134:1–16
Graves S (1982) The application of queueing theory to continuous perishable inventory systems.
Management Science 28:400–406
Greenwood JA (1955) Issue priority. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 2:251–268
Gurler U, Ozkaya Y (2003) A note on “Continuous review perishable inventory systems: models
and heuristics”. IIE Transactions 35:321–323
Gurler U, Ozkaya Y (2008) Analysis of the (s, S) policy for perishables with random shelf life.
IIE Transactions 40:759–781
Harris FW (1915) Operations and cost. Factory Management Series, Shaw, Chicago
Hadley GJ, Whitin TM (1963) Analysis of inventory systems. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs
Hsu VN (2000) Dynamic economic lot size model with perishable inventory. Management
Science 46:1159–1169
Hsu VN (2003) An economic lot size model for perishable products with age dependent inventory
and backorder costs. IEE Transactions 35:775–780
Hsu VN, Lowe TJ (2001) Dynamic economic lot size models with period-pair dependent
backorder and inventory costs. Operations Research 49:316–321
Jagannathan R, Sen T (1991) Storing crossmatched blood: a perishable inventory model with prior
allocation. Management Science 37:251–266
Jennings JB (1973) Blood bank inventory control. Management Science 19:637–645
74
References

Jennings JB, Kolesar PJ (1973) Comments on a blood-bank inventory model of Pegels and Jelmert.
Operations Research 21:855–858
Kalpakam S, Sapna KP (1996) A lost sales (s  1, s) inventory system with renewal demand.
Naval Research Logistics 43:129–142
Kaspi H, Perry D (1983) Inventory systems of perishable commodities. Advances In Applied
Probability 15:674–685
Kaplan R (1970) A dynamic inventory model with random lead times. Management Science 16:
491–507
Kendall KE, Lee SM (1980) Formulating blood rotation policies with multiple objectives.
Management Science 26:1145–1157
Lieberman GJ (1958) LIFO vs FIFO in inventory depletion management. Management Science
5:102–105
Liu L, Lian Z (1999) (s, S) continuous review models for products with ﬁxed lifetimes. Operations
Research 47:150–158
Muckstadt JA (2005) Analysis and algorithms for service parts supply chains. Springer Series in
Operations Research and Financial Engineering, 57 pages
Nahmias S (1972) Optimal and approximate ordering policies for a perishable product subject
to stochastic demand. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Northwestern University, Evanston,
Ill. 158 pages
Nahmias S (1974) Inventory depletion management when the ﬁeld life is random. Management
Science 20:1276–1283
Nahmias S (1975a) Optimal ordering for perishable inventory – II. Operations Research
23:735–749
Nahmias S (1975b) A comparison of alternative approximations for ordering perishable inventory.
INFOR 13:175–184
Nahmias S (1976) Myopic approximations for the perishable inventory problem. Management
Science 22:1002–1008
Nahmias S (1977a) Comparison between two dynamic perishable inventory models. Operations
Research 25:168–172
Nahmias S (1977b) Higher order approximations for the perishable inventory problem. Operations
Research 25:630–640
Nahmias S (1977c) On ordering perishable inventory when both the demand and lifetime are
random. Management Science 24:82–90
Nahmias S (1978) The ﬁxed charge perishable inventory problem. Operations Research 26:
464–481
Nahmias S (1980) Queueing models for controlling perishable inventories. Proceedings of the
First International Symposium on Inventories, Budapest
Nahmias S (1981) Managing reparable item inventory systems: a review, in Multilevel Production/
Inventory Control Systems: Theory and Practice, edited by L. Schwarz. TIMS Studies in the
Management Sciences, North Holland, Vol. 16, pp. 253–277
Nahmias S (2009) Production and Operations Analysis, Sixth Edition. McGraw Hill/Irwin, Burr
Ridge, Illinois, 787 pages
Nahmias S, Pierskalla WP (1973) Optimal ordering policies for a product that perishes in two
periods subject to stochastic demand. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly 20:207–229
Nahmias S, Pierskalla WP (1976) A two-product perishable/nonperishable inventory problem.
SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 30:483–500
Nahmias S, Schmidt CP (1986) An application of the theory of weak convergence to the dynamic
perishable inventory problem with discrete demand. Mathematics of Operations Research
11:62–69
Nahmias S, Wang SS (1979) A heuristic lot size reorder point model for decaying inventories.
Management Science 25:90–97
Nandakumar P, Morton TE (1993) Near myopic heuristics for the ﬁxed-life perishability problem.
Management Science 39:1490–1498
References
75

Pegels CC, Jelmert AE (1970) An evaluation of blood-inventory policies: a Markov chain
application. Operations Research 18:1087–1098
Pegels CC et al. (1977) An analysis of selected blood service policy changes. Medical Care
XV:147–157
Perry D, MJM Posner (1998) An (s-1,s) inventory system with ﬁxed shelf life and constant lead
times. Operations Research 46: Supp. #3, S65–S83
Pierskalla WP (1967a) Optimal issuing policies in inventory management. Management Science
13:395–412
Pierskalla WP (1967b) Inventory depletion management with stochastic ﬁeld life functions.
Management Science 13:877–886
Prastacos GP, Brodheim E (1980) PBDS: A decision support system for regional blood manage-
ment. Management Science 26:451–463
Raafat F (1991) Survey of literature on continuously deteriorating inventory models. Journal of the
Operational Research Society 42:27–37
Schmidt CP, Nahmias S (1985) (S-1, S) policies for perishable inventory. Management Science
31:719–728
Smith LA (1975) Simultaneous inventory and pricing decisions for perishable commodities with
price ﬂuctuation constraints. INFOR 13:82–87
Tekin E, Gurler U, Berk E (2001) Age-based vs. stock level control policies for a perishable
inventory system. European J. of Operational Research 134:309–329
Weiss HJ (1980) Optimal ordering policies for continuous review perishable inventory models.
Operations Research 28:365–374
Van Zyl GJJ (1964) Inventory control for perishable commodities. Unpublished doctoral disserta-
tion, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
Veinott AF Jr (1960) Optimal ordering issuing and disposal of inventory with known demand.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Columbia University, New York, NY
Veinott AF Jr (1978) Private communication
Veinott (1965) Optimal policy for a multi-product, dynamic, non-stationary inventory problem.
Management Science 12:206–222
Wagner HM, Whitin TM (1958) Dynamic version of the economic lot size model. Management
Science 5:89–96
Whitin (1957) The Theory of Inventory Management. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ
Zehna P (1962) Inventory depletion policies. in Studies in Applied Probability and Management
Science, Arrow, Karlin, Scarf (eds.), Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA. 263–287
76
References

About the Author
Steven Nahmias is a Professor of Operations and Management Information Systems
in the Leavey School of Business and Administration at Santa Clara University.
He holds a B.A. in Mathematics and Physics from Queens College, a B.S. in
Industrial Engineering from Columbia University, and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees
in Operations Research from Northwestern University. Prior to joining the faculty
of the Leavey School at Santa Clara in 1979, he served on the faculties of University
of Pittsburgh and Stanford University.
Dr. Nahmias has an international reputation for his research on stochastic
inventory models, especially those dealing with perishable inventories. He is the
author or co-author of more than 50 scientiﬁc articles published over the past 40
years. These have appeared in Operations Research, Management Science, SIAM
Journal on Applied Mathematics, and many others. He has served as an Area Editor
for Supply Chain Logistics for Operations Research, Associate Editor for both
Management Science and Naval Research Logistics, and was a founding Senior
Editor for the M&SOM journal. At Santa Clara University, he has served as
department chair and Director of the Competitive Manufacturing Institute.
He is a member of Alpha Pi Mu, Beta Gamma Sigma, Omega Rho and Sigma
Chi honoraries, and is listed in Who’s Who in Engineering, Who’s Who in
California, American Men and Women of Science, and Who’s Who in Frontier
Science and Technology. He received First Prize in the 39th Nicholson Student
Paper Competition (1971), Second Prize in the TIMS Student Paper Competition
(1972), and is the recipient of The University Award for Sustained Excellence in
Scholarship from Santa Clara University (1998). In June of 2010, Dr. Nahmias’s
lifetime contributions were recognized when he was made a Fellow of the
Manufacturing and Service Operations Management Society.
He is the sole author of Production and Operations Analysis originally published
by Richard D. Irwin in 1989. The text is currently in sixth edition which was
published by McGraw Hill with a 2009 publication date. This book has been
adopted at more than 100 outstanding universities and colleges worldwide includ-
ing Stanford, Berkeley, Harvard, Penn, Columbia, MIT, and many others. It has
77

been translated into Spanish (two editions), Hebrew, and Chinese. The seventh
edition is due out in 2013.
In addition to his academic activities, Dr. Nahmias has served as a consultant
to a variety of ﬁrms and agencies including Litton Industries, Xerox Corporation,
IBM Corporation, LEX Automotive, Department of Transportation of Santa Clara
County, Tropicana, and others. He enjoys golf and is currently handicap chairman
at Sharon Heights Country Club. For exercise, he swims and bikes. He is also an
accomplished jazz trumpeter. At the current time, he performs with the Quintes-
sence quintet, Tuesday Nite Live big band, and the Bob Enos Soundwave
Orchestra.
78
About the Author

Index
A
Approximate policies, 33
B
Backordering of demand, 29
Blood Bank Inventory Control, 65–69
Blood bank management, viii
C
Computer simulation, 69
Continuous production, 63
Continuous review, 2, 25
Continuous review and zero lead
time, 29
Continuous review perishable inventory
system, 26
Convexity, 13
Critical number policy, 33
Crossmatch, 67
Curse of dimensionality, 13
D
Decay, viii
Decaying inventories, 55–60
Decision variable, 10
Deﬁnition of perishability, viii
Deterministic demand, 1–2, 49
Differential equation, 57
Discrete demand, 13
E
Economic lot scheduling (ELS), 50
Economies of scale function, 53
EOQ formula, vii
Exponential decay, 55
F
Field life function, 42, 43
FIFO (First In First Out), 3
Fixed order quantity approximation, 39–40
Fixed order quantity policies, 34
Functional equations, 10, 17
H
Higher order approximations, 38–39
I
Induction argument, 5, 45
Inﬁnite lifetime, viii
Inventory control, vii
Inventory depletion management, 41
Issuing policies, 43
L
Lead time uncertainty, 15
LIFO (Last In First Out), 3
Linear regression, 67
M
Maintenance systems, 26
Markov chain, 34, 40
Markov renewal process, 59
M/M/1 queue, 62
Multiperiod Dynamic Model, 9–14
Multiproduct Models, 20–24
79

Multiproduct perishable inventory, 23
Myopic, 36
N
Negative exponential distribution, 11
Newsvendor model, 6
Nonperishable product, 21
NP hard, 54
O
Obsolescence, viii
One period transfer function, 9
Operations research, vii
Optimal issuing policies, 3
Optimal policy, 10
Order crossing, 15
Ordering and issuing of perishable items, 43
Order lead time, 25
P
Periodic review, 2
Poisson process, 29
Polya Frequency function, 37
Power series expansion, 46
Price, 58
Production-planning problem, 1–2
Q
(Q,R) models, 16
(Q,r) policy, 29
Quasi-convex, 19
Queueing theory, 31
Queues with impatient customers, 61–64
R
Radioactive substances, viii
Random lifetime, 15–19
Regeneration points, 30
S
Shortage/outdating trade-off curve, 66
Stationary distribution, 26, 40
Steady state distribution, 27
Stochastic ﬁeld life functions, 47–48
Stochastic ordering, 47
S type approximations, 38
V
Vector valued state variable, 3
Virtual waiting time, 31
Virtual waiting time process, 63
W
Weibull distribution, 57
Z
Zero inventory property, 51
80
Index

