Personality Psychology
Foundations and Findings
Marianne Miserandino
First Edition

 
 
 
Pearson New International Edition
Personality Psychology
Foundations and Findings
Marianne Miserandino
First Edition

Pearson Education Limited
Edinburgh Gate
Harlow
Essex CM20 2JE
England and Associated Companies throughout the world
Visit us on the World Wide Web at: www.pearsoned.co.uk
© Pearson Education Limited 2014 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without either the 
prior written permission of the publisher or a licence permitting restricted copying in the United Kingdom 
issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
All trademarks used herein are the property of their respective owners. The use of any trademark 
in this text does not vest in the author or publisher any trademark ownership rights in such 
trademarks, nor does the use of such trademarks imply any afﬁ liation with or endorsement of this 
book by such owners. 
ISBN 10: 1-269-37450-8
ISBN 13: 978-1-269-37450-7
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
 Printed in the United States of America
ISBN 10: 1-292-03917-5
ISBN 13: 978-1-292-03917-6

Table of Contents
P
E
A
R
S
O
N
 
C
U
S
T
O
M
 
L
I
B
R
A
R
Y
 
I
Glossary
1
Marianne Miserandino
1. Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
17
Marianne Miserandino
2. Personality Traits: A Good Theory
35
Marianne Miserandino
3. Personality Traits: Practical Matters
61
Marianne Miserandino
4. Personality Assessment
91
Marianne Miserandino
5. Self and Identity
119
Marianne Miserandino
6. Genetics
153
Marianne Miserandino
7. The Neuroscience of Personality
181
Marianne Miserandino
8. Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
217
Marianne Miserandino
9. Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
255
Marianne Miserandino
10. Cognitive Foundations of Personality
285
Marianne Miserandino
11. Gender and Personality
325
Marianne Miserandino
References
363
Marianne Miserandino

II
421
Index

GLOSSARY
Acquiescent responding  A type of response set in which respondents agree with nearly every 
question.
Active genotype–environment correlation  When people with a certain genotype seek out a specific 
environment because of their personality.
Actualizing tendency  The motive to actualize, that is, to bring about growth and positive change.
Adult attachment interview  A method for assessing attachment in adults by using open-ended 
interview questions to probe memories of adults’ relationships with their primary caregivers.
Agency  A traditionally masculine way of approaching the social world concerned with actions 
and accomplishments.
Agreeableness  A personality trait which describes the quality of personal relationships; how much 
a person feels for and gets along with others. People who are low in Agreeableness tend to be 
quarrelsome, critical, harsh, blunt, and aloof.
Ah-Q  An indigenous Chinese trait term that means defensiveness; named for Ah-Q, a well-known 
fictional Chinese character depicted in a classic novel.
Alleles  Alternative forms of the same gene which occur in pairs, one inherited from each birth parent.
Alpha  Part of the two-factor model of personality, being emotionally stable enough to get along 
with others. Includes the factors of Emotional Stability, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness.
Amae  An indigenous Japanese trait term describing a state of dependency on another person and 
the inducing of responsibility for caregiving in that other person.
Amotivation  The state of having no motivation, being neither intrinsically nor extrinsically 
motivated. Often accompanied by feelings of apathy or alienation.
Anal expulsive personality  A fixation in the early part of the anal stage resulting in inhibition, 
self-confidence, resistance to authority, lack of sphincter or bowel control, and the symbolic 
behaviors of generosity and creativity.
Anal retentive personality  A fixation in the later part of the anal stage resulting in rigidity, 
compulsiveness, living up to the expectations of others, constipation, stinginess, and the 
symbolic behaviors of orderliness, stubbornness, and perfectionism.
Androgens  Masculine hormones, like testosterone, that regulate sexual behavior and the brain 
structures that support these behaviors.
Androgynous  Males and females who score high on both the masculinity and femininity scales 
of the Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI).
Anhedonia  The lack of positive emotion; a loss of or inability to experience pleasure that may or 
may not be accompanied by the presence of negative emotions.
Anxious-ambivalent attachment  An insecure bond children have with their primary caregivers, 
marked by inconsistent responsiveness at home, little exploration in the strange situation, distress 
when separated, and seeking out of the mother on reunion, but being unable to be comforted.
Arousability  In physiology, how reactive people are to stimulation; an important difference 
between extraverts and introverts. In sexuality, the capacity to become aroused to sexual stimuli.
Arrangement techniques  A type of performance-based test in which respondents move objects 
around or choose their favorites using ambiguous stimuli.
From Personal
 Psychology: Foundations and Findings
ity
, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. 
Copyright © 2012 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
1

Glossary
Ascending reticular activating system (ARAS)  A pathway transmitting signals from the limbic sys-
tem and hypothalamus to the cortex. Activation here can make a person alert and mentally sharp.
Association techniques  A type of performance-based test, such as the Word Association Test 
and Rorschach inkblot test, in which respondents report their reactions to ambiguous stimuli.
Assumption of representativeness  The assumption that identical twins are typical of the population 
on the specific characteristic under investigation, an assumption behind the double-the-difference 
between MZ and DZ twins reared apart measure of heritability.
Attributional Style Questionnaire (ASQ)  A 12-item personality test designed to measure 
explanatory style.
Attributive self-descriptions  In the Twenty Statements Test, aspects of the self-concept that refer 
to psychological or physiological states or traits.
Authentic self-presentation  Presenting a true, correct image of the self.
Autonomic nervous system  Regulates smooth muscles including inner organs, cardiac muscle, 
and glands. Includes the sympathetic division and parasympathetic division.
Autonomous orientation  The degree to which people interpret a situation as autonomy supportive, 
providing information to allow them to be self-regulating.
Autonomy  One of the three needs according to self-determination theory; feeling free and able to 
make choices about one’s actions.
Avoidant attachment  An insecure bond children have with their primary caregivers, marked by 
little affection at home, exploration in the strange situation, no overt reaction to separation, and 
no seeking of comfort on reunion.
Avoidant coping  Strategies aimed at avoiding problems and not managing the negative emotions 
associated with stressful events.
Barnum Effect  When people falsely believe that invalid personality tests are actually good 
measures of personality because they contain feedback so general that it applies to many 
people at the same time.
Behavioral approach system (BAS)  The brain system associated with stimuli that are enticing, pleasur-
able, and rewarding and the personality characteristics of optimism, impulsiveness, addictive behav-
iors, high-risk impulsive behaviors, and mania. The BAS makes a person more sensitive to rewards.
Behavioral genetics  The study of the genetic and environmental contributions to individual 
differences in personality and behavior.
Behavioral inhibition system (BIS)  The brain system associated with conflicts that may cause 
feelings of anxiety, worry, rumination, risk assessment, vigilance, a sense of possible danger, 
and a sense of loss. May be related to obsessive-compulsive disorders or a generalized anxiety 
disorder. When the BIS is activated, people become more sensitive to punishment.
Behavioral residue  Physical traces in living spaces left behind by the everyday actions of people.
Beneficence  Along with respect for persons and justice, one of the three principles of ethical 
research with human participants outlined in the Belmont report.
Beta  Part of the two-factor model of personality, being open and adapting to new experiences. 
Includes the factors of Extraversion and Openness.
Big Five  A five-factor model of personality based on the lexical approach: Surgency (Extraversion), 
Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Emotional Stability, and Culture.
Biopsychosocial model  A model of gender differences that suggests gender differences are caused 
by a combination of biological, psychological, and social forces interacting with one another.
Bipolar scale  A scale that measures a single dimension, defined at either end by two contrasting 
qualities (e.g., masculinity–femininity, active–passive).
Boredom susceptibility  The need for change and variety and an aversion to routine and sameness. 
One of the four subscales of the Sensation Seeking scale.
Broaden-and-build theory  The theory that positive emotions like elevation, joy, interest, content-
ment, pride, and love expand people’s awareness, thoughts, and actions and help build physical, 
intellectual, social, and psychological resources for coping with adversity.
Cardinal trait  A single trait that completely dominates a person’s entire personality. Most often 
found in fictional characters than in actual people.
Case study method  The in-depth research study of a single individual.
Castration anxiety  When a boy lives in fear that his father will castrate him as revenge for loving 
his mother.
Catharsis  The release of built-up id energy.
2

Glossary
Causality orientation  People’s typical way of regulating their motivation and behavior developed 
over a lifetime of experiences with internal and external motivation.
CAVE technique  (the content analysis of verbatim explanations technique) A method for measuring 
explanatory style from any kind of verbal material.
Central nervous system  The brain and the spinal cord.
Central traits  The 5 to 10 traits that best describe a person.
Challenge test  A technique to identify neurotransmitter function in which researchers administer 
a drug with a known effect on a specific neurotransmitter and monitor the impact of the drug 
on reactions that are thought to be related to the neurotransmitter.
Change  When a personality trait is different, either increasing or decreasing, over time.
Clear purpose integrity tests  (overt integrity tests) A type of personality assessment, often used 
during the hiring process, to test the honesty of job candidates in a way that is clearly stated 
and obvious to the test taker.
Cognitive foundations  One of the building blocks of personality concerned with how people 
perceive and think about information about themselves and the world.
Cognitive unconscious  The part of the mind that contains nonconscious urges, thoughts, wishes, 
desires, and memories that may influence our conscious thoughts.
Collectivism  The belief that the views, needs, and goals of the group are more important than 
those of the individual, emphasizing the interconnectedness of individuals and the group.
Collectivistic cultures  Cultures that emphasize collectivism more than individualism.
Common rule  Regulations about human participant research adopted by all U.S. federal agencies 
establishing an institutional review board and procedures for obtaining informed consent at all 
institutions where research is conducted.
Communion  A traditionally feminine way of approaching the social world concerned with 
nurturing and getting along with others.
Competence  One of the three needs according to self-determination theory; feeling effective in 
one’s actions.
Completion techniques  A type of performance-based test, such as sentence completion tests, in 
which respondents fill in the blanks with their own responses.
Complex  A pattern of thoughts, memories, and perceptions organized around a theme that signify 
an important, but often unconscious, concern of a person.
Computer axial tomography (CAT) scan  A high-resolution x-ray picture of thin slices of brain 
tissue, now called a computerized tomography (CT) scan.
Computerized tomography (CT) scan  A high-resolution x-ray picture of thin slices of brain 
tissue, formerly called a computer axial tomography (CAT) scan.
Conscience  The part of the superego that contains knowledge of what we should not do, actions 
we have been punished for in the past, and that punishes us with feelings of guilt, shame, and 
embarrassment when we do something wrong in the present.
Conscientiousness  A personality trait that describes an individual’s degree of physical and mental 
organization and regulation of impulses like thinking before acting, delaying gratification, or 
following norms and rules. People who are low in Conscientiousness are described as disorga-
nized and tend to be late, careless, and impulsive.
Consistency  When a personality trait stays the same over time; also called continuity.
Constitutional predisposition models  Models of how personality impacts health that suggest 
that there may be some underlying genetic or constitutional factor which influences both 
personality and disease.
Construct validity  When an assessment successfully measures the theoretical concept it was 
designed to measure.
Construction techniques  A type of performance-based test, such as the Thematic Apperception 
Test and the Draw-A-Person Test, in which respondents create a story or a piece of artwork in 
response to an ambiguous stimulus.
Content analysis  Organizing and making sense out of people’s verbal responses in a meaningful way.
Continuity  When a personality trait stays the same over time; also called consistency.
Control condition  In an experiment, this refers to the group of participants who receive no 
treatment or a neutral treatment.
Controlled orientation  The degree to which people interpret a situation as controlling, letting the 
environment or their own introjects control their behavior.
3

Glossary
Convergent validity  Establishes how good an assessment is by comparing the results to other 
tests of the same construct or to tests of related constructs in order to establish what the test 
measures.
Conversion reaction  When anxiety is so extreme that it causes a physical symptom.
Correlation coefficient  An estimate of the co-relation between two variables. Correlations can be 
positive or negative depending on the type of relationship.
Correlational study  A type of research design in which experimenters measure variables to see 
how they are related. Used when certain variables, like personality, cannot be directly manipu-
lated for practical or ethical reasons.
Counterproductive work behaviors  Actions that make it difficult or impossible for people to 
function in their jobs, including absenteeism, tardiness, turnover, accidents, and stealing.
Criterion validity  Establishes how good an assessment is by comparing the results to an external 
standard such as another personality test or some behavioral outcome.
Cronbach’s alpha  A measure of internal consistency reliability; the average correlation among 
all possible combinations of test items taking them half at a time.
Cross sex-typed  A female who scores high on the masculinity scale and low on the femininity scale 
of the Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI); a male who scores high on the femininity scale and low 
on the masculinity scale of the BSRI.
Defense mechanism  How the ego deals with anxiety caused by an unacceptable impulse by chang-
ing the impulse or its desires into something more acceptable in order for the ego to protect 
itself and minimize anxiety and distress.
Deindividuation  The loosening of social norms and roles that occurs when people are anonymous 
or part of a large group.
Denial  A defense mechanism in which threatening or traumatic events or emotions are not 
acknowledged.
Dependent variable  The variable under study, a participant’s response, the variable the experi-
menters measure or observe.
Development  Continuity and change in personality over time.
Dialectic  A way of thinking in which contradictions are seen to be part of a higher truth rather 
than as opposing forces.
Discriminant validity  Establishes how good an assessment is by comparing the results to tests of 
theoretically unrelated constructs in order to establish what the test doesn’t measure.
Disguised purpose integrity tests  A type of personality assessment, often used during the hir-
ing process, to test the honesty of job candidates in a way that is hidden from the test taker.
Disinhibition  The extent to which people have lowered social inhibitions and enjoy letting 
loose in the company of others without a thought about decorum, proper behavior, or social 
norms. Disinhibition often takes the form of alcohol use, partying, and sex. Disinhibition is 
one of the four subscales of the Sensation Seeking scale.
Disorganized/disoriented  A lack of a clear, consistent bond between children and their primary 
caregivers marked by a lack of attachment strategy in the Strange Situation, often to a mother who 
is highly anxious and unable to give comfort to the child at home.
Displacement  A defense mechanism in which the ego substitutes an unacceptable object of an 
impulse with a more acceptable object.
Dispositional optimism  A general expectation that things will get better, good things will happen 
in the future, events and circumstances will work out for the best.
Dizygotic (DZ) twins  Fraternal twins, sharing about 50% of their genes with each other. DZ 
twins are created when two different sperm fertilize two different eggs leading to the develop-
ment of genetically distinct fetuses.
Double-blind technique  A research method to minimize expectancy effects in which neither the 
experimenter nor the participant knows which condition a participant is in.
Dream analysis  The detailed examination of the content and symbolism of dreams in order to 
decipher their hidden, unconscious meaning.
Effect size  A statistic that estimates the average difference between two groups.
Efficacy expectation  In self-efficacy theory, the belief that one is capable of acting in a certain way.
Ego ideal  The part of the superego that contains knowledge of what we should do, actions we have 
been rewarded for in the past.
4

Glossary
Ego resilience  The ability to modify one’s responses to meet the requirements of a stressful situation 
and return to one’s characteristic level of self-regulation after a stressor; now called trait resilience.
Eigenvalue  In factor analysis, the amount of variation among participants’ answers that a factor 
accounts for.
Electroencephalogram (EEG)  Identifies electrical activity in the brain through electrodes placed 
on the scalp.
Electromyography (EMG)  A measure of muscle activity during contraction and relaxation.
Emotion-focused coping  Strategies aimed at reducing distress by managing the negative emotions 
associated with stressful events.
Emotional attachment system  The biological system that maintains romantic relationships by 
causing us to fall in love; regulated by pair-bonding that evolutionarily keeps couples together 
to maximize the chances their offspring will survive.
Environmentality (e2)  The amount of observed individual differences in a characteristic which 
can be accounted for by environmental differences.
Epigenetics  The study of how the environment changes the function of genes without changing 
the genes themselves.
Equal environments assumption  The assumption that identical twins are not treated more alike 
than fraternal twins, an assumption behind the double-the-difference between MZ and DZ 
twins reared apart measure of heritability.
Erogenous zone  A part of the body where instincts originate; a part of the body that is a special 
focus of attention during a psychosexual stage of development.
Eros  The life instincts.
Evoked potential  Electrical activity in a specific brain cell in response to a stimulus.
Evolutionary psychology  The branch of psychology that studies how the need to survive, adapt, 
and reproduce under various biological and environmental conditions has shaped human 
personality and behavior.
Exemplification  A self-presentation strategy of projecting a false image of the self as a good example 
in order to arouse guilt in others.
Exon  That part of the gene which codes for a specific trait.
Exotic becomes erotic (EBE) theory  The theory of Daryl Bem that suggests that cultures that 
emphasize the difference between men and women end up polarizing the genders, causing the 
other gender to become foreign, mysterious, and a source of sexual interest.
Experience seeking  The desire for moderate arousal through different kinds of experiences involv-
ing both the mind and the senses, perhaps through music, travel, or an unconventional lifestyle. 
One of the four subscales of the Sensation Seeking scale.
Experimental condition  In an experiment, this refers to the group of participants who receive the 
treatment the experimenter is testing.
Experimental control  This is when all aspects of an experiment are the same except for the specific 
variable(s) under study. Along with random assignment, this allows experimenters to draw 
conclusions about the cause of their results.
Explanatory style  How people explain the good and bad events in their lives using the three 
dimensions of internal–external, stable–unstable, and global–specific.
Expression techniques  A type of performance-based test in which respondents express their 
thoughts and feelings through creative play or artwork.
External regulation  A type of self-regulation where behavior is controlled by something or someone 
outside a person often by rewards and punishments.
Extraversion  A personality trait that describes how much people energetically seek out interac-
tions with others and experience positive emotions. People who are low in Extraversion are 
described as introverted and tend to be reserved, quiet, and shy.
Extreme responding  A type of response set in which respondents avoid the middle of a scale, 
choosing answers on either end.
Extrinsic motivation  Engaging in an activity due to reasons outside the activity itself.
Extrinsically motivated  Doing something because of external pressures like rewards and 
punishments.
Face validity  When an assessment appears to measure the theoretical concept it was designed to 
measure based on the kinds of questions it contains.
5

Glossary
Facets  A set of subtraits for each of the five factors originally based on the subscales of the 
NEO-PI-R, a questionnaire measure of the five-factor model.
Factor analysis  A statistical technique that mathematically identifies a meaningful underlying 
structure (that is, factors) among a set of variables (such as questions on a questionnaire).
Factor loadings  An estimate of how strongly each question fits into a given factor in a factor 
analysis.
Faking bad  Falsely answering a personality assessment to appear worse off in specific ways related 
to the outcome of the test (e.g., unqualified, in need of help, etc.).
Faking good  Falsely answering a personality assessment to appear better off in specific ways related 
to the outcome of the test (e.g., appearing more psychologically healthy, more qualified, more 
experienced, etc.).
Feared self  Negative image of what we do not want to become or dread becoming in the future.
Feminine sex-typed  A female who scores high on the femininity scale and low on the masculinity 
scale of the Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI).
Feminist theory  An explanation of gender differences that studies how men and women are dif-
ferent as a result of differences in social status in society, and that different is not necessarily 
better or worse.
Field studies  Research that is conducted outside a laboratory.
Field-dependent  An individual difference between people in the way they perceive the world by 
relying more on visual cues, seeing the big picture rather than details.
Field-independent  An individual difference between people in the way they perceive the world 
by relying on their own sensations, showing a selective attention to the fine details rather than 
the big picture.
Fight-flight-freeze system (FFFS)  The brain system associated with fear and reactions to aversive 
stimuli (for example, fight or flight) and the personality characteristics of fearfulness, avoidance, 
phobias, and panic disorders.
Filial piety  An indigenous Chinese trait term describing the qualities of caring for the mental and 
physical well-being of one’s elderly parents, continuing the family line, and bringing honor to 
one’s family and ancestors.
Five-factor model  A five-factor model of personality based on the measurement approach: 
Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness.
Fixation  When some psychic energy is devoted to unresolved psychosexual issues of the 
past; may cause certain personality characteristics, behaviors, and symbolic behaviors in 
adulthood.
Flow  A positive state of complete absorption, deep enjoyment, and intense concentration in a task.
Fluid sexuality  A sexual orientation that is changeable.
Forced-choice format  A type of self-report test in which respondents must choose their answer 
from among a limited number of alternatives, typically two or three.
Fraternal birth order effect  The finding that gay men tend to have a larger number of older brothers 
in their families than do non-gay men.
Free association  A Freudian technique in which patients talk about whatever pops into their 
heads, following one thought to another, without trying to control, monitor, or censor what 
they are saying.
Freudian slip  A mistake in speaking caused by unconscious desires.
Fully functioning  The combination of being open to new experiences, trusting in oneself and the 
world, lacking fear of disapproval or rejection, experiencing thoughts and emotions deeply, 
being sensitive and responsive to others’ needs, and volunteering in the community that marks 
a healthy, well-adjusted adult, according to Carl Rogers. These characteristics are often shown 
by securely attached adults.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)  A high-resolution three-dimensional picture 
of brain activity over time using blood-oxygen levels. Color enhancement is used to identify 
amount of activity across many regions of the brain.
Galvanic skin response (GSR)  A measure of arousal using sweat.
Gender identity  A psychological sense of our maleness or femaleness apart from our biological 
gender.
Gender inversion  The early and now discredited belief that same-sex behavior is caused by a 
biological switch that turns males into females and females into males.
6

Glossary
Gender socialization  Teaching children to think and act in ways society says are appropriate for 
males and females.
Gene  A sequence of DNA that codes for a specific trait.
General Personality Factor (GPF)  A single factor that describes human personality in one dimen-
sion of being emotionally stable enough to get along with others and flexible enough to deal 
with change and demands. People who are high in this factor are altruistic, sociable, able to 
handle stress, relaxed, open to experience, dependable, and task-focused.
Generalizability  Establishes the limits of an assessment, the conditions, uses, and populations for 
which the measure is valid.
Genetics  One of the building blocks of personality. The study of how genes and environment 
affect personality and behavior.
Genotype  The genetic makeup that codes for a specific trait.
Genotype–environment correlation  When a genotype is exposed differently to an environment; 
when personality affects the environments people find themselves in. Genotype–environment 
correlations may be passive, reactive, or active.
Genotype–environment interaction  When people respond differently to the same environment 
due to their differing genetic makeup.
Global self-descriptions  In the Twenty Statements Test, aspects of the self-concept that are so 
abstract, comprehensive, or vague that they do not distinguish the person from others.
Global versus specific  One of three dimensions of explanatory style; whether the cause of an event 
will also affect other aspects of a person’s life (global) or just the one aspect (specific).
Health behavior models  Models of how personality impacts health that suggest that people with 
certain personality traits adopt a healthier lifestyle and take better care of themselves than others.
Heritability (h2)  The amount of observed individual differences in a characteristic that can be 
accounted for by genetic differences.
Heteronormativity  (normative heterosexuality) The view that heterosexuality is the natural, cor-
rect, and normal way for people to be.
HEXACO model  A six-factor model of personality including Honesty-Humility, Emotionality, 
Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness and Openness to experience.
Hoped-for self  A positive image of what we would like to become in the future.
Hopelessness model of depression  The theory that helplessness beliefs generalize to future events 
leading people to lose hope, stop trying, and feel sadness. If these thoughts last more than 
2 weeks, may lead to major depression.
Humanistic tradition  A viewpoint in psychology that emphasizes the importance of responsibility, 
growth, and actualization.
Hypothesis  An educated guess about what may be causing an observed or predicted effect.
Hysterical character  A fixation of females in the phallic stage resulting in hyperfemininity, 
flirtatiousness, seductiveness, and the symbolic behaviors of promiscuity and male-bashing.
Identification  When the ego finds an object or event that matches the wishes of the id and so 
satisfies the id impulse.
Identified regulation  A type of self-regulation where behavior is initiated from within a person, 
because the person has accepted a goal that is more important or interesting than the task at 
hand.
Identity  Our place in society; definitions and standards imposed on us by others.
Identity crisis  When a socially ascribed identity does not match our unique self-concept.
Idiographic  An approach to the study of traits in which researchers identify the traits that are 
important for the understanding of a single individual.
Illusion of control  The belief that one has control over an outcome when in reality one does not.
Impersonal orientation  The degree to which people feel they lack control over important 
outcomes, often resulting in amotivation.
Implicit Association Test (IAT)  A test administered on the computer that uses reaction times to 
measure unconscious attitudes.
Impression management  Using self-presentation to convey a specific image of the self to others, 
for example, as likable, dangerous, competent, a good example, or helpless.
Independent variable  The variable experimenters hypothesize to have an effect on participants’ 
responses. This may be manipulated in a true experiment or measured in correlational and 
quasi-experimental studies.
7

Glossary
Independent view of the self  A self-concept seen in individualistic cultures in which the self is 
autonomous and independent of others.
Indigenous traits  Words describing personality that are unique to a specific culture or language 
group and not found in Anglo-Saxon cultures.
Individual change  How an individual person changes over time.
Individualism  The belief in the uniqueness of the individual, emphasizing the separateness of 
individuals from the group.
Individualistic cultures  Cultures that emphasize individualism more than collectivism.
Informed consent  When potential research subjects willingly agree to participate in a study after 
being told about the study’s procedures, likely risks, and potential benefits of their participation.
Infrequency scale  A scale inserted into a personality assessment to identify people who may be 
using a response set (e.g., a lie scale).
Ingratiation  A self-presentation strategy of projecting a false image of the self as likable in order 
to arouse affection in others.
Instincts  Unconscious tension, impulse, or excitation originating in a bodily need.
Institutional review board (IRB)  Reviews all research to ensure that it upholds federal standards 
of ethical principles of research with human participants as outlined in the Common Rule.
Integrated regulation  A type of self-regulation where behavior is initiated from within a person 
because the person has internalized the goals and values involved with the task at hand such 
that it is an expression of his or her personality.
Integration  Combining individual parts into a coherent whole, such as how the building blocks 
of personality combine to form a whole person greater than the mere sum of the parts.
Integrity tests  Personality assessments, often used during the hiring process, to test the honesty 
of job candidates. These may be overt or clear purpose.
Intellectualization  A defense mechanism in which the ego keeps emotions separate from thoughts 
so that one can talk about an event without experiencing disturbing emotions; a form of the 
defense mechanism isolation.
Interactional stress moderation models  Models of how personality impacts health that suggest 
that certain personality characteristics modify physiological responses by reducing or increasing 
them and help people be resilient in the face of adversity.
Interdependent view of the self  A self-concept seen in collectivistic cultures in which the self 
includes others and cannot be understood apart from clan, family, friends, coworkers, and so on.
Internal consistency reliability  When an assessment gives consistent results across items, demon-
strated by parallel forms reliability, split-half reliability, or Cronbach’s alpha reliability.
Internal versus external  One of three dimensions of explanatory style; whether an event was 
caused more by people’s own actions (internal) or by outside influences (external).
Internal working models  Internalized expectations of what caregiving relationships are like, based 
on our early experiences.
Interpersonal relatedness  An indigenous personality factor unique to the Chinese referring to 
instrumentality of relationships, propriety, avoidance of conflict, support of traditions, and 
compliance with norms. Includes the traits of Harmony, Ren Qing, Ah-Q, and Face.
Interrater reliability  A measure of rater consistency; when there is agreement among raters.
Intimidation  A self-presentation strategy of projecting a false image of the self as dangerous in 
order to arouse fear in others.
Intrapsychic foundations  One of the building blocks of personality concerned with our own 
thoughts, feelings, and motives, both conscious and unconscious.
Intrinsic motivation  Engaging in an activity due to reasons inherent in the activity itself like 
satisfaction or pleasure.
Intrinsic regulation  Freely choosing to engage in an activity because of the pleasure, satisfaction, 
or interest inherent in the activity itself.
Intrinsically motivated  Doing something because of the pleasure, satisfaction, and interest in 
the activity itself.
Introjected regulation  A type of self-regulation where behavior is controlled by something inside 
a person, often by guilt and anxiety.
Intron  That part of the gene which does not code for a specific trait but may orchestrate the 
functioning of nearby genes in direct response to the environment.
Isolation  A defense mechanism in which the ego mentally keeps an unacceptable thought or feeling 
separate from other thoughts and feelings.
8

Glossary
Justice  Along with respect for persons and beneficence, one of the three principles of ethical 
research with human participants outlined in the Belmont report.
L data  See Life data.
Latent content  The true meaning of the dream as revealed through free association and dream 
analysis.
Learned helplessness  A state of lack of motivation, problems in thinking and learning, and 
negative emotions including depression caused by experiencing a lack of control.
Left–right asymmetries  Individual differences in how strongly the left side of the cortex responds 
to negative emotion compared to how strongly the right side responds to positive emotions.
Levels  In an experiment, the number of groups in an independent variable.
Lexical approach  Using synonyms within or commonalities across languages to identify the most 
important traits for understanding personality.
Libido  The energy of the life instincts (eros).
Life data  Called L data, they include information about people that is publically available, such 
as graduating from college, clubs and organizations, criminal records, marriages, and so forth.
Locus of causality  People’s beliefs about the choice to engage in a behavior, feeling autonomous 
or controlled.
Locus of control  People’s beliefs about what determines their outcomes in life, their own efforts 
(internal) or outside circumstances, such as other people, fate, or luck (external).
Longitudinal study  An experimental design in which research participants are followed over long 
periods of time, such as from childhood to adulthood, or from early to later adulthood.
Looking-glass self  Seeing our self as others see us.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)  A high-resolution three-dimensional picture of the brain 
tissue obtained by the use of radio frequency waves.
Manifest content  What people remember seeing in their dreams.
Masculine sex-typed  A man who scores high on the masculinity scale and low on the femininity 
scale of the Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI).
Maternal immune hypothesis  The theory that each male fetus increases the sensitivity of the 
mother’s immune system which increases the chances that later-born male children will be gay.
Maturation  Changes in personality that occur due to the normal process of growing from one 
period of life (for example, childhood, adolescence, early adulthood, middle adulthood, old 
age) to another.
Mean-level change  A type of general change that affects nearly all people as they grow from 
infancy to adulthood.
Measurement approach  Using questionnaires and statistics to identify the most important traits 
for understanding personality.
Mendelian inheritance  A pattern of inheritance named after Gregor Mendel, in which one 
trait dominates over another recessive trait that is later manifested in successive generations.
Meta-analysis  A technique in which researchers combine the effects of a specific variable, like 
gender, from many studies into a single index in order to estimate more accurately the average 
effect of that variable.
Mirror test  A test to see if an animal or human infant has a sense of self by showing self-directed 
behaviors while looking in a mirror. Often tested by placing a red spot on the research subject 
and observing its behavior.
Moderate responding  A type of response set in which respondents avoid the ends of a scale, 
choosing answers in the middle.
Monozygotic (MZ) twins  Identical twins, exact genetic duplicates of each other. MZ twins are 
created when a fertilized egg, the zygote, splits into two (or more) identical parts, each of which 
develops into a fetus.
Monozygotic twins raised apart (MZA)  Identical twins who were separated at birth and raised 
in different environments.
Motivated unconscious  The part of the mind that contains nonconscious urges, thoughts, 
wishes, desires, and memories and which strives to make these urges known in our conscious 
thoughts.
Narrow traits  The subtraits that make up each of the three factors of Eysenck’s PEN theory.
Negative genotype–environment correlation  When a genotype is exposed differently to an envi-
ronment that is unfavorable for developing certain characteristics. For example, an environment 
may discourage the development of certain personality characteristics.
9

Glossary
Neuroscience  One of the building blocks of personality. The study of how our brain and nervous 
system affect personality and behavior through the study of bodily responses, brain structure, 
brain activity, and biochemical activity.
Neuroticism  A personality trait that describes how anxious and vulnerable to negative emotions 
a person is. People who are low in Neuroticism are described as emotionally stable and tend to 
be calm, relaxed, and able to handle stress well.
Neurotransmitters  Chemicals released by neurons to inhibit or excite the next neuron into action 
to help transmit signals through the nervous system.
Nomothetic  An approach to the study of traits in which researchers seek to identify human univer-
sals (i.e., the key traits that are important for describing the personality of many different people).
Non-shared environment  Aspects of the family or nonfamily environment that are unique to an 
individual family member and that make him or her different from his or her siblings living 
in the same household.
Noncontent responding  Any way that people respond to a personality assessment that is not 
directly related to the questions asked.
Nonindependence error  A flaw in some fMRI studies that occurs when researchers uninten-
tionally bias their results by not independently selecting which brain areas to correlate with 
personality characteristics or other variables.
Normative change  How people change over time, on average.
O data  See Observation data.
Objective self-awareness  Seeing the self as an object of social scrutiny.
Observation data  Called O data, they include information given by friends, family, teachers, 
trained raters, or others based on watching how people behave in the laboratory or in their 
daily lives.
Observational study  A type of research design in which scientists observe what people do and 
generate a hypothesis to explain their findings.
Oedipus complex  When a child falls in love with the other-sex parent and shows hostility to the 
same-sex parent.
Openness  A personality trait that describes how much people appreciate creativity and the life of 
the mind as revealed in ideas, thoughts, fantasies, art, and beauty. People who are low in Open-
ness are described as conventional, preferring the concrete and traditional.
Optimal challenge  The point at which an activity is neither too easy, leading to boredom, or 
too difficult, leading to frustration.
Optimistic explanatory style  A consistent way of explaining good and bad events in which 
people believe that positive events are explained by causes that tend to be internal, stable, 
and global and that negative events are explained by events that tend to be external, unstable, 
and specific.
Oral incorporative personality  A fixation in the early part of the oral stage resulting in dependency, 
eating, drinking, smoking, kissing, and the symbolic behaviors of collecting things and being a 
good listener.
Oral sadistic personality  A fixation in the later part of the oral stage resulting in aggression, 
gum-chewing, nail-biting, overeating, and the symbolic behaviors of sarcasm, cynicism, and 
ridicule.
Outcome expectation  In self-efficacy theory, the belief that acting in a certain way will produce 
a certain outcome.
Overjustification effect  When people lose interest in a formerly intrinsically interesting activity 
as a result of extrinsic control.
Overt integrity tests  (clear purpose integrity tests) A type of personality assessment, often used 
during the hiring process, to test the honesty of job candidates in a way that is clearly stated 
and obvious to the test taker.
Parallel-forms reliability  A measure of internal consistency reliability; when two or more versions 
of a test give consistent results.
Parapraxes  Mistakes in speaking (e.g., slips of the tongue), or acting (e.g., accidents, bungled 
actions, mistakes, errors) caused by unconscious desires.
Parasympathetic division  Part of the autonomic nervous system; replenishes the body’s energy 
stores through salivation, digestion, and other functions.
Passive genotype–environment correlation  When a genotype is exposed to an environment but 
has done nothing to obtain the environment.
10

Glossary
Path analysis  A technique in which researchers use statistics to test hypotheses about how variables 
relate to one another.
Path diagram  A visual illustration of the results of a path analysis that shows the significant 
connections among variables.
Patterned responding  A type of response set in which respondents answer by making patterns 
on their response sheet.
Penis envy  Feelings of jealousy and inferiority girls feel when they realize that they do not have a 
penis but boys do.
Performance-based tests  Assessments in which people respond to unstructured stimuli, projecting 
their own meanings, significances, patterns, feelings, interpretations, concerns, or worldviews; 
sometimes called projective tests.
Peripheral nervous system  The somatic nervous system and the autonomic nervous system.
Personality assessment  The measurement of individual characteristics of a person, often through 
personality tests, interviews, and other measures.
Personality coherence  When the level of a personality trait within a person stays the same (e.g. from 
childhood to adulthood) but the way it is expressed differs.
Personality development  How personality changes or remains the same over time.
Personality psychology  The scientific study of what makes us who we are. The study of individual 
differences: identifying ways in which people are both similar and different and explaining how 
they became that way.
Personality questionnaires  Tests in which people answer questions about themselves that identify 
certain aspects of their personality or personality functioning.
Pessimistic explanatory style  A consistent way of explaining good and bad events in which people 
believe that negative events are explained by causes that tend to be internal, stable, and global 
and that positive events are explained by events that tend to be external, unstable, and specific.
Phallic character  A fixation of males in the phallic stage resulting in hypermasculinity, a concern 
for virility, and the symbolic behaviors of owning and using power tools, big cars and trucks, 
and large machinery.
Phenotype  The manifestation of the genes; the observable physical or psychological trait which 
is coded by the genes.
Philotimo  An indigenous Greek trait term describing the qualities of being polite, generous, 
responsible, respectful, and having a strong sense of honor.
Phrenology  The discredited theory of Joseph Gall from the 1790s that the size, shape, and location 
of bumps on the scalp was related to particular mental or personality characteristics.
Physical self-descriptions  In the Twenty Statements Test, aspects of the self-concept that refer to 
physical qualities.
Pleasure principle  How the id operates, wanting what it wants when it wants it, without concern 
for reality or social standards.
Positional cloning  A possible way of preventing inherited diseases by replacing defective genetic 
code with corrected code that matches the gene as closely as possible.
Positive genotype–environment correlation  When a genotype is exposed differently to an envi-
ronment that is favorable for developing certain characteristics. For example, an environment 
may encourage the development of certain personality characteristics.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scan  A picture of brain activity using a radioactive substance 
and a special scanner. Color enhancement is used to identify amounts of activity across many 
regions of the brain.
Possible selves  Images of what we hope, fear, or expect that we may become in the future.
Primary control  A way of exercising control by changing the circumstances.
Primary process thinking  Making decisions based on wants and desires without logical rules and 
conscious reasoning; used by the id.
Problem-focused coping  Strategies aimed at reducing distress by working directly on remedying 
the source of the stress and problem solving.
Proceptivity  The motivation to initiate sexual activity; sexual desire.
Projection  A defense mechanism in which the ego attributes its own disturbing or unacceptable 
impulses onto another person.
Psychosexual stages  The progression from childhood to adulthood, according to Sigmund Freud, 
in which we move from an immature reflexive expression of sexual impulses involving the id, to 
a mature, socially acceptable expression of sexual impulses involving ego and superego.
11

Glossary
Psychoticism  A personality trait that describes how tough-minded, selfish, and antisocial a person 
is. People who are low in Psychoticism are high in Agreeableness and Conscientiousness.
Qualitative methods  Research methods that classify, judge, or organize participants’ verbal 
responses into themes or patterns.
Quantitative methods  Research methods that use numerical measures of some sort including 
questionnaires, rating scales, test scores, and the like.
Quasi-experimental design  A research study in which experimenters, either for practical, logistical, 
or ethical reasons, do not randomly assign people to experimental conditions.
Random assignment  What experimenters do to make sure every participant has an equal chance 
of being a part of each experimental condition. Along with experimental control, this allows 
experimenters to draw conclusions about the cause of their results.
Rater consistency  When an assessment gives consistent results across multiple raters, often dem-
onstrated by interrater reliability.
Rationalization  A defense mechanism in which the ego acknowledges an unacceptable behavior 
but reinterprets it to make it seem more acceptable.
Reactant responding  A type of response set in which respondents disagree or say no to nearly 
every question.
Reaction formation  A defense mechanism in which the true unacceptable impulse is expressed 
by the opposite, acceptable impulse.
Reactive genotype–environment correlation  When the environment responds to certain person-
alities because of their genotype.
Reality principle  How the ego operates, satisfying id impulses within the confines of what is 
possible in the social and physical world.
Reflected appraisals  The opinions of significant others that are used as a mirror to evaluate 
ourselves.
Reflex action  Seeking gratification through immediate physical action; used by the id.
Regulation and motivation  One of the building blocks of personality concerned with how people 
adjust their responses to the environment, both consciously and unconsciously.
Reinforcement sensitivity theory  The theory that the way people’s brain and nervous systems 
respond to stimuli determines personality. The three hypothetical brain systems thought to 
be related to personality differences are the fight-flight-freeze system (FFFS), the behavioral 
approach system (BAS), and the behavioral inhibition system (BIS).
Relatedness  One of the three needs according to self-determination theory; feeling meaningfully 
connected to others.
Reliability  How consistent a measure is over time, items, or raters.
Ren Qing  An indigenous Chinese trait term that refers to a traditional relationship orientation 
emphasizing give and take and connectedness.
Repression  A defense mechanism in which the ego unconsciously keeps unacceptable thoughts 
or urges in the unconscious.
Resilience  The ability to recover from tragedy, adversity, hardship, or to adapt to ongoing life 
stressors.
Respect for persons  Along with beneficence and justice, one of the three principles of ethical 
research with human participants outlined in the Belmont report.
Response set  A habitual way of responding to a personality assessment that is not directly related 
to the questions asked; noncontent responding.
S data  See Self-report data.
Safe haven  A primary caregiver to whom the child can turn for comfort when distressed.
Scatterplot or scattergram  A two-dimensional graph that shows the relationship between two 
variables.
Schema  A pattern of thoughts, memories, and perceptions organized around a concept.
Scientific method  A set of guidelines for making and testing observations about the world in order 
to build knowledge while minimizing error and bias.
Secondary control  A way of exercising control by changing oneself.
Secondary process thinking  Logical thinking, weighing the costs and rewards of possible actions; 
used by the ego.
Secondary traits  Traits of lesser importance or less consistently displayed within a person.
12

Glossary
Secure base  A primary caregiver with whom the child feels safe enough to explore the environment.
Securely attached  Children are securely attached when they have a positive bond children have 
with their primary caregivers, marked by responsiveness at home, exploration in the strange 
situation, distress when separated, and comfort on reunion.
Selective placement  The assumption that adopted families of MZ twins raised apart are different 
from each other, that the identical twins were not purposely placed in similar environments, 
an assumption behind the rmza measure of heritability.
Self and identity  One of the building blocks of personality. Our own sense of who we are, includ-
ing self-concept, self-esteem, and social identity.
Self-concept  The set of ideas and inferences we hold about ourselves.
Self-concept clarity  How well people know themselves; consistency of self-concept.
Self-determination theory  The theory by Edward Deci and Richard Ryan that states that people 
need autonomy, competence, and relatedness in order to feel intrinsic motivation.
Self-efficacy  The belief that one can be competent and effective at some activity.
Self-esteem  The evaluative component of the self; how we evaluate ourselves.
Self-esteem stability  How consistent people’s feelings of self-worth are over time; consistency of 
self-esteem.
Self-fulfilling prophecy  The tendency for our own beliefs about what we think others are like to 
come true.
Self-handicapping  Purposely setting oneself up for failure in order to have a ready-made excuse 
when things go wrong and look particularly good when things go right.
Self-monitoring  A personality trait that describes the extent to which people are aware of and 
manipulate their self-presentations, expressive behaviors, and nonverbal displays of emotion 
in order to control the images and impressions others form of them.
Self-presentation  Acting, speaking, or dressing in a certain way in order to convey a specific image 
of ourselves to our self or others.
Self-promotion  A self-presentation strategy of projecting a false image of the self as competent 
in order to arouse respect in others.
Self-report data  Called S data, they include any information people respond to directly, such as 
objective personality tests, interviews, narratives, life stories, and survey questions.
Self-report tests  Assessments in which respondents answer questions about themselves; some-
times called objective tests.
Sensation seeking  The pursuit of varied, novel, complex, or intense experiences and the willing-
ness to take risks to have such experiences.
Sexual attractions  Thoughts, feelings, wants, or desires for sexual relations or to be in a loving 
sexual relationship with another person; it does not include sexual behavior.
Sexual behavior  Sexual actions people have actually engaged in, including genital contact with 
sexual excitement, with or without intercourse or orgasm, occurring with mutual consent.
Sexual desire system  The biological system that promotes sexual union; regulated by sexual mating 
that evolutionarily maximizes the chances of reproduction and survival of the species.
Sexual identity  Labels people associate with their sexuality, whether personally selected or socially 
ascribed.
Sexual orientation  The prevalence of erotic arousals, feelings, fantasies, and behaviors one has 
for males, females, or both.
Sexy Seven  Dimensions of personality that describe sexuality and overlap about 80% with 
the five factors: Sexual Attractiveness, Relationship Exclusivity, Gender Orientation, Sexual 
Restraint, Erotophilic Disposition, Emotional Investment, and Sexual Orientation.
Shared environment  Aspects of the family environment that are generally the same for all the 
children living in the same household, including physical, psychological, and social aspects.
Social constructionism  The idea that gender differences are in the eye of the beholder and actively 
constructed rather than being innate differences between males and females.
Social identity  Who people are when they are with others; the part of the self people present to 
others.
Socially desirable responding  Falsely answering a personality assessment to appear more coopera-
tive, likable, or socially appropriate, often by not admitting to distasteful, but perfectly human 
tendencies (e.g., gossiping, jealousy, etc.).
13

Glossary
Social role theory  The theory that males and females have different personality and social behavior 
due to the different roles they hold in society.
Social self-descriptions  In the Twenty Statements Test, aspects of the self-concept that refer to 
social roles, institutional memberships, or a socially defined status.
Somatic nervous system  Part of the peripheral nervous system; controls muscle movements.
Spiritual transcendence  A dimension of personality separate from the five factors: the ability 
of individuals to view life from a larger, more objective perspective; a personal search for a 
greater connection across all of humanity.
Split-half reliability  A measure of internal consistency reliability; when each half of a test gives 
consistent results.
Stable versus unstable  One of three dimensions of explanatory style; whether the cause of a posi-
tive or negative event is likely to reoccur in the future (stable) or not (unstable).
Stereotype  A generalization about a group of people in which attributes are assumed to be true of 
all members of the group regardless of the actual variation among group members.
Stereotype threat  The distress people feel in a situation where their performance may confirm a 
stereotype. This distress causes them to perform worse than they are capable of.
Strange Situation  A research technique devised by Mary Ainsworth in which children go through 
a series of separations and reunions with their primary caregivers and observed to measure the 
quality of their attachment bonds.
Strategic self-presentation  Presenting a false image of the self to others in order to achieve a goal.
Structural model of personality  The parts of the personality according to Sigmund Freud com-
prised of the id, ego, and superego.
Sublimation  A defense mechanism in which the ego substitutes an unacceptable impulse with a 
more acceptable impulse.
Supplication  A self-presentation strategy of projecting a false image of the self as helpless in order 
to arouse nurturance in others.
Suppression  A coping mechanism in which the ego consciously keeps unacceptable thoughts or 
urges in the unconscious.
Symbolic behavior  An innocent behavior that actually represents an unconscious desire, often 
sexual or aggressive.
Sympathetic division  Part of the autonomic nervous system; mobilizes energy for fight or flight.
T data  See Test data.
Temperament  A set of personality characteristics that are relatively stable across the life span, 
present from birth, determined by genetic factors, and develop with maturation and experience.
Temporal consistency reliability  When an assessment gives consistent results across time, often 
demonstrated by test–retest reliability.
Test data  Called T data, they include information about people’s reactions to a structured situa-
tion, such as experimental procedures, intelligence tests, performance tests, and projective tests.
Test–retest reliability  A measure of temporal consistency; when a test gives a consistent result 
from one point in time to a later point in time.
Thanatos  The death instincts.
Theoretical approach  Using theory to identify the most important traits for understanding 
personality.
Thrill and adventure seeking  Arousal seeking through physical sensations produced by speed, 
height, falling, danger, like through extreme sports. One of the four subscales of the Sensation 
Seeking scale.
Topographic model of personality  The location of thoughts, memories, and desires in the mind 
according to Sigmund Freud, comprised of the unconscious, preconscious, and conscious.
Trait resilience  The ability to modify one’s responses to meet the requirements of a stressful 
situation and return to one’s characteristic level of self-regulation after a stressor; once called 
ego resilience.
Traits  One of the building blocks of personality. A person’s typical way of thinking, feeling, and 
acting in various situations at different times.
Transactional stress moderation models  Models of how personality impacts health that suggest 
that certain personality traits may influence a person’s exposure to stressful or dangerous 
circumstances.
14

Glossary
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)  Using an electrical current to disrupt or enhance 
neuron functioning to pinpoint with greater accuracy than other techniques an exact area of 
brain function.
Transference  The unconscious redirection of feelings for one person onto a different person who 
resembles the original person in some way, especially from a person who was important in 
childhood onto a person who is important in the present.
Transformational coping  A way of coping with adversity in which people high in hardiness 
reinterpret an experience as less of a threat and more of a growth-enhancing experience.
Triadic design  A research method in learned helplessness experiments in which three groups are 
used to test the controllability of an aversive stimulus.
Triangulation  Using multiple methodologies within a single study.
True experiment  A design in which participants are randomly assigned to conditions which are 
identical except for the variable(s) under study, which allows experimenters to draw conclusions 
about the cause of their results.
Twenty Statements Test (TST)  A test of self-concept where participants generate 20 answers to 
the statement “I am ______.”
Undifferentiated  Males and females who score low on both the masculinity and femininity scales 
of the Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI).
Undoing  A defense mechanism in which the ego tries to nullify one action or thought with another.
Unidimensional scale  A scale that measures a single dimension.
Validity  How well a test measures what it was designed to measure.
Wish fulfillment  Seeking gratification through imagining what one wants; used by the id.
Word association method  A technique used to uncover unconscious material and complexes 
in which participants respond to one word with the first word that comes to their minds.
Yoking  A research technique in which participants in one group are matched to participants 
in another group so that they receive the same treatment.
15

16

1
WHO AM I? 
UNDERSTANDING THE 
BUILDING BLOCKS  
OF PERSONALITY
What Is Personality Psychology?
The Building Blocks of Personality
Traits
Genetics
Neuroscience
Self and Identity
Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
Cognitive Foundations
Putting It All Together: Integration
How Do Psychologists Study Personality?
The Scientific Method
Observational Studies and Personality Questionnaires
Correlational and Experimental Designs
Research Methods Illustrated: A True Experiment
Types of Data and Personality Assessment
Then and Now: The Ethics of Research With People
Science or Science Fiction? A Brief Introduction to Current Research Findings in 
Personality Psychology
Chapter Summary
Review Questions
Key Terms
Read the Chapter on 
mysearchlab.com 
© Dsabo/Dreamstime.com
From Chapter 1 of Personality Psychology: Foundations and Findings, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. Copyright © 2012 by Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
17

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
T
he summer after my first year in high school, my mom and I spent a few weeks explor-
ing the east end of Long Island. I had always loved the ocean growing up and I looked 
forward to the chance of spending every day at the beach. Until that summer, I thought 
I knew all about the ocean, having lived on Long Island my entire life—all 14 years of it—to 
that point. But that summer I learned that there was so much more to the ocean than I realized.
I was completely amazed at how different the ocean was each day. Some days the ocean 
would be very calm and we could walk out a long, long way before the water was over our heads. 
Other days, the ocean was too rough for small children to go into, with water over our heads and 
waves breaking just a few feet from shore. Some days the water would be very warm but then an 
overnight storm would churn up deep water delivering ice-cold water to the shore the next day. 
Even the color of the ocean varied from the light green of the sea foam to the dark forest green 
almost black of the deep water. I spent a lot of time thinking and daydreaming that summer 
while looking out to sea and it struck me that the ocean almost seemed to have a personality.
The ocean is a pretty good metaphor for personality. Think about it: The ocean is made 
up of water, but it is much more than that. There are tides, waves, inversions, salt, seaweed, and 
marine life; it is vast and deep; and it changes regularly. Could we understand the ocean only 
by studying water molecules? By exploring only its depths and ignoring the shore? Obviously, 
there are many different aspects of the ocean and scientists devote their lives to studying just 
a small part of what makes up the ocean. The ocean is all of these parts and yet it is also more 
than these parts. So it is with personality.
To understand personality, we need to understand what a person is like. Is she extroverted 
or introverted? Is he easygoing? Is she open to new ideas? Is he responsible? Would he make a 
good mate? Would she make a good lab partner? We also need to understand our genetics and 
physiology, which gives us our physical being and building blocks of neurons, hormones, and 
brain structures that take in and process information and direct our responses to the world. And 
we need to consider that there may be parts of the person hidden under the surface, much like 
how the ocean has tides and a myriad of creatures hidden in its depths. We also need to know 
how a person copes with the storms of life.
Even then, a person is more than these things, more than the sum of his or her parts. How 
does a person function in the world? How does a person think of himself or herself and interact 
with others? How do gender, sexual orientation, and other social identities and personal self-
concepts affect a person? How does a person fit into the large social world, much like how the 
ocean is part of the larger ecosystem of the earth, including fish, birds, sky, and land? And finally, 
how does a person, like the ocean, change over time and yet remain fundamentally the same?
Two early personality psychologists mused that there are aspects of personality that are 
universal to all people, that are shared by similar people, and that are completely unique to a 
single individual (Kluckhohn & Murray, 1948).
Consider that all humans, regardless of culture, have a genetic makeup, a brain, a nervous 
system, and are born into a social group. To the extent that these forces affect human personality, 
there will be universals in human personality.
Of course, people do vary, but there is often a rhyme and a reason to their variance. At a 
basic level, there are people who are more likely to venture forth in the world to meet other 
people. We call such people extroverts. Other people, introverts, prefer to keep to themselves. We 
would expect people who behave similarly to share similar personality characteristics, whether 
it be extraversion or introversion, neuroticism or emotional stability, openness or concreteness, 
agreeableness or grumpiness, conscientiousness or impulsiveness, for example.
Finally, we could say that another human universal is the desire for actualization (i.e., to 
be who we are meant to be; to develop and express our individual identity). Though we may 
share the same mechanisms (genetics, physiology, neurology), some of the same characteristics 
(introversion-extraversion), and have some of the same experiences in the world (attachment to 
caregivers, sexual adjustment, trauma, happiness), the way these building blocks of personality 
come together forms a unique individual: you!
Knowing that people do vary, personality psychologists attempt to study both the ways 
people are similar and the ways people are different from each other.
“Individual results may vary.”
Advertising disclaimer
18

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
In this text, I will share with you some of the building blocks of human personality at all 
levels, from the micro-level of genes on up to the macro- or meta-level of the social world. I 
hope to help you put these individual elements together and think across and beyond these 
individual levels to understand personality functioning.
What Is Personality Psychology?
Personality psychology is the scientific study of what makes us who we are. Using the scientific 
method of investigation, it is the study of individual differences: for identifying ways in which 
people are both similar and different, and for explaining how they became that way.
Part of personality is identifying and studying the building blocks or raw materials that 
make us think and act as we do. Consider the illustrations in the photos on the top of this page. 
Though the figure on the left is made up of smaller images, the figure as a whole is more than 
the mere sum of individual images. The same is true for personality. Although we can study 
the individual elements that make up the human personality, the elements come together to 
create a whole person in a way that is not reducible to its parts. And an individual’s personality 
is more than the sum of his or her parts. Not only can the individual parts vary among people, 
but the way they fit together may vary as well.
The Building Blocks of Personality
What are these individual parts that come together to create a whole person? Most psycholo-
gists would agree that to understand human personality we need to understand traits, genetics, 
neuroscience, self and identity, intrapsychic aspects, regulation and motivation, and cognition. 
Missing from this list are social and environmental forces that impact human personality at 
all of these levels. For example, environmental forces—including culture, society, and social-
ization by parents and peers—have a huge impact on our personalities. The impact of the 
social environment is felt at multiple levels, from our sense of self and identity to the level of 
our genetics. Rather than viewing social influences as a separate building block, the impact of 
societal forces runs as a theme throughout all of the foundations. Let’s take a closer look at the 
building blocks of personality.
“Whenever two people meet 
there are six present. There 
is the man as he sees himself, 
each as the other person sees 
him, and each man as he really 
is.”
William James, the father 
of American psychology
The whole is greater than the sum of its parts: Just as the small pictures, like the ones on the left, combine to form the picture of the 
whole person on the right, personality is made up of building blocks.
Neil Farkas
Neil Farkas
19

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
Traits.  How do we go about describing human personality and identifying important person-
ality characteristics? The answer is traits: a person’s typical way of thinking, feeling, and acting, 
in various situations, at different times. We may be born with a certain physiology that makes 
us more likely to develop certain characteristics, but there are many other characteristics that 
we can develop from our socialization (from parents, peers, teachers, society), and from our 
personal experiences. These traits will be consistent across our lives and will be expressed in all 
sorts of ways, as you will see in later chapters, from how we shake hands, to the kind of music 
we prefer, to even how we decorate our living spaces and the careers we choose.
Genetics.  Personality starts with our genetic makeup that we have inherited from each of 
our birth parents. Over millennia, evolutionary forces have selected behaviors that improve the 
survival of the species or survival of an individual and an individual’s close genetic relatives 
(Confer et al., 2010). Genetics is the study of how genes and environment affect personality 
and behavior. We know that even though many personality variables have a genetic component, 
every one of them has an environmental component as well. Nature and nurture work together 
to make us who we are. Whereas we may inherit specific personality characteristics, we also 
inherit potentialities that may be expressed in our personalities depending on the environment.
Neuroscience.  Our genes encode our physical bodies, including our brain and nervous sys-
tem. Neuroscience is the study of how our brain and nervous system affect personality and 
behavior through the study of bodily responses, brain structure, brain activity, and biochemi-
cal activity. Some of this research suggests that extroversion, neuroticism, and impulsivity are 
related to physiological and neurological differences which may be present at birth, or develop 
soon thereafter. Though the environment and our personal experiences can still impact how 
these characteristics develop, the current evidence suggests that part of who we are—at least in 
terms of these three characteristics—is built into us by our neurology.
Self and Identity.  Self and Identity encompasses our own sense of who we are including our 
self-concept, self-esteem, and social identity. One of the hallmarks of being human is the ability 
to reflect on ourselves. We have a sense of who we are: our self-concept. And we have an opinion 
about that: our self-esteem. We may even try to present ourselves in a certain way to others, or 
we may embrace what others think about us, taking on a social identity. Where scientists once 
thought that self-reflection was unique to humans, we now know that a few other species share 
this capacity including dolphins and chimpanzees. Part of what makes up our personality, in 
addition to our traits, is our sense of self and social identity.
Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality.  With this sense of self, we can look within our-
selves (intra) to our own conscious and unconscious thoughts and feelings (psychic) that also 
make up our personality (intrapsychic). No doubt you’ve heard of Sigmund Freud, who estab-
lished an entire theory about our unconscious motivations and the defenses we use to protect 
ourselves from threatening thoughts and desires.
One of Freud’s biggest contributions to psychology was the realization that physical dis-
orders could have psychological causes, which were often unconscious. He also claimed that 
our early experiences left an indelible, but unconscious, imprint on our adult personalities. At 
the same time, Freud was one of the first to suggest that personality could be changed, and he 
originated a method of psychotherapy to do so. Since Freud’s day, science has discounted some 
aspects of his theory, even as it has supported others (Westen, 1998a). Today, a complete under-
standing of personality must also take into account our unconscious motivations, including our 
defense mechanisms and important attachments, starting with our caregivers and continuing 
with our intimate relationships.
Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory. 
Although Freud believed 
that people were controlled by unconscious forces, a modern theory of motivation suggests 
that people can—and do!—regulate themselves consciously and unconsciously. According to 
“If a man has been his 
mother’s undisputed darling 
he retains throughout life 
the triumphant feeling, the 
confidence in success, which 
not seldom brings actual 
success along with it.”
Sigmund Freud
SEE FOR YOURSELF
How would you describe 
yourself? The words that 
come most readily to mind 
are often trait terms.
THINK ABOUT IT
Are you born with a self or 
does a self develop?
THINK ABOUT IT
What does it mean to say 
we inherit “potentialities”?
20

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Ryan & Deci, 2008), when people feel free to 
choose, are competent at what they do, and are connected to people around them, they will 
be motivated and self-directed for the task at hand. People differ in the extent to which they 
feel self-determined and regulate their own motivation. The building block of regulation and 
motivation is concerned with how people adjust their responses to the environment, both 
consciously and unconsciously.
Cognitive Foundations. 
Finally, people differ in how they process information, espe-
cially about the causes and impacts of events in their lives, and expectations for what 
may happen in the future. Specifically, there are individual differences in locus of control, 
learned helplessness, learned hopelessness, and optimism-pessimism. The Cognitive foun-
dation describes how people perceive and think about information about themselves and 
the world.
Putting It All Together: Integration
Finally, in Integration we combine the building blocks of personality into a whole person. 
When it comes to personality, the whole is greater than the mere sum of the parts. Consider 
your own personality. You are equipped with a specific package of genes that have provided a 
certain type of physiological reactivity and brain function, which, along with life experiences 
have led you to develop a package of character traits. You are able to reflect on who you are, and 
who the world wants you to be. You may also be vaguely aware of hidden motives and desires, 
such as whom you feel emotional attachments to. You may also be enthusiastically engaged in 
certain activities and bored or disengaged from others. You may face the world with optimism 
(or pessimism), believing that you have an impact on what befalls you (or not!). Is knowing all 
of this about you enough to say that we really know you?
For the most part, all of these topics stand alone. That is, we can understand any one of 
them without thinking a whole lot about the others (indeed, your instructor might take these 
chapters in a different order or omit some of them altogether). However, some of the most 
interesting aspects of the human experience can be understood only by seeing how these blocks 
build on each other and interact.
Take gender, for example. How much of our gender is genetic or physiological and how 
much of it is learned or socialized? Is gender identity grounded in our thoughts, beliefs, 
and cognitions? What impact do our society’s beliefs about gender have on us? Do men and 
women have different personalities? To answer these questions, we need an understanding 
of genetics, physiology, self, and cognitions. The picture is even more complicated—and 
fascinating—when it comes to understanding whom we are attracted to. Genetics and 
neurology interact with cognitions, attachments, and motivations, to determine our sexual 
orientation.
Or, consider how people cope with stress. Are there differences in physiology that make 
some people hardier and more resilient to stress? Or is handling stress more an issue of 
mind over matter? Are some types of people better able to cope with stress and tragedy? To 
answer these questions, we need to build on our understanding of neurology, cognitions, 
and personality traits.
THINK ABOUT IT
Do men and women have 
different personalities? Are 
these differences inborn or 
learned?
Who am I? Am I more than 
the sum of my genetics, 
neurology, traits, self and 
identity, intrapsychic 
motivations, attachments, and 
cognitions?
© memo/Fotolia
21

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
How Do Psychologists Study Personality?
You might wonder what the difference is between personality psychologists and you sitting around 
with friends making guesses about the personality of people you see at a party. In a word: research. 
Research allows us to formulate and test questions about human behavior, to design accurate 
methods to answer these questions, and to test competing explanations against one another 
(Dunn, 1999). By conducting research using sound methods, scientists are able to generalize 
beyond their own findings and add to the collective knowledge about a given phenomenon and, 
in many cases, apply their results to make the world a better place for individuals and whole 
societies (Dunn, 1999).
The Scientific Method
Research rests on the philosophy of empiricism: using direct experience to draw conclusions 
about the world. Psychological research relies on the scientific method which describes how 
to make and test observations about the world in order to draw conclusions while minimizing 
error or bias (Dunn, 1999). The scientific method starts with the identification of basic facts 
about the world. Then, using this collection of facts, scientists build theories. For example, 
while people watching at a party we might recognize that there are similarities and differences 
in how people behave, such as how some people laugh more than others. Then, using these facts 
as a basis, we can reason what other ideas are likely to be true. We might start to notice that 
people who laugh a lot like to hang out with other people. Is this true? We could do some more 
controlled observations of people to test our theory. Theories help scientists ask new questions 
and suggest where to look for answers and what kinds of answers they might find.
Then scientists make predictions and test predictions based on their theories using con-
trolled methods. For example, you might devise an experiment for these laughing partygoers 
to see if people who laugh respond differently to the experiment than the nonlaughers, or you 
might administer a series of personality questionnaires to them and see if the laughers all share 
a common personality trait which is different from the nonlaughers.
Finally, scientists make their results public by publishing them in journals, on the Internet, 
or by presenting their results at conferences. They do this to seek out independent verification 
from other researchers. For example, after the party you might do some investigation using a 
psychological database such as PsycArticles and read about a study that was conducted by other 
researchers that also found that people behave differently at a party and identified two kinds of 
people: extroverts and introverts.
Personality hasn’t always 
embraced the experimen-
tal method as much as other 
branches of psychology have 
(Cronbach, 1957; Eysenck, 1997), 
but over the last decade or so 
there has been a tremendous 
explosion in experimental per-
sonality psychology (John et al., 
2008). Science progresses along a 
continuum from casual observa-
tions, which may inspire a hunch 
or guess about human behavior, 
to controlled experimentation, 
in which researchers attempt to 
prove a theory false (Eysenck, 
1997; see Figure  1). As long as 
SEE FOR YOURSELF
What do you think causes 
people to act the way they 
do? Where do you believe 
personality comes from?
Falsification
Verification
Observation
Induction
Alternative
Theory
Hunch
Hypothesis
Theory
Law
Figure 1  Science progresses along a continuum, with 
methods that become more sophisticated as hunches 
turn into theory and laws.  Source: Eysenck (1997, Figure 1, 
p. 1225). Eysenck, H. J. (1997). Personality and experimental 
psychology. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
73(6), 1224–1237.
THINK ABOUT IT
How do common sense, 
anecdotal evidence, per-
sonal experience, the opin-
ion of experts, and research 
differ?
22

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
research evidence supports a theory, that theory will prevail and with more research will reach 
the status of a law until it is overthrown by an alternative theory that explains the evidence even 
better. For the most part, personality psychology has many theories, but unfortunately, very few 
(if any!) actual laws of human behavior.
Observational Studies and Personality Questionnaires
Personality psychologists, like other researchers in psychology, draw on many kinds of methods 
to explore the human personality (Robins, Fraley, & Krueger, 2007; see Table 1). The methods 
researchers use depend on the kind of questions they are asking. For example, researchers might 
use an observational study, where they observe what people do, to understand a certain phenom-
enon such as: Do some people talk more than others at a party? Then, based on these observations 
researchers might make an educated guess or generate a hypothesis to explain their findings. 
Continuing our example, one researcher might hypothesize that extroverted people talk more 
than introverted people. He might give partygoers a self-report personality questionnaire to see 
if, indeed, extroverts are doing more of the talking at a party than the introverts are. Personality 
questionnaires are tests in which people answer questions about themselves that identify certain 
aspects of their personality, like how talkative, outgoing, and sociable they are, all typical traits of 
an extrovert. Another researcher might hypothesize that extroverts circulate more than introverts. 
She might give out a personality questionnaire and link people’s answers to her observations of 
how many people each guest talks to and how long each interaction lasts.
Another researcher might present each person with an ambiguous picture and ask him 
or her to tell a story, administering a projective personality test. Yet another researcher 
Table 1  Methods and Measures Used in Personality Research
Type of Measure
Mean 
Frequency
% Ever Used
Self-report scales and questionnaires
6.17
100%
Judgments of self and others
5.07
99
Informant reports
3.68
86
Behavioral observation
3.58
89
Structured interviews
3.15
76
Behavioral responses
3.11
81
Other judgments tasks (e.g., of stimuli)
3.10
79
Narrative/open-ended questionnaires
3.03
74
Reaction time
2.93
61
Experience sampling
2.89
65
Implicit measures
2.76
64
Memory tasks
2.52
62
Autonomic arousal
2.22
57
Judgments of groups/nations/cultures
2.19
43
Hormone levels
1.94
36
Neuroimaging (fMRI, etc.)
1.75
32
Molecular genetics/DNA testing
1.60
26
Note:  Prominent personality psychologists (N = 72) were asked to rate how often they used each of 17 assessment methods 
using a scale ranging from 1 (Not at all) to 7 (Very much), with 4 (Somewhat) at the middle. The third column lists the percentage 
of researchers who have ever used the method in their work.
Source: Robins, Tracy, and Sherman (2007, Table 37.1, p. 676). From R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & R. F. Krueger, eds., Handbook of 
Research Methods in Personality Psychology.  Copyright © 2007 by Guilford Press.  Reprinted with permission.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Think about how extroverts 
may differ from introverts. 
How would you test your 
ideas to see if your hypoth-
eses are correct?
23

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
could ask guests about their past behavior or the behavior of their parents or siblings. Still 
another researcher might go so far as to compare the heart rate, hormone levels, or the 
brain activity of extroverts and introverts to see if differences in their behavior are due to 
underlying physiological or neurological differences between them. Another researcher 
might wonder if women are more talkative than men, and if so, how large, on average, is 
this difference?
Correlational and Experimental Designs
If researchers want to know more about why extroverts talk more, this will require different 
kinds of research. For example, one researcher may want to interview each person at the 
party or interview their friends, either using set structured questions for each person or by 
having each person merely tell his or her own story. Analyzing this kind of qualitative data 
requires different methods than rating scales or questionnaires. Sigmund Freud, the founder 
of psychoanalysis, built much of his theory on case studies of his patients.
Still another researcher might investigate whether extroversion and introversion runs in 
families using a family study. She might even study twins who were separated at birth and 
adopted by different families to gauge the relative contribution of genetics and environment 
on extroversion-introversion. She might hypothesize that if extraversion runs in families, then 
people ought to resemble their birth parents more than their adoptive parents or their twins 
more than their nontwin siblings.
How do we gauge similarity between children and their parents or between twins? Enter 
the correlation coefficient, indicated by the symbol r. A correlation coefficient does just 
that: It measures the relationship, or co-relation, between two variables. Correlations can 
be positive or negative, depending on the type of relationship the two variables in ques-
tion have. If two variables increase or decrease at the same time, then they are positively 
correlated. For example, softball skill and hits at bat are positively correlated: Better batters 
hit the ball more than weaker batters. However, if one variable increases as the other one 
decreases—or vice versa, decreasing as the other one increases—then the two variables are 
negatively correlated. Golf skill and golf scores are negatively correlated: Better players have 
lower scores.
By convention, correlations are considered high, medium, or low depending on how 
big they are (see Table 1.2). These numbers should be taken only as a rough guideline, as 
the size of a correlation doesn’t tell us if the relationship is statistically significant, and 
not merely a fluke. For that, we need to know the sample size and some other information 
about the sample, so researchers generally report the significance level of any correlations 
they calculate.
When two variables are related, there are always at least three possible explanations for the 
findings. First, it’s possible that the first variable causes the second. Second, it’s possible that 
the second variable causes the first one. Finally, it’s also possible that some third variable causes 
both of the variables. Because we can’t be sure what is causing the relationship we see between 
two variables we must keep in mind that correlation is not the same as causation. Knowing that 
two variables are similar doesn’t tell us about why they are similar.
Table 2  Interpreting Correlations
Negative Correlations
Size
Positive Correlations
.0 to -.3
Small
.0 to .3
-.3 to -.5
Medium
.3 to .5
-.5 to -.9
Large
.5 to .9
Source: From Cohen (1988).
24

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
Although a family study would yield some possible answers as to why extroverts talk more 
(e.g., “It’s in their genes” or “They come from a very sociable family”), it wouldn’t isolate a spe-
cific cause of the talkative behavior that we have observed. To test the theory that one variable 
causes another variable, scientists need to conduct a true experiment (described in the next 
section). When this is not possible either due to practical or ethical reasons, researchers use 
correlational studies. In correlational studies researchers generally don’t manipulate variables, 
but instead measure two variables to see how they are related.
In personality psychology, in particular, when we want to study how a person with a 
certain personality behaves, we use a correlational study to measure both personality and 
behavior. For example, we might give people a personality questionnaire that measures their 
level of extroversion. Extroverts would score high on this questionnaire whereas introverts 
would score low. Later, we can see how introverts and extroverts interact with strangers, or 
differ in physiological arousal, or any other measure that we think would show a difference 
based on personality. Similarly, we could measure a person’s typical level of anxiety and see 
how he or she reacts to a pop quiz. We would expect people high in anxiety to perform worse 
than people low in anxiety.
Many studies on the genetics or neuroscience of personality use correlational designs, 
such as twin or adoption studies. Indeed, when researchers can’t manipulate the variable they 
want to study, they conduct their studies in the “real world” using field studies and natural 
manipulations, such as studying people coping with job loss, ill health, or natural tragedies, or 
war. When correlational studies are well designed, replicated, and combined with other kinds 
of evidence, they are nearly as good as a true experiment in identifying the causes of outcomes 
(Aronson et al., 1990).
Research Methods Illustrated: A True Experiment
T
here are many different methods that psychologists use to study human personality and 
behavior (Revelle, 2007). Researchers could merely observe behavior or they might measure 
a personality characteristic or they might place people in a controlled situation and see how 
they react. This latter method, of placing people in a carefully controlled situation and measuring 
their responses, is called an experiment.
In a typical experiment, researchers decide what variable they wish to study. Researchers 
then design at least two conditions which differ in this variable. In one condition, called the 
experimental condition, participants experience one treatment. In the other, control condition, 
participants experience a different treatment or no treatment at all. Researchers will go to great 
lengths to ensure that the entire experimental procedure is exactly alike for all participants except 
for this one difference in the variable being studied.
Then, researchers must use random assignment to assign participants to one condition or 
the other. Random assignment means that every participant in the experiment has an equal chance 
of experiencing each of the conditions. In the case of two groups, the researcher might flip a coin to 
decide which treatment a participant will receive.
By having experimental control, where all aspects of the experiment are the same except 
for the variable being studied, and random assignment, where participants have an equal chance 
of being in any condition, researchers are able to conclude that a difference in reactions of 
participants must have been due to the variable that was manipulated. This is the logic of a true 
experiment which allows researchers to conclude that what they manipulated caused a difference 
in the outcome they measured (Aronson et al., 1990).
By manipulating one variable, researchers look to see if there was a difference in some 
response of the participants, which they measure. The variable that researchers manipulate is called 
the independent variable because it is independent of participants’ responses. The variable that 
the researchers measure, the responses of the participants, is called the dependent variable 
because it depends on participants’ responses. In fact, many experiments are aptly titled “The 
effect of _____ on _____” to help readers identify the independent variable (the first blank) and the 
dependent variable (the second blank) right away.
For example, suppose researchers wanted to see if some cognitive strategies for coping 
with failure were more effective than others. They might randomly assign participants to one of 
two treatment conditions: Effective Strategies or Ineffective Strategies. Then, after they learned 
25

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
and practiced these strategies, the researchers could measure how angry, anxious, disappointed, 
unhappy, and sad they felt afterward. In this experiment, the independent variable, what the 
researchers manipulated, is type of strategy. The dependent variable, what the researchers 
measured, is emotion.
If there is a difference in participants’ emotions after the experimental treatment, and if the 
researchers successfully controlled all other differences between the groups, then we can conclude 
that the difference in emotions at the end of the experiment must be due to the treatment during 
the experiment.
When it comes to research in personality, there are a lot of variables that we cannot manipulate 
because it is impossible, impractical, or unethical to do so. For example, there is no way to randomly 
assign people to a certain personality type, like being an extrovert or an introvert. Similarly, it would 
be wrong to manipulate self-esteem in an experiment by making people in one condition feel bad 
about themselves. In these cases, researchers either use correlational designs or else researchers see 
if their manipulation has a different effect on people depending on their personality (Brewer, 2000; 
Revelle, 2007; Smith, 2000).
This experiment on cognitive strategies for coping with failure was actually part of a more 
detailed experiment studying the effect of cognitive strategies and personality on emotions 
after failure (Ng & Diener, 2009). Participants imagined that they failed to get into any of the 
eight graduate programs to which they had supposedly applied. The researchers manipulated 
coping strategy, just as described, by randomly assigning all participants to an Effective Strategies 
condition or an Ineffective Strategies condition.
In the Effective Strategies condition, participants were instructed to reinterpret their failure 
to see it in a more positive light, to see if they could find something positive in the experience, and 
to reflect on how they might be able to grow as a person as a result of the event. They were also 
instructed to think about how they might do something to change or to improve the situation. 
Participants in the Ineffective Strategies condition were instructed to focus on how upset they 
were, to admit that they could not deal with what happened, and to think that they should just 
give up and stop trying to reach their goal of entering graduate school.
The researchers also took into account the personality of the participants by identifying them 
as being high or low in Neuroticism, a personality trait that describes how anxious and vulnerable 
to negative emotions a person is. Notice that the researchers are unable to randomly assign people 
to be high or low in Neuroticism, because it is a personality trait. Instead, they merely measured this 
variable and then assigned people high or low on Neuroticism to conditions, ensuring an equal 
number of people of both types in each condition.
Finally, they measured how angry, anxious, disappointed, unhappy, and sad they felt afterward, 
combining these responses into one composite variable of negative emotion. The design of this 
experiment is a 2 (Coping Strategy) by 2 (Neuroticism) design. There are two levels, or groups, 
within each independent variable: Effective and Ineffective Coping Strategies and High and 
Low Neuroticism. Note that only one of these variables, Coping Strategy, was actually under 
experimental control, that is, actually manipulated by the experimenters.
“There are two possible 
outcomes: If the result 
confirms the hypothesis, then 
you’ve made a measurement. 
If the result is contrary to the 
hypothesis, then you’ve made a 
discovery.”
Enrico Fermi
The true experiment, where 
participants are randomly 
assigned to treatment 
conditions, is one of many 
methods personality 
psychologists use to study 
individuals.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Take a recent negative 
occurrence and see if you 
can think about it in a dif-
ferent way using ideas from 
the Effective Strategies con-
dition. Does changing your 
thinking help you feel any 
better about the event?
© Edbockstock/Dreamstime.com
26

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
What did they discover? First, there was a main effect for condition, meaning that the condition 
that participants were in affected how much negative emotion they reported at the end of the 
experiment. Participants in the Ineffective Strategies condition reported more negative emotion 
than participants in the Effective Strategies condition. Second, there was also a main effect for 
personality, meaning that participants’ levels of Neuroticism affected how much negative emotion 
they reported at the end of the experiment. People high in Neuroticism reported more negative 
emotion than people low in Neuroticism.
Finally, there was a significant interaction between condition and Neuroticism. Whenever we 
find a significant interaction, it means that one of the main effects is different depending on the 
level of the other variable. Interaction effects are easiest to see in a graph. Lines that are not parallel 
to each other suggest an interaction between variables (see Figure 2).
Here, the significant interaction between Coping Strategy and Neuroticism suggests that 
Effective Strategies were effective only for people low in Neuroticism. People low in Neuroticism 
who used Effective Strategies felt less negative emotions than people low in Neuroticism who 
used Ineffective Strategies. Essentially, using ineffective strategies made people low in Neuroticism 
feel like people high in Neuroticism. The conclusion from these results is that the effect of strategy 
depends on personality, or, as the researchers caution, the power of positive thinking may not work 
for everyone—it depends on your personality (Ng & Diener, 2009).
Why might be this be the case? Although this is a very good question, it was not the question 
the researchers sought to answer in this experiment. This question will have to wait for another 
experiment.
Types of Data and Personality Assessment
As you can see, there are many ways of answering the seemingly simple question of “Why do 
some people talk more at a party?” The most accurate answers come from using principles 
of good research design. As a general rule, we can put more faith in results that come from 
more than just one study or more than just one method. Even when studying just a single 
person—that cute, outgoing partygoer telling a joke to a small crowd of admirers—there 
are many kinds of data we can gather (John & Soto, 2007). We can collect self-report data 
(e.g., questionnaires, interviews), observation data from friends or trained observers, test 
7
Intensity of Negative Emotions
4
4.2
4.4
4.6
4.8
5
5.2
5.4
5.6
5.8
6
6.2
6.4
6.6
6.8
Effective
Ineffective
Cognitive Strategy
Low Neuroticism
High Neuroticism
Figure 2  Negative emotions experienced by people high and low in 
Neuroticism who were instructed to use effective or ineffective cognitive 
strategies to cope with a hypothetical negative event.  Source: Ng & Diener 
(2009, Figure 3, p. 459). Reprinted with permission from, “ Feeling bad? The 
“power” of positive thinking may not apply to everyone,” by Ng, W., & Diener, 
E. (2009), Journal of Research in Personality, 43, 455–463.  Permission conveyed 
through the Copyright Clearance Center.
27

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
data (e.g., see how they behave in a controlled situation like the laboratory), or even life data 
(e.g., count how many times a person’s photo appeared in his or her yearbook or how many 
campus organizations he or she belongs to).
Of course, a study is only as good as the instruments that a researcher uses. Even a seem-
ingly straightforward personality test is backed by previous experimentation to assure that the 
questions are understandable and clear, that responders are giving sincere answers (as opposed 
to answering in bogus or unreliable ways), and that the results of such assessments are valid, 
reliable, and useful (Smith & Archer, 2008). How can a researcher be sure he or she is using 
the very best measurements in studies? This topic is so important to personality psychology 
that we spend an entire chapter discussing the common types of personality tests, the uses of 
personality tests, and what makes a good personality test, including reliability, validity, gener-
alizability, and response sets.
Scientists have a number of tools or methods at their disposal. And like a good carpenter, 
who chooses the right tool depending on the job at hand, personality psychologists use what-
ever tool is most appropriate for answering the question they wish to explore. As you learn 
about each of the building blocks of personality, you will also learn about one of the various 
methods personality psychologists have used to explore the human personality. Sometimes 
it is easier to understand a particular method when you can see how it is used by personality 
psychologists to answer a specific question or to test a specific theory.
The logic of the true experiment requires researchers to control all aspects of the laboratory 
environment even determining what participants in an experiment will be facing! As you can 
see, this is an awesome responsibility and one not to be taken lightly. Researchers must adhere 
to stringent ethical principles and guidelines set out by the American Psychological Associa-
tion (American Psychological Association, 2002, 2010). These guidelines were put in place to 
ensure the safety, trust, and welfare of research participants. Let us now turn to a discussion 
of research ethics.
Then and Now: The Ethics  
of Research With People
One day in 2004, Paula’s world suddenly 
changed forever. Though she knew she 
was adopted, the stranger on the other 
end of the phone gave her the news: You 
have an identical twin. Identical strangers 
is how Paula and Elyse came to refer to 
themselves (Schein & Bernstein, 2008). 
The women discovered that they were 
both interested in film, had lived in Paris, 
and were vulnerable to bouts of depres-
sion. But what truly disturbed them, is 
that they and their families, along with 
five other pairs of identical twins and one 
set of identical triplets, were unwitting 
participants in a strange study. The head 
psychiatrist at the adoption agency pur-
posely separated identical twins. But not 
all identical twins were separated, only 
those who were born of mothers with a 
history of disorders like schizophrenia 
and bipolar disorder. He used the identi-
cal twins to conduct his own study of the 
impact of genetics and environment on 
“If the only tool you have is a 
hammer, you tend to see every 
problem as a nail.”
Abraham Maslow
Identical twins Paula 
Bernstein and Elyse Schein 
didn’t find out until they 
were adults that they had 
an identical twin and were 
unwitting participants in 
an unethical study in which 
identical twins who were 
put up for adoption were 
purposely separated at birth 
and adopted by separate 
families.
© Bruce Gilbert/MCT/Newscom
28

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
the development of mental illnesses, and did so without the knowledge and consent of the 
birth mothers and the adoptive families. Families thought that the kindly doctor who made 
regular visits was merely making sure that the children were adjusting well to their adoptive 
families.
Many adoptive parents said that they would have gladly adopted their child and their 
child’s twin had they known. Many twins were understandably upset to discover—often 
well into their adult lives—that certain illnesses ran in their biological families, important 
information that was purposely kept from them and their adoptive families. Finally, although 
taken from their birth mothers right away, the twins were raised in foster care and not sepa-
rated from each other until they were 6 to 9 months of age. Many twins reported growing up 
with a permanent sense of loss or the fantasy that they had a secret twin (Schein & Bernstein, 
2008).
Elyse and Paula, like the other participants in this study, were outraged. Because of the pain 
the study caused and would continue to cause as participants discovered the true circumstances 
of their birth and adoption, a court order has sealed the documents describing the study and 
its results until 2066 (Schein & Bernstein, 2008). With horror, the more the facts of their birth 
came to light, the more their situation reminded Elyse and Paula of the experiments by the Nazi 
doctor Josef Mengele who conducted inhumane experiments on prisoners in the concentration 
camps (Lifton, 1986).
Sadly, this study is not the only incident in the history of unethical research that includes 
the Tuskegee Syphilis study (Reverby, 2009), in which impoverished African American share-
croppers were purposely given syphilis and prevented from obtaining treatment; the Nazi doc-
tors (Lifton, 1986); and studies done on people in prisons, mental hospitals, and orphanages 
without their consent and often with coercion. Could this twin study be conducted today? The 
scientific community, including the American Psychological Association (American Psycho-
logical Association, 2002, 2010), along with many governments, including the United States 
(Department of Health and Human Services, 1979), have all agreed to standards of ethical 
conduct for research with human subjects that protect human participants and prevent studies 
like these from ever being conducted.
According to the Belmont Report (Department of Health and Human Services, 1979), 
research with humans must adhere to three principles: respect for persons, beneficence, and 
justice. The principle of respect for persons includes allowing people to choose for themselves 
whether they wish to participate or not, by giving their consent after they have been informed 
THINK ABOUT IT
Does your school have a 
requirement that students 
in introductory psychology 
classes participate in research 
studies? Is this ethical?
Participants from the 
Tuskegee Study: From 1932 
to public outcry in 1972, the 
U.S. government carried out 
an unethical study observing 
the natural progression of 
syphilis in humans. The study 
continued even after penicillin 
was discovered to be a cure 
for syphilis in the 1940s.
National Archives, Southeast Region (#824600)
29

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
about the procedures and possible risks of the study. This is called informed consent. It also 
states that the researcher must give extra protection to people who have limited autonomy, or 
limited physical or mental capacity to give their informed consent.
For example, people who are in jail have limited autonomy and cannot be used for research 
without extra efforts to ensure that they understand that their participation will not impact 
their release in any way. Similarly, employees must be assured that their participation will not 
affect their employment status or their work evaluation. Also, students must be assured that 
their grades will not be affected by their willingness to participate in a research project or not. 
Children and people with certain disorders may lack the maturity or the cognitive capacity to 
evaluate the risks and benefits of participation for themselves, and so parents or legal guardians 
must give consent for them.
The principle of beneficence states that first, and foremost, researchers should do no 
harm to their participants. This includes using the best research methods and materials, hav-
ing trained personnel interact with research participants, and minimizing possible harm and 
maximizing possible benefits of research participation.
Finally, the principle of justice suggests that the benefits and the burdens of research 
participants must be shared equitably among potential research populations. At a basic level, 
this means that researchers must treat all participants fairly and equally, avoiding samples 
of convenience, exploitation of vulnerable populations, and by not involving persons from 
groups unlikely to benefit from the research. For example, researchers should be sure to 
represent both genders and various ethnic groups in research that would potentially affect 
them. The principle of justice also states that if research supported by public funds leads to a 
therapeutic treatment, for example, that treatment must be available to all, not just to those 
who can afford it.
Justice also suggests that participants should receive some benefit or value for being in the 
study, either something direct and concrete (e.g., learning experience, monetary reward, treat-
ment for an ailment under study) or more general for society (e.g., understanding personality 
or finding a cure for cancer).
The Belmont report also led to the Common Rule which was adopted by all federal 
agencies including the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the National Institute of 
Mental Health (NIMH), and which is also the rule at all universities, schools, hospitals, 
and other places where research is conducted. The Common Rule mandates that institu-
tions that conduct research must establish and maintain an institutional review board 
(IRB) to review all research to ensure that it upholds these standards. These boards must 
include ­researchers, an ethicist, and members of the community who discuss all research 
proposals, often making suggestions to ensure that participants’ rights are protected. The 
Common Rule establishes procedures for obtaining informed consent from potential 
research participants and for explaining all experimental procedures (see Mills, 1976, for 
an example).
If you have the opportunity to conduct research, you will need to submit a proposal to 
your school’s IRB. Though the questions asked by the IRB on their forms may seem unrelated 
to research, you can readily see that the questions are all meant to ensure that the principles 
of respect for persons, beneficence, and justice have all been considered and protected (see 
Figure 3).
Researchers who violate ethical principles face censure from their institution’s IRB, as 
well as from their professional societies, like the American Psychological Association, and 
from the federal government. Due to these principles and guidelines, it is unlikely that 
experiments like the twin study could be conducted today. Good researchers must always 
consider the rights and welfare of their participants in the design and planning of their 
research studies.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Does your school have an 
IRB to review research con-
ducted at your school?
30

Figure 3  A copy of the form used by the Arcadia University IRB. Note that questions 3 and 7 ensure the principle of autonomy whereas 
questions 5 and 6 ensure the principle of beneficence. Researchers must address the principle of justice in their narrative describing the 
procedure of their study which they submit for review to the IRB along with this form. Source: Reprinted courtesy of Arcadia University.
31

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
Science or Science Fiction? A Brief 
Introduction to Current Research Findings 
in Personality Psychology
Now that you know a bit about the methods psychologists use to study personality, it’s time to 
explore their findings. But first, here’s a chance for you to see for yourself just how exciting the 
field of personality psychology is. The field has changed so rapidly over the past decade or so 
that we might wonder if we are studying science or science fiction. Take a look at Table 3. Each 
of these statements draws on research you will learn about in this course. Can you tell which is 
science and which is science fiction?
Chapter Summary
This chapter introduced the topic of personality psychology—the scientific study of what makes 
us who we are. People vary and personality psychology studies both similarities and differences 
among people and how they became that way.
Though personality is made up of the building blocks of traits, genetics, neuroscience, self 
and identity, intrapsychic aspects, regulation and motivation, and cognitions, we are more than 
the mere sum of these parts. Especially when it comes to understanding gender, sexual orienta-
tion, and resilience, for example, these parts work together to make us who we are.
Personality psychologists use many methods to study personality. Using the scientific 
method, researchers make observations, build theories, and devise and test hypotheses. They 
may design true experiments, observational studies, correlational studies or administer per-
sonality questionnaires (both self-report and projective) to test their hypotheses and theories 
Table 3  Science or Science Fiction?
	 1.	 Most experiments take place in a dark, dank laboratory with scary-looking equipment.
	 2.	 The English language contains 17,937 words to describe human personality.
	 3.	 Psychologists can judge what people are like based on their residence hall rooms, offices, 
web pages, and handshakes.
	 4.	 Employers can use personality tests to see if potential employees have what it takes to suc-
ceed on the job.
	 5.	 Dolphins, elephants, and chimpanzees know who they are.
	 6.	 Social experiences can change how our genes function.
	 7.	 Gamers can control their character in some video games simply by thinking about how 
they want the character to move.
	 8.	 Plastic baby carriers may make it more difficult for parents and children to bond.
	 9.	 People who feel competent and who are intrinsically motivated have less dental plaque.
	10.	 College students today feel less in control of their lives than college students of earlier 
generations.
	11.	 Men are just naturally better than women at certain mathematical tasks such as mental 
rotation, for example, and no amount of practice or experience can change this fundamen-
tal difference.
	12.	 Women with a fluid sexual orientation are capable of experiencing a wider range of erotic 
experiences and feelings than captured by the labels of lesbian, bisexual, or heterosexual.
	13.	 Experiencing positive emotions such as love, joy, playfulness, wonder, and love make peo-
ple think more creatively than negative emotions such as sadness, disgust, or anxiety.
Note: All but two of these statements are based on science; the rest are science fiction. To find out which two, keep 
reading!
Go online for more 
resources to help you 
review.
Study and Review
on mysearchlab.com
32

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
about human personality. They may also collect self-report data, observation data, test data, or 
life data on people. Like a carpenter with a toolbox full of specialized tools, researchers choose 
the best methods to answer their questions about human personality.
One method personality psychologists use to study people is the true experiment, where 
researchers have experimental control over the independent variable and randomly assign 
participants to conditions. If researchers succeeded in controlling all aspects of the experi-
ment except for the one variable under study, then any difference in the dependent variable, 
or responses of the participants, must have been caused by the independent variable, what the 
experimenter manipulated. A true experiment is the only research design that allows researchers 
to draw conclusions about causality. However, there are times when it is impossible, impracti-
cal, or unethical to manipulate a variable—such as personality—so that researchers must use 
alternative methods like correlational designs.
The Belmont Report establishes guidelines researchers must follow for research with 
human participants. Researchers must apply the principles of respect for persons (including 
obtaining informed consent and protecting vulnerable populations), beneficence (minimize 
harm and maximize benefits), and justice (benefits and burdens of research must be shared 
equitably) while designing their experimental procedures. Researchers must then present 
their proposed study to an ethical review board, called an institutional review board (IRB), 
for approval. The IRB will review the proposal specifically making sure that the research 
upholds these standards. Institutions of the federal government all adhere to these principles, 
as outlined in the Common Rule, which includes the establishment and oversight of all IRBs 
throughout the United States.
Review Questions
	 1.	 What are some ways in which a single individual is like all others, like some others, and 
like no others?
	 2.	 What is personality psychology? What are the building blocks of personality?
	 3.	 How do psychologists study personality? What are some methods and measures used by 
personality psychologists?
	 4.	 What are the four different kinds of data a researcher can collect?
	 5.	 When researchers find a difference on some measure between two groups, is there a way 
to judge how large that difference is?
	 6.	 What is a correlation? When are correlational designs used? What is the difference between 
a correlational design and a true experiment?
	 7.	 What is so special about a true experiment? What two characteristics are present in a true 
experiment? What is an independent variable? What is a dependent variable?
	 8.	 According to the research by Ng and Diener (2009), are some coping strategies better than 
others? Why or why not? Where does personality fit in?
	 9.	 What are the three principles that researchers must adhere to in conducting research with 
human participants? What is an institutional review board?
“Personality is essential. It is 
in every work of art. When 
someone walks on stage for a 
performance and has charisma, 
everyone is convinced that 
he has personality. I find that 
charisma is merely a form of 
showmanship. Movie stars 
usually have it. A politician has 
to have it.”
Lukas Foss
33

Who Am I? Understanding the Building Blocks of Personality
Key Terms
Personality psychology
Traits
Genetics
Neuroscience
Self and identity
Intrapsychic foundations
Regulation and motivation
Cognitive foundations
Integration
Scientific method
Observational study
Hypothesis
Personality questionnaires
Correlation coefficient
Correlational studies
Experimental condition
Control condition
Random assignment
Experimental control
True experiment
Independent variable
Dependent variable
Neuroticism
Levels
Self-report data
Observation data
Test data
Life data
Respect for persons
Informed consent
Beneficence
Justice
Common Rule
Institutional review board 
(IRB)
34

21
PERSONALITY TRAITS: 
A GOOD THEORY
What Is a Personality Trait?
Two Approaches to the Study of Personality Traits
What Do We Know About Personality From the Idiographic Approach?
Studying Individual Personalities: The Idiographic Approach
The Idiographic Approach Applied: The Case of Jenny
What Do We Know About Personality From the Nomothetic Approach?
Finding Universals: The Nomothetic Approach
The Theoretical Approach
The Lexical Approach
The Measurement Approach
Research Methods Illustrated: Factor Analysis
The Great Nomothetic Search for Universal Principles of Personality
Three Superfactors: Eysenck
Five Factors: The Big Five and the Five-Factor Model
A Rose by Any Other Name? Two Models of the Five Factors
Is Five Really the Ultimate Answer to Life, the Universe, and Everything?
A One-Factor Solution
Six- and Seven-Factor Solutions . . . and Beyond!
Then and Now: The Four Temperaments and the Five Factors
The Personality of Everyday Life: What can you tell about someone from his or her 
living space?
Chapter Summary
Review Questions
Key Terms
Read the Chapter on 
mysearchlab.com 
© Marekuliasz/Dreamstime.com
From Chapter 2 of Personality Psychology: Foundations and Findings, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. Copyright © 2012 by 
Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
35

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
H
ave you ever tried to judge someone’s personality from his or her living space? When I 
was a brand-new college student, my roommate Kathy was a cheerleader, daughter of 
the head football coach and little sister of their star quarterback. She was tall, blonde, 
charming, sociable, flirty, attractive, outgoing, conservative, and slightly daring. We quickly 
unpacked and set up our room. Then we had the idea of walking down the hallway and intro-
ducing ourselves to our new hall-mates. This would both satisfy our curiosity—who were these 
people we would be living with?—and give us decorating ideas. After all, there’s not much one 
can do with a stark, square, concrete-block room of a dull-pastel color.
We were amazed at the ingenuity with which our peers had transformed these “cell blocks” 
into cozy and often inviting living spaces: cutesy posters and classic rock album covers on the 
walls, seashells, massive stereo systems, a snowboard, an open violin case, dressers with elabo-
rate makeup holders and perfume bottles, golden posters for far-away places (Vienna! Venice!), 
color-coded filing systems, and photos of cool boyfriends. We were amazed at what we could 
tell about these strangers from their rooms!
As the astute psychology majors that we were, we wondered how much we really learned 
about our hall-mates. Certainly people decorate their rooms to impress others or to create 
certain images—and there was a lot of that going around our first year—but at the heart of it 
all, to what extent does an individual’s personality manifest itself in the design and content of 
a dorm room?
Gosling, Ko, Mannarelli, and Morris (2002) asked this very question in a systematic way. 
They reasoned that when people live in an environment they leave behavioral residue behind. 
Such physical traces left behind by everyday actions are hints or cues to the personality of the 
occupant (Gosling et al., 2002). For example, specific items may be left behind either carelessly, 
like a snowboard that wasn’t put away properly, or on purpose to convey a certain image (e.g., 
“Hey, I’m cool, I’m edgy, I’m a snowboarder!”). Similarly, people may keep mementos from 
a summer vacation, like seashells, in a prominent place because such items have personal 
meaning to them or reinforce their own self-views (e.g., “I’m a nature lover”). People may 
have tidy rooms and organized bookshelves so they can find what they need quickly. All of 
these are ways we express personalities and leave, perhaps inadvertently, cues for observers 
(Gosling, 2008).
In this study, anywhere from 1 to 6 observers, ordinary folk with no particular training, 
visited actual rooms of 83 college student volunteers. These volunteers lived in private houses, 
apartments, residence halls, co-ops, and Greek-system housing either on or just off campus. 
The researchers covered names and any photos in the rooms so that observers would not know 
“There is nothing so practical 
as a good theory.”
Kurt Lewin
What can you tell about the 
personality of the occupant  
of this room?
© James Woodson/Thinkstock
36

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
for sure the race or gender of the occupant. The observers then glanced around the rooms and 
made ratings on a 7-point scale of the extent to which they thought each of 44 descriptions 
applied to the occupant of the room. Some of the descriptions included:
Anxious, easily upset
Extraverted, enthusiastic
Conventional, uncreative
Critical, quarrelsome
Disorganized, careless
Amazingly enough, there was a great amount of consensus. That is, observers readily 
agreed on what they thought an occupant was like. Even more amazing, observers were often 
very accurate in guessing the personality of the occupants. What cues were they using? Some-
times the neatness of a room indicated how conscientious the occupant was. Other times the 
distinctive look of a space, the presence of unique items, or the variety of books and maga-
zines indicated a creative, open personality. And still other times the researchers couldn’t 
be sure what cues observers used to accurately judge an occupant’s extraversion, emotional 
stability, and agreeableness (see Table 1). You can see where you fall on these five factors by 
taking a short personality test similar to the one used in the study shown in Table 2.
Gosling and his colleagues repeated the study looking at people’s office spaces and got 
pretty much the same results. In which space do you think people’s personalities shone through 
the most? If you thought that it would be easier for people to truly express themselves in their 
bedrooms you’d be right (Gosling et al., 2002). Workplaces tend to constrain how much decora-
tion and personal expression workers can show.
So, my roommate Kathy and I were indeed able to get to know our hall-mates a bit and 
to identify interesting people on our hallway that we wanted to get to know better. However, 
we also discovered that our tastes in friends and room decorations were quite different . . . as 
befitting two very different personalities!
As the opening research study illustrates, there are many ways of describing human person-
ality: charming, sociable, flirty, outgoing, conservative, daring, conventional, uncreative, disor-
ganized, careless, extraverted, enthusiastic, critical, quarrelsome, anxious, easily upset, and some 
17,937 others (Allport & Odbert, 1936)! Such descriptors of personality are called traits. In this 
first chapter on traits, as Kurt Lewin suggested, we start with understanding the theories behind 
personality traits—including two approaches to studying traits—and the kinds and num-
bers of traits, and discuss whether there are universal traits that can describe any personality. 
Later you will study some of the practical applications of trait psychology and, in parti­
cular, how traits are expressed in many aspects of our lives, from our handshakes  
Table 1  Cues Observers Use to Determine Personality of Room Occupants
Trait
Consensus
Accuracy
Valid Cues
Neuroticism
.08
.36**
(none)
Extraversion
.31*
.22*
(none)
Openness
.58**
.65**
Distinctiveness of the space, 
level of decoration, variety  
of magazines and books
Agreeableness
.20
.20*
(none)
Conscientiousness
.47**
.33**
Organized, neat, uncluttered
Note: Numbers in the table are correlations among observers’ ratings. Recall that correlations can be positive or negative. Higher 
numbers mean that there is a stronger relationship between the variables. Significant effects are noted by asterisks.
* = p 6 .05, ** = p 6 .01.
Source: From Gosling et al. (2002, Tables 4 and 5) Gosling, S. D., Ko, S. J., Mannarelli, T., & Morris, M. E. (2002). A room with a cue: 
Personality judgments based on offices and bedrooms. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82(3), 379–398. Copyright 
American Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.
THINK ABOUT IT
Besides living spaces, where 
else might we see people 
express their personalities?
37

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
Table 2  Test Your Own Personality: The Ten-Item Personality Inventory (TIPI)
Here are a number of personality traits that may or may not apply to you. Please write a number next to each statement to indicate the extent to 
which you agree or disagree with that statement. You should rate the extent to which the pair of traits applies to you, even if one characteristic applies 
more strongly than the other.
Disagree 
Strongly
Disagree 
Moderately
Disagree a 
Little
Neither Agree 
Nor Disagree
Agree a 
Little
Agree 
Moderately
Agree 
Strongly
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
  1. _____
Extraverted, enthusiastic
  2. _____
Critical, quarrelsome
  3. _____
Dependable, self-disciplined
  4. _____
Anxious, easily upset
  5. _____
Open to new experiences, complex
  6. _____
Reserved, quiet
  7. _____
Sympathetic, warm
  8. _____
Disorganized, careless
  9. _____
Calm, emotionally stable
10. _____
Conventional, uncreative
Note: To score, take the average of your score on the two items listed for each factor. Items marked with an R are reversed scored. Extraversion: 1, 6R; Agreeableness: 2R, 7; 
Conscientiousness: 3, 8R; Emotional Stability: 4R, 9; Openness to experience: 5, 10R. To reverse score, 1 = 7, 2 = 6, 3 = 5, 4 = 4, 5 = 3, 6 = 2, 7 = 1.
Source: Gosling, Rentfrow, and Swann (2003, Appendix A, p. 525). From Gosling, S. D., Rentfrow, P. J., & Swann, W. B. (2003), "A very brief measure of the big-five personality 
domains," Journal of Research in Personality, 37, 504–528.  Copyright © 2003 by Academic Press. Reprinted with permission.
to the kind of music we like, to the kind of careers we choose, including how our personality 
stays consistent, changes, or shows coherence over time.
What Is a Personality Trait?
Traits describe a person’s typical style of thinking, feeling, and acting in different kinds of 
situations and at different times (McCrae & Costa, 1997b). Although we might act differently 
in specific situations (e.g., a job interview compared to hanging out with a close friend), or at 
different times (e.g., think of what you were like in high school compared to now), if someone 
were to follow you around for a while to witness your behavior in many situations and at dif-
ferent times in your life he or she would see some commonalities and consistencies in your 
reactions (Allport, 1927). These generally persistent ways of acting and reacting are captured 
by the concept of traits. In contrast, temporary states (such as emotions), attitudes (liberal, 
conservative), and physical attributes (short, muscular) are not considered personality traits.
Traits are measured over a continuum—that is, in a continuous stretch, from low to high. 
This means that people who score high on a particular trait, say talkativeness, are more likely 
to strike up a conversation with a stranger than a person who is low on talkativeness (or high 
on the trait of  “quiet,” its opposite). If we were to ask several people from different walks of 
life “How talkative are you?” we would probably find a normal distribution of responses: Some 
people would be extremely high or low whereas others would fall somewhere in the middle (see 
Figure 1) on this continuum of talkativeness.
Because traits cannot be directly measured in the same way that, say, height and weight can, 
psychologists think of traits as hypothetical concepts. That is, psychologists assume traits exist 
even though we can’t see them. For this reason, some psychologists view traits as purely descrip-
tive summaries of behavior without thinking about where they came from or why a person acts 
that way (“Mario is very sociable; just look at how well he’s getting along with everybody”). 
“Nobody seems to know what 
a trait is, so it appears to us 
better to use ‘characteristic.’ ”
Healy, Bronner, and Bowers (1931,  
p. 311)
SEE FOR YOURSELF
What kind of person are 
you? List the traits that best 
describe yourself.
38

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
Other psychologists see traits as 
internal, causal properties (“Well, 
of course Mario is getting along 
with everybody; he’s a sociable per-
son”) and view a trait as a capacity 
that is present even when the trait 
is not being directly expressed. 
Just because you sit quietly in your 
personality class doesn’t mean that 
you are a quiet person. Just wait 
until the professor’s back is turned 
and see how many people start to express their talkative natures!
Psychologists have long debated the exact number and kinds of traits. In fact, psycholo-
gists have even debated how best to study traits. The next section examines two main ways 
that psychologists have approached the study of traits: through the detailed study of a single 
individual and through the combined study of numerous people. These approaches have 
been called idiographic and nomothetic, respectively (Allport, 1937; Allport, 1937/1961). 
However, because science, by definition, searches for generalized truths, there is an inher-
ent tension between these two approaches to personality that even Allport struggled with 
(Allport, 1937).
Two Approaches to the Study of Personality Traits
In the idiographic approach, the goal is to understand the personality of a single individual 
with all of his or her quirks or idiosyncrasies and characteristics that make them unique. The 
psychologist starts with what a single individual thinks is important to know about him or 
her and seeks to answer the question, “What unique combination of traits best describes this 
person?” Think about the insights into humankind that we glean from a study of history, the 
contemplation of a great painting, the power of a moving dramatic performance or a compel-
ling biography. These are examples of idiographic ways of understanding.
By using techniques of good science such as striving 
for objectivity and minimizing biases, psychologists are 
able to use case studies and other idiographic methods to 
study individual personalities (for example, see the Swann, 
Pelham, & Krull, 1989, and Pelham, 1993, experiments on 
self-concept).
In the nomothetic approach, the goal is to discover 
universals—concepts that can apply to everyone—by 
identifying traits that can describe all people or that can 
be applied to any person. Think about this: According to 
current estimates the number of people inhabiting planet 
Earth is over 6.7 billion. Does this mean that we need more 
than 6.7 billion traits to be able to describe each person? Of 
course not, but what exactly is the “right” number of traits, 
and how best should we organize them? This philosophical 
question started what I like to call The Great Nomothetic 
Search for Human Universals. The right number of trait 
terms is a source of some debate, as we will soon see.
Although Allport is often blamed for starting the battle 
between the idiographic and nomothetic approaches, he is 
seldom given credit for his brilliant resolution of the conflict. 
Just as the practice of medicine is essentially idiographic—
doctors must diagnose and treat their individual patients—
their methods of diagnosis and standards for treatment 
are based on solid nomothetic sciences of biochemistry, 
“A description of one 
individual without reference 
to others may be a piece of 
literature, a biography or a 
novel. But science? No.”
Meyer (1926, p. 217)
Figure 1  Normal Distribution of the Trait of Talkativeness.
The idiographic approach 
uses many variables to 
describe the personality  
of a single individual in great 
detail.
“Although the endless variety 
and colorfulness of human 
personality intrigue the 
artist . . . many psychometrists 
have nevertheless fled from 
this richness of human nature 
as from some fearsome 
[demon]. They have left reality 
to the novelist.”
Cattell (1946, p. 1)
© Imagerymajestic/Dreamstime.com
39

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
bacteriology, and so on. That is, the idiographic and nomothetic overlap and both contribute 
to a complete understanding of human personality (Allport, 1937).
Allport cautioned that “individuality cannot be studied by science” (Allport, 1937/1961, 
p. 8), yet he recognized a place for the study of the individual within psychology:
Why should we not start with individual behavior as a source of hunches (as 
we have in the past), and then seek our generalizations (also as we have in the 
past), but finally come back to the individual—not for the mechanical applica-
tion of laws (as we do now), but for a fuller, supplementary, and more accurate 
assessment than we are now able to give? I suspect that the reason our present 
assessments are now so often feeble and sometimes even ridiculous, is because 
we do not take this final step. We stop with our wobbly laws of personality and 
seldom confront them with the concrete person. (Allport, 1962, p. 407)
Hans Eysenck took up Allport’s challenge and found a way of reconciling these two seem-
ingly different approaches to the study of human personality. He realized that one could study 
both the general (nomothetic) and the specific (idiographic) within a single person and develop 
a theory of personality from there (Eysenck, 1998). He hypothesized that the human personality 
is organized into a hierarchy, which we can think of as a pyramid (see Figure 2). This pyramid 
Type
Level
Trait
Level
S.R.1
H.R.1
H.R.2
H.R.3
H.R.4
S.R.2
S.R.3
S.R.4
S.R.n1
S.R.n
H.R.n1
H.R.n
Habitual
Response
Level
Specific
Response
Level
EXTRAVERSION
SOCIABILITY
ACTIVITY
LIVELINESS
EXCITABILITY
IMPULSIVENESS
Figure 2  The Personality Pyramid: The Hierarchical Organization of Human Personality.
Source: Reprinted with permission from Eysenck, H. J. (1967), The Biological Basis of Personality, (Springfield, IL: Charles C. 
Thomas).  Permission conveyed through the Copyright Clearance Center. 
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Can you see which habits 
and responses make up 
each of your traits?
The nomothetic approach 
identifies the few key 
variables that can describe the 
personality of many people.
© Scott Leman/Shutterstock.com
40

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
categorizes human personality from the most general level at the top to the most specific level 
at the bottom. General means a trait is universal or applicable to other people, whereas specific 
means a trait is more unique to a single individual.
At the very bottom level of the pyramid are specific behaviors including responses, acts, 
cognitions, or reactions to everyday life (Eysenck, 1990). Because these reactions are observed 
only once, they may or may not be related to one’s personality. However, if the same reaction 
occurs many times then we might say that the response has become a habit or a typical way 
of responding. Further, if certain habits occur over time and across situations, then we might 
say the person is exhibiting a personality trait. Further, if we notice that certain traits tend to 
occur together in people then we can say that we’ve identified a personality type, a syndrome 
(Cattell, 1946), a superfactor, or an “observed constellation of traits” to use Eysenck’s words 
(Eysenck, 1998, p. 36).
According to Eysenck, the lower we go on the pyramid the more idiosyncratic our reactions 
are. Similarly, the higher we go on the pyramid, the more similar we become to people who may 
be of a similar personality type. To illustrate how this works, let’s imagine a junior engineering 
major we’ll call Lakeisha. Suppose Lakeisha spent Thursday night with her hall-mates watching 
TV in the lounge. Does this make Lakeisha an extrovert? From one specific response we can’t 
draw any conclusions about Lakeisha’s personality. After all, there could have been a special 
show on TV. Now suppose that Lakeisha regularly says “Hi!” to people she passes on campus and 
often meets up with friends for lunch. We might judge that she has the habit of being friendly 
toward others or seeking the company of others. If she exhibited these habits over time (e.g., 
during her sophomore year or junior year) and across different situations (e.g., at home, school, 
a summer internship), then we might say that Lakeisha shows the trait of sociability. If she also 
demonstrated the traits of impulsiveness, activity, liveliness, and excitability, then we might say 
that she is an extroverted type and is similar to other extroverted people. Although this example 
started by studying a single individual—Lakeisha—and ended by drawing conclusions about 
groups of people, Eysenck cautions that our conclusions must be based experimentally to build 
a valid scientific theory.
What Do We Know About Personality  
From the Idiographic Approach?
Studying Individual Personalities: The Idiographic Approach
Imagine a person who describes herself as stubborn, critical, curious, intelligent, funny, 
and sarcastic. Now compare her to a person who describes herself as caring, quiet, creative, 
loyal, funny, and loving. Both of these are actual students who responded to the question 
“What kind of person are you? List the traits that best describe yourself.” Such a description, 
where the psychologist focuses on understanding a specific person and where that person 
chooses which traits are important to him or her, is an example of the idiographic approach 
to personality.
Using this approach, Allport identified three different kinds of traits: central traits, sec-
ondary traits, and cardinal traits (Allport, 1937). Central traits are traits that are of major 
importance in understanding the person. They are the 5 or 10 traits that people who know you 
might mention in your letter of recommendation or to someone who doesn’t know you when 
describing you. Secondary traits are traits of lesser importance, less consistently displayed or 
seldom displayed or only slightly revealed so that only a very close friend might notice them 
(e.g., “shy with new people,” “leader like at times”).
Finally, an unusual person may have one and only one trait that describes him or her. Such 
single traits that completely dominate a personality are called cardinal traits. These traits are 
so pervasive and extremely influential that practically every aspect of a person’s life is touched 
by this “ruling passion” or “master sentiment” (Allport, 1937, p. 338). Do you know somebody 
like this? Even though it is highly unusual in real life to find a one-trait personality, it may not 
“The personality of each man 
is a unique integration, and as 
such is a datum for psychology, 
and for psychology only.”
Gordon Allport
THINK ABOUT IT
Why is it that cardinal traits 
seem to occur more often 
among fictional characters?
41

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
be so rare in the world of fictional characters. Just think of Don Juan, Don Quixote, Oscar the 
Grouch, or any of Snow White’s seven little friends! Allport himself noted that the occurrence 
of a cardinal trait is so unusual in the population that when it does occur we name individual 
traits after the “celebrity.” Notice how the names of actual people like Beau Brummell (the 
fashionista of early 1800s England), Machiavelli (the manipulative Florentine diplomat), and 
the Marquis de Sade (don’t ask) have entered the English language as trait terms (Allport, 
1937, p. 338).
The Idiographic Approach Applied: The Case of Jenny
Around 1946 Allport had the unique opportunity to apply the idiographic approach to a real 
person: “Jenny” (Allport, 1965; Anonymous, 1946). Jenny Gove Masterson was a pseudonym for 
a woman who wrote a detailed correspondence to two friends over a period of 10 years. Allport 
edited and published these letters with psychological commentary (Allport, 1965).
Jenny was born in Ireland in 1868 and as a young woman moved to the United States with 
her husband. Soon, they had a baby and, tragically, her husband passed away leaving Jenny a 
single mother to fend for herself and baby Ross far away from her native country. To say that 
Ross became the center of his mother’s life was an understatement, and this led to tension 
between mother and son when Ross was an adult. Jenny wrote to Ross’s college roommate, 
Glenn, and his wife, Isabel, some 10 years after Ross’s college years, about the time when their 
relationship was the most strained. Consider this excerpt from the second letter she wrote to 
Glenn and Isabel in 1926:
All during those years and years that I have lived as a hermit socially in order 
to pay the bills of that contemptible dog, I have never formed any social connec-
tion. I never had proper clothes—never had money to spare to entertain, even 
in a small way. And I would not be a sponge. My whole life has been wasted. 
(Allport, 1965, p. 11)
The following month, when Jenny was planning on visiting Glenn and Isabel, she sent the 
following letter:
My dear Glenn: I enclose a check for fifty ($50) dollars, payable to you. If any-
thing happens to me on my trip East please cash the cheque, and use it for my 
cremation. If I arrive OK you can let me have the money then. In case of acci-
dent, or death, insist on getting my heavy coat—I shall wear it on the trip East. 
Sewed in the lining of the coat at the bottom hem, left side, is fifty dollars. Five 
tens. Keep it. I shall have 8 or 10 in my purse, and a $10 bill in a pocket sewed 
on my corset. (Allport, 1965, p. 17)
As you can see, Jenny was an interesting and articulate woman who wrote with great sin-
cerity and candor. No wonder Allport found these letters a treasure-trove for understanding 
personality traits. Jenny’s personality came out naturally in the letters she wrote. By analyz-
ing her letters, might we be able to identify the traits that made Jenny a unique person? All-
port thought so. After editing, Allport enlisted the aid of 36 people who read the letters and 
described Jenny’s traits. They used 198 trait terms, which Allport then arranged in clusters of 
related words: quarrelsome-suspicious, self-centered, independent-autonomous, dramatic-
intense, aesthetic-artistic, aggressive, cynical-morbid, sentimental, and some 13 that remained 
unclassified.
Allport and others have gone on to analyze Jenny by applying various personality theories, 
including those of Sigmund Freud and Carl Rogers (Allport, 1965; Baldwin, 1942). Indeed, there 
are many such cases that illustrate personality functioning through the idiographic method (cf. 
Barenbaum, 1997; Barry, 2007; Nasby & Read, 1997; Rosenberg, 1989; Simonton, 1999; Swede 
& Tetlock, 1986; Winter & Carlson, 1988). In fact, others have analyzed Allport’s personality 
“[I]nstead of studying a 
thousand rats for one hour 
each or a hundred rats for ten 
hours each the investigator 
is more likely to study one 
rat for a thousand hours. The 
procedure is . . . appropriate to 
an enterprise which recognizes 
individuality.”
B. F. Skinner
THINK ABOUT IT
Would you enjoy having 
Jenny as a friend?
42

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
in his treatment of Jenny: As it turns out, 
Jenny was writing the letters to him and his 
wife Ada (Winter, 1997)!
What Do We 
Know About 
Personality From 
the Nomothetic 
Approach?
Finding Universals:  
The Nomothetic Approach
Do you remember the two students from 
my personality class? Between the two of 
them they used 11 different trait terms 
to describe themselves. In fact, my whole 
class of 46 people used 116 different terms 
to describe themselves. I noted earlier that 
psychologists who follow the nomothetic 
approach seek to identify the basic traits 
that make up the human personality.
Deciding on the right number of traits, or factors, to account for human personality is like 
figuring out how many playlists and what labels you need to keep your MP3 collection organized. 
Some people might organize their individual tracks into playlists by artist, album, genre (e.g., rock, 
blues, classical), purpose (e.g., working out, driving, studying, relaxing, partying), mood (e.g., 
angry, melancholy, happy), or even a combination of these. The best way to keep your collection 
organized depends on your purpose. The same logic applies to traits.
There are at least three different ways to identify the most meaningful and applicable words 
to describe personality. Researchers typically use a combination of the theoretical approach, the 
lexical approach, and the measurement approach (sometimes called the questionnaire or assess-
ment tradition; John, Naumann, & Soto, 2008). Once the basic traits have been identified by 
one of these methods, psychologists use statistical techniques, such as factor analysis, to verify 
and validate that they have indeed found important traits. These traits can then be applied, or 
generalized, to other people or populations.
The Theoretical Approach.  Sometimes personality psychologists start with a theory or 
even common wisdom about human personality (Barenbaum & Winter, 2008), referred to as 
a theoretical approach (Barenbaum & Winter, 2008). For example, do you remember Niccolò 
Machiavelli? Two researchers were so taken by his book of advice to the prince of Florence, The 
Prince (Machiavelli, 1532/1940), that they devised a personality scale to measure Machiavel-
lianism, or manipulativeness (Christie & Geis, 1970; an excerpt from the scale is presented in 
the chapter on personality assessment). This is how common wisdom can inspire the study 
of personality traits.
Other times, psychologists start with a theory. Carl Jung hypothesized that people differ 
in how they evaluate information: either rationally, what he called the thinking function, or 
through emotions. Jung (1921) spoke of at least two types of personality, feeling types and think-
ing types. Sigmund Freud (1915/2000) had a theory that if a child had problems with weaning 
or toilet training this would affect later adult personality. Perhaps you’ve heard of an oral per-
sonality who is overly dependent or anal personality who is incredibly organized and uptight. 
These are examples of how psychologists use theory to identify meaningful traits.
“The idiographic pattern is best 
illuminated by the nomothetic 
trend.”
Saucier and Goldberg (1996, p. 35)
Using the idiographic method, 
Gordon Allport analyzed 
the letters of “Jenny” and 
identified sentimental, 
suspicious, and quarrelsome, 
among her central traits.
© Comstock/Thinkstock
43

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
The Lexical Approach.  The lexical approach to personality traits explores a particular lan-
guage and identifies the number of synonyms that describe personality. The reasoning is that 
if a concept is important to speakers of a language, then that concept will be encoded in their 
language in multiple ways. People invent terms for salient or useful ideas and these new terms 
spread and become commonplace in the language. At the same time, useless words drop out. 
Presumably describing what your loved ones and neighbors are like is very relevant and useful, 
so crucial individual differences have become encoded in language (Allport, 1937). Now if the 
same personality trait is found across many different languages, such a trait may qualify as a 
human universal. In this way an analysis of language, specifically looking for many synonyms 
and commonalities across languages, may help personality psychologists identify key terms for 
describing human personality (Goldberg, 1981), whether they be adjectives (Allport & Odbert, 
1936) or nouns (Saucier, 2003).
The Measurement Approach.  For the last 60 years or so personality psychologists have 
been working separately on discovering important aspects of personality and trying to measure 
personality (Hogan, 1996), called the measurement approach. Some psychologists worked 
within a theoretical tradition, some operationalized their own observations, whereas still oth-
ers focused on developing the best questionnaires and measurement techniques apart from a 
theoretical context. For a while it seemed that each researcher devised an original question-
naire to measure what he or she deemed were the most important personality traits (John  
et al., 2008). The field almost seemed to care more about how accurate their measurements were 
than about what they were actually measuring (Hogan, 1996)! It needed a taxonomy, or some 
systematic method of identifying and classifying trait terms that unified them into a coherent 
body. After all, “the astronomer classifies stars, the chemist elements, the zoologist animals, the 
botanist plants” (Eysenck, 1991, p. 774).
One way of doing this is to use mathematical and statistical techniques such as factor 
analysis to see if the various trait terms cluster together in some way. For example, Raymond 
Cattell started with the 4,504 trait terms identified by Allport and Odbert (1936). He reduced 
these terms to 160 by eliminating similarities in the list. Then he added all traits that had been 
identified by other psychologists in previous research. Finally, he used an early and crude form 
of factor analysis—as this was done way before the day of computers—and discovered 16 fac-
tors (Cattell, 1946) that formed the basis of his questionnaire: The 16 Personality Factors (16PF; 
Cattell, Eber, & Tatsuoka, 1970). Ironically, due to some misguided statistical practices of the 
time, Cattell didn’t realize that the 5 factors that are so widely accepted today were staring him 
right in the face in his own data (Digman, 1996). The Research Methods Illustrated feature 
explains more about this technique.
Since that time and with the advent of powerful and accessible computers, researchers have 
been using a combination of these three approaches—theoretical, lexical, and measurement—to 
identify and organize personality traits. How successful have they been? Read on to find out.
Research Methods Illustrated: Factor Analysis
I
magine that we give a group of participants a questionnaire that lists many different types of 
music, from soul and funk to heavy metal to country. Participants rate how much they liked each 
of these genres on a 7-point scale from 1 (Not at all) to 7 (A great deal).
If people have consistent feelings about any of these types of music then we would expect 
them to answer the pertinent questions in roughly the same way. For example, say one group of 
people really enjoy blues and jazz and that their answers to these particular questions are more 
similar than to questions on how much they like country and religious music. Are there dimensions 
or aspects of music that are common to blues and jazz but that distinguish this kind of music from 
country and religious music? From hip-hop? More generally, is there some underlying structure to 
the answers of our participants? If there is, then do we really need all the separate questions or will 
fewer questions work just as well?
These are the questions that psychologists try to answer by using factor analysis (Lee 
& Ashton, 2007). Factor analysis is a statistical technique that mathematically identifies a 
44

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
meaningful underlying structure among a set of variables. Suppose some questions are related 
to each other—but not to other questions; then we can say that we have identified a unique 
factor in participants’ responses to these questions. Depending on what we’re studying—
say personality or intelligence—it’s possible to identify a number of factors that underlie 
participants’ responses.
How do we know that some questions go together? We look at the correlations among all 
of the questions in our data. Recall that correlations (symbolized by r) represent the strength of 
a relationship between two variables, with larger numbers indicating that the two variables are 
highly related. The sign of the r tells us that the two variables are either directly related (positive) 
or inversely related (negative). The pattern of correlations will tell us which variables go together 
or correlate with each other and which variables don’t seem to fit. Then the computer uses 
complex matrix algebra to try to re-create this pattern of correlations from a combination of one 
or more mathematical equations. The result of all this combining and weighting of participants’ 
responses is the formation of factors. A small number of these factors are usually able to re-create 
the variation among responses in our data set almost as well as all of the original answers 
themselves.
Each factor can explain a certain amount of variation, called variance, in answers between 
participants. This is called the eigenvalue of the factor. From the eigenvalues, we calculate 
factor loadings, which is an estimate of how strongly each question fits into a given factor. We 
can interpret factor loadings much like correlations, with higher numbers indicating a stronger 
correlation between the item and the factor and the positive or negative sign indicating the 
direction of the relationship. Each factor is defined by the questions with the highest factor 
loadings. Researchers look at the questions and try to identify what underlying concept the 
questions are all getting at.
When we do a factor analysis, the first factor that emerges generally accounts for the 
greatest amount of variation in the data. But because this is mathematically derived rather than 
inspired by our actual questions, there is no guarantee that the factor makes any sense. At this 
stage a researcher might move around the factors to find which questions go together the 
best. This is called rotating the factors and allows us to understand the factors better (kind of 
like rotating a map to match the direction you are facing to better see where you’re going). This 
doesn’t change the number of factors, nor does it change the relationship among the factors, 
but it does change which questions cluster together. By rotating the factors—and there are a 
number of mathematical ways of doing this—the combining and weighting of questions that 
make up that factor shift slightly so that the researcher is better able to see what the underlying 
factor is.
How do we know how many factors best explain the data? This is where factor analysis is 
more “art” than “science.” Much debate exists on the pros and cons of the various ways of deciding 
on the right number of factors. Researchers may stop when a new factor doesn’t add much, often 
determined mathematically (e.g., by accepting all eigenvalues greater than 1) or graphically. Often, 
researchers take a pragmatic approach and keep only the few factors that are actually interpretable. 
Later factors may capture only measurement error or response bias instead of a meaningful 
underlying concept.
Once the right numbers have been identified, the researcher must then name the factors. The 
way to do this is to look at the items that fall together on each factor and see what concept they 
all appear to be getting at. Take our music taste example from the beginning of this section which 
was based on an actual experiment. Rentfrow and Gosling (2003) designed the Short Test of Musical 
Preferences, called the STOMP, in which participants rated how much they liked each of 14 musical 
genres. The researchers then used factor analysis to see if there was some underlying construct that 
could explain similarities and differences in participants’ musical tastes. The results are shown in 
Table 3. Can you think of an adequate name for each of the factors?
This is how factor analysis is a useful tool for exploring the number and kind of traits contained 
in the human personality. But note that it does not give the definitive answer to this question 
(Darlington, 2009). Keep in mind that factor analysis is a useful, but limited statistical method and is 
only as good as the researcher behind it. At nearly every step of the way, researchers make choices 
and their choices impact the results. From choosing which questions to ask (and submit to factor 
analysis), to determining the right number of factors, to interpreting the factors, factor analysis has 
its shortcomings (Fabrigar, Wegener, MacCallum, & Strahan, 1999). Whereas factor analysis gives an 
answer, it is up to the researchers to make a solid case for their conclusions and to replicate their 
findings before we can believe it is the answer.
45

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
The Great Nomothetic Search for Universal 
Principles of Personality
How did these three traditions—theoretical, lexical, and measurement—lead to this “most 
celebrated empirical accomplishment” (McCrae & Costa, 1996, p. 53)? First, recall that Allport 
and Odbert conducted a lexical analysis and uncovered 4,504 trait terms. From this list of trait 
terms, Cattell, using factor analysis, identified 16 factors—not realizing the import of only 5 
of his factors (Cattell, 1946; Cattell et al., 1970). Others, building on Cattell’s statistical work, 
identified a solution of 5 remarkably similar factors (e.g., Fiske, 1949; Norman, 1963) known 
as the Big Five (Loehlin, 1992). This moniker was not to extol their greatness so much as to 
emphasize that they are broad factors (John et al., 2008). Each of the Big Five factors describes 
personality at a high level of abstraction (remember Eysenck’s pyramid?) summarizing a large 
number of more distinct lower level traits.
At the same time, working in the questionnaire approach, researchers found that popu-
lar personality tests at the time including the Personality Research Form (Jackson, 1984), the 
California Q-set (Block, 1961), and even the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (Myers & McCauley, 
1985) all contained 5 factors (Digman, 1996), as do numerous other questionnaires from widely 
different theoretical traditions (McCrae, 1989).
Finally, others have theorized that for personality traits to be universal they must be rooted 
in biology (Eysenck, 1990; McCrae & Costa, 1996) or solve evolutionary problems, which these 
5 factors appear to do (Buss, 1996).
The remarkable convergence of theory, research, and measurement makes this a particu-
larly exciting time for personality psychologists as the evidence for a five-factor model of 
personality mounts. But there are still plenty of researchers who are not convinced that five is 
the right number of trait factors and who have proposed their own dimensions or who have 
identified important traits left out from the five-factor model. However, to fully appreciate the 
significance of the current five-factor taxonomy—not to mention these alternative models and 
critiques—we will need to understand earlier models of personality traits.
Table 3  Factor Loadings of the 14 Music Genres on Four Factors
Genre
Factor 1
Factor 2
Factor 3
Factor 4
Blues
.85
.01
-.09
.12
Jazz
.83
.04
.07
.15
Classical
.66
.14
.02
-.13
Folk
.64
.09
.15
-.16
Rock
.17
.85
-.04
-.07
Alternative
.02
.80
.13
.04
Heavy metal
.07
.75
-.11
.04
Country
-.06
.05
.72
-.03
Soundtracks
.01
.04
.70
.17
Religious
.23
-.21
.64
-.01
Pop
-.20
.06
.59
.45
Rap/hip-hop
-.19
-.12
.17
.79
Soul/funk
.39
-.11
.11
.69
Electronica/dance
-.02
.15
-.01
.60
Note:  N = 1,704. The highest factor loadings for each dimension are listed in boldface type. The research-
ers named the factors Reflective and Complex; Intense and Rebellious; Upbeat and Conventional; and Energetic  
and Rhythmic.
Source: Rentfrow and Gosling, 2003, Table 1, p. 1242 Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2003). The do re mi’s of everyday 
life: The structure and personality correlates of music preferences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(6), 
1236–1256. Copyright American Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
How many factors did 
you use to describe your 
personality?
46

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
Three Superfactors: Eysenck
Psychologist Hans Eysenck spent his lifetime conducting experiments to identify and describe 
key differences between people. So convinced was he that there were fundamental constitutional 
differences between people that he first described these personality types in terms of physiologi-
cal or biological differences between people (Eysenck, 1998). More recent research has proved 
that Eysenck had the general principle right: His early twin studies support his claim for genetic 
differences in the three factors, even as the exact physiological mechanisms were unknown to 
scientists at the time (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985). He identified three broad dimensions of per-
sonality: Psychoticism, Extraversion, and Neuroticism. Eysenck also identified more specific, 
what he called narrow traits, associated with each of these factors (see Table 4). Together, these 
three superfactors form the basis of Eysenck’s PEN model of personality (Eysenck, 1952).
The first factor, Psychoticism, describes how tough-minded or antisocial people are. We can 
also think about this as impulsivity or disinhibition versus constraint or as undercontrolled versus 
overcontrolled (Clark & Watson, 2008). People who are high in Psychoticism tend to be selfish and 
antisocial (Eysenck, 1990; Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985). The narrow traits associated with Psychoti-
cism are aggressive, cold, egocentric, impersonal, impulsive, antisocial, lacking empathy, creative, 
and tough-minded (Eysenck, 1990; Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985). One writer describes Psychoticism 
as low agreeableness and low conscientiousness (from the five factors) “with a few other very bad 
things thrown in” (McAdams, 2009, p. 199). According to Eysenck, a person high in Psychoticism
may be cruel and inhumane, lacking in feeling and empathy, and altogether 
insensitive. . . . He has a liking for odd and unusual things, and a disregard 
for danger. He likes to make fools of other people and to upset them. (Eysenck 
& Eysenck, 1975, pp. 5–6)
Table 4  Eysenck’s PEN Model: Factors and Narrow Traits
Factors
Narrow Traits
Psychoticism
Aggressive
Cold
Egocentric
Impersonal
Impulsive
Antisocial
Unempathetic
Creative
Tough-minded
Extraversion
Sociable
Lively
Active
Assertive
Sensation-seeking
Carefree
Dominant
Surgent
Venturesome
Neuroticism
Anxious
Depressed
Guilt feelings
Low self-esteem
Tense
Irrational
Shy
Moody
Emotional
Source: From Eysenck (1990, p. 246).
47

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
The second factor is Extraversion (Eysenck, 1990). Extraversion describes how outgoing 
people are, both to the social and the physical environments. The narrow traits associated 
with extraversion are sociable, lively, active, assertive, sensation-seeking, carefree, dominant, 
surgent, and venturesome (Eysenck, 1990; Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985). In contrast to intro-
verts, extraverts tend to be outgoing and experience many positive feelings such as happiness 
and joy.
According to Hans Eysenck and Sybil Eysenck in their Manual of the Eysenck Personality 
Inventory:
The typical extravert is sociable, likes parties, has many friends, needs to have 
people to talk to, and does not like reading or studying by himself. He craves 
excitement, takes chances, often sticks his neck out, acts on the spur of the 
moment, and is generally an impulsive individual. . . . [H]e is carefree, easy-
going, optimistic, and likes to “laugh and be merry”. . . . [A]ltogether his feelings 
are not kept under tight control, and he is not always a reliable person. (Eysenck 
& Eysenck, 1975, p. 5)
In contrast, the typical introvert is
a quiet, retiring sort of person, introspective, fond of books rather than peo-
ple. . . . [H]e does not like excitement, takes matters of every day life with proper 
seriousness. . . . He tends to plan ahead, “looks before he leaps” and distrusts the 
impulse of the moment. . . . He keeps his feelings under close control . . . [H]e is 
reliable [and] somewhat pessimistic. (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1975, p. 5)
The third factor, Neuroticism, refers to negative emotionality and emotional reactivity. The 
narrow traits associated with Neuroticism are anxious, depressed, guilt feelings, low self-esteem, 
tense, irrational, shy, moody, and emotional (Eysenck, 1990; Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985). People 
high in Neuroticism tend to be easily upset and vulnerable to negative emotions. In contrast, 
those low in this trait are even-tempered, calm, relaxed, carefree, unworried, somewhat unemo-
tional, and recover quickly after an upsetting experience.
You can see sample questions from the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire (Eysenck 
& Eysenck, 1976) used to measure Psychoticism, Extraversion, and Neuroticism in Table 5. 
Eysenck and his colleagues conducted extensive research to demonstrate differences among 
people high and low in these fundamental factors. Much of his research focused on the physi-
ological differences and genetic evidence for his theory, which we will briefly cover in those 
chapters.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Where do your personal-
ity traits fall on these three 
factors?
Table 5  Sample Items From an Early Version of the Eysenck Personality Questionnaire
Psychoticism Questions
1.  Do you enjoy practical jokes that can sometimes really hurt people?
2.  Are there several people who keep trying to avoid you?
3.  Do you think people spend too much time safeguarding their future with savings and 
insurances?
Extraversion Questions
1.  Do you have many different hobbies?
2.  Do you often take on more activities than you have time for?
3.  Would you call yourself happy-go-lucky?
Neuroticism Questions
1.  Does your mood often go up and down?
2.  Do you ever feel “just miserable” for no reason?
3.  Do you worry too long after an embarrassing experience?
Note: Respondents answered Yes or No to each question.
Source: From Eysenck and Eysenck (1976, pp. 65–68).
48

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
For many years Eysenck’s theory held an important place in trait theory and inspired 
numerous experiments. Alas, the prominence of his theory has been eclipsed by the explosion 
of research on the five-factor model (John et al., 2008). One problem with Eysenck’s theory 
is that many personality psychologists feel that important traits are missing. Eysenck totally 
disagreed, and claimed that they were looking at different levels in the hierarchy.
Specifically, he believed that other conceptualizations of traits are invalid because they 
include traits from multiple levels of the hierarchy. For example, Eysenck claimed that Cattell’s 
16 personality factors are at the third level (the level of traits) and when factor analyzed reduce 
to Eysenck’s three superfactors (Eysenck, 1990). Further, Eysenck was talking about factors at 
the very top of the hierarchy (the type or superfactor level), but some measures of the five-
factor model claim to have identified traits yet instead have mixed habits and responses. When 
you factor analyze these terms, you get the three superfactors of Psychoticism, Extraversion, 
and Neuroticism (Eysenck, 1990). Indeed, although Eysenck acknowledged that aspects of the 
five-factor model overlapped with his theory (e.g., Extraversion and Neuroticism), he countered 
that the factors of Agreeableness and Conscientiousness were at the level of habits, and therefore 
not comparable. Finally, he claimed that Openness is more of a cognitive factor and should not 
be considered a dimension of personality (Eysenck, 1990).
Five Factors: The Big Five and the Five-Factor Model
The five factors that appear to be our best candidates for universal traits are Neuroticism, 
Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness and Conscientiousness (John, 1990; John et al., 2008). 
Because many researchers use slightly different terminology to summarize “their” five factors, 
even using Roman numerals to identify the factors rather than words, Oliver John and his col-
leagues (John, 1990, p. 96; John et al., 2008, p. 139) suggested that we think of the five factors 
using multiple words:
N: Neuroticism, Negative Affectivity, Nervousness (Factor IV)
E: Extraversion, Energy, Enthusiasm (Factor I)
O: Openness, Originality, Open-mindedness (Factor V)
A: Agreeableness, Altruism, Affection (Factor II)
C: Conscientiousness, Control, Constraint (Factor III)
Neuroticism, in contrast to Emotional Stability, refers to how well a person adjusts to the 
“slings and arrows of daily life.” It refers to emotionality, psychological distress, and reactivity. 
For example, does George worry a lot about what people think of him? Does Ally fall apart 
under stress? George and Ally would be considered high in Neuroticism. Does Yang stay calm, 
cool, and collected under pressure? Does James keep his feelings under control? Yang and James 
are low in Neuroticism, and would be considered high in Emotional Stability. People who 
are low in Neuroticism are not necessarily high in overall mental health (McCrae & John, 
1992)—that would depend on the other factors and perhaps some aspects of personality not 
captured by a trait model at all. People low in Neuroticism are even-tempered, calm, relaxed, 
and unruffled (McCrae & John, 1992). One of the best indicators for Neuroticism is agreement 
with the item “I often feel tense and jittery” from the NEO Personality Inventory—Revised 
(NEO-PI-R; McCrae, 2007).
According to the NEO-PI-R, each of the five factors are made up of six subscales called 
facets. If we think of Neuroticism as the superfactor, then the facets or narrow traits that 
make up Neuroticism are anxiety, angry hostility, depression, self-consciousness, impulsiveness 
(immoderation), and vulnerability to stress (Costa & McCrae, 1992; see Table 6).
People who are high in Neuroticism show poorer coping skills in stressful situations, 
poorer health, and are likely to experience burnout and job changes (John et al., 2008). They 
are also prone to negative emotions such as fear, sadness, embarrassment, anger, guilt, and dis-
gust (Costa & McCrae, 1992). Emotionally stable people show more commitment to work and 
great satisfaction with their personal relationships (John et al., 2008). Among undergraduate 
students at one Swiss university, those who were high on impulsivity—an important facet of 
Neuroticism—spent more time on the phone, made more cell phone calls in a day, and reported 
“Personality psychologists 
who continue to employ their 
preferred measure without 
locating it within the five-factor 
model can only be likened to 
geographers who issue reports 
of new lands but refuse to 
locate them on a map for 
others to find.”
Ozer and Reise (1994, p. 361)
THINK ABOUT IT
Why are people high in Neu-
roticism more vulnerable to 
stress and poor health?
49

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
being more dependent on their cell phones than people who were low in impulsiveness (Bil-
lieux, Linden, D’Acremont, Ceschi, & Zermatten, 2006).
Is Dominick full of life and fun to be around? Does Christine enjoy parties with lots 
of people? Is April more reserved and quiet? Dominick and Christine are more extroverted, 
whereas April is more introverted. The second factor listed, Extraversion, is contrasted with 
Introversion and describes how one “surges” or energetically engages with the social world. 
Extraverted people just like other people. They are assertive, active, talkative, and cheerful, enjoy 
large groups and gatherings, and enjoy excitement (Costa & McCrae, 1992).
The factor of Extraversion is made up of the facets of warmth (friendliness), gregarious-
ness, assertiveness, activity, excitement-seeking, and positive emotions (cheerfulness; Costa & 
McCrae, 1992; see Table 7). Extraversion also refers to energetically seeking out and interacting 
with others (John & Robins, 1993; McCrae & John, 1992). One of the best indicators of Extra-
version is agreement with the item “I am a cheerful, high spirited person” from the NEO-PI-R 
(McCrae, 2007).
Keep in mind that an energetic, optimistic person who shows enthusiasm and cheerfulness 
is not necessarily low in anxiety or depression. Anxiety and depression are related to Neuroti-
cism (McCrae & John, 1992). Extraverts are likely to hold leadership positions in groups, have 
many friends and a greater number of sexual partners, and are more likely to be selected as 
foreperson of a jury than are Introverts. In contrast, introverts are more likely to experience 
poorer relationships with parents and peers (John et al., 2008).
The third factor is Openness or “Inquiring Intellect” (Digman, 1996; Fiske, 1949). Open-
ness includes the facets of fantasy (imagination), aesthetics (artistic interests), feelings (emo-
tionality), actions (adventurousness), ideas (intellect), and values (psychological liberalism; see 
Table 8). Does Jim have a very active imagination? Does Ellen get completely absorbed in music 
she is listening to? Jim and Ellen are high in openness. Is Rick pretty well set in his ways? Is 
Catherine against controversial campus speakers? People high in Openness tend to be imagina-
tive and creative, whereas people low in openness tend to be more conventional, practical, and 
down-to-earth. People high in Openness tend to go further with their education, to succeed in 
creative jobs, and to create distinctive work and home environments (John et al., 2008). One 
of the best indicators of Openness is the experience of chills or goosebumps in response to an 
aesthetic experience (McCrae, 2007). In sum, a person high in Openness is seen as
interested in experience for its own sake, eager for variety, tolerant of uncer-
tainty, leading a richer, more complex, less conventional life. By contrast, the  
closed person is seen as being impoverished in fantasy, insensitive to art and 
beauty, restricted in affect, behaviorally rigid, bored by ideas, and ideologically 
dogmatic. (McCrae, 1990, p. 123)
Openness refers to an appreciation of the life of the mind in such things as ideas, 
thoughts, fantasies, art, and beauty, and is not the same as intelligence. People can score high 
in Openness without having a high IQ (McCrae & John, 1992). Similarly, artistic interests 
are not the same as artistic ability, which is not a personality trait. Openness includes an 
appreciation of a wide range of feelings in contrast to touchiness or defensiveness, which is 
part of Neuroticism (McCrae, 1990). Openness refers to an openness to ideas and new things 
Table 6  Facets of Neuroticism
Anxiety
Angry hostility
Depression
Self-consciousness
Impulsiveness
Vulnerability to stress
Source: From Costa and McCrae (1992).
Table 7  Facets of Extraversion
Warmth
Gregariousness
Assertiveness
Activity
Excitement-seeking
Positive emotions
Source: From Costa and McCrae (1992).
Table 8  Facets of Openness
Fantasy
Aesthetics
Feelings
Actions
Ideas
Values
Source: From Costa and McCrae (1992).
50

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
rather than an openness to people, which is part of Extraversion. Openness is not the same as 
excitement-seeking, which is part of Extraversion. People high in Openness like new experi-
ences, not necessarily dangerous or exciting ones.
Having high Openness may sound better or more fun than being low in Openness, but 
there’s no particular psychological benefit to being high or low on this factor (and the same 
can be said for Extraversion). Rather, the value of creativity or conventionalism depends on the 
situation, with people at either end found in everyday walks of life (Costa & McCrae, 1992).
Agreeableness refers to the quality of interpersonal relations—that is, how much a person 
feels for and gets along with others; whether he or she seeks out such enjoyment, as would an 
extravert, or does not, as would an introvert. Agreeableness can also be thought of as a prosocial 
or communal orientation to others and is contrasted with antagonism or competitiveness (Costa 
& McCrae, 1992; Graziano & Eisenberg, 1997; John et al., 2008). People low in Agreeableness show 
hostility, self-centeredness, spitefulness, indifference, and even jealousy toward others (Digman, 
1990). Agreeableness includes the facets of trust (of others), straightforwardness (honesty or 
morality as opposed to manipulativeness), altruism, compliance (cooperation), modesty, and 
tender-mindedness (sympathy; see Table 9).
Does Ramiro believe that most people are basically well intentioned? Does Betty have 
great empathy for people in need? Ramiro and Betty would be high in Agreeableness, showing 
trust in and sympathy for other people, a concern for social harmony, and getting along with 
others. In contrast, people low in Agreeableness distrust the motives of others and are on the 
lookout for others who might be trying to take advantage of them. For example, does Jasmine 
bully or flatter people into getting them to do what she wants? Does Darnell believe that most 
people will take advantage of you if you let them? Jasmine and Darnell are low in Agreeableness. 
Some measure of Disagreeableness might be useful in situations requiring tough judgments 
or “tough love.” Some of the most successful U.S. presidents have been low in Agreeableness 
(Rubenzer, Faschingbauer, & Ones, 2000). Generally, people high in Agreeableness show better 
performance in work groups than do those low in Agreeableness (John et al., 2008). People 
low in Agreeableness are often at risk for cardiovascular disease, juvenile delinquency, and 
interpersonal problems (John et al., 2008). However, Costa and McCrae (1992) noted that the 
“readiness to fight” is often an advantage in life, and good science demands the skepticism and 
critical thinking of the person low in Agreeableness.
Finally, Conscientiousness refers to an individual’s degree of organization, both physi-
cal organization, such as the organization of one’s office, or mental organization, as in plan-
ning ahead and having goals to be achieved. Conscientiousness also includes how we regulate 
our own impulses such as thinking before acting, delaying gratification, or following norms 
and rules (John et al., 2008). For example, does Brittany have separate files for each of her 
People high in Openness tend 
to enjoy the adventurousness 
of traveling abroad.
© Lilya/Shutterstock
51

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
classes? Does Dimitri put away his video games after he plays with them? If so, Brittany and 
Dimitri are displaying aspects of Conscientiousness. But consider a person like Charlie who 
is not dependable and who even cheats at solitaire! Or Lonette, who often does things on the 
spur of the moment without thinking of the consequences. Both of these people are low in 
Conscientiousness and might be expected to place short-term pleasures ahead of long-term 
accomplishments.
Conscientiousness includes the facets of competence (self-efficacy), order, dutifulness, 
achievement-striving, self-discipline, and deliberation (cautiousness; see Table 10). Interest-
ingly, people high in Conscientiousness are rated by their peers and even their spouses as 
well organized, neat, thorough, and diligent (McCrae & Costa, 1987). They also have higher 
grade point averages and better on-the-job performance (John et al., 2008). People low in 
Conscientiousness are more likely to smoke, abuse alcohol and other drugs, show attention 
deficit disorder, have a poor diet, and not exercise enough. In contrast, people high in Consci-
entiousness are more likely to adhere to doctor’s orders, and—when compared to those low 
in Conscientiousness—live longer (John et al., 2008)! But don’t be so smug if you are high in 
Conscientiousness; high levels of this trait may also lead to annoying habits such as fastidious-
ness, compulsive neatness, or workaholic behavior (Costa & McCrae, 1985).
If some of these factors sound familiar, they should: These five are very similar to Eysenck’s 
three factors. That is, both the five-factor 
model and Eysenck’s model identify Neu-
roticism and Extraversion as two impor-
tant dimensions of human personality. 
Further, Eysenck’s Psychoticism factor 
is a combination of Agreeableness and 
Conscientiousness (Digman, 1996).
A Rose by Any Other Name? Two 
Models of the Five Factors.  Part of 
the confusion for the names of the fac-
tors is that the factors, especially Open-
ness, look slightly different depending on 
the method used to identify them. When 
researchers start with the lexical approach, 
they get the Big Five of Surgency (Extra-
version), Agreeableness, Conscientious-
ness, Emotional Stability, and Culture 
(Goldberg, 1990; Norman, 1963). Gener-
ally, the phrase the Big Five refers to this 
lexical solution. The Big Five factors are 
identified by Roman numerals that sig-
nify the frequency of the factor words in 
the lexicon. For example, words that refer 
to lexical factor I, Extraversion, are more 
Table 9  Facets of Agreeableness
Trust
Straightforwardness
Altruism
Compliance
Modesty
Tender-mindedness
Source: From Costa and McCrae (1992).
Table 10  Facets of Conscientiousness
Competence
Order
Dutifulness
Achievement-striving
Self-discipline
Deliberation
Source: From Costa and McCrae (1992).
People high in 
conscientiousness have 
higher grade point averages 
than people low in this trait.
THINK ABOUT IT
Can people change how 
agreeable they are?
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Where do your personal-
ity traits fall on these five 
factors?
© vgstudio/Shutterstock
52

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
common than words of lexical factor V, Openness. Roman numerals also have the advantage of 
being neutral from a theoretical standpoint (McCrae & John, 1992). However, numbers are less 
memorable than mnemonics and so the OCEAN labeling has caught on more, especially among 
students of personality psychology (McCrae & Costa, 1985).
At roughly the same time, Costa and McCrae (1976), using factor analysis, discovered 
three factors: Anxiety-Adjustment (now called Neuroticism), Introversion-Extraversion, and 
Openness to experience. They devised an inventory to measure these three factors (the NEO; 
McCrae & Costa, 1983, 1985), and then persuaded by the strength of the lexical findings, they 
added scales to measure the factors of Agreeableness and Conscientiousness in 1990 and called 
their solution the five-factor model (FFM; Costa & McCrae, 1992; Costa, McCrae, & Dye, 1991; 
Digman, 1996). Indeed, comparing the lexical model with their five-factor model, McCrae 
and Costa (1985) noted that “the similarities are far more remarkable than the differences” 
(p. 720). Today, the five factors of the five-factor model—Neuroticism, Extraversion, Open-
ness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness—are measured using the revised version of the 
NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R; Costa & McCrae, 1992). This ordering of the factors, 
incidentally, reflects the amount of variance, from largest to smallest, accounted for by each of 
the five factors.
So, what’s the difference between the two models? After all, they seem pretty similar. The 
major similarity is, of course, a five-factor solution, which is no small feat given all the contro-
versy! Also, the two solutions identify virtually identical factors. One difference is the name of 
the individual factors. What the Big Five calls Emotional Stability the FFM calls Neuroticism. 
Both terms refer to the same dimension; the only difference is in direction, or which end of the 
pole researchers wish to emphasize. Second, the Big Five Culture factor is a narrower view of 
the FFM factor Openness, which refers to openness to aesthetic or cultural tastes, a wide range 
of emotions, and a need for variety, and is not limited to creativity and intellectual interests. 
Yet, both the Big Five and FFM solutions agree that creativity, imagination, and originality are 
aspects of this factor (Saucier, 1992). Recall that there are fewer words in the English language 
that describe Openness of personality, so it’s no wonder there are disagreements about what 
this factor represents. Maybe there are some aspects of personality we need questionnaires to 
measure such as sensitivity to art and beauty (McCrae, 1990).
Other differences are more philosophical and deal with the history behind the two tradi-
tions and the empirical usefulness of the models. For example, the Big Five describes personality 
without attempting to explain where these attributes come from (i.e., they are in our language 
so they must be important). In contrast, the FFM theorizes, much in the tradition of Eysenck, 
that the five factors are biological traits (Saucier & Goldberg, 1996). That is, these traits are 
causal entities that correspond to neuropsychic structures that are in the process of being 
identified (John & Robins, 1993). Second, because the Big Five is grounded in adjectives, it has 
been replicated cross-culturally in many different languages. The NEO-PI-R, because it uses 
sentences, may be more dependent on language and culture and may lose something in the 
translation (Saucier & Goldberg, 1996). We’ll examine cross-cultural evidence for the five-factor 
solution in the next chapter on traits. For now, we’ll use the term Big Five when referring to 
lexically derived factors, five-factor model or FFM when referring to the questionnaire factors, 
and five-factor taxonomy or the five factors when the specific model doesn’t matter.
Research on both the Big Five (using adjectival measures) and the FFM (using the NEO-PI-R 
questionnaire) yield similar results (John & Robins, 1993), giving us even greater faith in a five-
factor solution of Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness.
Is Five Really the Ultimate Answer to Life, the Universe, and Everything?  Although 
that sounds like a simple question, the answer is quite complicated. Remember Cattell’s claim 
that 16 was the right number of factors to describe human personality? Eysenck critiqued 
Cattell’s model and noted that direct factor analysis of the 16PF questionnaire recovers 3 fac-
tors, remarkably similar to Psychoticism, Extraversion, and Neuroticism (Eysenck, 1991). Inter-
estingly, though similar, this factor analysis failed to find the extreme antisocial aspects of 
Eysenck’s Psychoticism factor. This suggests, according to Eysenck, that the Cattell scales are 
missing key aspects of personality (Eysenck, 1991). Further, even though one study recovered 
“Factor analysis has improved 
the situation, as has clearer 
theorizing, but the problem of 
naming factors is of course still 
with us.”
Hans Eysenck
THINK ABOUT IT
Can you think of traits to 
describe a person who 
appreciates art and beauty?
53

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
five factors from the responses on the 16PF questionnaire from more than 17,000 people (Krug 
& Johns, 1986), Eysenck claimed that “it would need a lot of interpretive ingenuity” to make 
these resemble the Big Five factors of Norman (1963; Eysenck, 1991, p. 778). Instead, the three 
factors of Psychoticism, Extraversion, and Neuroticism fit the data better (Eysenck, 1991). And 
on top of it all, Eysenck claims, the 16 factors of Cattell are not even replicable!
Statistically, 16 factors explain more of the variance in personality than 3 factors do, but is 
the difference theoretically, socially, or practically important (Eysenck, 1991)? It all depends on 
what your goals are or on what you are trying to predict. We might think of the whole debate 
as a trade-off of fidelity versus bandwidth (John, 1989). Would you rather have a radio that 
picks up few stations with fantastic quality of sound or many stations with decent sound? Well, 
it depends on why you are listening to the radio. When I was a kid, it was incredibly exciting 
to discover that we could pick up far-away radio stations on our AM transistor radios—one 
of my classmates claimed that he could hear people talking in French!—never mind that we 
had to turn up the volume all the way and use a bit of our imaginations. On the other hand, 
you may be an opera fan who wants to tune in to the Metropolitan Opera Saturday afternoon 
broadcast to hear your favorite soprano in HD. So, if you are an explorer of personality, like 
Cattell and the early researchers, then a higher number of factors suits your purpose. If you’re 
trying to find out how people act differently depending on their traits, then a smaller number 
may be better.
Another way to think of this dilemma of identifying the right number for a taxonomy of 
personality traits is to consider what happens in a field such as biology with a well-established 
taxonomy for animals. We can classify the new creature lapping our face at the pound as an 
animal or as a dog or as a poodle or even as Mr. Bowser, the newest member of your family! 
The “broadest level of the hierarchy,” says John (1989), is to “personality what the categories 
‘plant’ and ‘animal’ are to the world of natural objects—extremely useful for some initial rough 
distinctions but of less value for predicting specific behaviors of a particular object” (p. 268).
Researchers have championed anywhere from 1 to 16 factors. We’ll consider some of these 
conceptualizations in turn.
A One-Factor Solution
The smallest number of factors that can account for human personality is, of course, one. 
Researchers have called this the general personality factor or GPF (Musek, 2007; Rushton & 
Irwing, 2008; van der Linden, te Nijenhuis, & Bakker, 2010). The GPF is hypothesized to explain 
all of human personality in much the same way that g represents a general factor of intelligence 
underlying all mental abilities (Musek, 2007). This GPF lies at the very top of a hierarchy of 
personality traits (see Figure 3).
What exactly is the GPF? According to Musek (2007) this factor includes all the positive 
aspects of the five factors: Emotional Stability, Agreeableness, Extraversion, Conscientious-
ness, and Intellect. Further, the GPF encompasses the two factors of Alpha (the emotional 
stability to get along with others) and Beta (the flexibility to deal with change, challenges, and 
demands) (Musek, 2007). People who are high in GPF are altruistic, sociable, able to handle 
stress, relaxed, open to experience, dependable, and task-focused (Rushton & Irwing, 2008). 
Rushton and his colleagues argued that these aspects of personality have been evolutionarily 
hard-wired as they are necessary for survival (e.g., Rushton, Bons, & Hur, 2008; Rushton & 
Irwing, 2008).
In one study, participants answered three different measures of the five-factor model and 
other personality questionnaires (Musek, 2007). When their responses were factor analyzed it 
turned out that the first factor, the GPF, accounted for 40 to 50% of the variance in participants’ 
responses. The second factor accounted for 17 to 26%. Further, this GPF correlated with mea-
sures of well-being and self-esteem. Other researchers found similar evidence for the same GPF 
using different trait measures (Rushton et al., 2008; Rushton & Irwing, 2008, 2009).
Although this GPF sounds an awful lot like a general “social desirability” factor or a “con-
formity” factor, Musek (2007) argued that the pattern of results—how this GPF correlates with 
other personality measures—rules out both of these alternative explanations. However, other 
researchers believe that a two-factor solution is merely an artifact of the way we measure traits 
54

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
and have evidence that a five- or six-factor solution is superior to a two-factor solution (Ashton, 
Lee, Goldberg, & de Vries, 2009).
Six- and Seven-Factor Solutions . . . and Beyond!
An alternative to the five-factor taxonomy is the HEXACO (or six-factor) model (Ashton & 
Lee, 2005, 2007; Lee & Ashton, 2004). The six factors are Honesty-Humility, Emotionality, 
Extraversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness and Openness to Experience. Five of the 
factors are very similar to their five-factor counterparts; the major difference is the addition 
of Honesty-Humility as a separate factor (Ashton & Lee, 2005). This factor emerged out 
of research in other cultures and languages (e.g., Ashton, Lee, Perugini, et al., 2004; Fung 
& Ng, 2006) and might be best thought of as a genuineness or trustworthiness factor in 
English (Ashton, Lee, & Goldberg, 2004). Honesty-Humility includes the facets of sincerity, 
fairness, greed avoidance, and modesty as contrasted with arrogance and egotism (Lee & 
Ashton, 2004). Although this sounds similar to Agreeableness, the difference has to do with 
manipulation and power. For example, a person high in Agreeableness is willing to help 
another person even when it might be against his or her own self-interest (i.e., altruism). 
Someone high in Honesty-Humility would not take advantage of another person, especially 
if that person is disadvantaged in some way (Lee & Ashton, 2004).
However, the HEXACO is not without its critics. For example, McCrae and Costa (2008) 
suggested that this sixth factor is just a variation of Agreeableness tapping more introverted 
aspects of Agreeableness, whereas the standard facets of Agreeableness (trust, straightforward-
ness, altruism, cooperation, modesty, sympathy) tap the more extroverted aspects of getting 
along with others. They believed that the six-factor model is redundant with the five-factor 
model and not an improvement on it.
One criticism of five-factor solutions (cf. Saucier, 1997) is that many of them can be traced 
back to Allport and Odbert (1936), who omitted adjectives that represented temporary states 
(such as moods) or evaluations (i.e., judgments of character, such as insignificant, worthy). 
When such terms are added back in, the result is a seven-factor solution (Almagor, Tellegen, & 
Waller, 1995; Benet & Waller, 1995; Benet-Martínez & Waller, 2002). These “Big Seven” factors 
Figure 3  The Current Hierarchical Model of Human Personality. Source: Adapted from Musek (2007, Figure 2, p. 1225) 
and Digman (1997, Figure 1, p. 1252). Musek, J. (2007), “A general factor of personality: Evidence for the Big One in the 
five-factor model,” Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 1213–1233.  Reprinted by permission of Academic Press. 
Level 5
  Constructs of
  Theoretical
  Systems
Level 4
  The Big Five
Level 3
  Characteristics
  Scales
  Facets
Level 2
  Habits
  Act Frequencies
  Items
Level 1
  Responses
GPF
Alpha
Beta
Agreeableness
Conscienti-
ousness
Emotional
Stability
Extraversion
Intellect
55

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
Then and Now: The Four Temperaments and the Five Factors
In ancient Greece, the philosopher Empedocles proposed that all of nature is made up of the 
four elements of air, earth, fire, and water. Hippocrates, building on this early work, further 
proposed that humans contained elements of the cosmos, therefore we have within our bodies 
the corresponding “humors” that affected our temperament or personality. A predominance 
of blood and one was cheerful and happy; too much yellow bile and one was quick to anger. 
But it was the Roman physician Galen, around AD 150, who linked these temperaments to 
diseases and is credited with being the first to recognize a relationship between physiology and 
personality (see Table 11). We might dismiss these ancient personality theories today in favor 
of empirically based theories, but the wisdom of the ancients is remarkably in line with many 
modern personality theories.
Because our personality is expressed in our facial expressions, body movements, and 
gestures, Gordon Allport showed illustrations of these four personality types to participants 
and found that most people were able to correctly guess which temperament went with each 
picture (you can try this yourself in Figure 4). Allport noted that the four temperaments fit 
easily into two-factor theories of personality, whether the two factors be speed and intensity 
of emotional arousal or activity level and a tendency to approach or withdraw from situations 
(Allport, 1937/1961). Similarly, Hans Eysenck noticed that the four temperaments matched 
the dimensions of emotional/nonemotional and changeable/unchangeable, two important 
personality factors identified by the founder of modern experimental psychology, Wilhelm 
Wundt in the 19th century (Eysenck, 1967). Perhaps you recognized that these dimensions 
correspond to Neuroticism and Extraversion of both Eysenck and the current five-factor 
taxonomy (see Figure 5).
Today, while researchers have pretty much decided that the five factors—Neuroticism, 
Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness—are the major dimensions of 
human personality; others have suggested that these five are aspects of a two-factor solution, 
alpha and beta (Digman, 1997).
Factor alpha consists of Emotional Stability, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness whereas 
Extraversion and Openness to Experience make up beta (Digman, 1997). Digman (1997) sug-
gested that these two factors represent the major tasks of personality development: socialization 
and actualization (although he didn’t use these labels). By socialization he meant developing 
according to “society’s blueprint” (p. 1250), including learning how to regulate one’s own emo-
tions and impulses, living up to expectations, and not being too defensive when interacting with 
others. By actualization he meant personality growth, or going out into the world being open 
to new experiences (recall that Surgency is another name for Extraversion) and adapt to them 
Table 11  The Four Temperaments
Element
Property
Humor
Temperament
Characteristic
Air
Warm and moist
Blood
Sanguine
Hopeful
Earth
Cold and dry
Black bile
Melancholic
Sad
Fire
Warm and dry
Yellow bile
Choleric
Irascible
Water
Cold and moist
Phlegm
Phlegmatic
Apathetic
Source: Adapted from Allport (1937/1961, p. 37). ­Allport, G. W. (1937/1961). Pattern and growth in personality. New York: Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston.
are very similar to the Big Five, with the two additional factors of Negative Valence and Posi-
tive Valence. These additional evaluative dimensions are especially useful for understanding 
pathology (Durrett & Trull, 2005).
This is one area of current research and debate as researchers try to garner evidence for 
and against their theories. In sum, John et al. (2008) suggested that five factors is our current 
best working hypothesis for the organization of human traits. There is much evidence from 
cross-cultural studies to support this view as well, as we will soon see.
56

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
(Digman, 1997). Similarly, others 
have suggested that all humans, 
regardless of culture, may seek to 
categorize people as benign versus 
harmful (socialized) and stimu-
lating versus boring (actualized). 
They have found evidence for 
this two-factor solution in Greek 
samples using Greek trait terms 
(Saucier, Georgiades, Tsaousis, & 
Goldberg, 2005).
These two aspects of person-
ality—socialization and actual-
ization—are common themes 
in many theories of personality. 
In fact, Wiggins (1968, p. 309) 
called Extraversion and Anxi-
ety the “Big Two” because they 
appear in numerous observa-
tions, theories, tests, and experi-
mental results of personality 
psychologists. Although these two 
factors were replicated by some 
researchers using various meth-
ods (Blackburn, Renwick, Don-
nelly, & Logan, 2004; DeYoung, 
2006; DeYoung, Peterson, & Hig-
gins, 2002; Markon, Krueger, & 
Watson, 2005), other researchers 
question these findings (McCrae et al., 2008; Mutch, 2005).
The two factors alpha and beta are very similar to the dimensions of emotional/nonemotional 
and changeable/unchangeable first identified as part of the four temperaments of personality over 
two millennia ago. As Eysenck pointed out, the ancients were not so much trying to devise theories 
about human personality as they were describing what their “friends, Romans, countrymen” were 
like. Time—and research—have proven their hunches remarkably accurate. Now if we could only 
see how they decorated their ancient living spaces!
Figure 4  Physiognomic Representation of the Four 
Temperaments: Melancholic, Choleric, Phlegmatic, and 
Sanguine. Source: Allport, G. W. (1937/1961). Pattern and 
growth in personality. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Figure 5  Eysenck’s 
Representation of the Four 
Temperaments in Two 
Dimensions. Source: From 
Eysenck (1967, p. 35). Reprinted 
with permission from Eysenck, 
H. J. (1967), The Biological Basis 
of Personality, (Springfield, IL: 
Charles C. Thomas).  Permission 
conveyed through the 
Copyright Clearance Center. 
ANXIOUS
PLAYFUL
REASONABLE
EASY-GOING
SOCIABLE
CAREFREE
HOPEFUL
CONTENTED
HIGH-PRINCIPLED
CONTROLLED
PERSISTENT
STEADFAST
CALM
WORRIED
UNHAPPY
SUSPICIOUS
SERIOUS
THOUGHTFUL
QUICKLY
        ROUSED
EGOCENTRIC
EXHIBITIONIST
HOT-HEADED
HISTRIONIC
ACTIVE
CHANGEABLE
UNCHANGEABLE
NON-EMOTIONAL
EMOTIONAL
S
A
N
G
UI
N
E
C
H
O
LE
RI
C
M
EL
A
N
C
H
O
LI
C
P
H
LE
G
M
AT
IC
57

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
Chapter Summary
In this chapter we defined traits as a person’s typical style of thinking, feeling, and acting. Traits 
can be organized into a hierarchy, moving up from specific responses to habitual responses 
to traits to a psychological type. Psychologists have studied traits through the idiographic 
approach, describing a single individual with all of his or her idiosyncrasies, or through the 
nomothetic approach, describing any personality using a set number of key traits.
Within the idiographic approach, individuals may have central and secondary traits or, 
rarely, a cardinal trait. Allport’s analysis of Jenny illustrates the idiographic approach.
Within the nomothetic approach, psychologists might start with a theory to which traits 
are most useful for describing personality or conduct an analysis of the lexicon to see which 
descriptions of personality have been coded into language, by statistical and mathematical 
techniques, or by a combination of any of these approaches. Factor analysis, where numerous 
traits are reduced to a few meaningful factors, is often used to identify the underlying structure 
among a set of traits.
Psychologists have debated the right number of factors claiming that 1 to 7 or 16 factors 
best account for personality. For example, Eysenck identified the three factors of Psychoticism, 
Extraversion, and Neuroticism. Others have claimed that a single general personality factor 
explains all of personality, whereas still others identify just two factors of socialization (alpha) 
and actualization (beta). Today there is tremendous consensus that the five factors of Neuroti-
cism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness best account for human 
personality. Some overlap occurs between the theories of Eysenck and the five factors, which, 
What can you tell about someone from his or her living space?
People’s personalities shine through in many aspects of their daily lives, as we saw in 
the research study that opened this chapter (Gosling et al., 2002). Now that you know 
about the various traits that are used to describe personality, you can use this knowledge 
to understand what people are like based on the physical cues of their surroundings or 
“native habitat.”
First, you must decide if the item or decoration was put there on purpose or if it was 
just behavioral residue from everyday living. Of course, the person’s carelessness tells you 
something about his or her personality as well!
If an item was put there on purpose, consider the following questions: Is the item 
expressive of the individual’s true personality or was it put there to convey a particular 
image? One way of telling this is to see if the item is in public view (e.g., a photo on a 
desk facing outward) or in a place that only the occupant can see (e.g., a photo on a desk 
facing inward). If it was put there to convey an image, what impression does the owner 
wish to convey?
If an item is a true expression of the owner’s personality, what does it tell us? Recall 
that people who are high in Conscientiousness tend to have rooms that are more orga-
nized, neat, and uncluttered. People who are high in Openness tend to have more decora-
tions in their living space and a greater variety of magazines and books.
As for Extraversion, Neuroticism, and Agreeableness, there are no specific cues you 
can look for, but perhaps you may be able to take a guess. Recall that for these traits observ-
ers were pretty good at guessing the occupants’ personality, even though there was little 
agreement on the specific cues they used to make their judgments.
By applying these findings from the Gosling et al. (2002) study you can be your own 
Sherlock Holmes!
The Personality of Everyday Life
Go online for more 
resources to help you 
review.
Study and Review
on mysearchlab.com
58

Personality Traits: A Good Theory
amazingly enough, is similar to ancient conceptualizations of the four temperaments (air, earth, 
fire, and water).
We opened this chapter with a study that found that observers are able to guess the 
personality of individuals by observing their living spaces. We saw that people express their 
personalities by the way they decorate their residence hall rooms, apartment bedrooms, and 
even offices. Later you will consider other ways people express their personalities including 
music preferences, web pages, and careers and to what extent people change or remain the 
same—or at least consistent in their personalities—across the life span.
Review Questions
	 1.	 What is a trait? Explain how traits are organized into a hierarchy.
	 2.	 What is the idiographic approach to the study of traits? Describe Allport’s case of “Jenny.” 
How is this an example of the idiographic approach?
	 3.	 What is the nomothetic approach? What are the three main ways of identifying the most 
meaningful and applicable words for describing human personality? What is factor analysis 
and how is it used in the nomothetic approach?
	 4.	 What three factors best account for human personality, according to Eysenck?
	 5.	 What are the five factors? What facets make up each factor? What are some important 
correlates of people high and low in each of the five factors?
	 6.	 Is human personality reducible to one factor? Two factors? Six or seven factors? Explain.
	 7.	 How is today’s view of personality similar to the view of the ancients?
	 8.	 What can you tell about a person from their living space?
Key Terms
Behavioral residue
Trait
Idiographic approach
Nomothetic approach
Central traits
Secondary traits
Cardinal traits
Theoretical approach
Lexical approach
Measurement approach
Factor analysis
Eigenvalue
Factor loadings
Big Five
Five-factor model
Narrow traits
Psychoticism
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Facets
Openness
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
General Personality  
Factor (GPF)
HEXACO model
Alpha
Beta
59

60

47
PERSONALITY TRAITS: 
PRACTICAL MATTERS
What’s Missing From the Five Factors?
Is Intelligence a Personality Trait?
Is Religiosity a Personality Trait?
Is Sexuality a Personality Trait?
Indigenous Personality: Unique Personality Traits?
The Five Factors in Other Cultures
Personality Traits Cross-Culturally: Personality Traits in China
Research Methods Illustrated: Triangulation and Types of Data
Expression of Traits in Everyday Life
Personality Traits of Presidents
Music Preferences and Personality Traits
Web Pages and Personality Traits
Careers and Personality Traits
The Personality of Everyday Life: What does your online presence say about your 
personality?
Personality Development Over the Life Span: Continuity, Change, and Coherence
How Consistent Are People Over Time?
How Much Do People Change in General?
How and Why Do Individuals Develop in Their Own Particular Ways?
Where Does Adult Personality Come From?
Then and Now: The Grant Study of Harvard Graduates
Personality Traits: Theoretical and Practical Conclusions
Chapter Summary
Review Questions
Key Terms
Read the Chapter on 
mysearchlab.com 
From Chapter 3 of Personality Psychology: Foundations and Findings, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. Copyright © 2012 by Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
© Warren Goldswain/Shutterstock
61

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
C
an you judge someone’s personality from his or her handshake? If we express our 
personalities in our decorating tastes, can something as simple as a handshake also 
express who we are? Amazingly enough, the answer to these questions is yes—at least 
when it comes to the five factors of Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and 
Conscientiousness.
In one study, participants came to the laboratory for a study on “personality question-
naires” where they were greeted by four experimenters, one at a time (Chaplin, Phillips, 
Brown, Clanton, & Stein, 2000). Each experimenter shook hands with the participant on 
arrival and departure, twice in all, for each participant. These experimenters, two men 
and two women, were trained extensively to rate handshakes on various scales including 
strength, grip, dryness, temperature, vigor, duration, eye contact, and texture (training took 
about a month for the experimenters to standardize and validate their judgments). Partici-
pants took a version of the Big Five Inventory which measured their personalities on the 
five factors.
Because a number of the handshake qualities were related to one another, the experiment-
ers created a Firm Handshake Composite from ratings of duration, eye contact, completeness 
of grip, strength, and vigor. They discovered that men had firmer handshakes than women and 
that personality for three of the five factors was significantly correlated with this Firm Hand-
shake Composite (Chaplin et al., 2000).
Neurotic participants tended to have a weak handshake, whereas those who were more 
emotionally stable had a firmer handshake. In addition, extraverts had a firmer handshake 
than introverts. Interestingly, there was a correlation between handshake and Openness for 
women only, such that women who had a firmer handshake were more open to experience 
than women with a softer handshake. Have you ever heard the advice “You never have a 
second chance to make a first impression”? Well, the authors noted that you might want to 
take the results of this study to heart, especially if you are nervous and shy on a job interview, 
graduate school interview, or when meeting business contacts (advice your mother might 
agree with!).
Our personality is expressed in many aspects of our lives, from our way of interacting 
with others to the kinds of music we enjoy to the kinds of careers we choose. Indeed, not 
only do we carry our personality around with us in various situations, but we are who we 
are across our lifetimes as well. In this chapter we consider whether there are traits left out 
of the five factors and if this model adequately explains the personality of non-Westerners. 
Then we take a look at how we express our personalities in various areas of our lives. Finally, 
we consider how personality develops—both stays consistent and changes—over time and 
how we maintain a coherent personality over our life spans: all very practical matters for the 
topic of traits.
“To all such questions about 
the nature of human nature, 
trait psychology offers a single 
yet powerful answer:  
It varies.”
McCrae and Costa (1996, p. 57)
What can you tell about the 
personality of a job candidate 
from his or her handshake?
© Adamgregor/Dreamstime.com
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Next time you meet new 
people, see if you can 
predict elements of their 
personality from their 
handshakes.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
What kind of person are 
you? What traits from the 
five-factor model would you 
use to describe yourself?
62

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
What’s Missing From the Five Factors?
Take a moment to describe yourself. Do you use standard traits such as sociable, outgoing, fun-
loving, and sarcastic? But do you also have responses such as “exhausted,” “good time manager,” 
“athletic,” “handy,” and “beautiful”? Where do these fall on the five factors?
Some critics have claimed that the five factors are complete and can account for even 
these unusual traits (Saucier & Goldberg, 1998). Others—reanalyzing the same data—take a 
more liberal view and identify additional factors (Paunonen & Jackson, 2000) illustrating how 
choosing the right number of factors is more art than science. What is out there beyond the five 
factors? If we eliminate adjectives that describe physical characteristics (short, beautiful, heavy), 
demographics (employed, unemployed), unusual behaviors (evil, cruel) and other adjectives not 
typically used to refer to personality, we have 10 possible candidates (see Table 1). Paunonen 
(2002) even created the Supernumerary Personality Inventory to measure these factors! Just 
for the record, these clusters also fall outside the six-factor HEXACO model (Lee, Ogunfowora, 
& Ashton, 2005).
Are these parts of personality? Are these traits? Or, are they attitudes, values, or social 
behaviors? We consider a few of these questions in turn as we take a closer look at three possible 
traits: intelligence, religiosity, and sexuality.
Is Intelligence a Personality Trait?
Generally, cognitive abilities are not considered personality traits. However, an early personality 
psychologist, Raymond Cattell, identified ability traits such as memory, mathematical ability, 
and intelligence (Cattell, 1946). So, is intelligence considered a personality trait today?
Maybe not. First, recall that early studies of the Big Five defined Openness as consisting of 
sophistication, artistic and intellectual interests, and intelligence (Norman, 1963). Psychologists 
in the lexical tradition thought of this factor as Culture rather than Openness to experience, as 
we do today. However, other studies find that adjectives such as intelligent, knowledgeable, and 
cultured load on a Conscientiousness factor (McCrae & Costa, 1985).
Second, when people rate themselves or a close friend on “intelligence” they are gener-
ally thinking of intelligent, rational and logical, clear-minded, mature, and similar adjectives 
(Borgatta, 1964). These are personality descriptors that are clearly different from cognitive 
ability or IQ, which is what we generally think of when we think of intelligence. We seem to 
think of productive, motivated, hardworking, and well-organized people as having academic 
intelligence, even though they do not score as such on IQ tests (Sternberg, Conway, Ketron, & 
Bernstein, 1981). Indeed, when participants rate themselves on intelligence adjectives such as 
hardworking, smart, and knowledgeable, these end up loading on a Conscientiousness factor and 
are not related to measured intelligence (McCrae & Costa, 1985).
Third, there is evidence that there are individual differences in how people perceive and 
process information about the social world. Some psychologists call this emotional intelligence 
(Goleman, 1995; Salovey & Mayer, 1994).
“To say that the five factors are 
unlikely to be comprehensive 
in no way denies their 
profound significance.”
Buss (1996, p. 204)
Table 1  Adjectival Clusters Beyond the Five Factors
	 1.	 Religious, devout, reverent
	 2.	 Sly, deceptive, manipulative
	 3.	 Honest, ethical, moral
	 4.	 Sexy, sensual, erotic
	 5.	 Thrifty, frugal, miserly
	 6.	 Conservative, traditional, down-to-earth
	 7.	 Masculine-feminine
	 8.	 Egotistical, conceited, snobbish
	 9.	 Humorous, witty, amusing
	10.	 Risk taking, thrill seeking
Source: Reprinted with permission from Paunonen, S. V., & Jackson, D. N. (2000), “What 
is beyond the big five? Plenty!,” Journal of Personality, 68(5), 821–835.  Permission con-
veyed through the Copyright Clearance Center.
THINK ABOUT IT
When do behaviors become 
personality traits?
63

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
Finally, the whole topic of intelligence as an ability in the form of IQ has a long and contro-
versial history in psychology. But because IQ is quite a different concept than traits, this topic 
is best covered in other psychology classes.
Is Religiosity a Personality Trait?
Think about the following adjectives: spiritual, prayerful, mystical, worshipful, devout, pious, 
orthodox, godly, born-again, heretical, irreverent, and agnostic (Saucier & Goldberg, 1998, 
p. 514). Do you think these form an important dimension of personality beyond the five 
factors?
Despite the importance of religion in many people’s lives, religion has not occupied a 
central role in psychology, and certainly not in the study of personality (Emmons, Barrett, & 
Schnitker, 2008). A chapter on the psychology of religion made its debut in only the third edi-
tion of the Handbook of Personality in 2008 (Emmons et al., 2008). For many people—up to 
75% in some polls—spirituality is more than a belief, an attitude, a demographic, a tradition, 
or a habit: It is a core part of who they are (Emmons et al., 2008).
Whether religiosity is an important dimension of personality beyond the five factors is a 
source of some debate (cf. Paunonen & Jackson, 2000; Saucier & Goldberg, 1998). For example, 
Saucier and Goldberg (1998) suggested that religiosity, like many dimensions beyond the five 
factors, is more appropriately considered a secondary trait, applicable for certain purposes, but 
not a core aspect of personality. Researchers consistently find correlations between religiosity 
and Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, and sometimes Openness and Extraversion depending 
on the aspect of religiosity under study (Emmons et al., 2008). But can religiosity account for 
personality beyond the five factors?
Consider the concept of spiritual transcendence, the ability of individuals to “stand 
outside of their immediate sense of time and place to view life from a larger, more objec-
tive perspective” (Piedmont, 1999, p. 988). According to Piedmont, spiritual transcendence 
includes a personal search for a greater connection rather than a spiritual encounter with a 
higher being. The concept of spirituality goes beyond any particular religious tradition, and 
in fact, Piedmont and his colleagues designed the Spiritual Transcendence Scale (STS) after 
first meeting with experts from various faiths including Buddhism, Hinduism, Quakerism, 
Lutheranism, Catholicism, and Judaism (Piedmont, 1999; Piedmont & Leach, 2002). The scale 
has three facets: Prayer Fulfillment, feelings of joy and contentedness from connection with 
the transcendent; Universality, seeing humanity as a single interrelated whole such that harm-
ing one harms all; and Connectedness, feeling belongingness to and social responsibility and 
gratitude for, others across generations and across social groups (You can see how you score 
in spiritual transcendence by taking the short form of the scale in Table 2 and finding your 
score in Table 3).
In two different validation samples, Piedmont and colleagues discovered that scores on 
each of the three transcendence scales were only slightly related to scores on the five factors 
as measured by both adjectival scales and by scores on the NEO-PI-R. Further, factor analysis 
yielded six independent factors: five for each of the five factors and one for spiritual transcen-
dence. Together, this suggests that spiritual transcendence is a dimension of personality separate 
from the five factors of personality (Piedmont, 1999; see also MacDonald, 2000, who came to 
the same conclusion using his own measure, the Expressions of Spirituality Inventory).
Further, scores on the STS predicted scores on measures of life outcomes beyond the five 
factors and, in some cases, the effect of spirituality was stronger than the effect of personal-
ity! Specifically, spiritual transcendence and personality together predicted scores on locus 
of control beliefs for health issues, vulnerability to stress, responsiveness to others, perceived 
social support, prosocial behavior, positive sexual attitudes, and prochoice and prolife attitudes 
toward abortion (Piedmont, 1999).
This evidence suggests that, indeed, we may think of spirituality as an important part of 
personality. Whether spirituality, gratitude, ultimate concerns, or some additional aspect of 
religiosity is best thought of as a trait, dimension, or as some other important part of human 
personality is still to be determined by researchers (Emmons et al., 2008).
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Is spirituality a core part of 
your personality? In what 
ways do you express this?
64

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
Is Sexuality a Personality Trait?
Do you know somebody who is “charming,” “flirtatious,” or “coy”? Can you account for these 
aspects of his or her personality within the five factors? There’s a good reason for that: Words 
that described aspects of sexuality or that were more applicable to one gender or the other 
were purposely excluded from early lexical studies (Buss, 1996). This, according to evolution-
ary psychologist David Buss, “resulted in the near total omission of the individual differences 
in sexuality” (p. 203).
Table 2  The Spiritual Transcendence Scale Short Form (STS-R)
Agree or disagree with each of the nine questions below using the following scale:
Strongly Agree =  SA
Agree =  A
Neutral =  N
Disagree =  D
Strongly Disagree =  SD
	 1.	 In the quiet of my prayers and/or meditations, I find a sense of wholeness.
SA A N D SD
	 2.	 I have done things in my life because I believed it would please a parent, relative, or friend that had died.
SA A N D SD
	 3.	 Although dead, memories and thoughts of some of my relatives continue to influence my current life.
SA A N D SD
	 4.	 I find inner strength and/or peace from my prayers and/or meditations.
SA A N D SD
	 5.	 I do not have any strong emotional ties to someone who has died.
SA A N D SD
	 6.	 There is no higher plane of consciousness or spirituality that binds all people.
SA A N D SD
	 7.	 Although individual people may be difficult, I feel an emotional bond with all of humanity.
SA A N D SD
	 8.	 My prayers and/or meditations provide me with a sense of emotional support.
SA A N D SD
	 9.	 I feel that on a higher level all of us share a common bond.
SA A N D SD
To score, points are assigned to your responses to each item. For items 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, and 9 assign 5 points for each Strongly Agree 
response, 4 points for each Agree, 3 points for each Neutral, 2 points for each Disagree, and 1 point for each Strongly Disagree. 
For items 5 and 6, the opposite applies; give 1 point for each Strongly Agree, 2 points for Agree, 3 points for Neutral, 4 points for 
Disagree, and 5 points for Strongly Disagree. Add your scores for all nine items together. See Table 3 for how you compare to others 
who have taken the test.
Source: STS-R short form copyright © 1999, 2005 by Ralph L. Piedmont, Ph.D.  No further copying, distribution, or usage is allowed without the explicit permission of Dr. Piedmont.
Table 3  Average Scores on the Spiritual Transcendence Scale by Gender and Age
Gender
Age
Total STS
Prayer Fulfillment 
(Items 1, 4, 8)
Universality 
(Items 6, 7, 9)
Connectedness 
(Items 2, 3, 5)
Women
Up to age 21
Ages 21–30
Ages 30 and up
29–35
32–38
35–39
9–12
11–13
11–14
9–12
11–13
11–13
10–12
10–13
10–12
Men
Up to age 21
Ages 21–30
Ages 30 and up
27–33
23–29
34–38
8–11
7–11
13–15
9–11
6–10
11–13
9–12
8–11
10–12
This table presents the average range of scores by gender and age group. If your total score falls in this range, then you have an interest in understanding broader, transcendent 
issues, but also have concerns for immediate needs. You balance both perspectives. If your score is higher than these values, then you have a strong spiritual transcendent 
orientation. You are concerned with living a life that is in accord with values and meanings that originate with some larger understanding of the purpose of the universe. You 
tend to see life in terms of “both and” rather than “either or.” Individuals whose score is lower than the tabled values are more focused on the tangible realities of daily living. 
There may be more of a self-oriented focus to life, where personal concerns and issues are of greater concern.
Source: STS-R short form copyright © 1999, 2005 by Ralph L. Piedmont, Ph.D. No further copying, distribution, or usage is allowed without the explicit permission of Dr. Piedmont.
65

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
To rectify this problem, Buss and his colleagues identified all adjectives referring to sexual-
ity from standard dictionary and similar lexical sources (Schmitt & Buss, 2000). Undergradu-
ate students rated themselves on each of these 67 words along with an adjectival measure of 
the Big Five. When Schmitt and Buss factor-analyzed these responses they found 7 sexuality 
factors, referred to as the Sexy Seven: Sexual Attractiveness (e.g., sexy, stunning, attractive), 
Relationship Exclusivity (e.g., faithful, monogamous, not promiscuous), Gender Orientation 
(e.g., feminine, womanly, manly, masculine), Sexual Restraint (e.g., virginal, celibate, chaste), 
Erotophilic Disposition (e.g., obscene, vulgar, lewd), Emotional Investment (e.g., loving, 
romantic, compassionate), and Sexual Orientation.
Are these Sexy Seven factors personality traits beyond the Big Five? In an extensive series 
of tests, Schmitt and Buss discovered that the sexuality factors overlap almost 80% with the 
five factors, suggesting that they are not really separate factors. For example, when both the Big 
Five and sexuality adjectives were factor-analyzed together, the result was five factors. Each of 
these factors included a combination of both types of adjectives: Agreeableness and Emotional 
Investment; Extraversion, Sexual Attractiveness, Erotophilic Disposition, Sexual Restraint; Open-
ness and Sexual Orientation; Neuroticism and Gender Orientation; and Conscientiousness and 
Relationship Exclusivity. Because sexuality can be accounted for by a combination of factors and 
facets of the five factors sexuality is not a separate personality trait. Rather, sexuality is—along 
with musical tastes, room decorating, and handshaking—another way in which we express our 
traits of Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness (Schmitt 
& Buss, 2000).
Indigenous Personality: Unique Personality Traits?
Although some have claimed that five factors misses important aspects of personality in 
American culture, the picture is even more complicated when trying to apply the model to 
other cultures. Because the five-factor taxonomy relies on measures that were validated in 
mostly American samples, even if they adequately explain personality in another culture, 
it is possible that we may have missed personality traits that are unique to that culture. For 
example, consider a person who is polite, generous, responsible, respectful, and has a strong 
sense of honor. We can readily understand what this means, but can you think of a single 
word to describe these qualities? If you were Greek, you would immediately recognize this 
as philotimo.
How about the qualities of caring for the mental and physical well-being of one’s elderly 
parents, continuing the family line, and bringing honor to one’s family and ancestors? For 
the Chinese, filial piety is a very desirable personality trait and is much more than obeying 
and honoring one’s parents. Disappointing a family member is like letting down all of your 
ancestors—and your future progeny (Ho, 1996; Zhang & Bond, 1998). According to cultural 
tradition, this trait must be internalized by young people. Filial piety is not captured by the five-
factor model alone; indigenous personality traits are necessary to fully explain this construct in 
Chinese college students (Zhang & Bond, 1998).
Can you think of a person on whom others depend? This person may even have a strong 
social obligation to take care of others. Whereas this sounds a lot like the relationship between 
parents and their children to our Western sensibilities, this characteristic of amae would seem 
very natural among Japanese adults. Amae characterizes relationships between people of lower 
and higher status, such as bosses and workers, in addition to the relationship between parents 
and children (Doi, 1973).
Although these concepts are readily understandable by an outsider, they are examples of 
indigenous culture-specific traits (cf. Goldstein, 2000). There is also the Korean concept of 
cheong (human affection; Choi, Kim, & Choi, 1993), the Indian concept of hishkama karma 
(detachment; Sinha, 1993), the Mexican concept of simpatia (avoidance of conflict; Triandis, 
Marin, Lisansky, & Betancourt, 1984), and the Filipino concept of pakikisama (going along 
with others; Enriquez, 1994), among others (Church & Ortiz, 2005). For the most part, these 
indigenous personality traits lie beyond the five factors.
THINK ABOUT IT
Can a person have a person-
ality trait that is expressed in 
only a few situations?
THINK ABOUT IT
In American culture, are phi-
lotimo and filial piety traits 
or behaviors?
66

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
The Five Factors in Other Cultures
How do we go about applying the five-factor taxonomy to other cultures? Do we take the 
“transport and test” approach where we translate English measures and see if they apply to 
people in other cultures? Or, do we start with the lexicon of a particular culture and try to 
identify indigenous personality traits? There are pros and cons to each of these approaches and 
the results depend on which method, as well as the specific measures, experimenters employ. 
Together, this line of research gets us closer to both identifying human universals in personality 
and understanding the impact of culture on personality. There are five main findings:
1.  Questionnaire measures of the five-factor model reliably replicate across many cultures 
and languages. The question-based NEO-PI-R, when translated and then carefully back-translated 
to ensure that the items are comparable, applies very well across many countries and cultures. So 
far, the FFM has been tested and validated in over 50 countries including most Western ones as well 
as Israel, Argentina, Botswana, Ethiopia, Japan, Malta, Peru, South Korea, and Nigeria (McCrae, 
2001, 2002; McCrae & Costa, 1997b; McCrae, Terracciano, & 78 Members of the Personality Pro-
files of Cultures Project, 2005a; McCrae, Terracciano, & 79 Members of the Personality Profiles 
of Cultures Project, 2005b). In all of these countries, self-ratings and peer ratings converge just as 
they do in the United States. In addition, five-factor scores correlate impressively with meaningful 
external criteria on life outcomes such as life satisfaction and getting along with others (Benet-
Martínez & Oishi, 2008). In sum, there is “considerable evidence that the FFM dimensions are in 
fact universally applicable” (McCrae et al., 2005b, p. 408).
2.  Adjectival measures of the Big Five reveal variations of Neuroticism, Extraversion, 
Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness but not Openness in many different cultures. The 
closer a culture is to a Northern European culture, the closer the results are to the Anglo-based 
Big Five (Saucier & Goldberg, 2001). This held true for 12 languages including German, Polish, 
Czech, Turkish, Dutch, Italian, Hungarian, Korean, Hebrew, Filipino, Spanish, and Catalonian 
(Saucier & Goldberg, 2001).
3.  Openness varies across cultures. Why is this the case? Recall that for the lexical Big 
Five model Openness is defined as intellect and imagination, but for the five-factor model 
using sentences (as in the NEO-PI-R) this factor is Openness to Experience. Lexical models 
find Openness (Norman’s V factor) to be language and culture specific. For example, according 
to Saucier and Goldberg (2001) there were slight variations in which adjectives loaded on the 
Openness factor in German (intelligence, competence, talents), Turkish (intellect and unconven-
tionality), Hebrew (sophisticated, sharp, knowledgeable), Filipino (intellect, competence, talent), 
and Dutch (intellectual autonomy vs. conventionality).
Because the Openness factor does not consistently appear in other languages it may be that 
this factor, though it exists cross-culturally, is defined differently in ways unique to a specific 
culture (Bond, 1994). Indeed, Benet-Martínez and Oishi (2008) suggested that Openness might 
be unique to Anglo-Saxon cultures. Aspects of Openness, particularly the facets of it such as 
imagination, emotionality, psychological liberalism, and adventurousness, may tap into Western 
culture’s emphasis on intellectual freedom, emotional expressiveness, and individual uniqueness.
However, consider the item “Sometimes when I am reading poetry or looking at a work 
of art, I feel a chill or wave of excitement.” This is one of the strongest predictors of scores 
on Openness of the NEO-PI-R in over 40 languages in 51 cultures, not just in Western cul-
tures but also in Brazil, Hong Kong, Japan, Lebanon, and Malaysia (McCrae, 2007). McCrae 
(2007) explains that this item performs less well as a marker of Openness in African cultures in 
Botswana, Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Uganda, and Nigeria, possibly due to measurement problems 
(e.g., acquiescence, and the fact that the NEO-PI-R was not given in their native language). That 
this one item seems to embody a more visceral or physiological response leads us to suspect 
that it may transcend culture and instead capture a human universal. Perhaps the feeling of 
chills when one is moved is universal, whereas what is likely to give us chills varies by culture.
4.  In some cultures more than five factors are needed to fully describe personality. In 
cultures where this happens such as Hungarian and Korean (Saucier & Goldberg, 2001), these 
“All people must be responsive 
to danger, loss, and threat; 
interact with others to some 
degree; choose between the 
risks of exploration and the 
limitations of familiarity; weigh 
self against social interest; 
balance work and play.”
McCrae and John (1992, p. 100)
THINK ABOUT IT
Does speaking in another 
language bring out different 
aspects of personality? Sur-
prisingly, research suggests 
that it can!
67

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
additional factors tap culture-specific forms of Extraversion or Agreeableness, or aspects of 
social evaluation (power, morality, attractiveness) that are particularly salient in that culture 
(Benet-Martínez & Oishi, 2008). Because interpersonal relations are so important, natural lan-
guages have developed many terms for getting along with others. No wonder that these traits 
may fall out on two factors in other languages, but on only one in English (McCrae & Costa, 
2008)! In this way Agreeableness and Conscientiousness may tap both universal and culture-
specific aspects of personality (Benet-Martínez & Oishi, 2008).
5.  We need more research on indigenous personality to truly see which aspects of per-
sonality are universal and which are unique to a culture. Although McCrae and Costa (2008) 
claimed that indigenous traits, traits originating in another language and which are unique 
to a culture, are “interpretable as characteristic adaptations within the Five Factor Theory” 
(p. 169), others counter that both questionnaire measures and adjectival measures may miss 
indigenous terms (Benet-Martínez & Oishi, 2008). To remedy this problem, some researchers 
start with the lexicon of a specific culture and, like Allport and Odbert (1936) did with English, 
see how many factors best account for personality in these cultures. This kind of research is 
rare, but it has identified both convergence with the five factors and some culturally unique 
factors (Benet-Martínez & Oishi, 2008; Cheung & Leung, 1998).
To understand some of these issues—as well as all of these findings on personality traits in 
other cultures—let’s consider some of this research in depth in the next section.
Personality Traits Cross-Culturally: Personality Traits in China
To understand how complicated it can be to test the five factors in other countries, consider 
current research in a country very different from America: China. China has a collectivistic 
culture, stemming from roots in Confucianism which emphasizes the fundamental related-
ness among individuals (Ho, 1998). When the five-factor model is tested using the NEO-PI-R, 
the results replicate the FFM for 29 out of the 30 facets (McCrae, Costa, & Yik, 1996). Indeed, 
Chinese college students scored virtually identical to their American counterparts on this 
translated version of the NEO-PI-R (McCrae et al., 1996). However, the facet of Actions, part 
of Openness, did not load on any of the factors. This may indicate problems with the scale, 
a genuine difference among the Chinese on this dimension, or simply measurement error 
(McCrae et al., 1996).
Some have wondered if the basic replication of the five-factor model is due to the structure 
of the questionnaire, the ubiquitous influence of Western culture in the world, or some other 
explanation (McCrae et al., 1996). A more convincing case for the universality of the five fac-
tors would be to start with traditional Chinese values—that is, traits important within Chinese 
culture—and see how these attributes apply to Chinese personality (McCrae et al., 1996).
© Jjspring/Dreamstime.com
Chinese culture emphasizes 
avoidance of conflict, support 
of traditions and norms, and 
a family orientation. How well 
will the five factors describe 
Chinese personality?
68

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
Cheung et al. (1996) developed the Chinese Personality Assessment Inventory (CPAI) 
by using a sort of lexical approach by identifying descriptions of Chinese personality from 
literature, proverbs, surveys, and previous research. This led to the identification of 10 trait 
clusters unique to the Chinese personality and not covered by Western personality inven-
tories: Harmony (tolerance, contentment), Ren Qing (traditional relationship orientation 
emphasizing give and take and connectedness), Modernization (vs. traditionalism), Thrift 
(vs. extravagance), Ah-Q mentality (defensiveness; named for Ah-Q, a well-known fictional 
Chinese character depicted in a classic novel), Graciousness (courtesy, kindness, patience, 
vs. meanness), Veraciousness-Slickness (trustworthiness), Face (reputation, social approval), 
Family Orientation, and Somatization (expression of distress via physical symptoms). When 
factor-analyzed, four factors emerged: Dependability (responsibility, practical-mindedness, 
graciousness), Chinese Tradition (Harmony, Ren Qing, Face), Social Potency (leadership, 
adventurousness), and Individualism (self-orientation, logical, Ah-Q mentality). These are 
not quite the five factors we might expect!
However, perhaps focusing solely on traditional Chinese values is too narrow a conceptu-
alization of Chinese personality. What would happen if we factor-analyzed them all together? 
After all, if Chinese personality is composed of both culturally unique and human universal 
aspects this would be the way to find them.
Cheung et al. (2001) conducted a follow-up study in which they factor-analyzed responses 
to the CPAI and the Chinese NEO-PI-R together. They found six factors: five from the five-factor 
model, as one might expect, plus an indigenous personality factor they called Interpersonal 
Relatedness made up of Harmony, Ren Qing, Ah-Q, and Face. This factor taps the indigenous 
factors identified in the earlier study, traits that are uniquely encouraged in Chinese culture and 
not in Anglo-Saxon cultures: instrumentality of relationships, propriety, avoidance of conflict, 
support of traditions, and compliance with norms (Benet-Martínez & Oishi, 2008).
This six-factor model not only explained the variance among the responses of college 
students, but it also applied equally well to a sample of nonstudent workers. However, the 
six-factor model did not apply as well as the traditional five-factor model did to non-Chinese 
undergraduate students. Here, items from the sixth indigenous factor loaded among the regular 
five factors. This study supports the existence of a uniquely Chinese personality factor beyond 
the Western five factors (Cheung et al., 2001).
Perhaps you’ve noticed that much of the research just reviewed on personality traits, 
including personality traits in other cultures, is all based on self-report. How can we be sure 
that we are capturing what people are really like and not what people claim to be like? This is 
one of many problems with self-report data, but alas, self-report is often the most direct way 
to find out what a person is like. However, personality psychologists have developed a way to 
compensate for the weaknesses of any single research method, a topic we take up in the section 
on Research Methods Illustrated.
Research Methods Illustrated: Triangulation and Types of Data
I
n ancient times, people would use triangles to measure distance or the height of objects such 
as the pyramids. Imagine a triangle connecting three points: two on one side of a river and one 
on the other side. By measuring the angles and applying geometry, they could figure out how 
far away or high up an object was. This image applies to research in personality: By using different 
methods we can better understand what a person is like than by using only one method. This 
process of using multiple methods within a single program of research is called triangulation 
(Brewer, 2000; Campbell & Fiske, 1959). Each method compensates for the weaknesses of the others.
There are four kinds of data that a personality psychologist might collect. The most obvious is 
to administer personality tests or other self-report questionnaires, called self-report data or S data. 
S data include objective personality tests, interviews, narratives, life stories, and survey research 
(John & Soto, 2007). Even experience sampling procedures, where participants are “beeped” via 
pagers or cell phones to fill out a questionnaire, are examples of S data. In one study, participants 
were beeped every 2 hours, on average, to fill out a self-esteem questionnaire and mood measures. 
Participants who had generally high self-esteem but which fluctuated over the day were angrier 
and more hostile than participants with stable self-esteem (Kernis, Grannemann, & Barclay, 1989).
THINK ABOUT IT
Might we see evidence 
of this sixth factor in the 
depiction of people in Chi-
nese art, literature, TV shows, 
plays, and movies?
69

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
We could also place a person in controlled situations that test them to see how they respond. 
Test data or T data include information from testing situations (not to be confused with objective 
or self-report personality tests, which are examples of S data). T data come from experimental 
procedures or standardized measures that have objective rules for scoring a person’s performance. 
Examples of T data include intelligence tests, task persistence, and reaction times (John & Soto, 
2007). The Implicit Association Test (IAT; Greenwald & Farnham, 2000), a computerized reaction-
time test, for example, has been used to measure self-esteem. Some projective tests, such as 
the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT; Morgan & Murray, 1935) or the Rorschach Inkblot Test 
(Rorschach, 1921), which use standardized stimuli and have explicit scoring guidelines, are also 
examples of T data.
Instead of relying on only self-reports, we might collect observation data or O data by watching 
people in the laboratory or in their daily lives. One can also collect O data by coding behavior from 
photos or video. Information from knowledgeable informants including friends, spouses, parents, 
children, teachers, interviewers, and the like are also examples of O data (John & Soto, 2007). Indeed, 
this is exactly what Costa and McCrae (1992) and others have done to measure the five factors. 
Another study found that the facial expression of women in their college yearbook photos predicted 
their marital satisfaction and personal well-being 30 years later (Harker & Keltner, 2001). Observing 
people’s actual behavior, even when it is captured in a photo or a video, gets around the problem of 
potential bias or memory problems in self-reports (Dunning, Heath, & Suls, 2004).
Finally, we could track down information about a person that is publicly available. Life data or 
L data include graduating from college, getting married, getting divorced, moving, in addition to a 
person’s socioeconomic status, memberships in clubs and organizations, number of car accidents, 
Internet activity, and similar life events (John & Soto, 2007). Researchers have used sources as varied 
as criminal records to measure antisocial behavior (Caspi, McClay, et al., 2005), counting bottles and 
cans in garbage containers to measure alcohol consumption (Webb, Campbell, Schwartz, Sechrest, 
& Grove, 1981), and counting the number of Facebook friends to measure social connectedness 
(Ellison, Steinfield, & Lampe, 2007).
Together, these four methods of data collection spell out LOTS, which should remind us to 
include lots of sources of data in our studies to maximize the validity of our research (John & Soto, 
2007). During World War II, the Office of Strategic Services (a forerunner of the CIA) set up a program 
to select the best candidates for espionage jobs behind enemy lines (Strategic Services, 1948). It 
collected S data, O data, and T data on the candidates.
Men and women were brought to a special assessment center where they filled out personality 
questionnaires (S data) and were interviewed (S data) and observed by psychologists who wrote 
a paragraph describing each candidate’s personality (O data). To ensure that the assessment staff 
would judge the candidates solely on their performance, they had no idea about the background of 
the candidates (a notable absence of L data).
They even put the candidates through special tests (T data) to see if they could tolerate stress 
and frustration such as getting their whole group over a large wall, building a wooden structure 
with recalcitrant workers (who were actually confederates of the assessment staff), staging a mock 
interrogation, and performing other tasks to see if the candidates could stand up to the emotional 
Lisa Schaffer
Photo by Office of Strategic Services (OSS)
The stress situation: An 
example of T data. Participants 
were given 12 minutes to 
develop a plausible cover 
story for an imagined crime. 
They were interviewed by a 
panel of interrogators who 
fired questions at them and 
jumped on any hesitations or 
inconsistencies in their stories, 
all while being observed and 
evaluated by psychologists.  
(Strategic Services, 1948, 
facing p. 212).
70

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
stress and the intellectual demands of keeping up a false identity while collecting information 
behind enemy lines.
Using all these kinds of data the assessment team rated each candidate on intelligence, 
physical ability, motivation, skill, and aspects of personality including emotional stability, 
leadership, and social relations (a combination of Extraversion and Agreeableness). They hoped 
to be able to track the actual performance of candidates to see which measures best predicted 
performance.
Despite the best efforts of the assessment staff—which included many notable 
psychologists such as Urie Bronfenbrenner, Donald Fiske, Clyde Kluckhohn, Henry Murray, 
Theodore Newcomb, Edward Tolman, and Kurt Lewin—the government was unwilling to reveal 
how a particular candidate fared in his or her eventual position due to security issues. The best 
the assessment team could do was to select promising candidates and to eliminate obviously 
unsuitable ones.
Although the Assessment Center failed in its original mission to develop a valid selection 
procedure for selecting spies, it stands today as a fascinating example of how triangulation—the 
use of multiple methods—can yield a more complete picture of a person.
Expression of Traits in Everyday Life
Our personality traits reveal themselves in lots of ways: body language, taste in decorating and 
in music, our online presence on the Internet, and also in the careers we choose—even if we 
happen to be the president of the United States! We can see the influence of traits in numerous 
ways in our everyday lives.
Personality Traits of Presidents
Do you have what it takes to be a great president? What does it take to be a great president? 
There is a long tradition in personality psychology of studying presidents, along with other 
famous people, both fictional and real, ever since Sigmund Freud psychoanalyzed the writings 
and speeches of Woodrow Wilson, the 28th president of the United States (Freud, 1967) and 
Leonardo Da Vinci (Freud, 1910/1964).
Using the five-factor model, Rubenzer et al. (2000) identified the traits of great presidents. 
To do this, they enlisted the help of presidential experts: biographers and people who had inter-
acted either professionally or personally with a president. Each expert filled out the NEO-PI-R 
(Costa & McCrae, 1992) as they thought their target president would. They were instructed to 
imagine what their subject was like in the 5-year period before he became president. In this way 
they hoped to get a valid measure of presidents’ personalities not confounded by the demands 
of the job or behavior in office so that each man’s personality could be correlated with his later 
performance as president. The number of raters per president ranged from 1 to 13 with an 
average of 4.2 raters per president. Where multiple experts rated a single president, their ratings 
were averaged into a single score.
Compared to the U.S. population at large, presidents tend to be more extraverted, less 
open to experience, and less agreeable. They score higher than the general population on the 
facets of achievement striving (Conscientiousness), and emotionality (Openness), but lower on 
psychological liberalism (Openness), morality (Agreeableness), and modesty (Agreeableness). 
In the words of Rubenzer et al. (2000):
[P]residents tends to be hardworking and achievement-minded, willing and 
able to speak up for their interests, and value the emotional side of life. They 
tend to trust in the traditional sources of moral authority, yet are willing to bend 
the truth and to bully or manipulate people to get their own way. They tend to 
see themselves as just as good as, and maybe better than, other people (p. 407).
Obviously, there is some truth to the stereotype of politicians as devious and bombastic! 
But what about truly great presidents? How do they compare to the general population? Ruben-
zer et al. (2000) gathered data from past studies of greatness. Historians often conduct polls 
assessing the ratings and ranking of the achievements of presidents and their overall historical 
THINK ABOUT IT
Why might low Agreeable-
ness be a useful trait for a 
president?
71

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
greatness. Presidents who are rated as truly great tend to be higher in Openness than the average 
person. This is particularly interesting for, as the authors pointed out, Openness is moderately 
related to general cognitive ability, suggesting that great presidents are smarter than average. 
Great presidents are aware of their feelings and are imaginative and more interested in art and 
beauty (artistic interests) than less successful presidents. They also tend to be willing to ques-
tion traditional values (psychological liberalism) and open to new ideas and trying new ways 
of doing things (intellect).
As for the other four factors, there were only small correlations between greatness and 
personality. Great presidents tend to be slightly more extraverted and conscientious and a little 
less agreeable than the average person. They are particularly likely to show assertiveness (a facet 
of Extroversion), perhaps as part of their leadership ability. Although showing sympathy for 
the less fortunate (Agreeableness), great presidents are no pushovers. They tend to score low 
on morality and cooperation (Agreeableness). The portrait emerges of a true politician who 
is not easily led but instead argues, tricks, or even lies when necessary (low in morality). From 
the Conscientiousness scale, it is no surprise that great presidents score higher in achievement 
striving and competence. Great presidents set high goals for themselves and the country and are 
willing to do just about anything to achieve them. Finally, Neuroticism was not related to great-
ness, so that historically great presidents can be well adjusted or neurotic. However, presidents 
who felt unable to cope with problems and who were upset by stress (vulnerability) tended to 
be given low ratings by historians.
Who would you consider to be our greatest president? When historians answer this ques-
tion, George Washington and Abraham Lincoln rise to the top of nearly every historical poll 
taken (Rubenzer et al., 2000). What makes these two presidents so special? Figures 1 and 2 show 
the distribution of scores of these two great presidents. Whereas Washington’s exceptionally 
high scores in Conscientiousness indicate that he had the traditional virtues of responsibility, 
dutifulness, self-discipline, as well as leadership (i.e., assertiveness, part of Extraversion) and 
courage (he scored exceptionally low on vulnerability to stress, part of Neuroticism), he scored 
low on friendliness (Extraversion) and sympathy (Agreeableness).
In contrast to Washington, Lincoln was higher in Agreeableness and indeed higher than 
the average president. His scores on Openness and Neuroticism are no surprise given that he 
suffered from bouts of depression (Rubenzer et al., 2000). He was particularly high in depres-
sion, anxiety, and in his awareness of feelings. Although he was high in achievement striving 
THINK ABOUT IT
Did the myth of Washing-
ton telling the truth about 
cutting down the cherry 
tree originate as a way of 
demonstrating his Consci-
entiousness trait?
Figure 1  Scores of George 
Washington on the NEO 
Personality Inventory 
Compared to the average 
president.  Source: Reprinted 
with permission from Rubenzer, 
S. J., Faschingbauer, T. R., & Ones, 
D. S. (2000), “Assessing the U.S. 
Presidents Using the Revised 
NEO Personality Inventory,” 
Assessment, 7(4), 403–420.  
Permission conveyed through 
the Copyright Clearance Center.  
U.S. T Score
Neuroticism
Extraversion
Openness
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
30
40
70
60
50
47
44
39
40
Washington
Avg. President
72
72

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
and self-efficacy, he tended to be disorganized (all facets of Conscientiousness). Despite his 
nickname of “Honest Abe” he was willing to stretch the truth (scoring low on morality) but 
was generally trusting of others (Agreeableness).
Many of the findings from this study are corroborated by related studies of personality and 
the presidency using different measures and methods (Kowert, 1996; Rubenzer et al., 2000; cf. 
Simonton, 1986; Winter, 2005; Young & French, 1996). This discussion about personality and 
presidents may have you wondering: What about our current president? Well, what do you 
think? What factors and facets do you think our president is notably high or low on? No doubt 
the answer to that question is lying in some researcher’s filing cabinet awaiting publication in 
a few years!
Music Preferences and Personality Traits
What’s your favorite type of music? Certainly, your choice of music reflects your personal taste, 
but is it related to your personality? Do people high in Neuroticism enjoy different kinds of 
music from extraverts? Interesting enough, Cattell wondered about this back in the 1950s and 
believed that musical choice reflected unconscious motives (Cattell & Anderson, 1953; Cattell 
& Saunders, 1954).
More recently, Rentfrow and Gosling explored how the personality traits of the five-factor 
model relate to musical taste (2003). First, they asked over 1,700 college students to take the 
Short Test of Music Preferences (STOMP). In this test, participants rate how much they enjoy 
different types of music on a 1 (Not at all) to 7 (A great deal) scale. The researchers then used 
factor analysis to identify the major types, or genres, of music (see Table 4).
Participants also filled out a series of personality questionnaires including the Big Five 
Inventory (BFI; John & Srivastava, 1999). The researchers correlated scores on the STOMP with 
scores on the BFI to see if there was a relationship between the kind of music college students 
liked and their personality traits.
What did they find? First, there were no gender differences in music preference. Men 
and women had similar tastes in music according to the STOMP test. Second, chronic mood, 
like being depressed, had no impact on what music the participants liked. Although college 
students might choose to listen to various songs depending on mood, overall there was no 
relationship between mood and the kind of music participants preferred. Finally, different 
personalities did indeed prefer different kinds of music (see Table 5).
Figure 2  Scores of Abraham 
Lincoln on the NEO Personality 
Inventory compared to the 
average president.  Source: 
Reprinted with permission from 
Rubenzer, S. J., Faschingbauer,  
T. R., & Ones, D. S. (2000), 
“Assessing the U.S. Presidents 
Using the Revised NEO 
Personality Inventory,” 
Assessment, 7(4), 403–420.  
Permission conveyed through 
the Copyright Clearance Center. 
U.S. T Score
Neuroticism
Extraversion
Openness
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
30
40
70
60
50
59
57
66
57
Lincoin
Avg. President
57
THINK ABOUT IT
What can you tell about a 
person from his or her favor-
ite songs?
73

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
As you can see, people who were high in Neuroticism did not like classical, jazz, folk, or 
blues, what the researchers called Reflective and Complex music. Or, to put it another way, 
emotionally stable people enjoyed this kind of music, especially those low in angry hostility and 
vulnerability (this later finding comes from a more detailed study of facets and genres by Zwei-
genhaft, 2008). Extraverts were particularly fond of the Energetic and Rhythmic music such 
as hip-hop, funk, soul, and electronica, and Upbeat and Conventional music such as country, 
religious, and pop, especially if they were high on excitement seeking or positive emotions (see 
also Dollinger, 1993; Rawlings & Ciancarelli, 1997; Zweigenhaft, 2008). This result makes sense; 
after all, where might you find a highly extroverted person on a Saturday night? Out clubbing 
with other extroverts!
What about people who were high in Openness? As you might expect, they liked the more 
cerebral classical and jazz music, part of the Reflective and Complex genre. This preference 
was related to scores on openness to fantasy, openness to aesthetics, openness to actions, and 
Table 5  Correlations Between Five-Factor Traits and Types of Music
Trait
Reflective  
and Complex
Intense  
and Rebellious
Upbeat  
and Conventional
Energetic  
and Rhythmic
Neuroticism
-.08*
.01
.07
-.01
Extraversion
.01
.00
.24*
.22*
Openness
.44*
.18*
-.14*
.03
Agreeableness
.01
-.04
.23*
.08*
Conscientiousness
-.02
-.04
.15*
.00
Note: Numbers in the table are correlations between traits and liking of music. Recall that correlations can be positive or negative. Higher numbers mean that there is a 
stronger relationship among the variables. Significant effects are noted by asterisks.
* = p 6 .05.
Source: Rentfrow and Gosling, 2003, Table 3, p. 1250 Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2003). The do re mi’s of everyday life: The structure and personality correlates of music 
preferences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(6), 1236–1256.
Table 4  Types of Music and Representative Songs From the Short Test of Music Preferences (STOMP)
Factors
Musical Genres
Representative Songs
Reflective and Complex
Blues
Ray Charles: “Ray’s Blues”
Folk
Bob Dylan: “Blowin’ in the Wind”
Classical
Mozart: “Marriage of Figaro,” Overture
Jazz
Miles Davis: “All Blues”
Intense and Rebellious
Alternative
Nirvana: “Verse Chorus Verse”
Heavy metal
Marilyn Manson: “Fight Song”
Rock
Jimi Hendrix: “Voodoo Child”
Upbeat and Conventional
Country
Johnny Cash: “Rusty Cage”
Religious
Praise Band: “Rock of Ages”
Pop
Christina Aguilera: “Don’t Make Me Love You”
Energetic and Rhythmic
Funk
James Brown: “Superbad Part 1”
Hip-hop/rap
Tupac Shakur (featuring Snoop Doggy Dogg): “2 
of Amerikaz Most Wanted”
Soul
Aretha Franklin: “Chain of Fools”
Electronica
DJ Shadow: “What Does Your Soul Look Like”
Source: Rentfrow and Gosling, 2003, Appendix, p. 1255–1256 Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2003). The do re mi’s of everyday life: The structure and personality correlates of 
music preferences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(6), 1236–1256.
74

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
openness to ideas (Zweigenhaft, 2008). These people also liked Intense and Rebellious music, 
especially if they were high on openness to values, but they disdained the Upbeat and Conven-
tional especially if they were high in openness to fantasy, aesthetics, ideas, and values (Zwei-
genhaft, 2008). Again, it makes sense that people who are open to new ideas and experiences 
would be attracted to the rebellious and turned off by the conventional, even when it comes 
to musical preferences (see also Dollinger, 1993; Rawlings & Ciancarelli, 1997). Similarly, they 
also liked bluegrass, world music, opera, punk, and funk, genres not part of the Rentfrow and 
Gosling (2003) study (Zweigenhaft, 2008). Finally, people who were high in Conscientiousness 
showed only a slight preference for the Upbeat and Conventional music, especially for people 
high in dutifulness or achievement striving (Zweigenhaft, 2008). Interestingly enough, many of 
these findings were replicated in a sample of college students from the Netherlands (Delsing, 
TerBogt, Engels, & Meeus, 2008).
Even the way people engage with music seems to be related to personality (Chamorro-
Premuzic & Furnham, 2007). People high in Openness, as measured by the NEO Five Fac-
tor Inventory (Costa & McCrae, 1992), tended to engage with music in a more intellectual 
way, concentrating on what they are hearing, enjoying analyzing complex compositions, and 
admiring the techniques of the musicians. In contrast, people high in Neuroticism, and low in 
Extraversion and Conscientiousness were more likely to engage with music in a more emotional 
way, for example, to change or enhance their mood. These people tended to feel emotional 
after listening to music, whether it be happy, sad, or nostalgic and they often associated specific 
memories with a particular song.
Do you know somebody who loves to listen to loud music with the bass turned up extra 
high? McCown, Keiser, Mulhearn, and Williamson (1997) looked at the relationship between 
preference for exaggerated bass and scores on the Eysenck Personality Inventory. They found 
that men, more so than women, and people high in Extraversion or Psychoticism enjoyed 
this music more so than introverts or people low in Psychoticism. The part about extraverts 
preferring the stimulation of a strong bass should come as no surprise knowing what we do 
about how introverts need less sensory stimulation than extraverts. Personality preferences for 
this type of music are particularly interesting, because exaggerated bass is a key component in 
club and rap music. The authors wondered if boosting bass might make less popular forms of 
music—like classical—more appealing to certain audiences.
What about musicians themselves? If there are personality differences in the kind of 
music people like to listen to, maybe rock musicians are different from, say, classical musicians. 
One early study found that pop musicians were slightly higher on Neuroticism and Psychoti-
cism (Wills, 1984) than the average adult. Any ideas how the average self-taught, guitar-
playing rocker around age 30 would score on Openness? What about Conscientiousness or 
Agreeableness? Gillespie and Myors (2000) recruited rock musicians from the metropolitan 
Sydney, Australia, area for their study. One hundred musicians took the NEO-PI-R (Costa 
& McCrae, 1992) and answered questions about their musical background. These musicians 
were high in all six facets of Neuroticism and Openness. Although they were about average 
in Extraversion, they were especially high in positive emotions and excitement seeking. In 
contrast, they tended to be low in Agreeableness, especially on the facets of trust, straight-
forwardness, and compliance, and low in all six facets of Conscientiousness! This is shown 
graphically in Figure 3.
Given how much of our personality we express in the music we like to play as well as listen 
to, perhaps we should swap our iPod playlists of musical favorites instead of astrology signs 
when making new friends.
Web Pages and Personality Traits
Living spaces, handshakes, musical preferences—is there any aspect of our behavior that doesn’t 
reflect our personality? What about our presence on the Internet, such as usernames and Face-
book pages; do these also reflect our personalities? They sure do—of course, they may reflect 
our true personality or they may reflect managed impressions specifically formulated to impress 
others (Gosling, 2008).
75

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
One study found a personality difference between people who blog and people who don’t 
(Guadagno, Okdie, & Eno, 2008). Bloggers tend to be higher in Neuroticism and Openness than 
nonbloggers. In particular, women who are high in Neuroticism are more likely to blog than 
more emotionally stable women.
Vazire and Gosling (2004) took the idea of online self-expression a bit further and judged 
people’s personalities from their personal web pages. They had trained experts rate 89 randomly 
selected websites listed in Yahoo!’s personal directory. Then they recruited web page owners 
to take part in their study. Web page owners rated themselves and their ideal selves on the five 
factors using the BFI. The researchers also recruited close friends of the owners so they could 
get an outside opinion of what the owners were really like. They used these ratings to judge the 
extent to which the web pages reflected what the owners were really like or if the page reflected 
what the owner wanted people to think they were like.
Figure 3  Scores of rock musicians on the NEO-PI-R.  Source: Adapted from Gillespie and Myors (2000, Figure 
1, p. 160). Reprinted with permission from Gillespie, W., & Myors, B. (2000), “Personality of rock musicians,” 
Psychology of Music, 28, 154–165.  Permission conveyed through the Copyright Clearance Center.
1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
z-score
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
N
E
O
A
C
N1
N2
N3
N4
N6
N5
E1
E2
E3
E4
E6
E5
O1
O2
O3
O4
O6
O5
A1
A2
A3
A4
A6
A5
C1
C2
C3
C4
C6
C5
What can you tell about this 
person from his web page?
Lisa Schaffer
76

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
What did they find? First, observers got clear impressions about web page owners. Raters 
not only agreed with each other, but they also could correctly judge a person’s Neuroticism, 
Openness, and Conscientiousness. Openness was the easiest trait to judge from web pages and 
was judged the most accurately.
Ratings of Extraversion and Agreeableness, although accurate, were closer to page owners’ 
ideals than to their true selves. After statistically removing the effect of “reality” (i.e., friends’ 
ratings) from owners’ ratings, Extraversion and Agreeableness were still judged accurately by 
observers. That is, raters tended to see a person as extraverted or as agreeable as the person 
wanted them to see it, rather than the true level of these traits. These results suggest that per-
sonal websites reflect both the owners “true” selves with a bit of impression management—of 
how outgoing and likable one is—thrown in. If these findings have you wondering about what 
your own web presence says about you, check out the Personality Of Everyday Life box below.
Careers and Personality Traits
Do you have what it takes to be a successful astronaut? Would you like to be a clinical psychologist? As 
you might imagine, there are personality differences among various careers and personality assess-
ment is an important part of personnel selection in many businesses. Take the career of astronaut.  
A successful astronaut must be able to work effectively and smoothly with others in the complex 
and highly stressful setting of a tiny spacecraft in close quarters far away from loved ones back 
What does your online presence say about your personality?
Are you on Facebook? Twitter? Nearly everybody has some sort of an online presence 
these days, whether it is a personal web page, a blog, a social media account, or a photo on 
a school or employer’s page. The research reviewed in this chapter suggests that our web 
presence reflects our personality, even without our awareness. What does your presence 
say about you?
First, consider what impression your e-mail address or username creates. One study 
found that people low in self-esteem picked usernames such as emotional_void_82 and 
empty_heart, whereas kingtony23 and gorgeouschic were all high in self-esteem. Similarly, 
people’s perceived competence also shone through—intentionally or unintentionally—in 
their usernames. Compare stevethetennisace and smartguy to spacystacy and sloppycrazy-
andweird (Gosling, 2008).
Next, how does your page’s layout and design as well as content reveal your personal-
ity? Recall that observers easily and accurately judged users’ levels of Openness, Consci-
entiousness, and Neuroticism from web pages. Other studies show that bloggers reveal 
their personalities by their choice of words. People high in Neuroticism use words related 
to negative emotions, whereas people high in Extroversion use words related to positive 
emotions. People low in Agreeableness use more swear words than people high in Agree-
ableness who refer more to community. People high in Conscientiousness write about 
achievement more so than people low in Conscientiousness (Yarkoni, 2010).
Of course, Facebook profiles are an easy way for people to get to know you (Evans, 
Gosling, & Carroll, 2008). Visitors are particularly likely to accurately judge personality 
when users talk about their beliefs, joys, embarrassing moments, proud moments, spiritu-
ality, heroes, and when they link to funny videos. Sharing information about least-favorite 
things is not as helpful in understanding what a person is like.
In sum, are you comfortable with what your online presence says about you? By 
making yourself aware of the subtle and not-so-subtle ways self-esteem and traits are 
manifested through online media, you can create a good impression and yet not reveal 
more than you intend.
The Personality of Everyday Life
77

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
on Earth. The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) must routinely process 
2,000 to 4,000 applications to select the less than 1% who will eventually be selected as astro-
nauts (Musson & Helmreich, 2004). What are the characteristics that make up the “right stuff”?
According to research reviewed by Musson and Helmreich (2004), successful astronauts—
as well as anybody, both women and men, who must live and work in confined and dangerous 
settings with others—must be high in independence, achievement striving, and goal orientation 
(what they call instrumentality); high in interpersonal warmth, sensitivity, and concern for 
others (expressivity); and low in arrogance, egotism, complaining, nagging, and verbal sniping 
(interpersonal aggression). In their analysis of the personality traits of aspiring astronauts, these 
characteristics correlated with high Conscientiousness, high Agreeableness, and low Neuroti-
cism. Applicants who were low in Agreeableness were clearly not cut out for space travel with 
longer missions and more diverse crews traveling and working in space.
What about professionals, police officers, managers, and sales and semiskilled workers? 
Which traits are related to success in these occupations? In a meta-analysis of over 117 studies, 
Barrick and Mount (1991) found that among the five factors, only high Conscientiousness was 
related to high performance ratings, productivity, training proficiency, low job turnover, and 
higher salaries. This held true across all of the occupations studied for both men and women 
including engineers, architects, attorneys, accountants, teachers, doctors, ministers, police offi-
cers, clerical workers, farmers, flight attendants, medical assistants, truck drivers, and grocery 
clerks. In addition, being extraverted was helpful for managers and people in sales; introverts 
were just as likely as extroverts to be working in any of the other occupations. In addition, 
Openness and Extraversion were related to job training proficiency.
Rubinstein and Strul (2007) looked for personality differences among doctors, lawyers, 
clinical psychologists, and artists in Israel using a Hebrew version of the NEO-FFI (McCrae & 
Costa, 1989). Even though the men and women who volunteered for this study were all Israeli 
professionals, their results were about what we might expect: Artists were the highest in Open-
ness to Experience, but they were only significantly higher than doctors, who scored the lowest 
in this trait. Artists and lawyers were the highest in Neuroticism whereas doctors were the most 
emotionally stable (clinical psychologists fell in between these groups but did not differ signifi-
cantly from the others). No differences were found among these occupational groups in Consci-
entiousness, supporting previous findings 
that high Conscientiousness is related to 
occupational success regardless of specific 
job (Barrick & Mount, 1991).
A study of sales personnel at a chain of 
health clubs in Great Britain echoed these 
results (Furnham & Fudge, 2008). Sales asso-
ciates, regardless of gender, were more likely 
to make their quota of selling memberships 
if they were high in Conscientiousness and 
Openness, and low in Agreeableness. The 
authors surmised that people high in Open-
ness may have a more positive attitude and 
open mind that helps them succeed at job 
training (cf. Barrick & Mount, 1991), which 
may then lead to better on-the-job perfor-
mance. Contrary to popular opinion, the best 
salespeople are not necessarily those who 
are sociable and enjoy the company of oth-
ers. Rather it is the hardworking, persistent, 
go-getter—putting in long hours making 
cold calls, following up with clients—who is 
most likely to succeed. And being a bit tough, 
pushy, and dogged (low in Agreeableness) 
doesn’t hurt either!
© holbox/Shutterstock
THINK ABOUT IT
Of the five factors, which 
one do you think is most 
closely related to job 
success?
Does it take special 
personality traits to be an 
astronaut?
78

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
Personality Development Over the Life 
Span: Continuity, Change, and Coherence
Think back to what you and your friends were like in junior high. Can you imagine what 
some of your friends might be like today? Will you be amazed at how much some people have 
changed? Will some people have not changed at all? Will some people be into different activi-
ties and seem like different people, but underneath it all, are really still the same? Of course, 
we know that everybody matures as they grow and move through adolescence and into young 
adulthood—or do they?
This mash-up of personality consistency, personality change, and personality coherence 
is what makes school reunions both fun and scary. The research on personality across the life 
span reflects the experience of running into old friends: Some people change, some people 
don’t, and some aspects of personality are bound to change because people mature. How can 
we make sense of all this?
First, when psychologists talk about development they refer to both continuity and 
change in personality (Roberts, Wood, & Caspi, 2008). When we say that personality develops 
as we grow from childhood into adulthood, we are saying that some aspects of personality 
stay the same—perhaps how sociable or nervous a person is—whereas some aspects are dif-
ferent: say how much self-esteem a person has or how thrill seeking he or she is. Continuity or 
consistency in personality means that the amount of a trait stays about the same. Personality 
change means that the amount of trait is different, either increased or decreased from what it 
was previously. The difference is often one of degree rather than kind; people generally don’t 
change into something opposite of what they were. That is, an extroverted child is not likely 
to grow into an introverted adult nor is an anxious, nervous child likely to become a calm, 
even-tempered adult.
Notice that we can talk about how traits change or are consistent in a group of people 
or we can talk about how a person changes or remains consistent over time. People may 
change or remain consistent compared to what they were like at a previous point in their 
lives or they may change or remain consistent relative to their peers or some other com-
parison group.
Even when traits stay the same, we wouldn’t expect a trait, say thrill seeking, to look the 
same in a 6-year-old as in a 16-year-old or a 26-year-old. A sensation-seeking 10-year-old 
might enjoy exploring the neighborhood on bicycle whereas a sensation-seeking 26-year-old 
might enjoy extreme sports. This is an example of personality coherence in the trait of sensa-
tion seeking.
Personality coherence is when the underlying trait stays the same but the way it is expressed 
changes (Roberts et al., 2008). We can think of personality coherence as a type of continuity. 
However, to identify true examples of personality coherence researchers must have a theory 
for explaining how the two different behaviors are manifestations of the same underlying trait 
(Caspi & Roberts, 2001).
Donald Miserandino
Dominick Miserandino
“Everybody thinks that as you 
age, you get old. You don’t. 
Inside I still feel like I’m 18. I 
just don’t look it anymore.”
An 80-year-old woman to her 
grown grandson
SEE FOR YOURSELF
In what ways is your person-
ality different from when 
you were in elementary 
school?
SEE FOR YOURSELF
In what ways is your person-
ality the same as when you 
were in elementary school?
Are they the same people 
today (right) as they were 40 
years ago when they were 
in college (left)? Personality 
remains remarkably 
consistent across the life 
span. However, against this 
backdrop of consistency, 
personality changes in 
important ways.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
In what ways do you act 
differently now compared 
to when you were in 
elementary school? Can 
any of these differences be 
explained by personality 
coherence?
79

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
For example, children who 
show high task persistence in 
childhood show high achieve-
ment orientation in adulthood. 
You can see that working hard 
and striving to excel are two 
aspects of an underlying desire 
for accomplishment. Shyness 
also shows personality coher-
ence: Shy children live at home 
with their parents longer and 
marry older than their socially 
bolder peers (Caspi, Elder, & 
Bem, 1988).
Aggression is another per-
sonality variable that shows 
strong coherence from child-
hood to adulthood. People 
who had been rated by their 
peers as aggressive at age 8 were 
more likely to commit serious 
criminal acts by age 30. Men 
who were rated as aggressive as 
children were also more likely 
to engage in physical aggres-
sion and abuse their spouses 
by age 30 (Huesmann, Eron, 
Lefkowitz, & Walder, 1984; see 
Figure 4).
The only way to answer the question of how do people develop over their lives is to, well, 
take a bunch of people and follow them over their lives! This is called a longitudinal study. In 
the last 10 years or so there has been an increase in longitudinal studies and so our knowledge 
of how people—and traits—change across the life span has increased as well.
A good metaphor to explain how personality changes over time is to picture a harbor 
filled with different kinds of boats (Roberts, 2010). Some boats might sit lower or higher in 
the water depending on their shapes, sizes, or cargo. The action of the tide coming in and 
going out lifts and lowers all the boats in the water at the same time. This action is like gen-
eral change or mean-level change which affects nearly everybody as we grow from infancy 
to adulthood. The boats are like individual people. Differences between the boats in how 
Donald Miserandino
Donald Miserandino
Dimitrios Miserandino
I love a parade. Personality 
coherence in Extraversion: 
Although the activities may 
change, this extrovert was 
always a joiner and loved the 
limelight whether it was Girl 
Scouts in elementary school 
or folk dancing as an adult.
Figure 4  Personality 
coherence in aggressiveness: 
Mean seriousness of criminal 
acts committed by age 30 as 
a function of peer ratings of 
aggression at age 8.  Source: 
From Huesmann et al. (1984, 
Figure 3, bottom, p. 1125). 
Huesmann, L. R., Eron, L. D., 
Lefkowitz, M. M., & Walder, L. O. 
(1984). Stability of aggression 
over time and generations. 
Developmental Psychology, 20, 
1120–1134.
50
40
30
20
10
0
Mean Seriousness of
Criminal Acts by Age 30
Low
Medium
High
Age 8 Aggression Group
Low
Medium
High
Males
Females
80

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
they sit in the water is like individual change in personality. Each boat can change in its 
own unique way due to the actions of the owner who can change the load of a boat so that 
it rises and falls independently of the other boats.
To understand how personality develops over the life span, we need to understand both 
general change and individual change. Let’s consider three questions about personality devel-
opment (Roberts, 2010). First, how consistent are people over time? This is a general question 
about the nature of personality. Second, how much do people change in general? This is a 
question about general change in personality traits that affect nearly everybody. Third, how 
and why do individuals develop in their own particular ways? This question looks at individual 
differences in consistency and change over the life course.
How Consistent Are People Over Time?
Personality is relatively enduring over time; in fact, people become more consistent in their 
traits across the life span (Roberts et al., 2008). Adults are more consistent in their traits than 
teens who are more consistent than children, a finding verified by many longitudinal studies 
(Caspi & Silva, 1995). This makes sense; after all, children are still in the process of developing 
their personalities.
Personality is about as consistent as cognitive ability; more consistent than income, blood 
pressure, and cholesterol levels; and much more consistent than happiness and self-esteem 
across a person’s lifetime (Roberts, 2010). The peak of consistency is around age 50, a fact that 
is surprising given that some notable theorists thought that personality was set in childhood 
or adolescence. Sigmund Freud, for example, believed that personality was set by age 5, and 
Erik Erikson believed that personality was set by the end of adolescence. Despite popular 
notions of an adolescent identity crisis or a midlife crisis, people remain consistent in their 
traits through these times. In fact, there are no periods of particularly dramatic personality 
change anywhere in the life course (Caspi & Roberts, 2001; Caspi, Roberts, & Shiner, 2005; 
Roberts et al., 2008).
During this time, and even beyond, the traits of the five factors are the most consistent of 
all, showing great consistency across all five traits regardless of type of test (self-report, projec-
tive tests) or rater (self, observer; Roberts et al., 2008). Traits of the five factors start to become 
consistent at age 3 and increase in consistency until after age 50. This means that personality is 
remarkably consistent, despite the turmoil of the teen years or the massive changes that come 
with starting careers and families in the 20s. These results illustrate the saying “the child is 
father to the man.”
Even though the boats are all 
different, the tide coming in 
and going out affects all boats 
in the same way. Individual 
people have different 
personalities, but general 
change such as maturity, or the 
aging process, affects us all.
© Landysh/Dreamstime.com
81

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
For example, based on a meta-analysis, a statistical summary of effects from 152 longitu-
dinal studies, Roberts and DelVecchio (2000) came to two conclusions. First, stability increases 
over the life span, a finding illustrated in Figure 5. Second, personality traits measured closer in 
time tend to be more similar than traits measured further apart in time.
According to reviews and meta-analyses, traits of the five factors show moderate consis-
tency across the life span (Ardelt, 2000; Bazana & Stelmack, 2004; Roberts & DelVecchio, 2000; 
Schuerger, Zarrella, & Hotz, 1989; see Table 6). According to one study, the overall consistency 
in all five factors across 81 studies suggests that about 29% of the variance in your personality 
at one point in time can be explained by your personality at another point in time (Bazana & 
Stelmack, 2004).
William James (1890) observed that “in most of us by the age of thirty, the character has set 
like plaster, and will never soften again” (p. 121), a view once endorsed by many trait theorists 
(Costa & McCrae, 1994). However, we now know that this isn’t so. Personality change does not 
stop, nor does it slow down after age 30. Instead, personality shows small gradual changes with 
age (Srivastava, John, Gosling, & Potter, 2003). Personality is consistent—but not unchanging.
Think about it: If less than a third of your personality stays about the same, then what hap-
pens to the other two-thirds? That’s where mean-level change and individual change comes in. 
Even as personality stays consistent, there are subtle changes as we grow and develop, even into 
adulthood and old age. Psychologists now believe that personality is like an open system that 
can change throughout life in response to events and environments. Further, once our person-
alities respond to accommodate these new experiences, we tend to remain at this new level of 
development for the remainder of our lives. In this way personality change is subtle at any one 
point in time, but cumulative over the life course (Roberts & Mroczek, 2008).
How Much Do People Change in General?
Here we are asking about normative change (Roberts, 2010). Across both cross-sectional and 
longitudinal studies there are similar changes in personality that, like how an incoming tide 
affects all the boats in the harbor, affect everybody. The period of greatest normative change 
occurs in young adulthood between ages 20 and 40. In general, people become more consistent, 
as we just saw, and better with age.
Specifically, people become more assertive, warm, and self-confident (aspects of Extra-
version), agreeable (nice, nurturing), conscientious (responsible, organized, hardworking, 
rule-oriented), and emotionally stable (calm and relaxed). Openness increases early in life—
paralleling being in school—and declines in old age, suggesting that maybe you can’t teach an 
old dog new tricks. Emotional stability increases early in life and remains constant whereas 
Figure 5  Consistency across 
the life course at various 
age periods. Personality 
becomes more consistent with 
age.  Source: From Roberts and 
DelVecchio (2000, Figure 1,  
p. 15). Roberts, B. W., & 
DelVecchio, W. F. (2000). 
The rank-order consistency 
of person- ality traits from 
childhood to old age: 
A quantitative review 
of longitudinal studies. 
Psychological Bulletin, 126(1), 
3–25. Copyright American 
Psychological Association. 
Reprinted with permission.
0.6
0.8
0.7
1
0.9
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.1
0.2
0
Rank-Order Trait Consistency
0–2.9
Age Periods
3–5.9
6–11.9
12–17.9
22–29
30–39
40–49
18–21.9
50–59
60–73
82

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
Agreeableness increases later in life. Agreeableness and Conscientiousness continue to rise into 
old age (Roberts, Walton, & Viechtbauer, 2006).
In an extensive meta-analysis of 92 longitudinal studies, Roberts, Walton, and Viechtbauer 
(2006) found evidence for continuity and change in six traits over the life course (see Figure 6). 
They reached three conclusions. First, all six traits showed changes past the age of 30 and 
indeed four of them—social vitality, Agreeableness, Emotional Stability, and Conscientious-
ness—showed significant changes in middle or old age. This suggests that personality continues 
to develop across the life course. Second, contrary to popular belief, young adulthood (ages 
20 to 40) and not adolescence appears to be a key period in life when personality traits change 
the most. Finally, except for Openness and social vitality, which decreased with age suggesting 
that we experience less positive emotions and sociability, all of the other traits became more 
positive with age. As we age, we become more self-confident, agreeable, emotionally stable, and 
conscientious.
This same pattern of results was echoed in a study using a different design. In a cross-
sectional study, the researchers compared responses of 132,515 adults aged 21 to 60 who 
responded to an Internet survey (Srivastava et al., 2003). One interesting difference, how-
ever, was that in this study, women but not men were more emotionally stable after age 
30; older men had the same level of emotional stability as younger men at age 30. They 
also found that people were less open in old age. These results also supported the idea that 
personality continues to change slowly but steadily with age, showing small to moderate 
systematic changes.
This pattern of older adults showing lower levels of Neuroticism, Openness, and some 
aspects of Extraversion, and higher levels of Agreeableness and Conscientiousness than college 
students, also holds for samples outside the United States including Germany, Italy, Portugal, 
Croatia, and South Korea (McCrae et al., 1999).
Whereas consistency implies that there is a similarity in personality from one age to 
another, it also suggests that there is a change. One reason why personality changes from child-
hood to adulthood and from young adulthood to old age is that people mature. Therefore, a 
certain amount of change in personality is due to maturation (Roberts et al., 2008). In particu-
lar, we develop higher levels of assertiveness, self-control, responsibility, and emotional stability, 
especially from age 20 to age 40 (Roberts, Walton, & Viechtbauer, 2006). These changes may be 
a result of positive experiences in work and personal relationships.
For example, working longer hours or attaining higher status increases aspects of Extraver-
sion (dominance, independence, and self-confidence) and Conscientiousness (self-discipline, 
competence, and responsibility) in both men and women (Clausen & Gilens, 1990; Elder, 1969; 
Roberts, 1997; Roberts, Caspi, & Moffitt, 2003). Positive work experiences may also help people 
become more emotionally stable (Roberts & Chapman, 2000; Scollon & Diener, 2006; Van 
Aken, Denissen, Branje, Dubas, & Goossens, 2006). For women, higher status at work is also 
Table 6  Average Consistency in Personality Over Time: Stability Coefficients
Trait
Everybody
Women
Men
Neuroticism
.52
.56
.52*
Extraversion
.59
.63
.60*
Openness
.52
.48
.55*
Agreeableness
.48
.51
.46*
Conscientiousness
.50
.50
.50
Overall Personality
.54
.56
.55
Note: Stability coefficients range from 0 to .99, with higher numbers indicating a higher correlation in the trait among various 
time periods. Average stability in the trait across intervals from as short as less than 3 years to as long as 25 years.
* Significant gender difference in consistency. From a meta-analysis of 81 studies using 95 different samples.
Source: From Bazana and Stelmack (2004).
THINK ABOUT IT
How might maturation 
affect a person’s levels  
of Neuroticism and 
Conscientiousness?
83

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
associated with an increase in masculinity and a decrease in femininity (Kasen, Chen, Sneed, 
Crawford, & Cohen, 2006).
A stable and happy home life can also change people for the better. In particular, both 
men and women in fulfilling relationships during their young adult years become less neurotic 
(Robins, Caspi, & Moffitt, 2002; Roberts & Chapman, 2000; Scollon & Diener, 2006), and more 
Figure 6  Accumulated changes in traits over the life course. The graphs show the average change (d) in each trait from the 
beginning to the end of a decade, added together over the life course. Social dominance and social vitality reflect two different 
aspects of Extraversion. Social dominance includes dominance, independence, and self-confidence in social situations; social 
vitality includes sociability, positive affect, gregariousness, and energy level.  Source: From Roberts, Walton, and Viechtbauer 
(2006, Figure 2, p. 15).
Social Vitality
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
Cumulative d Value
80
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0.2
Age
Social Dominance
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
Cumulative d Value
80
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0.2
Age
Agreeableness
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
Cumulative d Value
80
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0.2
Age
Conscientiousness
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
Cumulative d Value
80
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0.2
Age
Emotional Stability
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
Cumulative d Value
80
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0.2
Age
Openness to Experience
20
30
40
50
60
70
10
Cumulative d Value
80
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
0.2
Age
84

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
conscientious (Lehnart & Neyer, 2006; Roberts & Bogg, 2004) and agreeable (Lehnart & Neyer, 
2006) over time. Even men who married or remarried in late middle age or old age also showed 
a decrease in Neuroticism with age (women were not studied; Mroczek & Spiro, 2003).
As you can see, all of these normative changes are in the direction of greater maturity and 
better functioning. The years from a person’s 20s to 40s are when most people are busy with 
the twin concerns of family and career. This is the age when most people seek out a partner and 
start a family. At the same time, people are choosing and starting careers and their life’s work. 
Young people are also building identities by making commitments to social institutions such 
as work, marriage, family, and community. These new roles come with expectations, demands, 
and reinforcements that shape a person into becoming more socially dominant, agreeable, 
conscientious, and less neurotic (Roberts et al., 2008). Social investment in the conventional 
roles of adulthood, such as career or family, leads to normative increases in dominance, consci-
entiousness, and emotional stability in most people. These changes are small over short periods 
of time, but are quite large over longer periods.
Our personality determines which situations, environments, experiences, or social roles we 
choose. Once we choose an environment or role, the new situation reinforces these aspects of 
our personalities. The most common effect of life experiences on personality development is that 
our choice of environments and roles strengthens the very personality traits that selected them 
in the first place. Life experiences that elicit behaviors corresponding to a person’s disposition 
are validating and rewarding, often leading to similar behaviors and similar choices in the future.
The saying “life happens while you are busy making other plans” can apply to personality:  
By making plans and acting on them, we both express and develop our personalities, often 
without awareness of how we’ve changed. This type of personality change isn’t likely to make 
headlines or be the topic for a movie-of-the-week, but it is quite powerful nevertheless.
This explains why personality change in adulthood is most often slow and steady, as a 
result of being exposed to situations of our own choosing and less often as a result of a so-called 
life-altering experience. Life-altering experiences are actually very rare, and their impact on 
personality perhaps a bit overblown. In truth, people respond to devastating events with more 
of their true selves: Individual differences are magnified when people face unpredictable or 
ambiguous situations without guidelines for how to respond (Caspi & Moffitt, 1993).
How and Why Do Individuals Develop  
in Their Own Particular Ways?
Have you heard the saying “there’s an exception to every rule”? When it comes to normative 
influences (the tide) on personality (the boats in a harbor) some people do not experience these 
normative changes. There are individual differences in personality development (Mroczek & 
Spiro, 2003; Roberts, 1997; Roberts & Mroczek, 2008). Basically, nonnormative experiences make 
for nonnormative development. For example, women who continued to smoke marijuana into 
midlife (Roberts & Bogg, 2004) and people who engaged in stealing, fighting, or coming to work 
drunk (Roberts, Walton, Bogg, & Caspi, 2006) did not increase in Conscientiousness and actually 
decreased in emotional stability in their adult years. By consciously taking a stand against social-
izing roles—wife, mother, responsible employee—some people exposed themselves to different 
experiences and missed out on the kinds of personality development that most people go through.
In fact, researchers have identified reliable individual differences in personality change 
during all stages of life (Roberts et al., 2008): childhood and adolescence (De Fruyt et al., 2006; 
Pullman, Raudsepp, & Allik, 2006), young adulthood (Donnellan, Conger, & Burzette, 2007; 
Vaidya, Gray, Haig, & Watson, 2002), middle age (Van Aken et al., 2006), and old age (Steunen-
berg, Twisk, Beekman, Deeg, & Kerkhof, 2005). These individual differences in personality 
development are important because personality traits are linked to important outcomes in 
work, physical health, mental illness, and longevity (Roberts & Mroczek, 2008).
For example, in a study of college students aged 20 to 32 enrolled in an introduc-
tory psychology class, participants varied in how much they changed in positive emotions 
(related to Extraversion) and negative emotions (related to Neuroticism) over the subsequent 
2.5 years (Vaidya et al., 2002). Those who had significantly decreased in negative emotions 
THINK ABOUT IT
What kinds of situations 
might impact the personal-
ity of people who are about 
to graduate college?
THINK ABOUT IT
What are nonnormative 
experiences that might 
cause people to develop 
differently from their peers?
85

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
had experienced fewer negative events, such as a family member passing away, receiving a 
failing grade in a course, becoming a regular smoker, or experiencing divorce or separation of 
their parents, compared to their peers. Those who had significantly increased in positive emo-
tions had experienced more positive events in their lives, such as receiving academic honors 
or awards, getting promoted at a job, getting engaged, getting accepted into grad school, or 
getting married, compared to their peers. This study illustrates that we do not merely react to 
life experiences, but we may internalize them and become changed by them bit by bit until over 
longer periods of time we become permanently changed by them.
In another study, both men and women who increased in hostility as they developed from 
college age to about age 40 experienced a range of negative outcomes. People who increased 
in hostility over their adulthood, compared to those who either maintained or decreased their 
level of hostility, showed increased obesity, inactivity, social isolation, lower income (women 
only), worse physical health, greater risk of depression, and the perception that their work and 
family life was changing for the worse (Siegler et al., 2003).
Similarly, personality change in midlife was associated with successful adaptation to the 
day-to-day concerns of this periods of life: well-being of family members, work stress, and life 
satisfaction (Van Aken et al., 2006).
Finally, in a longitudinal study of male veterans aged 43 to 91, those who became more 
neurotic over time showed a 32% increase in mortality over men whose level of Neuroticism 
decreased (Mroczek & Spiro, 2007). In fact, the direction of change in neuroticism over the 18 
years of the study—whether it was increasing or decreasing—was more important than whether 
it was high or low to begin with (see Figure 7). Among men who were high in Neuroticism, 
those who were changing to become less neurotic lived longer than men whose neuroticism 
was increasing.
Where Does Adult Personality Come From?
There is still one big unanswered question: Where does adult personality come from? We know 
that children have differing temperaments, or individual differences, that emerge during the first 
year of life (Buss & Plomin, 1994). But how and when do these temperaments develop into the 
five factors of Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness? To 
answer this question, we need longitudinal studies that follow infants from birth to adulthood. 
Given that researchers have only recently reached consensus on the five-factor model, it will be 
a good while until we can collect the right evidence to answer this question. However, there is 
little doubt that childhood temperament does predict to adult personality (Caspi, Roberts, & 
Shiner, 2005; Caspi & Shiner, 2006; Caspi & Silva, 1995; Digman, 1989; Shiner & Caspi, 2003).
Figure 7  Survival curves for 
four groups of men according 
to neuroticism level and 
change over time, controlling 
for age, physical health, and 
depression.  Source: From 
Mroczek and Spiro (2007, Figure 
1, p. 375). Mroczek, D. K., & Spiro, 
A. (2007), “Personality change 
influences mortality in older 
men,” Psychological Science, 
18(5), 371–376.  Reprinted 
by permission of Blackwell 
Publishing.
Years
0
4
8
12
16
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Probability of Survival
a
b
c
d
Neuroticism
Rate
a Low-Average Decreasing
b High-Average Decreasing
c Low-Average Increasing
d High-Average Increasing
THINK ABOUT IT
Are babies born with a per-
sonality? With personality 
traits? With all five factors?
86

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
For example, in one study researchers identified five temperament groups among a sample 
of 3-year-old children in New Zealand, based on psychologists’ ratings of the child’s behavior 
(Caspi & Silva, 1995). The groups were Well-adjusted, Undercontrolled, Inhibited, Confident, 
and Reserved. When the children were 18 years old, the five groups showed differences in 
their personalities. Compared to Well-adjusted children, the Undercontrolled children at age 3 
were higher in impulsivity, danger seeking, aggression, and interpersonal alienation at age 18, 
whereas Inhibited children scored low on these variables. Confident children scored high in 
impulsivity. Reserved children scored low on dominance. The Well-adjusted group grew up to 
be, as you might imagine, typical teenagers. By age 3, children have developed individual dif-
ferences in behavior that are manifested as personality differences by age 18 and last to at least 
age 26 (Caspi, Harrington, et al., 2003).
Then and Now: The Grant Study of Harvard Graduates
Only a longitudinal study can address the kinds of questions we’ve been asking about personality 
in this section. As mentioned earlier, a longitudinal study follows the same group of participants 
over time—from as short as a few months to as long as many years (Fleeson, 2007; Mroczek, 
2007). Currently, only a handful of studies exist that have followed participants for more than 
20 years, and far fewer than that have followed children from birth to the end of their lives.
The longest running study is the study of gifted children begun in 1921 by Lewis Terman 
and slated to continue until the participants are no longer living (Holahan & Sears, 1995; Ter-
man, 1926). Another famous one is the Mills Longitudinal Study of Women, following women 
from the 1958 and 1960 graduating classes from Mills College, a small, private college in Cali-
fornia, to the present, when many of the original participants are in their 70s (Helson, 1967; 
Helson & Wink, 1992; Roberts & Helson, 1997). These women came of age and lived through 
some of the most exciting and volatile times of the last century including the civil rights move-
ment and the women’s movement. Many of the findings discussed in this section come out of 
the study of the Mills women (e.g., Roberts & Bogg, 2004; Roberts & Chapman, 2000; Roberts 
& Helson, 1997).
Perhaps the most famous longitudinal study of all is the Grant Study of Harvard Gradu-
ates. The study began in 1938 when Arlie Bock, frustrated that medicine focused on pathology, 
wanted to find out what combination of physical and mental health led to a successful life 
(Shenk, 2009). The department store magnate W. T. Grant supported the fledgling research 
project for the first 10 years, which is why today the study is known as the Grant study. They 
recruited the most physically and mentally healthy members of the Harvard classes of 1942 to 
1944 to volunteer for a lifetime of close scrutiny from a medical, psychological, and social stand-
point. They even questioned the men’s parents and close family members. The participants 
received questionnaires every 2 years, physicals every 5 years, and interviews every 15 years. In 
more recent years participants have been put through MRIs, DNA testing, and even a request 
that they donate their brains to the study upon their death.
As the men grew into middle age, many of the study participants achieved great success 
including President John F. Kennedy; former editor of the Washington Post Ben Bradlee; four for-
mer senate hopefuls; one presidential cabinet member; and one best-selling novelist. At the same 
time, almost a third of the participants struggled with mental illness by age 50 (Shenk, 2009).
Psychiatrist George Vaillant, who took over the study in 1967, sought not so much to find 
out what kind of troubles these men faced over a lifetime, but rather how they responded and 
adapted to what occurred in their lives (Vaillant, 1977, 2002a). For Vaillant, the most inspiring 
cases were often those where the men had overcome great hardships.
Vaillant studied the kind of defense mechanisms the men used to cope. He identified 
the classic Freudian defense mechanisms and many others (Vaillant, 1977). Defenses ranged 
from the most unhealthy such as paranoia or passive aggressiveness, to the healthiest or most 
mature adaptations such as altruism, humor, and sublimation. Vaillant found that as people 
matured, their defense mechanisms matured too. Between ages 50 and 75 the men used altru-
ism and humor more frequently and passive aggressiveness and fantasy less frequently. Mature 
adaptations turned pain and emotional turmoil into occasions for achievement, creativity, and 
connections with others.
“To be able to study lives in 
such depth, over so many 
decades, it was like looking 
through the Mount Palomar 
telescope.”
George Vaillant as cited in Shenk 
(2009, p. 38)
87

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
Amazingly, the accomplishments of men from the original Grant study can be predicted 
from their personality during college (Soldz & Vaillant, 1999). Out of the five factors, traits 
measuring Conscientiousness were the best predictors of the men’s lives across a variety of 
domains including personal adjustment, family relationships, work success, and health behav-
iors. Conscientious young men grew into successful and better-functioning older men.
However, neuroticism at age 65 was a good indicator of poor adjustment across various 
domains as a result of, presumably, difficulties in life since college. Neurotic older men had 
more psychiatric visits, depression, smoking, and use of drugs and alcohol in the course of their 
lives as compared with more emotionally stable men.
Based on their results, the authors surmise that Extraversion in young adulthood drove 
career and monetary success, whereas Neuroticism was related to adjustment and the inability 
to quit smoking in adulthood. Openness was related to adult creativity. Low Openness was 
related to a more conservative traditional and authoritarian political outlook and to psychiatric 
usage in adulthood, although this may reflect a greater willingness to explore their inner lives 
or an experience with psychological distress.
Today, the original Grant study is part of the Harvard Study of Adult Development. Due 
to the efforts of then-Harvard Law professor Sheldon Glueck, the study was expanded in 1939 
to include a control group of nondelinquent boys who were growing up in the inner-city 
neighborhoods of Boston from 1940 to 1945. In the 1970s Vaillant and his colleagues joined 
the project, now called the Glueck study, and conducted follow-ups with these men (Vaillant, 
1995). At one point, Vaillant even tracked down and interviewed women from the Terman 
study (Vaillant & Vaillant, 1990)! These additional cohorts were Vaillant’s way of broadening 
his sample so that he could draw conclusions about adult development that were not limited 
to a sample of upper-class, college-educated, elite men.
A journalist asked Vaillant what he had learned from his research on the Grant study. 
“That the only thing that really matters in life are your relationships to other people” he replied 
(Shenk, 2009, p. 46). From the Glueck study he learned that industriousness in childhood, 
things such as holding a part-time job, taking on chores, or joining sports teams, was a more 
important predictor of adult mental health than all other factors including family relationships. 
From the women of the Terman study he learned that whereas social interventions can increase 
a person’s chance of success, they can also destroy human potential (Vaillant, 2002b). Despite 
having superior intellectual potential and educational advantages, only 5% of the Terman 
women went on to successful business or professional careers.
At the heart of these findings are biology, environment, personality, and how experiences 
in our lives affect who we are and what we grow up to be—the kinds of questions that can only 
be answered with longitudinal studies like the Grant study.
© Visions of America LLC/Alamy
What will you be like at your 
40-year high school reunion?
88

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
Personality Traits: Theoretical  
and Practical Conclusions
There you have it: all about traits in a nutshell! From the original lexical studies to modern 
factor-analytic studies, from the ancients to the cutting-edge research of today, understand-
ing traits is key to understanding people. In particular, the identification of key dimensions 
of personality—recognized in a simple handshake, as we saw in the opening of this chapter—
and their applicability across cultures has inspired lines of research on nomothetic universals, 
indigenous personality traits, and the numerous ways we express our personality, our traits, in 
all aspects of our lives.
Of course, there is much more to personality than trait descriptions, as the side quote sug-
gests. (See Block, 1995, 2001, 2010 for an impassioned critique of the five factors in particular.) 
We might well wonder, for example, how we form an identity or how we are influenced by 
social roles (McCrae & Costa, 1996). One commentator noted that trait models are essentially 
“psychology of the stranger” because they describe personality at only a superficial level. In 
particular, McAdams (1992, p. 229) noted, trait models fall short when it comes to
	 1.	 Accounting for personality functioning and personality differences between people beyond 
the surface level.
	 2.	 Adequately describing the richness of persons’ lives.
	 3.	 Providing a true causal explanation for human behavior rather than circular reasoning 
(“Raj is outgoing because he’s extraverted. We know he’s extraverted because he likes to 
meet new people.”).
	 4.	 Addressing the social context of human experience—that is, how the ways we interact with 
others affect who we are.
	 5.	 Explaining personality integration and organization within an individual.
Only by studying other aspects of personality—genetics, physiology, identity, motivations, 
to name only a few—can we come to a complete understanding of human personality.
Chapter Summary
In this chapter we questioned whether the five-factor model leaves out important traits such as 
intelligence, religiosity, and sexuality and culture-specific traits such as philotimo, filial piety, 
and amae. In some cases these traits are indeed an omission (e.g., spiritual transcendence); in 
other cases these traits are a combination of facets and factors (e.g., sexuality), or abilities (e.g., 
intelligence). However, the most important question is whether the five factors adequately 
account for personality in other cultures.
We discovered that there are culture-specific indigenous personality traits that are not 
accounted for by the five factors (e.g., philotimo in Greece, filial piety in China, amae in Japan). 
Sentence or questionnaire measures of the five factors replicate across many cultures and lan-
guages, but adjectival measures are more sensitive to cultural differences. In particular, Open-
ness varies across cultures and some cultures are best described by more than five factors. 
Research that combined measures of the five factors with Chinese indigenous trait terms found 
the five factors plus a unique sixth factor tapping the traditional Chinese values of Harmony, 
Connectedness, Defensiveness, and Social approval.
People express their traits in many aspects of their everyday lives including handshakes, 
music preferences, web pages, and careers, including being the president of the United States.
To study individuals in depth, psychologists use multiple methods, called triangulation, 
in which they use LOTS of different methods including L data, O data, T data, and S data to 
understand personality. They also use longitudinal designs to study people across time. Lon-
gitudinal studies such as the Grant Study of Harvard Graduates let us draw conclusions about 
personality consistency, change, and coherence over the life course.
“We are fully prepared 
to admit that personality 
psychologists have been 
concerned with many aspects 
of human nature beyond 
enduring dispositions . . . and 
we agree with commentators 
who note that the five-factor 
model does not and cannot 
provide a complete model of 
personality.”
McCrae and Costa (1996, p. 65)
Go online for more 
resources to help you 
review.
Study and Review
on mysearchlab.com
89

Personality Traits: Practical Matters
Through these studies, we now know that personality is consistent over time, and that consis-
tency increases with age. The traits of the five factors are about as consistent as cognitive abilities 
are, and show consistency across measures and raters as well as over a lifetime. By age 3 children 
have developed individual differences in temperament which develop into traits in adulthood.
Against this backdrop of consistency, people do change over the course of a lifetime. In 
particular, we mature, showing more Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Emotional Stabil-
ity, and some aspects of Extraversion (assertive, warm, self-confident) as we enter into old 
age, but less Openness and other aspects of Extraversion (positive emotions, sociability, 
and vitality). People’s personalities change the most between ages 20 to 40, as they take 
their place in the adult world of work, family, and community. At the same time, there are 
individual differences in consistency and change, some related to important health outcomes 
and well-being.
Traits are but one aspect of human personality, perhaps only scratching the surface of 
understanding what people are like.
Review Questions
	 1.	 What traits may be missing from the five-factor model? Are they traits or abilities or some-
thing else? If they are traits, can they be accounted for by some combination of factors and 
facets of the five-factor model?
	 2.	 What are indigenous personality traits? What do we know about universals in human per-
sonality and about the impact of culture on personality? How many factors best account 
for personality in China? How would you describe these factors?
	 3.	 What is triangulation? What four kinds of data do psychologists use to understand per-
sonality? Give commonly used examples of each.
	 4.	 In what ways do we express personality traits in our everyday lives?
	 5.	 What is development? What is personality consistency, personality change, and personality 
coherence?
	 6.	 How consistent are people over time? What traits are particularly consistent over the life 
span?
	 7.	 How much do people change in general? What traits are particularly likely to change over 
the life span?
	 8.	 Are there individual differences in personality development? How does adult personality 
develop out of childhood temperaments?
	 9.	 What is a longitudinal study? What are some famous longitudinal studies? What have we 
learned about human personality from these longitudinal studies?
Key Terms
Openness
Spiritual transcendence
Sexy Seven
Philotimo
Filial piety
Amae
Indigenous traits
Ren Qing
Ah-Q
Interpersonal Relatedness
Triangulation
S data
T data
O data
L data
Development
Continuity
Consistency
Change
Personality coherence
Longitudinal study
Mean-level change
Individual change
Meta-analysis
Normative change
Maturation
Temperaments
90

77
PERSONALITY 
ASSESSMENT
What Makes a Good Personality Test?
Test Reliability: Generalizability Across Time, Items, and Raters
Test Validity
Test Generalizability
Research Methods Illustrated: Is the NEO-PI-R a Good Personality Test?
Personality Tests
Types and Formats of Personality Tests
Self-Report Tests
Performance-Based Tests
Response Sets
Personality Tests and Selection
Integrity Testing
Success Stories
Legal Issues
The Personality of Everyday Life: What can they ask you on a job interview?
Then and Now: Personality Assessment and Matchmaking
Chapter Summary
Review Questions
Key Terms
Read the Chapter on 
mysearchlab.com 
© Jofelle P. Tesorio/picture alliance/ANN/Newscom
From Chapter 4 of Personality Psychology: Foundations and Findings, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. Copyright © 2012 by 
Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
91

Personality Assessment
H
ave you ever taken a personality test on the Internet? According to some of these tests, 
your favorite candy bar, city, ice cream flavor or even the way you eat an Oreo can 
reveal your hidden personality. What is the difference between legitimate personal-
ity tests used by psychologists and the ones you find on the Internet? Amazingly, the need for 
standards in the measurement of personality had its start at a nightclub in the late 1940s way 
before the Internet made these sorts of tests so popular.
After a long, hard day of working with clients at a Veterans Hospital psychologist Bertram 
Forer went to a nightclub for a bit of relaxation (Forer, 1949). He was approached by a man who 
purported to assess people’s personality from a sample of their handwriting. The psychologist 
declined, and offered to administer the graphologist a Rorschach inkblot test instead. Insulted 
and hurt by the psychologist’s skepticism of his talents, the graphologist said he had “scientific 
proof” that his method was valid: Clients confirmed the accuracy of his interpretations. The 
psychologist was not impressed. He replied that a blindfolded psychologist could give at least 
as good a reading!
Forer went back to his introductory psychology class and conducted a little experiment. 
Instead of giving students the true results of the personality test he had recently administered, 
he gave every member of the class the exact same feedback (see Table 1). He asked students to 
rate on a 0 (poor) to 5 (perfect) scale how accurate a description of their personality the feedback 
was. He found that all but one member of his class thought the description was a perfect or 
nearly perfect estimation of their true personality.
How is it that different people can believe that the same exact feedback describes them per-
fectly? The same way that people can believe the feedback from a nightclub graphologist in the 
1940s and Oreo-cookie-eating tests on the Internet in the 2010s. These fake personality tests rely 
on general feedback that can apply to nearly anyone and the public’s goodwill to play along with 
and not question too closely the contents of these tests, rather than scientific evidence. So, how do 
we know when a personality test is accurate or not? That’s where personality assessment comes in.
Personality assessment is the measurement of the individual characteristics of a person. 
Though there are many types of methods that researchers use to study personality, the most 
commonly used are personality tests (see Table 2). 
There are many uses of personality assessment beyond the laboratory. Psychologists may 
gather and evaluate information about a person from various sources including personality 
tests, interviews, biographical material, and other people for hiring decisions, job placement, 
diagnosis, or development of a case study (Wiggins, 2003). In clinical settings, personality 
assessment may be used to develop models of disorders, design intervention programs, monitor 
treatments, evaluate treatments, and to make diagnoses (Meyer et al., 2001).
“You have to study the people 
and the ones that measure up 
are not always the ones you 
expect.”
American author Walter Lord
Table 1  A Little Something for Everybody?
“You have a great need for other people to like and admire you. You have a tendency to be critical of yourself. You have a great deal 
of unused capacity which you have not turned to your advantage. While you have some personality weaknesses, you are generally 
able to compensate for them. Your sexual adjustment has presented problems for you.
Disciplined and self-controlled outside, you tend to be worrisome and insecure inside. At times you have serious doubts as to 
whether you have made the right decision or done the right thing. You prefer a certain amount of change and variety and become 
dissatisfied when hemmed in by restrictions and limitations.
You pride yourself as a independent thinker and do not accept others’ statements without satisfactory proof. You have found it 
unwise to be too frank in revealing yourself to others. At times you are extroverted, affable, sociable, while at other times you are 
introverted, wary, reserved. Some of your aspirations tend to be pretty unrealistic. Security is one of your major goals in life.”
Note: How well does this describe your personality? If you are like most people, you will find this an accurate description of your personality. The trouble is, it is so general 
that it accurately describes nearly everybody! The fact that people readily believe such feedback is called the Barnum Effect.
Source: Forer, B. R. (1949), “The fallacy of personal validation: A classroom demonstration of gullibility,” The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 44(1), 118–123.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Take a personality test that 
you find on the Internet 
from a dubious source (e.g., 
Facebook). Are the results 
descriptive of your person-
ality or so general that they 
could apply to anybody?
92

Personality Assessment
Table 2  Assessment Methods and Measures Used in Personality Research
Type of Measure
% of Psychologists Who Reported That They 
Have Used the Measure
Self-report scales and questionnaires
100%
Judgments of self and others
99
Behavioral observation
89
Informant reports
86
Behavioral responses
81
Other judgment tasks (e.g., of stimuli)
79
Structured interviews
76
Narrative/open-ended questionnaires
74
Experience sampling
65
Implicit measures
64
Memory tasks
62
Reaction time
61
Autonomic arousal
57
Judgments of groups/nations/cultures
43
Hormone levels
36
Neuroimaging (fMRI, etc.)
32
Molecular genetics/DNA testing
26
Note: Prominent personality psychologists (N = 72) were asked if they had ever used the method in their work.
Source: Adapted from Robins, Tracy, and Sherman (2007, Table 37.1, p. 676). Reprinted with permission from Robins, R. W., Tracy, 
J. L., & Sherman, J. W. (2007), “What kinds of methods do personality psychologists use? A survey of journal editors and editorial 
board members,” In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of Research Methods in Personality Psychology, p. 
673–678 (New York, NY: Guilford).  Permission conveyed through the Copyright Clearance Center.  
In this chapter we consider what makes a 
good personality test and how people answer 
personality tests, and see how the results of 
personality tests have been used by busi-
nesses to select the right person for the right 
job. Along the way, we will take a close look at 
a few types of personality tests that are used 
by personality psychologists today.
What Makes a Good 
Personality Test?
According to standards set up by professional 
organizations in education and psychol-
ogy, including the American Psychological 
Association, the developers of a personality 
test must demonstrate that the test is valid 
and reliable, and specify the conditions, 
populations, and cultures the test applies to 
(American Educational Research Associa-
tion, American Psychological Association, & 
The Barnum Effect, named 
for famed showman 
P. T. Barnum, suggests that 
people falsely believe that 
invalid personality tests are 
good personality assessments 
when they contain “a little 
something for everybody” like 
a great circus.
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs 
Division, Washington, D.C. (LC-USZC4-921)
93

Personality Assessment
National Council on Measurement in Education, 1999). Test developers must also provide theo-
retical background and research evidence confirming (or disconfirming) that the test is related 
to certain outcomes. Where possible, developers should make sure that the results obtained are 
meaningful, and not just due to biased responding on the part of test-takers. Furthermore, this 
evidence should be published in scientific journals, where it has been reviewed and accepted 
by other experts in the field (see Clark & Watson, 1995; John & Benet-Martínez, 2000; Simms 
& Watson, 2007, for how to develop and validate a test).
The biggest difference between a personality test you might find on the Internet (“Does 
your personality match your favorite animal?” “What eating an Oreo cookie reveals about your 
personality”) and what you find in journals or purchase from a recognized publisher is that 
legitimate personality tests have reliability, validity, and generalizability, backed by research 
evidence that is available for public scrutiny.
When we have a good test, we know that we will be able to replicate a certain score (or come 
close enough, allowing for measurement error) and trust that the test has a particular meaning, 
which allows us to make inferences about behavior, a construct, or other variables (John & Soto, 
2007). When evaluating a test, we should ask ourselves: What does this test measure? Is this test 
reliable? For what purpose is this test valid? (Smith & Archer, 2008). The answers to these three 
questions will tell us about the test’s reliability, validity, and generalizability.
Test Reliability: Generalizability Across Time, Items, and Raters
Reliability is a prerequisite for validity. We cannot know the correct time with an unreliable 
watch (Smith & Archer, 2008). A measure must first be consistent in order to be a valid repre-
sentation of an underlying theoretical construct. Reliability is an estimate of how consistent a 
test is: A good test gives consistent results over time, items, or raters (see Table 3).
Reliability describes the extent to which test scores are consistent and reproducible with 
repeated measurements (Cronbach, Rajaratnam, & Gleser, 1963; John & Soto, 2007). These 
measurements may be repeated at different times, across multiple items, or using multiple judges 
or observers. We want to know that a test gives consistent results in all of these situations: across 
time, across items, and across raters. These are all kinds of reliability (Smith & Archer, 2008).
One way of checking to see if a test has temporal consistency reliability is to have respon-
dents take the test a second time to see if their scores are similar (Cronbach, 1947). Of course, 
when demonstrating test–retest reliability we need to be careful that participants are not 
merely remembering what they originally said in the first test-taking session. We also need to 
be careful that there are no practice effects, where participants perform better merely because 
they’ve seen the test before. To eliminate all of these effects, we want the second test to be far 
enough removed in time so that there is no memory or practice effects, yet not so much later 
that our participants have changed in the interim (Campbell & Stanley, 1966).
One way of checking internal consistency reliability is to see if different items of the test 
give similar results. In the early days of psychological testing developers would make up two 
versions of a test that were comparable and checked to see that the scores on the parallel forms 
of the test were similar—parallel-forms reliability (Cronbach, 1947). Sometimes they would 
split a test in half and see if test-takers’ scores on one half correlated with scores on the other 
half, to demonstrate split-half reliability (Cronbach, 1947). Today, most researchers rely on a 
statistic called Cronbach’s alpha (a) (Cronbach, 1951).
Table 3  Generalizability Across Time, Items, and Raters
Type of Consistency
Type of Reliability
Facet of Generalizability
Temporal consistency
Test–retest
Across time
Internal consistency
Parallel forms
Across items
Split-half
Cronbach’s alpha
Rater consistency
Interrater reliability
Across raters
Source: Trochim W. M. K. (2006). Research methods knowledge base, 3/e. Cincinnati, OH: Atomic Dog Publishing.
“I made my own assessment of 
my life, and I began to live it. 
That was freedom.”
Fernando Flores, Chilean  
politician
THINK ABOUT IT
Why is peer review an 
important part of the valida-
tion process for personality 
tests?
94

Personality Assessment
Imagine taking the correlation between the scores of two halves of a test. Now imagine 
calculating the average correlation of all possible halves of the test. That is what Cronbach’s 
alpha reliability estimates: the generalizability of the score from one set of items to another 
(John & Soto, 2007).
Because an unreliable measure makes it harder to find a true effect, researchers will try to 
make sure that their measures have an alpha of .70 to .80, and even higher when designing tests 
that will be used to compare or judge individuals, like IQ tests (Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994). 
Here, alphas should be greater than .9 and, ideally, at least .95. However, this is not a hard-and-fast 
rule; it is up to researchers to decide if their measures are good enough depending on the goals 
of their research (Cortina, 1993; John & Soto, 2007). Good researchers will provide a discussion 
of their rationale for accepting or rejecting an alpha when they publish their research findings.
To illustrate, suppose a researcher wants to measure Neuroticism. She constructs the scale 
in Table 4. This scale will have a high alpha, but it may lack validity. That is, it may not ade-
quately represent the concept of Neuroticism. Recall that Neuroticism includes the facets of 
anxiety, angry hostility, depression, self-consciousness, impulsiveness, and vulnerability (Costa 
& McCrae, 1992). Given the theory behind the scale, we would not expect the scores of the vari-
ous facets to correlate too highly with each other. However, we would expect high alphas among 
the eight questions tapping a single facet like anxiety. Of course, we would need to measure 
more than arachnophobia!
We also want to be sure our measures are reliable across multiple raters (John & Soto, 
2007). To check for interrater reliability we might have two separate judges rate the personality 
or behavior of a third person. Researchers will often calculate the average correlation among 
the scores of all raters or the percentage agreement among raters. If the raters are consistent 
in their judgments, then these correlations ought to be high. If there is disagreement among 
raters, it could mean that the construct is ambiguous or too broad, the measure is problematic, 
or that the raters misunderstand what they are judging. The researcher will need to rethink his 
or her operationalization of the construct, revise the measure, or work with the raters to clear 
up any confusion to improve the reliability of their ratings. Again, good researchers will report 
interrater reliability and how it was achieved in their reports.
For example, consider the study where observers tried to judge people’s personality based 
on what their bedrooms looked like (Gosling et al., 2002). Observers rated the personality of 
occupants using the five factors. Depending on the factor, the average correlation of observers’ 
ratings ranged from a low of .08 for Neuroticism, to a high of .58 for Openness, suggesting that 
observers were more likely to agree in their judgment of Openness than Neuroticism from the 
appearance of people’s bedrooms.
Test Validity
Validity is the extent to which a test measures what it is supposed to measure (Loevinger, 1957). 
Because there are many ways to investigate this question—Does the test correlate with other 
tests? Does it predict behavior? Does it predict some future outcome?—there are many kinds 
of validity. A test has validity if it is grounded in research evidence, that is, if it correlates with 
some standard (Loevinger, 1957). The exact standard or the kind of research evidence depends 
on the specific type of validity a researcher wishes to demonstrate.
“[E]verything that we do as 
scientists comes back, in the 
end, to the importance of 
being valid.”
Personality researchers Oliver 
P. John and Christopher J. Soto 
(2007, p. 489)
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Some professors of very 
large classes use multiple 
forms of the same test. What 
kind of reliability must these 
tests have?
Table 4  Redundancy Department: Example of a Scale With High Internal Consistency but With Questionable 
Validity
I am afraid of spiders
I get anxious around creepy-crawly things
I am not bothered by insects (reverse scored)
Spiders tend to make me nervous
Note: This scale may be a good measure of fear of insects, but not a very good measure of Neuroticism.
Source: John and Soto (2007, p. 471). Reprinted with permission from John, O. P., & Soto, C. J. (2007), “The importance of being 
valid,” as appeared in R. W. Robins & R. C. Fraley (Eds.), Handbook of Research Methods in Personality Psychology, p. 461–494 (New 
York, NY: The Guilford Press).  Permission conveyed through the Copyright Clearance Center.  
THINK ABOUT IT
What kinds of questions 
would measure anxiety? 
Angry hostility?
95

Personality Assessment
Every test aims to measure an underlying concept called a construct, which derives from a 
theory. Therefore, ultimately, every test must have construct validity and successfully measure 
the theoretical concept it was designed to measure (Loevinger, 1957; Simms & Watson, 2007). 
For example, the Eysenck Personality Inventory is designed to measure Extraversion, Neuroti-
cism, and Impulsivity, three dimensions that Eysenck theorized to be genetic, biological, and 
determined by our physiology (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1975).
A test has face validity when it appears to measure the construct of interest (Cronbach, 
1960). For example, you might reasonably figure out that a test that asks about suicide ide-
ation, mood, feelings of sadness, and changes in appetite is measuring feelings of depression. 
This is an example of a test with high face validity. However, with neuropsychological tests 
or tests asking about how one interacts with other people it would be harder to see exactly 
what concept the test is measuring. These are examples of tests with low face validity (Smith 
& Archer, 2008).
Face validity is not the most convincing type of validity. However, it is useful under two 
conditions. First, face validity is important for personnel testing, or other situations where the 
cooperation and motivation of the test-taker can affect the results of a test (Smither, Reilly, 
Millsap, Perlman, & Stoffey, 1993). When a test has face validity, respondents view the content 
of a test as fair and relevant to some situation or particular outcome, like job performance 
(Wiggins, 1973). Test-takers try harder and take a test more seriously if they can see how a test 
is related to the content of a job (Chan, Schmitt, DeShon, Clause, & Delbridge, 1997). When 
test items seem obscure to job applicants, they may view the test as busy work or a waste of their 
time. However, depending on the purpose of the test, test-takers might purposely respond inac-
curately, such as presenting themselves as better or worse off than they really are, or to present 
themselves in a favorable light (Smith & Archer, 2008). Researchers often disguise the content 
of a test to lessen the possibility that respondents might try to fake their answers, compromising 
face validity to establish other kinds of validity (Holden & Jackson, 1979).
A second useful condition for face validity is when researchers are developing a new measure 
of a concept. Often, they will think of items that appear to measure what they want the test to mea-
sure. Then they will administer their test to respondents and see which items are actually related 
to the trait or concept the researcher wants to measure. When it comes to test validity, substance is 
more important than looks. That is, we need evidence to support the validity of a test. Face validity 
is not good enough; there must be other kinds of validity for a test to be considered valid.
Criterion validity determines how good a test is, by comparing the results of the test to 
an external standard like another personality test or some behavioral outcome. For example, a 
THINK ABOUT IT
What behavioral outcomes 
should a test measuring 
extraversion and introver-
sion correlate with in order 
to have criterion-related 
validity?
THINK ABOUT IT
Why is face validity insuf-
ficient for establishing 
construct validity?
Which person do you think would score higher on the Need for Cognition Scale if the scale had construct 
validity?
© Thor Jorgen Udvang/Fotolia
© Pixland/Thinkstock
96

Personality Assessment
Table 5  The Need for Cognition Scale
  1.
I would prefer complex to simple problems.
  2.
I like to have the responsibility of handling a situation that requires a lot of thinking.
  3.*
Thinking is not my idea of fun.
  4.*
I would rather do something that requires little thought than something that is sure to challenge my thinking abilities.
  5.*
I try to anticipate and avoid situations where there is a likely chance I will have to think in depth about something.
  6.
I find satisfaction in deliberating hard and for long hours.
  7.*
I only think as hard as I have to.
  8.*
I prefer to think about small, daily projects to long-term ones.
  9.*
I like tasks that require little thought once I’ve learned them.
10.
The idea of relying on thought to make my way to the top appeals to me.
11.
I really enjoy a task that involves coming up with new solutions to problems.
12.*
Learning new ways to think doesn’t excite me very much.
13.
I prefer my life to be filled with puzzles that I must solve.
14.
The notion of thinking abstractly is appealing to me.
15.
I would prefer a task that is intellectual, difficult, and important to one that is somewhat important but does not require 
much thought.
16.*
I feel relief rather than satisfaction after completing a task that required a lot of mental effort.
17.*
It’s enough for me that something gets the job done; I don’t care how or why it works.
18.
I usually end up deliberating about issues even when they do not affect me personally.
Ratings were made using a -4 to +4 Likert scale, in which +4 = very strong agreement, +3 = strong agreement, +2 = moderate agreement, 
+1 = slight agreement, 0 = neither agreement nor disagreement, -1 = slight disagreement, -2 = moderate disagreement, -3 = strong disagreement, and 
-4 = very strong disagreement.  *Indicates reverse scored items.
Source: Cacioppo et al. (1984, Table 1, p. 307). Reprinted with permission from Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., & Kao, C. F. (1984), “The Efficient Assessment of Need for Cognition,” 
Journal of Personality Assessment, 48(3), 306–307.  Permission conveyed through the Copyright Clearance Center.   
THINK ABOUT IT
If a high sensation seeker 
and a low sensation seeker 
scored differently on a test, 
what kind of validity would 
this illustrate?
test of extraversion-introversion should distinguish people who seek out the company of others 
(extraverts) from those that don’t (introverts).
Take, for example, the Need for Cognition Scale (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982). This scale mea-
sures individual differences in the need for and enjoyment of effortful thinking (see Table 5). 
To establish criterion validity, Cacioppo and Petty (1982) compared two groups of participants 
assumed to differ in their preferences for heavy thinking: college professors and assembly-line 
workers. Sure enough, the college professors scored higher on the need for cognition test than 
the workers, suggesting that the test did indeed capture some important criteria that differed 
between the two groups, demonstrating criterion validity.
In addition to criterion validity, we might check to see if our test is similar to other tests 
of the same construct or to tests of related constructs. This establishes convergent validity 
(Campbell & Fiske, 1959). At the same time, we want to be sure that our test is different 
from tests of constructs that we theorize to be unrelated to the one we are interested in. We 
might look for discriminant validity to be sure that our test taps a different concept entirely 
(Campbell & Fiske, 1959). To establish construct validity we must demonstrate both what a 
test measures and what it doesn’t measure (John & Soto, 2007); neither type of validity alone 
is sufficient (Trochim, 2006). Essentially, we want to be sure our test converges with similar 
constructs and discriminates between dissimilar constructs (Trochim, 2006). For example, 
the Need for Cognition Scale, as Cacioppo and Petty (1982) hypothesized, correlated with 
open-mindedness but did not correlate with test anxiety or social desirability, demonstrating 
convergent and discriminant validity.
At the same time, a test ought to give feedback that is specific to a person or a group of 
people who share a certain characteristic. A test that gives feedback so general, superficial, or 
97

Personality Assessment
ambiguous that it could apply to virtually all people lacks predictive validity. Remember the story 
of Professor Forer, who gave all his students the same personality feedback? He demonstrated 
that people were quick to trust a test that gave general statements about their personalities.
The fact that people readily believe such feedback is called the Barnum Effect (Meehl, 1956; 
Snyder, Shenkel, & Lowery, 1977) after the circus showman P. T. Barnum, who believed that a 
good circus had a “little something for everybody.” Such tests lack construct validity because 
they distinguish no one. They give an illusion of accuracy when applied to a single individual 
(Wiggins, 1973). This is why people think that feedback from a nightclub graphologist, horo-
scopes, palm readers, and questionable personality tests applies to them.
Many invalid personality tests—especially those circulating on the Internet for fun—
provide feedback so general that they can apply to anybody, so that an unthinking reader can 
easily be taken in. Keep in mind our discussion of validity when you see one of these fake 
personality tests, and try not to be one of the gullible masses of whom Barnum also said, 
“There is a sucker born every minute.”
Test Generalizability
After designing a reliable measure and validating it, researchers also need to think about the 
specific uses, settings, and population groups the measure is valid for (John & Soto, 2007). This 
gets at the third question: For what purpose is this test valid?
Generalizability establishes the boundaries or limitations of a test. We cannot use a 
test for a use other than what it was intended, nor administer the test to a group of people 
it was not validated on. For example, the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 
(MMPI; Butcher, Dahlstrom, Graham, Tellegen, & Kaemmer, 1989), the Rorschach inkblot 
test (Rorschach, 1921), the Beck Depression Inventory (Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996), and 
other tests that were designed to diagnose mental disorders cannot be used to determine 
the fitness of an applicant for work.
Many personality tests specifically note that they are for children or adults but not both. 
A real challenge for researchers is to establish that their tests are valid for populations other 
than college students (John & Soto, 2007). Age, gender, race, and cultural background are just 
some of the population characteristics we must keep in mind when designing, validating, 
administering, and interpreting tests.
Research Methods Illustrated:  
Is the NEO-PI-R a Good Personality Test?
P
sychologists often use personality tests in their research. As a result, their research will only 
be as good as the tests they use. Using an unreliable test will make it hard to find a true effect; 
using an invalid test will render the results useless.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Take a personality test from 
the Internet or a magazine. 
Do you think the test is 
valid? Why or why not? What 
could you do to test this?
One size fits all? 
Generalizability establishes 
the limitations of a test, such 
as the population for which it 
is valid.
© Philip Date/Fotolia
98

Personality Assessment
When researchers publish a personality test, they must conduct validity and reliability analyses 
and report their findings. For many tests, especially personality and clinical tests, this information 
is published in the test manual or instruction booklet that comes with the test. Two examples of 
this are the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI; Butcher et al., 1989) and the NEO 
Personality Inventory—Revised (NEO-PI-R; Costa & McCrae, 1992). For some tests this information 
is published in a book or in peer-reviewed journals, as is the case with the Rosenberg Self-Esteem 
Scale (Rosenberg, 1965), the Crowne-Marlow Social Desirability Scale (Crowne & Marlow, 1960), the 
Need for Cognition Scale (Cacioppo & Petty, 1982; Cacioppo, Petty, & Kao, 1984), and the Snyder Self-
Monitoring Scale (Snyder & Gangestad, 1986).
Now that you understand what makes a good test—reliability, validity, and generalizability—
let’s evaluate one of the most extensively used personality tests: the NEO-PI-R (Costa & McCrae, 
1992).
Does the NEO-PI-R Have Reliability?
To see if the NEO-PI-R is a reliable test, Costa and McCrae (1992) report Cronbach’s alpha for each 
of the factors and facets. The alphas ranged from .56 to .81 for the various facets, which Costa and 
McCrae find acceptable for scales of only eight items. The internal consistency of the factors is much 
higher, as you can see in Table 6.
To check for test–retest reliability, college students took the NEO-PI-R at two different times, 3 
months apart. As you can see in Table 6 the correlations were quite high indicating good reliability.
Does the NEO-PI-R Have Validity?
To answer this question, let’s first take a look at construct validity. That is, does the NEO-PI-R 
measure 5 and only 5 factors of personality? Table 7 presents the results of a factor analysis of 
the 30 facet scales from the NEO-PI-R. The factor analysis yielded the 5 factors of Neuroticism, 
Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness, as predicted. Together, these 
factors accounted for 58% of the variance in responses (Costa et al., 1991). As you can see, each 
facet had the highest loading on the appropriate factor. Some facets also loaded on a second 
factor. Costa and McCrae (1992) deemed this acceptable because these additional correlations 
made theoretical sense.
Based on these analyses, it appears that the NEO-PI-R is a good operationalization of the theory 
behind the test. But does the test have criterion validity? Does it predict to a criterion outside the test? 
This is where McCrae and Costa have done, and continue to do, a lot of research.
Costa and McCrae (1992) hypothesized that individuals in psychotherapy would 
score high in Neuroticism and that drug abusers would score low on Agreeableness and 
Conscientiousness, and indeed they do. In addition, there are significantly high correlations 
between a person’s score on the NEO-PI-R and their friend’s or spouse’s ratings of their 
personality (Costa and McCrae,1992). These two findings demonstrate that the NEO-PI-R has 
criterion validity.
Costa and McCrae (1992) demonstrated both convergent and discriminant validity by 
correlating scores on the NEO-PI-R with scores on other personality tests. As expected, scores on 
Neuroticism and Extraversion correlate with the Neuroticism and Extraversion scales of the Eysenck 
Personality Inventory (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1975). Similarly, facet scores on the NEO-PI-R correlate 
Table 6  Reliability of the NEO-PI-R
Factor
Alpha
Test–Retest Correlations
Neuroticism
.92
.79
Extraversion
.89
.79
Openness
.87
.80
Agreeableness
.86
.75
Conscientiousness
.90
.83
Source: Adapted from Costa and McCrae (1992, Table 5, p. 44). Costa, P.  T., & McCrae, R.  R. (1992). Revised NEO person-
ality inventory (NEO-PI-R) and NEO five-factor inventory (NEO-FFI) professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological 
Assessment Resources.
99

Personality Assessment
Table 7  Factor Structure of the NEO-PI-R
Factor
Scale
N
E
O
A
C
Neuroticism Facets
N1
.81
.02
-.01
-.01
-.10
N2
.63
-.03
.01
–.48
-.08
N3
.80
-.10
.02
-.03
-.26
N4
.73
-.18
-.09
.04
-.16
N5
.49
.35
.02
-.21
-.32
N6
.70
-.15
-.09
.04
-.38
Extraversion Facets
E1
-.12
.66
.18
.38
.13
E2
-.18
.66
.04
.07
-.03
E3
-.32
.44
.23
-.32
.32
E4
.04
.54
.16
-.27
.42
E5
.00
.58
.11
-.38
-.06
E6
-.04
.74
.19
.10
.10
Openness Facets
O1
.18
.18
.58
-.14
-.31
O2
.14
.04
.73
.17
.14
O3
.37
.41
.50
-.01
.12
O4
-.19
.22
.57
.04
-.04
O5
-.15
-.01
.75
-.09
.16
O6
-.13
.08
.49
-.07
-.15
Agreeableness Facets
A1
-.35
.22
.15
.56
.03
A2
-.03
-.15
-.11
.68
.24
A3
-.06
.52
-.05
.55
.27
A4
-.16
-.08
.00
.77
.01
A5
.19
-.12
-.18
.59
-.08
A6
.04
.27
.13
.62
.00
Conscientiousness Facets
C1
–.41
.17
.13
.03
.64
C2
-.04
.06
-.19
.01
.70
C3
-.20
-.04
.01
.29
.68
C4
-.09
.23
.15
-.13
.74
C5
-.33
.17
-.08
.06
.75
C6
-.23
-.28
-.04
.22
.57
Note: Significant factor loadings appear in bold print.
Source: Costa and McCrae (1992, Table 5, p. 44). Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Revised NEO personality inventory (NEO-PI-R) and NEO five-factor inventory (NEO-FFI) profes-
sional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
100

Personality Assessment
with the appropriate adjective responses from the Adjective Check List (ACL; Gough & Heilbrun, 
1983). For example, “friendly” correlated with Warmth and Tender-Mindedness but not with Anxiety 
or Achievement-Striving. Similarly, “dreamy” correlated with Fantasy, but not any of the other facets 
of Openness.
Finally, whereas the NEO-PI-R doesn’t have special questions or scales to help identify response 
sets (see the following section), Costa and McCrae (1992) cautioned that if a person has left out 
more than 40 items, their scores may not be valid.
Does the NEO-PI-R Have Test Generalizability?
As reported in the manual for the NEO-PI-R, the test is valid for use in many populations, including 
adults and elders, White and non-White respondents, men and women, with high school or college 
levels of education (Costa & McCrae, 1992). The test is also valid for use in clinical settings, such as 
drug rehabilitation programs and individual psychotherapy. Many of these uses are described in 
more detail in the manual. The NEO-PI-R has also been translated into other languages and appears 
to be valid in other cultures as well (McCrae, 2002). The manual does note that the NEO-PI-R is for 
adults, so that it would not be appropriate to try to give the test to people younger than 18 (Costa & 
McCrae, 1992).
As you can see from this brief review of the many studies conducted, the NEO-PI-R does appear 
to be a valid and reliable test. However, this is merely the beginning of research on the five-factor 
model of traits. Psychologists may disagree with McCrae and Costa about their theory, the right 
number of factors, appropriate populations, or the design of their research, but nobody is claiming 
that the NEO-PI-R is invalid or unreliable. Now that McCrae and Costa have a good measure, it is up 
to them and other researchers to use this test to explore human personality.
Personality Tests
Now that we’ve established what makes for a good personality test, let’s take a closer look at 
personality tests. As you can imagine, there are many ways of asking people about their person-
alities and many different formats respondents can use to tell us. In addition, there is a whole 
science behind the ways people respond to personality tests, such as identifying whether people 
are just careless or if they are purposely trying to present themselves in a certain way by their 
answers. Let us consider the types and formats of personality tests and some of the typical ways 
people respond to them.
Types and Formats of Personality Tests
Psychologists generally divide personality tests into two kinds: self-report and performance-
based, once called objective tests and projective tests (Smith & Archer, 2008). In self-report tests 
respondents answer questions about themselves. Response formats and question styles can 
vary depending on the purpose of the test and the construct the researcher is trying to mea-
sure (Smith & Archer, 2008). Performance-based tests use an unstructured format in which 
participants must respond to a stimulus in as much detail as they would like, often within 
certain parameters set by the researcher. Because the stimuli used in these tests are ambiguous, 
respondents must project their own meanings, significances, patterns, feelings, interpretations, 
concerns, or worldviews onto the stimulus. These projections of people’s private worlds are 
reflected in their answers (Smith & Archer, 2008).
Self-Report Tests.  Self-report personality measures may use a dichotomous two-choice scale 
(e.g., true–false, yes–no) or a Likert-type rating scale. Likert rating scales might ask participants 
to rate their agreement (e.g., strongly disagree to strongly agree), degree (e.g., very little to quite 
a bit), similarity (e.g., uncharacteristic of me to characteristic of me), or frequency (e.g., never to 
always) using a scale, such as a 5- or 7-point scale (Simms & Watson, 2007, p. 246). Other pos-
sible formats include checklists, forced-choice scales, and visual analog scales (Clark & Watson, 
1995; see Figure 1).
THINK ABOUT IT
Why were performance-
based tests once called 
projective tests?
101

Personality Assessment
For example, in the Adjective Check List (ACL; Gough & Heilbrun, 1983), respondents 
select those adjectives out of 300 that best describe themselves. Based on the number and type 
of items checked, various scales are scored including achievement, dominance, autonomy, self-
confidence, nurturance, and creativity. The Creative Personality scale for the ACL measures 
creativity in college students (Gough, 1979; see Table 8).
Figure 1  Visual analog scale of one item from a test measuring intrinsic and extrinsic 
motivation in children. The administrators explained verbally to the children that the boxes 
represented a 1 to 5 Likert scale from not at all true for me to very true for me.  Source: Lepper 
Corpus, and Iyengar (2005, Figure 1, bottom, p. 187). Lepper, M. R., Corpus, J. H., & Iyengar, S. S. 
(2005). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivational orientations in the classroom: Age differences and 
academic correlates. Journal of Educational Psychology, 97(2), 184–196. Copyright American 
Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission.
I work on problems because I’m supposed to.
Table 8  The Creative Personality Scale of the Adjective Check List
Column 1
Column 2
Capable
Affected
Clever
Cautious
Confident
Commonplace
Egotistical
Conservative
Humorous
Conventional
Individualistic
Dissatisfied
Informal
Honest
Insightful
Interests narrow
Intelligent
Mannerly
Interests wide
Sincere
Inventive
Submissive
Original
Suspicious
Reflective
Resourceful
Self-confident
Sexy
Snobbish
Unconventional
Note: Circle those items which best describe yourself. Scoring: Give yourself 1 point for every item circled in the first column. 
Subtract 1 point for every item circled in the second column. Scores can range from -12 to +18. In 1979, Gough reported that in 
a sample of 1,121 college students, males averaged 5.03, significantly higher than females who scored 3.97. Graduate students 
in psychology were the most creative group he tested.
Source: Gough, H. G. (1979). A creative personality scale for the adjective checklist. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
37(8), 1398–1405. Copyright American Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission.
“Responding to questionnaire 
items is like talking with an 
anonymous interviewer. People 
use their item responses to tell 
an anonymous interviewer who 
they are and how they would 
like to be seen.”
Psychologists Robert Hogan, Joyce 
Hogan, and Brent Roberts writing 
about personality measurement 
and employment decisions  
(1996, p. 470)
102

Personality Assessment
Tests with a forced-choice format present respondents with a limited number of choices 
rather than a rating scale. True–false questions, or instructions to pick which of two state-
ments a respondent thinks best describes himself or herself are examples of forced choices. 
Personality tests that use a forced-choice format include the Locus of Control Scale (Rotter, 
1966) and the Machiavellianism Scale (Christie & Geis, 1970; Geis, 1978).
The Machiavellianism Scale is named for Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527) who was 
an astute adviser and diplomat in Florence, Italy, during the Renaissance. He wrote a book, 
The Prince, advising a fictional ruler on how best to acquire and stay in power. Machiavelli 
believed that most people were too trusting, not very smart, and could readily be taken 
advantage of for one’s own purposes. Personality psychologists Richard Christie and Florence 
Geis culled statements directly from The Prince to design a forced-choice questionnaire to 
measure Machiavellianism, the extent to which a person believes that other people are easily 
manipulable (Christie & Geis, 1970).
As you can see in Table 9, the items refer to types of interpersonal tactics, views of human 
nature, and beliefs about morality (Wrightsman, 1991). Originally, the scale was in Likert for-
mat, but Christie and Geis devised this forced-choice format to control for the effects of social 
desirability. Research conducted on this scale suggests that people who are high in Machiavel-
lianism, so-called High Machs are not more hostile, vicious, or vindictive than Low Machs; they 
just have a cool detachment when dealing with other people, emotional issues, or potentially 
embarrassing situations.
“One who deceives will 
always find those who allow 
themselves to be deceived.”
Niccolò Machiavelli
Table 9  Machiavellianism: Sample Questions From the Mach V Attitude Inventory
Please read each of the three statements in each group. Then decide first which of the statements is most true or comes the closest to 
describing your own beliefs. Circle a plus (+) in the space provided on the answer sheet.
Just decide which of the remaining two statements is most false or is the farthest from your own beliefs. Circle the minus (-) in the 
space provided on the answer sheet.
You will mark two statements in each group of three—the one that comes the closest to your own beliefs with a + and the one 
furthest from your beliefs with a -. The remaining statement should be left unmarked.
Statement
Most True
Most False
1.
A
It takes more imagination to be a successful criminal than a successful business man.
+
-
B
The phrase “the road to hell is paved with good intentions” contains a lot 
of truth.
+
-
C
Most men forget more easily the death of their father than the loss of their property.
+
-
2.
A
Men are more concerned with the car they drive than with the clothes their wives wear.
+
-
B
It is very important that imagination and creativity in children be cultivated.
+
-
C
People suffering from incurable diseases should have the choice of being put painlessly 
to death.
+
-
3.
A
Never tell anyone the real reason you did something unless it is useful to do so.
+
-
B
The well-being of the individual is the goal that should be worked for before anything 
else.
+
-
C
Once a truly intelligent person makes up his mind about the answer to a problem he 
rarely continues to think about it.
+
-
4.
A
People are getting so lazy and self-indulgent that it is bad for our country.
+
-
B
The way to handle people is to tell them what they want to hear.
+
-
C
It would be a good thing if people were kinder to others less fortunate than themselves.
+
-
Source: Adapted from Geis (1978, Table II-4, pp. 22–25). Geis, F. L. (1978). Machiavellianism. In H. London & J. Exner (Eds.), Dimensions of personality (p. 285–313). New York, NY.: Wiley.
103

Personality Assessment
Performance-Based Tests.  Performance-
based tests such as the Rorschach inkblot 
test (Rorschach, 1921) and the Thematic 
Apperception Test (TAT; Morgan & Murray,  
1935) are more often used in clinical set-
tings and forensic settings; however, the 
validity of many performance-based tests 
is highly controversial (Lilienfeld, Wood, & 
Garb, 2000). Some scales derived from the 
Rorschach and the TAT are valid for cer-
tain uses, but many other tests are indeed 
questionable.
There are five categories of projec-
tive techniques (Lindzey, 1959; Morgan & 
Murray, 1935):
  1.  Association techniques (e.g., Word 
Association Test; Rorschach inkblot 
test)
  2.  Construction techniques (e.g., Draw-
A-Person test; the TAT)
  3.  Completion techniques (e.g., sentence-
completion tests)
	 4.	 Arrangement or selection of stimuli (e.g., pick your favorite color, picture, or other 
stimuli)
	 5.	 Expression techniques (e.g., creative doll or puppet play; artwork)
The TAT is used by some personality psychologists to measure motives including the need 
for affiliation, the need for power, and most often, the need for achievement (McClelland, 
Atkinson, Clark, & Lowell, 1953). Respondents write a story in response to a picture. The stories 
are then coded for certain elements indicative of achievement motivation.
For example, take a look at the photo below. A person high in need for achievement might 
write a story like this:
In the picture I believe the little boy that I will call Jimmy has just come home 
running from school because he has just gotten his first A on a test. He tells his 
Self-report tests are frequently 
used for job selection and 
placement.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Write a story about the 
photo below. Who is the 
boy? What is he doing? How 
did he get here? What will 
happen next?
This original photo, from 1940, 
by American photographer 
Marion Post Wolcott  
(1910–1990) was modified by 
Henry Murray for use as one 
of the cards in the Thematic 
Apperception Test.
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division, Washington, D.C. (LC-USF34-055829-D)
© Absolut_photos/Dreamstime.com
104

Personality Assessment
parents how he knows that when he grows up he will be a doctor and can take 
care of everyone in the town when they get sick. He will be known by everyone 
and will be the best doctor in the whole world. His father says that he is positive 
that someday he will be something really amazing. Jimmy now asks his mom 
and dad, can I do a big boy chore as a reward for doing so good in school? I know 
I can do it, you just have to give me a chance to try. His parents tell him that the 
tasks of feeding the animals are still too dangerous for him, that maybe he can 
do something else. He says that [is] fine and goes out and sits in the barn door 
just thinking about all the wonderful things that he will accomplish during his 
lifetime; he even is considering [a] career as an astronaut. This is where you see 
him in the picture, just anxious to be able to do all the things that he wants and 
knows he will be able to do.
This story, written by a college student, contains themes such as high standards, unusual 
achievements, persistence, and an impediment toward success that suggest a high need for 
achievement (McClelland et al., 1953).
Similarly, the Goodenough-Harris Draw-A-Person (DAP) test may be interpreted 
according to the presence or absence of certain elements (e.g., size of the eyes may indicate 
paranoia; absence of a face may indicate depression). Here, the figure drawn is believed to 
represent the self-image of the respondent (Machover, 1949). Others have developed highly 
specific scoring guidelines depending on the level of detail of the picture (Koppitz, 1968). 
The global and sign approaches vary in their validity (Lilienfeld et al., 2000). The photo 
below depicts a variation of the Draw-A-Person test used by an art therapist working with 
cancer survivors.
Response Sets
There are pros and cons to both self-report and performance-based tests. Self-report tests can 
give us access to an amazing amount of information about various aspects of people’s thoughts 
and experiences. Self-report tests are relatively easy to administer and to score. Indeed, self-
reports may be the only way to measure certain aspects of personality including well-being, 
values, and life goals (Paulhus & Vazire, 2007).
However, there are some notable problems with self-reports. People may not be the best 
judges of their own skill, expertise, or knowledge, often overestimating their performance 
(Dunning et al., 2004). People may also wish to present themselves in a certain light and answer 
in a way that, unfortunately, jeopardizes the 
validity of the test (Paulhus & Vazire, 2007). 
For example, some people may answer 
questions to make themselves appear bet-
ter than they really are by faking good, such 
as appearing more psychologically healthy, 
more qualified, or more experienced than 
they really are. Others might make them-
selves appear worse by faking bad, such as 
appearing unqualified or in need of special 
treatment. This is more problematic in clini-
cal situations where people are evaluated for 
a diagnosis or for treatment than in job hir-
ing and assessment (Tett et al., 2006). Luck-
ily, the incidence of deliberate faking among 
job applicants is rather low (Hough, Eaton, 
Dunnette, Kamp, & McCloy, 1990).
Some people may portray themselves 
in an exaggeratedly positive manner where 
they try to appear more cooperative, lik-
able, or socially appropriate than they really 
THINK ABOUT IT
When might a person wish 
to fake good? When might a 
person wish to fake bad?
A variation of the Draw-A-
Person test. An example of a 
self-portrait of a 48-year-old 
woman recovering from 
cancer depicting where 
and how she experiences 
pain and health in her body. 
She experiences physical 
pain in her abdomen and 
feet, psychological pain as 
anxious thoughts in her 
head, and responsibilities as a 
weight on her shoulders. She 
experiences health when she 
feels love in her heart.
Marianne Miserandino
105

Personality Assessment
are, often by not admitting to distasteful, but perfectly human tendencies such as enjoy-
ing gossiping or having sexual urges. Psychologists call this socially desirable responding. 
Other people may be accommodating to the point of agreeing with whatever the question 
is asking, engaging in yea-saying or acquiescent responding. On the flip side, others might 
disagree with almost everything, engaging in nay-saying or reactant responding (Paulhus 
& Vazire, 2007).
Others, may engage in extreme responding where they avoid the middle of the scale, 
choosing the more extreme ends like choosing mostly 1s and 5s on a 5-point scale. Others, may 
engage in moderate responding often choosing the midpoint of the scale in their responses.
Still others may respond in patterned responding by making patterns on an answer 
sheet by marking their answers in a physical pattern like 1-2-3-4-5-4-3-2-1 or circling all 3s 
down the page. And then there’s just plain-old carelessness, where a person might leave out 
a question, forget to turn a page, or circle an answer on the wrong line throwing off all the 
answers.
When people have a set way that they tend to respond to self-report questions—either 
deliberately or unknowingly—psychologists call these response sets or noncontent respond-
ing. Response sets can lead to false results (Cronbach, 1947, 1950). Yea-saying, for example, can 
artificially inflate scores whereas nay-saying can artificially depress scores. Imagine an anxiety 
scale that asks about which symptoms a person has experienced in the past week. A person with 
a high score might truly be an anxious person—or he or she might be a yea-sayer.
Response sets can vary by culture. One study found that Canadian and American high 
school students showed more extreme responding, compared to Japanese and Chinese students, 
a tendency that correlated with personal ratings of individualism (Chen, Lee, & Stevenson, 
1995). Asian students showed more moderate responding. Despite a relationship between cul-
ture and response sets, response sets were not strong enough to account for cultural differences 
in individualism–collectivism scores. As you might expect, North American participants showed 
more individualism than participants in the Asian cultures.
Test constructors have devised ways of identifying and minimizing response sets. For 
example, designers might include the statement “I am happy” and its exact opposite “I am 
not happy” to catch people engaging in acquiescent or reactant responding. A good way to 
control both kinds of response sets is to write half the items so that a high rating indicates 
that the responder has the trait and the other half so that a low rating indicates that the 
responder has the trait (Paulhus & Vazire, 2007). This reverse scoring of some items prevents 
a person from getting a high score simply by agreeing or disagreeing with each of the items 
(Wiggins, 1973).
To identify pattern responding researchers might set up computer programs to catch cer-
tain patterns. Sometimes researchers will include extremely rare questions to check for pattern 
or random responses. For example, it would be highly unlikely for a person to agree that he or 
she were born in Pago-Pago or that he or she recently had a liver transplant (Paulhus & Vazire, 
2007). Although any one of these usual items on an infrequency scale could be true, a number 
of such answers suggests that all of a responder’s answers are suspicious. Such scales are often 
called lie scales because they are designed to identify a person who is lying.
To work around the problem of extreme responding the Q-sort test (Block, 1961), for 
example, forces respondents to limit the number of times each response can be used (Paulhus 
& Vazire, 2007). The 100 items of this test are listed on small cards. Some of the items include 
“Is a talkative individual,” “Is calm, relaxed in manner,” and “Feels a lack of personal meaning 
in life.”
Respondents must sort the cards into 1 of 9 piles, representing a 1 to 9 scale, indicating 
how characteristic of them each statement is. However, respondents must sort a set number 
of cards into each pile. For example, respondents can choose only 5 items that are the most 
characteristics of them (pile 9) and 5 items that are the least characteristic of them (pile 1), 
and 18 in the middle pile indicating that they are neither characteristic nor uncharacteristic of 
them (pile 5). This forces participants to use the full scale and avoids many types of response 
sets including extreme responding, moderate responding, acquiescent responding, or reactant 
responding.
THINK ABOUT IT
What should a researcher 
do about noncontent 
responding of a participant?
THINK ABOUT IT
Why do response sets vary 
by culture?
THINK ABOUT IT
What should a researcher 
do about a participant who 
scores high on a lie scale?
106

Personality Assessment
Social desirability responding is a bit harder for researchers to control. Sometimes a forced-
choice format, where both statements make a person appear equally good, can make it easier 
for respondents to answer truthfully rather than choose the one that makes them look better 
than they are (Paulhus, 1991). Another method is to give participants a scale that measures their 
tendency for socially desirable responding and then use their scores to statistically control for 
social desirability in the score of interest (Paulhus, 1991).
One such scale is the Crowne-Marlow Social Desirability Scale (Crowne & Marlow, 1960). 
As you can see in Table 10, most people, if they were completely honest, would have to admit 
that they have intensely disliked someone or have felt resentful. However, some people have 
a very hard time admitting that they have these all-too-human feelings. These are the kind of 
people who would score particularly high in social desirability on the Crowne-Marlow scale and 
are likely to respond in a socially desirable manner to any personality questionnaire.
Another way to control for social desirability is to structure the testing situation to mini-
mize the pressure for participants to look good (Paulhus, 1991). This can be done by assur-
ing respondents of anonymity in their responses, physically separating respondents from each 
other, or having respondents seal their responses in an envelope to be deposited in a box on 
their way out of the testing room. Sometimes questions can be phrased to appear reasonable 
so that a person will feel comfortable giving a true answer.
Finally, other researchers suggest that social desirability responding is merely a type 
of impression management and needs to be treated as a personality difference and not as a 
response set to be screened our or controlled for (Uziel, 2010).
Personality Tests and Selection
The area of psychological assessment has a lot to offer the business world. Personality tests, in 
particular, can be used to aid in selection, training, and performance (Barrick & Mount, 1991; 
Borman, Hanson, & Hedge, 1997; Hogan et al., 1996; Rothstein & Goffin, 2006).
When psychologists ask if a test works, they look for reliability and validity data: Does the 
test give consistent results, and does it predict to a criterion in the real world? Employers need 
to know the same information, but they ask the question differently. According to Hogan et al. 
(1996), businesses want to know:
Has this test been used in our industry?
Has it been used for Job X?
Can it identify persons who will perform well in Job X?
Will it work in our unique company? (p. 472)
When applying personality testing to the employment situation, we must be careful. 
Though our tests are not able to predict if a specific employee will be absent on a specific day, 
say next Tuesday, for example, we can predict how people with these characteristics are likely 
to behave on average when it comes to absenteeism or any work behavior (Barrick & Mount, 
Table 10  Sample Items From the Crowne-Marlow Social Desirability Scale
1.  Before voting I thoroughly investigate the qualifications of all the candidates.
2.  I never hesitate to go out of my way to help someone in trouble.
3.  *It is sometimes hard for me to go on with my work if I am not encouraged.
4.  I have never intensely disliked anyone.
5.  *I like to gossip at times.
6.  *I sometimes feel resentful when I don’t get my way.
Note: Respondents answer True or False to each item. Items with an * are reverse scored. The full test contains 33 items.
Source: Crowne, D. P., & Marlow, D. (1960). A new scale of social desirability independent of psychopathology. Journal of Consulting 
Psychology, 24(4), 349–354.
THINK ABOUT IT
How might social desirabil-
ity responding invalidate a 
participant’s responses?
107

Personality Assessment
1991; Hogan et al., 1996). For example, Openness to experience is a good predictor of how well 
a person is likely to respond to training, and Conscientiousness is a good predictor of many 
indexes of performance, including tardiness and absenteeism (Barrick & Mount, 1991). Friend-
liness, courteousness, responsiveness, and reliability—Agreeableness, Emotional Stability, and 
Conscientiousness—predict success in customer service positions (Frei & McDaniel, 1998).
Hiring the right person for the right job can save a business millions of dollars each year. 
According to one industry expert, the cost of recruiting and training a new worker, includ-
ing productivity loss, equals about 150% of an employee’s annual salary (Gale, 2002). In a 
company with 1,000 employees with an average turnover rate of 10% (considered low for 
most industries), if the average salary is $50,000 the annual cost of turnover could exceed 
$7.5 million a year.
Researchers are actively trying to determine the best combination of personality and skills 
that can predict important job outcomes (Bartram, 2005; Borman et al., 1997). These may 
include traditional outcomes such as production, sales, turnover, length of service, absenteeism, 
accidents, theft, and fit between the person and the organization. But more and more, employ-
ers around the world are looking to maximize process-oriented outcomes of their personnel 
including leading and deciding; supporting and cooperating; interacting and presenting; ana-
lyzing and interpreting; creating and conceptualizing; organizing and executing; adapting and 
coping; and enterprising and performing (Bartram, 2005).
According to a 2001 survey (see Table 11) close to a third of employers use some form of 
psychological assessment as part of the hiring process (Society for Industrial and Organizational 
THINK ABOUT IT
Is it fair to use personal-
ity testing to hire and fire 
people? Why or why not?
Personality tests are an 
important part of job 
selection for many industries 
including foreign service, law 
enforcement, airlines, and 
even some medical schools.
Table 11  How Many U.S. Companies Use Employment Tests? Percentage of Employers Who . . . 
Test job applicants in basic literacy and/or math skills
41%
Engage in various forms of job skill testing
68
Use one or more forms of psychological measurement or assessment
29
Use cognitive ability tests
20
Use interest inventories
8
Use some form of managerial assessments
14
Use personality tests
13
Use physical simulations of job tasks
10
Note: Information from a 2001 survey of 1,627 human resource managers who are members of the American Management Association.
Source: Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology (2010).
© Digital Vision/Photodisc/Thinkstock
108

Personality Assessment
Psychology, 2010), including mental and physical ability tests, achievement tests, interest mea-
sures, work and personal values measures, and personality questionnaires (U.S. Department of 
Labor Employment and Training Administration, 2006).
One 2006 study found that roughly 20% of companies in the Fortune 1000 use some form 
of personality testing (Piotrowski & Armstrong, 2006). Further, some 28.5% of companies 
screen potential employees for honesty and integrity and 22% for potential for violence. Surveys 
have also found that businesses use personality testing to improve employee fit and to reduce 
turnover. Indeed, some businesses reported a decrease in turnover ranging from 20% to as 
much as 70% after personality testing programs were implemented (Rothstein & Goffin, 2006). 
According to survey of 3,800 employees from seven companies across a variety of industries and 
jobs, applicants with a combination of the personality characteristics of adaptability, passion 
for work, emotional maturity, positive disposition, self-efficacy, and an achievement orienta-
tion are 14 times more likely than people without these qualities to be engaged and productive 
employees (Development Dimensions International Inc., 2005).
The use of preemployment personality testing by businesses is currently on the upswing 
(Rothstein & Goffin, 2006) due to better theoretical constructs, better testing methods, and the 
power of personality tests to predict job outcomes above and beyond other selection methods 
(Ones, Dilchert, Viswesvaran, & Judge, 2007; Rothstein & Goffin, 2006). Personality measures 
that hold to the principles of good test construction discussed throughout this chapter can 
help predict job performance and enhance fairness in hiring and personnel decisions (Hogan 
et al., 1996).
Employers can use personality tests to either screen out marginal applicants or to identify 
exceptional applicants. In either case, the measures they use—whether it be to identify knowledge, 
attitudes, job skills, or personality—must have proven criterion validity (Hogan et al., 1996).
Businesses may streamline their hiring process when they have many applicants for a large 
number of openings and need to fill the positions on a continuous basis. In such cases, employ-
ers screen out problematic applicants by using measures that predict accidents, absenteeism, 
turnover, and other counterproductive work behaviors (Hogan et al., 1996). For example, New 
Horizons Computer Learning Centers of Colorado, a small software training company, screened 
for applicants who were Internet savvy by instructing them to take a test online. If they were 
unable to navigate their way around the website, New Horizons learned from experience that 
such a person was not a good fit for the organization. This allowed its recruiters to spend more 
face-to-face time with applicants who were most likely to succeed (Gale, 2002).
However, if an organization has only a few applicants for a few openings, its goal is to hire 
excellent applicants rather than screen out marginal ones. Here, it may use personality tests to 
identify an applicant with characteristics that match the psychological requirements of the job 
(Hogan et al., 1996). For example, applicants applying for jobs in sales should be extraverted 
and ambitious (Deb, 1983; Oda, 1983), whereas people in customer service positions should 
be friendly, stable, and dependable, scoring high in Agreeableness, Emotional Stability, and 
Conscientiousness of the five factors (Frei & McDaniel, 1998).
For example, the web giant Google is notorious for its creative recruiting programs aimed 
at identifying the very best programmers, engineers, and mathematicians. In 2004, mysterious 
ads appeared in the subway system in Cambridge, Massachusetts; in Harvard Square; and along 
a California Highway in Silicon Valley. One billboard simply read “the first 10-digit prime found 
in consecutive digits of e.com” (NPR, 2004). The ads themselves were actually for job openings, 
but because the company name didn’t appear anywhere on the signs, people had no idea they 
were looking at recruitment ads for one of the largest and most prestigious tech places to work. 
Anybody could try, but only the most qualified people succeeded in solving two mathematical 
puzzles to find the correct website and password (see the photo on the next page) to view the 
full advertisements and apply for the jobs.
Integrity Testing
According to one estimate, employee theft costs employers over $100 billion worldwide each 
year (Sauser, 2007). No wonder that about a third of employers use some form of integrity 
testing (Berry, Sackett, & Wiemann, 2007; Ones, Viswesvaran, & Schmidt, 1993; Sackett, 
THINK ABOUT IT
What is criterion validity? 
Why must employment 
tests have this in order to 
be legal?
109

Personality Assessment
Burris, & Callahan, 1989; Sackett & Wanek, 1996). This is where employers test the honesty 
of job candidates to see if they are likely to steal or cheat. “Strong ethics are critical for our 
industry,” says a senior human relations specialist at Randolph-Brooks Federal Credit Union. 
“These tellers are handling other people’s money” (Gale, 2002).
There are two kinds of integrity tests: overt integrity tests and personality-based measures 
(Sackett et al., 1989). In overt or clear purpose integrity tests, responders understand that the 
intent of the test is to detect honesty. These tests often have two parts, one that directly assesses 
attitudes toward dishonest behaviors (e.g., “Do you think it’s okay to take home pens or enve-
lopes from the office?” “Under what conditions is it acceptable to steal from an employer?”), 
and a second part that asks about theft and other illegal activities, such as drug use and gam-
bling (e.g., “How often do you take drugs before going to work?” “How often have you let your 
car insurance lapse?”). Responses on these kinds of overt tests are easy to distort to create a 
favorable impression or fake good on (Berry et al., 2007).
A more subtle way of assessing integrity is to use disguised purpose integrity tests, like 
personality tests, to assess characteristics related to a range of behaviors including disciplin-
ary problems, violence on the job, absenteeism, tardiness, drug abuse, and theft. Personality 
dimensions such as reliability, conscientiousness, adjustment, trustworthiness, and sociability 
consistently predict these kinds of counterproductive behaviors (Ones et al., 1993).
Success Stories
Psychologists have studied personality assessment in many types of organizations, including 
Foreign Service (Thayer, 1973; Wiggins, 1973), law enforcement (Bernstein, 1980; Hargrave 
& Hiatt, 1989), airlines (Butcher, 1994; Hörmann & Maschke, 1996), and even some medical 
schools (Hojat, Callahan, & Gonnella, 2004; Lumsden, Bore, Millar, Jack, & Powis, 2005; Tyssen 
THINK ABOUT IT
Is it ethical to use disguised 
purpose integrity tests? Is 
it more ethical to use overt 
integrity tests? Why?
Congratulations. You’ve made it to level 2. Go to
 www.Linux.org and enter Bobsyouruncle as the login 
and the answer to this equation as the password.
	 	
f(1) = 7182818284
	
f(2) = 8182845904
	
f(3) = 8747135266
	
f(4) = 7427466391
	 	
f(5) =       
The mysterious billboard led 
to yet another mathematical 
puzzle which finally let to 
another website . . . Source:  
Vox (2004).
 . . . where they were finally 
rewarded with an invitation 
to apply for a job at Google. 
Source:  Vox (2004).
Screenshot courtesy of MarketingVox.com
Screenshot courtesy of MarketingVox.com
110

Personality Assessment
et al., 2007; Urlings-Strop, Stijnen, Themmen, & Splinter, 2009). Ideally, preemployment testing 
programs should first develop standards of what a successful employee is like by assessing all 
employees and identifying those characteristics linked to successful job performance. Once cri-
terion validity for an assessment has been established, then employers can use the test to select 
future employees. Programs following this model are in place at many restaurants, retailers, 
grocers, and trucking companies including the grocery chain Albertson’s, and retailers such as 
Neiman Marcus and Target (Cha, 2005).
This is precisely what Outback Steakhouse, known for its fun, friendly, and accommodating 
atmosphere, did. In an industry with high turnover rates of 200% annually, we might wonder 
how Outback maintains a turnover rate of only 40 to 60% among its approximately 45,000 
employees. The key to Outback’s success is hiring the right people, thanks to a customized per-
sonality assessment program. First, Outback administered a personality test to all of its servers 
and identified key personality traits such as sympathy, adaptability, gregariousness, sociabil-
ity, and meticulousness that characterized the typical Outback server. Then, when hiring new 
servers, as part of a three-phase interview process applicants take a personality test and those 
who don’t fit this mold, scoring below set cutoffs on certain characteristics like compassion and 
initiative, are cut from consideration (Gale, 2002).
Even Universal Studios Hollywood Theme Park takes its entertainment business seriously 
(Cha, 2005). Job applicants take a 50-minute online personality assessment and are classified 
into groups depending on their scores. Applicants scoring in the green range for customer ser-
vice have an 83% chance of getting hired whereas those in the yellow range have a 16% chance. 
Those scoring in the red range have only a 1% chance. Then, Universal interviews all applicants 
in case the assessment is wrong, but recruiter Nathan Giles explained that this almost never 
happens. Largely as a result of better hiring decisions, customer service and employee retention 
are up at Universal and theft and absenteeism are down (Cha, 2005).
However, these preemployment testing programs have many critics. For example, the 
reliability and validity data of their screening tests are not open to scientific scrutiny. Also, 
disgruntled rejected applicants have posted answer keys on the Internet compromising the 
validity of the test. There’s even a Facebook page against the company that designs and admin-
isters these assessment programs for allegedly dehumanizing the workforce! All of this raises 
questions about the legality of preemployment testing.
Legal Issues
The U.S. government has established a set of uniform guidelines to ensure that employee selec-
tion meets federal laws that prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, 
or national origin (Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Civil Service Commission, 
Department of Labor, Department of Justice, 1978). According to these guidelines, assessment 
tests are legal unless they have a disparate impact on disadvantaged groups. Employers must 
prove that their assessment predicts to job-related tasks or competencies by establishing con-
struct validity. For example, an employer would have to demonstrate that a higher-level mathe-
matics test predicts job success for engineers in order to use such tests to select employees. This is 
what Google did before it advertised openings in its corporation with the mysterious billboards.
Personality tests may be used to select employees. This is perfectly legal as long as there 
is evidence that preemployment personality tests identify personality characteristics that are 
important for successful performance on the job. For example, successful pilots in a European 
charter airline company scored lower in aggressiveness (impatient, impulsive, distrustful), neu-
roticism, empathy (affected by other’s misfortune, warm-hearted), and higher in vitality (active 
in sports, robust, looking for physical challenge) than pilots who were dismissed, reevaluated, 
downgraded, or experienced some other problem in their 3 years of employment (Hörmann 
& Maschke, 1996).
Research suggests that preemployment integrity testing is valid, useful, and, according to 
meta-analyses of 665 measures, predictive of who is likely to engage in counterproductive behav-
ior on the job (Ones et al., 1993, 2007). Integrity tests predict supervisors’ ratings of job perfor-
mance; absenteeism; tardiness; and disciplinary problems on the job such as theft, dismissals for 
theft, and other illegal activities (Ones et al., 1993). At the very least, such tests alert applicants 
THINK ABOUT IT
Do preemployment testing 
programs dehumanize job 
applicants? Why or why not?
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Have you ever taken a test 
as part of a job interview? 
Was it testing, skills, person-
ality, integrity, or something 
else?
111

Personality Assessment
What can they ask you on a job interview?
How old are you? Are you married? Pregnant? A U.S. citizen? What is your ancestry? 
Your native language? Do you have any disabilities? Do you take prescription drugs? How 
much do you smoke or drink? Though you might be tempted to answer any question a 
potential employer throws at you in the context of a job interview, these questions may 
violate privacy laws, equal opportunity laws, or the Americans with Disabilities Act and 
are therefore illegal for interviewers to ask. What about personality tests?
For example, according to the Americans with Disabilities Act employers cannot ask 
about disabilities or conduct a medical exam during the selection process. Under this law, 
employers cannot use a clinical test, such as a depression inventory or the MMPI that can 
diagnose a mental illness, to screen applicants. However, they can use nonclinical tests, and 
indeed many do use tests measuring the five factors or other personality traits.
In contrast to clinical tests, which may carry the stigma of mental health, or medi-
cal information, which violate privacy laws, well-constructed personality inventories that 
describe nonclinical populations can actually help people with disabilities, people from 
disadvantaged groups, or members of groups likely to be unfairly excluded from hiring 
based on ethnicity, age, gender, disability, and even other characteristics not protected by 
law but which are known to affect people’s judgments such as attractiveness and weight 
(Hogan et al., 1996). Because of the anonymity granted by many testing situations people 
who might not present well in a one-on-one interview may be better able to demonstrate 
their qualifications on a test.
In addition, people do have a right to privacy on selection tests unless an employer 
can show a compelling need for personal information—again, establishing criterion 
validity—about an applicant such as in positions where the safety of the public is at stake. 
Employers must balance a person’s right to privacy with their own need to hire competent 
people who are not a threat to others (Hogan et al., 1996).
So, what should you do if asked one of these questions or if asked to take an integrity 
test or a personality test? You might ask the interviewer how a question—or a personality 
test—bears on the requirements of the job (Reeves, 2009). Often, interviewers are merely 
trying to establish friendly rapport when they inadvertently hit on an illegal question. As 
a student of personality psychology, knowing about assessment and personality testing 
makes you a more astute job candidate.
The Personality of Everyday Life
Tests that explicitly screen 
for characteristics that are 
important for success on the 
job are legal. What kind of 
personality traits make for a 
successful server?
© Andres Rodriguez/Fotolia
112

Personality Assessment
that a potential employer cares about theft and dishonesty in its workforce (Wanek, 1999). 
Because the validity of integrity testing to predict job-relevant counterproductive behavior is 
well established, such tests are allowable by law.
Hogan et al. (1996) cautioned that although personality assessment—when done correctly—
is appropriate, employers should evaluate the results along with other information about the 
applicant including skills, job experience, and ability to learn. Relying solely on personality tests 
to make hiring decisions may be misguided. A senior human relations specialist at Randolph-
Brooks Federal Credit Union explained that when she interviews a job applicant she will ask 
them about their marginal answers. Because many applicants are just out of high school, they 
may not understand appropriate behavior in the workplace. Talking with them may clear up their 
misconceptions (Gale, 2002).
Then and Now: Personality Assessment and Matchmaking
What qualities go into a good marriage? Back in 1939 psychologist George W. Crane devised 
the Marital Rating Scale to give couples feedback on their marriage (Joyce & Baker, 2008). 
Husbands or wives would take this test (see Figure 2) and rate the wives’ behavior. Wives would 
then score “merits” and “demerits” depending on what they did or didn’t do.
For example, using slang or profanity would earn 5 demerits whereas “reacting with plea-
sure and delight to marital congress” would earn 10 merits. The number of merits and demerits 
would be tallied up and the wife would receive a score from “Very Poor (Failures)” to “Very 
Superior.” (Alas, we don’t know what happened to the husband’s rating chart, if Crane ever 
developed one.)
Crane started out scientifically enough by interviewing 600 husbands on their wives’ 
qualities. He compiled the 50 most frequently mentioned positive and negative qualities and 
fashioned them into a questionnaire. However, the weighted scoring of the items came from 
his own personal biases about which qualities he felt were more important to a successful 
marriage.
Crane went on to establish the Scientific Marriage Foundation in 1957, where he claimed 
to have arranged over 5,000 marriages by using principles of psychological testing. Men 
and women filled out forms that were then matched into compatible pairs by using an early 
computer.
Gender roles and qualities desired in a mate may have changed since Crane’s day—and 
psychologists today view his questionnaire as dated and humorous—but the principle of using 
psychological testing to match people is even more popular today. Witness the growth of online 
dating services including Match.com, ScientificMatch.com, PerfectMatch.com, Chemistry.com, 
and eHarmony.com, all of which use some form of personality assessment.
For example, eHarmony explicitly matches couples based on similarity of attitudes, 
beliefs, interests, leisure activities, and personality, including stability, sociability, and desire 
for closeness, using a questionnaire of over 400 items. In fact, it has created a model to predict 
couple compatibility using advanced statistics including factor analysis, regression analysis, 
and discriminant analysis. Its goal is to match couples to maximize their compatibilities and 
minimize their differences on key attributes (Carter & Snow, 2004). In fact, eHarmony has the 
only patented online matching system (U.S. Patent No. 6,735,568; Houran, Lange, Rentfrow, 
& Bruckner, 2004).
“Similarities are like money in the bank,” said Neil Clark Warren, the founder of eHarmony. 
“Differences are like debts you owe. It’s all right to have a few differences, as long as you have 
plenty of equity in your account” (Gottlieb, 2006, p. 60).
In the only study publicly available evaluating online dating sites, coincidentally conducted 
by eHarmony, married couples matched through eHarmony had higher happiness, optimism, 
commitment, and overall success of their marriage compared to couples who were not matched 
by eHarmony (Carter & Snow, 2004).
Although the test used to judge how successful couples were is a valid test—the Dyadic 
Adjustment Scale (Spanier, 1976)—critics have questioned whether high scores on this 
“Because if you don’t ask it, 
you’re never gonna know. So 
we had tons of questions on 
ability, even more on interest. 
Just every type of personality 
aspect that was ever measured, 
we were measuring it all.”
Galen Buckwalter, vice president  
of Research and Development,  
eHarmony, as quoted in Gottlieb 
(2006, p. 60)
113

Personality Assessment
Figure 2  The cover page of the Marital Rating Scale.  Source: Joyce and Baker (2008, Figure 1, p. 
144).
particular test actually predict a better marriage. They also question whether the test was vali-
dated for this purpose or for the age range of participants (Houran et al., 2004).
Finally, the two comparison groups differed in age, education, income, motivation, and 
other variables (Houran et al., 2004). For example, the couples who met on eHarmony may have 
been more motivated to see their relationships succeed; after all, they met through an online 
dating service that promised exactly this outcome for a hefty fee!
114

Personality Assessment
The lesson to be learned from this story is that principles of good research design and good 
testing—validity, reliability, and generalization—make the best partnerships. In the words of 
Warren, “Twelve thousand new people a day taking a 436-item questionnaire! . . . We’ve got 
more data than they could collect in a thousand years.”
Chapter Summary
In this chapter we learned all about personality tests: what makes a good personality test, kinds 
of personality tests, format of tests, response sets, and the various uses of personality tests.
The biggest difference between real personality tests and fun personality tests you might 
find on the Internet is that real personality tests have been empirically tested to have reliability, 
validity, and limited generalizability. Fake personality tests often use Barnum statements to fool 
people into thinking that they are accurate measures of personality.
Tests, like any good measurement instrument, such as a watch, must be reliable, giving a 
consistent measure of an underlying theoretical construct. A reliable test will give consistent 
results across time (temporal consistency reliability, test–retest reliability), across items (internal 
consistency reliability: parallel-forms reliability, split-half reliability, Cronbach’s alpha), and 
across raters (interrater reliability).
A valid test has construct validity, meaning that it has operationalized a theory, or predicts 
to an external standard such as an outcome or behavior (criterion validity). Tests may or may 
not look like they are measuring a specific construct (face validity), but respondents may be 
more motivated to answer questions that make sense to them and have face validity.
Scores on personality tests ought to be correlated with other measures of similar tests 
(convergent validity) but be uncorrelated with measures of unrelated constructs (discriminant 
validity). Tests, are valid only for the uses, settings, and populations they were validated for. 
Researchers and people using tests must consider the conditions under which tests are gener-
alizable or not. For example, tests may be applicable for adults or children, or for use within a 
particular culture.
Using these criteria—construct validity, criterion validity, convergent validity, discrimi-
nant validity, test–retest reliability, interrater reliability, Cronbach’s alpha, generalizability—the 
NEO-PI-R appears to be a good measure of the five-factor model of personality.
Personality tests can be self-report (objective) or performance-based (projective). Self-
report tests may use a Likert scale, checklists, forced-choice, or visual analog scales. The Creative 
Personality Scale of the Adjective Check List and the Machiavellianism Scale are two kinds of 
self-report tests. The Thematic Apperception Test and the Goodenough-Harris Draw-A-Person 
test are two kinds of performance-based tests.
Matchmaker, matchmaker: 
Even online dating services 
use personality assessment to 
make matches.
“If you want to know what 
Waldo is like, why not just ask 
him?”
Personality researchers  
Delroy L. Paulhus and Simine 
Vazire (2007, p. 224)
Go online for more 
resources to help you 
review.
Study and Review
on mysearchlab.com
115

Personality Assessment
When designing, administering, and scoring personality tests, we must be mindful of 
response sets or noncontent responding of participants including faking good, faking bad, 
socially desirable responding, acquiescent responding, reactant responding, extreme respond-
ing, moderate responding, patterned responding, and carelessness. Some tests include an infre-
quency or lie scale to identify people who may be purposely giving misleading answers to a 
test. The Crowne-Marlow Social Desirability Scale can be used to identify people with a socially 
desirable response set to statistically control for this tendency in their responses on other per-
sonality tests.
Businesses often use personality tests to screen applicants for important characteristics 
related to success on the job or to eliminate applicants who are likely to show counterproduc-
tive work behaviors. Integrity testing, using either clear purpose integrity tests or disguised 
purpose integrity tests, can be used to screen for honesty in job applicants. Legally, a business 
must be sure that an assessment program does not have disparate impact on any protected 
group and predicts to job-related tasks or competencies by demonstrating construct validity, 
content validity, or criterion validity of the test. Medical tests and clinical tests are disallowed, 
and other questions that may violate the right to privacy are allowed only when an employer 
can demonstrate a valid need for personal information.
Although valid and reliable personality assessment is useful and appropriate, employers 
should evaluate the results along with other information about the applicant including skills, 
job experience, and ability to learn and not rely on testing alone to select potential employees.
Online dating sites often use personality tests to match people. These services are only as 
good as the measures they use.
Personality assessment has been around for a long time, and continues to be important in 
research, work, and, for some, their love lives. If you haven’t already, no doubt you will be asked 
to take a personality test for one of these purposes. Understanding what goes into personal-
ity testing will help you perform your best and understand the impact of assessment in your 
life—and to not be taken in by nightclub graphologists, circus showmen, or Oreo-cookie-eating 
personality tests. Though P. T. Barnum believed that a sucker might be born every minute, you 
need not be one of them!
Review Questions
	 1.	 What is personality assessment? What makes a good personality test?
	 2.	 What is reliability? What are the different kinds of reliability?
	 3.	 What is validity? What are the different kinds of validity?
	 4.	 What is test generalizability?
	 5.	 Is the NEO-PI-R a good personality test? Why or why not?
	 6.	 What are self-report tests? Describe various test formats used by personality psychologists 
including dichotomous, Likert ratings, checklists, forced-choice scales, and visual analog 
scales, giving examples of each.
	 7.	 What are performance-based tests? What are the five categories of projective tests?
	 8.	 What are response sets? Describe the common types of response sets. What is an infre-
quency scale? What is it designed to measure?
	 9.	 What is social desirability? How it is measured? What are some strategies for dealing with 
a social desirable response set?
	10.	 What kind of validity must employers demonstrate to legally use personality tests to screen 
candidates?
	11.	 What are counterproductive work behaviors? How might an employer screen for these? 
What is integrity testing? How might an employer test for integrity?
	12.	 What are some of the legal issues surrounding employment testing?
116

Personality Assessment
Key Terms
Personality assessment
Reliability
Temporal consistency 
reliability
Test–retest reliability
Internal consistency 
reliability
Parallel-forms reliability
Split-half reliability
Cronbach’s alpha
Rater consistency
Interrater reliability
Validity
Construct validity
Face validity
Criterion validity
Convergent validity
Discriminant validity
Barnum Effect
Generalizability
Self-report tests
Performance-based tests
Forced-choice format
Association techniques
Construction techniques
Completion techniques
Arrangement or selection  
of stimuli
Expression techniques
Faking good
Faking bad
Socially desirable responding
Acquiescent responding
Reactant responding
Extreme responding
Moderate responding
Patterned responding
Response sets
Noncontent responding
Infrequency scale
Counterproductive work 
behaviors
Integrity tests
Overt integrity tests
Clear purpose integrity tests
Disguised purpose integrity 
tests
117

118

105
SELF AND IDENTITY
Self-Concept
How Does the Self-Concept Develop?
Chimpanzees and Self-Recognition
Who Is That Baby in the Mirror?
The Developing Self in School
Adolescence and the Looking Glass Self
Our Grown-Up Selves
Impact of Culture on Self-Concepts
Individualism and Collectivism
Independent and Interdependent Selves
Possible Selves
Positive Possible Selves
Negative Possible Selves
Then and Now: The Self
Self-Esteem
Self-Esteem Level
Self-Esteem Stability
Self-Concept Clarity
Life Outcomes of High and Low Self-Esteem: Myths and Realities
The Personality of Everyday Life: Shooting yourself in the foot  
to protect your self-esteem
Research Methods Illustrated: Qualitative Data and Content Analysis
Social Identity
Self-Presentation
Self-Monitoring
Chapter Summary
Review Questions
Key Terms
Read the Chapter on 
mysearchlab.com 
From Chapter 5 of Personality Psychology: Foundations and Findings, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. Copyright © 2012 by 
Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
© Handyart/Dreamstime.com
119

Self and Identity
T
he web sitcom series The Guild stars Felicia Day as a neurotic woman who is addicted—
along with five other misfits—to an online role-playing game. In one episode, the 
20-something Zaboo is trying to break free from the control of his overbearing mother, 
who he fears will become an expert on the Internet and ruin his life there too. He laments “The 
only place that I can be myself is online.” The show raises all sorts of questions about reality 
and identity, like, who are we on the inside and how do we portray ourselves to others? To the 
extent that these two aspects of our identity are slightly different, we might well wonder, along 
with the characters in the show, who is the real me, or even the real you?
Let’s just start with this most basic question: Who are you? On a blank screen or piece of 
paper, can you think of 20 answers to this question?
This was the exact task facing college students in a classic study. Most of their responses to this 
Twenty Statements Test (TST) (Kuhn & McPartland, 1954) were of the form “I am  . . . ” Students 
gave anywhere from 1 or 2 responses on up to the full 20, with a median of 17 responses. One 
interesting finding is that the first attributes people listed defined themselves in terms of social 
groups or categories to which they belonged, such as “student,” “girl,” “ husband,” “from Chicago,” 
“daughter,” “pre-med,” “Baptist,” and “oldest child.” Only later did they get into more idiosyncratic 
trait terms such as “happy,” “bored,” “pretty good student,” “good wife,” and “interesting.”
Additionally, Kuhn and McPartland (1954) found that members of religious minorities at the 
State University of Iowa at the time (e.g., Catholic and Jewish) were particularly likely to mention 
religious affiliation as an aspect of their self-concept and to mention it sooner than members of 
religious majorities (e.g., Methodist, Presbyterian) or people without a religious affiliation.
This study illustrates that our self-concepts are defined by the social world: how we are 
similar to others and how we are unique compared to others. In fact, we are constantly discov-
ering, creating, defining, and maintaining who we are—emphasizing either our connections 
or our uniqueness—and how we feel about ourselves through our interactions with the social 
world. In this chapter we explore these three aspects of the self: how we define or think about 
ourselves (our self-concepts), how we evaluate or think of ourselves (our self-esteem), and what 
we show to others (our social identity).
Self-Concept
Think about your 20 answers to the question “Who are you?” Together, these reflect your self-
concept: the set of ideas and inferences that you hold about yourself, including your traits, 
social roles, schemas, and relationships (Baumeister, 1997). Part of what makes the self hard to 
know is that we are hardly unbiased observers. We take center stage in our own lives! In addi-
tion, the self may be difficult to know because we are constantly growing and developing as 
well as revealing different facets of ourselves in different situations. In fact, it is through social 
interactions that we develop both our self-concepts and our evaluation of ourselves.
How Does the Self-Concept Develop?
Do you have a self? Of course you do, but how did you get it? It should be no surprise to you 
that we aren’t exactly born with a self, but you might wonder, how do we develop one? Do we 
just grow a self even as we grow taller? Or, do we need to have certain experiences in order to 
form a self? The answer is a bit of both: We develop a sense of self out of physical development 
and cognitive maturation along with social experiences.
In the 1970s, many psychologists and biologists supposed that humans were unique in their 
capacity to reflect on themselves. This ability of being aware of having an experience and of 
reflecting on oneself—having self-awareness or self-consciousness—is believed to be evidence 
of having a self-concept. Is it true that this ability is unique to humans?
Chimpanzees and Self-Recognition.  Psychologist Gordon Gallup investigated this ques-
tion in a series of experiments with chimpanzees (Gallup, 1977). He placed a full-length mirror 
in a room with a chimpanzee and observed how the chimp responded to this mirror stimula-
tion. For the first 1 or 2 days, the chimps acted as if the reflection were another chimp, showing 
other-directed social responses such as bobbing, vocalizing, and threatening, much the way 
“[T]he self is harder to know 
and understand than, say, a 
table or a spoon.”
Baumeister (1999, p. 2)
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Who are you? Give 20 
answers to the statement  
“I am . . .”
SEE FOR YOURSELF
How many of your answers 
to the Twenty Statements 
Test were trait terms? Social 
categories? What does this 
say about you?
“The self is not created nor 
discovered in social isolation.”
Baumeister (1999, p. 2)
THINK ABOUT IT
Do animals have a sense of 
self? How would we know?
120

Self and Identity
a chimp would respond when confronting 
a strange chimp in the wild. However, very 
soon the chimps started to respond to the 
reflection in the mirror with self-directed 
responses: grooming places they couldn’t 
normally see (e.g., picking food out of their 
teeth), entertaining themselves by blowing 
bubbles or making faces, and so on. But after 
about 10 days, the chimps grew tired of this 
sport and adapted to the presence of the mir-
ror. This is when the real test began.
At this point, the mirror was removed, 
the chimps were anesthetized, and while they 
were unconscious, bright red paint was placed 
across the eyebrow ridge of one eye and on 
the top half of the opposite ear. The research-
ers used a special paint that was odorless and 
imperceptible to the touch. Indeed, upon 
waking, the chimps did not pay any special 
attention to the newly marked areas. Then the 
mirror was returned to their chamber. How 
do you think chimps responded to their own 
reflections? Would they show other-directed 
responses (e.g., vocalize at the mirror) or 
would chimps touch their own brow and ear indicating self-recognition?
As it turned out, chimps spent over 25% more time touching themselves! And they spent 
about twice as much time touching their eyebrows than their ears. However, chimps that did 
not have the chance to adapt to the mirror did not pay any more attention to the marked areas 
of their bodies than to the nonmarked areas. This suggests that self-recognition must have been 
learned during their earlier experience with the mirror.
Gallup and others saw chimps’ self-directed behaviors in this mirror test as evidence of 
self-recognition. It is no accident that great apes like chimpanzees and orangutans—humans’ 
closest relatives—show self-recognition. There is no evidence of self-recognition in rhesus mon-
keys, capuchin monkeys, java monkeys, spider monkeys, mandrill, hamadryas, baboons, stump-
tail macaques, or two species of gibbons (Gallup, 1977). Self-recognition seems to be more than 
visual recognition: Baboons could not be trained to recognize themselves even using raisins as 
rewards. Nor is self-recognition related to mirror use per se. Monkeys are able to use the mir-
ror as a tool to manipulate and find objects but are unable to recognize their own reflections 
The man in the mirror: Until 
about 1 or 2 years of age 
babies do not recognize the 
reflection in the mirror as 
themselves.
Happy, the elephant, at the 
mirror touching the mark with 
the tip of her trunk. 
© JPagetRFphotos/Shutterstock
Joshua Plotnik, Frans de Waal, and Diana Reiss. Self-recognition in an Asian 
elephant. PNAS November 7, 2006 vol. 103 no. 45 17053-17057
121

Self and Identity
(Brown, McDowell, & Robinson, 1965). Using simi-
lar, or even improved, methods self-recognition has 
been demonstrated in elephants (Plotnik, de Waal, & 
Reiss, 2006), dolphins (Reiss & Marino, 2001), whales 
(Delfour & Marten, 2001), and even magpies (Prior, 
Schwarz, & Güntürkün, 2008)! The photo on the 
previous page and this page illustrate what this self- 
recognition in animals might look like.
Now you might think that there is something 
special about chimps who have spent their entire 
lives living in a psychology laboratory, but on this 
count, even chimps raised in the wild show self-
recognition on the mirror test (Gallup, 1977). 
However, chimps who are taken from their moth-
ers soon after birth and raised in isolation without 
contact with other chimps are unable to recognize 
themselves. In fact, at first they pretty much just 
sit and stare at their reflection in the mirror, never 
becoming adapted to it. When they are anesthetized 
and marked with the red paint they show no change 
in viewing time, suggesting that they have no idea 
that it is their own reflection in the mirror.
Gallup and his colleagues suspected that lack of 
social experience with other chimps somehow pre-
vented proper emotional development including self-recognition. He gave two of these isolated 
chimps remedial social experience by placing them in a cage with each other for 3 months. 
When these chimps were placed before the mirror with paint markings, they started to show 
preliminary signs of self-recognition.
Who Is That Baby in the Mirror? 
What about humans? At what age do human babies 
recognize that the image in the mirror is themselves? Self-recognition is one step along the 
way to self-concept development. But to appreciate the import of this developmental land-
mark, we need to start at the beginning of self-concept development. Table 1 summarizes 
the processes and major accomplishments of self-concept development (for more detail see 
Harter, 1998, 2003).
Self-recognition in a dolphin. 
© Joe Raedle/Newsmakers/Getty Images
SEE FOR YOURSELF
If you know any infants 
under 2 years of age, what 
happens when they look in 
the mirror? Do they recog-
nize themselves or do they 
think their own image is 
another baby?
Table 1  How We Develop a Sense of Self: Important Milestones in the Development of Self-Concept, Self-
Esteem, and Social Identity
Age
Developing Aspect of Self
Accomplishment
0–1 years
Physical self-awareness
Recognizing Me vs. Not me
1–2 years
Self-recognition
Mirror recognition
2–3 years
Self-esteem
Internalizing standards for behavior
3–4 years
Skills and abilities
Demonstrating new talents
5–12 years
Social comparison
Comparing abilities with others
Private self-concept
Keeping secrets
Adolescence
Identity
Abstract thought
Reflected appraisals
Objective self-awareness
Adulthood
The self
Internalizing societal expectations
122

Self and Identity
From birth to about 1 year of age infants are developing a sense of physical awareness. 
Rather than having an awareness of themselves in the world, they are still trying to discern 
what is part of them and what is part of the physical environment. If you have watched 
young infants in their cribs perhaps you’ve seen their momentary surprise and delight at a 
foot or an arm without the full recognition that it is their own limbs that are moving in such 
fascinating ways. Although there is some evidence that even newborns react differently to a 
recording of their own cry compared to the cry of another infant (Dondi, Simion, & Caltran, 
1999)—indicating some basic self-recognition—an infant’s self is really just a physical self 
(Meltzhoff, 1990).
Once children know that they are a physical being separate from other people and other 
objects, then they can begin to find out more about themselves (Harter, 1983). Have you ever 
tried the look-at-the-crying-baby-in-the-mirror trick to get an infant to calm down? Sadly, 
that “trick” works only until children recognize a familiar image in the mirror at around 4 or 5 
months (Legerstee, Anderson, & Schaffer, 1998). But is this merely visual discrimination or do 
they really know that the image is them?
If you were thinking that we ought to do the mirror test to test for self-recognition, 
much like Gallup (1977) did with his chimpanzees, you would be right. When a spot of 
rouge is placed on an infant’s nose by the mother, under the guise of wiping the infant’s 
nose, infants are able to recognize themselves in a mirror at 18 months of age, on average. 
They touch their own faces and wonder at this new mark. Only about 25% of infants tested 
could recognize themselves as early as 9 to 12 months of age, yet by the age of 21 to 25 
months about 75% of infant-participants could recognize themselves in the mirror (Lewis &  
Brooks-Gunn, 1979).
By ages 2 or 3, children are able to recognize themselves in the mirror and in pictures 
and have mastered language enough to use the words “I,” “me,” “my,” “mine,” and the phrase 
“I’m . . . ” appropriately (Lewis & Ramsay, 2004). Perhaps a little too appropriately, as this baby 
sense of self is partially what makes the “terrible twos” so challenging. Children will often 
want to exercise their developing selves by doing things without parental help or by refusing 
to cooperate amid protests of “No!” Children at this age know certain facts about themselves 
such as their sex, age, ethnic group, and family, and their self-concepts reflect this information 
(Stipek, Gralinski, & Kopp, 1990).
Around this age we also see the very beginnings of self-esteem. Children start to understand 
parents’ expectations for behavior and begin to internalize standards for good and bad behavior. 
They will often voluntarily offer that they are “a good girl” or respond positively to such praise 
(“good boy!”) from an adult.
By ages 3 to 4 children’s self-concepts reflect their developing skill and abilities in addi-
tion to physical attributes, preferences, and possessions (Harter, 1999). Children will often 
enthusiastically run up to visitors wishing to show off their latest accomplishments: “Look at 
me! I can jump!”
The Developing Self in School.  During ages 5 to 12 children are further developing their 
own abilities and at the same time becoming acutely aware of the abilities of other children 
as they enter school. Have you ever seen kids at a park run to the top of a hill and vie for the 
chance to declare “I’m king of the mountain!” Comparing themselves with peers becomes 
very important between ages 5 and 6 and becomes increasingly important (Ruble, 1983). 
Children gain a sense of their own talents by seeing how they measure up compared to others 
(Harter, 2005).
As early as ages 3 or 4 children recognize personality characteristics and can use them to 
describe other children. However, it is not until they are about 5 or 6 that children may further 
progress and come to describe kids in their class using personality attributes in addition to 
social comparison information: “He’s the smart one.” They may even be able to use traits to 
judge the past behavior of others as well as to make predictions about their future behavior. 
Imagine a child not wanting to invite another child to a birthday party because “she’s a baby.” 
Why is she a baby? “She cried in school yesterday.” But it is not until ages 9 or 10 that children 
THINK ABOUT IT
What is a 2-year old’s  
favorite word?
123

Self and Identity
come to understand what a trait is and recognize traits as enduring qualities within a person 
that are stable across time and situations (Alvarez, Ruble, & Bolger, 2001).
Also between ages 5 to 12 children start to develop a private sense of self as they recognize 
that there are parts of themselves that others cannot see. They start to realize that they have 
thoughts, feelings, and desires that are uniquely their own and not automatically known by 
others. At younger ages this may appear as an imaginary friend. At a slightly older age the child 
may taunt another child with “I know something you don’t know.” Later, children realize that 
they can keep a secret as in “I know a secret.” Of course, they won’t realize until they are older 
that to truly keep a secret you cannot even tell that you know a secret!
Consider this response of a 5-year-old girl to the Twenty Statements Test:
My name is Lizzie. I look like my mommy. I play a lot in the summer time with 
my grandparents. I like to play at the beach. I have brown hair. My eyes are blue. 
My teeth are white. I like to eat. I’m a girl. I like my hair. I like my eyes. I like my 
teeth. I like everything I do. I am five years old. (Yavari, 2002).
Or this 9-year-old boy, with his original spellings and emphasis:
My name is Bruce C. I have brown eyes. I have brown hair. I have brown eye-
brows. I’m nine years old. I LOVE! Sports. I have seven people in my family.  
I have great! eye site. I have lots! of friends. I live on 1923 Pinecrest Dr. I’m going 
on 10 in September. I’m a boy. I have a uncle that is almost 7 feet tall. My school 
is Pinecrest. My teacher is Mrs. V. I play Hockey! I’am almost the smartest boy 
in the class. I LOVE! food. I love fresh air. I LOVE School. (Montemayor & 
Eisen, 1977, p. 317).
Can you see how his self-description is very concrete? Compare Lizzie’s and Bruce’s 
responses with this one from an 11-year-old boy:
I’m a person who likes to look in space; I love astronomy. I love using rockets. 
I love playing outside and playing soccer. I love to swim. I’m smart. I’m a nice 
and sweet and loving person. I’m a great swimmer. (Yavari, 2002)
Or this one from an 11.5-year-old girl:
My name is A. I’m a human being. I’m a girl. I’m a truthful person. I’m not 
pretty. I do so-so in my studies. I’m a very good cellist. I’m a very good pianist. 
I’m a little bit tall for my age. I like several boys. I like several girls. I’m old-
fashioned. I play tennis. I am a very good swimmer. I try to be helpful I’m always 
ready to be friends with anybody. Mostly I’m good, but I lose my temper. I’m 
The queen and kings of the 
mountain: At about ages 5 
to 12, children’s self-concept 
includes comparing their 
abilities with others.
© Maszas/Dreamstime.com
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Did you have an imaginary 
friend as a child? How old 
were you at the time?
124

Self and Identity
not well-liked by some girls and boys. I don’t know if I’m liked by boys or not. 
(Montemayor & Eisen, 1977, p. 317–318)
Adolescence and the Looking Glass Self.  By the time we are adolescents, our self-concepts 
have become more abstract, incorporating motivations, beliefs, and personality characteristics 
in contrast to the more concrete descriptions of children’s self-concepts (Harter, 1999). You 
can see this difference in the response by this 16-year-old male to the Twenty Statements Test:
I guess I would say I’m God’s creation made for a purpose. I have a natural 
curiosity given to me by God. I have a strong will and desire to fulfill my pur-
pose in life and I also believe that as a man I have my weaknesses and strengths. 
I sin and make mistakes, but I learn from them with God’s help. As a Chris-
tian, I think that I am better prepared for the world’s temptations and societies’ 
manipulations. I am trying to strive for goals, which are to be successful, intel-
ligent, spiritual, and happy. I think that my relationship with God helps me 
to accomplish my goals and fulfill my purpose in life. Who I am as a person is 
defined by my spiritual nature. (Yavari, 2002)
And in this 17-year-old female:
I am a human being. I am a girl. I am an individual. I don’t know who I am. 
I am a Pisces. I am a moody person. I am a very curious person. I am not an 
individual. I am a loner. I am an American (God help me). I am a Democrat. 
I am a liberal person. I am a radical. I am a conservative. I am a pseudoliberal. 
I am an atheist. I am not a classifiable person (i.e., I don’t want to be). (Mon-
temayor & Eisen, 1977, p. 318)
Adolescents, especially ages 15 to 16, are particularly sensitive to how they are perceived 
and judged by others. This becomes a period of extreme self-consciousness, as anybody who’s 
ever had a pimple can attest to! Adolescents experience objective self-awareness (Duval & 
Wicklund, 1972), as they start to see themselves as the object of others’ attentions. They use the 
views of significant others as a social mirror to form the basis of their own self-views. Through 
these reflected appraisals adolescents internalize others’ evaluations of them, especially people 
who are very important to them, such as family and peers. The American sociologist Charles 
Cooley (1902) calls this the looking glass self and this forms the basis of the adolescent’s self-
esteem. In the words of Ralph Waldo Emerson: “Each to each a looking-glass/Reflects the other 
that doth pass.”
By the time the teenage years have ended, we not only respond to ourselves from the point 
of view of a particular person, but we also are able to respond to the views of a number of 
others. We combine these views and come to internalize the view of “the generalized other” 
(i.e. society; Mead, 1925).
We start to wonder during our teens about our place in society. We start to question our 
identities. An identity is socially defined. It includes definitions and standards that are imposed 
on us by others, including interpersonal aspects (e.g., roles, relationships), potentialities (e.g., 
who we might become), and values (e.g., morals, priorities) (Baumeister, 1986). People have 
identities from birth (Baumeister, 1997), but they may not be aware of their import until the 
teen years. That is, we may start to wonder if our ascribed identity matches what we’ve devel-
oped and recognize as our own unique self-concept.
Consider the following poem by a 13-year-old girl (Santana, 2005) struggling with the 
various identities she imagines people placing on her:
The Girl
I am the girl who sits on her roof, who wishes she could fly
free, fly free from the
prison cell she lives in
I am the girl that most fear, whose reputation was forged on
terror.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
What identity or identities 
are imposed on you and 
which have you willingly 
embraced?
125

Self and Identity
I am the girl who tries her best, but people think she doesn’t
try her best, who tries to be
but fails miserably.
I am the girl who you wouldn’t know with a pen, whose
weapon of choice isn’t the
one that draws blood, but the weapon that can leave a bigger
mark: WORDS
I am the girl who wears a disguise, who fools you on who she
really is.
What if I wasn’t the girl who sits on her roof, who wishes she
could fly free?
What if I wasn’t the girl whose reputation was forged on
terror, the one who most feared?
What if I wasn’t the girl who tries her best, whom no one
thinks tries?
What if I wasn’t the girl you would need a pen to know, who
didn’t make her first
weapon of choice be words?
What if I wasn’t the girl who always wears a disguise?
But I’m not that girl. If I was then I wouldn’t be me, I’d just
be another face in the crowd.
So let’s go back to the beginning,
When all you knew was that,
I am a girl.
Source: “The Girl” by Santana, © 2005 in A. C. of Princeton (Ed.), Under age (Vol. 17, p. 16–17). Princeton, 
NJ: Arts Council of Princeton.
Many people believe, much as the psychologist Erik Erikson did, that an identity crisis 
in adolescence is inevitable, universal, and perfectly normal (Erikson, 1968). However, this 
popular view is not supported by current research evidence (see Baumeister, 1997, for a com-
plete discussion). For example, only teens who openly question the beliefs, values, and goals 
of their parents may experience an identity crisis as they experience a great deal of confusion 
and anxiety over who they are and who they 
wish to be. For such teens, the choice is to 
either embrace these expectations or to form 
their own identity that is true to their self-
concepts and yet satisfies the expectations of 
their social worlds. Other teens embrace their 
identity and do not experience a crisis.
Our Grown-Up Selves. 
As adults, we 
have for the most part a good sense of who 
we are (our self-concepts) and how we feel 
about ourselves (our self-esteem), and we can 
choose who we want to be or what aspects 
of ourselves we wish to present to oth-
ers (social identity). Terms such as “wife,” 
“bread-winner,” “father,” and “future doctor” 
are all social identities that may also be part 
of one’s self-concept. The difference is that 
self-concept comes from within and iden-
tity comes from others (Baumeister, 1997). 
For example, some people may not fully 
embrace their new identity as a college stu-
dent and may struggle to balance their studies 
© Prod. Numérik/Fotolia
Starting at age 12, adolescents 
start to develop objective 
self-awareness and become 
concerned about how they 
appear to others.
126

Self and Identity
and the expectations of parents and professors with their own desires or the expectations  
of friends. Similarly, people may impose identities on us—“Black man,” “old woman,” “disabled 
kid”—based on certain attributes without knowing who we really are on the inside. 
Consider this poem from a 30-something woman (Missuz J, n.d.). Can you see what social 
identities she is alluding to?
I Am From  . . . 
I am from pink spongy curlers in my hair every Saturday night, for princess 
hair on Sunday.
I am from days in the car—writing letters on crackers in squeeze cheese,  
playing and fighting and sitting.
I am from job lists and sharing a room and “borrowing” my sisters clothes.
I am from salt smells and waves and fog; and naked red rock and juniper  
and sage.
I am from The Mists of Avalon, The Red Tent, The Blue Sword, and 
Dragonsinger.
I am from a religion that spread guilt like cheap margarine.
I am from the thrill and the burn, the laughter and hunger and sometimes  
the truth.
I am from long sticky nights on the couch, filled with kisses, Cheers and Taxi.
I am from stony silence, and fighting it out, and talking it out, and loving  
it out.
I am from stretch marks and breast pumps and diapers and a baby bouncing 
on my hip.
I am from Funshine Bear and big girl panties and Twinkle Twinkle Little Star.
I am from South Beach and Atkins and Phentemine and bulimia.
I am from crying with Mandy, playing with Katy, singing with Kodie, dancing 
with Jennifer, and regretting with Kelli.
I am from apostrophes, settings, topic sentences, and make-up work.
I am from driving with Janzen, reading to Sophie, and Erik holding my hand.
Source: Reprinted courtesy of Rebecca Jorgensen.
“Missuz J” is a blogger who writes about being a mom, wife, teacher, sister, and woman, as 
well as an individual. She readily embraces all of these identities and integrates them into her 
self. This post was from November 2005 and was inspired by a writing assignment she gave her 
high school students.
Depending on the culture that we live in—and on our own characteristics—we may 
have an easier or a harder time embracing our identity (Aronson & Rogers, 2008; Cass, 
1979; Cross & Cross, 2008; Helms, 1990; Swanson, Cunningham, Youngblood, & Spencer, 
2009; Swartz, 2008). We may hold certain ethnic, racial, gender, sexual, or class identities 
that may be at odds with the dominant culture. For example, people who are made aware 
of their membership in a stereotyped group may be unable to perform up to their potential 
as a result of stereotype threat. This is when a person experiences distress when faced with 
a stereotype that threatens his or her self-esteem or social identity. This apprehension then 
causes the person’s performance to suffer, which ends up confirming the very stereotype he 
or she felt threatened by (Aronson, Lustina, Good, Keough, & Steele, 1999; Aronson, Quinn, 
& Spencer, 1998; Aronson & Rogers, 2008; Steele & Aronson, 1995; Steele, Spencer, & Aron-
son, 2002; Walton & Spencer, 2009). One need not believe the stereotype—or an ascribed 
social identity—to feel upset by it (Aronson & Rogers, 2008). However, new research suggests 
that writing about things that are important such as creativity, family relationships, career, 
or having a sense of humor may counteract this effect by reinforcing a person’s values and 
individuality (Miyake et al., 2010).
Impact of Culture on Self-Concepts
As should be clear to you by now, we develop our selves—our self-concepts, self-esteem, and 
social identities—by using three sources of knowledge: social comparison with others, the 
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Do you currently struggle 
with aspects of your 
identity?
“The fact that everyone can 
use the term ‘self’ with such 
ease and familiarity suggests 
that the concept of selfhood 
is rooted in some simple, 
universal human experience.”
Baumeister (1999, pp. 1–2)
127

Self and Identity
reflected appraisals of others, and our own self-appraisals. The self is very much the product 
of social interaction, in addition to cognitive developments (Harter, 2003). Given this, do you 
wonder how you might be different if you were born at a different time? What if you were born 
in a different place? As strange as it may seem at first, who we are depends a lot on the culture 
we are born into.
Recall the Twenty Statements Test (TST) discussed in the study that opened this chapter 
(Kuhn & McPartland, 1954). One way of scoring the test is to classify participants’ responses 
into one of four categories (Cousins, 1989; see Table 2). With this standardized scoring scheme 
we can compare the responses of people from various cultures to see if there are differences in 
self-concepts across cultures.
In one study, Japanese and American college students answered the TST and their answers 
were sorted into one of the four categories by three trained judges (Cousins, 1989). About 58% 
of the responses of the American students fell into the Attributive self-description category, 
referring to their own psychological attributes or traits, whereas for Japanese students Attribu-
tive descriptions made up significantly less, about 19% of their total responses (see Figure 1). 
When Japanese students did refer to themselves, it was generally to their preferences, interests, 
wishes, aspirations, activities, and habits more so than to their personal traits.
If they weren’t describing 
themselves using Attributive or 
trait descriptions, how did the 
Japanese students define them-
selves? They described them-
selves in terms of the social 
groups to which they belonged. 
About 27% of the Japanese 
students’ responses fell into 
the Social self-descriptions 
category compared to only 
9% of the American students’ 
responses. Japanese students 
were also more likely to refer 
to Physical self-descriptions 
(5%) than American students 
(2%). Interestingly, similar 
results were found when com-
paring Chinese and American 
Table 2  Coding Scheme for the Twenty Statements Test
Category
Description
Examples
Physical
Physical qualities without implying  
social roles or group membership such as 
the information you might find on a driver’s 
license
“I am a male”
“I am 18 years old”
“I am short”
Social
Social roles, institutional memberships, 
socially defined status
“I am a student”
“I am a mother”
“I am Jewish”
Attributive
Psychological and physiological states  
or traits
“I am a warm person”
“I am a high energy person”
“I am introverted”
Global
Descriptions so comprehensive or so vague 
that they do not distinguish that person from 
any other
“I am a human being”
“I am light”
“I am me”
Source: Cousins (1989, p. 126).
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Using the coding scheme 
in Table 2, what are your 
results like?
Figure 1  Mean proportion 
of psychological attributes 
endorsed by American and 
Japanese students in the 
two self-description tasks 
of Cousins (1989).  Source: 
(Markus & Kitayama, 1991, 
Figure 3, p. 233. Markus,  
H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). 
Culture and the self: 
Implications for cognition, 
emotion and motivation. 
Psychological Review, 98(2), 
224–253. Copyright American 
Psychological Association. 
Reprinted with permission.
0
0.5
0.4
0.3
Proportion of Attributes in
Self-Description
0.2
0.1
0.6
Twenty
Statements
Test
Contextualized
Format
American Students
Japanese Students
128

Self and Identity
college students (Trafimow, Triandis, & Goto, 1991), in that the Chinese students were more 
likely to describe themselves in social ways and the American students in attributive ways.
Individualism and Collectivism.  What is it about Japan and China that lead to similar self-
descriptions by their natives that are very different from the self-descriptions of Americans? In 
a word: culture. According to psychologist Harry Triandis (1990), cultures may be described 
along two dimensions: individualism and collectivism. The extent to which cultures emphasize 
individualism and collectivism actually affects how people define their very selves!
Individualism focuses on the uniqueness of the individual and distinguishes the person as 
separate from the group. Under individualism, people develop their own selves including atti-
tudes and values as distinct from the group’s. Individualistic cultures place a value on bravery, 
creativity, and self-reliance (Triandis, 1990).
Collectivism places greater emphasis on the views, needs, and goals of the group rather 
than of the individual. Under collectivism, people emphasize being part of a social group and 
sharing beliefs and customs. In the extreme, one’s beliefs, goals, attitudes, and values reflect 
those of the group. Collectivistic cultures value obligation, duty, security, tradition, dependence, 
harmony, obedience to authority, equilibrium, and proper action (Triandis, 1990).
Keep in mind that every culture has both individualistic and collectivistic components. Think of 
collectivism and individualism like water and ice: Instead of being opposites, they are two different 
states of the same substance (Triandis, 1990). Like water, we are connected to others, especially when 
we are young and dependent on family. However, as we grow we may separate ourselves and become 
individuals or nuclear families or social groups, much like ice crystals forming out of the water. Just 
as water may be turned into ice and ice can melt into water, we can form and dissolve social bonds 
with others. Cultures differ in the extent to which one state is emphasized over the other.
Cultures that emphasize individualism are considered individualistic cultures; cultures 
that emphasize collectivism are considered collectivistic cultures. About 80% of the world’s 
population live in collectivistic cultures (e.g., Africa, Asia, South America; Dwairy, 2002). In 
Japan, for example, people value wa, the harmonious ebb and flow of interpersonal relations. 
Similarly, the Chinese have jen, the ability to interact with others in a sincere, polite, and decent 
fashion. Latinos talk of being simpático with each other, which means to both respect and share 
another’s feelings (Markus & Kitayama, 1991).
Cultures may have developed to be more collectivistic or more individualistic due to cul-
tural complexity, ecology, mobility (both social and geographic), and affluence (Triandis, 1990). 
As cultures become more complex, individuals must choose how to act from among conflicting 
norms and diverse worldviews. Without a clear culturally defined norm for behavior, people are 
forced to choose based on their own internal values and desires. Similarly, cultural complexity 
increases as the range of possible jobs within a society increases, forcing people to specialize 
rather than just do what everybody else does. Complexity also increases as people move from 
rural to urban settings. Together, these trends push a culture toward individualism.
Individualism also increases when a country’s geography forces a separation among its 
people (e.g., mountains, islands) or when individuals have migrated to distant lands (e.g., Great 
Britain). This distance among members of a culture forces them to make individual choices, 
fostering individualism in the culture. Triandis (1990) suggested that democracy was born in 
ancient Greece because its geography of mountains and islands dispersed the population, forc-
ing cities—and individuals living in the cities—to develop their own governments and ways of 
doing things. Finally, with affluence, individuals are less dependent on the group for survival 
and are free to cultivate their own interests.
How do these differing themes of individualism and collectivism play out in a culture? For 
example, in the United States, a place where individualism reigns, we tend to say “The squeaky 
wheel gets the grease” encouraging people to stand up for their rights. What do they say in 
Japan? “The nail that stands out gets pounded down,” to encourage getting along with others 
and placing the harmony of the group above individual rights. Or, when you were growing 
up, what did your parents say to cajole you into eating your vegetables? Often, it was some 
variation of “Think of starving kids in Ethiopia, and appreciate how lucky you are.” What do 
Japanese kids hear from their parents? “Think of the farmer who worked so hard to produce this 
129

Self and Identity
rice for you; if you don’t eat it he will feel bad, for his efforts will have been in vain” (Markus 
& Kitayama, 1991, p. 224). These cultural values are also reflected in literature and cartoons.
Or, consider having a friend over for lunch. In the United States we would either ask our 
guest what he would like to have or we would have a range of available foods and flavors so that 
he could make a choice that reflects his personal preferences. What might happen in Japan? For 
one, a good host wouldn’t come out and ask her guest what she would want. That would be 
considered rude! Instead, she would anticipate—even read the mind of—her guest and prepare 
just the right food (Markus & Kitayama, 1991). Speaking up, not speaking up, eating what’s put 
in front of you, no wonder we experience discomfort while trying to figure out what the polite 
thing to do or say is while interacting with someone from a different cultural background!
Independent and Interdependent Selves.  As a result of the contrasting emphasis placed 
on the individual person compared to the group under individualism and collectivism, people 
come to think of themselves differently. In individualistic cultures people develop an indepen-
dent view of the self, whereas people living in collectivistic cultures develop an interdependent 
view of the self (Markus & Kitayama, 1991).
An independent self exists apart from other people and is autonomous and self-contained. 
Individuals are encouraged to embark on a process of self-actualization and self-discovery to 
develop their potential. People are their truest selves when alone, apart from the influence of 
others. In contrast, the interdependent self includes others. People cannot be understood when 
separated from their social group (e.g., family, friends, clan, coworkers, etc.); they are not truly 
themselves without others (Markus & Kitayama, 1991). However, this does not mean that a person 
with an interdependent self merges, or loses himself or herself with others or that the person is 
passive when interacting with others. These two views of the self are illustrated in Figure 2.
These two views of the self lead to differences in the demands that society places on people 
in their respective cultures. There are also differences in what role others take in our lives. Even 
the basis of healthy self-esteem depends on our view of the self and the culture to which we 
belong. Keep in mind that well-being and self-esteem come from attaining culturally valued 
outcomes, so that neither individualism nor collectivism is better than the other (Oyserman, 
Coon, & Kemmelmeier, 2002). You can see these differences for yourself in Table 3, and reflected 
in items from a scale measuring individualism and collectivism in Table 4.
An independent self is likely to be found in 
more individualistic cultures like American and 
western European (Markus & Kitayama, 1991) 
and also Canadian (Oyserman, Coon, & Kemmel-
meier, 2002). An interdependent self is likely to 
be found in more collectivistic cultures like Asian, 
African, Latin American, and southern European 
(Markus & Kitayama, 1991). Of course, we need 
to be careful not to overgeneralize or to assume we 
know a person’s self view based on his or her cul-
ture, as there are many cultures and countries that 
have not been directly tested (Oyserman, Coon, 
& Kemmelmeier, 2002) and people can define 
themselves as independent or interdependent—
regardless of their culture—depending on the task 
(Oyserman & Lee, 2008; Trafimow et al., 1991).
In countries with very strong ethnic or reli-
gious identification, people may develop an inter-
dependent self despite living in an individualistic 
culture. For example, in the United States, Hawai-
ians, Quakers, African Americans, Latinos, and 
women—not to mention Italians and others of 
southern European ancestry or people living in 
small towns and rural areas—may have a more 
Mother
Father
Self
Sibling
Co-worker
Friend
A. Independent View of Self
Friend
Mother
Father
Self
Sibling
Co-worker
Friend
B. Interdependent View of Self
Friend
Figure 2  Conceptual 
representations  
of the self.  Source: Marcus & 
Kitayama (1991) Fig 1, p. 226.  
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. 
(1991). Culture and the self: 
Implications for cognition, 
emotion and motivation. 
Psychological Review, 98(2), 
224–253. Copyright American 
Psychological Association. 
Reprinted with permission.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Answer the questions in 
Table 4. Are you more indi-
vidualistic or collectivistic? 
How do these values impact 
your self-concept and  
self-esteem? You may wish 
to reflect on Table 3 for  
features to think about.
130

Self and Identity
interdependent sense of self (Markus & Kitayama, 1991) as do many people living in the south-
ern United States (Vandello & Cohen, 1999). As you can see, it would be a mistake to overgen-
eralize and assume that all Americans have an independent self!
In fact, some have claimed that earlier generations of Americans, say in the 1950s to 1960s, 
were more likely to describe themselves using social roles, much like the Japanese and Chinese 
college students of more recent times (Zurcher, 1977). This shifting of American self-concept 
from collectivistic to individualistic parallels the social upheavals of the 1960s to 1970s includ-
ing the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, the civil rights movement, the Vietnam War, 
the women’s rights movement, and the Watergate scandal of President Richard Nixon. What 
have sociologists named the generation that came of age during this time of individual rights 
and distrust of social institutions like government? The Me generation!
Table 3  Summary of Key Differences Between an Independent and an Interdependent Self
Feature Compared
Independent Self
Interdependent Self
Definition
Separate from social context
Connected with social context
Structure
Bounded, unitary, stable
Flexible, variable
Important features
Internal, private (abilities, thoughts, feelings)
External, public (statuses, roles, relationships)
Tasks
Be unique
Express self
Realize internal attributes
Promote own goals
Be direct:  “say what’s on your mind”
Belong, fit in
Occupy one’s proper place
Engage in appropriate action
Promote others’ goals
Be indirect:  “read other’s mind”
Role of others
Self-evaluation: others important for social 
comparison, reflected appraisal
Self-definition: relationships with others in specific 
contexts define the self
Basis of self-esteem
Ability to express self, validate internal attributes
Ability to adjust, restrain self, maintain harmony 
with social context
Note: Esteeming the self may be primarily a Western phenomenon, and the concept of self-esteem should perhaps be replaced by self-satisfaction, or by a term that reflects 
the realization that one is fulfilling the culturally mandated task. Source: (Marcus & Kitayama, 1991, Table 1, p. 230. Marcus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: 
Implications for cognition, emotion and motivation. Psychological Review, 98(2), 224–253. Copyright American Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.
Table 4  Selected Items Measuring Individualism and Collectivism
Individualism
In the end, achievements define the man/woman.
A mature person knows his/her abilities and acts to obtain maximum utility from them.
A man/woman of character attempts to act on his/her values and attain his/her goals without 
depending on others.
A man/woman of weak character forms his opinions in consultation with his/her friends.
I feel uncomfortable if I find I am very similar to the others in my group.
Collectivism
A mature person understands that he/she must act in accordance with the honor  
of the group.
A man/woman of character helps his/her group before all else.
A mature person understands the needs of the group and acts to fulfill them.
What is good for my group is good for me.
Without group loyalty there is no self-actualization.
Note: Questions were answered on a 5-point scale from 1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. 
Source: Adapted from Oyserman (1993, Table 1. p. 9). See Brewer and Chen (2007) for a review of various measures of individualism 
and collectivism. Reprinted with permission from Oyserman, D., Terry, K., & Bybee, D. (2002), “A possible selves intervention to enhance 
school involvement,” Journal of Adolescence, 25, 313–326. Permission conveyed through the Copyright Clearance Center.
THINK ABOUT IT
Are today’s college students 
more likely to describe 
themselves using trait terms 
or social terms? Why?  
Do you think this is likely to 
change in the near future?
131

Self and Identity
Possible Selves
According to modern-day psychologists, an important aspect of our self-concepts encom-
passes our hopes—and fears—of what we might become. For example, hoped-for selves might 
include the successful self, the creative self, the rich self, the thin self, or the loved and admired 
self. Feared selves might be the alone self, the depressed self, the incompetent self, the alcoholic 
self, the unemployed self, or the bag lady self. These images of our possible selves help us choose 
our aspirations, maintain motivation, and provide continuity in our self-concepts over time 
(Markus & Nurius, 1986).
A quote from William James stated (1890):
Not that I would not, if I could, be both handsome and fat and well dressed, 
and a great athlete, and make a million a year, be a wit, a bon-vivant, and a 
lady-killer, as well as a philosopher; a philanthropist, statesman, warrior, and 
African explorer, as well as a “tone-poet” and saint. . . . Such different characters 
may conceivably at the outset of life be alike possible to a man. But to make any 
one of them actual, the rest must more or less be suppressed. So the seeker of his 
truest, strongest, deepest self must review the list carefully, and pick out the one 
on which to stake his salvation. All other selves thereupon become unreal, but the 
fortunes of this self are real. . . . [We] . . . choose . . . one of many possible selves 
or characters [to become]. (pp. 309–310)
Possible selves also help us make sense out of our current experiences, as they give us a 
context to evaluate and interpret events. For example, a student with a possible self of physi-
cian will interpret a grade of A in organic chemistry differently from, say, a student with a pos-
sible self of lawyer. Or a person with a feared possible self of being alone or abandoned might 
react more negatively to a broken lunch date than someone without this negative possible self 
(Markus & Nurius, 1986).
Positive Possible Selves.  Ideas for possible selves derive from our past experiences set 
against the backdrop of our time, place, and culture. Our immediate social context has a big-
ger influence on our possible selves than demographics such as age, gender, or socioeconomic 
status, and here again we see the influence of our social experiences in making us who we are 
(Lee & Oyserman, 2009). Role models, either in the media or as real people in our worlds, pro-
vide powerful images of what we might become, or what we might fear becoming. For example, 
about 33% of college students and 25% of adolescents mention physical appearance as part of 
their desired self (Bybee & Wells, 2006). Using her media impact, Oprah Winfrey started a “Live 
Your Best Life” campaign to help readers of her magazine and viewers of her talk show imagine, 
strive for, and achieve a positive possible self. This campaign provides very vivid and powerful 
images of women living well despite their circumstances or past failures and no doubt serves 
as a motivating possible self for people, especially women, to change their lives for the better.
Psychologists have investigated the possible selves of many different kinds of people including 
pregnant teens and teen moms (Nurius, Casey, Lindhorst, & Macy, 2006), young fathers in prison 
(Meek, 2007), low-income mothers (Lee & Oyserman, 2009), juvenile delinquent teens (Oyser-
man & Markus, 1990), young women in counseling (Dunkel, Kelts, & Coon, 2006), gay men and 
lesbian women (King & Smith, 2004), and young, middle, and elderly adults (Cross & Markus, 
1991). Let’s consider some of these findings in depth.
Have you ever imagined what your life would be like if you married? Do you picture 
yourself as a good provider? A good homemaker? Both of these roles are examples of possible 
selves (Eagly, 2009). Can our possible selves change what we think is attractive in a potential 
mate? Apparently they can.
College students were randomly assigned to imagine themselves as married with children 
in one of three future self conditions: a homemaker role, a provider role, or a control condi-
tion in which they imagined themselves in whatever role came to mind. Then, while holding 
this image of their future self, they rated how important various characteristics were in their 
future mate. Although women rated provider characteristics as more important than men, 
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Do you imagine that you 
will be married someday? 
Do you picture yourself as a 
good provider or as a good 
homemaker?
132

Self and Identity
both women and men who imagined themselves as a future homemaker rated provider char-
acteristics (e.g., status, ambition, career focus, salary) as more important than participants in 
the provider condition. Both men and women who imagined themselves as a future provider, 
however, rated homemaker characteristics (e.g., good cook, good with children, good house-
keeper) as more important in a future mate. This study suggests that our possible selves can 
even change what we think is attractive in a future mate!
Sometimes people discover that they are growing up to be a person they didn’t quite imag-
ine. Such may be the case for gay men and lesbian women, especially those who are raised in 
conservative families or in a culture that assumes that heterosexuality is the norm. For example, 
in the United States of the late 20th century, many gays and lesbians grew up imagining them-
selves living the proverbial American dream of marrying someone of the other sex and having 
children. The realization that one is gay or lesbian requires that one abandon this straight pos-
sible self in favor of a gay possible self. How might an individual’s ability to imagine one self 
or the other relate to well-being?
This question was investigated in a study in which gay men and lesbians were asked to 
imagine their best possible straight and gay/lesbian future selves (King & Smith, 2004). Partici-
pants 18 to 66 years old rated how easily and vividly they imagined these possible selves. They 
also rated the extent to which they were out to their family, friends, and coworkers. Finally, they 
also answered questionnaires that measured their psychological distress, degree of regret or sec-
ond thoughts about their current gay/lesbian life, and feelings of well-being and life satisfaction.
The more salient a straight possible self was, the less life satisfaction and the more regrets 
a participant reported. In addition, the less likely they were to be out to others. In contrast, the 
more salient a gay/lesbian self was, the greater life satisfaction, the fewer regrets, and the more 
open about his or her life a participant was. Further, at a follow-up study conducted 2 years 
later, salience of straight possible selves was related to increased psychological distress whereas 
salience of gay/lesbian selves was related to lowered distress 2 years later. The more people were 
invested in their best possible gay/lesbian self—that is, easily and vividly imagining a gay/lesbian 
life, being out to more people—the less distress participants felt over time.
Negative Possible Selves.  The studies reviewed so far focused on positive possible selves. 
What about negative or feared possible selves? Imagine that you are an adolescent, 13 to 16 years 
old, say, living in inner-city Detroit. Perhaps you’ve committed some minor crimes, perhaps 
you’ve gotten into more serious crime, perhaps you are trying to stay out of trouble. What kinds 
of possible selves are particularly salient to you?
The easier it is to imagine 
a possible self, like being a 
mom or a dad, the more likely 
this possible self will guide 
our aspirations and increase 
our well-being.
© Creatas/Thinkstock
SEE FOR YOURSELF
What qualities do you find 
attractive in a future mate? 
How do your answers com-
pare to the results of the 
Eagly (2009) study?
SEE FOR YOURSELF
What do you hope to be 
true of you in the next 5 
years? What do you fear 
might be true?
133

Self and Identity
This is the question investigated by Oyserman and Markus (1990). They identified four 
groups of youths differing in their rates of delinquency. One group attended a regular public 
school and had no history of crime. A second showed mild delinquency and were attending 
either an alternative school or a delinquency intervention program as part of regular public 
school. A third group showed moderate delinquency and attended a special school or lived in 
a group home. The fourth group had a record of severe delinquency and were attending a state 
training school as a last resort after other treatments had failed. The participants included Black 
and White males and females.
Each teen was interviewed one-on-one by a trained researcher and asked to imagine pos-
sible selves over the next year. Specifically, they were asked to list three of each of their expected 
selves (“What is most likely to be true for you in the next year”), hoped-for selves (“Possible 
selves that you most hope to describe you in the next year”), and feared selves (“What do you 
most fear or worry about being in the next year”).
There were stark differences between the nondelinquent group and the severe delinquency 
group. Consider this reply from a young man in the public school group:
I expect to be doing better in school, to be almost independent—ready to move 
out and to have a part-time job. I hope to study more, have a good paying 
part-time job, and be independent of my parents. I’m afraid I might not stay in 
school, I won’t get a summer job, and I’ll be homeless. (16-year-old male, public 
school; Oyserman & Markus, 1990, p. 117)
Now, compare this reply with the reply from a teen in the severe delinquency group:
Next year I expect to be in trouble more, but trying to stay out of trouble, and 
trying to stay in school. I hope to graduate high school, not be in trouble with the 
police, and start a good job so I won’t steal for cash. I’m afraid I might be a thief, in 
prison, dead—killed breaking into houses. (16-year-old male, maximum secu-
rity training school for delinquent boys; Oyserman & Markus, 1990, p. 117)
Overall, the possible selves of this sample were more likely to include criminal than 
having a job or getting along well in school. Note that having a negative feared self—as 
part of a self-concept—doesn’t necessarily set you up for failure, nor is holding a posi-
tive hoped-for or expected self enough to 
lead to success. In a follow-up of the pub-
lic school and community placement teens 
2 or 3 months later, those youths who had a 
balance of positive and negative selves com-
mitted fewer and less serious crimes than 
youths with more negative selves or more 
positive selves. For possible selves to have 
the greatest impact on motivation and long-
term behavior change, we need both hoped-
for and feared selves. That is, having a clear 
positive hoped-for self helps us imagine 
what we can do to avoid the negative feared 
self, and a negative feared self can help us 
be aware of what could happen if we don’t 
achieve our positive hoped-for self.
Might it be possible to use these find-
ings on possible selves to help teens develop 
alternative possible selves and to succeed in 
school? Researchers developed an after-school 
program specifically for African Ameri-
can middle school students from inner-city 
Detroit (Oyserman, Terry, & Bybee, 2002). 
The 9-week intervention included group 
© Tommaso79/Dreamstime.com
The right balance of hoped-
for and feared possible 
selves can be particularly 
motivating.
134

Self and Identity
activities and discussions to help the youths articulate academically oriented possible selves, 
identify specific strategies to help achieve these selves, connect their possible selves to the selves 
of successful adult role models, and improve their social skills.
An important aspect of this intervention was that it took account of their social context. 
For example, the workshops took place after-hours in their regular schools and involved 
other kids in their school and adults in the community. The workshops also addressed 
issues these kids face on a regular basis including racism and how to deal with it, positive 
aspects of racial identity, and academic achievement as part of racial identity. Compared 
to boys and girls who did not experience the intervention, participants showed a greater 
sense of bonding to school, a greater concern for doing well in school, more balanced pos-
sible selves, knowledge of more plausible strategies to achieve their possible selves, greater 
school attendance, and, for boys, a decrease in getting into trouble at school (Oyserman, 
Terry, & Bybee, 2002).
These results are pretty remarkable when you realize that without this intervention, these 
middle school kids would be at risk for delinquency, much like the teens of the Oyserman and 
Markus (1990) study discussed in the preceding pages. Other researchers have created similar 
programs for at-risk youth, university-level student athletes, and middle school children (Hock, 
Deshler, & Schumaker, 2006).
Then and Now: The Self
As I am writing this chapter a certain phone company is launching the debut of a new mobile 
phone that is, in the words of the company, “the first phone that becomes 100% you.” The ad 
goes on to explain that you can “make your phone as unique as you are” with customizable 
accessories, applications, covers, and skins. As someone who can remember when phones were 
not mobile, came in basic black, and were rented to customers by the one and only phone 
company in existence at the time, the idea of customizing a phone would be like customizing 
a microwave oven! Clothes and living spaces sure, but when did choosing utilities become an 
important way of expressing ourselves?
According to Roy Baumeister (1987), the self has become a “problem.” For psychologists 
the self is a fascinating puzzle and exciting research area and has been for the last 120 years or 
so! For the rest of us, the self is something we need to find, become, express, or even have a crisis 
over. Growing up in modern Western societies we view ourselves—and others—as unique and 
special. But this was not always the case.
Drawing on the historical record and themes in literature of the time, psychologist Roy 
Baumeister described how the self—including self-knowledge, potential and fulfillment, rela-
tion between individual and society, and self-definitions—has changed in the course of history 
(Baumeister, 1986, 1987; see also Gergen, 1991, and Leary, 2004).
The history of self-knowledge can be traced at least as far back as the ancient Greeks. The 
words “Know thyself” were inscribed over the entrance to the Temple of Apollo at Delphi. Of 
course, in ancient times this probably meant that one should appraise his talents to be able to 
carry out his duties effectively, with good judgment and common sense. Even up to medieval 
times, around the 11th to 15th centuries, a person’s identity simply came from his or her 
duty or place in society, and depended on his or her social rank, family ties, and occupation 
(Baumeister, 1987).
Notions about the self at this time paralleled early Christian beliefs that salvation 
would come to humanity as a whole. However, this changed around the 12th century 
or so when the Christian concept of the Last Judgment emphasized individual salvation, 
suggesting that one’s eternal fate depended on the sum of one’s moral and spiritual life 
(Baumeister, 1987).
During the 16th to 18th centuries people became fascinated with the distinction between 
inner and outer life. Before that, people essentially equated the self with concrete outer appear-
ance: People looked like their station in life and that is who they essentially were. However, this 
new fascination with misleading appearances led to recognition of a private, inner, real self that 
was hidden (Baumeister, 1987). Just think of the themes in Shakespeare that reflect the contrast 
“[The self] has justly been 
regarded as the most puzzling 
puzzle with which psychology 
has to deal.”
William James (1890, p. 330)
135

Self and Identity
between appearances and realities: Romeo and Juliet (“O Romeo, Romeo, wherefore art thou 
Romeo? . . . ’Tis but thy name that is my enemy: Thou art thyself”), The Merchant of Venice 
(“Hath not a Jew eyes . . . if you prick us, do we not bleed?”), or Twelfth Night and other plays 
in which people switch places or pretend to be others.
Puritanism during the 16th and 17th centuries increased self-consciousness as individuals 
worried about their fate in the afterlife. Self-consciousness and self-awareness became impor-
tant values and people became concerned with their own self-deception. The self was deemed 
difficult or impossible to know (Baumeister, 1987).
As people sought to understand this hidden side to the self, personality became more 
important, as reflected in the increased popularity of biography and autobiography in the 
literature of the 18th and 19th centuries. People recognized that personality, rather than 
social status, defined the individual. It is interesting to note the psychologist and philosopher 
William James and his brother, the writer Henry James, both tackled the problem of self from 
different perspectives during this time. Politically, economically, and socially, this period saw 
revolutions in America and in France, for example, and a rise in individual rights and social 
equality (Baumeister, 1997). As a result, the Romantic era of the late 18th to early 19th centuries 
emphasized the unique, individual, cosmic destiny that an individual was expected to discover 
and fulfill (Baumeister, 1987, 1997).
Victorian repressiveness of the middle and late 19th century only served to further empha-
size the unique, but hidden self. High moral standards forced Victorians to become self-conscious 
and to hide their true selves, lest they appear to fall short of impossibly high standards of behavior 
(Baumeister, 1987). Victorians believed that the inner self could be revealed inadvertently, a feat 
exemplified by Sherlock Holmes with his keen powers of perception (Baumeister, 1987). Sigmund 
Freud may have captured this feeling best when he observed, “Betrayal oozes from every pore” 
(Baumeister, 1987; Freud, 1905/1959, p. 94). Perhaps Freud’s ability to decode this hidden self 
explains his popularity then and continued popularity today.
As a result of increasing modernization and mass production during the early part of 
the 20th century, people felt an increasing alienation and discontent with work life. This 
set the stage for self-exploration and belief in personal uniqueness that marked the self 
of the latter part of the 20th century (Baumeister, 1987). By the time Erik Erikson coined 
the phrase identity crisis (Erikson, 1968) the fervor with which people embraced the idea 
suggests that he merely named, rather than discovered, an important human experience 
(Baumeister, 1999).
By the end of the 20th century and into our own time, we struggle for a balance between 
our individual uniqueness and our group membership (Brewer, 1991) as we embrace our 
diverse social identities. What about the self of the 21st century? We have yet to see the full 
impact of technology—such as the Internet with instant messaging (IM), social networking, 
and yes, customizable phones—that simultaneously brings us closer to friends, family, and 
strangers even as it invites deception or at least strategic self-presentation and experimentation 
with various identities.
Under the repressiveness 
of the Victorian era people 
became self-conscious and 
developed a fascination with 
the hidden aspects of the self.
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division, Washington, D.C. 
(LC-USZ62-94644)
136

Self and Identity
Self-Esteem
Self-esteem, the “greatest love” according to a classic song, is just that: the amount of value people 
place on themselves (Baumeister, Campbell, Kreuger, & Vohs, 2003). People with high self-esteem 
have a favorable view of themselves, whereas people low in self-esteem have an unfavorable view 
of themselves. Keep in mind that self-esteem is more of a perception or an opinion and does not 
imply anything about whether the person actually is a good or a bad person. This might be con-
fusing, as people who are high in self-esteem may have an accurate and justified appreciation of 
their own achievements and successes or they may have an inflated, arrogant, and conceited view 
of their talents. Similarly, low self-esteem may reflect an accurate view of one’s shortcomings, or it 
may be a distorted and problematic view of one’s perceived inferiority (Baumeister et al., 2003).
Self-esteem often refers to a general evaluation of one’s self-concept (e.g., Rosenberg, 1965), 
but we can also have domain-specific self-esteem for work (e.g., Brockner, 1988), academics 
(e.g., Marsh, 1993), athletics (e.g., Fox & Corbin, 1989), appearance (e.g., Franzoi & Shields, 
1984), and even toward one’s social identity (Luhtanen & Crocker, 1992). Global self-esteem is 
moderately correlated with domain-specific self-esteem.
Self-Esteem Level
People vary in the amount of self-esteem they feel, so that even though we talk about people 
high or low in self-esteem, self-esteem is really a matter of degree. In fact, people rarely admit—
at least not on questionnaires to psychologists—that they feel bad about themselves. Low self-
esteem is really more like lacking positive views about the self (Baumeister et al., 2003). In 
many experiments people are classified as low in self-esteem if they fall in the bottom half or 
bottom third of a sample of people. You can get some idea of your own self-esteem by taking 
the Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale (Rosenberg, 1965) in Table 5.
People with high self-esteem tend to agree with items such as “I feel that I’m a person of 
worth, at least on an equal plane with others” or “I take a positive attitude toward myself” and to 
disagree with items like “At times, I think I am no good at all” or “I feel I do not have much to be 
proud of” (Rosenberg, 1965, pp. 17–18). People low in self-esteem, rather than feeling bad about 
themselves and agreeing with the negative items and disagreeing with the positive items, tend to 
be more neutral toward all items, sometimes agreeing or disagreeing, but not very strongly. In the 
words of one researcher, “High scores are high, but low scores are medium” (Tice, 1993, p. 40).
SEE FOR YOURSELF
How do you feel about 
yourself? Take the assess-
ment in Table 5 to find out.
Table 5  The Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale
How do you feel about yourself? For each of the items below, strongly agree SA, agree A, 
disagree D, or strongly disagree SD by circling the appropriate response.
	 1.	 On the whole, I am satisfied with myself.
SA
A
D
SD
	 *2.	 At times, I think I am no good at all.
SA
A
D
SD
	 3.	 I feel that I have a number of good qualities.
SA
A
D
SD
	 4.	 I am able to do things as well as most other people.
SA
A
D
SD
	 *5.	 I feel I do not have much to be proud of.
SA
A
D
SD
	 *6.	 I certainly feel useless at times.
SA
A
D
SD
	 7.	 I feel that I’m a person of worth, at least on an equal plane with others.
SA
A
D
SD
	 *8.	 I wish I could have more respect for myself.
SA
A
D
SD
	 *9.	 All in all, I am inclined to feel that I am a failure.
SA
A
D
SD
	10.	 I take a positive attitude toward myself.
SA
A
D
SD
Scoring: SA = 3, A = 2, D = 1, SD = 0. Items with an asterisk are reverse scored, that is, SA = 0, A = 1, D = 2, SD = 3. 
Sum the scores for the 10 items. The higher the score, the higher the self-esteem. Scores below 15 suggest low self-esteem.
Source: Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
137

Self and Identity
People with high self-esteem are better than people with lower self-esteem in coping with 
failure. They persist longer and bounce back quicker from setbacks (Shrauger & Rosenberg, 
1970; Shrauger & Sorman, 1977). People with lower self-esteem are more vulnerable to the 
slings and arrows of everyday life, showing more reactivity to events and greater mood swings 
(Campbell, Chew, & Scratchley, 1991). Also, people with lower self-esteem are more easily 
persuaded by the social influence of others (Brockner, 1984). People with lower self-esteem 
experience a conflict between wanting success and approval and being afraid of falling short 
(Brown, 1993). People with higher self-esteem are even physically healthier than people with 
low self-esteem (Brown & McGill, 1989).
Self-Esteem Stability
In addition to level of self-esteem (i.e., whether one’s self-esteem is high or low), researchers 
study how changeable one’s self-esteem is. Self-esteem stability refers to how stable or variable 
people’s general feelings of self-worth are over time (Kernis & Goldman, 2003). Although most 
self-esteem scales ask about how people typically feel about themselves or how they feel about 
themselves in general, self-esteem stability is measured by asking people how they feel about 
themselves at the moment that they are answering the question. Then, researchers ask people 
this question once or twice a day over a 4- to 7-day period.
People with stable self-esteem are consistent in how they feel about themselves. People with 
unstable or variable self-esteem feel good or bad about themselves depending on what’s going 
on around them. They seem to be very responsive—almost too responsive—to events that are 
potentially relevant to their self-worth. These events may be actual events (e.g., a compliment or 
an insult) or their own thoughts and reflections (e.g., thinking about one’s appearance). People 
with unstable self-esteem often feel fragile or vulnerable as if their self-esteem is continually in 
jeopardy (Kernis & Goldman, 2003).
There is some evidence that level of self-esteem interacts with stability of self-esteem. Low 
self-esteem may not be so bad if one is variable, compared to stable, in this negative self-view 
(Paradise & Kernis, 2002). However, people with unstable high self-esteem may have more 
difficulty coping in their everyday life compared to people with stable high self-esteem. People 
with unstable, high self-esteem tend to be more defensive (Kernis, Grannemann, & Barclay, 
1992), self-aggrandizing (Kernis, Greenier, Herlocker, Whisenhunt, & Abend, 1997), prone to 
anger (Kernis et al., 1989), and to have less satisfying relationships (Kernis & Goldman, 2003) 
than people with stable high self-esteem.
Self-Concept Clarity
People with high and low self-esteem don’t differ only in how they feel about themselves; they 
also differ in how they think about themselves. People with higher self-esteem know themselves 
better. Self-concept clarity refers to how well people know—or think they know—themselves. 
Although it is similar to self-esteem stability (Campbell et al., 1996), self-concept clarity refers 
to consistency of our self-concepts whereas self-esteem stability refers to consistency of our 
self-esteem, our feelings about our self-concepts.
In a very simple demonstration, college students described themselves using 15 pairs of 
adjectives and then rated how confident they were (Campbell, 1990). For example, they were 
asked how silly versus serious or how extravagant versus thrifty they were on a 7-point scale. 
A person who is clearer in his or her self-concept would give more extreme answers—that is, 
away from the midpoint—than a person who is more wishy-washy about himself or herself.
This is precisely what the researchers found. People with high self-esteem gave more 
extreme responses than people with low self-esteem. They were also more confident in their 
responses than people lower in self-esteem. In subsequent studies, participants high in self-
esteem were also faster at making self-ratings and more consistent in their ratings, than par-
ticipants lower in self-esteem (Campbell, 1990).
Similar results have been found by other researchers using different ways of defining and 
measuring self-concept clarity (Stinson, Wood, & Doxey, 2008) and related concepts including self-
concept confusion (Campbell & Lavallee, 1993), self-certainty (Baumgardner, 1990; Wright, 2001), 
self-ambivalence (Riketta & Ziegler, 2006), self-concept integration versus compartmentalization 
“I know who I am. No one else 
knows who I am. If I was a 
giraffe, and someone said I was 
a snake, I’d think, no, actually 
I’m a giraffe.”
Richard Gere, to British newspaper 
The Guardian, when asked if what 
the press says about his private life 
bothers him
THINK ABOUT IT
Does knowing yourself 
cause high self-esteem 
or does having high self-
esteem help you know 
yourself?
138

Self and Identity
© Michael Blann/Thinkstock
Shooting yourself in the foot to protect your self-esteem
As strange as it may seem, self-handicapping is when we purposely set ourselves up 
for possible failure. If we fail, we have a ready-made excuse and some measure of self-
protection. And if we succeed despite the sabotage? Why, we look even better and increase 
our worth in the eyes of others and ourselves! In this way self-handicapping can serve 
either self-enhancement or self-protection motives, depending on the task and the likeli-
hood of success or failure.
In one experiment, participants who were high or low in self-esteem would have 
a chance to practice and then perform a task (Tice, 1991). Participants were randomly 
assigned to one of four conditions that differed in how important they thought the task was 
and whether success or failure was meaningful on the task. For example, in one condition 
participants believed success indicated that they had high ability but that failure indicated 
nothing about their ability. In another condition, participants believed that failure meant 
they lacked ability but that success indicated nothing about their ability. The differing 
instructions suggested to participants that self-handicapping, in the form of not practicing 
before their big evaluation, could either protect or enhance their self-esteem.
Sure enough, before their performance participants who were low in self-esteem prac-
ticed less and self-handicapped more than people high in self-esteem when they thought 
it would protect their self-esteem (when failure reflected badly on their ability, but that 
success was no big deal) whereas participants high in self-esteem practiced less and handi-
capped more than people low in self-esteem when they thought it would enhance their 
self-esteem (when success reflected well on their ability but that failure was no big deal). 
In a second study, these findings were replicated with participants choosing distracting 
music as a self-handicap (Tice, 1991).
There are many ways that people, especially college students, can self-handicap. Perhaps 
you’ve seen some of these strategies in yourself or others: making excuses, not getting enough 
sleep, not trying your best, eating badly, arriving late, being distracted, not practicing, not 
studying, trying to do too much, using alcohol and other drugs, and—everyone’s favorite—
procrastinating. Although self-handicapping strategies may provide a short-term benefit by 
taking the pressure off, they are often detrimental in the long run because they prevent us 
from performing our best. Even procrastination, despite most procrastinators thinking that 
they “work best under pressure,” is detrimental (Tice & Baumeister, 1997). So the next time 
you are tempted to self-handicap—or procrastinate—think again!
The Personality of Everyday Life
People with low self-esteem 
often self-handicap as a way 
of protecting their self-esteem.
139

Self and Identity
(Showers, 1992; Showers & Zeigler-Hill, 2007; Story, 2004; Zeigler-Hill & Showers, 2007), con-
tingent self-esteem (Crocker & Knight, 2005; Deci & Ryan, 1995), and fragile self-esteem (Kernis, 
Lakey, & Heppner, 2008). However, one puzzle still remains: Does self-concept clarity cause self-
esteem or does self-esteem cause self-concept clarity? Perhaps they affect each other (Brandt & 
Vonk, 2006; Hoyle, 2006; Showers & Zeigler-Hill, 2006). Only with more research will we be able 
to know for sure.
Life Outcomes of High and Low Self-Esteem: Myths and Realities
Psychologists and the general public alike agree that self-esteem is important for individual 
well-being. In fact, in the 1980s the California legislature went so far as to fund a task force to 
increase the self-esteem of its residents. It believed—in the absence of scientific evidence—that 
an investment in the self-esteem of the citizenry would pay dividends in a reduction of welfare 
dependency, unwanted pregnancy, school failure, crime, drug addiction, and other social prob-
lems. Is it true that increasing self-esteem can do all this? Take a look at Table 6 and test your 
own knowledge about the supposed outcomes of self-esteem.
Myths? Truths? How can we know for sure? In 2003 the American Psychological Society 
(now the Association for Psychological Science) charged a task force, including four researchers 
in the area of self-esteem, to review and summarize available research to evaluate such claims 
(Baumeister et al., 2003). The statements in Table 6 come directly out of the task force’s work. 
Let’s take a closer look at some of what it found.
MYTH 1: Too many people suffer from low self-esteem.
FACT: There is no epidemic of low self-esteem in America or elsewhere in the world, 
for that matter. Quite the opposite: The average person sees himself or herself as better than 
average, in both the United States (Baumeister et al., 2003) and in 52 other cultures includ-
ing European, South American, Australian, Asian, and African, and in both individualistic 
Table 6  Myths (and Realities) of Self Esteem—Which Is which?
Can you separate the myths of self-esteem from the true research findings? Take this quiz to find 
out. Circle true or false to each of the statements below. The answers are given below and in the 
text.
	 1.	 Too many people suffer from low self-esteem.
True
False
	 2.	 People with high self-esteem are smarter, more likable, and more physically 
attractive than people with low self-esteem.
True
False
	 3.	 People with high self-esteem do better in school and achieve more on the 
job, and have greater life satisfaction and happiness than people with low 
self-esteem.
True
False
	 4.	 Interventions that aim to increase achievement by increasing the 
self-esteem of school students are successful.
True
False
	 5.	 Relationships are more likely to break up if a partner has low 
self-esteem than if a partner has high self-esteem.
True
False
	 6.	 Bullies suffer from low self-esteem so they need to lash out and hurt others.
True
False
	 7.	 People with low self-esteem are more likely to abuse alcohol and other drugs 
than people with high self-esteem.
True
False
	 8.	 People with low self-esteem are more likely to engage in premature sex-
ual activity and to have an unwanted pregnancy than people with high 
self-esteem.
True
False
Answers: All of the above statements are false. 
Source: See the text and Baumeister et al. (2003) for details.
THINK ABOUT IT
Is self-esteem important? 
Why?
140

Self and Identity
and collectivistic cultures (Schmitt & Allik, 2005). In many experiments, the “low self-
esteem group,” defined as scoring in the bottom portion of a sample of participants, often 
ends up scoring at least one standard deviation above the midpoint of the scale. In fact, the 
average score on self-esteem tests is actually above the midpoint of the scale (Baumeister, 
Tice, & Hutton, 1989). Although this lets us make comparisons between people higher 
and lower in self-esteem, it does not suggest that low self-esteem is a problem. We might 
well wonder if some of this self-reported high self-esteem is due to deliberate impression 
management, defensive self-enhancement, narcissism, or a tendency to see everything more 
positively (Baumeister et al., 2003). This heterogeneity of high self-esteem, where there may 
be different kinds of high self-esteem, makes it difficult to detect significant effects of 
self-esteem.
MYTH 2: People with high self-esteem are smarter, more likable, and more physically 
attractive than people with low self-esteem.
FACT: There is a strong correlation between self-esteem and being smart, likable, popular, 
and physically attractive, but this is true only for self-ratings. There is no correlation between 
self-esteem and others’ ratings of how likable, popular, and physically attractive a person is, 
or with objective measures of intelligence. What’s going on? People with high self-esteem 
believe all these things about themselves, but they are not true by objective standards. In fact, 
people high and low in self-esteem are equally likable and equal in physical attractiveness and 
intelligence.
For example, in one study male and female college students rated themselves on self-esteem, 
attractiveness, and intelligence, and took a standard intelligence test (Gabriel, Critelli, & Ee, 1994). 
Then, experimenters took their photographs and rated each one on attractiveness compared to the 
average college student. For both men and women, there was a significant correlation of r = .35 
between self-esteem and self-rated intelligence but no correlation between self-esteem and scores 
on the intelligence test (r = -.07). The results for attractiveness were similar, but fell just short of 
statistical significance. There was a positive correlation between self-esteem and self-rated attrac-
tiveness (r = .23) but not between self-esteem and experimenter-rated attractiveness (r = .01). 
Both men and women were guilty of this self-inflation. However, men inflated their own attractive-
ness ratings more than women did.
MYTH 3: People with high self-esteem do better in school, achieve more in their job, and 
have greater life satisfaction and happiness than people with low self-esteem.
FACT: There is a correlation between self-esteem and success but self-esteem is the 
result—not the cause—of success in school, work, and life. We have to remind ourselves that 
correlation is not causation. In this case research has demonstrated that achieving commend-
able accomplishments, working hard for outcomes, developing our skills through effort and 
Although self-esteem is 
important, scientific evidence 
suggests that interventions 
to increase self-esteem may 
be misguided.
© Bradcalkins/Dreamstime.com
141

Self and Identity
practice, and coping with negative events all make us feel good about ourselves whether in 
school, on the job, or in our lives.
All of the studies on workplace success and self-esteem are correlational in nature (Judge & 
Bono, 2001), but school success is one of the most studied outcomes of self-esteem (Baumeister 
et al., 2003). Numerous studies employing various methods, including longitudinal designs 
which can test for causality, find little (Valentine, DuBois, & Cooper, 2004) or no (Baumeister 
et al., 2003) effect of self-esteem on school achievement. Where there are significant correla-
tions between self-esteem and achievement, they are small and most often due to achievement 
causing increased self-esteem rather than the other way around. There is also some evidence 
that third variables, like family background, can cause both increased self-esteem and increased 
school achievement.
MYTH 4: Interventions that aim to increase achievement by increasing the self-esteem of 
school students are successful.
FACT: Alas, not only are such programs less successful than other, more traditional, meth-
ods of increasing achievement (e.g., getting parents more involved), but such methods may 
actually backfire. For example, one study specifically targeted college students who got a C, D, 
or an F on the midterm of their introductory psychology class and randomly assigned them 
to one of three feedback conditions (Forsyth, Lawrence, Burnette, & Baumeister, 2007). For all 
students, this feedback was administered via a weekly e-mail message that included a review 
question on that week’s material. The control condition received this review question only. In 
a second condition, students received feedback aimed at increasing their self-esteem. In a third 
condition, students received feedback aimed at increasing their sense of control and taking 
responsibility for their grades and study habits.
What happened when it came to the final exam? Take a look at Figure 3. The pattern of results 
was opposite to predictions! Bolstering self-esteem actually led to poorer performance especially 
among the weakest students. That is, students in the self-esteem bolstering feedback condition 
Figure 3  Mean final exam 
scores for C and D/F students 
in the self-esteem bolstering 
condition (SE), the internal and 
controllable (I/C) condition, and 
the control condition.  Source: 
From Forsyth et al. (2007, 
Figure 1, p. 453). Reprinted 
with permission from Forsyth, 
D. R., Lawrence, N. K., Burnette, 
J. L., & Baumeister, R. F. (2007), 
“Attempting to improve the 
academic performance of 
struggling college students by 
bolstering their self-esteem: An 
intervention that backfired,” 
Journal of Social and Clinical 
Psychology, 26(4), 447–459.  
Permission conveyed through 
the Copyright Clearance Center.
80
45
65
70
75
60
55
C Students
D/F Students
Control
Control
I/C
I/C
SE
SE
50
Score
40
35
30
Test 1
Final
Assessment
142

Self and Identity
actually performed worse than the other two groups, and none of the groups improved their grades 
from the midterm to the final exam. The authors pointed out that not only did the self-esteem 
group of D/F students perform significantly worse than the other two D/F groups, but they also 
performed worse on a practical level: Their average final grade was below passing!
What went so wrong with this intervention? The authors agreed with the reasoning of 
Baumeister et al. (2003) who cautioned that boosting self-esteem regardless of performance 
encourages people to devalue their performance. After all, one very effective way of maintaining 
self-esteem in the face of failure is to withdraw your effort from the task and convince yourself 
that your self-esteem is not contingent on your performance (i.e., that failure doesn’t matter). 
What happens to students who do not study, go to class, keep up with readings, or essentially 
withdraw their efforts from their studies? They do poorly in their classes but—and here is 
the amazing part—they don’t feel bad about it! Perhaps feeling bad when we know we’re not 
performing our best is not such a bad thing. After all, our self-esteem might suffer a bit in the 
short term, but our positive outcomes might increase in the long run.
MYTH 5: Relationships are more likely to break up if a partner has low self-esteem than 
if a partner has high self-esteem.
FACT: Both high and low self-esteem cause problems in relationships, so self-esteem has 
little to do with who stays together or who breaks up (Baumeister et al., 2003). However, low 
self-esteem does cause some problems in relationships, such as often distrusting a partner’s 
expressions of love and support.
MYTH 6: Bullies suffer from low self-esteem so they need to lash out and hurt others.
FACT: There is no correlation between self-esteem and self-report bullying or peer-reported 
likelihood of bullying. People with high self-esteem, especially with unstable self-esteem, with 
unrealistically positive self-views as in narcissism, or with defensive high self-esteem, are more 
likely to react to perceived threats with violence than people with low self-esteem. These people 
are especially sensitive to evaluation and react badly if they don’t measure up in their own 
minds to what they think they deserve (Baumeister et al., 2003).
MYTH 7: People with low self-esteem are likely to abuse alcohol and other drugs than 
people with high self-esteem.
FACT: There is no correlation between drug use and self-esteem (Baumeister et al., 2003).
MYTH 8: People with low self-esteem are likely to engage in premature sexual activity and 
to have an unwanted pregnancy than people with high self-esteem.
FACT: Experiencing sexual activity before one is ready or having an unwanted pregnancy 
are both events that make people feel bad about themselves and cause low self-esteem. Again, 
just because there is a correlation, we can’t assume causation. If anything, people with high self-
esteem are often less inhibited and more willing to take risks than people with low self-esteem 
(Baumeister et al., 2003). The problem appears to be with high self-esteem or the overconfi-
dence of unwarranted high self-esteem. One of the biggest puzzles of self-esteem for researchers 
is to separate out true high self-esteem from overly high self-esteem or defensive self-esteem 
(e.g., Jordan, Spencer, & Zanna, 2005; Lambird & Mann, 2006).
These myths and facts involve but a few of the many variables that have been assumed 
by people to be related to self-esteem. In their review Baumeister et al. (2003) also discussed 
research on self-esteem and group behavior, leadership, delinquency, antisocial behavior, smok-
ing, sexual orientation, and eating disorders, and came to similar conclusions. For most of 
these outcomes there are no significant correlations with self-esteem, and even when there 
are significant correlations, most of them are small, and evidence of a clear causal connection 
between self-esteem and these outcomes is lacking. Their report started a wave of controversy 
and renewed interest in understanding the correlates and outcomes of self-esteem (e.g., Swann, 
Chang-Schneider, & McClarty, 2007). For example, newer evidence suggests that when we look 
at aggression, antisocial behavior, and delinquency (including fighting, drug use, alcohol use, 
and illegal activities) outside the laboratory and over time, there are small to moderate correla-
tions with low self-esteem (Donnellan, Trzesniewski, Robins, Moffitt, & Caspi, 2005). Clearly, 
this is an exciting time to be a researcher in the area of self-esteem!
THINK ABOUT IT
Which of these myths did 
you find the most surpris-
ing? Why?
143

Self and Identity
Research Methods Illustrated: Qualitative Data  
and Content Analysis
S
uppose you were one of the researchers who posed these questions (see left margin) to their 
participants. You’ve collected responses from 150 college students at 5 different universities in 
the United States, Chile, and Japan (Unemori et al., 2004). Now what do you do?
This is an example of a study using qualitative methods, techniques that analyze 
broad themes or characteristics—qualities—reflected in participants’ responses. In contrast to 
quantitative methods, where the data collected involve measures, questionnaires, test scores, 
or other numerical data—quantities, amounts—qualitative data are often verbal. Qualitative data 
collection is used more in sociology, anthropology, and sometimes in education. Psychology, and 
personality in particular, draws on both kinds of research, often in the same study (see Table 7  
for a comparison of quantitative and qualitative research methods).
In personality psychology, sometimes the best way to study people’s thoughts, feelings, and 
reactions is through open-ended questions (Woike, 2007). Examples of open-ended questions are 
sentence-completion tests, essays, stories, and diaries (Woike, 2007). The challenge for researchers 
is to figure out a way of judging, categorizing, and analyzing the content of these responses in a 
meaningful fashion (e.g., Bartholomew, Henderson, & Marcia, 2000). This is called content analysis.
Open-ended questions have several advantages over questionnaire measures (Woike, 2007). 
First, they allow participants the freedom to express themselves without the constraints of a 
questionnaire. Participants may express their innermost thoughts and emotional reactions, and 
reveal their frames of reference and cultural assumptions in open-ended responses. Even when 
questionnaires allow participants to choose between options, we have no way of knowing if the 
options are relevant for participants or if they are merely choosing “the lesser of two evils.”
Second, what if we have left out some aspect of the topic that is important to participants? We 
would never know this from a questionnaire. Because open-ended responses are self-generated, 
we know that what participants say is personally relevant and important. Third, asking open-ended 
questions can minimize the researcher’s unknown or hidden biases that may contaminate more 
traditional measures.
Finally, asking open-ended questions may be the only way to understand how participants 
think, feel, and react to a topic that has never been studied before.
So, how do researchers conduct a content analysis? Let’s take a closer look at the steps 
involved (Smith, 2000; Woike, 2007) and see how they might apply to the study of the possible 
selves of young adults from four cultural backgrounds (Unemori et al., 2004).
Step 1: Identify the research question.What are we trying to identify, describe, or measure? 
Unemori et al. (2004) had two research questions in mind: What are the similarities and differences 
“Think about yourself in the 
future, please tell me about the 
possible selves that you think 
are most likely to be true of 
you in the next year. These are 
possible selves you expect to 
be true of you. . . . Now think 
about ways you would not 
like to be next year. Ways you 
would like to avoid being or 
fear being.”
Unemori, Omoregie, and Markus 
(2004, p. 326)
Table 7  A Comparison of Quantitative and Qualitative Research Methods
Quantitative Research
Tests a hypothesis that the researcher begins with.
Concepts are in the form of distinct variables.
Data are in the form of numbers.
Theory is largely causal and is deductive (reasoning from general principles to particular facts).
Analysis proceeds by using statistics, tables, or charts.
Qualitative Research
Captures and discovers meaning from the data.
Concepts are in the form of themes, motifs, generalizations, taxonomies, and so on.
Data are in the form of words from documents, observations, transcripts, open-ended questions, 
and so forth.
Theory can be causal or noncausal and is often inductive (reasoning from particular facts to 
general principles).
Analysis proceeds by extracting themes or generalizations from evidence and organizing data to 
present a coherent, consistent picture.
Source: Adapted from Neuman (1997, p. 329, Table 13.1). Neuman, W. L. (1997). Social research methods: Qualitative and quantitative 
approaches. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
144

Self and Identity
in possible selves (actual and feared) among young people of European American (EA), Japanese 
American (JA), Chilean (CH), and Japanese (JN) cultural backgrounds? Do people have a similar 
number of expected and feared possible selves, that is, a balance between the number of expected 
and feared possible selves? Or, does one kind or the other predominate?
Step 2: Decide if content analysis will answer the research question either alone or 
combined with other methods. Sometimes researchers will give a personality questionnaire like 
the NEO-PI-R to measure the five-factor model of traits (Costa & McCrae, 1985), a self-esteem scale 
(Rosenberg, 1965), or a measure of individualism–collectivism (Oyserman, 1993) along with open-
ended questions. The Unemori et al. (2004) study used content analysis combined with background 
questions (gender, age, highest level of education attained by their parents, highest level of 
education they expected to achieve) to explore their two research questions.
Step 3: Decide what type of material will answer the research question and how best to 
obtain it. The key here is to make the instructions neither too broad and general (“Tell me the story 
of your life”) nor too structured like a self-report questionnaire (“Are you more like a placid lake or a 
babbling brook?”). The questions Unemori et al. (2004) used (“Tell me about the possible selves that 
you think are most likely to be true of you in the next year” and “Ways you would like to avoid being 
or fear being”) have the right amount of structure. Additional instructions to “rank the three that are 
most meaningful to you” made sure that the researchers captured what was most important to the 
participants. Mentioning the number three ensured that participants would give the right amount of 
information, neither too much (making coding difficult) nor too little (rendering analysis impossible).
Step 4: Determine the unit of analysis to be coded. This might be a phrase, a sentence, a 
paragraph, or even an essay. Once the unit is identified, we can create a scoring system to capture 
and quantify the concept we are after. In the Unemori et al. (2004) study the unit of analysis was the 
possible self described. For most participants, this was a short phrase or sentence.
Step 5: Select or develop a content coding system. In the Unemori et al. (2004) study, since the 
researchers were building on past research, they used a coding scheme that had been validated in 
previous research instead of devising their own scheme. Each of the expected selves and feared selves 
was classified into one of the following categories: Intrapersonal (e.g., anxious, happy, rich), Interpersonal 
(e.g., keep in touch with friends, strengthen relationships), Career/Education (e.g., worried about future 
job, applying to medical school), Extracurricular (e.g., involved in clubs, swim more), Attainment of 
material goods (e.g., have a regular income, have a car), and Health-related (e.g., in shape, less tired).
Step 6: Test and refine the coding system with pilot data. In the Unemori et al. (2004) study, 
this was not necessary because they used a coding system that had already been validated with 
college students. This step is crucial, however, when conducting research in a new area, with new 
measures, or with a population that has not been tested before. Often, further refinement of a 
coding system is necessary before researchers are ready to collect data.
Step 7: Train coders and obtain adequate intercoder agreement. While training coders in what 
to look for and how to make their judgments, researchers must ensure that the coders are not aware of 
the experimental hypothesis. This way the coders can be as free from bias in their ratings as possible.
Step 8: Collect responses. Here, researchers should be careful that data are collected under 
the same conditions for all participants. Ideally, data should not be collected by the coders, so that 
they do not inadvertently bias the responses.
Open-ended questions, an 
example of qualitative data, 
are often used to study 
people’s thoughts, feelings, 
and reactions.
© Monkey Business Images/Dreamstime.com
145

Self and Identity
Step 9: Code the data. The first step here is to transcribe the responses and remove names 
and other identifying information to protect the identity of the participants. Researchers will often 
use code numbers or names to keep track of the data. Coders then make their judgments or ratings 
and the researcher should verify that coders are using the coding system correctly and show 
adequate agreement.
In the Unemori et al. (2004) study two groups of bilingual coders (English and Spanish; English 
and Japanese) who were unaware of the purpose of the study each read through a subset of 
responses. Once the coders achieved 92 to 96% agreement, one of each pair went on to read the 
remaining responses of the European American, Japanese American, Chilean, or Japanese samples.
Step 10: Analyze the data. Here, researchers might look for patterns, tally the percentage of 
responses that fall in various categories, calculate frequency data, conduct appropriate statistical 
analyses, and draw tables and figures. For example, in the Unemori et al. (2004) study, researchers 
tallied the number of possible selves that fell into each of the six categories for both expected and 
feared selves. See Figures 4 and 5 for their results.
So, what did Unemori et al. (2004) find? Basically, there were cultural differences in both 
expected and feared selves. The EA students reported more interpersonal selves whereas the JN, 
CH, and JA students reported more career/education selves. The EA and CH samples showed more 
balance in their expected and feared selves, whereas JA and JN samples showed more similarities 
between their expected and feared selves.
Step 11: Interpret the results. The more open-ended the questions are, the more challenging 
this part will be. Similarly, the more quantitative the coding system is, the easier this part will be. 
Regardless of method, the first part of interpreting the results is to see what the data have to say about 
the original research question. Then, researchers should think about how the results fit into what has 
been done before. Finally, researchers should think about what kinds of questions remain for future 
research. Often, the best studies raise more questions for future research than they actually answer!
In this study, Unemori et al. (2004) interpreted their results to mean that young adults who 
are attending elite universities share similar expectations and fears about their futures involving 
friendships, personal relationships, and careers, regardless of culture. However, the relative 
importance of these areas varies by culture, with students in individualistic cultures able to focus 
Figure 4  Percentage of expected selves across four categories of self in European 
American (EA), Chilean (CH), Japanese American (JP), and native Japanese (JN) 
participants.  Source: Reprinted with permission from Unemori, P., Omoregie, H., & Markus, 
H. R. (2004), “Self-portraits: Possible selves in European-American, Chilean, Japanese and 
Japanese-American cultural contexts,” Self and Identity, 3, 321–338.  Permission conveyed 
through the Copyright Clearance Center.
100%
0%
10%
Extracurricular
Category of Self
Interpersonal
Career/Education
Intrapersonal
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
EA
27.2
40.7
27.2
4.9
CH
Culture
42.8
37.9
11.7
7.6
JA
54.2
26.5
14.5
4.8
JN
51.4
25.0
8.3
15.3
146

Self and Identity
more on their internal attributes and relationships and students in more collectivistic cultures 
living up to parental and societal expectations about school success, further education, and future 
careers. Finally, more research is necessary to understand how similarities between expected and 
feared selves can be motivating for Japanese students the way that a balance between these selves 
is motivating to American students.
As you can see, the general process of conducting qualitative research is very similar to 
quantitative research. The biggest difference is in the development and validation of the coding 
system, the part we call content analysis.
Social Identity
An important part of who we are is who we are when we are with others. Do we purposely pres-
ent ourselves in a certain light to gain the esteem of others? Do we act a certain way to fit into a 
situation? Perhaps William James’s statement is even more true today as the Internet provides 
yet another way for us to define, refine, and present ourselves to others. In this section we will 
discuss the common self-presentation strategies and explore a personality variable that captures 
the extent to which people change who they are to blend into the social situation.
Self-Presentation
Imagine yourself getting ready for a big date. You have been attracted to this person for a long 
time, and now you will have the chance to go out one-on-one with the object of your affection. 
You hope to make a good impression, so that this first date turns into a series of dates culminat-
ing in a lifetime of happiness. To make the best impression possible, what do you do? How would 
you dress? What would you talk about (and avoid talking about) to make this person like you?
Or, think about going on a job interview for a job you really, really want. What image do 
you want to convey to the interviewer? What will you wear? Might you, modestly of course, talk 
about your talents and accomplishments? Would you try to steer the interviewer away from 
“A man has as many social 
selves as there are individuals 
to recognize him.”
William James (1890, pp. 189–190)
Figure 5  Percentage of feared selves across four categories of self in European American 
(EA), Chilean (CH), Japanese American (JP), and native Japanese (JN) participants.  Source: 
From Unemori et al. (2004, Figure 2, p. 331). Reprinted with permission from Unemori, P., 
Omoregie, H., & Markus, H. R. (2004), “Self-portraits: Possible selves in European-American, 
Chilean, Japanese and Japanese-American cultural contexts,” Self and Identity, 3, 321–338.  
Permission conveyed through the Copyright Clearance Center.
100%
0%
10%
Health/Physical
Category of Self
Interpersonal
Career/Education
Intrapersonal
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
EA
19.0
49.4
26.6
5.1
CH
Culture
24.1
43.3
22.7
9.9
JA
35.0
31.2
21.3
12.5
JN
42.1
32.3
12.8
12.8
147

Self and Identity
asking about your weakness? Would you find a way to put a positive spin on your faults (e.g., 
“My friends say I work too hard”)?
For most of us, first dates (Rowatt, Cunningham, & Druen, 1998) and job interviews (Rosse, 
Stecher, Miller, & Levin, 1998) are two places where we are likely to engage in self-presentation: act-
ing, speaking, or dressing in a certain way to convey a specific image of ourselves to others (Paulhus 
& Trapnell, 2008). According to this view, “All the world’s a stage,” to quote Shakespeare and elabo-
rated by sociologist Erving Goffman. Actors (i.e., people) strategically present themselves in certain 
ways to establish, maintain, or refine a specific image in the mind of an “audience”—for example, 
another person, other people (Goffman, 1959). The regulation of public self-presentations is called 
impression management (Paulhus & Trapnell, 2008; Schlenker & Pontari, 2000).
People can present themselves as they truly are with an authentic self-presentation or they 
may attempt to create a specific image for some ulterior motive using a strategic self-presentation 
(Jones & Pittman, 1982). For example, people tend to do a fair amount of self-presentation in their 
online dating profiles to make themselves seem more attractive to a potential date (Toma, Hancock, 
& Eillison, 2008). Women lie more about their weight and men lie more about their height. Also, 
people further away from the mean, on either weight or height, are more apt to stretch the truth. 
People also report being the most accurate about their relationship information, but the least 
authentic in their photographs.
Although there are many different kinds of self-presentational tactics—up to 12 by one 
count (Lee, Quigley, Nesler, Corbet, & Tedeschi, 1999)!—the most common and the most 
influential ones are the classic quintet identified by Jones and Pittman (1982): ingratiation, 
intimidation, self-promotion, exemplification, and supplication (Paulhus & Trapnell, 2008). 
For each of these self-presentational tactics, the actor projects a specific image through verbal 
and nonverbal cues (DePaulo, 1992) and uses various psychological ploys to create a specific 
impression. There is always a danger that self-presentation may backfire: Once the audience 
sees it for what it is—a presentational strategy rather than an authentic self-presentation—the 
technique often stops working. Table 8 summarizes the most common tactics.
Who is more likely to use self-presentational strategies? First, we tend to use self-presen-
tational strategies more with strangers than with friends (Tice, 1995). Second, people who are 
apt to tell little lies in their everyday life are more concerned with self-presentation than more 
truthful people (Kashy & DePaulo, 1996). Third, extroverts may be more apt to use self-presen-
tational strategies than introverts. For example, when it comes to choice of picture on a social 
networking site, there is a lot of room for self-presentation as you might imagine. Turns out that 
extroverts are more likely than introverts to present themselves in a less conservative manner 
by the choice of a unique profile photograph (Krämer & Winter, 2008). Can you guess who the 
extroverts might be in the photo on the next page. Finally, some people—high self-monitors 
(Turnley & Bolino, 2001) and the politically astute (Harris, Kacmar, Zivnuska, & Shaw, 2007), 
for example—are more effective at using self-presentational techniques than others.
“The image of myself which I 
try to create in my own mind 
in order that I may love myself 
is very different from the image 
which I try to create in the 
minds of others in order that 
they may love me.”
W. H. Auden, Hic et Ille (1956)
“All the world’s a stage, And all 
the men and women merely 
players.”
William Shakespeare, As You Like 
It (Act II, scene vii, lines 139–166)
Table 8  The Five Most Common Self-Presentation Tactics
Strategy
Image 
Projected
Emotion 
Aroused
How Achieved
Avoid
Illustration
Ingratiation
Likable
Affection
Flattery
Agreement
Similarity
Solidarity
Interest
Being found out
Seen as a sycophant
“Flattery will get you 
everywhere”
Intimidation
Dangerous
Fear
Respect
Being too threatening
“I’ll huff and I’ll puff”
Self-promotion
Competent
Respect
Claims of Performance
Conceit
“When you’ve got it 
flaunt it”
Exemplification
Good example
Guilt
Self-denial
Hypocrisy
“Do as I do”
Supplication
Helpless
Nurturance
Arouse empathy
Invoke responsibility
Loss of self-esteem
Victim blame
“You’re my only hope”
Source: Reprinted with permission from Jones, E. E., & Pittman, T. S. (1982), “Toward a theory of strategic self-presentation,” as appeared in J. Suls (Ed.), Psychological perspec-
tives on the Self, p. 231–262. (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum). Permission conveyed through the Copyright Clearance Center.
THINK ABOUT IT
Sure, everybody wants to 
make a good impression 
on the first date, but what 
about the second date? 
Are you better off going 
with an authentic self-
presentation or a strategic 
self-presentation? Why?
148

Self and Identity
Self-presentation is related to a whole host of social behaviors including the giving and 
receiving of help, conformity, reactance, attitude expression, attitude change, response to 
evaluation, aggression, and emotions (Baumeister, 1982). For example, putting our “best face 
forward” by trying to make a good impression on others actually improves our own mood 
(Dunn, Biesanz, Human, & Finn, 2007).
Yet, self-presentations can be hazardous to our health. One review suggested that reluctance 
to use sunscreen, use of certain cosmetics, engagement in unsafe sex, use of steroids, eating 
disorders, smoking, injuries and accidental death, failure to exercise, and alcohol and other 
drug use may all be related to the desire to present ourselves in a certain light when we are with 
others (Leary, Tchividjian, & Kraxberger, 1994).
Self-Monitoring
Is it possible for a person to use self-presentation all the time? Whereas most of us would monitor 
our behavior and emotional expressions at certain times, some people seem to be especially aware 
of the images they portray. Self-monitoring is a personality trait that describes the extent to which 
people are aware of and manage their self-presentations, expressive behaviors, and nonverbal dis-
plays of emotion to control the images and impressions others form of them (Snyder, 1979). Like 
other traits, self-monitoring describes behavior on a continuum from low to high.
High self-monitors are particularly sensitive to the behavior of others in social situations, and 
use other people as a guideline for their own behavior. In contrast, low self-monitors have less con-
cern for social appropriateness and so pay less attention to what others in a situation are doing. Low 
Table 9  Sample Items From the Self-Monitoring Scale
High self-monitors would agree with these statements:
	1.	 I guess I put on a show to impress or entertain people.
	2.	 In different situations and with different people, I often act like very different persons.
	3.	 I’m not always the person I appear to be.
	4.	 I may deceive people by being friendly when I really dislike them.
Low self-monitors would agree with these statements:
	1.	 I find it hard to imitate the behavior of other people.
	2.	 My behavior is usually an expression of my true inner feelings, attitudes, and beliefs.
	3.	 At parties and social gatherings, I do not attempt to do or say things that others will like.
	4.	 I can only argue for ideas which I already believe.
Source: From M. Snyder (1974, Table 1, p. 531). Snyder, M. (1974). Self-monitoring of expressive behavior. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 30, 526–537. Copyright American Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.
Self-presentation 2.0. 
Extroverts are more 
likely than introverts to 
present themselves as less 
conservative through the 
use of an unusual or stylized 
photograph rather than a 
realistic color picture. Pictures 
from the German social 
network site StudiVZ illustrate 
the normal style of photo 
(top left) and different types 
of photos. Top (from left to 
right): serious photo, partial 
face, different style (e.g., black 
and white). Bottom (from 
left to right): making a face, 
posing, location. Source: From 
Krämer and Winter (2008, 
Figure 1, p. 109).
Kramer, N. C., & Winter, S. (2008). Impression 
management 2.0: The relationship of self-esteem, 
extraversion, self-efficacy, and self-presentation 
within social networking sites. Journal of Media 
Psychology, Vol 20(3), 2008, p. 109, figure 1. Used 
by permission © 2008 Hogrefe & Huber Publish-
ers. www.hogrefe.com
149

Self and Identity
self-monitors audit and control their self-presentations far less than high self-monitors do. Ratings 
from the peers of high and low self-monitors confirm these differences (Snyder, 1974). When in 
a new situation, high self-monitors seem to ask themselves, Who does this situation want me to 
be and how can I be that person? (Snyder, 1979, p. 102). Low self-monitors are more apt to think, 
Who am I and how can I be me in this situation? (Snyder, 1979, p. 103). Table 9 presents sample 
items from the Self-Monitoring Scale (Snyder, 1974; Snyder & Gangestad, 1986).
Professional stage actors, as we might imagine, are higher than college students in self-
monitoring whereas psychiatric inpatients are lower (Snyder, 1974). Self-monitoring may well 
be a skill good politicians have mastered to their advantage. For example, the popular Depres-
sion-era mayor of New York City, Fiorello LaGuardia, was reputed to have been so skilled at 
reading a crowd and adopting their mannerisms, that one could tell which ethnic group he was 
addressing by watching silent films of his appearances (Snyder, 1974).
Low self-monitors are more consistent in their expressive behavior across situations and show 
greater correspondence between their attitudes and behaviors than high self-monitors (Snyder, 
1979). They also differ in their social interactions (Ickes, Holloway, Stinson, & Hoodenpyle, 2006). 
High self-monitors tend to take the lead in initiating conversations and managing smooth social 
interactions with a stranger, especially in an unusual situation (Snyder, 1979).
Although we might view high self-monitors as social chameleons, they see themselves as 
flexible and adaptable (Snyder, 1979). On the other hand, low self-monitors would agree with 
Polonius’s advice to the college-bound Laertes in Shakespeare’s Hamlet: “To thine own self be 
true” (Snyder, 1987).
In addition to differences in self-presentation, awareness of their own attitudes and emo-
tions, and sensitivity to situational demands, high and low self-monitors also show differences 
in friendship choice, close relationships, consumer behavior, and even workplace behavior 
(Leone, 2006). High and low self-monitors seem to want different things in their friendships, 
romantic relationships, and long-term relationships (Leone & Hawkins, 2006). For example, 
imagine that you’ve won free passes to one of the hottest bands in town. Who would you rather 
take, your very best friend, or an ordinary friend who is really into this band?
When it comes to choosing friends for activities, high self-monitors choose friends for activi-
ties whereas low self-monitors choose activities for friends (Snyder, Gangestad, & Simpson, 1983). 
That is, high self-monitors think in terms of what the activity requires and then pick a friend to 
invite along accordingly (e.g., “Even though John’s a better friend, he’s just not the right person to 
go to a concert with”). Low self-monitors think in terms of a friend they want to spend time with, 
and then they pick something to do (e.g., “Jan’s my best friend. Besides, she’s the most fun to be 
around, whatever the activity”; Snyder et al., 1983, p. 1069). As a result, high self-monitors tend 
to have many separate groups of friends (e.g., “My soccer friends,” “My work friends,” “My school 
friends”). Low self-monitors tend to have overlapping groups of friends (Snyder et al., 1983).
High and low self-monitors seem to want different things in their romantic relationships, 
too (Jones, 1993). Low self-monitors report more pleasure in their relationships from simply 
being with their partners, and to value kindness and consideration, faithfulness and loyalty, 
and honesty in a potential dating partner more so than high self-monitors. High self-monitors 
report more external rewards from their relationships (e.g., social connections, opportunities) 
than low self-monitors, and to value the qualities of physical attractiveness, sex appeal, social 
status, and financial resources in their potential dating partners more so than low self-monitors.
High and low self-monitors also differ in the kinds of ads that appeal to them (DeBono, 
1987, 2006; Snyder & DeBono, 1985). High self-monitors are attracted by glitzy ads that empha-
size the image use of a product projects, whereas low self-monitors are more swayed by ads 
emphasizing the quality of the product. High and low self-monitors also evaluate consumer 
products differently (DeBono, 2006). For high self-monitors a quality product is one that can 
enhance their image. For low self-monitors, quality comes from product performance.
Even in the workplace high and low self-monitors act differently (Day & Schleicher, 2006). High 
self-monitors are better than low self-monitors at getting along with others and in job performance. 
They also tend to become leaders of their work groups. Self-monitoring is not related to rates of job 
turnover per se, but it is related to reasons for switching jobs (Jenkins, 1993). Low self-monitors are 
more likely to leave a job once their commitment flags. High self-monitors don’t care as much about 
commitment to an organization, but are more likely to leave when the job becomes unsatisfying.
THINK ABOUT IT
Do you more often choose 
friends for activities or 
activities for friends?
“A man’s Self is the sum  
total of all that he CAN  
call his, not only his body and 
his psychic powers, but his 
clothes and his house, his wife 
and children,  
his ancestors and friends, his 
reputation and works, his lands 
and horses, and yacht and 
bank-account. All these things 
give him the same emotions. If 
they wax and prosper, he feels 
triumphant; if they dwindle 
and die away, he feels cast 
down,—not necessarily in the 
same degree for each thing, but 
in much the same way for all.”
William James (1890, p. 188)
150

Self and Identity
Is there an advantage to being high or low in self-monitoring? Is one style any healthier 
than the other? People high and low in self-monitoring do not differ in neuroticism, intel-
ligence, academic achievement, social anxiety, achievement anxiety, or vocational interests 
(Snyder, 1979). Also, high and low self-monitors do not differ in their rates of depression, 
but they do differ in what triggers depression. High self-monitors are more upset when their 
self-presentation is threatened, like when they fail to make a team, secure a part in a play, or 
land a job offer. Low self-monitors are more upset when they are unable to be their true selves, 
like working with people they do not like, being told they are hypocrites, or discovering that a 
close friend no longer shares important values or attitudes (Snyder, 1987). Basically, these are 
just two different ways of approaching and engaging the social world.
Chapter Summary
Who am I? By now you should have a better idea of how personality psychology answers this 
question. Our selves are made up of self-concepts (ideas about what we are like), self-esteem 
(how we feel about our selves), and our social identity (the parts of ourselves we show to others).
Our self-concepts develop from our experiences with the social world along with matu-
ration and cognitive development. Self-recognition, as demonstrated by the mirror test, is a 
very sophisticated skill, one shared by great apes, dolphins, elephants, and humans. From our 
interactions with others, we come to develop and refine our self-concepts, develop our self-
esteem, and understand our identity (i.e., how we are viewed by society). In short, we develop 
our selves through three sources of knowledge, two of which are based on our interactions with 
other people: social comparison, reflected appraisals, and our own self-appraisals.
Culture has a huge impact on how we think about ourselves. People who live in more 
individualistic cultures develop an independent self-concept, whereas people in more collectiv-
istic cultures develop an interdependent self-concept. These self-concepts differ in definition, 
structure, features, tasks, the role of others, and the basis of self-esteem. The Twenty Statements 
Test has been used to compare self-concepts of people across cultures.
Also contained in our self-concepts are our possible selves, including how we expect to be, 
what we hope to be, and what we fear becoming in the future. These different selves can help 
us set goals and stay motivated to achieve those goals.
The idea of self, identity, and identity crisis is a modern one. What the self is has 
changed through the ages and has become more complicated since William James, the father 
of psychology, defined the self in 1890.
Self-esteem, the evaluative component of the self, can be described as high or low, and 
stable or unstable, and can be global or specific to a domain. People with high self-esteem have 
greater self-concept clarity than people low in self-esteem.
No doubt feeling good about ourselves is a good thing, but is low self-esteem the root of all 
social ills? Although people think that those with high self-esteem are smarter, more likable, and 
more physically attractive, do better in school, achieve more on the job, have greater life satisfaction 
and happiness than those with low self-esteem, this is not supported by research. Similarly, it is not 
true that low self-esteem is problematic, causing relationship problems, aggressiveness, alcohol and 
other drug abuse, premature sexual activity, unwanted pregnancies, and other social ills.
Many of these myths derive from misinterpreting research, the different kinds of high self-
esteem masking the true effects of self-esteem, the inherent bias existing in self-ratings, not 
realizing that low self-esteem is really only moderate self-esteem, and mistaking correlation for 
causation. For example, self-esteem is often the result—not the cause—of achievement in school, 
work, and life. Also, the role of third variables (e.g., family background) has not been sufficiently 
investigated. Interventions that attempt to boost self-esteem through noncontingent rewards such 
as praise are misguided and may even backfire if they teach that one’s efforts are unimportant.
Personality psychologists use quantitative and qualitative methods in their research. Quan-
titative methods involve measures or scores whereas qualitative methods involve the content 
analysis of verbal material. Many steps are involved in conducting a study using content analy-
sis, the most important being to ask the right open-ended question and to take care in coding 
and categorizing participants’ responses.
Go online for more 
resources to help you 
review.
Study and Review
on mysearchlab.com
151

Self and Identity
Finally, our social identity is that part of ourselves that we share with others. We may show our 
true selves in an authentic self-presentation or we may use a strategic self-presentation to project 
a specific image or impression for others. Images may be agentic or communal. The regulation of 
public self-presentations is called impression management. The most common self-presentational 
strategies are ingratiation, intimidation, self-promotion, exemplification, and supplication.
Some people—that is, high self-monitors—seem to constantly monitor a situation and change 
their behavior accordingly. High self-monitors strive to be what a situation calls for; low self-
monitors strive to be themselves in all situations. High and low self-monitors differ in behavioral 
consistency, self-presentation, awareness of their own attitudes and emotions, sensitivity to situa-
tional demands, friendship choice, close relationships, consumer behavior, and workplace behavior.
These are but a few of the many aspects of the self studied by personality psychologists. 
One thing we can say for certain: Studying our selves is among the most fascinating topics in 
personality psychology.
Review Questions
	 1.	 What are the three parts of the self studied by psychologists?
	 2.	 What is a self-concept? Do animals have a self-concept? How do we know? How does a 
self-concept develop? What are some major milestones in the development of self-concept, 
self-esteem, and social identity?
	 3.	 Describe the Twenty Statements Test. What are the four categories of responses in the TST? 
How does culture impact self-concepts? What are the important differences between an 
independent and an interdependent self?
	 4.	 What are possible selves? What are the different kinds of possible selves identified by 
psychologists? What impact do positive and negative possible selves have on adjustment? 
Can possible selves be changed? How?
	 5.	 How has the self changed through time? How do personality psychologists define the self now?
	 6.	 What is self-esteem? What are people high in self-esteem like? What are people low in self-
esteem like? What is self-handicapping? Is this an effective strategy? Explain your reasoning.
	 7.	 What are some popular beliefs about self-esteem? What does research evidence have to say 
about these beliefs?
	 8.	 What is qualitative data? What is quantitative data? What is content analysis? What are 
some of the steps involved in doing content analysis?
	 9.	 What is a social identity? What is an authentic self-presentation? What is a strategic self-
presentation? What are some ways of strategically presenting ourselves?
	10.	 What is self-monitoring? What are some key differences between people high and low in 
self-monitoring? Is it better to be one or the other?
Key Terms
Twenty Statements Test (TST)
Self-concept
Mirror test
Objective self-awareness
Reflected appraisals
Looking glass self
Identity
Identity crisis
Stereotype threat
Attributive self-descriptions
Social self-descriptions
Global self-descriptions
Physical self-descriptions
Individualism
Collectivism
Individualistic cultures
Collectivistic cultures
Independent view of the self
Hoped-for selves
Feared selves
Possible selves
Self-esteem
Self-esteem stability
Self-concept clarity
Self-handicapping
Qualitative methods
Quantitative methods
Content analysis
Social identity
Self-presentation
Impression management
Authentic self-presentation
Strategic self-presentation
Ingratiation
Intimidation
Self-promotion
Exemplification
Supplication
Self-monitoring
152

139
GENETICS
Nature and Nurture as Allies
Genes and Environment as Co-actors
Heritability
Environmentality
Shared and Nonshared Environments
Estimating Heritability
Research Methods Illustrated: Correlational Designs I: The Logic of Adoption  
and Twin Studies
Heritability of Common Personality Characteristics
Then and Now: The Science of Genetics
Genes and Environment: A Dialectical Synthesis
Genotype–Environment Interactions
Genotype–Environment Correlations
Types of Genotype–Environment Correlations
What’s the Evidence? Researching Genotype–Environment Correlations
The Personality of Everyday Life: What can genetics research do for us?
Chapter Summary
Review Questions
Key Terms
Read the Chapter on 
mysearchlab.com 
© Inganielsen/Dreamstime.com
From Chapter 6 of Personality Psychology: Foundations and Findings, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. Copyright © 2012 by Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
153

Genetics
“What a piece of work is man! 
How noble in reason! How 
infinite in faculty! In form 
and moving how express and 
admirable! In action how like 
an angel! In apprehension 
how like a god! The beauty 
of the world! The paragon of 
animals!”
William Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act II, 
scene ii
D
o these words sound familiar to you? Of course they do, but do you recall the few lines 
preceding these classic words?
I have of late—but wherefore I know not—lost all my mirth.
And earlier in Act I, scene ii:
O, that this too, too solid flesh would melt,
Thaw, and resolve itself into a dew!
Or, that the Everlasting had not fix’d
His canon ’gainst self-slaughter! O God! God!
How weary, stale, flat and unprofitable,
Seem to me all the uses of this world!
Hamlet is depressed. Of course, he has good reason to be, with his father recently dead, 
his uncle trying to take over the kingdom, and his mother remarrying too soon. What makes a 
person depressed? Is depression caused by a genetic predisposition, such that some people are 
doomed to be depressed? Or is depression caused by experiences that are so devastating that 
anybody would be depressed by them?
For years, psychologists wondered what caused clinical depression: a debilitating combination 
of profound sadness, loss of interest in formerly pleasurable activities, lack of energy, hopelessness, 
feelings of worthlessness, and even thoughts of suicide. Although life events such as death of a 
parent, job loss, or stress no doubt cause people to be sad, what causes this devastating condition?
Because some psychologists had noticed that depression ran in families—or at least 
in some families—researchers tried to find a genetic mechanism of depression. Consider a 
study by Haeffel et al. (2008). They identified a sample of adolescent boys who were ordered 
by the courts to attend a residential juvenile delinquent detention facility in the Arkhangelsk 
region of northern Russia. The sample was not very diverse—about 98% of the sample was 
of Russian ancestry—but perfect for investigating possible genetic causes of depression.
The researchers looked for genetic and environmental differences between the youths who 
were depressed and those who were not. The amazing thing is that they found—nothing! That 
is, they found no impact of either genes or environment on rates of depression.
But, when they looked closer and divided up the sample depending on which of three 
specific gene combinations—called genotypes—a participant had, the results were startling, 
as Figure 1 shows. If a youth had both a stressful environment (as measured by maternal 
rejection in this study) and Genotype 3, there was a good chance that he was depressed. 
However, if a youth had any 
of the three genotypes with-
out maternal rejection or 
maternal rejection with 
either Genotype 1 or Geno-
type 2 he was not as likely to 
develop clinical depression. 
Further, this combination of 
environment (maternal rejec-
tion) and genotype predicted 
related outcomes such as 
suicide ideation and depres-
sive symptoms but not unre-
lated psychological problems 
such as an anxiety disorder. 
This suggests that there is 
something magical (perhaps 
alarming is a better word) 
about this particular interac-
tion of these genes with this 
environment.
Figure 1  Incidence of clinical depression as a function of 
genotype and maternal rejection.  Source: From Haeffel et 
al. (2008, Figure 1, p. 66), Haeffel, G. J., Getchell, M., Koposov, 
R. A., Yrigollen, C. M., DeYoung, C. G., af Klinteberg, B., et 
al. (2008), “Association between polymorphisms in the 
dopaminetransporter gene and depression,”  Psychological 
Science, 19(1), 62–69.  Reprinted by permission of Blackwell 
Publishing.
0.8
0.6
Proportion Depressed
0.4
0.2
0.0
Low Rejection
High Rejection
Genotype 1
Genotype 2
Genotype 3
154

Genetics
Like Haeffel et al. (2008), other researchers have found it notoriously difficult to find main 
effects of genes on personality traits (Krueger & Johnson, 2008). This highlights an important 
theme of this chapter: The interesting question is not whether genes or environment affect 
our personalities, for surely both do. The real question is how do genes and environment work 
together to make us the kind of people we are? To answer this question we need to explore some 
basics of behavioral genetics, which is the study of the genetic and environmental contribu-
tions to individual differences in personality and behavior (DiLalla, 2004). (To get you thinking 
about these issues, you may want to try the self-assessment exercise in Table 1).
The goal of this chapter is not to present a catalog of personality characteristics that have 
a genetic component, for the list would be too long! Neither will we explore the molecular 
mechanism of specific genes important for personality development, for the research evidence 
is piling up too quickly for a textbook to keep up with. Instead, we will focus on understanding 
how genetic principles work in explaining differences in personality. Armed with this broad 
understanding as your groundwork, you will be able to understand the genetics behind any per-
sonality characteristic you encounter in this text and to understand the newest breakthroughs 
in genetics research that you may hear about in the news.
Table 1  How Much Do Genes and Environment Contribute to Personality?
Instructions: Identify four family members or friends who differ in their blood-relation to you and in whether you grew up in the 
same environment by using the following descriptions for Person 1, Person 2, and so on and filling in their names at the top of each 
of the four columns in the chart.
Person 1 = Genetic parent (of same sex as you, if possible).
Person 2 = Genetic sibling (of same sex as you, if possible). If you are an only child, use a cousin or other relative.
Person 3 = Unrelated person (or less related to you than Person 2) living in your household while you were growing up.
Person 4 = Unrelated person, not living in your household while you were growing up (e.g., best friend, peer, roommate).
If you are unable to identify any of Persons 1 to 3, then use people who lived in your household, even if you were not related to 
them, and compare them with unrelated people who did not live in your household while growing up.
Next, rate how similar you are to each of these people using the following scale:
1
2
3
4
5
6
Completely different
Different
More different 
than Similar
More similar  
than Different
Similar
Very similar,  
almost the same
Person 1
Person 2
Person 3
Person 4
Name of person:
Characteristic:
	 1.	 Height
	 2.	 Sense of humor
	 3.	 Weight
	 4.	 Political views
	 5.	 Adventurousness
	 6.	 Taste in music
	 7.	 Extraversion
	 8.	 Anxiousness
	 9.	 Individualistic
	10.	 Tech-savy
Based on your responses, can you venture a guess as to which has a greater influence on the development of each characteristic, 
genes or environment? Finally, do you think that each characteristic is caused more by genes and environment working separately, 
working together, or by influencing each other?
155

Genetics
Nature and Nurture as Allies
Imagine that you are taking a standardized test and the following item appears in your test 
book:
Lemonade is
	 a.	 lemon juice.
	 b.	 water.
	 c.	 sugar.
How would you answer this question? Would you start to panic and wonder if this was a 
trick question? After all, everybody knows that lemonade is made up of all of these! In fact, we 
might say that lemonade is a compound solution entirely different from its constituent parts. 
So, this question, obviously, makes no sense. But consider this equally nonsensical question:
Extraversion is
	 a.	 genetic.
	 b.	 cultural.
	 c.	 familial.
	 d.	 due to all your idiosyncratic learning experiences.
When it comes to understanding human behavior, this question makes no sense either. 
That is, human behavior—and personality in particular—is an inextricable combination of 
both genetics and environment. In fact, taking sides in the nature–nurture debate is a massive 
“scientific mistake” (Krueger & Johnson, 2008, p. 287). So, if you are wondering whether genes 
determine your personality, stop right there: Personality is lemonade! (This fantastic example 
comes from Carey, 2003, pp. 2–3.)
The best characterization of the nature–nurture issue is that nature and nurture trans-
act. That is, genes and environment can work separately, together, or they may influence one 
another (Canli, 2008, p. 299). When we talk about heritability and environmentality separately, 
we are assuming that genes and environment each have a unique contribution to the whole 
personality. That is, genes and environment may operate separately but in parallel (i.e., at the 
same time) to influence our personalities. You can think of genes and environment as co-actors 
(Cardno & McGuffin, 2002). This is the simplest case, as we shall soon see, and may not, in fact, 
be the way most aspects of personality develop.
A more interesting case is that genes and environment may interact with each other, 
such that they change aspects of human personality by acting together on a person. You 
know that saying the whole is greater than the sum of its parts? Well, it is possible that certain 
“Environmental factors always 
contribute to individual 
differences in human 
behavior. . . . Genes contribute 
to individual differences in 
almost every dimension of 
human behavior that has been 
studied thus far.”
Carey (2003, pp. 3–4)
Genes and environment 
as co-actors: Physically and 
psychologically, we are the 
result of an inextricable 
combination of both genetics 
and environment.
© Sandra Gligorijevic/Fotolia
156

Genetics
environments have different effects on people depending on their specific genetic makeup. 
We call this combination of nature and nurture a genotype–environment interaction. With 
more sophisticated ways of exploring the human genome, especially at the molecular level, 
this is the most exciting, and potentially groundbreaking kind of research that personality 
researchers are conducting. This is partially what we meant by lemonade in the discussion 
that opened this chapter: sugar, lemon, and water, when mixed in the right proportions, com-
bine to make something fundamentally different (and better!) than each separate ingredient.
Yet another possibility is that it may be impossible to separate the effect of genes from 
the effect of the environment. What if people change environments and environments change 
people, so that we really can’t separate the impact of genes on environment? This is called a 
genotype–environment correlation. This is yet another sense in which personality is lemonade: 
There is no way to separate out the ingredients, as they are inextricably combined.
In fact, some researchers advocate an even more complicated equation for understand-
ing the manifestation of complex human traits—a concept known as phenotype (Cardno & 
McGuffin, 2002, p. 40):
Phenotype = Genotype + Environment + Gene9environment correlation
+ Gene9environment interaction.
We will consider each part of this equation in turn.
Genes and Environment as Co-actors
When we say that a characteristic is due to both genetics and environment, how do we know? 
Scientists are able to estimate how much of the differences among people on a given character-
istic are because of their genes. For example, consider the students in your personality class. No 
doubt there are wide variations of height, with some taller people and some shorter people and 
lots of people of average height. The question is, how much of this observed height difference 
among people in your class is due to their differing genetic makeup? In this section we examine 
the concepts of heritability and environmentality.
Heritability
Heritability (h2) is the amount of observed individual differences in some characteristic that 
can be accounted for by genetic differences (Carey, 2003). Heritability refers to differences 
across a group or population of people—not to a specific person. It is impossible to say how 
much of your height is due to your genes. But, considering a sample of people, like your per-
sonality class, we can estimate that about 80% of the observed differences in height is due to 
differing genetic makeup of your classmates and 20% is due to differing environments your 
classmates were raised in, plus some percentage of measurement error (because nothing, espe-
cially not our measurement instruments, is perfect).
To illustrate, imagine that you and your friends like to bake (and eat!) chocolate chip 
cookies, and each time you make them, they come out slightly different. Why might this be? 
Different brands of chocolate chips? Different types of flour? Is it possible that different bakers 
produce different cookies? You can readily see that the differences among batches could be due 
to differences in any of these factors. But suppose I asked you, which is more important to the 
flavor of this particular cookie: the flour or the eggs? Well, obviously we need both in order to 
have a good cookie! The question makes no sense. The same principle applies to understanding 
heritability: We cannot know what contributes more to the personality of a particular person, 
but we can know how much genetics and environment each account for differences in a par-
ticular personality characteristic of this particular sample of people.
Heritability, therefore, refers to the inheritance of a particular trait in a particular popu-
lation at a particular time, so sometimes heritability estimates differ depending on the exact 
“Everything is heritable.”
Turkheimer (2004, p. 161)
THINK ABOUT IT
What environmental factors 
could account for differ-
ences in height among a 
group of people?
157

Genetics
sample and methods used by 
researchers (Plomin, DeFries, 
McClearn, & McGuffin, 2008, 
p. 86). To understand this, let’s 
continue discussing height, 
a characteristic with a fairly 
large genetic component. The 
heritability of height is 80% 
or higher in the United States 
but it is only 65% in China and 
western Africa. And in Austra-
lia, one study estimated height 
heritability as 87% for men and 
71% for women (Silvetoinen 
et al., 2003)! This is because 
of genetic variations among 
ethnic groups and because of 
the distinct environments they 
face. For example, Americans, 
Chinese, and Africans vary in 
native climates, lifestyle, and 
dietary habits, as do men and women in many cultures (Lai, 2006). This is why heritability is 
considered an estimate that refers to a specific population: Estimates vary between samples.
Environmentality
It’s unlikely that genetics account for 100% of the variance in any personality variable, so what 
accounts for the rest of the variation? The environment, of course! We use the term environ-
mentality (e2) for that. Environmentality estimates the extent to which observed individual 
differences can be traced in any way to individual differences in environments (Carey, 2003). 
Together, heritability, environmentality, and measurement error account for all the differences 
we see among people on a given characteristic.
By now, it must be getting clearer to you that environment and genetics work together to 
impact human behavior so that it doesn’t make sense to pit nature against nurture. As a gen-
eral rule, the greater the heritability of a characteristic the less the environmentality. And the 
greater the environmentality, the less the heritability. Whereas height does have a large genetic 
component, the environmentality of height is fairly strong too, somewhere in the neighborhood 
of 20 to 40%. What kinds of environmental factors influence height? The biggest influence is 
childhood nutrition, especially protein, but also calcium, vitamin A, and vitamin D. In particu-
lar, childhood malnutrition is particularly detrimental to adult height. Childhood diseases can 
also limit adult height, and by the same token human growth hormones can counteract some 
of these detrimental effects (Lai, 2006). This is how genetically similar populations may show 
differing heritability estimates: environmentality.
We see higher heritability estimates in equalizing environments (i.e., environments that 
are the same for everybody, and lower estimates in more variable environments; Plomin et al., 
2008). This is because when everybody has access to resources in rich environments there is 
little variance in the effect the environment can have. For example, there’s a limit to how much 
meat will increase height. Once all or nearly all of the people in a society have access to good 
health care, high levels of protein, and enriched foods, then we will see a very strong effect of 
genetics. Essentially, the only thing left to vary at this point is genetics. This is why heritabil-
ity estimates for height are the greatest in developed countries such as the United States, and 
lower in less developed countries. In fact, average height in the United States has plateaued, 
meaning that as a nation we’ve gotten about as tall as we’re going to get due to environmental 
effects (Lai, 2006).
Heritability: Just as the 
variation among batches of 
cookies is due to variations in 
ingredients, the variation of a 
particular trait in a particular 
population at a particular 
time is due to differences in 
their genetic makeup.
© Bradcalkins/Dreamstime.com
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Consider your extended 
family of great-grandparents, 
grandparents, aunts, uncles, 
and cousins. Can you iden-
tify particular environmental 
factors that may account for 
height differences, especially 
between generations in 
your family?
158

Genetics
Shared and Nonshared Environments
Traditionally, environment referred only to any part of the phenotype not accounted for by 
genes. However, these days researchers are trying to zero in on, and specifically identify, the 
exact aspects of an environment that account for differences in personality among a group of 
people. One way of thinking about environmental influences on characteristics such as height 
or personality is to identify aspects of the environment that are shared and unshared among 
relatives living together in a household.
Shared environment includes aspects of the family environment that are generally the 
same for all the children in the household (Krueger & Johnson, 2008) including physical, psy-
chological, and social aspects (Carey, 2003). Physical aspects of a household may be the type of 
dwelling (e.g., apartment vs. house) and its layout, the number of computers or books in the 
home, or the presence of a video gaming system. Psychological aspects might include home 
atmosphere, parenting practices, the quality of sibling interactions, or psychopathology (e.g., 
alcoholism, drug use, depression) in the home. Social variables include socioeconomic status, 
family structure, educational attainment of the parents, an urban or a rural setting, and religion. 
In the broadest sense, anything not accounted for by genetics that makes relatives similar has 
been considered part of the shared environment (Carey, 2003).
In contrast, the nonshared environment includes experiences that relatives have which 
make them different from one another (Carey, 2003; Krueger & Johnson, 2008; Plomin, Asbury, 
& Dunn, 2001). These may include unique experiences within the family (e.g., being the eldest, 
being the only boy, spacing of siblings, differential parental treatment), or outside the family 
(e.g., peers, teachers, sports, hobbies). When it comes to personality, most of the environmental 
influence ends up being of the nonshared variety (Krueger & Johnson, 2008; Plomin & Caspi, 
1999; Turkheimer & Waldron, 2000). The big surprise to researchers has been that when family 
members resemble one another it is more often due to heredity than to shared environment 
(Krueger & Johnson, 2008; Plomin & Caspi, 1999). That is, children growing up in the same 
family are not any more similar to one another than children growing up in different families. 
Even when children experience the same event, like a divorce, it may be experienced differently 
by each of the children depending on their individual personalities or ages (e.g., a relief, the 
end of the world; Hetherington & Clingempeel, 1992). Certainly environment is important; 
however, the important aspects of the environment for personality development do not appear 
to be shared by family members.
It may be that family environment makes children different from one another (e.g., “Jerry is 
the adventurous one; Tony is the thoughtful one”) or it may be that researchers are looking too 
broadly and have not identified specific aspects of the environment that are shared (e.g., sense 
of humor, openness to ideas, cultural and aesthetic values). Also, parents may handle children 
differently depending on their personality, creating a unique environment for each child. For 
all of these reasons, researchers have had a difficult time identifying the precise shared and 
nonshared aspects of the child’s environment that, along with genetics, account for differences 
in personality.
For example, although we know that teachers and peers have a big impact on children’s 
development (e.g., Shaffer, 2009), is this part of the shared or the nonshared environment? In 
most behavioral genetic research the effect of schools, neighborhoods, and communities gets 
labeled as shared family experiences when they might not even be shared by siblings and they 
don’t involve family! To untangle familial experiences from nonfamilial experiences one study 
employed an unusual control group.
Richard Rose and colleagues (Rose & Dick, 2004/2005; Rose et al., 2003) studied a sample 
of identical twins and nonidentical twins along with kids who were from the same neighbor-
hood, school, and even classroom as each of the twins. The study took place in Finland, which 
at the time required parents to send their children to the closest neighborhood school. In this 
way, the researchers could estimate the separate effects of genetics (by comparing identical 
twins with nonidentical twins), familial environments (comparing twins with their matched 
control classmates), nonfamilial environments (comparing control kids from the same classes 
SEE FOR YOURSELF
What are some aspects of 
your physical, psychologi-
cal, and social environment 
shared among you and your 
parents or you and your 
siblings?
SEE FOR YOURSELF
What are some aspects of 
your physical, psychological, 
and social environment not 
shared among you and your 
parents or you and your sib-
lings that are unique to you?
159

Genetics
to one another), and personal environments (comparing kids from different neighborhoods 
to one another).
The twins were part of a longitudinal study known as the Finn Twin studies (Rose & Dick, 
2004/2005). Only same-sex twins were used, and each member of the twin pair was matched 
to a child of the same sex from the same school, and in about 90% of the cases, they were from 
the same classroom. In all, there were 333 identical twins, 298 nonidentical twins, and 1,262 
matched classmates for a total of 2,524 11- and 12-year-olds (Rose et al., 2003).
The participants were asked a series of yes-or-no questions about their smoking, drinking, 
and church activities (Rose & Dick, 2004/2005; Rose et al., 2003). From their responses, the 
researchers were able to estimate the amount of variance in the kids’ self-reported behaviors 
that was due to genetics, familial environment, school environment, or personal environment.
Which source of variance was the most important? That depended on the behavior. In no 
case did genetics explain all of the variance in participants’ self-reports. For some variables, 
notably smoking cigarettes, saying prayers, and seeing adults drunk, there was a greater effect 
of shared environment (i.e., the household) than shared genes. This makes sense because these 
are the kind of behaviors that parents model in front of their children. For alcohol use, both 
shared environment and shared genes had an impact.
When it came to drinking with peers without parents around, the neighborhood was more 
important than the household, as you might expect. After all, kids typically engage in these sorts 
of behaviors with their friends and do so far away from parental surveillance.
Finally, unique, unshared environment—what we might think of as a kid’s personal 
environment—was more important for participation in church activities. You can see that 
even though the parents might encourage certain behaviors in the family such as saying 
prayers, it appears that kids themselves are choosing to get involved or not in church activi-
ties beyond Sunday services. And, indeed, the influence of family was the largest and genetics 
the smallest for having prayers in the home while growing up.
This study illustrates how the relative importance of genetics and environments varies depend-
ing on the question. Research designed to take account of various sources of social influence can 
shed light on shared and nonshared environments in accounting for personality and behavior.
Estimating Heritability
By now you must be wondering how 
researchers are able to measure heritability. 
We estimate the heritability of a character-
istic by seeing if people who have similar 
genes show similar characteristics. If a 
characteristic has a strong genetic compo-
nent, then we would expect identical twins, 
who share 100% of their genes, to be more 
similar than strangers in that characteris-
tic. We can see this more clearly in physical 
characteristics, but it is harder to see the 
effects of genes and environment in per-
sonality, which is why so far in this chapter 
we’ve been looking at tangible things such 
as height.
Consider twins. As you know, there 
are two kinds of twins: identical and fra-
ternal. Identical twins, called monozygotic 
(MZ) twins, are exact genetic duplicates of 
each other. This happens when a fertilized 
egg, the zygote, splits into two (or some-
times more) identical parts that each go on 
© Andi Berger/Shutterstock
SEE FOR YOURSELF
In what ways are you more 
similar to your friends than 
to your siblings? Why might 
this be?
One method of studying 
genetic influence is to 
compare personality traits 
in identical twins and in 
nontwin siblings.
160

Genetics
to develop into a fetus. Identical twins are quite rare in the population, occurring just over 
32 times in 1,000 births in the United States.
In contrast, fraternal twins occur when two zygotes develop in utero at the same time. We 
call these kinds of twins dizygotic (DZ) twins. DZ twins result from the fertilization of two 
different eggs by two different sperm cells, hence they are genetically distinct. Essentially fra-
ternal twins are no more alike than ordinary siblings, sharing about 50% of their genes (Carey, 
2003). Although twins may look alike, the only way to be sure if they are identical (MZ) or 
fraternal (DZ) is to conduct a genetic test (of course, if the twins are of different sexes, then 
we know that they must be fraternal twins). Because of increased use of fertility drugs and in 
vitro fertilization the incidence of fraternal twins has been steadily increasing since the early 
1980s (Plomin et al., 2008).
One measure of heritability, then, is to calculate the correlation (r) between twins on a 
given trait and compare the correlation between MZ twins and DZ twins (Plomin et al., 2008). 
The exact formula is to double the differ-
ence between these correlations or
h2 = 2(rmz - rdz)
A second way of estimating herita-
bility is to compare identical twins who 
have been raised in separate environments 
(Plomin et al., 2008). We call these kinds 
of twins MZA twins (monozygotic twins 
raised apart). If such twins score simi-
larly in a trait such as Extraversion, then 
we know that Extraversion has a strong 
genetic component. Studies of MZA twins 
are particularly powerful in disentangling 
the effects of genes and environment 
because they have identical genes but dif-
ferent environments. Here is a second for-
mula for estimating heritability:
h2 = rMZA
We’ll consider the logic behind 
adoption studies and twin studies in the 
Research Methods Illustrated section, in a 
moment. For now, note that both of these 
Nonidentical twins, called 
dizygotic (DZ) twins, are no 
more alike than siblings, 
having about 50% of their 
genetic makeup in common.
 © Courtyardpix/Dreamstime.com
© Kenneth Sponsler/Shutterstock
Identical twins, called 
monozygotic (MZ) twins, are 
exact genetic duplicates of 
each other.
161

Genetics
estimates of heritability have limitations, and researchers may use more sophisticated formulas 
to account for these potential problems. The double-the-difference method assumes that twins 
were reared under equal environments (Cardno & McGuffin, 2002; Carey, 2003; DiLalla, 2004; 
Plomin et al., 2008). That is, it assumes that people have not treated MZ twins more alike than 
DZ twins. Whereas certainly twins are often treated differently than nontwins, the question 
is, are identical twins treated more similarly than are fraternal twins? If MZ twins are treated 
more alike, then they may score more similarly on a particular trait, artificially inflating the 
heritability estimate (you can see this for yourself by looking at our first formula). Essentially, 
what is really an environmental effect (similar treatment) gets mislabeled as a genetic effect 
(similar personality).
This equal environments assumption applies only to similar treatment that is related 
to the specific characteristic under study. For example, people often dress their twins alike in 
identical sailor suits or matching dresses. This probably happens more often to MZ twins than 
to DZ twins. If we were studying something like fashion sense, then this would violate our equal 
environments assumption. But unless wearing matching outfits affects a specific personality 
characteristic like shyness, then this assumption still holds (Carey, 2003).
You’ll see that researchers often test this assumption by asking research participants (or 
their parents) to describe how they were treated while growing up. Indeed, such studies have 
concluded that for the most part, parents of MZ twins don’t treat their twins any more alike 
than parents of DZ twins so that this equal environments assumption is a fair assumption 
(Cardno & McGuffin, 2002; Carey, 2003; Plomin et al., 2008).
The double-the-difference formula also assumes that twins are typical of the population. 
We call this the assumption of representativeness (Plomin et al., 2008). For example, twins 
are often premature and have a lower birthrate than single births. Twins, therefore, may not 
be representative of the general population on variables that are affected by prematurity or 
low birth weight. Again, this is something researchers may test for, and for the most part this 
assumption holds as well (Carey, 2003; Plomin et al., 2008).
The rMZA method of estimating heritability also has its limitations. Here, researchers assume 
that the adopted families of each twin are different from each other. If the identical twins are 
placed in similar environments this may increase the similarity between the twins, artificially 
inflating our heritability estimate. That is, twins may be more alike on a certain characteristic 
due to selective placement during the adoption process and not to their genetics. Selective 
placement makes it impossible to see the effect of genetics apart from the effect of environment 
because it confounds the two (Plomin, DeFries, & Loehlin, 1977; Plomin et al., 2008).
Adoption studies of MZA twins also assume that families who adopt are the same as families 
who do not adopt. Again, if there is something special about adoptive families, then this environ-
mental effect will get improperly labeled as a genetic effect. For example, prospective adoptive 
families often go through an interview to rule out extreme poverty, criminal behavior, drug abuse, 
and other factors that affect the ability of the family to provide a safe and secure environment for 
a child. We might wonder how representative adoptive families are. Although the mean income 
of adoptive families and the general population are not much different, there are fewer families in 
extreme poverty among adoptive families (Carey, 2003). This suggests a potential problem of range 
restriction among adoptive families, making it harder to detect a significant effect of environment. 
Again, whereas this might be a problem for some variables (e.g., antisocial behavior) it may not be 
a problem when it comes to personality traits (Carey, 2003). Both of these assumptions, selective 
placement and representativeness of adoptive families, have been tested by researchers and are not 
a problem for most studies (Plomin et al., 1977, 2008).
Research Methods Illustrated: Correlational Designs I:  
The Logic of Adoption and Twin Studies
W
hat do we mean when we say that a certain trait “runs in families”? For example, families 
often share inside jokes and find the same sorts of things amusing. Does sense of humor 
run in families? If so, why might this be? When we say that a trait runs in families, is this 
because of shared genetics among family members? Or, is it because family members all live in the 
THINK ABOUT IT
Do people treat identical 
twins differently from non-
identical twins?
THINK ABOUT IT
Does being a twin affect 
one’s personality more so 
than having a sibling close 
to your own age would?
162

Genetics
same environment, where they might watch the same TV programs, tell amusing stories around 
the dinner table, and laugh at one another’s jokes, for example? The trouble is, under ordinary 
conditions we can’t tell the two apart.
Sure, we could design a kind of science-fiction experiment: Imagine a set of MZ twins 
who are identical in their genetic makeup. For about 9 months, let’s say they share identical 
conditions inside their mother’s womb (although in reality MZ twins grow in their own 
subenvironment of the womb). Then we would take these twins, separate them at birth, and 
randomly place them in contrasting environments. When they grow to adulthood we see 
what kinds of cartoons they think are funny and then see if this is more similar to their birth 
family’s sense of humor or to their adopted family’s sense of humor. This would be the way to 
design a true experimental test, but obviously such an experiment is completely unethical and 
impossible to do.
However, such natural experiments do happen in the world. Babies—both twins and 
nontwins—are adopted and raised in families that provide a nurturing environment but no genetic 
material. Similarly, twins—both genetically identical and not—are raised in the same environment. 
Thus adoption studies and twin studies go a long way to helping researchers understand both the 
genetic and environmental impact on human behavior, including personality.
Recall that a true experiment allows a researcher to infer causality between the presence 
or absence of a variable and some outcome measure. This is because the researcher is able to 
manipulate the independent variable and to randomly assign participants to various levels 
of that independent variable. Therefore, any difference in the outcome between the groups 
must be due to differences in what the experimenter manipulated. Of course, this assumes 
everything else was exactly the same for each and every participant. These two requirements—
experimental control and random assignment to conditions—are the defining qualities of a true 
experiment.
However, there are times when one or both of these requirements are impossible. Like in our 
little sci-fi experiment, you can’t randomly assign children to parents! That violates the random 
assignment to condition requirement. Similarly, you can’t control whether children get raised in 
families with a dry sense of humor or into families with a corny sense of humor, violating the control 
of the independent variable requirement. So, sometimes it’s unethical to conduct a true experiment 
and sometimes it’s just impossible. Often, it’s just impractical or inconvenient, due to limited time or 
resources.
As an alternative to a true experiment, researchers turn to correlational designs. In a 
correlational design the experimenter doesn’t attempt to manipulate the presence or absence of 
the independent variable, but instead measures it along with some outcome measure. Because 
the independent variable is not under the experimenter’s control, if we see a difference between 
participants in the outcome of the dependent variable, we can’t assume that the independent 
variable is what caused the difference. In this case, the best we can say is that the two variables—our 
independent variable and our dependent variable—are related.
Although it is very rare to 
find identical twins who were 
separated at birth, studying 
such twins is a good way to 
understand the effects of 
genetics and environment on 
personality. For example, Bob 
and Bob first met as adults 
and discovered they had 
many similarities, including 
their name and occupation. 
© Thomas Wanstall/The Image Works
163

Genetics
Recall that when two variables are related, there are always at least three possible 
explanations for the findings. First, it’s possible that one variable causes the other, like being 
around the same people all the time causes people to develop a similar sense of humor. Second, 
it’s also possible that the second variable causes the first one, like people who have a similar sense 
of humor spend more time hanging around each other. Finally, it’s also possible that some third 
variable—like genetics—causes people to hang around each other (i.e., family) and to find the 
same jokes funny.
The beauty of twin and adoption studies is that they are able to rule out some of these 
explanations. For example, if adopted children are more similar to their birth parents than to their 
adoptive parents (or adopted siblings, even), then we can assume that the trait in question has 
a stronger genetic component. However, if adopted children are more similar to their adoptive 
parents than to their birth parents, then the trait in question must have a stronger environmental 
component.
An especially strong case for the relative contribution of genetics and environment 
may be made if we can study twins who were separated at birth. In these cases, we have two 
people with identical genetic makeup who have been exposed to different environments. If 
they respond similarly then we can conclude that genetics must have caused the similarity; if 
they respond differently then we can conclude that the environment must have caused the 
difference.
Take a look at Table 2 which shows the correlations between various family members in 
Extraversion and Neuroticism. Recall that positive correlations between two variables mean 
that the two variables are similar: as one variable increases (or decreases), the other variable 
increases (or decreases) too. Where are the correlations the highest? The lowest? As you can see, 
the more genetically similar two people are—for example, identical twins—the more similar 
they are in both of these characteristics. Being raised apart lessens the similarity, but being raised 
together without a genetic predisposition does little to make people similar on these traits. You 
can readily see how twin and adoption studies help us sort out the relative effects of genes and 
environment.
With all of this background on adoption studies, twin studies, and how to interpret correlations, 
we can now address our question: Does sense of humor run in families? And if so, why might this 
be? Using a sample of MZ and DZ female twin pairs, researchers had each twin rate how funny 
they found a series of five Far Side cartoons by Gary Larson (Johnson, Vernon, & Feiler, 2008). The 
researchers were careful to have the women rate the cartoons in separate rooms so they couldn’t 
hear or see their twin’s reaction.
How similar were the twins in their ratings of the cartoons? Overall, the ratings of each 
twin were pretty similar for each of the five cartoons. For one of the cartoons, for example, the 
correlation between ratings of one MZ with her twin was .50 and for DZ twins it was .41. This 
suggests that there is a medium, positive relationship between humor ratings of this cartoon in 
twins.
Take a closer look at these two correlations. Do you think that these correlations are different 
enough to suggest a genetic component to sense of humor? The researchers tested this idea using 
Table 2  Twin, Family, and Adoption Correlations for Neuroticism and Extraversion
Type of Relative
Neuroticism
Extraversion
Identical twins reared together
.43
.52
Fraternal twins reared together
.19
.18
Identical twins reared apart
.31
.42
Fraternal twins reared apart
.23
.08
Nonadoptive parents and offspring
.14
.18
Adoptive parents and offspring
.05
.06
Nonadoptive siblings
.18
.19
Adoptive siblings
.12
-.05
Note: Based on a meta-analysis of 145 studies.
Source: From Johnson et al. (2008).
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Is your sense of humor 
more similar to your family’s 
or your friends’? Why might 
this be?
164

Genetics
advanced statistical techniques and found that there was no significant impact of genetics on the 
ratings of these cartoons. However, they estimated that about 49% of the differences between 
twin pairs was due to differences in shared environment whereas 51% was due to nonshared 
environment. This suggests that sense of humor, at least for these kind of cerebral off-the-wall 
cartoons, is something that is partly learned at home and partly picked up from friends, and other 
aspects of a individual’s unique environment.
Note that in this study the researchers did not randomly assign participants to be MZ 
twins or DZ twins, nor did they manipulate people to share 50 or 100% of the genes. And yet, 
we are able to estimate the relative contribution of genes, shared environment, and unique 
environment on people’s sense of humor. Such is the value of correlational designs, adoption 
studies, and twin studies.
Heritability of Common Personality 
Characteristics
A solid finding in the research—one that has been well replicated across many samples and 
for both self-report and other report—is that virtually all individual differences in human 
behavior including cognitive abilities, personality, social attitudes, psychological interests, 
and psychopathology are moderately heritable (Bouchard & McGue, 2003). In the words 
of one researcher, “some degree of heritability is practically inevitable” (Turkheimer, 2004, 
p. 162).
The heritability of personality traits ranges from .40 to .60, and is the same for both men 
and women (Carey, 2003; Johnson et al., 2008; Krueger & Johnson, 2008; Plomin & Caspi, 1999; 
Plomin & Daniels, 1987; Plomin et al., 2008). In fact, one researcher went so far as to say that 
this is true for all known human differences (Turkheimer, 2000). In addition, shared environ-
ment typically accounts for very little variation (Johnson et al., 2008; Krueger & Johnson, 2008; 
Turkheimer, 2000), whereas nonshared environment accounts for a great deal (Johnson et al., 
2008; Krueger & Johnson, 2008; Turkheimer, 2000). The variance in personality traits typically 
breaks down like this (Krueger & Johnson, 2008):
Observed differences in personality traits = 40% Genetics + 0% Shared environment
+40% Nonshared environment + 20% Error.
So even after we account for the 40 to 60% of variation in most personality traits that comes 
from genetics (Plomin et al., 2002), there is still plenty of variance left to be explained 
(Turkheimer, 2004)!
To illustrate this model, let’s take a closer look at the heritability of the five-factor model 
(FFM) of traits. According to this model, human personality can be described using five broad 
categories of traits: Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness 
(McCrae & Costa, 2008) (we learned about these factors in earlier chapters). Table 3 presents a 
summary of results based on 85,640 pairs of MZ twins, 106,644 pairs of DZ twins, and 46,215 
nontwin kinships from 145 studies published from 1955 to 2006 (Johnson et al., 2008). As you 
can see, identical twins are very similar in the five-factor traits, even if they are raised apart, 
indicating a moderately strong genetic component to these traits. Indeed, the heritability of all 
five factors is in the .41 to .50 range, indicating that about 41 to 50% of the variation in these 
traits is due to genetic factors.
But look closely: Identical twins who were raised together have the highest correlations 
and indeed, even fraternal twins who are raised together look a bit like each other even 
though fraternal twins share only about 50% of their genes on average. This suggests that 
there is a moderate effect of the environment too. Indeed, the environment—both shared and 
nonshared—accounts for about 47 to 53% of the variance in these traits. Finally, the shared 
environment accounts for only about 8 to 17% of the variation in these traits. Other research-
ers have found similar results when looking at the individual facet traits that make up each of 
the five factors (Jang, McCrae, Angleitner, Riemann, & Livesley, 1998).
“Quantitative genetics is hardly 
needed any longer merely to 
ask whether and how much 
genetic factors influence 
behavioral traits because the 
answers are ‘yes’ and ‘a lot,’ 
respectively, for nearly all 
traits that have been studied, 
including personality and 
cognitive abilities” 
(Plomin, Happé, & Caspi, 2002, 
p. 88).
SEE FOR YOURSELF
How similar are you and 
your siblings or parents 
in how emotional you are 
(Neuroticism)? In aesthetic 
sense such as appreciation 
for art and classical music 
(Openness)?
165

Genetics
A similar picture emerges from a study of 660 MZ and 200 DZ twins from Germany and 
Poland (Riemann, Angleitner, & Strelau, 1997). Each twin and two friends of that twin filled 
out questionnaires to measure the twin’s personality on the five personality factors. The peer’s 
ratings correlated .61 with one another and .55 with the twin’s own rating indicating consider-
able agreement among the three raters in what the twin was like.
As you can see in Figure 2, although each of the five factors has moderate heritability— 
genetics accounted for about 35 to 60% of the variance in self-reported traits—there was 
a greater effect of nonshared environment on these traits (Plomin & Caspi, 1999). In fact, 
shared environment accounted for the smallest amount of variance in both self-reports and 
peer reports.
Here is a puzzle for you to think about. Notice that there is a strong genetic component 
to the peer ratings. Does this mean that we “inherit” the opinions of our friends? If not, then 
what might cause this correlation? It’s easy to see how our genetic makeup would account for 
our own ratings, but why would our genetic makeup correlate with our friends’ ratings? Stay 
tuned to find out!
Table 3  Kinship Correlations, Heritability Estimates, and Environmentality Estimates for Traits of the Five-
Factor Model
Type of Relative
N
E
O
A
C
Identical twins reared together
.43
.52
.48
.42
.47
Fraternal twins reared together
.19
.18
.24
.23
.22
Identical twins reared apart
.31
.42
.34
.19
.33
Fraternal twins reared apart
.23
.08
.14
.03
.09
Heritability
.41
.50
.46
.43
.49
Environmentality
.53
.47
.47
.49
.48
Shared environment
.08
.08
.12
.17
.11
Figure 2  Genetic and 
environmental influences 
for self-reports of Big Five 
personality traits.  Source: 
From Plomin and Caspi (1999, 
Figure 9.1, p. 252). From  
L. A. Pervin & O. P. John, eds., 
Handbook of Personality: Theory 
and Research (2nd ed., 
p. 251–276). New York, NY: 
Guilford Press.  Copyright © 
1999 Press.  Reprinted with 
permission.
100
0
Self
Peer
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Agreeableness
Conscienti-
ousness
Openess to
experience
Self
Peer
Self
Self
Self
10
20
80
90
Percentage of Variance
50
60
70
30
40
Peer
Peer
Peer
Nonshared environment
Genetic
Shared environment
166

Genetics
Then and Now: The Science of Genetics
To think the whole field of genetics started with a simple Augustinian friar named Gregor 
Johann Mendel (1822–1884), who was born and lived in what is now the Czech Republic, is 
mind-boggling. The son of a tenant farmer, he worked on the farm and learned about the 
grafting of fruit trees from his father. Mendel and his family recognized that he was too smart 
to simply follow in his father’s footsteps working land that he could never own, so he joined 
the monastery and attended the University of Vienna to earn the credentials he needed to 
teach high school science. It was there that this farmboy “began to turn himself into one of the 
greatest experimental biologists of all time” (Mawer, 2006, p. 38). The friars of the Abbey of St. 
Thomas in Brno were unusual in their desire to practice public ministry, getting involved in 
political causes of the day (Mendel may have taken part in protests against the Austrian Empire 
as a student) and fostering intellectual pursuits. Although some brothers were philosophers 
and others were accomplished composers, the stout, amiable, shy, introverted, sensitive, and 
nearsighted Mendel spent his free time conducting experiments in the monastery gardens:
Throughout each spring and summer the man spent hours and hours tending his plants, 
pollinating, scoring, labeling, harvesting, drying, putting seeds away for the next year, peer-
ing at the world through his gold-rimmed spectacles, puzzling and pondering, counting, 
and tallying, explaining to anyone who would listen what was going on. Visitors were in 
the presence of a man inspired—a Beethoven or a Goethe—and all they saw was a dumpy 
little friar with a sense of irony introducing them to his “children.” (Mawer, 2006, p. 63).
His children were, of course, pea plants—over 28,000 of them! He studied the variation 
in plants and noticed that sometimes characteristics of plants seemed to skip a generation. 
He meticulously planted and recorded details of his pea plants and counted their offspring 
instead of merely generalizing the results as earlier researchers had done (Plomin et al., 2008). 
In particular, the nearly obsessive Mendel followed seven “characters” of plants over succes-
sive generations by crossing one kind of plant with another. These characteristics included 
smooth or wrinkled peas, yellow or green seeds, white seed coat with white flowers or gray 
seed coat with purple flowers, smooth or constricted peapods, green or yellow peapods, 
flowers at the top of the plant or all along the stem, and tall or dwarf plants (Mawer, 2006).
At the time, people believed that inherited characteristics—of people and plants—were 
blended. That is, the offspring of a pea plant with wrinkled peas and a plant with smooth peas 
would have moderately wrinkled peas. But that is not what Mendel found. Instead, he found that 
the next generation was all smooth. What happened to the genetic information for wrinkly peas? 
Mendel reasoned that the trait must still be present in the genotype even though it was not expressed 
in the phenotype. If this was true, then the genotype ought to be passed on to the next generation. 
Indeed, about 75% of the plants in the next generation were smooth and 25% were wrinkled. How 
can it be that each generation can seem so different? From such observations, Mendel developed 
two hypotheses, part of what we now consider his first law of inheritance (Plomin et al., 2008).
First, each parent plant passes on one form of the gene (Mendel used the word element) 
for a given characteristic to its offspring, who get two forms of the gene, one from each parent 
(note that different forms of the same gene are called alleles). These two alleles can either be 
the same or different. When the alleles are different, one characteristic will be dominant over 
the other. However, both alleles will be passed on to the next generation.
For example, say a pea plant with wrinkled peas breeds with a plant that has smooth peas. 
The next generation will each get some combination of alleles for smooth and wrinkly peas. If 
smoothness is the dominant characteristic, then the peas will look smooth, but the plants will 
still carry and pass on the recessive wrinkly pea trait to the next generation (see Figure 3). When 
a trait is recessive, the trait will appear only when a plant receives two alleles for the recessive 
trait—in this case wrinkly peas.
This concept of dominance explains the pattern of seeds Mendel observed in successive gen-
erations. In fact, such inheritance patterns where one trait dominates over another is called Men-
delian inheritance and Mendel is now known as the founder of modern genetics (Mawer, 2006).
“When all the human genes 
are truly known, scientists will 
have produced a Periodic Table 
of Life.”
Peltonen and McKusick (2001,  
p. 1224)
167

Genetics
Fast-forward almost 150 years to the present day. Instead of inheritance of smooth or 
wrinkled peas, scientists are trying to understand what causes any number of human char-
acteristics: physical diseases, psychological disorders, and even personality traits. Since the 
start of the century, a collaborative of international scientists have identified the 20,000 to 
25,000 genes that make up the human genome (Mawer, 2006; Venter et al., 2001). Whereas 
about 99.9% of the human DNA sequence is the same for each and every one of us, it’s 
that .1% that does differ that makes us unique individuals (Plomin, DeFries, Craig, & 
McGuffin, 2003).
Have researchers discovered a genetic, yet noninheritable means by which the environ-
ment fundamentally changes human functioning? Apparently so. This exciting new area of 
genetics research is called epigenetics. We know that a gene is a sequence of DNA that codes 
for a specific trait. Genes are composed of coding regions called exons and noncoding regions 
called introns. Of the 3.3 billion base pairs of DNA in the human genome, only about 2 to 3% 
are functioning genes. The remainder of the DNA—nearly 2 meters of it—was once thought 
to do nothing because it occurs outside genes (Mawer, 2006). This so-called junk DNA is actu-
ally turning out to be more interesting than the coding genes themselves. Some of this “junk” 
appears to orchestrate—alter its regulation to underexpress or overexpress—a nearby gene 
(Plomin et al., 2003). In fact, some of these noncoding sequences end up changing how the 
genes function in direct response to the environment.
What might this look like? Cole et al. (2007) identified a sample of older American adults, 
with a median age of 55 years, who scored in the top 15% of the UCLA Loneliness Scale. They 
were matched to adults of the same sex, age, ethnicity, and socioeconomic status who scored 
in the bottom 15% of the scale.
Previous research had established that people who are socially isolated are vulnerable to 
a host of cardiovascular and infectious diseases due to increased levels of the stress hormone 
cortisol. In the Cole et al. (2007) study both the lonely group and the socially connected group 
Figure 3  Summary of Mendel’s experiments with peas.  Source: From Mawer (2006, p. 54). Gregor Mendel: 
Planting the seeds of genetics. New York, NY: Abrams.
Initial cross
First generation
Second generation
Third generation
“Parent” 1
“Parent” 2
Offspring
3 yellow
to
1 green
168

Genetics
gave samples of blood for genetic analysis to identify problems in the coding of glucocorticoid 
response genes that regulate how the body responds to stress hormones.
Figure 4 vividly shows the differences between these two groups in gene expression as a 
function of their feelings of isolation or connection. Significantly more genes that regulate 
immune functioning were turned down (not expressed at the same levels) in the lonely group 
than in the socially supported group. Specifically, those cells that protect against disease were 
turned down (red), whereas genes that increased disease were turned up (green). These results 
suggest that loneliness directly impacts immune functioning by regulating the specific genes 
that control immune functioning.
This is how epigenetics works for just one human behavior. As we learn more about 
genes involved in disorders and about the noncoding sequences of DNA that may turn out 
to regulate the genes, researchers may develop amazing new ways of treating diseases, both 
physical and psychological, perhaps in your lifetime. Scientists are searching for similar 
environmental effects behind diseases including (Carey, 2003) breast cancer, diabetes, high 
cholesterol, atherosclerosis, Alzheimer’s disease, and also schizophrenia (Gottesman, 1991) 
and bipolar disorder (McGuffin, 2004).
For example, if a disease was inherited, once we have identified the exact gene involved 
in a disorder we can diagnose or screen who has the gene. Researchers then will be able to use 
this information to replace faulty genetic code with new and improved code that has been 
cloned to match as precisely as possible the recipient’s genetics (McGuffin, 2004). This is called 
positional cloning.
In the words of one researcher:
It is now possible for behavior genetics to move beyond statistical analyses of differences 
between identical and nonidentical twins and identify individual genes that are related 
to behavioral outcomes. (Turkheimer, 2000, p. 163).
This is where the cutting-edge research is happening in behavioral genetics and the results are 
very exciting. We are finding that often the environment affects people differently depending 
on a specific genotype. We’ll talk about some of these genotype–environmental interactions 
and the specific genes involved in the next section.
Figure 4  Gene expression as a function of loneliness status. The top strip indicates how the genes are 
functioning in isolated individuals, the bottom strip in connected individuals. Horizontal location indicates 
function of gene: Those on the left increase disease, those on the right prevent disease. Color indicates 
activity of genes: Green indicates overexpression (up-regulated) and red indicates underexpression (down-
regulated). Here, the genes that code for disease are overexpressed in lonely people (green cells on the left) 
and underexpressed in socially connected people (red cells on the left). However, the genes that code for 
disease prevention are underactivated in lonely people (red cells on the right) and overexpressed in socially 
connected people (green cells on the right). Lonely individuals have significantly more underexpressed genes 
(red) than socially connected people.  Source: From Cole et al. (2007, Figure 1, p.  R189. 4). Cole, S. W., Hawkley, 
L. C., Arevalo, J. M., Sung, C. Y., Rose, R. M., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2007). Social regulation of gene expression in human 
leukocytes. Genome Biology, 8, R189 (doi:10.1186/gb-2007-8-9-r189)
0
25
Isolated
Integrated
Down-regulated
Up-regulated
50
Isolation related transcripts
75
100
125
150
Difference: p = .0001
169

Genetics
Genes and Environment:  
A Dialectical Synthesis
So far in this chapter we’ve been looking at the separate effects of genes and environment. 
But when it comes to personality, often genes and environment influence each other. We’ve 
briefly mentioned two ways this may happen—through genotype–environment interactions 
and genotype–environment correlations. Now it’s time for us to take a closer look at these two 
processes.
According to the philosopher Hegel, a dialectic is a way of thinking in which contradictions 
are seen to be part of a higher truth. Take the nature–nurture debate. This phrase suggests that 
nature and nurture work in opposition. What happens if we think of “nature” and “nurture” not 
as opposing forces, but as forces that can be combined or synthesized in some fashion? What if 
genes and environment worked together as allies instead of working against each other as foes?
Recall our formula from the beginning of the chapter in which the amount of variance in 
an observed characteristic can be due to genetics, environment, and some combination of the 
two (Cardno & McGuffin, 2002, p. 40):
Phenotype = Genotype + Environment + Gene9environment correlation
+ Gene9environment interaction.
Until the 1980s, researchers had been considering genes and environment only as separate 
factors influencing phenotype. Plomin et al. (1977) suggested that researchers can increase 
the accuracy of their results—and detect new effects—by specifically testing for two ways in 
which genes and environment influence each other: a genotype–environment interaction and 
a genotype–environment correlation. A genotype–environment interaction occurs when a 
genotype responds differently to an environment; a genotype–environment correlation occurs 
when a genotype is exposed differently to an environment (Loehlin, 1992). These two effects 
are really examples of how nature and nurture work together and lead us to a higher truth. In 
this way, nature–nurture is more of a dialectic than a debate.
Two caveats are in order here. First, whereas we may be unable to see the joint effects of 
genes and environment in a single individual (remember lemonade?) we can explore only 
genotype–environment interactions and genotype–environment correlations within a popula-
tion (Plomin et al., 1977). Although we will illustrate these concepts using individual examples, 
in practice we can really only gauge the genotype–environment effects in a group of people in 
which we are able to estimate key aspects of their genetic makeup and of their environment.
Second, Plomin et al. (1977) noted that in practice it is sometimes difficult to distinguish 
genotype–environment interactions from genotype–environment correlations. Researchers must 
be careful to define and measure aspects of both personality and the environment to truly see 
which kind of effect is occurring, ideally through a study that looks at these variables over time 
(Carey, 2003; Plomin et al., 1977). That is, it often comes down to sophisticated statistical tests 
to determine which effect—an interaction or a correlation—accounts for the data. Next we will 
define genotype–environment interactions and genotype–environment correlations in more detail 
and take a closer look at some interesting research findings that illustrate both kinds of effects.
Genotype–Environment Interactions
One way that genetics and environment work on each other is through a genotype–environment 
interaction. This is when people respond differently to the same environment because of their 
differing genetic makeup. That is, the environment has a different impact depending on a person’s 
genotype (Plomin et al., 1977).
To illustrate how this works, let’s go back to the study that opened the chapter. Recall that in 
a sample of juvenile delinquents in Russia even though many of the boys experienced maternal 
rejection in their lives (e.g., physical punishment, lack of respect for their point of view, public 
criticism), only those with a certain genotype experienced clinical depression (Haeffel et al., 2008).
As you can see now, this is an example of genotype–environment interaction. The same 
environment—maternal rejection—led to clinical depression only in boys with one specific 
THINK ABOUT IT
Can you think of another 
example of a dialectic?
170

Genetics
genotype (look back to Figure 1). In case you were wondering, maternal rejection was not cor-
related with clinical depression, so these really are separate effects.
To identify the specific genotype related to depression, researchers took blood samples 
from the participants. They then analyzed the samples to find out if the young men carried 
one of the three variations of a gene suspected to be related to depression. This gene (DAT1 or 
SLC6A3) is an important regulator of the neurotransmitter dopamine. Evidence suggests that 
prolonged exposure to dopamine may lead to depression.
Despite knowing which genes are related to dopamine functioning, scientists have been 
unable to prove that these genes cause depression. That is, no genetic difference has been found 
between depressed and nondepressed people. Recall that in this study researchers initially found 
no effect of genes alone or environment alone on clinical depression. But when they looked 
at the combination of a specific genotype with an environment of maternal rejection, that’s 
when they found a significant genotype–environment interaction. In this case, genes and envi-
ronment interacted with each other to cause a psychological outcome. We might well wonder 
what other genotype–environment interactions researchers may have missed out on by looking 
separately at genes and environment!
In fact, remember our earlier discussion of how shared environment effects on the develop-
ment of personality traits have been difficult to find? Well, Lahey (2009) pointed out that shared 
environments may impact the personality trait of Neuroticism through genotype–environment 
interactions. By not considering interactive effects of environment on genes, researchers may have 
accidentally overestimated genetic effects and underestimated the impact of shared environments.
A second potential genetic risk factor for depression, anxiety, and other mood disorders 
involves a certain region of the serotonin transporter gene. The thinking here is that depression 
may be caused by a lack of the neurotransmitter serotonin in the spaces between the neurons. In 
fact, many popular antidepressant drugs, called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 
work by blocking the cells that process serotonin so that it stays in the system a bit longer. People 
actually get two versions of the gene that regulates serotonin one from each parent. This leads to 
three different variations of the gene depending on which allele a person gets from his or her par-
ents: ss, sl, and ll. These letters stand for the “short” (s) and “long” (l) versions of the gene. People 
with the short version (ss or sl), especially two short alleles (ss), are less efficient at regulating 
serotonin so they are at risk for depression, whereas people with two long alleles (ll) may have a 
measure of protection from depression.
Early research on the link between the short version of the gene and depression was, in the 
words of one group of researchers, “inconclusive” (Caspi, Sugden, et al., 2003, p. 387). These 
researchers wondered if there might be an interaction between life stressors and genotype. 
Using a longitudinal sample of 1,037 men and women in New Zealand who were studied exten-
sively from ages 3 to 26, they were able to divide the sample into three groups depending on 
their genotype of the serotonin transporter promoter gene: ss, sl, and ll. In addition, participants 
noted if any of 14 major life events occurred to them between the ages of 21 and 26. These 
events included things such as a major change in employment, housing, finances, health, and 
relationships. Finally, participants were asked if they experienced any symptoms of depression, 
thoughts of suicide, suicide attempts, or a depressive episode in the past year. Interestingly, there 
were no differences in number of life stressors among the three genotype groups suggesting 
that genes did not cause people to experience more life stressors.
As you can see in Figure 5, for all of the outcomes studied, participants with the ss genotype 
were the most at risk whereas participants with the ll genotype were the least at risk for depres-
sion or symptoms of depression (Caspi, Sugden, et al., 2003). Participants with the sl genotype 
fell somewhere in between. In all cases, the environment—that is, having more life stressors—
put a person at greater risk for symptoms of depression or a full-blown depressive episode, but 
there was little impact of genotype on symptoms or incidence of depression. However, when a 
person with a specific genotype—ss—encountered stressful life events, the person was particu-
larly likely to develop depression or depressive symptoms. Thus the interaction between genes 
and environment was statistically significant in every instance (Caspi, Sugden, et al., 2003). No 
wonder early research was inconsistent; apparently it takes both the environment and a special 
genotype for a person to experience depression in his or her lifetime (see Monroe & Reid, 2008, 
for a review and Munafò & Flint, 2009, for a criticism of this work).
171

Genetics
These are just two examples of an increasing trend in personality where researchers look for 
genotype–environment interactions. One group of researchers suggested that such interactions 
probably occur more often than we realize, especially for psychopathology (Krueger, Markon, 
& Bouchard, 2003). Interactions between genes and environment have been found to account 
for religious upbringing lessening the impulsiveness of high sensation seekers (Boomsma, de 
Geus, van Baal, & Koopmans, 1999), parental bonding and family functioning decreasing emo-
tional instability (Jang, Dick, Wolf, Livesley, & Paris, 2005), a monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) 
promoter gene and parental harshness increasing adolescent antisocial behavior (Krueger et al., 
2003), the DRD2 gene and stress increasing alcoholism (Madrid, MacMurray, Lee, Anderson, 
& Comings, 2001), and negative life events increasing Neuroticism (Lahey, 2009).
Genotype–Environment Correlations
It seems easy enough to think about the effects of genes and environment. However, researchers 
soon discovered a curious finding: Measures of environments showed evidence of genetic influ-
ence (Plomin et al., 2002). In other words, measures of environmental effects, such as parenting 
styles on, or peer ratings of, a child, for example, were not strictly environmental. That is, people’s 
personalities affected the environments they found themselves in and also how they described 
those environments on questionnaires. This puzzle soon led to a breakthrough in personality 
research which led to many interesting findings (Plomin et al., 2002). Perhaps you can see now 
how this accounts for the genetic component of peer ratings in the twin study of the five-factor 
model of personality study discussed earlier (Riemann et al., 1997). Did you figure it out?
The answer to this puzzle is that people construct their environments. That is, we 
select, modify, create, and re-create in our memory (and on questionnaires administered 
by researchers!) our experiences (Plomin et al., 2002). When people’s experiences are related 
to—that is, are correlated with—their genetic inclinations we call this a genotype–environment 
correlation. A genotype–environment correlation occurs when people with a gene for a specific 
characteristic find themselves in an environment that fosters—or discourages—the expres-
sion of that characteristic (Carey, 2003). Or, to think of it another way, people with different 
genotypes are exposed to different environments depending on that genotype (Plomin et al., 
1977). Because both the genes and the environment occur together, we can’t be sure which 
is causing the manifestation of that characteristic.
THINK ABOUT IT
What does it mean to say 
that there is a genotype–
environment interaction 
between negative life 
events and Neuroticism? 
What kinds of people are 
more vulnerable to negative 
events?
“We propose that development 
is indeed the result of nature 
and nurture but that genes 
drive experience. Genes are 
components in a system that 
organizes the organism to 
experience its world.”
Scarr and McCartney (1983, p. 425)
Figure 5  Incidence of clinical depression symptoms as a function of genotype and life stressors.  Source: From Caspi, Sugden, et al. (2003, 
Figures 1 and 2, p. 388). From Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T. E., Taylor, A., Craig, I. W., Harrington, H., et al. (2003). Influence of life stress on 
depression: Moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene. Science, 301(5631), 386–389. Reprinted by permission of the American 
Association for the Advancement of Science. 
0
2
Number of stressful life events
1
3
s/s
s/l
l/l
4
2.50
0.00
7.50
5.00
10.00
12.50
Self reported depression
symptoms
0
2
Number of stressful life events
1
3
s/s
s/l
l/l
4
.02
.04
.00
.10
.06
.08
.12
.14
.16
Probability of suicide
ideation/attempt
0
2
Number of stressful life events
1
3
s/s
s/l
l/l
s/s
s/l
l/l
4
.10
.00
.30
.20
.40
.50
Probability of major
depression episode
No
maltreatment
Probable
maltreatment
Severe
maltreatment
s/s
s/l
l/l
.30
.20
.00
.50
.40
.60
.70
Probability of major
depression episode
0
2
Number of stressful life events
1
3
4
0.25
0.50
0.00
1.25
0.75
1.00
1.50
1.75
2.00
Informant reports
of depression
A
C
B
E
D
172

Genetics
Another way to think about genotype–environment correlations goes back to our defini-
tion of what a correlation is. In this case, a genotype–environment correlation occurs when 
people with high “genetic values” (i.e., a strong genetic predisposition for a specific character-
istic) find themselves in environments with high values (i.e., environments that push for that 
characteristic; Carey, 2003). Similarly, a genotype–environment correlation also occurs when 
people with low genetic values (i.e., no particular inclination for a characteristic) find them-
selves in environments with low values (i.e., environments with no particular demand for that 
characteristic). The interesting question is why people with certain genotypes find themselves 
in certain environments. There are three possible explanations, which lead to three types of 
correlations: passive, reactive, and active (Plomin et al., 1977; see Table 4).
Types of Genotype–Environment Correlations.  When parents provide both the genes 
and an environment that is favorable (or unfavorable) to the development of those genes, 
we observe a passive genotype–environment correlation (Plomin et al., 1977). For example, 
imagine parents who have very high verbal skills—gifted even—who not only pass on these 
fabulous genes to their children but also provide a home filled with books and games and other 
activities that are likely to help their children develop good verbal skills (Plomin et al., 1977). 
Because the children did nothing to cause the environment to provide these resources—and in 
fact, such resources may have been in place long before children were even on the scene—the 
genotype–environment correlation is passive.
But consider the same 
highly verbal parents who see 
that their baby is babbling 
constantly and often seems 
as if she is trying to commu-
nicate to them. These parents 
may purposely try to engage 
the baby in conversation (e.g., 
“Who’s Mama’s precious little 
baby?”) or encourage the baby 
to talk (“Say Dada!”). Because 
the parents are responding to 
something in the child, we call 
this kind of relationship a reac-
tive genotype–environment 
correlation (Plomin et al., 
1977). Just as with the passive 
genotype–environment corre-
lation, we can’t be sure if the 
child’s genetics or environment 
caused him or her to be so ver-
bal because the two co-occur.
Table 4  Three Types of Genotype–Environment Correlations
Type
Description
Pertinent Environment
Passive
Children are given genotypes linked to their 
environment
Natural parents and siblings
Reactive
Children are reacted to on the basis of their 
genotype
Anybody
Active
Children seek an environment conductive to their 
genotype
Anytime
Source: From Plomin et al. (1977, Table 1, p. 311). Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., & Loehlin, J. C. (1977). Genotype-environment interaction 
and correlation in the analysis of human behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 84(2), 309–322.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Can you identify a char-
acteristic you may have 
developed due to a passive 
genetic–environment corre-
lation between your genes 
and the environment your 
parents created for you?
Genotype–environment 
correlations occur when 
people are exposed to 
different environments 
depending on their genotype. 
Genotype–environment 
correlations can be passive, 
reactive, or active. This 
young boy is already an 
accomplished ballet dancer. 
Do you think this is an 
example of a passive or active 
genotype–environment 
correlation?
© Sean Nel/Shutterstock
173

Genetics
Now imagine that this child of highly verbal parents is spending the weekend with 
grandparents (with whom the child shares about 25% of her genes, on average). Suppose 
the baby babbles to both grandparents, but because Grandma is in the middle of cooking 
dinner, Grandpa investigates the noises coming from the crib. “Are you trying to talk, little 
baby?” he says while laughing. “Go on, tell me all about it.” For the rest of the weekend, the 
baby crawls to Grandpa whereever he is and continues to babble at him. This would be an 
example of an active genotype–environment correlation. Here, the parents (or grandpar-
ents, in this case) have provided both the genes and the environment. The baby can either 
interact with Grandma or Grandpa, but she chooses to “talk” with, and indeed seeks out, the 
more responsive one, Grandpa. Here, her high verbal ability comes from both her genetics 
and the environment, but she is the one who specifically seeks out the environment.
Genotype–environment correlations can be either positive or negative. The previous 
examples illustrated positive genotype–environment correlations, where conditions were 
favorable for developing a certain characteristic. In this case, verbal behavior was encouraged 
in the child either by an environment that just happens to encourage verbal ability (passive), 
responded to the child (reactive), or which the child sought out (active). But we could easily 
imagine scenarios where verbal behavior was discouraged or where the child found herself in 
an environment that was unfavorable for developing verbal ability because the TV was on all 
the time (passive), where there was an older sibling who talked at the baby and interrupted her 
babbling (reactive), or where the baby preferred the company of a quiet relative to a talkative 
relative (active). These would be examples of negative genotype–environment correlations.
In the case of a negative genotype–environment correlation, people with high genetic val-
ues for a characteristic find themselves in environments with low values for that characteristic. 
Often, the result is that the environment discourages the expression of that characteristic. The 
inverse is also possible, where people with low genetic values for a characteristic find themselves 
in environments with high values for that characteristic. They may end up developing some of 
their less pronounced characteristics.
Keep in mind that whether a genotype–environment correlation is positive or negative 
does not depend on the ultimate outcome—the development or lack of development of a 
characteristic—but on the relative levels of the genotype and the environment (see Table 5). 
Often positive genotype–environment correlations encourage a specific characteristic whereas 
negative genotype–environment correlations discourage a specific characteristic, but this is 
not necessarily the case. For example, Scarr and McCartney (1983) described a negative passive 
genotype–environment correlation where parents might be highly skilled readers and have a 
child who is not reading so well. They may decide to enhance the environment for this child—
because they are good at reading and not because of anything about the child—more than they 
might for a child who is already reading well or more than parents who are not highly skilled 
readers would do if they had such a child.
For personality characteristics, Raymond Cattell suggested that negative genotype–
environment correlations were probably more common than positive correlations (Plomin 
et al., 1977). For example, a person who is too domineering will probably be put in her place 
by her peers, indicating a negative reactive genotype–environment correlation (Plomin et 
al., 1977). Although it may seem odd that people would seek out environments that work 
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Can you identify a char-
acteristic you may have 
developed due to an active 
genotype–environment cor-
relation between your genes 
and the environment your 
parents created for you?
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Can you identify a charac-
teristic you may have failed 
to develop due to a passive, 
reactive, or active genotype–
environment correlation 
between your genes and 
the environment your par-
ents created for you?
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Can you identify a char-
acteristic you may have 
developed due to a reactive 
genotype–environment cor-
relation between your genes 
and the environment your 
parents created for you?
Table 5  Positive and Negative Genotype–Environment Correlations
Type of Correlation
Genotype
Environment
Positive
High
High
Positive
Low
Low
Negative
High
Low
Negative
Low
High
Note: High or low indicates the amount of the characteristic present in the genes or in the environment.
174

Genetics
against their natural inclinations, as is the case with negative active genotype–environment 
correlations, you could imagine a person who is anxious and easily upset seeking out stable 
and reassuring friends to calm him down (Plomin et al., 1977). What would a negative 
passive genotype–environment correlation look like? Imagine parents who are emotion-
ally reactive and get angry easily and yet have a child who is similar to them in this regard. 
They are very likely to squelch any unseemly reaction in their child (Plomin et al., 1977).
According to Scarr and McCartney (1983):
People seek out environments they find compatible and stimulating. We all select 
from the surrounding environment some aspects to which to respond, learn 
about, or ignore. Our selections are correlated with motivational, personality, 
and intellectual aspects of our genotypes. The active genotype S  environment 
effect, we argue, is the most powerful connection between people and environ-
ments and the most direct expression of the genotype in experience. (p. 427)
Note that these three types of correlations differ in terms of what constitutes the environ-
ment. For passive, the environment is the child’s immediate environment: parents, siblings, 
and other members of the household that he or she is born into. For reactive, the environment 
is any person who interacts with or responds to the child. For example, peers may recipro-
cate the affection of a sociable child or teachers may provide an enriched environment for a 
student who shows special aptitude. Finally, for active, the environment can be other people 
or indeed, the physical environment itself. For example, a musical child can rush to play the 
piano at Grandma’s house, gravitate to the music store at the mall, or even bang on pots and 
pans in the kitchen to make music. Further, the relative importance of these environments—and 
hence the type of genotype–environment correlation that is operating—shifts over the life span. 
For example, passive genotype–environment influences may decrease from infancy to adolescence 
whereas active genotype–environment influences increase as the child experiences more of the 
world away from home.
What’s the Evidence? Researching Genotype–Environment Correlations.  What evidence 
is there for this idea that social experiences are evoked by one’s genotype? One way to find a 
reactive genotype–environment correlation is to look at twin studies over time, where we might 
be able to see changes in a child’s behavior and if these changes correlate with changes in the 
environment. For example, comparing MZ twins and DZ twins, Narusyte, Andershed, Neider-
hiser, and Lichtenstein (2007) found that childhood aggression was related to parental criticism 
that was related, in turn, to self-reported antisocial behavior in adolescence. The researchers 
suggested that this is an example of a reactive genotype–environment correlation: Children at 
risk for antisocial behavior are indeed more aggressive than children not at risk, and they are 
also more likely to elicit negative reactions in their parents.
A similar reactive genotype–environment correlation was found in an adoption study, 
where teens’ antisocial behavior was correlated with both their biological parent’s substance 
abuse or antisocial personality (genotype) and with the harsh or inconsistent disciplinary prac-
tices of their adoptive mothers and fathers (environment; Ge et al., 1996).
Another way to investigate a reactive genotype–environment correlation is to create one in 
the laboratory, something researchers have only begun to explore. Burt conducted an experi-
ment in which undergraduate men were put in a controlled situation to see how they interacted 
with others (Burt, 2008, 2009). Would they elicit certain reactions from their peers as a function 
of their genotype? If they did, then this would demonstrate a reactive genotype–environment 
correlation in an experimental situation.
In this unusual experiment, Burt identified men who had either a G-allele or an A-allele 
for a certain serotonin receptor gene (5-HTR2A) and had them interact in small groups on 
two tasks. In previous research, the G-allele was associated with an increased response to selec-
tive serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). When normal volunteers are given SSRIs they act 
friendlier (indeed, recall that the administration of SSRIs has been shown to reduce clinical 
depression). Burt hypothesized that participants with the G-allele would be more likely than 
175

Genetics
those with the A-allele to be friendly, smile, and socialize with others, eventually becoming one 
of the most popular members of the group.
The groups were charged with two sets of tasks: answering brainteasers and planning two 
parties, one with a strict budget and the other with unlimited funds and the instructions to “be 
creative and have fun.” Afterward the participants rated how much they liked each person in 
their group. The researchers created a composite of group ratings for each participant indicat-
ing how likable each participant was perceived to be by the others in the group. In addition, 
observers took note of how often a participant joked, supported, or suggested, that the group 
break rules either during the planning of their party or as part of the entertainment at the party. 
For example, some participants suggested that they somehow steal money to supplement their 
limited budget, or, in the case of the creative second party, provide alcohol (even though all 
participants were under the legal drinking age), marijuana, other drugs, or even prostitutes. 
An overall composite measure of rule-breaking was created from these observer ratings along 
with self-reports. Burt reasoned that among young people, particularly men, rule-breaking is 
a way of establishing status and popularity.
As predicted, men with the G-allele were more likely to suggest or encourage rule-breaking 
and were, in fact, rated as more popular by their group-mates compared to men with the 
A-allele (Burt, 2008, 2009). As Burt explained, the funny thing is that it is biologically impos-
sible for a person’s gene to code for another person’s response. It seems that this particular gene 
codes for behaviors like rule-breaking that then lead people to be perceived as more likable. 
Burt’s results suggested that genes code for a particular behavior (e.g., rule-breaking) and for 
the social consequences of that behavior (e.g., popularity). This is an example of a positive reac-
tive genotype–environment correlation, where genes cause behavior to which the environment, 
in this case other people, then responds.
Burt (2009) recognized that rule-breaking is just one aspect of popularity. He suggested 
that researchers explore other aspects of personality that are known to affect liking such as 
social dominance, extraversion, physical attractiveness, and perceived athletic ability, or specific 
gestures that affect first impressions such as eye contact and smiling, to see if these might help 
explain the correlation between genotype and popularity.
There are many examples of gene–environment correlations, especially in developmental 
psychology. Correlations between genes and environment have been found for adolescents’ 
perceptions of parental warmth or conflict (Johnson & Krueger, 2006), physical punishment 
and misbehavior (Jaffee et al., 2004), parental harshness and antisocial behavior (Krueger et 
al., 2003), memories of childhood environment (Krueger et al., 2003), and family bonding and 
neuroticism (Jang et al., 2005).
Can one person’s gene 
code for other people’s 
responses? A reactive 
genotype–environmental 
correlation occurs when our 
genes, as expressed in our 
personalities, influence the 
environment around us.
© Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock
176

Genetics
“[I]f you really want to 
engineer your child’s IQ, stick 
to the old ways. Send them 
to Eton. And if governments 
want to improve the nations’ 
intelligence, the best value for 
money would be to double 
teachers’ salaries.”
Geneticist Steve Jones as cited in 
Smith (2005, p. 188)
The movie Gattaca portrays 
a futuristic world where 
parents select the exact 
genetic makeup of their 
offspring. As individuals and 
society we need to decide 
what to do with the results of 
genetic research.
What can genetics research do for us?
If the concept of cloning or prenatal genetic testing makes you nervous, you are not alone. 
Keep in mind that genetics is a tool, not a goal, so that understanding the human genome 
is really only the beginning (Carey, 2003). As a tool, genetics is value-neutral. The real 
moral question is, what do we do with the findings from genetic research? To make these 
kinds of decisions it is imperative that informed citizens understand what genetics can 
and can’t do so that we can be involved in the issues and not leave the debate solely to the 
scientists or lawmakers.
One way that findings from genetics have been misused in the past includes the 
eugenics movement, which claimed the moral superiority of one group over another 
(witness the so-called Final Solution of the Nazis) and even went so far as to control 
who gets to reproduce or not (for example, the United States for a time instituted forced 
sterilization of people with supposedly lower IQs as part of a eugenics program; Mawer, 
2006). Another questionable use of genetics is cloning, although some say human cloning 
may be nearly impossible (Smith, 2005).
Although gene therapy involving the cloning of the common cold virus has success-
fully cured some diseases, such as severe combined immune deficiency syndrome (SCIDS; 
Smith, 2005), sometimes the risk of this type of therapy is too great (Collins & Vedantam, 
1999). The biggest fear may be that genetic testing will be used to modify or even select for 
traits that are not disease related such as gender, intelligence, eye color, physical strength, 
or sociability—a brave new world indeed!
And yet, the knowledge gleaned from genetics can be used for a world of good. Some 
possible goals currently under investigation by geneticists include identification of genetic 
risk indicators (Plomin et al., 2008), medical treatments individually tailored to our DNA 
(Plomin et al., 2008), the conservation of endangered animal and plant species (Mawer, 
2006), a better understanding of evolution (Carey, 2003), identification of our common 
ancestors (Mawer, 2006), increased use of forensic evidence (Reilly, 2006), cures for cancers 
and other diseases (Reilly, 2006; Smith, 2005), improvement of crop production (Reilly, 
2006), prevention of famine (Reilly, 2006), solutions to historical puzzles (Reilly, 2006), 
and a better use of the limited resources of our planet (Reilly, 2006).
We must not forget our discussion from the beginning of this chapter: Personality 
is lemonade. For personality psychologists, knowing that even when a personality trait 
The Personality of Everyday Life
© AF Archive/Alamy
177

Genetics
Chapter Summary
How does genetics make us who we are? Basically, we develop the personalities we do, as a result 
of the following:
	 1.	 Inheritance of specific genes (e.g., Gregor Mendel and his pea plants).
	 2.	 Genes and environment working together as co-actors (e.g., heritability, environmentality).
	 3.	 Genes and environment working together as a dialectic (e.g., genotype–environment inter-
actions, genotype–environment correlations).
	 4.	 Environmental toxins, stressors, social situations (both nurturing and neglecting) that 
affect the regulation of specific genes (e.g., turning them up or turning them down). Envi-
ronmental effects can not only trigger negative outcomes in a genetically vulnerable per-
son, but can also offset genetic vulnerabilities for maladaptive outcomes.
Researchers often study twins (both MZ twins and DZ twins) to estimate the heritability 
of personality traits. Because it would be impossible to conduct a true experiment, research-
ers have relied on correlational designs (e.g., family studies, twin studies, adoption studies) to 
study genetics and personality.
We discovered that there are two ways of estimating heritability (double the difference 
in correlations between MZ twins and DZ twins; the correlation between MZ twins raised 
apart), and that heritability refers to a particular trait in a particular population at a particular 
time. Further, a phenotype (the observed manifestation of a gene) is a function of a person’s 
genotype, environment (including shared and nonshared aspects), the interaction of both, the 
correlation of both, and measurement error.
When it comes to personality, just about every individual difference characteristic you can 
think of (e.g., Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness) has a 
substantial genetic component (about 40% of the variance in a trait is due to genetics) and a 
substantial environmental component. Further, the important part of the environment appears 
to be the part that is unique to us and not shared with siblings raised in the same environment 
(also about 40%).
Where once psychologists who studied the genetics of personality concerned themselves 
with the heritability of personality characteristics, they now think in terms of epigenetics, or 
how genes are regulated by events or experiences in the environment. In fact, researchers believe 
that most aspects of personality including mental and physical illness are controlled by complex 
genetics (e.g., involving many genes, interacting with the environment, and even regulated by 
environmental conditions). One day we may be able to treat disorders with drugs or behavioral 
interventions that operate at the level of gene regulation. With the foundation of this chapter 
you will be able to understand both the ethical issues and the implications of research break-
throughs that will no doubt emerge in your lifetime in this most exciting area of personality 
research. In sum: “This ain’t your parents’ genetics!”
is genetic the environment still has a big impact suggests that mental health may be a 
public health issue (e.g., Lahey, 2009). Problems such as depression and antisocial behav-
ior (Carey, 2003) may be preventable whereas increasing intelligence, cooperation, and 
a host of other prosocial traits may be possible. With genes as an early warning system 
(Plomin et al., 2003), behavioral and environmental engineering will work with genetic 
engineering (Plomin et al., 2008). It all starts with an understanding of the genetic—and 
environmental—influences on human behavior and personality (e.g., Moffitt, Caspi, & 
Rutter, 2006).
“There is no gene for the 
human spirit.”
Tagline from the 1997 movie 
Gattaca, written and directed by 
Andrew Niccol
“It was a self-evident truth to 
the signers of the American 
Declaration of Independence 
that all men are created 
equal. . . . The founding fathers 
of America were not so naïve 
as to think that all people 
are created identical. The 
essence of a democracy is that 
all people should have legal 
equality despite their genetic 
differences.”
Plomin et al. (2008, p. 91)
Go online for more 
resources to help you 
review.
Study and Review
on mysearchlab.com
178

Genetics
Review Questions
	 1.	 If the real question is not whether genes or environment affect personality, what is the right 
question to ask? What does it mean to say that nature and nurture transact?
	 2.	 What is heritability? What is environmentality? What is shared environment? What is 
nonshared environment?
	 3.	 What are the two common ways of estimating heritability? What assumptions does each 
of these formulas depend on?
	 4.	 What is the logic behind adoption and twin studies? What makes a correlational design 
different from a true experiment? Based on research with twins, does sense of humor run 
in families? Why might this be?
	 5.	 What can we say about the heritability of the traits of Neuroticism, Extraversion, Open-
ness, Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness? Which is more important for developing these 
traits, shared or nonshared environment?
	 6.	 How do noncoding sequences of DNA change how genes function in direct response to 
the environment? Explain using the example of loneliness and immune functioning.
	 7.	 What does it mean to say that genes and environment are a dialectic? What is a dialectic? 
What is a genotype–environment interaction? Describe how genotype and life stressors 
interact to cause clinical depression according to research by Caspi, Sugden, et al. (2003).
	 8.	 What is a genotype–environment correlation? What is a positive genotype–environment 
correlation? What is a negative genotype–environment correlation? What are passive, reac-
tive, and active genotype–environment correlations?
	 9.	 What are some uses genetic research may be put to in the near future?
Key Terms
Genotype
Behavioral genetics
Phenotype
Heritability
Environmentality
Shared environment
Nonshared environment
Monozygotic (MZ)  
twins
Dizygotic (DZ) twins
MZA twins
Equal environments 
assumption
Assumption of 
representativeness
Selective placement
Alleles
Mendelian inheritance
Epigenetics
Genes
Exon
Intron
Positional cloning
Dialectic
Genotype–environment 
interaction
Genotype–environment 
correlation
Passive genotype– 
environment correlation
Reactive genotype– 
environment correlation
Active genotype– 
environment correlation
Positive genotype– 
environment correlation
Negative genotype– 
environment correlation
“Genetic diversity is the 
essence of life.”
Plomin et al. (2008, p. 91)
179

180

167
THE NEUROSCIENCE 
OF PERSONALITY
What Is Neuroscience and How Do We Study It?
Bodily Responses
Brain Structure
Brain Activity
Biochemical Activity
Research Methods Illustrated: Correlational Designs II: Scatterplots, Correlations, and 
the Alleged “Voodoo Science” of fMRI Studies
Neurological Theories of Personality
Eysenck’s PEN Model
Overview of Eysenck’s Three Dimensions
Neurology of Extraversion
Neurology of Neuroticism
Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory (RST)
Overview of Three Neurological Systems
Neurology of FFFS, BAS, and BIS
The Personality of Everyday Life: Personality and the guessing penalty
Then and Now: Phrenology, the New Phrenology, and the Future of Neuroimaging for 
Personality and Beyond
Neurological Correlates of Personality
Extraversion and Neuroticism
Brain Structure Differences in the Cortex and the Amygdala
Brain Activity Differences in the Cortex, Left–Right Asymmetry, and the Amygdala
Biochemical Activity
Impulsivity and Sensation Seeking
Bodily Responses
Brain Activity
Biochemical Activity
Conclusion: What Have We Learned From the Neuroscience of Personality?
Chapter Summary
Review Questions
Key Terms
Read the Chapter on 
mysearchlab.com 
© DocCheck Medical Services GmbH/Alamy
From Chapter 7 of Personality Psychology: Foundations and Findings, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. Copyright © 2012 by 
Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
181

The Neuroscience of Personality
W
hat if I told you there was a way that you could be healthier and happier? It’s not a 
drug, it doesn’t involve massive psychotherapy, it’s not painful, and it’s totally free. 
What is this miracle cure? Believe it or not, it’s meditation!
Although some religious and cultural traditions embrace meditation as a powerful spiritual 
practice, modern medical research has traditionally scoffed at alternative treatments. However, 
Dr. Jon Kabat-Zinn, professor of medicine emeritus at the University of Massachusetts Medi-
cal School, has changed all this with his brand of Westernized stress reduction using Eastern 
principles of meditation. And he and his colleagues have been doing controlled experiments 
to test the effectiveness of these techniques.
In one study, participants who wanted to learn about meditation as a form of stress reduc-
tion were randomly assigned to either a meditation group or a control group (Davidson et al., 
2003). The meditation group went through an extensive 8-week training in mindfulness-based 
stress reduction meditation, whereas people in the control group were put on a wait list for the 
8 weeks to receive the training at a later time. In this way, both groups were essentially equivalent 
except for participation in the meditation training.
During the training, participants practiced being in the moment instead of planning, 
worrying, thinking, or fantasizing about the future, the way most of us do when given a few 
moments to sit still. The meditation group members tuned in to their breathing and practiced 
regulating their attention to not think about these things—to think about nothing, in fact 
(Kabat-Zinn, 1990).
At the end of the training session the two groups were compared on a number of measures. 
The researchers found that the group that had learned meditation showed less anxiety. This 
would be exciting enough—that people who meditate have less anxiety—but the real news is 
that they also showed differences in how their brains responded to emotional stimuli (Davidson 
et al., 2003). People who meditated showed greater brain activation on the left prefrontal cortex 
of their brains both at rest and in response to positive and negative emotional events. As a spe-
cial bonus, participants in the meditation group also showed better immune functioning than 
participants in the control group.
Overall, the data suggest that regular meditation fundamentally changes how our brains 
work and that this activation is related both to the emotions we feel and to how we respond to 
stressful events. The researchers surmised that meditation makes people more open to expe-
riencing positive emotions and less reactive to negative emotions with the overall effect of 
decreasing their anxiety and improving immune functioning (Davidson et al., 2003)—all of 
this without drugs!
When it comes to understanding our biological functioning and personality, it’s like the 
question of which came first, the chicken or the egg: Does our physiology determine our per-
sonality, or does our personality determine our physiology? We may be born with a certain 
“As physicists had to learn that 
they were dealing with a space-
time continuum, psychologists 
will have to learn that they 
have to deal with a mind-body 
continuum—not with Cartesian 
entities entirelyç separate from 
each other.”
Eysenck (1997, p. 1224)
Evidence suggests that 
the regular practice of 
mindfulness meditation 
makes people more receptive 
to positive emotions, 
decreases anxiety, and 
bolsters the immune system.
© marcstock/Shutterstock
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Take a few minutes to close 
your eyes, sit still, clear your 
mind, and focus on your 
breathing. Were you able to 
do this? Did you start to feel 
more relaxed?
THINK ABOUT IT
Does physiology determine 
personality or does person-
ality determine physiology? 
Can it be both?
182

The Neuroscience of Personality
physiology that may cause us to develop certain traits, but the environment can modify aspects 
of our personality. Perhaps the best way to think of our physiology is as a package of poten-
tialities for personality traits that may be developed, discouraged, or even modified by our 
experiences. However, at the same time research such as the meditation study suggests that 
our behavior also affects our physiology. How much so and for which specific aspects of our 
personality are still open questions.
In this chapter we briefly review the major physiological systems and discuss two per-
sonality theories that hypothesize that neurological differences cause differences in personal-
ity traits. Then we consider the physiology and neurology behind some common personality 
characteristics.
What Is Neuroscience  
and How Do We Study It?
Researchers who explore the neuroscience behind personality focus on the brain and the ner-
vous system. A brief overview of the parts of the nervous system will help us better understand 
some of the recent findings in this area.
The nervous system is made up of the central nervous system and the peripheral ner-
vous system. The central nervous system includes the brain and the spinal cord whereas the 
peripheral nervous system includes the somatic nervous system, which controls movements of 
the muscles, and the autonomic nervous system, which regulates smooth muscle (e.g., inner 
organs), cardiac muscle, and glands. The autonomic nervous system is further divided into the 
sympathetic division and the parasympathetic division. The sympathetic division mobilizes 
energy (e.g., for fight or flight), whereas the parasympathetic division supports systems that 
replenish the body’s energy stores (e.g., salivation, digestion, etc.; Carlson, 2010).
The brain is protected by a bath of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) that cushions the delicate brain 
and also flows through spaces in the brain called ventricles. CSF is similar to blood plasma, 
and is continually produced, circulated, and reabsorbed through the brain and the ventricles 
(Carlson, 2010).
The brain contains a number of structures and systems that control everything from think-
ing, reasoning, learning, and memory, to breathing, sleeping, and eating, to movement and the 
processing of sensory information, to the experience of emotions. Because all of these parts are 
crucial for basic functioning, we should not expect to see large differences among people. How-
ever, individuals can vary in all kinds of ways, from how they may respond to stress (e.g., heart 
palpitations, sweating) to what they think is happy or sad, to how they respond to hormones and 
drugs. Researchers hypothesize that differences in bodily responses, brain structure, brain activity, 
and biochemical activity are all related to individual differences in personality (Zuckerman, 2005). 
All of the research that has been done on exploring physiological and neurological differences in 
personality fits into one of these four categories. These categories and the common physiological 
measures of each are summarized in Table 1.
Bodily Responses
When our body responds to arousing events in the environment it is the autonomic nervous 
system that responds. When aroused, the sympathetic division responds by increasing heart rate, 
blood pressure, blood flow to the extremities, respiration, sweating, and muscle activity. Essentially 
the body curtails some of its regular maintenance functions to mobilize an immediate response.
Sweating is measured by galvanic skin response (GSR) which is a measure of skin conduc-
tance or how quickly a slight electrical current passes through two points on the skin. The faster 
the conductance of the current, the more moisture is present that indicates greater arousal.
Muscle activity is measured by electromyography (EMG) or myoelectric activity, which 
estimates the electrical impulses of the muscles during contraction and relaxation. EMG is often 
used in biofeedback to train people to perceive muscle contractions so that they can learn to 
relax their muscles.
“It is unlikely that you would 
define your personality in 
terms of molecular and 
cellular brain processes. . . . Yet 
personality is the product of 
the brain.”
Corr (2006, p. 519)
183

The Neuroscience of Personality
Brain Structure
Another place that researchers have looked for differences among people is in the relative size 
and weight of specific parts of the brain, or even in the kinds and number of cells found in 
various parts of the nervous system. In the past, the only way of studying differences in brain 
structure and cells was through dissecting the brain after death. During an autopsy the brain 
may be removed and sections of tissues preserved for cytological (cell) study.
Today, through the advent of more sophisticated techniques we can study the structure 
of a living human brain through noninvasive procedures. For example, computerized tomog-
raphy (CT), called a CT scan, takes a high-resolution x-ray picture of the brain. By looking at 
thin cross sections of the brain—often less than a millimeter!—we can detect abnormalities or 
differences in brain tissue. (This same technique was once called computer axial tomography 
[CAT], or CAT scan.)
A similar technique involves magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Here radio frequency 
waves are used instead of x-rays. First, a strong magnetic field causes the nuclei of some atoms 
to resonate. Then radio frequency waves are used to detect the activity of these atoms. Because 
Table 1  Common Markers of Neurological and Physiological Differences in Personality
Bodily Responses
Brain Structure
Brain Activity
Biochemical Activity
Cardiovascular
Dissection
Cortical stimulation
Neurotransmitters:
  Heart rate
Cytology
EEG
  Dopamine,
  Blood pressure
CT scan
Evoked potential
  Serotonin,
  Blood flow
MRI
PET scan
  GABA
Respiratory function
fMRI
Enzymes:
Galvanic skin response
Transcranial magnetic stimulation
  MAO
Electromyography
Hormones:
  Epinephrine,
  Norepinephrine,
  Cortisol
Drug responses
Note: See the chapter text for descriptions and explanations of abbreviations.
Paper-thin slices of human 
brain mounted on slides for 
study.
© Simon Fraser/Newcastle General Hospital/Photo Researchers, Inc.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Have you ever had a CT 
scan, CAT scan, or an MRI? 
What information was your 
doctor hoping to find that 
couldn’t be found through 
other methods?
THINK ABOUT IT
Which of these four markers 
of neurological and physio-
logical activity do you think 
are most promising for 
understanding personality:  
bodily responses, brain 
structure, brain activity, or 
biochemical activity? Why?
184

The Neuroscience of Personality
hydrogen atoms are present in all tissues but in varying concentrations, the pattern of resonance 
formed by the hydrogen atoms forms a multidimensional picture of the brain.
Brain Activity
Both CT scans and MRIs can detect only static pictures of the brain—that is, pictures of brain 
structure at one moment in time. Measures of brain activity are ways of looking for differences 
in brain structures while the brain is stimulated. Often, participants are given a mental task to 
work on or other stimuli to react to while measures of brain activity are taken.
One early technique of studying brain activity is cortical stimulation. Using either elec-
trodes implanted in the brain or direct electrical stimulation of parts of the brain, the patient 
is awake and can report on sensations as various parts of the brain are being stimulated. Today, 
we are able to use less invasive procedures. For instance, in an electroencephalogram (EEG) 
electrodes are placed on the scalp to monitor electrical activity of the brain. When electrical 
activity of the brain or other part of the nervous system is measured in response to a specific 
stimulus, this is called an evoked potential (EP). Both EEGs and EPs indicate amount of brain 
activity in response to a stimulus. However, newer techniques identify the exact location of 
brain activity.
Non-invasive procedures, like 
the CT scan shown here, allow 
researchers to study brain 
structures.
© Monkey Business Images/Dreamstime.com
185

The Neuroscience of Personality
In positron emission tomography (PET), called a PET scan, a slightly radioactive glucose-
like substance with a very short half-life (rate of breakdown) is injected into the brain and the 
person is placed in a scanner similar to a CT scanner. Active regions of the brain use up more 
glucose than inactive regions and, with the aid of computer enhancement, scans of these regions 
appear in different colors related to their activity level.
The most detailed view of brain activity at a cellular level comes from functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI). This works the same as the traditional MRI except that brain activ-
ity levels are monitored over time by tracing blood oxygen levels in the brain. The more active 
areas use up more oxygen and this activity is translated into different color scans of the brain. 
Often images are taken while the participant is engaged in some cognitive activity or viewing 
stimuli, so that the researcher takes a series of these functional images over time.
Though the use of fMRI for personality research is on the rise, there are some notable 
problems with fMRI research. One problem is timing of response. When viewing a stimulus, 
our thoughts react within milliseconds whereas blood flow takes about 2 seconds. This makes 
it difficult to pinpoint the precise area that fired at the exact moment of a thought or reac-
tion. Another problem is that the procedure is time-intensive and the equipment expensive 
so that often experiments use only a small number of participants. Small sample sizes make 
it difficult to find a reliable and significant effect (Yarkoni, 2009). A third problem, called 
the nonindependence error, is that researchers may unintentionally bias their results by not 
independently selecting which brain areas to correlate with, say, personality characteristics or 
other variables (Vul, Harris, Winkielman, & Pashler, 2009a). We’ll talk more about this error 
and the controversy surrounding fMRI studies in the Research Methods Illustrated section. 
These fMRI images of a 
woman’s brain show areas of 
her brain that are active while 
she is engaged in a cognitive 
task.
Electrodes are attached to 
this woman’s head to measure 
brain activity.
© AJPhoto/Photo Researchers, Inc.
© CARY WOLINSKY/National Geographic Image Collection
186

The Neuroscience of Personality
Finally, confounds such as time of day and nervousness of participants can also affect the 
results of neuroimaging studies (Dumit, 2004; Uttal, 2001).
One of the newest techniques for studying brain activity is transcranial magnetic stimula-
tion (TMS). With TMS a brief electrical current passes through a coil placed on the head. The 
magnetic field disrupts the regular activity of the neurons, sometimes impairing and some-
times enhancing function (Schutter, 2009). By carefully mapping parts of the brain that are 
stimulated and noting what kind of functioning is disrupted, researchers are able to pinpoint 
with greater accuracy than cortical stimulation or EP the exact area affected. Essentially TMS 
mimics a brain lesion, which allows researchers to draw inferences about cause and effect. This 
is a huge improvement over earlier techniques that only suggested a correlational relationship 
between brain activity and behavior (Walsh & Cowey, 2000). Although this technique has been 
used to treat various disorders including depression and anxiety (George & Bellmaker, 2000) 
and the pain of fibromyalgia (Sampson, 2006), we do not know yet how useful TMS will be for 
the study of personality.
This imaging research is very exciting, but there is one major problem with interpreting the 
results of brain scan research: What exactly does it mean when an area reacts in response to certain 
stimuli? According to critics of brain localization techniques, it could mean a number of things 
(Dumit, 2004; Uttal, 2001; Wade, 2006). First, it could mean that the area in question is indeed the 
center for that characteristic or response. But there could also be other areas that are less active but 
of equal or even greater importance that may have disinhibited the more active area. Also, when 
an area responds to stimulation we know that the area is necessary, but we don’t know if it is a 
sufficient cause of the characteristic or response that we have observed. Maybe it’s sufficient only 
if other parts of the brain are also involved. Finally, when a PET scan finds an area of increased 
glucose use, it may indicate activity or it may also indicate a neuron that is working less efficiently 
needing more glucose. However, by using fMRI, PET scans, and other neuroimaging techniques 
in the context of a controlled experiment we can figure out what brain activity really means.
Biochemical Activity
Finally, physiological differences may appear as differences in how the brain and body process 
various chemicals including neurotransmitters, hormones, and drugs. Depending on how and 
where these chemicals function, we might analyze cerebrospinal fluid, saliva, blood, or urine 
to monitor levels of these chemical substances.
Neurotransmitters are chemicals released by neurons to inhibit or excite the next neuron 
into action. In this way, neurotransmitters do just that: help transmit signals through the ner-
vous system. Some important neurotransmitters are norepinephrine, epinephrine, dopamine, 
and serotonin. These all have a similar molecular structure, so that drugs that affect one tend 
to affect all of them. Norepinephrine (noradrenaline) and epinephrine (adrenaline) are also 
considered stress hormones. They help the body deal with threat by increasing blood flow to 
the muscles which increases heart rate and blood pressure. Dopamine is related to feelings of 
pleasure, and helps regulate movement, learning, attention, and rewards. Serotonin is involved 
with mood regulation, arousal, the control of sleeping and eating, and pain regulation. Depres-
sion, anxiety, and other mood disorders are related to how the body processes serotonin. The 
enzyme monoamine oxidase (MAO) regulates, to some degree, the availability of dopamine, 
norepinephrine, and epinephrine in the system.
Norepinephrine and serotonin may also be related to symptoms of depression (Thorn & 
Lokken, 2006). Some antidepressants, for example, work by blocking the reuptake of norepi-
nephrine, serotonin or both, so that they stay in the spaces between the neurons a bit longer 
(Thorn & Lokken, 2006). Antianxiety drugs work by mimicking another neurotransmitter, 
gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), an inhibitory neurotransmitter (Thorn & Lokken, 2006).
Researchers may study neurotransmitters and the systems that process them by having 
participants engage in a task or activity and monitor the fluctuations in these chemicals. When 
it is impossible to directly measure the level of neurotransmitters—as with norepinephrine, for 
example—researchers indirectly monitor how the neurotransmitter is being used by measur-
ing known byproducts of neurotransmitter metabolism. Another way is through a challenge 
test in which researchers administer a drug that is known to either increase or decrease a 
187

The Neuroscience of Personality
neurotransmitter’s functioning and monitor the impact of this new substance on reactions 
presumed to be related to the neurotransmitter.
Research Methods Illustrated: Correlational Designs II: Scatterplots, 
Correlations, and the Alleged “Voodoo Science” of fMRI Studies
A
re fMRI studies “voodoo science”? Are pretty scatterplots misleading? Oh, say it isn’t so! In 
March 2009 the journal Perspectives on Psychological Science published a series of invited 
papers and made overt a debate that had been brewing on the Internet for some time 
(Diener, 2009). It seems that a small group of researchers noted that some fMRI studies of emotion, 
social cognition, and personality reported, in the words of one overzealous researcher, “insanely 
strong” correlations (Vul, Harris, Winkielman, & Pashler, 2009b, p. 320). The group suspected that 
these correlations were too good to be true. What they found set off a whole controversy (Vul et al., 
2009a; see also Diener, 2010).
To understand all the fuss, we need to start with the concept of correlation. Recall that 
correlation is a measure of the relationship between two variables. If two variables increase or 
decrease at the same time—such as age and height—they are positively correlated. If one variable 
decreases (or increases) while the second variable increases (or decreases)—such as practice and 
typing errors—then the variables are negatively correlated. You can vividly see the relationship 
between two variables by graphing them against each other on the same graph.
Consider the graphs in Figure 1. The graph on the left shows Neuroticism scores on the 
x-axis plotted against thickness of a section of the orbital frontal cortex (OFC) on the y-axis. The 
graph on the right shows a similar graph for Extraversion scores. These are called scatterplots or 
scattergrams because they show the scatter, or spread, of the data. Many brain-imaging studies 
will use scatterplots to illustrate their results. Each point represents a participant in the study. In this 
graph, the blue circles represent females and the red squares represent males (ignore for a moment 
the diagonal lines drawn through the dots).
Notice how the cloud of data points on the left graph seems to slope downward. That tells us 
that as Neuroticism scores increase, thickness of this region of the OFC decreases. That suggests 
a negative correlation. Now look at the width of the cloud. Is it thinner or thicker? The thinner 
a cloud, the more closely related the two variables are and the stronger the correlation will be. 
The scatterplot on the left shows us that there is a moderately negative correlation between 
Neuroticism and thickness of the OFC. Indeed, the correlation of these data is -.65 (Wright et al., 
2006). The line through the cloud of points is called a linear regression line and it estimates our best 
guess of how we can predict y-values from x-values.
What do you think about the correlation between Extraversion and thickness of the OFC as 
illustrated in the graph on the right? Here, the dots seem to be more scattered, making more of a 
circle than an oval. This tells us that there is not much of a correlation between the two variables, .18 
in fact (Wright et al., 2006).
As you can see, a scatterplot is a very useful graphic. It can tell us at least three things about a 
set of data. First, it can alert us to outliers, or participants who score extremely high or low in one or 
Figure 1  Scatterplots showing the relationship between cortical thickness and Neuroticism (left) and 
Extraversion (right) in the orbitofrontal cortex.  Source: Adapted from Wright et al. (2006, Figure 3, p. 
1814). From Wright, C. I., Williams, D., Feczko, E., Barrett, L. F., Dickerson, B. C., Schwartz, C. E., et al. (2006), 
“Neuroanatomical correlates of extraversion and neuroticism,” Cerebral Cortex, 16(12), 1809–1819.  Reprinted 
by permission of Oxford University Press.
30
40
Neuroticism T-score
35
45
55
2.5
B
2.7
Female
Male
50
2.1
2.3
L OFC
thickness (mm)
45
Extraversion T-score
35
55
75
2.5
2.7
65
2.1
2.3
r = 0.648
P < 0.0001
r = 0.180
P = 0.362
C
188

The Neuroscience of Personality
both of our variables. There doesn’t seem to be any outliers in the Wright et al. (2006) data, except 
for maybe the male who is very low in Extraversion in the graph on the right. Second, a scatterplot 
can tell us the direction of the correlation: whether it’s positive (the cloud of dots points upward) 
or negative (the cloud points downward). Third, the thickness of the cloud or scatter of the dots 
tells us the strength of the correlation. The more the scatterplot looks like a circle, the less the two 
variables are related. The more the scatterplot looks like an oval, the more strongly the two variables 
are related. A perfect correlation will look like a straight line, whereas a zero correlation will look 
like random dots spread out around the graph. Check out the graphs in Figure 2 and try to guess 
whether the correlations are positive or negative, and high, medium, or close to zero.
Wright et al. (2006) also correlated cortical thickness in key areas with participants’ scores on 
Extraversion, Neuroticism, Openness, Conscientiousness, and Agreeableness. Can you think of why 
they did this? They wanted to show specifically that Neuroticism was related to the thickness in 
some areas of the brain whereas Extraversion (and the other personality traits) was not. Because 
Neuroticism and Extraversion correlate with thickness in some areas and not in others, and only 
these two traits and not all five factors correlate with these areas of the brain, we have more 
confidence that the researchers have found a true result and not a significant result by chance alone.
Notice that Wright et al. (2006) cross-checked an area of the cortex that they thought was 
related to positive and negative emotions (Extraversion and Neuroticism, respectively) but was not 
related to other traits (Openness, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness). Other researchers are not so 
careful to cross-validate their findings. Instead, they selected which areas to study based on how 
well signals from that area correlated with their dependent variable (e.g., personality) and then 
calculated correlations based on this narrower range of values. That is, the same sample was used to 
decide what ought to be correlated and for the calculation of the actual correlation itself.
Figure 2  Scatterplots 
illustrating various correlations 
in hypothetical data. The 
correlations are (left to right): 
0, -.3, .5, -.7, .90, -.99.
189

The Neuroscience of Personality
Technically, these two decisions should be made based on separate samples. It would be like 
deciding to have a state championship by choosing the best athletes in a specific sport—the sport 
you know your school excels in—instead of choosing a sport at random. Because the criterion 
and the outcome were determined within the same sample and not independent samples, the 
researchers made the nonindependence error (Vul et al., 2009a). This error caused artificially large 
correlations that made it seem like all kinds of social behaviors could be located in the brain. These 
“puzzlingly” large correlations led to accusations of fraudulence and claims that the researchers 
were conducting “voodoo science” and inflating their correlations on purpose (Vul et al., 2009b). 
Many of the researchers so accused defended the logic of their studies and claimed that Vul et al. 
(2009a) were exaggerating and that, in fact, the methods used by the authors to judge the studies 
in question were themselves flawed (Lazar, 2009; Lieberman, Berkman, & Wager, 2009; Lindquist & 
Gelman, 2009; Nichols & Poline, 2009).
The good news is that both sides agree that the methodology of fMRI studies correlating 
blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) effect to personality are not perfect and can be improved. 
The problems that Vul et al. (2009a) identified, though not unique to fMRI studies, can be readily 
fixed, sometimes without collecting new data (Barrett, 2009; Vul et al., 2009a, 2009b; Yarkoni, 2009). 
The whole scientific community is now committed to understanding the debate—ceasing with 
the name-calling—and coming to a thoughtful resolution that will no doubt improve both our 
methods and our findings in behavioral neuroscience.
This brings us to a familiar caution: Our results are only as good as our measures. Think of 
it this way: Imagine beachcombing. You walk along a beach looking for interesting things that 
people may have lost. Part of your success comes from knowing where to look, like going to 
popular beaches or searching under the boardwalk where people may have dropped change 
from the food stands above. But part of your success comes from having the right equipment: 
your eyes versus a rake versus a metal detector. With a metal detector—especially a very powerful 
one—you are more likely to find coins, jewelry, watches, and other valuables buried inches under 
the sand. However, you may also find things such as old bottle caps, broken toys, and rusty nails. As 
researchers, we want to find good, significant effects, but we also want to minimize the “junk” we 
find along the way.
Neurological Theories of Personality
In the 1998 revision to his 1947 classic book Dimensions of Personality, Hans Eysenck noted 
that even as we recognize that a substantial portion of our personality is inherited “there must 
be biological intermediaries between DNA and personality, and these intermediaries should be 
specified by theory and investigated” (Eysenck, 1998, p. xii). These biological intermediaries, what 
Eysenck’s technology was not sufficiently advanced in 1947 to detect, are physiological differences.
Although Eysenck and others would like to be able to identify specific aspects of our 
physiology—be it bodily responses, brain structures, brain activity, or biochemical activity—
that can account for differences in personality, this “holy grail” of personality research eludes 
us. Despite bigger and better and less invasive techniques and even with the ability to decode 
the smallest gene, protein, and neurotransmitter, scientists are not able to find consistent 
physiological differences that relate in a clear way to differences in personality characteris-
tics (e.g., Eysenck, 1990). It may be that our techniques are not up to the task or it may be 
that aspects of the human nervous system interact in complicated ways that we have yet to 
untangle. Even when we are able to identify such differences, we still have a long way to go to 
prove that these differences actually cause us to develop the personalities that we have consid-
ering that our personalities have developed over a lifetime of interactions with other people.
We can’t be sure that differences in physiology cause us to develop different full-blown 
personalities, but perhaps we are expecting too much. Maybe biology has the biggest impact 
at a broader, more general level of personality, called temperament. What is temperament? 
Temperament is a set of personality characteristics that are (Zuckerman, 2005)
	 1.	 Relatively stable across the life span
	 2.	 Expressed through general energy level
	 3.	 Present from early childhood
	 4.	 Similar in other species of animals
“Biological differences are 
innate and form the foundation 
upon which mature personality 
develops.”
Clark and Watson  
(2008, p. 266)
THINK ABOUT IT
Are infants a blank slate at 
birth or are they born with a 
personality?
190

The Neuroscience of Personality
	 5.	 Present at birth, at least in a general way
	 6.	 Determined by genetic factors
	 7.	 Changeable with maturation and experience
In their search for the biological basis of personality nearly all major personality typologies 
converge on three primary temperaments (Zuckerman, 2005), or clusters of related personality 
traits:
n Extraversion: Positive emotion, reward sensitivity, social rewards, sociability, approach.
n Neuroticism: Negative emotion, anxiety, punishment sensitivity, withdrawal.
n Impulsivity: Psychoticism, lack of constraint, sensation seeking, novelty seeking, lack of 
conscientiousness, lack of agreeableness.
Indeed, there has been striking similarity in the various models that researchers have pro-
posed. For example, Eysenck’s Psychoticism, Extraversion, and Neuroticism model (PEN model; 
Eysenck, 1990), the five-factor model (FFM; Costa & McCrae, 1992; John, 1990; John et al., 
2008), the Big Five (Goldberg, 1990; Norman, 1963), Gray’s RST (Corr, 2008b), and Cloninger 
(1998) all posit at least two of these three dimensions as part of their theories. However, both 
the FFM and the Big Five split Eysenck’s Psychoticism factor into Agreeableness and Consci-
entiousness (Digman, 1996). Other researchers write about an approach temperament (i.e., 
Extraversion) and an avoidance temperament (Neuroticism; Elliot & Thrash, 2008) or positive 
emotionality (Extraversion) and negative emotionality (Neuroticism; Depue, Luciano, Arbisi, 
Collins, & Leon, 1994).
Table 2 summarizes some of these relationships. Despite various names for the factors—and 
great debate about the “right” number of factors—when it comes to identifying basic physiological 
temperaments, the evidence from many theoretical backgrounds and different kinds of research 
methods converges on these three.
Table 2  Correspondences Among Three Personality Clusters and Major Trait Theories
Cluster
Theory
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Impulsivity
Eysenck
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Psychoticism
Gray
Behavioral  
Approach System
Behavioral Inhibition 
System
Five Factors
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Low Conscientiousness
Cloninger
Reward Dependence
Harm Avoidance
Novelty Seeking
Note: The Openness factor of the five-factor model, the Intellect factor of the Big Five, and Gray’s fight-flight-freeze system do 
not appear to correspond to any of the three primary traits identified by Zuckerman (2005).
Eysenck believed that 
temperament, determined 
by genes and passed on from 
parents to children, is the 
intermediary between DNA 
and personality.
© AISPIX/Shutterstock
191

The Neuroscience of Personality
To understand both the logic and the evidence supporting this assertion, let’s take a close 
look at two important biological theories of personality: Hans Eysenck’s PEN model and Jeffrey 
Gray’s reinforcement sensitivity theory. Afterward, we’ll look at the biological basis of the three 
temperaments of positive emotion, negative emotion, and impulsivity.
Eysenck’s PEN Model
When Eysenck first started working in the 1940s, he was unusual in his desire to build a person-
ality theory based on experimental findings (Eysenck, 1998). Further, he believed that a com-
prehensive theory should explain how people developed their personalities as well as predict 
consequences and outcomes of various personalities. While studying normal and psychiatric 
patients he developed his theory and identified two factors of personality, Extraversion and 
Neuroticism (Eysenck, 1998), and later he added Psychoticism, the third dimension. Together 
these three dimensions—Psychoticism, Extraversion, and Neuroticism—form the PEN model 
(Eysenck, 1952). This model is used to describe personality. People can be high or low on each 
of the three factors.
Overview of Eysenck’s Three Dimensions.  The first of Eysenck’s factors is Extraversion. 
People who are high in this factor, extroverts, tend to be sociable, popular, optimistic, and 
somewhat unreliable. Those low in Extraversion—introverts—tend to be quiet, introspective, 
reserved, and reliable, and to have a few close friends. Essentially, Extraversion refers to how 
outgoing people are, to both the social and the physical environments.
Eysenck’s second factor is Neuroticism, which we might contrast with emotional stabil-
ity. People high in this factor tend to be distressed, insecure, and upset in many areas of life. 
They are chronically worried, nervous, and moody, hold a low opinion of themselves, and 
find it difficult to get back on an even keel after an upsetting experience. In contrast, emo-
tionally stable people are even-tempered, calm, relaxed, carefree, unworried, and somewhat 
unemotional, and return to their natural state quickly after an emotional experience (Eysenck 
& Eysenck, 1975).
Eysenck called the third factor Psychoticism. We might think of Psychoticism as being 
antisocial and contrast it with ego control. People high in Psychoticism tend to be loners, ego-
centric, troublesome, manipulative, impulsive, uncooperative, hostile, and withdrawn, and do 
not fit in anywhere (Eysenck, 1990; Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985).
In contrast, people low in Psychoticism tend to be altruistic, socialized, empathetic, and 
conventional. They care about others and are able to control their impulses to a greater extent 
than those high in Psychoticism.
Eysenck and Eysenck suggested that the pathological labels of Psychoticism and Neuroti-
cism be dropped in favor of tough-mindedness and emotionality to emphasize that this is a 
theory of normal, nonpathological behavior and to eliminate the negative connotations of these 
labels (Eysenck & Eysenck, 1975, p. 3).
Eysenck drew on at least three pieces of evidence to support his view that these differences 
in personality are genetic and biological. First, cross-cultural universality in traits implies a 
strong biological component (Eysenck, 1990). After all, we would expect that large differences 
in culture and environment would produce different kinds of personality factors. However, this 
is not the case, as one study of personality in 25 diverse countries including Uganda, Nigeria, 
Japan, Mainland China, the United States, the Soviet Union, Hungary, Bulgaria, and the former 
Yugoslavia suggested (Barrett & Eysenck, 1984). The fact that three factors of Psychoticism, 
Extraversion, and Neuroticism occur in such diverse cultures suggests a biological, rather than 
cultural, explanation.
Second, people show tremendous consistency in these three traits over time, despite chang-
ing environments. Responses and habits might change over time and situations, but traits do 
not. This consistency suggests a strong biological component to these traits (Eysenck, 1990).
The third piece of evidence is the robust finding that Extraversion, Neuroticism, and 
Psychoticism each have moderate heritability (Eaves, Eysenck, & Martin, 1989). As Eysenck 
(1990) stated, “Genetic factors cannot directly influence behavior or cognitions, of course, 
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Can you think of people you 
know or characters from 
movies, books, or TV who 
exemplify Eysenck’s three 
factors?
192

The Neuroscience of Personality
and the intervening variables must inevitably be physiological, neurological, biochemical, or 
hormonal in nature” (p. 247).
Although Eysenck suspected that arousal and attention were involved with all three of 
his factors, he admitted that the research evidence did not suggest a clear hypothesis for a 
biological explanation of psychoticism (Eysenck, 1990; Eysenck & Eysenck, 1976). We now 
turn to a discussion of the physiological explanations Eysenck proposed for Extraversion and 
Neuroticism.
Neurology of Extraversion.  Eysenck thought that the main difference between introverts 
and extraverts had to do with arousal, and on that score he was right (Eysenck, 1990). He con-
sidered two possibilities: that introverts and extraverts differed in arousal level or in arousability 
(Eysenck, 1967).
Eysenck thought that introverts had greater cortical arousal than extraverts, particularly 
in the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS), a pathway transmitting signals from the 
limbic system and hypothalamus to the cortex (Eysenck, 1967; Eysenck & Eysenck, 1985). The 
ARAS processes the more cerebral aspects of arousal or emotion (e.g., thinking about a dif-
ficult calculus problem). Activation in the ARAS can make a person alert and mentally sharp 
or sluggish and mentally dull.
Because of their hypothesized overaroused baseline condition, introverts act more 
restrained and inhibited. That is, they avoid conditions that would aggravate their already 
overstimulated condition, preferring to stay to themselves and engaging in more quiet activi-
ties. In contrast, the system of extraverts, Eysenck reasoned, lets in too little stimulation so that 
their underaroused condition leads them toward more stimulating and unrestrained behaviors. 
Basically, extraverts are more outgoing and engaged with the world to raise their naturally low 
level of arousal. In this way, both extraverts and introverts attempt to regulate their own arousal 
striving to find their comfort zone: an optimal level of arousal (e.g., Hebb, 1955).
This sounds like a nice hypothesis, but is this true? Consider this: If there is a natural differ-
ence in arousal level between introverts and extraverts then we ought to see a difference between 
them even if they are sleeping or resting. Turns out we can readily test this hypothesis because 
arousal produced by the ARAS can be seen using EEG, whereas the arousal in the limbic system 
can be seen in the GSR and EMG (Eysenck, 1967).
Alas, using these traditional measures of arousal and even the newer methods (e.g., PET 
scans, cortical EPs) this is not the case. Indeed, over 1,000 studies have been conducted testing 
Eysenck’s theory of arousal with no success (Geen, 1997). There is only a tiny, if any, difference 
in arousal level between extraverts and intraverts at rest. However, there is a significant differ-
ence in how extraverts and introverts respond to moderate stimulation, suggesting that the 
key difference between them is in their arousability or sensory reactivity (De Pascalis, 2004; 
Stelmack & Rammsayer, 2008; Zuckerman, 2005).
© Rushour/Dreamstime.com
© Robert Kneschke/Shutterstock
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Think of people you know 
who are extraverted and 
introverted. Is there a differ-
ence in where they prefer to 
study? Why might this be?
Is choice of study area related to personality? Which kind of study area do you think introverts and extraverts would prefer?
193

The Neuroscience of Personality
Given these differences in arousability, we would expect introverts and extraverts to differ 
in their choice of situations: noisy versus quiet. One study found that people studying in the 
quiet study spaces of their college library—spaces with individual carrels, small tables—tended 
to be introverted. Where did the extraverts prefer to study? In the noisy but highly sociable 
areas of the library: big rooms with open spaces and large tables (Campbell & Hawley, 1982).
But here’s a question: Who performed better on their exams? Does noise level really matter 
when it comes to learning and performance? It sure does! Introverts and extraverts volunteered 
for a study in which they had to perform a moderately difficult cognitive reasoning task (Geen, 
1984). Participants were given two words, one that fit a rule and the other that didn’t. By observ-
ing a number of such pairs, participants had to figure out the rule. For example, the rule might 
be animal words or words that start with vowels.
While participants were viewing the words and trying to figure out the rule, they were 
bombarded with random bursts of white noise. Participants were randomly assigned to one of 
three conditions. In the choice condition, they were told that although they couldn’t turn off 
the noise, they could select the volume that was “Just right for you.” In the second and third 
conditions, participants were unable to control the volume. Instead, they were assigned the level 
of volume that matched what a participant in the first condition chose. In the assigned-same 
condition their volume was matched to the volume chosen by a personality just like them, either 
introverted or extraverted. However, in the assigned-different condition they were subjected 
to the volume chosen by a person different from them: an introvert, if they themselves were 
extraverted, or an extravert if they were introverted.
Who do you think chose the lower volume? Introverts in the choice condition chose a lower 
volume than extraverts in the choice condition. The difference was about that between a private 
office and a noisy group office. Second, who do you think experienced greater arousal as mea-
sured by heart rate and skin conductance? Well, it depended on which level of noise they were 
faced with. Both extraverts and introverts with noise levels at their optimum level of arousal—in 
either the choice condition or the assigned same condition—had similar levels of arousal as 
measured by heart rate and skin conductance. However, when faced with a level of noise not to 
their liking, introverts showed greater arousal and extraverts showed lower arousal. Essentially, 
introverts were overaroused by the loud “extraverted” level of noise whereas extraverts were 
underaroused by the soft, boring “introverted” level of noise.
Finally, how well did participants perform? By now you get the drill: It depended on 
if they were working at their optimum level of noise. Introverts assigned to the extravert’s 
noise level performed the worst, needing more trials to learn the rule. Next came extraverts 
assigned to the introvert’s noise level. The choice and assigned-same conditions performed 
best, learning the rule in the fewest number of trials. As you can see in Figure 3, what’s 
just right for introverts—leading to their optimum performance—is too little for extraverts  
Figure 3  Performance as 
function of noise intensity 
condition and personality. 
Higher numbers indicate 
more trials were needed 
to learn the rule. Note: 
Red line = Introverts, 
Blue line = Extraverts, 
Green dots = Assigned same 
condition. Source: From Geen 
(1984).
Noise Intensity
Introvert
Choice
Extrovert
Choice
Extroverts
Introverts
(7.3)
(5.4)
(5.8)
(9.1)
Average number of trials to learn rule
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Based on these results, 
where should you study for 
optimum performance?
THINK ABOUT IT
How else might extraverts 
and introverts regulate their 
arousability? Might they 
differ in preferences for 
caffeinated beverages for 
example? Favorite kinds of 
music?
194

The Neuroscience of Personality
and what’s just right for extraverts is too much for introverts. People’s noise preferences 
and performance outcomes depend on their optimal level of arousal as determined by their 
personality (Geen, 1984). Keep this study in mind the next time you are trying to decide 
where to study!
Neurology of Neuroticism.  Eysenck hypothesized that physiological arousal could also 
account for individual differences in Neuroticism. In contrast to Extraversion, which was related 
to activation of the ARAS, he thought that Neuroticism had to do with stability or instability 
of the sympathetic nervous system (i.e., those parts of the brain that are involved in emotional 
regulation such as the hippocampus, amygdala, cingulum, septum and hypothalamus; Eysenck, 
1967, 1990). Basically, the vulnerability of people high in Neuroticism to negative emotions 
such as fear and anxiety was due to an extrasensitive emotional or drive system (Eysenck, 1967, 
1990). Whereas postulating separate physiological processes to account for Extraversion and 
Neuroticism, Eysenck acknowledged that the cortical and sympathetic systems were intercon-
nected (Eysenck, 1967, 1990).
A vivid metaphor for how this might work is to think of Neuroticism as a smoke detec-
tor (Nettle, 2007). A good smoke detector alerts a building’s occupants to a fire, but it doesn’t 
go off for harmless events like someone burning the toast one morning. For the person high 
in Neuroticism, it’s as if they are living in a house with an overly sensitive smoke detector 
that sends out a warning under the kinds of conditions that people low in Neuroticism 
would readily dismiss as safe. (If you’re still thinking about how safe toast-burning is, then 
you are probably high in Neuroticism!) Extraversion and Neuroticism are similar in that 
both involve arousal; however, the big difference is in the valence or quality of that arousal. 
Extraversion is marked by positive arousal such as excitement and energy, whereas Neu-
roticism is marked by negative arousal such as fear and anxiety (Knutson & Bhanji, 2006; 
Zuckerman, 2005).
How did Eysenck’s theory about Neuroticism fare in the face of research evidence? Well, it 
appears that Eysenck was on the right track. Simple measures of sympathetic nervous system 
activation (e.g., heart rate, skin conductance), both at rest and during stressful situations do not 
show any relationship with Neuroticism, but people who are high in Neuroticism do show an 
increase in heart rate in response to an intense stimulus (Zuckerman, 2005). So do introverts! 
However, people high in Neuroticism, but not introverts, show greater startle response to fearful 
pictures (Zuckerman, 2005). Together, these findings suggest that people high in Neuroticism 
may be more sensitive to negative emotions in particular, and not to arousing situations in 
general, the way that introverts are.
If it is true that the defining feature of Neuroticism is sensitivity to negative emotions, 
then it would be particularly difficult for researchers to identify specific physiological differ-
ences between people high and low in Neuroticism. This is because people vary greatly in their 
sympathetic responses (e.g., heart rate, skin conductance, breathing, blood flow, etc.; Eysenck, 
1990). All in all, there is no support for Eysenck’s hypothesis that Neuroticism is related to 
activation in the sympathetic nervous system (Strelau, 1998).
Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory (RST)
An alternative theory was proposed by Jeffrey Gray. For Gray, personality is the variation in the 
functioning of brain systems. Indeed, the very essence of what makes people unique is differ-
ences in their responses to stimuli in the world (Corr, 2008b). Gray's idea was to (1) identify 
brain-behavior systems that accounted for important differences among individuals and (2) link 
these systems to standard measures of personality (Corr, 2008b). At first, he hypothesized two 
behavioral systems and linked these behavioral systems to Extraversion and Neuroticism in 
Eysenck’s PEN theory (Gray, 1970, 1976, 1982). But now, after some 40 years of research and 
refinement, evidence suggests that there are three important behavioral systems that do not 
exactly map onto any existing measure of personality (Corr, 2004, 2008b; Gray & McNaughton, 
2000; McNaughton & Corr, 2004, 2008; Pickering & Corr, 2008).
THINK ABOUT IT
If extraverts are more sensi-
tive to positive emotions 
are they more vulnerable to 
happiness?
THINK ABOUT IT
If people high in Neuroti-
cism are more sensitive to 
negative emotions, are 
they more vulnerable to 
depression?
195

The Neuroscience of Personality
Overview of Three Neurological Systems.  According to reinforcement sensitivity theory 
(RST) there are three hypothetical brain-behavior systems. These systems are presumed to exist 
based on evidence from neurology, physiology, behavior, and personality. Together they form 
a framework through which we can infer neural activity. Rather than identify isolated parts of 
the brain working separately, we can look for interconnected areas that function similarly and 
work together in accord with one of these hypothesized systems. Gray’s great contribution was 
in recognizing that everything in the brain is interconnected. The conception of these three 
systems is his way of studying these interconnections. We may think of these systems as a kind 
of shorthand for a whole set of neural networks.
The first is called the fight-flight-freeze system (FFFS). This system is associated with the 
emotion of fear and is responsible for orchestrating our reactions to aversive stimuli. We may opt 
to confront or fight the stimulus, avoid or escape it, or to remain frozen in place hoping the danger 
passes (Corr, 2004). The personality factor that matches this biological system is fearfulness and 
avoidance, which, if extreme, may lead to phobias and panic disorders (Corr, 2008b).
The second system, the behavioral approach system (BAS) organizes reactions to 
“appetitive stimuli,” that is, stimuli that are enticing, pleasurable, and rewarding (Corr, 
2004, p. 324). BAS makes a person more sensitive to reward. The related personality factor 
is optimism, impulsiveness, and the emotion of “anticipatory pleasure” (Corr, 2008b, p. 10). 
In the extreme, this system may lead to addictive behaviors, high-risk impulsive behaviors, 
and mania.
The third system, the behavioral inhibition system (BIS), once thought to control the 
inhibition of behavior, is now hypothesized to resolve conflicts (Corr, 2004). These may be 
conflicts between two really good things, like deciding which movie to watch with friends, or 
between two distasteful things, like deciding which to open first, the electricity bill or the phone 
bill. Or between two options that have both upsides and downsides to them, such as whether 
or not to go to a party where you will see people you like as well as a few people whom you’d 
rather not hang out with. BIS also is activated when there is a conflict within one of the other 
systems (e.g., FFFS–FFFS or BAS–BAS conflicts; Corr, 2008b). Until the conflict is resolved, we 
The fight-flight-freeze system 
(FFFS) regulates our reactions 
to aversive stimuli including 
fears, phobias, and panic 
disorders.
© laurent hamels/Fotolia
196

The Neuroscience of Personality
may experience anxiety, worry, rumination, risk assessment, vigilance for bad things, or a sense 
of possible danger or loss. Clinically, this system may lead to obsessive-compulsive disorder or 
generalized anxiety disorder (Corr, 2008b).
People may feel anxiety from BIS to a greater or a lesser degree depending on the spe-
cific rewards or punishments that are potentially in conflict. When BIS is activated, people 
become more sensitive to punishment (Corr, 2004) and often more cautious (Corr, 2008b). 
Further, there is an optimal level of BIS arousal. Too little leads to risk proneness, similar to 
Eysenck’s notion of Psychoticism. Too much leads to risk aversion and generalized anxiety 
disorder (Corr, 2008b). RST suggests that choice—even between two rewarding options—has 
a negative component. Corr (2008b) wondered if having too many good things to choose from 
(e.g., Caribbean? Europe? Sports car? SUV?) may be a cause of discontent and depression in 
our affluent society.
BAS is very similar to Extraversion and BIS is very similar to Neuroticism. Current evidence 
suggests that they are quite similar but not identical (Smits & Boeck, 2006). The dimensions 
of FFFS/BIS and BAS are about 30 degrees off from Eysenck’s dimensions of Neuroticism and 
Extraversion. Think of BAS as “2 parts Extraversion to 1 part Neuroticism” and BIS as “2 parts 
Neuroticism to 1 part Extraversion” (Smillie, Pickering, & Jackson, 2006, p. 323). Specifically, 
punishment sensitivity is manifested as neurotic-introversion and reward sensitivity is mani-
fested as neurotic-extraversion. Sensitivity to punishment and sensitivity to rewards are the 
biological systems that together are hypothesized to develop into the traits of Extraversion and 
Neuroticism (Corr, 2004). Table 3 lists sample items from an early measure of BIS and BAS 
based on the original version of RST (Carver & White, 1994).
Think of it like this: Extraversion reflects the trade-off of rewards and punishments, 
whereas Neuroticism reflects the combination of rewards and punishments. For example, 
punishment makes a person less willing to take action—unless of course that action is to 
flee the situation—whereas the possibility of a reward increases the action. If the situation is 
clearly punishing or rewarding, then everybody will go for the reward or avoid the punishment.
However, the situations that define and challenge us are ones that are not clearly rewarding 
or punishing. That is, the real question of character is: What will you choose when rewards and 
punishments are both present? Because these situations involve some degree of conflict, BIS will 
Table 3  Sample Items From the BIS/BAS Scale
BAS Drive
	1.	 When I want something I usually go all-out to get it.
	2.	 If I see a chance to get something I want I move on it right away.
BAS Fun Seeking
	1.	 I’m always willing to try something new if I think it will be fun.
	2.	 I crave excitement and new sensations.
BAS Reward Responsiveness
	1.	 When I’m doing well at something I love to keep at it.
	2.	 When I get something I want, I feel excited and energized.
BIS
	1.	 Criticism or scolding hurts me quite a bit.
	2.	 If I think something unpleasant is going to happen I usually get pretty “worked up.”
Note: Responses are indicated on a 4-point scale labeled Very true for me, Somewhat true for me, Somewhat false for me, 
and Very false for me.
Source: Adapted from C. S.  Carver and White (1994, Table 1, p. 323). Carver, C. S., & White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral inhibition, behav-
ioral activation, and affective respones to impending reward and punishment: The BIS/BAS scales. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 67(2), 319–333. Copyright American Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Are you more willing 
to risk a punishment 
to gain a reward or to 
forego a reward to avoid a 
punishment?
197

The Neuroscience of Personality
be activated and this will become manifested as Neuroticism. If rewards are more salient than 
punishments, then we will get a person who is willing to venture out into the world: a neurotic 
extravert. But if the punishment is more salient than the reward, or if the conflict is more salient 
than either the reward or the punishment, then we will get a person who would rather stay to 
himself or herself: a neurotic introvert. Who gets to decide if the rewards and punishments are 
in conflict? That’s where Neuroticism comes in. Somebody who is low in Neuroticism would 
not experience conflict over the same situation that might cause consternation in somebody 
who was high in Neuroticism.
You can see that Gray suggested two things: our inherent behavioral systems—FFFS, 
BAS, and BIS—predispose us to respond to punishments, rewards, and conflicts in a certain 
way. Then, a lifetime of experiences refine our personalities (neurotic, emotionally stable, 
extraverted, introverted). In addition, RST suggests that the difference between healthy per-
sonality and psychopathology is one of degree: The underlying biological systems are essen-
tially the same, differing only in their strength (See Table 4 for a summary of these three 
systems).
Neurology of FFFS, BAS, and BIS.  What evidence is there for these three systems? The 
short answer: Quite a lot! Although much of the research has been done on animals, RST 
appears to be a good general theory of emotion, motivation, and learning in humans too 
(Pickering & Corr, 2008; Smillie, 2008; Smillie et al., 2006). However, the long answer is that 
researchers are struggling with how to operationalize and test some of the propositions of 
RST (see Corr, 2001; Pickering et al., 1997; Smillie, 2008; Smillie et al., 2006; Torrubia, Ávila, 
Moltó, & Caseras, 2001 for reviews), especially the implications of RST for trait theory (Smillie 
et al., 2006). The biggest issue is that we cannot tell if there is a problem with Gray’s theory or 
a problem with the scales designed to measure the personality traits exhibited by these brain 
systems. As a sign of just how lively the debate is, recently The European Journal of Personality 
Table 4  Summary of Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory Systems
FFFS
BAS
BIS
Input:
Punishment
Reward
Conflict
Punishment (?)*
Response:
Avoidance
Approach
Passive avoidance
Freezing
Exploration
Risk assessment
Defensive attack
Active avoidance
Information processing
Arousal
Emotion:
Panic
Anticipatory pleasure
Rumination
Phobia
Hope
Rage
Fearfulness
Trait:
Psychoticism
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Neurotic-introversion
Neurotic-extraversion
Anxiety
Pathology:
Phobias
Addictive behaviors
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Panic disorders
Mania
Generalized anxiety disorder
Motto:
“Escape!”
“Go for it!”
“Be careful!”
*There is disagreement among researchers about whether some kinds of punishments (e.g., conditioned) are still under BIS control in the revised RST (cf. Corr, 2002).
Note: See the chapter text for descriptions and explanations of abbreviations.
Sources: Adapted from Corr and McNaughton (2008, Table 5.2, p. 182) and Smillie (2008, p. 362). Corr, P. J., & McNaughton, N. (2008). Reinforcement sensitivity theory and personality. In 
P. J. Corr (Ed.), The reinforcement sensitivity theory of personality (p. 155–187).  Cambridge, UK: Cambridge. 
If we could look through 
the skull into the brain of a 
consciously thinking person, 
and if the place of optimal 
excitability were luminous, 
then we should see playing 
over the cerebral surface, 
a bright spot with fantastic, 
waving borders constantly 
fluctuating in size and form, 
surrounded by a darkness 
more or less deep, covering the 
rest of the hemisphere.
Ivan Petrovich Pavlov  
(1928, p. 222)
198

The Neuroscience of Personality
dedicated an entire special issue to personality and RST (Ávila & Torrubia, 2008; Carver, 2008; 
Chavanon, Stemmler, & Wacker, 2008; Cloninger, 2008; Corr, 2008a; Johnson & Deary, 2008; 
Matthews, 2008; McNaughton, 2008; Reuter & Montag, 2008; Revelle & Wilt, 2008; Smillie, 
2008).
The theory does, however, suggest a number of important and intriguing hypotheses for 
understanding human personality. To give you a sense of the evidence that led to the formu-
lation of RST and the biology behind it, let’s review research on two key predictions of RST: 
individual differences in reward sensitivity and learning.
Consider one very important class of rewards for most people: Food. Given that BAS 
is related to how sensitive people are to rewards, we might wonder if people high and low 
in strength of BAS would have different reactions to images of food. But we’re not talking 
about taste for food. RST suggests that the brains of people high and low in BAS will respond 
differently to food.
There are at least five parts of the brain that are related to responding to visual food cues: 
the ventral (underside) part of the striatum, the amygdala, the orbitofrontal cortex, the ventral 
(underside) part of the pallidum and the midbrain regions that are associated with increased 
dopamine activity (Beaver et al., 2006). Participants looked at color photos of appetizing food 
(e.g., chocolate cake, an ice cream sundae), disgusting food (rotten meat, moldy bread), bland 
food (e.g., uncooked rice, potatoes), and nonfood items (e.g., an iron, a videocassette). While 
viewing these photos, their brains were scanned using fMRI.
Researchers found that BAS drive significantly accounted for differences in signals to 
appetizing food and disgusting food compared to bland foods in all five of these regions 
related to reward. Further, these responses were not related to a BAS measure of fun seek-
ing so that they were unique to BAS drive. Participants with a strong appetitive drive as 
measured by BAS scores showed stronger reactions to photos of appetizing and disgusting 
foods in these parts of the brain that are known to be related to food regulation (Beaver 
et al., 2006). This is an example of how neural differences may be related to BAS, BIS, and 
FFFS functioning.
An important individual difference, according to RST, is how quickly people learn from 
rewards and punishments. This reinforcement sensitivity is the whole premise on which the 
theory rests. People with a strong BAS are more sensitive to reward, meaning that they will 
condition—or learn responses—more quickly by responding than by withholding a response. 
However, people with a strong BIS are more sensitive to punishment, meaning that they will 
condition more quickly by withholding a response than by responding (Gray, 1970, 1976). Think 
about it: Would you learn better by concentrating on not doing things wrong and avoiding a 
punishment, or by doing things right and gaining a reward?
The behavioral approach 
system (BAS) regulates our 
reaction to things that are 
enticing, pleasurable, and 
rewarding.
© Andrew Brown/Fotolia
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Which statement do you 
agree with more: “Nothing 
ventured, nothing gained” 
or “Better safe than sorry”?
199

The Neuroscience of Personality
This question was explored in an 
experiment in which participants had 
to learn the right response to a com-
puter task—either press the “3” key 
or do nothing—when presented with 
random two-digit numbers (Zinbarg 
& Mohlman, 1998). The participants 
had to learn which numbers required a 
response and which numbers required 
that they withhold a response. Every 
trial was different, so that participants 
had to figure out all over again which 
numbers to respond to (e.g., hit the “3” 
key) or to withhold a response from 
(e.g., do nothing).
To let participants know whether 
they were correct or not, they received 
rewards and punishments depending 
on their responses. But instead of being 
rewarded every time they were cor-
rect (“You won 25 cents”) or punished 
every time they were wrong (“You lost 25 
cents”), there was a twist. On some trials 
taking action was associated with gain-
ing a reward. On other trials, not taking 
action would avoid a punishment (see Figure 4). This pattern of feedback gave participants 
enough information to master the task. However, there is a big difference between learning by 
doing and learning by not doing. The question is, do some people learn better by taking actions 
or by withholding actions?
As it turned out, just as RST predicts, people with a reactive BAS learned the correct 
responses faster from reacting than from withholding their responses. However, people with 
high scores on a mixed FFFS/BIS scale learned faster from withholding than from reacting. 
In addition, people who scored high on an anxiety scale also learned faster from withhold-
ing than from reacting (Zinbarg & Mohlman, 1998). This experiment shows differences in 
learning from rewards and punishments in humans as a function of BAS and BIS/FFFS (See 
The Personality of Everyday Life for an application of RST theory to test-taking). This study 
is the human equivalent of the many studies of rats and other animals that led to the original 
statement of RST.
The behavioral inhibition 
system (BIS) regulates our 
reactions to conflicts between 
the fight-flight-freeze system 
and the behavioral approach 
system such as worry, 
rumination, vigilance, and 
obsessive-compulsiveness.
Figure 4  Schematic 
of participant feedback in the 
Zinbarg and Mohlman (1998) 
study.
Participant’s
Response:
Answer:
Outcome:
Reward Trials
Respond
Right
Win 25 cents
Do nothing
Wrong
(nothing)
Punishment Trials
Respond
Wrong
Lose 25 cents
Do nothing
Right
(nothing)
Respond
Do Nothing
Correct Answer
© Forgiss/Dreamstime.com
200

The Neuroscience of Personality
Personality and the guessing penalty
Have you ever taken a test where you were faced with the dilemma of guessing or leaving 
a question blank? Some standardized tests such as the SAT or the ACT have what is com-
monly called a guessing penalty. Test takers get one point for a correct answer, but lose 
one-fourth point for a wrong answer. This scoring is meant to discourage a person from 
randomly guessing on a multiple-choice test with four choices. Is there an effective way 
to deal with these exams?
That depends on the relative strength of your BAS and BIS (Ávila & Torrubia, 2004). The 
participants in this study regularly faced exams in which they not only needed to know the 
material, but they had to decide whether they should respond to a question they were unsure 
of or to leave the question blank because there was a guessing penalty built into the exam.
How did participants deal with this conflict? Participants who scored high in sen-
sitivity to reward made more incorrect responses and left fewer questions blank than 
participants who scored low in sensitivity to reward (see Table 5). Essentially, people who 
are sensitive to reward are more likely to go for it, but then they are also more likely to pay 
for it, compared to people who are less sensitive to reward (see Figure 5).
However, participants who scored high in sensitivity to punishment left more ques-
tions blank but gave more correct answers than participants who scored low in sensitivity 
to punishment. Participants who were sensitive to punishment seemed to go by the rule 
“when in doubt, leave it out.”
Alas, Ávila and Torrubia (2004) did not report if there was a difference in grades 
as a function of high and low sensitivity to reward or punishment. However, an earlier 
study did (Torrubia, Ávila, Moltó, & Grande, 1995). Despite these differences in incorrect 
responses and omissions, there was no difference in overall exam scores between partici-
pants who were high in sensitivity to punishment or sensitivity to reward. This suggests 
that the contrasting strategies work equally well.
People who are more sensitive to reward—such as extraverts—seem to go though 
life with the philosophy “Nothing ventured, nothing gained.” In contrast, people who are 
more sensitive to punishment—such as people high in anxiety and/or fear—would rather 
be safe than sorry. The good news is, both strategies can be effective.
The Personality of Everyday Life
Table 5  Sample Items From the Sensitivity to Punishment and Sensitivity to Reward Questionnaire 
(SPSRQ)
Sensitivity to Punishment Questions
	1.	  Are you often afraid of new or unexpected situations?
	2.	  Is it difficult for you to telephone someone you do not know?
	3.	  As a child, were you troubled by punishments at home or in school?
Sensitivity to Reward Questions
	1.	  Do you often do things to be praised?
	2.	  Do you like being the center of attention at a party or a social meeting?
	3.	  Do you spend a lot of your time on obtaining a good image?
Source: Adapted from Torrubia et al. (2001, Table 2, p. 846). Reprinted with permission from Torrubia, R., Ávila, C., Moltó,
J., & Caseras, X. (2001), “The sensitivity to punishment and sensitivity to reward questionnaire (SPSRQ) as a measure of 
Gray’s anxiety and impulsivity dimensions,” Personality and Individual Differences, 29, 837–862.  Permission conveyed 
through the Copyright Clearance Center.  
201

The Neuroscience of Personality
Then and Now: Phrenology, the New Phrenology, and the Future of 
Neuroimaging for Personality and Beyond
Ever since ancient times, we humans have wondered, what makes us who we are? The ancient 
Greek philosopher Aristotle debated whether the heart or the brain was the seat of the soul or 
psyche, what we think of today as personality (Cowey, 2001). Since that time, others have won-
dered about the relationship between specific parts of the brain and personality. But it was the 
physician and anatomist Franz Joseph Gall in the 1790s who turned it into a science: phrenology. 
Gall reasoned—well ahead of his time—that certain functions of the brain were localized in parts 
of the cerebral cortex. That much, he had right. However, he also believed that the size of the cor-
tex, as indicated by the size, shape, and in particular the location and size of bumps on the scalp, 
was related to particular mental or personality characteristics.
We know today that this system is completely without merit, “absolutely absurd,” and “pre-
posterous nonsense” according to the reviewer of a 1910 book on phrenology (Seashore, 1912, 
p. 227). However, Gall inspired a later phrenologist, George Combe, who made two interesting 
observations in 1836. Combe discovered that by pressing his thumb on parts of the exposed cortex 
of patients who had serious head injuries, he was able to change their behavior. He also noticed that 
some areas of brain tissue became filled with blood when the patient was thinking, dreaming, or 
talking (Cowey, 2001). The detection of blood-flow fluctuation eventually led to the development 
of fMRI, which one researcher viewed as the greatest single influence in neurological research in 
over 2,000 years (Cowey, 2001).
Then in 1884 William Wundt, a doctor, psychologist, and physiologist, viewed by many 
as the founder of experimental psychology, gave a lecture with the provocative title “Old and 
New Phrenology” (1894). In it he was critical of both phrenology and brain localization. 
Ironically, brain localization turned out to be the beginning of an important branch of psy-
chology, as Combe’s observations attested to, but at the same time Wundt was eerily on target 
when he cautioned that the “hypothesis of [localization] gives no account of the manifold 
forms of ideational and sensational connexion.” (Wundt, 1894, p. 447). Indeed, his critique 
of brain localization was echoed 90 years later by a neuropsychologist who called neuropsy-
chology “the currently fashionable name for phrenology” (Marshall, 1984, p. 210). The prob-
lem is that theories of localization fail to account for the connectivity of ideas in the mind, 
“There is not the slightest 
resemblance between  
the phrenologist’s 
localization of function that 
we find in physiological 
psychology.”
Review of Charles H. Olin’s 1910 
book Phrenology as cited in 
Seashore (1912, p. 227)
Figure 5  A schematic showing differences in number of questions 
correct, incorrect, and left blank as a function of sensitivity to punishment 
(SP) and sensitivity to reward (SR).  Source: Based on data from Torrubia, 
et al. (1995).
30
0
5
20
25
15
10
SP
SR
Correct
Blank
Incorrect
202

The Neuroscience of Personality
according to Wundt (1894), 
and the complex interaction 
of brain systems, according to 
Marshall (1984).
In the last decade or so, 
researchers came to realize 
that the various parts and sys-
tems of the brain, especially 
in humans, work in concert 
to impact behavior (Knight, 
2007). Especially when it 
comes to understanding 
something as complicated as 
personality, we need to look at 
how systems within the brain 
work together (Uttal, 2001). 
Today, diffusion tensor imag-
ing (DTI), a special type of 
fMRI that traces the diffusion 
of water in cells, is giving even 
more detailed pictures of the 
brain. But more importantly, 
DTI can highlight connections 
between cortical and subcor-
tical regions (Cowey, 2001). 
DTI moves beyond localiza-
tion and has the potential to 
enable researchers to study 
systems and functions as a 
whole rather than piecemeal.
What might this new technology reveal? For one, we may be able to locate and study Gray’s 
hypothetical BAS, BIS, and FFFS. For example, Whittle, Allen, Lubman, and Yücel (2006) sug-
gested that the prefrontal cortex and limbic structures (including the amygdala) are associated 
with the three temperaments we have been discussing in this chapter: Extraversion, Neuroticism, 
and Impulsivity. Their model (see Figure 6) is based on neural circuitry that past research has sug-
gested may be related to personality and psychopathology. Direct evidence for their model comes 
from imaging studies using fMRI, DTI, and even newer and more powerful technology still being 
Visualization of a DTI 
measurement of a human 
brain. Coloured 3-dimensional 
magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) scan of the white 
matter pathways of the brain, 
side view. White matter is 
composed of myelin-coated 
nerve cell fibres that carry 
information between nerve 
cells in the cerebrum of the 
brain (top half of image) and 
the brain stem (bottom centre). 
This image was created by an 
MRI scanner sensitised to the 
movement of water around the 
brain. Blue represents neural 
pathways from the top to the 
bottom of the brain, green 
represents pathways from the 
front (left) to the back (right), 
and red shows pathways 
between the right and left 
hemispheres of the brain. 
Are theories linking parts of 
the brain with differences in 
personality as simplistic and 
outdated as phrenology?
© World History Archive/Alamy
© TOM BARRICK, CHRIS CLARK, SGHMS/Photo Researchers, Inc.
203

The Neuroscience of Personality
developed. Whittle et al. (2006) proposed to use these techniques to study the neural networks of 
young people who may be at risk for depression, anxiety disorders, or delinquency based on their 
temperament. By studying preteens whose brains are still growing and forming connections even 
as they are developing their own unique personalities, Whittle et al. (2006) hoped to relate changes 
in neural networks with behavior and psychopathology over time (Whittle et al., 2008).
Researchers in the Digital Media program at Drexel University have used Combe’s obser-
vation of the change in cerebral blood flow caused by mental activity to design video games in 
which the gamer controls the character’s actions just by thinking! There is no remote, joy stick, 
mouse, or other control in this game. Instead, infrared sensors, placed on a specially designed 
headband worn by the player, measure changes in blood oxygen levels in the frontal cortex. 
Figure 6  Structures 
proposed to comprise the 
neural circuits underlying  
the three temperaments:  
(a) Neuroticism (negative 
affect) (b) Extraversion 
(positive affect) and (3) low 
Impulsivity (high constraint).
Note: NAcc = nucleus ac-
cumbens; OFC= orbitofrontal 
cortex; ACC = anterior 
cingulate cortex;  DLPFC
= dorsolateral  prefrontal 
cortex. Solid colors indicate 
structures, shaded colors indi-
cate resting state activity, red 
indicates positive correlation 
(more activity), blue indicates 
negative correlation (less 
activity). Source: From Whittle 
et al. (2006, Figure 1, p. 520). 
Whittle, S., Allen, N. B., Lub-
man, D. I., & Yücel, M. (2006), 
“The neurobiological basis of 
temperament: Towards a bet-
ter understanding of psycho-
pathology,” Neuroscience and 
the Biobehavioral Reviews, 
30, 511–525.  Permission con-
veyed through the Copyright 
Clearance Center.
DLPFC
DLPFC
OFC
NAcc
DLPFC
Amygdala
Amygdala
NAcc
Amygdala
Hippocampus
Dorsal ACC
Dorsal ACC
Dorsal ACC
Ventral
ACC
C
B
A
204

The Neuroscience of Personality
“When we deal with brain 
science, we are dealing with 
the organ that makes us 
unique individuals, that gives 
us our personality, memories, 
emotions, dreams, creative 
abilities, and at times our 
sinister selves.”
Ruth Fischbach and Gerald Fisch-
bach as cited in Ackerman (2006)
People high in extraversion 
show increased activity in 
parts of the brain to positive 
photos like these compared 
to when they viewed 
negative pictures.
Blood flow, as Combe discovered, increases with concentration. The computer monitors these 
fluctuations and allows the gamer to interact in a virtual world (CBS3 News, 2008). In a joint 
endeavor between video game designers and medical scientists, the research team has designed 
a game that is fun, engaging, and that studies brain function at the same time (Drexel University 
Replay Lab, 2009). Researchers hope that the game and associated technology can one day be 
used to help people with ADHD focus better or to enable people with severe disabilities to 
communicate through their computer (CBS3 News, 2008).
Neurological Correlates of Personality
If RST and Eysenck’s PEN theory are beginning to blur in your mind, take heart: there’s a good 
reason for that. Both theories make predictions for the three personality clusters, or tempera-
ments, we identified earlier: Extraversion, Neuroticism, and Impulsivity.
A consistent finding is that a key difference between Extraversion and Neuroticism is in 
how emotions are experienced. Both extraverts and people high in Neuroticism have more 
positive emotions and negative emotions, respectively, and they also react more strongly to their 
positive or negative emotions than do introverts or emotionally stable people (Gross, Sutton, 
& Ketelaar, 1998; Larsen & Ketelaar, 1989, 1991). That is, extraverts experience more positive 
emotions and react to them more strongly than introverts, whereas people high in Neuroticism 
experience more negative emotions and react to them more strongly compared to people low in 
Neuroticism. In addition, extraverts experience more positive emotions but less negative emo-
tions than people high in Neuroticism. Indeed, much of the day-to-day anxiety and moodiness 
experienced by people high in Neuroticism is due to their reactivity compared to people low in 
Neuroticism (Bolger & Schilling, 1991).
Keep in mind that positive emotions (a marker of Extraversion) and negative emotions 
(a marker of Neuroticism) are not opposites but rather two separate dimensions (Diener & 
Emmons, 1984). That is, people can have a lot of both kinds of emotions or a little of both. 
Being high in one does not imply being low in the other. Indeed, the lack of positive emotion is 
not negative emotion, but a state called anhedonia, which is the loss of or inability to experi-
ence pleasure that may or may not be accompanied by the presence of negative emotions. In 
fact, extraverts report experiencing more happiness, positive emotions, and life satisfaction than 
introverts, whereas people who are high 
in Neuroticism experience more negative 
emotions, unhappiness, and dissatisfaction 
with life compared to more emotionally 
stable individuals (Costa & McCrae, 1980).
Impulsivity, the third temperament, 
involves a lack of constraint or a state of 
being undercontrolled (Clark & Watson, 
2008). Although this sounds very similar to 
Eysenck’s third factor of Psychoticism, they 
are not the same. Eysenck maintained that 
his concept of psychoticism was a “more gen-
eral higher-order concept” involving antiso-
cial aspects of behavior than just impulsivity 
(Eysenck, 1990, p. 269). Impulsivity is related 
to a broader cluster of characteristics includ-
ing sensation seeking, novelty seeking, or 
venturesomeness (Pickering & Gray, 1999).
The early work on RST proposed that 
Impulsivity was controlled by BAS. With 
the revised RST, there is consensus among 
researchers that BAS sensitivity is related to 
Extraversion (i.e., surgency: seeking incen-
tives in the world) where impulsivity is 
© Mind2concept/Dreamstime.com
THINK ABOUT IT
How would impulsive 
behavior such as gam-
bling relate to BAS and BIS 
functioning?
205

The Neuroscience of Personality
caused by the failure of BIS to inhibit behavior, especially around novel or exciting stimuli 
(Smillie et al., 2006). As a result, there may be two very different motivations behind a seemingly 
impulsive behavior such as excessive alcohol use. People may drink frequently or excessively as a 
means of gaining a reward (strong BAS) or because they are incapable of inhibiting a response 
(weak BIS; Pardo, Aguilar, Molinuevo, & Torrubia, 2007).
At some level, all of these terms are related and define a temperament of a person who seeks 
novelty and excitement and who sometimes acts without thinking about the consequences. 
There are similar physiological processes involved in Extraversion and Neuroticism, but Impul-
sivity seems to have a very different underlying physiology. Let us take a closer look at the 
neurological correlates behind Extraversion, Neuroticism, and Impulsivity.
Extraversion and Neuroticism
Because people who are high in Extraversion or high in Neuroticism differ in their experience of 
emotions, it should come as no surprise that they also differ in the neurological structures and 
systems that are involved in the experience and regulation of emotion. We experience emotions 
as a result of complex systems that coordinate form and function across brain structures, brain 
activity, and biochemical processes. These differences in sensitivity to positive or negative emo-
tion, although not reflected in heightened bodily responses, are reflected in differences in brain 
structures that control emotion, brain activity in response to emotional stimuli, and biochemi-
cal activity that regulates emotions. We’ll review some of this evidence, focusing on this general 
picture of personality differences more so than the neuroscience of emotional regulation.
Brain Structure Differences in the Cortex and the Amygdala.  Two main areas of the 
brain show differences in size depending on personality differences in Extraversion and Neu-
roticism: the cortex and the amygdala.
The Cortex.  One area that is important for the experience of emotion is the prefrontal 
cortex; and introverts and extraverts show differences in the size of their cortexes. In one study, 
the brains of normal, healthy volunteers were scanned using MRI while at rest (Wright et al., 
2006). Introversion was correlated with thickness of three sections of the right, but not the left, 
cortex. That is, introverts appeared to have more gray matter in these right hemisphere areas 
than extraverts (see Figures 7 and 8; Wright et al., 2006).
Wright et al. (2006) suggested that the relative thinning of these areas may be a neurological 
symptom of the lessened social inhibition found in extraverts. However, they also cautioned 
that smaller size doesn’t necessarily indicate diminished function. We know that one way the 
nervous system works is to start out with a lot of neurons and connections that gradually get 
abandoned or cut back as connections become more refined. It’s possible that neurons in these 
areas may have been pruned back during development, leading to greater efficiency in the 
system rather than reduced function.
In contrast, Neuroticism scores were negatively correlated with parts of the left, but not the 
right, cortex (Wright et al., 2006). That is, people high in Neuroticism had less gray matter in 
these left hemisphere areas compared to people low in Neuroticism (see Figure 9). This effect 
Figure 7  Significant 
correlations of cortical 
thickness and Extraversion in 
the lateral prefrontal cortex. 
The areas highlighted in red-
yellow are thicker in extroverts. 
The areas highlighted in 
blue-green are thicker in 
introverts.  Source: From Wright 
et al. (2006, Figure 1, p. 1812).
206

The Neuroscience of Personality
was stronger in males than in females. These results confirm an earlier study that found that 
people high in Neuroticism, especially in anxiety and self-consciousness, had lower brain volume 
and that brain volume was not related to Extraversion nor to other traits (Knutson, Momenan, 
Rawlings, Fong, & Hommer, 2001).
The Amygdala.  Extraversion and Neuroticism are also related to structural differences in 
the amygdala. Extraverts had a higher concentration of gray matter in the left amygdala as 
measured by MRI than introverts, and people high in Neuroticism had a lower concentration of 
gray matter in the right amygdala than people scoring low in Neuroticism (Omura, Constable, 
& Canli, 2005). Other studies have found that depressed people also have less gray matter in 
the amygdala. Because of its association with Neuroticism, Omura et al. (2005) stated that this 
reduction in the mass of the amygdala is not a result of depression, but instead, occurs before 
the depression hits.
Brain Activity Differences in the Cortex, Left–Right Asymmetry, and the Amygdala.  In 
addition to differences in brain structures, there are differences in how the brains of people high 
in Extraversion or high in Neuroticism function. These are reflected in brain activity differences 
in the cortex, including left–right asymmetry, and in the amygdala.
The Cortex. 
Extraversion and Neuroticism are each correlated with activity in the 
temporal and frontal parts of the cortex, areas that control consciousness (frontal) and 
emotions (both temporal and frontal), but in different ways: Extraversion is correlated 
with activity for positive emotions and Neuroticism is correlated with activity for nega-
tive emotions (Canli et al., 2001).
To illustrate, consider the following experiment. Women participants saw 20 positive and 
20 negative pictures while their brains were being scanned using fMRI (Canli et al., 2001). The 
positive pictures included a happy couple, sunsets, and pictures of appetizing foods such as ice 
Figure 9  Significant correlations of cortical thickness and 
Neuroticism in the orbitofrontal cortex. The areas highlighted 
in red-yellow are thicker in people who are high in Neuroticism. 
The areas highlighted in blue-green are thicker in people low in 
Neuroticism.  Source: From Wright et al. (2006, Figure 3, p. 1814).
Figure 8  Significant correlations of cortical thickness and 
Extraversion in the right fusiform cortex. The areas highlighted in 
red-yellow are thicker in extroverts. The areas highlighted in blue-
green are thicker in introverts.  Source: From Wright et al. (2006, 
Figure 2, p. 1813).
THINK ABOUT IT
Why would individual dif-
ferences in positive but not 
negative emotions evolve?
207

The Neuroscience of Personality
cream and brownies. The negative pictures 
included images of people crying, spiders, 
and a cemetery. While looking at the positive 
pictures, extraverts showed more activity in 
the temporal and frontal parts of the cortex 
compared to when they saw the negative 
pictures. However, people high in Neuroti-
cism showed greater activity in the temporal 
and frontal parts of the cortex when look-
ing at negative pictures than when look-
ing at positive pictures. Further, one study 
identified an amazing 15 different cortical 
and subcortical regions of the brain where 
extraverts responded with greater brain acti-
vation to positive stimuli compared to nega-
tive stimuli (Canli et al., 2001).
Left–Right Asymmetry.  Although the 
two hemispheres of the brain are special-
ized for different processes (e.g., linguistic 
processes in the left hemisphere among 
right-handers), there are individual differ-
ences in how the cortex of the brain reacts 
to specific emotional stimuli as shown by 
EEG brain wave response or fMRI. Specifically, the right frontal and prefrontal cortexes are 
more active than the left during negative emotions, whereas the left portion of these regions are 
more active than the right portion during positive emotions (Davidson, 1992, 2004). But more 
importantly, people differ in how large these relative differences are in responding to positive 
and negative emotions. Further, these differences are present as early as the first year of life. We 
call these differences left–right asymmetries.
Some people show more left asymmetry: their left cortex responds to positive emotion 
more than their right cortex responds to negative emotion. Other people show more right 
asymmetry: their right cortex responds to negative emotions more than their left cortex 
responds to positive emotion. People with greater left asymmetry report more positive emo-
tion to film clips than people with right asymmetry; people with greater right asymmetry 
report more negative emotion to film clips than people with left asymmetry (Davidson, 
1992).
What kind of people are likely to show left or right asymmetry? Shy, inhibited children 
and depressed adults show greater right asymmetry, as do people who are high in Neuroticism, 
both at rest and in response to emotional stimuli (Davidson, 1992). People who experience 
positive emotion, like those high in extraversion, show greater left asymmetry both at rest and 
in response to positive emotion (Tomarken, Davidson, Wheeler, & Doss, 1992).
Do you recall the meditation study that opened this chapter? One of the results was that 
people in the meditation condition showed greater left brain asymmetry both at rest and 
in response to positive and negative emotional events (Davidson et al., 2003). Psychologist 
Richard Davidson actually conducted an fMRI of a Tibetan monk with over 10,000 hours of 
training in meditation (Savory, 2004). This monk turned out to have the most extreme left 
asymmetry that Davidson had ever seen! We can see now that meditation reduces reactions 
in the right brain to stress and increases reactions in the left brain to positive emotions. The 
net result is that little stressors don’t bother people as much and they get more joy out of the 
small pleasures in life.
Of course we must be cautious, as these results may hold for only the kind of people who 
seek out and voluntarily invest the time and energy to learn and practice meditation. We can’t be 
sure if there is something special about these people, compared to people who are uninterested 
in meditation, or if it is the meditation per se that causes these changes. It is possible that yoga, 
spirituality, or any form of relaxation can lead to similar results.
People high in Neuroticism 
show increased activity 
in parts of the brain to 
negative photos like these 
compared to when they 
viewed positive pictures.
© Boudikka/Shutterstock
THINK ABOUT IT
If meditation changes left–
right asymmetry and if left–
right asymmetry shows 
consistent differences 
among people, does medi-
tation change personality?
208

The Neuroscience of Personality
The Amygdala.  Extraversion is also related to activity in the amygdala, a brain region involved 
in the processing and memory of emotions (Canli, Sievers, Whitfield, Gotlib, & Gabrieli, 2002). 
While viewing happy faces, extraverts showed more activity in the amygdala than did introverts 
(see Figure 10). Other research confirms these results (see Gross, 2008, for a review).
However, there was no relationship between Extraversion and amygdala response to nega-
tive faces nor was there any relationship between amygdala activation and Neuroticism in 
response to any of the other emotional faces used (e.g., angry, fearful, happy, sad, or neutral). 
The researchers believed that response to threatening faces—at least at this gut emotional 
level—is an important survival mechanism and so is unrelated to individual differences in 
personality (Canli et al., 2002).
Biochemical Activity.  Given that Extraversion and Neuroticism are associated with differ-
ences in brain structure and brain activity, it follows that there are biochemical differences as 
well. For Extraversion, these differences involve the dopamine system, whereas for people high 
in Neuroticism, serotonin seems to be key.
Dopamine and Extraversion.  You know how introverts have greater sensitivity to sensory 
stimulation—that is, arousability—than extraverts? It turns out that introverts are also more 
sensitive to fluctuations in the neurotransmitter dopamine in the brain as a result of sensory 
Figure 10  Response of the 
amygdala to emotional faces. 
The left fMRI images show 
significant activation to fearful 
(top) but not happy faces 
(bottom) across all participants. 
The right images show areas 
where greater activation 
to emotional images was 
significantly correlated with 
higher scores in Extraversion 
for happy (bottom) but not for 
fearful faces (top). Redder areas 
show greater activation.  Source: 
From Canli et al. (2002, Figure 1, 
p. 2191).
Richard J. Davidson 
meeting the Dalai Lama, the 
supreme leader of Tibetan 
Buddhism. The Dalai Lama 
visited Davidson’s lab at the 
University of Wisconsin–
Madison in May 2001 to 
discuss ways science could 
study meditation to promote 
human happiness.
© Jeff Miller/University of Wisconsin-Madison
209

The Neuroscience of Personality
input. This may explain their preference for quiet and solitude (Stelmack & Rammsayer, 2008). 
However, extraverts have greater dopamine activity than introverts in general. This may be due to 
either more extensive dopamine pathways in the brains of extraverts or a greater responsiveness 
to dopamine in general (Depue & Collins, 1999; Depue et al., 1994). This makes sense because 
the dopamine system connects with the amygdala, which is more responsive in extraverts, as we 
just saw (Gross, 2008; Knutson & Bhanji, 2006).
Serotonin and Neuroticism.  For people high in Neuroticism, the neurotransmitter sero-
tonin and the serotonin receptors in the brain may be more important than dopamine and the 
dopamine system. Serotonin and parts of the brain sensitive to serotonin such as the cortex 
and amygdala but also the hippocampus, septum, and hypothalamus are involved with mood 
regulation, depression, and anxiety disorders (Canli, 2006). Therefore it’s likely for these to be 
related to Neuroticism as well.
There is evidence that extreme levels of anxiety and depression, as found in clinical depres-
sion, posttraumatic stress disorder, chronic anxiety, and other kinds of pathology, may be 
related to low serotonin levels (Stelmack & Rammsayer, 2008; Zuckerman, 2005). Given that 
anxiety and depression are aspects of Neuroticism, this suggests that serotonin may also be 
related to individual differences in Neuroticism.
We know from the previous chapter on genetics that Neuroticism has a strong genetic com-
ponent. People high in Neuroticism are more likely than emotionally stable people to have the 
short allele of a serotonin transporter that people low in Neuroticism lack (Lesch et al., 1996). 
People with this variation of the gene have less serotonin in their system and are therefore at 
increased risk for mood and anxiety disorders (Canli & Lesch, 2007; Lesch, 2007).
Recall that Neuroticism is associated with increased neural activity, as measured by fMRI, 
in the amygdala especially during negative emotions such as fear (Hooker, Verosky, Miyakawa, 
Knight, & D’Esposito, 2008). Additional research finds that people with a genetic variation in 
a serotonin transporter, which causes lower levels of serotonin in the system, showed greater 
amygdala reactivity to fearful faces, especially for people who were higher in BIS threat sensitivity 
(Cools et al., 2005). These studies suggest that people high in Neuroticism may have stronger and 
longer-lasting learned associations, especially to punishment (Hooker et al., 2008). This would 
account for the earlier findings from reinforcement sensitivity theory that extroverts are more 
sensitive to reward whereas people high in Neuroticism are more sensitive to punishment.
Impulsivity and Sensation Seeking
Sensation seeking is the “seeking of varied novel, complex, and intense sensations and experi-
ences, and the willingness to take physical, social, legal, and financial risks for the sake of such 
experiences” (Zuckerman, 1994, p. 27). Sensation seekers are not so much into the danger of 
such behaviors—like risking all their money on a big bet; they are more into the fun part—like 
spending an entire evening at a casino.
Marvin Zuckerman first identified this personality trait while he was engaged in sensory-
deprivation and social isolation research in the 1960s (e.g., Zuckerman, Persky, Link, & Basu, 
1968). He and his colleagues found that many of their volunteers—people who were willing 
to go into physical isolation, alone in a dark, sound-proofed room, with heavy gloves cover-
ing their hands—were high in sensation seeking. Paradoxically, these high sensation seeking 
volunteers sought sensory deprivation in the hopes of having unusual sensory experiences like 
hallucinations as a result of the extreme deprivation in the experiments (Zuckerman, 2008). 
Low sensation seekers found such experiments particularly anxiety-provoking (Zuckerman 
et al., 1968). This led Zuckerman and his colleagues to realize that sensation seeking involved 
a desire for novel mental, internal sensations as well as exciting activities (Zuckerman, 2008). 
Sensation seekers were more likely to volunteer for studies involving unusual experiences such 
as hypnosis, ESP, meditation, encounter groups, or viewing pornography, but not for more 
run-of-the-mill experiments in learning or social psychology (Zuckerman, 2008).
Sensation seeking is typically measured by the Sensation Seeking Scale which is divided into 
four subscales, each measuring a different aspect of sensation seeking (Zuckerman, 1971). Expe-
rience seeking measures the desire for moderate arousal through different kinds of experiences 
“To me, one of the deepest 
motivations in the human 
spirit is to lead an interesting, 
exciting and thrilling life. It’s 
not for everybody, but I think 
it’s a powerful force.”
Frank Farley as cited in Munsey 
(2009, p. 40)
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Do you learn better through 
rewards or punishments? 
Is this related to how extra-
verted or neurotic you are?
210

The Neuroscience of Personality
involving both the mind and the senses, perhaps through music, travel, or an unconventional 
lifestyle (Zuckerman, 1971, 2008). It is very similar to the concept of Openness from the five-factor 
model (McCrae & Costa, 1997a). Boredom susceptibility taps the need for change and variety and 
an aversion to routine and sameness (Zuckerman, 1971). Thrill and adventure seeking measures 
arousal seeking through physical sensations produced by speed, height, falling, danger, and unique 
experiences such as exploring an underwater world by scuba-diving (Zuckerman, 1971, 2008). 
Many extreme sports athletes are no doubt high in thrill and adventure seeking! Disinhibition is 
the extent to which people have lowered social inhibitions and enjoy letting loose in the company 
of others, without a thought about decorum, proper behavior, or social norms. Disinhibition often 
takes the form of alcohol use, partying, and sex (Zuckerman, 2008). Table 6 contains sample items 
of the Brief Sensation Seeking Scale (Hoyle, Stephenson, Palmgreen, Lorch, & Donohew, 2002) so 
you can see for yourself what these four dimensions look like.
Sensation seeking shows a consistent gender difference and an age difference, with men 
scoring higher than women and young people scoring higher than older people, on average 
(Zuckerman & Neeb, 1980). Sensation seeking peaks in the late teens and early 20s.
High sensation seekers differ from low sensation seekers in some interesting ways. High 
sensation seekers are more likely to be younger at the age of first intercourse, and to have more 
sexual partners, more varied sexual experiences, and risky sex, defined as sex with strangers or 
under the influence of alcohol or other drugs (Hoyle, Fejfar, & Miller, 2000; Zuckerman, 2007).
High sensation seekers are also more likely to smoke cigarettes than low sensation seekers, a 
finding that has remained consistent over some 30-plus years of research and across many coun-
tries including Switzerland, Norway, the Netherlands, Israel, and the United States (Zuckerman, 
2008). Sensation seeking also correlates with drug and alcohol use including stimulants such as 
cocaine, amphetamine, marijuana and LSD, and depressants such as heroin (Zuckerman, 1979). 
Among people who use drugs, high sensation seeking is associated with the range of different 
kinds of drugs used, more so than with any one drug (Kaestner, Rosen, & Apel, 1977).
From the discussion so far, you might think that “sex, drugs, and rock ’n’ roll” somehow go 
together. Well, at least when it comes to the tastes of the high sensation seeker, they do! These 
are new and, to some extent depending on the generation, unusual and antisocial experiences. 
High sensation seekers prefer rock, heavy metal, and punk music over movie soundtracks and 
religious music (Litle & Zuckerman, 1986). They also enjoy alternative, rap, and electronic 
dance music more so than people low in sensation seeking (McNamara & Ballard, 1999).
“Bones heal, chicks dig scars, 
pain is temporary, glory is 
forever.”
Evel Knievel, American daredevil 
and entertainer
Table 6  The Brief Sensation Seeking Scale
Experience Seeking
	 1.	  I would like to explore strange places.
	 5.	  I would like to take off on a trip with no preplanned routes or timetables.
Boredom Susceptibility
	 2.	  I get restless when I spend too much time at home.
	 6.	  I prefer friends who are excitingly unpredictable.
Thrill and Adventure Seeking
	 3.	  I like to do frightening things.
	 7.	  I would like to try bungee jumping.
Disinhibition
	 4.	  I like wild parties.
	 8.	  I would love to have new and exciting experiences, even if they are illegal.
Note: To what extent do you agree or disagree? Answer using a 5-point scale from Strongly disagree (1), Disagree (2), Neither 
disagree nor agree (3), Agree (4), and Strongly agree (5). In a sample of 8th to 11th graders, females averaged 3.68 and males 3.54.
Source: Adapted from Hoyle et al. (2002, p. 405). Reprinted with permission from Hoyle, R. H., Stephenson, M. T., Palmgreen, P., 
Lorch, E. P., & Donohew, R. L. (2002), “Reliability and validity of a brief measure of sensation reliability and validity of a brief mea-
sure of sensation seeking,” Personality and Individual Differences, 32, pg. 401–414. Permission conveyed through the Copyright 
Clearance Center.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
How much of a sensation 
seeker are you? Why do you 
say this?
211

The Neuroscience of Personality
High and low sensation seekers also 
differ in the kinds of careers they enjoy. 
Whereas sensation seekers are not drawn 
more to the military or to law enforce-
ment than low sensation seekers, they are 
more likely to volunteer for riskier assign-
ments in both careers (Zuckerman, 2008). 
Speeders and reckless drivers—and the 
officers who engage in high-speed criminal 
chases—are more likely to be high sensa-
tion seekers (Zuckerman, 2008). People 
who deal with risk on a daily basis such as 
air traffic controllers and rape counselors, 
or physicians, nurses, psychologists, and 
paraprofessionals who voluntarily work in 
an emergency room are all higher in sensa-
tion seeking than people working in more 
traditional settings (Zuckerman, 2008).
What might it be like to be in a close 
relationship with a high sensation seeker? 
It depends: People have greater marital 
satisfaction when their partners are simi-
lar to them on this trait (Schroth, 1991). 
However, couples are less likely to divorce 
if both partners are low in sensation seek-
ing (Zuckerman & Neeb, 1980).
It isn’t all fun and games for a high sensation seeker. Tragically, sometimes high sensation 
seekers behave a little too riskily or impulsively for their own good. Casual observations in the 
past had noted that spinal cord injuries often happen due to poor judgment and impulsivity 
(Mawson, Jacobs, Winchester, & Biundo, 1988). Might personality (i.e., sensation seeking) be 
related to type of injury? An interesting study was conducted in which 140 men with spinal 
cord injuries were matched with control subjects who were of the same age, gender, educational 
attainment, and lived in the same zip code (Mawson et al., 1988). Through phone interviews, 
both injured and control participants filled out the Sensation Seeking Scale (Zuckerman, 1971) 
and answered questions about their lives.
Sure enough, the spinal cord injured participants scored higher than the matched control 
participants on boredom susceptibility and disinhibition. Even more interesting, when the 
researchers selected the injured participants who scored in the top and bottom 10% of the 
Sensation Seeking Scale (i.e., the highest and lowest sensation seekers, respectively) the highest 
sensation seekers were significantly more likely than the lowest sensation seekers to have an 
arrest record, be younger at the time of their injury (26.1 vs. 41.5 years of age), and to have been 
using alcohol or taking drugs at the time of their injury (Mawson et al., 1988).
Recently, Zuckerman has refined the concept of sensation seeking to the more specific 
impulsive sensation seeking (Zuckerman, 1993a, 2002). Impulsive sensation seeking is very 
close to Eysenck’s concept of Psychoticism. In contrast to high scorers, low scorers show 
restraint, responsibility, and inhibition (Zuckerman, 2008). Impulsive Sensation seeking is 
part of an alternative five-factor measure of personality that includes Impulsive Sensation 
Seeking, Neuroticism-Anxiety, Aggression-Hostility, Sociability, and Activity (Zuckerman, 
1993a, 2005).
Bodily Responses.  Why are some people high in sensation seeking and impulsiveness and 
others not? Zuckerman once thought that high sensation seekers were merely trying to increase 
their arousal to some optimum level of arousal, much like Eysenck thought extraverts and 
introverts do (Zuckerman, 1969). However, experimental tests failed to support this idea (Geen, 
1997). More recently, evidence suggests that the key difference may be in orienting—or how 
Ice climbing is an example 
of an extreme sport that 
involves inherent danger.
© Vitalii Nesterchuk/Shutterstock
SEE FOR YOURSELF
When you hear a strange 
noise or see something 
unusual, are you more likely 
to show a startle reflex or an 
orienting reflex?
212

The Neuroscience of Personality
people react to a novel stimuli—which may involve the reactivity of the nervous system, which 
is regulated by neurotransmitters (Geen, 1997).
Physiological reactions to novel stimuli, as measured by GSR, heart rate, and cortical activ-
ity (e.g., EPs), suggest that what is viewed as a potential threat by the low sensation seeker may 
be of keen interest to the high sensation seeker. That is, high and low sensation seekers differ 
in how they react to a novel stimulus. High sensation seekers are more likely to react with a 
physiological pattern of responses that are more similar to an orientating reflex, indicative of 
interest and a desire to approach. In contrast, low sensation seekers are more likely to react with 
a defensive startle reflex, indicative of danger and a readiness for action (Geen, 1997; Zucker-
man, 2005, 2008). For example, at the onset of a moderate noise, both high and low sensation 
seekers react with a spike in heart rate. As the noise continues, high sensation seekers will 
quickly habituate to the noise and their heart rate will rapidly decrease. In contrast, the heart 
rate of low sensation seekers will continue to increase, indicating a readiness to fight, flight, or 
freeze. Eventually, they too will habituate to the noise, but at a rate slower than high sensation 
seekers (Zuckerman, Simons, & Como, 1988).
Other evidence suggests that high sensation seekers have greater pain tolerance, higher 
Extraversion, less hypochondriasis, and higher sensory thresholds compared to low sensa-
tion seekers (Goldman, Kohn, & Hunt, 1983; Kohn, Hunt, & Hoffman, 1982). This sug-
gests that high sensation seekers are not trying to maintain an optimal level of arousal, but 
that they are able to handle and even enjoy more intense sensory stimulation (Stelmack & 
Rammsayer, 2008).
Brain Activity.  There are remarkably few studies done looking at brain imaging and sensa-
tion seeking. One of these few compared fMRI scans of high and low sensation seekers while 
they viewed positive and negative emotional images (Joseph, Liu, Jiang, Lynam, & Kelly, 2009). 
Some of the images were highly arousing, depicting things such as violence, extreme sports, 
and erotica. Other images, such as pictures of objects, people, or food, were not as arousing. 
High sensation seekers, compared to low sensation seekers, had stronger reactions in parts 
of the brain related to arousal and reinforcement while viewing the highly arousing pictures, 
regardless of whether they were positive or negative (Joseph et al., 2009). In contrast, low 
sensation seekers showed faster and stronger activation in regions related to emotional regu-
lation and decision making. Overall, high sensation seekers were more reactive to the arousal 
level of the pictures and were less sensitive to their positive or negative content compared to 
low sensation seekers.
Biochemical Activity.  Do you recall the important neurotransmitters dopamine, norepineph-
rine and epinephrine, and how they are all broken down by the enzyme MAO? All of these—
dopamine, norepinephrine, epinephrine, MAO—show correlations with sensation seeking and 
impulsivity (Carver, 2005; Rawlings & Dawe, 2008; Ruchkin, Koposov, af Klinteberg, Oreland, & 
Grigorenko, 2005; Zuckerman, 1984, 1994, 1995, 2007, 2008). Zuckerman’s (2008) latest model 
suggests that high sensation seeking comes from an interaction of these three systems: dopamine 
reactivity (which increases exploration of novel stimuli), low serotonin (which fails to inhibit 
behavior) and low norepinephrine/noradrenaline (which lessens the stress response to novel 
stimuli and the threat of punishment).
Much evidence suggests that high sensation seekers either have higher levels of dopamine 
or a more reactive dopamine system than low sensation seekers (Pickering & Gray, 1999; Stel-
mack & Rammsayer, 2008; Zuckerman, 1993b, 2008). And, indeed, high sensation seekers have 
lower levels of serotonin than low sensation seekers (Rawlings & Dawe, 2008; Zuckerman, 
2007). Because MAO regulates dopamine and norepinephrine we would expect differences in 
MAO between high and low sensation seekers (Geen, 1997). Some have compared the action 
of MAO to the braking system of a car: less braking power (e.g., less MAO) means more for-
ward motion (e.g., more dopamine, serotonin, or norepinephrine). Though researchers have 
hypothesized that high sensation seekers have lower levels of MAO (e.g., Zuckerman, 1995), 
until recently, the results have been inconsistent (Geen, 1997).
THINK ABOUT IT
Why were high sensation 
seekers more sensitive to 
the arousal than to the con-
tent in this study?
213

The Neuroscience of Personality
Conclusion: What Have We Learned From 
the Neuroscience of Personality?
Putting together a [physiological approach] to personality is like assembling 
the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle or fitting words into a crossword puzzle. In the 
crossword puzzle, horizontal words (relationships between traits and behaviors) 
require vertical words (between traits and behaviors and underlying biological 
traits) to confirm them. The puzzle . . . is beginning to form some semblance 
of a theoretical model, although many pieces are missing and many words are 
disconnected.(Zuckerman, 2006, p. 51)
Although Zuckerman wrote these words referring to sensation seeking, this statement could apply 
to any personality characteristic. We know that about 40% of the variance in a personality trait is 
due to genetics (Krueger & Johnson, 2008; Turkheimer, 2000) and, as Eysenck suggested, genet-
ics must work through physiology and neurology. There are a few theoretical models, notably 
Eysenck’s PEN model and Gray’s RST, that try to account for personality in terms of genetics and 
neurological differences. But even this equation leaves us with the question of where the other 
60% of the variance in personality traits comes from. Generally we say the environment, but really 
the answer is more complicated, as we know that experiences, including thoughts and behaviors, 
can affect our physiology. Think about the experiment that opened this chapter showing that 
meditation caused changes in brain functioning (Davidson et al., 2003).
Ultimately, even if we were to find a “Neuroticism” area of the brain, does this mean that 
neurology causes us to develop a certain personality? Does it mean that a lifetime of acting 
anxious causes our brains to develop a certain way? Maybe having a rough life filled with many 
unfortunate events makes one neurotic and changes our brains. No matter how good our imag-
ing techniques are, we are unable to determine the answer to this fundamental causal question 
without conducting a true experiment.
What might such an experiment look like? Right now, a standard treatment for patients 
with severe tremors in their hands or other limbs is to implant a tiny electrode. When switched 
on, a slight electrical current inhibits the tremor and the person is able to function without 
shaking. Could you imagine such a device implanted in an area of the brain that is related to 
Extraversion? Would turning on the electrode make a person want to be with other people? 
Would turning off the electrode make a person want to sit quietly and read a book?
Or, what if we randomly gave some people a drug that artificially lowers their levels of 
serotonin? Would they become more anxious? It is this random assignment to condition or a 
treatment that is the only way of determining causality. This serotonin study was actually con-
ducted. What did they find? The result depended on the level of the participant’s BIS. Partici-
pants with high BIS were more sensitive to negative stimuli as measured by BOLD levels in the 
amygdala (Cools et al., 2005). That is, serotonin level alone is not enough to cause a difference 
in brain functioning. This study highlights two important lessons from this chapter. First, we 
need to think of personality in terms of brain systems and not just localized areas of the brain. 
Second, we need to move beyond correlational methods if we hope to figure out how much of 
our personalities is due to our physiology and neurology.
Chapter Summary
How does our neurology and physiology make us who we are? The answer to this chicken-and-
egg question is still a bit murky. Let’s start with what we do know:
	 1.	 The field of neuropersonality studies the relationship between neurology and personal-
ity by studying bodily responses, brain structure, brain activity, and biochemical activity 
related to personality and personality functioning.
Go online for more 
resources to help you 
review.
Study and Review
on mysearchlab.com
“As the Dalai Lama himself 
said in his book The Art 
of Happiness, we have the 
capacity to change ourselves 
because of the very nature, of 
the very structure and function 
of our brain.”
Richard J. Davidson as cited in 
Savory (2004)
214

The Neuroscience of Personality
	 2.	 There appear to be broad, inborn, biological differences among individuals, called tem-
peraments, that develop into personality characteristics over a lifetime of interacting with 
the social environment.
	 3.	 Three broad temperaments or clusters of personality traits are Extraversion, Neuroticism, 
and Impulsivity (e.g., sensation seeking).
	 4.	 These three traits are related to physiological and neurological differences in dopamine 
and dopaminergic systems, emotion systems, and serotonin and serotonergic systems.
	 5.	 Just as phrenology, the science of determining personality from bumps on the head, is 
outdated, looking for correlates of personality in specific areas of the brain is outdated as 
well. Neuroscientists now think in terms of brain systems.
We learned how Hans Eysenck’s Psychoticism–Extraversion–Neuroticism model and 
Jeffrey Gray’s reinforcement sensitivity theory are models of personality grounded in physi-
ological and neurological differences and refined and revised in light of research evidence. 
These two theories are good examples of the questions—and answers—pursued by personality 
psychologists.
We discovered that high sensation seekers are driven toward excitement and novelty. Evi-
dence suggests that they have different reflexes or gut-level reactions to unusual stimuli. Sensa-
tion seekers appear to thrive on levels of excitement that would make low sensation seekers’ 
heads spin. This is a personality trait with a strong physiological correlate.
Now for what we don’t know. When it comes to neurology and personality, researchers 
often rely on correlational designs using neuroimaging techniques such as fMRI. These tech-
niques and designs, though imperfect, can tell us which part of the brain is active in which kinds 
of people on which kinds of tasks. Although it might be tempting to conclude that the brains of 
extraverts are this way whereas the brains of introverts are that way, we ultimately don’t know 
why the brains and physiologies of people differ. The techniques used by neurologists cannot 
tell us the ultimate answer, of whether our physiology causes us to develop certain personali-
ties or whether certain personalities develop certain neurology or whether certain experiences 
alter both our brains and our personalities. The answer will have to wait for more sophisticated 
methods and methodologies.
Review Questions
	 1.	 What are the four types of common markers of neurological and physiological differences 
in personality? What are some examples of each?
	 2.	 What is a correlational design? How does it compare to a true experiment? What are scat-
terplots? Why are some fMRI studies suspect?
	 3.	 What is Eysenck’s PEN model? What is the main physiological difference between intro-
verts and extraverts?
	 4.	 What are the three main systems of Gray’s reinforcement sensitivity theory? What kind of 
people learn better from rewards? What kind of people learn better from punishments?
	 5.	 What is phrenology? What is brain localization? In contrast to these methods, what do 
researchers today focus on? What are some preliminary findings from these cutting-edge 
methods in personality neuroscience?
	 6.	 How do extraverts and people high in Neuroticism respond to emotion? What differences 
in brain structure, brain activity, and biochemical activity are related to Extraversion and 
Neuroticism?
	 7.	 What is sensation seeking? How do high and low sensation seekers differ from one another? 
What three systems appear to be related to sensation seeking?
215

The Neuroscience of Personality
Key Terms
Central nervous system
Peripheral nervous system
Somatic nervous system
Autonomic nervous system
Sympathetic division
Parasympathetic division
Galvanic Skin Response 
(GSR)
Electromyography (EMG)
Computerized Tomography 
(CT)
Computer Axial Tomography 
(CAT)
Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(MRI)
Electroencephalogram (EEG)
Evoked Potential (EP)
Positron Emission Tomogra-
phy (PET)
Functional Magnetic Reso-
nance Imaging (fMRI)
Nonindependence error
Transcranial Magnetic Stim-
ulation (TMS)
Neurotransmitters
Challenge test
Scatterplots or scattergrams
Temperament
Extraversion
Neuroticism
Psychoticism
Ascending Reticular Activat-
ing System (ARAS)
Arousability
Reinforcement Sensitivity 
Theory (RST)
Fight-Flight-Freeze System 
(FFFS)
Behavioral Approach System 
(BAS)
Behavioral Inhibition System 
(BIS)
Phrenology
Anhedonia
Left–right asymmetries
Sensation seeking
Experience seeking
Boredom susceptibility
Thrill and adventure seeking
Disinhibition
216

203
INTRAPSYCHIC 
FOUNDATIONS  
OF PERSONALITY
Sigmund Freud and Psychoanalysis
Background
Instincts: The Connection Between Mind and Body
Uncovering the Unconscious
Then and Now: The Word Association Test and the Implicit Attitudes Test
Freud’s View of Personality: The Structural and Topographic Models
The Structural Model of Personality: Id, Ego, and Superego
The Topographic Model of Personality: Conscious, Preconscious, Unconscious
Anxiety and the Defense Mechanisms
Reaction Formation
Isolation
Denial
Undoing
Projection
Displacement
Sublimation
Repression
Rationalization
Psychosexual Stages
Oral Stage
Anal Stage
Phallic Stage
Latency Stage
Genital Stage
Problems With Freud’s Psychosexual Stages of Development
Research Methods Illustrated: Case Study and Psychobiography
Psychodynamic Theory Since Freud
Attachment Theory
Brief History
The Personality of Everyday Life: Taking the trauma out of a hospital stay
Attachment Patterns for Life?
Attachment Styles in Adulthood
Attachment and Adult Personality Functioning
Chapter Summary
Review Questions
Key Terms
From Chapter 8 of Personality Psychology: Foundations and Findings, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. Copyright © 2012 by 
Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
Read the Chapter on 
mysearchlab.com 
© akg-images/Newscom
217

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
D
o you believe in love at first sight, the sense that there is something so powerful, so 
attractive in another person that your realize that he or she is THE ONE? Imagine 
that you are perusing the personal ads hoping to find the Love of Your Life—or at 
least an interesting person to date! You read two different descriptions and imagine what it 
would be like to date each of them. Though they both seem nice enough, you seem to feel an 
inexplicable bond with one of them and, despite some slight nervousness, you could definitely 
picture yourself dating this person.
This was the exact task faced by participants in an interesting study (Brumbaugh & Fraley, 
2006). Undergraduate men and women read the personal ads of two potential dates. Unbe-
knownst to them, the two profiles were designed so that one resembled their most significant 
past romantic relationship whereas the other resembled the past love of another participant. 
Participants read both descriptions and rated whether each person seemed like someone they 
could date and to describe what it would be like to be in a relationship with each of them.
Participants imagined relationships with their potential dates in ways that were eerily 
similar to the kinds of relationships that they described having with their past love, especially 
when the potential date resembled their past love. Participants felt a greater degree of closeness 
and intimacy, were more interested in dating, and yet felt more susceptible to rejection with 
potential dates who resembled a former partner than potential dates who resembled another 
participant’s former partner. In particular, people were especially likely to feel anxious when 
contemplating dating a person who resembled their very first love (Brumbaugh & Fraley, 2006).
Why does this happen? According to attachment theory (Ainsworth, Bell, & Stayton, 1974; 
Bowlby, 1969), we form emotional bonds with our caregivers, which become mental represen-
tations, called internal working models, of all future intimate relationships. Researchers in this 
area would say that our feelings from past significant relationships, including our early love 
relationships with parents and caregivers, become transferred onto future potential partners, 
especially if they resemble these significant people in terms of personality characteristics and 
typical behaviors (e.g., Geher, 2000).
Are we, like actor LaBeouf in the quote that opened this chapter, destined to fall in love 
with our parent of the other sex, or at least with somebody who resembles him or her? These 
ideas of relationship styles and of transference come from—you guessed it—the work of Sig-
mund Freud (1856–1939). Freud defined psychoanalysis as a theory of personality, a method 
for investigating unconscious processes, and a technique of treatment (Freud, 1923/1961). A 
key premise of psychoanalytic psychology, the branch of psychology based on Freud’s theories 
and methods of psychoanalysis, is that we form mental representations of ourselves, others, and 
our relationships from early experiences (Westen, 1998a). However, the field of psychoanalysis 
today is undergoing a revolution, becoming more empirical and more open to findings from 
other areas of psychology (Westen, Gabbard, & Ortigo, 2008). Ironically, this change is occur-
ring even as the theories, methods, and findings of the founder of psychoanalysis, Sigmund 
Freud, are being discounted.
In this chapter we consider intrapsychic aspects of personality through a brief review of the 
controversy surrounding Sigmund Freud and his theory of personality, empirical evidence for 
key aspects of his theory, and other psychoanalytic approaches, including the research-based 
attachment theory.
Sigmund Freud and Psychoanalysis
A huge controversy has been brewing in psychology, made public by a 1993 cover of Time 
magazine that asked, “Is Freud dead?” Critics lined up on either side of the debate claiming 
that if he wasn’t dead, his outdated, discredited, and at times misogynistic theories ought to be 
laid to rest (see, for example, Azar, 1997; Crews, 1996, 1998; Macmillan, 1991; Webster, 1995).
At one extreme, a critic noted “there is literally nothing to be said, scientifically or thera-
peutically, to the advantage of the entire Freudian system or any of its component dogmas” 
(Crews, 1996, p. 63). Others pointed out that empirical data do not support this view (Westen, 
1998a; see also Azar, 1997; Damasio, 1999; Fisher & Greenberg, 1996; Guterl, 2002; Muris, 
2006; Weinberger & Westen, 2001; Westen, 1998b). Regardless of which side is correct, we have 
“Probably the sexiest woman 
I know is my mother. She’s an 
ethereal angel. Nobody looks 
like that woman. If I could 
meet my mother and marry 
her, I would. I would be with 
my mother now, if she weren’t 
my mother, as sick as that 
sounds.”
Actor Shia LaBeouf, in an  
interview June 2009
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Have you ever felt an inex-
plicable bond with a person 
you just met?
“We sometimes encounter 
people, even perfect strangers, 
who begin to interest us at first 
sight, somehow suddenly, all at 
once, before a word has been 
spoken.”
Fydor Dostoevsky
“Freud, like Elvis, has been 
dead for a number of years 
but continues to be cited with 
some regularity.”
Psychologist Drew Westen  
(1998a, p. 333)
218

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
got to marvel at a theorist who manages to stir up such controversy—not to mention make 
the cover of a major magazine—some 53 years after his death, even as his major works are at 
least 100 years old!
Perhaps Drew Westen had it right when he compared Sigmund Freud to Elvis Presley 
(Westen, 1998a). Just as it would be impossible to imagine rock ’n’ roll music without its 
founder, it would be difficult to imagine psychoanalysis today without its founder. Similarly, 
just as you wouldn’t hear Presley’s music on today’s pop or top 40 radio stations—his music 
is relegated to oldies stations nowadays—you wouldn’t see Freud’s theories appear in the top 
research journals of the field today exactly as he posited them. Yet the impact of Freudian 
thought on current research in personality, clinical, and developmental psychology—and even 
areas outside psychology including sociology, political science, cultural studies, literary studies, 
and especially religion—is indelible, just as Presley’s impact is on rock music today.
Rather than ask “Is Freud Dead?”, maybe we should ask, “Why is Freudian theory still 
alive?” (Horgan, 1996, p. 106). One reason may be that it provides a “compelling framework 
within which to ponder our mysterious selves” (Horgan, 1996, p. 106; Malcolm, 1994; Vaillant, 
1995b). Freud’s claim that the unique but hidden self is revealed in our unconscious behavior 
subverted the Victorian repressiveness of the day. Another reason that Freud’s ideas captured 
the fancy of both American scholars and the popular culture may be because they suggested 
that personality can change, which resonated with the sense of opportunity and possibility in 
America at the turn of the 20th century and still does even today (Horgan, 1996). Finally, no 
other paradigm has emerged to conquer Freudian thought.
So, why study Freud? For better or for worse, Freud’s ideas and terminology are an impor-
tant part of the history of psychology as well as the greater culture (Dunn & Dougherty, 2005). 
Further, his theories greatly influenced personality psychology and clinical psychology (Dunn 
& Dougherty, 2005). No doubt, a review of a major icon of Western thought will be fun, chal-
lenging, and perhaps even surprising (Anderegg, 2004). But don’t take my word for it: In this 
chapter, you will learn about Freud’s theories and decide for yourself if they contribute to a 
science of personality.
Background
Instincts: The Connection Between 
Mind and Body. 
Freud was very 
much influenced by scientists and phi-
losophers of his day, including Charles 
Darwin (Gay, 1988). He believed that 
he had an answer to the mind–body 
problem: instincts. Just as the body used 
energy to carry out its bodily functions 
of breathing, blood circulation, muscu-
lar and glandular activity, he reasoned 
that there had to be a similar source 
of energy for the mind. He called this 
energy psychic energy and believed that 
psychic energy fueled the functions of 
the mind including thinking, imagining, 
and remembering. According to the law 
of conservation in physics, Freud rea-
soned that energy within the mind–
body system must also be conserved, 
that is, neither created nor destroyed. 
He hypothesized that body energy and 
psychic energy could be turned into 
each other through an instinct, a “men-
tal representation of a physical or bodily 
need” (Freud, 1915/1957, p. 122).
Sigmund Freud, the famous 
Viennese neurologist and 
founder of psychoanalysis, 
lived from 1856 to 1939.
© World History Archive/Alamy
THINK ABOUT IT
Which Freudian theory 
should we debate, Freud’s 
original formulations or the 
current reformulations of 
others?
219

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
Freud’s original German word for what we call instincts was trieb, but the English word 
impulse really comes closer to capturing the concept Freud was trying to describe. We can think 
of an instinct or impulse like a tension, or an excitation originating from within the body. There 
are as many impulses as there are bodily needs. We first feel an impulse in the body that, like an 
itch, must somehow be satisfied. Impulses are always present in the body, therefore we always 
feel a certain amount of tension. There are many ways a particular impulse may be satisfied in 
the body or in the mind. The habitual ways we choose to deal with our impulses by gratifying 
them, inhibiting them, turning them into something more acceptable, or denying their very 
existence, form our personality.
According to Freud, there are two broad categories of instincts: life instincts, which he 
called Eros, and the death instincts, which he called Thanatos (Freud, 1914/1957). The life 
instincts are concerned with survival of the individual and the species, and include the needs 
for food, water, air, and sex. The psychic energy of the life instincts is called libido. The most 
important of the life instincts, according to Freud, is sex. Today, most contemporary psychody-
namic psychologists would deemphasize sex and instead emphasize the needs for relationships 
and self-esteem as important life instincts (Westen, 1998a).
Freud noted that all living things decay and die, and reasoned that death and destruction 
must be inborn instincts as well (Freud, 1920/1955). His discussion of Thanatos was not as 
fully developed as his discussion of Eros, and he discussed only one death instinct: aggression. 
Today, the death instinct is one aspect of Freudian theory that is rejected by most psychologists 
as false, being evolutionarily unsound (Westen, 1998a).
Taken together—the death instinct, and aggression in particular, and the life instincts, with 
an emphasis on sex—you can see why many people believe that all of Freudian theory reduces 
to sex and aggression. Though tempting to conclude, this would be an oversimplification of 
Freudian theory.
Here is a puzzle: If these two instincts provide the energy and direction for personality, then 
we should be able to see these sexual and aggressive instincts bubble to the surface demanding 
that we immediately gratify them. Why do we not spend more of our time engaged in sexual or 
aggressive acts? Freud reasoned that we have been socialized to consciously hide our sexual and 
aggressive impulses and to express them only in socially acceptable ways (Freud, 1929/1989). 
What happens to these ungratified instincts? Going back to the law of conservation of energy, 
libido cannot be destroyed. Instead, instincts become expressed in unconscious ways.
Uncovering the Unconscious.  How does Freud propose we get at this unconscious mate-
rial? Unacceptable urges are likely to leak into our everyday behavior when our normally vigi-
lant consciousness is relaxed. This may happen in any number of ways, including hypnosis, free 
association, dreams, Freudian slips, humor, and symbolic behavior.
Free Association.  Freud’s famous talk therapy, psychoanalysis, started when a colleague 
of his realized that people revealed their private thoughts and desires while under hypnosis. 
Freud started using hypnosis with his patients, and soon discovered that they needn’t be in 
an altered state, but just very relaxed (Freud, 1955). This is why, even today, psychoanalysis 
is often conducted with the patient lying down on a couch, with the therapist sitting slightly 
behind and out of sight of the patient. In this way the patient relaxes and says whatever 
comes to mind without consciously trying to control, monitor, or censor what he or she says. 
This free association of one thought to the next may lead the patient to reveal unconscious 
thoughts.
To illustrate how free association might work, let’s consider an incident from Freud’s own 
life. One day, when he left his office in a hurry to catch a train on his way to meet a new patient, 
he grabbed the wrong implement from his desk (Freud, 1901/1960). In trying to figure out why 
he took the tuning fork instead of the reflex hammer, he followed his associations to both tools. 
Of course, he might just have been in a hurry, but might there have been a deeper meaning to 
this mistake?
First, he recalled that the last person who touched the tuning fork was a slow-witted child 
who played with the tuning fork while Freud conducted his examination. Freud then wondered 
THINK ABOUT IT
Can unconscious thoughts 
affect our everyday behav-
ior? In what ways?
THINK ABOUT IT
Can you see a relationship 
between these ways of  
handling impulses and  
certain personality traits?
220

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
if he, himself, was an idiot for taking the wrong tool. He confirmed this passing thought in the 
very next moment by his realization that the Hebrew word for “hammer” was Chamer or “ass.”
But why was Freud moved to censure himself with such harsh language? He immediately 
remembered that the train station he was running to was the location of an earlier and par-
ticularly embarrassing misdiagnosis he had made. Freud suddenly realized that he had better 
be careful at his upcoming consultation to not repeat this mistake. By not taking the hammer, 
he was avoiding being an ass! Thus the ultimate meaning of picking up the wrong implement 
was a self-reproach:
You idiot! You ass! Pull yourself together this time, and see that you don’t diag-
nose hysteria again where there’s an incurable illness, as you did years ago. 
(Freud, 1901/1960, pp. 165–166)
Tuning fork, child, hammer, Chammer, ass, idiot, train station, hysterical woman, and a 
misdiagnosis—as disconnected as these may seem to us—make sense in Freud’s unconscious 
as revealed through his thoughts of free association.
Dream Analysis.  Free association was particularly useful for patients describing their 
dreams. Freud believed that “the interpretation of dreams is the royal road to a knowledge of 
the unconscious activities of the mind” (Freud, 1900/1953, p. 608). He used dream analysis, 
the detailed examination of the content and symbolism of dreams in order to decipher their 
hidden, unconscious meaning. When we are asleep, it is the perfect time for our unconscious 
thoughts, dreams, and wishes to make themselves known. Freud believed that dreaming acted 
as a safety value allowing a controlled release of unconscious tension built up by our instincts.
Because it would still be unsafe to directly express the dark urges of our instincts, our 
instinctual urges reveal themselves through the symbolism of dreams. Dreams allow wish ful-
fillment and gratification of our instincts in a safe, symbolic form. On waking, many people 
are able to describe in great detail what they saw in their dreams, called the manifest content. 
For Freud, both the dream symbolism and our reactions to the dream, expressed through free 
association under the guidance of a therapist, are important for understanding the latent con-
tent or true meaning of the dream.
There is some evidence that Freud was partially correct that suppressed thoughts are likely 
to reveal themselves in dreams. This was tested in an experiment in which undergraduate 
students were instructed to suppress thoughts of a specific person, right before falling asleep 
(Wegner, Wenzlaff, & Kozak, 2004). Would this suppression force the unexpressed thoughts to 
appear in participants’ dreams?
First, participants either thought about a crush (“a person you have never been in a roman-
tic relationship with—but whom you have thought about in a romantic way”) or a noncrush 
(“a person you feel fondly about, but to whom you are not attracted”).
This painting, The Dream by 
Henri Rousseau, was inspired 
by a poem about a young 
woman who dreams of 
hearing enchanted music in 
a lush green jungle under a 
moonlit sky that mesmerizes 
all who hear it, human and 
animal.
© SuperStock/SuperStock
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Make a point of remember-
ing or writing down your 
dreams for a few nights. 
How might Freud interpret 
your dreams? Do you think 
the symbolism of your 
dreams springs from your 
unconscious or from read-
ing about Freud’s theories?
221

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
Then participants were randomly assigned to one of three presleep thought conditions. In 
the suppression condition, participants were instructed to not think about their target person. 
In the expression condition, participants specifically thought about and focused on their target 
person. In the final, mention condition participants were not to specifically think about or avoid 
thinking about their target person, but to note if thoughts of the target person nonetheless came 
to mind. Participants spent 5 minutes before going to bed writing a stream of consciousness 
of whatever thoughts came into their heads. On waking, participants noted if they dreamed 
during the night and what they dreamed about.
As you can see in Figure 1, participants in the suppression condition, who were instructed 
to not think about their target person, actually ended up dreaming more about that person than 
participants in either the mention condition or the expression condition. However, it made little 
difference if the person participants were trying not to think about was a crush or a noncrush: 
Both kinds of targets appeared later in their dreams as measured by self-rated dreaming and 
the number of times the target person appeared in their dream reports.
This suggests that whereas Freud had the process correct—that suppressed thoughts will 
appear later in our dreams—he was incorrect that this had anything to do with our hidden 
desires or wishes. Instead, researchers believe that this is an example of cognitive ironic processes 
of mental control, rather than unconscious motivation from our instincts (Wegner, 1994).
Parapraxes: Mistakes in Speaking and Acting.  Another way that our unconscious urges 
can reveal themselves is through mistakes in thought or deed. For Freud, nothing is ever done by 
accident. He believed that slips-of-the-tongue, bungled actions (such as the incident described 
Figure 1  Dreaming about the 
target and nontarget persons as 
a function of presleep thought 
instruction: mean self-ratings 
(on a scale from 1 to 5) of 
whether the person appeared 
in the previous night’s dreams 
(a) and mean number of coded 
mentions of the target person 
in dream reports (b). Error bars 
show standard error.  Source: 
From Wegner et al. (2004,  
Figure 1, p. 234). Wegner,  
D. M., Wenzlaff, R. M., & Kozak, 
M. (2004), “Dream rebound: The 
return of suppressed thoughts 
in dreams,” Psychological 
Science, 15(4), 232–236.  
Copyright © 2004 by Sage 
Publications.  Reprinted with 
permission of Sage Publications.
3.00
2.50
2.75
2.25
2.00
Self-Rated Dreaming
1.75
1.50
Target
Nontarget
Expression
Suppression
Mention
1.20
0.90
1.10
1.00
0.80
0.60
0.70
0.50
0.30
Occurrences in Dream Reports
0.40
0.20
Presleep Thought Instruction
A
B
222

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
previously where Freud picked up the tuning fork instead of the hammer), mistakes and errors, 
forgotten names and words, lost and mislaid objects, misreadings, slips of the pen and mis-
prints, and other chance actions all reveal our hidden desires. Freud called mistakes caused 
by unconscious desires parapraxes (plural; parapraxis, singular). Freud collected examples of 
parapraxes and wrote about the many ways we reveal our hidden, and often unacceptable, urges 
in his classic book The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (Freud, 1901/1960).
One type of parapraxis is a Freudian slip, or a mistake in speech. One of Freud’s examples 
came from the president of the Lower House of the Austrian Parliament at the time, who 
opened a session by saying (in German, of course), “Gentlemen: I take notice that a full quorum 
of members is present and herewith declare the sitting closed!” (Freud, 1901/1960, p. 59). Could 
he have been expressing his deepest wish that the session were already over?
Despite many vivid examples, research suggests that not all slips are Freudian. People are 
likely to make verbal errors as a result of priming from whatever is on their mind, not necessar-
ily from forbidden id impulses (Motley & Baars, 1979). In particular, such slips may be caused 
by cognitive indecision over word choice (Motley, 1985).
Another type of parapraxis is an accident or a mistaken action. Consider a woman I knew, 
who had a terrific case of prewedding jitters. In the week leading up to the momentous event, 
her fiancé slammed the car door on her fresh-from-the-boutique gown and bridal veil, caus-
ing a slight tear in the delicate material of the veil. When she and her sister tried to repair it, 
they made it worse, and had to cut a few inches off the veil to hide their mistake. Then, while 
cleaning her apartment in preparation for the wedding night, a small bookcase collapsed as 
she was trying to move it, breaking her food processor and nearly breaking her own foot! The 
final “accident” came while she was washing a drinking glass that broke into pieces in her hands 
cutting her thumb. Would it surprise you to find out the couple divorced a few short—and very 
sad—years later?
Humor.  Even jokes, especially spur of the moment quips and comebacks and spontaneous 
reactions, can be analyzed, much like dreams, to uncover the unacceptable desires they satisfy 
(Freud, 1905/1960). Jokes give us a socially acceptable means of expressing aggression and 
sexual desires through laughter. Many people who would not ordinarily express these impulses 
find sexual jokes, bathroom humor, and jokes playing on unflattering stereotypes about gender, 
height, hair color, religion, ethnicity, or profession quite funny. Somehow these normally taboo 
thoughts are socially acceptable in jokes. Though consciously we might be thinking “I was only 
kidding” the impulses expressed are quite real to our unconscious.
Symbolic Behavior.  Another way in which we may express our hidden instincts is through 
actions that seem innocent enough on the surface, but that actually represent deeper motives. 
These symbolic behaviors allow us to safely express our id impulses under the guise of a benign 
behavior. For example, no doubt you’ve heard of people with an oral fixation, a personality type 
we will discuss shortly, who gratify their urges through smoking, eating, or even biting sarcasm. 
These oral behaviors symbolize or stand in as more acceptable ways of getting sexual (smoking, 
eating), or aggressive (sarcasm) gratification.
Then and Now: The Word Association Test and the Implicit 
Attitudes Test
Over 100 years ago, an important historical event took place: Sigmund Freud and his disciple at 
the time, Carl Jung, came to America to speak at Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts. 
Freud spoke about psychoanalysis, infantile sexuality, and dream interpretation. Jung also gave 
three lectures, two introducing his audience to the word association method (Benjamin, 2009).
The word association method was used by many psychologists of the day to identify the 
connections people made between words. Jung, however, took it to a new level by using the test 
to identify unconscious complexes, or important concerns for a person that he or she may not 
even be aware of. Complexes, what we call a schema today, are patterns of thoughts, memories, 
and perceptions organized about a theme (Jung, 1934/1960).
THINK ABOUT IT
Are all slips of the tongue or 
accidents expressions of our 
unconscious desires?
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Have you ever had an acci-
dent that may have been 
the result of an unconscious 
wish?
THINK ABOUT IT
Have you ever heard of an 
Oedipus complex? What 
does the word complex sug-
gest in this phrase?
223

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
In the word association test, Jung would slowly read 100 words out loud to subjects who 
were instructed to “Answer as quickly as possible the first word that comes to mind” after 
hearing each word. Jung would record not just the response, but also the reaction time and 
physiological responses. He maintained that the test assessed not just verbal fluency, but also 
whether there were some emotional connotations to the words that interfered with responding 
and caused the person to respond slower or with an unusual response (Jung, 1910).
For example, sometimes there might be too many ways of answering so that a subject might 
give more than one word. Sometimes a subject might be moved to give an explanation for his 
or her idiosyncratic answers. Other times, a subject might repeat the stimulus word, repeat 
the same answer to multiple stimulus words, stammer, exhibit a slip of the tongue, or just give 
up responding at all (Jung, 1910). All of these behaviors indicated that the stimulus word was 
provoking an emotional reaction in the person.
Jung would also calculate average reaction times and see which words elicited a faster or a 
slower response. These, too, could indicate a complex or a hidden problem. Consider the chart 
in Figure 2. These are the results of a 30-year-old woman, married for 3 years, who claimed 
to be happily married. From the pattern of slower reaction times and unusual responses, Jung 
deduced that she was not as happy in the marriage as she first claimed: She disliked that her 
husband was Protestant whereas she was Catholic; she often thought about being untrue to her 
husband and leaving the marriage; and she was afraid, either of her husband or of the future. 
When Jung revealed all this to her, she denied it at first, but then admitted her true feelings and 
told him even more about her unhappy life.
Carl Jung and Sigmund 
Freud at Clark University 
in September 1909. The 
organizer of the conference, 
G. Stanley Hall is in the center 
of the front row with Freud 
on his left, both holding hats; 
Jung is standing next to Freud 
in the front row, third from 
right.
Figure 2  Reaction times for the word association test of a young woman who reported being happily married. 
Height of the bars indicates reaction time (unit = 0.2 second). Selected stimulus words appear under the bars. Blue 
bars = no answer; green bars = repetition of stimulus word; yellow bars = mistakes or multiple word responses; 
black bars = average responses. Based on these results, do you think she is as happy as she claims?  Source: Jung 
(1910, color plate following p. 238).
yellow
to pray
to separate
to marry
to quarrel
old
family
happiness
to fear
false
kiss
pure
contented
0
10
15
20
24
30
36
5
12345678910
15
20
28
32
36
40
44
48
52
56
60
64
68
72 76
80
84
88
92
100
96
24
© CORBIS
224

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
Even today, researchers and clinicians use variations of the word association test to 
assess verbal fluency and semantic memory (Ross et al., 2007), personality (Stacy, Leigh, & 
Weingardt, 1997), brain injury (Silverberg, Hanks, Buchanan, Fichtenberg, & Mills, 2008), 
and more.
The idea that our reaction times can reveal our hidden thoughts and feelings is also behind 
a more modern assessment technique: the Implicit Association Test, or IAT (Greenwald, 
McGhee, & Schwartz, 1998). When it comes to self-reports, people may be reluctant to give 
their true responses, especially on sensitive subjects. They might also try to fake their responses, 
or present themselves in a positive light. Might our unconscious responses, like our reaction 
times, reveal our true attitudes?
The IAT uses reaction times to measure the strength of associations between concepts 
(Greenwald, Nosek, & Banaji, 2003; Greenwald, Poehlman, Uhlmann, & Banaji, 2009; Nosek, 
Greenwald, & Banaji, 2005). The more related two concepts are, the easier it will be to sort them 
on a computer task if they require the same response than if they require different responses. 
Because people will react faster to related concepts than to unrelated concepts, we can present 
participants with various pairings of concepts and infer their attitude based on when they 
respond the fastest. For example, people respond faster when liked items and positive words 
require the same response (e.g., hit the space bar) than when unliked items and positive words 
require the same response. We can pair photos, say, with positive or negative words and judge 
if people feel positive or negative to the objects or people in the photos based on their relative 
reaction times.
To illustrate how the IAT works, let’s take a look at an experiment using German under-
graduate students to compare self-reported anxiety with IAT-measured anxiety (Egloff & 
Schmukle, 2002). For the IAT measure of anxiety, participants had to categorize words reflect-
ing the self (I, self, my, me, own) and other (they, them, your, you, others) along with anxiety-
related words (nervous, afraid, fearful, anxious, uncertain) and calmness related words (relaxed, 
balanced, at ease, calm, restful).
Participants who scored higher on a questionnaire measure of anxiety found it easier to 
classify the self words with the anxiety words than with the calmness words. This suggests more 
of an association in their minds between self and anxiety than between self and calmness. Fur-
ther, participants’ scores on the IAT predicted poor performance after failure and an increase 
in nervous behaviors such as mouth movements, speech errors, and hand movements under 
stress better than their self-reported anxiety did.
Although it is more difficult to lie or fake your way through an IAT (Greenwald et al., 2009), 
does this mean that the IAT is a better measure of our true attitudes and beliefs? Not neces-
sarily. IAT and self-report measures are actually different evaluations of the same object and 
each predict slightly different outcomes (Greenwald et al., 2009). The key difference between 
self-report and IAT measures of attitudes appears to be depth of processing or how conscious 
we are of our beliefs. Perhaps our true attitudes and beliefs, like our true motivations, lurk deep 
in our unconscious just as Freud and Jung hypothesized.
Freud’s View of Personality: The Structural  
and Topographic Models
Freud described personality using a structural model, which outlined the parts of personality, 
and a topographic model, which described the regions in our mind where the parts of person-
ality resided. He even drew a graphic to illustrate the relationship between both models (see 
Figure 3).
The Structural Model of Personality: Id, Ego, and Superego.  The structural model of 
personality, which is indeed what we think of when we think of the self today, is made up of 
three parts: the id, the ego, and the superego (Freud, 1923/1961). In German, Freud referred 
to the id as das es or “the it” to emphasize that the id contains pure instinctual energy and is 
a bundle of reflexes and urges. The id operates through primary process thinking meaning 
that it makes decisions without logical rules and conscious thought (Freud, 1923/1961). The 
Figure 3  This is how 
Freud imagined the 
relationship between 
the topographical 
model of the mind and 
the structural model of 
personality. Note that 
pcpt-cs stood for the 
perceptual consciousness, 
Freud’s early term for 
the conscious. He placed 
it to illustrate how 
thoughts bubble up from 
the preconscious. Note 
how the unconscious, 
preconscious, and 
conscious blend into one 
another, illustrating Freud’s 
view of the continuity of 
mental life.  Source: From 
Freud (1933/1990, p. 98). 
Freud, S. (1933/1990). The 
anatomy of the mental 
personality (Lecture 31). In 
New introductory lectures 
on psychoanalysis. New 
York, NY: Norton. (Original 
work published 1933).
THINK ABOUT IT
Why might the IAT reveal 
hidden or unconscious 
thoughts better than a 
questionnaire?
225

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
id is completely out of our control, being housed completely in the unconscious. This is why 
we are apt to see the workings of the id in unconscious behaviors like dreams and parapraxes. 
The id operates according to the pleasure principle (Freud, 1923/1961), wanting what it wants 
when it wants it, and demanding immediate gratification as in the phrase “It [id] just came 
over me” (Westen et al., 2008).
There are two ways of satisfying an id instinct: reflex action and wish fulfillment. In keep-
ing with Freud’s attempt at reconciling the mind–body problem, one way involves the body 
and the other involves the mind. A reflex action is when the id seeks gratification through 
immediate physical action. If it is not possible or not practical to carry out a reflex action, then 
the id may try wish fulfillment. Here the id seeks gratification by imagining what it wants 
(Freud, 1911/1958). For the id, fantasy can be just as satisfying as reality, at least temporar-
ily. In this way, for example, dreams can serve as wish fulfillment for the impulses of the id 
(Freud, 1923/1961).
What part of personality decides whether the id will be satisfied or not? That’s up to the 
ego or das ich in German. The “I” or ego must try to match the wishes of the id with objects 
and events in the real world through a process called identification (Freud, 1923/1961). To 
identify with an object means that the object fulfills a wish of the id. The ego, therefore, must 
operate according to the reality principle where it tries to satisfy the id within the constraints 
of social and physical reality (Freud, 1923/1961). That is, the ego must figure out how to get 
the most amount of pleasure for the id with the least amount of negative consequences from 
both reality and from the superego. The ego operates using secondary process thinking, what 
we might think of as logical thinking, weighing the costs and rewards of possible courses of 
action (Freud, 1923/1961).
What is this superego that can reward or punish the ego for making a wrong decision in 
satisfying id impulses? Das über ich, the “over I” or the “above me,” contains moral standards 
for thinking and acting, standing like a harsh judge looking down over everything we do ready 
to inflict punishment on the ego for allowing id impulses to escape. The superego strives for 
perfection, and is just as unrealistic as the id. The superego contains society’s standards of 
behavior that we have learned from our parents while growing up.
The superego has two parts: the conscience and the ego ideal. The conscience (not to be 
confused with the conscious mind) contains knowledge of what we should not do. This is where 
we have internalized, or accepted as our own, actions from our past for which we have been 
punished. The conscience punishes us when we do something wrong with feelings of guilt, 
shame and embarrassment (Freud, 1923/1961).
The ego ideal contains knowledge of what we should do. This is where we have internalized 
experiences for which we have been rewarded. The ego ideal rewards us with feelings of pride 
when we have done the right thing (Freud, 1923/1961).
Do you remember how we said earlier that fantasizing about expressing id impulses—wish 
fulfillment—was a good way of satisfying the id within the constraints of reality? Well, you 
can see how this may also satisfy the superego, since the person is not actually doing anything 
wrong. A 5-year-old patient of Freud’s summed it up succinctly when describing his desire to 
masturbate: “wanting’s not doing, and doing’s not wanting” (Freud, 1909a/1955, p. 31; see the 
Research Methods Illustrated feature for more about Little Hans). However, a person with a 
very strong superego, indicating very high moral standards, would not buy this argument and 
instead would believe that thinking is just as bad as doing (“I lusted in my heart”).
In sum, the human personality is made up of id impulses that demand instant gratification. 
However, the superego, as the arbiter of moral standards, won’t let the id directly express itself. 
Instead, the ego must think of a way to gratify the id within the bounds of decency demanded 
by the superego, all the while taking into account the constraints of reality. As Freud tells it:
The ego’s relation to the id might be compared with that of a rider to his horse. 
The horse supplies the locomotive energy, while the rider has the privilege of 
deciding on the goal and of guiding the powerful animal’s movement. But only 
too often there arises between the ego and the id the not precisely ideal situation 
of the rider being obliged to guide the horse along the path by which it itself 
wants to go. (Freud, 1933/1990, p. 96)
THINK ABOUT IT
Where do the conscience 
and ego ideal get their 
moral standards from?
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Suppose you are in a class 
right before lunch and 
become very hungry. What 
do you do to deal with 
these feelings?
THINK ABOUT IT
Though Freud talks of the 
id, ego, and superego as 
structures, are they truly 
parts of our brain or more 
like hypothetical concepts 
or metaphors?
226

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
How well does the structural model hold up to empirical support? Alas, critics, even psy-
choanalytic psychologists, suggest that we abandon Freud’s structural model of personality 
(Brenner, 2003; Westen et al., 2008). There is no evidence that our personalities or our minds 
are divided into parts that are more or less logical than other parts (Brenner, 2003). However, 
the idea of conflict inherent in this model, and the idea that behavior represents a compromise 
among forces of desire, conscience, reality, and social acceptability, remain important and do 
influence our thoughts, behaviors, and personality (Westen et al., 2008).
The Topographic Model of Personality: Conscious, Preconscious, Unconscious.  The 
topographic model of personality consists of the conscious mind, the preconscious mind, and 
unconscious mind. The conscious mind contains the thoughts and sensations that we are cur-
rently aware of. The preconscious mind contains thoughts that are just outside of our awareness, 
thoughts that are easily accessible and that we could readily summon into our consciousness 
(Freud, 1923/1961).
The unconscious mind contains urges, thoughts, wishes, desires, and memories that we are 
unable to know about “in itself and without more ado” (Freud, 1923/1961, p. 15). That is, we 
are unable to retrieve thoughts from the unconscious by our own efforts except under the spe-
cial circumstances discussed earlier (e.g., through dreams, free association, symbolic behavior, 
parapraxes, etc.) (Freud, 1923/1961).
Although we may be able to move from topic to topic in our consciousness, pull out 
observations at will from our preconscious, or push thoughts into our unconscious, we cannot 
consciously retrieve thoughts directly from our unconscious. The unconscious can produce 
particular thoughts, feelings, behaviors, and defenses in us related to our impulses and for this 
reason is often called the motivated unconscious (Westen et al., 2008).
Keep in mind that the terminology of conscious, preconscious, and unconscious suggests 
three separate parts of the mind, when really Freud believed in the continuity of mental life. 
That is, thoughts or memories became conscious—or unconscious for that matter—not as if 
they were passing through a curtain to a separate room, but more like how a camera lens makes 
a picture come in and out of focus.
How does Freud’s model of mind and memory compare to what we know about the mind 
today? Freud was eerily close to what modern cognitive psychology is just now finding out 
about how the mind works, albeit with some notable exceptions.
First, Freud was correct in realizing that there is really more of a continuum between 
conscious and unconscious rather than a clear cut line between the two states (Erdelyi, 2006b). 
You can see this in Freud’s original drawing as a dotted line between the conscious and the 
unconscious in Figure 3. Also, we can have multiple levels of awareness even for thoughts in 
our unconscious (Glaser & Kihlstrom, 2005; Hilgard, 1977). Perhaps we should not talk about 
the unconscious as a location; instead we should talk about unconscious processes (Westen, 
1998b). The important question becomes—especially for therapy (Westen, 1998b)—to what 
extent are people aware of their defenses and motives, not what part of the mind is involved.
Second, Freud was also correct in suggesting that the unconscious influences our conscious 
experiences, including our thoughts and actions (Westen, 1998a, 1998b). However, Freud believed 
the unconscious operated in service of our drives; we know today that this view is too simplistic.
Third, current research suggests that the cognitive unconscious is motivated and goal-
driven, as Freud hypothesized, but not quite in the way that he thought. The unconscious is not 
preoccupied with the satisfaction of id impulses, nor is it concerned with infiltrating our con-
sciousness with its darker motives, or in betraying our true motives. Instead, the unconscious 
mind, much like the conscious mind, can help regulate our thoughts, emotions, motivations, 
goals, and even intentions, without all the “conflict and drama” of the psychoanalytic uncon-
sciousness (Uleman, 2005, p. 6). The unconscious is more like a helpful and efficient Jeeves-like 
butler and less like a conniving and controlling dark force.
Anxiety and the Defense Mechanisms
Recall that in Freud’s model of personality the ego must satisfy the id impulses in a socially 
acceptable way so as not to upset the superego, but must also take into account reality. 
THINK ABOUT IT
How does Freud’s notion of 
the unconscious compare 
to automatic thinking from 
cognitive psychology?
227

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
Sometimes this balancing of id, superego, 
and reality is too much for the ego and 
causes anxiety. This anxiety may come out 
in—and here’s that mind–body dualism 
again—a physical symptom (what Freud 
called a conversion reaction) or a psycho-
logical symptom (e.g., anxiety, a neurosis, 
a phobia). However, the ego can take mea-
sures to defend itself from the anxiety. One 
way the ego can prevent or lessen anxiety 
and achieve a balance among desire (id), 
morality (superego), and reality is to use a 
defense mechanism. Defense mechanisms 
are the ego’s way of handling a threaten-
ing thought or an unacceptable impulse 
to protect itself and minimize anxiety and 
distress.
Today, psychoanalysts have aban-
doned the idea that sexual and aggres-
sive impulses are the most threatening 
for people (Westen, 1998a). Instead, we 
are more concerned with threats to our 
self-esteem rather than to our egos (Bau-
meister, Dale, & Sommer, 1998). Perhaps 
in Freud’s day, acknowledging that one 
had sexual and aggressive impulses was particularly threatening to a person’s self-esteem 
(Baumeister et al., 1998).
In truth, most of the so-called Freudian defense mechanisms were interpreted and 
described in detail by Anna Freud, Sigmund Freud’s daughter and psychoanalyst in her own 
right. Anna identified 10 defense mechanisms in her father’s work (A. Freud, 1937/1966). 
Others have identified additional defenses (e.g., Vaillant, 1995b) including some 50 or more 
since that time (Clark, 1998)!
We will focus on the basic defense mechanisms, first identified by Freud, that are not 
indicative of serious pathology, and which have inspired later work in personality (Baumeister 
et al., 1998). Do not be surprised if you recognize seeing these in yourself or in people around 
you! Defense mechanisms can be useful, short-term ways of handling stress and anxiety.
Reaction Formation. 
In a reaction formation, instead of expressing a threatening id 
impulse, people express the opposite id impulse. A good clue to a reaction formation is that the 
reaction is out of proportion to the actual event, either more extreme or more intense than 
usual. For example, have you ever noticed that when a dating couple suddenly breaks up they 
immediately hate each other? How can love so quickly turn to hate? Sometimes, the circumstances 
may warrant the extreme reaction, but I wonder if anxiety over the thought of a love lost doesn’t 
make it easier for some people to express the opposite emotion—hate—as a way of coping.
An example of a reaction formation comes from an elderly friend of mine who had just 
gotten cable television. Instead of being entertained by the range of choices now available to her, 
she expressed her shock and outrage at an R-rated movie shown on one of the movie channels. 
She took a good 10 minutes explaining to me, in minute and embarrassing detail, the various 
love scenes and how angry watching each scene made her. When I asked her why she didn’t 
just change the channel, she exclaimed, “Well, I had to see how it all ended!” Obviously, it was 
too threatening for a usually prim and proper little old lady to admit that she was enjoying, or 
being aroused by, the love scenes so she expressed the opposite emotion, disgust.
Reaction formation may be one of the most often used defenses, especially when we fear 
others may be judging us badly. One review of the research found that we respond with extreme 
and opposite feelings when we are in danger of showing undesirable sexual feelings, prejudiced 
© k09/ZUMA Press/Newscom
Anna and Sigmund Freud on 
holiday in the Dolomites, Italy, 
1913.
“The lady doth protest too 
much, methinks.”
Hamlet, Act 3, scene ii, 222–230
228

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
attitudes, or incompetence, for example (Baumeister et al., 1998). It’s as if we are trying to 
prove these accusations wrong, by publicly demonstrating the opposite feeling. The evidence 
for reaction formation is strong; however, it remains to be determined just how conscious or 
unconscious some of our reactions may be.
Isolation.  Isolation occurs when we mentally isolate a threatening thought by keeping it 
separate from other thoughts and feelings. One way of doing this, as Freud observed in his 
patients, is to create a pause or gap between one train of thought and another.
One form of isolation is intellectualization, when we isolate the emotion so that we can 
experience thoughts or memories without the disturbing feelings. For example, people may use 
intellectualization to logically understand a traumatic event. Also, intellectualization may allow 
people to relate horrible stories without being overwhelmed by their emotions.
Isolation is easily understood within a cognitive model. Our thoughts are associated in 
our minds and memories so that a negative thought can trigger other negative thoughts. By 
mentally isolating negative thoughts—perhaps by consciously thinking of a neutral or positive 
thought—we can indeed make ourselves feel better. In fact, many articles that support isolation 
are from cognitive psychology and don’t even cite Freud (Baumeister et al., 1998)!
Baumeister et al. (1998) suggested ways that people may use isolation to protect themselves, 
such as keeping failure feedback separate from performance standards, trivializing a misdeed, 
and isolating past experiences by thinking of the present self like a different person. This may 
be why declaring oneself a “born-again Christian” or a “born-again virgin” are such meaningful 
designations for some.
Denial.  Denial is when we refuse to believe or even acknowledge a threatening or traumatic 
event, or the emotions associated with the event. For example, we may exclaim “Oh, no!” imme-
diately on hearing bad news, an effective use of denial that buys us a moment to process the 
shock. Or, we might daydream or have fantasies about how things might have been. Denial may 
be a helpful coping strategy in the short run, but less effective than other strategies in the long 
run (Suls & Fletcher, 1985).
For example, Freud believed that when little boys see that girls’ genitals are different 
from theirs, they “disavow the fact and believe that they do see a penis, all the same” (Freud, 
1923b/1961, pp. 143–144). Freud theorized that boys use this denial to allay their supposed 
castration anxiety, a point we will come back to later.
There is plenty of evidence that people deny feedback that is threatening to their self-
esteem. For example, people may think a test is unfair (Pyszczynski, Greenberg, & Holt, 1985) 
Jupiter Images/© Getty Images/Thinkstock
© Robepco/Fotolia
Oh, no! Students who lived in 
potentially unsafe residence 
halls were more likely to 
deny that they could be at 
risk in case of an earthquake 
(Lehman & Taylor, 1987).
229

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
or that research evidence is flawed (Liberman & Chaiken, 1992) if it helps them think well of 
themselves despite a poor performance or unhealthy behaviors. People may even convince 
themselves, with unrealistic optimism, that their futures are likely to be rosier than that of 
their peers (Weinstein, 1980). People may also experience denial in the aftermath of a trauma 
as a way of coming to grips with the event slowly (Janoff-Bullman, 1992). Denial has also been 
seen in people who deny the seriousness of a breast cancer diagnosis (Carver et al., 1993), the 
likelihood of being in harm’s way due to an earthquake (Lehman & Taylor, 1987), and even their 
chances of experiencing an unwanted pregnancy (Burger & Burns, 1988).
Undoing.  In undoing, a person who has either thought about performing or who has already 
performed an unacceptable behavior attempts to nullify that action with a later action. Of 
course, we rationally know that the behavior or thought has occurred, but through: “ . . .  a pro-
cedure that may be called magical, of “undoing” [Ungeschehenmachen or un-make-happen] 
what has been done” we can take it back or cancel it out (Freud, 1915/1957, p. 164). Freud 
described it as: “negative magic . . . by means of . . . symbolism to “blow away” not merely the 
consequences of some event (or the experiences or impression) but the event itself” (Freud, 
1925/1959, p. 119).
Freud believed undoing occurred as a part of obsessional disorders, popular customs, 
and also religious ceremonies (Freud, 1925/1959). For example, perhaps you’ve heard of the 
superstition whereby people must undo the bad luck of having spilled the salt by throwing a 
pinch of it over their left shoulder.
More serious examples of undoing might be a woman with an eating disorder who tries 
to undo eating by purging. Or an abusive man who might bring his wife flowers to atone for 
having harmed her the night before. Both of these involve some pathology where a person is 
truly convinced that she or he can undo the undesirable behavior. This extreme form of undo-
ing, whereby people attempt to alter the past, has not been documented in healthy individuals 
(Baumeister et al., 1998).
However, a more common and less serious type of undoing that many people uncon-
sciously do is to ruminate over past events, imagining how they might have gone differently and 
mentally undoing the damage (Baumeister et al., 1998; Roese, Sanna, & Galinsky, 2005). This 
counterfactual thinking was studied in a sample of athletes at the 1992 summer Olympic games 
(Medvec, Madey, & Gilovich, 1995). Bronze medal winners were happier than silver medalists 
both at the time of their performance and on the medal stand.
Why would the people who performed worse be happier? In a subsequent study, research-
ers were able to interview athletes competing in New York State’s 1994 Empire State Games 
directly after their performance. The researchers discovered that the silver medalists were more 
occupied than the bronze medalists with thoughts of “I almost did better” than with thoughts 
© Aflo Foto Agency/Alamy
Due to undoing, bronze 
medalists may be happier 
than silver medalists.
THINK ABOUT IT
Can you think of other 
examples of undoing in 
superstition or children’s 
games?
230

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
of “at least I did this well.” Silver medalists were preoccupied with thoughts of how they could 
have undone their failed performances. Unfortunately, this counterfactual rumination only 
made them feel worse.
In sum, the evidence for undoing is mixed, depending on how strict an interpretation 
one takes of Freud’s original idea. In either case, magically or mentally undoing the past does 
not seem to protect a person, or their self-esteem, from negative events. It might help a person 
develop alternative strategies to help a future performance, but it doesn’t change the reality of 
a negative event. For this reason Baumeister et al. (1998) suggested that undoing is best viewed 
as a coping mechanism to deal with negative events, rather than a defense mechanism.
Projection.  In projection, we attribute our own disturbing or unacceptable impulses to 
another person. For example, say we fight with a friend. Afterward in recalling the incident we 
might remark “She was very hostile” instead of admitting our own feelings of aggression. Often-
times, what we find annoying in other people is actually more revealing of our own insecurities: 
It is safer to project them onto others than to admit the failings in ourselves.
In a compelling demonstration of projection, participants attributed their undesirable 
traits to another person using an elaborate cover story and three-part procedure (Newman, 
Duff, & Baumeister, 1997). First, the researchers gave participants false feedback about their 
personalities. They were told that they possessed four positive traits and two undesirable traits 
(e.g., inflexible, indecisive, dishonest, disturbed) on a fake personality test.
Then, for the next 5 minutes participants were instructed to think about the results of 
the personality test and to free associate, verbalizing their thoughts out loud as they occurred. 
However, participants were instructed to not think about one of their negative trait ratings, 
which was determined ostensibly at random.
Finally, participants watched a video, without sound, of a college student talking about 
herself. From watching her nonverbal behavior they had to rate her personality on the same six 
trait dimensions that they had received feedback on in the first part of the experiment.
Would their own false feedback affect their ratings of the target student? It would if they 
were using the defense mechanism of projection to deal with the blow to their self-esteem 
from the unflattering feedback on the personality test. Participants rated the target more 
negatively but on only one of their negative trait dimensions: the one they had been asked 
not to think about! In other words, they were more likely to project an unflattering trait that 
they were trying not to think about than either a positive or negative trait that they were able 
to think about.
Based on the results of this and other related experiments, the researchers concluded that 
not thinking about an undesirable trait actually increases the tendency to see that trait in other 
people. So Freud was right about projection!
However, the evidence also suggests that projection occurs as a result of trying to suppress 
thinking about one’s own faults; it is another example of ironic processing as in the dream study 
discussed earlier. That is, thought suppression—not projection—is the defense mechanism; 
projection is a result of thought suppression and not a way to avoid thinking about one’s own 
faults. Paradoxically, thought suppression makes people more aware of the very traits they are 
trying not to think about, both negative and positive (Newman, Duff, Hedberg, & Blitstein, 
1996). This increased accessibility makes it more likely that people will use these very traits to 
interpret the ambiguous behavior of others.
The bottom line is that Freud identified an important phenomenon: defensive projection. 
But it took current research in social and cognitive psychology to fully explain the process. 
Our view of ourselves influences our view of others, for both positive and negative traits. But 
we commit this projection as a result of thought suppression, not as a way of rejecting these 
traits in ourselves.
Displacement.  In displacement the true id impulse is expressed but the target of that 
impulse is changed into a more acceptable one. Perhaps you’ve seen a child who is angry at her 
mother. It would be too threatening to express that anger directly at her mother, so instead she 
might express that anger by slamming the door to her room.
THINK ABOUT IT
How are the defense mech-
anism of projection and 
the ideas behind projective 
tests similar?
231

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
Freud’s famous case of Little Hans concerned a 5-year-old boy who was afraid of his father, 
but displaced this fear onto horses. Why horses? The horse had “black round their mouths” 
and blinders that resembled his father’s mustache and glasses (Freud, 1909a/1955, p. 42). For 
more about Hans and why he feared his father, see the Research Methods Illustrated feature 
in this chapter.
Despite the popular appeal of this defense, there is very little evidence for displacement 
(Baumeister et al., 1998). Often alternative explanations account for the results better than the 
notion of displacement. For example, we know that frustration, direct retaliation, or being in bad 
mood all increase aggression, but none of these involve displacement (Baumeister et al., 1998). 
In fact, the one study that was specifically designed to test for displacement found no significant 
effects (Bushman & Baumeister, 1998). Participants in this study were most aggressive toward 
the person who angered them and did not take out their aggression on an innocent person.
The idea of displacement hinges on Freud’s notion of catharsis (from the Greek word for 
cleanse or purge). The idea was that tension from unsatisfied id impulses builds up, like steam 
in a closed system, and must somehow be released or else cause damage to the system in the 
form of psychological symptoms. This release of the id energy is called catharsis (Breur & 
Freud, 1893/1955). Acting aggressively (body) or viewing aggression (mind) should satisfy the 
impulse and lead to less aggression. But does it?
To test this, participants in an experiment wrote an essay and then were later insulted by 
a confederate who called their essay the worst they had ever seen (Bushman, Baumeister, & 
Stack, 1999). Half the participants immediately got a chance to work out their aggression by 
hitting a punching bag for 2 minutes, whereas the other half didn’t. Then all participants played 
an aggressive video game against the very same confederate who had insulted them. Would 
participants who worked out their aggressiveness against the punching bag be less aggressive 
toward their tormentor?
According to the catharsis hypothesis, they ought to, having already released and satisfied the 
aggressive impulses triggered by the insulting confederate. However, that’s not what the research-
ers found! Participants who played with the punching bag were actually more aggressive—almost 
three times as much—toward their insulter than participants who were told to sit there. Not only 
is the concept of catharsis completely without merit, but acting aggressively or even viewing 
aggression actually increases later aggressive behavior (Bushman et al., 1999).
Sublimation. 
Another way of deal-
ing with an unacceptable id impulse is to 
change the impulse into something more 
acceptable, a process called sublimation. 
For example, aggressive urges might be 
morphed into the less psychologically 
threatening energy for sports, dangerous 
hobbies, or healthy competition. Similarly, 
Freud believed that sexual urges could 
be safely expressed through hard work, 
the fine arts, and other creative activities. 
Freud noted that society, in socializing us, 
demands that we sublimate our sexual and 
aggressive urges to be productive members.
Again, despite the intuitive appeal of 
sublimation, Baumeister et al. (1998) ada-
mantly claimed that there is no support 
whatsoever for sublimation. They were 
unable to find even a single article in a top 
research journal that showed convincing 
evidence for sublimation. So instead they 
tried, unsuccessfully, to find at least cor-
relational evidence of possible sublimation 
effects.
Despite its intuitive appeal, 
there is no empirical support 
for the notion that people 
sublimate their sexual drives 
into creative ones.
© Aguaviva/Fotolia
THINK ABOUT IT
What other popular notions 
about catharsis are also 
invalid? For example, would 
watching a violent sport on 
TV increase or decrease later 
aggressiveness?
232

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
For example, Baumeister et al. (1998) looked at historical periods of great creativity and 
found no corresponding increase in sexual abstinence; in fact, they found quite the opposite. Peri-
ods of intellectual creativity—think of the Italian Renaissance, Elizabethan England, or ancient 
Greece, for example—were generally periods of sexual freedom as well. Similarly, the lives of the 
most famous writers, musicians, and painters of the 20th century are marked by “sexual excess 
and misadventure” rather than sublimation of sexual impulses (Baumeister et al., 1998, p. 1106).
Until research evidence suggests otherwise, the defense mechanism of sublimation should 
be abandoned.
Repression.  According to Freud, “the essence of repression lies simply in the function of 
rejecting and keeping something out of consciousness” (Freud, 1915b/1957, p. 147). Keeping 
an undesirable thought out of consciousness protects a person from anxiety.
Freud originally believed that repression could be conscious or unconscious, going along 
with his belief in the continuity of mental life (Erdelyi, 2006b). His daughter Anna made the 
distinction between suppression and repression in her interpretation of his defense mechanisms 
(A. Freud, 1937/1966). In suppression the ego consciously keeps unacceptable thoughts or urges 
outside of our awareness whereas in repression the process is unconscious. For example, if we are 
faced with an event or a thought that makes us anxious we can consciously put it out of mind 
or suppress thinking about it. However, if this forgetting happens unconsciously, without our 
awareness, or out of our control, it would be an example of repression.
Freud believed that some traumatic events could be so anxiety-provoking that the ego 
would bury the event deep in the unconscious. You can see this in Freud’s original graphic in 
Figure 3. He depicts repression as a one-way slide channeling thoughts directly from the con-
scious into the very heart of the unconscious.
Defense mechanisms can work on both an explicit level and an implicit level (Vaillant, 
1998) and indeed, evidence suggests that one way people cope with trauma is to avoid thinking 
about it, either consciously or unconsciously (Brewin, 2003; McNally, 2003a, 2003b). But does 
this mean that people have completely forgotten about the traumatic event?
Probably not. First, we know from cognitive psychology that putting a thought out of our 
mind consciously, through suppression, or unconsciously, through repression, only makes the 
thought occur more frequently (Najmi & Wegner, 2006; Wegner, 1989, 1994; Wegner & Erber, 
1992; Wegner, Schneider, Carter, & White, 1987).
Second, generally people do not forget the traumatic event, rather, they cope with the 
trauma by managing their emotional responses to the event (Boden, 2006; Foa, Riggs, Massie, 
& Yarczower, 1995).
Third, there is no evidence that memories can be repressed and kept out of consciousness 
for significant periods of time (Boden, 2006; Crews, 2006; Hayne, Garry, & Loftus, 2006; Holmes, 
1995; McNally, 2003a, 2003b; Pope, Oliva, & Hudson, 1999). However, many victims would 
Don’t think about this bear: 
Paradoxically, trying to not 
think of something, as in 
repression, makes the thought 
occur more frequently.
© Zhiltsov Alexandr/Shutterstock
233

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
rather not remember the event so they may consciously choose not to share their memories 
with friends, family, therapists, or researchers. What may seem on the surface to be repression 
may really be due to fear, guilt, or embarrassment (Boden, 2006; Freyd, 2006).
Though the controversy is not entirely over, in light of the evidence available today, repres-
sion probably ought to be removed from a list of effective defense mechanisms (Rofé, 2008). 
Instead, more research on related topics in cognitive psychology such as cognitive avoidance, 
retrieval inhibition, or memory bias is needed (Erdelyi, 2000).
Rationalization.  Rationalization is when people reinterpret their behavior to hide their true 
motivations for their actions. Essentially, the behavior is acknowledged, but it is reinterpreted 
to seem more acceptable. In this way, the id can be gratified without the superego disapproving.
Freud noted that a person suffering from an obsessive neurosis might justify his compul-
sive behavior by explaining why he did what he did in a rational way. He described a patient 
of his, who having tripped on a branch in a park, threw the branch into some nearby bushes. 
On the way home, the man was suddenly struck with the thought that the branch might be 
more dangerous to passers-by in this new place than in the original place along the path. 
Freud believed that the man’s anxiety caused him to go back and replace the branch on the 
path, but instead of acknowledging this compulsion, the man rationalized it by convincing 
himself the branch was safer in its original place, even though, objectively, it wasn’t (Freud, 
1909b/1955).
The idea that we rationalize our decisions, beliefs, feelings, and attitudes forms the basis 
of cognitive dissonance theory from social psychology (Gray, 2001; Kay, Jimenez, & Jost, 2002). 
According to this theory, when we are faced with an inconsistency between our attitude and our 
behavior or between two beliefs, it causes us to feel dissonance; that is, to feel like hypocrites 
(Festinger, 1957). To feel better—and to convince ourselves that we are indeed logical people—
we find ways of rationalizing or justifying our behavior and beliefs. What cognitive dissonance 
calls justification is a specific example of the Freudian defense mechanism of rationalization.
Cognitive dissonance theory was later revised to suggest that we feel the need to rationalize our 
beliefs and behaviors only when our actions make us feel bad about ourselves (Aronson, 1968). In 
this way cognitive dissonance acts as a defense mechanism to preserve our self-esteem. The empiri-
cal support for cognitive dissonance theory is overwhelming. For example, by motivating people 
to explain themselves using the defense mechanism of rationalization, cognitive dissonance theory 
has been used to help people overcome eating disorders (Wade, George, & Atkinson, 2009), engage 
in safer sex (Stone, Aronson, Crain, Winslow, & Fried, 1994), and conserve water (Dickerson, 
Thibodeau, Aronson, & Miller, 1992), to name just a few applications of the theory.
You can see how the defenses all involve some kind of transformation of either the impulse, the 
target, or the person feeling the impulse (Freud used the colorful word vicissitudes to describe 
the changing nature of the instincts). Keeping these three processes separate will help you dis-
tinguish among the various defense mechanisms.
As you can see, there is quite a lot of evidence for the defense mechanisms. Psychologists 
continue to explore these and other defense mechanisms in their practice and in their research in 
personality, social psychology, developmental psychology, and cognition (Cramer, 2000, 2006).
Psychosexual Stages
One of the foundations of Freudian psychoanalysis is that adult personality is formed as a result 
of childhood experiences. Freud set out to describe the process of development based on the 
recollections of his patients in a series of stages called the Psychosexual stages of development. 
However, much of what Freud hypothesized about development is controversial. To be able to 
evaluate Freud’s theory, we need to understand just what his claims are. As you read about his 
theories below, see if they make sense to you from what you know about child development 
from other classes you’ve taken, or from your own experience with children.
Because the sexual instinct was of utmost importance to Freud, he interpreted the psy-
chological phenomena he observed within a sexual framework. Each psychosexual stage of 
“[Psychosexual hypotheses] 
are better understood 
metaphorically or discarded 
altogether. Knowing which 
ones to discard, however, is not 
always an easy task.”
Westen et al. (2008, p. 65)
THINK ABOUT IT
Why would there be no 
need for the other defense 
mechanisms if repression 
were completely effective?
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Have you ever used a ratio-
nalization to hide your true 
motivation for an unaccept-
able behavior?
234

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
development starts with a libidinal urge that is experienced in a specific, biologically deter-
mined, part of the body (Freud, 1955). The infant or child feels tension in an erogenous zone 
and must find a way of gratifying the id impulse in a socially acceptable way.
Once the id instinct is gratified, the tension subsides and the child is psychologically 
able to move into the next stage. However, if the child has received too much or too little 
gratification—and Freud did not differentiate between the two—then some libidinal energy 
gets left behind (Fenichel, 1945/1995). The child then has fewer psychological resources left 
to deal with the challenges of the next stage. The result is a fixation, where psychic energy is 
still devoted to resolving the earlier issue instead of moving fully into the next stage.
A person who is fixated at one of the stages will show certain adult personality character-
istics and engage in behaviors directly related to the fixation. In addition, the person will show 
symbolic activities related to the fixation. In keeping with Freud’s emphasis on the intercon-
nectedness of body and mind, we see evidence of the fixation in both the body (erogenous 
zone-related activity) and in the mind (symbolic activity).
Freud hypothesized that we are born with an id, the source of these libidinal urges, so 
that id impulses are present from birth (Freud, 1915/2000). By age 2, the ego is formed as 
we learn to control our bowel functions, and by age 5 the superego is formed as a result of 
resolving the Oedipal complex. By the time a child is around 5 years old, the three parts of 
the personality—id, ego, and superego—are formed and work together. This is why Freud 
believed that the first 5 years were the most important for development and believed that 
personality was set by the age of 5. Table 1 summarizes the key elements of Freud’s psycho-
sexual states of development.
THINK ABOUT IT
Do you agree that personal-
ity is set by age 5? Why or 
why not?
Table 1  Summary of Freud’s Psychosexual Stages of Development
Name of 
Stage
Erogenous 
Zone
Ages
Task
Adult Fixation
Personality 
Characteristics
Activities
Symbolic 
Activity
Oral stage
Mouth
0–18 
months
Early: feeding
Oral, incorporative 
personality: dependent
Eating, drinking, 
smoking, kissing
Collecting things, 
good listener, 
gullible
Late: weaning
Oral sadistic personality: 
aggressive
Gum chewing, 
nail-biting, 
overeating
Sarcasm, 
cynicism, ridicule
Anal 
stage
Anus/
buttocks
1–3 years
Early: feces 
expulsion
Anal expulsive 
personality: self-
confident, uninhibited, 
resistant to authority
Lack of sphincter 
or bowel control, 
bed-wetting
Overly generous, 
gives things away, 
creative
Late: feces 
retention
Anal retentive 
personality: rigid, 
compulsive, live up to 
expectations of others
Constipation
Stinginess, 
orderliness, 
stubbornness, 
perfectionistic
Phallic 
stage
Genitals
2–5 years
Boys: Oedipus 
complex, 
castration, 
anxiety
Phallic character: 
hyper-masculinity
Concern with 
virility, machismo
Power tools, 
cars, trucks, large 
machinery
Girls: Oedipus 
complex, penis 
envy
Hysterical character: 
Hyper-femininity
Flirtatiousness, 
seductiveness
Promiscuity, 
castration of men: 
male-bashing
Latency 
stage
(None)
5–puberty
Sublimation
(A period of psychological rest—no fixation at this stage)
Genital
stage
(None)
Adulthood
To marry, procreate, be a productive member of society:
“Lieben und arbeiten” which means “To love and to work”
Source: Bornstein 2005, Table 1, p. 327. Bonstein, R. F. (2005). Reconnecting psychoanalysis to main stream psychology. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 22(3), 323–340. Copyright 
American Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.
235

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
Oral Stage.  At birth and until about 18 months of age, an infant’s life revolves around feeding 
(Freud, 1915/2000). The erogenous zone of the oral stage is the mouth. The child gains pleasure 
through the mouth, as she takes in nourishment. Early in the oral stage infants are concerned 
with feeding, sucking, and swallowing. Later in the oral stage, the child develops teeth. Now the 
oral pleasures change from taking in to biting and devouring. If a child gets too much or too 
little pleasure from these activities—taking in while very young or biting when a little older—
then the infant may develop an oral fixation as an adult.
If the lack of appropriate gratification occurred early in the stage, the results might be the 
oral incorporative personality. As an adult, this person would replay this early infantlike state 
by showing excessive dependency and by trying to gain oral satisfaction by eating, drinking, 
smoking, or kissing. She might also try to get satisfaction through symbolic oral incorporative 
activities like collecting things, being a good listener, and being gullible (taking in what people 
tell her).
However, if the lack of gratification occurred later in the stage, then a person might develop 
the oral sadistic personality showing aggressive behavior, oral activities like gum chewing, 
nail-biting, or overeating, and the symbolic biting behaviors of sarcasm, cynicism, and ridicule.
Anal Stage.  Once an infant has been weaned, the next biological milestone is learning bowel 
and sphincter control, as this is the age that most children must face toilet training. Between the 
ages of 1 and 3 years, the child must learn where and when it is appropriate to relieve himself. 
This is the first time that a child must adhere to societal expectations, as enforced by the parents, 
instead of being totally indulged. How the child reacts to the monitoring and control of the 
parents can determine adult personality.
A child might react by feces expulsion, obtaining gratification by letting loose whenever and 
wherever. As an adult, this anal expulsive personality will show the personality traits of being self-
confident, uninhibited, nonconventional, and resisting of authority. He may show the physical 
behaviors of lack of sphincter or bowel control, and bed-wetting. He may also show the symbolic 
behaviors of being overly generous and giving things away, and also by being highly creative.
Alternatively, a child might react to parental control of her feces by refusing to go, holding 
on to her bowel movements. This adult anal retentive personality is rigid, compulsive, and lives 
up to the expectations of others. She might have physical anal problems (e.g., constipation), 
and also show the symbolic anal retentive activities of being stingy, highly organized, stubborn, 
and perfectionistic (Freud, 1908/1959).
Today we know that in adults, bowel and bladder problems are real physical disorders and 
are not related to an anal fixation.
Phallic Stage.  The phallic stage is the most complicated and the most controversial of Freud’s 
stages of development. So far, the developmental stages have tracked the id impulses from the 
mouth to the anus. Now, in the course of toilet-training the child discovers his penis (Freud 
couched everything in terms of masculine development, so let’s put aside for a moment what 
happens if you don’t happen to have a penis). In the phallic stage, the child feels id impulses in 
the penis and seeks gratification here by masturbation.
The young boy feels sexual feelings toward the mother and wants to marry his mother. 
However, there’s one problem: the father. The boy starts to harbor hatred for his father, as the 
father is his rival for the love and attention of the mother. The boy must now find some way 
of resolving this Oedipus complex (Freud, 1925/1961), named for the mythical Greek king of 
Thebes who unwittingly killed his father and married his mother.
At the same time, the boy discovers that girls are missing a penis. He reasons that girls must 
have had one, and therefore must have had it cut off and reacts with “horror at the mutilated 
creature” (Freud, 1925/1961, p. 252). Because his penis is the source of both pleasurable feel-
ings and sexual feelings toward his mother the boy develops castration anxiety and lives in 
fear that the father will cut his off as well. Freud noted that this fear may have originated with 
actual castration threats, not uncommon at the time in children who had been admonished to 
not touch themselves.
THINK ABOUT IT
Did you know that Freud 
loved to collect Greek, 
Roman, and Byzantine 
antiques? He was seldom 
without his trademark cigar 
and, as a therapist, was a 
good listener.
236

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
As a result, the boy then realizes that he must repress his desire for his mother and his 
hostility for the father or else he may face retribution from the father. So he represses these 
feelings and instead identifies with the father. By identifying with the father, imagining that 
he is the father, he gets to possess his mother, at least in his mind, through wish fulfillment of 
the id. Through identification, he also internalizes the father’s superego, taking on his father’s 
morality.
If a boy does not resolve his Oedipus complex and identify with the father he may become 
fixated at this stage. Such a man develops a phallic character marked by an overly exaggerated 
sense of masculinity or machismo. This phallic character continually strives to prove his virility 
by engaging in hobbies that are symbolic of the phallus: power tools, cars, trucks, and a desire 
for large machinery.
In girls, the process works slightly differently, with a much less satisfactory ending. Like 
the boy, the girl starts out strongly attracted to the mother, after all she is the source of comfort 
and food. The girl makes a “momentous discovery” that boys have a penis “strikingly visible 
and of large proportions, [and] at once recognize it as the superior counterpart of their own 
small and inconspicuous organ, and from that time forward fall a victim to envy for the penis” 
experiencing penis envy (Freud, 1925/1961, p. 252).
The girl reasons that she must have had one, but that it was somehow cut off. And because 
the only person close enough to have done so is her mother, she thinks that her mother must 
have cut off her penis. At the same time, she is sexually attracted to the father, but she is also 
angry and jealous because he has a penis and she doesn’t.
The sad conclusion Freud comes to is that there is no satisfactory way for a girl to resolve 
her Oedipus complex: “it may be slowly abandoned or dealt with by repression or its effects 
may persist far into women’s normal mental life” (Freud, 1925/1961, p. 257). A girl’s penis envy 
essentially keeps her fixated at this stage until she can achieve symbolic possession of a penis 
through having a baby (ideally, a male baby) with a man who resembles her father. “She gives 
up the wish for a penis and puts in place of it a wish for a child: and with that purpose in view 
she takes her father as a love-object” (Freud, 1925/1961, p. 256).
Because girls do not come to identify with their fathers, they have no way of developing a 
superego. Therefore women are lacking in moral character and are naturally inferior to men: 
“I cannot evade the notion (though I hesitate to give it expression) that for women the level of 
what is ethically normal is different from what it is in men” (Freud, 1925/1961, p. 258). This is 
why Freud believed that anatomy is destiny.
Many people oversimplify Freud by thinking that the lack of a penis is what makes women 
inferior to men. But it’s the lack of a superego that is more damaging for the status of women, 
according to Freud.
A woman who is fixated at this stage develops a hysterical character, marked by an exag-
gerated femininity and activities such as flirting, seducing men, and promiscuity (think of 
Scarlett O’Hara the Southern belle from Gone With the Wind). She may find ways of symboli-
cally remedying her penis envy by trying either to gain the penis she lacks through promiscuity, 
or to begrudge men the penis they have by symbolically castrating men through insulting and 
belittling them.
What did Freud have to say to women at the time who objected to his theory? “We must not 
allow ourselves to be deflected from such conclusions by the denials of the feminists, who are 
anxious to force us to regard the two sexes as completely equal in position and worth” (Freud, 
1925/1961, p. 258).
Latency Stage.  The latency stage, from age 5 until puberty, is a time of no significant devel-
opments, at least in terms of id impulses and activity in erogenous zones. Freud hypothesized 
that id impulses are sublimated into other activities like schoolwork, athletics, and friendships 
with same-sex peers (Freud, 1915/2000). Because of the child’s reproductive immaturity, these 
impulses cannot be satisfied and so must be defended against with sublimation. However, today 
we know that this is an important time for physical, cognitive, social, and emotional develop-
ment in children.
THINK ABOUT IT
Which is more important 
for Freudian theory, the lack 
of a penis or the lack of a 
superego?
THINK ABOUT IT
What kinds of developmen-
tal changes do children go 
through from ages 5 until 
puberty?
237

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
Genital Stage.  Once young people reach puberty they are, or least they were in Freud’s day, 
considered adults. If people passed successfully through the oral, anal, phallic, and latency 
stages, getting proper gratification, then they would be able to face the responsibilities of adult-
hood. To be an adult—and Freud was very clear on this, reflecting his conventional, conserva-
tive, and narrow Victorian sensibility—meant that you would be heterosexual, marry, have 
children, and be a self-sufficient, productive member of society. This philosophy is summed 
up in his phrase “Lieben und arbeiten” which means “To love and to work” (Erikson, 1950).
If, however, a person was unsuccessful in resolving the tasks or challenges of each of the 
psychosexual developmental stages, he or she would have problems in adulthood caused by a 
fixation in one of the stages. And how did Freud suggest that we resolve a fixation? Why, by psy-
chotherapy of course, where these unconsciously repressed urges and ungratified id impulses 
could be explored and the fixation resolved.
Problems With Freud’s Psychosexual Stages of Development.  A thorough critique of 
Freud’s claims, even if we just limit it to a discussion of the Oedipus complex, would take 
an entire volume by itself! However, because much of what he said is very controversial, it is 
worth discussing some of the major critiques. Indeed, some of these apply to other aspects of 
his work as well.
First, he worked out his theory of psychosexual development by analyzing the recollections 
of his patients and himself. Further, we know that his patients were generally suffering from 
some sort of emotional problem. Essentially, he started with adults who had problems, and 
asked them to remember their childhoods, instead of studying children at each of the stages 
or by studying a handful of children as they progressed through the stages, or by comparing 
the childhoods of adults with and without problems. As a result, his theory is based on biased 
methods and biased sampling.
Second, think about what Freud’s theory of the Oedipal complex starts with: knowledge 
of genital differences between males and females. Do children between the ages of 2 and 5 
really know about genital differences? Apparently, they do not know enough to either feel 
inferior or to fear castration as Freud claims (Bem, 1989; Brilleslijper-Kater & Baartman, 
2000; Katcher, 1955).
Third, boys and girls do not differ in morality, despite the theorized lack of superego 
formation in girls. One author, after finding no differences in morality of boys and girls and 
finding that children are able to behave morally much sooner than Freud imagined by toddler-
hood even, urged psychologists to abandon this invalid Oedipal morality theory (Shaffer, 2009).
© Digitalpress/Dreamstime.com
THINK ABOUT IT
When does a person 
become an adult in today’s 
society? Why?
Freud failed to recognize that 
the latency period, ages 5 to 
13, is an important time of 
physical, cognitive, social, and 
emotional development in 
children.
“Freud was one of the most 
creative thinkers in psychology, 
but that doesn’t mean he was 
right about everything.”
Psychologist Roy Baumeister as cited 
in Azar (1997, p. 28)
“The process of moral 
internalization may have 
already begun long before 
young children would have 
even experienced much of an 
Oedipal or Electra complex, 
much less have resolved 
it. . . . [P]erhaps it’s time to lay 
his theory of Oedipal morality 
to rest.”
Shaffer (2009, p. 343)
238

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
Finally, his whole theory of psychosexual development hinges on the notion of sexual 
fantasy. However, what if his adults were remembering not just thoughts, wishes, or fantasies 
of sexual acts, but memories of actual sexual assaults?
Originally, Freud believed that his patients, both men and women, were victims of sexual 
assault as children. He presented a paper in 1896 called “Etiology of Hysteria” (Masson, 1984a, 
1984b). Of the 18 patients with hysteria undergoing therapy with Freud at the time, all of them 
had a history of sexual assault, with independent corroborating evidence in some cases.
Jeffrey Masson—a leading Freud scholar and project director of the Sigmund Freud 
Archives until he went public with Freud’s original ideas over the objections of the officers 
of the archives, including Anna Freud herself—described the assault theory based on Freud’s 
correspondences of the time. Freud believed that the assaults were real and not a result of false 
memories or leading questions on the part of the therapist because
Freud’s patients recalled their traumas “with all the feelings that belonged to the 
original experience”; that is, they took the permission to remember as a permis-
sion to feel, and the feelings apparently absent from the original assault were at 
last experiences: the anger, the disgust, the sense of helplessness and betrayal, all 
these powerful emotions surfaced. Freud was like an explorer who has chanced 
on a long-submerged world. (Masson, 1984b, p. 35)
Even one of Freud’s colleagues at the time, Sándor Ferenczi, reportedly found similar evidence 
in his patients, but found the reports hard to believe because they suggested that the sexual abuse of 
children was widespread at the time. However, in 1905 Freud recanted the 1896 paper and instead 
concluded that the incidents were fantasy, emanating from the sexual feelings of the child. Masson 
believed—based on original unpublished documents and correspondence at the time, much of 
which had been censored by Freud and his followers to eliminate any mention of his unfortunately 
named seduction theory—that Freud capitulated to pressures at the time and was forever haunted 
by this decision. Instead of exposing a powerful and respected colleague at the time as a fraud, 
implying that other respected colleagues at the time could be child molesters and exposing child 
abuse for the widespread problem it was, Freud claimed he was mistaken and withdrew the theory.
By blaming the victim of a botched operation for her own physical problems saying that 
she nearly bled to death “deriving from repressed wishes not an unskilled surgeon” and Freud’s 
own negligence in the case, he saved his own reputation and the reputation of the colleague 
(Masson, 1984b, p. 41). However, by hypothesizing that children have sexual feelings for adults, 
Freud was able to excuse the suspect behavior of a few of his colleagues, including perhaps his 
own father, and essentially blamed the victim for his or her own abuse.
Let’s consider for a moment if Freud’s theory of psychosexual development was indeed a 
theory, not of normal development, but of the development of a child who had been abused. 
Does childhood sexuality originate within the child, or with the child’s experience with an 
adult? Could early sexual abuse account for how children would know about genital differences 
at so young an age? Also, why must a girl hate her mother instead of merely identifying with 
her like boys do with their fathers? Might the girl be angry at her mother, not for cutting off her 
penis, but for failing to protect her from an abusive father? And why must a girl also be angry 
at her father? Could he have been the perpetrator of the abuse? No wonder that being able to 
marry and have sexual relations in marriage became the benchmarks of healthy development. 
We might well ask ourselves which theory accounts for the data better, Freud’s original assault 
theory or his later theory of childhood sexuality?
Masson (1984b) claimed that some of Freud’s case histories make more sense if reread with 
sexual abuse in mind. Consider Freud’s description of a session with a young woman:
I told her that I was quite convinced that her cousin’s death had had nothing 
at all to do with her state, but that something else had happened which she 
had not mentioned. At this, she gave way to the extent of letting fall a single 
significant phrase; but she had hardly said a word before she stopped, and her 
old father, who was sitting behind her, began to sob bitterly. Naturally I pressed 
my investigation no further, but I never saw the patient again. (p. 45)
THINK ABOUT IT
Do you agree with Masson 
that some of Freud’s case 
studies make more sense if 
reread with sexual abuse in 
mind?
239

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
However, critics refute Masson’s claims and argue that Freud either lied about his patient’s 
reports, incorrectly inferred abuse from their symptoms, or created false memories in his 
patients, and that the medical community of the time rejected Freud’s claims for these reasons 
and not because they found his allegations of abuse repugnant (Gleaves & Hernandez, 1999).
The seduction theory, combined with Freud’s notion of repression, fueled the false memory 
controversy of the 1980s (Erdelyi, 2006a). At the time, there were a number of cases in the news 
of people who claimed to have remembered traumatic events that had happened to them years 
before. Later, these traumatic events were shown to be false. The popular press perpetuated the 
invalid belief that memories could be repressed for years and then suddenly come to the surface. 
Past incidences of abuse were believed to be responsible for a whole list of psychological and 
physical complaints, even if the person involved couldn’t recall any such abuse.
What causes false memories? First, memory does not work like an electronic recording; it is 
constructive and vulnerable to inconsistencies including the implantation—and recovery—of 
false memories (Loftus, Garry, & Feldman, 1994; Schacter, 1987; Sedikides & Green, 2006). 
Second, false memories may also occur due to leading questions or suggestions by inept or 
unscrupulous therapists (Loftus & Bernstein, 2005; Kihlstrom, 2006), a charge leveled by some 
critics at Freud himself (Esterson, 1993, 1998, 2001, 2002a, 2002b). However, some recovered 
memories may be real.
Although scholars continue to debate the status of Freud’s seduction theory (see Gleaves 
& Hernandez, 1999, for a good summary), alas, the failure to take childhood sexual abuse seri-
ously from the start has done damage to the field and to countless individuals. We must keep 
in mind that “false alarms do not imply the absence of true hits” (Erdelyi, 2006a, p. 40). The 
true tragedy is that these concepts have entered the culture so that most people, especially those 
who have not taken a psychology class, somehow continue to believe that childhood sexuality 
and the Oedipus complex are real, psychologically meaningful concepts, instead of misguided 
and invalid theories.
As long as we expect to see Oedipal behaviors—or oral or anal for that matter—we are 
apt to recognize them in the world around us as a result of our own self-fulfilling prophesies 
and confirmation biases, and not due to Freud’s alleged genius in shedding light on impor-
tant aspects of human experience. Certainly, Freud was on the right track in identifying the 
importance of early family experiences on later development, but he was wrong in hypothesiz-
ing that it revolves around sexual feelings. The empirical evidence does not support Freud’s 
psychosexual stages of development.
Research Methods Illustrated: Case Study and Psychobiography
C
ase study, an in-depth study of a single person, has traditionally been an important 
technique in medicine and clinical psychology to illustrate disorders. Psychobiography is 
the use of psychological theory, usually personality theory, to organize a person’s life into a 
coherent story (McAdams, 1988). Notable case studies in personality include Jenny (Allport, 1965), 
Henry Kissinger (Swede & Tetlock, 1986), a man who sailed solo around the world (Nasby & Read, 
1997), and various U.S. presidents (Simonton, 1999).
A case study can help us reach a greater understanding of the personality of a specific person 
(Elms, 2007), showing us how a person is unique, especially after we’ve discovered commonalities 
among people or between this person and other people (Schultz, 2005). Like any research method, 
there are strengths and weaknesses to the case study method. Of course, the major weakness is that 
we can draw conclusions only about this particular person; we can’t generalize to other people and 
we can’t demonstrate causality in the way a true experiment can.
However, rather than supporting or disconfirming a theory, like experiments, a case study 
can be used to generate theory. Whereas the logic of an experiment is deductive (generalizing 
from a general principle to a specific instance), the logic of a case study is inductive 
(generalizing from a specific instance to a general principle). In this way, the life of an individual 
person can inspire a new theory (Carlson, 1988). Case studies can help us understand a theory 
better by seeing how the theory may work in a real person with all of his or her idiosyncrasies 
(Elms, 2007). Case studies provide useful evidence, explanation, and interpretation of how a 
theory may work when applied to a single person (Elms, 2007).
THINK ABOUT IT
Why do people continue to 
believe in the Oedipus com-
plex, despite no supporting 
evidence for its existence?
240

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
The strength of a case study 
depends on the choice of subject 
and on the thoroughness of the 
researcher. Researchers, whenever 
they conduct research but especially 
when doing a case study, need to be 
aware of their own personal biases 
that may unduly influence their work. 
Also, researchers need to remain 
open to the possibility that they 
could be wrong about a person and 
should take pains to verify, ideally 
though multiple sources of data, their 
conclusions about the subject of 
their case study.
Freud was known for a number 
of famous case studies, including 
Leonardo Da Vinci (Freud, 1910/1964) 
and Woodrow Wilson (Freud, 1967). 
Let’s take a look at his case of Little 
Hans, the 5-year-old boy who 
developed a fear of horses (Freud, 
1909a/1955). Hans was the son of 
one of Freud’s associates who carried 
out the analysis of the boy himself 
and reported the events as they 
unfolded to Freud. Of course, Hans’s 
case was met with great excitement, as this was a chance to see how the theorized sexual instincts 
of the phallic stage would play out in an actual child.
Hans’s father reported that between ages 3 and 4 Hans was very curious about “wiwimakers” 
(unfortunately translated as widdlers in English). He quickly understood that horses and dogs had 
one but that tables and chairs didn’t. When his father drew a picture of a giraffe after an outing to 
the zoo, Hans insisted that they add the giraffe’s wiwimaker as well (see Figure 4). He noticed that his 
3-month-old baby sister Hannah had a “tiny, little one.” He saw his father’s, but when he asked if his 
mother had one, she replied that of course she did. At the same time, Hans would often touch himself, 
a habit his parents wished to break him of.  They even threatened to cut off his penis if he didn’t stop.
At about age 5, Hans developed a phobia about going out, for fear that a horse would bite him. 
When he was taken outside, he would immediately wish to return home and be comforted in the 
arms of his mother. Later, they discovered that he was particularly afraid of horses with blinders on 
and black harnesses around their mouths (see Figure 5).
Hans’s fears seemed to increase after an extended summer vacation in the country. While 
his father worked in the city, Hans could spend time alone with his mother. He especially liked to 
cuddle with her in the morning. He even had a dream during this time that his mother left him and 
he had nobody to cuddle with. Hans’s father blamed his mother for spoiling the boy by spending 
so much time with him as well as, in his mind, excessive displays of affection. His father noted that 
Hans still had not stopped touching himself, but grew increasingly anxious about this habit (recall 
Hans’s “wanting’s not doing” quote during our discussion of wish fulfillment and the superego).
One night Hans had a telling dream: “In the night there was a big giraffe in the room and a 
crumpled one; and the big one called out because I took the crumpled one away from it. Then it 
stopped calling out; and then I sat down on top of the crumpled 
one” (Freud, 1909a/1955, p. 37). A few days later Hans expressed 
his fear that one or both of his parents might leave him, and this 
came out later at breakfast. Hans’s father got up to leave and 
Hans remarked: “Daddy, don’t trot away from me!”
For Freud and Hans’s father, this unusual choice of words 
suggested the unconscious reason for his fear: His father was 
the horse! Of course, they interpreted the fear to be that Hans 
was afraid that the horse (his father) would hurt him because he 
wanted his mother all to himself.
In the case study method, 
psychologists study a single 
person in great depth. 
Pictured here is Bertha 
Pappenheim, whom Freud 
wrote about as “Anna O” in a 
famous case study.
Figure 5  The picture Hans’s 
father drew of a horse with black 
around his mouth and blinders 
on.  Source: S. Freud, 1955/1909a, 
p. 49. Freud, S. (1955/1909a). 
Analysis of a phobia in a five-
year old boy. In Standard edition: 
Volume 10. (p. 5–149). London, 
UK.: Hogarth Press. (Original 
work published 1909).
Figure 4  The picture of a 
giraffe drawn by Hans’s father. 
The wiwimaker was added by 
Hans himself.  Source: S. Freud, 
1955/1909a, p. 13. Freud, S. 
(1955/1909a). Analysis of a 
phobia in a five-year old boy. 
In Standard edition: Volume 
10. (p. 5–149). London, UK.: 
Hogarth Press. (Original work 
published 1909).
Widdler
© The Granger Collection, NYC
241

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
Freud and Hans’s father believed that this was all part of Hans’s Oedipal complex. First, Hans 
was obviously in love with his mother. Second, though he claimed to be fearful when his father 
was away, he really wanted his father out of the picture so he could have his mother all to himself. 
Freud reasoned that Hans wanted to do away with his father (the big giraffe) to have his mother 
(the crumpled giraffe). Then, Hans developed a castration anxiety and feared that his father would 
cut off his penis as revenge for wanting his mother. So instead of fearing his father, Hans displaced 
that fear onto horses and came to fear horses. This was later confirmed by his fear, actually a 
disguised wish, that his father would fall down and die like in an actual horse-and-cart accident he 
unfortunately witnessed while out with his mother.
But, can you think of an alternative explanation for his fear? How might a small child react to 
an accident involving carts and horses? How might a typical 3-year-old react to a new baby in the 
house? How might a 4-year-old react to his father being away from home for an extended period 
of time? Finally, not long after these events Hans’s parents separated and eventually divorced. Does 
this suggest to you a different interpretation of events?
This classic case demonstrates both the advantages and the problems of the case study 
method. Though this case allegedly illustrates Freud’s theory of childhood sexuality including id 
impulses, the Oedipus complex, and castration anxiety, Freud himself realized the biases contained 
in the case. He cautioned,  “psychoanalysis is not an impartial scientific investigation, but a 
therapeutic measure” (Freud, 1909a/1955, p. 104).
Psychodynamic Theory Since Freud
There have been a number of movements within psychoanalysis since Freud’s time. In the 
early days, some of Freud’s colleagues broke with him and started their own systems. These 
neo-Freudians included Alfred Adler, Carl Jung, Karen Horney, Eric Fromm, and Harry Stack 
Sullivan. Like Freud, they developed their own theories of personality and techniques of therapy 
(Westen et al., 2008).
In particular, some objected to Freud’s “id psychology” and developed their own ego psy-
chology, which focused on the development and functions of the ego rather than the impulses 
of the id. These early pioneers included Heinz Hartmann and Freud’s own daughter Anna 
Freud (Westen et al., 2008).
Systems such as object rela-
tions theory, self-psychology, and 
relational psychology soon followed 
(Wolitzky, 2006). All were rooted in 
psychoanalysis, but placed a greater 
emphasis on mental representa-
tions of the self and others and less 
of an emphasis on sex and aggres-
sion. Object relations theory, for 
example, focuses on the cognitive 
and emotional processes involved 
in intimate relationships: how we 
form close relationships, bond, 
and cognitively represent impor-
tant others. Object relations theory 
is concerned with the impact of 
actual experiences instead of fan-
tasy (Westen et al., 2008). Major 
theorists in object relations theory 
include Heinz Kohut (1966, 1971, 
1977, 1984), Otto Kernberg (1975, 
1984), Charles Brenner (1982), and 
Stephen Mitchell (1988, 1993, 1997; 
Greenberg & Mitchell, 1993).
“The assumption that there are 
unconscious mental processes, 
the recognition of the theory 
of resistance and repression, 
the appreciation of the 
importance of sexuality and of 
the Oedipus complex—these 
constitute the principal subject 
matter of psycho-analysis and 
the foundations of its theory. 
No one who cannot accept 
them all should count himself a 
psycho-analyst.”
Sigmund Freud (1955, p. 247)
Karen Horney (1885–1952) 
took issue with many 
of Freud’s concepts and 
established feminine 
psychology.
© Bettmann/CORBIS
242

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
What does psychoanalysis look like today? There are five postulates that define contempo-
rary psychoanalytic theory. These are aspects of Freudian theory that are supported by experi-
mental data and which are endorsed by most psychoanalytic psychologists today (Westen, 
1998a, 2000):
	 1.	 Much of our thoughts, feelings, motives, defenses, fears, and wishes are unconscious. 
Unconscious processes remain central to contemporary psychoanalysis.
	 2.	 Part of being human is recognizing that we have conflicting thoughts, feelings, and motiva-
tions. Behavior is often an imperfect compromise among these forces. Our unconscious 
is more rational than Freud thought; feelings influence our cognitions more than modern 
cognitive psychology originally thought.
	 3.	 Personality begins to form in childhood and shows continuity into adulthood. Childhood 
experiences are important in making us who we are as adults, especially when it comes to 
our relationships with others.
	 4.	 Mental representations of self, others, and relationships are important. These representa-
tions guide the way we form later relationships and the kind of psychological problems we 
may experience.
	 5.	 Personality development and growth involves moving from an immature, dependent state 
to a mature interdependent state. Development involves more than managing our sexual 
and aggressive urges; it includes managing feelings of dependency, independency, and 
interdependency in socially appropriate ways.
To see what these five postulates look like in a contemporary theory, let us consider a current 
theory, developed through and supported by empirical research. Attachment theory has been 
described as the resurrection of the psychodynamic theory of personality (Shaver & Mikulincer, 
2005). Though originally grounded in psychoanalytic thinking, attachment theory has moved 
beyond these roots to become an influential theory of personality, close relationships, and devel-
opmental psychology and has already changed psychoanalytic theories of child development 
(Westen et al., 2008; see also Fonagy, Gergely, & Target, 2008; Shaver & Mikulincer, 2007).
Attachment Theory
Brief History
Imagine a typical children’s hospital in the United States or Europe during the early part of the 
20th century. Infants and toddlers were kept in individual cubicles and were tended by masked 
and hooded nurses and doctors who walked carefully to avoid stirring up germs. Parents were 
not permitted to touch, hug, cuddle, comfort, or even see their children for the duration of their 
hospital stay, sometimes up to 1 year. The attending medical staff would handle the children 
only minimally, propping bottles on pillows to feed them efficiently and antiseptically (Karen, 
1994).
As chilling as this sounds to us, that was pretty much the standard way hospitals and 
orphanages worked in those days. People were more concerned about sterility, orderliness, and 
the physical needs of children than about their emotional needs. How did infants and children 
raised in these conditions fare? Not very well. Despite better nutrition and a cleaner environ-
ment, the children healed slower, seemed listless and depressed, and when they returned home 
(or were eventually adopted) they had behavioral problems ranging from anger to delinquency 
to detachment. Parents complained that the child they brought home was a very different child 
from the one they checked in a short time ago (Karen, 1994).
John Bowlby, a child psychiatrist originally trained as a psychoanalyst, was one of the young 
interns caring for children in a clinic very much like this. He was disturbed by what he saw in 
hospitals and clinics of the day and set out to document that children’s emotional needs were 
just as—if not more—important than their physical needs. Bowlby believed that emotional ties 
with mother, the primary caregiver for most children at the time, had an impact on emotional 
regulation, interpersonal relations, and mental health across the life span (Shaver & Mikulincer, 
“There are very few analysts 
who follow all of Freud’s 
formulations.”
Morris Eagle, president of the psy-
choanalysis division of the American 
Psychological Association as cited in 
Horgan (1996, p. 106)
THINK ABOUT IT
Why is the distinction 
between fantasy and real-
ity important to object 
relations theory? Why was 
fantasy more important to 
Freudians?
“[The child] may be ill-fed 
and ill-sheltered, he may be 
very dirty and suffering from 
disease, he may be ill-treated, 
but, unless his parents have 
wholly rejected him, he is 
secure in the knowledge that 
there is someone to whom he 
is of value and who will strive, 
even though inadequately, to 
provide for him.”
John Bowlby as cited in Karen  
(1994, p. 64)
THINK ABOUT IT
What is it like for hospital-
ized children today?
243

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
2007). Although he agreed with Freud’s view that much of adult behavior has its roots in child-
hood social experiences, he wanted to observe these events directly and over time rather than 
rely on adults’ reminiscences (Shaver & Clark, 1994).
Bowlby theorized that the attachment system evolved to keep infants close to their moth-
ers and safe from harm. According to Bowlby: (1) An infant who trusts that the mother will 
be accessible and responsive will be less fearful than an infant who does not have confidence 
that the mother will be available. (2) This confidence is built up slowly from birth through 
adolescence and will remain relatively unchanged through adulthood. (3) These expectations 
are fairly accurate reflections of the experiences individuals have actually had. Bowlby referred 
to these expectations as internal working models (Bowlby, 1973).
As a result of our early attachment relationships we form two sets of internal working 
models: working models of others and working models of our self. The working model of others 
comes from our expectations of our primary caregiver’s responsiveness. The working model 
of our self comes from our feelings of worthiness, lovability, and competence, as individuals 
deserving of help (Bowlby, 1969). These internal working models of others and of ourselves 
remain with us throughout our lives and form the basis of subsequent close relationships: 
They organize our memories and guide future interactions with people we would like to be 
close with.
But more than that, according to Bowlby, having secure attachments allows us to function 
better out in the world. With a secure base, we show increased exploration of our world, and 
develop self-regulation and the ability to rely on others when necessary. Insecure people are not 
THINK ABOUT IT
Can internal working mod-
els account for supposed 
love at first sight?
Taking the trauma out of a hospital stay
While observing children in the hospital, Bowlby noticed a distinct pattern of emotional 
responses to separation from the primary caregiver, be it the mother, the father, or a nurse. 
First is protest, where the infant cries, clings to, and tries to actively seek out the mother 
to either prevent her from leaving or to reestablish contact with her. Second is despair, 
where the infant shows sadness, passivity, and an increased hopelessness that the mother 
will return and appears to be mourning her loss. Finally, there is detachment, where the 
infant responds to the returning mother with loss of interest, turning away, apathy, and 
a lack of attachment behaviors seen before the separation (Bowlby, 1969). After reunion 
with the primary caregiver some children returned to normal after a number of days, but 
some children remained affected for a very long time.
This same pattern was also found in primate infants. Infant monkeys, separated from 
their mothers, preferred a warm, cuddly, terrycloth monkey over the cold, hard wire mesh 
surrogate mother even though only the wire mesh mother had food. Though psycholo-
gists at the time predicted that the monkey would prefer the mother who provided it with 
nourishment, Harlow discovered that contact comfort was a more powerful force, and the 
observations of Bowlby bear this out in human infants (Harlow, 1958).
Even Anna Freud noticed that during the Second World War, some children preferred 
to sleep next to their mothers in a dark and scary air raid shelter under the streets of Lon-
don than alone in the sterile but safe clinic for children she ran just outside the city. Alas, 
she failed to appreciate the full import of her observations (Karen, 1994).
Today, hospitals make arrangements for a parent or guardian to stay in the room with 
the child for the entire length of the child’s hospital stay. Some hospitals, such as the world-
renowned St. Jude’s Children’s Research hospital in Memphis, Tennessee, avoid hospital-
izing children entirely! They recognize that a child’s parents and family are a great source 
of emotional and social support, especially during an illness. By encouraging families to 
stay together and to stay in a homelike setting rather than in the hospital, these hospitals 
aim to fulfill the attachment needs of children for a secure base and a safe haven.
The Personality of Everyday Life
244

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
able to explore the world or make healthy connections with others. A person with an anxious 
attachment may be overly dependent on others, whereas an avoidant person may be overly 
self-reliant (Shaver & Mikulincer, 2007).
Bowlby’s work would be merely theoretical musings if not for the research of Mary 
Ainsworth. Ainsworth and her colleagues regularly visited infants and mothers in the Balti-
more area multiple times during the baby’s first year and watched how they interacted while 
the mother attended to the baby’s needs during a 4-hour visit (Ainsworth, Blehar, Waters, 
& Wall, 1978). Researchers rated the mother’s sensitivity to the infant’s signals; acceptance, 
as opposed to rejection, of the infant and his or her needs; cooperation with the infant’s 
desires and rhythms, rather than being interfering, demanding, or intrusive; and availabil-
ity to the infant, rather than ignoring the infant’s signals. For example, Ainsworth and her 
assistants recorded every time the mother or baby touched, cuddled, smiled, vocalized, made 
eye contact, or had face-to-face interactions. She noticed that some mothers were particu-
larly sensitive and responsive to the infant’s signals. Then—inspired by Bowlby’s work—she 
wanted to see how the infants reacted when separated from their mothers. She developed a 
laboratory technique called the Strange Situation.
In the Strange Situation a mother and her infant are brought to a laboratory room filled 
with toys. Over the next 30 minutes, the mother and the baby go through a series of separa-
tions and reunions, lasting about 3 minutes each. The infant’s reactions are carefully monitored 
during three key periods: free play with the mother in the room, separation where the mother 
departs, and reunion when the mother returns.
Not only did Ainsworth and her colleagues see remarkable differences in infants’ behavior 
in the Strange Situation, but they also were able to relate the infants’ attachment behaviors to 
the mothers’ sensitivity and responsiveness in the home (Ainsworth et al., 1978). They identi-
fied three patterns of attachment.
At home, children of sensitive and responsive mothers cried less, communicated better, 
obeyed more, and enjoyed close bodily contact more than children of less responsive mothers. 
Though they enjoyed physical contact, they were not clingy and actually sought physical contact 
less than infants in the other two groups. According to Ainsworth these infants showed secure 
attachment. In the Strange Situation of the laboratory they used the mother as a secure base 
from which to explore the toys in the lab and as a safe haven to return to for safety and comfort 
when danger is near, such as the approach of the laboratory assistant (Ainsworth et al., 1978).
In contrast, other mothers were less affectionate during the child’s first 3 months and 
frequently disliked and avoided close bodily contact with the child during the first year. These 
infants showed avoidant attachment to their mothers in the Strange Situation. Even though 
they actively explored the toys in the lab, they seemed oblivious to their mother’s departure 
and return and did not seek her out as a safe haven. Whereas these children appeared to be 
Securely attached children 
will use their parents as a safe 
base from which to explore 
the world.
© Jaspe/Dreamstime.com
245

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
independent and unemotional during separation, their heart rates were as high as the secure 
infants’, suggesting that despite outward appearances they were greatly distressed by the separa-
tion (Spangler & Grossmann, 1993).
Finally, a third group of mothers frequently ignored their babies’ signals but did not reject 
close bodily contact. These mothers were inconsistent in responding to their infants or seemed 
to respond in an interfering, nonsensitive way. At home, their infants cried more than usual 
even in the mothers’ presence, and explored their environments less, a pattern repeated in the 
Strange Situation. Though the infants showed distress upon separation from their mothers in 
the Strange Situation and ran to them when the mothers returned, the infants did not seem 
to accept the comfort the mothers attempted to offer, arching away as mothers attempted to 
hug them. Overall, these infants seemed generally anxious. These infants have an anxious-
ambivalent attachment to their mothers (Ainsworth et al., 1978).
Later, a fourth disorganized/disoriented group was identified in the Strange Situation 
(Main & Solomon, 1990). Parents of these infants are often full of fear, themselves, or inad-
vertently behave in ways that are frightening to an infant (e.g., showing anxious facial expres-
sions or awkward postures). Because it is difficult for the infant to approach such a parent, the 
child has no idea of how to respond. Sadly, many of these parents have experienced their own 
attachment-related traumas, such as the loss of a parent or caregiver through death or separa-
tion. Parents who maltreat their infants tend to have infants with a disorganized/disoriented 
attachment but not all disorganized/disoriented children have a history of abuse.
As you might expect if the attachment system is important for survival, using the mother 
as a secure base is universal—at least across the United States, Japan, Israel, Columbia, Ger-
many and Norway—but what makes for an ideal infant or a secure infant varies somewhat by 
culture (Posada et al., 1995; Rutter, 2008). Across many cultures, the essential ingredients of 
attachment are a caregiver who notices the baby’s signals, interprets them accurately by taking 
the baby’s perspective, responds promptly and appropriately, and can be depended on to do 
so (Ainsworth et al., 1974; Bretherton, 1990). The mother’s sensitivity to her infant appears 
to play a greater role in the infant’s attachment than the child’s temperament at this early age 
(Fraley & Shaver, 2008).
Attachment Patterns for Life?
Bowlby described the patterns of attachment from cradle to grave as being like a railway sys-
tem (Bowlby, 1973). Though the system may start with a single main route, it often forks into 
a number of individual lines depending on life experiences (see the photo below). A recent 
SEE FOR YOURSELF
The next time you are 
around a child, watch care-
fully to see if you can see 
the child using his or her 
caregiver as a secure base 
from which to explore the 
world or as a safe haven to 
return to when things get 
scary.
“What is more natural than 
that we should persist in 
looking for happiness along 
the path on which we first 
encountered it? . . . We are 
never so defenseless against 
suffering as when we love, 
never so helplessly unhappy as 
when we have lost our loved 
object or its love.”
Sigmund Freud (1929/1989, p. 33)
Bowlby used the metaphor 
of a railway to describe 
attachment trajectories across 
the life span.
© niv koren/Fotolia
246

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
meta-analysis of 27 different samples across various ages between 1 to 16 years suggests that 
these lines indeed remain very close to their original routes despite life experiences that cause 
them to diverge (Fraley, 2002). The correlation between early attachment and attachment at 
any later point in time is approximately r = .39.
Even more impressive is that recent studies find a 70 to 75% agreement between an infant’s 
secure or insecure attachment in the Strange Situation and his or her attachment in late ado-
lescence and young adulthood. Where participants changed their attachment style, it was due 
to life stresses, including death of a parent, parental divorce, or a life-threatening illness of the 
participant or a parent that often changed a secure environment into an insecure one (Crowell, 
Fraley, & Shaver, 2008). This suggests that internal working models are more like updated repre-
sentations modified by life experiences and events, as Bowlby suggested, as opposed to the very 
psychodynamic suggestion that they are residues from childhood (Shaver & Mikulincer, 2005).
There is also some evidence that attachment patterns are socialized into the next genera-
tion, which is not a surprise if attachment comes from a caregiver’s responsiveness. To assess 
an adult’s attachment pattern, researchers developed the Adult Attachment Interview, or AAI 
(Main, Kaplan, & Cassidy, 1985; see Hesse, 2008, for a review). Adults are asked to recall their 
childhoods and the kind of interactions they had with a parent. The manner in which partici-
pants revealed their memories was very telling. Participants fell into one of three categories of 
attachment styles, very similar to the three styles of infant attachment (Main, 1996).
In numerous studies using the AAI, parents’ recollections of their own childhood experi-
ences predicted the attachment of their children in the Strange Situation 76 to 85% of the time 
(Karen, 1994). In fact, one study was able to trace attachment patterns across three genera-
tions! Mothers were given the AAI when they were pregnant and again when their child was 
11 months old. The AAI was also given to their mothers. Then, when their child was 23 months 
of age, the mothers and infants were placed in the Strange Situation.
Attachment Styles in Adulthood
By the time we are adults, we have formed internal working models of ourselves and others in 
close relationships. Researchers hypothesized that people will have different expectations for 
romantic love depending on their adult attachment style, that is, their internal working models. 
Their adult romantic relationships will look very much like their childhood attachment behav-
ior patterns (Fraley & Shaver, 2008; Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007; Mohr, 2008).
To test this, researchers ran a “Love Quiz” in the Rocky Mountain News, a major newspaper 
in their area (Hazan & Shaver, 1987). Part of the quiz asked respondents to answer a question-
naire about their experiences and to choose which one of three paragraphs best described their 
feelings (see Table 2). The description of the three adult attachment styles was based on the 
original description of infants in the Ainsworth et al. (1978) study rewritten to apply to adult 
romantic behaviors.
Over 1,200 people aged 14 to 82, with an average of 36 years old, responded to their ad. 
People could readily identify with one of the three paragraphs in proportions comparable to the 
THINK ABOUT IT
What kind of experiences 
could make attachment 
patterns become less 
secure? More secure?
THINK ABOUT IT
Is attachment still important 
in adulthood?
Table 2  Adult Attachment Styles
%	
Attachment	
Description
56	
Secure	
“I find it relatively easy to get close to others and am comfortable depending on them and 
having them depend on me. I don’t often worry about being abandoned or about someone 
getting too close to me.”
25	
Avoidant	
“I am somewhat uncomfortable being close to others; I find it difficult to trust them completely, 
difficult to allow myself to depend on them. I am nervous when anyone gets too close, and often, 
love partners want me to be more intimate than I feel comfortable being.”
19	
Anxious-Ambivalent	
“I find that others are reluctant to get as close as I would like. I often worry that my partner 
doesnt really love me or won’t stay with me. I want to merge completely with another person, 
and this desire sometimes scares people away.”
Source: From Hazan and Shaver (1987, Table 2, p. 515). Hazan, C., & Shaver, P.  R. (1987). Romantic lover conceptualized as an attachment process. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 52(3), 511–524. Copyright American Psychological Association.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Which paragraph in Table 2 
best applies to you?
247

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
original findings with children (Ainsworth et al., 1978). There were no differences in childhood 
experiences with separation from parents between the three groups, but people with different 
adult attachment styles seemed to experience love differently.
People who described themselves as secure described their most important love experience 
as happy, friendly, and trusting. They believed that romantic feelings of love come and go over 
the course of a relationship, and that such feelings could return to the high intensity of the early 
days of a romance. Secure adults reported warmer relationships with both of their parents and 
also that their parents had a warmer relationship with each other than the other two groups.
Avoidant lovers demonstrated a fear of intimacy, and relationships marked by emotional 
highs and lows and jealousy. They believed that the romantic head-over-heels-love depicted 
in movies does not exist. They also believed that true romantic love seldom lasts and that it is 
rare to find a person whom they could really fall in love with. Avoidant adults described their 
mothers as cold and rejecting.
Anxious-ambivalent lovers experienced obsession, a desire for reciprocation and union, 
emotional extremes, strong sexual attraction, and jealousy with their partners. They fell in love 
easily, but seldom found true love. They also believed that romantic feelings come and go over 
the course of a relationship. In a second study, anxious-ambivalent lovers reported the most 
loneliness and secure lovers the least (Hazan & Shaver, 1987).
If we develop our attachment style from our early experiences, how might divorce affect 
attachment? This question was explored in a study of undergraduate men and women who 
reported on their parents’ marriages and identified their adult attachment style (Brennan & 
Shaver, 1993). They found evidence that the quality of the parents’ relationship, not the status 
itself, had a greater impact on a child’s attachment style.
Brennan and Shaver (1993) found that there was no relationship between adult attachment 
style and parents’ marital status. However, among parents who were still married, there was an 
effect on adult attachment. Parents who were described as being happily married had children 
with all three kinds of adult attachment styles. But parents who were unhappily married tended 
to have fewer securely attached adult children and more insecurely attached adult children, 
especially with the avoidant style.
On a hopeful note, these styles could be modified if the parent, especially the custodial 
parent, remarried happily. In this case, more adult children turned out secure. If both parents 
remained unmarried, then the adult child was likely to describe themselves as one of the inse-
curely attached styles.
Attachment and Adult Personality Functioning
Let’s consider for a moment how adults react to separation from their attachment figures. 
Although we wouldn’t be able to place an adult in the Strange Situation for children, some 
researchers discovered an adult equivalent of the Strange Situation. In a clever operationaliza-
tion of the concept of separation, researchers observed 109 couples at the airport, aged 16 to 
68 years, about half of whom were married (Fraley & Shaver, 1998). A bit more than half of the 
couples were separating; the rest were traveling together. The experiment took place at a time 
when people could walk right up to the gate to say goodbye to a traveling friend and even wave 
at them from the window while watching the plane take off!
In this study, one researcher asked couples to fill out a survey about their attachment style, 
the nature of their relationship, and, if separating, their distress at leaving their partner. Mean-
while, a second experimenter who knew nothing about the couple rated their separation and 
attachment behaviors by observing their behavior from a short distance away in the departure 
lounge while the participants were saying goodbye to their partners or entering the airplane 
with their partners.
Couples separating at the airport reacted very much like children separated from their 
mothers in the Strange Situation; their reactions were a reflection of their attachment style. First, 
there were more attachment behaviors in separating couples than in couples traveling together. 
Couples who were separating were particularly likely to sit close to their partner; kiss, hug, stroke 
their partner’s head or face in a comforting manner; and perhaps even well up with tears or cry.
THINK ABOUT IT
Why does the quality of the 
parents’ relationship have a 
greater impact on an adult 
child’s attachment style 
than marital status?
“How bold one gets when one 
is sure of being loved!”
Sigmund Freud (1960/1992, p. 11)
248

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
 Second, the longer a couple had been together, the less distress they reported at separation. 
Longer-term couples also showed less attachment behaviors than shorter-term couples at separa-
tion. Finally, there was an interaction between gender and attachment style in separation behavior. 
 Women with attachment anxiety reported more distress when facing separation than 
women in couples who were traveling together, even though they didn’t seem to show different 
separation behaviors. However, women with attachment avoidance showed more withdrawal 
and avoidance of their partners and less contact, contact-seeking, care-seeking, and caregiving 
than women in couples traveling together. 
 Men with attachment anxiety showed less contact with their partners than men who were 
traveling with their partners. Men with attachment avoidance who were separating showed no 
particular pattern of responses or behaviors. This study illustrates that, just as Bowlby suggested, 
attachment behaviors operate to maintain contact with caregivers when separation is imminent. 
 What about breaking up? Loss or threat of the loss of an important relationship should also 
elicit attachment-like behaviors. In one study, over 5,000 internet users voluntarily filled out a 
questionnaire asking about their anxiety and avoidance in close relationships and to describe a 
recent breakup of a serious relationship (Davis, Shaver, & Vernon, 2003). Participants who were 
secure in their attachments, scoring low in both anxiety and avoidance, reported using more 
social coping strategies like using friends and family as a safe haven to deal with the breakup 
of a relationship. 
 However, participants who showed attachment anxiety or attachment avoidance reported 
more distress and a harder time in dealing with their breakups. As you might expect, partici-
pants high in avoidance were more likely to use self-reliant coping strategies, preferring to go 
it alone rather than seek solace with friends and family. They also blamed themselves for the 
loss rather than their partners. 
 Participants with attachment anxiety reported the hardest time of all three attachment 
styles. They reported greater physical and emotional distress, a preoccupation with their lost 
love, and interference with exploration. Paradoxically, they would show angry and vengeful 
behaviors and yet went to great lengths in their attempts to reestablish the relationship. Rather 
than rely on friends or go it alone, they turned to more dysfunctional ways of coping including 
alcohol and other drugs. 
 If adult love relationships parallel children’s attachment patterns, what about exploratory 
behavior? Might secure adult attachments provide support for exploration in the adult world 
of work? This hypothesis was tested in a study of attachment styles, job satisfaction, leisure 
activities, and well-being (Hazan & Shaver, 1990). 
 Participants for this study were readers of the  Denver  Post  newspaper who responded to a 
questionnaire that appeared in the Sunday magazine section. This questionnaire assessed their 
adult attachment style using the paragraph measure (Hazan & Shaver, 1987; see  Table   2  ). As 
  Do adults separating at an 
airport show attachment 
behaviors like those shown 
by children in the Strange 
Situation? 
Sergiy Serdyuk/Fotolia.com
249

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
a follow-up they were sent a two-page questionnaire specifically asking about work-related 
attitudes and behaviors. As expected, there was a significant relationship between attachment 
and attitudes toward work.
Secure respondents reported a positive approach to work, and showed the least likelihood 
of the three groups to procrastinate, fear failure, and have difficulty completing work tasks. 
They were also least likely to fear rejection from coworkers. They had a healthy balance between 
their personal life and their work life, taking time off to enjoy vacations, putting relationships 
before work, and not letting work jeopardize their health. They reported the highest ratings 
of work satisfaction and success of all three groups. Essentially, feeling secure, they have the 
confidence to explore safely in the world of work and focus on their careers out of their own 
interests and desires.
In contrast, anxious-ambivalent respondents preferred to work with others on projects, yet 
felt misunderstood and underappreciated at work and resented the perceived intrusiveness of 
others. They seemed to be motivated by the approval of others, worried that others would not 
appreciate their efforts, and were likely to fear rejection for poor performance. They reported 
that their personal lives interfered with their work life. For these people, exploration—in the 
form of performance, achievement, and respect and admiration from others—had become a 
way of satisfying unmet attachment needs rather than a way of pursuing their own interests or 
developing their own talents. This group had the lowest average income of the three attachment 
groups even after controlling for differences in education.
Finally, avoidant respondents seemed to use work as a way of avoiding close relationships 
with others. They reported an almost compulsive approach to work, feeling nervous when not 
working and deriving little pleasure from vacations. They also preferred to work alone and 
found that work left little time for relationships. Avoidant adults used work as an excuse for 
avoiding interacting with others and to distract themselves from the anxiety associated with 
unmet attachment needs. Other studies find similar results for the relationship of adult attach-
ment styles and achievement motivation (Elliot & Reis, 2003).
Overall, studies find that attachment patterns are related to a whole range of positive 
outcomes in adults. For example, secure adults show less defensive behaviors including self-
enhancement biases and intergroup biases (Fraley & Shaver, 2008). Insecure adults show less 
tolerance of out-group members, less humanistic values, and are less compassionate and altru-
istic (Fraley & Shaver, 2008). Facing the world without a secure base and safe haven leads to a 
consistent struggle for stable self-worth as an adult (Foster, Kernis, & Goldman, 2007; Fraley 
& Shaver, 2008).
Secure adults are more likely than insecure adults to show the defining features of what 
the humanistic psychologist Carl Rogers (1968) called the fully functioning person: openness 
to new experiences, trust in oneself and the world, lack of fear of disapproval or rejection, 
THINK ABOUT IT
What attachment experi-
ences might help people 
achieve a better balance of 
work and relationships?
Adults with an avoidant 
attachment style may use 
work to avoid intimate 
relationships with other 
people.
© Otnaydur/Dreamstime.com
250

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
experiencing thoughts and emotions deeply, sensitivity and responsiveness to others’ needs, 
and volunteering in their communities (Fraley & Shaver, 2008).
Evidence suggests that, indeed, attachment styles are powerfully related to many different 
outcomes in adulthood related to both love and work. Maybe Freud wasn’t too far off when he 
suggested that “to love and to work” was the goal of healthy development!
Chapter Summary
So, what do you think? Is Freud dead? Does Freudian theory contribute anything to the science 
of personality? Or, have researchers and clinicians taken the useful parts of Freudian theory, 
expanded, revised, and built on it so much so that what remains of the original theory is indeed 
useless? Does Freudian theory belong “along with other Mesozoic curiosities, in a museum of 
natural history,” a view challenged by psychologist Drew Westen (1998a, p. 356)?
Freud hypothesized that humans were driven by the unconscious life and death instincts. 
Though these impulses, especially for sex and aggression, stay hidden in the unconscious, they 
occasionally infiltrate our consciousness through hypnosis, free association (e.g., the word 
association test championed by Carl Jung), dreams, parapraxes, jokes, symbolic behaviors, 
and projective tests. Freud’s structural model of personality (id, ego, and superego) remains a 
useful metaphor for describing personality functioning; his topographical model (conscious, 
preconscious, unconscious) is best viewed as a continuum. The ego must find ways of satisfying 
these id impulses within the bounds of morality (internalized in the superego as the conscience 
and the ego ideal) and reality. Defense mechanisms are ways the ego can deal with unacceptable 
impulses. Current research clearly supports some of the defenses Freud suggested (reaction 
formation, isolation, denial, rationalization), provides mixed support for two (undoing, projec-
tion), and provides no support for others (repression, displacement, sublimation).
Freud interpreted psychological changes associated with growth and development in chil-
dren with biological changes across a series of psychosexual stages: oral, anal, phallic, latency, 
and genital. Freud was correct in recognizing the importance of early relationships on later 
development but was misguided in interpreting them as sexual in nature and as fantasies. 
Especially controversial is the phallic stage where boys go through castration anxiety and must 
resolve their Oedipus complex and girls suffer from penis envy. Freud used the case study 
method to draw and support many of his conclusions.
Experimental evidence supports certain aspects of Freud’s theory including the impact 
of the unconscious, role of conflict and compromise of motives, the importance of childhood 
experiences in shaping adult personality, mental representations of the self and other, and that 
healthy personality development requires learning to regulate sexual and aggressive feelings.
Psychoanalytic approaches today build on some of the basic principles of Freudian theory: 
the importance of unconscious processes, conflict, continuity of personality across the life span, 
mental representations of the self and others, and the importance of childhood experiences on 
adult personality. These ideas are championed by current approaches including ego psychology, 
self-psychology, and object relations theory.
Attachment theory, developed by John Bowlby and Mary Ainsworth, confirms that we 
form internal working models of key attachments from our early childhood that affect our adult 
relationships. Secure attachment develops out of a relationship with a caregiver who is sensi-
tive, responsive, and dependable. Attachment is assessed in infants by observing them interact 
with their primary caregiver in the laboratory Strange Situation. For adults, there is the Adult 
Attachment Interview, a paragraph measure, and questionnaire measures. People’s attachment 
patterns tend to be somewhat consistent over their lives, and across generations. Attachment 
in adulthood is related to beliefs about love, reactions to separation from a partner, and even 
to achievement and satisfaction at work, that is, “To love and to work,” just as Freud predicted.
One demonstration of the impact of internal working models on later love relationships 
is the experiment that opened this chapter: People felt that a relationship with a potential 
dating partner who resembled a past love was likely to be particularly intimate compared to a 
“Freud should be placed in the 
same category as Darwin, who 
lived before the discovery of 
genes.”
Neuroscientist Jaak Panksepp as cited 
in Guterl (2002, p. 51)
Go online for more 
resources to help you 
review.
Study and Review
on mysearchlab.com
251

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
description of a person who did not resemble a past love. People were particularly vulnerable 
to a potential date who resembled their first love.
The debate on Freud will not be over anytime soon. Certainly, there are parts of Freudian 
theory we can lay to rest. Perhaps we should keep Freudian theory in its place as an interesting 
theory from a historical point of view and instead focus on modern empirical incarnations 
such as attachment theory.
Review Questions
	 1.	 What were the results of the Brumbaugh and Fraley (2006) study where participants rated 
personal ads that resembled a past romantic relationship? How would Freud explain these 
results? How would attachment theory explain these results?
	 2.	 Why does Drew Westen compare Freud to Elvis Presley? Is Freud dead?
	 3.	 What are instincts? What two categories of instincts did Freud posit? What is libido?
	 4.	 What techniques are used to uncover the unconscious? What are parapraxes? What are 
symbolic behaviors?
	 5.	 How did Carl Jung use the word association test to study unconscious processes? What did 
he find? What technique is a modern-day equivalent of the word association test?
	 6.	 What three parts make up the personality? At what three levels do these parts function?
	 7.	 What is primary process thinking? What is the pleasure principle? In what two ways does 
the id seek gratification?
	 8.	 What is identification? What is the reality principle? What is secondary process thinking?
	 9.	 What are the two parts of the superego?
	10.	 What are the three kinds of anxiety? How does the ego cope with anxiety? Which defense 
mechanisms have the strongest research support? Which ones have mixed support? Which 
ones have no support?
	11.	 What are the psychosexual stages of development? What is a fixation? In what two ways is 
a fixation expressed? How does a fixation affect adult personality?
	12.	 What is the Oedipus complex? How do boys and girls resolve this complex? What do the 
male and female adult fixations at this stage look like? What is the seduction theory? What 
is the evidence for Freud’s psychosexual stages of development?
	13.	 What is the case study method? What are some pros and cons of the case study method? 
How does Freud’s case of Little Hans illustrate these pros and cons?
	14.	 What five postulates define contemporary psychoanalytic theory?
	15.	 What is attachment? What is an internal working model? What two sets of internal working 
models do we develop as a result of our early attachment experiences?
	16.	 What is the Strange Situation? What are the four attachment patterns seen in the Strange 
Situation?
	17.	 Do early attachment patterns stay with us for life? Are attachment patterns similar across 
generations?
	18.	 What is the relationship between attachment style and adult expectations of romantic 
relationships? What impact does divorce have on attachment? How do adults respond to 
a separation from their loved one? Do adult attachment styles predict work behavior?
252

Intrapsychic Foundations of Personality
Key Terms
Transference
Instincts
Eros
Thanatos
Libido
Free association
Dream analysis
Manifest content
Latent content
Parapraxes
Freudian slip
Symbolic behaviors
Word association method
Complex
Schema
Implicit Association Test 
(IAT)
Structural model of 
personality
Primary process thinking
Pleasure principle
Reflex action
Wish fulfillment
Identification
Reality principle
Secondary process thinking
Conscience
Ego ideal
Topographic model of 
personality
Motivated unconscious
Cognitive unconscious
Conversion reaction
Defense mechanism
Reaction formation
Isolation
Intellectualization
Denial
Undoing
Projection
Displacement
Catharsis
Sublimation
Suppression
Repression
Rationalization
Psychosexual stages
Erogenous zone
Fixation
Oral incorporative 
personality
Oral sadistic personality
Anal expulsive personality
Anal retentive personality
Oedipus complex
Castration anxiety
Phallic character
Penis envy
Hysterical character
Case study method
Internal working models
Strange Situation
Secure attachment
Secure base
Safe haven
Avoidant attachment
Anxious-ambivalent 
attachment
Disorganized/disoriented
Adult attachment interview 
(AAI)
Fully functioning
253

254

241
REGULATION  
AND MOTIVATION:  
SELF-DETERMINATION 
THEORY
Three Fundamental Psychological Needs
How Do We Satisfy These Needs?
Fostering Autonomy: Autonomy Support
Fostering Competence: Structure and Optimal Challenge
Fostering Relatedness: Involvement
The Personality of Everyday Life: Relatedness in college students
Then and Now: Undermining Intrinsic Interest
Connections Between Self-Determination Theory and Other Theories in Personality
Autonomy and Locus of Causality
Competence and Self-Efficacy Theory
Relatedness and Attachment Theory
Research Methods Illustrated: Path Analysis
What It Means to Be Self-Regulated
Types of Motivation
Causality Orientations
Self-Determination Theory Applied
Health Behaviors
Sports Behaviors
Work Behaviors
The Pursuit of Happiness
The Tae Bo Study Revisited
Chapter Summary
Review Questions
Key Terms
Read the Chapter on 
mysearchlab.com 
From Chapter 9 of Personality Psychology: Foundations and Findings, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. Copyright © 2012 by 
Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
© charles taylor/Shutterstock
255

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
 W
 hen I was in my first year of college, students in the Psychology 101 class (some 
500 of them) were required to do a special project: pick a behavior of their own to 
modify. Although my friends chose to quit smoking or apply their acne medications 
more regularly, I decided to increase my violin-playing, something that I had, regrettably, let 
lapse since starting college. 
 My university had a number of practice rooms in the basement of the student center. 
Students could sign out a room and pick up and return the key at the front desk, which also 
happened to be where they sold candy by the pound. For every half hour of practicing I did, I 
would buy a small bag of M&Ms as my reward. Given that the reward followed directly after 
the desired behavior (practicing), and was something I really liked (chocolate), I thought my 
plan was foolproof. 
 Sure enough, I started practicing regularly and was able to revisit pieces I had mastered in 
high school. I was enjoying rediscovering the violin so much that one day, after about a week 
or so of this training, I was halfway back to my residence hall before I realized—with horror 
thinking that I would fail the assignment—that I forgot to give myself the reward.  And that 
I had forgotten to reward myself for the past few days! And yet, the behavior persisted in the 
absence of the reward. I was certain that I would fail the assignment because of this anomaly. 
However, when I received my grade, I was pleased to find that I had actually discovered the 
right answer: There’s more to motivation than rewards and punishments. And in some cases 
the intrinsic reward of mastery can be more effective that the extrinsic reward of candy—even 
chocolate!    
 According to the  self-determination theory of Edward Deci and Richard Ryan, there is 
a big difference between engaging in an activity because of extrinsic reasons and engaging in 
the same activity for intrinsic reasons (Deci & Ryan, 1985b; Ryan & Deci, 2000). When we are 
 extrinsically motivated , acting because of some external pressures like rewards (M&Ms) or 
punishments (failing an assignment), we may not enjoy the activity as much, perform our best, 
or continue the behavior on our own. However, when we are  intrinsically motivated acting out 
of our own desires and by our own choice doing things that are fun or satisfying to us (making 
music), we enjoy what we are doing and increase our well-being in the process. According to 
self-determination theory, the reasons  why we do something are often more important than 
what we do. 
 Consider the following experiment (Vansteenkiste, Simons, Soenens, & Lens, 2004). Stu-
dents in a high school physical education class participated in a unit on Tae Bo, which combines 
the martial arts movements of Tae Kwon Do with the speed and rhythm of boxing. The students, 
in Grades 10 to 12, were randomly assigned to conditions that varied in whether the instructor 
emphasized an intrinsic or extrinsic goal for the activity and whether he communicated these 
goals in a supportive or a controlling manner. 
 “When we are motivated 
by goals that have deep 
meaning, by dreams that need 
completion, by pure love that 
needs expressing, then we truly 
live life.” 
 Greg Anderson, American athlete 
and trainer 
© PHOTOINKE/Alamy
 SEE FOR YOURSELF 
 Is there some behavior 
you wish you engaged in 
more regularly like studying, 
exercising, or practicing an 
instrument or a hobby? 
 SEE FOR YOURSELF 
 What kinds of activities do 
you engage in just for the 
fun of it? 
  Doing a little Tae Bo for 
intrinsic reasons with a 
supportive instructor leads to 
greater motivation than doing 
it for extrinsic reasons or with 
a controlling instructor.   
256

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
For example, the instructor 
who introduced students to the 
Tae Bo unit emphasized intrinsic 
goals by telling the students that 
“Doing a little Tae Bo helps you to 
remain physically fit and prevents 
you from becoming sick at a later 
age.” In other classes, he emphasized 
extrinsic goals by saying “Doing a 
little Tae Bo helps you to remain 
physically appealing to others and 
prevents you from gaining weight at 
a later age.”
At the same time, in the supportive conditions, the instructor demonstrated various exer-
cises to students while emphasizing that students had the option of trying the Tae Bo exercises 
by using phrases such as “we ask you to,” “you can,” or “you might” during the class. In the 
controlling conditions the instructor used phrases such as “you are obligated,” “you should,” 
or “you have to” to emphasize that the students had little choice about whether they would 
participate in the exercises.
After this introduction, a certified Tae Bo instructor entered the room and, unaware of 
which conditions the students were in or that they were even part of an experiment, proceeded 
to teach exercises and practice with the students for the next two classes.
What impact did goal and context have on students’ motivation and performance? Quite a 
big one! Students with an intrinsic goal for learning Tae Bo put in greater effort during classes 
than students with an extrinsic goal. They also performed the exercises better when tested a few 
days after learning the exercises. Also, students in the supportive context put in greater effort 
and performed better than students in the controlling context.
The impact of goal and context was even greater on persistence (see Figure 1). To test the 
students’ willingness to engage in Tae Bo even after the unit had ended they were asked if they 
would be willing to demonstrate some Tae Bo exercises in another class. The request came 1 
week later, 1 month later, and 4 months after the Tae Bo unit ended. Although students in the 
supportive context and students with an intrinsic goal persisted longer than students in the con-
trolling context or students with an extrinsic goal, students who had both a supportive context 
and an intrinsic goal for learning Tae Bo showed the greatest persistence of all 4 months later. 
They were even more likely to join the school’s official Tae Bo club!
These results illustrate two important predictions of self-determination theory. First, the 
reasons why we do something—intrinsic or extrinsic reasons, for example—are important for 
effort, performance, and task persistence. Second, the way another person communicates his 
or her expectations and instructions to us also has a big impact on our effort, performance, 
and task persistence. Given that we are surrounded by people who wish to impart their expec-
tations on us—such as health care professionals, parents, bosses, and teachers—and the fact 
that we are likely to be in these very same positions imparting our expectations on others, self-
determination theory has a lot to say about motivation and performance.
In this chapter we will learn about self-determination theory and how people vary in how 
self-determined they feel. We will also consider aspects of the situation that can help people feel 
motivated and happily engaged in their activities at work and play rather than unmotivated, 
disengaged, and depressed. Then we will apply this theory to understand health behaviors 
(like following the doctor’s orders, staying healthy), sports behaviors, work behaviors, and the 
pursuit of happiness.
Three Fundamental Psychological Needs
Self-determination theory is grounded in the humanistic tradition which emphasizes respon-
sibility, growth, and the actualizing tendency (Deci, 1980; Deci & Ryan, 1985b). It views the 
Figure 1  Students who 
learned Tae Bo in a supportive 
context and with an intrinsic 
goal were more willing to 
demonstrate their skills 4 
months later.  Source: Based 
on means reported by 
Vansteenkiste et al. (2004).
100
40
60
80
Persistence 4 Months Later
20
0
Goal
Intrinsic
Extrinsic
Controlling
Context
Supportive
Context
SEE FOR YOURSELF
How might parents, teach-
ers, or bosses communicate 
their expectations to you 
in a way that would be 
more supportive and less 
controlling?
257

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
© EiskOnig/Fotolia.com
individual as an active organism seeking the best way, not merely to survive, but also to grow 
and develop. Carl Rogers (1951) called this the  actualizing tendency: the motive to actualize 
or bring about growth and positive change. Think of a wild flower that is so destined to grow 
that it blossoms even in a sidewalk crack. Of course, not all environments support the growth 
of an individual—flower or human—but according to the humanistic tradition, when people 
are not being pushed around by the environment they have the ability to find what they need 
for growth. 
 In addition to the physiological needs of food, water, and air, people have inborn psycho-
logical needs that must be met to survive and thrive. According to self-determination theory, 
there are three basic and universal psychological needs:  autonomy ,  competence , and  related-
ness (Deci & Ryan, 1985b; Ryan & Deci, 2000). In fact, of all the psychological needs that have 
been studied by psychologists such as Henry Murray (1938) and Abraham Maslow (1954)—
including self-actualization (Maslow, 1954), security, money, influence, popularity, health, self-
esteem, self-respect, and pleasure—the three needs of autonomy, competence, and relatedness 
appear to be the most important (Sheldon, Elliot, Kim, & Kasser, 2001). Further, these needs 
are important for  all people in a wide range of cultures studied, regardless of whether they were 
born and raised in a collectivistic or individualistic culture with traditional or egalitarian values 
(Deci & Ryan, 2008b; Sheldon et al., 2001). 
 First, individuals must feel that they can freely choose what to pursue, instead of being 
pushed around, forced to do things, or burdened with a lot of  have to s,  shoulds, or  musts from 
the people or situations around them or even from themselves. This is the need for autonomy. 
Autonomy is feeling free and able to make choices about one’s actions, being self-regulating and 
able to determine one’s own actions and plans, as opposed to feeling like a pawn at the mercy 
of others or fate (Deci & Ryan, 1985b). 
 Second, individuals also need to feel competent at their pursuits, achieving mastery at tasks 
that are neither too easy nor too hard for them. This is the need for competence. Competence 
is feeling effective in one’s actions and having the opportunities and experiences to exercise, 
expand, and express one’s abilities (Deci & Ryan, 1985b). 
 Finally, individuals also need to feel they have meaningful relationships with people 
around them, like peers or supervisors. This is the need for relatedness. Relatedness is feel-
ing connected to others, having people to 
care for, and to receive care from (Ryan 
& Deci, 2000). Relatedness can also come 
from feeling a sense of belonging within a 
community like a school, a work organi-
zation, a club, or a town (Reis & Patrick, 
1996). 
 When these three needs of autonomy, 
competence, and relatedness are met, 
people will feel motivated and will hap-
pily participate in some activity—that 
is, they will feel intrinsically motivated, 
perform well, and, as a result, build skills 
and increase their well-being (Ryan & 
Deci, 2000). These three basic psychologi-
cal needs are universal and essential for 
healthy development. Everybody requires 
these psychological nutriments whether 
they are explicitly aware of them or not 
(Ryan & Deci, 2008a).    
 To illustrate these three needs, think 
back to one of the worst classes you’ve 
ever encountered either in high school 
or in college. When I ask my students 
 THINK ABOUT IT 
 How does the humanistic 
tradition compare to the 
behavioristic tradition with 
its emphasis on the rein-
forcement of behavior? 
 SEE FOR YOURSELF 
 What was the worst class 
you’ve ever been in? Why? 
 SEE FOR YOURSELF 
 What was the best class 
you’ve ever been in? Why? 
  Humans, like all living things, 
seek out conditions in which 
they can survive and grow 
to their full capabilities. 
Self-determination theory 
describes the conditions 
that foster motivation and 
well-being.   
258

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
this question, they often describe experiences where they felt that one of their needs was 
not being adequately met, although they didn’t think of it in these terms at the time. For 
example, students often have a bad experience in a class that is too difficult for them or in 
which they are totally bored. A sense of competence is missing in both of these situations. 
Students often dislike classes where there are a lot of required readings or heavily structured 
assignments where they have little choice about what to do and how to do it. These are 
examples of classes where autonomy is sorely lacking. Finally, students sometimes say that 
they didn’t get along with a teacher who might have been uncaring, cold, or disrespectful. 
Other students will explain that they just didn’t enjoy being in a class where they didn’t have 
an opportunity to get to know the other students very well. These are examples of where 
relatedness is lacking.
By the same token, imagine a class that you really enjoyed. Was it because you worked 
hard but saw that hard work pay off as you mastered the material? Was it because the teacher 
gave a lot of freedom to students and encouraged creativity in the completion of assignments? 
Or was it because you had a strong group of friends suffering with you or a teacher who went 
out of his or her way to reach you? In these cases, classes that met your needs for competence, 
autonomy, and relatedness may have increased your motivation, learning, and well-being. In 
fact, I bet you can imagine a class or a work situation in which you felt incompetent, pushed 
around, and yet you got through it due to a bunch of dedicated friends sharing the experience 
with you!
How Do We Satisfy These Needs?
Just like flowers need soil and water provided by the environment to grow and thrive, people 
need to get their needs met by the context or situation in which they find themselves. People 
must balance their internal needs for autonomy, competence, and relatedness with the nutri-
ments provided by external environments (Ryan & Deci, 2008a). Certain aspects of the environ-
ment can foster the fulfillment of the three needs (see Table 1).
“He cultivates rare orchids. 
And people.”
The chair of a small psychology 
department talking about a clinical 
psychologist on staff.
Table 1  How to Foster the Three Psychological Needs
Need
Provided By
In These Ways
Autonomy
Autonomy support
Recognize individual’s unique perspective
Give choices where possible
Use minimal pressure
Encourage initiative
Link to the individual’s goals, values
Support individual’s choice
Help the individual live with the consequences of the 
choices at a level he or she can cope with
Competence
Structure
Clear expectations
Clear contingencies
Feedback provided
Break task into smaller, manageable pieces
Optimal challenge
Task not too hard
Task not too easy
Relatedness
Involvement
Time
Interest
Energy
Source: Connell and Wellborn (1990).
259

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
Fostering Autonomy: Autonomy Support
For persons to satisfy their need for autonomy they must feel they can act out of their own 
volition (i.e., from their own wishes, preferences, and desires). For example, parents, teachers, 
coaches, therapists, work supervisors, and even our close friends can help us make our own 
choices and develop our own way of doing things, or they can attempt to control and pres-
sure us into doing or thinking as they want us to. Strategies that help individuals develop and 
express their own self are autonomy supportive; the opposite of autonomy support is control. 
Ideally, parents, teachers, coaches, therapists, work supervisors, friends, and partners will have 
our own best interests at heart and wish to help us develop our own autonomy. However, this 
may not always be the case, like at certain jobs for example, or when parents must set limits to 
help teach or protect a child from harm. Even under these conditions, there are ways of being 
autonomy supportive without being pressuring, authoritarian, and directive or resorting to 
controlling and punitive methods.
One way to support autonomy is by providing choice (Connell, 1990). For example, a 
parent will have better luck getting a toddler to eat vegetables by asking: “Would you like peas 
or carrots?” than by saying “Eat your vegetables.” Recall that this is how the instructor in the 
Vansteenkiste et al. (2004) experiment introduced Tae Bo in the supportive condition. Similarly, 
a parent or a teacher can support the autonomy of a child by using the minimal amount of 
pressure necessary to gain the child’s compliance instead of immediately using threats to get 
the child to obey. When a friend of mine visited the doctor for swollen feet the doctor didn’t 
come right out and tell him to lose weight; instead he was sort of blasé and said something like 
“I find that my patients have the most difficulty in losing weight,” implying that it would be 
nice if my friend lost weight but that the doctor wasn’t going to pressure him into it or make 
him feel bad for not doing it.
Another way that a person can support another’s autonomy is by encouraging initiative—
that is, to give people a chance to decide for themselves what they would like to do or how they 
would like to do it without fearing repercussions for choosing poorly (Connell, 1990). Autonomy 
cannot be developed if a person is hesitant or fearful to make any choice whatsoever. Children 
learn to regulate and control their own behavior by making choices on trivial matters, like choos-
ing what to wear as a toddler, and then gradually learning how to make bigger decisions, like 
choosing their own friends and activities as teenagers.
To do this, parents, teachers, supervisors, therapists, or doctors need to support their 
child’s, worker’s, or patient’s, choice, even if they disagree with it (Connell, 1990). For example, 
students are often required to write a paper, but most of the time professors allow students to 
choose their own topics—even if it is a topic the professor has already read a hundred papers 
on! Good professors may limit topics or preap-
prove topics to make sure that all students work 
on a fruitful topic; bad professors may limit top-
ics to only the ones they do research on. Making 
the choice of what topic to write on helps build a 
sense of autonomy in students.
At the same time, parents and teachers 
should then stand by to help their children or 
students live with the consequences of these 
decisions—after all, that’s how we learn—but 
at a level the child or student can cope with 
(Connell, 1990). A psychology professor I knew 
would take his children with him to run errands 
on Saturdays. When they were finished, they 
would visit the local candy shop where the 
children could choose any kind of candy they 
wanted as a treat. The only catch was that the 
children couldn’t cry or make a fuss if they didn’t 
like what they picked (the store had a strict no-
return policy on the beautiful handmade candies 
“It is our choices, Harry, that 
show us what we truly are, far 
more than our abilities.”
Professor Dumbledore as cited in 
Rowling (1999, p. 333)
© Beckyabell/Dreamstime.com
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Which assignments do 
you like better, ones where 
you pick your own topic or 
where the professor assigns 
one? Why? Do competence 
or autonomy have anything 
to do with your answer?
Giving children choices over 
some behaviors, even if 
parents may not agree with 
those choices, helps children 
build a sense of autonomy. 
This girl is well on her way to 
developing autonomy, if not 
her fashion sense.
260

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
displayed in cases throughout the shop). Most of the time their choices worked out, but occa-
sionally they ended up with something they didn’t like. Their father, an expert in motivation, 
would say something like “Oh, those are your mom’s favorites! Go see if she has something 
she’d be willing to swap with you for those.” By this seemingly small treat, his two children 
learned to make decisions, try new things, take responsibility, and to live with their decisions. 
In short, he helped them develop autonomy in an age-appropriate way by applying these 
principles of autonomy support.
Even when it is not possible to give others choice and control, there are things that people 
can say to help the individual retain some sense of autonomy. For example, recognizing and 
respecting the individual’s point of view and feelings about the matter or helping individuals 
see how their actions relate to their personal goals, beliefs, or values, goes a long way toward 
helping people regulate their own behavior and stave off helplessness (Connell, 1990). For 
example an advisor might say: “I know you’re not happy about having to study for the LSATs 
while everybody else is out enjoying the nice weather. But it’s only for a few more weeks, and 
besides, you want to get into a good law school so you can become a lawyer. It will all be worth 
it in the end.”
Using these principles, researchers were even able to get kids to paint neatly. First and 
second graders were asked to draw a picture of a house they would like to live in using 
watercolors and paper neatly laid out in front of them in the experimental room (Koestner, 
Ryan, Bernieri, & Holt, 1984). Children were randomly assigned to one of three conditions 
in which an adult explained the rules to them. Children in the controlling limits condition 
were told “Before you begin, I want to tell you some things that you will have to do. There 
are rules that we have about painting. You have to keep the paints clean . . . . I want you 
to be a good boy (girl) and don’t make a mess with the paints.” Children in the autonomy 
supportive limits condition were told “I know that sometimes it’s really fun to just slop the 
paint around, but here the materials and room need to be kept nice for the other children 
who will use them.” There was also a control group that were given no limits on how they 
were to paint.
After this painting activity, the children were given the opportunity to continue to 
paint or to switch to another activity while the experimenter was out of the room for a 
few minutes. During this time, an assistant, unaware of which condition the child was in, 
surreptitiously monitored the child’s activity. The experimenters wanted to know how the 
differing instructions would affect the child’s intrinsic motivation, as measured by their 
choice to continue to paint or not. They also wanted to know if setting limits affected the 
children’s creativity and enjoyment of painting.
The children in all three groups did as they were told and did not make a mess with 
the paints. However, that was not the big news: Children in the autonomy supportive limits 
condition actually had greater enjoyment of painting and more artistic and creative paintings 
than children in the controlling limits condition (see Figure 2). Specifically, their paintings 
were higher in creativity, technical merit, over-
all quality, the number of colors used, and the 
level of detail. Further, the autonomy support-
ive limits condition and the no limits condi-
tion were not significantly different from each 
other on these variables. Even more amazing 
is that these differences between groups car-
ried over into the free choice period where 
children in the no limits and autonomy sup-
portive limits conditions painted longer than 
children in the controlling limits condition 
(see Figure 3). These results suggest that lim-
its can be communicated to children without 
undermining their autonomy, in a way that 
increases their motivation and the quality of 
their performance.
© Alena Ozerova/Fotolia
THINK ABOUT IT
Which is better: to tell a 
child “It’s your bedtime now” 
or “Your bedtime is in 5 min-
utes”? Why?
Limits and rules need 
not undermine intrinsic 
motivation if they are 
communicated in an 
autonomy-supportive way.
261

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
Fostering Competence: Structure and 
Optimal Challenge
To build competence, people need tasks that are aimed 
at the right level—not too easy, not too hard—with 
steps that are clear and doable. Specifically, people need 
to know exactly how to carry out a task and what the 
results of their actions will be. For example, if you are 
learning how to edit a document on the computer for 
the first time, it might be helpful to know that if you 
right-click on the mouse a menu will appear. People 
also need to know what is expected of them (e.g., “You 
need to choose copy from the menu”) and they need to 
get immediate feedback from the task (“Uh oh, cut is 
highlighted, where’s copy?”) or from another person so 
that they can learn the correct way to do a task (“cut is 
just above copy”). Large or difficult tasks need to be bro-
ken down into smaller steps, the way a basketball coach 
might institute drills to work on skills like passing, shooting, and dribbling, with the ultimate 
goal of winning a game. By attempting a task that is at the right level, where the steps necessary 
to carry out the task are clear and doable, and where there is immediate feedback, people learn 
very quickly how to master a task, building their sense of competence (Connell, 1990).
You can see this in action by coaches in how they train their players, by parents who set up 
household chores for their children (little kids set the table; bigger kids load the dishwasher), by 
work supervisors (“10 sales calls is a great goal for today”), and even in many computer games. 
Amazingly enough, this kind of structure is built into the Wii Fit game system. First, as part of 
the initial setup, the system calibrates an appropriate fitness level based on a player’s age and 
weight. This ensures that people are working toward a fitness goal that is neither too easy nor 
too hard for them. Then, as players start a game, the screen gives visual feedback to let players 
know exactly how they are doing.
For example, in one activity that trains players to control their balance on a board, the screen 
shows two columns visually indicating how much weight they have placed on each leg. Users must 
match their weight distribution to some standard set by the computer, leaning left or right to get 
the two columns to line up a certain way. In the early trials, players don’t have to be too exact to hit 
the standard. But as the game progresses, the computer demands that players get more and more 
precise in their movements. That is, the game trains players by successive approximation to become 
better at controlling their movements and balance. Of course, during the entire process players 
get both the visual feedback on the screen and a host of happy sounds when they achieve the goal 
(“Yay!”) or sad sounds when they don’t (“Awww!”). 
These features help players master physical activities 
like balance, agility, and coordination, and presum-
ably increase their fitness level in the process.
An important part of satisfying the need for 
competence is working on tasks that are opti-
mally challenging (Connell, 1990; Csikszentmih-
alyi, 1975; Deci, 1975). Tasks that are too difficult, 
where the demand outpaces the person’s skills, 
may cause the person to feel frustrated and then 
worried and anxious. Tasks that are too easy may 
cause relaxation and then boredom. Engagement 
in tasks that have a clear set of goals, that require 
appropriate responses, give immediate feedback, 
and in which people are operating at their maxi-
mum capacity can lead to a positive state called 
flow (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, 1997; see Figure 4).
Figure 2  Overall quality 
of children’s paintings as 
a function of condition. 
ns = not a significant 
difference between these 
groups; other comparisons are 
significant  Source: Koestner et 
al. (1984).
Autonomy Supportive Limits
Controlling Limits
No Limits
Condition
Overall Quality
ns
1
9
Figure 3  Time spent painting 
during the free choice period 
as a function of condition. 
ns = not a significant 
difference between these 
groups; other comparisons are 
significant  Source: Koestner 
et al. (1984).
Autonomy Supportive Limits
Controlling Limits
No Limits
Condition
60
120
180
240
360
300
Time Spent Painting During
Free Choice Period
ns
SEE FOR YOURSELF
How did you first learn to 
ride a two-wheel bike? Did 
you have training wheels? 
When did they come off?
262

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
 Flow is an experience marked by complete absorption, deep enjoyment, intense con-
centration, and almost an altered state, as people block out all irrelevant stimuli and focus 
entirely on the task at hand (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, 1997). Athletes call this being in the 
zone; religious mystics call it ecstasy (Csikszentmihalyi, 1997). Think of an artist who persists 
single-mindedly on a painting, ignoring hunger and fatigue (Getzels & Csikszentmihalyi, 
1976). When in a state of flow, people have no sense of time, reporting that minutes seem to 
pass in mere moments.    
 Flow experiences are especially likely to happen when people are engaged in creative activi-
ties, music, sports, games, and religious rituals. A composer explained how it felt when his music 
writing was going well: 
 You are in an ecstatic state to such a point that you feel as though you almost 
don’t exist. I have experienced this time and time again. My hand seems devoid 
© David L. Moore - Lifestyle/Alamy
  Figure 4  Tasks that are 
optimally challenging lead to 
a state called flow. Intensity 
of experience increases with 
distance from a person’s 
average levels of challenge and 
skill, as shown by the concentric 
rings.       Source: From Nakamura 
and Csikszentmihalyi (2009, 
Figure 18.2, p. 201). Nakamura, 
J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2009). 
Flow theory and research. 
In S. J. Lopez & C. R. Snyder 
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of 
positive psychology research 
(p. 195–206). Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.  
High
Anxiety
Arousal
Flow
Control
Boredom
Apathy
Relaxation
Worry
Low
High
Skills
Challenges
  People can develop 
competence at an activity 
when expectations are made 
clear, contingencies between 
behavior and outcomes are 
explained, tasks are broken 
down into manageable pieces, 
and feedback is given, even 
if all of this is provided by a 
computer game.   
 SEE FOR YOURSELF 
 Have you ever experienced 
flow? When? 
263

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
© Deanm1974/Dreamstime.com
THINK ABOUT IT
Is there something unique 
about parental attachments 
or can attachments to any 
adult meet a child’s need for 
relatedness?
of myself, and I have nothing to do with what is happening. I just sit there 
watching in a state of awe and wonderment. And the music just flows out by 
itself. (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975, p. 4)
Even just immersing oneself in everyday activities that are highly meaningful and which 
demand the right balance of challenge and skill can produce flow. Flow states are by no means 
the only way that a person can have their need for competence met, but they certainly are a 
powerful means of feeling competence, which together with autonomy, fosters motivation 
and engagement (Shernoff, Csikszentmihalyi, Schneider, & Shernoff, 2003). Tasks that are 
just a bit beyond a person’s skill level, personally meaningful, highly enjoyable, engrossing, 
or worth doing for their own sake, lead to the greatest amount of intrinsic motivation and 
positive emotion.
Fostering Relatedness: Involvement
Autonomy support and task structure both occur within a relationship, whether it be 
patient–doctor, teacher–student, parent–child, boss–worker, therapist–client, partner-to-
partner, or friend-to-friend. The quality of these relationships can increase the likelihood 
that autonomy and competence needs will be met. People feel related or connected to oth-
ers through involvement: the interest shown in them and their concerns, the time a person 
spends with them, and the energy that others invest in them (Connell, 1990; Grolnick & 
Ryan, 1987, 1989). For example, you may recall a teacher or coach who spent extra time 
with you or who took a special interest in your progress. Or perhaps a parent or grandpar-
ent helped you with a school project or shared their expertise with you, like teaching you 
to cook or fish. These efforts made you feel connected and made it easier for you to feel 
motivated.
One experiment’s failed attempt at a control condition inadvertently demonstrated the 
importance of relatedness. In this experiment, 4- to 5-year-old children played with colorful 
markers under various reward conditions (Anderson, Manoogian, & Reznick, 1976). In the 
control condition, where the child merely drew in the presence of a neutral experimenter, 
both the child and the experimenter found it awkward and unsettling to not interact with 
each other. Even as the experimenter didn’t 
make eye contact with the child, attend to 
his or her drawings, and ignored the child’s 
overtures, children persisted at getting the 
attention of the experimenter. Compared 
to the reward conditions, children in this 
control condition showed the lowest intrin-
sic interest of all conditions, when their 
motivation to draw with the markers was 
assessed a week later.
Part of what makes teachers auton-
omy-supportive is that they establish a 
warm, supportive relationship with their 
students (Reeve & Jang, 2006). Autonomy-
supportive teachers spend time listening to 
students, give students time to talk, and take 
the students’ perspective. These behaviors 
establish a sense of warmth, affection, and 
acceptance of students, fostering related-
ness. In contrast, controlling teachers seem 
to ignore the teacher–student relationship 
altogether and focus on correct answers and 
desired classroom behaviors instead (Reeve 
& Jang, 2006). Autonomy-supportive teach-
ers show a sensitivity and attunement to 
Relatedness, along with 
competence and autonomy, is 
important for the motivation 
and engagement of college 
students.
264

251
Relatedness in college students
Early research on students’ motivation for attending college focused on feelings of compe-
tence and autonomy, ignoring relatedness (Vallerand & Bissonnette, 1992). But for college 
students of color, relatedness to family, peers, and professors is especially important for 
their motivation and engagement. Students of color who perceive their campuses as hostile 
and unfriendly—indicating a lack of relatedness—are at risk for performing poorly in 
college and eventually dropping out (Smedley, Myers, & Harrell, 1993).
To study the relatedness of college students, researchers developed the Need for Relat-
edness at College Questionnaire (NRC-Q) to measure connectedness with friends and 
family back home, and faculty, staff, and peers at college (Guiffrida, Gouveia, Wall, & 
Seward, 2008; see Table 2).
Using this questionnaire, researchers discovered that relatedness was an important 
source of motivation for all college students regardless of their cultural background. 
Students were engaged in college for the relationships they hoped to develop (e.g., with 
friends), the teaching they looked forward to receiving (e.g., with professors), and the love 
and support of their family and friends back home. Researchers also found that friends 
and family back home could provide both intrinsic reasons (e.g., to give back to people 
who have supported and helped you) and extrinsic reasons (e.g., to keep up with others 
around you) for attending college. Intrinsic reasons, along with relatedness to peers and 
relatedness to faculty and staff, lessened a student’s intention to drop out of school. Extrin-
sic reasons were not related to a student’s intention to drop out of college.
These results highlight the predictions of self-determination theory that relatedness 
is an important but often overlooked variable in predicting motivation and engagement. 
Whether we are talking about students attending college or children in a classroom, 
involvement of parents, teachers, and peers can help fulfill a person’s need for relatedness.
The Personality of Everyday Life
Table 2  The Need for Relatedness at College Questionnaire (NRC-Q)
I go to college  . . . 
How well does each statement reflect your reasons for attending college? Rate each statement on a 1 (Does not correspond at all) to 
7 (Corresponds exactly) scale.
Relatedness with peers at college (M = 11.03):
	12.	 To make new friends
	 2.	 To meet friends who can relate to me and around whom I am comfortable
	 9.	 To become a member of an interesting and fun student organization
Relatedness with family and friends from home (helping them, making them proud, giving back to them) (M = 13.12):
	 1.	 To give back to my family
	11.	 To be able to help my family
	 4.	 Because I want to make my family and friends from home proud of me
Relatedness with faculty and staff (M = 10.96):
	 5.	 Because I am interested in connecting with faculty who have expertise in my areas of interest
	 7.	 To get to know faculty and staff whom I can learn from and feel comfortable around
	 3.	 To connect with a mentor who will support me and look out for me
Relatedness with family and friends from home (to keep up with them) (M = 7.51):
	10.	 To keep up with family members or friends from home
	 6.	 To relate to my friends from home who have gone to college
	 8.	 To help me talk to my friends or family members
Note: Responses are summed for each subscale. Average score for a group of college students on each of the subscales is given in parentheses. Numbers refer to the order of the items as presented 
on the original questionnaire.
Source: Adapted from Guiffrida et al. (2008, Appendix, p. 261). Guiffrida, D., Gouveia, A., Wall, A., & Seward, D. (2008). Development and validation of the need for relatedness at college questionnaire (NRC-Q). 
Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 1(4), 251–261. Copyright American Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.
265

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
students by sensing the cognitive and emotional states of their students and adjusting their 
instruction accordingly.
Then and Now: Undermining Intrinsic Interest
Is rewarding kids for getting good grades a good thing? In the Philadelphia area at the end 
of the 2009–2010 school year kids could cash in on their As to get pizza, ice cream, fast food, 
and even trading cards at some national chains, including Pizza Hut (Buckman, 2010). And 
that doesn’t even count the summer reading programs at local libraries that also promise kids 
rewards for reading on their own!
We can all agree that diligent work and reading skills are important for kids, but what if 
these extrinsic rewards inadvertently prevented kids from developing a lifelong love of read-
ing for its own sake? Just what is the effect of extrinsic factors like rewards, and also external 
controls like deadlines, imposed goals, competition, surveillance, and evaluations, on intrinsic 
motivation (Ryan & Deci, 2008a)?
This question of the impact of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic behavior has a long his-
tory in social psychology, and in fact was the inspiration behind self-determination theory 
(Deci, 1971; Ryan & Deci, 2008a). One of the earliest experiments was a landmark study 
rewarding nursery school children for drawing with markers (Lepper, Greene, & Nisbett, 
1973).
Researchers selected children who had shown an interest in drawing with markers to 
take part in an experiment on children’s drawing. Children came to the laboratory, one 
at a time, and were randomly assigned to one of three conditions. In the expected reward 
condition, children were told that they would earn “A Good Player Award” for drawing. In 
the unexpected reward condition, children received the same “Good Player Award” but only 
after they drew with the markers. This condition tested whether merely getting a reward 
lowers intrinsic interest or if explicitly contracting for the reward lowers interest. In a third 
no reward (control) condition, children drew with the markers but did not hear about nor 
receive an award.
All the children drew with the markers, received their awards (if they were in the expected 
or unexpected conditions), and returned to their regular classrooms. Then, after about a week 
or so, markers appeared in the children’s regular classrooms and the children were observed 
from behind a one-way mirror. The experimenters recorded how much of their free play time 
the children spent drawing with the markers.
Despite what a behaviorist might predict—that rewards will increase the desired 
behavior—rewards actually had the opposite effect! Not only were the drawings made by 
the children in the expected reward condition during the experiment rated by judges as 
inferior, but the children also played with the markers less when back in their regular class-
rooms and the experiment was over than children in the unexpected reward and no reward 
conditions (see Figure 5).
This effect is called the undermining of intrinsic interest or the overjustification effect. 
When intrinsic interest in an activity is already high, like drawing was for these children, if 
extrinsic factors are made more salient, by giving a reward, for example, then people will dis-
count their own intrinsic reasons for doing the behavior. It’s as if they say to themselves, “This 
must be one of those times when people have to make me to do something that’s not very fun 
to begin with.” As a result, people come to see the activity as the means to some end and cease 
to view the activity as desirable in itself. Both cognitive dissonance theory (Festinger, 1957) and 
self-perception theory (Bem, 1967, 1972) support this logic.
In the almost 40 years since this work was done, over 128 well-controlled experiments have 
tested the effect of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic interest. According to a meta-analysis the results 
are clear and consistent: tangible rewards—including anything from money to marshmallows—
undermine the intrinsic interest of participants, both children and college students (Deci, Koestner, 
& Ryan, 1999). In particular, rewards that are given explicitly for reaching a level of performance or 
for finishing a task are more likely to have an adverse effect than rewards that do not require engag-
ing in a specific task or which are not contingent on completion, quality of output, or reaching 
THINK ABOUT IT
What kinds of activities do 
people get paid for doing? 
Are they generally fun to 
begin with?
266

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
some standard of excellence (Deci et al., 1999, but see also Eisenberger, Pierce, & Cameron, 1999, 
for a dissenting view).
The key to predicting when rewards or threats of punishments will have negative 
effects on motivation and performance is to realize that external motivators can convey 
two meanings: control and information (Ryan & Deci, 2008a). The controlling aspect of 
an extrinsic factor suggests that the behavior is under external control (“You are doing the 
activity because I am giving you this reward”), essentially thwarting people’s satisfaction 
of the need for autonomy. The informational aspect provides feedback about people’s 
performance on the task (“One more and you’ll have 10!”) so that they can adjust their 
behavior and thereby satisfy their need for competence. A reward that is experienced as 
controlling (“Excellent! You should keep up the good work.”) will rob a person of auton-
omy and undermine intrinsic interest. But a reward that is experienced as informational 
(“Excellent! You’re doing great.”) will increase feelings of competence and not undermine 
intrinsic interest.
So it is not the reward per se that is good or bad, but how the reward is communicated 
and interpreted that determines whether the control or the information aspect will be more 
salient with the ultimate impact on motivation and performance. External motivators such 
Figure 5  Judges’ ratings of 
drawing quality during the 
experiment and percentage of 
free play time spent drawing 
with the markers after the 
experiment as a function of 
reward condition.  Source: 
Lepper et al. (1973). Quality was 
rated on a 1 to 5 scale.
No Reward
Unexpected Reward
Expected Reward
Condition
Percent of Free Choice Time
Spent Playing With the Markers
20
10
No Reward
Unexpected Reward
Expected Reward
Very Good
Very Poor
Quality of Drawings
5
1
0
2
3
4
What is the impact of rewarding 
people for getting good 
grades?
© Monkey Business/Fotolia
THINK ABOUT IT
What meanings does the 
phrase “I am proud of you” 
convey?
THINK ABOUT IT
What meanings does the 
phrase “See, I knew you 
could do it” convey?
267

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
as deadlines, imposed goals, competition, surveillance, and evaluations may also undermine 
intrinsic interest and performance if they are used to control (robbing autonomy) instead of 
for information (to increase competence).
Somebody at Pizza Hut grasped this important distinction, for now their website 
emphasizes the informational and non-performance-contingent nature of the reading 
rewards program by proclaiming, “Motivate children to read by rewarding their reading 
accomplishments with praise, recognition, and fun!”—all conditions that are less likely to 
undermine their intrinsic interest in reading.
Connections Between Self-Determination 
Theory and Other Theories in Personality
If some aspects of self-determination theory sound familiar to you that’s because the theory 
builds on and unites previous research in psychology. In particular, other theorists and research-
ers have recognized the importance of autonomy, competence, and relatedness. In this section, 
we highlight and clarify some of these connections.
Autonomy and Locus of Causality
People can differ in their beliefs about control (Rotter, 1966). Those with an internal locus of 
control believe they can influence what happens to them through their own efforts, behavior, 
or characteristics. Those with an external locus of control believe that what happens to them 
is due to chance, luck, fate, or other people. They believe that they have little control over what 
happens to them. Locus of control describes the connection between behavior and outcomes. 
The opposite of having control is feeling helpless.
Autonomy describes the connection between choice and behavior; the extent to which 
people feel free to choose their own behaviors or follow their own interests. Personality psychol-
ogists refer to the connection between choice and behavior as locus of causality (DeCharms, 
1981). As you can see, locus of causality (autonomy) is slightly different from locus of control. 
People may understand the contingency between their behavior and some outcome and are able 
to control their behaviors (locus of control), but they may not want to or feel free to engage in 
those behaviors (locus of causality).
The opposite of autonomy is compliance (including conformity to norms and obedience 
to a direct order) or defiance, both of which occur in direct response to the controlling actions 
of another (Patrick, Skinner, & Connell, 1993). Anytime a person gives in to external (e.g., 
rewards, punishments) or internal (e.g., guilt) pressures to behave in a certain way, he or she is 
behaving without autonomy.
Sadly, school, especially in the lower grades, is often structured to reward compliance 
instead of autonomy (Patrick et al., 1993). For example, have you ever been faced with the 
choice of writing what the teacher wanted rather than what you believed on an essay or a paper? 
In both cases—either writing what the teacher wants or writing what you believe—the behavior 
of writing is completely under your control. However, the feeling of pressure to just do what 
you are told and the lack of being able to act in a way that is truly and authentically yourself 
illustrates an external locus of causality as well as a lack of autonomy.
Competence and Self-Efficacy Theory
Feelings of competence are very similar to a sense of self-efficacy. Self-efficacy is the belief 
that one can be competent and effective at some activity (Bandura, 1977a, 1982, 2000b, 2001). 
There are two parts to self-efficacy beliefs (see Figure 6). First is the outcome expectation, the 
belief that behaving in a certain way will produce a certain outcome. Then there is the efficacy 
expectation, the belief that one is capable of acting in a certain way; that is, the expectation 
about whether a person will succeed or fail at performing the required action.
THINK ABOUT IT
What causes a person to 
feel guilty? Is that internal or 
external?
THINK ABOUT IT
What could you say to 
somebody to praise him 
or her without undermin-
ing the person’s intrinsic 
motivation?
268

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
For example, imagine a person recovering from a back injury who is told that one way of 
preventing such injury is by strengthening her abdominal muscles. Her physical therapist tells 
her that if she does certain exercises every day she will get stronger. This describes how her 
behavior (exercising) will lead to an outcome (increased strength). Is this enough for her to 
be motivated to do her exercises? She may indeed hold this outcome expectation, but she also 
needs to hold an efficacy expectation and believe that she is capable of physically getting down 
on the ground to do the sit ups or whatever the exercise demands. According to self-efficacy 
theory, the efficacy expectation is more important than the outcome expectation. There are 
many situations where people know what they ought to do—or not to do—but feel incapable 
of actually doing it. Self-determination theory would call this a lack of perceived competence.
Knowing people’s self-efficacy predicts how motivated they will be before and during an 
activity (Bandura, 1977). Self-efficacy determines which activities people are likely to engage in 
or avoid; how much effort they will put into that activity; whether they are likely to persist or 
give up, especially when the going gets tough; how well they perform; and what their emotional 
reactions might be before, during, and after the activity. Although self-efficacy theory predicts 
amount of motivation, it does not differentiate among types of motivation the way that self-
determination theory does.
We develop our self-efficacy beliefs from four sources of information (Bandura, 1977, 
1982). The most direct way is through personal experience. Successes build efficacy whereas 
failures decrease efficacy. Having a bad experience while skiing is likely to keep a person off the 
slopes for a long time and maybe even forever!
The second way is through the vicarious experience of watching another person enact 
the behavior and succeed or fail and then trying it ourselves. From observing others we can 
see what the task is all about so that we can anticipate what might happen when it is our turn. 
We also learn strategies to improve our own chances of succeeding. Have you ever witnessed a 
spectacular move of an athlete or dancer and thought that maybe you could do that? Or maybe, 
you’ve had the opposite experience of realizing that you could never do that! Then you’ve expe-
rienced how self-efficacy beliefs can be increased or decreased through observational learning 
and social modeling. Especially empowering are personal stories of people who have overcome 
difficulties in their lives through determination and effort (Bandura, 1977a).
© Checco/Dreamstime.com
Figure 6  The two parts 
of self-efficacy: efficacy 
expectations and outcome 
expectations.  Source: Lepper 
et al. (1973). Quality was rated 
on a 1 to 5 scale. Bandura, 1977, 
Figure 1, p. 193. Bandura, A. 
(1977a). Self-efficacy: Toward a 
unifying theory of behavioral 
change. Psychological Review, 
84(2), 191–215. Copyright 
American Psychological 
Association. Reprinted with 
permission. 
Efficacy
Expectations
Person
Behavior
Outcome
Expectations
Outcome
Whee! Self-efficacy beliefs 
come from direct experience, 
watching others, persuasion, 
and our physical and 
emotional reactions while 
engaging in an activity.
269

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
Self-efficacy beliefs can also develop or change through social persuasion. That is, friends, 
coaches, teachers, or therapists, for example, might be able to convince another person that he 
or she is capable of taking a desired action (e.g., Miserandino, 1998). Their persuasion often 
involves changing efficacy expectations (“Yes, you can call him up. Just take a deep breath and 
dial his number”), but can also involve outcome expectations (“Here’s his number, what’s stop-
ping you?” “Keep your eye on the ball, not the other player!”).
Finally, self-efficacy beliefs can come from physical and emotional states. According to self-
efficacy theory, we read our own physical and emotional reactions and adjust our self-efficacy 
beliefs accordingly. Do you have a gut reaction to the thought of giving a speech in front of the 
class or to the memory of a scary amusement park ride? Activities or the thought of activities that 
make us sweat, tire us out, or cause aches and pains lower our self-efficacy and may prevent us 
from attempting an activity (“I’m getting dizzy just looking at that ride”) or may cause us to stop 
the activity (“OK, three times on that roller coaster is enough”). Activities that energize us or occur 
in the absence of negative visceral reactions increase our self-efficacy and make us want to attempt 
the activity (“OK, I’ll give it a shot.”) or continue at it (“Hey, this isn’t so bad. Let’s go on it again!”). 
Tension, anxiety, and depression on many tasks, as well as feelings of fatigue and pain on tasks that 
require stamina and strength may be interpreted as signs of low self-efficacy (Bandura, 2000b).
Psychologists have used principles of self-efficacy theory to decrease people’s fears of trav-
eling by automobile, using elevators and escalators, climbing stairs to high levels, dining in 
restaurants, shopping in supermarkets, and entering public places (Bandura, Adams, Hardy, & 
Howells, 1980). In addition to treating phobias, self-efficacy theory has been used to help people 
recover from cardiac arrest (Bandura, 1982), to explain the effectiveness of groups (Bandura, 
2000a), and the academic achievement and career choices of students (Bandura, Barbaranelli, 
Caprara, & Pastorelli, 2001).
Relatedness and Attachment Theory
Relatedness is very much like attachment, and in fact, self-determination theory builds on 
work in attachment theory. Recall that an attachment figure can be a secure base from which 
to explore the world and a safe haven to retreat to in times of stress (Bowlby, 1973; Shaver & 
Mikulincer, 2007). In the same spirit, self-determination theory recognizes the fundamental 
importance of this need to be connected or attached to, not just caregivers or partners, but to 
friends, coworkers, teammates, peers, and other people in our world. Feeling connected to oth-
ers, along with autonomy and competence, gives us the motivation to engage with the world, 
persistence when the going gets tough, and increased well-being.
Research Methods Illustrated: Path Analysis
R
esearch in self-determination theory often uses a statistical technique called path analysis 
to test how variables affect each other. Though the mathematics behind this technique are 
pretty complicated, the logic is fairly straightforward and builds on the logic of regression.
Generally, researchers have some idea of how they think variables are related and path analysis 
is a way of testing their hunches. In a path analysis, researchers use statistics to test their hypotheses 
about how variables relate to one another. Researchers then draw a path diagram visually 
showing the significant effects of the variables on each other. Variables can have a direct effect 
on another variable, an indirect effect on another variable, or no effect on another variable. Direct 
effects are generally identified by a solid line; indirect effects by a dotted line, and no effect by the 
absence of a line. The head of the arrow tells us the direction of the effect. Lines with double arrows 
indicate that two variables affect each other.
Each of the lines connecting variables represents the regression coefficient, which is how much the 
x variable is weighted when it is used to predict the next variable in the model. The higher the weight 
the greater the impact one variable has on the other. A weight can be positive, indicating that it causes 
an increase in the next variable, or negative, indicating that it causes a decrease in the next variable.
For each model researchers propose, they test (1) if the overall model accounts for a significant 
amount of variability in the data; (2) if the weights are significantly different from 0; and (3) if the 
effects are direct or indirect. Once these questions have been answered, researchers draw a path 
diagram of the results, with variables, lines, arrows, and significant weights identified.
THINK ABOUT IT
Can systematic desensiti-
zation or guided imagery 
techniques decrease fear 
and increase self-efficacy? 
Why?
270

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
Consider the path diagram shown in Figure 7. This comes from a study of 528 employees 
from a major U.S. investment banking firm (Baard, Deci, & Ryan, 2004). The researchers wanted to 
test predictions of self-determination theory in the workplace. This overall model was better than 
other models the researchers tested in explaining their results. For example, gender was not a 
significant predictor in the model, so it was not included in this path diagram. As you can see, all 
of the pathways are direct (the lines are solid), one way (arrow heads on one end only), and highly 
significant (starred weights).
This analysis suggests that workers’ perceived supportiveness of their work environment 
had a direct impact on the satisfaction of their needs for autonomy, competence, and relatedness 
(measured in this study as one big variable called intrinsic need satisfaction). Also, approaching 
the world in an autonomous, intrinsically motivated way as opposed to being extrinsically 
motivated or feeling like the world pushes you around, also had a direct effect on workers’ need 
satisfaction.
Further, having their needs met had a direct effect on workers’ performance evaluations and 
adjustment. Because these two weights are positive, it means that having their needs met increased 
the quality of workers’ performance and increased their psychological adjustment in the work 
environment (Baard et al., 2004). Workers whose needs were met by an autonomy supportive climate 
showed greater emotional stability and better health than workers whose needs were not being 
met. Notice that the arrow between need satisfaction and performance evaluations is one way, so 
we know that having good performance evaluations does not satisfy workers’ needs for autonomy, 
competence, and relatedness. That is, need satisfaction is a cause, not a result, of high performance.
Now that you understand the basics of what path analysis is and how to interpret a path 
diagram, you can understand some of the fascinating research which has been done applying self-
determination theory in various domains.
What It Means to Be Self-Regulated
When faced with a task that is not particularly intrinsically interesting, say an assignment for 
school or work, what do you say to yourself to get yourself to do it? Do you give up and avoid 
thinking about it? Do you think of the dire consequences that could happen if you don’t do 
it? Do you promise yourself a treat if you do it? Do you remind yourself of how this activity 
is related to important goals you hold, a strategy of providing autonomy support, as we saw 
earlier in the chapter? Or, does doing it come naturally to you, as an extension of who you are, 
so that doing it is really no big deal? Although the behavior may look identical to an outsider 
when done for any of these reasons the outcomes are radically different.
Motivation is best characterized on a continuum, ranging from extrinsic to intrinsic, varying in 
how much volition or autonomy a person feels they have (Ryan & Deci, 2000). There is even a kind 
of motivation called amotivation that is a state of having no motivation, where people are neither 
extrinsically nor intrinsically motivated, perhaps feeling apathetic or alienated. Being self-regulated 
means adjusting our own behaviors and attitudes somewhere along this continuum of motivation 
depending on the situation and the activity at hand (see Figure 8). Self-regulation embodies the 
THINK ABOUT IT
Is it possible for good per-
formance evaluations to 
increase personal adjust-
ment at work? The research-
ers tested this hypothesis. 
What did they find?
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Think of something you 
have to do this week. What 
do you tell yourself to get 
motivated for it?
Figure 7  Path analysis 
of work performance and 
adjustment.  Source: From Baard 
et al. (2004, Figure 1, p. 2061). 
Reprinted with permission from 
Baard, P. P., Deci, E. L., & Ryan, 
R. M. (2004), “Intrinsic need 
satisfaction: A motivational 
basis of performance and well-
being in two work settings,” 
Journal of Applied Social 
Psychology, 34, pp. 2045–2068. 
Permission conveyed through 
the Copyright Clearance Center.
Intrinsic Need
Satisfaction
0.14**
0.46**
0.57**
0.24**
Perceived Autonomy
Support of Work
Climate
Autonomous
Causality
Orientation
Performance
Evaluations
Adjustment
271

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
humanistic values of freedom, responsibility, and authenticity, all part of being fully functioning 
according to Carl Rogers (1968), which is at the very heart of self-determination theory.
Types of Motivation
Intrinsic motivation and intrinsic regulation occur when people engage in an activity due to 
reasons inherent in the activity itself, like satisfaction or pleasure. Actually, very few activities we 
undertake in the course of a typical day are intrinsically motivating. Yet, most of our activities—
such as walking to class, grocery shopping, returning phone calls, going to the library, brushing 
our teeth—are undertaken with some measure of volition; that is, we are generally not forced 
or coerced into grocery shopping or brushing our teeth, yet there is nothing inherently plea-
surable about pushing a bristled implement around in your mouth with some special soaplike 
substance! We engage in many activities in our day, especially chores and other activities that 
are not particularly intrinsically interesting, by being self-regulating.
In contrast to intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation occurs when an activity is under-
taken for reasons that are external or separable from the activity itself, like gaining a reward 
or avoiding a punishment (Ryan & Deci, 2000). There are four types of extrinsic motivations, 
which vary in how much autonomy or volition is involved (Deci & Ryan, 2008b). At one extreme 
is external regulation , which is completely extrinsic and controlled by something or someone 
outside ourselves. Perhaps as a child you brushed your teeth to gain a reward like watching your 
favorite TV show or the praise of being called “good boy” or “good girl.”
Next comes introjected regulation in which the behavior is controlled by something 
within ourselves. Introjected regulation is experienced as just as controlling as external regula-
tion, except that we act as our own controlling agents, using guilt, anxiety, conditional self-
esteem, obligation, approval, or other thoughts to control ourselves. For example, I doubt that 
there is a parent who is going to tell you to brush your teeth before bed tonight and say “good 
boy” or “good girl” when you do (external regulation). However, you might make yourself brush 
your own teeth and perhaps feel good about yourself when you do (introjected regulation).
Both external and introjected regulation are considered controlled and therefore part 
of extrinsic motivation because the person feels pressured or controlled by demands and 
“[B]eing controlled by oneself 
can be fully as uncomfortable 
and detrimental to intrinsic 
motivation . . . as being 
controlled by another.”
Deci and Ryan (1985b, p. 106)
Figure 8  The types of motivation and regulation within self-determination theory, along with their placement along the 
continuum of relative self-determination.  Source: Ryan and Deci (2000, Figure 1, p. 72). Deci and Ryan (2008a, Figure 1, p. 17) 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2008a). Facilitating optimal motivation and psychological well-being across life’s domains. Canadian 
Psychology, 49(1), 14–23. Copyright American Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission.
Behavior
Nonself-Determined
Self-Determined
Motivation
Amotivation
Regulatory
Styles
Perceived
Locus of
Causality
Relevant
Regulatory
Processes
Non-Regulation
Impersonal
External
Somewhat
External
Somewhat
Internal
Personal
Importance,
Conscious
Valuing
Congruence,
Awareness,
Synthesis,
With Self
Interest,
Enjoyment,
Inherent
Satisfaction
Internal
Internal
Nonintentional,
Nonvaluing,
Incompetence,
Lack of Control
Compliance,
External
Rewards and
Punishments
Self-Control,
Ego-Involvement,
Internal Rewards
and Punishments
The Self-Determination Continuum Showing Types of Motivation With Their Regulatory Styles, Loci of Causality, and
Corresponding Processes
Extrinsic Motivation
Intrinsic
Motivation
Intrinsic
Regulation
External
Regulation
Introjected
Regulation
Identified
Regulation
Integrated
Regulation
272

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
contingencies (Deci & Ryan, 2008b). Despite all appearances of being actively engaged in an 
activity, when people are acting under external or introjected regulation they may also experience 
apathy, lower creativity, drug and alcohol abuse, and poor psychological health (Deci et al., 2001). 
 Two other kinds of extrinsic motivations are autonomously regulated but are still consid-
ered kinds of extrinsic motivation because they are not inherent in the activity (Deci & Ryan, 
2008b).  Identified regulation is when we accept the activity as personally meaningful, per-
haps for some greater goal which is more important than hassles involved in the task at hand. 
Under  integrated regulation , people have internalized the goals and values of the enterprise 
(e.g., work environment, maintaining a healthy lifestyle, getting an education) even though the 
particular activity (e.g., preparing reports, quitting smoking, taking an exam) is not inherently 
interesting. 
 For example, people who believe that they should take care of their bodies would prob-
ably show identified regulation for brushing their teeth and might not mind the momentary 
discomfort of hard bristles and medicine flavored toothpaste. However, if the  only reason a 
person brushes her teeth is to avoid having a nasty case of gingivitis, that would be an example 
of external regulation. 
 Consider a person who maintains a healthy lifestyle: He regularly exercises, doesn’t smoke, 
eats five servings of vegetables, avoids sugary drinks, uses organic products, and enjoys out-
door activities on the weekend. Suppose taking care of his teeth is just one of the many ways 
he expresses this aspect of his personality, it’s part of who he is, and he probably doesn’t even 
have to think about it. In this case, brushing his teeth is an example of integrated regulation 
where the identification with the activity is integrated into other aspects of the self (Ryan & 
Deci, 2000). Activities that are integrated are generally expressions of our true, authentic selves.    
 Getting back to the questions that opened this section, how  do you motivate yourself for 
an activity that is not particularly interesting? The possible strategies suggested there represent 
the different kinds of regulation just discussed—nonregulation, external regulation, introjected 
regulation, identified regulation, and integrated regulation. 
 This discussion of the different kinds of motivation and how people can regulate their 
own behavior suggests that people can willingly undertake even uninteresting tasks if the 
meaning and greater value behind the activities is understood. People who are more autono-
mous or self-regulated in their motivation can take up activities with identified, integrated, or 
intrinsic regulations and engage in these activities with more interest, enthusiasm, confidence, 
and show greater performance, persistence, and creativity (Deci & Ryan, 1991; Sheldon, Ryan, 
Rawsthorne, & Ilardi, 1997) in these endeavors than people who are more controlled in their 
activities (Ryan & Deci, 2000). They also show increased vitality (Nix, Ryan, Manly, & Deci, 
1999), self-esteem (Deci & Ryan, 1995), general well-being (Ryan, Deci, & Grolnick, 1995), and 
longer-lasting changes in health behaviors (Deci & Ryan, 2008b). 
  Experiences with extrinsic 
regulation as a child are often 
internalized as introjected 
regulation as an adult.   
© Suzi Nelson/Shutterstock
 THINK ABOUT IT 
 Recall the activity you 
identified at the beginning 
of this chapter. Why do you 
want to do it? What does it 
suggest about your moti-
vation for the task? 
273

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
Perhaps you can also see now why the various ways of providing autonomy support sum-
marized in Table 1 work: They help people find ways of regulating their behavior along this 
continuum. By supporting autonomy, agents such as parents, teachers, coaches, therapists, 
work supervisors, and friends foster internal motivation and self-determination. By being con-
trolling, these agents foster external motivation and non-self-determination (Deci & Ryan, 
1985b; Grolnick & Ryan, 1989). When we choose activities that are intrinsically interesting 
where possible, and regulate our behavior when choice is not possible, we maintain our own 
self-determination.
Causality Orientations
By the time we reach adulthood, we have a lifetime of experiences that can build our autonomy, 
lead us to develop competencies, and connect us with family, friends, and others. For people 
who have their needs for autonomy, competence, and relatedness met, the world is a very dif-
ferent place than for people who have had a lifetime of being pushed around, not developing a 
sense of their own competencies, or feeling unsupported by people around them. People differ 
in their causality orientations or their typical ways of self-regulating (Deci & Ryan, 2008b). 
These are important individual differences in what people expect from the world and how they 
approach specific situations.
Though people may express each of these orientations to some extent, generally one ori-
entation is stronger than the others. People show consistent, general ways of approaching tasks 
across many behaviors (brushing your teeth, practicing foul shots), situations (at work, at 
home), and even domains (academics, sports).
There are three causality orientations: autonomous, controlled, and impersonal. The 
autonomous orientation describes the degree to which people interpret a situation as 
autonomy supportive, providing information for their own self-regulation (Ryan & Deci, 
2008a). People develop an autonomous orientation when all three basic needs are regularly 
met. People with an autonomous orientation are attracted to situations that have the poten-
tial to stimulate their intrinsic motivation and which they find optimally challenging. The 
autonomous orientation is associated with autonomous self-regulation, greater initiative, 
good performance, and psychological well-being (Deci & Ryan, 2008b). You may recall the 
study, discussed earlier, of work performance at an investment banking firm (see Figure 7) 
in which workers with a more autonomous orientation were more likely to have all three of 
their needs met and to have more positive performance evaluations and better psychological 
adjustment (Baard et al., 2004).
A controlled orientation describes the degree to which people look for controls in the 
environment and let the environment or their own introjects determine and regulate their own 
behavior (Ryan & Deci, 2008a). People develop a controlled orientation when some degree of 
their needs for competence and relatedness are satisfied, but the need for autonomy is not. Peo-
ple with a controlled orientation approach situations ready to respond to situational demands 
and contingencies. People with the controlled orientation self-regulate through introjects and 
external contingencies, are dependent on rewards and other controls, and show diminished 
well-being (Deci & Ryan, 2008b).
An impersonal orientation describes the degree to which people feel they lack control 
over important outcomes (Ryan & Deci, 2008a). An impersonal orientation develops from 
consistently having all three needs thwarted. People with an impersonal orientation approach 
situations through amotivation with detachment and apathy, believing that there is little they 
can do to attain desired outcomes. People with an impersonal orientation show poor function-
ing and poor well-being (Deci & Ryan, 2008b).
Causality orientations are measured through the General Causality Orientations Scale 
(GCOS; Deci & Ryan, 1985a). The GCOS presents respondents with 12 hypothetical situations 
and 3 ways they might respond (see Table 3). Respondents rate each possible reaction on a 1 to 
7 scale of how likely they would be to react in each of these ways. Each of the possible responses 
represents one of the causality orientations. Responses are totaled separately for each orienta-
tion, and respondents receive a score indicating the strength of each of the orientations.
THINK ABOUT IT
Can causality orientations 
be changed?
274

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
Self-Determination Theory Applied
We can understand the three psychological needs and the conditions that foster these needs 
in one model of motivation and engagement (Connell & Wellborn, 1990; see Figure 9). 
According to this model, the context provides the nutriments for meeting the three needs, 
that is, structure for competence, autonomy support for autonomy, and involvement for 
relatedness. When these needs are met, we feel motivated for action and will experience 
positive emotions and feel like being engaged in the task at hand, be it school (Miseran-
dino, 1996; Skinner, Furrer, Marchand, & Kindermann, 2008), work (Gagné & Deci, 2005), 
health maintenance (Ryan, Patrick, Deci, & Williams, 2008; Williams et al., 2006, 2009; Wil-
liams, Grow, Freedman, Ryan, & Deci, 1996; Wilson, Mack, & Grattan, 2008), close relation-
ships (La Guardia & Patrick, 2008), therapy (Ryan & Deci, 2008b), or parenting (Joussemet, 
Landry, & Koestner, 2008). Across all of these contexts, as a result of our actions we will 
increase our skills, abilities, and general well-being.
However, if our needs are not met in a context that fails to provide either involvement, 
structure, or autonomy support, we will not feel motivated. Instead of engaging in the activi-
ties of the enterprise (e.g., studying, working, exercising, etc.) we may feel disaffection. For 
example, people who are engaged in a context show productive behaviors such as attention, 
effort and persistence, whereas people who are disaffected show behaviors such as lack of effort 
and withdrawal (Skinner et al., 2008). Instead of positive emotions like curiosity or enjoyment, 
they may express negative emotions like depression, frustration, or boredom (Skinner et al., 
Table 3  Sample Item and Orientations From the General Causality Orientations Scale
How likely is each outcome?
You have been offered a new position in a company where you have worked for some time. The 
first question that is likely to come to mind is:
I wonder if the new work will be interesting?
Autonomous Orientation
Will I make more at this position?
Controlled Orientation
What if I can’t live up to the new responsibility?
Impersonal Orientation
Source: Deci and Ryan (1985a, p. 118). Reprinted from Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985), “The general causality orientations scale: Self-determination 
in personality,” Journal of Research in Personality, 19, 109–134.  Copyright © 1985, with permission from Elsevier.  
Figure 9  A motivational model of the effects of psychological needs on engagement.   Source: From 
Connell and Wellborn (1990, Figure 2.2, p. 51). Reprinted from Connell, J. P., & Wellborn, J. G. (1990), 
“Competence, autonomy, and relatedness: A motivational analysis of self-system processes,” as appeared in 
M. Gunnar & L. A. Sroufe (Eds.), The Minnesota Symposia on Child Psychology Vol. 22, p. 43–77 (Minneapolis, 
MN: University of Minnesota Press). Permission conveyed through the Copyright Clearance Center.
Skills and
Abilities
Adjustment
Feel
Competent
Feel
Related
Feel
Autonomous
Structure
Involvement
Self
Context
Outcomes
Engagement &
Positive Emotions
vs.
Disengagement &
Disaffection
Actions
and
Emotions
Autonomy
Support
275

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
2008). As a result of disaffection, as shown in these behaviors and emotions, we will miss out 
on the chance to increase our skills and abilities, and may even end up experiencing the distress 
of poor psychological adjustment.
If all of this sounds a bit abstract to you, that’s what a theoretical model is. But if we apply 
this model to a specific context the model may make more sense. Part of the power of this 
model is that it can apply to many different situations. Let’s take a closer look at some of these.
Health Behaviors
Researchers and practitioners have applied the principles of self-determination theory to help 
patients take better care of themselves (Ryan et al., 2008). The more autonomy, competence, 
and relatedness patients feel, the more willing and able they are to quit smoking (Williams 
et al., 2006), successfully manage blood sugar levels (Williams et al., 2009), lose weight (Wil-
liams et al., 1996), and exercise regularly (Wilson et al., 2008). The self-determination model 
of motivation and engagement has even been used by dentists and hygienists to get people to 
take better care of their teeth (Halvari & Halvari, 2006; see Figure 10).
In the beginning of this study, patients in a dental clinic had their motivation for taking 
care of their teeth measured and their teeth examined for plaque and evidence of the gum 
disease gingivitis (Halvari & Halvari, 2006). About 1 month later, all participants had their 
teeth cleaned. Then, about 2 months later, patients were randomly assigned to receive either a 
special intervention or standard care. Patients in the intervention group returned to the clinic 
for a one-on-one session with a dental hygienist. Patients in the standard care condition did 
not return to the clinic and did not have this extra session about home oral health care. The 
lack of specific instruction was standard treatment at the time.
During the intervention, the hygienist asked patients in this condition about any den-
tal problems they might have been experiencing. They listened to and acknowledged the 
patient’s feelings and perspectives, and then gave feedback and suggestions. If a patient was 
having a problem, the hygienist presented patients with a combination of x-rays, pictures, 
examples, and information about how to remedy and prevent common gum problems. 
Patients were given options about treatments they could do at home to prevent problems 
along with a meaningful rationale for each option. The hygienist demonstrated the correct 
techniques of flossing and brushing and gave patients a chance to practice these techniques. 
“Diseases are of two 
types: Those we develop 
inadvertently, and those 
we bring on ourselves by 
failure to practice preventive 
measures. Preventable illness 
makes up approximately 70% 
of the burden of illness and 
associated costs.”
C. Everett Koop, surgeon general of 
the United States from 1982 to 
1989 (1995)
Plaque
T1
Plaque
T3
Gingivitis
T1
Gingivitis
T3
Perceived
Competence
T1
Autonomous
Motivation
T1
Autonomous
Motivation
T3
Perceived
Competence
T3
Autonomy
Support
T2
Health
Behavior
T3
0.39***
0.30**
0.20*
0.43***
0.33**
0.42***
0.49***
0.13
0.41***
0.24*
Figure 10  Self-determination theory model of oral health care: Self-determination theory predicted the amount 
of plaque patients had at the end of the experiment better than amount of plaque at the start of the experiment 
did. Significant pathways are marked by asterisks: *p 6 .05, **p 6 .01, ***p 6 .001. T1 = Beginning of 
experiment, T2 = Two months later, T3 = End of experiment.  Source: Halvari and Halvari (2006, Figure 1, 
p. 300) Halvari, A. E. M., & Halvari, H. (2006). Motivational predictors of change in oral health: An experimental test  
of self-determination theory. Motivation and Emotion, 30, 295–306.
THINK ABOUT IT
What prevents people from 
taking steps to protect 
themselves from prevent-
able diseases?
276

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
All the while, she encouraged and conveyed confi-
dence in their ability to do these tasks. During the 
entire intervention controlling or pressuring lan-
guage was kept to a minimum. At the end of the 
session, patients were given toothbrushes, floss, and 
brochures reinforcing good dental care at home.
Then, 7 months later, all participants returned 
to the clinic where their motivation, perceived com-
petence for dental care, attitudes toward dental care, 
and dental health behaviors were assessed. Finally, all 
participants had an oral examination in which plaque 
and gingivitis were again measured.
The researchers hypothesized that the interven-
tion would increase patients’ perceived competence 
for dental care and their sense of autonomy in prac-
ticing good dental hygiene. Patients with greater com-
petence would floss and brush better, and as a result, 
show less plaque and gingivitis at the end of the exper-
iment. Figure 10 shows the results of the path analysis 
testing this model.
The results supported these predictions. The intervention (the box labeled autonomy sup-
port T2) was successful in giving patients an increased sense of competence and autonomy (the 
boxes labeled perceived competence T3 and autonomous motivation T3, respectively). Patients 
whose competence and autonomy needs were being met either through the intervention or 
because they had a strong sense of autonomy to begin with were more likely to take better care 
of their teeth and to have less plaque than patients who believed they lacked competence and 
autonomy. This self-determination theory pathway was a better predictor of plaque at the end 
of the experiment than was the amount of plaque patients had at the beginning of the study! In 
addition, gingivitis at the end of the study was indirectly influenced by feelings of competence 
and autonomy through the amount of plaque patients had at the end of the study and directly 
through the amount of gingivitis patients had at the beginning of the study.
This study illustrates that feelings of autonomy and competence, nourished by autonomy 
support and task structure, motivated people to take better care of their teeth. Increased moti-
vation led to increased health behaviors which led to a healthier mouth.
Sports Behaviors
Which phrase do you agree with more: “Winning isn’t everything; it’s the only thing” or “It’s 
not whether you win or lose but how you play the game”? As we saw earlier in this chapter, 
feedback can communicate two meanings: control and information (Ryan & Deci, 2008a). 
The mere outcome of a game played against another opponent—winning or losing—conveys 
information about a person’s skill. So there is nothing inherently motivating or demotivat-
ing about competition by itself. However, the context in which the competition occurs can 
undermine intrinsic motivation if athletes experience the situation as controlling (Reeve & 
Deci, 1996).
College students who solved a block puzzle faster than their opponents, regardless of 
whether they were specifically instructed to beat their opponent or to just do their best, reported 
greater perceived competence than participants who lost the competition. However, partici-
pants who were pressured into winning (e.g., winning is the only thing that matters; focus your 
attention on being the winner) felt less intrinsic motivation and lowered perceived autonomy 
than participants without the pressure (Reeve & Deci, 1996). This suggests that coaches can 
have a huge impact on how their players interpret and experience practices and competitions 
to the benefit or detriment of their motivation.
In a study of soccer players aged 12 to 16 in Valencia, Spain, researchers found that coaches 
influence both the ability of their players to self-regulate their motivation and the emotional 
experiences of their players while playing and practicing (Álvarez, Castillo, & Duda, 2008). 
Open up and say 
ahh . . . tonomy! Patients 
who are competent at 
brushing and flossing and 
who take responsibility for 
doing so have less plaque 
than patients who lack 
competence and autonomy.
© Deklofenak/Dreamstime.com
SEE FOR YOURSELF
What kinds of things does 
your dentist or hygienist say 
to you? Do you feel com-
petent and motivated or 
incompetent and pressured 
after a visit?
277

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
Using path analysis, they discovered that the extent to which players’ needs for autonomy, 
competence, and relatedness were met, directly and indirectly increased their enjoyment and 
decreased their boredom of the game (see Figure 11). The more players perceived that coaches 
provided autonomy support, structure and involvement, the more the players were self-reg-
ulated and engaged in practice using intrinsic or identified regulation instead of external or 
introjected regulation or amotivation (see Table 4). Self-regulated motivation, in turn, also 
increased players’ enjoyment of the game.
As promising as these results are, keep in mind that these athletes were studied at one 
moment in time, so we are unable to know for sure if coaches behaviors caused the athletes 
to feel that their needs were being met. Recall our caveat that correlation is not causation. To 
answer definitively what impact coaching has on athletes’ motivation and well-being, we need 
to study coaches’ behaviors and athletes’ experiences over time. This is precisely what was done 
in a study of gymnasts (Gagné, Ryan, & Bargmann, 2003).
Using a diary study, researchers followed the day-to-day motivation to attend practice, 
satisfaction of the three needs, emotions, energy level, and self-esteem of a team of 45 female 
gymnasts, 7 to 18 years of age (Gagné et al., 2003). Gymnasts were part of a competition team 
that practiced an average of 7 hours a week. They filled out questionnaires before and after 
every practice for 15 practices over the course of a month. The researchers wanted to know how 
fluctuations in an athlete’s feelings of motivation, energy, and self-esteem related to perceptions 
of their coach’s and parents’ autonomy support, structure, and involvement, and feeling that 
their needs were being met during practice (see Table 5).
Coaches have a direct effect 
on players’ motivation and 
well-being.
© Photographerlondon/Dreamstime.com
Coach
Autonomy
Support
Psychological
Need
Satisfaction
0.47
0.29
0.18
0.16
0.51
0.17
0.43
Self-Determined
Motivation
Enjoyment
Boredom
Figure 11  Self-determination theory path analysis of soccer players’ context, need satisfaction, motivation, and 
emotions. All marked pathways are significant. Numbers marked are standardized beta weights. Negative numbers 
indicate that one variable decreases the next variable in the path.  Source: Adapted from Álvarez et al. (2008, Figure 
3, p. 145). Reprinted with permission from Álvarez, M. S., Balaguer, I., Castillo, I., & Duda, J. L. (2008), “Coach autonomy 
support and quality of sport engagement in young soccer players,” The Spanish Journal of Psychology, 12(1), 138–148.
278

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
As you might expect, these gymnasts were highly self-determined in their motivation, 
scoring the highest in identification and intrinsic regulation. Younger gymnasts showed more 
introjected regulation than older gymnasts. Gymnasts who were high in identification attended 
practices more regularly.
The more autonomy-supportive parents and coaches were perceived by the gymnasts to 
be, the more self-regulating the gymnasts were, showing more identified and intrinsic moti-
vation. Gymnasts who were more self-regulated experienced more positive emotions dur-
ing practices, like feeling excited, alert, enthusiastic, and inspired. They also showed more 
energy and vitality during practice (e.g., feeling alive, energized, spirited) and more stable 
self-esteem, and attended more practices. Gymnasts who were less self-regulating, feeling 
more controlled by their parents or the coach, reported more introjection and external 
motivation, experienced more negative emotions during practice, such as feeling distressed, 
nervous, sad, and irritable. They also showed less energy and vitality, and more unstable 
self-esteem.
During a practice session, gymnasts who reported that the practice fulfilled their needs 
for autonomy, competence, and relatedness experienced a boost in positive affect, energy, and 
stability of self-esteem by the end of that practice compared to how they felt at the beginning 
of practice. In particular, gymnasts who perceived the coach was highly involved in their train-
ing on a given day had more stable self-esteem during a practice session than gymnasts who 
perceived their coach as being uninvolved.
This study illustrates two parallel effects. First, there is the self-regulation style that gym-
nasts bring to practice. This style is developed over the course of a lifetime of experiences 
with parents as well as through past interactions with their coach. We might think of this as 
the backdrop for what goes on in a particular practice. The self-regulatory style of individual 
gymnasts is part of their personality, and was fairly stable over the month that these gymnasts 
were studied. In general, gymnasts who were more self-regulated showed greater engagement 
and well-being than gymnasts who were less self-regulating.
Table 4  Why Do You Practice Your Sport? Sample Items From the Sport Motivation Scale
Item
Type of Regulation
For the excitement I feel when I am really involved in the activity
Intrinsic Motivation
Because it is one of the best ways I have chosen to develop other aspects of myself
Identified Regulation
Because I must do sports to feel good about myself
Introjected Regulation
For the prestige of being an athlete
External Regulation
I don’t know anymore; I have the impression that I am incapable of succeeding in this sport
Amotivation
Note: Self-determined motivation was assessed with a Spanish version (Balaguer, Castillo, & Duda, 2007) of the Sport Motivation Scale (SMS; Pelletier et al., 1995). Responses are rated on a 7-point 
Likert scale ranging from 1 (Does Not Correspond at All) to 7 (Corresponds Exactly).
Source: Adapted from Álvarez et al. (2008, p. 142).
Table 5  Selected Items From the Need Satisfaction Scale
Need
Item
Autonomy
My coaches helped me choose my own direction during practice
Competence
I was good at gymnastics
Relatedness
I felt like I was part of the team
Note: This scale assessed the extent to which gymnasts felt that their needs were met during a practice session. Responses were rated on a 
5-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (Completely Disagree) to 5 (Completely Agree).
Source: Adapted from Gagné et al. (2003, p. 378).
THINK ABOUT IT
Why did younger gymnasts 
show less self-determined 
motivation than older 
gymnasts?
279

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
Second, what did vary over the course of the study, was the impact of each practice session 
on the engagement and well-being of the gymnasts. Each practice session affected the extent 
to which gymnasts felt their needs were met. A good practice session—one in which their 
needs for autonomy, competence, and relatedness were met—left them feeling better than 
when they came in: more excited, alert, inspired, energetic, enthusiastic, and so on. However, a 
bad practice—one in which their needs for autonomy, competence, and relatedness were not 
met—made them feel worse than when then came in: more distressed, nervous, sad, irritable, 
lonely, dispirited, discouraged, and not so sure of themselves.
Comparing the results of this study with the Álvarez et al. (2008) study of Spanish soc-
cer players (see Figure 11), we can confidently say that the extent to which a coach fosters the 
three needs within their players during a given practice session causes an increase in the self-
regulation, engagement, and well-being of their players.
Work Behaviors
According to Stone, Deci, and Ryan (2009), today’s workplace has changed in recent years and 
so managers need to change their ways of thinking as well. Where management once applied 
a carrot-and-stick approach to motivating their workers by offering rewards or punishments 
to control them, we now know that such controlling methods are problematic. At the very 
least, these methods require continual monitoring and surveillance, and at the very worst, 
they often undermine intrinsic interest. Further, the nature of work today in our information 
economy requires more thought and creativity than routine factory jobs of earlier times. One 
simply cannot foster creativity and talent with controlling methods, as we saw with children’s 
artwork in the Then and Now feature. Finally, because of the cost and effort required to hire 
and train skilled workers, organizations are shifting their focus and caring more about the 
retention and satisfaction of employees than they once did, seeking to boost well-being of 
workers in addition to organizational productivity. Self-determination theory provides the 
tools to increase motivation, creativity, satisfaction, and job performance of workers (Deci, 
Connell, & Ryan, 1989; Stone et al., 2009).
There are a number of steps that managers can take to foster the motivation of their 
workers, leading to a sustainable motivation—that is, a self-directed, rather than externally 
controlled, motivation that persists in the absence of direct surveillance (see Table 6). These 
steps are all ways of providing autonomy support, structure, and involvement to help satisfy 
workers’ needs for autonomy, competence and relatedness. As we saw, when people feel that 
their needs are being met they will be more engaged in the work at hand.
These principles were put into action to help employee morale in the Xerox Corporation 
during a period of downsizing in the late 1980s (Deci et al., 1989). The participants in this 
study were nearly 1,000 technicians and their field managers. Technicians spent practically all of 
their time on the road dealing with clients, whereas field managers were responsible for about 
18 technicians who formed their work team. Individual technicians had little contact with the 
other technicians except for monthly team meetings and saw their field manager only once a 
week or so to hand in time cards.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
How important to you are 
prestige, money, and free-
dom in a job?
Table 6  How to Create Autonomous Motivation in a Work Setting
	 1.	 Ask open questions and invite participation in problem solving.
	 2.	 Actively listen and acknowledge employee perspectives.
	 3.	 Offer choices within structure including the clarification of responsibilities.
	 4.	 Provide sincere, positive feedback that acknowledges initiative and factual, nonjudgmental feedback about problems.
	 5.	 Minimize coercive controls such as rewards and comparisons with others.
	 6.	 Develop talent and share knowledge to enhance competence and autonomy.
Source: From Stone et al. (2009, Table 1, p. 80). Beyond talk: Creating autonomous motivation through self-determination theory. Journal of General Management, 34, 75–91.
280

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
During this period of uncertainty, wages were frozen and layoffs were widespread. Both 
technicians and managers were understandably upset by the pay freeze, and felt tremendous 
pressure to perform fearing that they could easily be the next person laid off and lose their jobs. 
Technicians reported that instead of feeling supported by their managers—who were no doubt 
feeling pressure of their own from above—they felt pressured and controlled. Managers reported 
feeling isolated and avoided talking to other managers for fear of revealing weakness in themselves 
or in their team. As you can see, the needs of autonomy and relatedness were both lacking under 
these conditions, although corporate management didn’t think of the problems in these terms.
To help remedy this situation, corporate management wanted to change the organizational cli-
mate to include more participative management (which would increase autonomy) and employee 
involvement (which would increase relatedness). It instituted special training, established problem-
solving groups, restructured work teams, and brought in external consultants to help implement 
these changes. Some of these consultants were trained in principles of self-determination theory. 
During the intervention, these consultants modeled autonomy-supportive behaviors and involve-
ment in their interactions with the managers so that managers would experience for themselves 
the power of the self-determination theory model of motivation and engagement.
As part of the intervention, field managers met together and were given a chance to express 
their negative feelings about the work climate and to have their perspective acknowledged. 
Then, managers shared strategies that had worked for them with their own teams. During 
the process, the consultants modeled how to listen empathetically, taking the perspective of 
the managers, and acknowledging their feelings. Field managers were then trained in how to 
support their workers’ self-determination using aspects of autonomy support including giving 
them choice whenever possible, providing them with noncontrolling feedback, and showing 
acceptance and acknowledgment of their perspective.
In the process of mastering these skills, managers learned to support and encourage each 
other. Then, when they returned to their regular work teams, they were able to use these skills 
with their own technicians. As a result, technicians felt less pressure and control, and more 
support and freedom in the workplace. For example, instead of passing the pressure they were 
feeling onto the technicians, managers sought support from the other managers. Managers also 
supported initiative in their workers, and helped them be more self-regulating.
Over the 18 months of the study, technicians’ satisfaction with their work increased as a 
direct result of the field managers’ support of their self-determination. At the beginning, the 
researchers were likely to hear things like “This is the kind of company that doesn’t give a damn 
about its people” (Deci et al., 1989, p. 586). But by the end of the study workers with managers 
who supported their self-determination started to feel better and more positive about most 
aspects of their work situation. Workers with controlling managers continued to feel bad and 
to express negativity about most aspects of their work.
Autonomy, competence, and 
relatedness can increase 
workers’ motivation and job 
satisfaction.
© Savoi67/Dreamstime.com
THINK ABOUT IT
Many people today face 
an uncertain work environ-
ment. Could similar inter-
ventions improve employee 
morale and motivation?
281

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
The more managers supported the self-determination of their technicians, the more trust-
ing of the corporation technicians were and the less pressure they felt at work. Technicians also 
reported greater satisfaction with feedback from their managers, opportunity for input, and 
job security over the course of the study.
The Pursuit of Happiness
What leads to happiness? Does pursuing the ideals of achieving fame, fortune, and good looks 
lead to well-being? Though these goals are pursued by many people, both in the U.S. and in 
other countries, some researchers wonder if the pursuit of these extrinsic goals disconnect 
people from their family, friends, and community, making it difficult to achieve a sense of 
well-being and mental health.
For many people, pursuing the “American Dream” of financial success does indeed have a 
dark side (Kasser & Ryan, 1993, 1996). That is, young people who aspire to financial goals (e.g., 
being able to buy things they want, being their own boss, having a prestigious job) are more 
depressed, more anxious, and less self-actualized than people who strive for self-acceptance 
(having a meaningful life, knowing and accepting themselves) or affiliation (having friends, 
spouse, children).
This is true even in a formerly communist country like Russia, where young people today 
are able to pursue the values of a free-market economy even though they were not raised in 
such a climate (Ryan et al., 1999). U.S. and Russian college students who value intrinsic goals 
more than extrinsic goals have higher subjective well-being, life satisfaction, self-esteem, and 
self-actualization.
However, that’s not the whole story: Well-being also depends on people’s reasons for pur-
suing financial success (Carver & Baird, 1998). For example, students who agreed that it would 
be fun to have a job that paid well or that it was important to them to have the freedom to 
do what they choose or who felt that it would be satisfying to have a job that paid well, had 
higher self-actualization. In contrast, students who believed that achieving financial success is 
something you’re supposed to do, or that it would make their family proud, or that people will 
respect them if they are financially successful were less self-actualized.
The trouble is, too often the pursuit of fame, fortune, or good looks involves relying on 
external standards rather than on a person’s internal standards (Kasser & Ryan, 1996). That is, 
it involves extrinsic motivation rather than intrinsic motivation. So, it is both what you choose 
to pursue and why you pursue it that is important for well-being and happiness (Sheldon, 
Ryan, Deci, & Kasser, 2004). Fame, fortune, or good looks, in and of themselves, do not lead 
to well-being and happiness but rather freely choosing what to pursue, feeling competent in 
one’s endeavors, and being meaningfully related to others along the way does lead to happiness 
(Kasser & Ryan, 1996).
The Tae Bo Study Revisited
Do you recall the study that opened this chapter on teens learning about Tae Bo in their 
gym class? The experimenters manipulated the autonomy supportiveness of the instructor 
(Vansteenkiste et al., 2004). In one condition he emphasized the students’ own choice in 
whether to participate or not in the exercises, whereas in the other, he pressured students 
into participating. At the same time, the experimenters also manipulated whether students 
would engage in Tae Bo for intrinsic or extrinsic reasons. Both autonomy support and an 
intrinsic goal led to greater effort by the students, better performance, and higher persistence 
up to 4 months later. And the combination of both autonomy support and an intrinsic goal 
had the best outcomes of all!
You can see now how these manipulations helped foster a sense of autonomy in the students. 
Having their need for autonomy satisfied increased the students’ motivation for learning and 
practicing Tae Bo. Further, being fully engaged in their Tae Bo class, they no doubt developed 
competence at this new skill.
“The U.S. Constitution doesn’t 
guarantee happiness, only the 
pursuit of it. You have to catch 
up with it yourself.”
Ben Franklin
282

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
Imagine a lifetime of such experiences in which people build autonomy and competence 
while having warm, supportive relationships with peers and adults. By the time we reach adult-
hood, we have some generalized notions about what to expect from the world. People differ 
in the extent to which they feel pushed around or supported by the world. These causality 
orientations account for differences between people in how they approach new situations and 
interpret feedback which impacts their psychological functioning and well-being (Ryan & Deci, 
2008a, 2008b). So, a little Tae Bo may be good, but autonomy, competence, and relatedness are 
even better!
Chapter Summary
Self-determination theory suggests that people’s intrinsic or extrinsic reasons for undertaking 
an activity are related to important outcomes. When people act because they feel pressured 
to, they lose motivation, their performance suffers, and they experience a loss of well-being. 
However, when people act out of their own volition, they are able to sustain motivation, per-
form well, and increase their well-being. This illustrates the need for autonomy, one of three 
primary psychological needs.
According to self-determination theory, all people, regardless of cultural background, 
have three inborn psychological needs that are necessary to survive and thrive: autonomy 
(choice, volition), competence (mastery, skillfulness), and relatedness (connection with 
others). These needs have been studied extensively by psychologists from many differ-
ent traditions. Self-determination theory builds on the work of related theories including 
locus of causality (autonomy), self-efficacy theory (competence), and attachment theory 
(relatedness). People get these needs met from the social situation. Autonomy support helps 
people feel autonomous, structure and optimal challenge helps people feel competent, and 
involvement helps people feel relatedness.
One prediction of self-determination theory is that rewards and punishments may back-
fire, causing people to lose interest in an activity and to not perform their best, especially at 
activities that require creativity. This overjustification effect has been demonstrated in children 
and adults, with all sorts of rewards (e.g., monetary, praise, candy, etc.). External motivators 
such as deadlines, imposed goals, competition, surveillance, evaluations, and rewards that com-
municate information about competence at a task do not necessarily undermine motivation 
and performance. However, rewards that signal lack of autonomy and the presence of control 
will be detrimental to motivation and performance.
Part of being autonomous is having the ability to self-regulate one’s behaviors especially 
when it comes to engaging in activities that are not intrinsically interesting. Motivations can 
vary in how self-determined they are, from amotivation (or nonregulation), external regulation, 
introjected regulation, identified regulation, integrated regulation, and intrinsic regulation. The 
least self-determined regulation is amotivation, when people feel apathetic and disengaged. The 
most self-determined motivation is intrinsic regulation, when people act because of inherent 
interest in the task.
After a lifetime of having one’s needs for autonomy, competence, and relatedness met—
or not—people develop expectations about the world called causality orientations. People 
may have an autonomous, controlled, or impersonal orientation and differ in their motiva-
tion, engagement, psychological adjustment, and overall well-being.
Path analysis is a statistical technique researchers use to test that a hypothesized model 
accounts for a significant amount of variance in the data better than do other models. Path 
analysis identifies direct and indirect effects of variables on each other. The results are generally 
summarized in a diagram with significant paths drawn between variables. Path analysis can 
tell us which causal paths are more likely among a set of variables, but cannot prove causal-
ity unless the variables are measured at different times or were manipulated as part of a true 
experiment. Researchers have used path analysis to test predictions from the self-determination 
theory model of engagement.
Go online for more 
resources to help you 
review.
Study and Review
on mysearchlab.com
283

Regulation and Motivation: Self-Determination Theory
According to the self-determination theory model of engagement, the three needs can be 
fostered or thwarted by the social context. When these needs are met, people feel motivated, 
engaged, perform at a high level, build skills, and increase their well-being. When these needs 
are not met, people will feel disengaged and disaffected, show low motivation, experience nega-
tive emotions, not increase their skills, and overall have poor well-being. This model has been 
applied to numerous domains including school, work, health, close relationships, therapy, and 
parenting.
For example, when health professionals help their patients meet these needs, people take 
more responsibility over their health and experience greater health as a result. Coaches who help 
their players meet these needs have players who are more motivated and enjoy practices more. 
At work, employees who feel more autonomous, competent, and related to their coworkers and 
supervisors show greater work satisfaction and work more independently. Finally, freely choos-
ing what goals to pursue, feeling competent at one’s pursuits, and feeling meaningfully related 
to others while doing so leads to lasting happiness. Accepting external goals such as pursuing 
fame, fortune, or good looks because of societal pressures is a recipe for unhappiness.
Review Questions
	 1.	 What is self-determination theory? What two predictions of self-determination theory are 
illustrated by the Tae Bo study?
	 2.	 What are the three fundamental psychological needs? How do we satisfy these needs? What 
are some specific examples of how these needs may be met in a particular situation?
	 3.	 What two meanings might rewards and punishments for performance convey? What kind 
of feedback is likely to undermine intrinsic interest?
	 4.	 How are autonomy and locus of causality similar? How are competence and self-efficacy 
similar? How does relatedness build on attachment theory?
	 5.	 What is path analysis? When understanding a path diagram, what do solid lines, arrow 
heads, and weights indicate?
	 6.	 What does it mean to be self-regulated? What are the different kinds of regulation? What 
are the different types of motivation?
	 7.	 What are the three causality orientations? How do people with each of these orientations 
approach new situations?
	 8.	 What is the motivational model of engagement that describes how aspects of the context, 
self, and actions can lead to positive or negative outcomes?
	 9.	 How has self-determination theory been applied to dental care, athlete’s motivation, work 
motivation, and the pursuit of happiness?
Key Terms
“Don’t ask what the world 
needs. Ask what makes you 
come alive, and go do it. 
Because what the world needs 
is people who have come 
alive.”
Howard Thurman, American 
educator
Self-determination theory
Extrinsically motivated
Intrinsically motivated
Humanistic tradition
Actualizing tendency
Autonomy
Competence
Relatedness
Optimal challenge
Flow
Overjustification effect
Locus of control
Locus of causality
Self-efficacy
Outcome expectation
Efficacy expectation
Path analysis
Path diagram
Amotivation
Intrinsic motivation
Intrinsic regulation
Extrinsic motivation
External regulation
Introjected regulation
Identified regulation
Integrated regulation
Causality orientations
Autonomous orientation
Controlled orientation
Impersonal orientation
284

271
COGNITIVE 
FOUNDATIONS  
OF PERSONALITY
Locus of Control
Measures of Locus of Control
Locus of Control and Achievement
Locus of Control and Work Behavior
Locus of Control and Physical and Psychological Health
Locus of Control and Social Behavior
Cultural Differences in Locus of Control
Then and Now: Locus of Control
Learned Helplessness
Explanatory Style
Measures of Explanatory Style
Explanatory Style and Achievement
School
Athletics
Explanatory Style and Work Behavior
Explanatory Style and Physical and Psychological Health
Physical Health
Psychological Health: Depression
Explanatory Style and Social Behavior
Cultural Differences in Explanatory Style
Research Methods Illustrated: Field Studies and Natural Manipulations
Dispositional Optimism
Measures of Dispositional Optimism
Dispositional Optimism and Coping
Optimistic Beliefs and Expectations
Optimism and Coping Strategies
Optimists Take Action
Optimism and Judging Controllability
Optimistic Beliefs and Physiological Functioning
The Personality of Everyday Life: Making people more optimistic
Chapter Summary
Review Questions
Key Terms
From Chapter 10 of Personality Psychology: Foundations and Findings, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. Copyright © 2012 by Pearson 
Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
© Derek Gordon/Shutterstock
Read the Chapter on 
mysearchlab.com 
285

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
A
fter graduating from college with a degree in psychology, I wanted to save the world. 
I spent about a month doing volunteer work in a remote village in Mexico. My fellow 
workers and I organized various programs to help these people by administering a 
government-sponsored literacy program, staffing a health clinic, participating in teen outreach 
programs, visiting the sick, and running a day camp of sorts for the youngest villagers. On one 
of my first days, I was astounded to discover a small girl about 4 years old just staring blankly 
at the crayons in front of her. While the children around her giggled and grabbed crayons from 
the center of the table, merrily scribbling on their papers, Elena sat mute.
When I asked her why she wasn’t drawing, she merely shrugged and sank into herself. I was 
amazed that a 4-year-old might not know how to color, so I gently placed my hand around hers 
and together we clutched a crayon and started to scribble. But lack of practice coloring was not 
her problem; despite my instruction and encouragement Elena never did get the hang of drawing 
with crayons. As the other children filled their papers with elaborately colored designs, her paper 
remained strangely blank except for the few tiny scribbles we had done together.
The image of a helpless child staring at a table full of crayons stayed with me. What would 
make a child so helpless that she couldn’t or wouldn’t draw like the other children? I thought 
back to my psychology classes and wondered if this was what learned helplessness looked like. 
Today, I might be inclined to say that Elena was depressed, or at least depressed at the thought 
of drawing with crayons. Can mere thoughts depress us? If so, can changing our thoughts 
change our depressive feelings? And if we change how we think, are we also changing something 
fundamental about our personality?
The possibility of changing people’s thoughts was tested in an experiment conducted by 
Seligman and his colleagues (Seligman, Steen, Park, & Peterson, 2005). They randomly assigned 
volunteers to one of five treatments. Every day for a week they were instructed to think about 
certain things such as expressing gratitude; reflecting on good things in their lives; and either 
identifying, reflecting on, or developing character strengths such as curiosity, zest, leadership, 
forgiveness, hope, kindness, and love. In a sixth, control condition, participants wrote about 
their early memories. Finally, participants’ levels of depression and happiness were measured 
immediately, 1 week, 1 month, and 6 months after this treatment.
Despite being somewhat depressed at the start of the study, participants who thought 
about the good things that happened to them and about why they happened, and participants 
who developed one of their character strengths by using it in a new way, showed decreases in 
“The optimist sees the rose and 
not its thorns; the pessimist 
stares at the thorns, oblivious 
of the rose.”
Kahlil Gibran (1947/2006)
Exercising one’s character 
strengths such as curiosity, zest, 
leadership, forgiveness, hope, 
love, and kindness can prevent 
depression and increase 
happiness.
© Lisa F. Young/Fotolia
SEE FOR YOURSELF
The next time you are feel-
ing down, try one of these 
strategies for yourself.
286

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
symptoms of depression and increases in felt happiness over the course of the experiment. 
People who wrote and delivered a letter of gratitude felt better, but the positive effects lasted 
only a month. However, recalling early memories or identifying and reflecting on a character 
strength did nothing for depression or happiness (see Figure 1).
What is particularly amazing about this experiment is that the interventions were deliv-
ered, not by a human therapist, but by a computer! Participants never talked or interacted with 
another person and never even stepped into a laboratory. The recruitment, measurement, and 
intervention took place on the Internet via a website. Many therapeutic interventions depend 
on the expertise or empathy of the therapist, but here is an example of an intervention working 
in the absence of human interaction. Seligman et al (2005) believed that these interventions 
may be even more effective when combined with the support of a caring and effective counselor 
or life coach, based on preliminary data. This study demonstrates—literally and figuratively—
the power of positive thinking!
Many psychologists have identified consistent and specific differences between people in 
the way they perceive and think about the world. For example, some people are more dependent 
on visual cues and are more sensitive to the context. Those who are field-dependent tend to 
see the big picture rather than details. In contrast, people who are field-independent rely on 
their own physical sensations and have selective attention to a particular object without being 
distracted by the surrounding details (Witkin, Moore, Goodenough, & Cox, 1977). Whereas 
field-independent people are good at learning languages in a traditional classroom setting, 
field-dependent people learn best by being totally immersed in everyday situations where they 
are surrounded by a new language (Brown, 1994).
In addition to these differences in perceptions, people can differ in the constructs or sche-
mas they use to interpret the world (Kelly, 1955), whether intelligence is fixed or if it can be 
increased through effort and experiences (Dweck, 1999), and in their expectations, beliefs, and 
goals (Mischel & Shoda, 1995). In this chapter we focus on individual differences in expectations 
Figure 1  Depressive symptoms 
and levels of happiness 
over time as a function of 
condition. Although some 
of the interventions have an 
immediate impact, using only 
strengths (5) and explaining 
three good things (6) led to 
lasting changes.  Source: Based 
on Seligman et al. (2005, Figures 
1 and 2, pp. 417–418). 
Key
Depressive Symptoms
6
mos
3
mos
1
week
Post
Pre
1
mos
Time
Happiness
6
mos
3
mos
1
week
Post
Pre
1
mos
Time
6 = 3 Good things
5 = Using strengths
4 = You at your best
3 = Control
2 = Gratitude visit
1 = Identifying strengths
6
5
*
*
4
3
2
1
4
1
*
*
3
2
5
6
“Cogito ergo sum,” I think 
therefore I am.
Philosopher René Descartes
287

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
and beliefs and take an in-depth look at an area of current focus in personality: how people 
think about the causes and impacts of events in their lives and how these differences in locus 
of control, learned helplessness, optimistic and pessimistic explanatory styles, and dispositional 
optimism make us who we are.
Locus of Control
To be, or not to be—that is the question:
Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
And by opposing end them?
From Hamlet, by William Shakespeare (Act 3, scene i)
Which side of Hamlet’s dilemma do you agree with more: that we must put up with what life 
throws at us or that we can control what happens to us?
Although Shakespeare identified these two ways of viewing the world, personality psy-
chologist Julian Rotter was the first to define locus of control as people’s beliefs about the 
control of reinforcements and outcomes in their lives. People vary in the extent to which 
they believe that an outcome depends on their own behavior or personal characteristics, 
falling on a continuum of control beliefs. People who believe that they have some control 
over what happens to them have an internal locus of control and are often called internals. 
In contrast, externals, or people with an external locus of control, believe that they have little 
control over what happens to them and instead believe that reinforcements or outcomes 
are due to chance, luck, fate, powerful others, or are unpredictable (Rotter, 1966). Though 
people may have a mix of internal and external beliefs, generally one way of thinking will 
occur more often.
People develop these expectations from their experiences in the world (Rotter, Chance, & 
Phares, 1972). If people have been rewarded for their own actions, they will come to believe 
that they can indeed control what happens to them. However, if their actions have not been 
rewarded they will think that they lack control and that events happen due to external causes 
or for unknown and unpredictable reasons. For example, externals who believed that events 
happen due to chance or fate were more likely than internals to believe in astrology, and to 
act on their beliefs by reading their daily horoscopes or buying books about astrology (Sosis, 
Strickland, & Haley, 1980).
Internals and externals also differ in how they process information. Internals pay more 
attention to information that may be useful to them later and they also retain more information 
than externals (Wallston, 2001). For example, both hospitalized tuberculosis patients (Seeman 
& Evans, 1962) and prisoners facing parole (Seeman, 1963) who were internal retained more 
information related to their conditions than externals. People with an internal locus of control 
act as if knowing more about one’s condition or situation is an important step toward changing 
one’s circumstances.
Measures of Locus of Control
Locus of control is often measured with the Internal-External Locus of Control Scale (Rotter, 
1966; see Table 1). Respondents are presented with 29 pairs of statements in a forced-choice 
format. Each pair includes one internal locus of control statement and one external locus of 
control statement. Participants must decide which statement they agree with more. Six of 
the pairs are filler statements and are not scored. Scores can range from 0 to 23 with higher 
scores indicating a greater external locus of control, and lower scores a more internal locus 
of control.
More recently, researchers have developed scales to measure locus of control in specific 
goals areas (Lefcourt, 1979, 1981, 1991) including health (Wallston, Wallston, & DeVellis, 1978), 
weight management (Saltzer, 1982), personal finance management (Furnham, 1986), wealth 
THINK ABOUT IT
Who do you think is more 
likely to buy a lottery ticket? 
Why?
288

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
accumulation (Steed & Symes, 2009), interpersonal relationships (Lewis, Cheney, & Dawes, 
1977), marital outcomes (Miller, Lefcourt, & Ware, 1983), headache pain (Martin, Holroyd, & 
Penzien, 1990), work (Spector, 1988), sleep (Vincent, Sande, Read, & Giannuzzi, 2004), alcohol 
use (Donovan & O’Leary, 1978), and intellectual, physical, and social domains (Bradley, Stuck, 
Coop, & White, 1977).
Numerous studies have been done on locus of control which suggests that more positive 
outcomes in achievement, work, health, and relationships are associated with having an inter-
nal locus of control. However, Rotter himself warned that it would be too simple to declare an 
internal locus of control the better or healthier way to think and external locus of control as a 
bad way of thinking (Rotter, 1975). People with an external locus of control are not particu-
larly distressed by their beliefs. Many—but not all—important life outcomes are related to an 
internal locus of control. Let’s consider some of the major findings in these areas.
Locus of Control and Achievement
Internals take more action than externals (Rahim, 1997), including taking political action 
(Gore & Rotter, 1963; Strickland, 1965), and achieving greater academic success by studying 
more, performing better on tests, and getting better grades (Nord, Connelly, & Daignault, 
1974; Prociuk & Breen, 1974) than externals. In fact, internal locus of control scores at age 
10 predicted greater educational attainment in adulthood (Flouri, 2006). Internals even day-
dream more about achievement and less about failure than do externals (Brannigan, Hauk, 
& Guay, 1991).
Internals are better at planning and working at long-term goals (Lefcourt, 1982) and at 
establishing more realistic goals (Gilmor & Reid, 1978). For example, internals finished their 
college degrees faster than students with an external locus of control (Hall, Smith, & Chia, 
2008). Children in Grades 3 to 5 with an internal locus of control were better able to delay 
gratification than those with an external locus of control (Strickland, 1973). They were more 
willing to forgo a single lollipop to obtain three lollipops 2 weeks later.
Internals assume more responsibility for themselves and hold others to high standards of 
responsibility as well (Phares & Wilson, 1972). For example, they are more likely to support 
the death penalty (Butler & Moran, 2007). Internals also have higher credit ratings, even after 
controlling for income, education, and negative life events such as medical expenses, unem-
ployment, or a reduction in income. Internals also have higher income and more financial 
knowledge than externals and are more highly educated (Perry, 2008).
Table 1  Items From the Rotter Internal–External Locus of Control Scale
People who are internal tend to agree with these statements:
	 1.	 People’s misfortunes result from the mistakes they make.
	 2.	 In the long run people get the respect they deserve in this world.
	 3.	 Trusting to fate has never turned out as well for me as making a decision to take a definite 
course of action.
	 4.	 In the case of the well-prepared student there is rarely if ever such a thing as an unfair test.
	 5.	 Becoming a success is a matter of hard work, luck has little or nothing to do with it.
People who are external tend to agree with these statements:
	 1.	 Many of the unhappy things in people’s lives are partly due to bad luck.
	 2.	 Unfortunately, an individual’s worth often passes unrecognized no matter how hard he tries.
	 3.	 I have often found that what is going to happen will happen.
	 4.	 Many times exam questions tend to be so unrelated to course work that studying is really 
useless.
	 5.	 Getting a good job depends mainly on being in the right place at the right time.
Note: Based on a scale of 0 = no chance to 100 = certainty.
Source: Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of reinforcement. Psychological Monographs: General and 
Applied, 80(1), (Whole number 609), 1–28. Copyright American Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission.
289

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Locus of Control and Work Behavior
Having an internal locus of control quite literally pays off when it comes to career and work 
behavior. Based on a meta-analysis of 222 studies, workers with an internal locus of con-
trol showed greater satisfaction with their pay, promotions, coworkers, and supervisors than 
did workers with an external locus of control (Ng, Sorensen, & Eby, 2006). Internals showed 
greater job commitment, intrinsic motivation, productivity, career success, and job challenge 
and worked more hours than externals. In contrast, externals experienced greater job over-
load, work problems, stress, burnout, absenteeism, and conflicts between family and work 
responsibilities.
College students with an internal locus of control show better career decision-making 
skills (Millar & Shevlin, 2007). An internal locus of control was associated with greater work 
involvement in both skilled and unskilled workers across six countries (Reitz & Jewell, 1979). 
Internals are particularly sensitive to pay incentives and work particularly well under incentive 
systems such as sales or piecework. People with an internal locus of control tend to be more 
satisfied with their jobs (Spector, 1982) whereas people with an external locus of control were 
among the most stressed and burned out in a sample of distressed nurses in Germany (Schmitz, 
Neumann, & Oppermann, 2000).
Entrepreneurs, people who start their own business, though more internal than nonentre-
preneurs, are not necessarily more successful than people who work for others (Venkatapathy, 
1984). Entrepreneurs with an internal locus of control did more business-related activities 
such as working longer hours, expanding the business, and setting goals for the business than 
externals did (Durand & Shea, 1974). The authors suggested that people with an internal locus 
of control are better able to turn their thoughts and dreams into actions.
Business owners who were more internal coped better with a devastating hurricane and 
flood that hit central Pennsylvania in June of 1972, damaging some 430 businesses in the area 
(Anderson, 1977). By 8 months after the devastation, internals had engaged in more problem-
solving behaviors as a way of coping rather than emotion-focused coping and did things such 
as managing their anxiety, anger, or other emotional reactions. Externals found the whole situ-
ation more stressful than internals did.
Even 3 ½ years later, the businesses of internals were still doing better than the businesses 
of externals as indicated by a higher credit rating. The researchers found that business owners 
with an internal locus of control took more productive actions during this period which, in 
turn, led the owners to become even more internal and to bring their businesses back to their 
pre-flood levels of performance. External business owners whose businesses improved became 
even more external in the years after the flood (Anderson, 1977). This study illustrates Rotter’s 
original contention that locus of control affects performance and that performance also affects 
future locus of control beliefs.
Locus of Control and Physical and Psychological Health
The belief that they can control what happens to them combined with a greater willingness 
to take action contributes to the overall better physical and mental health of people with an 
internal locus of control (Lefcourt, 1982; Selander, Marnetoft, Åkerström, & Asplund, 2005). 
For example, internals have a decreased risk of heart attacks, presumably due to taking pre-
ventative measures like exercising more and eating a healthy diet (Stürmer, Hasselbach, & 
Amelang, 2006).
Internals are also more likely than externals to wear seatbelts (Hoyt, 1973), exercise (Nor-
man, Bennett, Smith, & Murphy, 1997), quit smoking (Segall & Wynd, 1990), use birth control 
(MacDonald, 1970), keep track of their medications (Hong, Oddone, Dudley, & Bosworth, 
2006), and take steps to reduce their risk of breast cancer (Rowe, Montgomery, Duberstein, & 
Bovbjerg, 2005). British children with an internal locus of control at age 10 were less likely to 
be overweight as adults and to have a lowered risk of obesity, better self-rated health, and less 
psychological distress at age 30 (Gale, Batty, & Deary, 2008). Individuals with chronic illness 
who had an external locus of control, believing that good health is in the hands of their doctors, 
reported more emotional distress (Shelley & Pakenham, 2004).
THINK ABOUT IT
Why would somebody with 
an internal locus of control 
show more intrinsic motiva-
tion than somebody with 
an external locus of control?
THINK ABOUT IT
Why do externals fail 
to take steps to protect 
themselves?
290

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Externals are more vulnerable to anxiety and depression (Benassi, Sweeney, & Dufour, 
1988), and are less able to cope with stressful life experiences (Lefcourt, 1983). Adolescent 
externals have a greater risk of suicide than internals (Evans, Owens, & Marsh, 2005). People 
with an internal locus of control tend to be happier (Lefcourt, 1982; Ye, She, & Wu, 2007).
For example, imagine living in Israel during the Persian Gulf War, when civilians faced 
nightly SCUD missile attacks for 5 weeks. Adolescents with an internal locus of control reported 
fewer physical symptoms (e.g., headaches, fatigue, insomnia, loss of appetite, etc.), less fear, and 
better cognitive functioning under stress (e.g., concentration, memory, decision making) than 
those with an external locus of control (Zeidner, 1993).
There is also evidence that individuals handle stressful situations differently depend-
ing on their control beliefs. Across many studies, a consistent finding is that people with an 
internal locus of control use more problem-focused coping, looking for possible solutions and 
taking concrete steps to make things better. In contrast, externals use more emotion-focused 
coping, relieving their feelings of anger, anxiety, or sadness by talking with others, for example 
(Ng et al., 2006). In the previous section we saw how this difference in business owners led to 
better economic recovery years after a devastating flood (Anderson, 1977).
Locus of Control and Social Behavior
Locus of control even leads to differences in how individuals interact with others. People who 
believe that their social relationships are established and maintained as a result of their own 
efforts are more socially skillful and show greater social sensitivity than people without these 
beliefs (Lefcourt, Martin, Fick, & Saleh, 1985). People with an internal locus of control are also 
more likely to show independence and resistance to social influence than externals (Crowne & 
Liverant, 1963). Externals are more vulnerable to persuasion, social influence, and conformity 
pressures (Avtgis, 1998).
Internals participate in more campus activities (Brown & Strickland, 1972) and hold more 
campus leadership positions than externals do (Brown & Strickland, 1972; Hiers & Heckel, 
1977). Internals are also more likely than externals to opt for a position of power—for example 
sitting at the head of the table—when choosing where to sit with others (Hiers & Heckel, 1977).
In accord with where they perceive the rewards to be, internals and externals differ in which 
aspects of a situation they pay more attention to. Externals are more sensitive to the social 
demands of a situation whereas internals are more sensitive to the task demands of the situa-
tion. In one experiment, externals paid more attention when feedback for their performance 
came from the experimenter instead of directly from the task. Internals, of course, preferred to 
receive feedback directly from their performance (Pines & Julian, 1972).
However, when interacting with a stranger, externals talked more and looked at their part-
ners more than internals did (Rajecki, Ickes, & Tanford, 1981). Again, we can see that this is due 
© Polina Nefidova/Fotolia
People with an internal 
locus of control are more 
likely to take better care of 
themselves, such as regularly 
using seatbelts and eating a 
healthier diet.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
For one day, act as if your 
social relationships depend 
on your own efforts. The 
next day, act as if they don’t. 
Which experience did you 
like better?
291

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
to where externals and internals expect to receive their rewards, either from their own behavior 
or from the behavior of others.
Cultural Differences in Locus of Control
Believing one has control or not seems to be a human universal in that the basic differences 
between internals and externals hold across a variety of cultures. However, differences exist 
between cultures in the amount of control people believe they have (Cross & Markus, 1999). 
Individualistic cultures, such as in the United States and western European countries, tend to 
have a more internal locus of control. In fact, individualistic cultures tend to be so internal that 
they are actually vulnerable to an illusion of control where people believe they have control 
even in situations where, objectively, they do not (Taylor & Brown, 1988).
In contrast, collectivistic cultures, such as in countries in East Asia, tend to be more exter-
nal. They believe that supernatural forces, fate, or even destiny determine outcomes. For exam-
ple, Japanese students feel less control over both positive and negative events than American 
college students do (Heine & Lehman, 1995).
However, John Weisz and his colleagues suggested that there are two ways of taking con-
trol (Weisz, Rothbaum, & Blackburn, 1984). First, people can exercise primary control and 
attempt to make themselves feel better or less distressed by changing circumstances. To do this, 
of course, one must have an internal locus of control.
Alternatively, people can choose to exercise secondary control and attempt to fit into, 
accommodate, or accept a situation or an event in ways that make themselves feel better, or 
at least less distressed. This also requires an internal locus of control. They cited an example 
of the Japanese cultural value of akirame which means being “at peace with what fate has 
given” (Weisz, Eastman, & McCarty, 1996, p. 67). Similarly, Hinduism places a value on giving 
up control and detaching oneself from a situation, which leads to better psychological health 
(Berry, Poortinga, Segall, & Dasen, 1992). Evidence suggests that as Americans move from 
young adulthood into middle age they show primary control, but then show secondary control 
as they move into old age (Schultz, Heckhausen, & Locher, 1991). That is, in the face of being 
able to do less, people turn to more cognitive ways of maintaining control rather than admit 
that they have no control over a situation.
The crucial difference between an internal and an external locus of control may be that 
externals have almost a “victim mentality” in which they feel helpless, act passively and believe 
that there is nothing they can do to change their outcomes or reinforcements. These feelings of 
helplessness and hopelessness are risk factors for depression, as we shall see later in this chapter. 
The notion of primary and secondary control suggests that just because collectivistic cultures 
© winni/Fotolia
THINK ABOUT IT
Just how much do stan-
dards of psychological 
health and pathology vary 
by culture?
People in collectivistic 
cultures, such as in countries 
in East Asia, tend to be more 
external than people in 
individualistic cultures, such 
as in the United States.
292

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
appear to have an external locus of control, they are not necessarily adapting less well or feeling 
more victimized by their circumstances. Rather, they are asserting their control differently than 
what Americans do (Sosis et al., 1980). This also suggests that standards of psychological health 
and what is considered normal are determined by culture.
Then and Now: Locus of Control
Here is a puzzle for you: Since the time that Julian Rotter first identified the concept of locus of 
control young Americans have shown an interesting trend. Do you think college students have 
become more internal or external since 1960?
On the one hand, American culture has become more individualistic during this time. We 
might expect that along with an emphasis on the individual, more people would believe in the 
power of the individual person as well. Or, as Twenge, Zhang, and Im (2004) put it, “Modern 
people are, in theory, strong, independent individuals in control of their own destinies and free 
of the confines of social forces” (p. 309). Objectively, people today do have more control over 
their environments than we did over half a century ago. Think about changes like birth control, 
increased opportunity for travel, a more diverse and tolerant society, and technological advance-
ments that facilitate shopping, communication, and entertainment. Does this translate into an 
increased sense of personal control?
Maybe not. During this same time Americans have also become more cynical, mistrust-
ing, alienated, and litigious (Twenge et al., 2004). In addition, there has been an increase in the 
divorce rate, violent crime, and the suicide rate. Perhaps blaming outside forces for our own 
troubles might be a way of protecting ourselves from a more dangerous world.
So which hypothesis is correct, the independence model that suggests that Americans have 
become more internal, or the alienation model that suggests that Americans have become more 
external? The beauty of locus of control is that because it is one of the most studied personality 
variables in the history of personality research, Twenge et al. (2004) were able to graph changes 
in mean level of locus of control scores over time. They found a correlation of r = .70 between 
scores on the Rotter I-E scale and the year the sample was collected for college student samples 
and among children in Grades 4 or 5. Or, to put it another way, the average college student in 
2002 scored more externally than 80% of college students in the early 1960s (Twenge et al., 2004).
Twenge et al. (2004) wondered if being moderately external is not as bad as it once was, if 
everyone has similar beliefs. That is, which is more important, absolute level of locus of control 
(e.g., internal or external) or level relative to one’s peers and the society at large? Perhaps, like 
in collectivistic cultures, Americans are turning to secondary control more and more as a way 
of maintaining control. This shift toward secondary control is reflected in a more external 
locus of control.
College students from the 
1960s (left). College students 
today (right) have a more 
external locus of control than 
college students in earlier 
times.
© H. ARMSTRONG ROBERTS/CLASSICSTOCK/Everett Collection
© Andres Rodriquez/Fotolia
THINK ABOUT IT
Which is more important, 
absolute level of locus of 
control (e.g., internal or 
external) or level relative to 
one’s peers and the society 
at large?
293

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Learned Helplessness
Locus of control is not the only consistent difference between people in how they think about 
the world. The opposite of having an internal locus of control is not having an external locus 
of control; it is feeling helpless in the present and hopeless about the future. It is to this topic of 
learned helplessness—of which locus of control is but one part—that we now turn.
At around the same time that Julian Rotter realized the importance of locus of control, 
Martin Seligman and his colleagues were trying to figure out why dogs, after being exposed to 
inescapable shock, were unable to escape from a later escapable shock (Overmier & Seligman, 
1967). The explanation seems obvious to us now—that the dogs had somehow learned that 
their responses were useless and gave up trying—but the notion that the dogs had expectations 
about future payoffs in a totally new situation flew in the face of years of research evidence on 
instrumental conditioning. Yet this is precisely what the dogs had learned!
Overmier and Seligman (1967) reasoned that when dogs or humans find themselves in 
a situation where they are exposed to aversive stimuli that they cannot reduce, eliminate, or 
control in any way, they may experience learned helplessness and come to believe that their 
actions will be useless in future situations as well. The authors hypothesized that lack of control 
causes this state of learned helplessness, whereas having control over aversive stimuli prevents 
later helplessness. Helplessness leads to loss of motivation, problems in thinking and learning, 
and negative emotions such as sadness, depression, and anger (Maier & Seligman, 1976).
To test the learned helplessness explanation, dogs were randomly assigned to one of three con-
ditions (Seligman & Maier, 1967). In the Escapable Shock condition, the dogs first went through 
a training phase where they received a shock, but could make the shock stop by touching a panel 
with their heads. In the Inescapable Shock condition, dogs received shocks for the same amount 
of time as dogs in the Escape condition did; the only difference was that there was nothing the 
dogs could do to stop the shocks. Researchers call this yoking when a treatment that participants 
in one condition receive depends on how participants in another condition behave. In the third, 
Experimental Control condition, dogs did not have this training with shocks like the dogs in the 
Escape and Inescapable conditions did. The triadic design of this experiment using these three 
conditions tests that the controllability of the shock, not the shock itself, causes the helplessness.
After this initial training, 24 hours later 
the dogs in all three conditions took part in 
the testing phase of the experiment. Here 
they were placed in a shuttle box that had 
two compartments separated by a wall at the 
dogs’ shoulder height. For each trial, dogs 
were placed in one side of the box and then 
the lights in the box would dim signaling 
that they were about to receive a shock. Sure 
enough, 10 seconds later the dogs would 
receive a shock through the floor of the com-
partment. However, if the dogs jumped over 
the wall into the adjacent compartment, the 
shock would terminate. Would dogs be able 
to figure this out for themselves?
As you can see in Table 2, all of the 
dogs that went through the Escapable Shock 
training figured out rather quickly that they 
could escape or even avoid the shock alto-
gether by jumping over the barrier as soon 
as the lights dimmed. But most of the dogs 
in the Inescapable Shock condition did not. 
Having learned in the training phase that 
there was nothing they could do to avoid the 
shocks, they did nothing in the testing phase. 
“Whether you think you  
can or think you can’t,  
you’re right.”
Henry Ford
Can dogs learn to be helpless?
© Aleksan/Dreamstime.com
THINK ABOUT IT
Should use of animals in 
research be regulated the 
same way an IRB regulates 
human research? You’ll be 
pleased to know that ani-
mal research must first be 
reviewed by an Institutional 
Animal Care and Use Com-
mittee (IACUC) before it can 
be conducted.
294

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
They just gave up and passively endured the shocks. However, if 
the experimenters forcibly dragged the dogs over the barrier, they 
eventually learned that they could escape the shock on their own 
(Maier & Seligman, 1976).
Keep in mind that the shocks were painful enough to make 
the dogs want to avoid them, but not so painful as to harm the 
dogs. Generally, researchers do not like using such methods except 
where they are unavoidable and have great potential to make a 
contribution to alleviate human suffering. Of course, many people 
object to using animals in research at all.
The results of this experiment were so surprising that critics suggested many alternative 
explanations to learned helplessness. Some suggested that the dogs, rather than learning that 
they had no control, instead learned that not responding paid off. Essentially the dogs learned 
to be passive, rather than helpless. To test this alternative explanation, experimenters used the 
same triadic design and exposed dogs to the same training and testing phases as in the Seligman 
and Maier (1967; Maier, 1970) experiments. But this time during the training phase, dogs in 
the Escapable Shock condition needed to remain perfectly still to make the shocks stop. In this 
way escaping the shocks was still under the dog’s control, but they were controllable only by 
being passive. In the testing phase, where dogs were placed in the shuttle box and given escap-
able shocks that they could escape by jumping over the barrier, the experimenters wondered if 
the dogs would indeed be passive, because this is what worked in the first part, or if they would 
manage to escape the shock.
As predicted by learned helplessness theory, the dogs escaped the shock, albeit a bit slower 
than dogs in the original experiment, after realizing that keeping perfectly still did not terminate 
the shock. The key to avoiding helplessness is not learning that a particular response is effective, 
but learning that any response is effective. Dogs who are not helpless will keep moving around, 
trying new behaviors, and eventually hitting on the right response in a given situation.
The flip side of helplessness, especially for humans, is personal control. Imagine partici-
pants in an experiment who are seated at a table in front of a red button (Hiroto, 1974). They 
are told, “From time to time a loud tone will appear. When that tone comes on, there is some-
thing you can do to stop it.” Suddenly, they hear an obnoxious, high-pitched tone about as loud 
as a chainsaw. How do you think a participant might react?
Most participants immediately hit the button. However, this worked only to terminate the 
noise if they were in the Escapable Noise condition. Despite these instructions, in the Inescap-
able Noise condition there was nothing participants could do to terminate the noise. In fact, 
they had to endure it for a full 5 seconds. There was also a Control Group that did not go 
through this training phase.
Then, participants in all three conditions were seated at a different table with a different 
apparatus in front of them: a wooden box that looked like an extraordinarily long shoebox, with 
a knob protruding out of the top locked in some sort of a track that ran from one end of the box 
to the other. A red light located at the top of the box would go on for 5 seconds and when the 
light went off, the same obnoxious noise from the first part of the experiment would come on.
As you probably recognized, this box was the human equivalent of the shuttle box used 
with dogs in the early helplessness studies. Participants could stop the noise if they pushed the 
knob from one side to the other. Sure enough, just like in the animal studies, human partici-
pants who were trained with the Inescapable Noise were significantly slower at figuring out 
how to escape the noise during the testing phase. Participants in the Control Group and the 
Escapable Noise conditions were faster at figuring out how to make the noise stop and even 
managed to prevent the noise from starting in the first place. Participants in the Inescapable 
Noise condition never quite realized that they could prevent the onset of the noise.
Participants in this experiment were also given a measure of locus of control. Based on Rot-
ter’s research on locus of control, the experimenters wondered who would be faster at figuring 
out how to make the noise stop during the testing phase of the experiment. True to the belief 
that they can control their own outcomes, internals were faster than externals to escape noise 
in this human shuttle box.
Table 2  Percentage of Dogs That Were Unable to Escape Shocks in 
the Testing Phase as a Function of Training Condition
Escapable Shock
0%
Inescapable Shock
75
Experimental Control Group
12.5
Source: Seligman and Maier (1967).
THINK ABOUT IT
Was Elena, the child who 
was unable to color, more 
like participants in the 
escapable noise or inescap-
able noise conditions?
295

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
In yet another twist to this experiment, some participants were led to believe that termi-
nating the noise involved skill: “What you do is really up to you to figure out. You are poten-
tially in control of the situation.” Other participants were told that the task involved chance: 
“The way to stop the tone is up to [the experimenter]. This is a guessing game. If you guess 
wrong the tone stays on.” Participants who thought that preventing or stopping the noise was 
due to their own skill were faster at the task than were participants who believed the task was 
due to chance.
This experiment demonstrated that learned helplessness comes from people’s beliefs about 
control, their expectations about a specific task, and their past experiences with uncontrollable 
outcomes (Hiroto, 1974). Each one alone is enough to cause helplessness in humans.
Learned helplessness in humans, just like in animals, causes problems in motivation, cogni-
tion, and emotion (Maier & Seligman, 1976). Exposure to inescapable shocks, uncontrollable 
loud noises, or unsolvable anagrams causes a state of helplessness that makes people give up 
responding (Hiroto & Seligman, 1975). Even if one of their responses should be effective, 
helplessness will make it difficult if not impossible for people to recognize that their response 
worked (Maier & Seligman, 1976). Helplessness first causes anxiety; then, after continued expo-
sure, it causes depression (Seligman, 1975).
In both humans and animals, learned helplessness is marked by the same three parts (Peter-
son, Maier, & Seligman, 1993). First, there must be a noncontingency or disconnect between 
people’s actions and their outcomes, such that people truly have no control over their outcomes 
in a given situation. But exposure to uncontrollable outcomes is not enough to cause helpless-
ness; people must also come to expect that their actions will also be ineffective in the future. 
Finally, people give up and act passively when they recognize that their actions are fruitless.
However, when they discover that they are helpless, humans, unlike animals, ask them-
selves, “Why am I helpless?” (Abramson, Seligman, & Teasdale, 1978). The way people under-
stand the cause of their helplessness is very important for determining how devastating the 
feelings of helplessness will be. This led to a reformulated theory of learned helplessness in 
humans (Abramson et al., 1978) which eventually led to the current hopelessness model of 
depression. Here, the belief that one lacks control—is helpless in the face of a negative event 
in the present—combines with the belief that the helplessness will continue in the future. This 
causes a person to lose hope, stop trying, and feel sadness (Abramson, Metalsky, & Alloy, 1989).
Hopelessness depression, like other kinds of depression, causes changes in motivation 
(e.g., passivity and giving up), cognition (e.g., failure to perceive an opportunity to control 
outcomes), emotions (e.g., sadness, guilt), and lowered self-esteem (e.g., feeling useless and 
incompetent; Abramson et al., 1989).
People can feel helpless without feeling hopeless if they anticipate that circumstances might be 
different in the future (Abramson et al., 1989). For example, believing that somebody else might 
© Chad McDermott/Fotolia
THINK ABOUT IT
What costs are involved in 
believing that something is 
wrongly due to chance? In 
believing that something is 
wrongly due to skill?
Can humans learn to be 
helpless?
296

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
step in to help or that the external circumstances could change for the better (e.g., the task becomes 
easier) are hopeful beliefs. The combination of helplessness in the present and the hopelessness that 
negative consequences will continue into the future makes people vulnerable to depression when a 
bad event occurs or when an important good event fails to occur.
Explanatory Style
An interesting side note to the original learned helplessness experiments with dogs is that 
Seligman and his colleagues used more than 150 dogs in their experiments (Maier & Seligman, 
1976). Of these, about 33% could not be made to feel helpless, even though they were exposed 
to inescapable shocks. Also, about 5% of the dogs never learned that they could escape the 
shock, even without experience with the inescapable shock. The experimenters wondered, was 
there something in the past history of these dogs that taught them to be helpless or immunized 
them against helplessness before they even came to the lab?
If you think about it, just like the dogs that were helpless or not helpless before the experi-
ment began, people have a lifetime of experiencing good and bad events. Essentially, the labora-
tory is not the first time or place that a person—or a dog—may have felt that his or her efforts 
are useless. After many such experiences, people develop habitual ways of explaining both the 
bad and the good things that happen to them in life. This is called explanatory style. How 
people differ in explanatory style is an important aspect of personality.
People who view negative events as their own fault (internal) likely to happen again (sta-
ble), and undermining other aspects of their lives (global) are at risk for depression (Peterson 
& Seligman, 1984; Sweeney, Anderson, & Bailey, 1986). This is called a pessimistic explanatory 
style. In contrast, people with an optimistic explanatory style view negative events as not their 
own fault (external), unlikely to happen again (unstable), and limited to just one aspect of their 
lives (specific). With an optimistic explanatory style people are faster at bouncing back from a 
negative event and are less likely to experience symptoms of depression.
There are also pessimistic and optimistic ways of explaining good events. People with an 
optimistic explanatory style believe that they caused the good thing to happen, that they are 
able to make it happen again, and that their good fortune makes everything in their life better. 
In contrast, people with a pessimistic explanatory style believe that they had little to do with 
their good fortune, that good things may or may not happen again, and that the good event 
affects just one aspect of their lives.
Explanations for events can vary in three ways. As we saw with learned helplessness, when 
trying to understand a situation in which they feel helpless, people may think that there is noth-
ing they can do to remedy the situation (i.e., that they lack control). So one way that explana-
tions can vary is in how internal versus external the cause might be.
How might a person with an 
optimistic explanatory style 
respond to this event?
© Goodshoot/Thinkstock
“No sense being pessimistic. It 
wouldn’t work anyway.”
Phillip Mueller
Tis nothing good or bad 
but thinking makes it so. 
Shakespeare. 
From Hamlet, by William 
Shakespeare (Act 2, scene ii)
297

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
For example, imagine that Olivia does poorly on her psychology test. Why might this be? She 
could think that the test was difficult (external) or unfair (external), or she might think that she 
didn’t study enough (internal), or that she is not smart enough (internal). However, not all expla-
nations are created equal! Some explanations may lead her to feel helpless in the future, whereas 
others will actually help her prevent a bad grade from happening again. If she truly believed that 
she didn’t study hard enough due to lack of effort—a temporary condition—she could study 
harder next time. However, if she believed that she doesn’t have the brain power to do any better 
than a D (lack of ability), then why should she bother studying at all next time? The difference 
between lack of effort and lack of ability has to do with how permanent or stable the cause is. So, 
the second way that explanations can vary is in how stable versus unstable the cause might be.
Consider another situation. Imagine that Tamika just told Jamal that she didn’t want to 
see him again after their first date. Jamal could think that this was because Tamika is extra busy 
this semester (external) or that she finds him boring (internal). But even if Tamika finds Jamal 
boring, this doesn’t mean that other potential dates will find him boring as well. Being boring, 
although an internal explanation, is also an unstable cause of Jamal’s failure to get a second 
date with Tamika. However, suppose Jamal is so devastated by the news that he starts to believe 
that his friends barely tolerate him, he is convinced that he will make a poor impression on a 
future employer, and that he will be a failure in life! Here the cause of the breakup is not only 
internal and stable, but it affects other aspects of his life as well, not just his chances of dating 
again. Jamal’s beliefs about the breakup have broad repercussions in his young life. The third 
way that explanations can vary is in how global versus specific the cause might be.
To summarize, when any good or a bad event occurs, people come up with possible expla-
nations to understand what caused the event (see Table 3). These explanations differ in three 
dimensions, as illustrated by our examples of Olivia and Jamal. Explanations can vary in locus 
of control (internal or external), stability (how stable, permanent, or recurrent a cause is vs. how 
unstable, temporary, or intermittent it is), and generality (how global, affecting many aspects 
of a person’s life, or limited to a specific domain a cause is).
In fact, undergraduates who had either an increase in good events or an increase in opti-
mistic explanatory style for positive events (attributing good events to stable and global factors) 
recovered from depression faster, showing fewer depressive symptoms than students with a 
more pessimistic style (Needles & Abramson, 1990). In addition, students with an optimistic 
style (making stable and global attributions) benefited the most from good events whereas 
students who made pessimistic attributions for good events (unstable, specific) didn’t seem to 
derive much cheer from the good events in their lives. In addition, an increase in participants’ 
hopefulness for future success in their career or personal lives was a significant predictor of 
recovery from depression.
Optimistic and pessimistic explanatory styles, like locus of control, have been associated with 
outcomes in achievement, career and work behavior, physical and psychological health, and social 
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Think about a recent nega-
tive event. What caused this 
event? Is your explanation 
more internal or external? 
Stable or unstable? Global 
or specific?
Table 3  Optimistic and Pessimistic Explanatory Styles
Optimistic Style
Pessimistic Style
External: “It’s not me”
Internal: “It’s me”
Bad events
Unstable: “It’s just a  
temporary setback”
Stable: “It’s going to last”
Specific: “It’s just this one 
situation”
Global: “It’s going to undermine 
everything I do”
Internal: “I did it”
External: “It happened to me”
Good events
Stable: “I can do it again”
Unstable: “It’s a one-time thing”
Global: “Life is good”
Specific: “It’s just this one situation”
Note: Causal explanations for both good and bad events vary in three dimensions: internal–external, stable–unstable, 
and global–specific.
Source: Abramson et al. (1978).
298

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
behavior (Wise & Rosqvist, 2006). An optimistic explanatory style is associated with increased 
motivation, achievement, physical health, lower depression, and overall well-being (Buchanan & 
Seligman, 1995; Peterson & Steen, 2002; Wise & Rosqvist, 2006). In contrast, a pessimistic explan-
atory style is associated with negative affect, depressive symptoms, lower academic achievement, 
poorer physical health, poorer athletic performance, lower marital satisfaction, and even political 
losses (Gillham, Shatté, Reivich, & Seligman, 2001). A pessimistic explanatory style is a risk factor 
for depression (Gladstone & Kaslow, 1995; Joiner & Wagner, 1995; Sweeney et al., 1986).
Measures of Explanatory Style
How is explanatory style measured? There are basically two different ways: questionnaires and 
content analysis. The most extensively used questionnaire is the Attributional Style Question-
naire (ASQ) (Peterson et al., 1982). The ASQ contains 12 hypothetical good and bad situations. 
Respondents imagine the situation happening to them and write down what they think would 
be one major cause of that situation. Then they rate each cause on a 1 to 7 scale of internal–
external, stable–unstable, and global–specific. The situations include things such as becoming 
very rich, getting a raise, getting complimented by a friend, having a date go badly, giving a 
bad presentation, and not getting all your work done on time. Generally, researchers average a 
participant’s responses on all three dimensions yielding a score for bad events, for good events, 
and a composite of the two. Higher numbers indicate a more pessimistic explanatory style 
(internal, stable, global for negative events and external, unstable, specific for good events) and 
lower numbers indicate a more optimistic explanatory style. Researchers can also measure a 
participant’s hopelessness by scoring the two dimensions of stable–unstable and global–specific 
for bad events only (Needles & Abramson, 1990).
The ASQ has been revised and expanded (Peterson & Villanova, 1988). There is also an 
ASQ for use with elderly populations (Houston, McKee, & Wilson, 2000), the Occupational 
Attributional Style Questionnaire for work situations (OASQ; Furnham, Sadka, & Brewin, 
1992), and the Cognitive Style Questionnaire to measure vulnerability to hopelessness depres-
sion (CSQ; Alloy et al., 2000; Haeffel et al., 2008).
The second method of measuring explanatory style is the content analysis of verbatim 
explanations called the CAVE technique (Peterson, Luborsky, & Seligman, 1983). The technique 
works very much like the ASQ. First, one must find a direct quote of a person explaining why 
a good or a bad event happened to him or her. The researcher then quotes the event and the 
explanation and presents both to trained judges who rate the explanation on the three dimen-
sions of internal–external, stable–unstable, and global–specific using the same 1 to 7 scale as 
on the ASQ (Zullow, Oettingen, Peterson, & Seligman, 1988). Ratings are averaged for each 
dimension and for good and bad events. Higher scores indicate a more pessimistic explanatory 
style, lower scores a more optimistic one.
© Jupiterimages/Thinkstock
THINK ABOUT IT
If you could discover the 
explanatory style of any 
person, who would it be 
and why? Could you use the 
CAVE technique with him 
or her?
Using the CAVE technique, 
researchers found that teams 
with optimistic players 
performed better after a loss 
than teams with pessimistic 
players.
299

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
The power of the CAVE technique is that a researcher can measure the explanatory style 
of historical figures, famous people, politicians, athletes—pretty much anybody who has left 
behind a sample of his or her words in letters, speeches, interviews, diaries, journals, school 
essays, newspaper stories, and other archival material (Zullow et al., 1988).
Table 4 illustrates how the CAVE technique might work. Quotations from members of 
the 1982–1984 Celtics, Knicks, Bullets, Sixers, and Nets basketball teams were taken from the 
weekly journal The Sporting News and from the hometown newspapers of the players. Judges 
then rated each explanation on the three dimensions of internal–external, stable–unstable, 
global–specific and calculated each player’s explanatory style. Across both seasons, teams with 
more optimistic players performed better following a loss than teams with more pessimistic 
players (Rettew & Reivich, 1995).
In another study, researchers were able to predict the ups and downs of a patient’s mood 
from the kind of explanations he made during a therapy session using the CAVE technique 
(Peterson et al., 1983). Mr. Q, as the 
patient was called, demonstrated very 
unusual mood swings during therapy 
sessions which often took him and his 
therapist by surprise. But as you can see 
in Figure 2, his mood shifts were actually 
preceded by certain types of explanations 
he made. When he made more pessimis-
tic explanations his mood became more 
depressed and his explanations more pes-
simistic. But when he made less pessimis-
tic explanations his depression seemed to 
improve and his explanations became 
more optimistic as the session continued.
An optimistic explanatory style as 
assessed by the CAVE technique has also 
been linked to political victory (Zullow, 
1995), military assertiveness (Satterfield 
& Seligman, 1994), and quality of life 
while living in a politically free coun-
try (Zullow et al., 1988). For example, 
Table 4  The CAVE Technique: Sample Events, Explanations, and Ratings
Event
Explanation
Ratings
Player is in a slump (bad event)
“I’ve been putting too much pressure on 
myself. Now I’m relaxed”
I/E = 7
S/U = 3
G/S = 6
“I’m not frustrated” (good event)
“Because I have confidence that  
I have what it takes”
I/E = 7
S/U = 7
G/S = 7
Player missed an easy shot (bad event)
“My timing was off for a second”
I/E = 7
S/U = 1
G/S = 1
Player hadn’t scored for two quarters 
(bad event)
“They were playing great defense  
for a change”
I/E = 1
S/U = 1
G/S = 1
Note: Causal explanations for both good and bad events vary in three dimensions: internal–external (I/E; higher numbers more 
internal, lower numbers more external), stable–unstable (S/U; higher numbers more stable, lower numbers more unstable), and 
global–specific (G/S; higher numbers more global, lower numbers more specific).
Source: From Rettew and Reivich (1995, Table 10.1 p.175). Reprinted with permission from Rettew, D., & Reivich, K. (1995), “Sports 
and explanatory style,” as appeared in G. M. Buchanan & M. E. P. Seligman (Eds.), Explanatory style, pp. 173–185 (Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum). Permission conveyed through the Copyright Clearance Center.
Figure 2  Means of attributions 
for negative events before 
and after Mr. Q’s mood shifts. 
Higher numbers indicate a 
more pessimistic explanatory 
style (numbers in parentheses 
refer to the number of therapy 
sessions on which means 
are based).  Source: From 
Peterson et al. (1983, Figure 1, 
p. 100). Peterson, C., Luborsky, 
L., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1983). 
Attributions and depressive 
mood shifts: A case study using 
the symptom-context method. 
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
92, 96–103. Copyright American 
Psychological Association. 
Reprinted with permission.
6
5
Depression
(n=4)
No change
(n=3)
Depression
(n=5)
4
Mean Rating-Composite
3
2
Before Shift
After Shift
300

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
in 9 out of the 10 U.S. presiden-
tial elections held between 1948 
and 1984, the more pessimistic 
candidate in his nomination 
acceptance speech lost the elec-
tion, especially if he was prone 
to ruminate or dwell on depres-
sive thoughts (Zullow & Selig-
man, 1990). What about the 10th 
election? That candidate started 
out optimistic enough during 
his acceptance speech, but then 
became much more pessimistic 
and ruminative as the campaign 
wore on. What about our current 
president? Optimism won again! 
(See the photo on the right.)
Explanatory Style  
and Achievement
Across many different contexts, 
people with an optimistic explan-
atory style outperform expecta-
tions—and often their pessimistic peers and rival teams—in school and on the playing field 
(Gillham et al., 2001; Rettew & Reivich, 1995; Schulman, 1995). In college, optimistic students 
achieve at a level beyond what would be expected based on their high school grades, class rank, 
SAT scores, or achievement test scores (Schulman, 1995). Optimistic teams and individual 
athletes bounce back faster from a loss or a bad performance than pessimistic teams or athletes 
(Gillham et al., 2001).
School.  Optimistic college students do better in their classes than students with a pessimistic 
explanatory style, even after controlling for ability (Metalsky, Abramson, Seligman, Semmel, 
& Peterson, 1982; Metalsky, Halberstadt, & Abramson, 1987; Peterson & Barett, 1987). What 
leads optimists to outperform expectations? Students with an optimistic explanatory style show 
greater motivation and persist longer in the face of adversity, strategies which are related to 
higher achievement (Wise & Rosqvist, 2006).
In one study, first-year college students filled out a series of questionnaires measuring 
explanatory style, how they coped with academic failures and frustrations, SAT scores, and 
grades. Students with a pessimistic explanatory style performed worse in their first year in 
college, averaging about a C, compared to students with an optimistic explanatory style who 
averaged almost a B-, even when SAT scores were used to control for natural ability (Peterson 
& Barett, 1987). Students with an optimistic style remained motivated in the face of setbacks 
and, as a result, obtained a higher GPA, whereas students with a pessimistic explanatory style 
tended to give up after academic frustrations. Their GPA reflects a lack of motivation rather 
than a lack of ability.
Similar results have been demonstrated with elementary school children. Kids with a pes-
simistic explanatory style showed poor achievement on standardized tests and grades in both 
the United States (Nolen-Hoeksema, Girgus, & Seligman, 1986) and in China (Yu & Seligman, 
2002). In addition, teachers in China reported that students with a pessimistic explanatory style 
showed behavioral problems as well, something not measured in the U.S. sample.
However, there are times when a more pessimistic explanatory style—focusing on failure 
and discounting success—may work to improve achievement such as when faced with highly 
demanding academic programs like law (Satterfield, Monahan, & Seligman, 1997) and mar-
keting (LaForge & Cantrell, 2003). In one study, students with a pessimistic explanatory style 
“A joint analysis of candidate 
optimism has determined 
that, once again, the more 
hopeful candidate, Barack 
Obama, has won an election. 
We believe that hopefulness 
has played a major role in 
this election. When it comes 
to celebrating what is good 
about America and to 
acknowledging our ability to 
make lasting positive change 
in the world, Obama wins out 
over McCain. That message 
appeals more to Americans 
at this time apparently,” 
according to Stephen 
Schueller of the Positive 
Psychology Center at the 
University of Pennsylvania. 
Here, then senator Barack 
Obama poses in front of 
the Superman statue in 
downtown Metropolis, IL, 
after his 50th town hall 
meeting in Massac County.
Photo by Clyde Wills, Metropolis Planet (Illinois) Editor Emeritus
301

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
(internal, stable, global for negative events and the opposite pattern for positive events) the 
summer before starting law school achieved a higher GPA and greater success working on their 
school’s law journal than those with an optimistic explanatory style. Some aspects of the pes-
simistic explanatory style, such as taking responsibility for one’s failures to remedy them, may 
be more adaptive and conducive to future achievement than explaining them away as external, 
unstable, or specific. Law school programs are intense, and maybe performance in law school 
is everything to a faltering law student. Perhaps viewing failures as internal may be a way of 
keeping oneself on track or motivated for success. Of course, the authors cautioned, we don’t 
know if these pessimists were at greater risk for depression or if these negative attributions 
merely served as defenses keeping their expectations low to keep themselves performing their 
best (Satterfield et al., 1997).
Pessimistic explanations tend to be self-fulfilling: Students with a pessimistic explanatory 
style were less likely to have specific academic goals and less likely to seek academic advising, 
symptoms of passive rather than active strategies to school achievement (Peterson & Barett, 
1987). In the academic life of a typical student—as many readers of this text can attest—there 
are many frustrations, from failed quizzes, difficult problem sets, a lost textbook, a surprise quiz, 
an incomplete reading assignment, difficulty starting an upcoming paper, or an unintelligible 
lecture, for example, that students must face on a daily basis. Successful students are not neces-
sarily the smartest, but those who are able to cope with these inevitable setbacks and continue 
to strive rather than give up.
Athletics.  Even in the sports arena, individuals and teams with an optimistic explanatory 
style perform better than those with a pessimistic style (Gillham et al., 2001; Rettew & Reiv-
ich, 1995; Seligman, Nolen-Hoeksema, Thornton, & Thornton, 1990), especially after defeat 
(Seligman et al., 1990). We saw this earlier with professional basketball teams using the CAVE 
technique (Rettew & Reivich, 1995).
In a different study using similar methods with baseball players, teams with more opti-
mistic players won more games the following season than teams with pessimistic players 
(Rettew & Reivich, 1995). Explanatory style was just as good a predictor of the next season’s 
performance as was the team’s performance in the current season (see Figure 3). Optimistic 
soccer players also play better after a loss than do players with a pessimistic explanatory style 
(Gordon, 2008).
Why does explanatory style have such a strong effect on athletic performance? Researchers 
think that the key to a winning athletic performance is the ability to persist despite setbacks. 
This was studied more closely in elite male and female swimmers.
For this experiment, the participants were members of the University of California at 
Berkeley’s men’s and women’s swim teams, both nationally ranked, in which several members 
THINK ABOUT IT
When it comes to academic 
achievement, is it better to 
be optimistic, pessimistic, or 
a balance of the two?
THINK ABOUT IT
Can a team be optimistic or 
pessimistic?
Figure 3  Explanatory style 
and baseball wins: Average 
explanatory style of players for 
negative events during the 1985 
season by percentage of games 
won during the 1986 season. 
Higher numbers indicate a 
more pessimistic explanatory 
style.  Source: From Rettew and 
Reivich (1995, Figure 10.1,  
p. 180). Rettew, D., & Reivich, K. 
(1995). Sports and explanatory 
style. In G. M. Buchanan &  
M. E. P. Seligman (Eds.), 
Explanatory style (p. 173–185). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
9.5
0.4
0.35
0.45
Pirates
Braves
Expos
Cardinals
Padres
Cubs
Dodgers
Giants
Phillies
Astros
Mets
Reds
0.5
0.55
0.6
0.65
CN 1985
9.75
10
10.25
10.5
10.75
11
11.25
11.5
11.75
12
12.25
12.5
12.75
13
Winning Percentage 1986
302

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
at the time held national and world records 
and were preparing for the 1988 Olympic 
trials. At the beginning of the season, the 
swimmers indicated their explanatory 
style and their coaches rated how likely the 
swimmer was to bounce back after a bad 
performance. Then, after every swim meet 
during the regular season, coaches rated 
whether the swimmer performed better 
than expected or worse than expected. 
Swimmers with a pessimistic explanatory 
style and swimmers who were rated by the 
coach as unlikely to bounce back after a 
defeat performed worse than expected 
over the course of the season (Seligman et 
al., 1990).
The researchers hypothesized that 
one reason why optimists outperform 
pessimists is because they are better able 
to bounce back after a defeat. Having a 
pessimistic explanatory style, where they 
believe that bad events are likely to recur, 
causes pessimists to become helpless after 
a failure and give up trying. However, 
as you no doubt recognized, this study 
merely showed that the two are correlated. We do not know if a bad performance caused 
the pessimists, but not the optimists, to give up and try less hard the next time around 
(Seligman et al., 1990).
In a second experiment using the same participants, the researchers specifically imposed 
defeat on each swimmer and watched what happened to his or her performance. To do this, 
after competing in their best event, swimmers were told that they swam at a time significantly 
slower than their actual time. Although the times were large enough so that each swimmer 
would feel that he or she performed poorly, the times were small enough to be undetected by 
the swimmers themselves. After a 30-minute rest swimmers swam the same event again. How 
would optimists and pessimists perform after this manipulated failure?
The optimistic swimmers did at least as well on their second swim as they had on the first 
swim, but the pessimistic swimmers swam slower. Despite no time difference between the 
optimists and the pessimists on the first swim, the difference between the optimists and the 
pessimists on the second swim was enough to lose the event if it had been an actual swim meet 
(see Figure 4; Seligman et al., 1990).
Another study found a similar 
effect in professional basketball teams: 
Teams with an optimistic explanatory 
style were more likely than teams with 
a pessimistic style to bounce back from 
a loss by winning the next game (Rettew 
& Reivich, 1995). When it comes to ath-
letic performance, it’s like the old saying: 
When the going gets tough, the tough—
the optimists in this case—get going! By 
the way, when the going gets tough the 
pessimists go shopping. Or something 
like that, as pessimists tend to use avoid-
ance as a way of coping with negative 
events (Scheier, Carver, & Bridges, 2001).
Figure 4  Swim times of 
optimists and pessimists after 
false failure feedback. Optimistic 
swimmers perform better than 
pessimistic swimmers after 
failure.  Source: Seligman et al. 
(1990). 
Time
Slower
Faster
Swim
1
Swim
2
Pessimists
Optimists
Optimistic swimmers bounce 
back better than pessimistic 
swimmers after a failed 
performance.
©  moodboard/Alamy
303

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Explanatory Style and Work Behavior
In the United States, as well as in other countries including Greece (Xenikou, 2005) and Australia 
(Henry, 2005), with managers, nonmanagers, or laborers and across many types of work includ-
ing hospitals, schools, sales, banking, or information technology, workers with an optimistic 
explanatory style are more motivated, persist longer in the face of adversity, perform better, 
and experience less burnout and turnover than workers with a pessimistic explanatory style.
When it comes to sales, in particular, an optimistic explanatory style really pays off. Whether 
it is insurance, telecommunications, real estate, office products, auto sales, or banking, whenever 
persistence is necessary to overcome difficulties, salespeople with an optimistic explanatory style 
outsell salespeople with a pessimistic explanatory style by about 20 to 40 percent (Schulman, 
1999). Why is this the case? Salespersons often must make “cold calls” where they contact a 
potential buyer who is not expecting the call or whom they do not yet know. Understandably, 
the likelihood of landing a sale under these conditions is quite slim, so the successful salesperson 
must be able to take a rejection and forge ahead with his or her calls.
Imagine two recently hired insurance salespeople, Carlos and Manny, who have just fin-
ished making 20 cold calls and were rejected on every single one. Carlos says to himself: “I made 
20 calls without a hint of a sale. What’s wrong with me? I’m just not cut out for this (internal). 
I guess I’m not good with people or not very persuasive” (stable and global; Schulman, 1999, 
p. 32). With this attitude, how likely will Carlos be to ever pick up the phone again?
Now consider Manny who says: “That was a tough stretch, but that can happen to the best 
of them (external). Maybe they don’t need what I’m selling or were too busy (external). Also, 
I’m new at this and it takes time and practice to learn the ropes and sharpen my sales pitch 
(unstable and specific). As my boss said, this is a numbers game—you have to make lots of calls 
to find those few customers who are interested enough to buy” (Schulman, 1999, pp. 32–33). 
With this attitude, Manny is able to face the next call and even the next rejection.
Obviously, Carlos has a pessimistic explanatory style whereas Manny has an optimistic 
one. These two imaginary salespeople are fairly representative of participants in a study of 
explanatory style of 104 insurance agents working for the Met Life Insurance Company (Selig-
man & Schulman, 1986). Agents with an optimistic explanatory style sold more life insurance 
than agents with a pessimistic explanatory style. They were also less likely to quit or be fired 
in the first 2 years of employment. In fact, optimists sold about 35% more insurance than the 
pessimists. Pessimists may be more easily overwhelmed by cold calling, and come to avoid it. 
They start to lose their confidence in a self-fulfilling prophesy of helplessness, hopelessness, and 
pessimism, which may eventually lead to their quitting, if they are not fired first (Schulman, 
1999). In contrast, optimists are more likely to see adversity as a challenge or as a puzzle that 
they can solve with the right strategy or enough effort. They may spend long hours refining 
their interpersonal skills and striving to maintain their confidence after a rejection so that they 
can rebound quickly after setbacks, and persist in the face of challenge.
But how can we be so sure that explanatory style caused workers to persist longer leading 
to other good outcomes? After all, because none of these studies randomly assigned workers to 
explanatory style, it is possible that job success led workers to become more optimistic in their 
explanatory style. However, we can randomly assign some workers to a treatment designed to make 
them more optimistic and compare them to workers who did not go through the treatment. Will 
changing a worker’s explanatory style to a more optimistic one also lead to better outcomes at work?
The answer is a resounding yes! Employees of a major British insurance company that had 
just undergone a massive reorganization took part in an intervention designed to help them 
develop a more optimistic explanatory style (Proudfoot, Corr, Guest, & Dunn, 2009). Before 
the intervention, the reorganization hit employees hard; some 37% of employees experienced 
levels of psychological distress high enough to warrant professional help.
For this experiment, half the participants were randomly assigned to participate in a special 
training group immediately; the others were placed on a wait-list control and would have the 
same exact training but 5 months later. In this way the researchers made sure that both the treat-
ment group and the control group were comparable except for the training. The experimental 
group attended weekly 3-hour sessions for 7 weeks. Using a combination of Socratic questioning, 
group discussions, self-observation, reflection, and assignments, these sessions used principles 
of cognitive behavior therapy to change employees’ work-related explanatory style.
THINK ABOUT IT
In what other jobs do work-
ers face similar conditions? 
Might people with an 
optimistic explanatory style 
excel there as well?
304

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
The intervention did more than make employees in the intervention group more optimistic 
compared to employees who had not yet experienced the intervention: It also led to positive psy-
chological and work-related outcomes. Both immediately after the intervention and 3 months 
later, employees in the experimental group reported greater self-esteem, job satisfaction, and pro-
ductivity compared to before they started the program. They also reported lowered psychological 
distress, intention to quit, and job turnover. Employees in the control group also showed these 
improvements, but only after they had gone through the training (Proudfoot et al., 2009; see 
Figure 5).
As you can see, an optimistic explanatory style not only leads to better outcomes at work but it 
can also help workers successfully weather the changes and stresses of a corporate reorganization.
Explanatory Style and Physical and Psychological Health
Physical Health.  We’ve already seen how a pessimistic explanatory style can be detrimental 
to good psychological health (Peterson & Seligman, 1984; Sweeney et al., 1986), but a pessi-
mistic explanatory style can be bad for one’s physical health as well (Peterson & Bossio, 2001).
An optimistic explanatory style is linked to better immune functioning (Brennan & 
Charnetski, 2000; Kamen-Siegel, Rodin, Seligman, & Dwyer, 1991). People with an optimistic 
explanatory style take better care of themselves, seeking and following medical advice more 
so than people with a pessimistic explanatory style. They are also more likely to engage in 
healthier behaviors that can prevent illness. Optimists have greater social support—that is, 
number and quality of friendships—and more quality personal relationships, both of which 
have been shown to bolster immune functioning (Seligman, 1990). College students with an 
optimistic explanatory style had fewer illnesses, made fewer visits to the doctor, and were more 
confident that they could prevent health problems than their more pessimistic peers (Peterson, 
1988; Peterson & De Avila, 1995).
The effects of explanatory style in young adulthood set the stage for good psychological 
and physical health later in life. Students with an optimistic explanatory style in college also had 
better physical health in middle age (Peterson, Seligman, & Vaillant, 1988). Among men who 
THINK ABOUT IT
Why might optimists and 
pessimists show differences 
in number and quality of 
friendships? Could a vicious 
cycle or self-fulfilling proph-
esy be operating here?
Figure 5  Comparison of 
experimental group with 
wait-list control group: 
1 = before intervention for 
experimental group; 2 = after 
intervention; 3 = 3@month 
follow-up of experimental 
group and baseline for control 
group; and 4 = after control 
group intervention.  Source: 
From Proudfoot et al. (2009, 
Figure 2, p. 150). Reprinted 
from Proudfoot, J. G., Corr, P. J., 
Guest, D. E., & Dunn, G. (2009), 
“Cognitive-behavioural training 
to change attributional style 
improves employee well-being, 
job satisfaction, productivity, 
and turnover,” Personality and 
Individual Differences, 46, 
147–153.  Copyright © 2009, 
with permission from Elsevier.  
t=3.93
Control Group
Cognitive-Behavioural Training Group
8
6
4
2
1
Average A. S.
Score (-21–21)
0
3
2
4
Occasions
Attributional Style
t=6.63
t=5.88
t=6.75
82
78
74
70
1
Average J.S.
Score (15–105)
66
3
2
4
Occasions
Job Satisfaction
t=9.97
t=2.68
80
76
68
72
15
10
5
1
Average GHQ
Score (0–30)
0
3
2
4
Occasions
Psychological Strain
t=4.28
t=4.72
t=4.46
5
4.5
1
Average WSE
Score (1–7)
3
3
2
4
Occasions
Professional Self-Esteem
t=35.41 t=29.51
3.5
4
t=6.34
305

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
had a previous heart attack, those with an optimistic explanatory style had a greater survival 
rate (Buchanan, 1995).
Psychological Health: Depression.  One of the most robust findings is that a pessimistic 
explanatory style is a risk factor for depression in both children (Gladstone & Kaslow, 1995; 
Joiner & Wagner, 1995) and adults (Gillham et al., 2001; Robins & Hayes, 1995). That is, 
although everybody might feel sad when a bad thing happens or a good thing fails to happen 
to them, people with a pessimistic style feel sadder longer and more deeply than people with 
an optimistic explanatory style (Peterson & Seligman, 1984). This finding has been demon-
strated in cross-sectional correlational studies, longitudinal studies, field experiments, labora-
tory experiments, and case studies (Peterson & Seligman, 1984). In addition to depression, 
pessimists experience more negative emotions such as anxiety, guilt, anger, sadness, despair 
and hopelessness in the face of negative events than optimists (Isaacowitz & Seligman, 2003).
The tricky part of proving that a pessimistic explanatory style actually causes depression 
is that we can’t randomly assign people to one style or the other. Also, it would be unethical to 
purposely cause bad things to happen to people and see who becomes depressed. As a result, 
much of the evidence for the effect of explanatory style on depression is correlational. However, 
the logic behind many of these studies does lead to the conclusion that pessimistic explanatory 
style is a risk factor for depression.
For example, much research finds a correlation between explanatory style and depression at 
the same point in time. As you recall, this could be because a pessimistic explanatory style causes 
depression, depression causes a person to develop a pessimistic explanatory style, or because 
some third variable, like Neuroticism, causes both depression and a pessimistic explanatory style.
One way around this problem is to start with a sample of optimistic and pessimistic people 
who do not differ in depressive symptoms and then attempt to predict who actually becomes 
depressed when a naturally occurring negative event—like failing a test, not getting into the 
college of your dreams, being rejected from a highly desirable fraternity or sorority, or having 
a heart attack—hits. Many studies have used such naturally occurring negative events to track 
explanatory style and depression and do indeed find that a pessimistic explanatory style often 
leads to depression after a negative event (e.g., Abela & Seligman, 2000).
College students, for example, regularly face naturally occurring negative events: exams. 
Undergraduate students in an intro psychology class took the ASQ and indicated what grade on the 
upcoming midterm exam would make them happy or unhappy. Then their mood was measured 
right before and right after the dreaded midterm exam. Among students who performed badly 
on the midterm exam—by their own definition—students with a pessimistic explanatory style 
were more likely to be depressed when they found out their grade than students with an optimistic 
explanatory style (Metalsky et al., 1982). Explanatory style was not correlated with exam grades.
© Jack Hollingsworth/Thinkstock
THINK ABOUT IT
If a pessimistic explanatory 
style causes depression, can 
attribution therapy prevent 
or alleviate depression?
Students regularly face 
naturally occurring 
negative events. However, 
students with an optimistic 
explanatory style bounce 
back better and are less likely 
to become depressed after 
doing badly on an exam than 
students with a pessimistic 
explanatory style.
306

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Similarly, undergraduate students in an abnormal psychology class who learned that they 
did badly on a midterm exam were understandably upset. However, students with an opti-
mistic explanatory style seemed to bounce back within a day or two, whereas students with a 
pessimistic explanatory style still showed symptoms of depression. Pessimistic students with 
low self-esteem who failed the exam—a triple whammy of risk factors—continued to show 
symptoms of depression up to 5 days after receiving their grades, long after students with high 
self-esteem recovered from their failing grades (Metalsky, Joiner, Hardin, & Abramson, 1993).
Even children are vulnerable to depression when bad events happen to them, if they have 
a pessimistic explanatory style (Nolen-Hoeksema et al., 1986). Third, fourth, and fifth graders 
who had a pessimistic explanatory style were more likely to show symptoms of depression both 
in the present and a few months later, especially if they experienced negative life events than 
children with a more optimistic explanatory style. The children also reported engaging in more 
helpless behaviors, an observation verified by their teachers, and showed lower scores on state 
achievement test scores. Overall, helpless behaviors and depression were associated with poor 
achievement on standardized tests. There was also evidence in this study that depression can 
cause a pessimistic explanatory style.
A second strategy researchers may use to effectively demonstrate that a pessimistic explana-
tory style causes depression is to track both explanatory style and depressive symptoms over 
time and see how they relate to each other. Studies that have taken this tack do indeed find that 
a pessimistic explanatory style predicts increases in depressive symptoms over time (Gillham 
et al., 2001). One study found that the greater the number of daily hassles people experienced 
over 6 weeks, the more likely they were to experience depressive symptoms, especially if they 
had a more pessimistic way of explaining events (Gibb, Beevers, Andover, & Holleran, 2006).
Yet a third strategy is to design a treatment that changes explanatory style and see if this 
leads to changes in depression. Of course, it would be unethical to attempt to change an opti-
mistic style to a more pessimistic one, so researchers opt to change a pessimistic style to a more 
optimistic one. An even more powerful demonstration would be to compare the intervention 
group to a control group of participants who are similar to them in explanatory style and 
depression, but who do not receive the intervention. If we see improvements in the experimen-
tal group but not in the control group, it suggests that it was the manipulation of explanatory 
style that caused the lessening of depressive symptoms.
Both of these studies have been done (Gillham et al., 2001). Martin Seligman and his col-
leagues at the University of Pennsylvania have devised the Penn Resiliency Program (PRP). 
This program was designed to change a pessimistic explanatory style to a more optimistic one. 
Indeed, not only do these programs change explanatory style, but they also prevent depression 
in both adults (Seligman, Schulman, DeRubeis, & Hollon, 1999) and children (Gillham et al., 
2001). These programs have met with great success in the United States (Gillham, Reivich, 
Jaycox, & Seligman, 1995; Jaycox, Reivich, Gillham, & Seligman, 1994) and in China (Yu & 
Seligman, 2002). We’ll take a closer look at how these programs work to increase optimism and 
lessen depression in The Personality of Everyday Life box later in this chapter.
Another kind of treatment is therapy. As adults successfully progress through cogni-
tive therapy for depression, their explanatory style changes from a pessimistic one to a more 
optimistic one (Peterson & Seligman, 1984; Seligman et al., 1988). Conversely, a pessimistic 
explanatory style predicts a relapse in depression after termination of therapy (DeRubeis & 
Hollon, 1995; Ilardi, Craighead, & Evans, 1997). For example, one study monitored the thought 
processes of four patients who were in cognitive therapy for depression after a loss of a loved 
one. According to the transcripts of their therapy sessions from the beginning, middle, and end 
of therapy, these people showed the most internal stable and global explanations for negative 
events at the beginning of their therapy and the least internal, stable, and global explanations 
during their last session (Peterson & Seligman, 1984).
However, not all research supports the finding that pessimistic explanatory style is a risk 
factor for depression (Gillham et al., 2001; Norem, 2003). A few inconsistent studies find that 
explanatory style does not predict changes in symptoms of depression up to one year later 
(Bennett & Bates, 1995; Hammen, Adrian, & Hiroto, 1988; Tiggemann, Winefield, Winefield, & 
Goldney, 1991). All three of these studies looked at the impact of everyday hassles on depression. 
307

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Perhaps everyday stress is not enough to cause 
depressive symptoms in people with a pessimistic 
explanatory style.
Other studies find that a pessimistic explan-
atory style may be more adaptive in certain 
situations. Recall our earlier discussion of how pes-
simistic college students in high-pressure courses 
of study achieved higher grades than students with 
an optimistic explanatory style (LaForge & Cantrell, 
2003; Satterfield et al., 1997). Because neither of 
these studies looked at depressive symptoms, we do 
not know if the higher grades of pessimists came 
at a psychological cost. However, there is some evi-
dence that a pessimistic explanatory style is better 
for the mental health of elderly people (Isaacowitz 
& Seligman, 2001).
In one sample of elders living in the greater 
Philadelphia region, those with a optimistic explanatory style showed the least symptoms of 
depression 6 months later unless they were faced with a negative event such as the death of a 
loved one or deterioration in physical health. In this case, optimists showed the most amount 
of depression. Pessimists, regardless of negative events, scored in between these two extremes 
on depressive symptoms (see Figure 6; Isaacowitz & Seligman, 2001).
Isaacowitz and Seligman (2001) surmised that the optimists’ lifetime habit of viewing 
negative events as temporary and changeable is suddenly thrown into doubt when negative 
events occur for elders. Whereas for young people failing an exam is temporary, events such 
as changes in health status, death of friends, or other lifestyle changes associated with aging 
are permanent for elders and in most cases really do impact many domains of their lives. For 
elders, attributing bad events to unstable causes may actually increase depression if the causes 
turn out to be a permanent part of the elders’ lives.
Similarly, aging may be harder for optimists who apply their typical active problem-
focused coping to unsolvable problems. Pessimists may be more able to accept that some 
things happen outside their control. So, even though a pessimistic explanatory style is gener-
ally a risk factor for depression in young people, an optimistic explanatory style may be a risk 
factor for elders given the reality of their lives. Realism—however depressing one’s prospects 
may be—may be a better coping strategy for elders, just as it may be for law students and 
marketing majors.
Explanatory Style and Social Behavior
People with optimistic and pessimistic explanatory styles also differ in social behaviors like 
loneliness and marital satisfaction. Just as how people can stave off depression and achieve good 
things by blaming negative events on external, unstable, and specific causes—the optimistic 
explanatory style—people who make such attributions for their spouses’ behavior feel better 
about their marriages (Gillham et al., 2001). After all, who would you rather be married to: a 
cranky, selfish mate or a distracted sweetie who is just going through a rough patch at work? 
The kind of attributions we make for our friends and life partners, giving them the attributional 
benefit-of-the-doubt, leads to better outcomes, like marital satisfaction 1 year later, the same 
way it does for our own behaviors (Fincham & Bradbury, 1993).
People who are lonely, compared to nonlonely people, and those who are depressed, com-
pared to nondepressed people, make more internal, stable, and global explanations for their 
loneliness or depression (Anderson & Arnoult, 1985; Anderson, Horowitz, & French, 1983). 
Lonely people and depressed people blame their problems in interacting with others on their 
own lack of ability or personal defects, attributing interpersonal failures to stable causes in 
themselves. In contrast, nonlonely or nondepressed people blame their interpersonal failings 
on lack of effort or poor strategies. This suggests that lonely people experience helplessness 
Figure 6  Depressive 
symptoms at 6 months in 
optimists and pessimists on 
the Beck Depression Inventory 
(BDI) as a function of negative 
live events.  Source: From 
Isaacowitz and Seligman (2001, 
Figure 1, p. 264). Reprinted 
from Isaacowitz, D. M., & 
Seligman, M. E. P. (2001), “Is 
pessimism a risk factor for 
depressive mood among 
community-dwelling older 
adults?” Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 39, 255–272.  
Copyright © 2001, with 
permission from Elsevier.
10
4
8
9.47
6.62
6.08
4.17
6
BDI Score at 6-Month Follow-Up
2
0
No Events
Life Events
Pessimists
Optimists
SEE FOR YOURSELF
The next time you are feel-
ing lonely, consider it a tem-
porary situation and think 
about what you could do, 
at least in the short term, to 
feel better.
308

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
when it comes to interacting with other people, which if true, also suggests how to cure loneli-
ness: realize that you can take concrete steps, such as reaching out to others, doing volunteer 
work, or contacting a friend, to ease your feelings of loneliness (Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). As 
mentioned in the section on physical health, social isolation has been linked to health prob-
lems (Cobb, 1976) and to negative genetic changes in immune functioning (Cole et al., 2007).
Cultural Differences in Explanatory Style
As you might expect, given that there are cultural differences in locus of control, there are also 
cultural differences in explanatory style (Peterson & Chang, 2003). Recall that people in col-
lectivistic cultures, such as in countries in East Asia, tend to be more external whereas people 
in individualistic cultures, such as in the United States, tend to be more internal (Heine & 
Lehman, 1995). The same pattern is found for explanatory style: Chinese people tend to have a 
more pessimistic and less optimistic explanatory style than Americans (Lee & Seligman, 1997).
Undergraduate students in China and the United States took the ASQ in their native lan-
guage. As you can see in Figure 7, Chinese students were the most pessimistic, American stu-
dents the most optimistic, with the Chinese American students falling somewhere in between. 
In particular, European Americans were more likely to show a self-serving bias, attributing 
good events to themselves and negative events to external factors, than were the Chinese Ameri-
cans or the mainland Chinese. Both groups of Chinese students attributed their good events 
to circumstances outside themselves, as would be expected in Chinese culture which values 
modesty. Across all three samples, pessimism related to lower grades, worse health, and less 
confidence.
Clearly, there is something about cultural values that fosters an optimistic or a pessimis-
tic explanatory style. What specific aspect of 
Chinese or American culture might do this? In 
a study of explanatory styles of Asian Ameri-
can and European American students, those 
who grew up in families emphasizing submis-
siveness—a value important in Chinese cul-
ture—were more global in their explanations 
for negative events regardless of their cultural 
background providing direct evidence that cul-
tural values, as reinforced by parents as well 
as by the dominant culture, affect explanatory 
style (Kao, Nagata, & Peterson, 1997).
© Paylessimages/Fotolia
Cultural differences in 
explanatory style: Chinese 
students tend to be more 
pessimistic than American 
students.
Figure 7  Mean composite 
scores of optimism between 
White Americans, Chinese 
Americans, and mainland 
Chinese. Higher numbers 
indicate a more optimistic 
explanatory style.  Source: 
From Lee and Seligman 
(1997, Figure 1, p. 36). Lee, Y., & 
Seligman, M. E. P. (1997), “Are 
Americans more optimistic 
than the Chinese?,” Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
23(1), 32–40.  Copyright © 
1997 by Sage Publications. 
Reprinted with permission of 
Sage Publications.
0
4
3
2
Mean CPCN
1
5
White
Americans
Mainland
Chinese
Chinese
Americans
4.06
2.46
3.08
309

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Research Methods Illustrated: Field Studies and Natural 
Manipulations
I
knew a particularly amazing professor back in graduate school. Ron Mack was a caring 
person and a bit of a character around the psychology department. But as a clinical 
psychologist, he often felt uncomfortable by the kinds of research done by social and 
personality psychologists that involved making people feel bad or sad, distressed them, or 
made them fail at seemingly important tasks. His philosophy was simple: There is enough pain 
in the world; we don’t need to add to it by putting participants through stressful manipulations 
in the laboratory.
Ron Mack was right: There are many naturally occurring tragic events in the world that 
challenge people’s beliefs and expectations and even send some into a tailspin of depression. 
Because it would be unethical to purposely induce a depression in people or psychologically 
distress them, researchers often design experiments or correlational studies around such natural 
manipulations using field studies (McGuire, 1967).
A field study is a study that takes place outside the laboratory. Field studies can be 
experimental or nonexperimental (Aronson, Ellsworth, Carlsmith, & Gonzales, 1990). When 
researchers are unable to control the independent variable or when randomly assigning 
participants to conditions that may be harmful or disturbing is impossible or inadvisable (Aronson 
et al., 1990), researchers may use nonexperimental methods rather than a true experiment. Designs 
that are nonexperimental are often called quasi-experimental or correlational designs. Quasi-
experimental designs strongly suggest a causal link, but, like a correlation, must be interpreted with 
caution because they can’t prove one (Aronson et al., 1990).
Because research questions can be investigated in a number of ways researchers must 
pick the best method for investigating their hypothesis. Often, this results in a compromise 
(Aronson et al., 1990). For example, when studying people who are coping with a catastrophic 
event—say a hurricane and a flood—experimenters must sacrifice experimental control and 
random assignment to gain insight into a real-world tragedy. Researchers might also apply 
different methods so that the shortcomings of one study can be compensated by the strengths 
of another (Aronson et al., 1990). This is why many researchers identify causal effects in the 
laboratory where they can conduct a true experiment and then attempt to extend their findings 
to a field study where they can’t (Aronson et al., 1990). One of the best examples of this is how 
researchers investigating learned helplessness first identified the causes of helplessness by doing 
laboratory experiments with dogs (Seligman & Maier, 1967) and then they applied the findings to 
understand human behavior in naturally occurring situations through quasi-experimental field 
studies.
Another advantage of field research, in addition to the ethical advantage, is that 
participants may give a more natural response, lessening experimental demand characteristics, 
because they are often unaware that they are even in an experiment. At the same time, because 
participants are unaware that they are in an experiment there may be invasion of privacy issues 
(Aronson et al., 1990).
Both laboratory and field research involves a trade-off between experimental control and 
generalizability (Dunn, 1999). Laboratory experiments generally have a lot of experimental 
control—so much so that we can identify the causes of an effect—but they have limited 
generalizability or applicability to situations that may differ from the strict, controlled conditions 
of the laboratory. Conversely, field research has very high generalizability, but lower levels of 
experimental control.
In personality psychology, field studies where people are observed and their behavior is 
recorded without their knowledge are less common than in social psychology or sociological 
research. Personality psychologists often use a blend of laboratory and field methods to study 
things like stress and coping with adversity that naturally occur in the world. For example, in this 
chapter we talk about research that followed people as they coped with tuberculosis (Seeman 
& Evans, 1962), parole (Seeman, 1963), hurricane and flooding (Anderson, 1977), lost swim meets 
(Seligman et al., 1990), possible unemployment (Proudfoot et al., 2009), failed exams (Metalsky et al., 
1982; Metalsky et al., 1993), death of a loved one (Peterson & Seligman, 1984), heart bypass surgery 
(Scheier et al., 1989), and cancer (Scheier et al., 2001). In none of these studies did experimenters 
manipulate or cause these bad things to happen. Instead, researchers looked at how people 
handled these distressing situations differently depending on their locus of control, explanatory 
style, or dispositional optimism.
310

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Consider the following field experiment, 
in which the participants were residents of 
a nursing home who didn’t even know they 
were being studied (Langer & Rodin, 1976). 
The experimenters wondered if part of the 
decrements associated with old age is due 
to the loss of personal responsibility and 
feelings of helplessness rather than failing 
health or the natural process of aging.
To test this hypothesis, elderly 
residents of two floors of a nursing home 
in Connecticut were randomly assigned 
to one of two conditions: a responsibility-
induced group and a control group. Note 
that the residents were not individually 
assigned to condition; instead residents 
on entire floor were assigned to the same 
condition. Even though not fulfilling the 
requirement of random assignment, this 
lessened the possibility that residents could 
talk with each other and contaminate the 
treatment effects. Because the residents 
on the two floors were similar in physical 
condition, psychological health, and prior 
socioeconomic status, and were assigned to 
rooms based on availability, the researchers 
accepted this compromise in experimental 
control to gain the realism and generalizability of their results.
One day, the administrator of the nursing home called a meeting in the lounge of each 
floor. To the residents on the responsibility-induced floor, he emphasized that they were 
responsible for decorating their rooms, caring for themselves, and deciding how they wanted 
to spend their time. Residents of the control floor were reminded of how much the home had 
provided for their care and comfort, such as nice rooms, taking care of them, and allowing 
them a range of activities. Then, residents in the responsibility-induced group had the option 
of choosing a plant, if they wanted, which was theirs “to keep and take care of as you’d like.” 
Residents in the control group were told “The plants are yours to keep. The nurses will water 
and care for them for you.” Finally, residents in the responsibility-induced group were reminded 
that they could choose which of two nights they wanted to see a movie the following week; 
residents in the control group were informed that they would be told which night they were 
scheduled to see the movie.
Though residents of both the experimental and control floors scored similarly on the 
dependent variables before the experiment started, there were significant differences between the 
two groups 3 weeks after this treatment. Residents of the responsibility-induced group reported 
greater increases in happiness and activity than the control group. They were also rated by an 
interviewer as being more alert, and by the nurses as engaging in more activities, such as visiting 
other residents, talking to the staff, and attending movie nights. Overall, 93% of the responsibility-
induced group showed improvements in eating, sleeping, and mood since the study started, whereas 
only 21% of the control group showed these positive changes. In fact, 71% of the control group 
actually became more debilitated despite receiving the same high-quality care provided by the 
institution. (Neither the interviewer nor the nurses were aware of which condition a resident was in.)
These differences were still seen 18 months later (Rodin & Langer, 1977). Although the overall 
death rate for the facility during the 18 months prior to the original experiment was 25%, the rate 
for the two floors in the 18 months after the treatment was strikingly different: 30% in the control 
group had died compared to 15% of the residents on the responsibility-induced floor.
The results of this experiment are quite striking, especially in light of what we know today 
about learned helplessness and the power of control on people’s physical and psychological 
health. Of course, we should still interpret these results with caution because this was not a true 
experiment.
That is why researchers always end their papers with the caveat “More research is necessary”!
© Nyul/Dreamstime.com
Elders who are given 
responsibility and retain 
control over aspects of their 
daily lives show better health 
than elders who experience 
loss of control in their lives.
THINK ABOUT IT
Imagine that your grand-
mother wants to help with 
food preparations for a big 
family dinner on Sunday. 
Your mom is concerned that 
it may be too much for her. 
Based on this research, what 
do you think?
311

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Dispositional Optimism
In addition to an optimistic explanatory style, another way personality psychologists define 
optimism is closer to what most people believe optimism is: an expectation that things will get 
better (Isaacowitz & Seligman, 2003). Dispositional optimism is a general expectation that 
good things will happen in the future (Scheier & Carver, 1985, 1993). People with dispositional 
optimism approach life with positive expectations—even in the face of adversity—and believe 
that good things will happen, events and circumstances will work out for the best, and that good 
will overcome bad (Carver & Scheier, 2001; Wise & Rosqvist, 2006). People low in dispositional 
optimism, whom we might call pessimists, hold negative expectations and believe that things 
will not work out and that bad things will happen and continue to happen in the future. As a 
result of their belief that things will work out, optimists tend to be confident and persistent. In 
contrast, pessimists are doubtful and hesitant (Carver & Scheier, 1998, 2002). These beliefs help 
optimists weather challenging experiences as well as everyday stressors better than pessimists.
Charles Carver and Michael Scheier developed their ideas of dispositional optimism and 
pessimism from their early work on self-regulation theory (Carver & Scheier, 2001; Scheier 
& Carver, 1988). While striving toward desired goals, people experience positive emotions 
(e.g., pride, gratitude, relief) when making progress toward those goals or negative emotions 
(e.g., shame, anger, and resentment) when their progress is impeded (Carver & Scheier, 1990; 
Scheier & Carver, 1992). But what happens when a person encounters an obstacle that he or 
she believes is too great to overcome?
First, if people are forced to abandon their efforts toward a goal they still want very badly, 
they may feel helplessness and distress (Carver & Scheier, 2003b). But if they give up on the 
goal or give up on their current efforts toward the goal, they could choose an alternative path to 
the same goal or even choose a different goal and avoid feelings of helplessness. This new goal 
may be more modest, the same, or even bigger than the original goal. Under these conditions, 
giving up doesn’t cause helplessness and may actually be adaptive. However, if no adjustment 
is made and people give up their commitment toward a goal without choosing an alternative 
goal, they might end up feeling aimless and empty (Carver & Scheier, 2003b). Healthy self-
regulation requires persistence in the face of adversity as well as giving up and changing to other, 
presumably more likely, goals in the same or in alternative domains (Carver & Scheier, 2001).
People regulate their current behaviors based on their future goals and their beliefs about 
their chances of achieving those goals. In this way, confidence (optimism) or doubt (pessimism) 
leads to different behaviors in the present and huge differences in achievement, psychological 
and physical health, and work behaviors and social behaviors in the future (Carver & Scheier, 
2001). These differing expectations of optimists and pessimists become self-fulfilling prophe-
cies: Giving up makes failure a sure thing whereas persistence makes success more likely.
Unlike people with an internal locus of control or an optimistic explanatory style, people 
with dispositional optimism do not necessarily need to be in control of their destinies to feel 
this confidence. Good things could happen because they are talented, hardworking, blessed, 
lucky, have friends in the right places, or some combination of all of these causes (Carver & 
Scheier, 2003a).
Rather than sit back and wait for good things to happen, optimists agree with Thomas 
Jefferson’s observation: “I’m a great believer in luck and I find the harder I work, the more I 
have of it.” In the face of difficulties, optimists continue working to find alternative ways to 
achieve their goals and believe that they can achieve their goals; pessimists are not so sure. 
Dispositional optimism leads to continuing efforts and perseverance whereas pessimism leads 
to giving up (Carver & Scheier, 2003a). As a result, optimists and pessimists differ in how they 
approach, cope with, and how effectively they prevail over challenges and problems (Carver & 
Scheier, 2003a).
As we saw with learned helplessness, people’s actions are regulated by their beliefs about 
the likely outcome of their actions (Scheier & Carver, 1987). When people see desired outcomes 
as attainable, they will persevere toward that goal even when the going gets tough. But when 
people believe that outcomes are unattainable, either due to their own inadequacies or due 
to circumstances, they will give up and choose another activity. People’s general expectations 
Twin 1: Hey, let’s get out of 
here. This old barn smells 
terrible! 
Twin 2: No, wait, with all this 
manure there’s got to be a 
pony around here somewhere!
“When God closes one door 
He opens another.”
312

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
of what good or bad outcomes will happen 
to them is reflected in their dispositional 
optimism and pessimism: how likely good 
things will happen for them regardless of 
the cause. As a result, everyday obstacles 
will be less disruptive to optimists.
Both explanatory style and dispo-
sitional optimism start with the belief 
that expectations impact people’s actions 
and experiences (Carver & Scheier, 
2003a). Though they come from different 
approaches, both lines of research converge 
on two important conclusions. First, hold-
ing negative expectations for the future 
leads to giving up, negative emotions, 
symptoms of depression, feelings of stress, 
slow recovery from stressors, social isola-
tion, and a shorter life expectancy (Scheier 
& Carver, 1987). Second, holding positive 
expectations for the future leads to persis-
tence, good morale, positive affect, active 
problem solving, problem-focused cop-
ing, a long life, social support, and greater 
well-being (Peterson, 2000). Even though 
optimists achieve better outcomes in life, 
dispositional optimism is not correlated with intelligence, wealth, or academic achievement 
(Aspinwall, Richter, & Hoffman, 2001).
For example, across different populations (e.g., college students, elderly people), and 
among people with varied medical conditions (e.g., cancer, pregnancy, bypass surgery, AIDS 
risk, joint replacement, rheumatoid arthritis), and their caregivers (e.g., nurses, family mem-
bers, Alzheimer’s caregivers), dispositional optimism was associated with fewer symptoms of 
depression and distress, better mood, and higher quality of life before, during, and after treat-
ment (Affleck, Tennen, & Apter, 2001; Scheier et al., 2001).
The research evidence for optimism is overwhelming: People with dispositional optimism 
are better than pessimists at realistically revising their goals and coping with negative events 
in their lives (Scheier et al., 2001). However, unrealistic optimism (Weinstein, 1980), wishful 
thinking (Peterson, 2000), or overconfidence—which are all different from dispositional opti-
mism—may cause problems if a person is so overly optimistic or optimistic in unproductive 
ways that he or she chooses to sit back and passively wait for good things to happen (Scheier & 
Carver, 1993). Dispositional optimism is similar to hopefulness (Needles & Abramson, 1990) 
or what Martin Seligman and his colleagues call a flexible optimism (Seligman, 1990).
Optimists differ in their expectations about the future, but what about their past and pres-
ent? Undergraduate men and women answered a questionnaire measuring how satisfied they 
were with their present lives (e.g., “I am satisfied with my current life”), past lives (“I am satis-
fied with my life in the past”), and anticipated future lives (“I will be satisfied with my life in the 
future”). Both pessimists and optimists saw their lives as becoming more satisfying over time, a 
common finding in life satisfaction research. However, as you might expect, optimists reported 
more life satisfaction at all three time periods than pessimists (Busseri, Choma, & Sadava, 2009).
There was also an interaction between time perspective and optimism/pessimism, such 
that optimists saw their present and future lives as similarly rosy, whereas pessimists antici-
pated a better life in the future—just not as good as the future lives the optimists imagined. 
That is, pessimists see their present lives as more similar to their past lives than optimists do 
(see Figure 8). The researchers concluded that life satisfaction is relative depending on one’s 
dispositional optimism: For optimists their present lives are “as good as it gets” whereas for 
pessimists “the best is yet to come.”
THINK ABOUT IT
What is the difference 
between unrealistic opti-
mism and dispositional 
optimism?
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Which do you agree with 
more: Is your life today as 
good as it gets or is the best 
yet to come?
Is this glass half empty or half 
full? People with dispositional 
optimism believe that good 
things will happen, events 
and circumstances will work 
out for the best, and that 
good will overcome bad.
© Lana Langlois/Shutterstock
313

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Measures of Dispositional Optimism
Individual differences in dispositional optimism and pessimism are measured by the Life Orien-
tation Test (LOT; Scheier & Carver, 1985), now in a revised version (LOT-R; Scheier, Carver, & 
Bridges, 1994). The LOT-R has 10 items, 3 for optimism, 3 for pessimism, and 4 that are fillers 
to help disguise the purpose of the test. Respondents must agree or disagree with each of the 
items on a 5-point scale. Scores from the individual items are combined to form a single score 
of optimism, although more recent research suggests that separate optimism and pessimism 
scores predict to different outcomes (Isaacowitz & Seligman, 2003; Peterson, 2000). You can see 
how optimistic or pessimistic you are by taking the LOT-R for yourself in Table 5.
Figure 8  Past, present, 
and anticipated future life 
satisfaction by optimism/
pessimism group. Life 
satisfaction means, plus  
and minus one standard  
error, are shown on the 
y-axis.  Source: From Busseri 
et al. (2009, Figure 1, p. 354). 
Reprinted from Busseri, 
M. A., Choma, B. L., & Sadava, 
S. W. (2009), “As good as it gets” 
or “The best is yet to come”? 
How optimists and pessimists 
view their past, present, 
and anticipated future life 
satisfaction,” Personality and 
Individual Differences, 47, 
352–356.  Copyright © 2009, 
with permission from Elsevier.
30
24
Optimists
Moderates
Pessimists
27
21
18
15
Past
Present
Future
Table 5  The Life Orientation Test—Revised (LOT-R)
Read each statement and circle your response. Please be as honest and accurate as you can throughout. Try not to let your response 
to one statement influence your responses to other statements. There are no “correct” or “incorrect” answers. Answer according to 
your own feelings, rather than how you think “most people” would answer.
A = I agree a lot
B = I agree a little
C = I neither agree nor disagree
D = I disagree a little
E = I disagree a lot
	 1.	 In uncertain times, I usually expect the best.	
A    B    C    D    E
	 2.	 It’s easy for me to relax.	
A    B    C    D    E
	 3.	 If something can go wrong for me, it will.	
A    B    C    D    E
	 4.	 I’m always optimistic about my future.	
A    B    C    D    E
	 5.	 I enjoy my friends a lot.	
A    B    C    D    E
	 6.	 It’s important for me to keep busy.	
A    B    C    D    E
	 7.	 I hardly ever expect things to go my way.	
A    B    C    D    E
	 8.	 I don’t get upset too easily.	
A    B    C    D    E
	 9.	 I rarely count on good things happening to me.	
A    B    C    D    E
	10.	 Overall, I expect more good things to happen to me than bad.	
A    B    C    D    E
Note: Items 2, 5, 6, and 8 are fillers and are not scored. Responses to the optimistic items 1, 4, and 10 are scored: A = 5, B = 4, C = 3, D = 2, E = 1. Responses to the 
pessimistic items 3, 7, 9, are reversed scored: A = 1, B = 2, C = 3, D = 4, E = 5. Add up scores for individual items to get the total score for the scale. Higher numbers 
indicate more optimism.
Source: From Scheier et al. (1994, Table 6, p. 1073). Scheier, M. F., Carver, C. S., & Bridges, M. W. (1994). Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism (and trait anxiety, self-mastery, 
and self-esteem): A reevaluation of the Life Orientation Test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 1063–1078.
314

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Dispositional Optimism and Coping
Echoing the findings for locus of control and explanatory style reviewed earlier in this chap-
ter, dispositional optimism is associated with positive outcomes in school and work, physical 
and psychological health, and social behavior. However, researchers on dispositional optimism 
have taken optimism and pessimism in a slightly different direction and have focused on how 
people cope with major life events. When faced with a negative event, people high in disposi-
tional optimism report fewer depressive symptoms, greater use of effective coping strategies, 
and fewer physical symptoms than pessimists (Scheier & Carver, 1992, 1993). Dispositional 
optimism is associated with greater well-being and better adjustment to life stressors over time 
(Scheier et al., 2001).
For example, among middle-aged women who experienced a negative event, those who 
were lower in dispositional optimism reported more depressive symptoms (Bromberger & 
Matthews, 1996). Similarly, a study following middle-aged women over a 1-year period found 
that caregivers were less optimistic and more pessimistic than noncaregivers. However, pes-
simism predicted changes in anxiety, perceived stress, and worsening self-rated health of both 
caregivers and noncaregivers (Robinson-Whelen, Kim, MacCallum, & Kiecolt-Glaser, 1997).
Dispositional optimism is also associated with better adjustment to the demands of col-
lege life in medical students, law students, and first-year undergraduates. Optimistic students 
showed greater achievement, less loneliness, less stress, fewer symptoms of depression, less 
chronic anger, and less anger suppression (Scheier et al., 2001).
Men with greater dispositional optimism prior to coronary bypass surgery showed more 
problem-focused coping and a faster recovery, returning to their regular activities faster than 
pessimists, and reporting a higher quality of life 6 months after the operation (Scheier et al., 
1989).
Overall, optimists cope better, in both the short term and in the long run, than pessimists. 
Let’s take a closer look at why this might be (see Table 6).
Optimistic Beliefs and Expectations.  Optimists fare better than pessimists when con-
fronted with stressful situations because their beliefs and expectations help them cope, whereas 
the beliefs and expectations of pessimists hurt them (Scheier et al., 2001). In the face of stress, 
optimism makes people resistant to depression (Carver, 2004), keeps them working toward 
their goals (Carver et al., 2005), and improves coping with life-threatening health issues (Carver 
et al., 1993; Stanton & Snider, 1993). Like this quote by Christine, optimists are likely to believe 
that much can be learned from trying experiences (Carver & Gaines, 1987). Just as civil engi-
neers analyze bridge and building disasters and use this knowledge to build better structures, 
optimists embrace failure and are ready to analyze past negative experiences to make things 
turn out better next time (Wise & Rosqvist, 2006). “It’s all a learning experience,” you might 
hear an optimist declare.
For example, dispositional optimism predicted adjustment to diagnosis and treatment 
for cancer. In women with breast cancer, and in men with prostate cancer, optimism predicted 
less distress immediately after surgery and up to 1 year afterward. In patients undergoing 
radiation treatments, optimism was associated with better adjustment throughout the process 
(Scheier et al., 2001). Optimism has been shown to predict better emotional and psychologi-
cal well-being and lower distress in breast cancer patients during and just after diagnosis 
(Carver et al., 1993, 1994; Epping-Jordan et al., 1999; Stanton & Snider, 1993) and also up to 
Table 6  Why People High in Dispositional Optimism Fare Better
	 1.	 Optimistic beliefs and expectations are more advantageous than pessimistic ones.
	 2.	 Optimists use better strategies to cope in a crisis.
	 3.	 Optimists take action, make plans, and engage in healthy behaviors.
	 4.	 Optimists are good at judging whether a situation is controllable or not and change strategies accordingly.
	 5.	 Optimistic beliefs alter physiological functioning and protect the body from stress.
“If every difficult 
experience makes you 
stronger . . . then I should be 
brilliant . . . amazing . . . and 
strong as hell after all this.”
Christine “Spoon Lady” Miserandino, 
32-year-old lupus survivor and 
founder of www. ButYouDontLookSick 
.com, November 25, 2009
315

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
13 years after treatment (Carver et al., 2005). Optimists were also able to return faster than 
pessimists to the social and recreational activities of their daily lives. These activities, in turn, 
lowered their emotional distress and protected them from depression as a result of enduring 
cancer treatments (Carver, Lehman, & Antoni, 2003). Pessimistic women did not experience 
these benefits.
In men and women recovering from coronary bypass surgery, dispositional optimists 
showed lower levels of hostility and depression than pessimists, and reported more happi-
ness, relief, satisfaction with their medical care, emotional support from friends and family, 
and higher quality of life immediately after the operation and up to 5 years later (Scheier 
et al., 2001).
In women of child-bearing age, dispositional optimism was associated with less anxiety 
during pregnancy, fewer depressive symptoms during pregnancy and after childbirth, and bet-
ter adjustment to abortion, whereas dispositional pessimism was associated with distress of 
infertile couples (Scheier et al., 2001).
One need not be facing a major life illness to benefit from dispositional optimism. Among 
first-year college students, optimists held higher academic expectations than pessimists and 
were more energized by the challenges of college, seeing them as opportunities rather than 
threats. As a result, they were less stressed, happier, healthier, better adjusted, and achieved 
higher grades during their first year of college than pessimists (Chemers, Hu, & Garcia, 2001).
Remember how stressful high school was, especially when it came to thinking about your 
future? Among Australian suburban high school students in Grades 8 to 12, those with higher 
levels of optimism, compared to students low in optimism, showed more career exploration and 
planning, career decision-making certainty, and held more career-related goals. Students with 
higher levels of pessimism, compared to students low in pessimism, knew less about the world 
of work, used decision-making strategies less, knew less about potential careers, were more 
indecisive, and had lower levels of school achievement. Overall, higher optimism in these teens 
was also associated with greater psychological health as shown by higher levels of self-esteem 
and less reported psychological distress (Creed, Patton, & Bartrum, 2002).
Optimism and Coping Strategies.  Even though optimists and pessimists use different 
coping strategies, the strategies of optimists are more effective at managing stress (Scheier & 
Carver, 1985). Optimists approach problems head-on, doing whatever they can to improve 
their predicament, engaging in active problem-focused coping. Problem-focused coping is 
when people work to solve their problems or do something concrete to change the source of 
the stress. This may involve planning, calling on friends to help fix the situation, focusing on 
fixing the problem and ignoring other activities, or engaging in any activity that is aimed at 
lessening the stress itself (Carver, Scheier, & Weintraub, 1989). Optimists are especially likely to 
use problem-focused strategies when they perceive the stressful situation as controllable. When 
things are not controllable, optimists use more adaptive coping mechanisms such as positive 
reframing, seeing the best in a situation, learning from a bad situation, accepting what can’t be 
changed, realistically revising goals, and using humor. Optimists keep trying whereas pessimists 
are more likely to get upset and give up (Brown & Marshall, 2001; Scheier & Carver, 1987).
Pessimists show more emotion-focused coping, where they attempt to reduce or manage 
the negative emotions and distress they feel as a result of the stress (Carver et al., 1989). This 
may involve being preoccupied with their emotional distress, accepting the stress, putting a 
positive spin on events, denying the stress, turning to religion, or seeking friends for comfort. 
Pessimists might also engage in avoidant coping such as giving up on goals, distancing, denying, 
escaping, abusing substances, and failing to take constructive steps to fix the situation.
Problem-focused coping works to reduce the threat whereas emotion-focused coping 
works to lessen the emotional distress caused by the threat (Scheier & Carver, 1987). People 
generally apply a combination of both problem-focused and emotion-focused coping depend-
ing on the circumstances. Often emotion-focused coping reduces the anguish and distress 
people feel, allowing them to carry out problem-focused coping.
To study these differences in coping styles, one study asked undergraduate students to 
imagine themselves in five hypothetical situations (Scheier, Weintraub, & Carver, 1986). The 
THINK ABOUT IT
How can one be optimistic 
while going through cancer 
treatment?
THINK ABOUT IT
What are some other ways 
of engaging in problem-
focused coping?
THINK ABOUT IT
What are some other ways 
of engaging in emotion-
focused coping?
316

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
situations were moderately stressful and somewhat controllable, such as managing multiple 
final exams on the same day, and other situations highly relevant to college students. As pre-
dicted, optimists and pessimists differed in their coping strategies, with optimists using more 
problem-focused coping and pessimists using more emotion-focused coping.
There is an interesting cultural difference between Asians and Americans in the coping strat-
egies of optimists and pessimists (Chang, 2001). Self-identified Asian American college students 
(an admittedly broad, heterogeneous category) showed similar amounts of dispositional opti-
mism as White Americans, but greater pessimism. This greater pessimism was associated with 
more avoidance coping and psychological problems (e.g., anxiety, fear, panic attacks, alienation, 
feelings of inadequacy, thought disorders, and other symptoms) among Asian Americans as dem-
onstrated in previous studies. But, this pessimism and avoidance coping was not associated with 
more depressive symptoms in Asian Americans as it generally is among White Americans. Instead, 
among those high in pessimism, Asian Americans use more problem-focused coping than White 
Americans. Perhaps this is how Asians can have higher pessimism and yet not be vulnerable to 
depression like American college students are. If these pessimistic thoughts are an important 
way for Asians to cope, Chang (2001) suggested that therapists of Asian Americans should try 
to increase optimistic thoughts in their clients rather than decrease pessimistic thoughts, as is 
standard practice with cognitive behavioral therapy (Beck, 1976).
Optimists Take Action. 
In contrast to pessimists, the direct, active, problem-solving 
approach of optimists causes them to act in ways that promote health. Optimists are more 
likely than pessimists to seek out information, adhere to medical regimes, eat a healthy diet, 
get regular exercise, and regularly engage in behaviors to promote health and reduce risk (e.g., 
engaging in safer sex practices if HIV-positive, or using sunscreen regularly if at risk for skin 
cancer; Scheier et al., 2001). Compared with pessimists, optimists take vitamins on a regu-
lar basis, eat healthier lunches, lower their levels of body fat, reduce smoking, reduce alcohol 
consumption, exercise, and enroll in cardiac rehabilitation programs more than pessimists do 
(Scheier & Carver, 1992). Optimism is associated with fewer physical symptoms in both elderly 
people and in college students (Scheier & Carver, 1987).
Part of problem-focused coping involves formulating a plan of action for dealing with a 
crisis, and optimists are more likely than pessimists to do this (Scheier & Carver, 1987). In one 
study, optimistic coronary bypass patients were more likely to make plans for their recovery by 
setting goals for themselves and by getting as much information as possible about the recovery 
process. In contrast, pessimists blocked out thoughts of what their recovery might be like. As 
a result, optimists showed a faster rate of recovery and fewer signs of complications from their 
bypass surgeries.
Optimism and Judging Controllability.  As mentioned earlier, optimists are more likely 
to change strategies or goals when faced with an uncontrollable situation. The key here is that 
optimists appear to be better able than pessimists to judge when situations are controllable or 
uncontrollable so they can choose more appropriate strategies (Aspinwall et al., 2001).
For example, in one study students tackled anagrams (scrambled word puzzles) that they 
believed tested their verbal intelligence (Aspinwall & Richter, 1999). The students had 20 min-
utes to solve as many anagrams as they could. Unbeknownst to them, the first 7 anagrams were 
unsolvable. For participants in the No Alternatives condition, this was the only task they were 
given. But participants in the Alternatives condition were given two additional sets of anagrams 
that were solvable (of course, the participants didn’t know this). At the same time, half of the 
participants in both conditions were allowed to return to an anagram they missed while the 
other half was not.
When participants had no alternative tasks to work on, all participants—both optimists 
and pessimists—worked on the puzzles until time was up. But when alternatives were available 
and participants couldn’t return to their previously unsolved problems—forcing them to admit 
defeat on a test of verbal intelligence—participants high in optimism gave up on the unsolvable 
problems 4 minutes sooner than pessimistic participants. Further, they performed better on the 
new tasks than pessimistic participants (Aspinwall & Richter, 1999; see Figure 9).
“God grant me the serenity 
to accept the things I cannot 
change; courage to change the 
things I can; and wisdom to 
know the difference.”
”The Serenity Prayer” by Reinhold 
Niebuhr
THINK ABOUT IT
Might the emotion-focused 
strategy of seeking the 
comfort of others be espe-
cially useful in a collectivistic 
culture compared to an 
individualistic culture?
317

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
This may remind you of the 
Serenity Prayer. Optimists are better 
able to change the things they can 
change, accept the things they can-
not change, and they do seem to have 
the wisdom to tell the difference—at 
least more wisdom than pessimists 
do (Aspinwall et al., 2001). Or, in 
the words of the legendary vaude-
villian comedian W. C. Fields: “If at 
first you don’t succeed, try, try again. 
Then give up. There’s no use in being 
a damn fool about it.”
Optimistic Beliefs and Physiological Functioning.  Optimism seems to have a protective 
effect on the body’s physiological reactions to stress, preventing stress from doing the kind of 
damage it might otherwise cause (Scheier & Carver, 1987). The relationship between optimism 
and physical and psychological health persists even after controlling for other personality vari-
ables that are known to be related to health, like neuroticism, anxiety, and depression. This 
suggests that there must be other ways that optimism impacts health. One such mechanism 
may be the immune system: Optimism seems to make the immune system function better and 
protect the body from the harmful effects of stress.
Previous studies have found significant correlations between optimism and immune func-
tioning, but these studies were all correlational. For example, in a sample of HIV-positive men 
and women, greater optimism was associated with greater immune functioning over time, 
although this enhanced immune function did not affect disease progression. Greater pessimism 
was associated with greater disease progression over time but not due to enhanced immune 
function (Milam, Richardson, Marks, Kemper, & McCutchan, 2004). In another study, opti-
mistic students showed greater T-cell and natural killer cell activity, two cell types that help 
fight infection, during times of academic stress than pessimists (Segerstrom, 2001, 2005; Seger-
strom, Taylor, Kemeny, & Fahey, 1998). In 
a study of women undergoing breast can-
cer diagnosis and treatment, dispositional 
optimism counteracted the usual associa-
tion between high perceived stress and low-
ered activity of natural killer cells (Von Ah, 
Kang, & Carpenter, 2007).
The best evidence that optimism causes 
changes in the functioning of the immune 
system comes from a recent experiment that 
used a placebo control group to compare 
the effects of dispositional optimism and 
stress on immune functioning (Brydon, 
Walker, Wawrzyniak, Chart, & Steptoe, 
2009). The experimenters manipulated 
the psychological stress of healthy male 
undergraduates and exposure to illness by 
randomly assigning them to one of four 
conditions.
Vaccines work by physiologically stim-
ulating the body into making antibodies to 
fight an infection. Using a double-blind 
technique, where neither the experimenters 
nor the participants know who received the 
Figure 9  Time spent on 
unsolvable anagrams as a 
function of dispositional 
optimism and whether 
returning to previous 
anagrams was prohibited 
or permitted.  Source: From 
Aspinwall and Richter (1999). 
High Optimism
Low Optimism
12
8
4
0
Returning Prohibited
Condition
Time in Minutes Spent Working
on Anagrams
Returning Permitted
10
2
6
© Nikitta/Dreamstime.com
THINK ABOUT IT
Why does a placebo control 
group provide the best evi-
dence that optimism causes 
changes in immune system 
functioning?
Evidence suggests that 
dispositional optimists have 
strong immune systems and 
are better able to fight colds 
than dispositional pessimists.
318

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
placebo and who received the vaccine, some participants received a typhoid vaccine whereas 
others received a harmless saline solution. Then half of the participants rested while the other 
half faced two psychologically stressful tasks. One task was the classic Stroop test, where partici-
pants were presented with names of colors displayed in various colored lettering on a computer 
screen. Participants had to indicate the color of the lettering, not what the word said (this task 
is harder than it looks, and is often used by experimenters to induce stress in participants). For 
the second task, participants had to imagine that they were falsely accused of a theft and had 
to give a speech defending themselves. They believed that the speeches would be videotaped 
and judged.
During these tasks, experimenters measured mood, stress responses, and immune func-
tioning of participants. They were particularly interested in interleukin-6, an inflammatory 
cytokine, the level of which increases when the immune system is activated. A short-term 
increase in inflammatory response is necessary to help fight infection. But a prolonged inflam-
matory response, which occurs when a person is under chronic stress, can be damaging. A side 
effect of interleukin-6 is an increase in tension and anxiety. The experimenters wondered, 
would psychological stress (Stroop test and speech) increase interleukin-6, what impact would 
a participant’s dispositional optimism have on this immune system response, and would this 
response compromise participants’ ability to ward off infection later?
First, when experiencing an immediate stressor—getting a needle in the arm as part of an 
experiment—optimists showed a smaller increase in tension and anxiety, indicating a smaller 
spike in interleukin-6.
Second, when faced with the anxiety-provoking Stroop test and the possibility of giving 
a speech, optimism moderated people’s stress responses. That is, the immune system of opti-
mists showed a steady response to these stressors rather than the five-alarm-end-of-the-world-
all-hands-on-deck immune response of pessimists. This limits long-term inflammation and 
preserves the body’s ability to fight infection.
You can see this for yourself in Figure 10. At 2 hours after the stressful experience, the 
interleukin-6 levels of pessimists were still elevated, whereas those of optimists had dropped 
significantly. This provides direct evidence that when faced with a stressor, dispositional opti-
mism causes better immune functioning.
Third, as a result of this more efficient response to stress, the immune system of optimists 
is better able to fight physical infection, as reflected in their response to the typhoid vaccine, 
three weeks later.
Think of it like this: imagine driving down the highway with your friends in the car and 
suddenly seeing a pothole. Some drivers might scream and swerve sharply to avoid the pothole, 
momentarily loosing control of the car and upsetting their passengers. Everyone may need a 
few moments to collect themselves before settling back into an otherwise pleasant road trip. 
However, other drivers might only gasp instead of scream, swerving a bit more gently to avoid 
the pothole. Their ability to retain control of the car isn’t as disruptive, making for a safer and 
more pleasant trip for them and their passengers. In general, stress compromises the body’s 
Figure 10  Optimists’ immune 
systems rebound faster than 
pessimists’ after a stressful 
event. This graph shows the 
mean change in interleukin-6 
at 2 hours poststress in relation 
to dispositional optimism 
scores, grouped from lowest 
(pessimistic) to highest 
(optimism) in five equal-sized 
groups. Whereas pessimists 
still show an inflammatory 
response to stress, the levels 
of interleukin-6 in optimists 
is greatly reduced. Optimism 
appears to protect the body 
from long-term inflammation 
by quickly reducing levels of 
interleukin-6 in the hours after 
a stressful event.  Source: From 
Brydon et al. (2009, Figure 2, p. 
813). Reprinted from Brydon, 
L., Walker, C., Wawrzyniak, A. J., 
Chart, H., & Steptoe, A. (2009), 
“Dispositional optimism and 
stress-induced changes in 
immunity and negative mood,” 
Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 
23, 810–816.  Copyright © 2009, 
with permission from Elsevier. 
Optimism Group
1.25
0.75
1
0.5
0.25
1 (low)
Log IL-6 Response
0
0.25
3
2
4
5 (high)
319

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
ability to fight off infections. However, optimists, perhaps by being not so physiologically reac-
tive to stress, are less vulnerable than pessimists to physical infections.
The results of this experiment suggest that optimism protects against the long-term inflam-
matory effects of psychological stress (Brydon et al., 2009). Interleukin-6 is correlated with 
depressive symptoms in healthy people and is elevated in some patients with clinical depression 
(Irwin & Miller, 2007). Circulating levels of interleukin-6 are also elevated in some conditions 
such as cardiovascular disease, arthritis, pain, and certain cancers, all health conditions under 
which optimists have been shown to fare better than pessimists. This experiment suggests 
that the reason why appears to be due to optimists having optimal immune system responses. 
Smaller long-term interleukin-6 responses in optimists may protect them against stress-related 
depressive illness. Optimism acts like an antioxidant—think of chocolate, green tea, berries, 
spinach—to help protect the body from long-term inflammation after a stressful experience!
In sum, the expectations, beliefs, coping strategies, readiness to spring into action, and 
immune systems of optimists combined with an ability to size up their chances of achieving 
their goals and a willingness to change strategies serve them well, especially in times of stress, 
protecting them and fostering both psychological and physical health. So, what can you do if 
you are not so high in dispositional optimism? Read the The Personality of Everyday Life box 
for a description of how psychologists have been able to change people’s thoughts for the better.
“Perpetual optimism is a force 
multiplier.”
Colin Powell
“Optimism is the foundation of 
courage.”
Nicholas Murray Butler
Making people more optimistic
Can we make people more optimistic—both in their explanatory style and in their dis-
positional optimism—by changing their thoughts? Two methods have proven successful 
in making people more optimistic: cognitive behavioral therapy (Carver & Scheier, 2002) 
and attributional retraining (Miserandino, 1998; Peterson, 2000; Proudfoot et al., 2009). 
Both of these principles were taught to children in a special program called the Penn 
Resiliency Program (PRP) through comics, stories, videos, role-playing, games, and dis-
cussions (Jaycox et al., 1994).
The program was based on the ABC model of Albert Ellis (Ellis, 1962) and the cogni-
tive behavioral therapy of Aaron Beck (Beck, 1976). When adversity hits (A), it stirs up 
beliefs (B) which have consequences (C) for how we feel. The children learned that some-
times negative thoughts occur automatically (e.g., “I’m no good at anything”) much like 
how a song gets stuck in our heads. By learning to dispute the automatic negative thoughts 
(step D, added to the ABC model by the facilitators; Seligman, 1975) and evaluating if the 
negative feelings go up or down (step E for energization of negative feelings) children can 
start to choose thoughts to make themselves feel better and dispute thoughts that make 
them feel bad.
The children followed the adventures of Hopeful Holly and Hopeful Howard. This 
optimistic pair would regularly challenge the negative thinking and pessimistic explana-
tory styles of Gloomy Greg and Pessimistic Penny and help them find ways to cope with 
their problems. Children were encouraged to act like Sherlock Holmes—and not his caus-
tic counterpart Hemlock Jones—using steps ABCD and E to think about alternatives, 
rather than believing their automatic thoughts, which were often internal, stable, and 
global explanations for a negative event (Seligman, 1995).
Before the program, 24% of these fifth- and sixth-grade children in both the wait-list 
control and prevention groups had moderate to severe symptoms of depression. Immedi-
ately afterward, whereas children in the control group still showed symptoms, children in 
the prevention group had fewer symptoms. By 2 years after the program ended, children 
in the prevention group were half as likely to be depressed as children in the control group 
(Gillham et al., 1995; Seligman, 1995). Children in the prevention group were less likely 
The Personality of Everyday Life
320

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Chapter Summary
In this chapter on cognitive approaches to psychology we witnessed the power of words: how 
our thoughts, beliefs, and expectations lead us to see and experience the world differently and 
become self-fulfilling prophesies in our lives.
One very important belief is in one’s own power to bring about important outcomes. Some 
people, those with an internal locus of control, believe that they can control their own destinies. 
Others, those with an external locus of control, believe that what happens to them is due to luck, 
chance, powerful others, fate, or any number of causes outside their control. Generally an inter-
nal locus of control is related to responsibility for one’s actions, higher achievement, greater 
success and satisfaction on the job, better physical and psychological health, and greater social 
sensitivity. People with an internal locus of control cope better with stressful events. People 
living in individualistic cultures tend to be more internal than people living in collectivistic 
cultures. American college students have become more external since 1960. Locus of control is 
measured by questionnaires.
A sense of control is so important that when people, dogs—or small children, as in the 
story of Elena with the crayons which opened this chapter—discover that they are unable to 
control important outcomes or prevent negative events from happening, they become helpless. 
Learned helplessness causes problems in motivation, cognition, and emotion, and may be a risk 
factor for hopelessness depression.
Over a lifetime of interacting with the world and being socialized by parents, teachers, coaches, 
and the media, people may develop habitual ways of explaining why things happen to them. These 
explanations can vary in three dimensions: internal or external, stable or unstable, and global or 
specific. People with an optimistic explanatory style see good events as internal, stable, and global; 
people with a pessimistic explanatory style see good events as external, unstable, and specific. 
People with an optimistic explanatory style see bad events as external, unstable, and specific. People 
with a pessimistic explanatory style see bad events as internal, stable, and global.
As a result of these beliefs, people with an optimistic explanatory style persist despite set-
backs and achieve more at school, in athletic competitions, and on the job, compared to people 
with a more pessimistic explanatory style. An optimistic explanatory style is related to better 
physical and psychological health; a pessimistic explanatory style is a risk factor for depression 
and loneliness. Like locus of control, there appear to be cultural differences in explanatory 
style: people living in collectivistic cultures tend to be more pessimistic than people living in 
individualistic cultures. Explanatory style can be measured through questionnaires or through 
a content analysis of people’s words.
Much of the research on locus of control, explanatory styles, and how people cope with 
adversity comes from field studies and natural manipulations. Researchers may study people 
outside the laboratory and often in real-world predicaments to see how they cope with heart 
disease, cancer, tuberculosis, hurricanes, unemployment, and other tragedies that cannot be 
to attribute negative events to stable causes, becoming slightly more optimistic in their 
explanatory style. They were also less likely to show behavioral problems at home and at 
school.
The PRP is successful in many settings including inner cities, suburban, and rural 
schools and with European American, African American, and Latino children and ado-
lescents’. Comparable programs in Australia and China were similarly effective. The PRP 
significantly reduces depression, prevents anxiety, prevents behavioral problems, and 
leads to a more optimistic explanatory style, less helplessness, fewer automatic thoughts, 
increased self-esteem, and better coping with adversity and problem-solving skills (Brun-
wasser, Gillham, & Kim, 2009; Gillham, Brunwasser, & Freres, 2007).
“Where there is room for 
doubt, people should fill the 
gap with hope.”
Christopher Peterson (2000, p. 51)
Go online for more 
resources to help you 
review.
Study and Review
on mysearchlab.com
321

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
purposely manipulated or controlled, and where participants cannot be randomly assigned to 
condition. Researchers will turn to quasi-experimental designs when a true experiment cannot 
be done for ethical or practical reasons. While a quasi-experimental design can suggest how 
a potential cause and an effect may be related, it cannot prove cause and effect the way a true 
experiment can.
Finally, people can differ in their general expectations that things will get better or worse 
for them in the future. Dispositional optimism, like locus of control and explanatory style, is 
related to achievement and better physical and psychological health. When the going gets tough, 
optimists have the coping skills and persistence to rise above their challenges and not give up. 
Dispositional optimism is measured through questionnaires.
Throughout this chapter, the research evidence is strong and clear that our thoughts and 
beliefs have a huge impact on how we experience life and cope with negative events: Optimists 
fare better. The real good news of this chapter is that explanatory style and dispositional opti-
mism can be changed either through cognitive behavioral therapy or special workshops that 
challenge automatic pessimistic thoughts and foster a more optimistic explanatory style or 
even an online intervention conducted by a computer therapist, as we saw in the study that 
opened this chapter. These programs have successfully immunized children and adolescents 
from depression and anxiety. If, according to the cognitive approach, you are what you think, 
then this chapter ought to give you something to reflect on. For, to paraphrase the words of 
Thomas Paine, “The real optimist smiles in trouble, gathers strength from distress, and grows 
brave by reflection.”
Review Questions
	 1.	 Describe the Seligman et al. (2005) online study where participants went through 1 of 6 
possible interventions for depression. Which two treatments were the most effective?
	 2.	 What is locus of control? How is it measured? What are some important differences 
between people who are more external or more internal in their locus of control when 
it comes to achievement, work behavior, physical and psychological health, and social 
behavior? Are there cultural differences in locus of control? Have American college students 
changed in locus of control over time?
	 3.	 What is learned helplessness? Describe the Seligman and Maier (1967) triadic design study 
where some dogs failed to learn how to escape shocks. What happens to humans who are 
placed in a similar situation? What is the hopelessness model of depression?
	 4.	 What is explanatory style? What three dimensions determine a person’s explanatory style? 
What kind of attributions do people with an optimistic explanatory style make? What kind 
of attributions do people with a pessimistic explanatory style make? In what two ways is 
explanatory style measured? What are some important differences between people who are 
more optimistic or more pessimistic in their explanatory style when it comes to achieve-
ment in school and athletics, work behavior, physical and psychological health, and social 
behavior? Are there cultural differences in explanatory style?
	 5.	 What is a field study? What are some advantages and trade-offs of field research?
	 6.	 What is dispositional optimism? How is it measured? Why do people high in dispositional 
optimism cope better with major life events?
	 7.	 Is it possible to train people to think more optimistically?
Key Terms
“When I started, I was like 
Pessimistic Penny. I always felt 
really crummy and thought 
that I always messed things 
up . . . . The people from Penn 
came to our school and helped 
us be less gloomy all the time.”
Seligman (1975, p. 129)
Field-dependent
Field-independent
Locus of control
Illusion of control
Primary control
Secondary control
Learned helplessness
Yoking
Triadic design
322

Cognitive Foundations of Personality
Hopelessness model  
of depression
Explanatory style
Pessimistic explanatory style
Optimistic explanatory style
Internal versus external
Stable versus unstable
Global versus specific
Attributional Style  
Questionnaire (ASQ)
CAVE technique
Field studies
Quasi-experimental design
Dispositional optimism
Problem-focused coping
Emotion-focused coping
Avoidant coping
Double-blind technique
323

324

311
GENDER  
AND PERSONALITY
Beliefs About Personality Similarities and Differences Between Men and Women
Research Methods Illustrated: Effect Size and Meta-Analysis
Personality Differences Between Men and Women: Fact or Fiction?
Gender Similarities and Differences in the Five-Factor Model
Gender Differences in Other Aspects of Personality and Social Behavior
Aggression
Risk Taking
Gender Differences? It Depends
Empathy
Emotions
Anxiety
Helping Behavior
Leadership
Influenceability
Self-Esteem and Self-Confidence
What Causes Gender Differences?
Evolution
Social Context
Social Role Theory
Social Construction
Biopsychosocial Model
The Personality of Everyday Life: Gendered beliefs about personality:  
What difference does it make?
Then and Now: Definition and Assessment of Gender
Chapter Summary
Review Questions
Key Terms
Read the Chapter on 
mysearchlab.com 
From Chapter 11 of Personality Psychology: Foundations and 
Findings, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. Copyright © 
2012 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
© Danita Delimont/Alamy
325

Gender and Personality
I
magine that you woke up tomorrow morning as a person of the other sex. What would 
be different in your life? Would you dress differently? Would you be friends with the same 
people? Would you have the same college major? Hairstyle? Would you still be the same 
person inside? Would you have the same personality?
This is the basic question of this chapter: How does gender—including genetics and physi-
ology as well as cultural and societal expectations—make us who we are? Or, to put it differ-
ently, if we view personality as a consistent way of behaving, are men and women consistent 
in behaving differently? Certainly, there are biological and physical differences between men 
and women, but are there psychological differences as well? Are these gender differences real 
or in the eye of the beholder? If real, where do these differences come from? Are they a result 
of biological and evolutionary forces that are resistant to change or are they a result of social 
and cultural forces that can change?
To illustrate why gender differences and where they come from are important take, for 
example, a commonly held belief that men are better than women at mathematics. This turns 
out to be a myth, something we’ll explore in more depth later in this chapter. However, it is 
true that men are better than women when it comes to one type of mathematical ability: spatial 
reasoning. In fact, the difference between men and women on mental rotation, one aspect of 
spatial reasoning where participants have to mentally rotate a figure (see Figure 1), is one of 
the largest gender differences in cognitive ability.
Where does this gender difference in mental rotation come from? Given that differ-
ences in mental rotation can be seen in infants as young as 3 to 5 months of age (Moore 
& Johnson, 2008; Quinn & Liben, 2008), psychologists assume that this difference was 
somehow hard-wired into the biology of men and women as a result of our evolution. 
After all, it takes more visual spatial ability to judge the distance of a quarry and to gauge 
how fast and how far to throw a weapon to take down a potential meal than is involved in 
the birthing and raising of children. Are differences in spatial rotation a legacy of how men 
and women have evolved?
Until recently, this is what many people thought. However, researchers gave undergradu-
ate men and women 10 hours of training on either a 3-D puzzle video game or a 3-D action 
video game that required them to aim and shoot at targets (Feng, Spence, & Pratt, 2007). As 
a result of the training, not only did participants get better at their respective games, as you 
would imagine, but those who played the action game (but not the puzzle game) improved 
their performance on a mental rotation task. Surprisingly, women benefited more from the 
training than did men. Even more impressive, the difference in mental rotation abilities between 
men and women—something once thought to be an innate gender difference and impossible 
to change—was greatly reduced so that women who trained on the action game caught up to 
the spatial ability level of the average man without this special training (see Figure 2). These 
results suggest that some gender differences that were once thought to be fixed may actually 
be changeable as a result of life experiences, opportunities, preferences (girls generally do not 
enjoy playing action video games), or expectations, rather than set in stone and due to innate 
differences. The catch is that we can’t always know which kind of gender difference—inborn 
or socialized—we are dealing with!
THINK ABOUT IT
Are gender differences in 
mathematics more innate 
or more learned?
Figure 1  A sample mental rotation task. Participants choose 
which two of the four pictures shown on the right portrayed 
an object identical to the one shown on the left, when 
rotated.  Source: Feng et al. (2007, Figure 1b, p. 851). Reprinted 
from Feng, J., Spence, I., & Pratt, J. (2007), “Playing an action 
video game reduces gender differences in spatial cognition,” 
Psychological Science, 18(10), 850–855.  Used with permission.
326

Gender and Personality
In this chapter we consider the question: Are there personality differences between men 
and women? To answer this question, we attempt to sort out facts from fiction about actual 
gender differences, evaluate the size of gender differences, debate where these gender differences 
might come from, consider the impact of gender beliefs, and take a look at how the definition 
and assessment of gender has changed through the years.
Beliefs About Personality Similarities  
and Differences Between Men and Women
According to some psychologists, the American majority culture is so taken with gender dif-
ferences that differences between 
men and women are seen as large, 
unchangeable, present from birth 
(if not sooner), and part of the 
very essence of what it means to be 
a man or a woman (Zurbriggen & 
Sherman, 2007).
We tend to believe that men and 
women differ in personality, social 
roles, physical attributes (in addition 
to the obvious reproductive ones), 
emotional experience and expres-
sion, and even the way we think (see 
Table  1). Beliefs about what men 
and women are like are remarkably 
stable and consistent across many 
cultures, both in the United States 
and abroad: Women are believed to 
be more concerned with nurturing 
whereas men are more concerned 
with actions and accomplishments 
(Kite, Deaux, & Haines, 2008; Wil-
liams & Best, 1990).
Men and women are also 
believed to pursue different careers 
“People do not have to be the 
same to be equal.”
Psychologist Diane Halpern (2004), 
researcher on gender differences in 
cognitive abilities
Some gender differences, 
such as spatial rotation 
abilities, once thought to be 
evolutionarily programmed 
can be eliminated with 
certain opportunities and 
experiences.
Figure 2  Performance on a mental rotation task after 
training with an action video game (left panel) or 
nonaction puzzle video game (right panel). Means are 
shown for males (M) and females (F) before training 
(“Pre”), after training (“Post”), and 5 months after training 
ended.  Source: Adapted from Feng et al. (2007, Figure 
3, p. 853) Feng, J., Spence, I., & Pratt, J. (2007), “Playing 
an action video game reduces gender differences in 
spatial cognition,” Psychological Science, 18(10), 850–855. 
Copyright © 2007 by Sage Publications.  Reprinted by 
permission of Sage Publications.
3
2
Pre
Post
M
F
Training
5 Months
Action Game
Puzzle Game
Pre
Post
M
F
Training
Percentage of Correct Responses
5 Months
THINK ABOUT IT
Do you think that men 
and women have different 
personalities?
© Wavebreakmediamicro/Dreamstime.com
327

Gender and Personality
as well as hobbies and favorite activities (Twenge, 1999). Traditional masculine occupations 
include auto mechanic, carpenter, jet pilot, and civil engineer. Traditional feminine occupa-
tions include nurse, art teacher, and social worker. Men are presumed to spend their free time 
working on computers or playing chess; women shopping.
Overall, these beliefs suggest that women are concerned with other people and the social 
group, being interdependent, and feeling connected with others and with the group. In contrast, 
men focus on the individual and feelings of self-protection and self-assertion. These contrasting 
ways of approaching the social world have been called communion and agency (Bakan, 1966) 
and reflect traditional feminine and masculine socialization (Eisenberg & Lennon, 1983).
No doubt you recognize these as stereotypes of what men and women are like. A stereotype 
is a generalization about a group of people, in this case men or women, in which attributes are 
assumed to be true of all members of the group regardless of the actual variation among group 
members (Aronson, Wilson, & Akert, 2001). Gender stereotypes describe traits and behaviors 
that people believe occur more frequently in one gender or the other (Best & Williams, 2001). 
They describe what men and women are like as well as what they should be like (Kite et al., 
2008). Often, these stereotypes reinforce traditional sex roles (Best & Williams, 2001).
Is there any truth to these beliefs? We know what “people” and the media say, but what 
does the psychological research say about differences in personality between men and 
women? Luckily, gender and gender differences are among one of the most studied topics in 
psychology. To compare findings across studies we will need to understand something called 
effect size.
Table 1  Traditional Stereotypes of Males and Females
Category:
Men Are:
Women Are:
Agentic and Instrumental
Expressive and Communal
Personality
active, competitive, independent, self-confident
emotional, gentle, understanding, devoted
Social Roles
leaders, financial providers, head of households
caregivers, provide emotional support, 
homemakers
Physical Attributes
athletic, brawny, broad-shouldered, physically strong
dainty, pretty, soft-voiced, graceful
Emotional Experience
anger, pride
more emotionally expressive, experience a 
wider range of all other emotions
Cognition
good at abstract thinking, problem solving
good at verbal reasoning, artistic
Source: From Kite et al. (2008).
A young Indian couple during 
their wedding ceremony. 
Gender stereotypes are 
amazingly similar around the 
world, but is there any truth 
to them?
© Vishakha27/Dreamstime.com
328

Gender and Personality
Research Methods Illustrated: Effect Size and Meta-Analysis
S
ay that you are making salsa (Doherty, 2004). You will need tomatoes, peppers, onions, cilantro, 
lime juice, salt, and perhaps a few other ingredients. But suppose you are in the middle of 
preparations for a dinner party and discover that you are out of lime juice. With guests due 
in 15 minutes, would you quickly run to the store to get some or would you just go without? Many 
cooks would just do without; after all, lime juice adds very little to the final flavor of salsa. However, 
suppose you discovered that you forgot to buy tomatoes. Can you make salsa without tomatoes? 
No way! It just wouldn’t be salsa without the tomatoes.
This analogy can help us understand the concept of effect size (Cohen, 1988). Just as how 
tomatoes and lime juice each have a different impact on the final flavor of salsa, effect size tells us 
the impact or importance of a variable to the overall observed effect. Whereas significance tests, 
such as a t-test or an ANOVA, tell us whether there is a significant difference in average scores 
between men and women, for example, effect size tells us the size of that difference.
We can calculate the effect size within an individual experiment, but the real power comes 
from conducting a meta-analysis (Hyde, 2005, 2007; Johnson & Boynton, 2008; Ozer, 2007; 
Roberts, Kuncel, & Viechtbauer, 2007). Here, researchers combine the individual results of different 
experiments to calculate an estimate of how large an effect is across many different participants, 
samples, experimenters, methods, and measures. Meta-analysis and effect size can help us 
understand just how large a gender difference is and to evaluate if the difference is real or if it is due 
only to a particular sample or measure.
Effect size is estimated using the statistic d:
d = Mm - Mf
s
where Mm is the average score for males and Mf is the average score for females and s is the average 
standard deviation of the male and female scores (Hyde, 2004, p. 93). You can see from this formula 
that when males score higher than females on average, then d will be positive. When females score 
higher than males on average, then d will be negative. When there is no significant difference 
between the genders on this variable, then d will be close to zero (see Table 2).
Figure 3 graphically illustrates various effect sizes. As you can see in the left part of Figure 3, 
when an effect size is small there is huge overlap in the distributions of the scores of men and 
women. Even though a small difference between men and women may be statistically significant, 
it does not necessarily have practical significance. A d of 0.2 is often too small to be noticeable in 
everyday life and would be only detectable in a controlled research study with lots of participants. 
By the same logic, a moderate difference of 0.5, the middle graph in Figure 3, will probably be 
noticeable in everyday life. When differences reach 0.8 or greater people are generally already 
aware of the difference between men and women on this variable (see the right graph in Figure 3; 
Lippa, 2005a).
That men and women differ on some characteristic is not nearly as important as 
understanding the size of that difference. After all, people vary across all sorts of variables. The 
formula for d expresses the difference between the averages of two groups in relation to the 
amount of variability in each distribution. This means that where there is a lot of variation in a 
characteristic among individuals (e.g., height) it will take a larger difference between men and 
women to make a significant gender difference. But where people don’t vary so much (e.g., scores 
on a 1 to 7 scale) smaller 
differences in averages can be 
significant. When doing a meta-
analysis we are trying to see 
if—on average—there is more 
variation between the genders 
than among individuals within a 
gender.
Consider Figure 4, which 
shows the distribution of spatial 
ability scores in men and women. 
Is the difference between 
the genders greater than the 
difference within a gender? As 
you can see, the average of the 
Table 2  Meta-Analysis: How Large a Difference?
Range of d
Size of Effect
-0.1 to 0 and 0 to +0.1
Trivial
-0.11 to -0.35 and +0.11 to +0.35
Small
-0.36 to -0.65 and +0.36 to +0.65
Medium
-0.66 to -01.0 and +0.66 to +1.0
Large
Greater than 1.0
Very large
Note: Positive numbers mean males scored higher than females. Negative 
numbers mean females scored higher than males.
Source: Effect size interpretations from Hyde (2007), after Cohen (1988).
329

Gender and Personality
Figure 4  The distribution of 
scores of males and females 
on a test of spatial ability. 
The difference between the 
two curves represents a large 
gender difference: d = 0.73.
0
20
70
85
100
115
130
40
60
Figure 3  A graphic illustration of small, moderate, and large effect sizes. For example, a small difference, d = 0.2, 
is the difference between men and women in self-esteem (left). A medium difference, d = 0.5, is the difference 
between boys and girls in activity level (middle). A large difference, d = 0.8, is a bit larger than the difference 
between men and women in knowledge of sports (right). Notice that in all cases there is substantial overlap between 
the curves.  Source: Lippa (2005a, Figure 14, p. 8). Lippa, R. A. (2005). Gender, nature, and nurture. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum and Associates.
Number of Cases
Score
(a) d = 0.2 (small)
Score
(b) d = 0.5 (medium)
Score
(c) d = 0.8 (large)
men is greater than the average of the women, but there is substantial overlap between the two 
curves. The area that is shaded represents those women who scored higher than the average man, 
which is about 23% of the women. So even though there is a large gender difference, it does not 
mean that every man scored higher than every woman on this variable.
Like any type of review, a meta-analysis is only as good as the data that go into it. Ideally, 
researchers should identify and compile all of the studies ever conducted on a topic. As a general 
rule, the larger the number of studies that are combined into an effect size estimate—especially 
of different experimenters and various methods—the better our estimate of the true gender 
difference will be. However, if all of the studies that went into a meta-analysis used the same 
dependent variable then the resulting effect size estimate may have limited generalizability and 
not apply to other measures. Researchers will often include a table describing all of the studies 
they combined into their effect size estimate, including the methods, measures, sample size, age, 
gender, and so on of each one. This allows researchers to generate and test specific hypotheses 
about what might account for an observed gender difference.
Finally, keep in mind that one-item measures, such as willingness to help or conformity 
as measured in many experiments on social behavior, may underestimate the true effect size 
(Lippa, 2005a). To the extent possible, this chapter reviews the findings on gender similarities and 
differences based on meta-analyses and review articles and not on single studies.
Now that you are familiar with effect size, we can evaluate just how large—and how 
important—gender differences are compared to individual differences (see Table 2). Because of 
variability in individual differences there will always be some overlap in the distributions of men 
330

Gender and Personality
and women. That’s why our estimate of effect size d is calculated as a ratio of difference between 
genders compared to individual variability within a gender. For every single personality variable that 
was been studied, there is overlap in the distributions of scores of men and women. Just how much 
overlap? Read on to find out!
Personality Differences Between Men  
and Women: Fact or Fiction?
Men and women are thought to be different in social behavior, physical attributes, emotional 
experiences, cognition, occupations, interests, moral reasoning, sexual behavior, and person-
ality, but are we really? We can attempt to answer this question by considering the size of 
gender differences, the consistency of these differences, and possible interpretations of these 
differences.
In a very careful and strict summary of meta-analytic research on gender differences, 
including some very extensive national studies, Janet Hyde (2007) found that 78% of the effects 
reported were small (48%) or nonsignificant (30%). To give you a sense of what the research 
she reviewed looked like, consider Table 3.
“[M]en and women are 
especially alike in their beliefs 
about their own differences. 
To the extent that males and 
females share expectations 
regarding intrapsychic and 
behavioral differences between 
the sexes, the expression of 
such differences constitutes a 
sex similarity.”
Rhoda K. Unger (1979, p. 1086)
Table 3  Summary of Meta-Analyses of Gender Differences
Variable
Type of Variable
% Non-overlap
d
Effect Size
Height (2.60)
Physical
2.6
Very Large
2.5
2.4
2.3
Throwing velocity (2.18)
Physical
81.1%
2.2
2.1
Throwing distance (2.0)
Physical
2.0
1.9
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
People–things dimension (1.35)
Occupations
1.3
1.2
1.1
Desire realistic occupation (1.06)
Technology knowledge (1.04)
Occupation
Interests
55.4
1.0
Large
Electronics knowledge (0.98)
Throwing accuracy (0.96)
Masturbation (0.96)
Interests
Physical
Sexuality
51.6
0.9
Number of ideal partners in a lifetime (0.87)
Aggression measured by projective tests (0.86)
Aggression measured by fantasy (0.84)
Attitude toward sex in a casual relationship (0.81)
Sexuality
Social behavior
Social behavior
Sexuality
47.4
0.8
Sports knowledge (0.75)
Mental rotation (0.73)
Interests
Cognitive
43
0.7 
(Continued)
331

Gender and Personality
Variable
Type of Variable
% Non-overlap
d
Effect Size
Extraversion: assertiveness (0.67)
Grip strength (0.66)
Jealousy over sexual vs. emotional infidelity (0.64)
Aggression measured by peer reports (0.63)
Aggression, physical (0.60)
Personality
Physical
Social behavior
Social behavior
Temperament
38.2
0.6
Medium
Science knowledge (0.58)
Desire physical attractiveness in mate (0.54)
Knowledge of general information (0.51)
Activity (0.5)
Interests
Sexuality
Interests
Social behavior
33
0.5
Attitude toward sex in a committed relationship (0.49)
Spatial perception (0.44)
Attitudes toward sex when engaged (0.43)
Aggression measured by self-reports (0.40)
Sexuality
Cognitive
Sexuality
Social behavior
27.4
0.4
SAT math (earlier than 2004) (0.39)
Arousal to erotic material (college students) (0.38)
Surgency (0.38)
Cognitive
Sexuality
Temperament
Helping behavior (0.34)
Self-esteem at ages 15–18 (0.33)
Activity (0.33)
Homosexuality (0.33)
SAT math (2004) (0.31)
Arousal to erotic material (0.31)
High-intensity fun (0.30)
Social behavior
Personality
Temperament
Sexuality
Cognitive
Sexuality
Temperament
21.3
0.3
Small
Number of sexual partners (0.25)
Self-esteem at ages 11–14 (0.23)
Self-esteem (overall) (0.21)
Empathy (less than 0.20)
Sexuality
Personality
Personality
Social behavior
14.7
0.2
Justice reasoning (0.19)
Self-esteem at ages 19–22 (0.18)
Self-esteem at ages 7–10 (0.16)
Mathematics (0.16)
Spatial visualization (0.13)
Moral reasoning
Personality
Personality
Cognitive
Cognitive
7.7
0.1
Self-esteem at ages 23–59 (0.10)
SAT verbal (0.06)
Desire for conventional occupations (0.06)
Extraversion: activity (0.01)
Openness: intellect/ideas (0.00)
Pride frequency (ns)
Pride intensity (ns)
Guilt frequency (ns)
Ideas-data dimension (ns)
Literature knowledge (ns)
Business knowledge (ns)
Arts knowledge (ns)
Leadership effectiveness (0.03) 
Self-esteem at age 60 + (-0.03)
Balance (-0.09)
GPA (-0.04)
Arousal to erotic material (adults) (-0.04)
Anger frequency (-0.05)
Sexual satisfaction (-0.06)
Extraversion: gregariousness (-0.06)
Guilt intensity (-0.07)
Personality
Cognitive
Occupations
Personality
Personality
Emotion
Emotion
Emotion
Occupations
Interests
Interests
Interests
Social behavior
Personality
Physical
Cognitive
Sexuality
Emotion
Sexuality
Personality
Emotion
0
0.0
Trivial
Table 3  (Continued)
332

Gender and Personality
Variable
Type of Variable
% Non-overlap
d
Effect Size
Openness (-0.07)
Reading comprehension (-0.09)
Neuroticism: impulsiveness (-0.10)
Verbal ability (in studies done after 1973) (-0.10)
Verbal ability (-0.11)
Personality
Cognitive
Personality
Cognitive
Cognitive
Fearfulness (-0.12)
Conscientiousness: order (-0.12)
Contentment frequency (-0.13)
Negative emotions frequency (-0.14)
Anger intensity (-0.14)
Conscientiousness (-0.14)
Extraversion (-0.15)
Joy frequency (-0.16)
Sadness frequency (-0.16)
Symptoms of depression (-0.16)
Fear frequency (-0.17) 
Contentment intensity (-0.18)
Self-disclosure
Temperament
Personality
Emotion
Emotion
Emotion
Personality
Personality
Emotion
Emotion
Emotion
Emotion
Emotion
Social behavior
7.7
-0.1
Small
Positive emotions frequency (-0.20)
Democratic leadership (-0.22)
Agreeableness: trust (-0.22)
Positive emotions intensity (-0.23)
Verbal ability (in studies before 1973) (-0.23)
Influenceability (-0.26) 
Joy intensity (-0.26)
Fear intensity (-0.26)
Affection intensity (-0.25)
Negative emotions intensity (-0.25)
Neuroticism: anxiety (-0.25)
Care reasoning (-0.28)
Sadness intensity (-0.28)
Emotion
Social behavior
Personality
Emotion
Cognitive
Social behavior
Emotion
Emotion
Emotion
Emotion
Personality
Moral reasoning
Emotion
14.7
-0.2
Affection frequency (-0.30)
Agreeableness (-0.32)
Conformity in the Asch paradigm (-0.32)
Medical knowledge (-0.32)
Emotion
Personality
Social behavior
Interests
21.3
-0.3
Medium
Perceptual sensitivity (-0.38)
Smiling (-0.40)
Food and cooking knowledge (0.48)
Emotional stability (-0.49)
Temperament
Social behavior
Interests
Personality
27.4
-0.4
33
-0.5
Desire for social occupation (-0.62)
Desire for artistic occupation (-0.63)
Desire ambitiousness in mate (-0.67)
Desire status in mate (-0.69)
Occupation
Occupation
Sexuality
Sexuality
38.2
-0.6
43
-0.7
Large
47.4
-0.8
Agreeableness: tender-mindedness (-0.92)
Personality
51.6
-0.9
55.4
-1.0
Key:
d = The average difference between males and females in standard deviation units.
+ Positive numbers mean that males score higher than females on this variable.
- Negative numbers mean that females score higher than males on this variable.
Source: Compiled from various sources.
Table 3  (Continued)
333

Gender and Personality
Table 3 summarizes the results of many meta-analyses (e.g., Feingold, 1992, 1994; Hyde, 
2005, 2007; Lippa, 2005a, 2007) including some not reviewed by Hyde (2005, 2007). The 
first column lists the variable and gives the exact effect size d in parentheses. The second 
column classifies that variable into type of variable (e.g., social behavior, physical attributes, 
emotional experiences, cognition, occupations, interests, moral reasoning, sexual behavior, 
and personality). The third column lists the percentage of overlap between the distribution 
of males and females on that variable. The fourth column lists the effect size (d) of the dif-
ference between males and females. The last column groups effect sizes by size: trivial, small, 
medium, large, and very large according to the guidelines used by Hyde (2007; see Table 2).
There are a number of things to notice about Table 3. First, and most obvious, is that there 
are many characteristics that have been studied! This table represents the results of over 1,500 
studies compiled into a single table by effect size. Can you think of any characteristic that is 
missing from this table? Second, how large are the vast majority of these effects? As you can see, 
almost half of the effects are trivial. In fact, if you were to eliminate the small and nonsignificant 
correlations from the table, that would eliminate the vast majority of effects. What kinds of 
variables are represented among these trivial effects?
Next, take a close look at the categories that are represented at the extreme of large and 
very large effects. Be sure to look at both ends where women score higher than men (the 
negative numbers) and where men score higher than women (the positive numbers). What 
kinds of variables account for the largest differences? Finally, even where there are significant 
differences, remember to consider the percentage overlap between men and women. For many 
of these variables, there is considerable overlap in the performances of men and women.
Table 3 doesn’t claim to represent every single study that has ever been done, but it does 
summarize some of the major meta-analyses that have been conducted by psychologists. 
The results of the many effect size analyses summarized here suggest that men and women 
are the most different when it comes to physical attributes such as height and strength 
(Easton & Enns, 1986; Thomas & French, 1985); some aspects of sexuality (Oliver & Hyde, 
1993; Petersen & Hyde, 2010), such as reported pornography use, frequency of masturba-
tion, and attitudes toward casual sex; and qualities desired in a potential mate (Feingold, 
1992; Sprecher, Sullivan, & Hatfield, 1994). The largest gender differences in personality 
and social behavior between men and women parallel the largest sex differences between 
males and females.
Men and women differ in ways you might expect and yet are similar in ways you might 
not. Table 4 highlights some of these interesting effects. As you can see here and in Table 3 
there are effect size differences between men and women in occupational preferences. Men 
prefer realistic occupations more so than women. These occupations involve working with 
machines, equipment, and inanimate objects. Instead, women prefer people-oriented occu-
pations that involve managing and interacting with other people. There are no gender dif-
ferences in preference for occupations that require creative thought and intellectual effort; 
routine data-oriented occupations; or conventional occupations that involve following set 
procedures and routines such as office manager and secretarial positions (Lippa, 2005a).
There is also no gender difference in general intelligence (Halpern, 2000; Halpern & 
LaMay, 2000), but there are some differences on specific types of mental abilities. Though 
traditionally people think that women show greater verbal ability than men, the difference 
is rather trivial (d = -0.11) and has been narrowing over time (Hyde & Linn, 1988). Simi-
larly, there is no gender difference in mathematical ability (d = -0.05) (Hedges & Nowell, 
1995; Hyde, Fennema, & Lamon, 1990). However, there is a slight (d = 0.12) difference in 
performance on word problems (Hyde & Linn, 2006). But as you can see in Figure 5, the 
far greater problem is that both American boys and girls lag far behind children in other 
countries in mathematics performance! Globally, girls and boys show comparable perfor-
mance in mathematics in wealthier countries where women are better educated, and hold 
a proportional share of seats in parliament and in research positions (Else-Quest, Hyde, & 
Linn, 2010).
THINK ABOUT IT
What personality character-
istics do you think men and 
women differ the most in? 
The least in?
THINK ABOUT IT
Do you find any of these 
results surprising? Why?
334

Gender and Personality
Figure 5  Cross-national and 
gender differences in math. 
Differences in fifth-graders’ 
performance on word problems 
are larger between countries 
than between genders. Boys’ 
scores are shown in orange; 
girls’ scores are shown in 
yellow.  Source: Hyde and Linn 
(2006, p. 600). Reprinted with 
permission from Hyde, J. S., 
& Linn, M. C. (2006), “Gender 
similarities in mathematics and 
science,” Science, 314(5799), 
599–600.  Permission conveyed 
through the Copyright 
Clearance Center.
Girls
Boys
20
10
0
U.S.
Taiwan
Japan
15
5
Math Score
Table 4  Yes, No, Maybe So?:  Gender Similarities and Differences in Personality and Social Behavior
There are no gender differences in these characteristics
Neuroticism: impulsiveness
Extraversion
Extraversion: gregariousness
Extraversion: activity
Openness
Openness: intellect
Conscientiousness
Conscientiousness: order
General Intelligence
Mathematics ability
Verbal ability
Leadership effectiveness
Self-confidence
There Are Gender Differences in These Characteristics
Agreeableness: sympathy
Extraversion: assertiveness
Sexuality
Nonverbal behavior
Aggressiveness
Risk taking
Occupational preferences
Mental disorders
Leadership style
There May Be Gender Differences in These Characteristics
Empathy
Emotions
Anxiety
Helping behavior
Influenceability
Self-esteem
Spatial ability
However, as we discussed earlier, there are slight differences in spatial ability (Linn & 
Petersen, 1985; Voyer, Voyer, & Bryden, 1995). When it comes to spatial visualization, like find-
ing hidden figures in a picture, there is a small difference between men and women (d = 0.13; 
Linn & Petersen, 1985). But there are large gender differences in spatial perception of true verti-
cal or horizontal (d = 0.44; Linn & Petersen, 1985) and mental rotation (d = 0.73 according 
to Linn & Petersen, 1985, but 0.56 according to Voyer et al., 1995).
335

Gender and Personality
When it comes to mental disorders, there seem to be some differences in the number of 
males and females affected depending on the disorder (Hartung & Widiger, 1998). Substance-
related disorders (e.g., alcohol, drugs), childhood disorders (e.g., mental retardation, reading 
disorders, autism), and sexual and gender identity disorders (e.g., sexual masochism, fetish-
ism, pedophilia) are more frequent among men than women. However, mood disorders (e.g., 
panic disorders, bipolar disorder, anorexia and bulimia), and depression (Nolen-Hoeksema 
& Hilt, 2009) are more frequent among women. Some personality disorders (e.g., schizotypal 
personality disorder, antisocial personality disorder, narcissistic personality disorder, compul-
sive personality disorder) occur more among men whereas others (e.g., borderline personality 
disorder, histrionic personality disorder) occur more among women.
Although interesting, none of these characteristics are, strictly speaking, personality. Are 
there differences in the personality of men and women? Let us turn now to a discussion of some 
of the differences in personality and social behavior.
Gender Similarities and Differences in the Five-Factor Model
That men and women differ in sexuality and physical attributes is not surprising, given the dif-
fering reproductive roles of males and females. What is surprising to most people is the number 
of similarities between men and women in personality (Hyde, 2005, 2007). Take the traits of the 
five factors (see Table 5). This table includes data from an extensive study of observer ratings of 
personality in 50 cultures, including the United States, using the NEO Personality Inventory—
Revised (NEO-PI-R; Costa & McCrae, 1992). Neuroticism shows the largest gender difference, 
with women averaging higher Neuroticism scores than men across all samples. Openness shows 
the smallest difference, where the genders are virtually identical. Across all cultures, women 
tend to be only slightly higher than men in Conscientiousness, Extraversion, and Agreeableness.
Table 5  Gender Similarities and Differences in The Five-Factor Model
Factor and Facets:
d
Trivial
Small
Medium
Large
Neuroticism
-0.49
✓✓
  Anxiety
-0.25
✓✓
  Impulsiveness
-0.10
✓✓
Extraversion
-0.15
✓✓
  Gregariousness
-0.06
✓✓
  Assertiveness
0.67
✓✓
  Activity
0.01
✓✓
Openness
-0.07
✓✓
  Ideas
0.00
✓✓
Agreeableness
-0.32
✓✓
  Trust
-0.22
✓✓
  Tender-Mindedness
-0.92
✓✓
Conscientiousness
-0.14
✓✓
  Order
-0.12
  ✓✓
Note: Meta-analysis of the five-factor model from observer ratings of the NEO-PI-R in adults from 50 cultures (N = 10,690; 
Meta-analysis of the facets from self-ratings combined across 4–8 different personality tests in 8 samples of U.S. Adults 
(N = 19,546; Feingold, 1994). Positive numbers mean males scored higher than females. Negative numbers mean females 
scored higher than males.  Sources: Feingold (1994); McCrae et al. (2005a).  
336

Gender and Personality
Recall our caveat that when it comes to effect size estimates multiple measures give the 
most generalizable estimate. Whereas this study looking at the five-factor model in 50 cultures 
included thousands of participants, all participants were measured using the same dependent 
variable. What evidence do we have that these gender differences are not somehow due to 
something about the NEO-PI-R questionnaire?
An earlier meta-analysis looked at possible differences in the five-factor model by summing 
results from many personality questionnaires including the NEO-PI-R, the revised Eysenck 
Personality Inventory, and the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI; Hatha-
way & McKinley, 1940), which were given to various samples of adults (see Table 5). Because 
each test measured different aspects of personality, the researchers were able to calculate effect 
sizes for only those variables of the five-factor model that were measured on more than one 
personality test. This limits the conclusions we can draw—data comparing men and women 
on all of the facets is frustratingly absent—but the effect estimates are more reliable and have 
greater generalizability.
As Table 5 shows, there are large differences in the facets of assertiveness (men score higher) 
and tender-mindedness (women score higher). Further, there are only small differences in anxi-
ety, trust, and order, with women scoring higher in all three facets than men. The remaining 
facets that have been studied with multiple measures—impulsiveness, gregariousness, activity, 
and openness to ideas—show only trivial differences. The bottom line: When it comes to per-
sonality, men and women are more similar than different (Hyde, 2005).
Gender Differences in Other Aspects of Personality  
and Social Behavior
Aggression. 
One of the most consistent findings, both within the United States and in 
other countries, is that men are more aggressive than women (Archer, 2004; Bettencourt 
& Miller, 1996; Eagly & Steffen, 1986; Hyde, 1984, 1986; Knight, Fabes, & Higgins, 1996; 
Maccoby & Jacklin, 1974). However, recall that one of the benefits of meta-analysis is that 
if the sample and range of studies is large enough we can test specific hypotheses. It turns 
out that men are more physically aggressive than women (d = 0.40), but only slightly more 
verbally aggressive (d = 0.18; Eagly & Steffen, 1986)—unless women have been directly 
threatened. Then there is no difference in aggression between men and women (Bettencourt 
& Miller, 1996).
Bettencourt and Miller (1996) found that gender differences are most apparent under 
experimental conditions of unprovoked aggression (d = 0.43) but disappear when people have 
been directly threatened (d = 0.06; Bettencourt & Miller, 1996). Overall, men are more likely 
than women to resort to physical aggression whether provoked (d = 0.21), or not (d = 0.48). 
But when provoked, women are slightly more likely than men to respond with verbal aggres-
sion (d = -0.11). What kinds of situations do people find threatening enough to respond with 
physical or verbal aggression? Men and women respond equally aggressively to a physical attack, 
an insult, or a negative evaluation. Men are more likely than women to respond aggressively to 
frustration (d = 0.17) or an insult about their intelligence (d = 0.59).
Most of these studies focused on aggression in the laboratory, when experimental par-
ticipants are no doubt on their best behavior. In fact, the gender difference in aggression 
is even larger than these early meta-analyses suggested according to a more recent meta-
analysis of field studies conducted in the United States and nine other countries including 
India, Japan, Australia, and Canada (Archer, 2004). Men were indeed more aggressive than 
women in physical and verbal aggression, with ds for overall aggression ranging from 0.42 
to 0.57 across peer, teacher, observer, and self-reports. Gender differences across all kinds 
of aggression were the greatest during young adulthood, ages 18 to 22 (d = 0.66) and then 
decreased with age. Men were particularly higher than women in physical aggression, rang-
ing from a low of 0.39 for self-reports to a high of 0.84 for observer reports. However, dur-
ing late childhood and adolescence, girls engaged in more indirect or relational aggression 
THINK ABOUT IT
Where might gender differ-
ences in assertiveness and 
tender-mindedness come 
from?
THINK ABOUT IT
Why do men and women 
show no difference in 
aggression when provoked 
but a medium difference in 
unprovoked aggression?
337

Gender and Personality
than boys (d = -0.74). Observational studies found that girls were more likely than boys 
to purposely hurt others by rejecting or excluding them, turning others against them, or 
spreading gossip about them.
In sum, the evidence across multiple meta-analyses, ages, cultures, types of aggression, and 
conditions of aggression is that boys and men are more aggressive than girls and women. This 
gender difference plays out daily where men are more often the perpetrators of violent crime 
than women are, both in the United States and in other countries (Daly & Wilson, 1988). This 
is not to say that all men are aggressive or that all men are more aggressive than all women. 
As Lippa (2005a) noted, most people—regardless of their gender—do not assault or murder 
others (Bussey & Bandura, 1999).
Risk Taking. 
Are there gender differences in risk taking? Men are higher in impulsive 
sensation-seeking, like bungee jumping while on vacation (Zuckerman & Kuhlman, 2000), 
but they are only slightly more likely than women (d = 0.13) to engage in risky behaviors 
that may have undesirable or dangerous outcomes in their daily lives, like speeding or run-
ning yellow lights (Byrnes, Miller, & Schafer, 1999). The size of the gender difference in risk 
taking depends on the context, the type of risk involved, and to some extent, age (Byrnes 
et al., 1999). As you can see in Table 6, the effect sizes, although small to medium, consis-
tently show that men take more risks than women. Gender differences are the greatest in the 
amount and kind of risky behaviors people have actually engaged in and least when it comes 
to attitudes toward risky activities.
The largest gender differences occur for volunteering for experiments with a chance 
of physical or psychological harm; engaging in games of physical skill under high stakes, 
like shuffleboard or ring toss; and intellectual risk taking, where one’s lack of skill might be 
uncovered. Differences are smaller for self-reported risk taking while driving (e.g., damage 
to one’s vehicle, physical injury, traffic tickets), gambling (playing chance games with little 
or no skill involved), observed driving (e.g., making a left turn in front of oncoming traffic, 
gliding through a stop sign rather than coming to a complete stop), and engaging in physical 
activities that involve the potential for physical harm such as climbing a steep embankment, 
playing in the street, trying out gymnastics equipment (e.g., a balance beam), and taking a ride 
on an animal (e.g., a donkey). Gender differences are trivial for engagement in self-reported 
risky behaviors like smoking, drinking, drug use, and sexual activities.
Table 6  Gender Differences in Risk Taking
Task
Mean d Value
Trivial
Small
Medium
Large
Self-reported Behavior
  Smoking
-0.02
✓✓
  Drinking/Drug use
0.04*
✓✓
  Sexual Activities
0.07*
✓
  Driving
0.29*
✓✓
Observed Behavior
  Physical activity
0.16*
✓
  Driving
0.17*
✓✓
  Gambling
0.21*
✓
  Risky experiment
0.41*
✓
  Intellectual risk taking
0.40*
✓
  Physical skills
0.43*
✓
Note: Positive numbers mean males scored higher than females. Negative numbers mean females scored higher than males. 
Asterisks (*) indicate effects which are significantly different from zero. Source: Byrnes et al., (1999).
338

Gender and Personality
Even though there were significant gender differences across all age groups, from childhood 
to adulthood, what was considered risky tended to vary by age. For example, men showed a 
sharper increase in drinking and drug use from high school to college than women. Women 
were more likely to smoke in college than men. Yet after college, the drinking and drug use of 
women increased, surpassing that of men.
Another interesting gender difference is that boys and men tended to take more risks 
even when it was a bad idea to do so. Girls and women tended toward the opposite: avoiding 
risks even in situations where risk might have paid off, such as the intellectual risk taking 
that is involved on practice SATs, for example. Byrnes et al. (1999) surmised that males may 
encounter failure or other negative consequences more often than females, but the risk-averse 
strategy of females may inadvertently hold girls and women back from achieving success in 
many areas.
Finally, these gender differences in risky behaviors may be lessening over time. The mean 
effect size for studies conducted from 1964 to 1980 (d = 0.20) was larger than for those con-
ducted from 1981 to 1997 (d = 0.13). Has this trend continued into the present day? That 
question will have to wait for the next round of meta-analyses.
Gender Differences? It Depends
Let’s take a closer look at some of the gender differences in personality and social behavior. 
When we say “it depends,” what does that mean?
Empathy.  As we saw, one of the largest personality differences—in an area with many trivial 
and small differences—is that women show more empathy and sympathy than do men. Tender-
mindedness, a facet of Agreeableness, shows the largest gender difference in all 50 cultures 
studied to date, including the United States (d = -0.39 for observer ratings; d = -0.28 for 
self-ratings; McCrae et al., 2005), and in a meta-analysis using various measures of tender-
mindedness (d = -0.92; Feingold, 1994). This would suggest that women are indeed more 
empathic and sensitive to the plight of others than men are.
Men are more likely than 
women to engage in risky 
behaviors.
© Lovrencg/Fotolia
THINK ABOUT IT
Why do you think these 
gender differences in risky 
behaviors are lessening over 
time?
THINK ABOUT IT
What does it suggest when 
men and women differ in 
self-reports but not in actual 
behavior?
339

Gender and Personality
But this isn’t the whole story. These findings were all based on self-report measures of feel-
ings, rather than actual performance or accuracy in understanding another person’s emotions 
(Feingold, 1994; McCrae et al., 2005).
In many studies of empathetic accuracy, participants view a videotaped interaction between 
two people and try to identify what one of the people in the scenario is feeling. In some experi-
ments, participants estimate how accurate they think they were whereas in other experiments 
responses are scored as correct or incorrect. According to one meta-analysis, women reported 
greater accuracy at judging emotions than men did (d = -0.56). However, there was no dif-
ference between men and women in their actual performance (d = -0.04; Ickes, Gesn, & 
Graham, 2000). The researchers surmised that women present themselves as more empathic 
in self-reports than men do, perhaps in keeping with gender role stereotypes.
This finding echoes the results of an earlier meta-analysis looking at empathy across 
many types of tasks including emotional responsiveness after hearing about or viewing pic-
tures of others, physiological measures, observation of facial expressions, tone of voice, and 
self-reported empathy (e.g., “Seeing people cry upsets me”; Eisenberg & Lennon, 1983). The 
researchers noted inconsistent results across the seven types of measures studied. However, 
one clear effect emerged: Females showed more empathy than males on self-reports or other 
measures obviously related to empathy, but there was no gender difference on unobtrusive 
measures of empathy like facial expressions or physiological distress. Again, the pattern suggests 
that there is a demand characteristic operating such that participants act differently—and in 
line with gender roles—when they know that their empathy is being monitored (Eisenberg & 
Lennon, 1983).
Women are also more likely to feel the emotions of people around them according to a 
self-report measure of emotional contagion (Doherty, 1997). The scale included items such as 
“If someone I’m talking with begins to cry, I get teary-eyed” or “I tense when overhearing an 
angry quarrel.” Women reported that they felt the emotions of happiness, fear, anger, or sad-
ness while being around people who were experiencing these emotions more often than men 
reported catching these emotions from others.
This greater responsiveness of women to what another person is feeling is reflected in 
women’s greater nonverbal perceptiveness (Hall, 1978, 1984, 2006b). Women are better at read-
ing other people’s body language and facial expressions (d = -0.43) and recognizing faces 
(d = -0.34). Women are also better at expressing emotions nonverbally (d = -0.52), par-
ticularly in the face (d = -1.01), and they engage in more eye contact when interacting with 
others than men do (d = -0.68).
Emotions.  Are women more emotional than men? Are men less emotional than women? 
Gender differences in emotions depend more on cultural factors, situational influences, gen-
der role pressures, and the measures used rather than differences in the actual experience of 
Men and women both feel 
empathy for others; however, 
men may be more reluctant 
to show nonstereotypical 
masculine behavior when 
they know they are being 
monitored.
© BananaStock/Thinkstock
340

Gender and Personality
emotion (e.g., Brody, 2000; Ickes et al., 2000; LaFrance & Banaji, 1992; Shields, 1995; Wester, 
Vogel, Pressly, & Heesacker, 2002). The problem is compounded by the lack of a single measure 
of emotion (LaFrance & Banaji, 1992). For example, researchers might measure emotional 
intensity, frequency, duration, range, onset, accuracy, and congruence among different modes 
of expression (e.g., body, face, voice, words, etc.; LaFrance & Banaji, 1992). Or, researchers might 
use measures of experienced emotion, nonverbal expressions, or physiological reactions, which 
each tap different aspects of emotional experience and expression.
For example, there are no gender differences in women’s and men’s physiological experi-
ence of emotions. However, women report more emotion if asked directly, using self-reports, 
about an emotion that is readily observable and that involves other people. Women also report 
more emotion if asked about general emotion rather than about a specific emotion (LaFrance 
& Banaji, 1992).
Women report more intense feelings of sadness, depression, and being in a bad mood than 
do men (Brody & Hall, 2008). Men report more intense feelings of pride, confidence, guilt, and 
excitement than do women (Brody, 1993). Finally, gender differences in shame (Brody, 2000), 
anger, contempt, guilt, and loneliness (Brody & Hall, 2008) are inconsistent, depending on the 
situational context and the methods used.
These findings suggest that differences in men’s and women’s self-reported emotions 
parallel gender role expectations. In keeping with the expectation that admitting vulnerability, 
sadness, or self-consciousness is seen as unmanly, men report feeling negative emotions like 
disgust, sadness, fear, anxiety, hurt, shame, and embarrassment less than women do (Brody, 
1999, 2000). Similarly, women find it less appropriate to express any emotion that might 
threaten a social relationship such as pride and lack of guilt or remorse. Instead, women feel 
social pressure to express emotions that protect and foster relationships like warmth, support, 
and cheerfulness (Brody, 2000). Is this truly a gender difference in the experience of emotion, 
or have men and women internalized appropriate gender roles?
Women and men in many countries feel similar pressures to adhere to gender expectations 
about emotional expression. In one study involving participants from 37 countries, women 
reported expressing emotions more publicly, feeling emotions more intensely, and experienc-
ing emotions for a longer period of time, than men within their own culture did (Fischer & 
Manstead, 2000).
How large are these differences? There is no easy way to say, as the methods and measures 
vary greatly. In fact, no one has been able to conduct a meta-analysis combining individual 
effects from across these varied studies. However, a more recent study of undergraduates in 41 
countries did try to estimate the size of the gender difference in emotion (Brebner, 2003). They 
asked participants how frequently and how intensely they felt four positive emotions (affection, 
contentment, joy, pride) and four negative emotions (anger, fear, guilt, sadness).
To help interpret their results, the researchers calculated the effect size of the difference 
between men and women in self-reported intensity and frequency of the eight emotions. Recall 
that effect size summarizes multiple effects in the case of meta-analysis, or single effects, as in 
the case of one study. We can compare the size of the effect in this study to other gender effects 
discussed in this chapter.
As you can see in Table 7, the effects are in the trivial to small range (Brebner, 2003). If any-
thing, we would expect these effects based on self-reports to exaggerate the difference between 
the genders in the experience of emotion (LaFrance & Banaji, 1992). Until more research—and 
meta-analyses comparing effects across multiple methods and measures—is conducted, we 
can safely conclude that gender differences in emotional experience may have more to do with 
gender role expectations or experimental methods than a dispositional difference between men 
and women.
Anxiety.  Which gender is more anxious? According to meta-analyses, women are more 
anxious (d = -0.30). However, this is based on self-report (Maccoby & Jacklin, 1974). Are 
women really more anxious than men or are they just more willing to admit to being more 
anxious—because it’s more socially acceptable for a woman to publicly admit vulnerability? 
When researchers actually observe the reactions of men and women to stressful events there 
THINK ABOUT IT
Why might men and 
women differ in self-
reported emotional 
experiences?
341

Gender and Personality
are no gender differences in anxiety (Maccoby & Jacklin, 1974). Other studies have shown that 
men are actually more physiologically reactive than women, showing greater heart rate, skin 
conductance, and breathing when anxious (see Gottman, 1993, for a review).
Helping Behavior.  Meta-analyses show that, overall, men engage in more helping behavior 
than women (d = 0.34), especially if onlookers are present and the participant knows that he 
or she is being watched (d = 0.74; Eagly & Crowley, 1986). But if there are no witnesses, this 
gender difference disappears (d = -0.02)! Consider, too, that men and women may not dif-
fer in the amount of helping but in the kind of helping they provide. Women are more often 
the primary caregivers of children and elderly parents, but men are more often rescuers and 
heroes, especially where conditions rely on physical strength (Eagly, 2009a; Eagly & Crowley, 
1986). Women’s helping behavior is more communal, often taking place in close relationships, 
whereas men’s is more agentic, taking place with strangers (e.g., bystander intervention), a 
type of helping most often studied in social psychological experiments (Eagly, 2009a; Wood 
& Eagly, 2010).
Leadership.  Similarly, there is no gender difference in leadership effectiveness (d = 0.03). 
However, women and men tend to have different styles of leadership (Eagly, Karau, & Makhi-
jani, 1995). The effect size for democratic leadership (d = -0.22) suggests that women tend 
to share the power whereas men tend to be more autocratic (Eagly & Johnson, 1990). The 
difference is one of style rather than effectiveness (Eagly & Johannesen-Schmidt, 2001; Eagly, 
Johannesen-Schmidt, & van Engen, 2003; Eagly & Johnson, 1990). Other studies echo this find-
ing, with men more likely to emerge as leaders in situations involving task leadership, where 
getting the task done and maintaining productivity is the most important (d = 0.33). Women 
are more likely to emerge as leaders in situations involving social leadership, and where work-
ing well together and maintaining the integrity of the group is important (d = -0.21; Eagly 
& Karau, 1991).
Influenceability.  Consider the social behavior of influenceability, or how likely people are 
to go along with others. Meta-analyses show that women are somewhat more influenceable 
than men (d = -0.26) (Eagly, 1978; Eagly & Carli, 1981). Women are more easily swayed by 
the conformity pressure of peers—think of the classic Asch line length experiment—especially 
if they must respond in front of others (d = -0.32). Women were also more easily persuaded 
Table 7  Effect Sizes for Gender Differences in Emotions
Emotion
Frequency
Intensity
Positive Emotions
-0.20
-0.23
Affection
-0.30
-0.25
Joy
-0.16
-0.26
Contentment
-0.13
-0.18
Pride
ns
ns
Negative Emotions
-0.14
-0.25
Fear
-0.17
-0.26
Anger
-0.05
-0.14
Sadness
-0.16
-0.28
Guilt
ns
-0.07
Note: Positive numbers mean males scored higher than females; negative numbers mean females scored higher than males; 
ns indicates that the difference between males and females was not significant.
Source: Brebner (2003).
SEE FOR YOURSELF
What image comes to mind 
when you picture a “hero”?
342

Gender and Personality
than men to change their attitude when interacting with another person who holds a different 
position on a topic (d = -0.16; Eagly & Carli, 1981).
As you might expect, women conform and change their attitudes more than men when the 
stimulus materials involve traditionally masculine topics such as sports, military, or technology. 
For example, the topic showing the greatest gender difference in influenceability is football 
(d = 1.05). At the same time, males are more easily swayed when it comes to traditionally 
female topics like social work, education, health habits, day care, domestic issues, abstract art, 
or judgment of artistic creativity. Men are particularly influenced when it comes to judging 
birth control (d = -0.75). There are no gender differences in conformity or attitude change 
if the subject matter is gender-neutral (Eagly & Carli, 1981).
Curiously, Eagly and Carli (1981) also found that women were more swayed than men in 
experiments conducted by males (d = -0.28). There was no gender difference in influence-
ability in experiments by female authors. At the time of this meta-analysis some 79% of the 
conformity and persuasion studies they summarized were conducted by men. The authors 
wondered if the impact of author gender might be due to a bias of male authors in choice of 
topic used in experiments or to not mentioning insignificant gender differences.
Overall, the difference between men and women in influenceability is small to medium. 
As we said earlier, a meta-analysis is only as good as the research that goes into it, and there are 
many unanswered questions on the topic of gender and influenceability. For example, we don’t 
know the extent to which these effects carry over outside of psychology experiments to the real 
world and everyday situations of social influence (Becker, 1986). We don’t know if these results 
apply to a non-college-aged population, or if they still apply today, considering many of these 
studies were done well over 30 years ago. Finally, we don’t know how long lasting the attitude 
change of men and women might be (Becker, 1986).
Men and women have 
different but equally effective 
styles of leadership. Here, 
then U.S. secretary of state 
Madeleine Albright meets 
Russian Orthodox patriarch 
Alexy II at the Danilov 
Monastery in Moscow, 
February 1997. 
© AP Photo/Sergei Karpukhin
343

Gender and Personality
Self-Esteem and Self-Confidence.  Perhaps the most interesting gender difference is the case 
of self-esteem. Based on the combination of 216 studies, men have slightly higher self-esteem 
(d = 0.20) than women, but this difference varies—getting higher or lower—depending on age 
(see Figure 6). The gender difference in self-esteem occurs in White participants (d = 0.20), 
but not in African American samples (d = -0.04).
Recall that self-esteem is a general evaluation about one’s self. This is different from self-
confidence, or belief that one will be successful at a task. Though early reviews found that 
women have less self-confidence than men (Maccoby & Jacklin, 1974) a more recent review 
concluded that under certain conditions women may merely appear less confident than men 
depending on the specific task involved, the availability of performance feedback, and the 
emphasis placed on social comparison with others (Lenney, 1977).
These findings were borne out in a later experiment. First-semester undergraduate women 
and men predicted what GPA they expected to achieve that semester either out loud to another 
student who was conducting the experiment or written privately and sealed in an envelope so 
the student-experimenter wouldn’t be able to see it. Participants’ estimates were later checked 
against their actual GPAs. Women predicted significantly lower estimates than men, showing 
an underconfidence, but only in the public condition. The estimates of women and men did 
not differ in the private condition (Heatherington et al., 1993).
In a second experiment, using similar methods, women gave lower estimates of their GPA 
in front of a weaker student. Interestingly, there was no gender difference in the participants’ 
actual GPAs in either of these experiments. The researchers surmised that women underes-
timate their GPAs to appear modest or out of concern for another person’s feelings. That is, 
what appears as a difference in self-confidence is really a difference in modesty or sensitivity 
to others.
Subsequent research has discovered that the difference is due as much to men overesti-
mating their chances of success as women underestimating their chances of success. Men may 
be a bit overconfident, even as women may be a bit underconfident (Beyer, 1999; Mednick & 
Thomas, 1993). We should be sensitive to how our interpretation of the data unnecessarily 
projects female deficit or nonconsciously sets male behavior as the standard (Hyde, 2004).
What Causes Gender Differences?
Perhaps men and women are more similar than you thought; after all, many psychological 
gender differences are trivial. The reality is that medium and large differences do exist so 
we should be careful not to embrace a simplistic conclusion that men and women are the 
Figure 6  Effect size of 
self-esteem over the life 
span.  Source: Kling et al., 1999.
-0.2
7–10
11–14
15–18
19–22
23–59
Effect Size d
0.6
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-0.1
0.8
Age Range
Effect Size of Self-Esteem Over the Life Span
60+
344

Gender and Personality
same or that men and women are different (Lippa, 2006). The real questions for researchers 
is why do these gender differences exist and where do they come from, so that we can start 
to untangle the biological and social forces that generate these similarities and differences 
(Lippa, 2006).
By now, from our discussion of gender similarities and differences, you probably have some 
idea of what causes men and women to develop the kind of personalities that we do. For the 
most part, psychologists have proposed variations of the nature and nurture question to explain 
gender differences. Let’s briefly review some of these explanations (see Table 8).
First, at the nature extreme, are biological explanations. These explanations suggest that 
the differences between the genders are innate and due to biological causes like hormones, 
genetics, and evolution. One study of families, including identical and nonidentical twins, esti-
mated that 25% of the variance in gendered behavior for teenage males and 38% for females 
was due to genetic influences (Cleveland, Udry, & Chantala, 2001). The remaining 75 and 
62% was due to nonshared environmental influences, like differential treatment by parents, 
and measurement error. Also, psychologists are now discovering the extent to which prenatal 
hormones as well as daily fluctuations in testosterone (in males), monthly fluctuations in 
estrogen (for females), and even lifetime exposure to estrogen (in females) affect cognitive 
abilities (Halpern, 2004).
Or, consider the recent finding that when under stress, the sympathetic nervous system of 
females releases oxytocin in addition to epinephrine and norepinephrine. Oxytocin leads to a 
“tend-and-befriend” response in women under stress. In contrast to men, where testosterone 
interacts with norepinephrine to increase the “fight-or-flight” response, women seek out com-
pany and become more maternal, taking care of others (Taylor et al., 2000). In a double-blind 
study, men performed better at a test of nonverbal sensitivity when they had been given oxy-
tocin compared to when they had a placebo (Domes, Heinrichs, Michel, Berger, & Herpertz, 
2007). Oxytocin could well account for the sex difference in tender-mindedness and nonverbal 
sensitivity.
At the nurture extreme are social explanations. Social learning theory, for example, suggests 
that differences between the genders are not innate, but are socialized in us from our parents 
or learned from peers, teachers, or society via the media (Bandura, 1977; Mischel, 1966). For 
example, many supposed cognitive differences between males and females turned out to have 
been socialized. These have been reduced or eliminated altogether due to educational opportu-
nities and changing social expectations (Halpern, 2004). For example the gender difference in 
mathematics is due to girls’ choices (Ceci & Williams, 2010), such as opting out of mathematics 
courses in high school (Hyde, 1993), and not to an innate deficit in ability.
However, toy preference and color preference—characteristics thought to be a product 
of gender socialization—may actually be innate (Hurlburt & Ling, 2007). Infant girls 3 to 8 
months old showed greater visual interest in a pink doll over a blue truck, whereas boys pre-
ferred the truck to the doll (Alexander, Wilcox, & Woods, 2009). Female and male monkeys 
“When examining the 
multifaceted topic of gender, 
it may be useful to remember 
that human males and females 
are, after all, only slightly 
variant forms of the same 
animal species. By this we 
mean that anatomically and 
physiologically, males and 
females are much more similar 
than they are different, and as 
a result, they are for the most 
part interchangeable with 
regard to social behaviors and 
roles—childbearing being the 
major exception.”
Deborah L. Best and John E. Williams 
(1993, p. 215)
Table 8  Possible Explanations for Gender Differences
Explanation
Example
Biology
Aggressiveness, nonverbal sensitivity
Genetics
Physical characteristics
Evolution
Sexuality
Socialization
Spatial ability
Social context
Helping behavior
Social role theory
Extraversion: assertiveness
Feminist theory
Empathy
Social construction
Emotions
Biopsychosocial model
Personality
THINK ABOUT IT
Do sex hormones account 
for all gender differences?
345

Gender and Personality
show similar toy preferences (Alexander & Hines, 2002; Hassett, Siebertand, & Wallen, 2008). 
That these sex differences occur in monkeys and that they occur in infants so young makes it 
hard to argue that socialization is responsible for gender differences in toys and colors.
Alexander (2003) believed that humans have evolved sex differences in color and form 
preferences that prepare them for their adult reproductive roles. Females, whether human 
or monkey, prefer pink objects which cue nurturing behavior. Males prefer objects which 
signal movement and location. Further, there is evidence that the hormone androgen, which 
stimulates and controls the development of masculine characteristics, also affects the struc-
tures of the visual system including the visual cortex. Androgens may be responsible for 
sex differences in color naming and spatial perception, in addition to color and function 
preferences.
Then there are theories that fall somewhere in between these two extremes. Some dif-
ferences between men and women are due to the social situation or context in which the 
behavior occurs, as we saw in our discussion about emotional expression, anxiety, and self-
confidence. What appears to be a gender difference may change or disappear under different 
circumstances. Other social explanations suggest that differences between men and women 
reflect the different roles they hold in society. Feminist theories question the status quo nature 
of these roles.
According to feminist views, too often gender differences become translated into value 
judgments of females as inferior to males (Halpern, 1997; Unger, 1979). Halpern (1997) noted 
that we all know that men’s and women’s genitals differ, so to ask if one set is superior to the 
other doesn’t make sense. Yet, this is often what happens when it comes to psychological dif-
ferences between the genders.
Feminist perspectives also point out how the power differential between men and women 
in our society colors the kind of questions researchers pursue. For example, instead of focus-
ing on differences between men and women in reproduction—a deterministic view held by 
evolutionary psychologists—researchers should explore broader questions about women and 
sexuality beyond reproductive role (Hyde & Oliver, 2000).
Finally, psychologists are recognizing that the answer to the question of what causes gen-
der differences may not be as simple as biology or social forces. Instead, some have proposed 
a biopsychosocial model, where biologi-
cal and psychosocial forces influence each 
other (Halpern, 2004).
Others are realizing that the answer to 
the puzzle of what makes women and men 
the way they are may be a combination of 
all these explanations (Sternberg, 1993; see 
Halpern et al., 2007, for an extensive review 
of how all these theories can be applied to 
understanding the gender gap in science 
and mathematics). The trouble is, we may 
never know for sure which variables and in 
what precise combination explain a given 
gender difference. Table  9 presents psy-
chology’s best guess for documented gen-
der difference in light of current research 
evidence.
Evolution
According to evolutionary psychology, 
humans have evolved certain character-
istics to solve adaptive problems, that is, 
how to adapt to and survive under various 
biological and environmental conditions 
There are many possible 
explanations for gender 
differences. Is this woman a 
doctor or a nurse? Why do you 
think that?
© Image Source/Alamy
THINK ABOUT IT
If men and women were to 
occupy different social roles, 
would some gender differ-
ences disappear?
346

Gender and Personality
(Buss, 2004, 2005). To the extent that all humans must face similar challenges, such as finding 
adequate food or shelter for survival, men and women will develop similar characteristics (for 
example, taste preferences for high-caloric sweet and fatty foods). However, when men and 
women face different adaptive problems—as they do for reproduction—then gender differ-
ences are likely to emerge. Those characteristics which lead to reproductive success are more 
likely to be passed on to successive generations (Buss, 1995a). How do we know that a charac-
teristic has been selected? We look for similarities across time and cultures. Particularly valuable 
characteristics will appear as universal gender differences across many different environments 
and cultures (Kenrick & Trost, 1993). Differences between men and women in physical attri-
butes (e.g., height), aggressiveness, sexuality, and in qualities desired in a mate are hypothesized 
to exist due to the different adaptive problem each sex must face to successfully reproduce 
(Buss, 1995b, 2003).
How do sex differences in reproduction lead to different dating and mating strategies in 
men and women? For females, reproduction involves a tremendous investment of time and 
energy. The opportunity for reproduction occurs only once a month, they must carry the 
embryo for 9 months, and then feed and care for a relatively helpless creature for an additional 
amount of time. Above all, females need to secure resources to carry them and their offspring 
through times when food might be scarce and their mobility might be limited due to pregnancy 
or birth. In contrast, reproduction for males is less costly. As a result, different mating strategies 
have evolved to solve these differing adaptive problems (Buss, 1995b).
Females have evolved to be more particular about whom they mate with, seeking a mate 
who has the resources to invest in them and their progeny to help their genes survive. This is 
why, according to evolutionary psychologists, women are much less in favor of casual sex and 
value status and ambitiousness in a potential mate (Buss, 1995b).
In contrast, males have evolved strategies to increase their chances of passing on their 
genes through aggression and risk taking to beat out the competition for a female; casual sex; 
desire for multiple partners in a lifetime; and the valuing of physical attractiveness (as a gauge 
of health and fertility) in a potential mate (Buss, 1995b).
In addition, whereas both males and females experience jealousy over a partner’s emotional 
infidelity and sexual infidelity, there is a large effect size difference between the importance 
women and men place on each that follows from their differing reproductive strategies (Con-
fer et al., 2010). Across all cultures studied, women’s jealousy is triggered more by emotional 
Table 9  Gender Differences in Personality and Social Characteristics Revisited: Possible Explanations
Characteristic
Current Best Explanation
Sexuality
Evolution
Aggressiveness
Evolution
Risk taking
Evolution
Toy preferences
Evolution
Pink–blue color preference
Evolution
Nonverbal behavior
Biological (oxytocin)
Agreeableness: tender-mindedness
Biological (oxytocin)
Mental rotation
Socialization
Occupational preferences
Socialization
Leadership style
Socialization
Extraversion: assertiveness
Social role theory
Mental disorders
Biopsychosocial
Note: These explanations are based on current research findings and represent psychology’s best guess in light of the 
evidence. Some explanations are open to debate and may change as more evidence emerges.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Which would upset you 
more, discovering that your 
partner is having a sexual 
relationship or an emotional 
relationship with another?
347

Gender and Personality
infidelity whereas men’s jealousy is triggered more by sexual infidelity (d = 0.64; Hofhansl, 
Voracek, & Vitouch, 2004, cited in Confer et al., 2010). This difference in jealousy has been 
documented using self-reports and physiological measures (Buss, Larsen, & Westen, 1992) and 
is not easily explained by other theories (Buss, Larsen, & Westen, 1996).
Similarly, according to evolutionary psychology, males develop better spatial skills because 
these skills were required by successful hunters who lived to reproduce, thus passing on these 
crucial genes to the next generation. However, one could argue that traditional female skills 
like weaving or fitting objects together such as required in sewing, quilting, or housekeep-
ing require spatial skills more so than traversing large distances or throwing spears (Halpern, 
2004; Pontius, 1997). Psychologists have proposed alternatives to evolutionary explanations of 
sex differences and the evolutionary perspective of human behavior is not without its critics 
(Confer et al., 2010).
Social Context
Gender differences in the characteristics discussed earlier—helping behavior, leadership, 
anxiety, empathy, and influenceability—all depend on the context in which they occur or in 
how they are measured. For example, people may behave differently—often more in line with 
social expectations for gender—if other people are present or if assessed using self-report. 
Are men really more interested in sex than women, or do women feel uneasy admitting this 
on surveys? Are women really more sensitive to others or do they feel they need to appear 
so? That these differences in the behavior of men and women change depending on the situ-
ation suggests that these differences have more to do with the social context than with any 
important difference between men and women (Yoder & Kahn, 2003). We will never be able 
to answer the ultimate question and truly understand the essence of what a man is and what 
a woman is until social influences are minimized. This is why it is important to consider 
what causes gender differences. For example, the norms of a given situation may change how 
people behave, or people may change their behavior to present themselves in a certain light.
For example, for years psychologists and others thought that the gender difference in spa-
tial ability was “hard-wired” into the brains of males and females. However, the experiment 
that opened this chapter demonstrating that practice with certain video games can actually 
eliminate this gender difference in mental rotation suggests otherwise (Feng et al., 2007). Even 
something as simple as stimuli (human figures vs. abstract figures; see Figure 7; Alexander & 
Evardone, 2008) or task instructions can eliminate gender differences on a mental rotation 
task (Sharps, Price, & Williams, 1994; Sharps, Welton, & Price, 1993). When a mental rotation 
task was described as “an evaluation of some of your spatial abilities, of your abilities to reason  
THINK ABOUT IT
Why should gender differ-
ences depend on the social 
situation in which they are 
measured?
Figure 7  Examples of human figure stimuli. Both males and females 
perform better on a mental rotation task when human figures are used 
and the gender difference between men’s and women’s performance was 
reduced by half.
348

Gender and Personality
and solve problems regarding physical objects in space. Such abilities are involved in mechanical 
skills, and in navigation, map reading, and work with tools” we see the standard gender differ-
ence in spatial abilities, with men performing better than women. But when the same task was 
described as “an evaluation of some of your mental abilities, of your abilities to reason and solve 
problems” without any mention of the spatial nature of the task, men and women performed 
equally well (see Figure 8).
Social Role Theory
Social role theory suggests that men and women have developed differences due to the different 
roles they hold in society (Eagly, 1987; Eagly & Wood, 1999). What appears to be a gender differ-
ence may really be a power or status difference, due to the greater value placed on men and more 
power afforded to men in a patriarchal society. For example, perhaps the reason why women 
are more nurturing is because they do much of the caregiving in our society. If men did more 
caregiving, the reasoning goes, they would develop more empathy. Similarly, if women were 
better represented among the Fortune 500 CEOs and positions of political power, or earned 
salaries equal to what men in similar positions earned, they would develop more confidence, 
competitiveness, and business acumen, and stereotypes of what makes a good leader would 
start to change (Eagly & Sczesny, 2009).
Figure 8  Performance in 
mental image rotation task as a 
function of participant gender 
and instructional set. Men and 
women perform equally well on 
a mental rotation task when it 
is not labeled as a test of spatial 
ability.  Source: Sharps et al. 
(1993).
0
1
2
Spatial Task
Nonspatial Task
Females
Males
Number Correct on Mental Image
Rotation Task
18
14
16
12
10
8
6
4
2
20
Social role theory of gender 
differences suggests that men 
and women develop different 
aspects of their personality 
because of the different social 
roles they occupy in our 
society. By changing these 
roles, we may eliminate some 
gender differences.
© Melissa Schalke/Fotolia
349

Gender and Personality
Society’s division of labor between the two sexes provides both opportunities and restric-
tions that cause males and females to develop differently. This leads to a concentration of men 
and women in differing roles. Historically, men have ended up in roles with greater power, 
status, and wealth, particularly as societies have become more complex, with sex differences 
traditionally favoring men. From accommodating these roles, men develop dominant behav-
ior and women develop subordinate behavior. Dominant behavior is assertive, controlling, 
autocratic, and may involve sexual control. Subordinate behavior is more yielding to social 
influence, less overtly aggressive, more cooperative, and may involve a lack of sexual autonomy 
(Eagly & Wood, 1999). From accommodating these roles, men and women develop role-related 
skills and characteristics. Social role theory explains how men and women develop their typical 
agentic or communal characteristics, respectively (Eagly & Wood, 1999).
For example, one experiment found that men and women assigned to a supervisory 
role showed more dominant behaviors, but when these same participants were assigned 
to the underling role they acted more submissive. When the roles were reversed, the same 
participants showed completely different behaviors. That is, the former supervisors became 
more submissive and the former underlings became more dominant (Moskowitz, Suh, & 
Desaulniers, 1994).
Social role theory does explain some gender differences in nonverbal communication. For 
example, that men tend to interrupt others more may be a function of dominance or men’s 
higher social status (Hall, 2006a). However, dominance or status doesn’t explain all the gender 
differences in nonverbal communication.
Another way to see if gender role might be causing differences in personality between men 
and women is to eliminate the gender role and see if this eliminates the difference in behavior. To 
test this, researchers took advantage of a social phenomenon called deindividuation (Zimbardo, 
1969). Deindividuation is when people feel unaccountable and not responsible for their actions. 
When people are anonymous and part of a group, they stop feeling like individuals and experi-
ence a loosening of ordinary social norms and social roles. When deindividuated, people act in 
nonnormative, often antisocial and aggressive ways. Because part of the social role of being a 
man is to act aggressively and for a woman to inhibit her aggressiveness, would loosening these 
social roles reduce gender differences in aggression?
Male and female participants played a video game in which they could attack their oppo-
nents by dropping bombs. In the individuated condition, the experimenter first introduced 
them to the other participants, gave them large name tags, and had them answer personal 
questions about their background and interests out loud. In the deindividuated condition, 
participants were part of a small group, no introductions were made, no names or name tags 
were used, and no personal questions were asked. How did these conditions affect later behavior 
in an aggressive video game?
Figure 9    Aggressive 
responding as a function 
of deindividuation and 
participant sex. This graph 
shows a significant interaction 
between participant sex and 
deindividuation. Females were 
more aggressive when the 
social role prohibiting female 
aggressiveness was weakened. 
Source: Lightdale and Prentice 
(1994).
1
Male Participants
Female Participants
Individuation
Deindividuation
Amount of Aggressive Responding
1.9
1.7
1.8
1.6
1.5
1.4
1.3
1.2
1.1
2
350

Gender and Personality
As you can see in Figure 9, females dropped fewer bombs than males in the individuated 
condition but not in the deindividuated condition. When the pressure to adhere to gender 
norms was eliminated through deindividuation women became more aggressive and the usual 
gender difference in aggression disappeared! Just in case you were thinking that maybe these 
participants were somehow going along with what they thought might be expected of them in 
an aggressive game or when deindividuated, a previous experiment verified that undergraduates 
are unaware of how deindividuation might affect their later aggressiveness.
Social role theory also proposes an alternative explanation for some of the differences in 
reproductive strategies like the qualities desired in a potential mate. Men and women must 
choose partners and potential mates who fit in with society’s sexual division of labor in marital 
roles. Because women lack status, power, and wealth they must choose a mate who can provide 
these resources. Indeed, in a study of 37 cultures, women in cultures with greater gender equity 
were less likely to prefer an older man, or a potential mate with high earning capacity. Men 
in these cultures were less likely to prefer a younger woman, or to choose future mates based 
on domestic skills. Gender differences in these mating preferences decreased in cultures with 
greater gender equity. However, the gender difference for men preferring an attractive mate 
more than women still held regardless of the gender equity of the culture. Perhaps the emphasis 
on physical attractiveness is driven by evolution but other mating preferences are driven more 
by social roles (Eagly & Wood, 1999).
To test this alternative explanation for mate selection, male and female college students 
imagined themselves as married with children in either a homemaker role, a provider role, or 
a control condition where they imagined themselves in whatever role came to mind (Eagly, 
2009b). Both women and men who imagined themselves as future homemakers rated status, 
ambition, career focus, and salary as important in a future mate. However, women and men 
who imagined themselves as a future provider rated good cook, good with children, and good 
housekeeper as important in a future mate. Notice that the qualities these participants desired 
in a future mate depended on the role they saw themselves in and not on their gender. This 
study suggests that some gender differences, like some aspects of mate preference, may be more 
a function of social role than of biological sex (Eagly, 2009b).
Social Construction
Imagine the following scenario:
Chris was really angry today! Enough was enough. Chris put on the gray suit, 
marched into work, and went into the main boss’s office and yelled: “I’ve brought 
in more money for this company than anybody else and everyone gets promoted 
but me! You hand out promotions like candy!” The boss saw Chris’s fist slam 
down on the desk. There was an angry look on Chris’s face. They tried to talk but 
it was useless. Chris just stormed out of the office in anger.(Beall, 1993, p. 127)
While reading this passage, did you imagine Chris as a man or woman? Perhaps the part 
about choosing the gray suit made you think of a woman, putting care into her appearance. 
Perhaps the part about the fist slamming down on the desk made you think Chris was a man, 
his aggressiveness coming to the fore. Go back now and reread the passage imagining Chris dif-
ferently than you had before. If you look carefully, there is nothing in this paragraph to indicate 
gender—except your own expectations.
The idea that we define or construct our own reality is at the heart of social construction-
ism. According to Gergen (1985), we construct our perceptions based on our cultural back-
ground. Some constructions, like stereotypes about gender, may persist because they support 
the current social order or rationalize differential treatment of groups (Beall, 1993). Social 
construction explanations claim that gender differences have more to do with people’s beliefs 
about gender than any innate differences between men and women. This view suggests that 
gender is in the eye of the beholder.
SEE FOR YOURSELF
Imagine yourself as married 
with children. Do you see 
yourself more as a home-
maker or as a provider? 
What qualities are impor-
tant for your future mate?
THINK ABOUT IT
How do our beliefs about 
what men and women are 
like color our perceptions of 
people?
351

Gender and Personality
For example, in one study, male 
and female undergraduates watched 
a short video clip of a 9-month-
old infant reacting to various toys, 
including a jack-in-the-box (Con-
dry & Condry, 1976). The infant’s 
response to the jack-in-the-box 
was ambiguous. At first the infant 
appeared startled when Jack popped 
up. Then the infant became more 
and more agitated and started to cry. 
Later, the infant screamed when Jack 
popped up, and then dissolved into 
tears. Participants watched the same 
video, but were randomly assigned 
to believe that they were watching 
a boy (“David”) or a girl (“Dana”). 
They judged what emotion the baby 
was feeling and how intensely he or 
she was feeling it.
Despite watching the same infant, participants judged the emotion of the infant very dif-
ferently depending on whether they thought they were watching a girl or a boy (see Figure 10). 
Both male and female participants thought that “David” was equally angry or afraid of the 
jack-in-the-box but that “Dana” was more afraid and less angry at the toy.
Many studies have been done manipulating the ascribed (assigned) gender of infants, chil-
dren, and even adults and the common finding is that the way people see emotions (Condry 
& Condry, 1976), choose toys (Seavey, Katz, & Zalk, 1975; Sidorowicz & Lunney, 1980), judge 
physical attributes (Vogel, Lake, Evans, & Karraker, 1991), rate aggression (Condry & Ross, 
1985), and a host of other variables depends on the gender of the person participants believe 
they are watching and not on the target’s actual sex.
Biopsychosocial Model
When it comes to understanding gender differences, the biological and the social influence 
each other (Halpern, 2004). Nature and nurture work together to make us who we are. A 
biopsychosocial model suggests that gender differences are caused by a combination of 
© joshhhab/Shutterstock
Figure 10  Gender is in the eye 
of the beholder. While watching 
the same videotape of an infant 
playing with a jack-in-the-box, 
participants who believed they 
were watching a girl viewed 
her as less angry and more 
afraid of it. The boy was judged 
as equally likely to be angry 
or afraid.  Source: Condry and 
Condry (1976).
0
“David”
“Dana”
Anger
Fear
Emotional Intensity
4.5
3.5
4
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
5
What emotion is this baby 
feeling and what does gender 
have to do with it?
352

Gender and Personality
social forces acting on biological processes and, in turn, biological processes operating on 
psychological and social process (Halpern, 2004; Sternberg, 1993; Wood & Eagly, 2002).
For example, boys and girls may seek out different experiences based on their interests and 
abilities, thus further developing these abilities (Halpern, 2004). What appears to be a biologi-
cally determined sex difference in ability might really be a gender difference in interests, an 
active genotype–environment correlation, or a reactive genotype–environment correlation if 
people provide certain opportunities to children on the basis of their sex alone) If kids naturally 
gravitate toward, or avoid pursuing, certain activities, that would be one thing. However, if some 
children are discouraged from pursuing activities they like or forced to engage in activities they 
don’t like, then this would be an example of social forces changing a genetic predisposition. This 
example suggests how hard it is to separate out the effects of nature (genetics) from nurture 
(social forces) in trying to explain gender differences.
For example, take the gender differences in mental rotation. Though this difference occurs 
in very young infants (Moore & Johnson, 2008), we saw how the difference between college 
students can be eliminated by framing the task as gender appropriate (Sharps et al., 1993) or 
by providing women with special training (Feng et al., 2007). Even if this difference turns out 
to be innate and biological, the gender difference as it exists is not large enough to account for 
the finding that women earn only 10% of bachelor degrees in engineering in the United States 
(Hyde, 2004).
Why is this so? Women might not see themselves as fitting the stereotype of a scientist 
(Thomas, Henley, & Snell, 2006) or computer programmer (Cheryan, Plaut, Davies, & Steele, 
2010) or they may find the demands of a science career unappealing (Cheryan et al., 2010). 
Overwhelmingly, both male and female college students picture “a scientist” as male (Thomas 
et al., 2006; see Figure 11). Among undergraduates, women found majoring in computer 
science or even learning a computer language far less interesting than men when sitting in a 
computer science classroom decorated with Star Trek posters, video game boxes, computer 
parts, technical books, and junk food. However, when the same classroom contained nature 
posters, water bottles, general interest books, and healthy snacks—objects not considered 
stereotypical of computer science majors—women’s interest in computer science increased 
and was equivalent to the men’s interest in this as a possible career (Cheryan et al., 2010; see 
Figure 12).
What was it about the environment that turned the women off to the field of computer 
science? Later studies confirmed that regardless of decisions the participants were asked to 
make (choose a major, join a work team, work for a generic company, or work for a web design 
company), or the gender representation of a work group (majority male, entirely female, or 
gender balanced), women avoided the stereotypical environment, which was viewed by both 
men and women as masculine. The masculine work environment discouraged women, even 
when gender proportion, salaries, work hours, and job descriptions were identical across the 
masculine and neutral environments (Cheryan et al., 2010).
These findings were echoed in a recent report by the American Association of University 
Women which found that the reason why there are so few women in science, technology, engi-
neering, and mathematics has little to do with biology or innate sex differences in mathematics 
but everything to do with the social environment (Hill, Corbett, & St. Rose, 2010). Equality 
requires that we provide equal opportunities to all people; it makes no promises about equal 
outcomes from those opportunities.
Perhaps the most curious examples of how a biopsychosocial model can apply to gender 
differences are recent cross-cultural studies of personality (Costa, Terracciano, & McCrae, 
2001; Guimond, 2008; Schmitt, Realo, Voracek, & Allik, 2008). Which kind of culture do you 
think has greater gender differences in personality: countries with a poorer standard of living 
and far less gender equity or more affluent cultures with equality, prosperity, and health? If 
you’re thinking that social and economic equality would make the genders more similar—
think again. Men and women in more affluent countries have more resources to pursue their 
own interests and talents and, strangely enough, this actually increases the personality differ-
ences between the genders (Schmitt et al., 2008).
SEE FOR YOURSELF
What image comes to 
mind when you picture a 
scientist?
THINK ABOUT IT
Which kind of culture 
do you think has greater 
gender differences in per-
sonality: countries with less 
gender equity or countries 
with more gender equity?
353

Gender and Personality
Cultures with a higher standard of 
living and greater gender equity show 
the largest differences in personality 
(McCrae et al., 2005a). In both self-
reports and observer-reports, Asian and 
African cultures show the smallest gen-
der differences in personality whereas 
European and American cultures show 
the largest (Costa et al., 2001; McCrae, 
2002; Schmitt et al., 2008). For example, 
Figure 13 shows sex differences in the 
five factors across 50 cultures grouped 
by region (Schmitt et al., 2008). This 
graph shows that gender differences in 
personality decrease as one moves from 
Western to non-Western cultures.
When Schmitt et al. (2008) tried 
to figure out what accounted for this 
effect, they discovered that gender dif-
ferences correlated with men’s person-
ality but not women’s. This suggests 
Figure 12  Reported interest 
in computer science by women 
(N = 22) and men (N = 17) 
when sitting in a room 
with objects stereotypically 
associated with computer 
science or not stereotypically 
associated with computer 
science.  Source: Cheryan (2010, 
Figure 1, p. 1049). Cheryan, S., 
Plaut, V. C., Davies, P. G., & Steele, 
C. M. (2010). Ambient belonging: 
How stereotypical cues 
impact gender participation in 
computer science. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 
97(6), 1045–1060. Copyright 
American Psychological 
Association. Reprinted with 
permission.
Women
Men
1
1
Stereotypical
Interest in Computer Science (Standardized)
Nonstereotypical
Environment
0
Figure 11  After a field trip to 
the Fermilab proton collider in 
Batavia, Illinois, where students 
met with three physicists (a 
White male, a White female, 
and an African American 
male) who explained the tools, 
methods, and applications of 
Fermilab science, including 
cancer therapy, seventh graders 
changed their views of what a 
scientist was like. The image on 
the left is what Amy thought 
“a scientist” looked like before 
the tour. On the right is her view 
afterwards. Source: From http://
ed.fnal.gov/projects/scientists/
amy.html. 
354

Gender and Personality
that as countries become more affluent, men’s personalities are changing more than women’s. 
Specifically, men are becoming less similar to women, showing less Neuroticism, more Intro-
version, less Agreeableness, and less Conscientiousness. Affluence allows men and women to 
pursue their individual interests, which brings out and develops their innate temperament 
and—in the case of men—seems to make them more agentic and less communal in the process.
Schmitt et al. (2008) surmised that genetics and environment work on personality dif-
ferences in a way similar to height. Once the environment is enriched for everybody, then 
differences between people are caused by the only variable that can still vary: genetics. Gender 
differences in personality start to appear once the environment is good enough so that people 
can choose their activities, careers, and mates and develop aspects of their personality in the 
process.
This finding that gender differences are greater in more affluent cultures suggests that 
the differences between men and women are exaggerated in Western or affluent cultures, the 
very same cultures in which psychologists have been looking for gender differences. Have we 
artificially exaggerated the differences between the genders by looking for gender differences 
within Western cultures (Guimond, 2008)? With affluence, men become less neurotic, more 
introverted, less agreeable, and less conscientious, all characteristics of the universal masculine 
stereotype (Williams & Best, 1990).
There’s a saying, The answer you get depends on the question you ask. This is particu-
larly true of the research on gender differences (Sternberg, 1993). Psychologists once framed 
questions about gender as questions about whether gender differences were due to biology or 
Figure 13  Magnitude 
of sex differences (d) in 
Extraversion, Agreeableness, 
Conscientiousness, and 
Neuroticism, across the 
10 major world regions of 
the International Sexuality 
Description Project (ISDP). 
Gender differences in 
personality decrease as one 
moves from Western to non-
Western cultures (from left to 
right).  Source: Schmitt (2008, 
Figure 1, p. 175). Schmitt, 
D. P., Realo, A., Voracek, M., & 
Allik, J. (2008). Why can’t a 
man be more like a woman? 
Sex differences in big five 
personality traits across 55 
cultures. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 94(1), 
168–182. Copyright American 
Psychological Association. 
Reprinted with permission.
Sex Difference (d) in Personality
0.20
0.10
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
World Region of the ISDP
Extraversion
North America
South America
Western Europe
Eastern Europe
Southern Europe
Middle East
Africa
Oceania
South/SE Asia
East Asia
Agreeableness
Conscientiousness
Neuroticism
355

Gender and Personality
due to the environment. As you’ve realized by now, there is no simple answer to this question: 
Both biology and the environment influence each other, and the impact of each varies over 
time and place (Sternberg, 1993). As we pose the question of gender in more complex ways, 
our answers—and the psychological research on which they are based—get more advanced. 
By now, you’ve become more sophisticated as well during this process and have gained an 
appreciation of the biological and social mechanisms that affect similarities and differences 
between the genders.
Gendered beliefs about personality: What difference does it make?
Certainly there are differences between men and women, but these differences have 
become magnified and obscure the many similarities and commonalities that we share. 
Why is this important? There are many reasons. First, by seeing men and women as 
“opposites” or as enemies in a “battle of the sexes” we do ourselves and each other a 
disservice. This view makes it hard to see people as individuals instead of as represen-
tatives of their gender. It also sets us up for competition with each other instead of 
cooperation.
Second, stereotypes establish standards and norms for behavior and attitudes. Society 
does not take kindly to people who do not fit in, especially when it comes to norm viola-
tions for sex and gender. For example, women who do not fit the norm of being nurturant 
may face problems with evaluation in the workplace (Eagly, Makhijani, & Klonsky, 1992; 
Rudman & Glick, 1999).
Third, gender stereotypes may become self-fulfilling prophecies. When people hold 
beliefs about what another person is like based on their sex, whether true or false, it influ-
ences how they act toward that person. This causes the man or woman to act consistent 
with those gendered beliefs, making the original gendered expectations come true (Jussim, 
1986; Rosenthal & Jacobson, 1968).
For example, parents, teachers, and even kids themselves hold expectations that 
boys are likely to do better academically than girls (Bhanot & Jovanovic, 2005; Jussim & 
Eccles, 1992; Yee & Eccles, 1988). Adults may prevent girls from ever having the oppor-
tunity to improve their skills, and as a result, the false belief of academic inferiority 
becomes a reality. Similarly, how will a man ever develop insight into his own emotions 
or sensitivity to the emotions of others if we don’t expect a man to be in touch with his 
emotions?
Fourth, focusing on gender differences, especially those which are trivial or nonexis-
tent, may take the attention away from more serious gender issues. For example, with an 
emphasis on the lower self-esteem of girls we may be disregarding boys who, contrary to 
the stereotype, are also at risk for self-esteem problems (Kling, Hyde, Showers, & Buswell, 
1999). Similarly, talented girls may be overlooked if parents and teachers expect girls to 
be bad at mathematics (Hyde, 2005; Lummis & Stevenson, 1990).
Finally, stereotype threat is when a person experiences distress when faced with a 
stereotype that threatens him or her, causing the person’s performance to suffer thereby 
confirming the very stereotype he or she felt threatened by (Aronson et al., 1998; Aronson 
& Rogers, 2008; Spencer, Steele, & Quinn, 1999; Steele et al., 2002). For example, when 
faced with a challenging math problem, an otherwise capable woman might choke under 
the combined pressures of wanting to get the right answer and not wanting to be just 
another woman who is bad at math.
For each person to develop his or her own unique talents and to thrive in life we 
need to allow people to be their true selves without limitations set by stereotypes, society, 
expectations, or even our own self-inflicted limitations.
The Personality of Everyday Life
356

Gender and Personality
Then and Now: Definition and Assessment of Gender
Are you: male or female? (circle one)
If you are male then you are masculine and if you are female then you are feminine, right? 
Maybe not. Traditionally, psychologists assumed that people developed a set of personality 
traits depending on their biological sex: males are masculine and females are feminine. Today, 
we have a richer and broader definition of gender that takes into account biological sex as well 
as personal feelings and social experiences.
Let’s start with the basics. Sex refers to a biological classification depending on a person’s 
combination of chromosomes and hormones. Gender refers to a social classification (Unger, 
1979). Psychologists generally use the terms male and female to refer to biological sex and 
masculine and feminine to refer to social gender (of course, it’s not always easy to decide if a 
difference is due to biology or social role). In the early days of personality measurement, gender 
was measured as a typology, meaning that people would be one type or the other—masculine 
or feminine—as if being placed in a box. Further, it was assumed that a person’s gender was 
the same as his or her sex: males are masculine and females are feminine. Any deviation from 
this norm was considered problematic.
Psychologists soon recognized the limitations of a gender typology and combined mascu-
linity and femininity into a single bipolar (two-ended) dimension of masculinity–femininity: 
The more masculine a person is, the less feminine that person is. Like the earlier typology 
model, this unidimensional model was also limiting, as people could either be masculine or 
feminine but could not display aspects of both.
A personality test that illustrates gender as a single dimension is the Minnesota Multipha-
sic Personality Inventory (MMPI; Hathaway & McKinley, 1940), of which a 1989 revision, the 
MMPI-2, is used today (Butcher et al., 1989). Both versions consist of 10 different scales, one 
of which is the masculinity–femininity scale. On the MMPI, if a man scores too high on the 
masculinity scale (indicating more femininity) or if a woman scores too low (indicating more 
masculinity) this is a sign of pathology.
By the 1970s personality psychologists started to realize that a unidimensional scale did 
not fully capture the possible range of people’s gendered behavior (Constantinople, 1973). 
Why couldn’t a woman be gregarious and assertive? Why couldn’t a man be self-sufficient 
and nurturing? Psychologists started thinking of masculinity and femininity as two separate 
unidimensional scales. A person could be high or low on one or both of the scales. That 
is, a person could be high in both stereotypically masculine traits such as leadership and 
analytical thinking, and in stereotypically feminine traits such as being affectionate and 
compassionate. Two scales, the Personal Attributes Questionnaire (PAQ; Spence, Helm-
reich, & Stapp, 1974, 1975) and the Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI; Bem, 1974) measure 
gender in just this way. Both the PAQ and the BSRI yield very similar results and correlate 
“Experimental results are 
based on group averages, and 
no one is average.”
Psychologist Diane Halpern (2004)
THINK ABOUT IT
Do definitions of masculin-
ity and femininity change 
over time? Why?
THINK ABOUT IT
Is measuring gender like try-
ing to hit a moving target?
“Consider a rainbow. Given 
the full spectrum of color, we 
perceive red and magenta 
as being similar. If, however, 
we eliminate all other hues, 
red and magenta are now 
perceived as being different. 
But the price of emphasizing 
this difference is the loss of the 
rest of the spectrum. Similarly, 
relationships relevant to both 
sexes have been obscured by 
the limitation of research to 
the difference between them.” 
Rhoda K. Unger (1979, p. 1093)
© Bruce2/Dreamstime.com
357

Gender and Personality
with each other (Spence, 1991). Further, there is no correlation between the masculinity 
and femininity scales of each test, suggesting that these are separate dimensions (Spence & 
Helmreich, 1979).
In the PAQ, respondents use a 5-point scale to rate which of a pair of statements best 
describes their personalities (see Table 10). The masculinity items measure goal-oriented and 
instrumental attributes. The femininity items measure interpersonally oriented and expressive 
attributes. Even though the masculine items tend to be stereotypically more characteristic of 
men and the feminine items stereotypically more characteristic of women, all attributes were 
rated as being equally desirable in men and women. Undergraduates imagined—back in 1975 
at least—that the ideal man or woman would possess these attributes (Spence et al., 1975).
In the BSRI, respondents rate each of 60 adjectives on a 7-point scale from 1 (never or 
almost never true) to 7 (almost always true). Responses for the 20 feminine and the 20 masculine 
Table 10  The Personal Attributes Questionnaire
  1.   Not at all aggressive
A
B
C
D
E
Very aggressive
  2.   Not at all independent
A
B
C
D
E
Very independent
  3.   Not at all emotional
A
B
C
D
E
Very emotional
  4.   Very submissive
A
B
C
D
E
Very dominant
  5.   Not at all excitable in a major crisis
A
B
C
D
E
Very excitable in a major crisis
  6.   Very passive
A
B
C
D
E
Very active
  7.   Not at all able to devote self completely to 
others
A
B
C
D
E
Able to devote self completely to others
  8.   Very rough
A
B
C
D
E
Very gentle
  9.   Not at all helpful to others
A
B
C
D
E
Very helpful to others
10.   Not at all competitive
A
B
C
D
E
Very competitive
11.   Very home oriented
A
B
C
D
E
Very worldly
12.   Not at all kind
A
B
C
D
E
Very kind
13.   Indifferent to others' approval
A
B
C
D
E
Highly needful of others' approval
14.   Feelings not easily hurt
A
B
C
D
E
Feelings easily hurt
15.   Not at all aware of feelings of others
A
B
C
D
E
Very aware of feelings of others
16.   Can make decisions easily
A
B
C
D
E
Has difficulty making decisions
17.   Gives up very easily
A
B
C
D
E
Never gives up easily
18.   Never cries
A
B
C
D
E
Cries very easily
19.   Not at all self-confident
A
B
C
D
E
Very self-confident
20.   Feels very inferior
A
B
C
D
E
Feels superior
21.   Not at all understanding of others
A
B
C
D
E
Very understanding of others
22.   Very cold in relations with others
A
B
C
D
E
Very warm in relations with others
23.   Very little time for security
A
B
C
D
E
Very strong need for security
24.   Goes to pieces under pressure
A
B
C
D
E
Stands up well under pressure
Note: The items above inquire about what kind of person you think you are. Each item consists of a pair of characteristics, with the letters A–E in between. Each pair describes 
contradictory characteristics—that is, you cannot be both at the same time, such as very aggressive and not at all aggressive. The letters form a scale between the two extremes. 
You are to choose a letter that describes where you fall on the scale. For example, if you think you are not at all aggressive, you would choose A. If you think you are aggressive, 
you might choose D. If you are only somewhat aggressive, you might choose C, and so forth.
To score, assign numbers based on the letter you circled: A = 0, B = 1, C = 2, D = 3, E = 4. Based on the responses you circled, enter the appropriate numbers for the 
remaining items in the spaces to the left of the items. To compute your score on the femininity scale, add up the numbers next to items 3, 7, 8, 9, 12, 15, 21, and 22. To compute 
your scores on the masculinity scale, add up the numbers next to items 2, 6, 10, 16*, 17, 19, 20, and 24. Note that item 16 must be reverse scored so that a 4 is scored as a 0; 3 
as a 1; 2 as a 2; 1 as a 3; and 0 as a 4.
Source: Spence and Helmreich (1978).
358

Gender and Personality
items are averaged. The remaining 20 are applicable to either gender and are not scored. Then 
using their masculinity and femininity scores, researchers classify respondents into one of four 
categories (see Table 11).
Women who score high in femininity and low in masculinity are classified as feminine 
sex-typed. Men who score high in masculinity and low in femininity are classified as mas-
culine sex-typed. Women and men who score high in both masculinity and femininity—
possessing attributes of both males and females—are called androgynous (from the Greek: 
andro = male and gyn = female). People who score low in both masculinity and femininity 
are undifferentiated. However, women who score high in masculinity (and low in feminin-
ity) and men who score high in femininity (and low in masculinity) are considered cross 
sex-typed (Bem, 1977).
Since the BSRI was designed and validated on a sample of college students from Stan-
ford University in the 1970s, society has changed a lot. For one, undergraduates have become 
more androgynous over time (Twenge, 1997). That is, it has become more acceptable for 
men to be expressive and for women to be instrumental. A replication of Bem’s original 
study with students at Franklin and Marshall college in 1999 discovered that both men and 
women found it more acceptable for a woman to demonstrate certain masculine traits like 
assertiveness and athleticism and to avoid feminine traits like being soft-spoken and not 
using harsh language (Auster & Ohm, 2000). Second, Sandra Bem, the originator of the 
scale, recognized that the test and the theory that it was built on suggested that androgyny 
was somehow better than being sex-typed or undifferentiated and that being cross sex-typed 
was particularly problematic, which was never her intention (Bem, 1981, 1993). Her uto-
pian goal had been to create a climate in which gender matters only where it is biologically 
relevant (Bem, 1993). Recognizing that this may be impossible, she now advocates omitting 
gender categorization altogether and letting people be fluid in their biological sex, social 
gender, and sexual desires (Bem, 1995).
On both the BSRI and the PAQ women have become more masculine over time, show-
ing an increase in the extent to which they say that stereotypical masculine traits apply to 
them and eliminating the difference between men and women on these scales. However, even 
though cultural changes from the 1970s to the 1990s have encouraged the development of 
instrumental traits in women, there has not been a similar increase in the acceptability of 
expressive and communal traits in men (Twenge, 1997). Perhaps the expectations for gender 
behavior, at least for women, are less strict today than they were when the BSRI and the PAQ 
were developed.
The idea of being sex-typed or androgynous comes from gender schema theory (Bem, 1981, 
1984, 1993). Bem found that for those people who scored as sex-typed on the BSRI, gender was a 
highly salient and important organizing principle or schema for them, which they used to make 
judgments about themselves and the world. For example, sex-typed participants were more likely 
to organize words by gender when recalling them on a memory test (Bem, 1981). They were also 
faster at judging sex-congruent traits (e.g., female–sensitive; male–competitive) as descriptive of 
Table 11  Gender as Two Dimensions: The Personal Attitudes Questionnaire and the Bem Sex Role 
Inventory
Low Masculine
High Masculine
Low Feminine
Undifferentiated
Masculine sex-typed (if male)
Cross sex-typed (if female)
High Feminine
Feminine sex-typed (if female)
Androgynous
Cross sex-typed (if male)
Note: Participants are classified as scoring high or low depending on whether they are above or below the median of their 
peers. People who are undifferentiated have a lower self-esteem than people in the other categories, which echoes our earlier 
discussion of self-esteem and self-concept clarity.
Sources: Bem (1977); Spence et al. (1975).
359

Gender and Personality
themselves than sex-incongruent traits (e.g., female–forceful, male–loves children) (Bem, 1981). 
The BSRI may be a better measure of cognitive orientation or the strength of one’s schema for 
gender than a measure of gender itself (but see Spence, 1993).
Today, there is a trend among researchers to define gender using not just one or two dimen-
sions, but multiple dimensions (e.g., Twenge, 1999). For example, Janet Spence and her col-
leagues have suggested that masculinity and femininity (or instrumental and expressive traits) 
as measured by the PAQ or the BSRI is but one such dimension of gender identity. She suggested 
that our gender identity, a psychological sense of our own maleness and femaleness, like our 
self-concept, is established early in life (Spence, 1993; Spence & Sawin, 1985). Gender identity 
is one of many possible social identities (Wood & Eagly, 2009). Adult men and women reported 
that their gender identity included physical attributes, such as appearance, movements, and 
speech; social roles; interests and hobbies; social behavior; biological sex; and sexuality, in addi-
tion to instrumental and expressive personality traits (Spence & Sawin, 1985). People display 
only modest consistency in their gender-typical behavior across many aspects of their lives, 
from toy preference to careers, to preferred relationship partners to activity preferences (Egan 
& Perry, 2001). A multidimensional view of gender identity accounts for people’s experiences 
of themselves as male or female better than either one- or two-dimensional models.
In two studies, the gender identity of middle school students was related to their psy-
chological and social adjustment over the course of the school year (Carver, Yunger, & Perry, 
2003; Egan & Perry, 2001). Researchers hypothesized that gender identity was made up of four 
dimensions:
	 1.	 Membership Knowledge. Knowledge of membership in a gender category: male, female.
	 2.	 Gender Compatibility. Felt compatibility with one’s own gender compared to the other 
gender. Self-perceptions of how typical a person feels for his or her gender. Contentment 
with one’s gender assignment, emerging sexuality, and sexual orientation.
	 3.	 Gender Conformity Pressure. The extent to which participants feel compelled to engage 
in gender-appropriate activities and to avoid gender-inappropriate activities and fearing 
punishment or ridicule from teachers, parents, peers, or themselves, instead of feeling free 
to explore a wide range of activities regardless of gender appropriateness.
	 4.	 Intergroup Bias. Attributing positive qualities to one’s own sex and negative qualities to 
the other sex, such as showing favoritism for own sex and a bias against the other sex, or 
exaggerating the positive aspects of own sex and the negative aspects of the other sex.
Both studies found that these four dimensions were not strongly related to each other, 
supporting a multidimensional view of gender identity, and that all were related to psycho-
logical and social adjustment. Children showed better adjustment as measured by self-esteem, 
social competence, and acceptance from peers if they felt secure in themselves as typical for 
their gender and yet free to explore cross-sex behaviors when they wanted to. Poor adjustment 
was related to feeling greater pressure to conform to gender expectations and showing greater 
intergroup bias. Interestingly, boys had higher scores than girls on gender typicality, gender 
contentedness, and felt pressure, which goes along with other findings that suggest that boys 
are more sex-typed than girls and experience more pressures to act in accord with expecta-
tions for their gender. In addition, felt pressure to behave in accord with one’s gender led to 
reduced agentic behaviors (e.g., assertion, daring, competitiveness) in girls and less communal 
behaviors (e.g., cooperation, maintaining of harmony, showing of fear or weakness) in boys 
(Carver et al., 2003).
As a final note, the results of both studies suggest that masculinity and femininity are 
indeed two ends of a single bipolar dimension: The more masculine one feels the less feminine 
one feels or the more expressive one is the less instrumental one is. So, when it comes to the 
measurement of gender, researchers have come back to thinking of masculinity and femininity 
as aspects of a single scale and not as two separate scales. But as these two studies show, there is 
more to our gender identity than the single dimension of masculinity–femininity.
360

Gender and Personality
Chapter Summary
Are there personality differences between men and women? People in Canada, the United 
States, and around the world hold amazingly consistent notions about what men and women 
are like. People believe that men and women differ in personality, social roles, physical 
attributes, emotional experience, emotional expression, cognitive skills, careers, hobbies, 
interests, and activities. Women are seen as communal, focusing on nurturing and feel-
ing connected to others. Men are seen as more agentic, focused on individual actions and 
accomplishments.
Meta-analysis, a way of statistically combining results across methods and measures to 
estimate an average effect size (d), can help us evaluate if there are gender differences in these 
characteristics and estimate how large and how consistent gender differences are. Based on 
meta-analysis, there are many similarities and a few differences between males and females. 
Most of the differences tend to be physical or sexual; most of the similarities are in personality.
Men and women are the same when it comes to impulsiveness, Extraversion, gregariousness, 
activity, Openness, ideas, Conscientiousness, order, intelligence, mathematical ability, verbal abil-
ity, leadership effectiveness, self-confidence, and many more traits. Men and women are different 
when it comes to tender-mindedness, assertiveness, sexuality, nonverbal behavior, aggressiveness, 
risk taking, occupational preferences, and in the incidence of certain mental disorders. Other 
differences in personality and social behavior depend on the context in which they occur, how 
they are measured, and how they are defined. For example, men and women may not differ in 
empathy, emotions, helping behavior, leadership style, anxiety, and self-esteem. Differences in 
spatial ability can be eliminated by practice and how the task is presented to participants.
What causes gender differences? Psychologists have suggested that sex and gender differ-
ences may be due to biology, genetics, hormones, evolution, socialization, the social situation 
in which the behaviors occur, social construction, social roles, and biopsychosocial theory.
What difference do gendered beliefs make? When we judge people based on how we think 
they ought to behave for someone of their gender we fail to see them as individuals. Our ste-
reotypical beliefs may become norms for behavior and we may negatively evaluate or even 
shun people who don’t follow norms for sex or gender. Beliefs about gender can lead to a self-
fulfilling prophesy in the behavior of others, take attention away from more serious gender 
differences, cause people to perform badly because of stereotype threat, and to wrongly think 
of men and women as opposites.
Finally, definitions of gender have become more sophisticated, moving from single-
dimensional measures, to two-dimensional measures, to multidimensional measures. Gender 
identity is much richer than a single dimension of masculinity–femininity and includes bio-
logical sex, gender compatibility, gender conformity pressures, and intergroup bias.
Recall our thought experiment that opened the chapter. Would you answer differently now? 
Would you be the same person inside? Would you have the same personality? I suspect that 
most of us would have the same personality, but perhaps we would express it differently. Just as 
the facets of a diamond can look different depending on the light and the setting, perhaps men 
and women are not quite alien species to each other after all. Let’s focus on our commonali-
ties while celebrating—and not exclusively focusing on—our differences. Whatever male and 
female differences there are, we are not the opposite of each other (Lippa, 2005a). Ideally, gender 
and gender roles should fit comfortably like a favorite pair of jeans rather than uncomfortable 
hand-me-downs that pinch and restrict in places.
Review Questions
	 1.	 Is spatial rotation skill learned or innate? What does this suggest about the cause of the 
gender difference between men and women in this skill?
	 2.	 What do people believe men and women are like? Are these stereotypes different depending 
on culture?
“I’m just a person trapped 
inside a woman’s body.”
Comedian Elayne Boosler
Go online for more 
resources to help you 
review.
Study and Review
on mysearchlab.com
361

Gender and Personality
	 3.	 What is effect size? How is it measured? How can we interpret effect sizes? What questions 
about gender differences can a meta-analysis help answer?
	 4.	 What kinds of variables show the largest gender differences? What kinds of variables show 
the smallest gender differences? When it comes to the factors and facets of the five-factor 
model, are men and women more similar than different or more different than similar?
	 5.	 Are there gender differences in aggression and risk taking? Are there gender differences 
in empathy, basic emotions, helping behavior, leadership effectiveness, anxiety, influence-
ability, self-esteem, or self-confidence? Explain your reasoning.
	 6.	 What are some possible explanations for gender differences put forth by psychologists? 
Explain how each of these explanations can account for gender differences.
	 7.	 What impact on ourselves and people around us does holding gendered beliefs about 
personality have?
	 8.	 How have definitions and assessments of gender changed over time?
Key Terms
Communion
Agency
Stereotypes
Effect size
Meta-analysis
Gender socialization
Feminist theory
Evolutionary psychology
Social role theory
Deindividuation
Social constructionism
Biopsychosocial model
Self-fulfilling prophecies
Bipolar scale
Unidimensional model
Feminine sex-typed
Masculine sex-typed
Androgynous
Undifferentiated
Cross sex-typed
Gender identity
362

REFERENCES
Abela, J. R. Z., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2000). The hopelessness theory of depression: A test of the 
diathesis-stress component in the interpersonal and achievement domains. Cognitive Therapy 
and Research, 24(4), 361–378.
Abramson, L. Y., Metalsky, G. I., & Alloy, L. B. (1989). Hopelessness depression: A theory-based 
subtype of depression. Psychological Review, 96(2), 358–372.
Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., & Teasdale, J. D. (1978). Learned helplessness in humans: 
Critique and reformulation. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 87(1), 49–74.
Ackerman, S. J. (2006). Hard science, hard choices. New York: Dana Press.
Affleck, G., Tennen, H., & Apter, A. (2001). Optimism, pessimism, and daily life with chronic illness. In  
E. C. Chang (Ed.), Optimism & pessimism: Implications for theory, research, and practice 
(pp. 147–168). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Ahern, N. R., Kiehl, E. M., Sole, M. L., & Byers, J. (2006). A review of instruments measuring resil-
ience. Issues in Comprehensive Pediatric Nursing, 29, 103–125.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Bell, S. M., & Stayton, S. (1974). Infant–mother attachment and social devel-
opment. In M. P. Richards (Ed.), The introduction of the child into a social world (pp. 99–135). 
London, England: Cambridge University Press.
Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978). Patterns of attachment: A psychological 
study of the strange situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Alexander, G. M. (2003). An evolutionary perspective of sex-typed toy preferences: Pink, blue, and 
the brain. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 32(1), 7–14.
Alexander, G. M., & Evardone, M. (2008). Blocks and bodies: Sex differences in a novel version of 
the mental rotations test. Hormones and Behavior, 53, 177–184.
Alexander, G. M., & Hines, M. (2002). Sex differences in response to children’s toys in nonhuman 
primates (Cercopithecus aethiops sabaeus). Evolution and Human Behavior, 23, 467–479.
Alexander, G. M., Wilcox, T., & Woods, R. (2009). Sex differences in infants’ visual interest in toys. 
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38, 427–433.
Allen, L. S., & Gorski, R. A. (1992). Sexual orientation and the size of the anterior commissure of the 
human brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 89, 7199–7202.
Alloy, L. B., Abramson, L. Y., Hogan, M. E., Whitehouse, W. G., Rose, D. T., Robinson, M. S., et al. 
(2000). The Temple-Wisconsin cognitive vulnerability to depression project: Lifetime history 
of axis I psychopathology in individuals at high and low cognitive risk for depression. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 403–418.
Allport, G. W. (1927). Concepts of trait and personality. Psychological Bulletin, 24, 284–293.
Allport, G. W. (1937). Personality: A psychological interpretation. New York: Holt.
Allport, G. W. (1937/1961). Pattern and growth in personality. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Allport, G. W. (1962). The general and the unique in psychological science. Journal of Personality, 
30, 405–422.
Allport, G. W. (1965). Letters from Jenny. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.
From Personal
 Psychology: Foundations and Findings
ity
, First Edition. Marianne Miserandino. 
Copyright © 2012 by Pearson Education, Inc. All rights reserved.
363

References
Allport, G. W., & Odbert, H. S. (1936). Trait names: A psycho-lexical study. Psychological Monographs, 
47(Whole No. 211), 1–171.
Almagor, M., Tellegen, A., & Waller, N. G. (1995). The big seven model: A cross-cultural replication 
and further exploration of the basic dimensions of natural language trait descriptors. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 69(2), 300–307.
Alvarez, J. M., Ruble, D. N., & Bolger, N. (2001). Trait understanding or evaluative reasoning: An 
analysis of children’s behavioral predictions. Child Development, 72, 1409–1425.
Álvarez, M. S., Balaguer, I., Castillo, I., & Duda, J. L. (2008). Coach autonomy support and quality of 
sport engagement in young soccer players. The Spanish Journal of Psychology, 12(1), 138–148.
American Educational Research Association, American Psychological Association, & National Council 
on Measurement in Education. (1999). The standards for educational and psychological testing. 
Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
American Psychological Association. (2002). Ethical principles of psychologists and code of conduct. 
American Psychologist, 57, 1060–1073.
American Psychological Association. (2010). 2010 amendments to the 2002 “ethical principles 
of psychologists and code of conduct.” American Psychologist, 65(5), 493.
Anderegg, D. (2004). Paging Dr. Froid: Teaching psychoanalytic theory to undergraduates. Psycho-
analytic Psychology, 21(2), 214–221.
Anderson, C. A., & Arnoult, L. H. (1985). Attributional style and everyday problems in living: 
Depression, loneliness, and shyness. Social Cognition, 3(1), 16–35.
Anderson, C. A., Horowitz, L. M., & French, R. D. (1983). Attributional style of lonely and depressed 
people. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 127–136.
Anderson, C. R. (1977). Locus of control, coping behaviors, and performance in a stress setting: A lon-
gitudinal study. Journal of Applied Psychology, 62(4), 446–451.
Anderson, R., Manoogian, S. T., & Reznick, J. S. (1976). The undermining and enhancing of intrinsic 
motivation in preschool children. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 34, 915–922.
Anonymous. (1946). Letters from Jenny. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 41, 315–350, 
449–480.
Archer, J. (2004). Sex differences in aggression in real world settings: A meta-analytic review. Review 
of General Psychology, 8(4), 291–322.
Ardelt, M. (2000). Still stable after all these years? Personality stability theory revisited. Social 
Psychology Quarterly, 63, 392–405.
Aronson, E. (1968). Dissonance theory: Progress and problems. In R. P. Abelson, E. Aronson, W. J. 
McGuire, T. M. Newcomb, M. J. Rosenberg, & P. H. Tannenbaum (Eds.), Theories of cognitive 
consistency: A sourcebook (pp. 5–27). Chicago: Rand McNally.
Aronson, E., Ellsworth, P. C., Carlsmith, J. M., & Gonzales, M. H. (1990). Methods of research in social 
psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Aronson, E., Wilson, T. D., & Akert, R. M. (2001). Social psychology (7th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson.
Aronson, J., Lustina, M. J., Good, C., Keough, K., & Steele, C. M. (1999). When White men can’t 
do math: Necessary and sufficient factors in stereotype threat. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 35(1), 29–46.
Aronson, J., Quinn, D. M., & Spencer, S. J. (1998). Stereotype threat and the academic underper-
formance of minorities and women. In J. K. Swim & C. Stangor (Eds.), Prejudice: The target’s 
perspective (pp. 83–103). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Aronson, J., & Rogers, L. (2008). Overcoming stereotype threat. In S. J. Lopez (Ed.), Positive psy-
chology: Exploring the best in people: Vol. 3. Growing in the face of adversity (pp. 109–121). 
Westport, CT: Praeger.
Ashby, F. G., Isen, A. M., & Turken, A. U. (1999). A neuropsychological theory of positive affect and 
its influence on cognition. Psychological Review, 106, 529–550.
Ashton, M. C., & Lee, K. (2005). Honesty-humility, the Big Five, and the five-factor model. Journal 
of Personality, 73(3), 1321–1353.
Ashton, M. C., & Lee, K. (2007). Empirical, theoretical, and practical advantages of the HEXACO 
model of personality structure. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 11(2), 150–166.
Ashton, M. C., Lee, K., & Goldberg, L. R. (2004). A hierarchical analysis of 1710 English personality-
descriptive adjectives. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(5), 707–721.
Ashton, M. C., Lee, K., Goldberg, L. R., & de Vries, R. E. (2009). Higher order factors of personality: 
Do they exist? Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 13(2), 79–91.
364

References
Ashton, M. C., Lee, K., Perugini, M., Szarota, P., de Vries, R. E., DiBlas, L., et al. (2004). A six-factor 
structure of personality-descriptive adjectives: Solutions from psycholexical studies in seven 
languages. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86(2), 356–366.
Aspinwall, L. G., & Richter, L. (1999). Optimism and self-mastery predict more rapid disengagement 
from unsolvable tasks in the presence of alternatives. Motivation and Emotion, 23, 221–245.
Aspinwall, L. G., Richter, L., & Hoffman, R. R., III. (2001). Understanding how optimism works: 
An examination of optimists’ adaptive moderation of belief and behavior. In E. C. Chang 
(Ed.),Optimism & pessimism: Implications for theory, research, and practice (pp. 217–238). Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Auster, C. J., & Ohm, S. C. (2000). Masculinity and femininity in contemporary American society: 
A  reevaluation using the Bem Sex-Role Inventory. Sex Roles, 43(7/8), 499–528.
Ávila, C., & Torrubia, R. (2004). Personality, expectations, and response strategies in multiple-
choice question examinations in university students: A test of Gray’s hypotheses. European 
Journal of Personality, 18, 45–59.
Ávila, C., & Torrubia, R. (2008). Performance and conditioning studies. In P. J. Corr (Ed.), The reinforce-
ment sensitivity theory of personality (pp. 228–260). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University 
Press.
Avtgis, T. (1998). Locus of control and persuasion, social influence and conformity: A meta-analytic 
review. Psychological Reports, 83, 899–903.
Azar, B. (1997, October). Was Freud right? Maybe, maybe not. APA Monitor on Psychology, 28, 30.
Baard, P. P., Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2004). Intrinsic need satisfaction: A motivational basis of 
performance and well-being in two work settings. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 34, 
2045–2068.
Bailey, J. M. (2003). Biological perspectives on sexual orientation. In L. Garnets & D. C. Kimmel 
(Eds.), Psychological perspectives on lesbian, gay, and bisexual experience (pp. 50–85). New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Bailey, J. M., & Dawood, K. (1998). Behavioral genetics, sexual orientation, and the family. In C. J. 
Patterson & A. R. D’Augelli (Eds.), Lesbian, gay and bisexual identities in families (pp. 3–18). 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Bailey, J. M., Dunne, M. P., & Martin, N. G. (2000). Genetic and environmental influences on sexual 
orientation and its correlates in an Australian twin sample. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 78(3), 524–536.
Bailey, J. M., & Pillard, R. C. (1991). A genetic study of male sexual orientation. Archives of General 
Psychiatry, 48, 1089–1096.
Bailey, J. M., & Pillard, R. C. (1995). Genetics of human sexual orientation. Annual Review of Sex 
Research, 6, 126–150.
Bailey, J. M., Pillard, R. C., Dawood, K., Miller, M. B., Farrer, L. A., Trivedi, S., et al. (1999). A family 
history study of male sexual orientation using three independent samples. Behavior Genetics, 
29(2), 79–86.
Bailey, J. M., Pillard, R. C., Neale, M. C., & Agyei, Y. (1993). Heritable factors influence sexual orienta-
tion in women. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 217–223.
Bailey, J. M., Willerman, L., & Parks, C. (1991). A test of the maternal stress theory of human male 
homosexuality. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 20(3), 277–293.
Bailey, J. M., & Zucker, K. J. (1995). Childhood sex-typed behavior and sexual orientation: A conceptual 
analysis and quantitative review. Developmental Psychology, 31(1), 43–55.
Bakan, D. (1966). The quality of human existence. Boston: Beacon Press.
Balaguer, I., Castillo, I., & Duda, J. L. (2007). Propiedades psicométricas de la escala de motivación 
deportiva en deportistas españoles. Revista Mexicana de Psicología, 24, 197–207.
Baldwin, A. L. (1942). Personal structure analysis: A statistical method for investigating the single 
personality. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 37, 163–183.
Bandura, A. (1977a). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. Psychological 
Review, 84(2), 191–215.
Bandura, A. (1977b). Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1982). Self-efficacy mechanism in human agency. American Psychologist, 37(2), 122–147.
Bandura, A. (2000a). Exercise of human agency through collective efficacy. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 9(3), 75–78.
Bandura, A. (2000b). Self-efficacy. In A. E. Kazdin (Ed.), Encyclopedia of psychology (Vol. 7, 
pp. 212–213). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
365

References
Bandura, A. (2001). Social cognitive theory: An agentic perspective. In S. T. Fiske, D. L. Schacter, 
& C. Zahn-Waxler (Eds.), Annual Review of Psychology (Vol. 52, pp. 1–26). Palo Alto, CA: 
Annual Reviews.
Bandura, A., Adams, N. E., Hardy, A. B., & Howells, G. N. (1980). Tests of the generality of self-
efficacy theory. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 4, 39–66.
Bandura, A., Barbaranelli, C., Caprara, G. V., & Pastorelli, C. (2001). Self-efficacy beliefs as shapers 
of children’s aspirations and career trajectories. Child Development, 72(1), 187–206.
Barahal, H. S. (1940). Testosterone in psychotic male homosexuals. Psychiatric Quarterly, 14, 319–329.
Bardeen, M. (2000). Retrieved July 9, 2010, from http://ed.fnal.gov/projects/scientists/amy.html.
Barenbaum, N. B. (1997). The case(s) of Gordon Allport. Journal of Personality, 65(3), 743–755.
Barenbaum, N. B., & Winter, D. G. (2008). History of modern personality theory and research. In 
O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research. 
New York: Guilford Press.
Barrett, L. F. (2009). Understanding the mind by measuring the brain. Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 4(3), 314–318.
Barrett, P., & Eysenck, S. B. G. (1984). The assessment of personality factors across 25 countries. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 5, 615–632.
Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. (1991). The Big Five personality dimensions and job performance: 
A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44, 1–26.
Barry, H. I. (2007). Characters named Charles or Charley in novels by Charles Dickens. Psychological 
Reports, 101(2), 497–500.
Bartholomew, K., Henderson, A. J. Z., & Marcia, J. E. (2000). Coded semistructured interviews in social 
psychological research. In H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social 
and personality psychology (pp. 286–312). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Bartone, P. T. (1999). Hardiness protects against war-related stress in army reserve forces. Consulting 
Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 51(2), 72–82.
Bartram, D. (2005). The great eight competencies: A criterion-centric approach to validation. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 90(6), 1185–1203.
Baumeister, R. F. (1982). A self-presentational view of social phenomena. Psychological Bulletin, 
91(1), 3–26.
Baumeister, R. F. (1986). Identity: Cultural change and the struggle for self. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Baumeister, R. F. (1987). How the self became a problem: A psychological review of historical 
research. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52(1), 163–176.
Baumeister, R. F. (1997). Identity, self-concept, and self-esteem: The self lost and found. In R. Hogan, 
J. Johnson, & S. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of personality psychology (pp. 681–710). San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press.
Baumeister, R. F. (1999). The nature and structure of the self: An overview. In R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), 
The self in social psychology (pp. 1–20). Philadelphia: Taylor and Francis.
Baumeister, R. F. (2000). Gender differences in erotic plasticity: The female sex drive as socially 
flexible and responsive. Psychological Bulletin, 126(3), 347–374.
Baumeister, R. F., Campbell, J. D., Kreuger, J. I., & Vohs, K. D. (2003). Does high self-esteem cause 
better performance, interpersonal success, happiness, or healthier lifestyles? Psychological 
Science in the Public Interest, 4(1), 1–44.
Baumeister, R. F., Dale, K., & Sommer, K. L. (1998). Freudian defense mechanisms and empirical 
findings in modern social psychology: Reaction formation, projection, displacement, undoing, 
isolation, sublimation, and denial. Journal of Personality, 66(6), 1081–1124.
Baumeister, R. F., Tice, D. M., & Hutton, D. G. (1989). Self-presentational motivations and personal-
ity differences in self-esteem. Journal of Personality, 57, 547–579.
Baumgardner, A. H. (1990). To know oneself is to like oneself: Self-certainty and self-affect. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 1062–1072.
Bazana, P. G., & Stelmack, R. M. (2004). Stability of personality across the life span: A meta-analysis. 
In On the psychobiology of personality: Essays in honor of Marvin Zuckerman (pp. 113–144). 
Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier.
Beall, A. E. (1993). A social constructionist view of gender. In A. E. Beall & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.), The 
psychology of gender (pp. 127–147). New York: Guilford Press.
Beaver, J. D., Lawrence, A. D., van Ditzhuijzen, J., Davis, M. H., Woods, A., & Calder, A. J. (2006). 
Individual differences in reward drive predict neural responses to images of food. The Journal 
of Neuroscience, 26(19), 5160–5166.
366

References
Beck, A. T. (1976). Cognitive therapy and the emotional disorders. New York: International Universi-
ties Press.
Beck, A. T., Steer, R. A., & Brown, G. K. (1996). Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory-II. San 
Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation.
Becker, B. J. (1986). Influence again: An examination of reviews and studies of gender difference in 
social influence. In J. S. Hyde & M. C. Linn (Eds.), The psychology of gender: Advances through 
meta-analysis (pp. 178–209). Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Press.
Bell, A. P. (1974). Homosexualities: Their range and character. In Nebraska symposium on motivation 
1973 (Vol. 21, pp. 1–26). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Bell, A. P., Weinberg, M. S., & Hammersmith, S. K. (1981a). Sexual preference: Its development in men 
and women. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Bell, A. P., Weinberg, M. S., & Hammersmith, S. K. (1981b). Sexual preference: Its development in men 
and women. Statistical appendix. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Bem, D. J. (1967). Self-perception: An alternative interpretation of cognitive dissonance phenomena. 
Psychological Review, 74, 183–200.
Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social 
psychology (Vol. 6, pp. l–62). New York: Academic Press.
Bem, D. J. (1996). Exotic becomes erotic: A developmental theory of sexual orientation. Psychological 
Review, 103(2), 320–335.
Bem, D. J. (1998). Is EBE theory supported by the evidence? Is it androcentric? A reply to Peplau et 
al. (1998). Psychological Review, 105(2), 395–398.
Bem, D. J. (2000). Exotic becomes erotic: Interpreting the biological correlates of sexual orientation. 
Archives of Sexual Behavior, 29(6), 531–548.
Bem, D. J. (2008). Is there a causal link between childhood gender nonconformity and adult homo-
sexuality? Journal of Gay and Lesbian Mental Health, 12(1), 61–79.
Bem, S. L. (1974). The measurement of psychological androgyny. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 42, 155–162.
Bem, S. L. (1977). On the utility of alternative procedures for assessing psychological androgyny. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 45(2), 196–205.
Bem, S. L. (1981). Gender schema theory: A cognitive account of sex typing. Psychological Review, 
88, 354–364.
Bem, S. L. (1984). Androgyny and gender schema theory: A conceptual and empirical integration. In 
Nebraska symposium on motivation (Vol. 32, pp. 179–226). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Bem, S. L. (1989). Genital knowledge and gender constancy in preschool children. Child Develop-
ment, 60, 649–662.
Bem, S. L. (1993). The lenses of gender: Transforming the debate on sexual inequality. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press.
Bem, S. L. (1995). Dismantling gender polarization and compulsory heterosexuality: Should we turn 
the volume down or up? The Journal of Sex Research, 32(4), 329–334.
Benassi, V. A., Sweeney, P. D., & Dufour, C. L. (1988). Is there a relationship between locus of control 
orientation and depression? Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 97, 357–367.
Benet, V., & Waller, N. G. (1995). The big seven factor model of personality description: Evidence 
for its cross-cultural generality in a Spanish sample. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 69(4), 701–718.
Benet-Martínez, V., & Oishi, S. (2008). Culture and personality. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & 
L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (pp. 542–567). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Benet-Martínez, V., & Waller, N. G. (2002). From adorable to worthless: Implict and self-report 
structure of highly evaluative personality descriptors. European Journal of Personality, 16, 
1–41.
Benjamin, L. T., Jr. (2009). Psychoanalysis, American style. APA Monitor on Psychology, 40(8), 24.
Bennett, D. S., & Bates, J. E. (1995). Prospective models of depressive symptoms in early adolescence: 
Attributional style, stress and support. Journal of Early Adolescence, 15, 299–315.
Berenbaum, S. A., & Snyder, E. (1995). Early hormonal influences on childhood sex-typed activity 
and playmate preferences: Implications for the development of sexual orientation. Develop-
mental Psychology, 31(1), 31–42.
Berlant, L., & Warner, M. (1998). Sex in public. Critical Inquiry, 24(2), 547–566.
Bernstein, I. H. (1980). Security guards’ MMPI profiles: Some normative data. Journal of Personality 
Assessment, 44(4), 377–380.
367

References
Berry, C. M., Sackett, P. R., & Wiemann, S. (2007). A review of recent developments in integrity test 
research. Personnel Psychology, 60, 271–301.
Berry, J. W., Poortinga, Y. H., Segall, M. H., & Dasen, P. R. (1992). Cross-cultural psychology: Research 
and applications. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Best, D. L., & Williams, J. E. (1993). A cross-cultural viewpoint. In A. E. Beall & R. J. Sternberg (Eds.), 
The psychology of gender (pp. 215–248). New York: Guilford Press.
Best, D. L., & Williams, J. E. (2001). Gender and culture. In D. Matsumoto (Ed.), The handbook of 
culture and psychology (pp. 195–219). Cambridge, MA: Oxford University Press.
Bettencourt, B. A., & Miller, N. (1996). Gender differences in aggression as a function of provocation: 
A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 119(3), 422–447.
Beyer, S. (1999). Gender differences in the accuracy of grade expectations and evaluations. Sex Roles, 
41, 279–296.
Bhanot, R., & Jovanovic, J. (2005). Do parents’ academic gender stereotypes influence whether they 
intrude on their children’s homework? Sex Roles, 52, 597–607.
Billieux, J., Linden, M. V. D., D’Acremont, M., Ceschi, G., & Zermatten, A. (2006). Does impulsiv-
ity relate to perceived dependence on and actual use of the mobile phone? Applied Cognitive 
Psychology, 21, 527–537.
Blackburn, R., Renwick, S. J. D., Donnelly, J. P., & Logan, C. (2004). Big five or big two? Superordinate 
factors in the NEO five factor inventory and the antisocial personality questionnaire. Personality 
and Individual Differences, 37, 957–970.
Blackwood, E. (1984). Sexuality and gender in certain native American tribes: The case of cross-
gender females. SIGNS: Journal of Women in Culture and Society, 10(1), 27–42.
Blackwood, E. (2000). Culture and women’s sexualities. Journal of Social Issues, 56(2), 223–238.
Blanchard, R. (1997). Birth order and sibling sex ratio in homosexual versus heterosexual males and 
females. Annual Review of Sex Research, 8, 27–67.
Blanchard, R. (2001). Fraternal birth order and the maternal immune hypothesis of male homo-
sexuality. Hormones and Behavior, 40, 105–114.
Blanchard, R., & Bogaert, A. F. (1996). Homosexuality in men and number of older brothers. Ameri-
can Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 27–31.
Blanchard, R., & Klassen, P. (1997). H-Y antigen and homosexuality in men. Journal of Theoretical 
Biology, 185, 373–378.
Blanchard, R., & Sheridan, P. M. (1992). Sibship size, sibling sex ratio, birth order, and parental 
age in homosexual and nonhomosexual gender dysphorics. Journal of Nervous and Mental 
Disease, 180, 40–47.
Blanchard, R., & Zucker, K. J. (1994). Reanalysis of Bell, Weinberg, and Hammersmith’s data on birth 
order, sibling sex ratio, and parental age in homosexual men. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
151, 1375–1376.
Blanchard, R., Zucker, K. J., Bradley, S. J., & Hume, C. S. (1995). Birth order and sibling sex ratio 
in homosexual male adolescents and probably prehomosexual feminine boys. Developmental 
Psychology, 31, 22–30.
Block, J. (1961). The Q-sort methodology in personality assessment. Springfield, IL: Thomas.
Block, J. (1995). A contrarian view of the five-factor approach to personality description. Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 117, 187–215.
Block, J. (2001). Millennial contrarianism: The five-factor approach to personality description 5 
years later. Journal of Research in Personality, 35, 98–107.
Block, J. (2010). The five-factor framing of personality and beyond: Some ruminations. Psychological 
Inquiry, 21(2), 2–25.
Block, J., & Kremen, A. M. (1996). IQ and ego-resiliency: Conceptual and empirical connections and 
separateness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(2), 349–361.
Bobrow, D., & Bailey, J. M. (2001). Is male homosexuality maintained via kin selection? Evolution 
and Human Behavior, 22, 361–368.
Boden, J. M. (2006). Motive and consequence in repression. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 29(5), 
514–515.
Bohan, J. S. (1996). Psychology and sexual orientation. New York: Routledge.
Bolger, N., & Schilling, E. A. (1991). Personality and the problems of everyday life: The role 
of neuroticism in exposure and reactivity to daily stressors. Journal of Personality, 59(3), 
255–386.
368

References
Bonanno, G. A. (2004). Loss, trauma, and human resilience: Have we underestimated the human 
capacity to thrive after extremely aversive events? American Psychologist, 58(1), 20–28.
Bond, M. H. (1994). Trait theory and cross-cultural studies of person perception. Psychological 
Inquiry, 5(2), 114–168.
Boomsma, D. I., de Geus, E. J. C., van Baal, G. C. M., & Koopmans, J. R. (1999). A religious upbring-
ing reduces the influence of genetic factors on disinhibition: Evidence for interaction between 
genotype and environment on personality. Twin Research, 2, 115–125.
Borgatta, E. F. (1964). The structure of personality characteristics. Behavioral Science, 9(1), 8–17.
Borman, W. C., Hanson, M. A., & Hedge, J. W. (1997). Personnel selection. Annual Review of Psychol-
ogy, 48, 299–337.
Bouchard, T. J., & McGue, M. (2003). Genetic and environmental influences on human psychological 
differences. Journal of Neurobiology, 54, 4–45.
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New York, Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss: Vol. 2. Separation: Anxiety and anger. New York: Basic Books.
Bowlby, J. (1980). Attachment and loss: Vol. 3. Loss, sadness, and depression. New York: Basic Books.
Bradley, R. H., Stuck, G. B., Coop, R. H., & White, K. P. (1977). A new scale to assess locus of control 
in three achievement domains. Psychological Reports, 41(2), 656–661.
Brandt, A. C., & Vonk, R. (2006). Who do you think you are? On the link between self-knowledge 
and self-esteem. In M. H. Kernis (Ed.), Self-esteem issues and answers (pp. 224–228). New York: 
Psychology Press.
Brannigan, G. G., Hauk, P. A., & Guay, J. A. (1991). Locus of control and daydreaming. The Journal 
of Genetic Psychology, 152(1), 29–33.
Brebner, J. (2003). Gender and emotions. Personality and Individual Differences, 34, 387–394.
Brennan, F. X., & Charnetski, C. J. (2000). Explanatory style and immunoglobulin A (IgA). Integrative 
Physiological and Behavioral Science, 35(4), 251–255.
Brennan, K. A., & Shaver, P. R. (1993). Attachment styles and parental divorce. Journal of Divorce & 
Remarriage, 21(1–2), 161–175.
Brenner, C. (1982). The mind in conflict. Madison, CT: International Universities Press.
Brenner, C. (2003). Is the structural model still useful? International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 84, 
1093–1103.
Bretherton, I. (1990). Open communication and internal working models: Their role in the develop-
ment of attachment relationships. In R. A. Thompson (Ed.), Nebraska symposium on motivation 
1988 (Vol. 36, pp. 57–113). Lincoln, NB: University of Nebraska Press.
Breur, J., & Freud, S. (1893/1955). On the psychical mechanisms of hysterical phenomena: Prelimi-
nary communication. In Standard edition (Vol. 2, pp. 1–17). London: Hogarth Press. (Original 
work published 1893).
Brewer, M. B. (1991). The social self: On being the same and different at the same time. Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 475–482.
Brewer, M. B. (2000). Research design and issues of validity. In H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Hand-
book of research methods in social and personality psychology (pp. 3–84). Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press.
Brewer, M. B., & Chen, Y. (2007). Where (who) are collectives in collectivism? Toward conceptual 
clarification of individualism and collectivism. Psychological Review, 114(1), 133–151.
Brewin, C. R. (2003). Post-traumatic stress disorder: Malady or myth? New Haven, CT: Yale University 
Press.
Brilleslijper-Kater, S. N., & Baartman, H. E. M. (2000). What do young children know about sex? 
Research on the sexual knowledge of children between the ages of 2 and 6 years. Child Abuse 
Review, 9, 166–182.
Brockner, J. (1984). Low self-esteem and behavioral plasticity: Some implications for personality 
and social psychology. In L. Wheeler (Ed.), Review of personality and social psychology (Vol. 4, 
pp. 237–271). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Brockner, J. (1988). Self-esteem at work: Research, theory, and practice. Issues in organization and man-
agement series. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Brody, L. R. (1993). On understanding gender differences in the expression of emotion: Gender roles, 
socialization, and language. In S. Ablong, D. Brown, E. Khantzian, & J. Mack (Eds.), Human feelings: 
Explorations in affect development and meaning (pp. 89–121). Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Brody, L. R. (1999). Gender, emotion, and the family. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
369

References
Brody, L. R. (2000). The socialization of gender differences in emotional expression: Display rules, 
infant temperament, and differentiation. In A. H. Fischer (Ed.), Gender and emotion: Social 
psychological perspectives (pp. 24–47). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Brody, L. R., & Hall, J. A. (2008). Gender and emotion in context. In M. Lewis, J. M. Haviland-
Jones, & L. F. Barrett (Eds.), The handbook of emotions (3rd ed., pp. 395–408). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Bromberger, J. T., & Matthews, K. A. (1996). A longitudinal study of the effects of pessimism, trait 
anxiety, and life stress on depressive symptoms in middle-aged women. Psychology and Aging, 
11, 207–211.
Brown, H. D. (1994). Principles of language learning and teaching. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Brown, J. C., & Strickland, B. R. (1972). Belief in internal–external control of reinforcement and par-
ticipation in college activities. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 38(1), 148.
Brown, J. D. (1993). Motivational conflict and the self: The double-bind of low self-esteem. In R. F. 
Baumeister (Ed.), Self-esteem: The puzzle of low self-regard (pp. 117–130). New York: Plenum Press.
Brown, J. D., & Marshall, M. A. (2001). Great expectations: Optimism and pessimism in achievement 
settings. In Optimism & pessimism: Implications for theory, research, and practice (pp. 239–255). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Brown, J. D., & McGill, K. L. (1989). The cost of good fortune: When positive life events produce 
negative health consequences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 1103–1110.
Brown, W. L., McDowell, A. A., & Robinson, E. M. (1965). Discrimination learning of mirrored cues 
by rhesus monkeys. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 106, 123–128.
Brumbaugh, C. C., & Fraley, R. C. (2006). Transference and attachment: How do attachment pat-
terns get carried forward from one relationship to the next? Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 32(4), 552–560.
Brunwasser, S. M., Gillham, J. E., & Kim, E. S. (2009). A meta-analytic review of the Penn resiliency 
program’s effect on depressive symptoms. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77(6), 
1042–1054.
Brydon, L., Walker, C., Wawrzyniak, A. J., Chart, H., & Steptoe, A. (2009). Dispositional optimism 
and stress-induced changes in immunity and negative mood. Brain, Behavior, and Immunity, 
23, 810–816.
Buchanan, G. M. (1995). Explanatory style and coronary heart disease. In G. M. Buchanan & M. E. 
P. Seligman (Eds.), Explanatory style (pp. 225–232). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Buchanan, G. M., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1995). Explanatory style. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Buckman, A. (2010, June 21). Reap rewards of good grades [Television broadcast]. Philadelphia: 
WPVI TV.
Burger, J. M., & Burns, L. (1988). The illusion of unique invulnerability and the use of effective contra-
ception. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 14(2), 264–270.
Burt, S. A. (2008). Genes and popularity: Evidence of an evocative gene–environment correlation. 
Psychological Science, 19(2), 112–113.
Burt, S. A. (2009). A mechanistic explanation of popularity: Genes, rule breaking, and evocative 
gene–environment correlations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96(4), 783–794.
Bushman, B. J., & Baumeister, R. F. (1998). Threatened egotism, narcissism, self-esteem, and direct 
and displaced aggression: Does self-love or self-hate lead to violence? Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 75, 219–229.
Bushman, B. J., Baumeister, R. F., & Stack, A. D. (1999). Catharsis, aggression, and persuasive influ-
ence: Self-fulfilling or self-defeating prophecies? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
76(3), 367–376.
Buss, A., & Plomin, R. (1994). Temperament: Early developing personality traits. New York: Erlbaum.
Buss, D. M. (1995a). Evolutionary psychology: A new paradigm for psychological science. Psycho-
logical Inquiry, 6, 1–30.
Buss, D. M. (1995b). Psychological sex differences: Origins through sexual selection. American Psy-
chologist, 50, 164–168.
Buss, D. M. (1996). Social adaptation and five major factors of personality. In J. S. Wiggings (Ed.) The 
five-factor model of personality: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 180–207). New York: Guilford Press.
Buss, D. M. (2003). The evolution of desire: Strategies of human mating. New York: Basic Books.
Buss, D. M. (2004). Evolutionary psychology: The new science of the mind. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Buss, D. M. (2005). The handbook of evolutionary psychology. New York: Wiley.
370

References
Buss, D. M., Larsen, R. J., & Westen, D. (1992). Sex differences in jealousy: Evolution, physiology, and 
psychology. Psychological Science, 3(4), 251–255.
Buss, D. M., Larsen, R. J., & Westen, D. (1996). Sex differences in jealousy: Not gone, not forgotten, 
and not explained by alternative hypotheses. Psychological Science, 7(6), 373–375.
Busseri, M. A., Choma, B. L., & Sadava, S. W. (2009). “As good as it gets” or “The best is yet to come”? 
How optimists and pessimists view their past, present, and anticipated future life satisfaction. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 47, 352–356.
Bussey, K., & Bandura, A. (1999). Social cognitive theory of gender development and differentiation. 
Psychological Review, 106, 676–713.
Butcher, J. N. (1994). Psychological assessment of airline pilot applicants with the MMPI-2. Journal 
of Personality Assessment, 62(1), 31–44.
Butcher, J. N., Dahlstrom, W. G., Graham, J. R., Tellegen, A., & Kaemmer, B. (1989). The Minnesota 
Multiphasic Personality Inventory-2 (MMPI-2): Manual for administration and scoring. Minne-
apolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Butler, B., & Moran, G. (2007). The impact of death qualification, belief in a just world, legal authori-
tarianism, and locus of control on venirepersons’ evaluations of aggravating and mitigating 
circumstances in capital trials. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 25(1), 57–68.
Bybee, J. A., & Wells, Y. V. (2006). Body themes in descriptions of possible selves: Diverse perspectives 
across the life span. Journal of Adult Development, 13(2), 95–101.
Byne, W. (1995). Science and belief: Psychobiological research on asexual orientation. Journal of 
Homosexuality, 25(3/4), 303–344.
Byne, W., Tobet, S., Mattiace, L., Lasco, M. S., Kemether, E., Edgar, M. A., et al. (2001). The interstitial 
nuclei of the human anterior hypothalamus: An investigation of variation within sex, sexual 
orientation and HIV status. Hormones and Behavior, 40, 86–92.
Byrnes, J. P., Miller, D. C., & Schafer, W. D. (1999). Gender differences in risk taking: A meta-analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin, 125(3), 367–383.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Patrick, W. (2008). Loneliness: Human nature and the need for social connection. 
New York: Norton.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. (1982). The need for cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 42, 116–131.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., & Kao, C. F. (1984). The efficient assessment of need for cognition. Jour-
nal of Personality Assessment, 48(3), 306–307.
Campbell, D. T., & Fiske, D. W. (1959). Convergent and discriminant validation by the multitrait-
multimethod matrix. Psychological Bulletin, 56(2), 81–105.
Campbell, D. T., & Stanley, J. C. (1966). Experimental and quasi-experimental designs for research. 
Chicago: Rand McNally.
Campbell, J. B., & Hawley, C. W. (1982). Study habits and Eysenck’s theory of extravertion-introversion. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 16, 139–146.
Campbell, J. D. (1990). Self-esteem and clarity of the self-concept. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 59, 538–549.
Campbell, J. D., Chew, B., & Scratchley, L. S. (1991). Cognitive and emotional reactions to daily 
events: The effects of self-esteem and self-complexity. Journal of Personality, 59, 473–505.
Campbell, J. D., & Lavallee, L. F. (1993). Who am I? the role of self-concept confusion in understand-
ing the behavior of people with low self-esteem. In R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), Self-esteem: The puzzle 
of low self-regard (pp. 3–20). New York: Plenum Press.
Campbell, J. D., Trapnell, P. D., Heine, S. J., Katz, I. M., Lavallee, L. F., & Lehman, D. R. (1996). 
Self-concept clarity: Measurement, personality correlates, and cultural boundaries. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 141–156.
Canli, T. (2006). Genomic imaging of extraversion. In T. Canli (Ed.), Biology of personality and indi-
vidual differences (pp. 93–115). New York: Guilford Press.
Canli, T. (2008). Toward a “molecular psychology” of personality. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & 
L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (pp. 311–327). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Canli, T., & Lesch, K. P. (2007). Long story short: The serotonin transporter in emotion regulation 
and social cognition. Nature Neuroscience, 10(9), 1103–1109.
Canli, T., Sievers, H., Whitfield, S. L., Gotlib, I. H., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2002). Amygdala response to 
happy faces as a function of extraversion. Science, 296(5576), 2191.
371

References
Canli, T., Zhao, Z., Desmond, J. E., Kang, E., Gross, J., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2001). An fMRI study of per-
sonality influences on brain reactivity to emotional stimuli. Behavioral Neuroscience, 115, 33–42.
Cantor, J. M., Blanchard, R., Paterson, A. D., & Bogaert, A. F. (2002). How many gay men owe their 
homosexual orientation to fraternal birth order? Archives of Sexual Behavior, 31, 57–65.
Cardno, A., & McGuffin, P. (2002). Quantitative genetics. In P. McGuffin, M. J. Owen, & I. R. Gottesman 
(Eds.), Psychiatric genetics and genomics (pp. 31–53). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Carey, G. (2003). Human genetics for the social sciences. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Carlson, N. R. (2010). Physiology of behavior. Boston: Allyn & Bacon.
Carlson, R. (1988). Exemplary lives: The uses of psychobiography for theory development. Journal 
of Personality, 56, 105–138.
Carter, S., & Snow, C. (2004, May). Helping singles enter better marriages using predictive models 
of marital success. Paper presented at the 16th Annual Convention of the American Psychological 
Society, Chicago, IL.
Carver, C. S. (1998). Resilience and thriving: Issues, models and linkages. Journal of Social Issues, 
54(2), 245–266.
Carver, C. S. (2004). Negative affects deriving from the behavioral approach system. Emotion, 4, 3–22.
Carver, C. S. (2005). Impulse and constraint: Perspectives from personality psychology, conver-
gence with theory in other areas, and potential for integration. Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, 9, 312–333.
Carver, C. S. (2008). Two distinct bases of inhibition of behavior: Viewing biological phenomena 
through the lens of psychological theory. European Journal of Personality, 22, 388–390.
Carver, C. S., & Baird, E. (1998). The American dream revisited: Is it what you want or why you want 
it that matters? Psychological Science, 9(4), 289–292.
Carver, C. S., & Gaines, J. G. (1987). Optimism, pessimism, and postpartum depression. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 11(4), 449–462.
Carver, C. S., Lehman, J. M., & Antoni, M. H. (2003). Dispositional pessimism predicts illness-related 
disruption of social and recreational activities among breast cancer patients. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 84(4), 813–821.
Carver, C. S., Pozo, C., Harris, S. D., Noriega, V., Scheier, M. F., Robinson, D. S., et al. (1993). How 
coping mediates the effect of optimism on distress: A study of women with early stage breast 
cancer. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 375–390.
Carver, C. S., Pozo-Kaderman, C., Harris, S. D., Noriega, V., Scheier, M. F., Robinson, D. S., et al. 
(1994). Optimism versus pessimism predicts the quality of women’s adjustment to early stage 
breast cancer. Cancer, 73, 1213–1220.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1990). Origins and functions of positive and negative affect: A control 
process view. Psychological Review, 97, 19–35.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1998). On the self-regulation of behavior. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2001). Optimism, pessimism, and self-regulation. In E. C. Chang (Ed.), 
Optimism & pessimism: Implications for theory, research, and practice (pp. 31–51). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2002). Optimism. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of 
positive psychology (pp. 231–243). New York: Oxford University Press.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2003a). Optimism. In S. J. Lopez & C. R. Snyder (Eds.), Positive psycho-
logical assessment: A handbook of models and measures (pp. 75–89). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2003b). Three human strengths. In L. G. Aspinwall & U. M. Staudinger 
(Eds.), A psychology of human strengths: Fundamental questions and future directions for a positive 
psychology (pp. 87–102). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Carver, C. S., Scheier, M. F., & Weintraub, J. K. (1989). Assessing coping strategies: A theoretically 
based approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56(2), 267–283.
Carver, C. S., Smith, R. G., Antoni, M. H., Petronis, V. M., Weiss, S., & Derhagopian, R. P. (2005). 
Optimistic personality and psychosocial well-being during treatment predict psychosocial well-
being among long-term survivors of breast cancer. Health Psychology, 24(5), 508–516.
Carver, C. S., & White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral inhibition, behavioral activation, and affective 
responses to impending reward and punishment: The BIS/BAS scales. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 67(2), 319–333.
372

References
Carver, P. R., Yunger, J. L., & Perry, D. G. (2003). Gender identity and adjustment in middle child-
hood. Sex Roles, 49(3/4), 95–109.
Caspi, A., Elder, G. H., & Bem, D. J. (1988). Moving away from the world: Life-course patterns of shy 
children. Developmental Psychology, 24(6), 824–831.
Caspi, A., Harrington, H., Milne, B., Amell, J. W., Theodore, R. F., & Moffitt, T. E. (2003). Children’s 
behavioral styles at age 3 are linked to their adult personality traits at age 26. Journal of Person-
ality, 71, 495–513.
Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moffitt, T., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I. W., et al. (2005). Role of genotype in the 
cycle of violence in maltreated children. Science, 297, 851–854.
Caspi, A., & Moffitt, T. E. (1993). When do individual differences matter? A paradoxical theory of 
personality coherence. Psychological Inquiry, 4(4), 247–271.
Caspi, A., & Roberts, B. W. (2001). Personality development across the life course: The argument for 
change and continuity. Psychological Inquiry, 12(2), 49–66.
Caspi, A., Roberts, B. W., & Shiner, R. L. (2005). Personality development: Stability and change. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 56, 453–484.
Caspi, A., & Shiner, R. L. (2006). Personality development. In W. Damon & R. M. Lerner (Eds.), 
Handbook of child psychology: Social, emotional, and personality development (Vol. 3, pp. 
300–365). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Caspi, A., & Silva, P. A. (1995). Temperamental qualities at age three predict personality traits in 
young adulthood: Longitudinal evidence from a birth cohort. Child Development, 66, 486–498.
Caspi, A., Sugden, K., Moffitt, T. E., Taylor, A., Craig, I. W., Harrington, H., et al. (2003). Influence of 
life stress on depression: Moderation by a polymorphism in the 5-HTT gene. Science, 301(5631), 
386–389.
Cass, V. C. (1979). Homosexual identity formation: A theoretical approach. Journal of Homosexuality, 
4, 219–235.
Cattell, R. B. (1946). Description and measurement of personality. Yonkers, NY: World Book.
Cattell, R. B., & Anderson, J. C. (1953). The I.P.A.T. music preference test of personality. Champaign, 
IL: Institute for Personality and Ability Testing.
Cattell, R. B., Eber, H. W., & Tatsuoka, M. M. (1970). Handbook for the sixteen personality factor 
questionnaire (16PF). Champaign, IL: Institute for Personality and Ability Testing.
Cattell, R. B., & Saunders, D. R. (1954). Musical preferences and personality diagnosis: A factoriza-
tion of one hundred and twenty themes. Journal of Social Psychology, 39, 3–24.
CBS3 News. (2008). Drexel students create ‘mind control’ video games. Retrieved July 27, 2009, from 
http://cbs3.com/topstories/Drexel.University.Games.2.762554.html.
Ceci, S. J., & Williams, W. M. (2010). Sex differences in math-intensive fields. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 19(5), 275–279.
Cha, A. E. (2005, March 27). Employers relying on personality tests to screen applicants. Washington 
Post, p. A01.
Chamorro-Premuzic, T., & Furnham, A. (2007). Personality and music: Can traits explain how 
people use music in everyday life? British Journal of Psychology, 98, 175–185.
Chan, D., Schmitt, N., DeShon, R. P., Clause, C. S., & Delbridge, K. (1997). Reactions to cognitive 
ability tests: The relationships between race, test performance, face validity perceptions, and 
test-taking motivation. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(2), 300–310.
Chang, E. C. (2001). Cultural influences on optimism and pessimism: Differences in Western 
and Eastern construals of the self. In E. C. Chang (Ed.), Optimism & pessimism: Implica-
tions for theory, research, and practice (pp. 257–280). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Chaplin, W. F., Phillips, J. B., Brown, J. D., Clanton, N. R., & Stein, J. I. (2000). Handshaking, gender, 
personality, and first impressions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79(1), 110–117.
Chavanon, M. L., Stemmler, G., & Wacker, J. (2008). A cognitive-affective extension to reinforcement 
sensitivity. European Journal of Personality, 22, 391–393.
Chemers, M. M., Hu, L., & Garcia, B. F. (2001). Academic self-efficacy and first-year college student 
performance and adjustment. Journal of Educational Psychology, 93(1), 55–64.
Chen, C., Lee, S., & Stevenson, H. W. (1995). Response style and cross-cultural comparisons of rating 
scales among East Asian and North American students. Psychological Science, 6(3), 170–175.
Cherkas, L., Hochberg, F., MacGregor, A. J., Sneider, H., & Spector, T. D. (2000). Happy families: A 
twin study of humor. Twin Research, 3, 17–22.
373

References
Cheryan, S., Plaut, V. C., Davies, P. G., & Steele, C. M. (2010). Ambient belonging: How stereotypical 
cues impact gender participation in computer science. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
97(6), 1045–1060.
Cheung, F. M., & Leung, K. (1998). Indigenous personality measures: Chinese examples. Journal 
of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 29(1), 233–248.
Cheung, F. M., Leung, K., Fan, R. M., Song, W., Zhang, J., & Zhang, J. (1996). Development of the 
Chinese personality assessment inventory. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 27(2), 181–199.
Cheung, F. M., Leung, K., Zhang, J., Sun, H., Gan, Y., Song, W., et al. (2001). Indigenous Chinese 
personality constructs: Is the five-factor model complete? Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 
32(4), 407–433.
Chivers, M. L. (2005). A brief review and discussion of sex differences in the specificity of sexual 
arousal. Sexual and Relationship Therapy, 20(4), 377–390.
Choi, S. C., Kim, U., & Choi, S. H. (1993). Indigenous analysis of collective representations: A Korean 
perspective. In U. Kim & J. W. Berry (Eds.), Indigenous psychologies: Research and experience in 
cultural context (pp. 193–210). Belmont, CA: Sage.
Christie, R., & Geis, F. L. (1970). Studies in Machiavellianism. New York: Academic Press.
Church, A. T., & Ortiz, F. A. (2005). Culture and personality. In V. J. Derlega, B. A. Winstead, & 
W. H. Jones (Eds.), Personality: Contemporary theory and research (pp. 420–456). Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth.
Ciani, A. C., Corna, F., & Capiluppi, C. (2004). Evidence for maternally inherited factors favouring 
male homosexuality and promoting female fecundity. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 
Series B: Biological Sciences, 271, 2217–2221.
Clark, A. J. (1998). Defense mechanisms in the counseling process. New York: Sage.
Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (1995). Constructing validity: Basic issues in objective scale development. 
Psychological Assessment, 7(3), 309–319.
Clark, L. A., & Watson, D. (2008). Temperament: An organizing paradigm for trait psychology. In 
O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research 
(3rd ed., pp. 265–286). New York: Guilford Press.
Clausen, J. A., & Gilens, M. (1990). Personality and labor force participation across the life course: 
A longitudinal study of women’s careers. Sociological Forum, 5(4), 595–618.
Cleveland, H. H., Udry, J. R., & Chantala, K. (2001). Environmental and genetic influences on sex-
typed behaviors and attitudes of male and female adolescents. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 27(12), 1587–1598.
Cloninger, C. R. (1998). The genetics and psychobiology of the seven-factor model of personality. 
In K. R. Silk (Ed.), Biology of personality disorders (pp. 63–92). Washington, DC: American 
Psychiatric Press.
Cloninger, C. R. (2008). Psychobiological research is crucial for understanding human personality. 
European Journal of Personality, 22, 393–396.
Cobb, S. (1976). Social support as a moderator of life stress. Psychosomatic Medicine, 38, 300–314.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences (2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cohn, M. A., Fredrickson, B. L., Brown, S. L., Mikels, J. A., & Conway, A. M. (2009). Happiness unpacked: 
Positive emotions increase life satisfaction by building resilience. Emotion, 9(3), 361–368.
Cole, S. W., Hawkley, L. C., Arevalo, J. M., Sung, C. Y., Rose, R. M., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2007). Social 
regulation of gene expression in human leukocytes. Genome Biology, 8, R189 (doi:10.1186/
gb-2007-8-9-r189).
Collins, H., & Vedantam, S. (1999, December). Penn denies therapy lapse killed teen the FDA found 
2 violations in the gene test. Philadelphia Inquirer, p. A01.
Condry, J. C., & Condry, S. (1976). Sex differences: A study of the eye of the beholder. Child Develop-
ment, 47, 812–819.
Condry, J. C., & Ross, D. F. (1985). Sex and aggression: The influence of gender label on the percep-
tion of aggression in children. Child Development, 56(1), 225–233.
Confer, J. C., Easton, J. A., Fleischman, D. S., Goetz, C. D., Lewis, D. M. G., Perilloux, C., et al. (2010). 
Evolutionary psychology: Controversies, questions, prospects, and limitations. American Psy-
chologist, 65(2), 110–126.
Connell, J. P. (1990). Context, self, and action: A motivational analysis of self-system processes 
across the life span. In D. Cicchetti (Ed.), The self in transition: Infancy to childhood (pp. 61–97). 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
374

References
Connell, J. P., & Wellborn, J. G. (1990). Competence, autonomy, and relatedness: A motivational 
analysis of self-system processes. In M. Gunnar & L. A. Sroufe (Eds.), The Minnesota symposia 
on child psychology (Vol. 22, pp. 43–77). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Constantinople, A. (1973). Masculinity-femininity: An exception to a famous dictum? Psychological 
Bulletin, 80(5), 389–407.
Cooley, C. H. (1902). Human nature and the social order. New York: Scribner’s.
Cools, R., Calder, A. J., Lawrence, A. D., Clark, L., Bullmore, E., & Robbins, T. W. (2005). Individual 
differences in threat sensitivity predict serotonergic modulation of amygdala response to 
fearful faces. Psychopharmacology, 180(4), 670–679.
Corr, P. J. (2001). Testing problems in J. A. Gray’s personality theory: Commentary on Matthews 
and Gilliland. Personality and Individual Differences, 30, 333–352.
Corr, P. J. (2002). J. A. Gray’s reinforcement sensitivity theory: Tests of the joint subsystems hypoth-
esis of anxiety and impulsivity. Personality and Individual Differences, 33, 511–532.
Corr, P. J. (2004). Reinforcement sensitivity theory and personality. Neuroscience and the Biobehav-
ioral Reviews, 28, 317–322.
Corr, P. J. (2006). Understanding biological psychology. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Corr, P. J. (2008a). An intermediate-level approach to personality: Dissolving the bottom-up and 
top-down dilemma. European Journal of Personality, 22, 396–398.
Corr, P. J. (2008b). The reinforcement sensitivity theory (RST): An introduction. In P. J. Corr (Ed.), 
The reinforcement sensitivity theory of personality (pp. 1–43). Cambridge, England: Cambridge 
University Press.
Corr, P. J., & McNaughton, N. (2008). Reinforcement sensitivity theory and personality. In P. J. Corr 
(Ed.), The reinforcement sensitivity theory of personality (pp. 155–187). Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press.
Cortina, J. M. (1993). What is coefficient alpha? An examination of theory and applications. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 78(1), 98–104.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1976). Age differences in personality structure: A cluster analysis 
approach. Journal of Gerontology, 31, 564–570.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1980). Influence of extraversion and neuroticism on subjective well-
being: Happy and unhappy people. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 668–678.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1985). The NEO personality inventory manual. Odessa, FL: Psychologi-
cal Assessment Resources.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1992). Revised NEO personality inventory (NEO-PI-R) and NEO 
five-factor inventory (NEO-FFI) professional manual. Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment 
Resources.
Costa, P. T., & McCrae, R. R. (1994). Set like plaster: Evidence for the stability of adult personality. 
In T. F. Heatherton & J. L. Weinberger (Eds.), Can personality change? (pp. 21–40). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Costa, P. T., McCrae, R. R., & Dye, D. A. (1991). Facet scales for agreeableness and conscientious-
ness: A revision of the NEO personality inventory. Personality and Individual Differences, 12(9), 
887–898.
Costa, P. T., Terracciano, A., & McCrae, R. R. (2001). Gender differences in personality traits across 
cultures. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81(2), 322–331.
Cousins, S. D. (1989). Culture and self-perception in Japan and the United States. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 56(1), 124–131.
Cowey, A. (2001). Functional localisation in the brain: From ancient to modern. The Psychologist, 
14(5), 250–254.
Cramer, P. (2000). Defense mechanisms in psychology today. American Psychologist, 55(6), 637–646.
Cramer, P. (2006). Protecting the self: Defense mechanisms in action. New York: Guilford Press.
Creed, P. A., Patton, W., & Bartrum, E. (2002). Multidimensional properties of the LOT-R: Effects 
of optimism and pessimism on career and well-being related variables in adolescents. Journal 
of Career Assessment, 10(1), 42–61.
Crews, F. C. (1996). The verdict on Freud. Psychological Science, 7(2), 63–68.
Crews, F. C. (1998). Unauthorized Freud. New York: Viking.
Crews, F. C. (2006). What Erdelyi has repressed. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 29(5), 516–517.
Crocker, J., & Knight, K. M. (2005). Contingencies of self-worth. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 14(4), 200–203.
375

References
Cronbach, L. J. (1947). Test “reliability”: Its meaning and determination. Psychometrika, 12, 1–16.
Cronbach, L. J. (1950). Further evidence on response sets and test design. Educational and Psycho-
logical Measurement, 10, 3–31.
Cronbach, L. J. (1951). Coefficient alpha and the internal structure of tests. Psychometrika, 16, 
297–334.
Cronbach, L. J. (1957). The two disciplines of scientific psychology. American Psychologist, 12, 
671–684.
Cronbach, L. J. (1960). Essentials of psychological testing (2nd ed.). New York: Harper & Row.
Cronbach, L. J., Rajaratnam, N., & Gleser, G. C. (1963). Theory of generalizability: A liberalization 
of reliability theory. The British Journal of Statistical Psychology, 16(2), 137–163.
Cross, S., & Markus, H. R. (1991). Possible selves across the life span. Human Development, 34, 
230–255.
Cross, S. E., & Markus, H. R. (1999). The cultural constitution of personality. In L. A. Pervin &  
O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (2nd ed., pp. 378–396). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Cross, W. E., & Cross, T. B. (2008). Theory, research, and models. In S. M. Quintana & C. McKown 
(Eds.), Handbook of race, racism, and the developing child (pp. 154–181). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Crowell, J. A., Fraley, R. C., & Shaver, P. R. (2008). Measurement of individual differences in ado-
lescent and adult attachment. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment 
(pp. 599–634). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Crowne, D. P., & Liverant, S. (1963). Conformity under varying conditions of personal commitment. 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 66, 547–555.
Crowne, D. P., & Marlow, D. (1960). A new scale of social desirability independent of psychopathology. 
Journal of Consulting Psychology, 24(4), 349–354.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975). Beyond boredom and anxiety. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. New York: Harper Perennial.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1997). Finding flow: The psychology of engagement with everyday life. New 
York, NY: Basic Books.
Daly, M., & Wilson, M. (1988). Homicide. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Damasio, A. R. (1999). Commentary by Antonio R. Damasio. Neuro-Psychoanalysis, 1(1), 38–39.
Darlington, R. B. (2009). Factor analysis. Retrieved February 23, 2009, from http://www.psych.cornell
.edu/Darlington/factor.htm.
Davidson, R. J. (1992). Emotion and affective style. Psychological Science, 3(1), 39–43.
Davidson, R. J. (2004). What does the prefrontal cortex “do” in affect: Perspectives on frontal EEG 
asymmetry research. Biological Psychology, 67, 219–233.
Davidson, R. J. (2009). Lab for affective neuroscience. Retrieved July 17 from http://psyphz.psych.wisc
.edu/web/news.html.
Davidson, R. J., Kabat-Zinn, J., Schumacher, J., Rosenkranz, M., Muller, D., Santorelli, S. F., et al. 
(2003). Alterations in brain and immune function produced by mindfulness meditation. Psy-
chosomatic Medicine, 65, 564–570.
Davis, C. G., Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Larsen, J. (1998). Making sense of loss and benefitting from 
experience: Two construals of meaning. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 561–574.
Davis, D., Shaver, P. R., & Vernon, M. L. (2003). Physical, emotional, and behavioral reactions to 
breaking up: The roles of gender, age, emotional involvement, and attachment style. Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29(7), 871–884.
Davis, J. A., Smith, T. W., & Marsden, P. V. (2010). General social surveys, 1972–2008. Storrs, CT: Roper 
Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut/Ann Arbor, MI: Interuniver-
sity Consortium for Political and Social Research. Available from http://www.icpsr.umich.edu/
icpsrweb/ICPSR/series/00028/studies/25962/detail.
Day, D. V., & Schleicher, D. J. (2006). Self-monitoring at work: A motive-based perspective. Journal 
of Personality, 74, 685–713.
Deb, M. (1983). Sales effectiveness and personality characteristics. Psychological Research Journal, 
7(2), 59–67.
DeBono, K. G. (1987). Investigating the social adjustive and value expressive functions of attitudes: 
Implications for persuasion processes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 279–287.
DeBono, K. G. (2006). Self-monitoring and consumer psychology. Journal of Personality, 74(3), 
715–737.
376

References
DeCharms, R. (1981). Personal causation and locus of control: Two different traditions and two 
uncorrelated constructs. In H. M. Lefcourt (Ed.), Research with the locus of control construct: 
Vol. 1. Assessment methods (pp. 337–358). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Deci, E. L. (1971). Effects of externally mediated rewards on intrinsic motivation. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 18(1), 105–115.
Deci, E. L. (1975). Intrinsic motivation. New York: Plenum Press.
Deci, E. L. (1980). The psychology of self-determination. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Deci, E. L., Connell, J. P., & Ryan, R. M. (1989). Self-determination in a work organization. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 74(4), 580–590.
Deci, E. L., Koestner, R., & Ryan, R. M. (1999). A meta-analytic review of experiments examining 
the effects of extrinsic rewards on intrinsic motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 125(6), 627–668.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985a). The general causality orientations scale: Self-determination in 
personality. Journal of Research in Personality, 19, 109–134.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985b). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior. 
New York: Plenum Press.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1991). A motivational approach to self: Integration in personality. In 
R. Dienstbier (Ed.), Nebraska symposium on motivation: Vol. 38. Perspectives on motivation 
(pp. 237–288). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1995). Human autonomy: The basis for true self-esteem. In M. H. Kernis 
(Ed.), Efficacy, agency, and self-esteem (pp. 31–49). New York: Plenum Press.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2008). Self-determination theory: A macrotheory of human motivation, 
development and health. Canadian Psychology, 49(3), 182–185.
Deci, E. L., Ryan, R. M., Gagné, M., Leone, D. R., Usunov, J., & Kornazheva, B. P. (2001). Need satis-
faction, motivation, and well-being in the work organizations of a former Eastern bloc country. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 930–942.
De Fruyt, F., Bartels, M., Van Leeuwen, K. G., De Clercq, B., Decuyper, M., & Mervielde, I. (2006). 
Five types of personality continuity in childhood and adolescence. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 91(3), 538–552.
Delfour, F., & Marten, K. (2001). Mirror image processing in three marine mammal species: Killer 
whales (orcinus orca), false killer whales (pseudorca crassidens) and california sea lions (zalophus 
californianus). Behavioural Processes, 53, 181–190.
Delsing, M. J. M. H., TerBogt, T. F. M., Engels, R. C. M. E., & Meeus, W. H. J. (2008). Adolescents’ 
music preferences and personality characteristics. European Journal of Personality, 22, 109–130.
Department of Health and Human Services. (1979). The Belmont report: Ethical principles and guide-
lines for the protection of human subjects of research (DHEW Publication No. 1983, 381-132, 3205). 
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
De Pascalis, V. (2004). On the psychophysiology of extraversion. In R. M. Stelmack (Ed.), On the psy-
chobiology of personality: Essays in honor of Marvin Zuckerman (pp. 295–327). New York: Elsevier.
DePaulo, B. M. (1992). Nonverbal behavior and self-presentation. Psychological Bulletin, 111(2), 
203–243.
Depue, R. A., & Collins, P. F. (1999). Neurobiology of the structure of personality: Dopamine, facili-
tation of incentive motivation, and extraversion. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 491–569.
Depue, R. A., Luciano, M., Arbisi, P., Collins, P., & Leon, A. (1994). Dopamine and the structure of 
personality: Relation of agonist-induced dopamine activity to positive emotionality. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 67(3), 485–498.
DeRubeis, R. J., & Hollon, S. D. (1995). Explanatory style in the treatment of depression. In G. M. 
Buchanan & M. E. P. Seligman (Eds.), Explanatory style (pp. 99–112). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Development Dimensions International Inc. (2005). Research results: Predicting employee engage-
ment. Pittsburgh, PA: Author.
DeVries, A. C., Johnson, C. L., & Carter, C. S. (1997). Familiarity and gender influence social prefer-
ences in prairie voles (Microtus ochrogaster). Canadian Journal of Zoology, 75, 295–301.
DeYoung, C. G. (2006). Higher-order factors of the Big Five in a multi-informant sample. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 91(6), 1138–1151.
DeYoung, C. G., Peterson, J. B., & Higgins, D. M. (2002). Higher-order factors of the Big Five predict 
conformity: Are there neuroses of health? Personality and Individual Differences, 33(4), 533–552.
Diamond, L. M. (2003a). Was it a phase? Young women’s relinquishment of lesbian/bisexual identi-
ties over a 5-year period. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(2), 352–364.
377

References
Diamond, L. M. (2003b). What does sexual orientation orient? A biobehavioral model distinguishing 
romantic love and sexual desire. Psychological Review, 110(1), 173–192.
Diamond, L. M. (2004). Emerging perspectives on distinctions between romantic love and sexual 
desire. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 13(3), 116–119.
Diamond, L. M. (2005). A new view of lesbian subtypes: Stable versus fluid identity trajectories over 
an 8-year period. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 29, 119–128.
Diamond, L. M. (2006a). The evolution of plasticity in female–female desire. In M. R. Kauth (Ed.), 
Handbook of the evolution of human sexuality (pp. 245–274). London: Haworth Press.
Diamond, L. M. (2006b). What we got wrong about sexual identity development: Unexpected find-
ings from a longitudinal study of young women. In A. M. Omoto & H. S. Kurtzman (Eds.), 
Sexual orientation and mental health: Examining identity and development in lesbian, gay, and 
bisexual people (pp. 73–94). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Diamond, L. M. (2007). A dynamic systems approach to the development and expression of female 
same-sex sexuality. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 2(2), 142–161.
Diamond, L. M. (2008a). Female bisexuality from adolescence to adulthood: Results from a 10-year 
longitudinal study. Developmental Psychology, 44(1), 5–14.
Diamond, L. M. (2008b). Sexual fluidity: Understanding women’s love and desire. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Dickerson, C. A., Thibodeau, R., Aronson, E., & Miller, D. (1992). Using cognitive dissonance to 
encourage water conservation. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 22(1), 841–854.
Diener, E. (2009). Editor’s introduction to Vul et al. (2009) and comments. Perspectives on Psycho-
logical Science, 4(3), 272–273.
Diener, E. (2010). Neuroimaging: Voodoo, new phrenology, or scientific breakthrough? Introduction 
to special section on fMRI. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5(6), 714–715.
Diener, E., & Emmons, R. A. (1984). The independence of positive and negative affect. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 1105–1117.
Diener, E., & Larsen, R. J. (1993). The experience of emotional well-being. In M. Lewis & J. M. 
Haviland (Eds.), Handbook of emotions (pp. 405–415). New York: Guilford Press.
Digman, J. M. (1989). Five robust trait dimensions: Development, stability, and utility. Journal of 
Personality, 57, 195–214.
Digman, J. M. (1990). Personality structure: Emergence of the five-factor model. Annual review of 
psychology, 41, 417–440.
Digman, J. M. (1996). The curious history of the five-factor model. In J. S. Wiggins (Ed.), The 
five-factor model of personality: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 1–20). New York: Guilford Press.
Digman, J. M. (1997). Higher-order factors of the Big Five. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
73(6), 1246–1256.
DiLalla, L. F. (2004). Behavioral genetics: Background, current research, and goals for the future. 
In L. F. DiLalla (Ed.), Behavioral genetics principles: Perspectives in development, personality, 
and psychopathology (pp. 3–15). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Dillon, K., Minchoff, B., & Baker, K. H. (1985–1986). Positive emotional states and enhancement of 
the immune system. International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine, 15, 13–18.
Doherty, K. T. (2004). Society for teaching of psychology discussion list archives. Available from http://list
.kennesaw.edu/archives/psychteacher.html.
Doherty, R. W. (1997). The emotional contagion scale: A measure of individual differences. Journal 
of Nonverbal Behavior, 21(2), 131–154.
Doi, T. (1973). The anatomy of dependence. New York: Harper Row.
Dollinger, S. J. (1993). Research note: Personality and music preference: Extraversion and excitement 
seeking or openness to experience? Psychology of Music, 21, 73–77.
Domes, G., Heinrichs, M., Michel, A., Berger, C., & Herpertz, S. C. (2007). Oxytocin improves “mind-
reading” in humans. Biological Psychiatry, 61, 731–733.
Dondi, M., Simion, F., & Caltran, G. (1999). Can newborns discriminate between their own cry and 
the cry of another newborn infant? Developmental Psychology, 35(2), 418–426.
Donnellan, M. B., Conger, R. D., & Burzette, R. (2007). Personality development from late ado-
lescence to young adulthood: Differential stability, normative maturity, and evidence for the 
maturity-stability hypothesis. Journal of Personality, 75, 237–263.
Donnellan, M. B., Trzesniewski, K. H., Robins, R. W., Moffitt, T. E., & Caspi, A. (2005). Low self-
esteem is related to aggression, antisocial behavior, and delinquency. Psychological Science, 16(4), 
328–335.
378

References
Donovan, D. M., & O’Leary, M. R. (1978). The drinking-related locus of control scale: Reliability, 
factor structure and validity. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 39(5), 759–784.
Downey, J. I., & Friedman, R. C. (1998). Female homosexuality: Classical psychoanalytic theory recon-
sidered. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association, 46, 471–506.
Drexel University Replay Lab. (2009). Retrieved July 27, 2009, from http://www.replay.drexel.edu/.
Dumit, J. (2004). Picturing personhood: Brain scans and biomedical identity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Dunkel, C. S., Kelts, D., & Coon, B. (2006). Possible selves as mechanisms of change in therapy. In 
C. Dunkel & J. Kerpelman (Eds.), Possible selves: Theory, research and application (pp. 187–204). 
New York: Nova Science Publishers.
Dunn, D. S. (1999). The practical researcher: A student guide to conducting psychological research. 
Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Dunn, D. S., & Dougherty, S. B. (2005). Teaching Freud by reading Freud: Controversy as pedagogy. 
Teaching of Psychology, 32(2), 114–116.
Dunn, E. W., Biesanz, J. C., Human, L. J., & Finn, S. (2007). Misunderstanding the affective conse-
quences of everyday social interactions: The hidden benefits of putting one’s best face forward. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(6), 990–1005.
Dunning, D., Heath, C., & Suls, J. M. (2004). Flawed self-assessment: Implications for health, educa-
tion, and the workplace. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 5(3), 69–106.
Durand, D. E., & Shea, D. (1974). Entrepreneurial activity as a function of achievement motivation 
and reinforcement control. The Journal of Psychology, 88, 57–63.
Durrett, C., & Trull, T. J. (2005). An evaluation of evaluative personality terms: A comparison of 
the big seven and five-factor model in predicting psychopathology. Psychological Assessment, 
17(3), 359–368.
Duval, S., & Wicklund, R. A. (1972). A theory of objective self awareness. New York: Academic Press.
Dwairy, M. (2002). Foundations of psychosocial dynamic personality theory of collective people. 
Clinical Psychology Review, 22, 343–360.
Dweck, C. S. (1999). Self-theories: Their role in motivation, personality, and development. Philadelphia: 
Psychology Press.
Eagly, A. H. (1978). Sex differences in influenceability. Psychological Bulletin, 85, 86–116.
Eagly, A. H. (1987). Sex differences in social behavior: A social-role interpretation. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Eagly, A. H. (2009a). The his and hers of prosocial behavior: An examination of the social psychology 
of gender. American Psychologist, 64(8), 644–658.
Eagly, A. H. (2009b). Possible selves in marital roles: The impact of the anticipated division of labor 
on the mate preferences of women and men. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35(4), 
403–414.
Eagly, A. H., & Carli, L. L. (1981). Sex of researchers and sex-typed communications as determinants 
of sex differences in influenceability: A meta-analysis of social influence studies. Psychological 
Bulletin, 90(1), 1–20.
Eagly, A. H., & Crowley, M. (1986). Gender and helping behavior: A meta-analytic review of the 
social psychological literature. Psychological Bulletin, 100, 283–308.
Eagly, A. H., & Johannesen-Schmidt, M. C. (2001). The leadership styles of women and men. Journal 
of Social Issues, 57(4), 781–797.
Eagly, A. H., Johannesen-Schmidt, M. C., & van Engen, M. L. (2003). Transformational, transactional, 
and laissez-faire leadership styles: A meta-analysis comparing women and men. Psychological 
Bulletin, 129(4), 569–591.
Eagly, A. H., & Johnson, B. T. (1990). Gender and leadership style: A meta-anlaysis. Psychological 
Bulletin, 108(2), 233–256.
Eagly, A. H., & Karau, S. J. (1991). Gender and the emergence of leaders: A meta-analysis. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 60(5), 685–710.
Eagly, A. H., Karau, S. J., & Makhijani, M. G. (1995). Gender and the effectiveness of leaders: A meta-
analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 117(1), 125–145.
Eagly, A. H., Makhijani, M. G., & Klonsky, B. G. (1992). Gender and the evaluation of leaders: A meta-
analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 111, 3–22.
Eagly, A. H., & Sczesny, S. (2009). Stereotypes about women, men, and leaders: Have times changed? In 
M. Barrento, M. K. Ryan, & M. T. Schmitt (Eds.), The glass ceiling in the 21st century: Understand-
ing barriers to gender equality (pp. 21–47). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
379

References
Eagly, A. H., & Steffen, V. J. (1986). Gender and aggressive behavior: A meta-analytic review of the 
social psychological literature. Psychological Bulletin, 100(3), 309–330.
Eagly, A. H., & Wood, W. (1999). A social role interpretation of sex differences in human mate prefer-
ences. American Psychologist, 54, 408–423.
Easton, W. O., & Enns, L. R. (1986). Sex differences in human motor activity level. Psychological 
Bulletin, 100, 19–28.
Eaves, L., Eysenck, H. J., & Martin, N. (1989). Genes, culture and personality: An empirical approach. 
New York: Academic Press.
Egan, S. K., & Perry, D. G. (2001). Gender identity: A multidimensional analysis with implications 
for psychosocial adjustment. Developmental Psychology, 37(4), 451–463.
Egloff, B., & Schmukle, S. C. (2002). Predictive validity of an implicit association test for assessing 
anxiety. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83(6), 1441–1455.
Eisenberg, N., & Lennon, R. (1983). Sex differences in empathy and related capacities. Psychological 
Bulletin, 94(1), 100–131.
Eisenberger, R., Pierce, W. D., & Cameron, J. (1999). Effects of reward on intrinsic motivation—
negative, neutral, and positive: Comment on Deci, Koestner, and Ryan (1999). Psychological 
Bulletin, 125(6), 677–691.
Elder, G. H. (1969). Occupational mobility, life patterns, and personality. Journal of Health and Social 
Behavior, 10(4), 308–323.
Elliot, A. J., & Reis, H. T. (2003). Attachment and exploration in adulthood. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 85(2), 317–331.
Elliot, A. J., & Thrash, T. M. (2008). Approach and avoidance temperaments. In G. J. Boyle, G. 
Matthews, & D. H. Saklofske (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of personality theory and assessment: 
Vol. 1. Personality theories and models (pp. 315–333). Los Angeles: Sage.
Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and emotion in psycholherapy. Secaucus, NJ: Lyle Stuart.
Ellis, H. (1928). Studies in the psychology of sex: Vol. 2. Sexual inversion. Philadelphia: F. A. Davis.
Ellis, L. (1996). Theories of homosexuality. In R. C. Savin-Williams & K. M. Cohen (Eds.), The lives 
of lesbians, gay, and bisexuals: Children to adults (pp. 11–70). Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace 
College.
Ellis, L., & Ames, M. A. (1987). Neurohormonal functioning and sexual orientation: A theory of 
homosexuality/heterosexuality. Psychological Bulletin, 101, 233–258.
Ellis, L., Ames, M. A., Peckham, W., & Burke, D. (1988). Sexual orientation of human offspring 
may be altered by severe maternal stress during pregnancy. The Journal of Sex Research, 25(1), 
152–157.
Ellis, L., & Cole-Harding, S. (2001). The effects of prenatal stress, and of prenatal alcohol and nico-
tine exposure, on human sexual orientation. Physiology & Behavior, 74, 213–226.
Ellison, N. B., Steinfield, C., & Lampe, C. (2007). The benefits of Facebook “friends”: Social capital 
and college students’ use of online social network sites. Journal of Computer-Mediated Com-
munication, 12(4), article 1.
Ellsworth, P. C., & Smith, C. A. (1988). Shades of joy: Patterns of appraisal differentiating pleasant 
emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 2, 301–331.
Elms, A. C. (2007). Psychobiography and case study methods. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & 
R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 97–113). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Else-Quest, N. M., Hyde, J. S., Goldsmith, H. H., & Van Hulle, C. A. (2006). Gender differences in 
temperament: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 132(1), 33–72.
Else-Quest, N. M., Hyde, J. S., & Linn, M. C. (2010). Cross-national patterns of gender differences 
in mathematics: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 136(1), 103–127.
Emmons, R. A., Barrett, J. L., & Schnitker, S. A. (2008). Personality and the capacity for religious and 
spiritual experience. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research. New York: Guilford Press.
Emmons, R. A., & McCullough, M. E. (2003). Counting blessings versus burdens: An experimental 
investigation of gratitude and subjective well-being in daily life. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 84(2), 377–389.
Enriquez, V. G. (1994). From colonial to liberation psychology: The Philippine experience. Manila, 
Philippines: De La Salle University Press.
Epel, E. S., McEwen, B. S., & Ickovics, J. R. (1998). Embodying psychological thriving: Physical 
thriving in response to stress. Journal of Social Issues, 54(2), 301–322.
380

References
Epping-Jordan, J. E., Compas, B. E., Osowiecki, D. M., Oppedisano, G., Gerhardt, C., Primo, K., 
et al. (1999). Psychological adjustment in breast cancer: Processes of emotional distress. 
Health Psychology, 18, 315–326.
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Civil Service Commission, Department of Labor, & 
Department of Justice. (1978). Adoption by four agencies of uniform guidelines on employee 
selection procedures. Federal Register, 43, 38290–38315.
Erdelyi, M. H. (2000). Repression. In A. E. Kazdin (Ed.), Encyclopedia of psychology (Vol. 7, pp. 69–71). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Erdelyi, M. H. (2006a). The return of the repressed [Author’s Response]. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 29(5), 535–543.
Erdelyi, M. H. (2006b). The unified theory of repression. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 29, 499–551.
Erikson, E. H. (1950). Childhood and society. New York: Norton.
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York: Norton.
Esterson, A. (1993). Seductive mirage: An exploration of the work of Sigmund Freud. Chicago: Open Court.
Esterson, A. (1998). Jeffrey Masson and Freud’s seduction theory: A new fable based on old myths. 
History of the Human Sciences, 11(1), 1–21.
Esterson, A. (2001). The mythologizing of psychoanlytic history: Deception and self-deception in 
Freud’s accounts of the seduction theory episode. History of Psychiatry, 12, 329–352.
Esterson, A. (2002a). Freud’s seduction theory: A reply to Gleaves and Hernandez. History of 
Psychology, 5, 85–91.
Esterson, A. (2002b). The myth of Freud’s ostracism by the medical community in 1896–1905: Jeffrey 
Masson’s assault on truth. History of Psychology, 5, 115–134.
Evans, D. C., Gosling, S. D., & Carroll, A. (2008, March 31–April 2). What elements of an online social 
networking profile predict target-rater agreement in personality impressions? In Proceedings of 
the international conference on weblogs and social media. Seattle, WA.
Evans, W. P., Owens, P., & Marsh, S. C. (2005). Environmental factors, locus of control, and adolescent 
suicide risk. Child and Adolescent Social Work Journal, 22(3–4), 301–319.
Eysenck, H. J. (1952). The scientific study of personality. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Eysenck, H. J. (1967). The biological basis of personality. Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Eysenck, H. J. (1990). Biological dimensions of personality. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of 
personality: Theory and research (pp. 244–276). New York: Guilford Press.
Eysenck, H. J. (1991). Dimensions of personality: 16, 5, or 3?—criteria for a taxonomic paradigm. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 12(8), 773–790.
Eysenck, H. J. (1997). Personality and experimental psychology. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 73(6), 1224–1237.
Eysenck, H. J. (1998). Dimensions of personality. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, M. W. (1985). Personality and individual differences. New York: Plenum Press.
Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, S. B. G. (1975). Manual of the Eysenck personality inventory. San Diego, 
CA: Educational and Industrial Testing Service.
Eysenck, H. J., & Eysenck, S. B. G. (1976). Psychoticism as a dimension of personality. London: Hodder 
and Stoughton.
Fabrigar, L. R., Wegener, D. T., MacCallum, R. C., & Strahan, E. J. (1999). Evaluating the use of 
exploratory factor analysis in psychological research. Psychological Methods, 4(3), 272–299.
Feingold, A. (1992). Gender differences in mate selection preferences: A test of the parental invest-
ment model. Psychological Bulletin, 112.
Feingold, A. (1994). Gender differences in personality: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 116(3), 
429–456.
Feng, J., Spence, I., & Pratt, J. (2007). Playing an action video game reduces gender differences in 
spatial cognition. Psychological Science, 18(10), 850–855.
Fenichel, O. (1945/1995). The psychoanalytic theory of neurosis. New York: Norton. (Original work 
published 1945)
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Evanston, IL: Row, Peterson.
Fincham, F. D., & Bradbury, T. N. (1993). Marital satisfaction, depression, and attributions: A longitudinal 
analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 442–452.
Finn, R. (2004, March 25). This Queer Eye takes design to the masses. New York Times, p. B2.
Fischer, A. H., & Manstead, A. S. R. (2000). The relation between gender and emotion in different 
cultures. In A. H. Fischer (Ed.), Gender and emotion: Social psychological perspectives (pp. 71–98). 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
381

References
Fisher, H. E. (1998). Lust, attraction, and attachment in mammalian reproduction. Human Nature, 
9, 23–52.
Fisher, S., & Greenberg, R. P. (1996). Freud scientifically reappraised: Testing the theories and therapy. 
New York: Wiley.
Fiske, D. W. (1949). Consistency of the factorial structures of personality ratings from different 
sources. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 44(3), 329–344.
Fleeson, W. (2007). Studying personality processes: Explaining change in between-persons longitu-
dinal and within-person multilevel models. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley & R. F. Krueger (Eds.), 
Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 523–542). New York: Guilford Press.
Flouri, E. (2006). Parental interest in children’s education, children’s self-esteem and locus of control, 
and later educational attainment: Twenty-six-year follow-up of the 1970 British birth cohort. 
British Journal of Educational Psychology, 76(1), 41–55.
Foa, E. B., Riggs, D. S., Massie, E. D., & Yarczower, M. (1995). The impact of fear activation and anger 
on the efficacy of exposure treatment for PTSD. Behavioral Therapy, 26, 487–499.
Folkman, S., & Moskowitz, J. T. (2000). Positive affect and the other side of coping. American Psy-
chologist, 55(6), 647–654.
Folkman, S., & Moskowitz, J. T. (2004). Coping: Pitfalls and promise. Annual Review of Psychology, 
55, 745–774.
Folkman, S., Moskowitz, J. T., Ozer, E. M., & Park, C. L. (1997). Positive meaningful events and cop-
ing in the context of HIV/AIDS. In B. H. Gottlieb (Ed.), Coping with chronic stress (pp. 293–314). 
New York: Plenum Press.
Fonagy, P., Gergely, G., & Target, M. (2008). Psychoanalytic constructs and attachment theory and 
research. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment (2nd ed., pp. 783–810). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Forer, B. R. (1949). The fallacy of personal validation: A classroom demonstration of gullibility. The 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 44(1), 118–123.
Forsyth, D. R., Lawrence, N. K., Burnette, J. L., & Baumeister, R. F. (2007). Attempting to improve 
the academic performance of struggling college students by bolstering their self-esteem: An 
intervention that backfired. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 26(4), 447–459.
Foster, J. D., Kernis, M. H., & Goldman, B. M. (2007). Linking adult attachment to self-esteem stabil-
ity. Self and identity, 6, 64–73.
Fox, K. R., & Corbin, C. B. (1989). The physical self-perception profile: Development and prelimi-
nary validation. Journal of Sport & Exercise Psychology, 11(4), 408–430.
Fraley, R. C. (2002). Attachment stability from infancy to adulthood: Meta-analysis and dynamic 
modeling of developmental mechanisms. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 6(2), 
123–151.
Fraley, R. C., Brumbaugh, C. C., & Marks, M. J. (2005). The evolution and function of adult attach-
ment: A comparative and phylogenetic analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
89(5), 731–746.
Fraley, R. C., & Shaver, P. R. (1998). Airport separations: A naturalistic study of adult attachment 
dynamics in separating couples. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75(5), 1198–1212.
Fraley, R. C., & Shaver, P. R. (2008). Attachment theory and its place in contemporary personality 
theory and research. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research (pp. 518–541). New York: Guilford Press.
Frankl, V. E. (1959). Man’s search for meaning. Boston: Beacon Press.
Franzoi, S. L., & Shields, S. A. (1984). The body esteem scale: Multidimensional structure and sex 
differences in a college population. Journal of Personality Assessment, 48(2), 173–178.
Fredrickson, B. L. (1998). What good are positive emotions? Review of General Psychology, 2(3), 
300–319.
Fredrickson, B. L. (2000). Cultivating positive emotions to optimize health and well-being. Preven-
tion & Treatment, 3(1), ArtID 1.
Fredrickson, B. L. (2001). The role of positive emotions in positive psychology: The broaden-and-
build theory of positive emotions. American Psychologist, 56(3), 218–226.
Fredrickson, B. L. (2002). Positive emotions. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), Handbook of positive 
psychology (pp. 120–134). New York: Oxford University Press.
Fredrickson, B. L., & Branigan, C. (2001). Positive emotions. In G. A. Bonanno & T. J. Mayne (Eds.), 
Emotions: Current issues and future directions (pp. 123–151). New York: Guilford Press.
382

References
Fredrickson, B. L., & Branigan, C. (2005). Positive emotions broaden the scope of attention and 
thought-action repertoires. Cognition and Emotion, 19(3), 313–332.
Fredrickson, B. L., Cohn, M. A., Coffey, K. A., Pek, J., & Finkel, S. M. (2008). Open hearts build lives: 
Positive emotions, induced through loving-kindness meditation, build consequential personal 
resources. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95(5), 1045–1062.
Fredrickson, B. L., & Joiner, T. (2002). Positive emotions trigger upward spirals toward emotional 
well-being. Psychological Science, 13(2), 172–175.
Fredrickson, B. L., & Levenson, R. W. (1998). Positive emotions speed recovery from the cardiovas-
cular sequelae of negative emotions. Cognition and Emotion, 12(2), 191–220.
Fredrickson, B. L., Mancuso, R. A., Branigan, C., & Tugade, M. M. (2000). The undoing effect of 
positive emotions. Motivation and Emotion, 24(4), 237–258.
Frei, R. L., & McDaniel, M. A. (1998). Validity of customer service measures in personnel selection: 
A review of criterion and construct evidence. Human Performance, 11(1), 1–27.
Freud, A. (1937/1966). The ego and the mechanisms of defense. Madison, CT: International Universities 
Press. (Original work published 1937)
Freud, E. L. (Ed.). (1960/1992). Letter to his fiancée Martha Bernays (27 June 1882). In E. L. Freud 
(Ed.), Letters of Sigmund Freud (pp.10-12). Mineola, NY: Dover Publications.
Freud, S. (1900/1953). The interpretation of dreams. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), Standard edition 
(Vols. 4 & 5). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1900)
Freud, S. (1901/1960). The psychopathology of everyday life. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), Standard 
edition (Vol. 6). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1901)
Freud, S. (1905/1959). Fragment of an analysis of a case of hysteria. In A. Strachey & J. Strachey 
(Eds.), Collected papers (Vol. 3, pp. 13–136). New York: Basic Books.
Freud, S. (1905/1960). Jokes and their relation to the unconscious. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), 
Standard edition (Vol. 8). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1905)
Freud, S. (1908/1959). Character and anal eroticism. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), Standard edition 
(Vol. 9, pp. 167–175). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1908)
Freud, S. (1909a/1955). Analysis of a phobia in a five-year-old boy. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), 
Standard edition (Vol. 10, pp. 5–149). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1909)
Freud, S. (1909b/1955). Notes upon a case of obsessional neurosis. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), 
Standard edition (Vol. 10, pp. 153–320). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1909)
Freud, S. (1910/1964). Leonardo Da Vinci and a memory of his childhood (A. Tyson, Trans.). New 
York: Norton.
Freud, S. (1911/1958). Formulations on the two principles of mental functioning. In J. Strachey (Ed. 
and Trans.), Standard edition (Vol. 12, pp. 215–226). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work 
published 1911)
Freud, S. (1914/1957). On narcissism. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), Standard edition (Vol. 14, 
pp. 67–102). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1914)
Freud, S. (1915a/1957). Instincts and their vicissitudes. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), Standard 
edition (Vol. 14, pp. 111–140). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1915)
Freud, S. (1915b/1957). Repression. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), Standard edition Vol. 14, pp. 
(141–158). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1915)
Freud, S. (1915/2000). Three essays on the theory of sexuality (J. Strachey, Ed. and Trans.). New York: 
Basic Books. (Original work published 1915)
Freud, S. (1920/1955). Beyond the pleasure principle. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), Standard edition 
(Vol. 18, pp. 3–64). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1920)
Freud, S. (1923a/1961). The ego and the id. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), Standard edition (Vol. 19, 
pp. 12–66). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1923)
Freud, S. (1923b/1961). The infantile genital organization: An interpolation into the theory of sexual-
ity. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), Standard edition (Vol. 19). London: Hogarth Press. (Original 
work published 1923)
Freud, S. (1925/1959). Inhibitions, symptoms and anxiety. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), Standard 
edition (Vol. 20, pp. 77–175). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1925)
Freud, S. (1925/1961). Some psychical consequences of the anatomical distinction between the 
sexes. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), Standard edition (Vol. 19, pp. 248–258). London: Hogarth 
Press. (Original work published 1925)
Freud, S. (1929/1989). Civilization and its discontents. New York: Norton. (Original work published 1929)
383

References
Freud, S. (1933/1990). The anatomy of the mental personality (Lecture 31). In New introductory 
lectures on psychoanalysis. New York: Norton. (Original work published 1933)
Freud, S. (1955). Two encyclopedia articles. In J. Strachey (Ed. and Trans.), Standard edition (Vol. 
18, pp. 235–259). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1923)
Freud, S. (1967). Woodrow Wilson: A psychological study. London: Hogarth Press.
Freyd, J. J. (2006). The social psychology of cognitive repression. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
29(5), 518–519.
Fung, H. H., & Ng, S. (2006). Age differences in the sixth personality factor: Age differences in 
interpersonal relatedness among Canadians and Hong Kong Chinese. Psychology and Aging, 
21(4), 810–814.
Funk, S. C. (1992). Hardiness: A review of theory and research. Health Psychology, 11(5), 335–345.
Funk, S. C., & Houston, B. K. (1987). A critical analysis of the hardiness scale’s validity and utility. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(3), 572–578.
Furnham, A. (1986). Economic locus of control. Human Relations, 39, 29–43.
Furnham, A., & Fudge, C. (2008). The five factor model of personality and sales performance. Journal 
of Individual Differences, 29(1), 11–16.
Furnham, A., Sadka, V., & Brewin, C. R. (1992). The development of an occupational attributional 
style questionnaire. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 13, 27–39.
Gable, P., & Harmon-Jones, E. (2010). The blues broaden, but the nasty narrows: Attentional 
consequences of negative affects low and high in motivational intensity. Psychological Science, 
21, 211–215.
Gabriel, M. T., Critelli, J. W., & Ee, J. S. (1994). Narcissistic illusions in self-evaluations of intelligence 
and attractiveness. Journal of Personality, 62, 143–155.
Gagné, M., & Deci, E. L. (2005). Self-determination theory and work motivation. Journal of Orga-
nizational Behavior, 26, 331–362.
Gagné, M., Ryan, R. M., & Bargmann, K. (2003). Autonomy support and need satisfaction in the 
motivation and well-being of gymnasts. Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, 15, 372–390.
Gale, C. R., Batty, G. D., & Deary, I. J. (2008). Locus of control at age 10 years and health out-
comes and behaviors at age 30 years: The 1970 British cohort study. Psychosomatic Medicine, 
70, 397–403.
Gale, S. F. (2002, April). Three companies cut turnover with tests. Workforce, 66–69.
Gallup, G. G. (1977). Self-recognition in primates: A comparative approach to the bidirectional 
properties of consciousness. American Psychologist, 32(5), 329–338.
Garnets, L. D. (2002). Sexual orientations in perspective. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psy-
chology, 8(2), 115–129.
Gay, P. (1988). Freud: A life for our time. New York: Norton.
Ge, X., Conger, R. D., Cadoret, R. J., Neiderhiser, J. M., Yates, W., Troughton, E., et al. (1996). The 
developmental interface between nature and nurture: A mutual influence model of child 
antisocial behavior and parent behaviors. Developmental Psychology, 32(4), 574–589.
Geen, R. G. (1984). Preferred stimulation levels in introverts and extraverts: Effects on arousal and 
performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 46(6), 1303–1312.
Geen, R. G. (1997). Psychophysiological approaches to personality. In R. Hogan, J. Johnson, & S. Briggs 
(Eds.), Handbook of personality psychology (pp. 387–414). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Geher, G. (2000). Perceived and actual characteristics of parents and partners: A test of the Freudian 
model of mate selection. Current Psychology, 19(3), 194–214.
Geis, F. L. (1978). Machiavellianism. In H. London & J. Exner (Eds.), Dimensions of personality 
(pp. 285–313). New York: Wiley.
George, M. S., & Bellmaker, R. H. (2000). Transcranial magnetic stimulation in neuropsychiatry. 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Gergen, K. J. (1985). The social constructionist movement in modern psychology. American Psy-
chologist, 40(3), 266–275.
Gergen, K. J. (1991). The saturated self. New York: Basic Books.
Getzels, J. W., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1976). The creative vision. New York: Wiley.
Gibb, B. E., Beevers, C. G., Andover, M. S., & Holleran, K. (2006). The hopelessness theory of depres-
sion: A prospective multi-wave test of the vulnerability-stress hypothesis. Cognitive Therapy 
and Research, 30, 763–772.
384

References
Gibran, K. (1947/2006). The Kahlil Gibran reader. New York: Kensington Publishing (Original work 
published 1947)
Gillespie, W., & Myors, B. (2000). Personality of rock musicians. Psychology of Music, 28, 154–165.
Gillham, J. E., Brunwasser, S. M., & Freres, D. R. (2007). Preventing depression in early adolescence. 
In J. R. Z. Abela & B. L. Hankin (Eds.), Handbook of depression in children and adolescents 
(pp. 309–332). New York: Guilford Press.
Gillham, J. E., Reivich, K. J., Jaycox, L. H., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1995). Prevention of depressive 
symptoms in schoolchildren: Two year follow-up. Psychological Science, 6, 343–351.
Gillham, J. E., Shatté, A. J., Reivich, K. J., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2001). Optimism, pessimism, and 
explanatory style. In E. C. Chang (Ed.), Optimism & pessimism: Implications for theory, research, 
and practice (pp. 53–75). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Gilmor, T. M., & Reid, D. W. (1978). Locus of control, prediction, and performance on university 
examinations. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 46(3), 565–566.
Gladstone, T. R. G., & Kaslow, N. J. (1995). Depression and attributions in children and adolescents: 
A meta-analytic review. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology, 23, 597–606.
Glaser, J., & Kihlstrom, J. F. (2005). Compensatory automaticity: Unconscious volition is not an oxy-
moron. In R. R. Hassin, J. R. Uleman, & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The new unconscious (pp. 171–195). 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Gleaves, D. H., & Hernandez, E. (1999). Recent reformulations of Freud’s development and abandon-
ment of his seduction theory: Historical/scientific clarification or a continued assault on truth? 
History of Psychology, 2(4), 324–354.
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Goldberg, L. R. (1981). Language and individual differences: The search for universals in personality 
lexicons. In L. Wheeler (Ed.), Review of personality and social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 141–165). 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Goldberg, L. R. (1990). An alternative “description of personality”: The Big Five factor structure. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 1216–1229.
Goldman, D., Kohn, P. M., & Hunt, R. W. (1983). Sensation seeking, augmenting, reducing, and 
absolute auditory threshold: A strength of the nervous system perspective. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 45(2), 405–411.
Goldstein, S. (2000). Cross-cultural explorations: Activities in culture and psychology. Needham 
Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Goleman, D. (1995). Emotional intelligence. New York: Bantam Books.
Golombok, S., Spencer, A., & Rutter, M. (1983). Children in lesbian and single-parent households: 
Psychosexual and psychiatric appraisal. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 4, 551–572.
Gonzales, F., & Espin, O. (1996). Latino men, Latina women, and homosexuality. In R. Cabaj & 
T. Stein (Eds.), Textbook of homosexuality and mental health (pp. 583–601). Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Press.
Gordon, R. A. (2008). Attributional style and athletic performance: Strategic optimism and defensive 
pessimism. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 9(3), 336–350.
Gore, P. M., & Rotter, J. B. (1963). A personality correlate of social action. Journal of Personality, 
31(1), 58–64.
Gosling, S. D. (2008). Snoop: What your stuff says about you. New York: Basic Books.
Gosling, S. D., Ko, S. J., Mannarelli, T., & Morris, M. E. (2002). A room with a cue: Personality 
judgments based on offices and bedrooms. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82(3), 
379–398.
Gosling, S. D., Rentfrow, P. J., & Swann, W. B. (2003). A very brief measure of the big-five personality 
domains. Journal of Research in Personality, 37, 504–528.
Gottesman, I. I. (1991). Schizophrenia genesis: The origins of madness. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Gottlieb, L. (2006). How do I love thee? The Atlantic Monthly, 297(3), 58–70.
Gottman, J. M. (1993). What predicts divorce? The relationship between marital processes and marital 
outcomes. New York: Psychology Press.
Gough, H. G. (1979). A creative personality scale for the adjective check list. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 37(8), 1398–1405.
Gough, H. G., & Heilbrun, A. B. (1983). Adjective Check List manual. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press.
385

References
Gray, J. A. (1970). The psychophysiological basis of introversion-extraversion. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy, 8, 249–266.
Gray, J. A. (1976). The behavioural inhibition system: A possible substrate for anxiety. In M. P. Feldman 
& A. Broadhurst (Eds.), Theoretical and experimental bases of behaviour modification (pp. 3–41). 
London: Wiley.
Gray, J. A. (1982). The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry into the functions of the septo-
hippocampal system. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Gray, J. A., & McNaughton, N. (2000). The neuropsychology of anxiety: An enquiry into the functions 
of the septo-hippocampal system. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.
Gray, P. O. (2001). Psychology (4th ed.). New York: MacMillian.
Graziano, W. G., & Eisenberg, N. H. (1997). Agreeableness: A dimension of personality. In R. Hogan, 
J. Johnson & S. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of personality psychology (pp. 795–824). San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press.
Green, R. (1978). Sexual identity of 37 children raised by homosexual or transsexual parents. 
American Journal of Psychiatry, 135, 692–697.
Green, R. (1987). The “sissy boy syndrome” and the development of homosexuality. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press.
Greenberg, J. R., & Mitchell, S. (1993). Object relations in psychoanalytic theory. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Greene, B. (2000). African American lesbian and bisexual women. Journal of Social Issues, 56, 
239–250.
Greenwald, A. G., & Farnham, S. D. (2000). Using the Implicit Association Test to measure self-
esteem and self-concept. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 1022–1038.
Greenwald, A. G., McGhee, D. E., & Schwartz, J. L. K. (1998). Measuring individual differences in 
implicit cognition: The implicit association test. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
74, 1464–1480.
Greenwald, A. G., Nosek, B. A., & Banaji, M. R. (2003). Understanding and using the implicit associa-
tion test: I. An improved scoring algorithm. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85(2), 
197–216.
Greenwald, A. G., Poehlman, T. A., Uhlmann, E. L., & Banaji, M. R. (2009). Understanding and using 
the implicit association test: III. Meta-analysis of predictive validity. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 97(1), 17–41.
Grolnick, W. S., & Ryan, R. M. (1987). Autonomy support in education: Creating the facilitating 
environment. In N. Hastings & J. Schwieso (Eds.), New directions in educational psychology: 
Vol. 2. Behaviour and motivation (pp. 213–232). London: Falmer Press.
Grolnick, W. S., & Ryan, R. M. (1989). Parent-styles associated with children’s self-regulation and 
competence in school. Educational Psychology, 81, 143–154.
Gross, J. J. (2008). Emotion and emotion regulation: Personality processes and individual differ-
ences. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and 
research (pp. 701–724). New York: Guilford Press.
Gross, J. J., Sutton, S. K., & Ketelaar, T. (1998). Relations between affect and personality: Support 
for the affect-level and affective-reactivity view. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
24(3), 279–288.
Guadagno, R. E., Okdie, B. M., & Eno, C. A. (2008). Who blogs? Personality predictors of blogging. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 24, 1993–2004.
Guiffrida, D., Gouveia, A., Wall, A., & Seward, D. (2008). Development and validation of the need 
for relatedness at college questionnaire (NRC-Q). Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 
1(4), 251–261.
Guimond, S. (2008). Psychological similarities and differences between women and men across 
cultures. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2(1), 494–510.
Guterl, F. (2002, November 11). What Freud got right. Newsweek, 140(20), 50–51.
Haeffel, G. J., Getchell, M., Koposov, R. A., Yrigollen, C. M., DeYoung, C. G., af Klinteberg, B., et al. 
(2008). Association between polymorphisms in the dopamine transporter gene and depression. 
Psychological Science, 19(1), 62–69.
Haeffel, G. J., Gibb, B. E., Metalsky, G. I., Alloy, L. B., Abramson, L. Y., Hankin, B. L., et al. (2008). 
Measuring cognitive vulnerability to depression: Development and validation of the cognitive 
style questionnaire. Clinical Psychology Review, 28(5), 824–836.
Haidt, J. (2000). The positive emotion of elevation. Prevention & Treatment, 3(3), ArtID 3c.
386

References
Hall, C., Smith, K., & Chia, R. (2008). Cognitive and personality factors in relation to timely comple-
tion of a college degree. College Student Journal, 42(4), 1087–1098.
Hall, J. A. (1978). Gender effects in decoding nonverbal cues. Psychological Bulletin, 85(4), 845–857.
Hall, J. A. (1984). Nonverbal sex differences: Communication accuracy and expressive style. Baltimore: 
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hall, J. A. (2006a). Nonverbal behavior, status, and gender: How do we understand their relations? 
Psychology of Women Quarterly, 30, 384–391.
Hall, J. A. (2006b). Women’s and men’s nonverbal communication: Similarities, differences, stereo-
types, and origins. In V. Manusov & M. L. Patterson (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of nonverbal 
communication (pp. 201–218). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Halpern, D. F. (1997). Sex differences in intelligence: Implications for education. American Psycholo-
gist, 52, 1091–1102.
Halpern, D. F. (2000). Sex differences in cognitive abilities. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Halpern, D. F. (2004). A cognitive-process taxonomy for sex differences in cognitive abilities. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 13(4), 135–139.
Halpern, D. F., Benbow, C. P., Geary, D. C., Gur, R. C., Hyde, J. S., & Gernsbacher, M. A. (2007). The 
science of sex differences in science and mathematics. Psychological Science in the Public Inter-
est, 8(1), 1–51.
Halpern, D. F., & LaMay, M. L. (2000). The smarter sex: A critical review of sex differences in intel-
ligence. Educational Psychology Review, 12(2), 229–246.
Halvari, A. E. M., & Halvari, H. (2006). Motivational predictors of change in oral health: An experi-
mental test of self-determination theory. Motivation and Emotion, 30, 295–306.
Hammen, C. L., Adrian, C., & Hiroto, D. (1988). A longitudinal test of the attributional vulnerability 
model in children at risk for depression. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 27, 37–46.
Hammer, D. H., Hu, S., Magnuson, V. L., Hu, N., & Pattatucci, A. M. (1993). A linkage between DNA 
markers on the X chromosome and male sexual orientation. Science, 261, 321–327.
Hargrave, G. E., & Hiatt, D. (1989). Use of the California psychological inventory in law enforcement 
officer selection. Journal of Personality Assessment, 53(2), 267–277.
Harker, L., & Keltner, D. (2001). Expressions of positive emotions in women’s college yearbook 
pictures and their relationship to personality and life outcomes across adulthood. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 112–124.
Harlow, H. F. (1958). The nature of love. American Psychologist, 13, 673–685.
Harris, K. J., Kacmar, K. M., Zivnuska, S., & Shaw, J. D. (2007). The impact of political skill on impres-
sion management effectiveness. Journal of Applied Psychology, 92(1), 278–285.
Harter, S. (1983). Developmental perspectives on the self-system. In P. H. Müssen (Ed.), Handbook 
of child psychology: Vol. 4. Socialization, personality and social development (pp. 275–386). New 
York: Wiley.
Harter, S. (1998). The development of self-representations. In W. Damon & N. Eisenberg (Eds.), 
Handbook of child psychology: Vol. 3. Social, emotional, and personality development (pp. 
553–617). New York: Wiley.
Harter, S. (1999). The construction of the self: A developmental perspective. New York: Guilford Press.
Harter, S. (2003). The development of self-representations during childhood and adolescence. In M. R. 
Leary & J. P. Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp. 610–642). New York: Guilford Press.
Harter, S. (2005). Self-concepts and self-esteem, children and adolescents. In C. B. Fisher & R. M. 
Lerner (Eds.), Encyclopedia of applied developmental science (Vol. 2, pp. 972–977). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hartung, C. M., & Widiger, T. A. (1998). Gender differences in the diagnosis of mental disorders: 
Conclusions and controversies of the DSM-IV. Psychological Bulletin, 123, 260–278.
Hassett, J. M., Siebertand, E. R., & Wallen, K. (2008). Sex differences in rhesus monkey toy prefer-
ences parallel those of children. Hormones and Behavior, 54, 359–364.
Hathaway, S. R., & McKinley, J. C. (1940). A multiphasic personality schedule (Minnesota): I. Con-
struction of the schedule. Journal of Psychology, 10, 249–254.
Hayne, H., Garry, M., & Loftus, E. F. (2006). On the continuing lack of scientific evidence for repres-
sion. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 29(5), 521–522.
Hazan, C., & Shaver, P. R. (1987). Romantic love conceptualized as an attachment process. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 52(3), 511–524.
Hazan, C., & Shaver, P. R. (1990). Love and work: An attachment-theoretical perspective. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 59(2), 270–280.
387

References
Hazan, C., & Zeifman, D. (1994). Sex and the psychological tether. In Advances in personal relation-
ships: A research annual (Vol. 5, pp. 151–177). London: Jessica Kingsley.
Healy, W., Bronner, A. F., & Bowers, A. M. (1931). The struture and meaning of psychoanalysis. New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Heatherington, L., Daubman, K. A., Bates, C., Ahn, A., Brown, H., & Preston, C. (1993). Two inves-
tigations of “female modesty” in achievement situations. Sex Roles, 29, 739–754.
Hebb, D. O. (1955). Drives and the CNS (conceptual nervous system). Psychological Review, 62, 
243–259.
Hedges, L. V., & Nowell, A. (1995). Sex differences in mental test scores, variability, and numbers 
of high-scoring individuals. Science, 269, 41–45.
Heine, S. J., & Lehman, D. R. (1995). Cultural variation in unrealistic optimism: Does the West feel 
more invulnerable than the East? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 595–607.
Helms, J. E. (1990). Black and White racial identity: Theory, research, and practice. New York: Green-
wood Press.
Helson, R. (1967). Personality characteristics and developmental history of creative college women. 
Genetic Psychologic Monographs, 76, 205–256.
Helson, R., & Wink, P. (1992). Personality change in women from the early 40s to the early 50s. 
Psychology and Aging, 7, 46–55.
Henry, P. C. (2005). Life stresses, explanatory style, hopelessness, and occupational class. Interna-
tional Journal of Stress Management, 12(3), 241–256.
Herek, G. M. (2010). Sexual orientation differences as deficits: Science and stigma in the history of 
American psychology. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5(6), 693–699.
Hesse, E. (2008). The adult attachment interview: Historical and current perspectives. In J. Cassidy 
& P. R. Shaver (Eds.), The handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications 
(pp. 552–598). New York: Guilford Press.
Hetherington, E. M., & Clingempeel, W. G. (1992). Coping with marital transitions: A family 
systems perspective. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 57(2–3, 
Serial No. 227).
Hiers, J. M., & Heckel, R. V. (1977). Seating choice, leadership, and locus of control. The Journal of 
Social Psychology, 103, 313–314.
Hilgard, E. R. (1977). Divided consciousness. New York: Wiley.
Hill, C., Corbett, C., & St. Rose, A. (2010). Why so few? Women and girls in science, technology, 
engineering and mathematics. Washington, DC: American Association of University Women.
Hiroto, D. S. (1974). Locus of control and learned helplessness. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 
102(2), 187–193.
Hiroto, D. S., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). Generality of learned helplessness in man. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 31(2), 311–327.
Ho, D. Y. F. (1996). Filial piety and its psychological consequences. In M. H. Bond (Ed.), The hand-
book of Chinese psychology. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.
Ho, D. Y. F. (1998). Indigenous psychologies: Asian perspectives. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 
29(1), 88–103.
Hock, M. F., Deshler, D. D., & Schumaker, J. B. (2006). Enhancing student motivation through the 
persuit of possible selves. In C. Dunkel & J. Kerpelman (Eds.), Possible selves: Theory, research 
and application (pp. 205–221). New York: Nova Science Publishers.
Hofhansl, A., Voracek, M., & Vitouch, O. (2004). Sex differences in jealousy: A meta-analytical recon-
sideration. Paper presented at the 16th annual meeting of the Human Behavior and Evolution 
Society, July 21–25, Berlin, Germany.
Hogan, R. (1996). A socioanalytic perspective on the five-factor model. In J. S. Wiggins (Ed.), The 
five-factor model of personality: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 163–179). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Hogan, R., Hogan, J., & Roberts, B. W. (1996). Personality measurement and employment decisions. 
American Psychologist, 51(5), 469–477.
Hojat, M., Callahan, C. A., & Gonnella, J. S. (2004). Students’ personality and rating of clinical 
competence in medical school clerkships: A longitudinal study. Psychology, Health & Medicine, 
9(2), 247–252.
Holahan, C. K., & Sears, R. R. (1995). The gifted group in later maturity. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
388

References
Holden, R. R., & Jackson, D. N. (1979). Item subtlety and face validity in personality assessment. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 47(3), 459–468.
Holmes, D. S. (1995). The evidence for repression: An examination of sixty years of research. In  
J. Singer (Ed.), Repression and dissociation: Implications for personality theory, psychopathology 
and health (pp. 85–102). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hong, T. B., Oddone, E. Z., Dudley, T. K., & Bosworth, H. B. (2006). Medication barriers and anti-
hypertensive medication adherence: The moderating role of locus of control. Psychology, Health 
& Medicine, 11(1), 20–28.
Hooker, C. I., Verosky, S. C., Miyakawa, A., Knight, R. T., & D’Esposito, M. (2008). The influence of 
personality on neural mechanisms of observational fear and reward learning. Neuropsychologia, 
46, 2709–2724.
Horgan, J. (1996). Why Freud isn’t dead. Scientific American, 275(6), 106–111.
Hörmann, H., & Maschke, P. (1996). On the relations between personality and job performance of 
airline pilots. The International Journal of Aviation Psychology, 6(2), 171–178.
Hough, L. M., Eaton, N. K., Dunnette, M. D., Kamp, J. D., & McCloy, R. A. (1990). Criterion-related 
validities of personality constructs as the effect of response distortion on those validities. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 75, 581–595.
Houran, J., Lange, R., Rentfrow, P. J., & Bruckner, K. H. (2004). Do online matchmaking tests work? 
An assessment of preliminary evidence for a publicized “predictive model of marital success.” 
North American Journal of Psychology, 6(3), 507–526.
Houston, D. M., McKee, K. J., & Wilson, J. (2000). Attributional style, efficacy, and the enhancement 
of well-being among housebound older people. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 22(4), 
309–317.
Hoyle, R. H. (2006). Self-knowledge and self-esteem. In M. H. Kernis (Ed.), Self-esteem issues and 
answers (pp. 208–215). New York: Psychology Press.
Hoyle, R. H., Fejfar, M. C., & Miller, J. D. (2000). Personality and sexual risk-taking. a quantitative 
review. Journal of Personality, 68(6), 1203–1231.
Hoyle, R. H., Stephenson, M. T., Palmgreen, P., Lorch, E. P., & Donohew, R. L. (2002). Reliability 
and validity of a brief measure of sensation seeking. Personality and Individual Differences, 
32, 401–414.
Hoyt, M. F. (1973). Internal–external control and beliefs about automobile travel. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 7(3), 288–293.
Huesmann, L. R., Eron, L. D., Lefkowitz, M. M., & Walder, L. O. (1984). Stability of aggression over 
time and generations. Developmental Psychology, 20, 1120–1134.
Hull, J. G., Van Treuren, R. R., & Virnelli, S. (1987). Hardiness and health: A critique and alternative 
approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(3), 518–530.
Hurlburt, A. C., & Ling, Y. (2007). Biological components of sex differences in color preference. 
Current Biology, 17, 623–625.
Hyde, J. S. (1984). How large are gender differences in aggression? A developmental meta-analysis. 
Developmental Psychology, 20(4), 722–736.
Hyde, J. S. (1986). Gender differences in aggression. In J. S. Hyde & M. C. Linn (Eds.), The psychology of 
gender: Advances through meta-analysis (pp. 51–66). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Hyde, J. S. (1993). Gender differences in mathematics ability, anxiety, and attitudes: What do meta-
analyses tell us? In L. A. Penner, G. M. Batsche, H. M. Knoff, D. L. Nelson, & C. D. Spielberger 
(Eds.), The challenge in mathematics and science education: Psychology’s response (pp. 237–249). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Hyde, J. S. (2004). Half the human experience: The psychology of women. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Hyde, J. S. (2005). The gender similarities hypothesis. American Psychologist, 60, 581–592.
Hyde, J. S. (2007). New directions in the study of gender similarities and differences. Current Direc-
tions in Psychological Science, 16(5), 259–263.
Hyde, J. S., & DeLamater, J. D. (2006). Understanding human sexuality. Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Hyde, J. S., & Durik, A. M. (2000). Gender differences in erotic plasticity—Evolutionary or sociocul-
tural forces? Comment on Baumeister (2000). Psychological Bulletin, 126(3), 375–379.
Hyde, J. S., Fennema, E., & Lamon, S. J. (1990). Gender differences in mathematics performance: 
A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 107, 139–155.
Hyde, J. S., & Jaffee, S. R. (2000). Becoming a heterosexual adult: The experiences of young women. 
Journal of Social Issues, 56(2), 283–296.
389

References
Hyde, J. S., & Linn, M. C. (1988). Gender differences in verbal ability: A meta-analysis. Psychological 
Bulletin, 104, 53–69.
Hyde, J. S., & Linn, M. C. (2006). Gender similarities in mathematics and science. Science, 314(5799), 
599–600.
Hyde, J. S., & Oliver, M. B. (2000). Gender differences in sexuality: Results from meta-analysis. In 
C. B. Travis & J. W. White (Eds.), Sexuality, society, and feminism (pp. 57–77). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Icard, L. D. (1996). Assessing the psychosocial well-being of African American gays. In J. F. Longres 
(Ed.), Men of color: A context for service to homosexually active men (pp. 25–50). London: Haworth 
Press.
Ickes, W., Gesn, P. R., & Graham, T. (2000). Gender differences in empathic accuracy: Differential 
ability or differential motivation? Personal Relationships, 7, 95–109.
Ickes, W., Holloway, R., Stinson, L. L., & Hoodenpyle, T. G. (2006). Self-monitoring in social interac-
tion: The centrality of self-affect. Journal of Personality, 74(3), 659–684.
Iemmola, F., & Ciani, A. C. (2009). New evidence of genetic factors influencing sexual orientation in 
men: Female fecundity increase in the maternal line. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38, 393–399.
Ilardi, S. S., Craighead, E. W., & Evans, D. D. (1997). Modeling relapse in unipolar depression: The 
effects of dysfunctional cognitions and personality disorders. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 65, 381–391.
Irwin, M. R., & Miller, A. H. (2007). Depressive disorders and immunity: 20 years of progress and 
discovery. Brain Behavior and Immunity, 21, 374–383.
Isaacowitz, D. M., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2001). Is pessimism a risk factor for depressive mood among 
community-dwelling older adults? Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39, 255–272.
Isaacowitz, D. M., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2003). Cognitive styles and well-being in adulthood and 
old age. In M. H. Bornstein, L. Davidson, C. L. M. Keyes, K. A. Moore, & The Center for Child 
Well-being (Eds.), Well-being: Positive development across the life course (pp. 449–475). Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Isen, A. M. (1987). Positive affect, cognitive processes, and social behavior. Advances in Experimental 
Social Psychology, 20, 203–253.
Isen, A. M., Daubman, K. A., & Nowicki, G. P. (1987). Positive affect facilitates creative problem 
solving. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52(6), 1122–1131.
Izard, C. E. (1977). Human emotions. New York: Plenum Press.
Jackson, D. N. (1984). Personality research form manual. Port Huron, MI: Research Psychologists 
Press.
Jaffee, S. R., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T., Polo-Thomas, M., Price, T. S., & Taylor, A. (2004). The limits of 
child effects: Evidence for genetically mediated child effects on corporal punishment but not 
on physical maltreatment. Developmental Psychology, 40, 1047–1058.
James, W. (1890). The principles of psychology. New York: Holt.
Jang, K. L., Dick, D. M., Wolf, H., Livesley, W. J., & Paris, J. (2005). Psychosocial adversity and emo-
tional instability: An application of gene–environmental interaction models. European Journal 
of Personality, 19, 359–372.
Jang, K. L., McCrae, R. R., Angleitner, A., Riemann, R., & Livesley, W. J. (1998). Heritability of facet-
level traits in a cross-cultural twin sample: Support for a hierarchical model of personality. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1556–1565.
Janoff-Bullman, R. (1992). Shattered assumptions: Towards a new psychology of trauma. New York: 
Free Press.
Jaycox, L. H., Reivich, K. J., Gillham, J., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1994). Prevention of depressive symp-
toms in schoolchildren. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 32(8), 801–816.
Jenkins, J. M. (1993). Self-monitoring and turnover: The impact of personality on intent to leave. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 14(1), 83–91.
John, O. P. (1989). Towards a taxonomy of personality descriptors. In D. M. Buss & N. Cantor 
(Eds.), Personality psychology: Recent trends and emerging directions (pp. 260–271). New York: 
Springer-Verlag.
John, O. P. (1990). The “Big Five” factor taxonomy: Dimensions of personality in the natural lan-
guage and in questionnaires. In L. A. Pervin (Ed.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research 
(pp. 66–100). New York: Guilford Press.
390

References
John, O. P., & Benet-Martínez, V. (2000). Measurement: Reliability, construct validation, and scale 
construction. In H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in social and 
personality psychology (pp. 339–369). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
John, O. P., Naumann, L. P., & Soto, C. J. (2008). Paradigm shift to the integrative Big Five trait tax-
onomy: History, measurement, and conceptual issues. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin 
(Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research. New York: Guilford Press.
John, O. P., & Robins, R. W. (1993). Gordon Allport: Father and critic of the five-factor model. In 
K. H. Craik, R. Hogan, & R. N. Wolfe (Eds.), Fifty years of personality psychology (pp. 215–236). 
New York: Plenum Press.
John, O. P., Robins, R. W., & Pervin, L. A. (Eds.). (2008). The handbook of personality psychology: 
Theory and research. New York: Guilford Press.
John, O. P., & Soto, C. J. (2007). The importance of being valid. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley & 
R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 461–494). 
New York: Guilford Press.
John, O. P., & Srivastava, S. (1999). The Big Five trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and theoreti-
cal perspectives. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research 
(2nd ed., pp. 102–138). New York: Guilford Press.
Johnson, A. M., Vernon, P. A., & Feiler, A. R. (2008). Behavioral genetic studies of personality: An 
introduction and review of the results of 50+ years of research. In G. J. Boyle, G. Matthews, 
& D. H. Saklofske (Eds.), The Sage handbook of personality theory and assessment (Vol. 1, pp. 
145–173). Los Angeles: Sage.
Johnson, B. T., & Boynton, M. H. (2008). Cumulating evidence about the social animal: Meta-analysis 
in social-personality psychology. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2(2), 816–841.
Johnson, W., & Deary, V. (2008). Is RST the Newtonian mechanics of personality psychology? Euro-
pean Journal of Personality, 22, 398–400.
Johnson, W., & Krueger, R. F. (2006). How money buys happiness: Genetic and environmental 
processes linking finances and life satisfaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
90(4), 680–691.
Joiner, T. E., & Wagner, K. D. (1995). Attribution style and depression in children and adolescents: 
A meta-analytic review. Clinical Psychology Review, 15, 777–798.
Jones, E. E., & Pittman, T. S. (1982). Toward a theory of strategic self-presentation. In J. Suls (Ed.), 
Psychological perspectives on the self (pp. 231–262). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jones, M. (1993). Influence of self-monitoring on dating motivations. Journal of Research in Person-
ality, 27, 197–206.
Jordan, C. H., Spencer, S. J., & Zanna, M. P. (2005). Types of high self-esteem and prejudice: How 
implicit self-esteem relates to ethnic discrimination among high explicit self-esteem individuals. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31(5), 693–702.
Joseph, J. E., Liu, X., Jiang, Y., Lynam, D., & Kelly, T. H. (2009). Neural correlates of emotional reac-
tivity in sensation seeking. Psychological Science, 20(2), 215–223.
Joussemet, M., Landry, R., & Koestner, R. (2008). A self-determination theory perspective on parent-
ing. Canadian Psychology, 49, 194–200.
Joyce, N., & Baker, D. B. (2008, May). Husbands, rate your wives. Monitor on Psychology, 39(5), 18.
Judge, T. A., & Bono, J. E. (2001). Relationship of core self-evaluations traits—self-esteem, gener-
alized self-efficacy, locus of control, and emotional stability—with job satisfaction and job 
performance: A meta analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 80–92.
Jung, C. G. (1910). The association method. The American Journal of Psychology, 21(2), 219–269.
Jung, C. G. (1921/1971). Psychological types (R.F.C. Hull, trans.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, Bollingen Series XX (Vol. 6). (Original work published 1921)
Jung, C. G. (1934/1960). A review of the complex theory. In The structure and dynamics of the 
psyche (pp. 92–104). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, Bollingen Series XX (Vol. 8). 
(Original work published 1934)
Jussim, L. (1986). Self-fulfilling prophecies: A theoretical and integrative review. Psychological Review, 
93, 429–445.
Jussim, L., & Eccles, J. S. (1992). Teacher expectations: II. Construction and reflection of student 
achievement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 947–961.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living. New York: Random House.
391

References
Kaestner, E., Rosen, L., & Apel, P. (1977). Patterns of drug abuse: Relationships with ethnicity, 
sensation seeking, and anxiety. Journal of Consulting and Clinical psychology, 45(3), 462–468.
Kamen-Siegel, L., Rodin, J., Seligman, M. E. P., & Dwyer, J. (1991). Explanatory style and cell-mediated 
immunity in elderly men and women. Health Psychology, 10(4), 229–235.
Kao, E. M., Nagata, D. K., & Peterson, C. (1997). Explanatory style, family expressiveness, and self-
esteem among Asian American and European American college students. The Journal of Social 
Psychology, 137(4), 435–444.
Karen, R. (1994). Becoming attached: First relationships and how they shape our capacity to love. New 
York: Oxford University Press.
Kasen, S., Chen, H., Sneed, J., Crawford, T., & Cohen, P. (2006). Social role and birth cohort influ-
ences on gender-linked personality traits in women: A 20-year longitudinal analysis. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 91(5), 944–958.
Kashy, D. A., & DePaulo, B. M. (1996). Who lies? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(5), 
1037–1051.
Kasser, T., & Ryan, R. M. (1993). A dark side of the American dream: Correlates of financial success 
as a central life aspiration. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65(2), 410–422.
Kasser, T., & Ryan, R. M. (1996). Further examining the American dream: Differential correlates of 
intrinsic and extrinsic goals. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22(3), 280–297.
Katcher, A. (1955). The discrimination of sex differences by young children. The Journal of Genetic 
Psychology, 87, 131–143.
Kay, A. C., Jimenez, M. C., & Jost, J. T. (2002). Sour grapes, sweet lemons, and the anticipatory ratio-
nalization of the status quo. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28(9), 1300–1312.
Kelly, G. (1955). The psychology of personal constructs. New York: Norton.
Keltner, D., & Bonanno, G. A. (1997). A study of laughter and dissociation: Distinct correlates of 
laughter and smiling during bereavement. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(4), 
687–702.
Keltner, D., & Haidt, J. (2001). Social functions of emotions. In T. J. Mayne & G. A. Bonanno (Eds.), 
Emotions: Current issues and future directions (pp. 192–213). New York: Guilford Press.
Kendler, K. S., Thorton, L. M., Gilman, S. E., & Kessler, R. C. (2000). Sexual orientation in a U.S. 
national sample of twin and nontwin sibling pairs. American Journal of Psychiatry, 157, 
1843–1846.
Kenrick, D. T., & Trost, M. R. (1993). The evolutionary perspective. In A. E. Beall & R. J. Sternberg 
(Eds.), The psychology of gender (pp. 148–172). New York: Guilford Press.
Kernberg, O. (1975). Borderline conditions and pathological narcissism. New York: Jason Aronson.
Kernberg, O. (1984). Severe personality disorders: Psychotherapeutic strategies. New Haven, CT: 
Yale University Press.
Kernis, M. H., & Goldman, B. M. (2003). Stability and variability in self-concept and self-esteem. 
In M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney (Eds.), Handbook of self and identity (pp. 106–127). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Kernis, M. H., Grannemann, B. D., & Barclay, L. C. (1989). Stability and level of self-esteem as predic-
tors of anger arousal and hostility. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 1013–1023.
Kernis, M. H., Grannemann, B. D., & Barclay, L. C. (1992). Stability of self-esteem: Assessment cor-
relates. Journal of Personality, 60, 621–644.
Kernis, M. H., Greenier, K. D., Herlocker, C. E., Whisenhunt, C. R., & Abend, T. (1997). Self-
perception of reactions to positive and negative outcomes: The roles of stability and level of 
self-esteem. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 845–854.
Kernis, M. H., Lakey, C. E., & Heppner, W. L. (2008). Secure versus fragile high self-esteem as a 
predictor of verbal defensiveness: Converging findings across three different markers. Journal 
of Personality, 76(3), 477–512.
Kihlstrom, J. F. (2006). Repression: A unified theory of a will-o’-the-wisp. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 29(5), 523.
King, L. A., & Smith, N. G. (2004). Gay and straight possible development. Journal of Personality, 
72(5), 967–994.
Kinsey, A. C., Pomeroy, W. B., & Martin, C. E. (1948). Sexual behavior in the human male. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press.
Kinsey, A. C., Pomeroy, W. B., Martin, C. E., & Gebhard, P. H. (1953). Sexual behavior in the human 
female. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
392

References
Kirk, K. M., Bailey, J. M., Dunne, M. P., & Martin, N. G. (2000). Measurement models for sexual 
orientation in a community twin sample. Behavior Genetics, 30(4), 345–356.
Kirkpatrick, M., Smith, C., & Roy, R. (1981). Lesbian mothers and their children: A comparative 
survey. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 51, 545–551.
Kite, M. E., Deaux, K., & Haines, E. L. (2008). Gender stereotypes. In F. L. Denmark & M. A. Paludi 
(Eds.), Psychology of women: A handbook of issues and theories (2nd ed., pp. 205–236). Westport, 
CT: Praeger/Greenwood.
Klein, F., Sepekoff, B., & Wolf, T. J. (1985). Sexual orientation: A multi-variable dynamic process. 
Journal of Homosexuality, 11(1/2), 35–49.
Kling, K. C., Hyde, J. S., Showers, C. J., & Buswell, B. N. (1999). Gender differences in self-esteem: 
A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 125(4), 470–500.
Kluckhohn, C., & Murray, H. A. (1948). Personality formation: The determinants. In C. Kluckhohn 
& H. A. Murray (Eds.), Personality in nature, society and culture. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Knight, G. P., Fabes, R. A., & Higgins, D. A. (1996). Concerns about drawing causal inferences from 
meta-analyses: An example in the study of gender differences in aggression. Psychological 
Bulletin, 119(3), 410–421.
Knight, R. T. (2007). Neural networks debunk phrenology. Science, 316(5831), 1578–1579.
Knutson, B., & Bhanji, J. (2006). Neural substrates for emotional traits? The case of extraversion. 
In T. Canli (Ed.), Biology of personality and individual differences (pp. 116–132). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Knutson, B., Momenan, R., Rawlings, R. R., Fong, G. W., & Hommer, D. (2001). Negative asso-
ciation of neuroticism with brain volume ratio in healthy humans. Biological Psychiatry, 50, 
685–690.
Kobasa, S. C. (1979). Stressful life events, personality, and health: An inquiry into hardiness. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(1), 1–11.
Koestner, R., Ryan, R. M., Bernieri, F., & Holt, K. (1984). Setting limits on children’s behavior: The 
differential effects of controlling vs. informational styles on intrinsic motivation and creativity. 
Journal of Personality, 52(3), 233–248.
Kohn, P. M., Hunt, R. W., & Hoffman, F. M. (1982). Aspects of experience seeking. Canadian Journal 
of Behavioral Science, 14(1), 13–23.
Kohut, H. (1966). Forms and transformations of narcissism. Journal of the American Psychoanalytic 
Association, 14, 243–272.
Kohut, H. (1971). The analysis of the self: A systematic psychoanalytic approach to the treatment of 
narcissistic personality disorders. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Kohut, H. (1977). The restoration of the self. New York: International Universities Press.
Kohut, H. (1984). How does analysis cure? Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Koop, C. E. (1995). Editorial: A personal role in health-care reform. American Journal of Public 
Health, 85(6), 759–760.
Koppitz, E. M. (1968). Psychological evaluation of children’s human figure drawing. New York: Grune 
& Stratton.
Kowert, P. A. (1996). Where does the buck stop?: Assessing the impact of presidential personality. 
Political Psychology, 17, 421–452.
Krafft-Ebing, R. (1908/1986). Psychopathia sexualis (F. J. Rebman, trans.). Brooklyn, NY: Physicians 
and Surgeons Book Co. (Original work published 1908)
Krämer, N. C., & Winter, S. (2008). Impression management 2.0: The relationship of self-esteem, 
extraversion, self-efficacy, and self-presentation within social networking sites. Journal of Media 
Psychology, 20(3), 106–116.
Krueger, R. F., & Johnson, W. (2008). Behavior genetics and personality: A new look at the integration 
of nature and nurture. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: 
Theory and research (pp. 287–310). New York: Guilford Press.
Krueger, R. F., Markon, K. E., & Bouchard, T. J. (2003). The extended genotype: The heritability 
of personality accounts for the heritability of recalled family environments in twins reared 
apart. Journal of Personality, 71(5), 809–833.
Krueger, R. F., & Tackett, J. L. (2003). Personality and psychopathology: Working toward the bigger 
picture. Journal of Personality Disorders, 17(2), 109–128.
Krug, S. E., & Johns, E. F. (1986). A large-scale cross-validation of second-order personality structure 
defined by the 16PF. Psychological Reports, 46, 509–522.
393

References
Kuhn, M., & McPartland, T. S. (1954). An empirical investigation of self-attitudes. American Sociological 
Review, 19, 68–76.
La Guardia, J. G., & Patrick, H. (2008). Self-determination theory as a fundamental theory of close 
relationships. Canadian Psychology, 49, 201–209.
Långström, N., Rahman, Q., Carlström, E., & Lichtenstein, P. (2010). Genetic and environmental 
effects on same-sex sexual behavior: A population study of twins in Sweden. Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 39, 75–80.
LaForge, M. C., & Cantrell, S. (2003). Explanatory style and academic performance among college 
students beginning a major course of study. Psychological Reports, 92, 861–865.
LaFrance, M., & Banaji, M. (1992). Towards a reconsideration of the gender-emotion relationship. 
In M. S. Clark (Ed.), Emotion and social behavior (pp. 178–201). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Lahey, B. J. (2009). Public health significance of neuroticism. American Psychologist, 64(4), 241–256.
Lai, C. (2006, December 11). How much of human height is genetic and how much is due to nutrition? 
Retrieved April 9, 2009, from http://www.sciam.com/article.cfm?id=how-much-of-human-height.
Lambird, K. H., & Mann, T. (2006). When do ego threats lead to self-regulation failure? Negative 
consequences of defensive high self-esteem. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32(9), 
1177–1187.
Langer, E. J., & Rodin, J. (1976). The effects of choice and enhanced personal responsibility for the 
aged: A field experiment in an institutional setting. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
34(2), 191–198.
Larsen, R. J., & Ketelaar, T. (1989). Extraversion, neuroticism and susceptibility to positive 
and negative mood induction procedures. Personality and Individual Differences, 10(12), 
1221–1228.
Larsen, R. J., & Ketelaar, T. (1991). Personality and susceptibility to positive and negative emotional 
states. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61(1), 132–140.
Laumann, E. O., Gagnon, J. H., Michael, R. T., & Michaels, S. (1994). The social organization of sexual-
ity: Sexual practices in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lazar, N. A. (2009). Discussion of “puzzlingly high correlations in fMRI studies of emotion, 
personality, and social cognition” by Vul et al. (2009). Perspectives on Psychological Science, 
4(3), 308–309.
Leary, M. R. (2004). The curse of the self: Self-awareness, egotism, and the quality of human life. 
Cambridge, MA: Oxford University Press.
Leary, M. R., Tchividjian, L. R., & Kraxberger, B. E. (1994). Self-presentation can be hazardous to 
your health: Impression management and health risk. Health Psychology, 13(6), 461–470.
Lee, K., & Ashton, M. C. (2004). Psychometric properties of the HEXACO personality inventory. 
Multivariate Behavioral Research, 39(2), 329–358.
Lee, K., & Ashton, M. C. (2007). Factor analysis in personality research. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, 
& R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 424–443). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Lee, K., Ogunfowora, B., & Ashton, M. C. (2005). Personality traits beyond the Big Five: Are they 
within the HEXACO space? Journal of Personality, 73(5), 1437–1463.
Lee, S. J., & Oyserman, D. (2009). Expecting to work, fearing homelessness: The possible selves of 
low-income mothers. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 39(6), 1334–1355.
Lee, S. J., Quigley, B. M., Nesler, M. S., Corbet, A. B., & Tedeschi, J. T. (1999). Development of a self-
presentation tactics scale. Personality and Individual Differences, 26, 701–722.
Lee, Y., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1997). Are Americans more optimistic than the Chinese? Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23(1), 32–40.
Lefcourt, H. M. (1979). Locus of control for specific goals. In L. C. Perlmutter & R. A. Monty (Eds.), 
Choice and perceived control (pp. 209–220). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lefcourt, H. M. (1981). The construction and development of the multidimensional-multiattributional 
causality scales. In H. M. Lefcourt (Ed.), Research with the locus of control construct: Vol. 1. Assess-
ment methods (pp. 245–277). New York: Academic Press.
Lefcourt, H. M. (1982). Locus of control: Current trends in theory and research. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lefcourt, H. M. (1983). The locus of control as a moderator variable: Stress. In H. M. Lefcourt 
(Ed.), Research with the locus of control construct: Vol. 2. Developments and social problems 
(pp. 253–268). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
394

References
Lefcourt, H. M. (1991). Locus of control. In J. P. Robinson, P. R. Shaver, & L. S. Wrightsman 
(Eds.), Measures of personality and social psychological attitudes (pp. 413–499). San Diego, 
CA: Academic Press.
Lefcourt, H. M., Martin, R. A., Fick, C. M., & Saleh, W. E. (1985). Locus of control for affilia-
tion and behavior in social interactions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48(3), 
755–759.
Legerstee, M., Anderson, D., & Schaffer, A. (1998). Five- and eight-month-old infants recognize their 
faces and voices as familiar social stimuli. Child Development, 69, 37–50.
Lehman, D. R., & Taylor, S. E. (1987). Date with an earthquake: Coping with a probable, unpredict-
able disaster. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 13(4), 546–555.
Lehnart, J., & Neyer, F. J. (2006). Should I stay or should I go? Attachment and personality in stable 
and instable romantic relationships. European Journal of Personality, 20, 475–495.
Lenney, E. (1977). Women’s self-confidence in achievement settings. Psychological Bulletin, 84(1), 
1–13.
Leone, C. (2006). Self-monitoring: Individual differences in orientations to the social world. Journal 
of Personality, 74(3), 633–657.
Leone, C., & Hawkins, L. B. (2006). Self-monitoring and close relationships. Journal of Personality, 
74(3), 739–778.
Lepper, M. R., Corpus, J. H., & Iyengar, S. S. (2005). Intrinsic and extrinsic motivational orientations 
in the classroom: Age differences and academic correlates. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
97(2), 184–196.
Lepper, M. R., Greene, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1973). Undermining children’s intrinsic interest with 
extrinsic reward: A test of the “overjustification” hypothesis. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 28(1), 129–137.
Lesch, K. P. (2007). Linking emotion to the social brain. The role of the serotonin transporter in 
human social behaviour. EMBO Reports, 8(S1), S24–S29.
Lesch, K. P., Bengel, D., Heils, A., Sabol, S. Z., Greenberg, B. D., Petri, S., et al. (1996). Association of 
anxiety-related traits with a polymorphism in the serotonin transporter gene regulatory region. 
Science, 274(5292), 1527–1531.
Letzring, T. D., Block, J., & Funder, D. C. (2005). Ego-control and ego-resiliency: Generalization of 
self-report scales based on personality descriptions from acquaintances, clinicians and the self. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 39(4), 395–422.
LeVay, S. (1991). A difference in hypothalamic structure between heterosexual and homosexual men. 
Science, 253(5023), 1034–1037.
Lewis, M., & Brooks-Gunn, J. (1979). Social cognition and the acquisition of self. New York: Plenum 
Press.
Lewis, M., & Ramsay, D. (2004). Development of self-recognition, personal pronoun use, and 
pretend play during the 2nd year. Child Development, 75, 1821–1831.
Lewis, P., Cheney, T., & Dawes, S. A. (1977). Locus of control of interpersonal relationships question-
naire. Psychological Reports, 41(2), 507–510.
Liberman, A., & Chaiken, S. (1992). Defensive processing of personally relevant health messages. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18, 669–679.
Lieberman, M. D., Berkman, E. T., & Wager, T. D. (2009). Correlations in social neuroscience aren’t 
voodoo. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4(3), 299–307.
Lifton, R. J. (1986). The Nazi doctors: Medical killing and the psychology of genocide. New York: Basic 
Books.
Lightdale, J. R., & Prentice, D. A. (1994). Rethinking sex differences in aggression: Aggressive behavior 
in the absence of social roles. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20(1), 34–44.
Lilienfeld, S. O., Wood, J. M., & Garb, H. N. (2000). The scientific status of projective techniques. 
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 1(2), 27–66.
Lindquist, M. A., & Gelman, A. (2009). Correlations and multiple comparisons in functions imaging: 
A statistical perspective (commentary on Vul et al., 2009). Perspectives on Psychological Science,4(3), 
310–313.
Lindzey, G. (1959). On the classification of projective techniques. Psychological Bulletin, 56, 158–168.
Linn, M. C., & Petersen, A. C. (1985). Emergence and characterization of sex differences in spatial 
ability: A meta-analysis. Child Development, 56, 1479–1498.
395

References
Lippa, R. A. (2000). Gender-related traits in gay men, women, and heterosexual men and women. 
Journal of Personality, 68, 899–926.
Lippa, R. A. (2002). Gender-related traits of heterosexual and homosexual men and women. Archives 
of Sexual Behavior, 31, 83–98.
Lippa, R. A. (2003). Are 2D:4D finger-length ratios related to sexual orientation? Yes for men, no for 
women. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85(1), 179–188.
Lippa, R. A. (2005a). Gender, nature, and nurture. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lippa, R. A. (2005b). Sexual orientation and personality. Annual Review of Sex Research, 16, 119–153.
Lippa, R. A. (2006a). The gender reality hypothesis. American Psychologist, 61, 639–640.
Lippa, R. A. (2006b). Is high sex drive associated with increased sexual attraction to both sexes? 
Psychological Science, 17(1), 46–52.
Litle, P., & Zuckerman, M. (1986). Sensation seeking and music preferences. Personality and Indi-
vidual Differences, 7(4), 575–577.
Loehlin, J. C. (1992). Genes and environment in personality development. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Loevinger, J. (1957). Objective tests as instruments of psychological theory. Psychological Reports, 
3, 635–694.
Loftus, E. F., & Bernstein, D. M. (2005). Rich false memories. In A. F. Healy (Ed.), Experimental cog-
nitive psychology and its applications (pp. 103–113). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
Loftus, E. F., Garry, M., & Feldman, J. (1994). Forgetting sexual trauma: What does it mean when 
38% forget? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 62, 1177–1181.
Luhtanen, R., & Crocker, J. (1992). A collective self-esteem scale: Self-evaluation of one’s social 
identity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18(3), 302–318.
Lummis, M., & Stevenson, H. W. (1990). Gender differences in beliefs and achievement: A cross-
cultural study. Developmental Psychology, 26, 254–263.
Lumsden, M. A., Bore, M., Millar, K., Jack, R., & Powis, D. (2005). Assessment of personal qualities 
in relation to admission to medical school. Medical Education, 39, 258–265.
Lyubomirsky, S., King, L., & Diener, E. (2005). The benefits of frequent positive affect: Does happi-
ness lead to success? Psychological Bulletin, 131(6), 803–855.
Maccoby, E. E., & Jacklin, C. N. (1974). The psychology of sex differences. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
MacDonald, A. P. (1970). Internal–external locus of control and the practice of birth control. Psy-
chological Reports, 27(1), 206.
MacDonald, D. A. (2000). Spirituality: Description, measurement, and relation to the five factor 
model. Journal of Personality, 68(1), 153–197.
Machiavelli, N. (1532/1940). The prince. New York: The Modern Library.
Machover, K. (1949). Personality projection in the drawing of the human figure. Springfield, IL: 
Charles C. Thomas.
Macmillan, M. (1991). Freud evaluated: The completed arc. Amsterdam, Netherlands: North-Holland.
Maddi, S. R. (1987). Hardiness training at Illinois Bell Telephone. In J. Opatz (Ed.), Health promotion 
evaluation (pp. 101–115). Stephens Point, WI: National Wellness Institute.
Maddi, S. R. (2002). The story of hardiness: Twenty years of theorizing, research, and practice. 
Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 54(3), 173–185.
Maddi, S. R., Kahn, S., & Maddi, K. L. (1998). The effectiveness of hardiness training. Consulting 
Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 50(2), 78–86.
Maddi, S. R., & Kobasa, S. C. (1984). The hardy executive. Homewood, IL: Jones-Irwin.
Madrid, G. A., MacMurray, J., Lee, J. W., Anderson, B. A., & Comings, D. E. (2001). Stress as a 
mediating factor in the association between the DRD2 Taq I polymorphism and alcoholism. 
Alcoholism, 23, 117–122.
Magaña, J. R., & Carrier, J. M. (1991). Mexican and Mexican-American male sexual behavior and 
spread of AIDS in California. Journal of Sex Research, 28, 425–441.
Magee, M., & Miller, D. C. (1997). Lesbian lives: Psychoanalytic narratives old and new. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Analytic Press.
Maier, S. F. (1970). Failure to escape traumatic shock: Incompatible skeletal motor response or 
learned helplessness? Learning and Motivation, 1, 157–170.
Maier, S. F., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1976). Learned helplessness: Theory and evidence. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, 105(1), 3–46.
396

References
Main, M. (1996). Introduction to the special section on attachment and psychopathology: 2. Over-
view of the field of attachment. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64(2), 237–243.
Main, M., Kaplan, N., & Cassidy, J. (1985). Security in infancy, childhood, and adulthood: A move 
to the level of representation. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 
50(1–2), 66–104.
Main, M., & Solomon, J. (1990). Procedures for identifying infants as disorganized/disoriented dur-
ing the Ainsworth Strange Situation. In M. T. Greenberg, D. Cicchetti, & E. M. Cummings 
(Eds.), Attachment in the preschool years (pp. 121–160). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Malcolm, J. (1994). Psychoanalysis: The impossible profession. New York: Jason Aronson.
Markon, K. E., Krueger, R. F., & Watson, D. (2005). Delineating the structure of normal and abnor-
mal personality: An integrative hierarchical approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 88(1), 139–157.
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and the self: Implications for cognition, emotion and 
motivation. Psychological Review, 98(2), 224–253.
Markus, H. R., & Nurius, P. (1986). Possible selves. American Psychologist, 41(9), 954–969.
Marsh, H. W. (1993). Academic self-concept: Theory, measurement, and research. In J. Suls (Ed.), 
Psychological perspectives on the self (pp. 59–98). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Marshall, E. (1995). NIH’s “gay gene” study questioned. Science, 268, 1841.
Marshall, J. C. (1984). Multiple perspectives on modularity. Cognition, 17, 209–242.
Martin, N. J., Holroyd, K. A., & Penzien, D. B. (1990). The headache-specific locus of control scale: 
Adaptation to recurrent headaches. Headache: The Journal of Head and Face Pain, 30(11), 729–734.
Maslow, A. (1954). Motivation and personality. New York: Harper & Row.
Masson, J. M. (1984a). The assault on truth: Freud’s suppression of the seduction theory. New York: 
Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
Masson, J. M. (1984b, February). Freud and the seduction theory. The Atlantic Monthly, 33–60.
Masten, A. S. (2001). Ordinary magic: Resilience processes in development. American Psychologist, 
56(3), 227–238.
Matthews, G. (2008). Challenges to personality neuroscience: Measurement, complexity and adapta-
tion. European Journal of Personality, 22, 400–403.
Mawer, S. (2006). Gregor Mendel: Planting the seeds of genetics. New York: Abrams.
Mawson, A. R., Jacobs, K. W., Winchester, Y., & Biundo, J. J. (1988). Sensation-seeking and traumatic 
spinal cord injury: Case-control study. Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 69(12), 
1039–1043.
McAdams, D. P. (1988). Biography, narrative, and lives: An introduction. Journal of Personality, 
56(1), 1–18.
McAdams, D. P. (1992). The five-factor model in personality: A critical appraisal. Journal of Personality, 
60(2), 229–361.
McAdams, D. P. (2009). The person: An introduction to the science of personality psychology (5th ed.). 
New York: Wiley.
McClelland, D. C., Atkinson, J. W., Clark, R. A., & Lowell, F. L. (1953). The achievement motive. New 
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
McCown, W., Keiser, R., Mulhearn, S., & Williamson, D. (1997). The role of personality and gender in 
preferences for exaggerated bass in music. Personality and Individual Differences, 23(4), 543–547.
McCrae, R. R. (1989). Why I advocate the five-factor model: Joint factor analyses of the NEO-PI with 
other instruments. In D. M. Buss & N. Cantor (Eds.), Personality psychology: Recent trends and 
emerging directions (pp. 237–245). New York: Springer-Verlag.
McCrae, R. R. (1990). Traits and trait names: How well is Openness represented in natural languages? 
European Journal of Personality, 4, 119–129.
McCrae, R. R. (2001). Trait psychology and culture: Exploring intercultural comparisons. Journal 
of Personality, 69, 819–846.
McCrae, R. R. (2002). NEO-PI-R data from 36 cultures: Further intercultural comparisons. In R. R. 
McCrae & J. Allik (Eds.), The five-factor model of personality across cultures (pp. 105–125). New 
York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.
McCrae, R. R. (2007). Aesthetic chills as a universal marker of openness to experience. Motivation 
and Emotion, 31, 5–11.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1983). Joint factors in self-reports and ratings: Neuroticism, extraver-
sion and openness to experience. Personality and Individual Differences, 4(3), 245–255.
397

References
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1985). Updating Norman’s “adequate taxonomy”: Intelligence and 
personality dimensions in natural language and questionnaires. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 49, 710–721.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1986). Personality, coping, and coping effectiveness in an adult sample. 
Journal of Personality, 54(2), 385–405.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1987). Validation of the five-factor model of personality across instru-
ments and observers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 81–90.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1989). Rotation to maximize the construct validity of factors in the 
NEO Personality Inventory. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 24, 107–124.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1996). Towards a new generation of personality theories: Theoretical 
contexts for the five-factor model. In J. S. Wiggins (Ed.), The five-factor model of personality: 
Theoretical perspectives (pp. 51–87). New York: Guilford Press.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1997a). Conceptions and correlates of openness to experience. In 
R. Hogan, J. Johnson, & S. Briggs (Eds.), Handbook of personality psychology (pp. 825–847). 
New York: Academic Press.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (1997b). Personality trait structure as a human universal. American 
Psychologist, 52(5), 509–516.
McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T. (2008). The five-factor theory of personality. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, 
& L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (pp. 159–181). New York: 
Guilford Press.
McCrae, R. R., Costa, P. T., Pedroso de Lima, M., Simões, A., Ostendorf, F., Angleitner, A., et al. 
(1999). Age differences in personality across the adult life span: Parallels in five cultures. Devel-
opmental Psychology, 35(2), 466–477.
McCrae, R. R., Costa, P. T., & Yik, M. S. M. (1996). Universal aspects of Chinese personality structure. 
In M. H. Bond (Ed.), The handbook of Chinese psychology. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.
McCrae, R. R., & John, O. P. (1992). An introduction to the five-factor model and its applications. 
Journal of Personality, 60, 175–215.
McCrae, R. R., Terracciano, A., & 78 Members of the Personality Profiles of Cultures Project. (2005a). 
Universal features of personality traits from the observer’s perspective: Data from 50 cultures. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 547–561.
McCrae, R. R., Terracciano, A., & 79 Members of the Personality Profiles of Cultures Project. 
(2005b). Personality profiles of cultures: Aggregate personality traits. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 89(3), 407–425.
McCrae, R. R., Yamagata, S., Jang, K. L., Riemann, R., Ando, J., Ono, Y., et al. (2008). Substance and 
artifact in the higher-order factors of the Big Five. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
95(2), 442–455.
McGuffin, P. (2004). Behavioral genomics: Where molecular genetics is taking psychiatry and psy-
chology. In L. F. DiLalla (Ed.), Behavioral genetics principles: Perspectives in development, person-
ality, and psychopathology (pp. 191–204). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
McGuire, W. J. (1967). Some impending reorientation in social psychology. Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 3(2), 124–139.
McKnight, J., & Malcolm, J. (2000). Is male homosexuality maternally linked? Psychology, Evolution, 
& Gender, 2, 229–239.
McNally, R. J. (2003a). Recovering memories of trauma: A view from the laboratory. Current Direc-
tions in Psychological Science, 12(1), 32–35.
McNally, R. J. (2003b). Remembering trauma. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press/Harvard University Press.
McNamara, L., & Ballard, M. E. (1999). Resting arousal, sensation seeking, and music preference. 
Genetic, social, and general psychology monographs, 125(3), 229–250.
McNaughton, N. (2008). Unscrambling the personality omelet. European Journal of Personality, 22, 
403–405.
McNaughton, N., & Corr, P. J. (2004). A two-dimensional neuropsychology of defense: Fear/anxiety 
and defensive distance. Neuroscience and the Biobehavioral Reviews, 28(3), 285–305.
McNaughton, N., & Corr, P. J. (2008). The neuropsychology of fear and anxiety: A foundation 
for reinforcement sensitivity theory. In P. J. Corr (Ed.), The reinforcement sensitivity theory of 
personality (pp. 44–94). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Mead, G. H. (1925). The genesis of the self and social control. International Journal of Ethics, 35, 
251–273.
398

References
Mednick, M. T., & Thomas, V. G. (1993). Women and the psychology of achievement: A view from 
the eighties. In F. L. Denmark & M. A. Paludi (Eds.), Psychology of women: A handbook of issues 
and theories. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Medvec, V. H., Madey, S. F., & Gilovich, T. (1995). When less is more: Counterfactual thinking and 
satisfaction among Olympic medalists. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(4), 603–610.
Meehl, P. E. (1956). Wanted—a good cookbook. American Psychologist, 11, 263–272.
Meek, R. (2007). The parenting possible selves of young fathers in prison. Psychology, Crime and 
Law, 13(4), 371–382.
Meltzhoff, A. N. (1990). Foundations for developing a concept of self: The role of imitation in relat-
ing self to other and the value of social mirroring, social modeling, and self-practice in infancy. 
In D. Cicchetti & M. Beeghly (Eds.), The self in transition: Infancy to childhood (pp. 139–164). 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Metalsky, G. I., Abramson, L. Y., Seligman, M. E. P., Semmel, A., & Peterson, C. (1982). Attributional 
styles and life events in the classroom: Vulnerability and invulnerability to depressive mood 
reactions. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 612–617.
Metalsky, G. I., Halberstadt, L. J., & Abramson, L. Y. (1987). Vulnerability to depressive mood reac-
tions: Toward a more powerful test of the diathesis-stress and causal mediation components 
of the reformulated theory of depression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 
386–393.
Metalsky, G. I., Joiner, T. E., Hardin, T. S., & Abramson, L. Y. (1993). Depressive reactions to failure in 
a naturalistic setting: A test of the hopelessness and self-esteem theories of depression. Journal 
of Abnormal Psychology, 102, 101–109.
Meyer, G. J., Finn, S. E., Eyde, L. D., Kay, G. G., Moreland, K. L., Dies, R. R., et al. (2001). Psychological 
testing and psychological assessment: A review of evidence and issues. American Psychologist, 
56(2), 128–165.
Meyer, I. H. (2003). Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual popula-
tions: Conceptual issues and research evidence. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 674–697.
Meyer, M. (1926). Review of handbuch der vergleichenden psychologie. Psychological Bulletin, 23(5), 
261–276.
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L. (1984). Psychoendocrine research on sexual orientation. current status and 
future options. Progress in Brain Research, 61, 375–398.
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L. (1997). The role of prenatal estrogens in sexual orientation. In L. Ellis & 
L. Ebertz (Eds.), Sexual orientation: Toward biological understanding (pp. 41–51). Westport, 
CT: Praeger.
Meyer-Bahlburg, H. F. L., Ehrhardt, A. A., Rosen, L. R., Gruen, R. S., Veridiano, N. P., Vann, F. H., et 
al. (1995). Prenatal estrogens and the development of homosexual orientation. Developmental 
Psychology, 31, 12–21.
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (2007). Attachment in adulthood. New York: Guilford Press.
Milam, J. E., Richardson, J. L., Marks, G., Kemper, C. A., & McCutchan, A. J. (2004). The roles 
of dispositional optimism and pessimism in HIV disease progression. Psychology and Health, 
19(2), 167–181.
Millar, R., & Shevlin, M. (2007). The development and factor structure of a career locus of control 
scale for use with school pupils. Journal of Career Development, 33(3), 224–249.
Miller, N. (1992). Out in the world: Gay and lesbian life from Buenos Aires to Bangkok. New York: 
Random House.
Miller, P. C., Lefcourt, H. M., & Ware, E. E. (1983). The construction and development of the Miller 
marital locus of control scale. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science/Revue canadienne des 
sciences du comportement, 15(3), 266–279.
Mills, J. (1976). A procedure for explaining experiments involving deception. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 2(1), 3–13.
Mischel, W. (1966). A social-learning view of sex differences in behavior. In E. E. Maccoby (Ed.), The 
development of sex differences (pp. 56–81). Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-affective system theory of personality: Reconceptual-
izing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in personality structure. Psychological 
Review, 102(2), 246–268.
Miserandino, M. (1996). Children who do well in school: Individual differences in perceived compe-
tence and autonomy in above-average children. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 203–214.
399

References
Miserandino, M. (1998). Attributional retraining as a method of improving athletic performance. 
Journal of Sport Behavior, 21, 286–297.
Missuz J. (n.d.). I am from  .  .  . Retrieved August 29, 2009, from http://www.missuzj.com/
mjblog/2005/11/index.html.
Mitchell, S. A. (1988). Relational concepts in psychoanalysis: An integration. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Mitchell, S. A. (1993). Hope and dread in psychoanalysis. New York: Basic Books.
Mitchell, S. A. (1997). Autonomy and influence in psychoanalysis. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press.
Miyake, A., Kost-Smith, L. E., Finkelstein, N. D., Pollock, S. J., Cohen, G. L., & Ito, T. A. (2010). 
Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: A classroom study of values affirma-
tion. Science, 330(6008), 1234–1237.
Moffitt, T. E., Caspi, A., & Rutter, M. (2006). Measured gene-environment interactions in psycho-
pathology. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 1(1), 5–27.
Mohr, J. J. (2008). Same-sex romantic attachment. In J. Cassidy & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of 
attachment (2nd ed., pp. 482–502). New York: Guilford Press.
Monroe, S. M., & Reid, M. W. (2008). Gene–environment interactions in depression research. 
Psychological Science, 19(10), 947–956.
Montemayor, R., & Eisen, M. (1977). The development of self-conceptions from childhood to 
adolescence. Developmental Psychology, 13(4), 314–319.
Moore, D. S., & Johnson, S. P. (2008). Mental rotation in human infants. Psychological Science, 19(11), 
1063–1066.
Morgan, C. D., & Murray, H. A. (1935). A method of investigating fantasies: The thematic appercep-
tion test. Archives of Neurology and Psychiatry, 34, 289–306.
Morgan, W. G. (1995). Origin and history of the thematic apperception test images. Journal of 
Personality Assessment, 65(2), 237–254.
Moskowitz, D. S., Suh, E. J., & Desaulniers, J. (1994). Situational influences on gender differences in 
agency and communion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 753–761.
Motley, M. T. (1985). Slips of the tongue. Scientific American, 253(3), 116–127.
Motley, M. T., & Baars, B. (1979). Effects of cognitive set upon laboratory induced verbal (Freudian) 
slips. Journal of Speech and Hearing Research, 22(3), 421–432.
Mroczek, D. K. (2007). The analysis of longitudinal data in personality research. In R. W. Robins, 
R. C. Fraley, & R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology 
(pp. 543–556). New York: Guilford Press.
Mroczek, D. K., & Spiro, A. (2003). Modeling intraindividual change in personality traits: Findings 
from the normative aging study. Journal of Gerontology, 58B(3), P153–P165.
Mroczek, D. K., & Spiro, A. (2007). Personality change influences mortality in older men. Psychologi-
cal Science, 18(5), 371–376.
Munafò, M. R., & Flint, J. (2009). Replication and heterogeneity in gene x environment interaction 
studies. International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology, 12, 727–729.
Munsey, C. (2009, July/August). Frisky, but more risky: High sensation-seekers’ quest for new expe-
riences leads some to the high-stress jobs society needs done but makes others vulnerable to 
reckless behavior. APA Monitor on Psychology, 37(7), 40.
Muris, P. (2006). Freud was right . . . about the origins of abnormal behavior. Journal of Child and 
Family Studies, 15(1), 1–12.
Murray, H. A. (1938). Explorations in personality. New York: Oxford University Press.
Muscarella, F. (2006). The evolution of male–male sexual behavior in humans: The alliance theory. 
In M. R. Kauth (Ed.), Handbook of the evolution of human sexuality (pp. 275–311). London: 
Haworth Press.
Musek, J. (2007). A general factor of personality: Evidence for the Big One in the five-factor model. 
Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 1213–1233.
Musson, D. M., & Helmreich, R. L. (2004). Personality characteristics and trait clusters in final stage 
astronaut selection. Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine, 75(4), 342–349.
Mustanski, B. S., & Bailey, J. M. (2003). A therapist’s guide to the genetics of human sexual orienta-
tion. Sexual and Relationship Therapy, 18(4), 429–436.
Mustanski, B. S., Chivers, M. L., & Bailey, J. M. (2002). A critical review of recent biological research 
on human sexual orientation. Annual Review of Sex Research, 13, 89–140.
400

References
Mutch, C. (2005). Higher-order factors of the Big Five model of personality: A reanalysis of Digman 
(1947). Psychological Reports, 96(1), 167–177.
Myers, D. G. (2000a). Feeling good about Fredrickson’s positive emotions. Prevention & Treatment, 
3(1), ArtID 2c.
Myers, D. G. (2000b). The funds, friends, and faith of happy people. American Psychologist, 55(1), 
56–67.
Myers, D. G., & Diener, E. (1995). Who is happy? Psychological Science, 6(1), 10–17.
Myers, I. B., & McCauley, M. H. (1985). Manual: A guide to the development and use of the Myers-
Briggs type indicator. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Najmi, S., & Wegner, D. M. (2006). The united states of repression. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 
29(5), 528–529.
Nakamura, J., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2009). Flow theory and research. In S. J. Lopez & C. R. Snyder 
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of positive psychology research (pp. 195–206). Oxford, England: Oxford 
University Press.
Narusyte, J., Andershed, A., Neiderhiser, J. M., & Lichtenstein, P. (2007). Aggression as a mediator 
of genetic contributions to the association between negative parent–child relationships and 
adolescent antisocial behavior. European Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 16, 128–137.
Nasby, W., & Read, N. W. (1997). The life voyage of a solo circumnavigator: integrating theoretical 
and methodological perspectives. Journal of Personality, 65, 785–1068.
Needles, D. J., & Abramson, L. Y. (1990). Positive life events, attributional style, and hopeful-
ness: Testing a model of recovery from depression. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 99(2), 
156–165.
Nettle, D. (2007). Personality: What makes you the way you are? Oxford, England: Oxford University 
Press.
Neuman, W. L. (1997). Social research methods: Qualitative and quantitative approaches. Boston: 
Allyn & Bacon.
Newman, L. S., Duff, K. J., & Baumeister, R. F. (1997). A new look at defensive projection: Thought 
suppression, accessibility, and biased person perception. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 72(5), 980–1001.
Newman, L. S., Duff, K. J., Hedberg, D. A., & Blitstein, J. (1996). Rebound effects in impression 
formation: Assimilation and contrast effects following thought suppression. Journal of Experi-
mental Social Psychology, 32, 460–483.
Newman, R. (2005). APA’s resilience initiative. Professional psychology: Research and practice, 36(3), 
227–229.
Ng, T. W. H., Sorensen, K. L., & Eby, L. T. (2006). Locus of control at work: A meta-analysis. Journal 
of Organizational Behavior, 27(8), 1057–1087.
Ng, W., & Diener, E. (2009). Feeling bad? The “power” of positive thinking may not apply to every-
one. Journal of Research in Personality, 43, 455–463.
Nichols, T. E., & Poline, J. (2009). Commentary on Vul et al.’s (2009) “Puzzlingly high correlations 
in fMRI studies of emotion, personality and social cognition.” Perspectives on Psychological Sci-
ence,4(3), 291–293.
Nix, G., Ryan, R. M., Manly, J. B., & Deci, E. L. (1999). Revitalization through self-regulation: The 
effects of autonomous and controlled motivation on happiness and vitality. Journal of Experi-
mental Social Psychology, 35, 266–284.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Girgus, J. S., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1986). Learned helplessness in children: A 
longitudinal study of depression, achievement, and explanatory style. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 51(2), 435–442.
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., & Hilt, L. M. (2009). Gender differences in depression. In I. H. Gotlib & C. L. 
Hammen (Eds.), Handbook of depression (2nd ed., pp. 386–404). New York: Guilford Press.
Nord, W. R., Connelly, F., & Daignault, G. (1974). Locus of control and aptitude test scores as predic-
tors of academic achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology, 66(6), 956–961.
Norem, J. N. (2003). Pessimism: Accentuating the positive possibilities. In E. E. C. Chang & L. L. J. 
Sanna (Eds.), Virtue, vice, and personality: The complexity of behavior (pp. 91–104). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association.
Norman, P., Bennett, P., Smith, C., & Murphy, S. (1997). Health locus of control and leisure-time 
exercise. Personality and Individual Differences, 23(5), 769–774.
401

References
Norman, W. T. (1963). Toward an adequate taxonomy of personality attributes: Replicated factor 
structure in peer nomination personality ratings. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 
66, 574–583.
Nosek, B. A., Greenwald, A. G., & Banaji, M. R. (2005). Understanding and using the implicit associa-
tion test: 2. Method variables and construct validity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
31(2), 166–180.
NPR. (2004). Google entices job-searchers with math puzzle. Retrieved May 27, 2010, from http://www.npr
.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=3916173.
Nunnally, J. C., & Bernstein, I. H. (1994). Psychometric theory (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Nurius, P. S., Casey, E., Lindhorst, T. P., & Macy, R. J. (2006). Identity health, stress, and support: Profiles 
of transition to motherhood among high risk adolescent girls. In C. Dunkel & J. Kerpelman (Eds.), 
Possible selves: Theory, research and application (pp. 97–121). New York: Nova Science Publishers.
Oda, M. (1983). Predicting sales performance of car salesmen by personality traits. Japanese Journal 
of Psychology, 54(2), 73–80.
Oliver, M. B., & Hyde, J. S. (1993). Gender differences in sexuality: A meta-anlaysis. Psychological 
Bulletin, 114, 29–51.
Omura, K., Constable, R. T., & Canli, T. (2005). Amygdala gray matter concentration is associated 
with extraversion and neuroticism. Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuropsychology, 16, 1905–1908.
Ones, D. S., Dilchert, S., Viswesvaran, C., & Judge, T. A. (2007). In support of personality assessment 
in organizational settings. Personnel Psychology, 60, 995–1027.
Ones, D. S., Viswesvaran, C., & Schmidt, F. L. (1993). Comprehensive meta-analysis of integrity test 
validity: Findings and implications for personnel selection and theories of job performance. 
Journal of Applied Psychology Monograph, 787(4), 679–703.
Ong, A. D., & Allaire, J. C. (2005). Cardiovascular intraindividual variability in later life: The influence 
of social connectedness and positive emotions. Psychology and Aging, 20(3), 476–485.
Ong, A. D., Bergeman, C. S., Bisconti, T. L., & Wallace, K. A. (2006). Psychological resilience, posi-
tive emotions, and successful adaptation to stress in later life. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 91(4), 730–749.
Ong, A. D., Edwards, L. M., & Bergeman, C. S. (2006). Hope as a source of resilience in later adult-
hood. Personality and Individual Differences, 41, 1263–1273.
OSS Assessment Staff (1948). Assessment of men: Selection of personnel for the Office of Strategic 
Service. New York: Rinehart & Company.
Overmier, J. B., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1967). Effects of inescapable shock upon subsequent escape 
and avoidance responding. Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology, 63(1), 28–33.
Oyserman, D. (1993). The lens of personhood: Viewing the self and others in a multicultural society. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65(5), 993–1009.
Oyserman, D., Coon, H. M., & Kemmelmeier, M. (2002). Rethinking individualism and collectivism: 
Evaluation of theoretical assumptions and meta-analyses. Psychological Bulletin, 128(1), 3–72.
Oyserman, D., & Lee, S. W. S. (2008). Does culture influence what and how we think? Effects of 
priming individualism and collectivism. Psychological Bulletin, 134(2), 311–342.
Oyserman, D., & Markus, H. R. (1990). Possible selves and delinquency. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 59(1), 112–125.
Oyserman, D., Terry, K., & Bybee, D. (2002). A possible selves intervention to enhance school involve-
ment. Journal of Adolescence, 25, 313–326.
Ozer, D. J. (2007). Evaluating effect size in personality research. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & 
R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 495–501). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Ozer, D. J., & Reise, S. P. (1994). Personality assessment. In L. W. Porter & M. R. Rosenzweig (Eds.), 
Annual review of psychology (Vol. 45, pp. 357–388). Palo Alto, CA: Annual Reviews.
Paradise, A. W., & Kernis, M. H. (2002). Self-esteem and psychological well-being: Implications of 
fragile self-esteem. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 21(4), 345–361.
Pardo, Y., Aguilar, R., Molinuevo, B., & Torrubia, R. (2007). Alcohol use as a behavioural sign of dis-
inhibition: Evidence from J. A. Gray’s model of personality. Addictive Behaviors, 32, 2398–2403.
Patrick, B. C., Skinner, E. A., & Connell, J. P. (1993). What motivates children’s behavior and emo-
tion? Joint effects of perceived control and autonomy in the academic domain. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 65(4), 781–791.
Patterson, C. J. (1997). Children of lesbian and gay parents. In T. H. Ollendick & R. J. Prinz (Eds.), 
Advances in clinical child psychology (Vol. 19, pp. 235–282). New York: Plenum Press.
402

References
Paulhus, D. L. (1991). Measurement and control of response bias. In J. P. Robinson, P. R. Shaver, & 
L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of personality and social psychological attitudes (pp 17–59). 
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Paulhus, D. L., & Trapnell, P. D. (2008). Self-presentation of personality: An agency-communion 
framework. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory 
and research (pp. 492–517). New York: Guilford Press.
Paulhus, D. L., & Vazire, S. (2007). The self-report method. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & R. F. 
Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 224–258). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Paunonen, S. V. (2002). Design and construction of the supernumerary personality inventory (Research 
Bulletin 763). London, Ontario: University of Western Ontario.
Paunonen, S. V., & Jackson, D. N. (2000). What is beyond the Big Five? Plenty! Journal of Personality, 
68(5), 821–835.
Pavlov, I. P. (1928). Lectures on conditioned reflexes. London: Martin Lawrence.
Pelham, B. W. (1993). The ideographic nature of human personality: Examples of the idiographic 
self-concept. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64(4), 665–677.
Pelletier, L. G., Fortier, M. S., Vallerand, R. J., Tuson, K. M., Brière, N. M., & Blais, M. R. (1995). 
Toward a new measure of intrinsic motivation, extrinsic motivation, and amotivation in sports: 
The sport motivation scale (SMS). Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 17, 35–53.
Peltonen, L., & McKusick, V. A. (2001). Genomics and medicine: Dissecting human disease in the post-
genomic era. Science, 291(5507), 1224–1229.
Peplau, L. A. (2001). Rethinking women’s sexual orientation: An interdisciplinary, relationship-
focused approach. Personal Relationships, 8, 1–19.
Peplau, L. A. (2003). Human sexuality: How do men and women differ? Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 12(2), 37–40.
Peplau, L. A., & Garnets, L. D. (2000). A new paradigm for understanding women’s sexuality and 
sexual orientation. Journal of Social Issues, 56(2), 329–350.
Peplau, L. A., Garnets, L. D., Spalding, L. R., Conley, T. D., & Veniegas, R. C. (1998). A critique 
of Bem’s “exotic becomes erotic” theory of sexual orientation. Psychological Review, 105(2), 
387–394.
Peplau, L. A., & Huppin, M. (2008). Masculinity, femininity and the development of sexual orienta-
tions in women. Journal of Gay and Lesbian Mental Health, 12(1/2), 145–165.
Peplau, L. A., Spalding, L. R., Conley, T. D., & Veniegas, R. C. (1999). The development of sexual 
orientation in women. Annual Review of Sex Research, 10, 70–99.
Perry, V. G. (2008). Giving credit where credit is due: The psychology of credit ratings. The Journal 
of Behavioral Finance, 9, 15–21.
Petersen, J. L., & Hyde, J. S. (2010). A meta-analytic review of research on gender differences in 
sexuality, 1993–2007. Psychological Bulletin, 136(1), 21–38.
Peterson, C. (1988). Explanatory style as a risk factor for illness. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 
12, 117–130.
Peterson, C. (2000). The future of optimism. American Psychologist, 55(1), 44–55.
Peterson, C., & Barett, L. C. (1987). Explanatory style and academic performance among university 
freshmen. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(3), 603–607.
Peterson, C., & Bossio, L. M. (2001). Optimism and physical well-being. In E. C. Chang (Ed.), Opti-
mism & pessimism: Implications for theory, research, and practice (pp. 127–145). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association.
Peterson, C., & Chang, E. C. (2003). Optimism and flourishing. In C. L. M. Keyes & J. Haidt (Eds.), 
Flourishing: Positive psychology and the life well-lived (pp. 55–79). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association.
Peterson, C., & De Avila, M. (1995). Optimistic explanatory style and the perception of health 
problems. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 51, 128–132.
Peterson, C., Luborsky, L., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1983). Attributions and depressive mood 
shifts: A case study using the symptom-context method. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 
92, 96–103.
Peterson, C., Maier, S. F., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1993). Learned helplessness: A theory for the age of 
personal control. New York: Oxford University Press.
Peterson, C., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1984). Causal explanations as a risk factor for depression: Theory 
and evidence. Psychological Review, 91, 347–374.
403

References
Peterson, C., Seligman, M. E. P., & Vaillant, G. E. (1988). Pessimistic explanatory style is a risk 
factor for physical illness: A thirty-five year longitudinal study. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 55, 23–27.
Peterson, C., Semmel, A., von Baeyer, C., Abramson, L. Y., Metalsky, G. I., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1982). 
The attributional style questionnaire. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 6(3), 287–300.
Peterson, C., & Steen, T. A. (2002). Optimistic explanatory style. In C. R. Snyder & S. J. Lopez (Eds.), 
Handbook of positive psychology (pp. 244–256). London: Oxford University Press.
Peterson, C., & Villanova, P. (1988). An expanded attributional style questionnaire. Journal of 
Abnormal Psychology, 97(1), 87–89.
Phares, E. J., & Wilson, K. G. (1972). Responsibility attribution: Role of outcome severity, situational 
ambiguity, and internal–external control. Journal of Personality, 40(3), 392–406.
Pickering, A. D., & Corr, P. J. (2008). J. A. Gray’s reinforcement sensitivity theory (RST) of personality. 
In G. J. Boyle, G. Matthews, & D. H. Saklofske (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of personality theory 
and assessment: Vol 1. Personality theories and models (pp. 238–256). Los Angeles: Sage.
Pickering, A. D., Corr, P. J., Powell, J. H., Kumari, V., Thornton, J. C., & Gray, J. A. (1997). Individual 
differences in reactions to reinforcing stimuli are neither black nor white: To what extent are 
they gray? In H. Nyborg (Ed.), The scientific study of personality: Tribute to Hans J. Eysenck at 
eighty (pp. 36–67). London: Elsevier.
Pickering, A. D., & Gray, J. A. (1999). The neuroscience of personality. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John 
(Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (pp. 277–299). New York: Guilford Press.
Piedmont, R. L. (1999). Does spirituality represent the sixth factor of personality? Spiritual transcen-
dence and the five-factor model. Journal of Personality, 67(6), 985–1013.
Piedmont, R. L., & Leach, M. M. (2002). Cross-cultural generalizability of the spiritual transcendence 
scale in India. American Behavioral Scientist, 45(12), 1888–1901.
Pines, H. A., & Julian, J. W. (1972). Effects of task and social demands on locus of control differences 
in information processing. Journal of Personality, 40, 407–416.
Piotrowski, C., & Armstrong, T. (2006). Current recruitment and selection practices: A national 
survey of Fortune 1000 firms. North American Journal of Psychology, 8(3), 489–496.
Plomin, R., Asbury, K., & Dunn, J. (2001). Why are children in the same family so different? Non-
shared environment a decade later. Canadian Journal of Psychiatry, 46, 225–233.
Plomin, R., & Caspi, A. (1999). Behavioral genetics and personality. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John 
(Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (2nd ed., pp. 251–276). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Plomin, R., & Daniels, D. (1987). Why are children in the same family so different from one another? 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 10, 1–60.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., Craig, I. W., & McGuffin, P. (2003). Behavioral genetics. In R. Plomin, J. C. 
DeFries, I. W. Craig, & P. McGuffin (Eds.), Behavioral genetics in the postgenomic era (pp. 3–15). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., & Loehlin, J. C. (1977). Genotype–environment interaction and correlation 
in the analysis of human behavior. Psychological Bulletin, 84(2), 309–322.
Plomin, R., DeFries, J. C., McClearn, G. E., & McGuffin, P. (2008). Behavioral genetics. New York: 
Worth.
Plomin, R., Happé, F., & Caspi, A. (2002). Personality and cognitive abilities. In P. McGuffin, M. J. 
Owen, & I. R. Gottesman (Eds.), Psychiatric genetics and genomics (pp. 77–112). Oxford, England: 
Oxford University Press.
Plotnik, J. M., de Waal, F. B. M., & Reiss, D. (2006). Self-recognition in an Asian elephant. Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(45), 17053–17057.
Pomeroy, W. B. (1972). Dr. Kinsey and the Institute for Sex Research. New York: Harper & Row.
Pontius, A. A. (1997). Lack of sex differences among east Ecuadorian school children on geometric 
figure rotation and face drawings. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 85, 72–74.
Pope, H. G., Oliva, P. S., & Hudson, J. I. (1999). Repressed memories: The scientific status. In D. L. 
Faigman, D. H. Kaye, M. J. Saks, & J. Sanders (Eds.), Modern scientific evidence: The law and 
science of expert testimony (Vol. 1, pp. 115–155). Eagan, MN: West.
Posada, G., Gao, Y., Wu, F., Posada, R., Tascon, M., Schoelmerich, A., et al. (1995). The secure-base 
phenomenon across cultures: Children’s behavior, mothers’ preferences, and experts’ concepts. 
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 60(2–3), 27–48.
Prior, H., Schwarz, A., & Güntürkün, O. (2008). Mirror-induced behavior in the magpie (Pica pica): 
Evidence of self-recognition. PLoS Biology, 6(8), e202.
404

References
Prociuk, T. J., & Breen, L. J. (1974). Locus of control, study habits and attitudes, and college academic 
performance. Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary and Applied, 88(1), 91–95.
Proudfoot, J. G., Corr, P. J., Guest, D. E., & Dunn, G. (2009). Cognitive-behavioural training to 
change attributional style improves employee well-being, job satisfaction, productivity, and 
turnover. Personality and Individual Differences, 46, 147–153.
Pullman, H., Raudsepp, L., & Allik, J. (2006). Stability and change in adolescents’ personality: A 
longitudinal study. European Journal of Personality, 20, 447–459.
Pyszczynski, T., Greenberg, J., & Holt, K. (1985). Maintaining consistency between self-serving beliefs 
and available data: A bias in information processing. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
11, 179–190.
Quinn, P. C., & Liben, L. S. (2008). A sex difference in mental rotation in young infants. Psychological 
Science, 19(11), 1067–1070.
Rahim, M. A. (1997). Relationships of stress, locus of control, and social support to psychiatric 
symptoms and propensity to leave a job: A field study with managers. Journal of Business and 
Psychology, 12(2), 159–174.
Rajecki, D. W., Ickes, W., & Tanford, S. (1981). Locus of control and reactions to strangers. Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 7(2), 282–289.
Ramanaiah, N. V., & Sharpe, J. P. (1999). Hardiness and major personality factors. Psychological 
Reports, 84, 497–500.
Ramchand, R., Karney, B. R., Osilla, K. C., Burns, R. M., & Caldarone, L. B. (2008). Prevalence of 
PTSD, depression, and TBI among returning service members. In T. Tanielian & L. H. Jaycox 
(Eds.), Invisible wounds of war: Psychological and cognitive injuries, their consequences, and 
services to assist recovery (pp. 35–85). Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation.
Rawlings, D., & Ciancarelli, V. (1997). Music preferences and the five-factor model of the NEO 
personality inventory. Psychology of Music, 25, 120–132.
Rawlings, D., & Dawe, S. (2008). Psychoticism and impulsivity. In G. J. Boyle, G. Matthews, & D. H. 
Saklofske (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of personality theory and assessment: Vol. 1. Personality 
theories and modules (pp. 357–378). Los Angeles: Sage.
Reeve, J., & Deci, E. L. (1996). Elements of the competitive situation that affect intrinsic motivation. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22(1), 24–33.
Reeve, J., & Jang, H. (2006). What teachers say and do to support students’ autonomy during a learning 
activity. Journal of Educational Psychology, 98(1), 209–218.
Reeves, E. G. (2009). Can I wear my nose ring to the interview?: A crash course in finding, landing, and 
keeping your first real job. New York: Workman.
Regan, P. C., & Berscheid, E. (1995). Gender differences in beliefs about the causes of male and female 
sexual desire. Personal Relationships, 2, 345–358.
Regan, P. C., & Berscheid, E. (1996). Beliefs about the state, goals, and objects of sexual desire. Journal 
of Sex and Marital Therapy, 22, 110–120.
Reilly, P. R. (2006). The strongest boy in the world. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor 
Laboratory Press.
Reis, H. T., & Patrick, B. P. (1996). Attachment and intimacy: Component processes. In E. T. Higgins 
& A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 523–563). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Reiss, D., & Marino, L. (2001). Mirror self-recognition in the bottlenose dolphin: A case of cognitive 
convergence. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 98(10), 5937–5942.
Reitz, H. J., & Jewell, L. N. (1979). Sex, locus of control, and job involvement: A six-country investi-
gation. Academy of Management Journal, 22(1), 72–80.
Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2003). The do re mi’s of everyday life: The structure and personality 
correlates of music preferences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(6), 1236–1256.
Rettew, D., & Reivich, K. (1995). Sports and explanatory style. In G. M. Buchanan & M. E. P. Seligman 
(Eds.), Explanatory style (pp. 173–185). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Reuter, M., & Montag, C. (2008). Switching the perspective from neuroscience to personality. European 
Journal of Personality, 22, 405–407.
Revelle, W. (2007). Experimental approaches to the study of personality. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, 
& R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 37–61). New 
York: Guilford Press.
Revelle, W., & Wilt, J. (2008). Personality is more than reinforcement sensitivity. European Journal 
of Personality, 22, 407–409.
405

References
Reverby, S. M. (2009). The infamous syphilis study and its legacy. Chapel Hill: University of North 
Carolina Press.
Rhodewalt, F., & Zone, J. B. (1989). Appraisal of life change, depression, and illness in hardy and 
nonhardy women. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56(1), 81–88.
Rice, G., Anderson, C., Risch, N., & Ebers, G. (1999). Male homosexuality: Absence of linkage to 
microsatellite markers at Xq28. Science, 284, 665–667.
Riemann, R., Angleitner, A., & Strelau, J. (1997). Genetic and environmental influences on personal-
ity: A study of twins reared together using the self- and peer report NEO-FFI scales. Journal of 
Personality, 65, 449–476.
Riketta, M., & Ziegler, R. (2006). Self-ambivalence and self-esteem. Current Psychology: Developmental, 
Learning, Personality, Social, 25(3), 192–211.
Roberts, B. W. (1997). Plaster or plasticity: Are adult work experiences associated with personality 
change in women? Journal of Personality, 65(2), 205–232.
Roberts, B. W. (2010, Winter). Personality, continuity, and change. In C. Berger (Ed.), Psychology times 
(pp. 1, 4–5). Champaign: Psychology Department, University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign.
Roberts, B. W., & Bogg, T. (2004). A longitudinal study of the relationships between conscientious-
ness and the social-environmental factors and substance-use behaviors that influence health. 
Journal of Personality, 72(2), 325–353.
Roberts, B. W., Caspi, A., & Moffitt, T. E. (2003). Work experiences and personality development in 
young adulthood. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(3), 582–593.
Roberts, B. W., & Chapman, C. N. (2000). Change in dispositional well-being and its relation to role 
quality: A 30-year longitudinal study. Journal of Research in Personality, 34, 26–41.
Roberts, B. W., & DelVecchio, W. F. (2000). The rank-order consistency of personality traits from child-
hood to old age: A quantitative review of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 126(1), 3–25.
Roberts, B. W., & Helson, R. (1997). Changes in culture, changes in personality: The influence of individ-
ualism in a longitudinal study of women. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 641–651.
Roberts, B. W., Kuncel, N. R., & Viechtbauer, W. (2007). Meta-analysis in personality psychology. In 
R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality 
psychology (pp. 652–672). New York: Guilford Press.
Roberts, B. W., & Mroczek, D. (2008). Personality trait change in adulthood. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 17(1), 31–35.
Roberts, B. W., Walton, K.E., Bogg, T., & Caspi, A. (2006). De-investment in work and non-normative 
personality trait change in young adulthood. European Journal of Personality, 20, 461–474.
Roberts, B. W., Walton, K. E., & Viechtbauer, W. (2006). Patterns of mean-level change in personal-
ity traits across the life course: A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 
132(1), 1–25.
Roberts, B. W., Wood, D., & Caspi, A. (2008). The development of personality traits in adulthood. 
In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research 
(pp. 375–398). New York: Guilford Press.
Robins, C. J., & Hayes, A. M. (1995). The role of causal attributions in the prediction of depression. 
In G. M. Buchanan & M. E. P. Seligman (Eds.), Explanatory style (pp. 71–98). Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Robins, R. W., Caspi, A., & Moffitt, T. E. (2002). It’s not just who you’re with, it’s who you are: 
Personality and relationship experiences across multiple relationships. Journal of Personality, 
70(6), 925–964.
Robins, R. W., Caspi, A., Moffitt, T. E., & Stouthamer-Loeber, M. (1996). Resilient, overcontrolled, 
and undercontrolled boys: Three replicable personality types. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 70(1), 157–171.
Robins, R. W., Fraley, R. C., & Krueger, R. F. (Eds.). (2007). Handbook of research methods in personal-
ity psychology. New York: Guilford Press.
Robins, R. W., Tracy, J. L., & Sherman, J. W. (2007). What kinds of methods do personality psycholo-
gists use? A survey of journal editors and editorial board members. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, 
& R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 673–678). 
New York: Guilford Press.
Robinson-Whelen, S., Kim, C., MacCallum, R. C., & Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. (1997). Distinguishing 
optimism from pessimism in older adults: Is it more important to be optimistic or not to be 
pessimistic? Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(6), 1345–1353.
406

References
Rodin, J., & Langer, E. J. (1977). Long-term effects of a control-relevant intervention with the institu-
tionalized aged. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(12), 897–902.
Roese, N. J., Sanna, L. J., & Galinsky, A. D. (2005). The mechanics of imagination: Automaticity and 
control in counterfactual thinking. In R. R. Hassin, J. R. Uleman, & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The new 
unconscious (pp. 138–170). New York: Oxford University Press.
Rofé, Y. (2008). Does repression exist? Memory, pathogenic unconscious and clinical evidence. 
Review of General Psychology, 12(1), 63–85.
Rogers, C. R. (1951). Client-centered therapy: Its current practice, implications, and theory. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C. R. (1968). On becoming a person: A therapist’s view of psychotherapy. Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin.
Rorschach, H. (1921). Psychodiagnostics: A diagnostic test based on perception. New York: Grune & 
Stratton.
Rose, R. J., & Dick, D. M. (2004/2005). Gene–environment interplay in adolescent drinking behavior. 
Alcohol Research and Health, 28(4), 222–229.
Rose, R. J., Viken, R. J., Dick, D. M., Bates, J. E., Pulkkinen, L., & Kaprio, J. (2003). It does take a vil-
lage: Nonfamilial environments and children’s behavior. Psychological Science, 14(3), 271–277.
Rosenberg, M. (1965). Society and the adolescent self-image. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Rosenberg, S. (1989). A study of personality in literary autobiography: An analysis of Thomas Wolfe’s 
Look Homeward Angel. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56(3), 416–430.
Rosenthal, R., & Jacobson, L. (1968). Pygmalion in the classroom: Teacher expectations and student 
intellectual development. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Ross, T. P., Calhoun, E., Cox, T., Wenner, C., Kono, W., & Pleasant, M. (2007). The reliability and 
validity of qualitative scores for the Controlled Oral Word Association Test. Archives of Clinical 
Neuropsychology, 22(4), 475–488.
Rosse, J. G., Stecher, M. D., Miller, J. L., & Levin, R. A. (1998). The impact of response distortion 
on preemployment personality testing and hiring decisions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 83, 
634–644.
Rothstein, M. G., & Goffin, R. D. (2006). The use of personality measures in personnel selection: 
What does current research support? Human Resource Management Review, 16, 155–180.
Rotter, J. B. (1966). Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of reinforcement. 
Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 80(1), 1–28.
Rotter, J. B. (1975). Some problems and misconceptions related to the construct of internal ver-
sus external control of reinforcement. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 43(1), 
56–67.
Rotter, J. B., Chance, J. E., & Phares, E. J. (1972). Applications of social learning theory of personality. 
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Rowatt, W. C., Cunningham, M. R., & Druen, P. B. (1998). Deception to get a date. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 1228–1242.
Rowe, J. L., Montgomery, G. H., Duberstein, P. R., & Bovbjerg, D. H. (2005). Health locus of control 
and perceived risk for breast cancer in healthy women. Behavioral Medicine, 31, 33–40.
Rowling, J. K. (1999). Harry Potter and the chamber of secrets. New York: Scholastic.
Rubenzer, S. J., Faschingbauer, T. R., & Ones, D. S. (2000). Assessing the U.S. presidents using the 
revised NEO Personality Inventory. Assessment, 7(4), 403–420.
Rubinstein, G., & Strul, S. (2007). The five factor model (FFM) among four groups of male and 
female professionals. Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 931–937.
Ruble, D. (1983). The development of social comparison processes and their role in achievement-
related self-socialization. In E. T. Higgins, D. Ruble, & W. Hartup (Eds.), Social cognition and 
social behavior (pp. 134–157). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ruchkin, V., Koposov, R. A., af Klinteberg, B., Oreland, L., & Grigorenko, E. L. (2005). Platelet 
MAO-B, personality, and psychopathology. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 114, 477–482.
Rudman, L. A., & Glick, P. (1999). Feminized management and backlash toward agentic women: The 
hidden costs to women of a kinder, gentler image of middle managers. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 77, 1004–1010.
Rushton, J. P., Bons, T. A., & Hur, Y. (2008). The genetics and evolution of the general factor of 
personality. Journal of Research in Personality, 42, 1173–1185.
407

References
Rushton, J. P., & Irwing, P. (2008). A general factor of personality (GFP) from two meta-analyses of 
the Big Five: Digman (1997) and Mount, Barrick, Scullen, and Rounds (2005). Personality and 
Individual Differences, 45, 679–683.
Rushton, J. P., & Irwing, P. (2009). A general factor of personality in the Comrey Personality 
Scales, the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory-2, and the Multicultural Personality 
Questionnaire. Personality and Individual Differences, 46, 437–442.
Rutter, M. (2008). Implications of attachment theory and research for child care policies. In J. Cassidy 
& P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Handbook of attachment (pp. 958–974). New York: Guilford Press.
Ryan, R. M., Chirkov, V. I., Little, T. D., Sheldon, K. M., Timoshina, E., & Deci, E. L. (1999). The 
American dream in Russia: Extrinsic aspirations and well-being in two cultures. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 25(12), 1509–1524.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motiva-
tion, social development, and well-being. American Psychologist, 55, 68–78.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2008a). Self-determination theory and the role of basic psychological 
needs in personality and the organization of behavior. In O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin 
(Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research (pp. 654–678). New York: Guilford Press.
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2008b). A self-determination theory approach to psychotherapy: The 
motivational basis for effective change. Canadian Psychology, 49(3), 186–193.
Ryan, R. M., Deci, E. L., & Grolnick, W. S. (1995). Autonomy, relatedness, and the self: Their relation to 
development and psychopathology. In D. Cicchetti & D. J. Cohen (Eds.), Developmental psycho-
pathology: Theory and methods (pp. 618–655). New York: Wiley.
Ryan, R. M., Patrick, H., Deci, E. L., & Williams, G. C. (2008). Facilitating health behaviour change 
and its maintenance: Interventions based on self-determination theory. The European Health 
Psychologist, 10, 2–5.
Sackett, P. R., Burris, L. R., & Callahan, C. (1989). Integrity testing for personnel selection: An update. 
Personnel Psychology, 42, 491–529.
Sackett, P. R., & Wanek, J. E. (1996). New developments in the use of measures of honesty, integ-
rity, conscientiousness, dependability, trustworthiness, and reliability for personnel selection. 
Personnel Psychology, 49, 787–829.
Salovey, P., & Mayer, J. D. (1994). Emotional intelligence. Imagination, Cognition, and Personality, 
9, 185–211.
Saltzer, E. B. (1982). The Weight Locus of Control (WLOC) scale: A specific measure for obesity 
research. Journal of Personality Assessment, 46, 620–628.
Sampson, S. M. (2006). Slow-frequency rTMS reduces fibromyalgia pain. Pain Medicine, 7(2), 
115–118.
Santana, M. A. (2005). The girl. In Arts Council of Princeton (Ed.), Under age (Vol. 17, pp. 16–17). 
Princeton, NJ: Arts Council of Princeton.
Satterfield, J. M., Monahan, M., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1997). Law school performance predicted by 
explanatory style. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 15, 95–105.
Satterfield, J. M., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1994). Military aggression and risk predicted by explanatory 
style. Psychological Science, 5, 77–82.
Saucier, G. (1992). Openness versus intellect: Much ado about nothing? European Journal of 
Personality, 6, 381–386.
Saucier, G. (1997). Effects of variable selection on the factor structure of person descriptors. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(6), 1296–1312.
Saucier, G. (2003). Factor structure of English-language personality type-nouns. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 85(4), 695–708.
Saucier, G., Georgiades, S., Tsaousis, I., & Goldberg, L. R. (2005). The factor structure of Greek 
personality adjectives. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88(5), 856–875.
Saucier, G., & Goldberg, L. R. (1996). The language of personality: Lexical perspectives on the five-
factor model. In J. S. Wiggins (Ed.), The five-factor model of personality: Theoretical perspectives 
(pp. 21–50). New York: Guilford Press.
Saucier, G., & Goldberg, L. R. (1998). What is beyond the Big Five? Journal of Personality, 66(4), 
495–524.
Saucier, G., & Goldberg, L. R. (2001). Lexical studies of indigenous personality factors: Premises, 
products, and prospects. Journal of Personality, 69, 847–879.
Sauser, W. I. (2007). Employee theft: Who, how, why, and what can be done. SAM Advanced Manage-
ment Journal, 72(3), 13–25.
408

References
Savin-Williams, R. C. (1998). “. . . And then I became gay”: Young men’s stories. New York: Routledge.
Savin-Williams, R. C. (2006). Who’s gay? Does it matter? Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 15(1), 40–44.
Savin-Williams, R. C. (2007). The new gay teenager. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Savory, E. (2004). Indepth: Meditation in depth meditation: The pursuit of happiness. Retrieved July 
17, 2009 from http://www.cbc.ca/news/background/meditation/.
Scarr, S., & McCartney, K. (1983). How people make their own environments: A theory of genotype 
environment effects. Child Development, 54, 424–435.
Schacter, D. L. (1987). Implicit memory: History and current status. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 13, 501–518.
Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1985). Optimism, coping and health: Assessment and implications 
of generalized outcome expectancies. Health Psychology, 4, 219–247.
Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1987). Dispositional optimism and physical well-being: The influence 
of generalized outcome expectancies on health. Journal of Personality, 55, 169–210.
Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1988). A model of behavioral self-regulation: Translating inten-
tion into action. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 21, 
pp. 303–346). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1992). Effects of optimism on psychological and physical well-being: 
Theoretical overview and empirical update. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 16, 201–228.
Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1993). On the power of positive thinking: The benefits of being 
optimistic. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 2(1), 26–30.
Scheier, M. F., Carver, C. S., & Bridges, M. W. (1994). Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism 
(and trait anxiety, self-mastery, and self-esteem): A reevaluation of the Life Orientation Test. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 1063–1078.
Scheier, M. F., Carver, C. S., & Bridges, M. W. (2001). Optimism, pessimism, and psychological 
well-being. In E. C. Chang (Ed.), Optimism & pessimism: Implications for theory, research, and 
practice (pp. 189–216). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Scheier, M. F., Matthews, K. A., Owens, J. F., Magovern, G. J., Lefebvre, R. C., Abbot, A. R., et al. 
(1989). Dispositional optimism and recovery from coronary artery bypass surgery: The benefi-
cial effects on physical and psychological well-being. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
57(6), 1024–1040.
Scheier, M. F., Weintraub, J. K., & Carver, C. S. (1986). Coping with stress divergent strategies of 
optimists and pessimists. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1257–1264.
Schein, E., & Bernstein, P. (2008). Identical strangers: A memoir of twins separated and reunited. New 
York: Random House.
Schlenker, B. R., & Pontari, B. A. (2000). The strategic control of information: Impression manage-
ment and self-presentation in daily life. In A. Tesser, R. B. Felson, & J. M. Suls (Eds.), Psychological 
perspectives on self and identity. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Schmitt, D. P., & Allik, J. (2005). Simultaneous administration of the Rosenberg self-esteem scale in 
53 nations: Exploring the universal and culture-specific features of global self-esteem. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 89(4), 623–642.
Schmitt, D. P., & Buss, D. M. (2000). Sexual dimensions of person description: Beyond or subsumed 
by the Big Five? Journal of Research in Personality, 34, 141–177.
Schmitt, D. P., Realo, A., Voracek, M., & Allik, J. (2008). Why can’t a man be more like a woman? 
Sex differences in Big Five personality traits across 55 cultures. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 94(1), 168–182.
Schmitz, N., Neumann, W., & Oppermann, R. (2000). Stress, burnout and locus of control in 
German nurses. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 37, 95–99.
Schroth, M. L. (1991). Dyadic adjustment and sensation seeking compatibility. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 12(5), 467–471.
Schuerger, J. M., Zarrella, K. L., & Hotz, A. S. (1989). Factors that influence the temporal stability of 
personality by questionnaire. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 777–783.
Schulman, P. (1995). Explanatory style and achievement in school and work. In G. M. Buchanan & 
M. E. P. Seligman (Eds.), Explanatory style (pp. 159–171). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Schulman, P. (1999). Applying learned optimism to increase sales productivity. Journal of Personal 
Selling and Sales Management, 19(1), 31–37.
Schultz, R., Heckhausen, J., & Locher, J. L. (1991). Adult development, control, and adaptive 
functioning. Journal of Social Issues, 47, 177–196.
409

References
Schultz, T. (2006). File:dti-sagittal-fibers.jpg. Retrieved July 27, 2009, from http://en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/File:DTI-sagittal-fibers.jpg.
Schultz, W. T. (2005). Handbook of psychobiography. New York: Oxford University Press.
Schutter, D. J. L. G. (2009). Transcranial magnetic stimulation. In E. Harmon-Jones & J. S. Beer 
(Eds.), Methods in social neuroscience (pp. 233–260). New York: Guilford Press.
Scollon, C. N., & Diener, E. (2006). Love, work, and changes in extraversion and neuroticism over 
time. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91(6), 1152–1165.
Seashore, C. E. (1912). Review of Charles H. Olin’s Phrenology. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
3(4), 227.
Seavey, C. A., Katz, P. A., & Zalk, S. R. (1975). Baby X: The effect of gender labels on adult responses 
to infants. Sex Roles, 1(2), 103–109.
Sedikides, C., & Green, J. D. (2006). The mnemic neglect model: Experimental demonstrations of 
inhibitory repression in normal adults. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 29(5), 532–533.
Seeman, M. (1963). Alienation and social learning in a reformatory. American Journal of Sociology, 
69, 270–284.
Seeman, M., & Evans, J. (1962). Alienation and learning in a hospital setting. American Sociological 
Review, 27, 772–782.
Segall, M., & Wynd, C. A. (1990). Health conception, health locus of control, and power as predictors 
of smoking behavior change. American Journal of Health Promotion, 4, 338–344.
Segerstrom, S. C. (2001). Optimism, goal conflict, and stressor-related immune change. Journal of 
Behavioral Medicine, 24, 441–467.
Segerstrom, S. C. (2005). Optimism and immunity: Do positive thoughts always lead to positive 
effects? Brain Behavior and Immunity, 19, 195–200.
Segerstrom, S. C., Taylor, S. E., Kemeny, M. E., & Fahey, J. L. (1998). Optimism is associated with 
mood, coping, and immune change in response to stress. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 74, 1646–1655.
Selander, J., Marnetoft, S., Åkerström, B., & Asplund, R. (2005). Locus of control and regional 
differences in sickness absence in Sweden. Disability and Rehabilitation: An International, 
Multidisciplinary Journal, 27(16), 925–928.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1975). Helplessness: On depression, development, and death. San Francisco: 
Freeman.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1990). Learned optimism. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Seligman, M. E. P. (1995). The optimistic child. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Seligman, M. E. P., Castellon, C., Cacciola, J., Schulman, P., Luborsky, L., Ollove, M., et al. (1988). 
Explanatory style change during cognitive therapy for unipolar depression. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology, 97, 13–18.
Seligman, M. E. P., & Maier, S. F. (1967). Failure to escape traumatic shock. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 74(1), 1–9.
Seligman, M. E. P., Nolen-Hoeksema, S., Thornton, K. M., & Thornton, N. (1990). Explanatory 
style as a mechanism of disappointing athletic performance. Psychological Science, 1, 143–146.
Seligman, M. E. P., & Schulman, P. (1986). Explanatory style as a predictor of productivity and quit-
ting among life insurance sales agents. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 832–838.
Seligman, M. E. P., Schulman, P., DeRubeis, R. J., & Hollon, S. D. (1999). The prevention of depres-
sion and anxiety. Prevention & Treatment, 2, ArtID8.
Seligman, M. E. P., Steen, T. A., Park, N., & Peterson, C. (2005). Positive psychology progress: Empirical 
validation of interventions. American Psychologist, 60(5), 410–421.
Selye, H. (1956). The stress of life. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Shaffer, D. R. (2009). Social and personality development (6th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Sharps, M. J., Price, J. L., & Williams, J. K. (1994). Spatial cognition and gender: Instructional and 
stimulus influences on mental image rotation performance. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 
18, 413–425.
Sharps, M. J., Welton, A. L., & Price, J. L. (1993). Gender and task in the determination of spatial 
cognitive performance. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 17, 7183.
Shaver, P. R., & Clark, C. L. (1994). The psychodynamics of adult romantic attachment. In J. M. 
Masling & R. F. Bornstein (Eds.), Empirical perspectives on object relations theory (pp. 105–156). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Shaver, P. R., & Mikulincer, M. (2005). Attachment theory and research: Resurrection of the psycho-
dynamic approach to personality. Journal of Research in Personality, 39, 22–45.
410

References
Shaver, P. R., & Mikulincer, M. (2007). Attachment theory and research. In A. W. Kruglanski & E. T. 
Higgins (Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 650–677). New York: Guilford 
Press.
Sheldon, K. M., Elliot, A. J., Kim, Y., & Kasser, T. (2001). What is satisfying about satisfying events? 
Testing 10 candidate psychological needs. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80(2), 
325–339.
Sheldon, K. M., Ryan, R. M., Deci, E. L., & Kasser, T. (2004). The independent effects of goal contents 
and motives on well-being: It’s both what you pursue and why you pursue it. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 30(4), 475–486.
Sheldon, K. M., Ryan, R. M., Rawsthorne, L., & Ilardi, B. (1997). Trait self and true self: Cross-role 
variation in the Big Five traits and its relations with authenticity and subjective well-being. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 1380–1393.
Shelley, M., & Pakenham, K. I. (2004). External health locus of control and general self-efficacy: 
Moderators of emotional distress among university students. Australian Journal of Psychology, 
56(3), 191–199.
Shenk, J. W. (2009, June). What makes us happy? The Atlantic, 36–53.
Shernoff, D. J., Csikszentmihalyi, M., Schneider, B., & Shernoff, E. S. (2003). Student engagement 
in high school classrooms from the perspective of flow theory. School Psychology Quarterly, 
18(2), 158–176.
Shields, S. A. (1995). The role of emotion beliefs and values in gender development. In N. Eisenberg 
(Ed.), Review of personality and social psychology (Vol. 15, pp. 212–232). Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Shiner, R., & Caspi, A. (2003). Personality differences in childhood and adolescence: Measurement, 
development, and consequences. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 44(1), 2–32.
Showers, C. J. (1992). Compartmentalization of positive and negative self-knowledge: Keeping bad 
apples out of the bunch. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 1036–1049.
Showers, C. J., & Zeigler-Hill, V. (2006). Pathways among self-knowledge and self-esteem: How are 
self-esteem and self-knowledge linked? Are these links direct or indirect? In M. H. Kernis (Ed.), 
Self-esteem issues and answers (pp. 216–223). New York: Psychology Press.
Showers, C. J., & Zeigler-Hill, V. (2007). Compartmentalization and integration: The evaluative orga-
nization of contextualized selves. Journal of Personality, 75(6), 1181–1204.
Shrauger, J. S., & Rosenberg, S. E. (1970). Self-esteem and the effects of success and failure feedback 
on performance. Journal of Personality, 38, 404–417.
Shrauger, J. S., & Sorman, P. B. (1977). Self-evaluations, initial success and failure, and improvement 
as determinants of persistence. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 45, 784–795.
Sidorowicz, L. S., & Lunney, G. S. (1980). Baby X revisited. Sex Roles, 6(1), 67–73.
Siegler, I. C., Costa, P. T., Brummett, B. H., Helms, M. J., Barefoot, J. C., Williams, R. B., et al. (2003). 
Patterns of change in hostility from college to midlife in the UNC alumni heart study predict 
high-risk status. Psychosomatic Medicine, 65, 738–745.
Silverberg, N. D., Hanks, R. A., Buchanan, L., Fichtenberg, N., & Mills, S. R. (2008). Detecting 
response bias with performance patterns on an expanded version of the controlled oral word 
association test. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 22(1), 140–157.
Silvetoinen, K., Sammalisto, S., Perola, M., Boomsma, D. I., Cornes, B. K., Davis, C., et al. (2003). 
Heritability of adult body height: A comparative study of twin cohorts in eight countries. Twin 
Research, 6(5), 399–408.
Simms, L. J., & Watson, D. (2007). The construct validation approach to personality scale construc-
tion. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in 
personality psychology (pp. 240–258). New York: Guilford Press.
Simonton, D. K. (1986). Presidential personality: Biographical use of the Gough adjective checklist. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 149–160.
Simonton, D. K. (1999). Significant samples: The psychological study of eminent individuals. 
Psychological Methods, 4(4), 425–451.
Sinha, D. (1993). Indigenization of psychology in India and its relevance. In U. Kim & J. W. Berry 
(Eds.), Indigenous psychologies: Research and experience in cultural context (pp. 30–43). Newbury 
Park, CA: Sage.
Skinner, E., Furrer, C., Marchand, G., & Kindermann, T. (2008). Engagement and disaffection in the 
classroom: Part of a larger motivational dynamic? Journal of Educational Psychology, 100(4), 
765–781.
411

References
Smedley, B. D., Myers, H. F., & Harrell, S. P. (1993). Minority-status stresses and the college adjust-
ment of ethnic minority freshmen. Journal of Higher Education, 64, 434–452.
Smillie, L. D. (2008). What is reinforcement sensitivity? Neuroscience paradigms for approach-
avoidance process theories of personality. European Journal of Personality, 22, 359–384.
Smillie, L. D., Pickering, A. D., & Jackson, C. J. (2006). The new reinforcement sensitivity theory: 
Implications for personality measurement. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10(4), 
320–335.
Smith, C. P. (2000). Content analysis and narrative analysis. In H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), 
Handbook of research methods in social and personality psychology (pp. 313–335). New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Smith, E. R. (2000). Research design. In H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research methods 
in social and personality psychology (pp. 17–39). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University 
Press.
Smith, G. (2005). The genomics age. New York: American Management Association.
Smith, S. R., & Archer, R. P. (2008). Introducing personality assessment. In R. P. Archer & S. R. Smith 
(Eds.), Introducing personality assessment (pp. 1–36). New York: Taylor and Francis.
Smith, T. W. (2006a). American sexual behavior: Trends, socio-demographic differences, and risk behavior. 
Chicago: National Opinion Research Center, University of Chicago.
Smith, T. W. (2006b). Personality as risk and resilience in physical health. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 15(5), 227–231.
Smither, J. W., Reilly, R. R., Millsap, R. E., Perlman, K., & Stoffey, R. W. (1993). Applicant reactions 
to selection procedures. Personnel psychology, 46, 49–76.
Smits, D. J. M., & Boeck, P. D. (2006). From BIS/BAS to the Big Five. European Journal of Personality, 
20, 255–270.
Snyder, C. R. (2002). Hope theory: Rainbows in the mind. Psychological Inquiry, 13, 249–275.
Snyder, C. R., Shenkel, R. J., & Lowery, C. R. (1977). Acceptance of personality interpretations: The 
“Barnum Effect” and beyond. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 45(1), 104–114.
Snyder, C. R., Sympson, S. C., Ybasco, F. C., & Borders, T. F. (1996). Development and validation of 
the state hope scale. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70(2), 321–335.
Snyder, M. (1974). Self-monitoring of expressive behavior. Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 30, 526–537.
Snyder, M. (1979). Self-monitoring processes. Advances in experimental social psychology, 12, 85–128.
Snyder, M. (1987). Public appearances/private realities. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Snyder, M., & DeBono, K. G. (1985). Appeals to image and claim about quality: Understanding the 
psychology of advertising. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 586–597.
Snyder, M., & Gangestad, S. W. (1986). On the nature of self-monitoring: Matters of assessment, 
matters of validity. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51(1), 125–139.
Snyder, M., Gangestad, S. W., & Simpson, J. A. (1983). Choosing friends as activity partners: The role 
of self-monitoring. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 45(5), 1061–1072.
Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology. (2010). How many U.S. companies use employ-
ment tests? Retrieved May 27, 2010, from http://www.siop.org/workplace/employment%20test-
ing/usingoftests.aspx.
Soldz, S., & Vaillant, G. E. (1999). The Big Five personality traits and the life course: A 45-year lon-
gitudinal study. Journal of Research in Personality, 33, 208–232.
Sosis, R. H., Strickland, B. R., & Haley, W. E. (1980). Perceived locus of control and beliefs about 
astrology. The Journal of Social Psychology, 110, 65–71.
Spangler, G., & Grossmann, K. E. (1993). Biobehavioral organization of securely and insecurely 
attached infants. Child Development, 64, 1439–1450.
Spanier, G. B. (1976). Measuring dyadic adjustment: New scales for assessing the quality of marriage 
and similar dyads. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 38, 15–28.
Spector, P. E. (1982). Behavior in organizations as a function of employee’s locus of control. Psycho-
logical Bulletin, 9(13), 482–497.
Spector, P. E. (1988). Development of the Work Locus of Control Scale. Journal of Occupational 
Psychology, 61(4), 335–340.
Spence, J. T. (1991). Do the BSRI and the PAQ measure the same or different concepts? Psychology 
of Women Quarterly, 15, 141–165.
412

References
Spence, J. T. (1993). Gender-related traits and gender idiology: Evidence for a multifactorial theory. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64(4), 624–635.
Spence, J. T., Helmreich, R., & Stapp, J. (1974). The personal attributes questionnaire: A measure of 
sex role stereotypes and masculinity–femininity. Journal Supplement Abstract Service Catalog of 
Selected Documents in Psychology, 4, 43–44 (Ms. 617).
Spence, J. T., Helmreich, R., & Stapp, J. (1975). Ratings of self and peers on sex-role attributes and 
their relation to self-esteem and conceptions of masculinity and femininity. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 32(1), 29–39.
Spence, J. T., & Helmreich, R. L. (1978). Masculinity and femininity: Their psychological dimensions, 
correlates and antecedents. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Spence, J. T., & Helmreich, R. L. (1979). On assessing “Androgyny.” Sex Roles, 5(6), 721–738.
Spence, J. T., & Sawin, L. L. (1985). Images of masculinity and femininity: A reconceptualization. 
In V. O’Leary, R. Unger, & B. Wallston (Eds.), Sex, gender, and social psychology (pp. 35–66). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Spencer, S. J., Steele, C. M., & Quinn, D. M. (1999). Stereotype threat and women’s math perfor-
mance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 35, 4–28.
Sprecher, S., Sullivan, Q., & Hatfield, E. (1994). Mate selection preferences: Gender differences exam-
ined in a national sample. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 1074–1080.
Srivastava, S., John, O. P., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. (2003). Development of personality in early 
and middle adulthood: Set like plaster or persistent change? Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 84(5), 1041–1053.
Stacy, A. W., Leigh, B. C., & Weingardt, K. (1997). An individual-difference perspective applied to 
word association. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23(3), 229–237.
Stanton, A. L., & Snider, P. R. (1993). Coping with a breast cancer diagnosis: A prospective study. 
Health Psychology, 12, 16–23.
Steed, L., & Symes, M. (2009). The role of perceived wealth competence, wealth values, and internal 
wealth locus of control in predicting wealth creation behavior. Journal of Applied Social Psychol-
ogy, 39(10), 2525–2540.
Steele, C. M., & Aronson, J. (1995). Stereotype threat and the intellectual test performance of African 
Americans. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(5), 797–811.
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Aronson, J. (2002). Contending with group image: The psychology 
of stereotype and social identity threat. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social 
psychology (Vol. 34, pp. 379–440). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Stelmack, R. M., & Rammsayer, T. H. (2008). Psychophysiological and biochemical correlates 
of personality. In G. J. Boyle, G. Matthews, & D. H. Saklofske (Eds.), The SAGE handbook 
of personality theory and assessment: Vol. 1. Personality theories and models (pp. 33–55). Los 
Angeles: Sage.
Sternberg, R. J. (1993). What is the relation of gender to biology and environment: An evolutionary 
model of how what you answer depends on just what you ask. In A. E. Beall & R. J. Sternberg 
(Eds.), The psychology of gender (pp. 1–6). New York: Guilford Press.
Sternberg, R. J., Conway, B. E., Ketron, J. L., & Bernstein, M. (1981). People’s conceptions of intelligence. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41(1), 37–55.
Steunenberg, B., Twisk, J. W., Beekman, A. T., Deeg, D. J., & Kerkhof, A. J. (2005). Stability and change 
in neuroticism in aging. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences, 60, 27–33.
Stinson, D. A., Wood, J. V., & Doxey, J. R. (2008). In search of clarity: Self-esteem and domains of 
confidence and confusion. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34(11), 1541–1555.
Stipek, D., Gralinski, H., & Kopp, C. (1990). Self-concept development in the toddler years. Devel-
opmental Psychology, 26, 972–977.
Stone, D., Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2009). Beyond talk: Creating autonomous motivation through 
self-determination theory. Journal of General Management, 34, 75–91.
Stone, J., Aronson, E., Crain, L. A., Winslow, M. P., & Fried, C. B. (1994). Inducing hypocrisy 
as a means of encouraging young adults to use condoms. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 20(1), 116–128.
Story, A. L. (2004). Self-esteem and self-certainty: A mediational analysis. European Journal of 
Personality, 18, 115–125.
Strelau, J. (1998). Temperament: A psychological perspective. New York: Plenum Press.
413

References
Strickland, B. R. (1965). The prediction of social action from a dimension of internal–external 
control. The Journal of Social Psychology, 66(2), 353–358.
Strickland, B. R. (1973). Delay of gratification and internal locus of control in children. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 40(2), 338.
Stürmer, T., Hasselbach, P., & Amelang, M. (2006). Personality, lifestyle, and risk of cardiovascular 
disease and cancer: Follow-up of population based cohort. British Medical Journal, 332(7554), 
1359.
Suls, J., & Fletcher, B. (1985). The relative efficacy of avoidant and nonavoidant coping strategies: A 
meta-analysis. Health Psychology, 4, 249–288.
Swaab, D. F. (2005). The role of the hypothalamus and endocrine system in sexuality. In J. S. Hyde 
(Ed.), Biological substrates of human sexuality (pp. 21–74). Washington, DC: American Psycho-
logical Association.
Swaab, D. F., & Hofman, M. A. (1990). An enlarged suprachiasmatic nucleus in homosexual men. 
Brain Research, 537, 141–148.
Swann, W. B., Chang-Schneider, C., & McClarty, K. L. (2007). Do people’s self-views matter? Self-
concept and self-esteem in everyday life. American Psychologist, 62(2), 84–94.
Swann, W. B., Pelham, B. W., & Krull, D. S. (1989). Agreeable fancy or disagreeable truth?: Reconciling 
self-enhancement and self-verification. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 782–791.
Swanson, D. P., Cunningham, M., Youngblood, II, J., & Spencer, M. B. (2009). Racial identity develop-
ment during childhood. In H. A. Neville, B. M. Tynes, & S. O. Utsey (Eds.), Handbook of African 
American psychology (pp. 269–281). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Swartz, S. J. (2008). Self and identity in early adolescence: Some reflections and an introduction to 
the special issue. The Journal of Early Adolescence, 28(1), 5–15.
Swede, S. W., & Tetlock, P. E. (1986). Henry Kissinger’s implicit theory of personality: A quantitative 
case study. Journal of Personality, 54, 617–646.
Sweeney, P. D., Anderson, K., & Bailey, S. (1986). Attributional style in depression: A meta-analytic 
review. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50, 974–991.
Tafoya, T. (1997). Native gay and lesbian issues: The two-spirited. In B. Greene (Ed.), Ethnic and 
cultural diversity among lesbians and gay men (p. 109). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Tangney, J. P., Baumeister, R. F., & Boone, A. L. (2004). High self-control predicts good adjustment, 
less pathology, better grades, and interpersonal success. Journal of Personality, 72(2), 271–324.
Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. (1988). Illusion and well-being: A social psychological perspective on mental 
health. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193–210.
Taylor, S. E., Kemeny, M. E., Reed, G. M., Bower, J. E., & Gruenewald, T. L. (2000). Psychological 
resources, positive illusions, and health. American Psychologist, 55(1), 99–109.
Taylor, S. E., Klein, L. C., Lewis, B. P., Gruenewald, T. L., Gurung, R. A. R., & Updegraff, J. A. (2000). 
Biobehavioral responses to stress in females: Tend-and-befriend, not fight-or-flight. Psychologi-
cal Review, 107, 411–429.
Terman, L. M. (1926). Mental and physical traits of a thousand gifted children: Vol. 1. Genetic studies 
of genius. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Tett, R. P., Anderson, M. G., Ho, C., Yang, T. S., Huang, L., & Hanvongse, A. (2006). Seven nested 
questions about faking on personality tests. In R. L. Griffith & M. H. Peterson (Eds.), A closer 
examination of applicant faking behavior (pp. 43–84). Scottsdale, AZ: Information Age.
Thayer, C. R. (1973). The relationship between clinical judgements of missionary fitness and subse-
quent ratings of actual field adjustment. Review of Religious Research, 14(2), 112–116.
Thomas, J. R., & French, K. E. (1985). Gender differences across age in motor performance: A meta-
analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 260–282.
Thomas, M. D., Henley, T. B., & Snell, C. M. (2006). The draw a scientist test: A different population 
and a somewhat different story. College Student Journal, 40(1), 140–148.
Thorn, B. E., & Lokken, K. L. (2006). Biological influences. In F. Andrasik (Ed.), Comprehensive 
handbook of personality and psychopathology: Vol. 2. Adult psychopathology (pp. 85–98). Hobo-
ken, NJ: Wiley.
Tice, D. M. (1991). Esteem protection or enhancement? Self-handicapping motives and attributions 
differ by trait self-esteem. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 711–725.
Tice, D. M. (1993). The social motives of people with low self-esteem. In R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), Self-
esteem: The puzzle of low self-regard (pp. 37–53). New York: Plenum Press.
414

References
Tice, D. M. (1995). When modesty prevails: Differential favorability of self-presentation to friends 
and strangers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69(6), 1120–1138.
Tice, D. M., & Baumeister, R. F. (1997). Longitudinal study of procrastinaion, performance, stress 
and health: The costs and benefits of dawdling. Psychological Science, 8(6), 454–458.
Tiggemann, M., Winefield, A. H., Winefield, H. R., & Goldney, R. D. (1991). The prediction of 
psychological distress from attributional style: A test of the hopelessness model of depression. 
Australian Journal of Psychology, 43, 125–127.
Toma, C. L., Hancock, J. T., & Eillison, N. B. (2008). Separating fact from fiction: An examination of 
deceptive self-presentation in online dating profiles. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
34(8), 1023–1036.
Tomarken, A. J., Davidson, R. J., Wheeler, R. E., & Doss, R. C. (1992). Individual differences in 
anterior brain asymmetry and fundamental dimensions of emotion. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 62(4), 676–687.
Torrubia, R., Ávila, C., Moltó, J., & Caseras, X. (2001). The sensitivity to punishment and sensitivity 
to reward questionnaire (SPSRQ) as a measure of Gray’s anxiety and impulsivity dimensions. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 29, 837–862.
Torrubia, R., Ávila, C., Moltó, J., & Grande, I. (1995). Testing for stress and happiness: The role of 
the behavioral inhibition system. In C. D. Spielberger, I. G. Sarason, J. Brebner, E. Greenglass, 
P. Langani, & A. M. O’Roark (Eds.), Stress and emotion: Anxiety, anger, and curiosity (Vol. 15, 
pp. 189–211). Washington, DC: Taylor and Francis.
Trafimow, D., Triandis, H. C., & Goto, S. G. (1991). Some tests of the distinction between the private 
self and the collective self. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60(5), 649–655.
Triandis, H. C. (1990). Cross-cultural studies of individualism and collectivism. In J. J. Berman 
(Ed.), Nebraska symposium on motivation 1989 (Vol. 49, pp. 41–133). Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press.
Triandis, H. C., Marin, G., Lisansky, J., & Betancourt, H. (1984). Símpatica as a cultural script of 
Hispanics. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 47, 1363–1375.
Trochim, W. M. K. (2006). Research methods knowledge base (3rd ed.). Cincinnati, OH: Atomic Dog.
Tugade, M. M., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2004). Resilient individuals use positive emotions to bounce 
back from negative emotional experiences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86(2), 
320–333.
Tugade, M. M., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2007). Regulation of positive emotions: Emotion regulation 
strategies that promote resilience. Journal of Happiness Studies, 8, 311–333.
Tugade, M. M., Fredrickson, B. L., & Barrett, L. F. (2004). Psychological resilience and positive emo-
tional granularity: Examining the benefits of positive emotions on coping and health. Journal 
of Personality, 72(6), 1161–1190.
Turkheimer, E. (2000). Three laws of behavior genetics and what they mean. Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 9, 160–164.
Turkheimer, E. (2004). Spinach and ice cream: Why social science is so different. In L. F. DiLalla 
(Ed.), Behavioral genetics principles: Perspectives in development, personality, and psychopa-
thology (pp. 161–189). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Turkheimer, E., & Waldron, M. (2000). Nonshared environment: A theoretical, methodological, and 
quantitative review. Psychological Bulletin, 126(1), 78–108.
Turnley, W. H., & Bolino, M. C. (2001). Achieving desired images while avoiding undesired images: 
Exploring the role of self-monitoring in impression management. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
86(2), 351–360.
Twenge, J. M. (1997). Changes in masculine and feminine traits over time: A meta-analysis. Sex 
Roles, 36, 305–325.
Twenge, J. M. (1999). Mapping gender: The multifactorial approach and the organization of gender-
related attributes. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 23, 85–502.
Twenge, J. M., Zhang, L., & Im, C. (2004). It’s beyond my control: A cross-temporal meta-analysis of 
increasing externality in locus of control, 1960–2002. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 
8(3), 308–319.
Tyssen, R., Dolatowski, F. C., Røvik, J. O., Thorkildsen, R. F., Ekeberg, O., & Hem, E. (2007). Personal-
ity traits and types predict medical school stress: A six-year longitudinal and nationwide study. 
Medical Education, 41, 781–787.
415

References
U. S. Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration. (2006). Testing and assessment: 
A guide to good practices for work force investment professionals. Washington, DC: U. S. Depart-
ment of Labor.
Uleman, J. S. (2005). Introduction: Becoming aware of the new unconscious. In R. R. Hassin, J. R. 
Uleman, & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The new unconscious (pp. 3–15). New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Unemori, P., Omoregie, H., & Markus, H. R. (2004). Self-portraits: Possible selves in European-
American, Chilean, Japanese and Japanese-American cultural contexts. Self and Identity, 3, 
321–338.
Unger, R. K. (1979). Toward a redefinition of sex and gender. American Psychologist, 34(11), 
1085–1094.
Urlings-Strop, L. C., Stijnen, T., Themmen, A. P. N., & Splinter, T. A. W. (2009). Selection of medical 
students: A controlled experiment. Medical Education, 43, 175–183.
Uttal, W. (2001). The new phrenology: The limits of localizing cognitive processes in the brain. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press/Bradford Books.
Uziel, L. (2010). Rethinking social desirability scales: From impression management to interperson-
ally oriented self-control. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5(3), 243–262.
Vaidya, J. G., Gray, E. K., Haig, J., & Watson, D. (2002). On the temporal stability of personality: 
Evidence for differential stability and the role of life experiences. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 83(6), 1469–1484.
Vaillant, G. E. (1977). Adaptation to life. Boston: Little, Brown.
Vaillant, G. E. (1995a). Natural history of alcoholism revisited. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Vaillant, G. E. (1995b). The wisdom of the ego. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vaillant, G. E. (1998). Where do we go from here? Journal of Personality [Special Issue], 66, 1147–1157.
Vaillant, G. E. (2002a). Aging well. Boston: Little, Brown.
Vaillant, G. E. (2002b). The study of adult development. In E. Phelps, F. F. Furstenberg, & A. Colby 
(Eds.), American longitudinal studies of the twentieth century (pp. 116–132). New York: Russell 
Sage Foundation.
Vaillant, G. E., & Vaillant, C. O. (1990). Determinants and consequences of creativity in a cohort of 
gifted women. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 14, 607–616.
Valentine, J. C., DuBois, D. L., & Cooper, H. (2004). The relation between self-beliefs and academic 
achievement: A meta-analytic review. Educational Psychologist, 39(2), 111–133.
Vallerand, R. J., & Bissonnette, R. (1992). Intrinsic, extrinsic, and amotivational styles as predictors 
of behavior: A prospective study. Journal of Personality, 60, 599–620.
Van Aken, M. A. G., Denissen, J. J. A., Branje, S. J. T., Dubas, J. S., & Goossens, L. (2006). Midlife 
concerns and short-term personality change in middle adulthood. European Journal of Person-
ality, 20, 497–513.
van der Linden, D., te Nijenhuis, J., & Bakker, A. B. (2010). The general factor of personality: A meta-
analysis of Big Five intercorrelations and a criterion-related validity study. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 44, 315–327.
Vandello, J. A., & Cohen, D. (1999). Patterns of individualism and collectivism across the United 
States. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77(2), 279–292.
Vansteenkiste, M., Simons, J., Soenens, B., & Lens, W. (2004). How to become a persevering 
exerciser? Providing a clear, future intrinsic goal in an autonomy-supportive way. Journal of 
Sport & Exercise Psychology, 26, 232–249.
Vasey, P. L., & VanderLaan, D. P. (2010). An adaptive cognitive dissociation between willingness to 
help kin and nonkin in Samoan Fa’afafine. Psychological Science, 21(2), 292–297.
Vazire, S., & Gosling, S. D. (2004). E-perceptions: Personality impressions based on personal websites. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87(1), 123–132.
Venkatapathy, R. (1984). Locus of control among entrepreneurs: A review. Psychological Studies, 
29(1), 97–100.
Venter, J. C., Adams, M. D., Myers, E. W., Li, P. W., Mural, R. J., Sutton, G. G., et al. (2001). The 
sequence of the human genome. Science, 291, 1304–1351.
Vincent, N., Sande, G., Read, C., & Giannuzzi, T. (2004). Sleep locus of control: Report on a new 
scale. Behavioral Sleep Medicine, 2(2), 79–93.
416

References
Vogel, D. A., Lake, M. A., Evans, S., & Karraker, K. H. (1991). Children’s and adults’ sex-stereotyped 
perceptions of infants. Sex Roles, 24(9/10), 605–616.
Von Ah, D., Kang, D. H., & Carpenter, J. S. (2007). Stress, optimism, and social support: Impact on 
immune responses in breast cancer. Research in Nursing & Health, 30, 72–83.
Vox, M. (2004). Mysterious billboard may be Google recruitment ad. Retrieved May 27, 2010, from http://
www.marketingvox.com/mysterious_billboard_may_be_google_recruitment_ad-016350/.
Voyer, D., Voyer, S., & Bryden, M. P. (1995). Magnitude of sex differences in spatial abilities: A meta-
analysis and consideration of critical variables. Psychological Bulletin, 117, 250–270.
Vul, E., Harris, C., Winkielman, P., & Pashler, H. (2009a). Puzzlingly high correlations in fMRI 
studies of emotion, personality, and social cognition. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4(3), 
271–290.
Vul, E., Harris, C., Winkielman, P., & Pashler, H. (2009b). Reply to comments on “Puzzlingly high 
correlations in fMRI studies of emotion, personality, and social cognition.” Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 4(3), 319–324.
Wade, C. (2006). Some cautions about jumping on the brain-scan bandwagon. APS Observer, 19(9), 
24.
Wade, E., George, W. M., & Atkinson, M. (2009). A randomized controlled trial of brief interventions 
for body dissatisfaction. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77(5), 845–854.
Wallston, K. A. (2001). Conceptualization and operationalization of perceived control. In A. Baum, 
T. A. Revenson, & J. E. Singer (Eds.), Handbook of health psychology (pp. 49–58). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Wallston, K. A., Wallston, B. S., & DeVellis, R. (1978). Development of the Multidimensional Health 
Locus of Control (MHLC) scales. Health Education Monographs, 62(2), 160–170.
Walsh, V., & Cowey, A. (2000). Transcranial magnetic stimulation and cognitive neuroscience. Nature 
Reviews, 1(1), 73–79.
Walton, G. M., & Spencer, S. J. (2009). Latent ability: Grades and test scores systematically under-
estimate the intellectual ability of negatively stereotyped students. Psychological Science, 20(9), 
1132–1139.
Wanek, J. E. (1999). Integrity and honesty testing: What do we know? How do we use it? International 
Review of Selection and Assessment, 1, 183–195.
Waugh, C. E., Fredrickson, B. L., & Taylor, S. F. (2008). Adapting to life’s slings and arrows: Indi-
vidual differences in resilience when recovering from an anticipated threat. Journal of Research 
in Personality, 42, 1031–1046.
Webb, E. J., Campbell, D. T., Schwartz, R. D., Sechrest, L., & Grove, J. B. (1981). Nonreactive measures 
in the social sciences. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Webster, R. (1995). Why Freud was wrong: Sin, science, and psychoanalysis. New York: Basic Books.
Wegner, D. M. (1989). White bears and other unwanted thoughts. New York: Vintage.
Wegner, D. M. (1994). Ironic processes of mental control. Psychological Review, 101, 34–52.
Wegner, D. M., & Erber, R. (1992). The hyperaccessibility of suppressed thoughts. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 63, 903–912.
Wegner, D. M., Schneider, D. J., Carter, S. R., & White, T. L. (1987). Paradoxical effects of thought 
suppression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 5–13.
Wegner, D. M., Wenzlaff, R. M., & Kozak, M. (2004). Dream rebound: The return of suppressed 
thoughts in dreams. Psychological Science, 15(4), 232–236.
Weinberg, M. S., Williams, C. J., & Pryor, D. W. (1994). Dual attraction: Understanding bisexuality. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Weinberger, J., & Westen, D. (2001). Science and psychodynamics: From arguments about Freud to 
data. Psychological Inquiry, 12(3), 129–166.
Weinstein, N. D. (1980). Unrealistic optimism about future life events. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 39, 806–820.
Weisz, J. R., Eastman, K. L., & McCarty, C. A. (1996). Primary and secondary control in East Asia: 
Comments on Oerter et al. Culture and Psychology, 2, 63–76.
Weisz, J. R., Rothbaum, F. M., & Blackburn, T. C. (1984). Standing out and standing in: The psychol-
ogy of control in America and Japan. American Psychologist, 39, 955–969.
Westen, D. (1998a). The scientific legacy of Sigmund Freud: Toward a psychodynamically informed 
psychological science. Psychological Bulletin, 124(3), 333–371.
417

References
Westen, D. (1998b). Unconscious thought, feeling, and motivation: The end of a century-long 
debate. In R. F. Bornstein & J. M. Masling (Eds.), Empirical perspectives on the psychoanalytic 
unconscious (pp. 1–43). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Westen, D. (2000). Psychoanalysis: Theories. In A. E. Kazdin (Ed.), Encyclopedia of psychology (Vol. 6, 
pp. 344–349). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Westen, D., Gabbard, G. O., & Ortigo, K. M. (2008). Psychoanalytic approaches to personality. In 
O. P. John, R. W. Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research 
(pp. 61–113). New York: Guilford Press.
Wester, S. R., Vogel, D. L., Pressly, P. K., & Heesacker, M. (2002). Sex differences in emotion: A critical 
review of the literature and implications for counseling psychology. The Counseling Psycholo-
gist, 30(4), 630–652.
Whitam, F. L., & Mathy, R. M. (1991). Childhood cross-gender behavior of homosexual females in 
Brazil, Peru, the Philippines, and the United States. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 20(2), 151–170.
Whittle, S., Allen, N. B., Lubman, D. I., & Yücel, M. (2006). The neurobiological basis of tempera-
ment: Towards a better understanding of psychopathology. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 30, 511–525.
Whittle, S., Yücel, M., Fornito, A., Barrett, A., Wood, S. J., Lubman, D. I., et al. (2008). Neuroanatomical 
correlates of temperament in early adolescents. The Journal of the American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry, 47(6), 682–693.
Widiger, T. A., & Smith, G. T. (1999). Personality and psychopathology. In L. A. Pervin & O. P. John 
(Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research. New York: Guilford Press.
Wiggins, J. S. (1968). Personality structure. Annual Review of Psychology, 19, 293–350.
Wiggins, J. S. (1973). Personality and prediction: Principles of personality assessment. Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley.
Wiggins, J. S. (2003). Paradigms of personality assessment. New York: Guilford Press.
Williams, G. C., Grow, V. M., Freedman, Z. R., Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (1996). Motivational predic-
tors of weight loss and weight-loss maintenance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
70, 115–126.
Williams, G. C., McGregor, H. A., Sharp, D., Levesque, C., Kouides, R. W., Ryan, R. M., et al. (2006). 
Testing a self-determination theory intervention for motivating tobacco cessation: Supporting 
autonomy and competence in a clinical trial. Health Psychology, 25(1), 91–101.
Williams, G. C., Patrick, H., Niemiec, C. P., Williams, L. K., Devine, G., Lafata, J. E., et al. (2009). 
Reducing the health risks of diabetes: How self-determination theory may help improve medi-
cation adherence and quality of life. Diabetes Educator, 35, 484–492.
Williams, J. E., & Best, D. L. (1990). Measuring sex stereotypes: A multination study. Newbury Park, 
CA: Sage.
Wills, G. I. (1984). A personality study of musicians working in the popular field. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 5(3), 359–360.
Wilson, E. O. (1978). Human nature. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, P. M., Mack, D. E., & Grattan, K. P. (2008). Understanding motivation for exercise: A self-
determination theory perspective. Canadian Psychology, 49(3), 250–256.
Winter, D. G. (1997). Allport’s life and Allport’s psychology. Journal of Personality, 65(3), 723–731.
Winter, D. G. (2005). Things I’ve learned about personality from studying political leaders at a dis-
tance. Journal of Personality, 73(3), 557–584.
Winter, D. G., & Carlson, L. A. (1988). Using motive scores in the psychobiographical study of an 
individual: The case of Richard Nixon. Journal of Personality, 56, 75–103.
Wise, D., & Rosqvist, J. (2006). Explanatory style and well-being. In J. C. Thomas & D. L. Segal (Eds.), 
Comprehensive handbook of personality and psychopathology: Vol. 1. Personality and everyday 
functioning (pp. 285–305). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Witkin, H. A., Moore, C. A., Goodenough, D. R., & Cox, P. W. (1977). Field-dependent and field-
independent cognitive styles and their educational implications. Review of Educational Research, 
47(1), 1–64.
Woike, B. A. (2007). Content coding of open-ended responses. In R. W. Robins, R. C. Fraley, & 
R. F. Krueger (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in personality psychology (pp. 292–307). 
New York: Guilford Press.
418

References
Wolitzky, D. L. (2006). Psychodynamic theories. In J. C. Thomas & D. L. Segal (Eds.), Comprehen-
sive handbook of personality and psychopathology: Vol. 1. Personality and everyday functioning 
(pp. 65–95). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Wood, W., & Eagly, A. H. (2002). A cross-cultural analysis of the behavior of women and men: Impli-
cations for the origins of sex differences. Psychological Bulletin, 128(5), 609–727.
Wood, W., & Eagly, A. H. (2009). Gender identity. In M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle (Eds.), Handbook of 
individual differences in social behavior (pp. 109–125). New York: Guilford Press.
Wood, W., & Eagly, A. H. (2010). Gender. In S. T. Fiske, D. T. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The hand-
book of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 629–667). New York: Wiley.
Wright, C. I., Williams, D., Feczko, E., Barrett, L. F., Dickerson, B. C., Schwartz, C. E., et al. (2006). Neu-
roanatomical correlates of extraversion and neuroticism. Cerebral Cortex, 16(12), 1809–1819.
Wright, R. (2001). Self-certainty and self-esteem. In T. J. Owens, S. Stryker, & N. Goodman (Eds.), 
Extending self-esteem theory and research: Sociological and psychological currents (pp. 101–134). 
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Wrightsman, L. S. (1991). Interpersonal trust and attitudes towards human nature. In J. P. Robinson, 
P. R. Shaver, & L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), Measures of personality and social psychological attitudes 
(pp. 373–412). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Wundt, W. (1894). Old and new phrenology. In J. E. Creighton & E. B. Titchner (Eds.), Lectures on 
human and animal psychology (trans. from German, 2nd ed., pp. 437–454). New York: Swan 
Sonnenschein & Co.
Xenikou, A. (2005). The interactive effect of positive and negative occupational attributional styles 
on job motivation. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 14(1), 43–48.
Yarkoni, T. (2009). Big correlations in little studies: Inflated fMRI correlations reflect low statistical 
power—commentary on Vul et al. (2009). Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4(3), 294–298.
Yarkoni, T. (2010). Personality in 100,000 words: A large-scale analysis of personality and word use 
among bloggers. Journal of Research in Personality, 44(3), 363–373.
Yavari, C. (2002). Self-conceptions from childhood to adolescence: A brief experiment. Retrieved August 
24, 2009, from http://www.psychology.sbc.edu/yavari.htm.
Ye, M., She, Y., & Wu, R. (2007). The relationship between graduated students’ subjective well-being 
and locus of control. Chinese Journal of Clinical Psychology, 15(1), 63–65.
Yee, D., & Eccles, J. S. (1988). Parent perceptions and attributions for children’s math achievement. 
Sex Roles, 19, 317–333.
Yoder, J. D., & Kahn, A. S. (2003). Making gender comparisons more meaningful: A call for more 
attention to social context. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 27, 281–290.
Young, T. J., & French, L. A. (1996). Judged political extroversion-introversion and perceived com-
petence of U.S. presidents. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 83(2), 578.
Yu, D. L., & Seligman, M. E. P. (2002). Preventing depressive symptoms in Chinese children. Preven-
tion & Treatment, 5, ArtID9.
Zautra, A. J., Affleck, G. G., Tennen, H., Reich, J. W., & Davis, M. C. (2005). Dynamic approaches to 
emotions and stress in everyday life: Bolger and Zuckerman reloaded with positive as well as 
negative affects. Journal of Personality, 73(6), 1–28.
Zautra, A. J., Smith, B., Affleck, G. G., & Tennen, H. (2001). Examinations of chronic pain and affect 
relationships: Applications of a dynamic model of affect. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 69(5), 786–795.
Zeidner, M. (1993). Coping with disaster: The case of Israeli adolescents under threat of missile 
attack. Journal of Youth and Adolescents, 22(1), 89–108.
Zeigler-Hill, V., & Showers, C. J. (2007). Self-structure and self-esteem stability: The hidden vulner-
ability of compartmentalization. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33(2), 143–159.
Zhang, J., & Bond, M. H. (1998). Personality and filial piety among college students in two Chinese 
societies. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 29(3), 402–417.
Zimbardo, P. G. (1969). The human choice: Individualism, reason and order versus deindividua-
tion, impulse and chaos. In W. J. Arnold & D. Levine (Eds.), Nebraska symposium on motivation 
(Vol. 17, pp. 237–307). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Zinbarg, R. E., & Mohlman, J. (1998). Individual differences in the acquisition of affectively valenced 
associations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74(4), 1024–1040.
419

References
Zucker, K. J. (1990). Gender identity disorders in children: Clinical descriptions and natural his-
tory. In R. Blanchard & B. W. Steiner (Eds.), Clinical management of gender identity disorders in 
children and adults (pp. 1–23). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.
Zuckerman, M. (1969). Theoretical formulations. In J. P. Zubek (Ed.), Sensory deprivation: Fifteen 
years of research (pp. 407–432). New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Zuckerman, M. (1971). Dimensions of sensation seeking. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 36(1), 45–52.
Zuckerman, M. (1979). Sensation seeking: Beyond the optimal level of arousal. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zuckerman, M. (1984). Sensation seeking: A comparative approach to a human trait. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 7, 413–434.
Zuckerman, M. (1993a). A comparison of three structural models for personality: The big three, 
the Big Five, and the alternative five. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 757–768.
Zuckerman, M. (1993b). P-impulsive sensation seeking and its behavioural, psychophysiological and 
biochemical correlates. Neuropsychobiology, 28(1–2), 30–36.
Zuckerman, M. (1994). Behavioral expressions and biosocial bases of sensation seeking. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Zuckerman, M. (1995). Good and bad humors: Biochemical bases of personality and its disorders. 
Psychological Science, 6(6), 325–332.
Zuckerman, M. (2002). Zuckerman-Kuhlman Personality Questionnaire (ZKPQ): An alternative 
five-factorial model. In B. DeRaad & M. Peraigini (Eds.), Big Five assessment (pp. 377–396). 
Seattle, WA: Hogrefe & Huber.
Zuckerman, M. (2005). Psychobiology of personality. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Zuckerman, M. (2006). Biosocial bases of sensation seeking. In T. Canli (Ed.), Biology of personality 
and individual differences (pp. 37–59). New York: Guilford Press.
Zuckerman, M. (2007). Sensation seeking and risky behavior. Washington, DC: American Psychologi-
cal Association.
Zuckerman, M. (2008). Personality and sensation seeking. In G. J. Boyle, G. Matthews, & D. H. 
Saklofske (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of personality theory and assessment: Vol. 1. Personality 
theories and models (pp. 379–398). Los Angeles: Sage.
Zuckerman, M., & Kuhlman, D. M. (2000). Personality and risk-taking: Common biosocial factors. 
Journal of Personality, 68(6), 999–1029.
Zuckerman, M., & Neeb, M. (1980). Demographic influences in sensation seeking and expres-
sions of sensation seeking in religion, smoking, and driving habits. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 1(3), 197–206.
Zuckerman, M., Persky, H., Link, K. E., & Basu, G. K. (1968). Experimental and subject factors deter-
mining responses to sensory deprivation, social isolation, and confinement. Journal of Abnormal 
and Social Psychology, 73(3), 183–194.
Zuckerman, M., Simons, R. F., & Como, P. G. (1988). Sensation seeking and stimulus intensity as 
modulators of cortical, cardiovascular, and electrodermal response: A cross-modality study. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 9, 361–372.
Zullow, H. M. (1995). Pessimistic rumination in American politics and society. In G. M. Buchanan 
& M. E. P. Seligman (Eds.), Explanatory style (pp. 21–48). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Zullow, H. M., Oettingen, G., Peterson, C., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1988). Pessimistic explanatory style 
in the historical record. American Psychologist, 43(9), 673–682.
Zullow, H. M., & Seligman, M. E. P. (1990). Pessimistic rumination predicts defeat of presidential 
candidates, 1900 to 1984. Psychological Inquiry, 1(1), 52–61.
Zurbriggen, E. L., & Sherman, A. M. (2007). Reconsidering “sex” and “gender”: Two steps forward, 
one step back. Feminism & Psychology, 17(4), 475–480.
Zurcher, L. A. (1977). The mutable self: A self-concept for social change. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Zweigenhaft, R. L. (2008). A do re mi encore: A closer look at personality correlates of music 
preference. Journal of Individual Differences, 29(1), 45–5.
420

Index
Page references followed by "f" indicate illustrated
figures or photographs; followed by "t" indicates a
table.
1
16PF, 44, 53-54, 373, 393
A
Abilities, 54, 63, 89-90, 97, 122-124, 131, 205, 258,
260, 275-276, 326-327, 334, 345, 348-349,
353, 404, 417
innate, 326, 345, 353
Abnormal, 92, 300, 307, 363-365, 367, 376, 382, 397,
399-404, 407, 410, 420
Abnormal behavior, 400
Abnormal psychology, 300, 307, 363, 367, 399, 401,
403-404, 407, 410
abortion, 64, 316
Abstract thinking, 328
Abuse, 52, 80, 140, 143, 151, 162, 175, 239-240, 246,
273, 369
Academic achievement, 135, 151, 270, 299, 302, 313,
401, 416
Academic performance, 142, 382, 394, 403, 405
gender differences in, 403, 405
Academic success, 289
Accessibility, 231, 401
Accidents, 4, 70, 108-109, 223
Accuracy, 15, 37, 92, 98, 170, 187, 340-341, 368, 387,
390
Achievement, 52, 71-72, 75, 77-78, 80, 87, 104-105,
109, 135, 140, 142, 151, 250-251, 270, 285,
289, 307, 312-313, 315-316, 321-322,
369-370, 388, 391, 395-397, 399-401, 409,
416, 419
attributions for, 298, 419
influences on, 369, 400
understanding, 77, 369, 399
Achievement motive, 397
Achievement tests, 109
Acne, 256
Acquiescence, 67
Acquisition, 395, 419
Actions, 1-4, 36, 50, 68, 74, 81, 200, 204, 222-223,
226-227, 234, 258, 261-262, 284, 290, 294,
296, 312-313, 321, 327, 350
Active genotype-environment correlations, 175, 179
Activity level, 56, 186
Actualizing tendency, 1, 257-258, 284
ADA, 43
Adaptation, 86, 370, 397, 402, 416
evolutionary, 370
Addiction, 140
Adjustment, 18, 53, 88, 110, 113, 152, 271, 274-276,
283, 315-316, 360, 372-373, 380-381, 409,
412, 414
Adolescence, 9, 79, 81, 83, 85, 119, 122, 125-126,
244, 247, 337, 367, 377-378, 400, 402, 411,
414, 419
attachment in, 247
autonomy, 377, 400, 402
identity, 81, 119, 122, 125-126, 378, 387, 402, 414,
419
identity development, 378, 414
identity in, 414
mental health, 367, 378, 385, 414
self-esteem in, 414
sexual behavior in, 400
social comparison, 122
Adolescents, 125-126, 132, 176, 291, 321-322, 368,
374-375, 377, 385, 387, 391, 405, 418-419
aggression in, 374
depression in, 385, 391
Adoption studies, 25, 161-165, 178
Adoption study, 175
Adult attachment style, 247-249
Adult attachment styles, 247-248, 250, 252
Adult development, 88, 371, 409, 416
Adulthood, 6, 9, 79-80, 82-83, 85-86, 88, 90, 122, 163,
217, 235, 238, 243-244, 247, 251, 274, 283,
289, 292, 305, 337, 339, 378, 387, 399, 402,
406, 413, 416
midlife, 85-86, 416
Adults, 1, 28, 66, 81, 83, 98, 101, 115, 132, 135, 144,
146, 168, 236, 238-239, 243-244, 247-252,
283, 306-308, 336-337, 356, 406, 410, 413,
417, 420
Advertisements, 109
Advertising, 18, 412
Affect, 18, 20, 30, 43, 50, 81-84, 88-89, 96-97, 112,
155, 162, 176, 178-179, 187, 214, 231, 248,
251-252, 279, 313, 345, 390, 405, 419
neuroscience of, 187, 204, 214
affiliation, 104, 120, 282, 395
Africa, 129, 158, 355
African, 29, 67, 130, 132, 134, 140, 321, 344, 354,
386, 390, 413-414
African Americans, 130, 413
in psychology, 413
self-esteem, 130, 413
Age, 9, 29, 65, 75, 79-88, 90, 98, 102, 112, 114,
121-124, 131-132, 145, 162, 168, 211-212,
235-237, 239, 241, 246-247, 257, 261-262,
289-290, 305, 316, 326, 330, 337-339, 344,
373, 390, 395, 398, 403, 406, 408, 412, 414
and health, 88, 145, 384, 414
and identity, 121-124, 126, 131-132, 145, 414
and personality, 75, 79, 90, 112, 188, 326, 330,
337-339, 344, 373, 375-376, 390, 395,
398, 406, 408, 412
and self-esteem, 81, 278, 406, 414
Aggression, 10, 78, 80, 87, 143, 149, 175, 212, 220,
223, 231-232, 242, 251, 325, 331-332,
337-338, 350-352, 362, 364, 368, 370, 374,
378, 395, 401, 408
and sex, 220
deindividuation and, 350
Eros, 220
in adolescence, 175
in children, 251, 374, 401
peers, 80, 175
relational aggression, 337
self-esteem and, 143, 325
Thanatos, 220
Aggressiveness, 80, 87, 111, 151, 232, 335, 347,
350-351, 361
Aging, 81, 308, 311, 370, 384, 388, 400, 402, 413, 416
and brain, 384
intelligence and, 384
physical, 308, 311
study of, 370, 400, 416
successful, 402
Agonist, 377
Agreeableness, 1-2, 6-7, 12, 18, 37-38, 47, 49, 51-56,
58-59, 64, 66-68, 71-75, 77-78, 83-84, 86,
90, 99-100, 108-109, 165-166, 178-179, 189,
191, 335-336, 347, 355, 386
AIDS, 313, 382, 396
Ainsworth, Mary, 245, 251
Ainsworth Strange Situation, 397
Alcohol, 4, 52, 70, 88, 139-140, 143, 149, 151, 160,
176, 206, 211-212, 273, 289, 336, 379-380,
402, 407
genetics and, 160, 407
use of, 88, 149, 380, 407
alcohol consumption, 70, 317
Alcohol use, 143, 160, 206, 211, 289, 402
Alcoholism, 159, 172, 396, 416
Algebra, 45
Alleles, 1, 167, 171, 179
Allport, Gordon, 41, 43, 56, 366, 391
Alternative five, 212, 420
Alternative treatments, 182
Altruism, 49, 51-52, 55, 87
Amae, 1, 66, 89-90
Ambiguity, 404
Ambivalent attachment, 1, 253
American Educational Research Association, 93, 364
American Journal of Psychology, 389, 391, 404
American Psychological Association, 28-30, 37, 46,
82, 128, 130-131, 149, 197, 235, 243, 265,
269, 272, 289, 300, 354-355, 363-365, 370,
372-373, 375, 378-379, 384-385, 389-390,
396, 398, 401, 403-404, 409-410, 414-415,
418, 420
employment, 30, 102, 381
members, 30, 93, 265, 300, 398
Americans, 112, 129-131, 158, 292-293, 301, 309,
317, 394, 413
Americans with Disabilities Act, 112
Amygdala, 181, 195, 199, 203-204, 206-207, 209-210,
214, 371, 375, 402
emotions and, 207
extraversion and, 181, 195, 206-207, 209, 375, 402
Anagrams, 296, 317-318
Anal expulsive personality, 1, 235, 253
Anal fixation, 236
Anal personality, 43
Anal retentive personality, 1, 235-236, 253
Anal stage, 217, 235-236
Ancient Greece, 56, 129, 233
Ancient Greeks, 135
Androgens, 1, 346
Androgynous, 1, 359, 362
Androgyny, 359, 367, 413
Anecdotal evidence, 22
Anger, 49, 56, 138, 239, 243, 290-291, 294, 312, 315,
328, 332-333, 340-342, 351-352, 369, 392,
415
facial expressions, 56, 340
managing, 243, 290
Animal research, 294
Animals, 44, 54, 105, 120, 122, 152, 198, 294-296
learned helplessness in, 296
learning by, 200
research on, 295
self-recognition in, 122
Anonymity, 107, 112
Antidepressant drugs, 171
Antidepressants, 187
Antisocial behavior, 70, 143, 172, 175-176, 178, 378,
384, 401
predictors of, 401
Antisocial personality disorder, 336
Anxiety, 4, 25, 32, 49-50, 53, 57, 72, 95, 97, 101, 126,
151, 154, 195, 197-198, 200-201, 204-205,
207, 210, 212, 217, 227-229, 233-236, 242,
249-253, 272, 290-291, 306, 314-319,
321-322, 348, 369-370, 383, 398, 409-410,
415
stress and, 49, 228, 318, 415
Anxiety disorders, 204, 210
Anxious attachment, 245
Anxious-ambivalent attachment, 1, 253
Applied developmental science, 387
Appraisal, 131, 380, 385, 397, 406
performance, 385
Aptitude, 175, 401
Aptitude test, 401
Arguments, 417
Aronson, E., 364, 378, 413
Aronson, J., 364, 413
Arousal, 5-6, 14, 23, 25, 56, 93, 193-195, 197-198,
210-213, 332, 392, 398, 420
and aggression, 374
low level of, 193
optimal, 193, 195, 197-198, 213, 420
Arousal and performance, 384
Art, 33, 45, 50, 53, 63, 67, 69, 72, 105, 136, 165, 214,
328
421

Asch paradigm, 333
Asia, 129, 292, 309, 417
Asian Americans, 317
depression, 317
Asian cultures, 106
Asians, 317
Assessment, 2-8, 10-14, 17, 27, 40, 43, 69-73, 91-117,
137, 142, 155, 197-198, 357, 366-368,
371-372, 374-375, 377, 382, 387, 389,
391-392, 394, 396, 399-400, 402, 404-405,
407-409, 412-413, 416-418, 420
content validity, 116
criterion validity, 4, 96-97, 99, 109, 111-112,
115-117
history of, 366, 400, 416
of personality, 14, 17, 27, 40, 43, 73, 91-93, 97,
101-103, 105, 108-109, 112-113, 115,
155, 197-198, 357, 366-368, 371-372,
374-375, 382, 389, 391-392, 394, 396,
399-400, 402, 404-405, 407-409,
412-413, 416-418, 420
psychosocial, 372, 379-380
Assimilation, 401
Astronauts, 78
Attachment, 4-5, 14, 18, 217-218, 243-253, 255, 270,
283-284, 369-370, 380, 382, 387-388, 395,
397, 399-400, 405, 408, 410-411
contact comfort, 244
differences in, 245, 248, 250, 363, 369-370, 376,
380, 382, 387-388, 395, 399-400, 405,
410-411
fathers, 399
first, 18, 217-218, 244-246, 248, 252, 255, 405
Strange Situation, 14, 245-249, 251-253, 363, 397
strange situation and, 246-247
theory of, 218, 243, 363, 376, 380, 382, 399
to friends, 270
Attachment behaviors, 244-245, 248-249
Attachment needs, 244, 250
Attachment relationships, 244, 369
insecure, 244
Attachment styles, 217, 247-252, 369
Attachment theory, 217-218, 243, 251-252, 255, 270,
283-284, 382, 408, 410-411
pros and cons of, 252
Attention, 5-6, 52, 121, 149, 182, 187, 193, 201, 236,
264, 277, 287-288, 356, 361, 419
Attitude, 64, 78, 103, 137, 149, 225, 304, 331-332
Attitude change, 149, 343
Attitudes, 38, 63-64, 109-110, 113, 129, 149-152, 165,
217, 223, 225, 234, 250, 271, 332, 334, 338,
343, 356, 359, 374, 389, 394-395, 403, 405,
419
advertisements and, 109
behavior and, 149, 234, 356
change in, 405
functions of, 376
importance of, 64
measuring, 113
persuasion, 343, 376
Attraction, 248, 382, 396, 417
romance, 248
Attractiveness, 13, 66, 68, 112, 141, 150, 176, 351
Attribution, 306, 391, 404
situational, 404
Attributional retraining, 320, 400
Attributional style, 2, 299, 305, 323, 367, 384-385,
389, 404-405, 414-415
Attributions, 298, 300, 302, 308, 322, 385, 403, 406,
414, 419
consistency, 406
internal, 298, 300, 302, 308, 322, 414
Attunement, 264
Audience, 148, 223
Auditory threshold, 385
Australia, 75, 158, 304, 321, 337
Authoritarianism, 371
authority, 1, 71, 235-236
influence of, 71
obedience to, 129
Autism, 336
Automatic thinking, 227
Automaticity, 385, 407
Autonomic nervous system, 2, 183, 216
Autonomous motivation, 276-277, 280, 413
Autonomy, 2, 13, 30-31, 67, 102, 255, 258-262,
264-265, 267-268, 270-272, 274-284, 350,
377, 384, 386, 399-400, 402, 405, 408, 416,
418
development of, 384, 386, 399-400
emotional, 2, 13, 67, 270-271, 277, 408
Average children, 399
Avoidant attachment style, 250
Avoidant coping, 2, 316, 323
Avoidant style, 248
Awareness, 10, 72, 77, 85, 120, 122-123, 125-126,
136, 150, 152, 227
B
Babbling, 145, 173-174
Baby, 32, 42, 119, 122-123, 127, 173-174, 237,
241-242, 245-246, 352, 410-411
Balance, 65, 67, 112, 126, 134, 136, 145-147, 228,
250, 264, 338
Bandura, A., 365-366
Barnum effect, 2, 92-93, 98, 117, 412
BAS, 2, 12, 181, 196-201, 203, 205-206, 216, 372,
412
Basic emotions, 362
Basic level, 18, 30
Beck Depression Inventory, 98, 308, 367
Behavior, 1-10, 12-14, 20, 22-25, 40, 52, 70-71, 75,
87, 89, 94-95, 107, 111, 113, 115, 129, 134,
149-150, 152, 155-156, 160, 165, 172-176,
178, 183, 187, 192, 195-196, 202-206, 211,
213, 230-232, 236, 243-245, 247-249, 252,
256, 260-261, 263, 266-269, 271-274, 276,
285, 290-292, 298-299, 308, 319, 322,
330-340, 356-357, 359-362, 367-368,
370-372, 386-388, 390, 392-396, 399-402,
404, 407-408, 410, 412-416, 418-420
and hormones, 357
and self-concept, 359, 386
and stress, 172, 319, 370, 419
attitude and, 234
biology and, 356, 413
confirming, 94, 356
delinquent, 134
genes and, 20, 155-156, 160, 172-174, 176, 178,
396
infant, 9, 123, 236, 244-245, 247, 345, 363, 370,
378
intrinsically motivated, 8, 256, 258, 271
moral, 71, 136, 226, 331-334
prosocial, 64, 178, 379
psychological health and, 292
self-handicapping, 13, 152, 414
self-perception theory, 266, 367
self-regulation of, 372
sexual, 1, 5-6, 13-14, 64, 143, 211, 223, 232, 234,
236, 239, 243, 248, 331-332, 334, 336,
338, 347-348, 350, 359-361, 370-372,
384, 386-388, 390, 392-394, 396,
399-400, 412, 418
strength of, 274, 360
Behavior genetics, 169, 365, 393, 415
Behavior therapy, 304
Behavioral genomics, 398
Behavioral medicine, 407, 410
Behavioral neuroscience, 190
brain, 190
Behavioral self-regulation, 409
Belief in a just world, 371
Beliefs, 21, 64, 77, 103, 113, 125-126, 129, 149, 152,
225, 234, 251, 261, 268-270, 285, 287-291,
296-298, 310, 312, 320-322, 327-328, 351,
356, 361-362, 405, 411-412, 416
about self, 152
Bem, Sandra, 359
Bem Sex-Role Inventory, 365
Bereavement, 392
Bias, 12, 22, 45, 70, 145, 151, 234, 309, 343, 360-361,
403, 405, 411
gender, 145, 343, 360-361, 403, 405, 411
implicit, 70
in information processing, 405
optimistic, 10, 309, 403
response bias, 45, 403, 411
self-serving, 309, 405
test, 12, 22, 45, 70, 145, 151, 411
Biases, 39, 113, 144, 240-242, 250
analyzing, 144
cognitive, 242
objectivity and, 39
Big Five, 2, 35, 46, 49, 52-56, 59, 62-63, 66-67, 73,
166, 191, 355, 366, 368, 377-378, 385,
390-391, 394, 398, 401, 403, 408-409,
411-412, 416, 420
Big Five inventory, 62, 73
Big Five personality dimensions, 366
Big Five personality traits, 166, 355, 409, 412
Big Five traits, 411
Biofeedback, 183
Biological basis, 40, 57, 191-192, 381
Biological perspectives, 365
Biology, 46, 54, 88, 169, 190, 199, 326, 345-346, 353,
355-357, 361, 368, 371, 389, 393, 404, 413,
420
and beliefs, 389
and homosexuality, 368
and psychology, 368, 371
Bipolar disorder, 28, 169
Birth, 1, 14, 20, 24, 28-29, 86-87, 122-123, 125,
162-164, 190-191, 235-236, 244, 290, 293,
327, 343, 347, 382, 392, 396
BIS, 2, 12, 181, 196-201, 203, 205-206, 210, 214, 216,
372, 412
Blaming the victim, 239
Blank slate, 190
Blocking, 171, 187
bloggers, 76-77, 419
Blogs, 386
Blood, 6, 56, 81, 126, 155, 169, 171, 183-184,
186-187, 190, 195, 204-205
blood pressure, 81, 183-184, 187
Blood sugar levels, 276
Body, 5, 44, 56, 71, 105, 150, 169, 182-183, 187, 217,
219-220, 228, 232, 235, 315, 317-320,
340-341, 361, 371, 382, 411, 417
Body fat, 317
Body language, 71, 340
Bonding, 5, 135, 172, 176
Borderline personality, 336
Botswana, 67
Bowlby, John, 243, 251
Boys, 11, 88, 124-125, 134-135, 154, 170, 229, 235,
237-239, 251-252, 330, 334-335, 338-339,
345, 353, 356, 360, 406
Brain, 1-3, 5-6, 9-12, 18, 20-21, 24, 181-190, 195-196,
198-199, 202-203, 205-210, 213-215,
225-226, 298, 319, 366, 368, 372, 375-377,
381, 384, 387, 390, 392-393, 395, 399, 401,
404, 410, 414-417, 420
adolescent, 376, 381, 401
amygdala, 181, 195, 199, 203, 206-207, 209-210,
214, 375
anatomy of, 225, 384
and emotion, 370, 381, 387, 415
and learning, 198-199, 410
behavior and, 384, 390, 410
CT scans, 185
development, 5, 9, 11, 202, 206, 363, 366, 372,
376-377, 387, 390, 392, 395, 399, 401,
404, 410, 414-417
evolution and, 363, 368
hemispheres of, 203, 208
hypothalamus, 2, 195, 210, 414
images of, 186, 199, 208, 366
localization of function, 202
neurons, 10, 18, 187, 206
regions of, 186, 208
self, 1-3, 5-6, 9-12, 15, 20-21, 207, 225, 366, 370,
372, 375-377, 379, 381, 384, 387, 390,
392-393, 395, 399, 401, 404, 414-416,
420
sex differences in, 363, 379, 387, 395, 399, 417
sexual orientation and, 363
Brain function, 21, 205
Brain stem, 203
Brain-imaging studies, 188
Brazil, 67, 418
Breaking up, 249, 376
Breast cancer, 169, 230, 290, 315, 318, 372, 381, 407,
413, 417
Buddhism, 64, 209
Bullies, 140, 143
Bullying, 143
Burkina Faso, 67
Burnout, 49, 290, 304, 409
Buss, David, 65
C
Calcium, 158
Cancer, 30, 105, 169, 290, 310, 313, 315-318, 321,
354, 372, 381, 407, 413-414, 417
and gender, 413
breast, 169, 230, 290, 315, 318, 372, 381, 407,
422

413, 417
Cardinal traits, 41, 59
Cardiovascular disease, 51, 320, 414
Career, 77, 85, 88, 105, 127, 145-147, 270, 290, 298,
316, 351, 353, 366, 375, 399
selection, 77, 351
Career development, 399
Careers, 20, 59, 61-62, 71, 77, 81, 88-89, 212, 250,
327, 355, 360-361, 374
choices, 85
Caregivers, 1-2, 13-14, 18, 20, 249, 270, 313, 315,
342
communal, 328, 342
Case studies, 24, 39, 239-241, 306
Castration, 2, 229, 235-236, 238, 242, 251, 253
Castration anxiety, 2, 229, 236, 242, 251, 253
Casual relationship, 331
Categories, 54, 104, 116, 120, 128, 145-147, 152, 165,
183, 220, 247, 252, 359
Categorization, 359
Catharsis, 2, 232, 253, 370
catharsis hypothesis, 232
Catholicism, 64
Cattell, Raymond, 44, 63, 174
Causality, 3, 9, 33, 142, 163, 214, 255, 268, 271-272,
274-275, 283-284, 377, 394
Causation, 24, 141, 143, 151, 278, 377
behaviors and, 278
Cause and effect, 187, 322
Cautiousness, 52
Cells, 161, 169, 171, 184, 203, 318
horizontal, 169
stem, 203
Central nervous system, 183, 216
Central traits, 3, 41, 43, 59
Cerebral cortex, 188, 202, 419
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 183
Cerebrum, 203
Challenge, 3, 10, 40, 97-98, 111, 144, 187, 197, 216,
255, 259, 262-264, 283-284, 304, 322, 389
Change, 1-4, 7-10, 18, 26, 32, 45, 52, 54, 59, 61, 75,
79-86, 89-90, 122, 131-134, 147, 149, 152,
156-157, 171, 179, 192, 202, 204, 208,
218-219, 231-232, 280-281, 292, 297,
300-301, 304-305, 307, 315-320, 346-349,
357, 365-366, 379, 387-388, 400, 405-406,
408, 410-411, 413, 416, 420
in personality traits, 81, 214, 375, 400, 406
Charisma, 33
Child abuse, 239, 369
Child care, 408
Child development, 234, 243, 364, 366-367, 373-374,
388, 395, 397, 404, 409, 412
resilience in, 412
theories of, 243, 364, 412
Childbirth, 316
Childhood, 9, 11, 79-83, 85-86, 88, 90, 158, 175-176,
190, 234, 242-244, 247-248, 251, 336-337,
339, 365, 367, 373-374, 381, 383, 387,
399-400, 406, 411, 414, 418-419
influences on personality, 406
Childhood disorders, 336
Children, 1-2, 7, 18, 24, 29-30, 32, 66, 70, 80-81,
86-87, 90, 102-103, 115, 123-125, 132-133,
135, 150, 159-160, 163-164, 167, 173, 175,
191, 208, 230, 234, 236-239, 243-249, 251,
260-262, 264-266, 280, 282-283, 289-290,
293, 306-307, 320-322, 351-353, 360,
366-369, 382, 385-387, 391-393, 395, 399,
401-402, 404, 407, 414, 417, 419-420
development in, 237-238, 251, 367
temperament, 14, 86-87, 90, 191, 374, 380
Chimpanzees, 20, 32, 119-121, 123
China, 61, 68, 89-90, 129, 158, 192, 301, 307, 309,
321
Chinese, 1, 8, 12, 66, 68-69, 89, 106, 128-129, 131,
309, 384, 388, 394, 398, 419
Chinese Americans, 309
Chromosomes, 357
Chronic stress, 319, 382
Cingulum, 195
Claims, 54, 140, 148, 190, 224, 234, 240
two, 54, 148, 190, 234
Classical music, 165
Classification, 357
Classroom, 92, 102, 159-160, 264-265, 287, 353, 382,
395, 399-400, 407, 411
Client-centered therapy, 407
Clinical psychologists, 78
Clinicians, 225, 251, 395
Clinics, 243
for children, 243
Cloning, 11, 169, 177, 179
close relationships, 150, 152, 242-244, 247, 249-250,
275, 284, 342, 394-395
Coaching, 278
Cocaine, 211
Coding, 70, 145-147, 151, 168-169, 418
Coding scheme, 128, 145
Cognition, 19, 96-97, 99, 128, 130-131, 188, 234, 296,
321, 326-328, 331, 364, 380-381, 383, 386,
394-395, 397, 401, 407-410, 417
affect and, 364, 386
and leisure, 401
elements of, 381
need for, 96-97, 99, 234, 386
Cognitive ability, 63, 72, 81, 108, 326, 373
Cognitive development, 151
culture, 151
intelligence, 151
Cognitive dissonance, 234, 266, 367, 378, 381
Cognitive dissonance theory, 234, 266
Cognitive processes, 390, 416
Cognitive psychology, 227, 229, 231, 233-234, 243,
368, 396
today, 227, 234, 243
Cognitive theory, 366, 371
Cognitive therapy, 307, 363, 366-367, 372, 384,
403-404, 409-410
Cohort, 373, 382, 384, 392, 414, 416
Cold virus, 177
Collective self, 396, 415
Collectivistic culture, 68, 317
Collectivistic cultures, 3, 129-130, 141, 147, 151-152,
292-293, 309, 321
College, 9, 32, 36, 42, 66, 68-70, 73, 75, 79, 83,
85-88, 97-99, 101-102, 128-129, 131-132,
138-139, 141-142, 144-145, 150, 194,
255-256, 258, 264-266, 282, 289-290,
292-293, 301, 305-306, 308, 313, 315-317,
321-322, 351, 359, 373, 382, 386-388, 392,
400, 405, 411-412, 414, 419
exploration in, 380
getting into, 306
College students, 32, 66, 68-69, 73, 75, 83, 85, 102,
120, 128-129, 131-132, 138-139, 141-142,
144-145, 150, 255, 264-266, 282, 301,
305-306, 308, 313, 316-317, 321-322, 332,
351, 359, 382, 392, 419
Color, 18, 104, 111, 149, 169, 177, 186, 199, 223-224,
265, 319, 345-347, 351, 357, 389-390
Colors, 186, 204, 261, 319, 346
Commitment, 49, 113, 150, 290, 312, 376
Communal orientation, 51
Communication, 293, 350, 369, 380, 387
of emotion, 369
Community, 6, 29-30, 77, 85, 90, 134-135, 190, 240,
258, 282, 393
comparison, 79, 114, 122-123, 127, 131, 144, 151,
305, 344, 379, 407, 420
of performance, 344
Comparison groups, 114
Comparisons, 141, 262, 280, 373, 395, 397, 419
behavioral, 373
Competence, 3, 13, 52, 67, 72, 77, 83, 244, 255,
258-260, 262-265, 267-271, 274-284, 360,
386, 388, 399, 413, 418-419
projecting, 13
Competition, 232, 266, 268, 277-278, 283, 347, 356
everyday, 356
Compliance, 8, 51-52, 69, 75, 260, 268, 272
Computer games, 262
Computerized tomography (CT), 3, 184, 216
Computerized tomography (CT) scan, 3
Computer-mediated communication, 380
Computers, 44, 159, 328, 386
Concept, 2-3, 7-8, 11-15, 20, 38-39, 44-45, 66, 95-97,
119-120, 124-127, 130-131, 134-135,
137-138, 140, 145, 151-152, 157, 167, 177,
188, 211-212, 232, 248, 293, 359-360, 386,
392, 397, 399, 403, 413, 420
Conception, 196, 410
Concepts, 38-39, 66, 119-120, 123, 125-128, 132,
138, 144, 151-152, 170, 225-226, 240, 363,
387, 400, 404, 412
concrete, 125
taxonomies, 144
Conclusion, 27, 64, 181, 214, 237, 306, 344
Conditioned reflexes, 403
Conditioning, 294, 365
instrumental, 294
Condoms, 413
Confederates, 70
Conflict, 8, 39, 66, 68-69, 138, 176, 196-198, 201,
227, 251, 369-370, 410
inhibitory, 410
task, 8, 410
Conflicts, 2, 196, 198, 200, 290
theory, 2, 196, 198, 200
Conformity, 54, 149, 268, 291, 330, 333, 342-343,
360-361, 365, 376-377
social influence and, 365
Confucianism, 68
Congruence, 272, 341
Conscience, 3, 226-227, 251, 253
Conscientiousness, 1-3, 6-7, 12, 18, 37-38, 47, 49,
51-56, 58-59, 62-64, 66-68, 71-75, 77-78,
83-86, 88, 90, 99-100, 108-110, 165-166,
178-179, 189, 191, 335-336, 355, 361, 406,
408
Consciousness, 49-50, 65, 120, 125, 136, 207, 220,
222, 225, 227, 233, 251, 384, 388
control and, 388
control of, 120
function of, 222, 233
psychology of, 384
Consensus, 37, 58, 86, 205
Conservation, 177, 219-220, 378
Consistency, 3-4, 8, 10, 12-14, 79, 81-83, 89-90,
94-95, 99, 115, 117, 138, 152, 192, 331, 360,
364, 405-406
Constancy, 367
Constraint, 47, 49, 191, 204-205, 372
Constraints, 144, 226
Construals, 373, 376
Construction, 3, 104, 109, 117, 325, 345, 361, 387,
391, 394, 403, 411
social construction, 325, 345, 351, 361
Consumer psychology, 376
Contact, 13, 62, 122, 176, 244-246, 249, 264, 280,
304, 340
Contact comfort, 244
Content validity, 116
Context, 44, 89, 112, 131-132, 135, 187, 257, 259,
275-278, 284, 300, 325, 338, 345-346, 348,
361, 370, 374, 382, 390, 403, 411, 419
Contingency, 268
Continuity, 3-4, 61, 79, 83, 90, 132, 225, 227, 233,
243, 251, 377, 406
Contraception, 370
Control, 3, 5-7, 9-13, 21, 25-26, 28, 32-34, 48-49, 64,
83, 88, 103, 106-107, 116, 120, 132, 142,
149-150, 159, 163, 169, 177, 182-183, 196,
198, 206-207, 212, 222, 226, 235-236,
260-264, 266-268, 274, 283-284, 285-298,
304-305, 307-312, 315, 318-322, 343,
369-373, 377, 384-385, 391, 394-399,
401-405, 407-417, 419
coping and, 290, 315, 409, 415
hardiness and, 389, 405
locus of control, 9, 21, 64, 103, 268, 284, 285,
288-295, 309-310, 312, 315, 321-322,
364-365, 369, 377, 379, 381-382,
384-385, 388-389, 391, 394-397, 399,
401, 404-405, 407-417, 419
of emotions, 183, 206, 370
perceived, 64, 272, 277, 315, 318, 384, 394, 399,
402, 407, 412-413, 417, 419
Control orientation, 367
Controlled motivation, 401
Controlled observations, 22
cooperation, 51, 55, 72, 96, 178, 245, 356, 360
Coping, 2, 5, 11, 14-15, 25-27, 33, 49, 108, 138, 142,
228-229, 249, 285, 290-291, 303, 310, 313,
315-317, 320-323, 372, 398, 409-410,
413-415, 419
cognitive approaches to, 321
emotion-focused, 5, 290-291, 316-317, 323
emotion-focused coping, 5, 290-291, 316-317, 323
individual differences in, 395, 415, 419
problem-focused, 11, 291, 313, 315-317, 323
problem-focused and emotion-focused, 316
problem-focused coping, 11, 291, 313, 315-317,
323
resilience, 5, 14, 372, 415
social support, 313
Coping strategies, 26, 33, 249, 285, 315-317, 320, 414
423

Coping with stress, 409
Corporal punishment, 390
Correlation, 4, 7, 9-12, 24, 33-34, 45, 62, 83, 95, 143,
151, 161, 164, 166, 170, 172-176, 178-179,
188-189, 204, 247, 306, 310, 353, 358, 404
explaining, 10-11
negative, 4, 9-11, 24, 45, 172, 174-175, 178-179,
188-189, 204, 306
positive, 4, 7, 9-11, 24, 45, 83, 143, 164, 174, 176,
179, 189, 404
Correlation coefficient, 4, 24, 34
Correlational design, 33, 163, 179, 215
Correlational designs, 25-26, 33, 153, 162-163, 165,
178, 188, 215
Correlational methods, 214
Correlational study, 4, 25
Correlations, 7, 24, 37, 45, 64, 72, 74, 95, 99,
142-143, 153, 164-165, 170, 172-176,
178-179, 188-190, 213, 318, 334, 394-395,
401, 417, 419
cautions about, 417
Cortex, 2, 9, 181-182, 188-189, 193, 199, 202-204,
206-208, 210, 346, 376, 419
prefrontal, 182, 203-204, 206, 208, 376
Cortisol, 168, 184
Counseling psychologist, 418
Counterfactual thinking, 230, 399, 407
couples, 113-114, 212, 248-249, 382
Crack, 258
Creative problem solving, 390
Creativity, 1, 10, 51, 53, 87-88, 102-103, 127, 129,
259, 261, 280, 283, 393, 416
tests, 10, 103
Cremation, 42
Crime, 70, 133-134, 140, 293, 338, 399
Crimes, 133-134
Crisis, 7, 81, 126, 135-136, 151-152, 315, 317, 358,
381
Criterion validity, 4, 96-97, 99, 109, 111-112, 115-117
Criterion-related validity, 96, 416
Critical thinking, 51
Cross-cultural studies, 56, 353, 369, 415
CT scan, 184-185
Cues, 6, 36-37, 58, 148, 199, 287, 370, 374, 387
nonverbal, 148, 387
Cultural context, 374, 411
Cultural differences, 89, 106, 146, 285, 292, 309,
321-322
Cultural factors, 340
Cultural influences, 373
Cultural universality, 192
Culture, 2, 8, 18-19, 52-53, 57, 63, 66-69, 89-90, 106,
115, 119, 127-133, 146-147, 151-152, 192,
240, 246, 258, 292-293, 317, 341, 351, 353,
361, 367-368, 374-375, 393, 397, 402, 406,
409, 417
adolescence and, 119
and cognitive development, 151
and happiness, 151
and hunger, 127
and norms, 68
and research, 57, 367, 374, 380, 393, 397, 406,
409
and the self, 128, 130-131, 397
child development, 367, 374, 397, 409
collectivistic, 68, 129-131, 147, 151-152, 258,
292-293, 309, 317
context, 89, 131-132, 341, 361, 374
differences, 2, 19, 53, 89-90, 106, 128, 130-131,
146, 152, 192, 292, 309, 341, 351, 353,
361, 368, 385, 393, 397, 402, 409, 417
gender differences in personality, 353, 375
gender roles, 341, 361
individualistic, 8, 129-131, 146, 151-152, 258,
292-293, 309, 317
levels of, 52, 317
norms and, 129
of honor, 66
organizational, 402
personality theory and, 380
research and, 368, 374, 402
self and, 19, 119, 127-133, 146-147, 151-152, 402,
409
sexuality and, 89, 240, 368
Custodial parent, 248
D
Dalai Lama, 209, 214
Daredevil, 211
Darwin, Charles, 219
Data, 9-10, 12-14, 17, 24, 27-28, 33-34, 44-45, 54, 63,
69-71, 89-90, 107, 111, 115, 144-146, 152,
170, 182, 188-190, 202, 239, 243, 270, 283,
330, 334, 336-337, 367-368, 397-398, 400,
405, 417
Dating, 113-116, 148, 150, 218, 228, 251, 298, 347,
391, 415
Daydreaming, 18, 369
Death, 14, 42, 87, 103, 149, 154, 184, 219-220, 239,
246-247, 251, 289, 308, 310-311, 371, 410
choosing, 311
of infant, 247
preparations for, 311
Death instinct, 220
Death instincts, 220, 251
Decay, 220
deception, 136, 381, 399, 407
in psychological research, 381
Decision making, 213, 291
Decisions, 11, 92, 102, 109, 111, 113, 177, 190, 225,
234, 260-261, 353, 358, 388, 407
individual, 11, 92, 261
Defense, 8, 14-15, 20, 87, 217, 227-228, 231-234,
251-253, 300, 374-375, 383, 398
Defensive pessimism, 385
Defensiveness, 1, 50, 69, 89, 392
Deficiency, 177
production, 177
Delinquency, 51, 134-135, 143, 204, 243, 378, 402
Demand characteristics, 310
Denial, 4, 148, 217, 229-230, 251, 253
Denmark, 393, 399
Dental care, 277, 284
Dependability, 69, 408
Dependence, 129, 368, 378
substance, 129
Dependent variable, 4, 25-26, 33-34, 163, 189, 330,
337
Depressants, 211
alcohol, 211
Depression, 28, 49-50, 86, 88, 95-96, 98, 105, 112,
150-151, 154, 159, 170-172, 175, 178-179,
197, 204, 207, 210, 270, 275, 285-287,
291-292, 294, 296-300, 302, 306-308, 313,
315-318, 320-323, 333, 363-364, 372-373,
381, 384-387, 390-391, 399-401, 403,
405-406, 410, 414-415
age differences in, 384
and brain, 377, 381, 384, 387, 401, 410
and loneliness, 321, 341
antidepressants, 187
cardiovascular disease and, 414
chronic, 210, 315, 363
clinical, 105, 112, 154, 170-172, 175, 179, 210,
310, 320, 367, 385-387, 390-391, 403,
414
cognitive therapy and, 363, 367, 372, 384, 403
double, 178, 270, 318, 323
environment and, 171
hopelessness theory of, 363, 384
in children and adolescents, 385, 391
rate of, 317
rumination, 197
Deprivation, 210, 420
human, 210, 420
Depth, 68, 87, 89, 97, 132, 225, 240-241, 288, 326,
409
convergence, 68
Depth of processing, 225
Desensitization, 270
systematic, 270
Developed countries, 158
Development, 4-5, 9, 29, 56, 61, 79, 81-82, 85, 88, 90,
92, 113, 122, 147, 151-152, 155, 159,
171-174, 206, 234-240, 242-243, 251-252,
265, 359, 363-364, 371-374, 376-379, 382,
384-388, 394-401, 403-404, 406-417
adult, 29, 61, 79, 85, 88, 90, 234-236, 238-239,
251-252, 346, 367, 371, 373, 376, 382,
388, 398, 406, 409-411, 414, 416
biological, 5, 29, 236, 251, 346, 372, 374, 376, 378,
399-400, 414
brain, 5, 9, 11, 202, 206, 363, 366, 372, 376-377,
387, 390, 392, 395, 399, 401, 404, 410,
414-417
complexity of, 401
of brain, 202
psychosexual, 5, 11, 217, 234-235, 238-240,
251-252, 385
Developmental psychology, 80, 176, 219, 234, 243,
367-368, 373, 378, 384, 389-390, 396,
398-400, 413
adulthood, 80, 243, 373, 378, 380, 390, 399, 413
explained, 176
Developmental psychopathology, 408
Developmental stages, 236, 238
Diagnosis, 39, 92, 105, 230, 315, 318, 373, 387, 413
clinical, 92, 105, 387
Diathesis, 363, 399
Dickens, Charles, 366
Diet, 52, 290-291, 317
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), 203
Direct experience, 22, 269
Disabilities, 112, 205
Discipline, 52, 72, 83
Discrimination, 111, 123, 370, 391-392
Discrimination learning, 370
Disease, 3, 51, 177, 243, 276, 318, 320-321, 368, 370,
399, 403, 414
cardiovascular, 51, 320, 414
Diseases, 11, 56, 103, 158, 168-169, 177
disgust, 32, 49, 228, 239, 341
Dismantling, 367
Disorders, 6, 20, 28, 30, 92, 98, 143, 149, 168-169,
171, 178, 187, 196, 198, 204, 210, 236, 317,
335-336, 347, 361, 367, 390, 392-393, 420
diagnosis of, 387
genetics and, 28, 169, 178, 393
mood disorders, 171, 187, 336
psychological, 2, 6, 20, 28, 30, 149, 168-169, 171,
234, 240, 317, 367, 387, 390, 420
universal, 347
Disorganized/disoriented attachment, 246
Disoriented attachment, 246
Displaced aggression, 370
Display rules, 370
Disposition, 13, 66, 85, 109
Dissociation, 389, 392, 416
Dissonance, 234, 266, 364, 367, 378, 381
Dissonance theory, 234, 266, 364
distinctiveness, 37
Distress, 1, 4-5, 11, 13-14, 49, 69, 88, 228, 246,
248-249, 276, 290, 304-305, 310, 312-313,
315-316, 322, 340, 356, 372, 381, 411, 415
Distribution, 38-39, 65, 72, 262, 329-330, 334
Distributions, 329-331
Diversity, 179, 386, 414
cultural, 384, 414
Division of labor, 350-351, 379
Divorce, 86, 159, 212, 247-248, 252, 293, 385
Divorce rate, 293
Dizygotic (DZ) twins, 4, 161, 179
DNA, 23, 87, 93, 168-169, 177, 190-191
DNA testing, 23, 87, 93
Dolphins, 20, 32, 151
Dominance, 83-85, 87, 102, 167, 176, 350
Dopamine, 171, 184, 187, 209-210, 213, 215, 386
and extraversion, 209, 377
Double-blind study, 345
Double-blind technique, 4, 318, 323
Draw-a-Person test, 105, 115
Dream, 4, 9, 133, 221-223, 241, 253, 282, 372, 392,
408, 417
Dream analysis, 4, 221, 253
Dream interpretation, 223
Dreaming, 202, 221-222
Dreams, 4, 9, 205, 220-223, 226-227, 251, 256, 290,
306, 383, 417
analysis of, 290, 383
as wish fulfillment, 226
interpretation of, 221, 383
Drive, 103, 172, 195, 197, 199, 366, 396
sex, 366, 396
Drives, 227, 232, 388
Drug abuse, 110, 151, 162, 392
Drugs, 52, 88, 110, 112, 139-140, 143, 161, 171, 176,
178, 182-183, 187, 211-212, 249, 336
antidepressant, 171
Dualism, 228
Dylan, Bob, 74
E
Early and middle adulthood, 413
Early childhood, 190, 251
Eating, 10, 92, 94, 116, 129-130, 139, 143, 149, 183,
187, 230, 234-236, 290-291, 311
obesity, 290
424

Eating disorders, 143, 149, 234
Echo, 342
Ecology, 129
Educated guess, 23
Education, 17, 50, 93-94, 101, 114, 144-147, 250,
255-256, 273, 289, 379, 382, 386-387, 389,
412, 415-417
bilingual, 146
exercise, 382, 416
health, 145, 147, 250, 255, 273, 289, 379, 382,
387, 412, 415, 417
Educational psychologist, 416
Ego, 4, 11-12, 14-15, 192, 217, 225-228, 233, 235,
242, 251-253, 272, 368, 383, 394-395, 416
Ego ideal, 4, 226, 251, 253
Ego psychology, 242, 251
Elderly, 66, 132, 228, 299, 308, 311, 313, 317, 342,
392
Elderly people, 308, 313, 317
Electra complex, 238
Electroencephalogram (EEG), 185, 216
e-mail, 77, 142
emotions, 77
Emotion, 1, 5, 9, 13, 26-27, 128, 130-131, 148-149,
188, 191-193, 196, 198, 205-206, 208, 215,
276, 290-291, 296, 316-317, 321, 323,
332-333, 341-342, 365, 369-372, 376,
380-381, 383, 386-387, 401-402, 411, 415,
417-418
basic, 191, 228, 369-370, 376, 383, 395, 411, 417
elements of, 381
face of, 296
knowledge of, 332, 369
limbic system and, 193
neuroscience of, 188, 191-193, 196, 198, 205-206,
208, 215
nonverbal communication, 387
sex-role, 365
emotional arousal, 56
Emotional development, 122, 237-238
Emotional infidelity, 332, 347
Emotional intelligence, 63, 385, 408
Emotional intensity, 341
Emotional involvement, 376
Emotional responsiveness, 340
Emotions, 1-2, 4-6, 8-10, 26-27, 32, 38, 43, 48-50, 53,
56, 74-75, 77, 83, 85-86, 90, 149-150, 152,
182-183, 195, 205-210, 227, 229, 251,
275-276, 278-279, 294, 296, 312-313, 316,
325, 340-342, 345, 352, 361-362, 369-370,
380, 382-383, 387, 401-402, 415, 419
counting, 380
physiology and, 56, 183
subjective well-being, 380, 419
subjective well-being and, 419
Empathy, 47, 51, 111, 148, 287, 325, 332, 335,
339-340, 348-349, 361-362, 380
Empirical evidence, 218, 240
Empiricism, 22
Employees, 30, 32, 108-109, 111, 116, 271, 284,
304-305
hiring, 108-109, 111
motivation of, 280
training, 108-109, 304-305
Employment, 30, 102, 107, 109, 111, 116, 304, 412,
416
Employment tests, 109, 412
Endocrine system, 414
Environment, 1, 7-13, 19-21, 24, 28, 36, 85, 88, 123,
153-166, 168-176, 178-179, 183, 214-215,
243, 247, 258-259, 271, 273-274, 353-356,
369-370, 386, 396, 400, 404, 407, 409, 413,
415
enriched, 158, 175, 355
gender and, 353-356, 369-370
infants and, 243
sensation seeking and, 396
shared, 13, 153, 159-160, 162, 165-166, 171,
178-179, 281
Environmental factors, 156-158, 381, 406
Environmental influences on personality, 406
Epigenetics, 5, 168-169, 178-179
Epinephrine, 184, 187, 213, 345
Equality, 136, 178, 353, 379
Equity, 113, 351, 353-354
Erikson, E., 381
Erikson, Erik, 81, 126, 136
Erogenous zones, 237
Erotic plasticity, 366, 389
Eroticism, 383
Error, 12, 22, 45, 68, 94, 157-158, 165, 178, 190, 216,
314, 345
measurement, 45, 68, 94, 157-158, 178, 345
Errors, 10, 188, 223, 225
ESP, 210
Estrogen, 345
Ethical issues, 178
Ethics, 17, 28, 110, 398
Ethnicity, 112, 168, 223, 392
Etiology, 239
Eugenics, 177
Eugenics movement, 177
Europe, 197, 243, 355
Evaluation, 30, 68, 120, 131, 137, 139, 143, 149, 344,
348-349, 356, 379, 396, 402
of self, 120, 131, 137, 143, 149, 344
Evidence, 20, 22-23, 25, 46, 48, 53-57, 63-64, 67, 83,
86, 92, 94-96, 111, 120-121, 123, 126, 138,
140-144, 152, 153, 155, 171-172, 177,
191-193, 195-199, 210, 212-213, 215, 227,
229-235, 239-240, 247-248, 251-252, 276,
291-292, 294, 306-309, 313, 318-319, 322,
337-338, 346-347, 373-376, 378, 389-391,
399-400, 402-404, 407, 413, 416
anecdotal evidence, 22
Evolution, 177, 325-326, 345-347, 351, 361, 368,
370-371, 378, 382, 388, 398, 400, 407
adaptation and, 370
emotion in, 370
of desire, 370
Evolutionary psychologists, 346-347
Evolutionary psychology, 5, 346, 348, 362, 370, 374
Exceptions, 227
Exercise, 52, 123, 149, 155, 258, 269, 276, 290, 292,
317, 382, 385, 401, 403, 416, 418
NEAT, 52
Expectations, 8, 21, 56, 85, 122-123, 126-127,
146-147, 235-236, 244, 247, 252, 257, 263,
269-270, 283, 285, 287-288, 294, 296,
301-302, 310, 315-316, 320-322, 326, 331,
341, 345, 348, 351, 356, 359-360, 368, 407
influence, 356, 365, 368, 370, 391
Experience, 1, 14-15, 21-23, 25-26, 30, 32, 38, 48-50,
53-56, 62-63, 67, 69, 71, 78-79, 83-85,
88-89, 93, 113, 116, 120-122, 125-127, 130,
135-136, 138, 171-172, 191-192, 205-206,
208, 210-211, 216, 229-230, 234, 239-240,
243, 248, 259, 269, 273, 275, 283-284, 294,
297, 306-308, 311-312, 315-316, 319-322,
327-328, 340-341, 360-361, 393, 397-398,
411
Experiencing emotions, 341
Experiment, 3, 15, 17, 22, 25-28, 33-34, 45, 92, 139,
175, 178-179, 187, 200, 207, 214-215, 221,
225, 231-232, 240, 248, 251, 256-257, 264,
266-267, 276-277, 283, 294-297, 302-304,
318-320, 322, 338, 342, 361, 416, 419
control, 3, 5, 9, 25-26, 28, 33-34, 163, 187, 207,
260, 264, 266-267, 277, 283, 286-287,
294-297, 304, 310-311, 318-320, 322,
394, 416, 419
designing, 33
manipulation, 26
Experimental conditions, 337
Experimental method, 22
Experimental methods, 341
Experimental psychology, 22, 56, 381, 388, 396,
409-410
experimentation, 22, 28, 136
Experiments, 25, 29-30, 32, 39, 47, 49, 120, 137, 141,
163, 167-168, 186, 210, 240, 266, 306, 310,
329-330, 338, 342-344, 399
significance tests, 329
Expert, 71, 108, 120, 261, 404
Expertise, 105, 264-265, 287
Explanatory styles, 288, 298, 308-309, 320-321
Exposure, 14, 171, 296, 318, 345, 368, 380, 382
Expressive style, 387
Expressive traits, 360
External control, 267, 289, 370, 389, 404, 407, 414
External locus of control, 268, 288-294, 321, 396
Externals, 288-292, 295
Extraversion, 5-7, 18, 24, 37-38, 40, 47-59, 64, 66-68,
71-75, 77-78, 80, 82-86, 88, 90, 96-97,
99-100, 149, 161, 164-166, 176, 178-179,
181, 188-189, 191-193, 195, 203-209,
213-216, 335-336, 345, 347, 361, 375,
377-378, 393-394, 397, 402, 410, 419
Extraverts, 1, 48, 50, 62, 73-75, 97, 201, 205-210,
212, 215, 384
Extrinsic reward, 256, 395
Extroversion, 20, 24-25, 72, 77, 419
extroverts, 18, 22-25, 74, 78, 148-149, 192, 206-207,
210
Eye, 13, 62, 121, 124, 176-177, 245, 264, 270,
351-352, 374, 381
Eysenck, Hans, 40, 47-48, 53, 56, 190, 192, 215
Eysenck Personality Questionnaire, 48
F
Face validity, 5, 96, 115, 117, 373
Facebook, 70, 75, 77, 92, 111, 380
Faces, 121, 123, 209-210, 340, 371, 375, 395
Facial expressions, 56, 246, 340
Factor analysis, 6, 35, 43-46, 53, 58-59, 64, 73, 99,
113, 376, 394
Factor loadings, 6, 45-46, 59, 100
Failure, 25-26, 134, 137-140, 143, 149, 206, 225, 229,
240, 250, 276, 289, 296, 298, 301, 303, 312,
339, 394, 399, 410-411
False memories, 239-240, 396
False memory controversy, 240
Families, 6, 13, 24, 28-29, 81, 129, 133, 154, 159,
162-164, 179, 244, 309, 365
Family, 10, 13, 24-25, 54, 66, 85-88, 90, 123-125, 127,
129-130, 133, 135-136, 142, 151, 155,
158-160, 162-164, 178, 224, 234, 244, 265,
311, 313, 316, 369, 392-393, 400, 404, 412
blended, 167
friends and, 160, 249, 265, 316
nuclear, 129
same-sex, 6, 10, 160, 400
systems, 290, 388
Family relationships, 88, 127
Family structure, 159
Family systems perspective, 388
Fantasizing, 182, 226
Fat, 132, 317
body, 317
Father, 19, 81, 103, 105, 126, 130, 151, 154, 232,
236-237, 239, 241-242, 244, 261, 391
Fathers, 132, 175, 178, 237, 399
favoritism, 360
Fear, 2, 6, 8, 49, 95, 125, 132-134, 144-145, 148, 151,
177, 195-196, 201, 228, 232, 234, 236, 238,
241-242, 248, 250, 281, 333, 340-342, 352,
360
Feared self, 6, 134
Feedback, 92, 97-98, 113, 142, 200, 229, 231, 259,
262-263, 276-277, 280-284, 291, 303, 411
Feelings, 1-3, 5, 8, 20, 32, 44, 47-50, 72, 96, 101, 107,
131, 133, 138, 144-145, 149, 154, 187,
224-229, 234, 236-237, 239-240, 243-244,
247-248, 251, 267-268, 276-278, 281,
291-292, 309, 311-314, 317, 320, 340-341,
357-358
Females, 1, 6-7, 13-15, 80, 102, 134, 188, 207, 211,
238, 327-331, 333-334, 338-340, 342,
345-351, 357, 359, 361, 368, 414, 418
Feminine psychology, 242
Feminine traits, 357, 359, 415
Feminist theory, 6, 345, 362
Fertility drugs, 161
Fertilization, 161
in vitro, 161
Fetishism, 336
Fetus, 161
FFI, 78, 99-100, 375, 406
Fidelity, 54
Field experiment, 311, 394
Field experiments, 306
Field research, 310, 322
Field studies, 6, 25, 285, 310, 321, 323, 337
Field study, 310, 322, 405
Filial piety, 66, 89-90, 388, 419
First impressions, 176, 373
Fish, 18, 264
Fitness, 98, 414
Five-factor model, 6, 35, 46, 49, 52-55, 59, 62, 67-69,
71, 73, 86, 89-90, 145, 172, 211, 336-337,
362, 370, 378-379, 391, 397-398, 404-405,
408
agreeableness and, 49, 52-53, 68, 191
of personality, 35, 46, 49, 53-55, 59, 67-68, 71, 73,
89, 172, 211, 336-337, 364, 370,
378-379, 388, 397-398, 400, 404-405,
408
425

Five-Factor Theory, 398
Fixation, 1, 6-7, 10-11, 223, 235-236, 238, 252-253
in the phallic stage, 236
Fixations, 252
Flattery, 148
Flexibility, 54
Flooding, 310
Fluency, 224-225
Fluid, 32, 183, 187, 359
Fluidity, 378
Forgetting, 233, 396
repression, 233
Form of words, 144
Framing, 353, 368
Fraternal twins, 161-162, 164-166
Free association, 6, 220-221, 227, 251, 253
Frequency, 9, 23, 52, 101, 146, 184, 332-334,
341-342, 408
Freud, S., 241, 369, 383-384
Freud, Sigmund, 20, 24, 42-43, 71, 81, 136, 217-219,
223-224, 228, 239, 242, 246, 248, 381, 417
and psychoanalysis, 217-218, 417
psychodynamic theory, 217, 242
Freudian psychoanalysis, 234
Freudian slip, 6, 223, 253
Freudian slips, 220
Freudian theory, 219-220, 237, 243, 251-252
Friendliness, 50, 72, 108
Friends, 22, 24, 27, 37, 41-42, 48, 50, 57, 70, 75-77,
79, 127, 130-131, 133, 136, 145, 148, 150,
157, 164-166, 192, 211, 249, 256, 259-260,
274, 282, 308, 319, 401, 412, 415
Friendship, 150, 152
qualities of, 150
Friendships, 146, 150, 237
Fulfillment, 15, 64-65, 135, 221, 226, 237, 241, 253
Fully functioning person, 250
future, 4, 6-7, 11, 21, 48, 66, 85, 111, 126, 131-133,
144-147, 151, 179, 181-182, 202, 218, 231,
244, 294, 296-298, 302, 312-314, 316, 322,
371-372, 392, 399, 403, 416-417
predictions about, 123
G
Galen, 56, 113
Gall, Joseph, 202
Galvanic skin response, 6, 183-184, 216
Gamma-aminobutyric acid, 187
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), 187
Gay parents, 402
Gays and lesbians, 133
Gender, 5-7, 18, 21, 32, 37, 65-66, 73, 78, 83, 98,
112-113, 127, 132, 145, 177, 211-212, 223,
249, 271, 325-362, 366-371, 373-377,
379-381, 389-390, 392-394, 396-398,
400-403, 405, 410-411, 413-416, 418-420
aggression, 78, 212, 223, 325, 331-332, 337-338,
347, 350-352, 362, 368, 370, 374, 389,
393, 401
and cancer, 414
and leadership, 379
and leadership style, 379
and middle adulthood, 413
and work, 78, 349
androgynous, 359, 362
cognitive abilities, 327, 345, 387
college, 9, 32, 66, 73, 83, 98, 132, 145, 326, 339,
343, 353, 359, 373, 380, 387, 392, 394,
400, 405, 411, 414, 419
conformity, 330, 333, 342-343, 360-361, 376-377
development and, 369, 371, 377, 401
differences, 2, 5-7, 21, 32, 73, 78, 113, 211,
325-331, 334-356, 361-362, 366,
368-371, 373-377, 379-381, 387,
389-390, 392-394, 396-398, 400-403,
405, 410-411, 413-415, 418-420
differences in aggression, 350, 362, 368, 389, 393
differences in self-esteem, 366, 393
environmental influences, 345, 369
gender constancy, 367
gender schema, 359, 367
gender schema theory, 359, 367
generalizability and, 330
in the classroom, 411
schema, 223, 359-360, 367
self-perception, 367, 375
sexuality, 6, 13, 65-66, 223, 331-336, 345-347,
355, 360-361, 389-390, 394, 400,
402-403, 414
spatial ability, 326, 329-330, 335, 345, 348-349,
361
temperament and, 355
verbal ability, 333-335, 361, 390
video games, 32, 326, 348, 373
Gender constancy, 367
Gender development, 371, 411
Gender differences, 73, 325-328, 330-331, 334-335,
337-356, 361-362, 366, 368-371, 380-381,
387, 389-390, 393, 396, 400-403, 405,
413-414
in cognitive abilities, 327, 387
in emotion, 341, 371
in leadership, 342
in mate selection preferences, 381
in self-esteem, 330, 344, 366, 393
in spatial abilities, 349
in temperament, 380
Gender differences in, 73, 325-327, 334-335, 337-343,
346-348, 350-351, 353-355, 361-362, 366,
368-371, 380-381, 387, 389-390, 393, 396,
400-403, 405
divorce, 369
Gender expectations, 341, 360
Gender gap, 346
Gender identity disorders, 336, 420
Gender issues, 356
Gender roles, 113, 340-341, 361, 369
Gender schema theory, 359, 367
Gender similarities hypothesis, 389
Gender socialization, 7, 345, 362
Gene therapy, 177
Generalizability, 7, 28, 91, 94-95, 98-99, 101, 115-117,
310-311, 330, 337, 376, 404
Generalizable, 115, 337
Generalization, 14, 115, 328, 395
Generalizations, 40, 144
Generalized expectancies, 289, 407
Genes, 4-5, 7-8, 19-21, 25, 32, 153-157, 159-161,
164-165, 167-174, 176, 178-179, 191, 251,
347-348, 370, 396
and individual differences, 396
dominant, 167
Genetic engineering, 178
Genetic factors, 165, 191-192, 369, 390
developmental, 390
Genetic influences, 345, 374
Genetic predisposition, 154, 164, 173, 353
Genetic testing, 177
Genetics, 7, 17-21, 23-25, 28, 32, 34, 89, 93, 153-179,
210, 214, 326, 345, 355, 361, 372, 397-398,
400, 404, 407, 415
basics of, 155
genes, 7, 19-21, 25, 32, 153-157, 159-161,
164-165, 167-174, 176, 178-179
genetic testing, 177
impulsivity and, 210
inheritance and, 167
of depression, 7, 28, 154, 171, 415
psychological disorders, 168
recessive trait, 167
sex and, 361
zygote, 160
Genital stage, 217, 235, 238
genocide, 395
Genomics, 372, 398, 403-404, 412
Genotypes, 154, 172-173, 175
Gere, Richard, 138
Germany, 83, 166, 246, 290, 388
Gerontology, 375, 400, 413
Gifted children, 87, 414
Girls, 11, 124-125, 135, 229, 235-238, 251-252, 326,
330, 334-335, 337-339, 345, 353, 356, 360,
388, 402
Glands, 2, 183
Glass ceiling, 379
Goals, 3, 8, 51, 54, 72, 92, 95, 105, 125-126, 129,
131, 151, 177, 256-257, 268, 273, 282-284,
287-290, 302, 312-313, 315-317, 320, 378,
392, 394, 405
and social behavior, 315, 394
and values, 125, 129, 273
Golf, 24
Google, 109-111, 417
Grandparents, 124, 174
Graphologists, 116
Graphs, 84, 188-189
Great apes, 121, 151
Greeks, Ancient, 135
Green tea, 320
Grip strength, 332
Group, 3-5, 14-15, 18, 44, 65, 79-80, 87-88, 97-98,
102-103, 116, 127-131, 134, 136, 141, 143,
150, 159, 168-172, 176-177, 188, 194, 246,
250, 265, 276, 304-305, 311, 318-320, 328,
353, 357, 413
experimental, 5, 14, 70, 261, 276, 295, 304-305,
307, 311, 357, 388, 413
yielding to, 350
Group behavior, 143
Groups, 9, 23, 25-26, 30, 33, 50-51, 64, 78, 86-87, 93,
97-98, 111-112, 114, 120, 128-129, 134, 143,
146, 150, 158, 163, 171, 175-176, 210, 245,
250, 281, 319-320, 329, 334, 339, 407
coordination, 262
social roles, 120, 128, 351
Growth, 1, 7, 15, 56-57, 113, 158, 243, 251, 257-258
Growth hormones, 158
Guided imagery, 270
Guilt, 3, 5, 47-49, 127, 148, 226, 234, 268, 296, 306,
332, 341-342
H
Hair, 124, 127, 223
Hallucinations, 210
Halpern, Diane, 327, 357
Handshake, 62, 89
handshakes, 32, 37, 62, 75, 89
Happiness, 18, 48, 81, 113, 140-141, 147, 151, 195,
205, 214, 224, 246, 255, 257, 282, 286-287,
311, 316, 340, 374, 401, 409, 415
children and, 391
factors that influence, 409
flow, 195, 205, 284, 401
marital, 113
Hardiness, 15, 366, 384, 389, 393, 396, 405
Hartmann, Heinz, 242
Health, 3, 7-8, 14, 25, 29-30, 49, 64, 78, 85-88, 90,
112, 145, 147, 149, 158, 171, 178, 250, 255,
257-258, 271, 275-277, 282, 285-286,
288-290, 292-293, 298-299, 305-306,
308-309, 311-312, 315-318, 320-322, 347,
367, 372, 377-382, 384-385, 387-389,
392-396, 399, 401-403, 406-415, 417-418
and weight, 112, 418
loneliness and, 308
mental, 3, 29-30, 49, 85, 87-88, 112, 178, 243, 282,
290, 308, 347, 353, 367, 378, 384-385,
387-388, 399, 403, 410, 414, 417
optimism and, 285, 312, 315-318, 370, 385, 399,
403, 409-410
perceived control, 394, 402, 417
prevention, 320, 382, 385, 401, 410
Health care, 158, 257, 276
Health promotion, 396, 410
Health psychologist, 408
Health psychology, 372, 381, 384, 392, 394, 409,
413-414, 417-418
Healthy lifestyle, 273
Hearing, 75, 221, 224, 229, 340, 400
Heart, 24, 36, 77, 88, 105, 183-184, 187, 194-195,
202, 205, 213, 226, 246, 260, 272, 310, 321,
351, 411
disease, 321, 370
Heart attacks, 290
Heart disease, 321, 370
Helping behavior, 325, 332, 335, 342, 345, 348,
361-362, 379
Hemispheres, 203, 208
Heredity, 159
Heritability, 2, 5, 7, 13, 153, 156-158, 160-162,
165-166, 178-179, 192, 390, 393, 411
adoption studies, 161-162, 165, 178
adoption studies of, 162
and twin studies, 153, 161-162, 165, 179
of personality traits, 165, 178
of psychoticism, 192
Heritability estimate, 162
Heroin, 211
Heterogeneity, 141, 400
Hierarchical organization, 40
Hierarchy, 40, 49, 54, 58-59
High school, 18, 38, 88, 101, 106, 113, 127, 167, 301,
316, 345, 411
engagement in, 411
Higher education, 386, 412
Hippocampus, 195, 204, 210
History, 28-29, 39, 53, 64, 134-135, 203, 217, 219,
426

243, 246, 251, 266, 293, 297, 365-366, 378,
388, 391, 400, 409, 416, 420
of psychology, 219, 365-366, 378, 381, 385, 391
reinforcement, 365
Histrionic personality, 336
HIV/AIDS, 382
Holmes, Sherlock, 58, 136, 320
Homosexuality, 332, 365, 367-368, 371, 373-374,
379-380, 385-386, 393, 398, 406
developmental theory of, 367
origins of, 385
society and, 393
Homosexuals, 366
Honesty, 3-4, 7-8, 10, 51, 55, 109-110, 116, 150, 364,
408, 417
Hopelessness theory of depression, 363, 384
Hormones, 1, 18, 158, 169, 183-184, 187, 345, 357,
361, 371, 387
and sexual orientation, 368
gender development and, 371
stress, 169, 183, 187, 345, 363
Hospitals, 29-30, 243-244, 304
Hostility, 10, 49-51, 74, 86, 95, 212, 237, 392, 411
Hues, 357
Human development, 376
Human nervous system, 190
Human sexuality, 378, 389, 400, 403, 414
Human traits, 56, 157
Humor, 56, 87, 127, 155, 159, 162-165, 220, 316, 373
Hunger, 127
Hyde, Janet, 331
Hyperaccessibility, 417
Hypnosis, 210, 220, 251
responsiveness to, 210, 251
Hypochondriasis, 213
hypocrisy, 148, 413
Hypothalamus, 2, 193, 195, 210, 371, 414
Hypotheses, 11, 23, 32, 167, 199, 234, 330, 337, 365,
371
testing, 23, 270
Hypothesis, 7, 9-10, 22-23, 26, 34, 56, 144-145, 193,
195, 232, 249, 271, 293, 368, 389, 395-396
Hysteria, 221, 239, 383
I
Icon, 219
ideal partners, 331
Identical twins, 28, 159-166
Identification, 7, 22, 69, 89, 130, 177, 226, 237,
252-253, 273
Identity, 6-7, 13, 17-21, 32, 34, 71, 81, 89, 119-152,
336, 360-362, 366, 378-382, 386-388, 392,
396, 402, 409, 413-414, 416, 419-420
formation, 366, 373
statuses, 131
Identity formation, 373
Idiographic approach, 35, 39, 41-42, 58-59
I-E Scale, 293
Illinois, 301, 354, 396, 406
Illness, 85, 87, 112, 178, 221, 244, 247, 290, 305, 316,
318, 320, 363, 372, 403-404, 406
Illusion, 7, 98, 322, 414
Illusions, 384, 414
Imagery, 270
Images, 11, 19, 36, 122, 132, 145, 149, 152, 176,
185-186, 199, 208-209, 213, 217, 229, 400,
413, 415
Imagination, 50, 53, 67, 103, 407-408
imaging techniques, 214
Imitation, 399
Immune system, 182, 318-320, 378
placebo and, 319
Implicit Association Test, 7, 70, 225, 253, 380, 386,
402
Implicit Association Test (IAT), 7, 253
Implicit attitudes, 217, 223
Implicit memory, 409
Impression formation, 401
Impression management, 7, 77, 141, 148-149, 152,
387, 393-394, 409, 415-416
ingratiation, 148, 152
Imprint, 20
Impulsivity, 20, 47, 49, 87, 96, 181, 191-192, 201,
203-206, 210, 212-213, 215, 405, 415
In vitro fertilization, 161
Incentives, 205, 290
Incidence, 105, 154, 161, 171-172, 361
Independent self, 130-131, 151
Independent variable, 7, 25-26, 33-34, 163, 310
Independent verification, 22
Independent view of the self, 8, 130, 152
India, 337, 404, 411
Individual differences, 19, 21, 44, 81, 85-87, 90, 97,
155-158, 165, 195, 199, 207-211, 274, 330,
366, 368-369, 371, 373, 375-378, 384-386,
389, 393-397, 399, 401-402, 404-405,
408-409, 415, 417-420
in development, 378, 397, 415
Individualism, 3, 8, 69, 106, 119, 129-131, 145, 152,
369, 402, 406, 415-416, 419
of social psychology, 419
Individualism-collectivism, 106, 145
Individualistic culture, 130, 258, 317
Industriousness, 88
Infancy, 9, 80, 175, 374, 397, 399
behavior in, 175
Infants, 86, 122-123, 190, 236, 243-247, 251, 326,
346, 352-353, 363, 395, 400, 405, 410, 412,
417
nervous system, 190
nutrition, 243
perception, 86, 346
social and personality development, 410
Infants and toddlers, 243
inferences, 13, 94, 120, 187, 393
Information, 2-3, 9-10, 13-14, 18, 21, 24, 29, 43, 63,
70-71, 77, 105, 107-108, 112-113, 116, 128,
145-146, 148, 183-184, 198, 200, 203,
267-269, 283, 288, 317, 404-405, 409, 414
processing, 183, 198, 404-405
sources of, 70-71, 269
Information processing, 198, 404-405
model, 404-405
Informed consent, 8, 30, 33-34
Infrequency scale, 8, 106, 116-117
ingratiation, 8, 148, 152
Inheritance, 9, 157, 167-168, 178-179
Inheritance, Mendelian, 9, 167, 179
Injuries, 149, 202, 212, 405
Insecure attachment, 247
Insight, 310, 356
instant messaging, 136
Instinct, 219-220, 226, 234-235
death, 219-220
Institute for Sex Research, 404
Institutional review board, 8, 30, 33-34
Institutional review board (IRB), 8, 30, 33-34
Instrumental traits, 359
Instrumentality, 8, 69, 78
Insurance, 110, 410
Integration, 8, 17, 21, 34, 41, 89, 138, 372, 377, 393,
400, 411
Integrity tests, 3-4, 8, 10, 110-111, 116-117
Intellectual ability, 417
Intellectual development, 407
Intelligence, 14, 45, 50, 54, 61, 63-64, 67, 70-71, 89,
141, 151, 177-178, 287, 337, 361, 384-385,
387, 398, 408, 413
creative, 50, 334, 384-385
distribution of, 334
domains of, 413
emotional intelligence, 63, 385, 408
factor analysis, 45, 64
genetics, 89, 177-178, 361, 398
measures of, 54, 64, 67, 89, 141, 408
measuring, 313
music, 45, 50, 61, 89, 385, 398
musical, 45
native, 67
pragmatic, 45
profiles of, 67, 398
spiritual, 14, 64, 89
tests, 14, 63, 70, 141, 384
theories, 398, 413
verbal, 151, 334-335, 337, 361
Intelligence tests, 70
validity of, 70
Interdependent self, 130-131, 151-152
Interdependent view of the self, 8, 130
Internal working model, 252
Internal-external locus of control, 288-289, 396
Internalization, 238
Internals, 288-292, 295
Internet, 22, 70-71, 75, 83, 92, 94, 98, 109, 111, 115,
136, 147, 249, 287
and experimentation, 136
dating services, 115
information from, 70
Internet survey, 83
Interpersonal relations, 51, 68, 129, 243
Interpretation of dreams, 221, 383
Interpretations, 92, 101, 329, 331, 412
Interrater reliability, 8, 94-95, 115, 117
Interventions, 88, 140-142, 151, 178, 281, 287, 322,
408, 410, 417
selective, 287
Interviews, 13, 23, 27, 69, 87, 92-93, 111, 113, 148,
212, 300, 366
assessment, 13, 27, 69, 92-93, 111, 113, 366
job interviews, 148
Intimacy, 218, 248, 405
goals, 405
Intimate relationships, 20, 218, 242, 250
Intrinsic motivation, 8, 261, 264, 266, 268, 272, 274,
277, 279, 282, 284, 290, 364, 377, 393, 403,
405, 408
Intrinsic reward, 256
Introversion-extraversion, 18, 53, 386
Invasion of privacy, 310
Iowa, 120
IQ, 50, 63-64, 95, 177, 368
IQ tests, 63, 95
IRB, 8, 30-31, 33-34, 294
Ironic processes, 222, 417
Ironic processing, 231
Isolation, 8, 86, 120, 122, 169, 210, 217, 229, 251,
253, 309, 313, 420
J
Japan, 67, 89, 129-130, 144, 192, 246, 335, 337, 417
Japanese, 1, 66, 106, 128-129, 131, 145-147, 292,
402, 416
Jefferson, Thomas, 312
Job, 3-4, 8, 10, 25, 28, 32, 38, 49, 52, 62, 71, 86, 88,
91-93, 96-97, 104-105, 107-113, 140-142,
145, 147-148, 150-151, 249, 280-282,
289-290, 304-305, 321, 353, 402, 405, 419
analysis, 3-4, 78, 113, 145, 147, 151, 290, 321,
366, 402, 419
Job satisfaction, 249, 281, 305, 391, 405
Job security, 282
John, R., 366-367, 371, 374, 382, 386, 403, 406, 418
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 300, 363, 367, 399,
401, 403-404, 407, 410
Journal of Adolescence, 402
Judaism, 64
Judgment, 93, 95, 135, 212, 343
Judgments, 23, 37, 51, 55, 58, 62, 95, 112, 145-146,
359, 385
visual, 346
Junk food, 353
just world, 371
Juvenile delinquency, 51
K
Kin selection, 368
Kissinger, Henry, 240, 414
Knowledge, 3-4, 12, 22, 29, 58, 80, 94, 105, 109, 127,
135, 140, 151, 177, 221, 226, 243, 280, 315,
330-333, 360, 369, 411, 415
and attitudes, 389
aspects of, 58, 80, 105, 127, 135, 238, 243, 360
L
Labeling, 53, 167
Labor, 109, 111, 350-351, 374, 379, 416
LaGuardia, Fiorello, 150
Language, 32, 42, 44, 53, 58, 67-68, 71, 112, 123,
277, 287, 309, 353, 359, 364, 390, 398, 408
processes and, 353, 385
scientific, 32, 385
Language learning, 370
Latency period, 238
Latent content, 9, 221, 253
Later adulthood, 402
Latinos, 129-130
Law, 22-23, 88, 108, 110, 112-113, 167, 212, 219-220,
261, 301-302, 308, 315, 371, 387, 399, 404,
408
Leaders, 150, 328, 342, 379, 418
stereotypes of, 328
transformational, 379
Leadership, 50, 69, 71-72, 143, 286, 291, 325,
332-333, 335, 342-343, 347-348, 357,
361-362, 379, 388
styles of, 342-343, 379
427

transactional, 379
Learned helplessness, 9, 21, 285-286, 288, 294-297,
310-312, 321-322, 363, 388, 396, 401, 403
Learned optimism, 409-410
Learning, 9, 30, 56, 97, 109, 156, 183, 198-200, 210,
236, 251, 259-260, 262, 269, 282, 294-295,
315-316, 320, 345, 353, 389, 396, 399,
405-407, 409-410
active, 187, 198, 316, 353
by observing, 194, 251
in future, 294
latent, 9
observational, 269, 389
observational learning, 269
Learning theory, 345, 365, 407
Legal issues, 91, 111, 116
Lesbians, 133, 414
Leukocytes, 169, 374
Lewin, Kurt, 36-37, 71
Lewis, M., 395
Lexical approach, 35, 43-44, 52, 59, 69
Lexicon, 52, 58, 67-68
Lie scale, 106, 116
Lieben und Arbeiten, 235, 238
Life expectancy, 313
Life insurance, 304, 410
Life Orientation Test, 314, 409
Life span, 59, 61, 79-82, 90, 175, 190, 243, 251, 344,
366, 371, 374, 376, 398
Life stories, 69
Life stress, 172, 370, 373-374
Lifestyle, 5, 7, 158, 211, 273, 308, 414
Lifestyles, 366
Light, 18, 26, 29, 96, 105, 147, 149, 160, 215, 225,
234, 240, 295, 311, 346-348, 361
Lincoln, Abraham, 72-73
Links, 411
Listening, 50, 54, 75, 264
Localization of function, 202
Locus, 9, 21, 64, 103, 255, 268, 272, 283-284,
288-295, 309-310, 312, 315, 321-322,
364-365, 369, 377, 379, 381-382, 384-385,
388-389, 391, 394-397, 399, 401, 404-405,
407-417, 419
Locus of control orientation, 367
Logic, 25, 28, 153, 161-162, 179, 190, 240, 270, 306,
329
deductive, 240
Logical thinking, 226
Loneliness, 168-169, 179, 248, 308-309, 315, 321,
341, 364, 371
Longevity, 85
Longitudinal designs, 89, 142
Longitudinal studies, 80-83, 86, 88-90, 306, 406, 416
Longitudinal study, 9, 80, 86-87, 90, 160, 364, 374,
378, 388, 401, 404-406, 412, 415
Looking-glass self, 9
Loss, 1-2, 25, 29, 67, 108, 148, 154, 197, 205, 244,
249, 283, 294, 299-303, 307, 311, 376, 418
Love, 5, 10, 32, 51, 74, 80, 105, 116, 124, 137, 143,
148, 211, 218, 228, 235-238, 244, 246-249,
251-252, 265-266, 370, 385, 410
factors of, 370, 378
ingredients of, 246
Low birth weight, 162
M
Machismo, 235, 237
Magazines, 37, 58
Males, 1, 6-7, 11, 13-15, 80, 102, 134, 188, 207, 211,
238, 327-331, 333-334, 338-340, 342-343,
345-351, 357, 359, 361, 368
Malnutrition, 158
Maltreated children, 373
Management, 7, 77, 107-108, 141, 148-149, 152,
280-281, 288, 387-388, 393-394, 405,
407-409, 412-413, 415-416, 420
participative, 281
MAO-B, 407
Mapping, 187, 415
Marijuana, 85, 176, 211
Marriage, 74, 85, 113-114, 224, 239, 412
Masculine traits, 357, 359
Maslow, Abraham, 28, 258
Masturbation, 236, 331, 334
Mate selection, 351, 381, 384, 413
Mathematics, 111, 270, 326, 332, 334-335, 345-346,
353, 356, 380, 387-390
Mating, 13, 347, 351, 370
Mating preferences, 351
Mating strategies, 347
Matrix, 45, 371
Maximizing, 30
Mean, 20, 23, 37, 39, 74, 80, 82, 90, 128, 130, 142,
146, 179, 214, 222, 225, 233, 309, 319,
329-330, 338-339, 342, 345, 406, 415
Meanings, 65, 101, 267, 277, 284
Mean-level change in personality traits, 406
Measurement, 6, 9, 11, 26, 35, 43-46, 59, 67-68, 92,
94, 102, 108, 157-158, 178, 203, 287, 345,
357, 360, 367, 376, 391, 393, 396-397, 403,
411-412
of heritability, 157
Measurements, 28, 44, 94
Media, 77, 132, 149, 204, 321, 328, 345, 381
Median age, 168
Mediator, 401
Medication adherence, 389, 418
Medications, 256, 290
Medicine, 39, 87, 182, 240, 273, 374, 376, 384,
388-389, 397, 400, 403, 407-408, 410-411,
416
Chinese, 374, 384, 388
Meditation, 182-183, 208-210, 214, 376, 383, 409
receptive, 182
memories, 1, 3, 9, 12, 14, 65, 75, 176, 205, 223, 227,
229, 233-234, 239-240, 244, 247, 286-287,
396, 398, 404
Memory, 23, 63, 70, 93-94, 172, 209, 225, 227, 234,
240, 270, 359, 383, 407, 409
attention and, 383
explicit, 70
field, 94, 240
implicit, 23, 70, 93, 225, 409
knowledge, 94
preconscious, 225, 227
recall, 63, 227, 240, 270
structural, 225, 227
men, 5-6, 21, 24, 32, 62, 70, 73, 75, 78, 80, 83-88,
101, 113, 132-133, 148, 158, 171, 175-176,
178, 211-212, 237, 248-249, 313, 318,
325-331, 334-351, 353-356, 358-362, 379,
385-387, 390, 395-396, 400, 402-403, 409,
414, 419
and intimacy, 218
Mendel, Gregor, 168, 178, 397
Mendelian inheritance, 9, 167, 179
Mental disorders, 98, 335-336, 347, 361, 387
autism, 336
diagnosis, 387
sexual and gender identity disorders, 336
Mental functioning, 383
Mental health, 30, 49, 87-88, 112, 178, 243, 282, 290,
308, 367, 378, 385, 399, 403, 414
future of, 403
Mental hospitals, 29
Mental illness, 85, 87, 112
Mental representation, 219
Mental retardation, 336
Mental rotation, 32, 326-327, 331, 335, 347-349, 353,
400, 405
Mental rotation task, 326-327, 348-349
Metaphor, 18, 80, 195, 246, 251
Methods, 17, 22-26, 28, 30, 32-33, 39, 43-44, 57,
69-71, 73, 89, 91-95, 98, 109, 122, 142,
144-145, 151-152, 158, 190-191, 214-215,
217-218, 226, 232, 238, 280, 295, 302, 320,
329-330, 341, 344, 354, 361, 364, 369, 377,
380-382, 394, 400-403, 405-406, 408,
410-412, 415, 418
Middle adulthood, 413, 416
Middle childhood, 373
Middle school, 134-135, 360
Midlife crisis, 81
Military, 212, 300, 343, 408
Mind over matter, 21
Minorities, 120
Mirage, 381
Mirror test, 9, 121-123, 151-152
Mnemonics, 53
Model, 1-2, 6-7, 14, 35, 46-47, 49, 52-55, 59, 62-63,
66-69, 71, 73, 86, 89-90, 111, 113, 145, 160,
172, 191-192, 211, 213-215, 225, 244,
251-253, 270-271, 275-277, 296, 320,
322-323, 345-346, 352-353, 357, 362, 364,
367, 369-370, 384, 387-391, 396-398,
400-402, 404-405, 407-410, 413, 415,
419-420
Modeling, 269, 382, 390, 399-400
Monkeys, 121, 244, 345-346, 370
Monogamous, 66
Mood, 43, 48, 73, 75, 96, 138, 149, 171, 187, 210,
232, 306, 308, 311, 313, 319, 336, 341, 370,
390, 394, 399, 403, 410
Mood disorders, 171, 187, 336
bipolar, 336
norepinephrine and, 187
Moods, 55
Moral reasoning, 331-334
Moral standards, 136, 226
Morality, 51, 68, 71-73, 103, 228, 237-238, 251
conventional, 238
Mothers, 28-29, 122, 132, 175, 244-248, 393-394, 404
surrogate, 244
Motion, 213
Motivation, 5, 8-9, 11-13, 17, 19-21, 32, 34, 71, 96,
102, 104, 114, 128, 130-132, 250, 255-284,
299, 301, 321, 364-365, 369, 379-380,
383-384, 386-388, 390, 393, 396-397, 401,
403, 405, 408, 413, 415, 418-419
achievement, 71, 102, 104, 250, 270, 299, 301,
321, 369, 388, 396-397, 401, 419
achievement motivation, 104, 250, 379
and job performance, 280
controlled, 3, 5, 8-9, 20, 266, 272-275, 279-281,
283-284, 401
for achievement, 104
for sex, 387
of employees, 280
possible selves and, 134
rewards and, 198, 256, 274, 280, 283-284
Motives, 8, 21, 51, 73, 104, 139, 223, 227, 243, 251,
411, 414
Motor skills, 404, 419
Movement, 87, 131, 177, 183, 187, 203, 226, 346
Movies, 69, 192, 248
Muscle, 2, 5, 14, 183
Music, 20, 44-46, 50, 59, 61-62, 71, 73-76, 89, 139,
155, 165, 175, 194, 211, 221, 256, 263-264,
377-378, 396-398, 405, 420
heavy metal, 44, 46, 74, 211
rap, 46, 74-75, 211
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator, 46
N
Narcissism, 141, 143, 370, 383, 392-393
Narcissistic personality, 336, 393
Narcissistic personality disorder, 336
National Geographic, 186
National Institute of Mental Health, 30
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), 30
National Opinion Research Center, 412
Natural experiments, 163
Natural response, 310
Nature and nurture, 20, 153, 156-157, 170, 172, 179,
345, 352, 384, 393
Nature-nurture, 156, 170
Nature-nurture debate, 156, 170
Nature-nurture issue, 156
Need for achievement, 104-105
Need for affiliation, 104
Need for cognition, 96-97, 99
Need for social connection, 371
Negative affect, 204, 299, 372, 378
Negative attributions, 302
Negative correlation, 188, 204
Negative correlations, 24
Negative emotionality, 48, 191
Neglect, 410
NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R), 99-100, 375
Neo-Freudians, 242
Nervous system, 2-3, 11, 14, 18, 20, 183-185, 187,
190, 195, 206, 213, 216, 345, 385
autonomic, 2, 11, 14, 183, 216
CNS, 388
parts of, 18, 183-185, 187, 195, 206, 213
spinal cord, 183
sympathetic, 2, 14, 183, 195, 216, 345
Neural circuits, 204
Neural networks, 196, 204, 393
Neural pathways, 203
Neurobiology, 369, 377
Neuroimaging, 23, 93, 181, 202, 215, 378
Neurons, 10, 18, 171, 187, 206
Neuroscience, 10, 17, 19-20, 25, 32, 34, 181-216,
366, 371-372, 375-376, 395, 397-398, 402,
404-405, 410, 412, 417-418
428

behavior, 10, 20, 25, 183, 187, 192, 195-196,
202-206, 211, 213, 371-372, 402, 404,
410, 412, 418
clinical, 210, 397, 402, 412, 417-418
Neuroscientists, 215
Neurotransmitters, 10, 184, 187, 213, 216
New Psychology, 390
Newborn, 378
Newborns, 123, 378
Newcomb, Theodore, 71
Nicotine, 380
Noise, 194-195, 212-213, 295-296
Nolen-Hoeksema, S., 376, 401, 410
Nonidentical twins, 159-162, 169, 345
Nonverbal behavior, 231, 335, 347, 361, 377-378, 387
nonverbal cues, 387
Nonverbal communication, 350, 387
Nonverbal cues, 148, 387
Norepinephrine (noradrenaline), 187
Norms, 3-4, 8, 51, 68-69, 129, 211, 268, 348, 350-351,
356, 361
North Carolina, 406
Nuclear families, 129
Nutrition, 158, 243, 394
O
Obama, Barack, 301
Obedience, 129, 268
Obedience to authority, 129
Obesity, 86, 290, 408
diet, 290
Objective personality tests, 69
Objective self, 10, 122, 125-126, 152, 379
Objective tests, 101, 396
Observation, 22-23, 27, 33-34, 70, 93, 204, 304, 307,
312, 340
direct, 22
Observational learning, 269
Observational study, 10, 34
OCEAN, 18, 53
Oedipal complex, 235, 238, 242
Oedipus complex, 10, 223, 235-238, 240, 242,
251-253
OFC, 188, 204
Old age, 82-83, 85, 90, 292, 311, 390, 406
Open-ended question, 151
Open-mindedness, 49, 97
Openness to experience, 38, 53, 55-56, 63, 67, 78, 84,
378, 397-398
Operationalization, 95, 99, 248, 417
Optimism, 2, 21, 113, 196, 230, 285, 288, 301,
309-310, 312-320, 322-323, 365, 370,
372-373, 375, 388, 399, 403, 406, 409-410,
417
Optimism-pessimism, 21
Optimistic explanatory style, 10, 297-309, 312,
321-323, 403-404
Optimists, 285, 301, 303-306, 308, 312-320, 322, 365,
371, 409
Oral fixation, 223, 236
Organization, 40, 51, 56, 89, 108-109, 150, 258, 265,
369, 377, 383, 408, 411-412, 415
Organizational climate, 281
Organizational psychology, 108, 412, 419
motivation, 419
Orgasm, 13
Orientation, 3, 6-7, 12-13, 18, 21, 32, 51, 65-66,
68-69, 78, 80, 109, 143, 274-275, 283-284,
314, 360, 363, 371-372, 387-388, 390,
392-393, 396, 399-400, 403, 409
kin, 368
Orienting reflex, 212
Out-group, 250
Outliers, 188-189
Overjustification, 10, 266, 283-284, 395
Overjustification effect, 10, 266, 283-284
P
Pain, 29, 87, 105, 187, 211, 213, 270, 289, 310, 320,
397, 408, 419
management, 408
sense of, 29
Pain tolerance, 213
Paine, Thomas, 322
Panic, 6, 156, 196, 198, 317, 336
Panic attacks, 317
Panksepp, Jaak, 251
Paraprofessionals, 212
Parental investment, 381
Parenting, 159, 172, 275, 284, 391, 399
styles, 172, 399
Parents, 19-20, 24, 29-30, 32, 66, 70, 80, 86-87, 105,
123, 126-127, 129, 142, 145, 159-160,
162-165, 171, 173-175, 177-178, 218,
241-248, 257, 278-279, 309, 321, 342, 345,
356, 360, 384, 402
adoptive, 24, 29, 162, 164, 175
single, 66, 162, 241, 246, 360
Participative management, 281
Pascalis, 193, 377
Passion, 41, 109
Path analysis, 11, 255, 270-271, 277-278, 283-284
Pedophilia, 336
Peer, 67, 80, 94, 99, 143, 155, 166, 332, 337, 402,
406
groups, 143
Peer-reviewed, 99
peers, 19-20, 36, 50, 52, 79-80, 85-86, 123, 125, 150,
159-160, 174-175, 230, 237, 258, 265, 283,
293, 301, 359-360, 413
influence of, 160
PEN model, 47, 181, 191-192, 214-215
Penicillin, 29
Penis envy, 11, 235, 237, 251, 253
Perception, 86, 136-137, 266, 332, 335, 346, 369,
374-375, 382, 401, 403, 407
constancy in, 367
of time, 86
Performance standards, 229
Perseverance, 312
Person, 1-3, 5, 7-8, 10-15, 18-21, 23-28, 38-42, 47-53,
55, 58-59, 62, 66, 69-74, 76-77, 79, 81-83,
85, 88, 92-93, 95-97, 99, 101, 112, 124-125,
127-133, 135, 137-138, 140-141, 147-150,
170-171, 174-176, 178, 193-198, 214, 226,
228-238, 245, 247-248, 252, 257, 262-265,
277, 281-282, 296-299, 312-313, 319, 322,
340, 356-358, 360-361, 369, 382, 401,
407-409
described, 3, 5, 10, 25-26, 42, 47, 101, 128-129,
135, 138, 174, 218, 222, 228, 230, 234,
247-248
Person perception, 369, 401
Personal constructs, 392
Personality, 17-30, 32-34, 35-59, 61-90, 91-117, 119,
123, 125, 136, 139, 144-145, 147, 149,
151-152, 155-160, 162-163, 165-166, 168,
170-172, 174-179, 181-216, 217-253, 265,
268, 273, 279, 285-323, 325-362, 363-420
and coronary heart disease, 370
defense mechanisms, 20, 87, 217, 227-228,
233-234, 251-252, 374-375
enterprising, 108
environmental influences on, 159, 365, 406
healthy, 87, 105, 198, 206, 230, 232, 239, 245,
250-251, 273, 290, 312, 315, 317-318,
320, 407
Jung and, 224
lexical approach to, 44
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, 98-99,
337, 357, 371, 408
NEO Personality Inventory, 49, 53, 72-73, 99-100,
336, 375, 398, 405, 407
neo-Freudians, 242
neurotic, 62, 72, 84-86, 88, 197-198, 210, 214, 355
personal concerns, 65
projective tests, 70, 81, 101, 116, 231, 251, 331
psychoanalysis, 24, 217-220, 223, 225, 234-235,
242-243, 367, 376, 384, 388, 397, 400,
417-418
psychoanalytic approach to, 393
psychodynamic approach to, 410
psychosexual stages, 11, 217, 234-235, 238, 240,
251-253
self-evaluation of, 396
self-presentation and, 136
social cognitive theory, 366, 371
structure of, 68, 100, 184, 365-367, 369, 376-377,
397, 399, 408
studies of, 24, 63, 71, 73, 162, 200, 340, 353, 367,
369, 394, 401, 408, 414-417
temperaments and, 35, 56
traits, 2-3, 7-10, 14, 17, 19-21, 23, 32, 34, 35-59,
61-90, 101, 111-112, 123, 145, 149, 155,
160, 162, 165-166, 171, 177-179, 189,
191-192, 197-198, 214-215, 220, 231,
236, 336, 357, 359-361, 375, 390-398,
400, 402, 406, 409, 411-415
traits in, 39, 61, 68-69, 71, 89-90, 160, 231, 359,
390, 392, 396, 406
types, 17, 21, 26-28, 43-44, 47, 56, 66, 69, 73-74,
91-93, 101, 106, 110, 116, 149, 175, 215,
318, 334, 338, 377, 391, 406, 415
Personality assessment, 17, 27, 43, 91-117, 367-368,
374, 382, 387, 389, 400, 402, 408, 412, 418
Personality assessments, 93
Personality development, 11, 56, 61, 79, 81, 85, 90,
155, 159, 243, 251, 378, 396, 406, 410
Personality differences, 75, 78, 87, 89, 206, 325, 327,
331, 355, 361, 366, 411
Personality disorders, 336, 390, 392-393
antisocial, 336
borderline, 336, 392
borderline personality, 336
genetic factors, 390
histrionic, 336
narcissistic, 336, 393
schizotypal, 336
Personality profiles, 67, 398
Personality psychologist, 63, 69, 288
Personality psychologists, 18, 22-23, 26, 28, 32-33,
43-44, 49, 57, 69, 89, 93, 103-104, 116,
151-152, 177, 215, 268, 312, 357, 406
Personality psychology, 17, 19, 22-23, 25, 28, 32-34,
53, 71, 95, 112, 144, 151-152, 366, 369, 372,
380, 382, 386, 390-391, 394, 397-398, 400,
402-403, 405-406, 411-412, 418
Personality tests, 28, 32, 69-70, 91-94, 98-99, 101,
103, 107-113, 115-116, 414
objective, 69-70, 101, 115
projective, 32, 70, 101, 115-116
Personality theories, 42, 56, 183, 380, 398, 404-405,
413, 420
current, 56, 183, 398, 404
Personality traits, 17, 20-21, 35-59, 61-90, 111-112,
155, 160, 162, 165-166, 168, 171, 178, 189,
191, 198, 214-215, 220, 236, 355, 357, 360,
375, 392, 394, 400, 402, 406, 409, 412, 415
longitudinal studies, 80-83, 86, 88-90, 406
religiosity and, 64
Personnel selection, 77, 369, 383, 402, 407-408
Perspective, 14, 64, 246, 259, 264, 281, 313, 348,
363-364, 374, 384-385, 387-388, 391-392,
395, 398, 405, 411, 413-414, 418
Perspectives, 65, 136, 148, 188, 276, 280, 365-366,
370-372, 376-378, 381, 387-388, 391,
394-395, 397-398, 400-401, 408-410,
415-419
Persuasion, 269-270, 291, 343, 365, 376
techniques, 270
Pessimistic explanatory style, 11, 297, 299-309,
321-323, 404, 420
Pessimists, 302-306, 308, 312-320, 371, 409
Phallic stage, 217, 235-236, 241, 251
Phobia, 198, 228, 241, 383
Phobias, 6, 196, 198
social, 6, 270
Phrases, 257
Physical appearance, 132
Physical attractiveness, 141, 150, 176, 332, 351
Physical development, 120
Physical health, 85-86, 285, 299, 305, 308-309, 312,
320, 412
Physical traits, 414
Physiological explanations, 193
Physiological needs, 258
Physiology, 1, 18, 20-21, 56, 89, 96, 182-183, 190,
196, 206, 214-215, 371-372, 380
of stress, 182
Placebo, 318-319, 345
treatment, 318, 345
Plasticity, 366, 369, 378, 389, 406
Play, 5, 67, 75, 92, 104, 124, 129, 151, 175, 241,
245-246, 257, 266-267, 302
Pleasure principle, 11, 226, 252-253, 383
workings of, 226
Polarization, 367
political views, 155
Polymorphisms, 154, 386
popular culture, 219
Popularity, 136, 176, 258, 370
Population, 2, 42, 71, 145, 157-158, 161-162, 170,
178, 343, 382, 394, 414
Positive correlation, 141, 204
Positive correlations, 24, 164, 174
Positive emotionality, 191, 377
429

positive illusions, 414
Positive psychology, 263, 301, 364, 372, 382, 401,
403-404, 410
possible selves, 11, 119, 131-135, 144-147, 151-152,
371, 376, 379, 388, 394, 397, 399, 402, 416
Potter, Harry, 407
Poverty, 162
Powell, Colin, 320
Power, 27, 39, 55, 68, 103-104, 109, 213, 276, 281,
287, 291, 293, 298, 300, 321, 342, 349-351,
374, 401, 409-410, 419
interacting with, 291, 321
Practical significance, 329
Practice, 32, 39, 94, 139, 142, 167, 170, 182, 188,
208, 256-257, 276, 278-280, 304, 317, 361,
363, 365-366, 369-370, 372-373, 385, 388,
396, 401, 403, 407, 409
Practice effects, 94
Preconscious, 14, 217, 225, 227, 251
Pregnancy, 140, 143, 230, 313, 316, 347, 380
childbirth, 316
Prejudice, 364, 391, 399
discrimination, 391
social cognition, 364
Premise, 199, 218
Preschool years, 397
Presleep, 222
Pressure, 49, 81, 107, 183-184, 187, 259-260, 268,
277, 281-282, 300, 308, 341-342, 351, 358,
360
sound, 268
Prevalence, 13, 405
of PTSD, 405
Prevention, 169, 177, 320, 382, 385-386, 390, 401,
410, 419
Primary control, 11, 292, 322
Primary process thinking, 11, 225, 252-253
Priming, 223, 402
Princeton University, 137, 379, 391, 407
Principles of Psychology, 390
Problem solving, 280, 313, 328, 390
context, 390
Problems, 43, 46, 51, 67-70, 92, 97, 105, 110-111,
140, 143, 151, 162, 178, 186, 217, 236,
238-239, 242-243, 305, 308-309, 312-313,
316-317, 320-321, 334-335, 356, 403, 407
Processing, 183, 198, 209, 225, 231, 395, 404-405
depth of, 225
Professional organizations, 93
Project A, 152
Projection, 11, 217, 231, 251, 253, 366, 396, 401
Projective tests, 70, 81, 101, 116, 231, 251, 331
Rorschach Inkblot Test, 70
Promotions, 290, 351
Prosocial behavior, 64, 379
Prostate cancer, 315
Psychiatry, 365, 368, 378, 381, 385-386, 392-393,
398, 400-401, 404, 411, 418
Psychoanalysis, 24, 217-220, 223, 225, 234-235,
242-243, 367, 376, 384, 388, 397, 400,
417-418
dream interpretation, 223
resistance, 242
structure of personality, 369
unconscious, 217-220, 223, 225, 242-243, 418
Psychoanalyst, 228, 243
Psychoanalytic theories, 243
Psychoanalytic theory, 243, 252, 364, 379, 381, 386
Psychobiography, 217, 240, 372, 380, 410
Psychodynamic approach to personality, 410
Psychodynamic theories, 419
Psychodynamic theory, 217, 242-243
Freudian, 243
Psychological assessment, 99-100, 107-108, 374-375,
379, 399
Psychological Bulletin, 82, 173, 363, 366, 368, 371,
375, 377, 379-381, 387, 389-390, 393,
395-396, 399, 402-404, 406, 412, 414-415,
417, 419
Psychological disorders, 168
Psychological health, 273, 285, 290, 292-293, 298,
305-306, 311, 315-316, 318, 321-322
Psychological inquiry, 368-370, 373, 412, 417, 420
Psychological perspectives, 148, 365, 370, 381, 391,
397, 409
Psychological research, 22, 328, 356, 376, 379, 381
Psychologists, 17-19, 22-23, 25-26, 28, 32-33, 38-39,
49, 57-58, 63, 69-71, 78-79, 82, 87, 89-90,
92-93, 101-104, 110, 113, 116, 120, 132,
135, 137, 151-152, 177-178, 212, 215, 220,
223, 227, 234, 241, 243-244, 270, 283, 312,
320, 334, 345-348, 355, 357, 361-362, 401,
406
counseling, 132
developmental, 234, 238, 243, 390, 406
engineering, 178
professional organizations, 93
rehabilitation, 101
school, 18, 26, 38, 79, 82, 101, 104, 106, 113, 135,
151, 310, 345
science of, 215
types of, 17, 28, 43-44, 69, 92-93, 103, 106, 110,
116, 215, 334
Psychology, 7, 17, 19-20, 22-23, 25, 28-29, 32-34,
35-37, 53, 56, 61-62, 64, 71, 74, 76, 80, 85,
89, 95, 102, 107-109, 135, 142, 144, 149,
151-152, 210, 229, 231, 242-243, 251,
259-260, 271-272, 275, 300-301, 306-307,
309-310, 321, 346-348, 354-355, 362,
363-420
applications of, 37, 234, 354, 407, 419
applied, 35, 37, 240, 271, 275, 310, 346, 364-366,
368, 373, 375, 377-378, 387, 389, 391,
394, 402, 405, 407, 413, 415
clinical, 92, 112, 142, 210, 219, 259, 310, 370, 379,
382, 385-392, 396-397, 402-403, 407,
411-412, 414, 417-420
consumer, 152, 376
experimental, 5, 7, 17, 22, 25, 33-34, 56, 243, 251,
307, 310, 364, 380-381, 386-388, 390,
396, 398, 401, 405, 409-410, 412-413,
420
feminist, 346, 362
field of, 32, 218, 397
humanistic, 7, 272
military, 300, 343, 408
overview of, 181, 397
politics and, 420
psychological research, 22, 328, 376, 379, 381
racial, 135, 388, 414
research in, 202, 210, 219, 231, 234, 268, 275,
364, 368, 371, 385, 388-389, 391, 395,
397, 400-401, 404, 406-407, 409-410,
412, 416-417, 419
research methods in, 23, 93, 95, 366, 380, 382,
391, 394, 400, 402-403, 405-406,
411-412, 418
scientific method, 17, 19, 22, 32, 34
traditional, 71, 89, 108, 142, 144, 328
women in, 343, 346-347, 368
Psychology, defined, 151
Psychometrists, 39
Psychopathology, 107, 159, 165, 172, 198, 203-204,
363, 376, 378-379, 383, 389, 393, 397-398,
400, 407-408, 414-415, 418-419
parent, 419
Psychopharmacology, 375
Psychotherapy, 20, 99, 101, 182, 238, 407-408
Psychoticism, 12, 47-49, 52-54, 58-59, 75, 191-193,
197-198, 205, 212, 215-216, 381, 405
Puberty, 235, 237-238
Punishment, 2, 170, 176, 191, 197-202, 210, 213, 226,
360, 390, 415
corporal, 390
Pygmalion in the Classroom, 407
Q
Qualitative data, 24, 119, 144-145, 152
Qualitative research, 144, 147
Quantitative data, 152
Quantitative research, 144, 147
Quasi-experimental design, 12, 322-323
Quasi-experimental designs, 322, 371
Questionnaires, 9, 11-12, 17, 22-24, 27, 32, 34, 44, 46,
53-54, 62, 69-70, 73, 87, 93, 109, 133, 144,
166, 172, 278, 301, 321-322, 390, 398
political, 299
The Big Five, 46, 53-54, 62, 73, 398
R
Race, 37, 98, 111, 373, 376
Racial identity, 135, 388, 414
Racism, 135, 376
modern, 135
Rahman, Q., 394
Rand Corporation, 405
Random assignment, 12, 25, 34, 163, 214, 310-311
of participants, 25
Random assignment to condition, 163, 214
Rap music, 75
Rape, 212
Rationalization, 12, 217, 234, 251, 253, 392
reactance, 149
Reaction formation, 12, 217, 228-229, 251, 253, 366
Reading, 32, 48, 67, 92, 127, 150, 174, 221, 266, 288,
302, 349, 351, 379, 418
Reality, 7, 11-12, 39, 77, 120, 163, 226-228, 231, 243,
251-253, 308, 344, 356, 396
Reasoning, 11, 44, 89, 143-144, 152, 183, 194, 326,
328, 331-334, 349, 362
ability, 326, 333-334, 349
abstract, 328
analytic, 89, 331, 364
good, 11, 44, 328, 349, 364
numerical, 144
Receptors, 210
Recessive trait, 167
Recognition, 119-123, 135, 151, 242, 268, 384,
404-405
Recovery, 240, 291, 298, 313, 315, 317, 383, 401,
405, 409
Reflected appraisal, 131
Reflective, 46, 74
Reflex, 12, 212-213, 220, 226, 253
Reflex action, 12, 226, 253
Reflexes, 215, 225, 403
Reframing, 316
Regression, 113, 188, 270
Reinforcement, 181, 192, 195-196, 198-199, 210, 213,
215-216, 258, 289, 365, 370, 373, 375, 379,
398, 404-405, 407, 412
contingencies of, 375
internal, 210, 289, 370, 404, 407
pattern of, 213
punishment, 198-199, 210, 213
Relapse, 307, 390
Relationship orientation, 69
Relationships, 1, 8, 20, 49-50, 66, 69, 83-84, 88, 114,
120, 125, 131, 138, 140, 143, 145-147, 150,
152, 171, 191, 242-244, 247-252, 264-265,
275, 283-284, 289, 341-342, 357, 388, 392,
394-395, 401, 403, 405-406, 419
breaking up, 249
building, 8, 20, 145
close, 20, 150, 152, 242-244, 247-250, 275, 284,
342, 394-395
heterosexual, 395
homosexual, 373, 395
therapeutic, 242
Relative size, 184
Relaxation, 5, 92, 183, 208, 262-263
Reliability, 4, 8, 10, 14, 28, 91, 94-95, 99, 107-108,
110-111, 115-117, 211, 379, 389, 391,
407-408
interrater, 8, 12, 94-95, 115, 117
of projective tests, 116
split-half, 8, 14, 94, 115, 117
Reliability, test, 115
Remarriage, 369
Remembering, 94, 219, 221, 239, 398
Replication, 68, 359, 364, 400
Representations, 130, 218, 242-243, 247, 251, 387
Representativeness, 2, 162, 179
Repression, 12, 217, 233-234, 237, 240, 242, 251,
253, 368, 381, 383-384, 387, 389, 392, 401,
407, 410
and ego, 368
Reproductive success, 347
Research, 2-4, 8-10, 12, 14-15, 17, 20, 22-30, 32-33,
37-38, 44, 46-49, 53, 55-58, 67-70, 77-79,
87-89, 93-95, 98-99, 101, 103, 111, 113,
115-116, 135, 140-141, 143-147, 151-152,
155, 157, 165-166, 168-172, 177-179,
181-183, 186-188, 190-191, 195, 198-199,
205, 209-211, 215, 223, 226-228, 230-234,
240-241, 251-252, 260, 263, 268, 293-295,
306-308, 310-311, 313-314, 321-322,
328-329, 343-344, 355-357, 363-374,
376-382, 388-391, 393-412, 414-420
and genomics, 372, 404
applied cognitive, 368
case studies in, 240
correlational, 4, 17, 24-26, 32-33, 162, 165,
178-179, 187-188, 215, 232, 306, 310
cross-cultural, 53, 56, 364, 367-369, 373-374, 385,
388, 390, 404, 415, 419
430

deception in, 381
designs for, 371
experimental methods, 341
experiments in, 210
generalizability of, 95, 311, 404
hypotheses and, 32
in child development, 388, 397, 404
interviews in, 366
longitudinal, 9, 87-89, 160, 171, 306, 364, 373-374,
378, 382, 388, 400-401, 404-406, 412,
415-416
on depression, 172, 306-307, 373, 410
psychotherapy, 20, 99, 101, 182, 407-408
reactivity in, 391
sex, 6, 9-10, 15, 111, 155, 160, 168, 211, 218, 234,
251, 328, 331, 334, 346-347, 355-357,
363-371, 373-374, 378-380, 382,
388-389, 394-396, 399-400, 403-405,
409-411, 415-420
techniques for, 187
twin studies in, 161
unanswered questions, 343
use of animals in, 294
with human subjects, 29
Research design, 27, 33, 115, 369, 412
Research ethics, 28
Research methods, 17, 23, 25, 30, 44, 93-95, 98, 144,
161-162, 186, 191, 232, 240, 329, 366, 380,
382, 391, 394, 400-403, 405-406, 411-412,
415, 418
Research participants, 28, 30, 162
Resilience, 5, 12, 14, 32, 363, 369, 372, 397, 401-402,
412, 415, 417
Resistance, 1, 242, 291
to persuasion, 291
Response, 3-6, 25, 28, 40-41, 45, 50, 65, 67, 82, 91,
104-107, 115-117, 137, 149, 168-169,
175-176, 179, 182-187, 195, 198-200, 206,
208-209, 213, 216, 224-225, 268, 295-296,
314, 319, 345, 352, 375-376, 380-381, 396,
403, 407, 410-411, 420
conditioned, 198, 403
Response bias, 45, 403, 411
Response sets, 28, 91, 101, 105-106, 115-117, 376
Responsiveness, 1, 13, 64, 108, 197, 210, 244-245,
247, 251, 340
Resting state, 204
Restoration, 393
Retention, 111, 235, 280
Retrieval, 234
Reuptake, 171, 175, 187
Revised NEO Personality Inventory (NEO-PI-R),
99-100, 375
Reward, 30, 105, 191, 196-202, 206, 210, 226, 256,
266-268, 272, 389, 395, 415
Rewards, 5, 12, 121, 150-151, 187, 191, 197-200,
210, 215, 226, 256, 266-268, 272, 274, 280,
283-284, 291-292, 370
and children, 150
Rhyme, 18
Ridicule, 10, 235-236, 360
Risk factors, 292, 307
Rock music, 219
Role-playing, 120, 320
Roles, 4, 14, 85, 89, 113, 120, 125, 128, 131-132,
327-328, 336, 340-341, 345-346, 349-351,
360-361, 365, 368-369, 373, 379, 388, 392,
395, 399, 410-411, 413, 415, 417, 419
Romance, 248
course of, 248
Romantic relationships, 150, 247, 252, 395
Rosenberg Self-Esteem Scale, 99, 137, 409
Rotter, Julian, 288, 293-294
S
Sadness, 32, 49, 96, 154, 244, 291, 294, 296, 306,
333, 340-342
Safer sex, 234, 317
Safety, 28, 112, 221, 245
Sample, 24, 48, 69, 75, 87-88, 92, 102-103, 107, 134,
137, 141, 149-150, 157-159, 164, 170-171,
186, 189-190, 201, 211, 279, 300-301, 306,
308, 318, 329-330, 337, 359, 365, 390,
392-393, 398, 413
standardized, 201, 301
Sample size, 24, 330
Samples, 30, 57, 64, 66, 146, 165, 169, 171, 190, 247,
293, 309, 329, 336-337, 344, 365, 411
Sampling, 23, 69, 93, 238
Sarcasm, 10, 223, 235-236
SAT scores, 301
Satisfaction on the job, 321
Scatterplot, 12, 188-189
Schema, 12, 223, 253, 359-360, 367
Schemas, 120, 287
Schizophrenia, 28, 169, 385
origins of, 385
symptoms, 385
Schizotypal personality disorder, 336
School, 18, 26, 29-30, 38, 41, 77, 79-80, 82, 86, 88,
101, 104-106, 113, 119, 123-124, 127, 131,
134-135, 140-142, 145, 147, 150-151,
159-160, 167, 201, 256-258, 264-266, 268,
284, 300-302, 315-316, 321-322, 360, 386,
396, 399, 402, 404, 408-409, 411, 415
achievement, 77, 80, 101, 104-105, 140, 142, 151,
285, 301-302, 315-316, 321-322, 388,
396, 399, 409
higher education, 386
middle school, 134-135, 360
Schools, 30, 108, 110, 135, 159, 321
literacy and, 108
Science, 17, 20, 22, 32, 39-40, 45, 51, 63, 86, 140,
153-154, 167, 172, 188, 190, 205, 209, 215,
353-354, 365-366, 369-376, 378-379, 381,
383-391, 393-410, 412, 415-417, 419-420
Scientific American, 389, 400
Scientific method, 12, 17, 19, 22, 32, 34
Scientific psychology, 376
Secondary control, 12, 292-293, 322, 417
Secondary process thinking, 12, 226, 252-253
Secondary traits, 12, 41, 58-59
Secure adults, 248, 250
Secure attachment, 245, 251, 253
Secure infants, 246
Selection procedures, 381, 412
Selective placement, 13, 162, 179
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), 171,
175
Self, 1-15, 17, 19-21, 23, 26-27, 32-34, 36, 38-39, 42,
47-52, 54-55, 65, 69-70, 72-73, 75-77, 79,
81-84, 90, 91-93, 99, 101-106, 115-117,
119-152, 154-155, 165-166, 175-176, 178,
207, 219-222, 231, 234, 238, 240, 242-245,
249-251, 255-284, 290, 296, 307, 309, 312,
314-317, 321, 328, 332-333, 335-341, 344,
356-362, 369-377, 381-382, 384-387,
389-409, 411-416, 418-420
evaluative component of, 151
independent view of, 8, 130, 152
interdependent view of, 8, 130
looking-glass, 9, 125
working models of, 244, 251
Self, the, 132
Self-concept, 2, 7-8, 11, 13-15, 20, 39, 119-120,
124-126, 130-131, 134, 137-138, 140,
151-152, 359-360, 371, 386, 392, 397, 403,
413, 420
development of, 122, 152, 359, 386, 403, 413
Self-conceptions, 400, 419
Self-control, 83, 272, 414, 416
Self-deception, 136, 381
Self-descriptions, 2, 7, 11, 14, 128-129, 152
Self-determination theory, 13, 17, 21, 255-284, 377,
384, 387, 391, 394, 408, 413, 418
Self-discovery, 130
Self-efficacy, 4, 10, 52, 73, 109, 149, 255, 268-270,
283-284, 365-366, 373, 391, 411
career, 270, 366
Self-enhancement, 139, 141, 414
Self-esteem, 13, 20, 26, 47-48, 54, 69-70, 77, 79, 81,
99, 119-120, 122-123, 126-127, 130-131,
137-143, 145, 148-149, 151-152, 228, 231,
234, 278-279, 282, 307, 314, 316, 321, 325,
330, 332, 335, 359-362, 369-371, 387,
391-394, 396, 402, 406, 409, 411, 413-414,
419
desire for, 332
global, 137, 151-152, 307, 321, 409
threats to, 228
Self-evaluations, 384, 391, 411
Self-exploration, 136
Self-fulfilling prophecy, 13
Self-handicapping, 13, 139, 152, 414
self-image, 105, 137, 407
self-knowledge, 135, 369, 389, 411
Self-monitoring, 13, 119, 149-152, 376, 390-391, 395,
412, 415
Self-presentation, 2, 5, 7-8, 13-14, 119, 136, 147-152,
377, 391, 393-394, 403, 409, 415
self-promotion, 13, 148, 152
Self-psychology, 242, 251
Self-recognition, 119-123, 151, 384, 404-405
Self-reflection, 20
Self-regard, 370-371, 414
Self-report data, 12-13, 27, 33-34, 69
Self-report personality tests, 70
Self-representations, 387
Self-serving bias, 309
Self-socialization, 407
Self-system, 275, 374-375, 387
Semantic memory, 225
Sensation, 2, 4-5, 47-48, 79, 97, 172, 181, 191, 205,
210-216, 338, 385, 389, 391-392, 396-398,
400, 409, 420
adaptation, 397
senses, 5, 211
sensory deprivation, 210, 420
Sensation seeker, 97, 211-213
Sensation seekers, 172, 210-213, 215
Sensation seeking scale, 210-212
Sensations, 6, 14, 185, 197, 210-211, 227, 287
Senses, 5, 211
Sensitivity, 12, 53, 78, 150, 152, 181, 191-192,
195-199, 201-202, 205-206, 209-210,
215-216, 251, 264, 291, 321, 333, 344-345,
365, 373, 375, 398, 404-405, 412, 415
Sensory thresholds, 213
Sentences, 53, 67, 127
Separation, 2, 86, 129, 244-246, 248-249, 251-252,
369
Serotonin, 171, 175, 184, 187, 209-210, 213-215, 371,
395
Set, 1, 5-6, 8-9, 11-14, 24, 28, 36, 45-46, 50, 58, 70,
81-82, 93, 95, 101, 106-107, 111, 116, 132,
136, 151, 234-235, 243, 260, 283, 346, 349,
356-357, 375, 400, 413
Sex, 1, 6, 9-10, 111, 123, 133, 149-150, 155, 160, 168,
211, 218, 220, 234, 242, 251, 317, 331-332,
334, 345-348, 350-357, 359-362, 363-371,
373-374, 378-380, 382, 387-389, 392,
394-396, 399-400, 403-405, 409-411, 413,
415-420
determination of, 410
sexual orientation, 360, 363, 365, 367-368, 371,
378, 380, 387-388, 392, 396, 399-400,
403
Sex differences, 334, 346-348, 350, 353-355, 363-364,
370-371, 373-374, 379-380, 382, 387-389,
392, 395-396, 399, 404, 409, 417-419
Sex drive, 366, 396
Sex hormones, 345
Sexual activity, 140, 143, 151
Sexual attractiveness, 66
Sexual behavior, 13, 331, 334, 363, 365, 367, 390,
392, 394, 396, 400, 412, 418
masturbation, 331, 334
risky, 400
Sexual experiences, 211
Sexual infidelity, 347-348
Sexual instinct, 234
Sexual orientation, 13, 18, 21, 32, 66, 143, 360, 363,
365, 367-368, 371, 380, 387-388, 390,
392-393, 396, 399-400, 403
Sexual selection, 370
Sexuality, 6, 13, 61, 63, 65-66, 89, 223, 239-240, 242,
331-336, 345-347, 355, 360-361, 378, 383,
389-390, 394, 400, 402-403, 414
in later life, 402
research in, 368, 389, 400
Shadow, 74
Shakespeare, William, 148, 288, 297
Shaping, 251
Shared environment, 10, 13, 159-160, 165-166, 171,
179
Shy children, 80, 373
Shyness, 80, 162, 364
Siblings, 10, 24, 159-161, 164-165, 173, 175, 178
Sight, 218, 220, 244
Significance tests, 329
Significant differences, 311, 334
Significant others, 125
Similarity, 24, 53, 83, 101, 148, 162, 164, 331
Simpatia, 66
Sissy, 386
Situation, 1-5, 13-14, 25-26, 28-29, 51, 53, 70, 85,
96-97, 147, 149-150, 152, 175, 197-198,
431

245-249, 251-253, 257, 259, 274, 281,
283-284, 288, 290-292, 294-299, 308,
315-317, 322, 346, 361, 363, 397, 405
physical environment, 175
Situational context, 341
situations, 14, 20, 41, 49, 51, 56, 62, 66, 70, 84-85,
96-97, 103, 149-150, 152, 178, 192,
194-195, 201, 258-259, 274, 283-284, 287,
291-292, 308, 315-317, 342-343, 399
Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire, 373
Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (16PF), 373
Size, 11, 24, 105, 184, 198, 202, 206, 320, 325,
327-334, 337-339, 341-342, 344, 347,
361-362, 368, 402
Skepticism, 51, 92
Skin, 6, 183-184, 194-195, 216, 317, 342
Skin cancer, 317
Skull, 198
Sleep, 139, 244, 289, 416
getting enough, 139
Slips-of-the-tongue, 222
Smith, G., 412, 418
Smoking, 10, 88, 143, 149, 160, 223, 235-236, 256,
273, 276, 290, 317, 338, 410, 420
passive, 10
quitting, 273, 410
Sociability, 40-41, 83-84, 90, 110-111, 113, 177, 191,
212
Social, 10-14, 18-20, 22, 32, 37, 42, 48, 50-51, 54,
63-64, 66-71, 77, 83-89, 92, 97, 99, 102-103,
116, 119-120, 122-123, 125-132, 135-138,
140, 142, 147-152, 159-160, 165, 175-176,
190-192, 201, 210-211, 215, 226-227, 231,
234, 237-238, 244, 247, 249, 266, 269-271,
283-284, 285, 289, 308-310, 312-316,
321-322, 325-328, 330-337, 341-357,
359-362, 363-420
congruence, 341
Social action, 385, 414
Social adjustment, 360
Social approval, 69, 89
Social behavior, 285, 291, 308, 315, 322, 330-337,
339, 342, 360-361, 379-380, 390, 394, 407,
419
bystander, 342
Social capital, 380
social change, 420
Social cognition, 188, 364, 371, 394-395, 401, 407,
417
Social comparison, 122-123, 127, 131, 151, 344, 407
Social competence, 360
Social connectedness, 70, 402
Social construction, 325, 345, 351, 361
Social constructionism, 13, 351, 362
Social coping, 249
Social development, 363, 387, 408
Social identities, 18, 126-127, 136, 360
Social identity, 13, 20, 119-120, 126-127, 137, 147,
151-152, 396, 413
Social influence, 138, 160, 291, 343, 350, 352, 365,
367, 379
Social interaction, 128, 390
Social interest, 67
Social motives, 414
Social neuroscience, 395, 410
Social norms, 211, 350
Social potency, 69
Social psychological perspective, 414
Social psychology, 22, 37, 74, 92, 102, 149, 197, 210,
234, 309-310, 354-355, 364-420
self in, 366, 374, 385, 399
social action, 385, 414
social influence, 365, 367, 379
Social relationships, 291
Social responsibility, 64
Social role theory, 14, 325, 345, 347, 349-351, 362
Social self, 14, 128, 152, 369
Social situations, 84, 149, 178
Social status, 136, 150, 350
high, 136, 150
Social support, 64, 244, 305, 313, 374, 405, 417
well-being, 305, 313, 405
Socialization, 7, 19-20, 56-58, 328, 345-347, 361-362,
369-370, 387, 407
Society for Research in Child Development, 388, 397,
404
Socioeconomic status, 70, 132, 159, 168, 311
solidarity, 148
Somatic nervous system, 14, 183, 216
Sound, 22, 51-52, 54, 154, 210, 231, 268
Sounds, 53-55, 66, 193, 205, 218, 243, 262, 276
Source, 22-24, 27, 31, 37-40, 46-48, 50, 52, 55-57,
63-65, 80, 82-84, 86, 92-95, 97, 99-100,
102-103, 107-108, 114, 126-128, 137, 140,
146-149, 154, 160, 164, 166, 168-169,
172-173, 197, 201-202, 206-207, 209, 211,
219, 222, 224-225, 235-237, 241, 244, 259,
267, 278-280, 302-303, 305, 308-309, 314,
316, 318-319, 326-330, 333, 349-350,
354-355, 358, 402
Spatial ability, 326, 329-330, 335, 345, 348-349, 361,
395
Spatial perception, 332, 335, 346
Spatial visualization, 332, 335
Speech, 223, 225, 270, 301, 319, 360, 400
Spin, 148, 215, 316
Spinal cord, 183, 212, 397
Split-half reliability, 14, 94, 115, 117
Sport psychology, 384
Stability, 1-2, 13, 18, 37-38, 49, 52-56, 71, 80, 82-85,
90, 108-109, 113, 119, 152, 192, 271, 279,
298, 333, 366, 378, 389, 391-392, 405, 409,
413, 416, 419
Stamina, 270
Standard deviation, 141, 329, 333
Standard of living, 353-354
Star Trek, 353
Statistics, 9, 11, 113, 144, 270
correlation, 9, 11
Status, 23, 30, 66, 70, 83, 132-133, 136, 150,
168-169, 176, 237, 311, 333, 346-347,
349-351, 387, 392, 395, 399, 404, 409,
411-412
stability as, 83
Stereotype threat, 14, 127, 152, 356, 361, 364, 413
Stereotypes, 223, 328, 340, 349, 351, 356, 361-362,
368, 379, 393, 413, 418
of sexual behavior, 418
Sterilization, 177
Sternberg, R., 413
Stigma, 112, 388
Stimulants, 211
amphetamine, 211
Stimuli, 1-2, 6, 11-12, 23, 70, 93, 101, 104, 117, 182,
185-187, 195-196, 206, 208, 213-215, 263,
348, 395, 404
appetitive, 196
Stimulus, 3, 5, 15, 101, 185-186, 195-196, 213, 224,
343, 410, 420
neutral, 3, 343
Stress, 7-8, 14, 21, 49-50, 54, 64, 70-72, 86, 154,
168-169, 182-183, 187, 208, 210, 213, 225,
228, 270, 290-291, 308, 313, 315-316,
318-320, 345, 363-367, 373-374, 380, 384,
394, 396, 399-400, 402, 405, 409-410,
414-415, 417, 419
and locus of control, 382, 388, 409, 419
and pessimists, 308, 316, 409
coping with, 310, 313, 315, 409, 419
during pregnancy, 316, 380
effective coping strategies, 315
extreme, 14, 208, 210, 213, 228, 345
friends, 50, 70, 308, 316, 319, 380, 415
hardiness, 366, 384, 396, 405
hostility and depression, 316
job, 8, 10, 49, 71, 86, 154, 290, 366, 402, 405, 419
mortality, 86, 400
optimism and pessimism, 313, 315, 370, 373, 399
response, 8, 50, 168-169, 182-183, 187, 208, 213,
225, 310, 319, 345, 363, 365, 380, 396,
410
responses, 10, 14, 21, 49, 54, 183, 213, 225,
319-320, 410, 414, 417
traumatic, 369, 396, 410
vulnerability to, 49-50, 64, 72, 363, 399
Stress management, 388
Stress response, 213
Stressful life events, 171-172, 393
Stressors, 12, 171-172, 178-179, 208, 312-313, 315,
319, 368
chronic, 315, 319
Stroop test, 319
Structured interviews, 23, 93
students, 29-30, 32, 41, 43, 49, 53, 66, 68-69, 73, 83,
85, 92, 102, 127-129, 138-147, 150, 157,
255-260, 264-266, 282, 289-290, 298,
301-302, 305-309, 313, 315-318, 321-322,
332, 351, 353-354, 359-360, 365, 373, 382,
388, 392, 405, 411, 416-417, 419
Study methods, 380
Studying, 18-19, 25-27, 32, 35, 37, 41-43, 45, 48, 89,
139, 152, 160, 162-163, 184-185, 187, 192,
204, 238, 256, 289, 310, 382, 418
Sublimation, 14, 87, 217, 232-233, 235, 237, 251, 253,
366
Substance abuse, 175
Success in school, 141
Sufficient cause, 187
Suicide, 96, 154, 171, 291, 293
Superfactor, 41, 49
Superfactors, 35, 47, 49
Surgency, 2, 52, 56, 205, 332
Surgery, 310, 313, 315-316, 409
Surprise, 72, 75, 120, 123, 159, 206, 247, 300, 302
Surrogate mother, 244
Survey, 13, 69, 83, 93, 108-109, 248, 393, 404, 406
Survey research, 69
Surveys, 69, 109, 348, 376
Survival, 20, 54, 86, 129, 209, 246, 306, 347
Sympathetic nervous system, 195, 345
Symptoms, 69, 106, 154, 171-172, 187, 240, 287,
297-299, 302, 306-308, 313, 315-317, 320,
367, 370, 383, 385, 390, 405, 419
Syphilis, 29, 406
Systems perspective, 388
T
Talented, 312, 356
Tardiness, 4, 108, 110-111
Task persistence, 70, 80, 257
Taste, 45, 73, 155, 199, 347
qualities, 347
TAT, 70, 104
Taxonomies, 144
Taylor, S., 395, 410, 414, 417
T-cell, 318
Teens, 81, 125-126, 132, 134-135, 175, 211, 282, 316
Television, 228, 370
Temperament, 14, 56, 86-87, 90, 190-191, 204-206,
216, 332-333, 355, 370, 374, 380, 413, 418
dimensions, 14, 56, 190-191, 205, 413
Tend-and-befriend, 345, 414
Terman, Lewis, 87
Terman study, 88
Test anxiety, 97
Test construction, 109
Test scores, 94, 144, 301, 307, 401, 417
Testosterone, 1, 345, 366
Tests, 2-4, 8, 10-11, 13-14, 23, 28, 32, 57, 63, 66,
69-70, 81, 91-99, 101, 103-105, 107-113,
115-117, 144, 170, 212, 231, 251, 289, 294,
301, 366, 384, 389, 396, 412, 414-415
group, 3-4, 8, 14, 70, 97-98, 103, 116, 141, 170
of integrity, 109-110, 113
personality, 2-4, 8, 10-11, 13-14, 23, 28, 32, 57, 63,
66, 69-70, 81, 91-99, 101, 103-105,
107-113, 115-117, 144, 170, 212, 231,
251, 289, 294, 301, 366, 384, 389, 396,
412, 414-415
test-retest reliability, 14, 94, 99, 115, 117
Theories, 22-23, 32, 37, 42, 56-58, 181, 190-192,
202-203, 205, 215, 218-219, 221, 234, 240,
242-243, 268, 283, 346, 364, 379-380, 382,
393, 398-399, 402, 404-405, 412-413,
418-420
self-determination, 255, 268, 283, 413, 418
Theories of child development, 243
psychoanalytic theories, 243
Theory, 2-7, 9-14, 17, 20-25, 28, 35-59, 68, 79, 95-96,
99, 101, 115, 144, 148, 166, 190-193,
195-196, 198-200, 215-216, 217-220, 234,
237-240, 242-243, 255-284, 295-296, 312,
345, 347, 349-351, 359, 361-362, 363-367,
369-377, 379-394, 396-414, 418-420
stage, 5, 7, 10-11, 45, 148, 217, 234, 237-238,
251-252, 372, 400
Therapist, 105, 220-221, 236, 239, 264, 287, 300, 322,
407
Therapists, 234, 240, 260, 270, 274, 317
Therapy, 177, 220, 227, 239, 242, 275, 284, 300, 304,
306-308, 317, 320, 322, 363, 366-367, 372,
374, 379, 384, 386, 390, 403-405, 407,
409-410
behavioral, 317, 320, 322, 372, 374, 382, 384,
403-404, 407, 409-410
change in, 379, 382, 400, 405, 410
cultural context, 374
432

exposure, 382
family, 400, 404
men and, 239, 367, 403
modeling, 382, 390, 400
psychodynamic, 220, 242, 410
Thinking, 3-4, 11-12, 14, 18, 20-21, 26-27, 32, 38, 43,
51-52, 58, 63, 97, 105, 115, 123, 138-139,
170-171, 182-183, 193, 198, 202, 206,
222-223, 225-227, 229-231, 233, 237, 243,
252-253, 260, 287-289, 294, 313, 316, 320,
357, 399, 401, 407, 409
cognitive psychology and, 229
concepts, 38, 123, 138, 170, 225-226
convergent, 4, 97, 115
divergent, 409
dreams as, 222
thinking about, 32, 38, 105, 138, 155, 159, 193,
206, 222, 233, 316
Thought, 18, 20, 29, 37, 42, 51, 55, 63-64, 71, 97,
168, 186, 189, 195-196, 211-212, 219-222,
224-225, 227-231, 233-234, 243, 280, 296,
307, 317, 322, 326-327, 334, 344-345, 348,
351-352, 354, 361, 401, 417-418
building blocks of, 18, 20, 29
concepts, 225
counterfactual thinking, 230
critical, 37, 51, 92, 417-418
judgments, 37, 51, 55
Thought disorders, 317
Threats, 143, 228, 236, 260, 267, 316
to self-esteem, 143
Threshold, 385
Thresholds, 213
Time, 2-4, 6, 8-14, 18, 20, 23-24, 32, 44, 46-49, 53,
57, 61-64, 79-83, 85-90, 91, 93-94, 96-97,
107, 115-116, 120-125, 127-128, 131-136,
138-139, 143, 147, 149-150, 152, 156-159,
161, 163-164, 167, 170, 174-175, 182-183,
185-188, 192, 200-202, 204-205, 208,
220-221, 230, 235-250, 257, 259-264,
266-267, 278, 280, 282-283, 289, 293-295,
297-299, 303-304, 306-308, 310-311, 315,
317-318, 322, 356-359, 369, 384, 389, 401,
410, 415
savings and, 48
Toilet-training, 236
Tolerance, 69, 213, 250
Tolman, Edward, 71
Touch, 121, 123, 145, 236, 241, 356
Toxins, 178
Traditionalism, 69
Training, 36, 43, 78, 107-109, 134, 145, 208, 236, 262,
279, 294-295, 304-305, 326-327, 353, 396,
405, 416
Traits, 2-3, 7-10, 14, 17, 19-21, 23, 32, 34, 35-59,
61-90, 101, 111-112, 120, 123-124, 128, 145,
149, 155, 157, 160, 164-166, 171, 177-179,
189, 191-192, 197-198, 214-215, 220, 231,
236, 336, 357, 359-361, 375, 390-398, 400,
402, 406, 409, 411-415
central traits, 3, 41, 43, 59
in identical twins, 160
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), 15, 187, 216
Transformation, 234
Transition, 374, 399, 402
Transitions, 388
Trauma, 18, 217, 230, 233, 244, 369, 396, 398
early, 18, 244
Treatment, 3, 25-26, 29-30, 39, 43, 105, 159, 162,
214, 218, 276, 304, 307, 311, 313, 315-316,
345, 386, 393, 401, 410, 419
access to, 105
Triangulation, 15, 61, 69, 71, 89-90
True self, 377, 411
T-test, 329
Tuskegee Study, 29
Tuskegee syphilis study, 29
Twenty Statements Test, 15, 120, 124-125, 128,
151-152
Twenty Statements Test (TST), 15, 128, 152
Twin studies, 47, 153, 160-165, 175, 178-179
Twin study, 29-30, 172, 373
Twins, 2, 4-5, 9, 13, 24, 28-29, 159-166, 169, 175,
178-179, 345, 393-394, 406, 409
dizygotic, 4, 161, 179
identical twins, 28, 159-166
monozygotic, 9, 160-161, 179
nonidentical twins, 159-162, 169, 345
Twitter, 77
Typicality, 360
U
Unconscious, 3-4, 6-10, 12, 14-15, 20, 73, 121,
217-223, 225-227, 233, 241-243, 251-253,
383, 385, 407, 416, 418
Unconscious mind, 227
Unconscious motivation, 222
Unemployment, 289, 310, 321
Unique invulnerability, 370
United States, 29, 33, 42, 67, 71, 83, 89, 129-131,
133, 140, 144, 158, 161, 177, 192, 211, 243,
246, 304, 327, 336-339, 361, 394, 401, 416,
418
independence, 83
Universals, 10, 18, 35, 39, 43, 67, 89-90, 385
V
Vaillant, George, 87
Valence, 56, 195
Validity, 3-5, 15, 28, 70, 91, 94-99, 104-105, 107, 109,
111-113, 115-117, 211, 369, 373-374,
379-380, 383-384, 386, 389, 398, 402, 407,
412, 416
content, 3-4, 96, 116, 412
criterion-related, 96, 389, 416
illusion of, 98
insufficient, 96
of personality tests, 28, 91, 109, 115
of research, 28, 95, 99, 113, 211, 369, 380, 389,
402, 407, 412, 416
Values, and goals, 126
Variable, 4-5, 7, 9, 15, 24-27, 33-34, 80, 131, 147,
158, 163-164, 188-189, 265, 270-271, 278,
306, 310, 329-334, 355, 393-394, 408
independent, 7, 9, 25-26, 33-34, 131, 163, 310
Variables, 20, 24-27, 37, 39-40, 45, 74, 87, 114,
142-144, 151, 159-160, 162-164, 170, 186,
188-189, 193, 261, 270, 283, 293, 318, 329,
334, 346, 352, 362, 402, 417
Variations, 67, 157-158, 171, 225, 345
Vegetables, 129, 260, 273
Verbal aggression, 337
Vicarious experience, 269
Victims, 233, 239
Violence, 109-110, 143, 213, 370, 373
Vision, 108, 384
Visual cortex, 346
Visual cues, 287
Visual recognition, 121
Visual system, 346
Vitamin A, 158
Vitamin D, 158
Voice, 340-341
W
Wait-list control group, 305
Water conservation, 378
Web pages, 32, 59, 61, 75-77, 89
Weight, 38, 105, 112, 148, 155, 162, 260, 262, 270,
408, 418
Weight management, 288
Well-being, 54, 66, 70, 86, 90, 103, 105, 130, 140,
249, 256, 258-259, 270, 272-275, 278-280,
282-284, 305, 313, 315, 377-378, 380,
382-384, 389-390, 402-403, 405-406,
408-409, 411, 414, 418-419
Wellness, 396
Westen, Drew, 218-219, 251-252
White Americans, 309, 317
White noise, 194
Who Am I?, 17-30, 32-34, 151, 371
Wikipedia, 410
Withdrawal, 191, 249, 275
Womb, 163
Women, 5-6, 21, 24, 28, 32, 62, 70, 73, 75-76, 78,
83-88, 101, 113, 130-133, 148, 158,
164-165, 171, 207, 211, 237, 248-249, 313,
315-316, 318, 325-331, 334-351, 353-356,
358-362, 364-365, 377-379, 385-389,
392-393, 395-396, 399, 403, 406-407, 410,
412-413, 415-416, 419
and control, 403, 407
and mathematics, 346, 353, 387-388
Words, 20, 32, 41-44, 49, 52-53, 59, 65-66, 71, 77,
123, 125-126, 137, 144, 154, 165, 171-172,
188, 194, 214, 223-225, 321-322, 359, 419
Work, 20, 23, 27, 30, 32-33, 44, 46, 49-51, 56, 77-78,
83, 85-86, 88, 90, 93, 95-96, 98, 109-110,
116-117, 127, 136-137, 139-141, 150-151,
154-156, 158, 178, 182, 185, 195-196, 201,
205, 212, 214, 235, 240-241, 245, 249-252,
255, 257-260, 266-267, 273-275, 280-284,
285-286, 297-301, 304-305, 307-309,
312-313, 315-318, 322, 351-353, 355,
376-377, 389, 393-394, 401, 406, 409-410,
412, 416, 419
and academic performance, 394
choice of, 77, 85, 148, 260, 343
job training, 78
pros and cons, 67, 252
willingness to, 30, 88, 257, 290, 416
Work and organizational psychology, 419
Work motivation, 284, 384
Work satisfaction, 250, 284
Work settings, 271, 365
Work teams, 281
Workforce, 111, 113, 384
Workplace, 113, 142, 150, 152, 271, 280-281, 412
World, 1, 6, 18-19, 21-22, 25, 28, 42, 50, 54, 56, 63,
70, 75, 90, 107-108, 120, 123, 125, 129,
151, 175, 177, 193, 198, 211, 239-240,
244-246, 249-250, 270-271, 283-284,
286-289, 293-294, 301, 303, 310, 316, 321,
328, 359, 363-364, 405
Worry, 2, 48-49, 134, 197, 200, 247, 263
X
X-rays, 184, 276
Y
Yoga, 208
Young adulthood, 79, 82-83, 85, 88, 247, 292, 305,
337, 373, 378, 406
Young adults, 144, 146, 413
coping, 413
Young people, 66, 85, 145, 176, 211, 238, 282
Z
Zuckerman, Marvin, 210, 366, 377
Zygotes, 161
433

434

