PETER S. BEAGLE
 
Professor Gottesman and the Indian Rhinoceros
 
 
Peter  S.  Beagle  was  born  in  New  York  City  in  1939.
Although  not  prolific  by  genre  standards,  he  has
published four well-received  fantasy  novels,  and his first
such, A Fine and Private Place, was widely influential. In
fact, Beagle may be the most suc-cessful writer of lyrical
and
 evocative
 modern
 fantasy
 since
 Brad-bury,
something he proves once again in the gentle, wry, wise,
and  whimsical  story  that  follows,  in  which  a  reclusive
professor reluctantly takes on a very unusual roommate .
. .
 
Beagle’s  other  books  include  the novels  The  Last
Unicorn,  The  Folk  of  the  Air,  and,  most  recently,  the
critically  acclaimed
 The
 Innkeeper’s
 Song,
 which
certainly  must  be  in  the  running  for  the  title  of  most
successful fantasy novel of the 1990s  to date.  His short
fiction has appeared in such varied places as Seventeen
 and  Ladies  Home  Journal—as  well  as  in  fantasy
anthologies  such  as  New  Worlds  of  Fantasy  and  After
the King, and has been collected in The Fantasy Worlds
of  Peter  S.  Beagle.  His  film  work  includes  screenplays
for Ralph Bakshi’s animated film The  Lord  of the  Rings,
The  Last  Unicorn,  Dove,  and  an  episode  of  Star  Trek:
The  Next  Generation.  He  has  also  written  a  stage
adaptation of The Last Unicorn, the libretto  of  an opera,
The  Midnight  Angel,  and  a  popular  autobiographical
travel book, I See By My Outfit. His most  recent  book  is
the  fan-tasy  anthology  Peter  S.  Beagle’s  Immortal
Unicorn,  edited  in  collab-oration  with  Janet  Berliner.
Beagle lives in Davis, California,  with his wife,  the Indian
writer Padma Hejmadi.
 
* * * *
 
Professor Gustave Gottesman went to a zoo for the first time when he was
thirty-four years old. There is an excellent zoo in Zurich, which was
Professor Gottesman’s birthplace, and where his sister still lived, but

Pro-fessor Gottesman had never been there. From an early age he had
de-termined on the study of philosophy as his life’s work; and for any true
philosopher this world is zoo enough, complete with cages, feeding times,
breeding programs, and earnest docents, of which he was wise enough to
know that he was one. Thus, the first zoo he ever saw was the one in the
middle-sized Midwestern American city where he worked at a middle-sized
university, teaching Comparative Philosophy in comparative con-tentment.
He was tall and rather thin, with a round, undistinguished face, a snub nose,
a random assortment of sandyish hair, and a pair of very in-tense and very
distinguished brown eyes that always seemed to be look-ing a little deeper
than they meant to, embarrassing the face around them no end. His
students and colleagues were quite fond of him, in an indul-gent sort of
way.
 
And how did the good Professor Gottesman happen at last to visit a
zoo? It came about in this way: his older sister Edith came from Zurich to
stay with him for several weeks, and she brought her daughter, his niece
Nathalie, along with her. Nathalie was seven, both in years, and in the
number of her that there sometimes seemed to be, for the Professor had
never been used to children even when he was one. She was a generally
pleasant little girl, though, as far as he could tell; so when his sister
be-sought him to spend one of his free afternoons with Nathalie while she
went to lunch and a gallery opening with an old friend, the Professor
gra-ciously consented. And Nathalie wanted very much to go to the zoo and
see tigers.
 
“So you shall,” her uncle announced gallantly. “Just as soon as I find
out exactly where the zoo is.” He consulted with his best friend, a fat,
cheerful, harmonica-playing professor of medieval Italian poetry named
Sally Lowry, who had known him long and well enough (she was the only
person in the world who called him Gus) to draw an elaborate two-colored
map of the route, write out very precise directions beneath it, and make
several copies of this document, in case of accidents. Thus equipped, and
accompanied by Charles, Nathalie’s stuffed bedtime tiger, whom she
desired to introduce to his grand cousins, they set off together for the zoo
on a gray, cool spring afternoon. Professor Gottesman quoted Thomas
Hardy to Nathalie, improvising a German translation for her benefit as he
went along.
 
This is the weather the cuckoo likes, 
And so do I;
When showers betumble the chestnut spikes,
And nestlings fly.

 
“Charles likes it too,” Nathalie said. “It makes his fur feel all sweet.”
They reached the zoo without incident, thanks to Professor Lowry’s
excellent map, and Professor Gottesman bought Nathalie a bag of
some-thing sticky, unhealthy, and forbidden, and took her straight off to see
the tigers. Their hot, meaty smell and their lightning-colored eyes were a bit
too much for him, and so he sat on a bench nearby and watched Nathalie
perform the introductions for Charles. When she came back to Professor
Gottesman, she told him that Charles had been very well-behaved, as had
all the tigers but one, who was rudely indifferent. “He was probably just
visiting,” she said. “A tourist or something.”
 
The Professor was still marvelling at the amount of contempt one
small girl could infuse into the word tourist, when he heard a voice,
sound-ing almost at his shoulder, say, “Why, Professor Gottesman—how
nice to see you at last.” It was a low voice, a bit hoarse, with excellent
diction, speaking good Zurich German with a very slight, unplaceable
accent.
 
Professor Gottesman turned quickly, half-expecting to see some old
acquaintance from home, whose name he would inevitably have forgotten.
Such embarrassments were altogether too common in his gently
preoc-cupied life. His friend Sally Lowry once observed, “We see each
other just about every day, Gus, and I’m still not sure you really recognize
me. If I wanted to hide from you, I’d just change my hairstyle.”
 
There was no one at all behind him. The only thing he saw was the
rutted, muddy rhinoceros yard, for some reason placed directly across
from the big cats’ cages. The one rhinoceros in residence was standing by
the fence, torpidly mumbling a mouthful of moldy-looking hay. It was an
Indian rhinoceros, according to the placard on the gate: as big as the
Pro-fessor’s compact car, and the approximate color of old cement. The
creak-ing slabs of its skin smelled of stale urine, and it had only one horn,
caked with sticky mud. Flies buzzed around its small, heavy-lidded eyes,
which regarded Professor Gottesman with immense, ancient unconcern.
But there was no other person in the vicinity who might have addressed
him.
 
Professor Gottesman shook his head, scratched it, shook it again,
and turned back to the tigers. But the voice came again. “Professor, it was
in-deed I who spoke. Come and talk to me, if you please.”
 
No need, surely, to go into Professor Gottesman’s reaction: to
describe in detail how he gasped, turned pale, and looked wildly around for

any corroborative witness. It is worth mentioning, however, that at no time
did he bother to splutter the requisite splutter in such cases: “My God, I’m
either dreaming, drunk, or crazy.” If he was indeed just as classically
absentminded and impractical as everyone who knew him agreed, he was
also more of a realist than many of them. This is generally true of
philoso-phers, who tend, as a group, to be on terms of mutual respect with
the impossible. Therefore, Professor Gottesman did the only proper thing
under the circumstances. He introduced his niece Nathalie to the
rhi-noceros.
 
Nathalie, for all her virtues, was not a philosopher, and could not hear
the rhinoceros’s gracious greeting. She was, however, seven years old,
and a well-brought-up seven-year-old has no difficulty with the notion that a
rhinoceros—or a goldfish, or a coffee table—might be able to talk; nor in
accepting that some people can hear coffee-table speech and some
people cannot. She said a polite hello to the rhinoceros, and then became
involved in her own conversation with stuffed Charles, who apparently had a
good deal to say himself about tigers.
 
“A mannerly child,” the rhinoceros commented. “One sees so few
here. Most of them throw things.”
 
His mouth dry, and his voice shaky but contained, Professor
Gottes-man asked carefully, “Tell me, if you will—can all rhinoceri speak, or
only the Indian species?” He wished furiously that he had thought to bring
along his notebook.
 
“I have no idea,” the rhinoceros answered him candidly. “I myself, as
it happens, am a unicorn.”
 
Professor Gottesman wiped his balding forehead. “Please,” he said
earnestly. “Please. A rhinoceros, even a rhinoceros that speaks, is as real a
creature as I. A unicorn, on the other hand, is a being of pure fantasy, like
mermaids, or dragons, or the chimera. I consider very little in this universe
as absolutely, indisputably certain, but I would feel so much bet-ter if you
could see your way to being merely a talking rhinoceros. For my sake, if not
your own.”
 
It seemed to the Professor that the rhinoceros chuckled slightly, but it
might only have been a ruminant’s rumbling stomach. “My Latin desig-nation
is Rhinoceros unicornis,” the great animal remarked. “You may have
noticed it on the sign.”
 
Professor Gottesman dismissed the statement as brusquely as he

would have if the rhinoceros had delivered it in class. “Yes, yes, yes, and
the man-atee, which suckles its young erect in the water and so gave rise to
the myth of the mermaid, is assigned to the order sirenia. Classification is
not proof.”
 
“And proof,” came the musing response, “is not necessarily truth. You
look at me and see a rhinoceros, because I am not white, not graceful, far
from beautiful, and my horn is no elegant spiral but a bludgeon of mat-ted
hair. But suppose that you had grown up expecting a unicorn to look and
behave and smell exactly as I do—would not the rhinoceros then be the
legend? Suppose that everything you believed about unicorns—every-thing
except the way they look—were true of me? Consider the possibil-ities,
Professor, while you push the remains of that bun under the gate.”
 
Professor Gottesman found a stick and poked the grimy bit of
pastry— about the same shade as the rhinoceros, it was—where the
creature could wrap a prehensile upper lip around it. He said, somewhat
tentatively, “Very well. The unicorn’s horn was supposed to be an infallible
guide to detecting poisons.”
 
“The most popular poisons of the Middle Ages and Renaissance,”
replied the rhinoceros, “were alkaloids. Pour one of those into a goblet
made of compressed hair, and see what happens.” It belched
resoundingly, and Nathalie giggled.
 
Professor Gottesman, who was always invigorated by a good
argument with anyone, whether colleague, student, or rhinoceros,
announced, “Isidore of Seville wrote in the seventh century that the unicorn
was a cruel beast, that it would seek out elephants and lions to fight with
them. Rhinoceri are equally known for their fierce, aggressive nature, which
often leads them to attack anything that moves in their shortsighted vi-sion.
What have you to say to that?”
 
“Isidore of Seville,” said the rhinoceros thoughtfully, “was a most
learned man, much like your estimable self, who never saw a rhinoceros in
his life, or an elephant either, being mainly preoccupied with church history
and canon law. I believe he did see a lion at some point. If your charming
niece is quite done with her snack?”
 
“She is not,” Professor Gottesman answered, “and do not change the
subject. If you are indeed a unicorn, what are you doing scavenging
dirty           buns and candy in this public establishment? It is an article of
faith that a unicorn can only be taken by a virgin, in whose innocent embrace
the ferocious creature becomes meek and docile. Are you prepared to tell

me that you were captured under such circumstances?”
 
The rhinoceros was silent for some little while before it spoke again.
“I cannot,” it said judiciously, “vouch for the sexual history of the gentleman
in the baseball cap who fired a tranquilizer dart into my left shoulder. I
would, however, like to point out that the young of our species on occasion
become trapped in vines and slender branches which entangle their
horns—and that the Latin for such branches is virge. What Isidore of
Seville made of all this…” It shrugged, which is difficult for a rhi-noceros,
and a remarkable thing to see.
 
“Sophistry,” said the Professor, sounding unpleasantly beleaguered
even in his own ears. “Casuistry. Semantics. Chop-logic. The fact remains,
a rhinoceros is and a unicorn isn’t.” This last sounds much more impressive
in German. “You will excuse me,” he went on, “but we have other
specimens to visit, do we not, Nathalie?”
 
“No,” Nathalie said. “Charles and I just wanted to see the tigers.”
 
“Well, we have seen the tigers,” Professor Gottesman said through
his teeth. “And I believe it is beginning to rain, so we will go home now.” He
took Nathalie’s hand firmly and stood up, as that obliging child snuggled
Charles firmly under her arm and bobbed a demure European curtsy to the
rhinoceros. It bent its head to her, the mud-thick horn almost brushing the
ground. Professor Gottesman, mildest of men, snatched her away.
 
“Good-bye, Professor,” came the hoarse, placid voice behind him. “I
look forward to our next meeting.” The words were somewhat muffled,
because Nathalie had tossed the remainder of her sticky snack into the
yard as her uncle hustled her off. Professor Gottesman did not turn his
head.
 
Driving home through the rain—which had indeed begun to fall,
though very lightly—the Professor began to have an indefinably uneasy
feeling that caused him to spend more time peering at the rearview mirror
than in looking properly ahead. Finally he asked Nathalie, “Please, would
you and—ah—you and Charles climb into the backseat and see whether we
are being followed?”
 
Nathalie was thrilled. “Like in the spy movies?” She jumped to obey,
but reported after a few minutes of crouching on the seat that she could
detect nothing out of the ordinary. “I saw a helicopiter,” she told him,
at-tempting the English word. “Charles thinks they might be following us that
way, but I don’t know. Who is spying on us, Uncle Gustave?”

 
“No one, no one,” Professor Gottesman answered. “Never mind,
child, I am getting silly in America. It happens, never mind.” But a few
moments later the curious apprehension was with him again, and Nathalie
was hap-pily occupied for the rest of the trip home in scanning the traffic
behind them through an imaginary periscope, yipping “It’s that one!” from
time to time, and being invariably disappointed when another prime suspect
turned off down a side street. When they reached Professor Gottesman’s
house, she sprang out of the car immediately, ignoring her mother’s
wel-come until she had checked under all four fenders for possible homing
devices. “Bugs,” she explained importantly to the two adults. “That was
Charles’s idea. Charles would make a good spy, I think.”
 
She ran inside, leaving Edith to raise her fine eyebrows at her brother.
Professor Gottesman said heavily, “We had a nice time. Don’t ask.” And
Edith, being a wise older sister, left it at that.
 
The rest of the visit was enjoyably uneventful. The Professor went to
work according to his regular routine, while his sister and his niece
ex-plored the city, practiced their English together, and cooked
Swiss-German specialties to surprise him when he came home. Nathalie
never asked to go to the zoo again—stuffed Charles having lately shown an
interest in in-ternational intrigue—nor did she ever mention that her uncle
had formally introduced her to a rhinoceros and spent part of an afternoon
sitting on a bench arguing with it. Professor Gottesman was genuinely sorry
when she and Edith left for Zurich, which rather surprised him. He hardly
ever missed people, or thought much about anyone who was not actually
pres-ent.
 
It rained again on the evening that they went to the airport. Returning
alone, the Professor was startled, and a bit disquieted, to see large muddy
footprints on his walkway and his front steps. They were, as nearly as he
could make out, the marks of a three-toed foot, having a distinct
resem-blance to the ace of clubs in a deck of cards. The door was locked
and bolted, as he had left it, and there was no indication of any attempt to
force an entry. Professor Gottesman hesitated, looked quickly around him,
and went inside.
 
The rhinoceros was in the living room, lying peacefully on its side
before the artificial fireplace—which was lit—like a very large dog. It
opened one eye as he entered and greeted him politely. “Welcome home,
Professor. You will excuse me, I hope, if I do not rise?”
 
Professor Gottesman’s legs grew weak under him. He groped blindly

for a chair, found it, fell into it, his face white and freezing cold. He
man-aged to ask, “How—how did you get in here?” in a small, faraway
voice.
 
“The same way I got out of the zoo,” the rhinoceros answered him. “I
would have come sooner, but with your sister and your niece already here, I
thought my presence might make things perhaps a little too crowded for
you. I do hope their departure went well.” It yawned widely and
con-tentedly, showing blunt, fist-sized teeth and a gray-pink tongue like a
fish fillet.
 
“I must telephone the zoo,” Professor Gottesman whispered. “Yes, of
course, I will call the zoo.” But he did not move from the chair.
 
The rhinoceros shook its head as well as it could in a prone position.
“Oh, I wouldn’t bother with that, truly. It will only distress them if any-one
learns that they have mislaid a creature as large as I am. And they will never
believe that I am in your house. Take my word for it, there will be no
mention of my having left their custody. I have some experience in these
matters.” It yawned again and closed its eyes. “Excellent fireplace you
have,” it murmured drowsily. “I think I shall lie exactly here every night. Yes,
I do think so.”
 
And it was asleep, snoring with the rhythmic roar and fading whistle of
a fast freight crossing a railroad bridge. Professor Gottesman sat star-ing in
his chair for a long time before he managed to stagger to the tele-phone in
the kitchen.
 
Sally Lowry came over early the next morning, as she had promised
several times before the Professor would let her off the phone. She took
one quick look at him as she entered and said briskly, “Well, whatever
came to dinner, you look as though it got the bed and you slept on the living
room floor.”
 
“I did not sleep at all,” Professor Gottesman informed her grimly.
“Come with me, please, Sally, and you shall see why.”
 
But the rhinoceros was not in front of the fireplace, where it held still
been lying when the Professor came downstairs. He looked around for it
increasingly frantic, saying over and over, “It was just here, it has been here
all night. Wait, wait, Sally, I will show you. Wait only a moment.”
 
For he had suddenly heard the unmistakable gurgle of water in the
pipes overhead. He rushed up the narrow hairpin stairs (his house was, as

the real-estate agent had put it, “an old charmer”) and burst into his
bathroom, blinking through clouds of steam to find the rhinoceros lolling
blissfully in the tub, its nose barely above water and its hind legs awkwardly
stick-ing straight up in the air. There were puddles all over the floor.
 
“Good morning,” the rhinoceros greeted Professor Gottesman. “I
could wish your facilities a bit larger, but the hot water is splendid, pure
luxury. We never had hot baths at the zoo.”
 
“Get out of my tub!” the Professor gabbled, coughing and wiping his
face. “You will get out of my tub this instant!”
 
The rhinoceros remained unruffled. “I am not sure I can. Not just like
that. It’s rather a complicated affair.”
 
“Get out exactly the way you got in!” shouted Professor Gottesman.
“How did you get up here at all? I never heard you on the stairs.”
 
“I tried not to disturb you,” the rhinoceros said meekly. “Unicorns can
move very quietly when we need to.”
 
“Out!” the Professor thundered. He had never thundered before, and
it made his throat hurt. “Out of my bathtub, out of my house! And clean up
that floor before you go!”
 
He stormed back down the stairs to meet a slightly anxious Sally
Lowry waiting at the bottom. “What was all that yelling about?” she wanted
to know. “You’re absolutely pink—it’s sort of sweet, actually. Are you all
right?”
 
“Come up with me,” Professor Gottesman demanded. “Come right
now.” He seized his friend by the wrist and practically dragged her into his
bathroom, where there was no sign of the rhinoceros. The tub was empty
and dry, the floor was spotlessly clean; the air smelled faintly of tile cleaner.
Professor Gottesman stood gaping in the doorway, mutter-ing over and
over, “But it was here. It was in the tub.”
 
“What was in the tub?” Sally asked. The Professor took a long, deep
breath and turned to face her.
 
“A rhinoceros,” he said. “It says it’s a unicorn, but it is nothing but an
Indian rhinoceros.” Sally’s mouth opened, but no sound came out.
Pro-fessor Gottesman said, “It followed me home.”
 

Fortunately, Sally Lowry was no more concerned with the usual
splut-ters of denial and disbelief than was the Professor himself. She
closed her mouth, caught her own breath, and said, “Well, any rhinoceros
that could handle those stairs, wedge itself into that skinny tub of yours, and
tidy up afterwards would have to be a unicorn. Obvious. Gus, I don’t care
what time it is, I think you need a drink.”
 
Professor Gottesman recounted his visit to the zoo with Nathalie, and
all that had happened thereafter, while Sally rummaged through his
min-imally stocked liquor cabinet and mixed what she called a “Lowry Land
Mine.” It calmed the Professor only somewhat, but it did at least restore his
coherency. He said earnestly, “Sally, I don’t know how it talks. I do not know
how it escaped from the zoo, or found its way here, or how it got into my
house and my bathtub, and I am afraid to imagine where it is now. But the
creature is an Indian rhinoceros, the sign said so. It is sim-ply not
possible—not possible—that it could be a unicorn.”
 
“Sounds like Harvey,” Sally mused. Professor Gottesman stared at
her. “You know, the play about the guy who’s buddies with an invisible white
rabbit. A big white rabbit.”
 
“But this one is not invisible!” the Professor cried. “People at the zoo,
they saw it—Nathalie saw it. It bowed to her, quite courteously.”
 
“Urn,” Sally said. “Well, I haven’t seen it yet, but I live in hope.
Meanwhile, you’ve got a class, and I’ve got office hours. Want me to make
you another Land Mine?”
 
Professor Gottesman shuddered slightly. “I think not. We are
discussing today how Fichte and von Schelling’s work leads us to Hegel,
and I need my wits about me. Thank you for coming to my house, Sally.
You are a good friend. Perhaps I really am suffering from delusions, after
all. I think I would almost prefer it so.”
 
“Not me,” Sally said. “I’m getting a unicorn out of this, if it’s the last
thing I do.” She patted his arm. “You’re more fun than a barrel of MFA
candidates, Gus, and you’re also the only gentleman I’ve ever met. I don’t
know what I’d do for company around here without you.”
 
Professor Gottesman arrived early for his seminar on “The Heirs of
Kant.” There was no one in the classroom when he entered, except for the
rhinoceros. It had plainly already attempted to sit on one of the chairs,
which lay in splinters on the floor. Now it was warily eyeing a ragged
hassock near the coffee machine.

 
“What are you doing here?” Professor Gottesman fairly screamed at
it.
 
“Only auditing,” the rhinoceros answered. “I thought it might be
rewarding to see you at work. I promise not to say a word.” 
 
Professor Gottesman pointed to the door. He had opened his mouth
to order the rhinoceros, once and for all, out of his life, when two of his
students walked into the room. The Professor closed his mouth, gulped,
greeted his students, and ostentatiously began to examine his lecture
notes, mumbling professorial mumbles to himself, while the rhinoceros,
unnoticed, negotiated a kind of armed truce with the hassock. True to its
word, it listened in attentive silence all through the seminar, though
Professor Gottesman had an uneasy moment when it seemed about to be
drawn into a heated debate over the precise nature of von Schelling’s
intellectual debt to the von Schlegel brothers. He was so desperately
care-ful not to let the rhinoceros catch his eye that he never noticed until the
last student had left that the beast was gone, too. None of the class had
even once commented on its presence; except for the shattered chair,
there was no indication that it had ever been there.
 
Professor Gottesman drove slowly home in a disorderly state of
mind. On the one hand, he wished devoutly never to see the rhinoceros
again; on the other, he could not help wondering exactly when it had left the
classroom. “Was it displeased with my summation of the Ideas for a
Philosophy of Nature?” he said aloud in the car. “Or perhaps it was
something I said during the argument about Die Weltalter. Granted, I have
never been entirely comfortable with that book, but I do not recall saying
anything exceptionable.” Hearing himself justifying his interpretations to a
rhi-noceros, he slapped his own cheek very hard and drove the rest of the
way with the car radio tuned to the loudest, ugliest music he could find.
 
The rhinoceros was dozing before the fireplace as before, but
lumbered clumsily to a sitting position as soon as he entered the living
room. “Bravo, Professor!” it cried in plainly genuine enthusiasm. “You were
ab-solutely splendid. It was an honor to be present at your seminar.”
 
The Professor was furious to realize that he was blushing; yet it was
impossible to respond to such praise with an eviction notice. There was
nothing for him to do but reply, a trifle stiffly, “Thank you, most grati-fying.”
But the rhinoceros was clearly waiting for something more, and Professor
Gottesman was, as his friend Sally had said, a gentleman. He went on, “You
are welcome to audit the class again, if you like. We will be considering

Rousseau next week, and then proceed through the ro-mantic philosophers
to Nietzsche and Schopenhauer.”
 
“With a little time to spare for the American Transcendentalists, I
should hope,” suggested the rhinoceros. Professor Gottesman, being
some distance past surprise, nodded. The rhinoceros said reflectively, “I
think I should prefer to hear you on Comte and John Stuart Mill. The
Ro-mantics always struck me as fundamentally unsound.”
 
This position agreed so much with the Professor’s own opinion that
he found himself, despite himself, gradually warming toward the
rhi-noceros. Still formal, he asked, “May I perhaps offer you a drink? Some
coffee or tea?”
 
“Tea would be very nice,” the rhinoceros answered, “if you should
happen to have a bucket.” Professor Gottesman did not, and the
rhinoceros told him not to worry about it. It settled back down before the
fire, and the Professor drew up a rocking chair. The rhinoceros said, “I
must admit, I do wish I could hear you speak on the scholastic
philosophers. That’s really my period, after all.”
 
“I will be giving such a course next year,” the Professor said, a little
shyly. “It is to be a series of lectures on medieval Christian thought,
be-ginning with St. Augustine and the Neoplatonists and ending with William
of Occam. Possibly you could attend some of those talks.”
 
The rhinoceros’s obvious pleasure at the invitation touched Professor
Gottesman surprisingly deeply. Even Sally Lowry, who often dropped in on
his classes unannounced, did so, as he knew, out of affection for him, and
not from any serious interest in epistemology or the Milesian School. He
was beginning to wonder whether there might be a way to permit the
rhinoceros to sample the cream sherry he kept aside for company, when
the creature added, with a wheezy chuckle, “Of course, Augustine and the
rest never did quite come to terms with such pagan survivals as unicorns.
The best they could do was to associate us with the Virgin Mary, and to
suggest that our horns somehow represented the unity of Christ and his
church. Bernard of Treves even went so far as to identify Christ directly with
the unicorn, but it was never a comfortable union. Spiral peg in square hole,
so to speak.”
 
Professor Gottesman was no more at ease with the issue than St.
Augustine had been. But he was an honest person—only among
philosophers is this considered part of the job description—and so he felt it
his duty to say, “While I respect your intelligence and your obvious

intellectual cu-riosity, none of this yet persuades me that, you are in fact a
unicorn. I still must regard you as an exceedingly learned and
well-mannered Indian rhi-noceros.”
 
The rhinoceros took this in good part, saying, “Well, well, we will
agree to disagree on that point for the time being. Although I certainly hope
that you will let me know if you should need your drinking water puri-fied.”
As before, and as so often thereafter, Professor Gottesman could not be
completely sure that the rhinoceros was joking. Dismissing the sub-ject, it
went on to ask, “But about the Scholastics—do you plan to discuss the later
Thomist reformers at all? Saint Cajetan rather dominates the movement, to
my mind; if he had any real equals, I’m afraid I can’t re-call them.”
 
“Ah,” said the Professor. They were up until five in the morning, and it
was the rhinoceros who dozed off first.
 
The question of the rhinoceros’s leaving Professor Gottesman’s
house never came up again. It continued to sleep in the living room, for the
most part, though on warm summer nights it had a fondness for the young
wil-low tree that had been a Christmas present from Sally. Professor
Gottes-man never learned whether it was male or female, nor how it
nourished its massive, noisy body, nor how it managed for toilet
facilities—a reticent man himself, he respected reticence in others. As a
houseguest, the rhi-noceros’s only serious fault was a continuing
predilection for hot baths (with Epsom salts, when it could get them.) But it
always cleaned up after itself, and was extremely conscientious about not
tracking mud into the house; and it can be safely said that none of the
Professor’s visitors—even the rare ones who spent a night or two under his
roof—ever remotely sus-pected that they were sharing living quarters with a
rhinoceros. All in all, it proved to be a most discreet and modest beast.
 
The Professor had few friends, apart from Sally, and none whom he
would have called on in a moment of bewildering crisis, as he had called
her. He avoided whatever social or academic gatherings he could
rea-sonably avoid; as a consequence his evenings had generally been
lonely ones, though he might not have called them so. Even if he had
admitted the term, he would surely have insisted that there was nothing
necessar-ily wrong with loneliness, in and of itself. “I think,” he would have
said—did often say, in fact, to Sally Lowry. “There are people, you know,
for whom thinking is company, thinking is entertainment, parties, dancing
even. The others, other people, they absolutely will not believe this.”
 
“You’re right,” Sally said. “One thing about you, Gus, when you’re right
you’re really right.”

 
Now, however, the Professor could hardly wait for the time of day
when, after a cursory dinner (he was an indifferent, impatient eater, and truly
tasted little difference between a frozen dish and one that had taken half a
day to prepare), he would pour himself a glass of wine and sit down in the
living room to debate philosophy with a huge mortar-colored beast that
always smelled vaguely incontinent, no matter how many baths it had taken
that afternoon. Looking eagerly forward all day to anything was a new
experience for him. It appeared to be the same for the rhi-noceros.
 
As the animal had foretold, there was never the slightest suggestion
in the papers or on television that the local zoo was missing one of its larger
odd-toed ungulates. The Professor went there once or twice in great
trepidation, convinced that he would be recognized and accused
immediately of conspiracy in the rhinoceros’s escape. But nothing of the
sort happened. The yard where the rhinoceros had been kept was now
occupied by a pair of despondent-looking African elephants; when
Professor Gottesman made a timid inquiry of a guard, he was curtly
informed that the zoo had never possessed a rhinoceros of any species.
“Endangered species,” the guard told him. “Too much red tape you have to
go through to get one these days. Just not worth the trouble, mean as they
are.”
 
Professor Gottesman grew placidly old with the rhinoceros—that is to
say, the Professor grew old, while the rhinoceros never changed in any way
that he could observe. Granted, he was not the most observant of men, nor
the most sensitive to change, except when threatened by it. Nor was he in
the least ambitious: promotions and pay raises happened, when they
happened, somewhere in the same cloudily benign middle distance as did
those departmental meetings that he actually had to sit through. The
companionship of the rhinoceros, while increasingly his truest de-light, also
became as much of a cozily reassuring habit as his classes, his office
hours, the occasional dinner and movie or museum excursion with Sally
Lowry, and the books on French and German philosophy that he
occasionally published through the university press over the years. They
were indifferently reviewed, and sold poorly.
 
“Which is undoubtedly as it should be,” Professor Gottesman
fre-quently told Sally when dropping her off at her house, well across town
from his own. “I think I am a good teacher—that, yes—but I am decidedly
not an original thinker, and I was never much of a writer even in Ger-man. It
does no harm to say that I am not an exceptional man, Sally. It does not
hurt me.”
 

“I don’t know what exceptional means to you or anyone else,” Sally
would answer stubbornly. “To me it means being unique, one of a kind, and
that’s definitely you, old Gus. I never thought you belonged in this town, or
this university, or probably this century. But I’m surely glad you’ve been
here.”
 
Once in a while she might ask him casually how his unicorn was
get-ting on these days. The Professor, who had long since accepted the
fact that no one ever saw the rhinoceros unless it chose to be seen,
invariably rose to the bait, saying, “It is no more a unicorn than it ever was,
Sally, you know that.” He would sip his latte in mild indignation, and
eventu-ally add, “Well, we will clearly never see eye to eye on the Vienna
Cir-cle, or the logical positivists in general—it is a very conservative
creature, in some ways. But we did come to a tentative agreement about
Bergson, last Thursday it was, so I would have to say that we are going
along quite amiably.”
 
Sally rarely pressed him further. Sharp-tongued, solitary, and
pro-foundly irreverent, only with Professor Gottesman did she bother to
know when to leave things alone. Most often, she would take out her
bat-tered harmonica and play one or another of his favorite tunes—”Sweet
Georgia Brown” or “Hurry On Down.” He never sang along, but he always
hummed and grunted and thumped his bony knees. Once he men-tioned
diffidently that the rhinoceros appeared to have a peculiar fond-ness for
“Slow Boat to China.” Sally pretended not to hear him.
 
In the appointed fullness of time, the university retired Professor
Gottesman in a formal ceremony, attended by, among others, Sally Lowry,
his sister Edith, all the way from Zurich, and the rhinoceros—the latter
hav-ing spent all that day in the bathtub, in anxious preparation. Each of
them assured him that he looked immensely distinguished as he was
invested with the rank of emeritus, which allowed him to lecture as many as
four times a year, and to be available to counsel promising graduate
students when he chose. In addition, a special chair with his name on it was
re-served exclusively for his use at the Faculty Club. He was quite proud of
never once having sat in it.
 
“Strange, I am like a movie star now,” he said to the rhinoceros. “You
should see. Now I walk across the campus and the students line up, they
line up to watch me totter past. I can hear their whispers—’Here he comes!’
‘There he goes!’ Exactly the same ones they are who used to cut my
classes because I bored them so. Completely absurd.”
 
“Enjoy it as your due,” the rhinoceros proposed. “You were entitled to

their respect then—take pleasure in it now, however misplaced it may seem
to you.” But the Professor shook his head, smiling wryly.
 
“Do you know what kind of star I am really like?” he asked. “I am like
the old, old star that died so long ago, so far away, that its last light is only
reaching our eyes today. They fall in on themselves, you know, those dead
stars, they go cold and invisible, even though we think we are seeing them
in the night sky. That is just how I would be, if not for you. And for Sally, of
course.”
 
In fact, Professor Gottesman found little difficulty in making his peace
with age and retirement. His needs were simple, his pension and savings
adequate to meet them, and his health as sturdy as generations of Swiss
peasant ancestors could make it. For the most part he continued to live as
he always had, the one difference being that he now had more time for
study, and could stay up as late as he chose arguing about structuralism
with the rhinoceros, or listening to Sally Lowry reading her new transla-tion
of Gavalcanti or Frescobaldi. At first he attended every conference of
philosophers to which he was invited, feeling a certain vague obliga-tion to
keep abreast of new thought in his field. This compulsion passed quickly,
however, leaving him perfectly satisfied to have as little as possi-ble to do
with academic life, except when he needed to use the library. Sally once
met him there for lunch to find him feverishly rifling the ten Loeb Classic
volumes of Philojudaeus. “We were debating the concept of the logos last
night,” he explained to her, “and then the impossible beast rampaged off on
a tangent involving Philo’s locating the roots of Greek philosophy in the
Torah. Forgive me, Sally, but I may be here for awhile.” Sally lunched alone
that day.
 
The Professor’s sister Edith died younger than she should have. He
grieved for her, and took much comfort in the fact that Nathalie never failed
to visit him when she came to America. The last few times, she had brought
a husband and two children with her—the youngest hugging a ragged but
indomitable tiger named Charles under his arm. They most often swept him
off for the evening; and it was on one such occasion, just after they had
brought him home and said their good-byes, and their rented car had
rounded the corner, that the mugging occurred.
 
Professor Gottesman was never quite sure himself about what
actually took place. He remembered a light scuffle of footfalls,
remembered a sav-age blow on the side of his head, then another impact
as his cheek and forehead hit the ground. There were hands clawing
through his pockets, low voices so distorted by obscene viciousness that
he lost English com-pletely, becoming for the first time in fifty years a

terrified immigrant, once more unable to cry out for help in this new and
dreadful country. A face-less figure billowed over him, grabbing his collar,
pulling him close, mouthing words he could not understand. It was
brandishing something menacingly in its free hand.
 
Then it vanished abruptly, as though blasted away by the
sidewalk-shaking bellow of rage that was Professor Gottesman’s last clear
memory until he woke in a strange bed, with Sally Lowry, Nathalie, and
several policemen bending over him. The next day’s newspapers ran the
mar-velous story of a retired philosophy professor, properly frail and
elderly, not only fighting off a pair of brutal muggers but beating them so
badly that they had to be hospitalized themselves before they could be
ar-raigned. Sally impishly kept the incident on the front pages for some
days by confiding to reporters that Professor Gottesman was a practitioner
of a long-forgotten martial-arts discipline, practiced only in ancient Sumer
and Babylonia. “Plain childishness,” she said apologetically, after the fuss
had died down. “Pure self-indulgence. I’m sorry, Gus.”
 
“Do not be,” the Professor replied. “If we were to tell them the truth, I
would immediately be placed in an institution.” He looked sideways at his
friend, who smiled and said, “What, about the rhinoceros rescuing you? I’ll
never tell, I swear. They could pull out my fingernails.”
 
Professor Gottesman said, “Sally, those boys had been trampled,
practically stamped flat. One of them had been gored, I saw him. Do you
re-ally think I could have done all that?”
 
“Remember, I’ve seen you in your wrath,” Sally answered lightly and
untruthfully. What she had in fact seen was one of the ace-of-clubs
foot-prints she remembered in crusted mud on the Professor’s front steps
long ago. She said, “Gus. How old am I?”
 
The Professor’s response was off by a number of years, as it always
was. Sally said, “You’ve frozen me at a certain age, because you don’t want
me getting any older. Fine, I happen to be the same way about that
rhi-noceros of yours. There are one or two things I just don’t want to know
about that damn rhinoceros, Gus. If that’s all right with you.”
 
“Yes, Sally,” Professor Gottesman answered. “That is all right.”
 
The rhinoceros itself had very little to say about the whole incident. “I
chanced to be awake, watching a lecture about Bulgarian icons on the
Learning Channel. I heard the noise outside.” Beyond that, it sidestepped
all questions, pointedly concerning itself only with the Professor’s

recu-peration from his injuries and shock. In fact, he recovered much faster
than might reasonably have been expected from a gentleman of his years.
The doctor commented on it.
 
The occurrence made Professor Gottesman even more of an icon
him-self on campus; as a direct consequence, he spent even less time
there than before, except when the rhinoceros requested a particular book.
Nathalie, writing from Zurich, never stopped urging him to take in a
housemate, for company and safety, but she would have been utterly
dumbfounded if he had accepted her suggestion. “Something looks out for
him,” she said to her husband. “I always knew that, I couldn’t tell you why.
Uncle Gustave is somebody’s dear stuffed Charles.”
 
Sally Lowry did grow old, despite Professor Gottesman’s best
efforts. The university gave her a retirement ceremony too, but she never
showed up for it. “Too damn depressing,” she told Professor Gottesman,
as he helped her into her coat for their regular Wednesday walk. “It’s all
right for you, Gus, you’ll be around forever. Me, I drink, I still smoke, I still
eat all kinds of stuff they tell me not to eat—I don’t even floss, for God’s
sake. My circulation works like the post office, and even my cholesterol has
arthritis. Only reason I’ve lasted this long is I had this stupid job teach-ing
beautiful, useless stuff to idiots. Now that’s it. Now I’m a goner.”
 
“Nonsense, nonsense, Sally” Professor Gottesman assured her
vigorously. “You have always told me you are too mean and spiteful to die. I
am holding you to this.”
 
“Pickled in vinegar only lasts just so long,” Sally said. “One cheery
note, anyway—it’ll be the heart that goes. Always is, in my family. That’s
good, I couldn’t hack cancer. I’d be a shameless, screaming disgrace,
absolutely no dignity at all. I’m really grateful it’ll be the heart.”
 
The Professor was very quiet while they walked all the way down to
the little local park, and back again. They had reached the apartment
com-plex where she lived, when he suddenly gripped her by the arms,
looked straight into her face, and said loudly, “That is the best heart I ever
knew, yours. I will not let anything happen to that heart.”
 
“Go home, Gus,” Sally told him harshly. “Get out of here, go home.
Christ, the only sentimental Switzer in the whole world, and I get him.
Wouldn’t you just know?”
 
Professor Gottesman actually awoke just before the telephone call
came, as sometimes happens. He had dozed off in his favorite chair

dur-ing a minor intellectual skirmish with the rhinoceros over Spinoza’s
ethics. The rhinoceros itself was sprawled in its accustomed spot, snoring
au-thoritatively, and the kitchen clock was still striking three when the phone
rang. He picked it up slowly. Sally’s barely audible voice whispered, “Gus.
The heart. Told you.” He heard the receiver fall from her hand.
 
Professor Gottesman had no memory of stumbling coatless out of
the house, let alone finding his car parked on the street—he was just
suddenly standing by it, his hands trembling so badly as he tried to unlock
the door that he dropped his keys into the gutter. How long his frantic
fumbling in the darkness went on, he could never say; but at some point he
be-came aware of a deeper darkness over him, and looked up on hands
and knees to see the rhinoceros.
 
“On my back,” it said, and no more. The Professor had barely
scram-bled up its warty, unyielding flanks and heaved himself precariously
over the spine his legs could not straddle when there came a surge like the
sea under him as the great beast leaped forward. He cried out in terror.
 
He would have expected, had he had wit enough at the moment to
expect anything, that the rhinoceros would move at a ponderous trot,
fart-ing and rumbling, gradually building up a certain clumsy momentum.
In-stead, he felt himself flying, truly flying, as children know flying, flowing
with the night sky, melting into the jeweled wind. If the rhinoceros’s huge,
flat, three-toed feet touched the ground, he never felt it: nothing ex-isted, or
ever had existed, but the sky that he was and the bodiless power that he
had become—he himself, the once and foolish old Professor Gustave
Gottesman, his eyes full of the light of lost stars. He even forgot Sally
Lowry, only for a moment, only for the least little time.
 
Then he was standing in the courtyard before her house, shouting and
banging maniacally on the door, pressing every button under his hand. The
rhinoceros was nowhere to be seen. The building door finally buzzed open,
and the Professor leaped up the stairs like a young man, calling Sally’s
name. Her own door was unlocked; she often left it so absent-mindedly, no
matter how much he scolded her about it. She was in her bedroom,
half-wedged between the side of the bed and the night table, with the
telephone receiver dangling by her head. Professor Gottesman touched
her cheek and felt the fading warmth.
 
“Ah, Sally,” he said. “Sally, my dear.” She was very heavy, but
some-how it was easy for him to lift her back onto the bed and make a
place for her among the books and papers that littered the quilt, as always.
He found her harmonica on the floor, and closed her fingers around it.

When there was nothing more for him to do, he sat beside her, still holding
her hand, until the room began to grow light. At last he said aloud, “No, the
sentimental Switzer will not cry, my dear Sally,” and picked up the
tele-phone.
 
The rhinoceros did not return for many days after Sally Lowry’s death.
Professor Gottesman missed it greatly when he thought about it at all, but it
was a strange, confused time. He stayed at home, hardly eating, sleeping
on his feet, opening books and closing them. He never answered the
telephone, and he never changed his clothes. Sometimes he wandered
endlessly upstairs and down through every room in his house; sometimes
he stood in one place for an hour or more at a time, staring at nothing.
Occasionally the doorbell rang, and worried voices outside called his name.
It was late autumn, and then winter, and the house grew cold at night,
because he had forgotten to turn on the furnace. Professor Gottes-man
was perfectly aware of this, and other things, somewhere.
 
One evening, or perhaps it was early one morning, he heard the
sound of water running in the bathtub upstairs. He remembered the sound,
and presently he moved to his living room chair to listen to it better. For the
first time in some while, he fell asleep, and woke only when he felt the
rhinoceros standing over him. In the darkness he saw it only as a huge, still
shadow, but it smelled unmistakably like a rhinoceros that has just had a
bath. The Professor said quietly, “I wondered where you had gone.”
 
“We unicorns mourn alone,” the rhinoceros replied. “I thought it might
be the same for you.”
 
“Ah,” Professor Gottesman said. “Yes, most considerate. Thank you.”
 
He said nothing further, but sat staring into the shadow until it
appeared to fold gently around him. The rhinoceros said, “We were
speaking of Spinoza.”
 
Professor Gottesman did not answer. The rhinoceros went on, “I was
very interested in the comparison you drew between Spinoza and Thomas
Hobbes. I would enjoy continuing our discussion.”
 
“I do not think I can,” the Professor said at last. “J do not think I want
to talk anymore.”
 
It seemed to him that the rhinoceros’s eyes had become larger and
brighter in its own shadow, and its horn a trifle less hulking. But it’s stomach
rumbled as majestically as ever as it said, “In that case, perhaps we should

be on our way.”
 
“Where are we going?” Professor Gottesman asked. He was feeling
oddly peaceful and disinclined to leave his chair. The rhinoceros moved
closer, and for the first time that the Professor could remember its huge,
hairy muzzle touched his shoulder, light as a butterfly.
 
“I have lived in your house for a long time,” it said. “We have talked
together, days and nights on end, about ways of being in this world, ways of
considering it, ways of imagining it as a part of some greater imagining.
Now has come the time for silence. Now I think you should come and live
with me.”
 
They were outside, on the sidewalk, in the night. Professor
Gottesman had forgotten to take his coat, but he was not at all cold. He
turned to look back at his house, watching it recede, its lights still burning,
like a ship leaving him at his destination. He said to the rhinoceros, “What is
your house like?”
 
“Comfortable,” the rhinoceros answered. “In honesty, I would not call
the hot water as superbly lavish as yours, but there is rather more room to
maneuver. Especially on the stairs.”
 
“You are walking a bit too rapidly for me,” said the Professor. “May I
climb on your back once more?”
 
The rhinoceros halted immediately, saying, “By all means, please do
excuse me.” Professor Gottesman found it notably easier to mount this
time, the massive sides having plainly grown somewhat trimmer and
smoother during the rhinoceros’s absence, and easier to grip with his legs.
It started on briskly when he was properly settled, though not at the
rap-turous pace that had once married the Professor to the night wind. For
some while he could hear the clopping of cloven hooves far below him, but
then they seemed to fade away. He leaned forward and said into the
rhinoceros’s pointed silken ear, “I should tell you that I have long since
come to the conclusion that you are not after all an Indian rhinoceros, but a
hitherto unknown species, somehow misclassified. I hope this will not make
a difference in our relationship.”
 
“No difference, good Professor,” came the gently laughing answer all
around him. “No difference in the world.”
 
* * * *

