
P OTOSHOP E EMEN S 2 
[F@~® MCID[k®@W®[f~ 
DIGITAL MAKEOVERS OF FRIENDS & FAMILY 
Gavin Cromhout 
Josh Fallon 
Nathan Flood 
Katy Freer 
Jim Hannah 
Francine Spiegel 
Pete Walsh 
James Widegren 
APress Media, LLC 

Photoshop Elements 2 Face Makeovers 
DIGITAL MAKEOVERS OF FRIENDS & FAMILY 
© 2002 Apress 
Originally published by Friends of ED in 2002 
All rights reserved. No part of th1s book may be reproduced, stored In a 
retrie~al system or trammitted In any form or by any means, without the prier 
wntten permission of the publisher. except in the case of brief quotations 
embodied In critical article~ or r~iews . 
The autho~ and publisher have made every effort In the preparation of this 
book to ensure the accurow of the Information. However. the Information 
cont.-.lned In tht; book is sold Without warranty, either e~press or implied. 
Neither the author:~. In ends of ED nor its dealers or distnbutors will be held 
liable for any damages caused or alleged to be cauoed either directly or 
lnd lrectly by this t>ook. 
Fir:~! Printed january 2002 
Trademark Acknowledgements 
Additional material to this book can be downloaded from http://extras.springer.com 
ISBN 978-1-59059-162-8 
ISBN 978-1-4302-5179-8 (eB
) 
ook)
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4302-5179-8
Crocdlts 
Authors 
Gavin Crom haul 
josh Fallon 
Nathan Flood 
Kat}' freer 
Jim Ha~nah 
Francine Sp1~ge! 
Pete Walsh 
)ames W1degren 
Technical Reviewers 
Vlctona Blackburn 
Nyree Cos te!lo 
Deni> E. Graham 
VICki Loader 
Cathenne O'Fiynn 
Commissioning Editor 
hm Hannah 
Editor 
Alan McCann 
Project Manager 
R1chard Harrison 
Graphic Editor 
Katy Fr~er 
!nduer 
Simon Coll1ns 
Proof Reader 
Helena Shorman 
Managing Editor 
Chris Hindley 

I L__ 
Contents 
Preface [pre-face} 
1: lnbuilt Features 
2: Retouching Photos 
3: Freaky Faces 
4: Face Painting 
5: Liquifying Faces 
6: Ageing a Face 
7: Fantasy Faces 
8: Imitating Artists 
Index 
1 
3 
37 
69 
113 
135 
153 
179 
221 
261 

Pre ace 
[Pre-face] 
The idea of this book is very simple. We take snaps of faces and manipulate them. 
Easy, eh? Well, yes - but amazing too. You'll be blown away by how simple it is to 
create fantastic effects, whether it's careful retouching you're after, or full on 
stomping ogre creation! 
If you stick to a small canvas, the result is an explosion of ideas and creativity. In this 
book we have face painting, oil painting and screen-printing. We dabble with 
hyper-reality, surrealism, fantasy, romance, horror. tension and serenity. From a 
collection of everyday faces. we can generate a cast of digital characters - clowns. 
tigers. glamour pusses, angels, demons, rock stars, monsters and ogres. 
This book presents a series of step-by-step tutorials on how to create these amazing 
facial effects in Photoshop Elements 2. displaying excellent hints and tips that can be 
stretched out across all of your digital manipulation. 
On the accompanying CD, you will find all of the original source files, plus the 
finished multi-layered files, enabling you to search through the images. turning on 
and off effects, to see how to generate each finished image. 
Between these packed covers you'll find a wealth of material to get busy with - all 
you need to do is have fun and learn! 
As with all friends of ED titles, this book is backed up with free. fast. and friendly 
technical support from our editors. If you have a query or problem, mail 
support@friendsofed.com, and we will get back to you as soon as possible. 
If you have any comments about this book, good, bad, or ugly, we're keen to hear 
from you. Mail feedback@friendsofed.com and have your say! 
There's a host of other features at www.friendsofed.com that may interest you -
interviews with top designers, samples from our other books, and a message board 
where you can post your questions. discussions and answers. 
Enjoy making faces! 


Cha~ter 1 
I 
res 
What you'll learn in this chapter 
This chapter is going to take a swift look at some of 
the things that could be considered no-brainer effects 
in Photoshop Elements 2. They're the things that 
Elements can do with the least effort on our part. We 
just have to click a few buttons and it does the hard 
work for us. That said, we'll have some pretty original 
uses for these, and you'll see that Elements built-in 
features can be very useful for many professional-
looking effects. Along the way, we'll explore: 
• 
Using Elements vast range of brushes and 
brush options to add some neat effects. 
• 
Exploring Elements main ready-made effects 
solutions - Recipes and Filters. 
• 
Making 3D objects out of your faces. 
• 
Masking a face to superimpose it into 
another image. 

Chapter 1 
4 
Most of the rest of this book encourages you to apply a little bit of care in creating your final 
masterpieces, whereas in this chapter you'll never be more than a few Undo commands away from 
where you started. So, you'd better enjoy this chapter while it lasts! 
As with all our examples in the book, all our finished PSDs are 
provided in full on the CD-ROM, named after the model and/or 
tutorial. Play around with the PSDs to familiarize yourself with the 
images and techniques, or just use them to check you're following 
along, it's up to you, but they're all there! 
The idea behind this chapter is that you can do anything with any snap. So let's have a look at putting 
something together using the snappiest of snaps. 
The Brush rush 
Photoshop Elements 2 has more brushes than you can shake a bristly stick at. and we're going to have 
a look at what sort of things you can achieve with them. In reality, there are more brushes than you 
could possibly need. 
We're going to be looking quite comprehensively at what brushes can do in one or two later chapters, 
most especially the Imitating Artists chapter, which will examine how to create different painterly 
effects. 
However, for these first few tutorials. let's spend a little time getting acquainted with a couple of 
brushes that can give us an immediate return for our money! 
Elizabeth - brush strokes 
This little brush technique will prepare us for a more advanced 
technique in the Fantasy Faces chapter. where we'll create a fairy 
(hey, don't skip ahead just yet! Well OK, maybe for a look, but 
make sure you come back). 
I'm sure Elizabeth here would like to be turned into a fairy, so let's 
make her wish come true! 

lnbuilt features 
As with all the files on the CD-ROM, we've named them after our 
models, so you'll find this one in the lnbullt Features folder. called 
elizabeth . jpg. Open this up in Elements and we'll get started! 
1. 
First, select the Brush tool. and then 
in the vast drop-down menu in the 
Options bar. scroll to the brush that 
looks like a bunch of five-pointed 
stars. It's called Flowing Stars. 
2. 
Create a new layer with Layers > ew > Layer, or CTRL +SHiFT+N. We'll do all of our brushwork 
on this, so name it flowing stars. 
Then it's a question of getting the settings right. First off, and most obviously, you've got to get 
the size just perfect. On the hair I've used the largest stars. and on the face I've gone with 
smaller ones. 
After getting a good layout of stars. we need to apply a layer effect called Outer Glow, which 
will make the whole composition much more ethereal. 
5 

Chapter 1 
3. 
Open the Layer Styles palette (either docked at the 
top right of your screen or visible through Window 
> Layer Styles). 
4. 
Select Outer Glows from 
the drop-down menu. The 
glow you should choose 
here is Simple. 
L ay .-r S tyle5 
• 
~ 
Noisy 
• • 
~~vyNoisy lli9 Border • 
SINI Bord... 
SINI Nois._ 
Now, that just scrapes the surface. It seems the makers of 
Photoshop Elements are way ahead of us. If you look at the 
specialized menu in the drop-down Brushes palette, you'll see a 
wide range of other categories. For example, in the Special Effects 
brushes we have such brushes as cattered Flowers Mums, Ducks 
ot in a Row, and Butterfly with Chroma. These are all of course 
perfect for decoration. 
Huvy • 
Bicj Noisy B._ 
Fire 
•= 
•= 
This picture utilizes the brush from the Pen Pressure selection, called Music 
otes - Scatter. 
6 

lnbuilt features 
5. 
To achieve this effect create a new layer called mu ic notes (we'll put all our brush effects on 
separate layers, then we can show and hide them at will), and select a good brush size (I've used 
250 px). Paint randomly in black over the picture (while on the new layer). 
6. 
When you've got the spread of notes about 
right (not always as easy as it sounds!) go to 
the Layers palette and set the blending mode 
to Soft Light -
then you'll get that lovely 
translucent effect! 
su: no te s 
If you apply a Soft Light blending mode to a layer; it's a bit like using 
the Dodge or Burn tools across the whole image. The Dodge and 
Burn tools, as you may be aware, lighten or darken the 
image. Applying the Soft Light blending mode causes Elements to 
assess whether to Dodge or Burn the image below. So, if you put a 
black and white checker board on a layer above someone's face. the 
black squares will burn the face darker, and the white squares will 
dodge the face lighter. 
a 
7. 
Let's use another brush from the Pen Pressure selection. and have a look at how the Color jitter 
settings on the brushes work. For this effect. use the Confetti brush - it's the third one down -
and again. put it on another layer. 
7 

Chapter 1 
8 
8. 
Using a red foreground color and a white 
background color. with a 40 px brush. paint 
around the head. 
9. 
Now let's make a change. Click on the last 
button on the Options bar -
the More 
Options button, and from the pop-up settings 
palette, increase the Spacing setting as 
shown: 
Sc~tter : 

The difference is tangible: 
... so now we have a picture at the end of the confetti 
shower1 
10. If you now set the Fade level to 1 00#, and apply your 
confetti you can see how to control the swiftness of the 
fade at the end of each brush stroke. 
11. Playing around with the Color Jitter will deliver the 
following effect, this time achieved with an orange 
foreground and a black background color: 
The effect down the left-hand side is done with a 0% 
Jitter. and the right-hand effect is done with 100% jitter 
- so you can control how wild your confetti throwing is 
getting! 
You con find our finished PSD for this section on the 
CD-ROM in the 01 lnbuilt Features folder. called 
eli zabethBrushes . psd This file has each of our 
effects conveniently on a separate Ioyer! 
lnbuilt features 
9 

Chapter 1 
10 
jolly - the Impressionist Brush 
Photoshop Elements 2 also has the facility to create your own brushes. Now this may sound pretty 
scary. but trust me, it's one of the most phenomenally useful things you could ever ask for. We'll have 
a look at that in the chapter on Imitating Artists. so be sure to look out for it! 
However. if Imitating Artists is going to steal our brush-making, it's only fair we steal an 
Imitating Artists effect! Adobe has seen fit to include an Impressionist Brush, which has 
one of the best icons around. 
Essentially, it acts as a hand-controlled filter. Take a look at the following gallery of easy-to-create 
Impressionist effects on our model, jolly: 
j olly . jpg, our original image, is available 
in the lnbuilt Features folder on the CD-Rom. 
Essentially, the Impressionist Brush is a good way of quickly mussing your 
friends up to make them look as if they've been painted by a robotic 
Cezanne. However, it does have other benefits, as we will find out in the 
Imitating Artists chapter. 
Basically, it's useful for breaking a photograph down into its basic colors, 
which can be incredibly helpful if you're looking to create a color palette to 
work from in order to make your picture look as if it's painted. More of that 
later! 
1 Opx brush Tight Curl SOpx area 

lnbuilt features 
Filter tips 
You may have already had a bit of a play with the filters in Photoshop Elements 2, but let's have a quick 
look over some of the most face-friendly ones. 
Recipes 
One of the most wanted effects Photoshop Elements 
offers is the ability to create a sepia-tinted photo. which 
Elements can handle using its automated Recipes. 
1. 
With your picture open, simply click on the 
How To palette at the top of the screen and 
select Fun Stuff from the drop-down menu. 
2. 
Click on Create an old-fashioned or tinted 
photo. Click through the instructions as they 
appear on the screen. 
Now. this does the job of course. but it's best 
not to get too complacent. I prefer to have a 
lovely vignette around my old-fashioned 
photographs -
and fortunately Elements has 
got that covered too! 
3. 
Simply make a selection with the appropriate 
marquee tool, and click the Effects tab from the 
top right of the interface. From the drop-down 
menu, select Frames. and then click on the icon 
Vignette (selection). 
... ... 
... 
Fun Stuff 
S:p!pr e btu, eop rhHe PheW 
Cre•tt • cplodca bapk 
Cretta 1 ch;;to colltpt 
11 

Chapter 1 
12 
This will do the tricky work for you, like so: 
Fake sketching 
People love to see themselves sketched, and Elizabeth in particular is 
perfectly suited to a storybook-like pencil sketch. 
One thing I would urge you to do is apply the right filter to the 
right picture. Too o(ten you'll see renditions of pictures which 
have been put through an inappropriate filter. The basic rule of 
thumb is: we don't want our Photoshop to show! There's noth-
ing better (or ruining someone's enthusiasm (or a picture than 
having them realize it took you thirty seconds to make. Applying 
a filter requires a deftness of touch, so don't get punchy! 
Elements has just pretty nitty built-in filters for the penciling effect, 
and they can be used beautifully. This one works pretty well, I think. 
- it's from Filter> Artistic> Colored Pencil: 
There are, of course. other choices in the sketch mold, but I feel this 
one works best. Check out the filters in the Sketch option of the 
Filters palette drop-down for more Elements wows. 
Glass filter 
One of the more amazing things Elements can do with a bit of 
number crunching is create some really effective-looking glass. 
1. 
Starting with our original elizabeth. jpg once again. 
make a selection with the Rectangular Marquee tool. From 
the Filter's palette, click on the drop-down menu and select 
Distort. This will present you with a series of options - and 
we're interested in Glass. 
2. 
Use the settings shown here: 
,_, ),..,l,., 
3 
!G8.o 
fiiD % 
r.-

Why? Welt, I guess it's because we had that glass back home 
when I was a kid. So now our face is looking through a pane 
of glass! 
Or, given that ch ildren have a tendency to throw baseballs 
wildly. perhaps we should go for the realistic model: 
Now, I think what's interesting here is that we've 
managed to change the context of the whole picture -
not by changing the face, but by making simple 
amendments to the surroundings! By adding in a bit of 
broken glass we've changed that sweet li'l girl into 
something rather more menacing. This kind of idea is 
a great strength when you're fixing up digital images, 
so use it wisely! 
3. 
The effect can be achieved by using the Polygonal Lasso tool 
to select a jagged area, and then applying the Glass filter 
with the Texture set to Frosted. Next, with the selection 
marquee still flashing, click through Layers > ew via Copy. 
4. 
Fi nally, click through Edit > Stroke to apply a bit of edging 
around the glass. 
5. 
Optionally, you may want to go around the edges of the 
glass, adding in extra white lines with a 3 px brush at about 
40% opacity. I think that looks pretty realistic! 
lnbuitt features 
caac::::J 
13 

Chapter 1 
14 
Gradient Map 
One effect you might like to unearth is not really a filter at all. It's the Gradient Map option in the 
Filters palette: 
This basically imagines what your picture would look like in a grayscale format. and then replaces the 
shades of gray with something a little more exciting. There are a number of different color palettes it 
uses. so let's take a quick look. 
1. 
Click on the Create new fill or adjustment 
layer button at the bottom of the Layers 
palette. Select Gradient Map from the 
drop-down menu. 
This will bring up a palette 
showing the existing gradient 
that it uses when you want it 
to 
go 
grayscale. 
Not 
su rprisingly, 
it's black to 
white. 
Gtad1~nt Map 
... 
Gradient ... 
Pattern .. 
levels ... 
Br i~rle$s/CortrMI ... 
Hue/Saturation. .. 
OK 
Cancel 
~Preview 

lnbuilt features 
2. 
Click on the drop-down button beside the gradient to see some variations: 
3. 
A particular favorite of mine is the Copper gradient, which uses a lovely series of browns to 
create a weird kind of metal (well, copper!) effect. 
4. 
If you click on the arrow-in-a-circle 
button (what do you call those?!) 
you'll find a whole host of new color 
palettes available: 
~Preview 
le.t<lltt 
.,,...._ 
::-----'J!!!!I!=-----
... 90 ~ 
-Utt 
lMQeUSt 
Prtset M.IJniJOIIf .. 
-r..-.. .. 
t.ood<i..t.m ... 
-"-··· 
-Gr-... 
Cob"'"""""" 2 
Dold -· 
'*">o-
r--
SooooiEitects 
Cil 
SooW-
17f'f ........ 
15 

Chapter 1 
5. 
Now take the opportunity to flex your color muscles: 
16 
This sort of effect is ideal if you want to incorporate your image into a design that has a strict 
color palette. If, for example, you wanted to have the face in the colors of your favorite 
sports team (say, Wolverhampton Wanderers Soccer Team). you can construct your own 
gradient and swamp the face in these colors. 
If you want to do this, you'll have to carry out the following: 

lnbuilt features 
6. 
Select the Gradient tool from the toolbar, or with the shortcut key G, and then press Edit in the 
Options bar. 
7. 
Rename your gradient (in this case Wolverhampton Wanderers). To select the color of your 
gradient. click once on the bottom (checkered) arrow. This will allow you to select a color. 
Graclont Type ~ 
Sl=tress ~-
====odl ~ 
8. 
Double-click on the colored block, and choose your hue! 
17 

Chapter 1 
18 
9. 
Then, just press the New button to 
dedicate your new gradient to the palette, 
for all posterity. 
So there we have it. the Wolverhampton Wanderers 
mascot! 
We'll do much more advanced coloring in our 
dedicated Imitating Artists chapter later. where we'll 
go through a much more detailed example of 
someone wearing their team's colors! 
Nama 
~wand!n!n 
G-odent T~~>t [SOid--::l 
5moo1tress ~" 

Making 3D objects! 
One very lovely aspect of Photoshop Elements is 
its ability to manipulate images into a 30 format. 
So, we're going to use that to create an object 
or two. 
1. 
Go back to our basic elizabeth. jpg 
image, and duplicate the Background 
layer so we have a layer to edit. This is 
easily done by right-clicking on the 
layer and choosing Duplicate .. . 
2. 
Fill the Background in with white by 
clicking Edit > Fill. .. and then choosing 
White as shown. 
3. 
We want to have space to throw 
this picture around a little. so select 
the Move tool and resize the 
picture so it sits in the middle of 
the image. 
Note: if you hold down the ALT and SHIFT 
keys while you do this, the picture will stay 
centered while you shrink it. Press ENTER 
when you've 
finished 
resizing, 
and 
Elements will apply the change. 
cements 
Use rl 
Wh~1te------,::J 
Fore~ Color 
Bacley"cxm Co lor 
lnbuilt features 
Cancel 
19 

Chapter 1 
20 
This is the part of the experiment where you can be as creative as you like. before you apply 
the 30 effect. But for now. let's not be creative at all. Let's just deal with the picture as it is, 
just to demonstrate the 30 effect. 
4. 
While still on your Background copy layer, press CTRL+A to select the whole image. 
5. 
Click through Filter> Render> 3D Transform to bring up the 30 Transform dialog box. 
I~ I I 
~ 
tillj 
6. 
Press Options and deselect 
Display Background. Press OK 
to that. 
What we're going to do is paste 
this image on to a tincan. 
Simple! 
Options 
EJ 
R~d~====~----------~ 
OK 
Resolution: 
·~--...JO-:::!l 
Cancel 
Anll·aliasing: 
~Display Background 

lnbuilt features 
7. 
Select the Cylinder tool from the dialog's specialized tool palette. Now. just as you would with 
the Rectangular Marquee tool, go to the top left of the picture, and drag out a cylinder, down 
to the bottom right corner: 
OK 
c.n:el 
Olltlons . 
What we have to do now is pretend the image we've got is already 3D. So ask yourself- how 
would we make the picture of the girl flat, if she really were pasted onto a can? Answer- we'd 
have to look at the can directly on, so we couldn't see the top or the bottom. You got me? What 
we have to do is change the can shape so we can't see the top or bottom. 
8. 
Select the white arrow (the Direct Selection tool). Move it to the little square at the bottom of 
the can shape. 
:m r '"""'"''" 
£) 
OK 
Carcel 
Options . 
21 

Chapter 1 
22 
9. 
Drag the can shape upwards. and you'll see the can shift until it is full on to us. 
[1TIJ 
" 
-
1+1~1 
~ 
OK 
Ca-cel 
So you see? If we assume the picture is 3D already, the can would look like that. What? You 
don't believe me? Well OK, we'd better shift the can around as if it were 3D. That'll persuade 
you! 
10. Select the Trackball tool, and drag the can in whichever direction you like. 
3D I !dnsluuu 
E) 
OK 
Cancel 
Opt lens 

lnbuilt features 
See what I mean? There we have a tin can with 
our picture on! 
11. just press OK, and see it rendered in full color 
on our main picture. 
12. Cool huh? Well, now's the time you get to go 
back to that stage where I said you could be as 
creative as you liked. At that stage, on our flat 
picture, I just added a gradient to the picture, 
and put some appropriately nauseating words 
on the can. I flattened the image before 
transforming it into 30. I also had rather more 
fun with the angle of 30 - and I expect you'll 
want to also! 
OK. let's have one more go at a 30 object. This 
time we'll go for a balloon. 
Now, balloons aren't quite spherical, and we 
only have a spherical 30 tool. So the first thing 
we're going to have to do is make the image 
completely square so, we can stretch it out later 
on. 
13. Hit CTRL +0 to deselect the whole image and instead click on the picture of Elizabeth on its own. 
or highlight the Background copy layer. 
23 

Chapter 1 
14. Select Windows > Info to show the Info 
palette. With the Move tool highlighted. 
drag the bottom handle of the picture so 
that the Info palette shows we have a 
completely square picture. In this case, 
it's 33.66 em in width and height. 
15. Press ENTER, and then CTRL +D to deselect everything. 
24 
16. Starting 
from 
roughly 
the 
center of the picture. and 
pressing ALT and SHIFT, draw an 
elliptical marquee. You can 
reposition it with the cursor 
keys to make sure it's more or 
less in the center. 
Don't forget you can also hold 
the spacebar while drawing (if 
you have enough fingers) to 
reposition the marquee as you 
draw it! 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
R 
~ G 
B 
+. 
X a'• 
v 
12JO 
., ...... ----·---... ~ ..... 
··. 
" 
W : ltXlOIC 
H : 
~ A : 
..J 
H : 
0 
W : 
H : 
· ...... -.... 
7131C 
00' 
00' 
33« 
33" 
·· ........ . 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
. 
' ' 

lnbuilt features 
Next. we need to create a circle that's an appropriate color for our balloon. 
17. Use the Eyedropper tool to select a 
color from the background of the 
image (a light gray), and fill in the 
circle using the Paint Bucket tool. 
Personally, I also chose to calm the 
square edges of the picture down 
with a 30% opacity paintbrush too. 
I 
( 
I 
/ 
~ 
I 
I 
t 
I 
~ -................. .. 
··. ·· . ...... 
•. 
\ ·. . 
•. 
\, . 
t 
I , 
i . 
' 
\ 
I 
I 
0 
/ 
I 
I 
I 
18. I also wanted to add a lighting effect to make this appear more bal/oony, so click through Filter 
> Render > Lighti ng Effects and use the following settings: 
.h. 
·v· 
• 
l.igt'i type. Is polf9lt 
f:l On 
lrilniy 
;.;.Neoative::z:::.::
' =--......:;.;21~ .... 
..----...:.F.:::;~ D 
Nmow 
69 
Focus: 
Malle 
100 
SI!}I.A. 
·100 
Melalc 
·21 
Over 
M~ k~~
·~~~-~== 
[l!p()U« ~U:.!:nder=-.___,~:...__....:::..::!:. 
Ambience: Negaiive 
T eldl.le Charnel: 
None 
17 
28 
PosiJve 
.... 
D 
25 

Chapter 1 
It's already looking quite good: 
19. OK, back into the 3D Transform dialog. This time, use 
the Sphere 3D shape and drag a circle to about the 
same size as the image. Use the Selection tool (black 
cursor arrow) to move your circle, if it's not 
positioned precisely. 
31) r l d nslm lil 
EJ 
26 
mil 
~ 
-
l·!·l·~·l 
[fiB] 
20. And, once again with the Trackball tool, 
position the image in exactly the way you want 
it! Now we have the face wrapped around a 
ball! Press OK to render it to your main image. 
That's a nice bouncy ball. but I said I wanted a 
balloon, darn it! Well, that's easy. 
01< 
Calcel 
()piiOilS ... 
,_. 
E.ieldof\Wot· 

21. Simply select the image with the Rectangular Marquee 
tool and use the Move tool to drag the bottom down a 
bit. 
As you see. that brings the squashed face back into 
proportion a bit. 
If you've got your thinking cap on straight, you'll realize 
that unsightly pattern on the right of the balloon is 
caused by the fact that it's trying to go behind the image 
... which is a bit of a problem, because a 20 image (which 
is what it was) doesn't have a behind. So. it just comes up 
with any old tat. 
23. Fortunately. it's a fairly sober sort of tat. so I suggest you 
select it with the Magic Wand tool (Tolerance set to SO%) 
and then, with the SHIFT key pressed, select the white 
stripe as well. 
24. Then, select a color from the edge of the 'proper' 
balloon, and click through Edit > Fill > Use Foreground 
Color. Deselect, and patch the inevitable white line up 
with the paintbrush. 
25. 
All you have to do now is select it and revolve it how you 
like. Then, add a little valve at the bottom. I constructed 
mine out of a couple of ellipses and an adjoining 
polygon, shaded with the paintbrush. The string is just a 
shaky white line, made also with the paintbrush. 
You might want to create a bunch of them to stick on a 
party invitation or some such. The application's up to 
you! 
lnbuilt features 
27 

Chapter 1 
28 
You asking? I'm masking! 
One thing we're going to see quite a lot of in this book is masking, so I guess we'd better get to grips 
with Photoshop Elements 2's masking capabilities right away! 
Here's a handy picture of a photographer that should suit our 
purposes well. What we want to achieve with this picture is a 
neat little effect where we see what the photographer is taking 
reflected in his camera lens. Here's the face I want to use as 
the reflection: 
Yes, it's her again. Elizabeth's mischief knows no bounds ... 
The process will involve letting the second image (the face) 
show through the first image (the photographer). Wherever 
we paint our mask, that's where the second image will show 
through. 

lnbuilt features 
1. 
First things first. Open up photographer. jpg from the CD-ROM. This will be our base image. 
2. 
Now select the Layers palette in 
the menu bar, and drag it out onto 
the 
screen, so 
it sits 
there 
permanently. 
3. 
Next, using the Move tool, drag the face image from its window into that of the photographer. 
The picture of Elizabeth is much larger than the photographer, so resize it so you can see her. 
29 

Chapter 1 
30 
4. 
Rename the new layer face. So, here are our options. We could: 
• 
Cut away the background of the face image using the lasso tool. This would be a 
very permanent way of doing things, and not actually masking as such. 
• 
Use the Selection Brush - I guess this would be the best way of approaching things 
using Photoshop Elements, because the Selection Brush is there and ready for use. 
• 
Create our own editable masking layer. This would be a way more conducive to 
professional image manipulation. 
We'll have a look at the latter two options. 
The Selection Brush 
1. 
Choose the Selection Brush. In the Options bar at the top, make 
sure the Mode is set to Mask rather than Selection. 
What we're going to do is paint 
over every bit of the face we 
want to keep. Why would we 
want to do this? Well, it's more 
accurate than a Lasso tool, 
because you have scope for 
error, and the priceless use of the 
Undo command! 
Selects an area of your image 
using a variety of soft-edged 
or hard-edged brushes. You 
can drag to either define the 
selected area or define a 
mask of the unselected area. 

lnbuilt features 
2. 
So. with an appropriately sized brush for such a delicate 
operation, get to painting! You don't have to get it 1 00% 
right at this point - we're just flexing our Elements 
muscles here. 
When you've finished this, switch out of the Selection Brush by 
clicking on another tool and see what happens. Everything you 
haven't painted over is given a selection. It's at that point that you 
press delete, and the whole background disappears. 
But hold on there- isn't that just like selecting and deleting? Yup, 
it sure is. And that's cheating! 
True masking 
Here's a neat little workaround which will give us a proper mask. What we're going to do is use a 
dedicated layer to create our mask. That way, we can alter the shape of our mask at will. 
1. 
First off, let's return to the state where we have the 
complete face picture sitting on top of the complete 
photographer picture. as it was before we took out the 
Selection Brush. 
2. 
Now, create a new layer and call it mask. 
On this layer. we are going to paint with the regular 
Brush tool, in exactly the same way as we did with the 
Selection Brush. 
3. 
So. select the Brush, and a bright red paint to go with it. 
4. 
Make sure you're on the mask layer, and begin to paint 
over the face in exactly the way as you did with the 
masking brush. Note - you can reduce the layer opacity 
in the Layers palette if you want to see what you're 
painting over. 
It's at this point that really annoying people usually 
come in and tell you you're not a very subtle painter. 
Oh, how they laugh. Well, we'll show them. 
31 

Chapter 1 
32 
S. 
Once you've finished painting over the face (are you ready for this?) go to the Layers palette, 
and drag the mask layer down below the face layer. 
6. 
Now. click in the Link box on that layer, and a 
chain icon will appear. 
7. 
Finally, press CTRl +G (or click through Layer> Group Linked) 
There we have it! A mask layer, completely controlling the layer above it! That. if I say so myself. 
is pretty amazing. Best of all. it gives us the possibility to amend the mask if we want to! 

lnbuilt features 
Say if I decided I wished I'd kept that long strand of hair running down the left of the picture, 
I would just ungroup the layers (Layer > Ungroup), drag the mask layer back over the top of 
the face layer, and paint in that extra bit of hair to the mask. No problem! 
Also, if you decide you want to resize the face. the mask will resize itself automatically- because 
the layers are linked! It just works on so many levels' Literally! 
Finishing off the effect 
Well. you'll have to excuse me - I got so excited about the masking that I forgot we're trying 
to finish off an effect here. Photoshop Elements can do that to you! 
1. 
Right, we'd better resize that face so it fits in the camera lens. Do this by dragging it around 
with the Move tool. 
Remember to keep the SHIFT button down if you wont to keep the 
face in the correct proportions. You might also wont to slightly crop 
the overall image if you want to focus in on the tiny face. I've 
cropped a little off each side. 
33 

Chapter 1 
34 
2. 
OK. so that still looks a little slapdash. so let's fix those rough edges. Making sure you have 
the mask layer selected. change the layer blending mode properties. 
Pin Light works pretty well, I think, giving the face that feel of genuinely being reflected. 
3. 
For that final touch, let's slap on a lens flare ... seeing as this is a lens! Now, where do you 
put the filter? On the face layer? On the mask layer? On the background? 
The answer is none of these. What we have to do is copy everything we've already done and 
flatten it on to a new layer. 
4. 
Select All (CTRL +A) and click through Edit> Copy Merged. This takes a snapshot of everything 
visible. in exactly the format it appears in. Then, simply paste this snapshot on top of 
everything else (CTRL +V). 

Jnbuilt features 
5. 
It's this layer we use to put the lens flare on. So, click 
through Fi lter> Render> Lens Flare and choose your 
Brightness (I went for 1 00%). 
And there we have it! job done! 
You can find our PSD on the CD-ROM, 
called elizabet hPhotographer .psd. 
Summary 
-· 
What we've done here is try to get as many quick results as possible. lt's been a case of gain without pain. 
and Photoshop Elements is excellent for this kind of instant gratification. 
Throughout of the rest of this book, we're going to be dealing with some much more involved and 
careful techniques, which sometimes take a bit of hard work to realize - but don't ever lose sight of the 
fact that you're just a few clicks away from some great effects! 
The tools and techniques we've covered in this chapter will serve you well as we turn our attention to 
some more original and frankly astounding effects, but you'll be amazed at just how easy even the most 
complex of facial transformations can be when you have Elements and this book at your side! 
35 


What we'll learn in this chapter 
Retouching photos is one of the most common things 
you'll need to do with Photoshop Elements 2, but 
there are a wide range of different techniques 
required to achieve that perfect photo. We'll cover all 
the bases in this chapter: 
• 
Introducing the Clone Stamp tool -
sampling skin to clear up a complexion. 
• 
Using the Red Eye tool, and some other 
techniques, to eliminate scarlet peepers. 
• 
Using adjustment layers to correct bad 
lighting and recolor our pictures. 
• 
Finishing off with a full makeover. 

Chapter 2 
In this chapter, we'll look at some of the ways faces can be retouched, enhanced and transformed. 
Along the way, you'll discover a lot about the way faces are constructed, how imperfections affect 
them. and how faces are lit. 
We'll look at a number of different projects to illustrate the different techniques you can use within 
Elements to get the best effects and the best results. 
Retouching 
Before you can even consider adding special effects to your images, you might have to fix some 
problems with the image. For example, a noticeable pimple on your heavenly model's cheeks, 
something as simple as a discoloration of the skin, or a small scar caused by a childhood trip or fall. 
In any event, Elements has a number of tools created for the specific task of removing small, unwanted 
areas from your image, and these are especially useful when we come to dealing with faces - no face 
is perfect. You'll often find you need to spend some time touching up your images before progressing 
onto anything more creative. 
Let's have a look at an example. 
Caroline - Clearing the complexion 
38 
This image has been very 
well taken, but there are still 
a number of small niggling 
problems that Elements can 
easily help us remove or 
cover up. Open the image 
from the CD-ROM, it's called 
caroline . jpg. 

Retouching Photos 
Firstly, what we need to do is make a list of the problems and decide on an order to tackle them: 
• 
There is a tiny scar on the bridge of the nose. 
• 
There is a slight yellowing just to the left of the iris. 
• 
There are a few tiny spots around the nose. 
• 
There are some burst blood vessels in the cheeks. 
Nothing particularly major here, but let's see what we can do 
about them. We'll tackle these in order of complexity -
starting with the easiest. 
Blemish removal 
Elements includes a really ingenious tool called the Clone 
Stamp tool, which you can activate from the main toolbar, 
or by using the handy keyboard shortcut s. 
We use Atr+CtiCK to define a 'source' area for the stamp, and 
then wherever our brush goes from there, Elements copies 
the image relative to our source point. So if we draw to the 
right, we'll get the pixels to the right of our source point, 
and so on. Basically, instead of using paint, we are using 
another part of the image. 
The Clone Stamp tool is great for removing unwanted 
objects (by 'cloning' an empty area). duplicating existing 
objects, and covering up imperfections, as we are about to 
do now. We'll use the Clone Stamp to stamp out Caroline's 
very subtle imperfections. 
~ -~------"-
0 
~----
. c:.::;:D 
~ 
Clone stamp 
Cr&ates a sample of .an lmelge . 
You c.an al£o uss ths tool to 
remove unwanted objects 
frtlm a photograph. 
l!elated topics 
USing tbo dgoo ,;amp spot 
Before we begin, zoom in on your first target; I've chosen one close 
to the nose. You con never be too close to your subject when 
retouching (aces. 
39 

Chapter 2 
40 
1. 
Click on the Clone Stamp from the toolbar, or use the shortcut S. We now need to pick a 
brush size and define a source area. 
2. 
Choosing a suitable brush is actually half the trick. 
Pick a soft brush, small enough to give you precision 
- as a general guide, I've picked a brush that's about 
half the size of those red circles we drew round the 
spots earlier. 
I've chosen Soft Round 45 pixels from the picker, but 
these choices will depend on how big your image is 
to begin with. 
The soft edge on our brush means that the 
edges of our 'paste' won't be too noticeable. 
Even with the soft round edge, our brush is actually still way too rough to give us a believable 
effect. This is a human face after all. and no two parts of a face are identical so you don't 
want the copying to be too obvious. 
3. 
With this in mind, let's change the opacity of our 
brush using the Opacity slider on the Clone Stamp 
Options bar. We'll dab gently over the damaged area 
as opposed to using 100% opacity brush and 
completing the task with one obvious-looking 
stroke. 
Now we've got our brush set up and have thought about what we're going to do, it's time to 
select a source area for our sneaky piece of cloning. 
4. 
We need an area of skin close to the blemish that is untarnished. Start by looking at the spot 
immediately below and to the left of the eye, on the bridge of the nose. Notice that this area 
has a gradient of light to dark from left to right. running vertically almost all the way down 
the nose - caused by the way the light catches it. 
5. 
Select an area to paste (using ALT-click) from the area immediately above the blemish. 
6. 
Now start dabbing on the blemish below- the skin tone and light gradient will be preserved. 
Keep dabbing until the blemish gradually fades away. 

Retouching Photos 
No amount of painting over this area with a single color brush 
could accomplish anything like this level of realism. 
Remember. as with most effects in this book, keep in mind the 
uniqueness of your subject- the human face. No two areas are 
the same so if people start seeing repeated parts of skin. 
they're going to get suspicious and it might even turn out that 
your 'modifications' are even more noticeable blemishes than 
the spots themselves. 
Right. that takes care of the spots. but what about the scar? 
The scar 
. 
. ' 
... , r..:.. - . 
. \ -
-, 
~.........__ 
, 
... ,_ 
... - ., 
' 
·-
.. --
This is a slightly larger area than any one spot. Cloning from any one area will surely create an obvious 
and recognizable pattern. 
Don't worry though. because another great thing about using the Clone Stamp tool is that we're not 
restricted to using the original unblemished area; we can resample new areas as often as we like. 
Using Elements to completely remove the scar will take a few stages, but let's get started and we can 
deal with hurdles as and when they appear. 
1. 
To fix the top of the scar, sample an untarnished area from immediately above it (which would 
be most similar color. lighting. and texture wise). Use the same dabbing technique from the 
previous exercise to lightly paint out the upper part of the scar. 
2. 
Select a new area to sample from for the bottom part - for instance. the area just below the 
scar. Repeat the same dabbing to paint away our troubles. 
3. 
Once you have begun to see some results, try 
sampling from all around the scar, filling in 
the gaps from the first two steps and 
gradually building up the new area out of 
healthy adjacent areas. We can use the same 
process on the burst blood vessels on the 
cheek too. 
Remember. we're trying to be realistic here, so 
don't remove every single tiny mark, or you run 
the risk of losing believability. 
41 

Chapter 2 
42 
Especially with faces, it is really important that the texture of the face is preserved when you're using 
the Clone Stamp tool. It's pointless if you've got the color, hue and tone of the area right, but suddenly 
the pores of the skin end in a suspiciously smooth area. 
As you can see in the above image, just such a problem has occurred in this image: there is a 
suspiciously smooth area around the bridge of the nose. where we removed the scar. Wouldn't it be 
great if we could use some of the texture from the forehead to paste over this area? 
There's just one problem with this, if we used our Clone Stamp tool to select this forehead area and 
then pasted it over the effected spot. the tonality (arrangement of colors) would be all wrong - the 
forehead is far lighter, and so, changed area would stand out and seem unnatural. 
Let's try and solve this using an adjustment layer. What we're going to do in a moment is make a 
new layer. use our Clone Stamp tool, and then add a layer that will adjust the color of our cloned layer. 
so that it blends in better with everything else. This way we will ensure that the new piece we're 
cloning doesn't stand out! 
1. 
First things first. let's create a new layer. At the 
bottom of the Layers palette, dick on the icon to 
create a new layer immediately above the 
Background one - call it scar: 
We're going to clone from our existing layer onto 
our new layer. 
2. 
In the Options bar. turn on Use All Layers. This 
means that the Clone Stamp tool will sample from 
all layers underneath it when you use Au +CLICK, 
and not just the layer that you're on. 
Remember that we're going to be stealing texture 
(skin) from one layer - our background layer- and 
pasting it over the scar onto another new layer 
(which we have just created). 
Layers Palette 
Displays a thumbnail of all 
the layers in the active 
image. You can use the 
Layers palette to add layers, 
move layers, duplicate 
layers, and link layers. You 
can also change layer 
opacity and the way layers 
blend with one another. 

3. 
Go ahead and clone from the forehead. Don't worry 
about getting it too perfect for now. 
As you can see, this cloned area does not match its 
new surroundings, because its origin (the forehead) 
was much lighter than the destination area (the 
bridge of the nose). 
We're going to add a layer that modifies the way our 
cloned layer looks -like looking at the layer through 
colored cellophane. 
4. 
From the menus. select Layer > 
ew Adjustment 
Layer> Hue/Saturation. 
Retouching Photos 
5. 
Group this layer (by checking 
this option) so that the effect 
applies only to our cloned 
layer, and not to all our layers. 
Leave the other options as 
default. 
R' Group With Previous Layer 
Cancel 
Checking this option means that 
this adjustment layer will not 
actually 
change 
the 
layer 
beneath; it will just make it look 
different. We could just adjust 
the hue/saturation on our layer. 
But what if we wanted to 
change this later? With the 
adjustment 
layer, 
the 
hue/saturation effect is applied 
to 
the 
layer 
-
but 
not 
permanently- we can turn it on 
and off as we go. We're going to 
use the adjustment layer to 
adjust the color and brightness 
of our cloned area: 
Edit I MaS'Ier 
1-kJe: 
Sallratb'l: 
L ICjltneSS; 
• 
Qlaclty· 1100 I ~ I " 
OK 
Cft:el 
HelP 
43 

Chapter 2 
44 
Why these particular settings? Well, as we make the area darker (by adjusting the Lightness 
slider) it shifts the colors towards black. This obviously has the effect of shifting the colors 
towards gray (in other words desaturating them), so we need to pump up the saturation a 
bit to compensate for this. Adjusting the Hue slider changes the color range of the image. 
With this done. our cloned layer blends in perfectly with the surrounding skin. 
The difference is subtle. but if you're going for realism. very effective. You'll probably only 
find it necessary to go to these lengths when dealing with the larger imperfections such as 
scratches and scars. 
Our final task on this project is getting rid of the yellow area of the eye. 
The yellowing eye 
Here we have a different problem: The tone and texture of the 
area are correct; it's just the hue that's gone awry. 
This is a slightly longer procedure than spot removal. Obviously. 
there are lots of different ways to achieve this task. I chose the 
one we're about to run through for two reasons: firstly it 
preserves the underlying textures of the eye and is therefore 
more believable. and secondly because it is alterable at any time. 
If you're working on multiple 
aspects of an image, it's useful to 
be able to come back and 
change something at a later 
date without having to redo all 
the tasks involved. This is one of 
the things that makes the 
Photoshop family of tools so 
great. 
1. 
Zoom in on Caroline's eye so that we can properly see what we're doing. 
2. 
Using 
the 
same 
proximity you would 
with the Clone Stamp 
tool. use the Eyedropper 
to choose a color just 
next to the damaged 
area - this will be our 
foreground color. 

Retouching Photos 
We've done it this way because we need a color that's going to effectively replace the yellow 
area. To do this, we've picked a color that's near the blemish, but not tainted by it. In this case, 
it's a light reddish gray color. 
3. 
Now let's wrap our lasso round the damaged area. 
Draw a marquee round the area with the Lasso tool as 
shown. 
With this done. it's time to add another hue/saturation 
adjustment layer. 
4. 
Select Layer > 
ew Adjustment 
Layer > Hue/Saturation. 
Note: leave the Group W ith Previous Layer option 
unchecked this time. Because we hove an existing marquee. 
the adjustment layer will only be applied to that area. 
N ew Layer 
EJ 
D Gr~ With Previous Layer 
-~~= 
~ Qlaelty lmo I ~ 1!16 
OK 
) 
Cancel I 
5. 
Check the Colorize option which will take all the colors in our selected area (within the 
marquee) and replace the hues using the foreground color. whilst keeping the tonality intact. 
This basically means that the damaged area of the eye is recolored using only our foreground 
color- which we chose from an undamaged part of the eye. So the texture (tonality) remains 
the same, whilst the color changes: 
Master 
OK 
1-Ue: 
Ccn:el 
5atlJ"atm: 
Help 
LightneSs: 
45 

Chapter 2 
46 
Notice, in the Layers palette. you can see that the mask 
for the adjustment layer is mostly black with one speck 
of white - the white is the marquee area where the 
adjustment is being applied. 
This adjustment layer uses a mask because of the 
small selection we made when we created it. The 
tiny white shape defines haw much of the under-
lying layer shows through. 
All that remains to be done is to use the Brush tool to blur the edges of the adjustment layer 
mask where our marquee (affected area) ends - so that the change from the adjustment 
colors to the original eye is less abrupt. 
Painting (or erasing) on the mask changes the size and 
shape of the 'adjusted' selection. We don't want to 
change this shape, we just want to soften its edges. 
6. 
Take out your Brush tool - we 
want a soft-edged black brush 
with low opacity. as before. 
7. 
Go around the edges of the 
affected area with your brush, 
and you'll gradually remove 
any rough edges of the effect. 
We have now finished dealing 
with all the issues we raised 
earlier, 
but feet 
free 
to 
continue to tweak the image 
until you're totally happy. 
There are also a few light speckles just to the right of the discolored area, which the Clone 
Stamp tool can take care of. Finally. I removed the visible blood vessel just above this area: 
Feel free to study the PSD of this tutorial which we've supplied on our packed CD-ROM. It's 
in the Retouching Photos folder. called carolineBlem.psd. 

Retouching Photos 
Julie - Removing Red Eye 
Aside from any imperfections on the face of your subject. not every photograph can be taken perfectly 
in the first place. Photoshop Elements 2 is the ideal tool for correcting any of the common pitfalls of 
photography. 
A classic problem is red eye. This is far less contagious than pink eye. and a lot easier to clear up. Red 
eye happens when the flash you're using ricochets off the back of the wall of the eye and reflects back 
out into the shot. 
Some more modern cameros hove anti-red eye measures - like 
creating a pre {lash to constrict the pupil - which means less light 
can enter and escape from it. 
It's extremely easy to get red eye 
creeping into your shots. In fact, I'm 
particularly good at it. Take a look at 
julie - she looks pretty devilish: 
Luckily. getting rid of red eye is about as easy as getting it in the first place. Elements gives us two main 
ways to achieve this, so let's try one on each eye 
First method - the Red Eye Brush 
The first method of removing red eye involves using the Red Eye Brush tool. This is a really easy tool to 
use and will be adequate for many of your photos. 
The second method I'll show you will give you better results (rom a 
little extra ingenuity! 
Let's get started - those red eyes are beginning to burn 
two holes in the page! 
1. 
To begin. open julie . jpg 
and select the 
Elliptical Marquee tool. 
47 

Chapter 2 
48 
2. 
Now zoom in on the eye on the left side of your 
image. and draw a circular marquee around the 
red eye area. 
Remember that while you're drawing your 
marquee, if you hold the space bar you can 
move the shape around. This will help you (it 
the red area to perfection! 
3. 
Switch to the Red Eye Brush tool. 
4. 
Use the Options bar to pick a suitable 
replacement color (usually black). and set the 
tolerance to 40% - this way the brush takes into 
account the various tones of red in the eye. and 
not just the one specific color. 
US!OQ tha red eye bruW 
5. 
Now all you need to do is dab around inside the marquee using this brush and all the red is 
replaced with a dark gray. 
This tool basically matches the intensity of the Current (originaO 
color with the Replacement color. So, even though our replacement 
color is set to black, the resulting color ends up being a dark gray. 
Using the next technique we'll get a superior result. even if it takes us a little longer. .. 

Retouching Photos 
Second way - Layer Blending 
1. 
Let's start on the eye on the right hand side of the picture. Zoom in, if you have 
to, and select the Elliptical Marquee tool again. 
2. 
Draw once again around the red area. Alternatively. if your last marquee is still 
there, you can drag it over to the right-hand eye -the red areas of both are of 
roughly equal size and shape. 
3. 
Now a change from our previous technique. This time. create a new layer using 
CTRL +SHIFT+N or the Create New Layer button we used earlier. 
4. 
Select the Paint Bucket tool from the toolbar or by using the shortcut K. We 
want it to paint it black, and a quick way of doing this is to reset the 
background/foreground colors to black and white, as shown. 
5. 
Fill the selected area with black. 
6. 
Now change the blending mode 
in the Layers palette to Overlay, 
and we're almost all the way 
there already! 
49 

Chapter 2 
50 
The Overlay blending mode is a great blend to use in this case: it preserves the original (base) 
colors. especially how light or dark they are, and simply blends in the new colors by mixing 
them. This is useful when you want to keep your light and dark areas intact - which is one 
of our goals in this case. 
The glint in the eye is still red. however. We want the glint there; we just don't want it red. 
7. 
To fix this, once again introduce a hue/saturation adjustment layer. You know the drill by 
now. 
8. 
All that we need to do is drop 
the saturation down all the 
way (-1 00), draining the color 
out, and no more red eye. 
Edit: I Master 
1-t.Je 
Sallntkln: 
Cancel 
r Colorize 
p Pri!Yiew 

Retouching Photos 
Enhancing 
Correcting an image is normally just the first step in working with faces. Often we will want to enhance 
the photograph to improve the overall impact. It's important for us to consider the way in which the face 
is lit. Even with good lighting on a face, the overall effect can sometimes come out looking quite flat. 
Faces have the most amazing number of curves (if you don't believe me. just try modeling one in clay) 
and it's often nice to accentuate these. Part of the beauty of a face is the play of light along it. and a 
good place to start when enhancing an image of a face is to reintroduce this tonal flow if it's missing. 
David - Adding special lighting effects 
One of the most difficult types of faces to work 
with is the bearded one. This totally breaks up 
the play of light across the face. Let's see what 
we can do to fix it. 
This picture was taken in fairly harsh light. 
Because of this. the tone and color of the image 
has been drastically affected to the detriment of 
the image. 
Remember that if we change the lighting of the 
image - as we enhance it - this will affect the 
color of the image, which we are then going to 
have to tweak. The original color of the image 
isn't that great to start with, but we're going to 
make it far worse. If we stopped and analyzed 
what needed to be done on the image before 
starting to alter the image, we would probably 
concentrate on two areas: Fixing the lighting and 
then fixing the color. 
The reason that I've chosen to fix the lighting first. is that doing so will affect the color. If we started by 
fixing the color and then went on to fix the lighting, this would to some extent mess up the color changes 
that we had made. 
1. 
Open up david . jpg from the CD-ROM and we'll get started. 
51 

Chapter 2 
52 
2. 
Start by duplicating the Background layer (cal! it bg duplicate) and then change the blending 
mode to Color Burn. 
What I'm trying to achieve is to bring out the light - to create some contrast in the lighting 
on the face. I'm then going to subtly blend this over the original face and in this way enhance 
the lighting. 
I now want to use this Color Burn layer - I want to use the way it has exaggerated the 
contrast between light and dark areas. However, if I were to use the color burn as is, it would 
only target very specific areas of the image (this blending mode works a little bit like 
increasing the contrast of the image, and the areas that would be most affected would be 
those at the edges of the tone range - extremely light and dark colors) which would then 
start to look a little artificial. I'm aiming for a kind of rosy glow to the image, so we need to 
spread this contrast around a little bit. 

Retouching Photos 
3. 
Now create a new layer of the effect of the entire image by using the Copy Merged technique. 
Press CTRL +A (or Select >All) to select everything, and then Edit > Copy Merged (CTRL +SHIFT+C) 
to copy a merged version to the clipboard. 
4. 
Press CrRL+V to paste what we've copied into a new 
layer, and rename it burn blur. Why 'blur'? Well. .. 
53 

Chapter 2 
54 
5. 
Because we're trying to spread the effect. 
apply a fairly strong Gaussian Blur- Filters> 
Blur > Gaussian Blur. Set the Radius to 15. 
Like with brush sizes. the exact radius of a blur and its 
relative strength depends on haw large your picture is. If 
our picture was twice the size it is here. the blur would 
seem only half as strong. Beor this in mind. 
6. 
Now when you change the blending mode 
of this layer to Screen, a fairly rich glow is 
added to the image. It proved to be a little 
too rich for me, so I dropped the Opacity of 
the layer to 80%. You'll also want to make 
sure the bg duplicate layer is hidden. 

Retouching Photos 
As you can see, the color of the image has been fairly drastically affected. A lot of unwanted 
red and yellow has crept into the image. This is obviously because some of the color from the 
olor Burn has come through and is affecting the image. 
7 
To achieve this. add a solid color adjustment layer using a fairly earthy brown as the fill color 
and change the blending mode to Hue. On the mask of this layer, I used black to remove the 
effect from the eyes. Not bad, but I think you'll agree that the image now looks a little plastic. 
55 

Chapter 2 
56 
8. 
To 
get 
around 
this. 
add 
a 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer and 
shift the entire hue range slightly into 
the red (shifting the Hue slider to -4). 
enough to reintroduce a realistic 
looking skin color. 
Admittedly, we have lost a fair amount 
of the 
color 
range, 
which 
we 
consciously narrowed by using the Hue 
blending mode. The Hue/Saturation 
adjustment layer has not in fact 
addressed this problem- while we have 
shifted all the colors, we have not 
introduced any new ones. 
Edft l Master 
Hue: 
l.llt'1neSS: 
9. 
To address this, drop the Opacity of the Solid Color adjustment layer to 80%, which lets in a 
small percentage of the original color. 
The end result. therefore (hopefully), has the correct blend between interesting tone and aesthetically 
pleasing color. without departing too radically from being realistic. 
So even though we are dealing with a bearded face, we are still able to introduce an interesting flow 
of light that enhances the image and increases the visual depth. 
You can find the 
finished Photoshop 
Elements file on the 
CD-ROM, 
called 
davidEnhance . psd. 

Retouching Photos 
Marc - Recoloring an image 
Sometimes we need to adjust the color of an image 
before we start altering the lighting. In the case of the 
following image. fixing the color is far more 
important than introducing enhancing lighting 
elements. 
The important thing to watch for when radically 
changing the color of an image is the way the range 
of hues is affected -
as we saw with the previous 
image (even when the amount of change was fairly 
small). 
Open up marc. jpg from the Retouching folder on the CD-ROM to see for yourself. 
Poor lighting (or to be technical, wrong color temperature) in this photograph has severely affected the 
color. giving it an unnatural yellow sheen. Let's see what we can do to change this. 
1. 
As always, duplicate the Background layer. I'm always 
paranoid that I'm going to irreparably alter the original 
and therefore have no point of reference, so I always 
make a copy, just in case. 
Also, with this exercise we are going to apply a lot of 
adjustment layers to the image in order to preserve the 
original Background layer. 
2. 
Now let's add a Hue/Saturation adjustment layer. 
57 

Chapter 2 
58 
I just wanted to start chipping away at the skewed color in the image, and at least get the 
range of color more towards pink than yellow. I also figured that the color present in the 
image was too rich, and so desaturated the image slightly at the same time. 
3. 
Similar to what we did with bearded Dave, adjust the Hue slider to -4. but this time also drop 
the Saturation slider down to -27. 
0( 
C.UI 
Satlratlan 
~ 
Hetl 
l~ 
p-
r cob"tze 
p Pr1Yilw 
A good start. but the image is way too dark. We need to address this before we can continue 
altering the color of the image. 
4. 
Create a Brightness/Contrast adjustment layer. In this case, I increased both the brightness 
and the contrast to simply amplify the entire range of color. But how much? Well, that's really 
up to you. 

I used + 35 to Brightness and + 23 to 
Contrast, but the best way to decide 
on what values to use is to see what 
looks best for you. At this poin. l 
could have started messing with levels 
and suchlike, but I knew I still had a 
fair amount of color manipulation to 
go before that. so in the mean time, 
as mentioned. I just raised the entire 
hue range. 
One important thing that I noticed 
from this was that even though I had 
drastically changed the brightness of 
the entire image, the color of the eyes 
was still staying fairly dull. 
Work would have to be done on the 
eyes alone. In order to achieve this. 
we're 
going to 
create 
another 
Brightness/Contrast adjustment layer, 
but this time with a twist. 
5. 
Use the Lasso or the 
Selection Brush to 
select the whites of 
the eyes, as shown, 
then create the new 
adjustment layer. 
Retouching Photos 
59 

Chapter 2 
The important thing for me here was not to go overboard. We are still quite a way from 
completing the transformation - the face is still incorrectly lit and colored, so making the 
eyes perfectly white would therefore mean that at a later stage they would become 
over-bright. as we address the rest of the face. 
60 
All we're doing now is just subtly making them stand out a bit. If you're working on separate 
features, it's important to try and keep all the overall effect cohesive. Artificially enhancing 
a particular feature so that it stands out from the rest is not desirable if you're going for 
realism. 
6. 
With this in mind, set your Brightness to +68, and 
your Contrast to +23, and then give the new layer 
15% Opacity as a finishing touch. 
7. 
Now add another Hue/Saturation 
layer. this time desaturating a 
little more and increasing the 
brightness slightly. This brings the 
range of color fairly close to 
normal. Remember what we're 
going for here is a realistic look-
reintroducing realistic color into 
the image. Obviously, this is open 
to 
interpretation. 
Perhaps 
I 
should rather say we're going for 
believable color. 
ltue/SnhHcllmn 
EJ 
Here's my settings, but do feel 
free to play around: 
Ean. I Master 
OK 
Carcel 
Help 
r eo~er~re 
M Preview 

Retouching Photos 
With the addition of this adjustment layer I 
felt that the range and tone of color in the 
image was almost there. Most of the yellow 
had gone, and even though the image was 
still a little bit on the dark side, things had 
certainly progressed. I did, however. feel that 
the Brightness/Contrast layer had desaturated 
the overall color of the image a little too 
much, so I dropped the opacity of the layer 
down to 60%. 
This gave me enough of an alteration in the 
brightness, 
without 
the 
undesirable 
desaturation creating problems. 
8. 
Almost there. A final Levels adjustment layer 
should see us through, so add one to your 
project. 
For the purposes of this image. just choose Auto, and you'll see that Elements will produce a 
fairly impressive effect. This good result though is only because of our careful earlier 
preparation. 
"''" l"l~lllfl:tll, .. ,.lal l .. y,-1 M.u H 
61 

Chapter 2 
62 
As I stated before, when you're trying to make something realistic. this is an entirely subjective goal. 
We have, however, managed to effectively increase the color range of the image. and at the same time 
introduce a healthy amount of contrast. 
To complete the above task we had to add a lot of different adjustment layers, each one slightly 
changing the image. 
But how do you know which layers to add when? 
While there's no hard and fast rule here, a good point to remember is: when you're trying to alter the 
color or lighting of an image, realize that it's unlikely that you're going to pull it off in one step. As 
you change the hue, often this will affect the lighting, and visa versa. Start with whatever seems to be 
the biggest problem. I usually start with the lighting, because as we've seen before. if you start with 
altering the color, a lot of the time you'll have to come back and redo it. 
Always be careful of decreasing the color depth too drastically: if you add a very strong contrast 
adjustment this might remove too much of the midtones of the image which might not be 
recoverable. Using Elements is a lot like using makeup: if you plaster too much on too quickly, people 
can spot it a mile away. Try to avoid doing this! 
Check out rna reLight . psd on the CD-ROM to see our finished file. 
Transforming 
While a nice diffuse lighting effect (or lengthy session with the Clone Stamp tool) can go a long way 
to removing freckles and even hiding wrinkles, structural elements of the face - the morphology - will 
be relatively unaffected by these alterations. 
So how far can we go? Well. with Elements the sky is pretty much the limit. In fact. the only real limit 
is your imagination. and available time. Let's look at a combination of all the techniques discussed in 
this chapter and demonstrate their application in a complete makeover project. In this way, we can 
see the order of techniques and the progression of the image - from stock standard shot. to finished 
product. 

Retouching Photos 
Nadia - Full makeover 
Let's have a critical look at the image we are 
going to be working with; nadia . jpg: 
There are a number of areas that we can 
improve on in this image. I like to work on the 
face before altering the color balance of the 
image. Let's list the tasks for the face then: 
• 
There are some minor skin blemishes 
to get rid of. 
• 
The lighting on her nose is particularly 
unflattering, making it look bigger than 
it should. We will need to change either 
the lighting, or the shape of the nose. 
• 
The shadow on her eyes makes them look rather small: it would be better if they were slightly 
bigger. 
That about covers the work we need to do on the 
face. 
Once we have accomplished these tasks, we can 
address the fairly poor color and lighting in the 
image. 
Blemishes 
We've already covered how to get rid of minor 
blemishes. There aren't many to worry about. so 
you can go ahead and do those yourself. 
If you need any guidance, look bock at 
the first model in this chapter, Caroline, 
or look up our final Nadia PSD. 
nadiaMakeover .psd, on the CD-ROM. 
I had no texture to worry about in this image, so 
the task was relatively easy. But what about the 
shape of the face? 
Obviously. different people will find different 
tasks to address. Altering the look of a face to 
make it 'more pleasing' is almost entirely subjec-
tive. Certainly there are some aspects of beauty 
that are universal: regularity of features. good 
skin tone and color, lock af blemishes etc., but on 
the whole, you'll have to decide (or yourself 
63 

Chapter 2 
64 
Morphology 
Changing the entire shape of the face was slightly trickier. No matter the shape of the marquee you 
draw, Elements will apply changes to it using a rectangular bounding box. So, for instance. if you're 
using a diamond shaped marquee. Elements will draw a square around it and resize it according to 
that square. So here's the problem: what if you want to push the sides of the diamond closer together, 
and not the points? 
Apply this poser to our face: if I apply a rectangular marquee around the face and then resize it, the 
face will be squashed out of proportion - the correctly positioned marquee would be tilted slightly 
clockwise (in accordance with the fact that the face is presented to us slightly diagonally). What we 
want to achieve is to narrow the face. If we rotate the entire image until the face is parallel with the 
canvas, and then scale it to narrow the face. we can achieve this task (about 25 degrees clockwise). 
Once done, the face can simply be rotated back. 
You'll notice when doing this (Image> Rotate > Custom) that Elements rotates the entire project, and 
not just the layer you're on. This makes your canvas a lot larger, as it has to accommodate a diagonally 
shaped image. When you rotate the image back this is still the case, so you will have to crop away this 
now unnecessary space. 
We could have also used the Image> Transform > Free Transform option to both rotate and distort the 
image, but this is probably not a good idea for the following reasons: 
Firstly, distorting along any plane, other than the vertical (i.e. narrowing the face), produces results 
that to my mind are too artificial and unnatural. 
Secondly, while it's useful to rotate the image in this way to check what angle we need to get the face 
parallel with the canvas. actually using this option to perform the rotation means that the diagonal 
corners get cut off- as this command does not resize the canvas- so we lose quite a bit of our image. 
I think I might have got slightly carried away on the shape of the face - it's a lot thinner than the 
original, but it's amazing to see how much we can actually get away with here! 
Color 
The color in the image up until now is fairly drab and uninteresting. Let's change this. I 
decided to go for a healthy summer glow. The first thing to address is the slightly washed 
out pink color of the image. A quick and easy way to change this is to use Enhance > 
Adjust Color > Color Variations (also accessible from the main toolbar using the icon of 
three colored circles). 

Retouching Photos 
With a couple of clicks we can 
adjust the color and the 
contrast of the image: 
•-- I 
This goes a long way to sorting out the color, but the lighting is still pretty boring. Let's create a glow. 
similar to the one we completed earlier in the chapter with David. 
Once again this involves duplicating our working layer, setting the blending mode of this new layer to 
Color Burn and then creating a merged copy of this effect (Select > All, Edit > Copy Merged). 
65 

Chapter 2 
66 
With this result pasted onto a new layer. we 
can Gaussian Blur it (with a Radius of 
around 7) and then set the blending mode 
of this new layer to Screen. just as we did 
before. I also dropped the Opacity of this 
layer to 70% to make the glow more subtle. 
Let's add one further special effect to the 
image. What we want to do is turn off our 
Background and copy of background 
(working) layer and do an Edit > Copy 
Merged of just the new Color Burn layer 
that we've got set to S reen. 
Turning off these layers leaves our image 
slightly transparent, as the Screen blending 
mode is now blend ing with nothing (the 
layers below are turned off. remember). 
So, when we do our Edit > Copy Merged 
on this layer and paste the result to a new 
layer this result will obviously also be 
semi-transparent- which is what we want 
- we're creating a wash over effect, and 
don't need it to be opaque. This new layer 
we are going to apply Filter > Noise > 
Median to, will smooth out the effect 
we're creating. Essentially, this is a similar 
effect to the one we've just created 
except we will be tweaking the contrast 
and increasing the smoothness of the 
overall image. 
Finally. we need to desaturate this layer 
(this effect has a tendency to mess with 
the color which is undesirable in this case) 
using a new Hue/Saturation adjustment 
layer. 
Drop the opacity of the median layer to 
around SO% to give it a more subtle effect, 
and add a Soft Light blending mode. 
lluc/Sdhunhon 
~ 
Lifjltness: 

Lips 
On final inspection I decided 
that the lips needed a little bit 
more color. so I added in 
another layer. painted some flat 
color over the top of them (that 
I got by using the color picker 
in the middle of the lips to 
select an appropriate color) and 
setting the blending mode of 
this new layer to Color. A final 
Hue/Saturation 
adjustment 
layer 
to 
drop 
the 
color 
saturation by about 20 gives the 
image a more realistic feel: 
Summary 
Retouching Photos 
So. in conclusion. I'm forced to offer some slightly schizophrenic advice. While it's important to plan 
ahead, and decide in advance what needs to be altered/improved in an image, nothing is quite as 
powerful as experimentation. Exploring the use of different blending modes for layers is always really 
interesting when working with faces. 
One of the strangest things for me as a young child was to hold up photographic negatives to the light. 
Here were shapes that I understood, but in totally unnatural colors. Experimenting with different 
blending modes is along those lines. If you're just starting out in Elements. using faces is a nice way to 
get into working out how blending modes work - you already understand how a face should look, and 
it is therefore really easy to see how changing the blending mode affects the overall look. 
If we were working on cars, and we decided to completely change the color range this might not look 
so startling. But change a face to bright blue and you know just what the effect is doing to the original. 
In any event, regardless of your skill level with Elements, I'll leave you with one really valuable exercise: 
Duplicate an image onto a new layer and apply a blending effect 
on that new layer. Make a new layer that is a merged copy of the 
previous two layers. Now experiment with altering the blending 
mode for this new layer. We used this technique in this chapter to 
create a warm glow to the image, but there are lots of different 
permutations of blending modes to be discovered. Give it a try. 
67 


Cha 
er 3 
Frea 
ac 
What we'll learn in this chapter 
We've done some quick and painless effects, and a 
little retouching, but it's now time to get a little freaky. 
Now we're aiming to shock as well as to please with 
our gallery of the unusual, the weird and the 
downright crazy! Our journey through Elements' 
palette of face-meddling tools continues: 
• 
Using masks to isolate individual facial 
features, to play with eyes, lips, teeth and 
more ... 
• 
Cloning eyelids and recoloring eyes. 
• 
Blending features of more than one picture 
to create a freaky alternative. 
• 
Removing 
eyes, 
extending 
eyelashes, 
teething a toddler, and more. 
s 

Chapter 3 
70 
Imagine waking up on a typical morning and after customarily hitting the snooze button on your alarm 
clock seven times, you drag yourself into the bathroom. After running cold water through your 
clammy hands and splashing your face to remove the sleepy-dust. you raise your head to confront 
your mirror image. How would you react if you discovered that your eyes were solid black? What if 
one of your eyeballs was missing or if your eyelashes had grown to four times their normal length? 
Welcome to my world ... 
In this chapter. we're going to look at the ways in which you can take a face in Photoshop Elements 
and make it look really freaky. Sometimes it is enough to just unsettle our viewers. And sometimes 
you have to blow them away with plain weirdness. No end of people have managed to turn it to their 
advantage. How do you think hardcore weirdo Marilyn Manson managed to infuriate all the elders and 
hypnotize the kids? Simple eye techniques, a little bit of foundation dabbed on here, an eyebrow 
carelessly tossed away there. We can do all this without touching our model's actual skin. 
OK, let's get started. Open up Photoshop Elements (unless you've been making an evening of it and 
are coming straight from the last chapter) and I'll introduce you to our first victim ... sorry, model. 
Charlie - Taking an eye out 
This is Charlie - his portrait was a prime 
candidate for this effect because a lot of 
people are drawn to his trademark lazy 
right eyelid. But let's see what people 
think when you really give them 
something to gawp at. We're going to 
take his eyeball out altogether! 
Are you sitting uncomfortably? Then let's 
begin. 

Freaky Faces 
Masking Charlie 
1. 
Open up charlie . j pg from the Freaky Faces folder on the CD-ROM. This is our original 
image. 
2. 
First off, we're going to have to clear out the area where the eyeball will become just the eye 
socket. Since we want to work behind the shape of the eyelid, the best option here is to mask 
out the eyeball. 
3. 
Choose the Selection Brush tool. 
4. 
This is a very nifty piece of kit we're going to be seeing more of later (unlike Charlie) in the 
chapter. 
5. 
Make sure it is set to Mask mode rather than Selection mode in 
the Options bar. This will allow us to mask out the area of the face 
we want to see through . 
6. 
Zoom right in on Charlie's eye, and paint over the area we want to omit. 
I've chosen a nice bright red. You might find it easier to reduce the Opacity to 50% just to make 
sure you're painting in exactly the right areas. The initial brush size should have 100% Hardness 
and should be small enough to move around the eye comfortably. 
Note - you change the Hardness of a brush through the More 
Options button on the Options bar. 
Don't skimp on changing brush sizes to get the 
really fiddly bits. If you paint over an edge, 
press CTRL +Z to retract your brush stroke. 
71 

Chapter 3 
72 
7. 
If you now click on the Move tool, you'll find a selection marquee appears. selecting 
everything except the area we've painted over. 
8. 
Next, click through Layer > ew > Layer via Copy. Double-click on the layer name and call 
it mask. While you're in the Layers palette. turn off the visibility of the Background layer, so 
we can see through to the checkered transparency. 
What we end up with is this: 
This mask of Charlie will allow us to happily work beneath Charlie's 
(ace without ruining any of his beautiful features. What we have is 
a single masked layer of the image with the eye cleared out, ready 
to have more layers added beneath it to help compose the socket 
underneath. 
What we want to do with the socket is convey the 
right amount of depth, and add some type of 
organic texture inside the socket. The texture should 
be visible but very subtle, so the viewer has to 
almost strain to see it. Drag them in! 
My Layers palette looks like this at the moment: 

Freaky Faces 
What we're going to do is add layers above Background, and below mask. Really, you could just 
delete the Background layer. but I like to keep a copy of the original in case everything goes 
belly-u p. Now. however you want to do this is up to you - it depends what you want inside his 
head - but let's look at what I did. 
Filling the void 
1. 
Create a layer below the mask layer and fill it with a dark red color. 
I sampled a color from a portion of Charlie's skin that was in shadow. using the Eyedropper tool. 
2. 
Create another layer on top of that (still below the masked layer) and use black paint with a 
large. soft brush to create the shading. 
Imagining the way that light would enter the eye socket, I made the 
shadowing darker toward the top of the socket and gradually 
lighter toward the bottom. 
73 

Chapter 3 
3. 
Next, to utilize the red tint from the layer below. set this layer's blending mode to Multiply. 
74 
This has the effect of combining the black shadow with the dark red color to give the socket 
a fleshy tone. 
I determined that the shadowing wasn't dark enough, so I duplicated the shadow layer and 
left it set to Multiply. This was a little too dark, so I reduced the layer opacity down to 60%, 
which made me happier. Feel free to play around with these basic techniques until you get 
a result you're pleased to continue with. 
Now it's time to figure out how to go about finding the perfect texture for the socket. 
It's o(ten better to sample (rom the source than to try to create 
something (rom scratch. Charlie's face is an amazing textural land-
scape, and has plenty of areas that are suitable to sample (rom. In 
my opinion, the eyes have it. 

4. 
With the mask layer active. use the Lasso toot to make a 
selection considerably bigger than the size of the eye 
socket area. 
Freaky Faces 
5. 
Then. click through Layer> 
ew > Layer via Copy. name the layer so ket skin and drag it over 
the eye socket. Then. on the Layers palette. drag it below the mask layer. 
6. 
To stop it looking so much like a duplication, select Image> Rotate> Flip ayer Horizontal and 
then Flip Layer Vertical. You might have to drag it into place to make sure it's covering the 
whole socket. 
As you can see. the skin texture is not subtle in the least. It's actually covering the other layers 
that make up the shadowing and skin tone. 
7. 
Blend the texture with the other layers below, by setting the layer blending mode to Overlay. 
and reducing the Opacity to 80%. 
75 

Chapter 3 
76 
The composition is finally coming together, but there are a few areas that require some extra 
attention. 
8. 
The coloring of the eye socket is too strong- the red tint is too unrealistic for my tastes. If 
you agree. add a Hue/Saturation adjustment layer just above the layer filled with the red and 
set the Saturation to -75. This helps to make the image look just a little more real. 
llu P./Salur;,toon 
EJ 
Elln: I Master 
Hue. 
Sall.r atlon: ~ 
Ci 
The image is now complete - the socket is believable and the eyelid has been corrected to blend 
better with the now dark area that it encloses. 
The texturing and shading looks OK, but this image has a problem. If an eye socket was truly missing 
an eyeball. the lid wouldn't have any form to it. It would most likely just be closed, or in the way I 
imagine it (which means more creepy), the lids would eventually grow together and close off the 
socket. That's where our next little project lays! 

Freaky Faces 
77 

Chapter 3 
78 
Lifting the Lid 
To achieve this effect. we should switch over and use the left eye. because there is more flat. visible 
eyelid available to clone from. 
1. 
Starting from the original photo, first create a selection 
around the upper part of the top eyelid with the Lasso 
tool. and feather it a little. Copy the selection as a new 
layer and move it down. You might need to rotate it a 
little in order to match the curvature of the socket. 
2. 
In this way, select and drag piece by piece until you've created a total coverage for the eye. 
3. 
Once you have a base covering, link all the pieces of eyelid cover together (by clicking the 
link box for each skin layer on the Layers palette. then clicking Layer> Merge Linked). 
Naturally, the pieces don't mesh very well (ain't no such thing as a free lunch!), so this is 
where the Clone Stamp tool is once again our best friend. 
What we need to do is go through the layer and used the Clone Stamp tool to touch up the 
areas that look too 'duplicated' (the patterned look you get with repeated layer copying). 
4. 
Grab random areas to blend the wrinkles more seamlessly. A good technique for doing this 
is using the Clone Stamp tool at 50% opacity to make the blending look smoother. 
I th ink that just about finishes Charlie off! The only other thing l was desperate to do was shove a 
monocle in there. but that might be pushing the taste boundaries just a little ... I'll leave it up to you! 
You can find our PSD versions of each 'Charlie' on the CD-ROM, 
saved as char lieEye . psd 

Freaky Faces 
79 

Chapter 3 
80 
Ashley- Not-so-bright eyes? 
After all that subtlety, let's go a bit sci-fi. We're going to give Ashley here black eyes, and she won't 
feel a thing! How do we make this freaky effect look real? Bear in mind, I'm not talking black eyes as 
you see in the next chapter on Face Painting. I mean actual black actual eyes! I guess these will work 
well in this picture because dark eyes will contrast well with Ashley's light complexion. 
First off. we need to build the base of the dark eyes. There are several approaches we could choose 
to achieve this, such as drawing a selection around the exposed part of the eyeball and filling it black. 
However, this option doesn't allow much flexibility, and the key to the realism in the picture is using 
as much of what is already there as possible. 
Instead, we'll look at a more freehand way of approaching things. Open as hl ey. j pg and we'll get 
going. 
1. 
Working on a new layer, use a medium-sized brush {around 20 pixels) with 50% hardness to 
paint the bulk of the dark base. 

Freaky Faces 
2. 
Leave the black pupil alone. and brush over the colored 
iris, making sure to airbrush around the reflections. 
3. 
Make sure you are totally accurate in brushing the black 
color right to the edge of the eye. If the black coloring 
is not close enough to the edges, then white of the eye 
will show through and the effect will look unrealistic. Go 
carefully, reduce brush size as you near the edge, and 
perhaps choose a softer brush at the final boundary. 
More Options: ./ 
Set to enable airbrush capabilities 
My own preference is to have the airbrush capabilities checked to 
allow for greater control of how much "paint" gets laid out. 
The composition looks reasonable, but the bottom of the eye looks a bit flat-black to me. To 
help add a bit more photorealism, we'll airbrush in a very subtle inner glow to help give the 
impression that a small amount of light is entering the eyes. 
81 

Chapter 3 
82 
4. 
So. working on a new layer for each eye, and using a medium sized brush with 0% Hardness, softly 
brush in the highlight with white paint for each eye. You'll probably find the highlights too strong 
in their initial application, so you should use the Gaussian Bl ur filter to soften them up a little. 
then reduce the Opacity way down to around 30%. 
job done! Ashley looks decidedly unsettling. 
Where else can we go with this? Well, l guess we could have a go at doing the Marilyn Manson thing and 
removing the eyebrows. 

Freaky Faces 
83 

Chapter 3 
84 
Eyebrow removal 
1. 
Select a big area. en com passing the eyes. eyebrows and surrounding area. 
2. 
Click Layers > New > Layer via Copy and call the new layer Eyebrow mask. Now we're going 
to get going with some serious concealer! 
3. 
Using the Clone Stamp tool. clone an area directly 
above and below the left eyebrow. Through a 
series of long strokes. you will be able to cover 
the eyebrow completely, leaving a line where the 
dark underside meets the light brow. 
0 
4. 
Bear in mind. as we're making wholesale structural changes. it's better to use a brush with 
100% opacity. Of course, it's tempting to go lower while we find our feet, but that results in 
a blurred cloning that just never seems to look right. Trust me. I found out the hard way! But 
if you're doing subtle retouches, a reduced opacity is essential. 
The result is pretty freaky in itself! 
OK, so the eyebrows are a little wonky. but I kinda think that gives a bit of personality. 

Freaky Faces 
85 

Chapter 3 
86 
Further possibilities 
Where can we go from here? It's up to you which part of Ashley you'd next like to amend - when 
you're setting out to create increasingly weird effects. the stars really are the limit. 
The next area I chose to mess with was the hair. Using the Smudge tool (set to quite a high strength 
of 75%), I carefully combed all of the hair. in order to create a sort of other-worldly effect, with stylized 
follicles curling off Ashley's head. I also removed any stray hairs (which I deemed a little unkempt) by 
using the clone tool. and I accentuated the parting into something akin to a reverse Superman effect! 
Here. of course. we're jumping out of the realms of photorealism, but 
this certainly illustrates the idea of how far you can go with a picture, 
using some simple techniques! I think it's time to move on, don't you? 
Check out ashleyEyes. psd on the CD-ROM. J 

Freaky Faces 
87 

Chapter 3 
jake -Teething troubles 
88 
Some people might see jake's portrait and 
wonder if anything has 
even 
been 
changed. However. the fact that Jake is an 
eight-month-old child should tip you to 
the fact that he shouldn't have a full set of 
teeth yet. The challenge with Jake's 
portrait was to realistically blend the teeth 
taken from another portrait. which 
happen to be the teeth of a 53-year-old 
man. 
On the surface. it wouldn't appear that there would be much work required to create this image. 
Simply sample the teeth from one image and drop them on jake's face- perhaps a little cleanup, and 
it's all done. right? Well, there were actually a few more crucial steps involved that really pulled the 
composition together and made the effect blend in perfectly. 

Freaky Faces 
First, let's go back to the beginning - I determined that I wanted to use the teeth from a portrait of a 
53-year-old man to replace jake's one tooth mouth, since they both appear to have a slight underbite. 
Additionally, I thought it would be even more interesting to feature the drastic age difference between 
jake (8 months old) and the teeth he would borrow from Tom (53 years old). 
Don't worry if you don't have any teeth lying around. We've 
supplied Tom's on the CD-ROM; called tomTeeth. jpg, which is 
where you can also find jake . jpg. our source image. 
1. 
So, beginning with the picture of Tom's mouth, drag it 
over wholesale to the portrait of jake, and name the 
new layer Tom's teeth. 
2. 
Next. while on the Background layer, create a mask 
(with the Selection Brush tool) of the inside of jake's 
gooey mouth. 
3. 
Then, create a new Layer via Copy, and drag it above 
the Tom's teeth layer. Now that's starting to look 
unusual! 
The choice here is very much yours. Big 
teeth look unusual. so you might want to 
resize the teeth to make them look more 
natural. A bit of scale and a bit of rotate 
should see you right, so long as you're on 
the Tom's teeth layer with the Move tool at 
your disposal. 
89 

Chapter 3 
90 
Whatever you choose to do, you're going to need to finish the effect off by shading up those 
teeth a little, to take account of jake's upper lip. 
4. 
To do this, create a new layer called Teeth shadow above Tom's teeth and select a smallish 
brush at a low opacity (say, 40%) to fill in those shadows. 
5. 
To introduce a little more realism to the image, borrow some of the original glare from jake's 
bottom lip that has been covered by his new teeth and place it on the portion of the lip that's 
now visible. 
This was a simple task of creating a selection around the glare on the original layer. feathering 
the selection and then creating a new layer from the selection. This new layer was then 
positioned over the bottom lip. I ended up adding a mask to the glare layer so that I could 
feather it even more, helping it to blend a little better. 
This composition demonstrates that even the simplest of effects can always be improved by taking 
notice of small details, and what can be added or modified to make that simple effect blend more 
seamlessly. If you're not one for subtlety. don't worry. We'll be seeing more of jake in a little while ... 
Have a look at j akeTeeth. psd on the CD-ROM if you wont to see 
our final Elements file. 

Freaky Faces 
91 

Chapter 3 
92 
josh -
Focus Pocus 
OK. we're going to do a couple of things with this picture. 
First up. we're going to do some more eyework, because 
that has a terrific effect on an image. Then. we're going to 
have a play around with the whole structure of the picture. 
to look at what special effects we can pull off. 
The main task with this composition is to change the iris to 
the same color as the white of the eye. We want to maintain 
the same little imperfections and color variations that are 
present in the visible white part of the eye in the iris that 
we're going to create. 
With such a small area to work with, it would be a nightmare to try and use the Clone Stamp tool 
accurately. The alternative is this: 
1. 
Use the Lasso tool to draw a selection around the light, lower area of the left part of the 
white of the eye. 
2. 
Feather the selection by 3 or 4 pixels and create a new layer from the selection. Duplicate 
and move this new layer several times - enough to cover the iris. Don't worry too much 
about covering the edges of the iris or pupil at this point. 
Once you've covered the iris, click in all 
the layers' link boxes and merge linked. 
As with Jake's teeth. you find yourself 
having to create an extra layer to paint in 
a little shadow on the eyeball. 
As a result of the iris base covering some 
of the elements of the original iris, we now 
have to recreate the highlights and 
shadowing of the eyeball. 
3. 
Working on a new layer, use the Airbrush 
with white paint and a small brush to paint 
in the highlights. Set the iris cover to 50% 
so that you can use the original highlights 
as a guide. 

Freaky Faces 
93 

Chapter 3 
94 
Changing the look 
OK, so we've done our initial manipulation 
- let's have a look at playing around with 
the whole look of the photograph. What I 
want to do is throw josh's face into 
dramatic relief, so I'm going to toy with the 
focus on his picture. 
I'm going to have a play around with that really useful little Elements initiative- the Selection 
Brush tool. 
4. 
We're about to select his whole head, so 
we're going to need a big brush. (No slur on 
josh intended!). Basically, the thing to do is 
paint over his entire head and shoulders, 
and watch those marquee outlines grow! 
This tool is ace - it may be a little sluggish 
(I don't want to think of how much number 
crunching is going on on your PC's hard 
drive) but it's very specific in its selection. 
Take care around the edges. and don't 
hesitate to revert to a smaller brush if you 
fear going over the line. 

Freaky Faces 
Of course. if you're on your toes, you might be thinking there's an easier way to go about this 
-you could, of course, select all the white background with the Magic Wand tool - that would 
work - or you could carefully draw around josh with the regular Lasso tool. However, the 
Selection Brush tool will help us out when selecting parts of the face that are not defined by 
an outline. You'll see what l mean! 
5. 
With this selection blinking at you on the screen, 
click through Layer > 
ew > Layer via Copy. ln the 
Layers palette. you'll see the action confirmed like 
this: 
6. 
The next thing to do is make another selection, this 
time. a little further 'forward' than the previous one. 
Make sure Layer 1 is selected. and use the Selection 
Brush once again. Personally, I selected all of the face 
forward of his neck. 
7. 
Then create a new layer as before, through Layer> 
ew > Layer via Copy. 
95 

96 
Chapter 3 
8. 
Continue in this fashion. selecting sections of josh's 
face further and further forward until you have this 
rather fetching collection of layers showing josh's face 
disappearing under a checkered ocean. Note that you 
can pay particular attention to his eyes. as they are set 
quite far back- your selections should pay attention to 
this. 
9. 
With this basic file (which I suggest you save as a 
Photoshop PSD file, retaining all the layers). you can 
have a lot of fun. 

Freaky Faces 
10. With the picture on the previous page, I've put a Gaussian Blur on each level - the "furthest 
away" is the most blurred, and the nearest is in perfect clarity. So, that's: 
Level 
Gaussian Blur setting 
Level 6 
0 
Level 5 
2 
Level 4 
4 
Level 3 
6 
Level 2 
8 
Level l 
10 
Background 
12 
11. And here's a go at keeping those striking 
eyes in focus: 
... where I have doubled the amount by which I've blurred everything, so: 
Level 
Level 6 
Level 5 
l evel 4 
l evel 3 
Level 2 
Level 1 
Background 
Gaussian Blur Setting 
12 
8 
4 
0 (this is where the eyes are) 
4 
8 
12 
97 

Chapter 3 
98 
I guarantee, you'll see so much of this 
in advertising, you'll start to get really 
mad that people are making money 
out of it! Here are a few more bang-
for-your-buck variations, just using 
that same source file we created: 
.. .if we want a closer look at josh's lovely 
ears: 
This one was done by clicking CTRL+U on 
each layer and altering the Hue to 
values of 100, 75, SO, 25, 20, 15 and 10. 
The one on the opposite page actually 
makes me feel like I'm gonna barf if I 
look at it too long. The technique's 
exactly the same as before. only with a 
Radial Blur (with Zoom). 
Feel free to browse through our (ina/ 
file, 
j oshBl ur. psd 
on 
the 
accompanying CD-ROM. 

Freaky Faces 
99 

Chapter 3 
100 
Linda - Mom's makeover 
Here we have an image which is going to 
take some careful handiwork. This effect is 
a huge plug for using a pen and tablet. 
which made it much easier to airbrush the 
smooth strokes required to create the 
extended lashes. 
If you're into freehand drawing, this image 
is going to be your favorite to create. 
Broken down, the effect is really very 
simple: it's just a matter of keeping a 
steady hand. Personally, I have very 
unsteady hands, so to do this I had to 
constantly back up and start over, but 
that's just part of the process ... right? Have 
you ever drawn a detailed image on paper 
without having to erase? Think of it that 
way. 
OK, down to business. 
1. 
Start out each set of eyelashes by simply creating a new layer and using a 1-pixel brush to 
airbrush in the lashes with solid black. 
2. 
Pay special attention to ensure each lash starts out with a thick base and gradually tapers out 
to a fine point. This is where a pen and tablet play their part -
they'll allow you to create 
natural, sweeping strokes that would be much more delicate with a mouse. 

Freaky Faces 
3. 
With a solid set of lashes brushed in, we're ready to move on to the next step in bringing them 
to life. If you look at the existing lashes to see how they reflected light and showed other colors, 
you can see that they have a hint of brown in them - a feature that adds depth as well as color. 
4. 
To replicate this effect, use the Eyedropper tool to sample the brown from the original lashes 
and, working on a new layer above the original lashes, use the same 1 -pixel airbrush as before 
to paint in the brown color hues. Draw them into random places on the lashes - mostly around 
the edges and closer to the roots. 
5. 
Another thing you may notice about the original lashes is that they have individual highlights. 
So, in much the same manner that we created the brown tints on the lashes, we should go for 
the 1-pixel brush again on a new layer above everything else, except using white paint to 
airbrush in the highlights on the lashes. Additionally, instead of drawing on the edges of the 
lashes. draw the highlights on the middle of the lashes. You should also put the highlights in 
random sections, which helps to emphasize the fact that lashes are really out of control and 
reflecting light at all different angles. 
101 

Chapter 3 
102 
6. 
To pull the lashes together with the rest of the image a little better, give them a very subtle 
shadow. Duplicate the base lashes and move the duplicate layer below the base lashes. Next, 
apply a Gaussian Blur to soften the strokes and move the layer slightly so the shadow looks 
offset. Then reduce the Opacity down to 40% to achieve the necessary subtlety. 
There we go, the composition is now complete. Although the description makes it sound like a quick 
process, achieving a realistic effect is a very time-consuming process, as you may have discovered (is 
it that time already!). 

Freaky Faces 
Pushing the boat out 
Having done our horrific eyelashes, it would be a crime to leave this image alone now. wouldn't it? So, 
let's carry out a few extra simple changes. 
7. 
First off. let"s flatten everything with layer > Flatten Image, so we have no layers to worry about. 
8. 
Next. select the eyes Gust the colors and black) and open the Hue/Saturation dialog box with 
CTRL +U. Set the Hue to -120, the Saturation to +85, and leave the lightness. Now we have some 
pretty acidic eyes. with a mighty fine shine! 
9. 
Next, select the whites in the same fashion and. through the Hue/Saturation dialog, check the 
Colorize box and set Hue to 360 and Saturation to 0. 
10. OK, now it's time to move on to the liquify tool. It's pretty tough to describe what goes on in 
this dark art, but basically choose a nostril sized bloat-tool brush for each nostril, and then a 
nose-sized bloat-tool brush for the end of the nose. 
11. Next, let's give her warped dimensions with a Filter> Distort > Pinch, set to 50%. 
103 

Chapter 3 
104 
12. Now it's time to color the skin. so 
carefully select all the flesh tone with the 
Selection Brush. Through the trusty 
Hue/Saturation dialog, set the Hue to 50, 
with everything else at 0. Now we have a 
green monster! Make sure you keep that 
selection marquee live. 
Now it's time to create a pattern. 
13. On a new canvas, create a new layer. On 
the new layer, use the paintbrush to 
create yellow dots of varying sizes. Then 
click through Edit > Define Pattern. Call it 
Dots. 
14. Using Edit > Fill, set the dialog to fill with 
a pattern, and on the drop-down menu 
select the pattern Dots. You may now fill 
the skin area with yellow dots- sickening! 
15. Now, simply invert the skin selection and 
click through Filter > Brush Strokes > 
Accented Edges. This gives the hair a 
weird plastic look. Next. change the 
Hue/Saturation 
to 
Hue 
270, 
and 
Saturation 50. 
16. Select the lips and give them an extra 
boost of Hue +50, Saturation -25 and 
Lightness -1 0. 
And there it is - through little more than a few 
color changes, we've a totally freaky mom! 
Look up lindaLashes.psd and 
linda Freaky. psd on the CD-ROM 
to browse through our finished files. 

Freaky Faces 
105 

Chapter 3 
Peter- Two-faced 
106 
You really have to look hard to find the effect in Peter's portrait. Here's a hint: take a look at the moles 
and wrinkles on his face. You should be able to see that his face in the finished portrait is perfectly 
symmetrical. right down to the hair on his head. I initially thought that the challenge with this effect 
would be to make it look realistic. but it works surprisingly well with Peter's portrait. 

1. 
The first thing we have to do to get 
Peter"s portrait (peter. jpg) ready for 
the effect is to get his face perfectly 
straight - as symmetrical as possible, 
with the eyes level and nose straight 
up and down. Otherwise, when we 
reflect one of the halves of his face. 
nothing will match up right. 
The next thing to do is add a mask to 
the layer and mask the right-hand side 
of the face. Here is the cool thing 
about this effect- we're going to learn 
a new way to mask! 
2. 
Duplicate the background layer and 
call it face. Create a new blank layer 
above it and call it mask. 
3. 
Using a bright color (I've chosen red) 
paint on the mask layer every section 
you wish to mask. When you have 
done this, drag the red layer down 
below the face layer. Click in the link 
box of the face layer, and press CTRL +G 
to link them both together. The mask 
is complete. In order to show it. fill the 
original Background layer in white. 
and you'll see half the face disappear! 
Marvelous. no? 
Freaky Faces 
107 

Chapter 3 
108 
4. 
With one side of the face ready to go, duplicate the face layer (call it face 2) and then click 
through Image > Rotate> Flip Layer Horizonta l. 
S. 
Create another blank layer above it (call it mask 2) and fill in as before. only on the other 
side. Drag mask 2 below face 2. link the layers, and hey presto. you have a symmetrical face! 
All you need to do is line them up and they should fit perfectly! 
6. 
And finally, to get the reverse effect, and see the other side of Peter's personality, simply 
swap the images round on their layers! 
Our finished PSD is on the CD-ROM and is called peter2Faced. psd! 

Freaky Faces 
109 

Chapter 3 
Up to this point, I've focused on one specific effect on each portrait. Here is a chance to see a portrait 
with several effects applied, and create a true freak of nature. 
jake - Problem child 
110 
Let's go back to the image of Jake. our favorite toothy toddler. 
There's no need to revisit the descriptions of the effects here, but just to be aware that I used the eye 
effects from Ashley's portrait. the symmetry effects from Peter's image, and borrowed the eyebrows 
from Charlie, while the chin stubble came from Peter. The end result gives quite a disturbing montage! 
Whoa, Jake just aged about 25 years (and also looks like he's from another planet, to boot)! 
The entire process of creating these freaky faces was really enjoyable. The concept is so simple, yet it 
is a great exercise for anyone interested in Photoshop. We get down to the roots of why we use 
Photoshop Elements- plain and simple -we just love to mess with photos! 

Freaky Faces 
111 


Fac 
What you'll learn in this chapter 
One of the first things anyone ever wants to do in 
photo manipulation is paint on a photograph and 
Photoshop Elements contains some pretty potent 
tools to help you do this. In this chapter, we'll paint 
half a dozen faces, exploring along the way: 
• 
Using different brush styles to paint faces 
easily and convincingly. 
• 
Experimenting with 
a wide 
range 
of 
blending modes to add realism and blend 
paints into the complexion. 
• 
Create a cute little clown, a face-painted 
sports fan, a chubby-cheeked tigress, and 
more! 

Chapter 4 
Whether it's black and white photographs you want to bring to life, or a rea!!y bad snapshot of yourself 
you want to improve on, or even if you want to add a black eye to someone without actua!!y socking 
them. this chapter will tell aiL 
The main tools we'll be using are the Brush and careful use of those tricky layer blending modes. You'll 
soon be creating real water-cooler moments with your snaps! 
When we've figured out the best ways of using it. we'll concentrate on how we can best optimize the 
brush control we have at our disposal in order to achieve the makeup effects we want - whether 
they're subtle or extreme. 
Takeshi- sports fan makeover 
114 
Now you've got to take your hat off to the dedication of sports fans. They take the time to go out and 
buy paint. make a design for their face, and then sit uncomfortably with this non-breathable goo all 
over them for hours in the heat. It is, to look on the positive side. a very theatrical and dramatic 
expression. This makeover pays homage to those people. and gives you a look into exactly how we 
should go about totally transforming the color of a face. 
You might want to note that this makeover also pays homage to the New 
York Mets - my favorite baseball team. If you don't like it, choose your own 
team -
but !'m writing this chapter so you'll have to suffer my own 
allegiances! To that end, this makeover will include the colors blue and 
orange, along with a number 31 for catcher Mike Piazza. 
I guess because of the extreme look of dedication mixed with a degree of 
messiness. I imagined this kind of fan to be over excited and rowdy. To 
exaggerate the rough and rowdy element. I decided I would give our 
portrait a hockey player look. with bruises and a black eye to complement 
his face paint. 
As I wanted to show the paint application as realistically as possible, I 
studied some photos of painted fans partying at sporting events. Their 
makeup often looks sloppy and is often smeared. It's best not to cut 
corners on your research, and these days it's as easy as surfing on the Web 
to get a couple of reference images. One recurrent theme I noticed was it 
seemed common to apply paint sloppily around the eye area without a 
distinct shape. Usually eyebrows were painted but there was often a gap in 
the paint where skin showed through underneath the eye area. This worked 
well for me when I was thinking about the black eye as it gave me enough 
space to focus on realistically incorporating the painful feature. 

Face Painting 
Preparation 
1. 
Open takeshi. jpg in Photos hop Elements, and click through Layer > New Adjustment Layer 
> Levels to create a new adjustment layer to sort out the Levels of the picture. 
2. 
Play with them a little until the light 
and 
color 
quality 
are 
to 
your 
satisfaction. You may choose simply to 
press Auto, which most often does a 
good job! 
l evels 
. 
Auto 
l;ti.!IJ'I 
r-' Preview 
Sdod Cob .•• 
Gradient ••. 
Pattern ..• 
Bri\tllress/Contrast ... 
Hue/Saturation .•. 
Gta<iert Map .•. 
Invert 
Th-eshold .•. 
Postenze ••. 
It's always a good idea to start properly by getting the levels right. 
Making a face mask! 
That horrible dark background doesn't really do us any 
favors in this picture, so it's time to get rid of it. 
3. 
Use the Selection Brush {set to Mask) to select every 
part of the face. For subtlety, you're going to have to 
be very careful around the hair, and I suggest using a 
very small brush at a low opacity, and eating away. It 
depends how obsessive you are! 
J 
115 

Chapter 4 
116 
4. 
Once you've done that, create a new layer. Call it white 
background. Click through Edit > Fill, and fill the area 
with white. This will present you with our sportsfan 
neatly placed on a white background! 
Why have we done it on a new layer? Well, the 
fact is sometimes you get dissatisfied with your 
masking, and if you have a preserved original 
of the background, you can always go back 
and sort things out. 
OK, now we should turn our attentions to getting that 
black eye and facepaint together. 
Black eye 
To create the black eye you need to start thinking 
about colors that say "bruise" to you. To my mind that 
means greeny purple. Layering these colors lightly on 
top of dark browns will deepen the tone without 
making it muddy. 
5. 
Create a new layer, and call it blackeye. Select Multiply 
from the new layer's blending mode drop-down. 
As this layer is grouped, Multiply mode com-
bines new colors with existing colors in the 
photo to create a third, darker color. Any dark 
areas or lines on the skin are enhanced. which 
works well towards achieving the effect of a 
black eye. 
6. 
So. paint with a reduced opacity - at 20% maximum. 
with a brush at 0% Hardness. being careful not to over 
satu rate the dark colors. Making slight marks helps add 
realistic light and energy to the surface, so work lightly 
from the ground up. 
Oaf! 
The next step is to apply the greasepaint! 

Team Colors 
To help achieve our face painting effect, we need to make a mask of 
the face. 
7. 
Let's copy everything we've done so far. Press CTRL+A to 
Select All, and then press CrRL +SHIFT+( to Copy Merged (that 
is, to take a snapshot of everything we've done up to now). 
Press CTRL +V to paste it on top of the layer stack. Call the new 
layer facemask. 
8. 
Once again, using the Selection Brush (set to Mask) paint 
over the face, but this time in just the areas you wish to have 
the 'paint' appear. 
When you're satisfied with your selection. click out of the 
Selection Brush and press DELETE. Now we have an 
independent face to play with! 
9. 
What we're going to do now is think ahead a little. The place 
where we want to put the paint is going to be a little 
smeared around the eyes. so it's time to take a soft-edged 
Eraser with about 1 0% Opacity and muss up the edges of the 
eyes a little - that is delete them from the facemask layer so 
the paint only fills those areas. It will help you to make the 
Background layer invisible while performing this task. 
10. Next. create a new layer called paint. This will provide the 
basis for the color on the face. The blending mode that best 
imitates light and dark is Overlay. so use the Layers palette 
to apply the mode to the paint layer. 
When Overlay mode is painted on top of existing 
colors, it enhances contrast and helps boost color's 
saturation. I've found that this doesn't work so well 
with lighter skin because the color tends to over 
saturate. In this case, orange turns fluorescent and 
yellow. blue turns iridescent purple. 
11. With the Polygonal Lasso tool, draw a box, with a line down 
the center of the nose, encompassing the whole left hand 
side of the face. Fill it with a vibrant orange. Create another 
box for the right side of the face and fill it with blue. 
Face Painting 
117 

Chapter 4 
118 
12. So now we have a rectangular paint job. which looks 
purple and orange on the face. Now. click in the link box 
of the facemask layer and click through Layers > Group 
Linked. This associates the two layers and rather usefully 
deletes any of the paint that we don't want! 
13. What is almost infinitely useful at this point is the fact that 
we can edit both the paint and facemask layers together. 
So, the thing to do now is go on to the fa emask layer and 
use the eraser to soften up those hard edges at the side of 
the face. The paint needs to look like it's been blended in. 
After you've done that, work over the fa emask layer with 
a low opacity Eraser (say, 1 0%) and randomly delete areas 
of the mask in order to make it look like the paint has 
worn away in areas. What we're doing -just to keep you 
ahead of the game -
is deleting the face mask, and 
revealing the unpainted face layer right at the bottom of 
the layer stack! 
Man. you've just gotta love it when Photoshop Elements 
comes together like this! 
14. OK, now we still have that real straight line down the center of his nose. so we'd better sort 
that out. It's going to involve mixing the colors- so let's head back to the paint layer. Use 
the Smudge tool and make a gestured smear across the hard line of color in between the 
eyebrows. We want the smudge placed here in relation to the black eye to help accentuate 
battle scar evidence. After that, have fun messing up that straight line by scribbling over it 
with the Smudge tool! 
15. To finish off, we need to line up the layers so that the blue is genuinely blue and the orange 
is genuinely orange. The way to do this is to select the facemask layer and press CTRL +U to 
bring up the Hue/Saturation dialog. Set the Saturation to 0, and you have yourself one blue 
and orange picture! 
Check out takeshiSports. psd if you want to look at our final Elements file. 
] 
The finished image looks pretty wild compared to our original. The next makeover also possesses a 
wild element- attempting to combine the features of a tiger and a female. 

Face Painting 
119 

Chapter 4 
Miya- Face of the Tiger 
120 
For this portrait. my focus was on experimenting with transforming a female into a tigress. Aside from 
being associated as wild and exotic, tigers are also associated with glamour and wealth. 
My main aim in this makeover was to combine the 'wild sides' of both women and tigers. The dramatic 
stripes and dark outlines that you see around the eyes and mouth of a tiger would also really help to 
enhance female facial features. The combination of soft white and orange furry texture, combined 
with stark black was a fun mix to experiment with. 
1. 
Open miya . jpg from this chapter's source files. Because the background to this portrait is 
pretty unattractive, we'll need to fill it in as we did in the previous exercise. Mask everything 
you want to keep (with the Selection Brush set to Mask). and on a new layer (background 
bla k) fill out the background with black. 
2. 
Once again. use the Selection Brush on the Background layer and select the area of the face 
you want to be painted. Click through Layer> 
ew > Layer via Copy and place that layer at 
the top of the pile. Call it facemask. 

3. 
Now we're going to do what we did right at 
the end of the previous example - we're 
going to desaturate facemask so our colors 
look right. Click CTRL +U and set the 
Saturation level of the layer down to 0. 
4. 
Now, 1 find that a little flat, so in the spirit 
of 
getting 
everything 
right 
before 
proceeding. let's tweak the levels by 
pressing CTRL +L and entering the following 
values: 
I evd~ 
--
3 
OK 
1233 
Cancel 
He~ 
Auto 
OUIIXJ1l.l!YI!Is r 1255 
I~IJ'IJ'I 
... 
P Preview 
Face Painting 
121 

Chapter 4 
122 
5. 
Now it's time to add a new layer for the paint. Call it paint - why not? Set its layer blending 
mode to Overlay. 
You'll remember we performed a very handy grouping of layers before in order to make that 
square blue and orange paint fall into line with the shape of the facemask layer. Well, let's 
do that again now -there's no reason to put it off! 
6. 
While on the paint layer, click in the link box of the facema k layer and then click through 
Layers > Group Linked. 
Now for the paint. This face is much more about playing around with art styles and sketching. 
to produce what will hopefully be a fine feline - it's about building up paint. rather than 
wearing it away. as we did in the last exercise. 
7. 
With a 50% Opacity Brush tool, start 
sketching with color. painting a faint 
undercoat shape of white and orange 
around the cheeks. Daub the lips with 
scarlet for the main part, and thin maroon 
edges. Remember your lip liner girls! 

8. 
Now's the time to experiment with different shaped 
brushes. In the Brush menu. you have the facility to select 
Calligraphic Brushes. 
9. 
With a calligraphic brush - l"ve chosen the flat 235 px 
brush - brush 'eyeliner' around her eyes and start to 
lengthen her eyelashes by painting an exaggerated shape. 
10. It's from here you can build your colors and blend the 
face to your own preferences. Personally, I darkened the 
existing orange and added more around her nose and 
forehead to help further define a tiger-like fuzzy chin. I 
also colored in the pink of her nose and outlined the top 
of the shape with a dark. warm brown. 
The design and impact of this makeover is mainly 
dependent on the placement and shape of the tiger 
stripes. 
11. Use the lasso tool to 
draw an outline of 
your planned pattern 
and fill it in black. 
s 
• 
9 
Face Painting 
H .... 13 
123 

Chapter 4 
124 
12. Using the Lasso tool and trying to work along the 
curve of the cheek, draw a jagged stripe, becoming 
thinner towards the nose. Paint the inside of the 
shape black using the Brush, and add some white 
with a soft white brush at a low opacity (1 0% or 
below) to help add softness to the pattern, and 
interrupt the flat black. 
13. Next. add a new layer to the top of the layer stack and make a layer mask. We need to see 
what l was painting in the layer mask and at the same time, see the makeup to trace the 
stripes. Using SHIFT-CLICK, the new layer mask turns red and acts like a screen. 
14. As the eyebrows are still showing through the Overlay layer, add a new layer (do not group 
it to the previous paint layer) and give it a Screen blending mode. Call it eyebrows. With a 
30% opacity white brush. carefully paint over the eyebrows in white to reduce their presence 
on the face. This layer works as thick makeup to help cover over the eyebrows, but it looks 
natural because it is still possible to see the texture coming through. 
l feel that was a pretty successful makeover .. Combinations of both striking and subtle effects bind 
really well together to help achieve the female tigress appearance. Of course, if you want to go beyond 
simulating makeup application and really incorporate a tiger appearance, you could look at 
manipulating the eyes and mouth so that they have more feline characteristics. Along with the addition 
of a few whiskers. you'd really have something far flung from the original portrait. 
/(you want to experiment with our finished file, miyaTiger .psd.you can find 
it on the accompanying CD-ROM! 
For now, though. let's get back to the realms of human beings (albeit silly ones) and look at a clown-
style makeover. 

Face Painting 
125 

Chapter 4 
Ava - Clown makeover 
126 
When I was a kid, my Mom would dress 
as a clown every year on Halloween. She 
was a drama teacher and very skilled at 
theater makeup. I always wanted her to 
paint my face like hers so I could see it 
transform. After seeing Ava's photo, I 
couldn't let the opportunity pass by to 
return to childhood memories. 
Ava's expression in this photo was 
precious. how could I ever possibly 
improve on such a perfect photo? 
We have to paint an even more 
endearing personality - that of a young 
hobo clown. 
This makeover is based purely on 
greasepaint and love. I think the 
background looks great - sort of like a 
country setting that helps add a positive 
element to what should become a 
bittersweet character. 
1. 
This time, we don't need to get rid of the background, we just need to create a facemask 
layer. So, as before. paint over the face with the selection brush and create a new layer out 
of it with Layer > New > Layer Via Copy. Call it 
facemask. and desaturate it. 
2. 
Then create a new layer called paint. link it and 
Group Linked with the facemask layer. Give it an 
Overlay layer blending mode. We've done all this 
with the other pictures. so you should be pretty nifty 
at it now! 

Face Painting 
3. 
With a large 40% opacity brush, with its Hardness set to 0. start marking out where you want 
your colors to go. I began by marking out and filling in a peach color for her forehead. 
4. 
Paint around her eyes with white. in order to give the makeup a powdery look. Start her beard 
by adding black under her nose with a soft brush at 40% Pressure, and continue the beard on 
her cheek and around the mouth. The appearance of the beard helps convey the look of a glum 
expression around the mouth area, which you can accentuate by painting the inside white. 
5. 
Working in the color is 90% of the job with this picture. Paint over and over the picture with 
low opacity brushes until you have the color you want. For example. with the peach forehead, 
I added scarlet at a low opacity just to make everything look a bit more rosy. 
Her lips are still apparent in the Overlay 
mode, so we should disguise this. 
6. 
Create a new layer (lips) and give it a Screen 
layer blending mode. Add more white to the 
area 
we've 
already 
earmarked 
(or 
/ipmarked). Bear in mind. if the whiteness 
looks too opaque. you can always reduce the 
opacity 
of 
this 
layer, 
because 
it's 
independent! 
127 

Chapter 4 
128 
7. 
Back on the paint layer. draw a red line on her 
bottom lip to further accentuate the look of a 
frowning face. You may have to go back and 
erase some of the white on the lips layer to 
prevent it interfering with the red line. 
8. 
Next. using a hard brush, paint her nose with 
the same deep red I used on her lips, before 
powdering her cheeks with a softer brush and 
a slightly more cool, rosy red. 
9. 
Finally, using a calligraphic brush, apply black 
around her eyes like eyeliner, and also add 
some long, stylized eyelashes to give her the 
special girl clown touch- we want to make sure 
we bring attention to the fact that she's a girl 
clown, even though she has a beard! 
After doing this, I realized I hadn't left room for 
the full color eyes when creating the facemask 
layer! Disaster! Not really - I just went to the 
facemask layer and deleted away the grayscale 
eyes to reveal color ones beneath. 
10. With the addition of some out-of-position 
eyebrows, our girl hobo clown is complete! 
Ava's face now looks tinged with sadness. but is still captivating even though she's now wearing wacky 
clown makeup. The idea of wacky makeup leads us nicely into our next makeover. 
avaClown. psd can be found in the Face Painting folder of the CD-ROM. 

Face Painting 
129 

Chapter 4 
Kymar - a lightning bolt across the face 
130 
For the last makeover. let's work in Overlay mode as we have been all along, but with having to 
desaturate skin tone. Whereas paint applied in Overlay mode tends to over saturate on light skin, it is 
enhanced as it mixed with Kymar's darker skin tone. The makeover will be a vivid blend of colors that 
are very effective - and it's easy to do. with the right foreground color. 
For this design, I wanted to replicate a makeover in the ilk of a 1970s glam rock star and looked at 
pictures of music artists such as David Bowie. Kiss and the New York Dolls. 
As we've already experimented with thick paint. let's see how fluorescent color looks with a light 
application. 
1. 
Block out the background in white. and create a facemask layer for old time's sake. Then, 
add a paint layer, grouped with the facemask layer, and set its blending mode to Overlay. 

Face Painting 
2. 
Using a brush at about 1 5% opacity, paint with 
red along the edges of his face. The glowing 
effect suits the concept for this makeover quite 
well, so use the same brush in facemask and 
draw a lightning bolt across his face at a greater 
opacity (about 50%). 
3. 
Create a new Screen layer (paint2), and group it with facemask and place it underneath paint. 
Add some yellow through the lightning bolt at about 15% opacity, which transforms into more 
of a gold color and acts like a highlighter around the lightning bolt to help bring out its shape. 
4. 
Create and group a Multiply layer (paintJ), 
placing it at the top of the layer stack, and 
roughly outline the edge of the bolt with a navy 
blue, at around 20% opacity. Several strokes 
should see it dark enough. 
5. 
For the lipstick color, go for gold, which you can 
achieve by painting yellow back in the paint 
layer - the highlights in his lips really brought a 
glossy shine to the texture. Darken the edges of 
his lips a little by painting yellow in the paint3 
layer. 
131 

Chapter 4 
In a few short and simple steps, we have been able to give Kymar a lightning bolt like on David Bowie's 
Aladdin Sane album cover. When the approach is this straightforward. the effects are just as enjoyable 
as spending hours crafting a finished portrait. 
See lightning strike twice by double-checking your version against our provided PSD -
kymarBol t. psd. 
Summary 
132 
Treating the face like a 3D canvas. Photoshop Elements' blending modes help us to focus on the 
photo and allow us to be expressive. while not straying too far from a level of realism. 
It's worth experimenting with blending modes when using a photo as the beginning point for a 
portrait. 

Face Painting 
133 


Cha ter 5 
ces 
What you'll learn in this chapter 
Tired of stuffy family portraits? Need some fun in your 
photos? Come this way and meet Elements' Liquify 
filter -
the fast and easy way to mind-bending 
distortion effects. With a toolset including Warp, Bloat 
and Pucker it's a seriously fun way to liven up your 
photos. As we explore this cool tool we'll cover: 
• 
The tools in the Liquify filter dialog. 
• 
Using the Liquify filter to create pixies out 
of children and adults alike. 
• 
Warping, bloating and puckering eyes, 
noses and ears to create instant amazing 
effects. 
• 
Putting it all together in a cool family 
puppetshow montage; you'll never have a 
dull family portrait again. 

Chapter 5 
In this chapter we'll explore Liquify's key tools. We'll 
liquify members of my very own family, with the overall 
aim of creating a unique family portrait of pixie puppets! 
Why pixies? Because unfortunately in the mid nineties I 
thought that Magic Pixel House wou ld be a great name 
for a business, we've been called the ·magic pixies' ever 
since! Why puppets? I'm not entirely sure, but we do 
have a great homemade puppet theater that the girls 
love to play with. 
Before beginning a composite image project such as this 
it's a good idea to list out the photographic elements 
required. In this example, these include: 
• 
An empty puppet theater 
• 
All members of the family against puppet 
theater backdrop 
• 
Boy and girl puppets against puppet theater 
backdrop 
A fun hour or two in the playroom, and the photos were in the bag! Our two daughters often dress 
up as fairies so required little encouragement- Selena my wife however was a little less co-operative, 
especially knowing what I had in mind. Let's get to work! 
Holi - Pixie-liquifier 
136 
1. 
Open holi. j pg located in the 
Liquifying Faces folder on the Face 
Makeovers CD-ROM. 
2. 
Select Filter:> Distort > Liquify. 
--
_.,. . 
·--
--~ 
r 

Liquifying Faces 
Elements' liquify filter provides a real time what-you-see-is-what-you-get (WYSIWYG) 
environment for applying 'elastic' or 'melted' effects to your photos. Liquify's tools are located 
in a vertical bar on the left of the image space, tool options on the right. 
People often comment on Holi's big dark 
brown eyes - let's use Elements' Liquify to 
give them something to really talk about! 
3. 
Select the Bloat tool (shortcut 
B) - it pushes pixels away from 
the 
center 
of the 
brush, 
effectively enlarging or creating 
a 'bloated' appearance. Set the 
Brush to a size that covers the 
main area of the eye. I've set 
mine to 100 and left Brush 
Pressure at the default setting 
of 50%. 
4. 
Click over each eye, applying the Bloat in 
short bursts by repeated clicking and 
releasing. I've chosen to apply the effect 
evenly to both eyes. 
A good strategy when attempting to create 
a caricature is to exaggerate the most 
noticeable aspects of a person's face. 
Heavy use of the Liquify tools can destroy 
detail in an image so unless that's part of 
your plan be sure to watch carefully as 
effects are applied, and stop while detail is 
visible. 
Every respectable pixie needs a fine set of ears! Now, Holi's aren't going to be as well-developed 
as Nalith's from the Fantasy chapter but they should still be pointy enough to poke an eye out. 
5. 
With the Bloat tool still selected, increase the Brush Size to 200, and lower the Brush Pressure 
to 20. A lower pressure slows the rate the effect is applied at. giving us more control of the 
process. 
6. 
Place the Bloat tool inside the left ear and click to gradually enlarge. You may need to apply 
the Bloat to several locations to evenly enlarge the ear. 
137 

Chapter 5 
138 
We need to add a sharp tip to the ear. The Warp tool pushes pixels as it's dragged - sounds 
like the tool for the job! 
7. 
Select the Zoom tool (Z) and zoom in to 
the ear as shown. 
8. 
Select the Warp tool 0/IJ). and 
decrease the Brush Size- this will 
make creating a sharper point on 
the ear easier. Gradually push the 
ear up and out to the left. being 
careful to keep the outline of the 
ear smooth and flowing. 
Holi's other ear is obscured by 
her hair. However I've chosen to 
use the Bloat tool to enlarge the 
area to roughly match the size of 
the pixie ear we've just created, 
and have also used the Warp tool 
to add the beginnings of a pixie 
shape to the part of the ear that 
can be seen. 
The Liquify filter dialog supports Elements 
Zoom shortcuts of CTRL +SPAC£+CucK to zoom 
in and CTRL +SPAce+Atr+CucK to zoom out. 
Elements' Liquify filter does not allow you to save intermediate 
states. If you've created a great effect but would like to keep 
/iquifying the image without risking the effect, click OK to apply 
the effect to the image and exit Liquify. Then Save As giving the 
image a different filename, and CTRL +F to re-open the Liquify 
filter with your previous effect saved and in place. 
OK. now our pixie needs a characteristically small nose! 
9. 
Select the Pucker tool (P). The Pucker tool moves pixels towards the center of the image, 
effectively shrinking whatever is within the brush size area. Set the Brush Size to cover nose 
tip area. I've set mine to 1 SO. Click to gradually reduce the size of the tip. 

Liquifying Faces 
10. Switch back to the Warp tool (W). 
With the Brush Size at 1 SO work up 
and down both sides of the nose 
gradually pushing it in - a fine nose 
any self-conscious superstar would 
be proud of! 
Holi's pixie face is coming along - a 
few minor touches and we'll be 
done. Let's make the bottom half of 
the face narrower. 
11. Using the Bloat tool again, select a larger Brush Size- I've set mine to 300, and place the tool 
so the edge of the circle overlaps with the cheek and neck area we'd like to narrow as shown. 
12. Apply the Bloat tool to both sides of 
the face, gradually pushing it in. 
Be sure to leave ample room 
around your face to make 
Liqui(ying faces easy! 
13. Now enlarge the forehead. Adjust the brush size as needed, being careful not to change the 
shape of the eyes. 
Our final touch is cheeky eyebrows. 
139 

Chapter 5 
140 
14. Set a small Brush Size on the Warp 
tool - I've set mine to 30 - and zoom 
in. Raise the eyebrows towards the 
outside, again being careful not to 
damage the eye shape. 
Our work here is done, one pixie 
caricature! 
15. Click OK to apply the Liquify effects to 
your image in Elements and save your 
file. 
You can find a ]PG of my effect on 
the 
CD-ROM 
-
it's 
coiled 
holiP.ixie . j pg. Why haven't we 
supplied the PSD - well, as Liquify 
effects are permanent once you 
close the dialog, the PSD would 
just be our finished picture 
anyway and wouldn't be editable! 
A pixie in only a few minutes - not a 
bad effort! Luckily for Holi her pyjamas 
won't live to haunt her in her teen 
years - later in the chapter we'll attach 
her pixie head to a puppet as a part of 
The Greatest Puppet Show on Earth. 
Has your /iquifying got out of control? Check out Liquify's Reconstruct tool (E) - it allows 
you to fully or partially reverse the Liquify effects you've applied to the image. Wont to 
start over? Click Revert. 

Liquifying Faces 
lndi- More pixie tricks 
From the day lndi was born, people have commented on her chubby cheeks. Even at three years old she's 
still growing into them - maybe we can add a few more years to that process for her! 
1. 
Open incli . jpg from the Liquifying Faces folder of the CD-ROM. 
2. 
Click through Filter > Distort > Liquify 
once again. 
3. 
Select the Bloat tool with the brush set to a size that covers the cheek. I've set mine to 200 and 
have reduced the pressure to 20 to give me more control over the rate the effect is applied, as 
well as a better chance of stopping before too much pixel information becomes blurred and 
distorted. 
4. 
Apply the Bloat gradually to each 
cheek. I've zoomed in a little for a 
better look at the effect being applied. 
As you might guess from the photo I 
had a little trouble getting Indiana in 
front of the camera, let alone smile! 
With the cheeks out of the way what do 
we have to work with? An exaggerated 
right eyebrow could be fun. 
141 

Chapter 5 
142 
5 
Select the Warp tool. Set the Bru h 
Size to 40. 
Our rambunctious pixie is coming 
together -
some chubby lips 
should finish the job nicely! 
6. 
CTRL +SPACE+Click to zoom in tight on the lips. 
7. 
With the Warp tool still selected set the Brush Size to 20 - a small brush will help us with 
this finer work, as will a low pressure setting of 20. 
8. 
Build out the shape of each lip 
gradually by repeated short "click 
and drags' with the Warp tool. I've 
taken the opportunity to increase 
the smile a little too! 

Liquifying Faces 
9. 
Keeping 
with 
the 
p1x1e 
theme rve chosen to apply 
the Bloat tool to lndi's eyes. 
10. Click OK to apply the Liquify 
effects to your image and 
save your file. 
As before, a }PG of my liquified 
offspring is on the CD-ROM as 
indiPixie. jpg. 
Pixie number two complete! lndi will be joining us in the puppet theater shortly. 
Pete and Selena- Pixie parents 
·--
-.- ... ~ 
...... --1!1 
, ...... __ , 
Aside from being great fun the Liquify tool can be also be great therapy- always wanted your partner 
to have pixie ears? Need a new look? The queue starts here! 
1. 
Open pete. jpg and 
selena. jpg from the 
CD-ROM and liquify our 
faces, 
just 
don't 
mention it to my wife! 
Here's a few examples 
to get you started. 
Self portrait- Max Headroom meets Mr Speck 
143 

Chapter 5 
I'll leave you to experiment in this 
stage of the tutorial; you know the 
tools and techniques by now - go 
have some fun! 
We've so far concentrated on 
the main Liquify filter tools. but 
there are more. Have a play 
around with the Turbulence, 
Twirl and Shift Pixels tools! 
Selena meets Elvira 
·---
.... ~ · 1"3 
• 
o-·· · ~:!1 
~ .. .,_. _ r-11 
Puppet Assembly 
144 
With the family suitably liquified into pixies it's time to assemble the puppets! The puppet photos were 
taken in front of the same background as the family so merging them should be a snap. 
1. 
Open girl Puppet . jpg and holiPixie . psd (the one you've saved!) 
2. 
With holi Pixie .psd active. select the Lasso tool and drag a rough marquee around the 
outside of Holi's head, leaving some of the background intact - we'll need some of it left to 
easily merge the two images. 
3. 
With the Move tool (or holding down the 
CTRL key) drag the selected area into 
girlPuppet. jpg. 

Liquifying Faces 
4. 
Name the layer head. 
5. 
With the head layer active, select the Free 
Transform tool (CTRL + n and rotate and resize 
Holi's head - the proportions are up to you. I 
want to replace the puppet's head with Holi's 
in approximately the same size. 
6. 
Hit ENTER to apply the transformation. 
7. 
We need to merge the two images- the backgrounds are essentially the same. the only problem 
is the rough edge around Holi. A large soft brush at a reduced opacity will do the job. 
8. 
Select the Eraser tool. I've set my Brush Size to 125. Opacity to 75%. 
9. 
Work your way around Holi's head with the 
Eraser tool, removing the hard edge and 
making it appear the two images are one. 
Toggle the display of the Eraser cursor 
between Preci e and Bru h by using the 
CAPS LOCK key. 
i) Opiclty: ~ 
145 

Chapter 5 
146 
The neck area presents a problem - I'd like Holi's pixie head to replace the puppet's head 
cleanly, as if it had always been there! If only we could see through the head layer we'd know 
where to erase to reveal the decorative trim around the puppet's neck. 
10. Change the blending mode of head to Multiply. This is only a temporary measure to allow 
us to see through the head layer to the puppet beneath. 
11. Select the Eraser tool again, with a small soft brush at 100% opacity. I've set mine to 20 pixels. 
12. With the head layer active carefully erase the pixel information immediately above the 
decorative trim. 
Some of the doll's head may now be visible around the lower part of Holi's head - time for 
the Clone Stamp tool. 
13. Make the Background active. 
14. Select the Clone Stamp tool. I've set my Brush Size to 75, yours may need to be larger or 
smaller depending on the resolution of the files you are working on. 75 should be fine if 
you're following along. 

Liquifying Faces 
15. 
ALT+CucK to sample fabric beside the doll's head and clone over any parts of the head visible 
behind Holi. 
16. With the doll's head 
no 
longer 
visible, 
switch the blending 
mode of head back to 
ormal. 
Our Pixie Holi puppet is now complete and 
ready for further use in the theater. 
17. Save your file now and repeat the same process 
to create the lndi. Pete and Selena puppets. You 
can find a boy puppet image to use on the 
CD-ROM. 
147 

Chapter 5 
Puppet Show 
148 
Our pixie puppets are ready to move into their new 
puppet theater. Open theater. psd from the 
CD-ROM ... 
Theater. psd is a file I prepared earlier. based on a 
photo of the girl's puppet theater. It's made up of four 
layers: 
• 
ba kground (white) 
• 
puppet theater 
• 
text - for placing custom text over theater 
• 
stage mask - the layer we'll clip the puppets 
too. 
1. 
Switch to your Holi puppet PSD. 
We want to drag the contents of this PSD (our background of a puppet and 
our overlaid head) into our theater file, so to do this we'll either have to layer 
> Flatten Image or use the Copy Merged technique you've seen in previous 
chapters (CTRL+A, Edit > Copy Merged. (TRL+V). Choose your weapon and 
we're ready for the next step. 

2. 
Select the Move Tool and drag the 
merged layer from the Holi puppet 
file into theater .psd. Place it at 
the top of the layer stack. directly 
above the stage mask layer and 
name it head. 
3. 
AlT+CucK on the line dividing the 
stage mask and head: 
Holi's head is now clipped to the 
stage mask layer, but she is way too 
big! 
4. 
Using the Free Transform tool, size 
the head layer down so the Holi 
puppet fits within the mask. 
Liquifying Faces 
149 

Chapter 5 
5. 
Select the Text tool. and add a title in the orange area using the existing text layer. I've named 
mine pixie holi using the Parry Hotter font. just right for pixies! If you haven't got this font. 
choose your next best. 
I've continued to add the three other puppets I'd saved earlier using the same process, and finished 
off with a change of title and a tight crop, job done - The Greatest Puppet Show on Earth! 
You can find the finished article on the CD-ROM, saved os 
puppetsFinal.psd 
Summary 
150 
I hope this chapter has shown you how much creative fun you can have with Elements liquify filter. 
As further projects, why not make a liquified portrait of a group of your own family or friends, or how 
about trying to liquify a photo of a cloud into the shape of a face! 
Along the way I hope I've also demonstrated techniques you can use to combine liquified images with 
other photo objects. Remember with a tool like the Liquify filter there are absolutely no rules. Open 
your favorite images. explore each tool and settings and have fun - photos of your family and friends 
will never be safe again! 

Liquifying Faces 
151 


c pt 
ng 
What you'll learn in this chapter 
In this chapter, we study the most fundamental 
face-shaping event any of us will ever encounter -
ageing. Along the way, you'll pick up lots of tips about 
how to approach larger projects like this. Amongst the 
effects covered: 
• 
Researching 
the 
ageing 
process 
and 
preparing your photos. 
• 
Altering facial colors and skin pigmentation 
using blending modes. 
• 
Changing the shape of the face using the 
Liquify tool. 
• 
Sampling wrinkles and eye coloring from 
other photos. 

Chapter 6 
154 
The real power of a program like Elements lies in its ability to alter photographs. In this chapter. we're 
going to push this as far as we can. We've all seen how on magazine covers, wrinkles and spots are 
removed with the greatest of ease. Let's head off in the other direction: instead of reversing the ageing 
process, let's enhance it. Let's make someone actually look older than they really are. 
Kirsten - has it really been 30 years? 
Here's a picture of Kirsten - she's 25. We're going to spend the next 30 pages ageing Kirsten by about 
30 years! Along the way we'll learn a lot about Elements. and a lot about the nature of the human face 
and how ageing affects our looks. 

Ageing a Face 
There is no Auto-Ageing tool for us to use here. Like all the previous chapters. we need to use a little 
ingenuity and some cool techniques to get Kirsten looking old enough to be her own mother. You'll be 
amazed at the results though. 
Research and preparation 
A good place to start when you're doing a project of this nature is to actually go and take a look at 
people who are 55. What's different about them? When we look at this person, how do we know they're 
in their fifties? We're going for maximum realism here. so let's make a list. 
Perhaps the most important change in a person's face is the change of elasticity of the skin. As you get 
older, the skin begins to droop slightly. This isn't always the case. especially where the person is super 
thin and fit, but more often than not, this is a tell tale sign of ageing. 
Next is the way the skin discolors. Older people have been in the sun more. Their skin has developed 
discoloration blemishes and such like. As the skin gets older, not only does it lose its elasticity, but also 
its continuous tone. Older people have more blotchy skin, as a general rule. 
Obviously, because of the loss of elasticity, we start to see the appearance of wrinkles. Another major 
change in the actually morphology of the face is that people tend to put on a little weight as they get 
older. Also, as the skin relaxes, the face expands slightly. One last major change: the eyes discolor, 
especially the white areas. 
Peripheral to the face are changes like hair color changes, teeth discoloration etc. 
Obviously not all these changes happen to everybody. Everyone ages in a different way as we are all 
susceptible to different environmental conditions. life stresses etc. We are going to use these changes as 
a guideline. and make our way from there. For this project, we are going to attempt: 
• Changes of face pigmentation 
Changes of face morphology 
• Changes of eye color 
• 
Changes in skin consistency 
A change of hair color 
• 
Adding wrinkles 
155 

Chapter 6 
The face- pigmentation 
156 
Let's start by looking at Kirsten's face. Not much in the way of any pigmentation inconsistency, so we'll 
use Elements to introduce some! 
1 
Open up kirsten. jpg from the CD-ROM and take a look for yourself. 
2. 
To get started, simply duplicate the Background layer and change the blending mode of this 
new layer to Linear Light. 
This changes the contrast of the photograph quite considerably. 
We're basically looking for high contrast here (you'll see why in a 
moment) and this blending mode is good for this. 

Ageing a Face 
3 
Now let's make a merged copy of this 
layer (Select > All, Edit > Copy Merged, 
Edit > Paste) and change its blending 
mode to Luminosity. Again, we're 
looking for changes in the lighting, and 
nothing else. We can turn off the 
visibility of our original Linear Light 
blended layer now. 
Remember that when we make a merged copy, it's like taking a 
photo of the way all the layers look together. If your blending made 
is set to default far this layer (which would be the 
ormal setting), 
all the layers underneath this made will no longer be doing any-
thing to the image - they will be hidden by the merged layer. You 
can actually turn the visibility of all these layers off if you like. just 
remember that this merged layer is replacing everything we've done 
up until this paint- see it as a representative of our image so far. 
Notice how the Luminosity blending mode picks up a lot of the contrast from our merged 
Lin ar Light layer, which is what we're going for. 
We've already got some nice skin discoloration going, adding a year or two onto Kirsten's age. 
So now she's what, 27, 28? And we're just getting warmed up! 
The contrast is a bit much however, especially around the eyes. 
157 

Chapter 6 
158 
4. 
Make another merged copy of the image thus far. and change the blending mode of this layer 
to Lighten. Turn off the Luminosity merged layer we just made. We're just basically adding 
layers at this point to try, mess with the lighting on the skin - to break it up a bit. I also used 
the Eraser to remove the eyes on this layer. as I was just interested in affecting the skin at 
this point. and the effect was making the eyes way too dark. So we're compounding layers-
each one we add is affecting all the others. Let's have a look at how this has gone so far: 
Notice 
that 
the 
difference between 
the first and third 
picture 
is 
fairly 
subtle. Have a look 
at the layers we've 
used: 

Ageing a Face 
A note about experimentation 
We've used the second layer (labeled here as lum) which is our second picture. in order to create the 
lighting for the third picture. So actually, we can go ahead and delete the second layer- it's a piggyback 
to get the third. A fairly odd thing to do in a way- create a layer and then end up deleting it. but what 
we're doing here is looking for a specific type of lighting- we're trying to emphasize the discoloration 
in the face. In order to get to the third image. we need to really bring out the possible discoloration in 
the skin. Kirsten has good skin, so we needed to use a lighting effect that would totally exaggerate the 
tones of the skin- which is what we did with our luminosity layer. Once we had achieved this. we used 
this Luminosity merged layer as a springboard to get the lighting we wished to achieve. 
This is easy enough for me to explain. But what about when you're sitting at home with your own 
projects? How will you know what layers to create and when? Break it down for yourself. First question: 
What do I need to achieve? Don't worry about the techniques you're going to use. Start just by answering 
this question: "\ need to discolor the skin; I need to exaggerate skin blemishes". Then you can move on 
to: "How am I going to achieve this?" 
Sometimes you will know the answer. sometimes you won't. Not to worry, there's a solution for both! In 
this specific instance I knew the answer - I knew what blending modes to use. But let's look at the 
situation where this isn't the case. Let's pretend I didn't have a clue which blending mode to use. or which 
layers to create. 
If you're looking to create a lighting effect, the first thing to do is always duplicate the Background layer. 
Always do this. There are two reasons here: 
Firstly, we're going to be messing with the image a lot. It pays to have 
the original handy as a frame of reference. Remember we're going for 
a subtle look- we want things to look realistic. If we make Kirsten look 
like a prune, no one is going to believe that she's really old. A good 
practice to get into is: whenever you make a change - in this case a 
lighting change - turn all your layers off leaving only the Background 
layer on -
compare what you've done to the original. Is the 
enhancement you're making believable? 
Secondly. the best and most natural way to make lighting changes that 
will be realistic is to use the existing lighting in the image. This means 
duplicating the background image and using that duplicate layer to 
enhance the lighting of the layer below it - which of course is our 
Background layer. We do this by changing the blending mode of the 
duplicated layer. This means that the two layers are going to combine 
in an interesting way. Blending modes affect the lighting of an image in 
all sorts of ways, and as I've said before. it pays to cycle through all the 
different modes just to see which ones work- even if you know before 
hand which mode you're going to use. 
159 

Chapter 6 
So what we've really done up until now is add a bit more lighting to the face, but at the same time 
highlighted areas of skin discoloration slightly. The change in lighting is less important than the fact 
that this change has caused the discoloration to become emphasized. Remember we're trying to be 
believable here, so we're going for a subtle approach. 
That said, let's leave subtlety behind for the time being. We need to do something about the facial 
morphology before continuing. 
The face - morphology 
160 
Let's have a look at a reference photo I dug out. Pictures of people who naturally are your target age 
are one of your best tools in creating a realistic looking face. This one can be found on the CD-ROM. 
entitled oldMouth. j pg: 
Notice the way the skin comes away from the jaw in the middle, and the cheeks have drooped a bit. 
Let's try emulating that. 
1. 
Make a merged copy of everything Gust as we've done before) and we'll get to work on the 
shape of the face with the Liquify tool (Filter > Distort> Liquify .. . ). 
Another copy-merging tip: the command works by taking a picture 
of the exact state of affairs. which allows you to paste this to a new 
layer- so hidden layers will obviously be ignored- it's just replicat-
ing exactly how things look at present. It won't work if you are on 
a hidden layer. If you're trying to use this command and it's not 
working, check to see if you currently have a hidden layer selected. 

Ageing a Face 
2. 
I used a 260 sized brush with 70 brush pressure in order to pull the cheeks down and adjust 
the jaw slightly. 
T ... _ 
Your brush size depends on what you're trying to achieve here. obviously. I used a brush roughly 
the size of the oval in the above image of the old mouth so I could make a large yet subtle 
change. I also pulled the skin away from the right hand side of the mouth a little bit. In addition 
to this, I used our Transform tool to stretch the entire image a little bit horizontally- to make 
the face a little heavier. The morphology of the face tends to change a bit in this way as a person 
gets older, in addition to the skin sagging a bit: 
161 

Chapter 6 
162 
Wow, that really makes a major change to the look of the person! But they could have just 
put on weight. Let's start addressing the skin again. 
In order to achieve this, we're going to borrow some of the skin from our study photo. 
3. 
Cut these areas out from our study image (oldMouth. j pg) and 
paste them onto new layers on our project. (I called these layers 
mouth wrinkle and cheek wrinkle). Notice that the orientation of 
the face is in the opposite direction, so we will have to flip the 
images around. (Image> Rotate> Flip Layer Horizontal). 
4. 
For this piece, set the blending mode to Darken, which helps 
merge the piece into the background. 
Basically, this blending mode will merge the pixels together in such 
a way as to darken the resultant merge. Sa if you're merging a light 
piece onto a dark piece, the resultant will use the tone (how light or 
dark it is) of the darker layer and set the tone of the piece it's merg-
ing. 

Ageing a Face 
It's not totally consistent; as you can see the area to the left of the mouth is slightly lighter, but 
that's OK- we're going for a patchy skin look anyway! 
The effect is perhaps a little bit too subtle. As you can see, I've cut the bottom circle area out 
of the raw material image and pasted it to a new layer (our mouth wrinkle layer). 
I've used the Eraser around the edges to make the piece fit in with the image, but in doing so. 
we've lost quite a bit of the texturing. Let's go back and make a new layer and this time make 
sure that wrinkle at the corner of the mouth comes with it! 
5. 
Head back to our raw material mouth image and use 
our Selection and Move tools to drag another piece 
of raw material across to our project. We'll keep the 
old layer, as it still adds a bit of a wrinkle which is 
good. We're going to call our new layer corner 
mouth wrinkle: 
6. 
Much better. Do the same thing with the left cheek: paste from the original study piece (we're 
going to use oldCheek. jpg here), use the Marquee tool to select the area shown in the image 
on the following page. 
163 

Chapter 6 
164 
7. 
Drag this to your project with the Move tool. flip the image around, set the blending mode 
to Darken and use a soft edged Eraser on the edges of the image to make it blend in better. 
Our image so far: 
Cheeks as a general rule don't get too wrinkly, so don't go too over-
board here. 

Ageing a Face 
The Eyes 
Time to get started on the eyes. What is it 
about old people that changes in the eyes? 
Let's have a look at a new study image. 
old.Eyesl . jpg: 
A number of things: firstly. the eye takes on a yellowish tinge. There's also a kind of build up of film on 
the eye that we need to take into account. 
I was lucky in this instance - my source image and destination 
image (our projecV were taken more or less at the same angle. If 
this isn't the case, you're probably going to have to make do with 
the Transform tool until you've got the perspective right. 
1. 
To get this right, cut the eye out of where it is, 
flip it around and shrink it so that it's more or 
less in the right place with the correct 
orientation. I used the Rectangular Marquee to 
select the piece I wanted (from my source 
image), then the Move tool to drag it across to 
our project (where it automatically becomes a 
new layer); then I flipped it (Image > Rotate > 
Flip Layer Horizontal) and used the Transform 
tool (CTRL + n to resize it till I was happy that it 
fitted in properly. 
165 

Chapter 6 
166 
2. 
All we really want from this area is the white of the eye - or in this case, the yellow, so 
remove most of it using the Eraser tool once more. 
3. 
As you can see, all that actually remains from the source 
piece is the white of the eye on the left hand side of the 
pupil -
I erased everything else around it from our 
source piece and just left that. 
I ended up keeping a little piece of skin on the left of 
the eye too - a small fold that looked realistic to me. I 
called this layer left eye when I as done with it. Once 
again, a fairly subtle and therefore realistic change. We 
might need to address the right hand side of the eye, but 
let's move on for the time being. 
Here are some great wrinkles we can use for the right eye. 

Ageing a Face 
4. 
In exactly the same manner. cut and paste the area 
above the eye (source photo is oldEyes2. jpg on the 
CD) onto a new layer, then erase the bits around it: 
Because I shrank this piece to the right size (using the Transform 
tooV. it was just a matter of using the eraser to blend it in properly. 
5. 
Use the Marquee tool on the source image and borrow wrinkles from just above the eye. Using 
the Move tool, drag this selected area from the source and drop it onto our project. Have the 
top layer of the project selected when you do this so that the piece we've stolen appears in a 
new layer at the top of the layer order. 
6. 
Use your Move tool again to position the piece in the 
right place. Once done. you might need to resize the 
piece with CTRL + T, if it's too large or small to match the 
project appropriately. With this done, change the 
blending mode to Darken (if the piece you've pasted 
stands out too much) and use that Eraser tool (with a 
soft-edged brush) to blend the edges of the new piece 
in with the project beneath it. 
167 

Chapter 6 
Skin consistency - forehead 
168 
We've been quite lucky with the skin in this project. Sometimes the difference in the skin tones is so 
great that you have to use a Hue/Saturation adjustment, or a different blending mode on the pasted 
piece in order to get things to match up. We're going for blotchy, but we're also going for realism. 
Take a step back: if you think the hues of the new piece and the project are too different, try adjusting 
the hue or changing the blending mode (I usually cycle through all of them to see what will work best). 
Having finished the eyes, we need to move on upwards to the forehead. How about a nice wrinkle in 
this area? We could add lots of wrinkles here. but one should be enough. The person isn't frowning 
in the photograph, so introducing too many forehead wrinkles might be a tad unnatural. 
Here's the image I used for 
the study, on the CD-ROM as 
oldForehead . jpg: 
1. 
Not much in the way of wrinkles are 
there, so cut and paste the larger wrinkle 
on the right. then erase the edges. 
2. 
For this layer, use a Darken blending mode once more just to make things look more natural. 
The source image is quite light. using Darken means we get to blend this piece in better with 
our project. 

Ageing a Face 
3. 
Duplicate this layer, flip it 
around and shave some of it off 
to use as a wrinkle for the nose: 
One major thing is bothering me. We've increased the sagging in the left cheek, but the skin in 
this region is really smooth. 
4. 
To fix this, copy and paste from 
the original mouth study image. 
oldMouth. j pg: 
5. 
Use a Luminosity blending mode this time, since the tone is a little bit too off to just erase 
around the edges and be done. 
Using the Darken blending mode doesn't work that well in this case as we're blending over a 
rather dark area. I first tried Darken but found that I lost almost all of the texture - which is 
what we're going for. This blending mode works well in this instance as the tone (light and dark) 
matches well. and we still get the texture coming through. So which blending mode do you use 
when? That's always a tough one. There are sometimes preferred blending modes to use in 
certain instances, but I find that it's always good to cycle through them all - it only takes a few 
seconds, and often you'll find a blending mode that works a lot better than the one you thought 
you needed to use. Overlay and Soft Light are often like this - I often think I want to use the 
Overlay blending mode, but Soft Light (which is actually very similar) sometimes gives me a 
softer effect which works better for the particular image I'm working on. 
169 

Chapter 6 
170 
By this stage, we've covered so mony blending modes in this book, 
that you will by now have a much better understanding of the 
effects each can have on a face! 
In this instance, Luminosity works nicely to 
blend in with the skin tone, and once the 
edges have been erased, things look quite 
realistic: 
6. 
While in the area, we need to address the 
region just above the mouth -
way too 
youthful still. Cut a piece from the original 
mouth study: 
7. 
The Eraser tool will once again help you blend 
things in. Again, the effect is pretty subtle, but 
remember we're going for believable, not 
creature from the black lagoon .... 

Ageing a Face 
It's amazing how one thing just sparks everything else 
off. The area to the left of the left eye, and the region 
just underneath it bother me a little. up until this 
point. The area is just too smooth: 
8. 
Once again borrowing from our eye study image 
(oldEyes. jpg). remedie the situation. 
As you can see, we are applying the same 
methodology over and over again: sampling from our 
source image using the Marquee and Move tools, 
adding the piece to our project and then using the 
Eraser tool and blending mode change to make the 
new piece look natural. 
When I first applied this patch, I was a bit worried that it didn't fit in that well. In this instance 
however. I left things as is. I kind of liked the way the skin looked bloated/blotchy. I could use 
a blending mode to drop this patch in more naturally. but this doesn't seem necessary in this 
case. 
171 

Chapter 6 
172 
Remember, all we're really doing at this point is borrowing materi-
al from our study images, and blending it into the project on sepa-
rate layers. This isn't a particularly difficult task, but the important 
thing to keep in mind at this point is a sense of balance. Don't over-
do one area and underdo another. People's faces tend to age fairly 
uniformly. Yes the skin gets unevenly discolored, but on the whole 
wrinkles appear over the entire face: if you've been a sun 
worshipper, you're bound for prunedom, if not, you're probably just 
going to get craw's feet and some mouth ley-lines. 
Performing this part of the project is very much like painting in dabs. Apply a change. and 
then see what else needs to be done ... 
9. 
With this in mind, finish off the right-hand side of the left 
eye. which has been far too white: 
To do this, just went go and drag in more source material 
(from the same image). in the same way that we did 
before when handling the left region of this eye. 
Finishing touches 
When you're working on this kind of project, it's vital to constantly take a step back. Try and critically 
assess the image yourself. If someone told you this was a picture of an older person, what would give 
it away? 
The eyebrows. This was the first thing that jumped out at me when I asked myself this question. Old 
people still have eyebrows; they just have much finer hair, and less of it. 
1. 
To 
remove 
most 
of the 
eyebrows, use the Clone Stamp 
tool with a low opacity (20%) 
brush. Borrow the area just 
above the eyebrows and stamp 
this over the top of them. 
Because the brush is a fairly 
low 
opacity, 
they 
don't 
disappear completely; they just 
get a bit smothered: 

Ageing a Face 
2. 
One final touch up to perform is addressing the line of the mouth. I use the same technique 
for obtaining source material as before. Because of the relaxing of the skin, the line of the lip 
wouldn't be so hard, so just borrow from our original mouth study image and fix this problem. 
I actually use a Normal blending mode on this one as the color and contrast of the skin match 
really well. Obviously, again I need to flip the borrowed image horizontally. 
The Hair 
Time to get cracking on the hair. 
1. 
The first thing we need to do is select the hair using the Selection Brush tool. 
2. 
Once done. copy the hair to a new layer and desaturate it using a Hue/Saturation adjustment 
(Enhan e > Adjust Color > Hue/Saturation). 
A little bit too harsh, don't you think? 
173 

Chapter 6 
174 
3. 
To fix this, duplicate this layer, apply a slight Gaussian Blur to it (with a Radius of around 5-
1 0), and then change the blending mode to Screen. Using screen means the light areas 
become lighter and the dark areas on the layer you're using to blend with (in this case, our 
duplicated hair layer) are discarded. So most of the gray stays the same, except for the light 
areas which become a lot lighter. This is useful to us because even people with whitish hair 
have darker grayer areas underneath. 
4. 
As you can see, I've left a little bit of color in the hair here and there. Making it too uniform 
would be a little bit unrealistic, in my opinion. I achieve this by using a soft-edged Eraser on 
the edges of the gray hair layer - which means that some of the color of the original hair 
shine through from underneath. I could also not be so accurate with the Selection Brush and 
leave some of the hair unselected - but it's a lot easier to use the Eraser tool and you can at 
least see the effect taking shape. If I use the selection tool haphazardly, I won't see the effect 
at that point - because we were still selecting the area, so none of it will be gray at that 
stage! 
More finishing touches 
Hmmm. The eyebrows are looking a little bit underdone - perhaps we got a tad carried away with that 
Clone Stamp tool. 
1. 
No problem. just refer once more to our study (this time old.Eyebrows. jpg) and borrow a 
few pieces of eyebrow: 

Taking a step back, the mouth is still looking a bit too youthful. 
2. 
Add in more wrinkles just above the 
lips, by once again borrowing from the 
mouth study image and using the 
same procedure as in all the other 
adding of areas. This time, however, I 
stole a piece of the chin, rotated it 180 
degrees and blended it in. No one will 
know when you're done! 
Much better! One last look around the 
image 
and 
I notice 
one 
really 
important thing. Old people do not 
really have shiny skin. The skin is 
rougher. and not as good a reflector of 
light. 
Ageing a Face 
175 

Chapter 6 
3 
So. add another layer. using the Darken 
blending mode. and this time use the Airbrush 
(with a brush about the size of the pupil of the 
left eye) to just paint some matt skin over the 
shiny areas. 
4 
Use the Eyedropper tool to select a fairly 
average color (a color that to your mind 
represents an average of the skin tone for the 
whole image) and use this as your paint. Use 
the brush at fairly low opacity (1 5%) so you can 
apply the paint evenly and carefully. 
Well, Kirsten certainly looks a lot older: 
You can deconstruct my final PSD by opening it up 
from the CD-ROM; it's called kirstenOl d.psd. 
Further ideas 
176 
There are still a few areas that we could work on. Firstly, as you can see I haven't touched the neck. 
Necks often get wrinkles pretty much before any other area. This would need to be addressed. 
Secondly, the left cheek has lost quite a bit of texture. so we might want to fix that. Sometimes things 
don't go quite as planned and you will need to step back. critically assess the work you've done. and 
decide which (if any) areas need redoing. While we're at it. the right eye needs to be a bit duller. So 
who's going to fix all this? 
Well, why don't you have a crack at it? All the files are available to you. Try a bit of cut and pasting 
yourself. When you're done. show someone the image and see if they believe this to be a 55-year-old 
woman. As you can see from the images below, you can go in either direction. In the first image. I 
used lighting and airbrushing to make Kirsten look really pretty (not much of a task as she's already 
really pretty!). I think you'll agree that the difference between the two images is certainly substantial. 
Have a look at kirstenYoung. psd on the CD to see how I created this glossy image. 
Is this really the same person? 
Photoshop Elements gives you the power to go in any direction you want with your photography. Tasks 
that would have been impossible (or at least very expensive) using traditional methods are now just a 
few hours away. The things you can achieve are virtually limitless with a little planning and a little time. 

Ageing a Face 
177 


Fantasy Fac s 
What we'll learn in this chapter 
In this chapter. we leave reality behind and set out to 
create some truly stunning fantasy figures out of our 
faces. We'll show you how to turn ordinary people 
into fairies, witches, vampires, and more, giving each a 
thorough and out-of-this-world transformation that 
leaves no facial features untouched. Among the 
techniques we'll cover: 
• 
Using the Clone Stamp, Dodge tool and 
more to create fantasy facial features. 
• 
Creating other-worldly lighting and layer 
blending effects to complement our faces. 
• 
Using the Liquify filter to enhance and 
warp facial features. 
• 
Create fairies, witches. devils, sirens and 
vampires in no time at all. 

Chapter 7 
From Star Wars to Lord of the Rings, the appetite for fantasy figures has gone through the roof. In this 
chapter. we're going to work over some of the most effective techniques for turning your photographs 
into fantasy masterpieces that wouldn't look out of place on any movie poster. or for that matter in 
any other world or mystic realm. 
The techniques we're after are occasionally subtle, but always effective. Along the way, we're going to 
be touching on some techniques that the professionals use - so buckle yourself in! 
Of course, fantasy is a pretty abstract concept. so we have to make sure we're focused on what we're 
doing. We have to find some kind of way to generate ideas for each picture. 
You'll quickly realize, fantasy can be pretty much anything - it can be the abstract, the bizarre or even 
the unbelievable. It's a good idea to generate some kind of backstory to your picture in order to realize 
exactly what will be needed. If it's fantasy you want, you'd better start fantasizing! 
If you're looking to create the complete composition. as well as focusing on the faces, it's a good idea 
to work on their environments too. Remember back in Chapter 1 when we saw how the surroundings 
managed to alter the way we interpreted Elizabeth's cute (or was that mischievous) smile? To that end, 
we'll be adjusting the backgrounds of the images to help contribute towards the overall effect, and 
create a realistic setting for our fantasy characters. 
Nalith - the fairy 
180 
Unlike previous tutorials, for this chapter we're 
going to be working with shots that I've thought 
a bit about beforehand. I had my intentions for 
the picture in mind when I took the photo. and 
also when I chose the model. What I've done 
here is make efforts to use a person who looks 
a bit like they might suit the role ... Nalith the 
Fairy. 
On top of that, the subject is wearing distinctive 
eye make-up. and has brushed her hair in an 
interesting style so that her ears are showing a 
little. A white blouse seems like a good idea too, 
as this seemed to correspond with the classic 
vision of what a fairy might wear. So you see. it's 
not rocket science. and it's not Hollywood 
make-up design. but it's just employing a little 
thought before you get the image into Elements. 

Preparation 
By way of preparation, I've made up the following 
image for a background, which is created by various 
30 elements layered on top of one another using 
different blending modes such as Screen and 
Multiply. The image is included with the source files, 
entitled nalithBackground. jpg. 
1. 
First off. let's open nalith . jpg and put 
the figure on a new layer. 
We've visited 
various ways of doing this in previous 
chapters, so choose your weapon, select 
the head and body. and copy them to a 
higher level. If you can't make your mind 
up, I suggest just lassoing around her and 
clicking through Layer > 
ew > Layer via 
Copy! Call the new layer nalith. 
2. 
Copy the nalithBackgl:rurrl.jP3 
image and paste it onto a new 
layer 
in 
your 
new 
PSD. 
Alternatively, just drag the 
image from its window into 
your Nailith window and it will 
automatically paste in. 
Fantasy Faces 
181 

Chapter 7 
182 
Retouching 
OK, so this is no snapshot, but the photo's poor quality has given us a bad lighting and ugly grain. If 
you look at the original photo, she appears not to have a chin because there isn't enough light to cast 
a sufficient shadow. Fairies have a range of unique physical characteristics, but being chinless isn't one 
of them. So we have to make one! 
1. 
Make a selection underneath her chin 
using the lasso tool with a feather value 
equivalent to the rest of the photo's 
edges (about 4). Ensure Anli-aliased is 
checked. The selection should cover 
about half of her neck so we have enough 
space on which to add shadows. 
2. 
Create 
a 
new 
layer 
((TRL +SHtFT+N) and call it 
chin shadow. Select a dark 
matching shadow color 
from a suitable area of her 
skin with the Eyedropper 
tool - I selected from her 
cheek/jaw on the right half 
of the image. 
3. 
Select the Brush tool with 
quite a large brush with 
hardness set to 0, and 
between 
10% and 
30% 
opacity. 
/ 
li'S'M 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
-~ 

Fantasy Faces 
4. 
The best way to go about this is to brush quite intensely near her chin, and ease off further 
down to create a realistic fade. Finally, select a layer blending mode of Multiply to help the 
shadow blend more seamlessly with her skin. 
Now we've sorted that out. we need to give her some supermodel skin like the images in glossy 
magazines. 
5. 
With the Clone Stamp tool, select the areas of her skin that appear more clean/smooth and 
apply these to the areas that need improvement. You learned how to do this in Retouching 
Photos. 
Pretend Nalith is going to be on the front cover of Glamour and be ruthless with every fickle 
imperfection! 
6. 
To provide a little extra facial definition, 
create a new layer (contrast) and use the 
same techniques we used on her chin to 
add more contrast -
apply to her 
cheekbones. neck and hair. Once again, 
use a Multiply blending mode. 
183 

Chapter 7 
184 
7. 
Now we've darkened areas, the logical thing to do would be to bring some out into the light. 
To achieve this, create a new layer (h ighlight) and this time brush with a brighter color. When 
you've highlighted the areas you want to, apply a Screen blending mode in the Layers palette. 
This should bring those areas out a treat! 
8. 
Finally, to give her that semi-shiny look. hide 
the background layer so the image becomes 
transparent. Next, choose the Select> All and 
Edit > Copy Merged menu options, and paste 
it at the top of the layer stack before switching 
the background layer back on. On the new 
merged layer. select Filter> Noise > Median 
with a radius of about 8. 

Fantasy Faces 
Ears 
9. 
Next, apply a Soft Light blending mode and bring up the Hue/Saturation window (CTRL +U) to 
reduce the saturation to -60 so that it doesn't look too color burned. 
10. You may be wanting to use Levels to perform this kind of skin-glowing task. but Median does 
a better job because it makes the skin look even smoother. 
The four stages of facial retouching 
Now it's time to turn our attention to the ears. 
1. 
Choose the Lasso tool to make a selection for her sexy new ear 
shape. Make sure the selection overlaps the real ear so we can 
make a nice blend between them. 
2. 
Create a new layer called car fill, choose a color close to that of 
the existing ear and fill the selection. 
185 

Chapter 7 
3. 
Next, copy a selection of skin from her face (from the nalith layer) and paste it on top of the 
ear fill as a new layer. Then, link it with the ear fill layer and group the layers via CTRL+G. This 
crops it to the required shape. Apply a Multiply blending mode for a subtle blend. 
4. 
To finish off, use the Dodge tool to make the ear look more realistic -
brushing the edges for lighting or holding down ALT for shading to give 
it a more beveled look. Once you are happy with the ear's appearance. 
merge the skin with the ear fill layer. 
5. 
Fortunately, her other ear looks the same, so we can just copy the new 
ear extension and flip it horizontally before positioning it correctly. Now 
doesn't that look sweet! 
Wings 
186 
Now, it's a fact that Photoshop Elements makes you want to fly before you can walk. Resist this! Before 
I started making the wings, I sat looking at the image for maybe an hour - planning on how to make 
fairy wings that are translucent. and of course how to make them look convincing. 
First I created a base and added several textures and translucency effects before simply duplicating 
what I'd created. When I had finished with the wings I was laughing a bit. because it was easier than I 
had imagined it to be. I can now make wings! I'm sure the techniques and approach that I took will 
be replicated in some way in my future projects. Well. there we have it. a finished fairy! No, only joking 
... let's make those wings. 
The base 
The base is built up in almost the same way as 
the extended ear. 
1. 
On a new layer (left wing base) create 
a shape for the left wing. I found 
using the Line tool is best for this 
delicate operation. You'll have to link 
all the eventual shape layers and press 
CTRL +E to Merge Li nked. Make sure 
you create a closed shape. so you can 
fill it in with color (I chose beige). 
The opacity should be fairly low 
so we con see through to the 
background. 

2. 
In the Layer palette. drag them down to below the 
nalith layer. Repeat this action for all of the wings Cleft 
and lower lett. right and lower right). so you end up 
with four layers: 
Next, for each wing, we're going to create a gradient 
layer. Let's run through it once. 
3. 
On left wing base, select all the beige with the Magic 
Wand tool. Create a new layer called left wing gradient. 
4. 
Using the Gradient tool, create 
a white linear gradient (white 
to transparent) that starts near 
her back and fades off about a 
third in on the wing. 
Fantasy Faces 
187 

Chapter 7 
188 
5. 
Give the gradient a Soft Light blending mode so that the wing is brighter close to her body 
and becomes darker towards the top, helping make the wing look as if it is slightly pointing 
backwards into the image. 
6. 
Repeat for all wings. 
7. 
To add more strength to the wing, 
select the Edit > Stroke option (while 
you're on each base level) with a 
Center Location on a few pixels (I've 
used 3) to give the wing an outline. 
This makes the wing look more 
contained and stronger for flying -
even though we all know fairies fly off 
of pure magical energy, and according 
to studies their wings are just a 
distraction from keeping their secret 
of controlling energy! 

Fantasy Faces 
The texture 
The texture for the wing was a product of pure experimentation. 
8. 
Create a new layer called wing lines. and make a pattern with a thin brush. adding random 
diagonal lines all over the wing. Then apply Filter > Distort > Wave to give the wing a more 
organic look and feel. You can, of course. play with the settings (this is a very versatile tool), 
but I used these: 
WoJVC 
Nuniler of Gensoton: 
SC41e 
You can see the lines here, 
before and after the filter has 
been applied: 
Mn 
Horil. 
Vert. 
Type -----~ 
r.s .... 
Triangle 
Square 
Randcmze I 
OK 
Cancel 
UrdelinedAteas: --~-~-.........,. 
r \llrop Around 
(:" Repeat Edge Pi>cel$ 
189 

Chapter 7 
190 
9. 
Keep the result of the texture inside of 
the wing canvas and erase where 
required using the Lasso tool. Blend it in 
using the Soft Light blending mode 
again. 
10. For depth of effect, you may like to 
duplicate the texture several times and 
give each of them different opacity 
percentages and color hues. putting 
them on different areas within the wing 
canvas. 
11. OK. so let's add a little more texture 
here. Use a brush to make random 
curvy patterns all over the wing. The 
overall effect suits the wing rather well. 
It's best to use an Overlay blending 
mode on this layer. to make it glow a 
little bit. Again. it's totally up to you. but 
to make the effect a little more subtle. I 
used a 30% Eraser tool on the lines. just 
to work them into the wing membrane. 
It would be brilliant to add a little 
translucency to the wings. 
12. On the Layer palette, CTRL-CucK on the base layer for each wing. This selects everything in 
that layer. Next. select the newback layer and apply a Gaussian Blur (Filter> Blur> Gaussian 
Blur). I used a strongish blur of about 1 0. 

Fantasy Faces 
Final touches 
1. 
On top of all the layers, create a new one and add a linear gradient in the bottom (white to 
transparent) to give the sense that she's glowing a little bit out of pure magic. 
2. 
It's popular among fairies to use glowing 
makeup that attracts more attention to 
the eyes so, using the Brush tool with no 
hardness and full opacity. make a 
combination of dots next to her eye. 
Give them a glowing appearance using 
an Overlay blending mode. Put the 
additional makeup on the other eye by 
duplicating it and flipping it horizontally. 
Personally. I decided to put 40% opacity 
on the left-hand side and 30% opacity 
on the right. since her face is slightly 
darker on that side. 
3. 
At this stage, I wanted to see a little bit more glow in the whole image. I merged the image into 
a new layer called diffuse glow (Select > All then Edit > Copy Merged before pasting on top of 
the layer stack), and then applied a Diffuse Glow (Filter > Distort > Diffuse Glow) with a 
Graininess factor of 0. Glow Amount of 2, and Clear Amount of 6. Finally, I set the opacity for 
the layer to 15%. 
Focal depth 
Lastly is a variation on the technique used in the chapter Freaky Faces. We're going to do fake the depth 
perception a little bit by erasing Blur. 
1. 
First. duplicate the diffuse glow layer and then apply a Gaussian Blur with a factor of 9. Using 
the Eraser tool with a low opacity brush (about 20%). start erasing the areas in the image you 
want to keep sharp and in focus. 
Personally. I tend to use a fairly short focal depth because it makes 
the image more interesting. This helps to more easily emphasize 
where I want the view focused and which areas are more or less 
important. 
191 

Chapter 7 
192 
I also wanted her eyes, and most of the face to look sharper. The upper wings are supposed 
to be pointing a bit backwards, so I didn't erase the Gaussian Blur further out on the wings 
because they are further into the image (less in focus). I divided the image into five depths: 
Foreground -for the glowing energy balls which we'll add in a moment 
Middleground - her face 
1st set of wings 
2nd set of wings 
Actual background - least focus 
2. 
The final touch is to add some glowing magic balls, which will surround Nalith. They were 
simply achieved by distributing several white dots of varying sizes using the Brush tool in a 
new layer. I then simply applied an Outer Glow layer effect with a slight red tinge. 
And there we have the finished portrait. Talk about someone whose beauty is out of this world. Now 
go find some friends or family to experiment on! 
As ever. our PSD file on our special CD-ROM. You'll find it in the 
Fantasy (older. entitled nalithFairy. psd! 

Fantasy Faces 
193 

Chapter 7 
Delonia - the siren 
194 
I'm still unsure what Delonia is. but that furry 
coat makes me think of a bird; I think she'd 
definitely pass as some sort of siren. 
You can find Delonia's original portrait on the 
CD-ROM. 
Retouching 
To begin retouching the image, we need to paste her onto a new layer. With that hair, I must admit. 
this is a bit of a chore, but follow this advice. and you'll be grand: 
1. 
Use the Selection Brush to select her face and shoulders. leaving only that troublesome 
blonde hair. 
2. 
Then, pick the Magic Wand tool and set its Tolerance level to around 1 0. Make sure 
Contiguous is unchecked so that all instances of the color are selected - not just the color 
immediately adjacent to your clicking point. 
3. 
Holding down the SHIFT key, select her hair, tone by tone, until the whole barnet is 
surrounded by a crawling marquee. 
Note - if you acddentally select a load of the background. just 
Undo until you've got back to a safer position. 
This took me about 10 minutes to achieve. 

Fantasy Faces 
4. 
Create a new layer via copy (call it delonia). 
Create another new layer below it, fill it with 
white (Edit> Fill. .. > White), and call it white. 
5. 
Now, start selecting the ugly areas and edges (containing grain and elements that you couldn't 
select) with the Lasso tool. and then fill them with white. Where the hair is still blocky and 
pixilated, use the Dodge tool to burn out the hair to blend with the white. making the edges 
less prominent. 
6. 
Add a Radial Gradient (white to transparent) on a new fill 
layer to create a sense of depth in the image. 
Now we're going to change a few colors. We'll do this 
by adding adjustment layers. To find the color you want 
is very much a process of experimentation, and I tend 
to add lots of them and change them until I'm happy 
with the result. 
Solid Colo! ... 
• I 
Pattern ... 
Levels ... 
Brightness/Contrast... 
Hue/Satwation ... 
Gradient Map ... 
Invert 
Threshold. .. 
Posterize ... 
195 

Chapter 7 
196 
7. 
Using the New Adjustment Layer 
button 
again, 
add 
a 
Hue/Saturation layer. In the reds, 
set the Hue to - 20. In the 
yellows, set it to - 40. Then, 
create a new Levels adjustment 
layer, and set it to the following: 
Of course. it's up to you what 
sort of tint you're after. but that 
about suits me. 
Levell!> 
' 
Charnel I RGB 
:o:J 
~tle-.oets : ~ 
JU7 1zss 
OK 
Cancel 
8. 
While we're at it. delete the shoulders with the Eraser tool. and be careful to go easy around 
the neck area to help create a nice tone. 
9. 
Delonia's skin doesn't need much retouching since the lighting was rather good from the 
beginning. However, you might want to do some cloning with the Clone Stamp tool. as we 
did with Nalith, applying the finer areas of her skin to where the less fine areas are. 
u 
+ 

Fur Coat 
The next step is to create her furry coat 
-imitation of course! 
10. Start by creating a new layer (coat) and 
making a selection with the Lasso tool for 
the base. and then click through the 
Filter > Render> Clouds menu option to 
get some texture. 
11. Press 
CTRL+U 
to 
open 
the 
Hue/Saturation dialog. Colorize the coat 
to a suitable pink: 
12. A few delicate deletes around the 
edges. and then a few brushstrokes 
across the shoulders should turn that 
blocky outline into something more 
tactile. In addition, try using the Smudge 
tool to create an extra furry outline! 
As you con see. we're wading through 
these tools. but as you've found in this 
book. even the most complex and 
amazing effects con be achieved with 
the right combination of tools and a bit 
of imagination! 
Fantasy Faces 
lhl ~ ~.lhn a hnn 
. 
OK 
Corcel 
197 

Chapter 7 
198 
13. Next. with a number of different brushes 
of a number of different sizes, work up the 
texture on the coat to refine the effect 
some more: 
14. Link all the adjustment layers together, and merge them so you have just the coa t. delonia, 
white and Ba kground layers. We're about to perform the masterstroke on Delonia's coat. 
Man. you'd want to buy this if you saw it in the local store! 
15. Copy pieces of her actual hair, resize them. duplicate them and place them randomly over 
her body to create the fur. Simple eh? And so effective! It's a good idea to distribute the 
pieces we copy very randomly, and also flip or rotate them so it's less visible that it was taken 
from her hair. A careful going-over with the Clone Stamp tool will also improve the subtlety 
of the effect. 
16. Finally, use the Eraser tool to remove any ugly edges that were copied across with the hair. 
What I chose to do was singe a few of the edges a little using the Dodge tool. It is also a good 
idea to put some hair behind her (on a new layer behind coat), so she looks like she is 
actually wearing the fur. 
17. As a final final touch, I adjusted the Saturation of the image so that it had only a 50% value. 
This makes a little color difference between the coat and the hair. 
Amazing huh? The things learned here have so many applications: I'll leave you to discover all the 
wondrous new tricks you can perform. 
If you want to check your version against mine. the final PSD is 
available for inspection on the CD-ROM -
it's called 
deloniaFur .psd! Zoom in on it and let us know ot what % 
zoom the fur starts looking fake! 
OK. now I know what you're thinking - "enough with the beauties, where's the monsters!?" 
Let's play Dr Frankenstein and create us a monster ... 

Fantasy Faces 
199 

Chapter 7 
Dakar- the devilish fiend 
200 
With this image, I wanted to create an ugly, 
devilish being. Once again, I've just applied a 
little bit of thought to the picture before I took 
it: having him start off making that really ugly 
face made it all so much easier, while his hair 
and clothes enforce the whole look. 
Hey, what do you mean I've got weird friends? 
trs important, and a great time-saver. to 
do os much os you can before taking the 
picture. saving Photoshop Elements for 
the truly Impossible stuff. It's very eosy to 
style your model's hair beforehand, but a 
little trickier to point that hair on in 
Elements! 
Here's what we want to end up with: 
Our motivation here is to take one bad boy and 
just emphasize him a little into a genuinely evil, 
bad boy. 
Now. I'm going to employ a little bit of cutting 
to the chase here - you'll need to prepare the 
image in exactly the same way as we did the 
others. 

Fantasy Faces 
1. 
Open dakar. jpg and cut the image out 
on to a new layer (call it devil, and then 
create a black background for him called 
black). You'll have to be pretty careful 
around that hair. but it's defined enough 
to use the Selection Brush. 
2. 
Next, it's time to add a bit of color. Make 
a selection encompassing all the exposed 
parts of skin - going deep into his hair 
roots to cover that area as well. Create a 
new adjustment layer and apply the 
coloring of your choice. I've used the 
following settings: 
Edn-1 Masll!r 
fU! 
Saturation· 
LIQhtno;s 
~ 
3 
c:::20 
F2iJ 
~ 
~ ~ 
~ 
r Colaoe 
p Prl!'llew 
3. 
To make it smooth and to remove the sharp edges by his hair, simply erase smoothly from his 
hair towards his face, using a low opacity Eraser. 
4. 
The rest should be easy now we've seen it in action with Nalith and Delonia. The most obvious 
changes are the ear, which we learned how to do with Nalith, and I removed his eyebrow using 
the Clone Stamp tool. You'll remember we did this in the earlier chapter on Freaky Faces. 
Next, if I say so myself, comes the moment of prime inspiration - that oddly spinal-looking 
construction down his throat, which is made up solely of Adam's Apples. Man, it shows you how 
wicked this guy must be if he swallowed three of the things! 
201 

Chapter 7 
202 
5. 
All you have to do is, on the devil layer, lasso and 
copy the lump and a circumference of skin. Then 
simply paste it onto a new layer above devil and 
maneuver it into position. (Note you may have to 
switch off the Hue/Saturation layer to avoid 
moving that around). Use a soft Eraser to calm 
those edges down a little. See! Textbook 
Elements! Simple and effective! 
6. 
To create the sharp teeth, use the Lasso tool to 
select areas where you anticipate the gaps to be. 
Then, on a new layer (teeth gaps), use the 
Eyedropper and Fill tools to select the dark color 
inside his mouth before using it to fill the gaps. 
To increase the nostril size, simple apply a bit of 
Clone Stamping on the devil layer. 
7. 
Of course. you can't pass up using an ace line like 
that defining his cheek, so on the devil layer. 
copy it, and paste it to its own layer (cheek line). 
Rotate. resize and move it to follow on from the 
existing line. As with the Adam's Apples, employ 
a soft Eraser to ease the obvious join. 

Fantasy Faces 
8. 
Now it's down to nit-picking. Select all (CTRL +A) and Copy Merged (CTRL +SHtFT+C). before 
pasting onto a new layer. Set the layer's blending mode to Multiply, which just darkens 
everything up a little. and makes it look more sinister. 
9. 
To finish things off. tint his wide eye yellow Oust with a low-opacity yellow paintbrush), and 
further seal his other eye with the Clone Stamp tool. by drawing a few flaps of skin over it to 
semi-seal it. 
( 
You can find our finished Dakar on the CD-ROM, called dakarFiend. psd. ] 
There we go, I think we have ourselves one bad fantasy dude! Enough to make Nailith and Delonia hide 
behind the sofa! Without bothering to wonder whether fairies and sirens have sofas. let's move on to 
make another bad boy, and this one's fangtastic ... 
203 

Chapter 7 
Vampiel- the vampire leader 
204 
With this image, I had no idea of the outcome, 
except that I wanted to make a sort of 
vampire-like figure. This 
was just pure 
experimentation from layer to layer, which is 
something you'll learn to do more and more 
successfully the more you get comfortable with 
Elements . 
... and here's what I ended up with: 
I like to think it's got some kind of back story 
to it -
there's certainly oodles of dramatic 
tension going on there -
an idea which is 
harking back to what we did with the little girl's 
face in Chapter 1. We've added context. So, 
let's give this one a go 

Fantasy Faces 
1. 
Open the image vampiel. jpg from the CD-ROM, duplicate the Background layer. and call the 
new layer vampiel. 
2. 
Start by distorting the face using the Filter > Distort > 
Spherize menu option over the entire new layer. making it 
inflate. Set the palette options to create an inverse sphere: 
3. 
The face has grown some spikes and the chin is now pointing out a bit. • 
4. 
Through a little use of the Liquify filter and using the Warp tool. tweak the nose tip and make 
the eyebrow look a bit meaner. 
205 

Chapter 7 
206 
5. 
To pursue the look in the eyes. simply 
use the Dodge tool to burn out the 
colors - giving them a very cold and 
intense look. The ear was done by ... 
well. you know by now! 
6. 
Next. take the time to mask the face 
and put it on a new layer (vampiel2), 
and 
then 
introduce 
a 
black 
background, as we did in the previous 
examples. 
7. 
To thunder it up a bit. add a Levels 
adjustment layer and set it to the 
following: 
8. 
To alter the coloring, create a new 
layer and fill it with a color similar to 
that of Vampiel's eyes -
a sort of 
yellowy green. Then, switch the layer's 
blending mode to Multiply. This 
should give Vampiel an unhealthy 
yellow tinge. Good for night vision! 
OK 
C<lal 
Auto 
1~1 -'l-'l 
P Prevew 
9. 
Create a Hue/Saturation adjustment layer and make the Hue +1 3. This should add a red, 
murderous feel to everything. 
10. OK, let's flip the image horizontally to make it look like he's going out for the hunt rather 
than coming home for his supper (Image > Rotate > Flip Horizontal). 
11. Once again, apply Filter > Distort > Spherize over the entire vampiel2 layer to make it inflate 
even more. Carefully delete any area of the coat that gives away our Spherize shenanigans, 
leaving his body in gloom. 
12. Duplicate the figure. and paste it on a layer just above the background. A quick resize, a slight 
rotate and a Gaussian Blur create a little different character - a vampire brother. 
You con look up vanpielTwins .pad on the CD-ROM-just don't look ot 
him the wrong woyf 

Fantasy Faces 
207 

Chapter 7 
Lothirade- the evil witch 
208 
Now we're going to took at a way of repurposing a picture with the utmost simplicity. Believe it or not. 
it's an evil remix of Natith using simple edits to create a whole different character. There are no special 
techniques involved. so this witt be relatively easy. 
1. 
Our starting point is the image of Nalith without the distracting energy balls, and without 
wings. The source file is included, catted lothiradeStart. psd, if you don't want to use 
your own. 
2. 
Start by darkening the whole of Natith's image using Levels. I used these settings: 
Ch<rnel I RGB 
3 ----
OK 
n.ut Lew~ r ~ 
fi34 
cancel 
3. 
Next, crop the whole thing to focus a bit more on her face and apply Filler > Distort > 
Spherize to her head, using the familiar -1 00 setting. Maybe we could start catting the 
Spherize filter the evil fitter, as it seems to do the trick for us every time! 
4. 
To easily change the expressions in her face. use the Warp toot in Filler > Distort > Liquify ... 
to do the following: 

Fantasy Faces 
• 
Drag the outsides of her eyebrows upwards: 
--. 
--r---:n 
~ 
• 
Push her brow down: 
----· . 
--~ 
,. 
209 

Chapter 7 
• 
Make her nose pointy: 
--
-~ 
·--
r 
• 
Give her mouth that sour look: 
210 

Fantasy Faces 
Now remember. liquify may be a wondertool, but that doesn't mean you 
should shirk on being carefuL You can mess things up very easily with a 
shoddy liqui(ication! 
--
5. 
Additionally, gradually fill her eyes with black. using the paintbrush at a 10% opacity. 
6. 
Next. select her face using the Lasso 
tool with a Feather value of 10 and 
paste it into a new layer (ghost) before 
applying the Screen blending mode. 
Using the Move tool. stretch the copy 
quite a bit towards the top right-hand 
corner to make it look as if it's her 
demonic soul flying out. 
7. 
A motion blur should add the finishing 
touch. 
211 

Chapter 7 
212 
8. 
Paint a quick black mask on a new layer (black mask) 
to blot out that virginal looking blouse, and to add a 
little evil drama to the bottom of her face. 
9. 
Finally, add a Hue/Saturation adjustment layer on top of everything, and reduce the 
saturation to around -50. You might also choose to add a greeny tinge by creating a new layer 
(tinge) and filling it with a greeny color. and applying a Multiply blending mode. 
And there we have it - Lothirade. Nalith's sister. who didn't get the best bicycle and wasn't allowed to 
go out to play when she wanted. 
That's how easy it can sometimes be when re-using material. Bear it in mind! 
lothiradeWitch.psd on the CD-ROM has all the steps above. 
performed to perfection. 

Fantasy Faces 
213 

Chapter 7 
Dceva - Enchanted! 
214 
For the next portrait, I wanted to give model Megan horns and distort her features somewhat. I also 
put some sticks in her hair. Sure, we could have spent a few hours doing this in Elements. but this is 
another example where a little preparation on the original photo can save you time in front of your 
computer! 
1. 
First off. after opening daeva. jpg, 
duplicating the layer and calling it 
daeva, add a Hue/Saturation layer and 
apply the following values: 
EdH I Master 
Hue 
Sallrat<n 
(;n:;el 
reoc..rze 
!" Preview 

Fantasy Faces 
2. 
Next up, use the Color Burn tool to remove her teeth. 
3. 
Now, let's have a go at her eyes. On a new layer (eye skin), using the Clone Stamp tool, copy 
parts from her face, place them on her eye, and then use the Eraser tool to remove any surplus 
parts. 
4. 
Then, using the Color Burn tool. darken areas to help the eye modifications blend more 
seamlessly into the rest of the face. This is a question of feel. 
215 

Chapter 7 
216 
5. 
It's time to put something that looks freaky 
under her skin. Add a new layer. scar. I think 
it looks like an embedded needle, but I don't 
want to think about that too much. The basic 
technique is to make a selection with the 
Lasso tool, using as your first line the exact 
line you want the needle to go along. Then. 
clone some light skin right up to that line. 
Next, pick up the Inverse selection and clone 
dark skin along the top, all the way up to the 
line. Softly erase around the ugly edges. and 
you're laughing! 
OK, so lets get busy implanting some horns in her head! 
6. 
With the Lasso tool, draw the base shape of 
what you want the horn to look like, and paint 
it black. 
7. 
Then, using the Brush. with the Airbrush box checked in the menu bar, brush in some 
highlights in white. Add some Noise through the Filter > 
oisc > Add 
oise menu option. 
Add more highlights and darken to taste. using the Dodge tool as we did on the previous 
skin effects. 
8. 
Another exciting texture can come out of the bag here - add a slight Craquelure to the horns 
through the Filter > Texture> Craquelure menu option. 
9. 
When you're happy with the result, duplicate it, flip it horizontally and then distort it slightly 
using the Move tool before scaling it down. Finally, use the Image > Adjustments > 
Hue/Saturation menu option to make the horn darker by adjusting the Lightness setting. 

Fantasy Faces 
10. Once you're happy with the look of the horn, it's time to make it look like it's coming out of 
the skin. Using the Clone Stamp tool, grab some parts of the face and started painting some 
skin over the horn. Using the Burn and Dodge tools, shade the skin. 
11. Aw, go on then. just to finish off. 
paint on some dramatic eyelashes 
using the Brush/Airbrush tool, not 
forgetting to add a couple of 
highlights to make them look cool! 
The Calligraphic brushes are best 
for this sort of thing, and I used the 
Flat 1 0 px brush. 
217 

Chapter 7 
I 
It's now time to change the colors to give the image a more fantasy feel. 
12. Again, using Color Balance, change the piece to a purple color. and add in a background 
containing a similar color. Reverting once again to the Airbrush and Dodge tools, continue to 
add further elements of light and dark to her face. 
13. Try a new technique to add a little drama to the lighting. Add a Gradient Map adjustment 
layer, and select a black and white gradient to go over the top of the picture. Then set the 
layer blending mode to Overlay. 
This should give you a moody sepia-toned picture, and the finale to a perfect effect. We're not quite 
sure what Daeva is, but she's sure got a past! 
Check out our finol PSD. daevaHoms .pad. on the CD-ROM. J 
Summary 
218 
So, there you have it! We've made some pretty beautiful and some pretty horrendous creations! Did 
you notice how quickly we got on to the horrendous side ... ? Sorry about that. Stilt, I'm sure you'll have 
some delightful masterpieces cooking before you know it! 
Hopefully, you'll have learned to raise your game, and think with a professional-level standard, while 
agreeing that it really doesn't take that much effort. It's all easy. if you've got the right ideas! 

Fantasy Faces 
219 


Cha~ er 8 
g Artists 
What we'll learn in this chapter 
By now we've covered most of the basics of face 
transformations in Photoshop Elements 2. It's now 
time to get a bit more artistic and draw some 
inspiration from some classical artists and art styles. 
From Andy Warhol to Van Gogh, this chapter will 
show you how to reproduce the familiar styles and 
unique flair of your favorite artists. We'll cover: 
• 
Simple layer and selection techniques that 
can produce amazing effects in a snap. 
• 
Creating 
patterns 
for 
overlays 
or 
backgrounds. 
• 
Stretching 
faces 
and 
smudging 
the 
complexion to create the perfect forgery. 
• 
Imitate Warhol, lichtenstein. Van Gogh. 
Klimt. Matisse. Modigliani. and even 
Manga! 

Chapter 8 
Imitation is the sincerest form of flattery. And, it makes things a whole tot easier when you're trying 
to take control of your image manipulation techniques! What better than to have a finished product 
before you begin? Seriously, it's a really useful toot to aspire to existing artistic styles, because you can 
gauge exactly how sensitive your Elements touch is becoming. Moreover, it's an excellent opportunity 
to create image gifts for cards and presents! It's a sure-fire winner to render your nearest and dearest 
into an objet d'art! 
It would be amazing if we could modify a picture so that it looked like a Warhol or a Van Gogh. Then 
we'd really be able to see exactly how far digital art has come in the last 20 years. This book is about 
taking Elements to the limits. so let's not feel overwhelmed by the task ahead. Let's just do it. 
We'll take a look at a single snapshot and attempt to work it into a convincing rendition of various 
artistic styles. It's the same snapshot used in Chapter 1 when we had a quick whiz around the 
Impressionist brush. Now it's really time to imitate some other artists. 
jolly - painted by a dozen artists 
222 
At the behest of the model, I should point 
out that this snapshot was taken in a 
kitchen with a single fluorescent tube for 
lighting, the night after a very heavy party. 
This will ensure the maximum wow quality 
from our Photoshoppery. 

Imitating Artists 
Pop goes the easel 
A good style to begin with is Pop Art. The whole point of Pop Art was to create easily-copied and mass-
producible images. It's not about excellence; it's all about image. Better still, it's about relatively easy 
things to do in Photoshop Elements. Flat colors, simple shapes - all things that are going to be easy for 
us to approach. 
If you're unfamiliar with Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein, I'm sure you're familiar with their pictures, 
as they are some of the most imitated around. Advertising uses them a lot- but the basic breakdown is: 
Warhol used Xeroxed photographs in psychedelic colors, and Lichtenstein created comic strip-like 
paintings, colored in with little dots. 
Warhol 
It's no surprise Andy Warhol is the easiest artist to mimic. He was all about convenience, which suits me 
down to the ground! It also means we're going to have to chuck subtlety out the window. We're on a 
production line here. 
If you look at Warhol's most famous paintings (like his famous picture of Marilyn Monroe), you'll see that 
the photographs he uses are of very bad quality. They're newspaper snaps, basically, using the newspaper 
technology of the 1960s. That's the first thing we're going to have to mimic. It's black and white for a 
start - and I don't mean grayscale. BLACK or WHITE. 
1. 
Open up jolly. jpg from the Imitating Artists folder on the CD-ROM. 
2. 
To mimic the Marilyn picture, we're only interested in the 
head and face, so select all of the head and click through 
layer> ew > l ayer via Copy. Call it Warhol. On this new 
layer. fill the background in with pure white using the 
Paint Bucket. 
223 

Chapter 8 
224 
5. 
In your layers palette, CTRL-click the right-hand icon 
(which has a black and white image of the threshold 
you've just created). 
6. 
Press CTRL +Au +l, which will invert the selection. From the 
Warhol layer, create another Threshold adjustment layer. 
and fix the face's levels. I used 170. 
Strangely enough, it gives the image that Warhol-hair 
look! The rest is easy - this is where we whack in the 
colors! 
What we need to do is create a new layer for each color 
we're going to use. We will fill each layer with exactly the 
color we want. and then set its mode so that the black 
shows through. 
This will select evetything In 
the layer. lfs a handy tip (or 
lots of occasions! 
7. 
Create a new layer and call it lips. With the l asso tool. select around the lips and then choose 
the color you want to turn them into. I'd say scarlet is pretty much within Warhol's subtle 
palette! 
Colot l>rcker 
Select 1ore;round color; 
r Only Web Colors 
c< H. p• 
5 roo-" 
B roo" 
Rj255 
r Gp 
OK 
Oncel 

Imitating Artists 
S. 
In your layers palette, CTRL-click the right-hand icon 
(which has a black and white image of the threshold 
you've just created). 
6. 
Press CTRL +ALT+I, which will invert the selection. From the 
Warhol layer, create another Threshold adjustment layer. 
and fix the face's levels. I used 170. 
Strangely enough, it gives the image that Warhol-hair 
look! The rest is easy - this is where we whack in the 
colors! 
What we need to do is create a new layer for each color 
we're going to use. We will fill each layer with exactly the 
color we want. and then set its mode so that the black 
shows through. 
This will select everything in 
the layer. lfs a handy tip (or 
lots of occasions! 
7. 
Create a new layer and call it lips. With the Lasso tool. select around the lips and then choose 
the color you want to turn them into. I'd say scarlet is pretty much within Warhol's subtle 
palette! 
Color Pu::l<er 
Select fore;Tound color; 
()( 
carcet 
r Only Web Colors 
225 

Chapter 8 
226 
8. 
Click through Edit > Fi ll and fill the selection with the 
foreground color. Finally, set the blending mode of 
the lips layer to Multiply. 
There we have it! Colored lips! You can adjust the 
potency of the red by messing around with the layer's 
Opacity setting. 
A quick note: You may find. when you moke selections Ulce those (or the 
skin, you end up overlapping colors on other levels. This makes (or a 
very weird and unsatis(r:lctOI CDior miX. To get rid of this, use the 
techmque of CTRI..-Ciicldng on e«h ~ 
palette Icon (to make a 
selection) and deleting awoy that sel«tton (tom the skin IOJI'f. 
9. 
The rest is just mechanical- move on to the eyelids, eyeballs, hair. face and background. 
And, I'm ashamed to say, that's about it. But using that 
technique, you can create as many variations as you like! 
Both of these variations are based on Warhol's own colors. His 
classic Marilyn image used something close to human tones -
pink skin, yellow hair and so on. Later versions became a little 
more psychedelic, with even the black being replaced. You 
could try a few variations of your own, to see how random 
Warhol could get- or was he being very careful? You decide! 
The final PSD (or this ef{ect In on the CD-ROM. 
and IS called ollyWiu:l:lol. -

Imitating Artists 
227 

Chapter 8 
228 
Lichtenstein 
OK, that was just too easy, and I don't feel like 
I've earned my fee yet. I tried explaining that I'm 
only contracted for 15 minutes of fame, but... 
Let's move on to that other great icon of 1960s 
Pop Art, Roy Lichtenstein. Compared to Warhol, 
he seems a whole lot less cynical - there is craft 
to his art, so we can begin pushing the subtlety 
up a little bit. 
1. 
Once again, the utter hopelessness of 
my photography threatens to make this 
a difficult task, so we'd better play 
around with the mid-tones in the Levels 
palette (CTRL +L) until we have quite a 
flat-colored image. 
2. 
Fortunately, we can bring out some hair 
color to work with. while leaving those 
eyes still nicely defined. 
Reverie by Roy lichtenstein 
0 Christie's lmages/CORBIS 
ChaTel IIG! 
::1 
~tL.evets ~~I§: 
0< 
<:alee I 
He., 
Au1o 
l;ti.!IJ'I 
"" 
P Prev.ew 

Imitating Artists 
The Eyes 
Let's isolate the eyes. It's much better to get them onto their own layer so we can work on them 
without worrying about everything else. 
3. 
Draw around them with the Lasso tool and copy them onto a new layer. Call it eyes. It's all in 
the eyes with Lichtenstein. The eyes are the focal point (as with lots of art styles), and are often 
the most beautifully crafted part of a Lichtenstein print. 
Here they are with the background layer turned 
off: 
4. 
For the time being, simplify the eyes with a small paintbrush. making the whites all white (quite 
a task after such a heavy party), the blues all blue. and the blacks all black. The blue should be 
chosen using the Eyedropper (!) and selecting from the existing blues. 
5. 
Then, with a small-brush size on the Eraser. get rid of as much of the residual skin pink. 
Lines 
The next thing we need to do is draw in some lines to define the face. Now, I'll be honest with 
you. Elements just isn't that good at lines. Even full-fat Photos hop (the $600 variety) has trouble. 
We can't draw curved lines (unless we do them freehand which, in this instance, takes some 
phenomenal talent). so we're going to have to draw lots and lots of straight lines. 
6. 
Select the Line tool: 
7. 
Set its thickness to 3 px. Note - don't forget to actually type the px, or this tool is liable to 
throw a wobbler and give you a 3 em line! 
Now, we want to draw in those main places of definition on the face. 
8. 
Start off down the length of the nose. Click and drag a short line. Then. holding down the SHIFT 
key, click and drag again. The reason you have to hold down SHIFT is so you stay on the same 
layer. Otherwise, Elements would give you a new layer every time you drew a single little line, 
which is just too impractical. 
229 

Chapter 8 
230 
9. 
In this fashion, line by line, work your way down the 
length of the nose. 
If you've successfully managed to get through that 
test, it's time to pick out all the other defined areas 
of the face. 
10. Draw a series of lines to mark out the eyelashes. 
eyebrows, nose. lips. edges of the face and the neck. 
11. Once you're satisfied you have every line you need. 
simplify the layer via the Layers palette. This 
basically unites every line you've drawn into one big 
pattern. 
Here's what my image looks like after having drawn 
in the lines, filled the eyebrows in with black and 
brushed in some eyelashes using the Brush (set to a 
Ca lligraphic brush to bring out a stylized lash 
shape). 
Merge Down 
MergeVIstie 
Flatten Image 
Palette Options ..• 

Dots 
Imitating Artists 
Next, we have to set about using the same technique to draw 
in the hair. This is the first place where artistic interpretation 
really comes into play. The hair has got to look good and 
comicbook-like, so you should simplify the fringe somewhat 
and think about how you're going to shade everything. 
It's ptObobly best to tum off the Bac:Jcsrouncl loyerwblle 
you're WOI'Idng (rom ~ 
so you am ttDUbleshoot ~ 
gaps bebwen lin4 We're worldng crt fiiUII9 m Whole 
areas with the Paint Budc« tooL so gops beMifn the 
lines CDn become a reol problem lf.you (fnd gaps that 
let the paint leak through and fill tift lnappivprlGte 
areo, just fill It In with a small blade paintbrush. 
OK, let's get going on that hair. Now, Lichtenstein doesn't do shade. Like Warhol, he's an 
absolute colors man. Moreover, he's an absolute primary colors man. So, this hair is going 
to have to be flat yellow, and flat black. 
12. To this end, start drawing Paths with the Pen tool in black, and 
then using the Paint Bucket tool to fill them with yellow 
highlights or black lowlights. 
13. To make the hair look better, fill in the background - one side 
white. the other black. 
Aside from the clarity of lines, the other main problem this artistic style throws up is how 
exactly to get the familiar Lichtenstein newsprint dots. As I've already stated, there is no room 
for shades in this picture. and we have to get the right kind of pink by using a very regular 
pattern of pure red dots. So what do we do? 
Well, uniform dots are actually pretty easy to come by. What we're going to do is create a 
pattern! They've got to be the right size. and the right color. It might take a couple of goes. but 
this is what you do. 
231 

Chapter 8 
14. Select the Brush tool, with a circular brush. Resize it to roughly the size you want your dots to be. 
The brush size I've selected is 1 0 px. 
15. Create an entirely new file in Elements and size it to a few pixels larger than your 
chosen brush (so mine was 14 x 14 px). Then, paint a single blob in the middle of 
the canvas. This is our sample spot! From this we're going to make our pattern! 
16. Click through Edit> Define Pattern. It takes everything on your canvas (namely, one spot) and 
turns it into a pattern. Name it spotl. OK, you can happily close that small file without saving it: 
our pattern is created! 
17. Next. on your main canvas, select the Paint Bucket tool. In the 
Options bar. change the fill from Foreground to Pattern. Then, 
fill the area you like! 
And that is more or less it. The only subtle difference is the lips. for which I created a new brush. 
It's an 8 px white brush on a 12 px red background. It's a subtle change, but it does make the lips 
a darker tone of pink. 
Final touches 
232 
So. how do we give it that authentic look? Well, the face as I originally had it looked a bit flat, 
and when it comes to highlighting, Lichtenstein goes for the dramatic. 
18. There isn't a great deal of drama to the original image, so we'll have to make it up - lassoing a 
section of the skin and filling it with white. 
It also might be quite nice to make the eyes a bit bigger, to go for that real comicbook 
proportions routine. 
19. To achieve this. go to the lines layer and select the black of the eyelashes with the Magic Wand 
tool. Then, with the SHIFT key pressed, select the insides of the eyes (these should be transparent, 
looking through to the eyes layer below). 
20. 
Click through Edit > Copy Merged. and press CTRL+V to paste them 
onto a new layer. This was so you can happily select and resize each 
eye with ease. 
So there we go - one genuine lost Lichtenstein. Form a queue. please! 
jollyLic:k.pad Is provided on the CD-ROM so you con look over it. 

Imitating Artists 
233 

Chapter 8 
Matisse 
234 
If we're looking to move on from Pop Art, then we're going to have to move backwards (historically 
speaking, of course). The challenges thrown up by an artistic style such as that employed by Matisse 
are significant. He uses more than just primary colors, for one. What is our palette going to be? With 
this image we're going to look at how to narrow our colors down, and how to develop to brushing 
styles which will give us some nice oil paint textures. 
So how do we cut down the photorealistic colors? One way is 
through the simple addition of a Posterize adjustment layer. 
1. 
Take the original photo, and add a Posterize layer -
allowing for six levels of color. Select all and Copy 
Merged, before pasting into a new layer and renaming 
it base. 
2. 
The next significant problem is that of brushstrokes. 
Now, we have some Artistic filters to play with, such 
as Pa int Daubs and Palette Kn ife. So, let's go for 
Palette Knife. I used a Stroke Size of 10, Stroke Detail 
of 3 and Softness of 5. I really smear those oils around: 
So - at least we have some shadows to play with. It 
doesn't really give a sense of thick dirty paint, but 
maybe that will come later. The next thing to do is get 
going with some brushwork. 
Said Color .. 
Graliert. .. 
Paltem. .• 
Levelt. .. 
BnghlneWContrett . 
Hue/Saluralion. .. 
Gracient Map. ----1 
Invert 
I 
Threthold .. 

3. 
To get us in the mood get rid of the face shine. Select 
a pink from the face using the Eyedropper tool. On a 
new layer (flat matting) use the Brush to just fill in the 
white areas, so we've got a flatter. less photographic 
canvas to work with. 
4. 
The Matisse painting that formed my touchstone for 
this project was The Green Stripe (1905). which has very 
unusual colors in well-defined facial areas. 
Given the photograph I was working with, the color to 
choose for that central streak would be bright white. 
but I figure that's not Matisse enough. So, let's go with 
yellow and brush it down the center of the face using a 
medium-sized soft brush at a fairly strong opacity (60% 
for me!). 
Imitating Artists 
The Green Stripe by Henri Matisse 
e Archivo lconogra(ico, S.A/CORBIS 
235 

Chapter 8 
236 
5. 
The next thing to do is divide the face into two pinks- we 
should go for a light side and a dark side. Fortunately we've 
already sorted the light side of the face (on the right). so 
let's just paint in a darker color for the shadier side of our 
model. I used quite an orangey shade (not sampled from the 
face itself). Again, I had the brush at 60% opacity to provide 
evidence of some brushwork. 
You'll note there is an extra lowlight down the left side of 
the face -
that is created through exactly the same 
technique. using a darker. more orange shade. The rule is 
basic: if you see anything that looks like a photograph, paint 
over it! The shape of the shadow on this picture is totally 
dictated by daubing over the photographic shading. 
6. 
Now we want to move on to the hair. On a new layer (hai r), 
fill in the darkest areas in black. For the more defined. 
highlighted areas, select a brown color and fill in. It's all 
simple stuff! The real trick is to be patient and allow your 
black paints to go over your brown paints, and your brown 
paints to go over your black paints. The more you switch 
between the two colors. the better. While we're here we may 
as well daub in the background: 
As you'll see. I've had another go down that left side of the 
face, because I like the brown of the hair. This is a picture of 
experimentation! 
7. 
Now it's time to do the eyebrows and eye definition. This is 
a place for black! Use a small brush and highlight the 
eyebrows and the definition of the eyelids and so forth. You 
can also take the chance to fill in the colors of the eyes. So, 
Lichtenstein saw the face with blue eyes, Matisse with black. 
Go figure. 

Imitating Artists 
8. 
To finish off the image, it's a question of working at the flat matt colors until you're happy with 
the blend. Personally, I worked to make the left side of the face more convincing- less a line 
of color, more a whole shaded area. It was all done by selecting the colors that were already 
there and painting back over them with a 60% opacity brush. 
9. 
I also emphasized the lips by selecting a scarlet versus a pale 
pink and picking them out. 
The resulting image is a combination of the colors that were in 
the original photograph. and the colors that you might expect 
to see from Matisse. It is. after all, his style we're after. and as 
we had to bend to Lichtenstein's use of primary colors, so we 
have to bend to Matisse's subdued hues. 
Now it's time to get that dingy background sorted out. so let's 
experiment with some brush shapes. 
10. Create 
a 
new 
layer 
(new 
background). From the Default 
Brush menu, select the Chalk brush. 
I chose the 36 pixel sized one. 
Oddly enough, this gives us a very 
good oil paint effect. Select a 
completely fake looking red and 
daub around the head on the left 
side of the picture. Do the same on 
the right side of the picture with a 
completely fake looking blue. Why 
fake? Well. that's how it is with 
Matisse! 
The background on this version is I 
think excellent. but that's mostly 
because I utilized reduced opacity 
brushes over the top of other 
colors. 
Chedc out jollyMatisse.psd 
from the CD-ROM. 
237 

Chapter 8 
Modigliani 
238 
Modigliani didn't tend to paint Western-style pictures. He was 
very keen on incorporating African influences into his art, 
which makes for some very distinctive faces, usually 
elongated (like some African masks) with simplified features. 
He was driven largely by shape rather than texture, and he 
had a fascination with reds and russets. 
It's fascinating to tweak a picture and see exactly when it 
attains a recognizable quality of the artist in question. 
To gain that Modigliani look, we're going to have to expand 
the canvas, to allow for that stylized elongation. so open 
j olly. j pg again and let's get going. 
1. 
Click through Image > Resize > Canvas Size, and 
increase both the width and height by 125%, 
anchoring it at the bottom left hand corner. 
2. 
Make a selection around the head with the lasso 
tool and, with the Move tool. elongate it, and then 
rotate it until you have a satisfactory result. Then, fill 
in the resultant gap with a black Paint Bucket, and 
employ the Clone Stamp to extend the neck. Don't 
worry if it looks a bit duplicated. because we'll be 
spattering it with paint before you know it! 
In a sense. that's it - job done. The rest is just going 
through the paces. Well. more or less. 
Head of a Woman by Modigliani 
~ Christie's lmages/CORBIS 
Clml\1 SIN 236M 
Wllllll 27.34an 
f1et1lt 3761an 
NowSIIt 369M 
Wdll~~~ El 
l<ol!1>'~ p<rani 
.. 
rRe~a•~ :..m ~ 
-~:'"' 
~ 
rrm 
petit> 
u:pbs::;:::.._ ........ 
)C 

Imitating Artists 
3. 
Blocking the colors in is simple enough. by clicking through Image > Adjustments > Posterize. 
and giving it a six. 
4. 
Then. fix the color so it has more of a russet feel. Elements has a simple tool for this, Enhance 
> Adjust Color > Color Variations. Using the default settings (namely, midtones changing at a 
medium amount). I hit the following sequence: 
Increase red x 7 
Decrease blue x 2 
Lighten x 2 
5. 
Press OK, and watch the picture gain that autumnal 
hue! 
6. 
On a new layer (daub) choose the most apt color with 
the Eyedropper tool, and daub the whole face with it. 
The basic idea is to get rid of the white, thereby 
flattening the whole image, and making it look less 
obviously digital. 
This time though. the need is for further elongation. 
7. 
From the Default Brushes. use the Chalk brush (any of 
them!) to get a good texture going at this point - fix it 
to 50% opacity in order to get some sense of paint 
thickness. Where you have a choice while painting over 
shadows. go for long and thin. The nose is the most 
obvious instance where we can "up the Modigliani". 
As with Uchtenstein, this ortlst Is wry porticulor 
obout qes. Quite often In his paintings they ore 
reduced to dotk hollows. or ewn dosed oltclgethet; 
For a little variation on this portrait we're going to opt 
for the latter. For the time being. let's just rough it in. 
239 

Chapter 8 
240 
8. 
Zoom in and carefully 
paint over the eyes with a 
small paintbrush. Leave 
the existing eyelashes to 
mark 
where 
shadows 
should go later on. Add a 
few daubs to shade the 
eyelids and give a rounded 
feel. 
As with Matisse, Modigtiani tends to keep shadow and shading fairly muted in his pictures, 
preferring instead to emphasize the fascinating shapes that go to make up his subjects. So, 
in this picture we're concentrating on the shape of the jaw, the neck, the nose, lips and eyes, 
while keeping shading and shadow to a minimum. 
So, now for some heavy brushwork. Remember to keep those brushes quite small. 
9. 
You should begin the task of replacing that orangey shading 
around the periphery of the face (left over from the Posterize) 
with something more appropriate - a reduced opacity (about 
1 0%) gray seems to do the trick, particularly around the eyes. 
The lips are important- Modigliani favored scarlet. pouting mouths. 

Imitating Artists 
10. To achieve this, use red lines (like the black ones in 
Lichtenstein) to accurately emphasize the features of the lips 
that are already there. 
11. The result is a kind of caricature, with a really emphasized Cupid's bow. Fill them in with a 
scarlet brush, at about 20% opacity. Really work it in to the center and corners of the mouth to 
build up the red. 
There's a running theme in Modigliani: there's a romance and 
sexuality about them. which is really emphasized by the lips 
and the faintly sensual poses. I guess we're learning to read 
art! 
12. Next. let's turn our attention to the blacks. Create a new layer 
named blacks. 
13. Draw in black lines for the eyebrows - I suggest using a soft 
paintbrush at about half the width of the brows themselves. 
Pick out the eyelashes also. You may wish to blur these a little 
with the Blur tool so as not to make everything look too 
severe. 
As these things ore on a MW ta,er. you CDn toke the 
oppottunn;y to dean up underneath them If your black 
Une Is slightly off the mtlfk. Fotward thinking/ 
14. Now it's time to go 19th Century on the hair - something to 
counterbalance that brewing sexuality. Simply paint it black. 
as Mick Jagger once said. Use a 70% opacity brush to give a 
nice sloppy paint appearance. 
241 

Chapter 8 
242 
Filthying it up 
Once again. a problem we encounter with this picture is the regular old digital problem- clean colors. 
Everything is bright and beautiful. and wholly un-Modigliani-like. 
15. To dirty up the face a little, create a new layer (filth). Using the Eyedropper tool, select some 
of the darker tones from the face and paint back over the face with a reduced opacity 
paintbrush. 
16. For the background, select a dark green and work away with a 
reduced opacity and a tiny little brush until you have something 
you're pleased with. I used the green and a little white. 
17. This is the perfect place to get out your Impressionist Brush of 
course - so long as you have the right color blend. Whack the 
Impressionist Brush around for a nice filth. 
Finally, and very importantly, we have a signature Modigliani style: 
rosy cheeks! 
Now. you're going to have to trust me on this. I spent ages trying 
to get the rosy cheeks right. I tried soft brushes, pinks at 100%, reds 
at 10%. I tried marqueeing and changing the color balance and also 
tried the Burn tool. However, I just kept getting washed-out or 
circular cheeks or obviously shoehorned-in cheeks. or black 
cheeks. 
The final answer for this subtle effect comes from an unexpected source. It's a brush yes, but 
it's a weird brush. 
18. If you go to the Faux Finish Brushes option. you'll find 
the Mesh brushes. They're really square and blocky, but 
they deliver exactly the right amount of color for these 
purposes. I guess in a strange way it's the same as doing 
what Lichtenstein did - using uniform dots to get the 
right blend of color. 
19. Anyway, choose red, and get this brush to do the 
business for you: 
If you wont to compQreyours to mine. chedc out jol.l)'Mcxl.ped. on the CD-ROM. 

Imitating Artists 
243 

Chapter 8 
Manga 
244 
The amazing thing about globalization in the latter half of the 20th century is that we can now get 
some amazing art from cultures that have previously been totally isolated from one another. The 
artists I've looked at up to now have been Western masters, but how will our face look with an Oriental 
look? Manga is probably the most exciting form of figurative art around, and it is the result of 
hundreds of years of Eastern thinking being twanged onto a Western pop culture. The result is some 
pretty amazing faces- so let's see how and why. 
Manga is a cartoon format (note to self - one day you must work out what differentiates cartoon styles 
from non-cartoon styles) and so the face should be based on a single flat shade of pink. 
1. 
There are subtle shades to be added. but for a base color 
start by posterizing the face and choosing one of the most 
pleasing pinks to paint over much of the face. 
Proportions 
The first thing people said to me when I suggested doing a 
Manga remix of someone's face was, 'big eyes'. And they 
were dead right. The most notable thing about a Manga 
picture is eyes the size of saucers. In fact. the Manga face 
has proportions roughly equivalent to those of a baby or 
young child: Big eyes. small nose. and tiny mouth. 
Here the Liquify tool comes into its own. 
2. 
To capture the eyes, hop into the Filter > Distort > Liquify 
interface. and apply the Bloat tool to each eye. The real 
trick is making sure the tool is dead center on the eye, 
otherwise you could end up with some pretty warped 
looking eyes. 
As l found, it's probably best not to let the subject of your 
picture walk in at this point. The result was pretty pleasing 
more or less straight away. That's where Elements' strength 
lies - excellent results in seconds. You've just got to know 
where to start! 
Manga eyes can be seen as very beautiful or grotesque - it's a fine line. What I find amazing 
is that they're almost photorealistic in a comic book world. I won't be doing anything to the 
pupils from now on. That's pretty amazing to me. 

3. 
So, what's next? Well, the background of this picture is 
hopeless. Really dark, and we're in a cartoon world, so we'd 
better choose one of the greens that are just perceptible back 
there, and paint the background in with the Brush tool, making 
up any outlines we can't see. 
Then I turned my attentions to the other essential Manga 
feature: the small nose. Manga noses have no width to them at 
all. 
4. 
Begin by blotting out the bridge with your chosen shade of 
pink. and head back to the Liquify interface. Use the Pucker 
tool to reduce the size of the end of the nose. leaving it no 
width at all. Press OK to return to the main Elements interface. 
5. 
Next. let's turn our attention to the mouth. This is real chop 
shop time. What we're going to do is basically pull the corners 
of the mouth inwards, to make the whole thing smaller. Lasso 
a marquee around the corners of the mouth and copy them 
onto a new layer, mouth. Drag each half into the center. and 
slap pink over any telltale holes left on the layer below: 
6. 
It's best to Copy all this onto a new layer, so Select All (CTRL+A) 
and then Edit> Copy Merged (or CTRL+SHJFT+C), before pasting 
all onto a new layer. 
The final move to make in order to get the proportions right is 
to shrink the head. If you look, the head's just too adult-
shaped. The nose-space is too long for a cutesy Manga face. 
7. 
Draw a marquee around the bottom half of the face. making 
sure to include the nose, and drag the whole thing up with the 
Move tool until the facial proportions say Manga. Of course. 
the sides of the face won't fit, so stretch those out using the 
side handles. Fix the shading by daubing everything in pink. 
Imitating Artists 
245 

Chapter 8 
246 
If you've got the proportions right, the rest is just style. So. what we should look for from 
now on is to get the final look of everything right. We've got to get the delicate shading right, 
get the expression of those features right, and for heaven's sake do something with that hair. 
Then we should be done. 
8. 
First off, reduce the lips somewhat with our trusty 
pink -
using a smallish brush with about 50% 
opacity. Then choose another pink directly from the 
lips and paint them in a bit for that slightly vague 
watercolor look. 
9. 
Next draw lines over the existing eyebrows, taking 
your color from the dark head hair. Take the 
opportunity also to draw lines for the eyelashes and 
lines for the chin. 
10. To shade the eyelids, select some of the eyeshade 
that is already there and, using a 30% opacity brush. 
begin to fill in. The more you work, the further 
down the nose you'll find yourself going! 
11. 
Finally, get rid of any dark pink that 
remains from the initial image, using 
the stock pink we chose at the start. 
So - time to take care of the hair. 
Manga hair varies. Some of it is 
really wispy and time-intensive, and 
some is quite blocky and 20. like 
vector graphics. We'll go for the 
latter. in order to achieve the 
maximum effect in the minimum 
time. 
As with the Lichtenstein image, outline the hair using black lines, and then fill it in using a 
flat black. For some reason, black works better with Manga hairdos -it's just more dramatic. 
12. Carve out a suitable looking area (using lines again) and 
fill it in a blonde shade. just to give the 'do a bit of 
shape. The addition of a white gleam adds to the 
dramatic impact, and a few spidery locks will blow 
beautifully in the Manga wind. 
My f;nal PSD is saved on the 
CD-ROM as joll)'Manga.psc:L 

Imitating Artists 
247 

Chapter 8 
OK. so I think we've made the point about this one very badly 
taken photograph. Let's branch out and see how else Photoshop 
Elements is going to springboard us towards the masters. 
Van Gogh 
One artist who's really going to put Elements to the test is Vincent 
van Gogh. His paintings are full of vivid colors and rich textures. 
He painted landscapes, still life, people - anything. He produced 
a huge volume of work, but sold only two paintings before taking 
his own life. His brushstrokes and paintings are full of the inner 
torment he felt throughout his turbulent life, and if you look 
carefully you can see his technique and his palette change and 
develop as his life progresses. 
Open ollie. jpg from the Imitating Artists folder of the CD-
ROM and we'll try to make our own Van Gogh ... 
Ollie - Van Gogh's long Lost brother 
248 
One of the most important things to do is to give a bit of texture 
to the image. I did this to serve as the base onto which I could 
add paint strokes. 
1. 
To do this, we'll have a go at using the Angled Strokes 
filter (Filter > Brush Strokes > Angled Strokes). Use the 
settings shown - a Direction value of 50, Stroke Length 
30, and Sharpne s 3. 
OK. so we're narrowing the face down a bit so its flat 
planes are easier to work with. 
Self-Portrait (1889) by VIncent van Gogh 
<0 Gianni Dogli Orti!CORBIS 

Imitating Artists 
2. 
The face at the moment has too many planes of color. Rather than Posterizing as before, click 
through Image> Mode> Indexed Color to limit it to 256 colors. Then once again click through 
Image> Mode> RGB Color to carry on working on it. This gives us a much flatter base to start 
the real work on. 
We also want to make the background more like the Van Gogh self portrait above - this was 
his last self-portrait. and his palette had become much calmer. and more toned down. 
3. 
Select only the background and using the Hue/Saturation dialog box (CTRL +U), change the Hue 
to +40 to make it a greener blue. 
4. 
Then, invert the selection (CTRL +SHIFT+I) and 
change the Hue of that to +40 and the 
Saturation to +75. There you'll find we're 
getting closer to Van Gogh already! Genius 
indeed ... 
5. 
Invert the selection again (CTRL +SHIFT+ I) for 
our next trick ... 
One major port of Von Gogh's work IS hiS 
erratic brushstroke technique. The key to 
making the photo resemble o Von Gogh Is 
delivered to us in the form of the 
Impressionist Brush. 
6. 
With the background selected, create a new 
Layer via Copy. Ha! Putting the background in 
the foreground! Maybe he was a genius ... 
7. 
On the Layers palette. click the little 
checkered icon to lock the transparent pixels. 
This means our brush won't dare spew paint 
all over the space where the face is showing 
through. 
8. 
Get the normal paintbrush and, selecting 
colors from across the background, put in 
little daubs of dark on the light and light on 
the dark -just squiggles will do, to get us an 
interesting pattern. 
249 

Chapter 8 
250 
9. 
Then, use the Impressionist Brush to your heart's 
content! I set mine to Loose Curl Long using an area 
of SO px. Be sure to stay on the background, 
because if you stray on to the face area a whole load 
of white will be entered into your Impressionist 
palette. Give it a try if you don't believe me ... 
10. The next part we'll move on to is the sweater. What we need to do is put the figure on to its 
own layer. You can easily select the figure by applying a magic wand to the empty space in 
the Impressionist layer. This selects exactly the right shape. Then simply move down to the 
layer containing the actual image. and create a new layer via copy. 
Looking at some Van Gogh portraits, he used short stubby downward strokes for the clothes. 
So, what we're going to do is create a brush! This is very much like the pattern creation we 
used for lichtenstein. 
11. Using a fresh canvas (by creating a brand new file). create a new layer. and then make the 
background layer invisible (via the eye icon on the Layers palette). This will help us define 
the brush/pattern from the background. 
12. Make a series of short, stubby downstrokes. When you're happy with your pattern. dick 
through Edit > Define Brush. Call it VanGogh1 . While we're here, let's define a pattern and 
call that VanGoghl as well. This will save us a bit of time! 

13. Back on the main canvas, use the Lasso to select 
the sweater. Then on a new layer (brushing). use 
the Paint Bucket tool (selecting the newly-created 
pattern from the drop down menu) to fill it in. 
The problem with patterns is you have to create 
them in the color you want to use. but with 
brushes we don't have the same problem. 
14. Offset this by using the new brush to mess things 
up a bit with variant colors. Use the brush most 
heavily where the material folds. 
Definition 
Imitating Artists 
Looking at a Van Gogh portrait, you'll see a deep cobalt blue (almost black) around the clothing. 
15. On a new layer (jumpDef) using a small round 
brush, trace around the outlines and folds of the 
sweater with a nice blue cover. Don't worry about 
making these lines perfect - in fact they look 
better the rougher they are. Reduce the opacity 
of the brushing layer if you can't see the original 
sweater. 
Now to concentrate on the hair and face. 
251 

Chapter 8 
252 
16. On a new layer (facePaint) use the Eyedropper tool to select colors, and paint specks in using 
our VanGoghl brush. It's just a question of getting the paint mix right. The model doesn't 
need to look like he's got measles, or to look too much like a photograph. After you've 
painted to your heart's content, set the layer blending mode to Soft Light, which will give you 
a much subtler blend of colors. 
The last thing to do is to bring it all together by adding definition to the 
nose, neck and chin. With the nose, you can see a natural division of color. 
so what we need to do is emphasize that. 
17. Under the chin, draw in a soft brown line 
to provide a bit of shadow and to show the 
jaw line. 
18. Work this in by simplifying the layer and smudging it with the Blur tool and a soft eraser. 
19. On the lips add a less passionate color than the rosy smacker that has evolved. Looking back 
at Van Gogh's painting. his lips look as if they're already dead. Green and yellow should be 
used to subtly flatten their effect. 
20. On the hair, do what you did on the skin, introducing just three or four component colors 
to make up the general effect. 
If you need to study the PSD 1tse1t ifs on the CD-ROM 
coUed VaDGogh.psd. 

Imitating Artists 
253 

Chapter 8 
Klimt 
254 
What an excellent idea it would be to give your 
mother or grandmother a print of herself as a 
Gustav Klimt iconic lady! I'm telling you, it's a real 
winner! Don't you dare give me that vacant look 
next time her birthday comes around! 
Gustav Klimt was an Austrian artist who worked at 
the turn of the century, in Vienna. You're most likely 
to know his work from The Kiss. which adorns card 
and poster stores around the Western World. 
In that picture, Klimt uses patterns to represent 
different things. On the woman's dress you have 
feminine circular shapes - they remind me of cells 
- which contrast with the man's tunic of angular 
masculine shapes in black and gold. 
Preparation 
The Kiss by Gustav Kllmt 
IC Austrian Archives; Osterreichische Golerie, Vienno/CORBIS 
For this design we're going to prepare a small canvas to help us on our way. 
1. 
Open a new canvas. about 600x600 pixels. 
2. 
First of all put down a green background. with a large brush. with the opacity relatively low. 
just to gain a bit of texture. Add a few more leafy textural strokes with different shades of 
green. 
3. 
On a new layer draw a rough sketch using a small 
paintbrush with a pale color of where the shapes 
should go. Notice how the shapes interact with each 
other. they kind of swim around the canvas. They are 
not all perfectly round, and they don't really overlap 
each other much. I think these particular shapes are 
based on anemones - they have the same colors as 
these flowers and the same voluptuous roundness. 

Imitating Artists 
It's then a matter of filling them in. Klimt's palette for these flowers was deep reds and pinks 
with a hint of blue. The middles have white in them. but note that the whites are tinted with 
pink and orange, and even a bit of blue. This can make all the difference in whether an image 
looks right. 
4. 
The technique is up to you but, to follow me, fill them in using brushes and layering colors of 
different opacities and smudging it all together. Put a couple over the top of each other at 
different opacities to gain a bit of depth. 
Becky the pea - Klimting a photograph 
Now on to the real thing! 
1. 
Open pea. jpg from the CD-ROM. 
2. 
First off. let's exercise the good practice of duplicating the 
background layer. Call it KlimL 
3. 
Select everything behind the head with the Lasso tool and cut it 
away so we are left with just the face and hair. Don't worry if you 
don't create a perfect selection for the hair - we'll be painting 
over it later. 
4. 
Next. twang on a Smart Blur filter, so all the colors are smoothed 
out and the face is paler. I used a radius of 3. 
Now on to the background. We want to create a kind of gold 
background. Klimt's backgrounds look like they have a million 
stars in them. 
5. 
Fill a new layer (goldBack) with a goldish color. Gold is difficult to 
come by, and I find a lot of people go for yellow too much, but I 
think it's a lot greener and browner than people give it credit for. 
Now we need a star-like effect. 
6. 
Create a pattern, by opening up a new canvas, 300x300 pixels 
square. Create a new layer immediately and, using a small round 
brush with slightly softened edges. put lots of dots on it. Use both 
small and large dots to get a nice starry feel. and then give the 
whole thing a Gaussian Blur of about 2.8. Then, select everything 
and click through Edit > Define Pattern. 
• 
255 

Chapter 8 
256 
7. 
Back on the main canvas, on a new layer, use the 
Paint Bucket to fill it in with the new pattern. For 
a deeper effect, you might like to do this a couple 
of times on new layers, moving them slightly each 
time and altering the color. 
Face style 
Moving on to the face, the model is looking a little too smiley at the moment so choose a 
pink and close her eyes like we did with the Modigliani. 
8. 
With a flat pink there, choose a slightly darker pink to paint in the shadows and tone. Use a 
soft-edged brush with a reduced opacity to keep the subtlety going! 
9. 
In order to make her slightly paler and more interesting, set the face Opacity to 90%. 
10. To get the kind of blue tinge that you can see in Klimt's painting, make a new layer (faceba c) 
and put a pale blue wash behind. You'll see a marvelous glow emanate from the serene face! 

Imitating Artists 
11. Create another layer. called foundation. Paint on layers of 
pale blue and peach. with a round paintbrush at 100% 
opacity, putting more blue around her nose and areas 
where there needs to be more definition, until you end up 
with something like this: 
12. Then apply a Gaussian Blur 
of around 50. 
.:J 
13. You end up with a blotchy face. which is quite like Klimt's 
faces if you look closely. You can see that they are not one 
smooth color but yellows. blues and peaches. Set this 
layer to 50% opacity in order to make it more subtle. 
14. If we look at the hair now, we can see it isn't the classic burnt umber Klimt favored. So let's 
make it like that- all we need to do is go onto a new layer, paint over the top of the original 
hair with a delicious orange color, with a low opacity (about 40%). Once again we're going for 
depth. Set the whole layer to Multiply so it blends in with the original hair. 
15. Create one more new layer called definition and. using a single pencil with a 20% opacity. sketch 
a thin line across the nose. Choose some colors for the hair to make up the eyebrows with the 
same technique. and used a dull bluish-gray to shade under the chin. 
The last thing for the face is to add some color to the cheeks and lips. lf you look at the cheeks 
and lips in The Kiss. you'll see how rosy and flushed they are. This typifies Klimt's paintings. 
257 

Chapter 8 
16. On a new layer called ch eks. draw in some pale peach 
colors and then paint on a darker pink. Smudge this all 
together using the Smudge tool. 
17. Set the layer to Overlay at 64% opacity. and there we have 
it - some rosy cheeks for our lady. 
18. The lips are created in a similar way. I figured I should 
emphasize the Cupid's Bow. brushing it all in scarlet with 
quite a hard small brush. Change the layer blending mode 
to Overlay and set the layer Opacity to 68% 
Patterns 
Finally, we should add the glorious patterns that typify Klimt's work. 
First off. we have to add some backgrounds for the patterns to lie on. Firstly a blue dress, 
that comes from her shoulders. 
19. Select the area you want it to clothe, and fill that area with a dark blue. For a bit of depth, 
add another layer and still in the same selection draw some roughly straight darker blue lines 
down it. 
20. 
What we're going to do is make brushes of different flowers 
and circles just like in Klimt's paintings. 
Here's a picture of the ones I made: 
Using these. build up patterns in rich pinks, reds. blues and 
oranges throughout her hair and along her dress. 
As you can see, it's just a question of building up 
as Klimt does, and thereby developing your own 
manner of symbolism and iconography! 
You con loolc more closely at my vetSion by 
cheddng out Klimt.ped on the CD-ROM. 
Summary 
258 
There we have it 40 pages and 6 different artistic styles. spanning centuries. Now isn't that value for 
money. 
We've seen that the key to mimicking art is a little bit of research beforehand and a dash of Elements 
creativity. And by now you'll know you're not just limited to these artists and styles. You can take the 
principles you've learned here and use them to reproduce the look and feel of any artist you desire. 

Imitating Artists 
259 

Index 
The index is arranged hierarchically. in alphabetical order. with 
symbols preceding the letter A. Many second-level entries also 
occur as first-level entries. This is to ensure that you will find the 
information you require however you choose to search for it. 
friends of ED particularly welcomes feedback on the layout and 
structure of this index. If you have any comments or criticisms, 
please contact feedback@friendsofED.com 

Face Makeovers 
30 objects (tutorial) 19-27 
3D Transform filter 20. 26 
adding balloon valve and string 27 
Cylinder tool 21 
Direct Selection tool 21 
elizabeth.jpg 19 
elizabethBalloon.psd 27 
elizabethTincan.psd 27 
Eyedropper tool 25 
Lighting Effects filter 25 
Magic Wand tool 27 
Move tool 19, 27 
Paint Bucket tool 25 
pasting image onto cylinder 21-22 
pasting square image onto circle 25 
Rectangular Marquee tool 27 
removing white stripe 27 
reshaping image to square 24 
resizing image 19 
Selection tool 26 
stretching sphere into balloon 27 
Trackball tool 22. 26 
transforming circle to sphere 26 
30 Transform filter 20, 26 
A 
Accented Edges filter 104 
Add Noise filter 216 
.adjustment layers. See full makeover (tutorial); lighting 
effects (tutorial); Matisse (tutorial); recoloring 
(tutorial); retouching (tutorial); siren (tutorial); 
Warhol (tutorial) 
ageing face (tutorial) 154-176 
adding cheek wrinkles 169 
adding mouth wrinkles 162. 17S 
adding older eyes 165-167. 172 
adding older forehead 168 
Airbrush tool 176 
262 
changing line of mouth 173 
Clone Stamp tool 172 
Copy Merged option 157, 160 
creating gray hair 173-174 
creating sagging cheeks 161 
Darken blending mode 162. 167. 168, 169. 176 
discoloring skin 157-159 
Eraser tool 158, 163, 164. 166, 174 
Eyedropper tool 176 
Gaussian Blur filter 174 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 173 
kirsten.jpg 156 
kirstenOld.psd 176 
kirstenYoung.psd 176 
Lighten blending mode 158 
Linear Light blending mode 156 
Liquify tool 160, 161 
Luminosity blending mode 157, 169, 170 
Marquee tool 163 
matt skin effect 176 
Move tool 167 
Normal blending mode 173 
oldCheek.jpg 1 63 
oldEyebrows.jpg 174 
oldEyes1 .jpg 165 
oldEyes2.jpg 167 
oldEyes4.jpg 171 
oldforehead.jpg 168 
oldMouth.jpg 160, 162, 169 
Rectangular Marquee tool 165 
Screen blending mode 17 4 
Selection Brush tool 174 
thinning eyebrows 172 
Transform tool161. 167 
Airbrush tool 81, 92, 216 
Angled Strokes filter 248 
B 
baby teeth (tutorial) 88-90, 110 
jake.jpg 89 
jakeFreaky.psd 110 
jakeTeeth.psd 90 
masking out mouth 89 
Selection Brush tool 89 
tomTeeth.jpg 89 
black eyes (tutorial) 80-86 
adding texture to hair 86 
Airbrush tool 81 
ashley.jpg BO 
ashleyEyes.psd 86 
Clone Stamp tool 84 
Gaussian Blur filter 82 
removing eyebrows 84 
Smudge tool 86 
blending modes 67, 132, 159, 169. See also individual 
mode names 
Bloat tool 137-139, 141, 143, 244 
brush strokes (tutorial) 4-9 
Color Jitter setting 9 
Confetti brush 7-9 
elizabeth.jpg 5 
elizabethBrushes.psd 9 

Flowing Stars brush 5 
Music Notes - Scatter brush 6, 7 
Outer Glow layer effect 5-6 
Soft Light blending mode 7 
Brush tool 4, 31, 46, 122, 127. See also brush strokes 
(tutorial); individual brush names 
Burn tool 7 
c 
Calligraphic Brush tool 123, 217, 230 
caricature 137 
Chalk Brush tool 237, 239 
Clone Stamp tool 39-42, 46, 78, 84 
Clouds filter 197 
clown face (tutorial) 126-128 
adding color to face 127-128 
avaClown.psd 128 
Brush tool 127. 128 
desaturating face 126 
Overlay blending mode 126 
Screen blending mode 127 
Color blending mode 67 
Color Burn blending mode 52, SS, 65 
Color Burn tool 215 
Color Variations option 239 
Colored Pencil filter 12 
Confetti brush 7-9 
Copy Merged option 157, 160 
Craquelure filter 216 
D 
Doeva (tutorial) 214-218 
Add Noise filter 216 
adding eyelashes 217 
Airbrush tool216, 217, 218 
Calligraphic Brush tool 217 
Clone Stamp tool 215, 217 
Color Burn tool 215, 217 
Craquelure filter 216 
creating horns 216-217 
creating scar 216 
daeva.jpg 214 
daevaHoms.psd 218 
Dodge tool 216. 217. 218 
Eraser tool 215 
Gradient Map adjustment layer 218 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 214, 216 
Lasso tool 216 
Move tool 216 
removing teeth 215 
reshaping eyes 215 
Darken blending mode 162 
devilish fiend (tutorial) 200-203 
Clone Stamp tool 201, 202. 203 
Copy Merged option 203 
creating sharp teeth 202 
dakar.jpg 201 
dakarFiend.psd 203 
duplicating Adam's apple 201-202 
Eraser tool 201 , 202 
extending cheek line 202 
Eyedroppertool202 
Fill tool 202 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 201, 202 
increasing nostril size 202 
Multiply blending mode 203 
reshaping ear 201 
Selection Brush tool 201 
source photo 200 
Direct Selection tool 21 
Dodge tool 7, 186, 216 
drawing tablets 100 
E 
Elliptical Marquee tool 48-49 
Eraser tool117-118, 145, 1S8 
Eyedropper tool 25, 44, 73, 101 
F 
fairy (tutorial) 180-192 
adding contrast and highlights 183-184 
adding glowing balls 192 
applying eye makeup 191 
background image 181 
blemish removal183 
Brush tool182. 191 , 192 
Clone Stamp tool 183 
Copy Merged option 191 
creating chin 182 
creating wings 186-190 
Diffuse Glow filter 191 
Dodge tool186 
Eraser tool 191 
Eyedropper tool 182 
focal depth effect 191-192 
Gaussian Blur filter 190. 191. 192 
Gradient tool 187 
Lasso tool 182. 185 
Line tool 186 
Magic Wand tool 187 
Median Noise filter 184. 185 
Multiply blending mode 183, 186 
Index 
263 

Face Makeovers 
nalith.jpg 181 
nalithBackground.jpg 181 
nalithFairy.psd 192 
Outer Glow layer effect 192 
Overlay blending mode 190. 191 
reshaping ears 185-186 
Screen blending mode 184 
Soft Light blending mode 188, 190 
source photo 180 
Wave filter 189 
wing texture 189-190 
fantasy faces 179-180. See also Dreva (tutorial); devilish 
fiend (tutorial); fairy (tutorial); siren (tutorial); vampire 
(tutorial); witch (tutorial) 
f iles: 
264 
ashley.jpg 80 
ashleyEyes.psd 86 
avaCiown.psd 127 
caroline.jpg 38 
caroline81em.psd 46 
chartie.jpg 71 
charlieEye.psd 78 
daeva.jpg 214 
daevaHorns.psd 218 
dakar.jpg 201 
dakarFiend.psd 203 
david.jpg 51 
davidEnhance.psd 56 
deloniaFur.psd 198 
elizabeth.jpg 4 
elizabethBalloon.psd 27 
elizabethBrushes.psd 9 
elizabethFilters.psd 18 
elizabethPhotographer.psd 35 
elizabethTincan.psd 27 
giriPuppet.jpg 144 
holi.jpg 136 
holiPixie.jpg 140 
holiPixie.psd 144 
indi.jpg 141 
indiPixie.jpg 143 
jake.jpg 89 
jakeFreaky.psd 108 
jakeTeeth.psd 90 
jolly.jpg 1 o. 223 
jollylmpressionist.psd 1 0 
jollylick.psd 232 
jollyManga.psd 246 
jollyMatisse.psd 237 
jollyMod.psd 242 
jollyWarhol.psd 226 
joshBiur.psd 98 
julie.jpg 47 
kirsten.jpg 1 56 
kirstenOid.psd 176 
kirstenYoung.psd 176 
Klimt.psd 258 
kymarBolt.psd 132 
lindaFreaky.psd 104 
lindalashes.psd 104 
lothiradeStart.psd 208 
lothiradeWitch.psd 212 
marc.jpg 57 
marclight.psd 62 
miya.jpg 120 
miyaTiger.psd 124 
nadia.jpg 63 
nadiaMakeover.psd 63 
nalith.jpg 181 
nalithBackground.jpg 181 
nalithFairy.psd 192 
oldCheek.jpg 163 
oldEyebrows.jpg 174 
oldEyesl.jpg 165 
oldEyes2.jpg 167 
oldEyes4.jpg 171 
oldForehead.jpg 168 
oldMouth.jpg 160 
ollie.jpg 248 
pea.jpg 255 
pete.jpg 143 
peter.jpg 1 07 
peter2Faced.psd 108 
photographer.jpg 29 
puppetsFinal.psd 1 50 
selena.jpg 143 
takeshi.jpg 115 
takeshiSports.psd 118 
theater.psd 148 
tomTeeth.jpg 89 
vampiel.jpg 205 
vampieiTwins.psd 206 
vanGogh.psd 252 
f ilters 12. See also 30 objects (tutorial); Individual filter 
names: Gradient Map option (tutoriaO 
Flowing Stars brush S 
Free Transform tool 64, 145 
full makeover (tutorial) 63-67 
adding color to lips 67 
adjusting image color and contrast 65 
changing shape of face 64 
Color blending mode 67 

G 
Color Burn blending mode 65 
Color Variations option 64 
Copy Merged option 65 
Gaussian Blur filter 66 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 66, 67 
Median Noise filter 66 
nadia.jpg 63 
nadiaMakeover.psd 63 
Screen blending mode 66 
Soft Light blending mode 66 
Gaussian Blur filter 54, 66, 82, 97, 102 
Glass filter (tutorial) 12-13 
Gradient Map option (tutorial) 14-19 
color palette options 15 
Copper gradient 15 
creating custom gradient 16-17 
elizabethFilters.psd 18 
Gradient tool 17 
Wolverhampton Wanderers gradient 17 
Gradient tool17, 187 
H 
Holi (t utorial) 136-140 
Sloat tool 137. 138. 139 
enlarging eyes and ears 137 
enlarging forehead 139 
holi.jpg 136 
holiPixie.jpg 140 
Liquify filter 136 
Pucker tool 138 
raising eyebrows 140 
shrinking nose 138 
Warp tool 138. 139, 140 
Hue blending mode 55 
Impressionist Brush tool 10, 242, 249-250 
Indexed Color option 249 
lndi (tutorial) 141-143 
Bloat tool141, 143 
indi.jpg 141 
indiPixie.jpg 143 
Liquify filter 141 
Warp tool 142 
josh Fallon (tutorial) 92-98 
Airbrush tool 92 
applying variable focus to face slices 97-98 
changing iris color 92 
Gaussian Blur filter 97 
joshBiur.psd 98 
Radial Blur filter 98 
selecting face slices 95-96 
Selection Brush tool 94. 95 
josh's mom (t utorial) 100-104 
Accented Edges filter 1 04 
K 
adding color and highlights to lashes 101 
adding dots pattern 104 
adding shadows to lashes 102 
coloring skin 104 
drawing in eyelashes 100 
Eyedropper tool 101 
Gaussian Blur filter 102 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 1 03 
lindafreaky.psd 1 04 
lindalashes.psd 104 
Liquify tool 103 
Pinch filter 103 
Selection Brush tool 1 04 
Klimt (tutorial) 254-258 
l 
creating background and flower shapes 254-255 
creating custom pattern 255 
Gaussian Blur filter 2S5. 257 
Multiply blending mode 257 
Klimtpsd 258 
Paint Bucket tool 256 
painting eyes shut 256 
painting in cheeks and lips 257-258 
painting in face 256-257 
pea.jpg 255 
removing photo background 255 
Smart Blur filter 255 
Smudge tool 258 
Lasso tool 30, 45, 59, 124 
lens Flare filter 35 
Lichtenstein (tutorial) 228-232 
adding highlights 232 
Brush tool 232 
Calligraphic Brush tool 230 
creating dots pattern 231 -232 
drawing facial outlines 229-230 
drawing in hair 231 
Eraser tool 229 
Eyedropper tool 229 
Index 
265 

Face Makeovers 
jollylick.psd 232 
Lasso tool 229 
Levels adjustment layer 228 
Line tool 229 
Paint Bucket tool 231, 232 
Pen tool 231 
lighten blending mode 158 
lighting effects 159 
lighting effects (tutorial) 51-56 
burn blur layer 53 
Color Burn blending mode 52, 55 
Copy Merged option 53 
david.jpg 51 
davidEnhance.psd 56 
Gaussian Blur filter 54 
Hue blending mode 55 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 56 
Screen blending mode 54 
Lighting Effects filter 25 
lightning bolt (tutorial) 130-132 
adding lip makeup 131 
drawing lightning bolt 131 
kymarBolt.psd 132 
Multiply blending mode 131 
Overlay blending mode 130 
Screen blending mode 131 
line tool 186, 229 
Linear Light blending mode 156 
Liquify filter 103, 135-137, 160, 205, 211 . See also Holi 
(tutorial); lndi (tutorial); Manga (tutorial); Pete and 
Selena (tutorial); puppet show (tutorial) 
Luminosity blending mode 157, 170 
M 
Magic Wand tool27, 95 
Manga (tutorial) 244-246 
Bloat tool 244 
Brush tool 245 
Copy Merged option 245 
drawing facial outlines 246 
drawing in hair 246 
enlarging eyes 244 
jollyManga.psd 246 
Liquify filter 244 
Pucker tool 245 
shrinking head, nose, and mouth 245 
Marquee tool 163 
masking (tutorial) 28-35 
Brush tool 31 
elizabethPhotographer.psd 35 
266 
face layer 32 
Lens Flare filter 35 
linking layers 32-33 
mask layer 31 , 32 
Move tool 29, 33 
painting over face area 31 
photographer.jpg 29 
Pin Light blending mode 34 
resizing face to fit in lens 33 
Selection Brush tool 30 
Matisse (tutorial) 234-237 
adding brush strokes 234-235 
adding yellow stripe 235 
Brush tool 235 
Chalk Brush tool 237 
Eyedropper tool 235 
jollyMatisse.psd 237 
painting in background 237 
painting in face and hair 236-237 
Palette Knife filter 234 
Posterize adjustment layer 234 
reducing color range 234 
Median Noise filter 66, 185 
Mesh Brush tool 2.42 
Modigliani (tutorial) 238-242 
adding brush strokes 240 
adding dirt and texture to image 242 
adding russet tones 239 
Blur tool 241 
Chalk Brush tool 239 
Clone Stamp tool 238 
Color Variations option 239 
elongating image 238 
Eyedroppertool239, 242 
Impressionist Brush tool 242 
jolly.jpg 238 
jollyMod.psd 242 
Mesh Brush tool 242 
Paint Bucket tool 238 
painting eyes shut 240 
painting in eyebrows and hair 241 
painting in lips and cheeks 241-242 
Posterize adjustment layer 239 
Motion Blur filter 211 
Move tool 19, 27, 2.9, 33 
Multiply blending mode 74, 116, 183 
Music Notes - Scatter brush 6-7 

0 
Outer Glow layer effect S-6 
Overlay blending mode 49-SO, 117, 130, 169 
p 
Paint Bucket tool 2S, 49 
Paint Daubs filter 234 
Palette Knife filter 234 
Pete and Selena (tutorial) 143-144 
Pin Light blending mode 34 
Pinch filter 103 
Polygonal Lasso tool 117 
Pucker tool 138, 24S 
puppet show (tutorial) 144-150 
Clone Stamp tool146 
R 
Eraser tool 145. 146 
Free Transform tool 145. 149 
girlPuppet.jpg 144 
holiPixie.psd 144 
merging puppet body and pixie head 144-147 
Multiply blending mode 146 
Normal blending mode 147 
placing puppets on stage 148-149 
puppetsFinal.psd 150 
resizing puppet 149 
rotating and resizing head 145 
Text tool 1 50 
theater.psd 148. 149 
Radial Blur filter 98 
Recipes 11 
recoloring (tutorial) S7-62 
Brightness/Contrast adjustment layer 58, 59. 61 
duplicating Background layer 57 
enhancing eye color 59. 60 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 57. 58, 60, 61 
Lasso tool 59 
Levels adjustment layer 61 
marc.jpg 57 
marclight.psd 62 
Reconstruct tool 140 
Rectangular Marquee tool 27, 165 
Red Eye Brush tool 47-48 
red eye removal (tutorial) 47-50 
Elliptical Marquee tool 47, 49 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 50 
julie.jpg 47 
Overlay blending mode 49. 50 
Paint Bucket tool 49 
Red Eye Brush tool 48 
removing an eye (tutorial) 70-78 
charlie.jpg 71 
charlieEye.psd 7B 
Clone Stamp toot 78 
creating eye socket 72-7S 
Eyedropper tool 73 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 76 
masking out eyeball 71-72 
Multiply blending mode 74 
Overlay blending mode 7S 
sealing up eye socket 78 
Selection Brush tool 71 
retouching (tutorial) 38-46 
blemish removal 39-41 
Brush tool 46 
s 
caroline.jpg 38 
caroline81em.psd 46 
Clone Stamp tool 39, 40, 41. 42. 46 
eye yellowing removal 44-46 
Eyedropper tool 44 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 42-46 
Lasso tool 45 
scar removal41-42 
selecting area to clone 40 
Screen blending mode 54, 65, 124, 127 
Selection Brush tool 30, 71, 89, 104, 11S 
Selection tool 26 
sepia-tinted photo (tutorial) 11 
Shift Pixels tool 144 
siren (tutorial) 194-198 
adding white background 195 
blemish removal 196 
Clone Stamp tool 196. 198 
Clouds filter 197 
creating fur coat 197-198 
deloniaFur.psd 198 
Dodge tool195, 198 
Eraser tool 196. 198 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 196. 197. 198 
Lasso tool 195. 197 
Levels adjustment layer 196 
Magic Wand tool 194 
Radial Gradient 195 
removing shoulders 196 
selecting face and hair 194 
Selection Brush toot 194 
Smudge toot 197 
Smart Blur filter 2SS 
Index 
267 

Face Makeovers 
Smudge tool86, 118, 197 
Soft light blending mode 7, 66, 169, 188 
Spherize filter 20S, 208 
sports fan (tutorial) 114-118 
applying team colors 117 
black eye effect 11 6 
Eraser tool 117, 11B 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 11B 
Levels adjustment layer 115 
Multiply blending mode 116 
Overlay blending mode 117 
Polygonal Lasso tool 117 
removing background 115-116 
Selection Brush tool 115, 117 
Smudge tool 11B 
takeshi.jpg 115 
takeshiSports.psd 11B 
symmetrical face (tutorial) 106-10B 
aligning face halves 1 OB 
T 
Flip Layer Horizontal option 1 OB 
peter.jpg 107 
peter2Faced.psd 1 OB 
tiger woman (tutorial) 120-124 
adding color to face 122-124 
Brush tool 122, 124 
Calligraphic Brush tool 123 
desaturating face 121 
Lasso tool 124 
Levels adjustment layer 121 
miya.jpg 120 
miyanger.psd 124 
Overlay blending mode 122 
removing background 120 
Screen blending mode 124 
Selection Brush tool 120 
Trackball tool 22, 26 
Transform tool161, 165 
Turbulence tool 144 
Twirl tool 144 
v 
vampire (tutorial) 204-206 
268 
adding dark background 206 
distorting face 205 
Dodge tool 206 
Gaussian Blur filter 206 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 206 
Levels adjustment layer 206 
Liquify filter 205 
Multiply blending mode 206 
reshaping ear 206 
Spherize filter 205, 206 
vampiel.jpg 205 
vampieiTwins.psd 206 
Warp tool 205 
Van Gogh (tutorial) 248-252 
adding brush strokes 248-249 
adding outlines 251 
Angled Strokes filter 248 
creating custom pattern 250 
Eyedropper tool 252 
Impressionist Brush tool 249, 250 
Indexed Color option 249 
ollie.jpg 248 
ollieVanGogh.psd 252 
Paint Bucket tool 251 
painting in background 250 
painting in face 252 
reducing color range 249 
w 
Warhol (tutorial) 223-226 
coloring lips 225 
coloring rest of face 226 
desaturating image 224 
jolly.jpg 223 
jollyWarhol.psd 226 
Lasso tool 225 
Multiply blending mode 226 
Paint Bucket tool 223 
removing background 223 
Threshold adjustment layer 224, 225 
Warp tool 138-140, 142, 205, 208 
Wave filter 189 
witch (tutorial) 208-212 
changing facial expression 20B-21 0 
Hue/Saturation adjustment layer 212 
Lasso tool 211 
Levels adjustment layer 208 
Liquify filter 20B, 211 
lothiradeStart.psd 208 
lothiradeWitch.psd 212 
Motion Blur filter 211 
Move tool 211 
Multiply blending mode 212 
Screen blending mode 211 
Spherize filter 20B 
Warp tool 20B 

